Title: 

URL Source: http://www.oas.org/en/sla/docs/AG08884E03.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 30 Nov 2023 17:39:08 GMT

Markdown Content:
FIFTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION OEA/Ser.P 

June 21 to 23, 2023 AG/doc.5828/23 corr. 1 

Washington, D.C. 27 June 2023 

Original: Spanish/English 

DECLARATIONS AND RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

(Provisional version subject to review by the Style Committee) TABLE OF CONTENTS 

AG/DEC. 110 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION ON “THE QUESTION OF THE MALVINAS ISLANDS” ............................................................................................ 1 

AG/DEC. 111 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION FOR THE PROTECTION AND INTEGRATION OF MIGRANT AND REFUGEE CHILDREN IN THE AMERICAS .................................................................................. 3 

AG/DEC. 112 (LIII-O/23) COMMEMORATION OF THE LEGACY OF JIMMY CARTER IN PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY IN THE AMERICAS .................................................................................. 9 

AG/DEC. 113 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION FOR THE RIGHTS OF ALL WOMEN, ADOLESCENTS, AND GIRLS IN RURAL AREAS OF THE AMERICAS ........................................................................................ 13 

AG/RES. 2997 (LIII-O/23) RENEWAL OF RESOLUTIONS AND MANDATES ENTRUSTED TO THE INTER-AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR INTEGRAL DEVELOPMENT NOT IMPLEMENTED IN THE 2022-2023 TERM ................................................................................ 17 

AG/RES. 2998 (LIII-O/23) STRENGTHENING THE INTER-AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR THE INTEGRAL DEVELOPMENT (CIDI) ...................................... 19 

AG/RES. 2999 (LIII-O/23) PROMOTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF COMPETITIVE, SAFE, SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE PORTS ........................ 21 

AG/RES. 3000 (LIII-O/23) THE KEY ROLE OF THE INTER-AMERICAN TELECOMMUNICATION COMMISSION IN ADVANCING TELECOMMUNICATIONS/INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES ........................................... 23 

AG/RES. 3001 (LIII-O/23) TOWARDS ENHANCED ACCESS TO CLIMATE FINANCING .. 27 

AG/RES. 3002 (LIII-O/23) INCREASING AND STRENGTHENING THE PARTICIPATION OF CIVIL SOCIETY AND SOCIAL ACTORS IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES AND IN THE SUMMITS OF THE AMERICAS PROCESS; AND SUPPORT FOR AND FOLLOW-UP TO THE SUMMITS OF THE AMERICAS PROCESS .................................... 33 

AG/RES. 3003 (LIII-O/23) PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ............ 35 

AG/RES. 3004 (LIII-O/23) STRENGTHENING DEMOCRACY ................................................. 51 

AG/RES. 3005 (LIII-O/23) INTERNATIONAL LAW .................................................................. 63 

AG/RES. 3006 (LIII-O/23) THE HUMAN RIGHTS CRISIS IN NICARAGUA .......................... 71 

AG/RES. 3007 (LIII-O/23) TOWARDS THE IMMEDIATE RESTORATION OF SECURITY, STRENGTHENING OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, AND SUPPORT FOR PROTECTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY IN HAITI................................................................... 75 - 4 -

AG/RES. 3008 (LIII-O/23) IN COMMEMORATION OF THE 50 TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE 

COUP D'ÉTAT IN CHILE .................................................................. 81 

AG/RES. 3009 (LIII-O/23) ADVANCING HEMISPHERIC SECURITY: AMULTIDIMENSIONAL APPROACH............................................... 83 

AG/RES. 3010 (LIII-O/23) HEMISPHERIC LEGACY OF FORMER OAS SECRETARY-GENERAL JOÃO CLEMENTE BAENA SOARES ......................... 97 

AG/RES. 3011 (LIII-O/23) PROGRAM-BUDGET OF THE ORGANIZATION FOR 2024 / ....... 99 

AG/RES. 3012 (LIII-O/23) PLACE AND DATE OF THE FIFTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ................................. 131 AG/DEC. 110 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION ON “THE QUESTION OF THE MALVINAS ISLANDS” 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING its repeated statements that the question of the Malvinas Islands is a matter of enduring hemispheric concern; 

RECALLING its resolution AG/RES. 928 (XVIII-O/88), adopted by consensus on November 19, 1988, in which it requested the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to resume negotiations in order to find, as soon as possible, a peaceful solution to the sovereignty dispute; 

BEARING IN MIND that in its resolution AG/RES. 1049 (XX-O/90) it expressed satisfaction over the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries; 

RECOGNIZING that the accreditation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, under resolution CP/RES. 655 (1041/95), as a permanent observer of the OAS reflects principles and values shared by that country and OAS member states, which facilitate greater mutual understanding; 

NOTING with satisfaction that the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland maintain important political, cultural, and trade ties, share common values, and are also engaged in close cooperation both bilaterally and in international forums; 

BEARING IN MIND that, despite those ties and shared values, it has not yet been possible to resume the negotiations between the two countries with a view to solving the sovereignty dispute over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgias and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas in the framework of resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49, 37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25 of the United Nations General Assembly, the decisions adopted by the same body on the same question in the Special Committee on Decolonization, and the reiterated resolutions and declarations adopted at the OAS General Assembly; and 

HAVING HEARD the presentation by the head of the delegation of the Argentine Republic, 

WELCOMES the reaffirmation of the will of the Argentine Government to continue exploring all possible avenues towards a peaceful settlement of the dispute and its constructive approach towards the inhabitants of the Malvinas Islands. 

REAFFIRMS the need for the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to resume, as soon as possible, negotiations on the sovereignty dispute, in order to find a peaceful solution to this protracted controversy. - 2 -

DECIDES to continue to examine the question of the Malvinas Islands at its subsequent sessions until a definitive settlement has been reached thereon. - 3 -

AG/DEC. 111 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION FOR THE PROTECTION AND INTEGRATION OF MIGRANT AND REFUGEE CHILDREN IN THE AMERICAS 1/2/

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

RECOGNIZING that migration is inherent to human nature, which, at times, may represent an option for individuals and communities in vulnerable situations; 

ACKNOWLEDGING that States, have an obligation to protect the human rights of all persons in their territory and subject to their jurisdiction, and should adopt measures for the management and governance of migration and the situation of refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless persons as well as 

promote actions that should emphasize on the positive contributions of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons at a social, economic, and cultural level in countries of origin, transit, destination, and return with a comprehensive human rights perspective; 

EMBRACING the progress made by different multilateral instances for the treatment of migrants and refugees, such as the Regional Conference on Migration(CRM), South American Conference on Migration (CSM), the Quito Process, the regional comprehensive framework for protection and protection and solutions (MIRPS), the 2022 Los Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection, as well as the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and its guiding principles and recognizing the commitment of countries of origin, transit, destination, and return to manage migration and protection issues based on a spirit of collaboration, solidarity, and shared responsibility that allows for safe, orderly, and regular migration; 

NOTING that an increasing number of children and adolescents are migrating throughout the hemisphere due to a multi-causal reality, and that includes children seeking asylum, refugees, and 

stateless, separated, unaccompanied, and/ or undocumented minors; and taking into consideration the 

particular impact on girls; 

CONVINCED that migration requires coordinated and responsible management that protects and promotes the dignity and rights of persons in migration contexts, especially children and adolescents who suffer a double situation of vulnerability, being minors and migrants, who are exposed to different forms of abuse and violence, including separated, undocumented, or unaccompanied children; 

RECALLING the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and its guiding principles, which are cross-cutting and interdependent for the sake of protecting and integrating migrants and refugees.   

> 1.Trinidad and Tobago will include footnote
> 2.The Dominican Republic does not join this declaration by virtue of the fact that the document refers to agreements to which it is not a signatory. Nevertheless, the country reiterates its…

- 4 -

CONSIDERING the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the American Convention on Human Rights, and the Inter-American principles on the Human rights of all migrants, refugees, stateless persons, and victims of human trafficking as appropriate; as well as the relevant standards developed by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, especially the Advisory Opinion OC-21 of 2014, which addressed the obligations of the applicant States regarding the application of the principle of the best interests of the child when designing, adopting, and implementing migration, refugee, asylum seeking, statelessness and other policies that affect children and adolescents; 

DECLARE OUR INTENT TO: 

1. Strengthen the regional cooperation measures for the safe, orderly, and regular migration of children and adolescents, that contribute to the consolidation of international protection frameworks, with a shared responsibility approach, as well as the prevention and mitigation of the structural causes of irregular migration, refugee, asylum seeking and statelessness of these persons in countries of origin through the following actions: 

a) Advance, in this sense, in designing and implementing mechanisms for the information and data collection disaggregated by age and sex of girls, boys, and adolescents in migration contexts, for exclusively statistical purposes and in accordance with relevant legislation, to count with evidence of their migratory dynamics and their protection needs. 

b) Promote, in a manner consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the adoption of preventive measures within our borders for the identification and management of the migration of unaccompanied or separated children and adolescents; adopting measures that allow when appropriate, to facilitate their family reunification, and adopting measures safeguarding their best interest and respect for their human rights. 

c) Support the adoption and strengthening of national, bilateral, and 

multilateral actions that are victim-centered and that takes into account the 

protection of their human rights, including with a gender perspective to prevent, detect, refer investigate, and sanction any form of human trafficking in persons or migrant smuggling that may victimize children and adolescents. 

d) Train those responsible for aiding and caring for migrant and refugee children and adolescents to include specialized training with a gender-responsive and intersectional perspective, understood as the interconnection of multiple forms of discrimination, exclusion, and inequality, to meet the particular needs of groups in situations of vulnerability in migration contexts. 

e) Manage the coordinated attention of States, civil society, and international organizations, including women's rights organizations, with a permanent commitment to attend to the structural causes of irregular migration, reducing the risks and vulnerabilities faced by children and adolescents. - 5 -

f) Protect and promote the enjoyment of human rights of children and adolescents in matters of migration and the situation of refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless persons seeking to sensitize legislators, public servants, and judicial officials and underscoring the importance of the principle of the best interest of the child. 

2. Recognize that children and adolescent’s rights are inherent to them and apply regardless of their migratory situation. 

3. Reaffirm our commitment to implement and systematize regular migration channels for migrant children and adolescents, including recognition of refugee status or complementary protection, including the protection and safeguarding of the human rights of children and adolescents, asylum seekers, and unaccompanied and/or separated refugees children and adolescents, and underscoring the importance of the principle of the best interest of the child. 

4. Advance in the need for the elimination of legal or administrative barriers that may prevent migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless children and adolescents in any migratory situation and context from enjoying human rights in equality conditions with children and adolescents who are nationals of the host countries, such as those related to education and health subject to its political and administrative division systems. To this purpose, we seek to advance in the flexibilization of the administrative requirements and facilitate school and college enrollment and recognition of qualification. 

5. Reaffirm the importance of promoting the enjoyment of human rights of children and adolescents in the migration context in addressing the problem of lack of documentation and recognizing the right to identity, including nationality, name, and legal personality, and the importance of the States of origin to issue the identification documents of its nationals and, identify the importance of implementing policies to reduce the risk of statelessness, among other challenges 3/.

6. Promote measures that facilitate the social integration of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless children and adolescents in host countries, including, 

a) Advance in the flexibility within migration processes, to eliminate the legislative and bureaucratic restrictions that have an impact on regular entry for a variety of reasons, including family reunification. 

b) Advance in gender-responsive policies that allow equitable and equal and nondiscriminatory access to physical and mental health care, disease prevention and comprehensive healthcare, including sexual and reproductive health services with special attention to those in need of urgent medical attention for diseases or conditions associated with or exacerbated by the migration process, including all forms of sexual and gender-based violence, while promoting the necessary partnerships with civil society and international organizations.  

> 3.The United States notes that the purported “right to identity” referenced in operative paragraph 5 is not established in treaty or customary international law. The United States interprets the phrase ..

- 6 -

c) Develop programs for the integration of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, and stateless children and adolescents in destination countries, with educational policies that facilitate the full enjoyment of the right to education, with an intercultural approach subject to its political and administrative division systems and capable of addressing in an equitable manner and without discrimination with a gender perspective, the particular needs of children and adolescents in migration contexts, such as proficiency in a language different from that of the host country, including indigenous languages regardless of their migratory and legal situation. 

d) Promote care, assistance, and protection actions for children and adolescents, both those who migrate alone and those accompanied by their parents, who are subjected to irregular and risky migration contexts and occupy a particularly vulnerable position that affects their dignity and enjoyment of their human rights. - 7 -

FOOTNOTES 

2. …commitment to the protection of the human rights of all children and adolescents, recognized in international agreements to which we are signatories and in accordance with our national legislation. 

3. …“right to identity” in operative paragraph 5 to refer to relevant rights under Article 24 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as under Article 20 of the American Convention on Human Rights and Articles 7 and 8 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which the United States is not party. - 9 -

AG/DEC. 112 (LIII-O/23) COMMEMORATION OF THE LEGACY OF JIMMY CARTER IN PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY IN THE AMERICAS 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING that the theme of its fifty-third regular session, “Strengthening a culture of 

democratic accountability with human rights promotion, protection, and equality in the Americas,” 

reflects the dedication and vision of the 39th president of the United States Jimmy Carter to the 

same end; 

BEARING IN MIND that Carter hosted the Fourth Regular Session of the OAS General 

Assembly in Atlanta in April 1974 as Governor of the State of Georgia and, as President, attended the 

Eighth and Tenth OAS General Assemblies convened in Washington D.C.; 

RECOGNIZING that, throughout his presidency (1977 to 1981), Carter advanced democratic 

principles and championed the promotion and protection of human rights, including through his signing 

of the American Convention on Human Rights on June 1, 1977 at OAS headquarters and advocacy in 

support of the Convention which came into force on July 18, 1978, as well as his strong support for the 

drafting and adoption of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 

Treatment or Punishment (UNCAT) which came into force on June 26, 1987; 

RECALLING IN PARTICULAR the historic on-site visit of the Inter-American Commission 

on Human Rights (IACHR) to Argentina from September 6 to 20, 1979, with the firm support of Carter 

and aided by the visits in March and August 1977 of first Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights 

and Humanitarian Affairs of the United States, Patricia “Patt” Derian, which had the support of human 

rights organizations and helped lay the groundwork for the preparation of the Commission's historic 

April 1980 report, as well as the Trial of the Juntas in 1985 at which Derian also testified on June 14, 

contributing to the reestablishment of democracy in Argentina whose 40th anniversary of uninterrupted 

democracy is being celebrated in 2023; 

RECALLING ALSO that the Panama Canal Treaties between the United States and Panama, 

member states of the OAS represented by Carter and Omar Torrijos Herrera, respectively, were signed 

at the Organization’s headquarters on September 7, 1977 and that those Treaties, after being ratified in 

accordance with the respective constitutional procedures of both countries, entered into force on 

October 1, 1979; 

EMPHASIZING that one of the principal objectives of the OAS, the peaceful settlement of 

disputes, was fully achieved with the conclusion and subsequent implementation of the Panama Canal 

Treaties, culminating in Carter leading the United States delegation to the Transfer Ceremonies in 

Panama on December 14, 1999 and the successful turnover of the Canal and the adjacent lands, waters, 

and facilities to the Republic of Panama on December 31, 1999; - 10 -

AWARE that, following his presidency, President Carter and First Lady Rosalynn Carter 

founded in 1982 the nonpartisan Atlanta-based The Carter Center in partnership with Emory 

University, with a fundamental commitment to human rights and the alleviation of human suffering, 

focused on efforts to prevent and resolve conflict, enhance freedom and democracy, and improve 

health; 

RECOGNIZING that The Carter Center has been a pioneer in election observation, monitoring 

114 elections around the world since 1989, including in the Americas, and forging many techniques 

now common to the field; 

MINDFUL OF the efforts undertaken by Carter, in concert with hemispheric leaders including 

the OAS Secretary General as well as the United Nations (UN), to bring about an end to armed conflict 

in Nicaragua through the organization and holding of free, fair and internationally-observed general 

elections on February 25, 1990; 

COGNIZANT that Carter and former OAS Secretary General César Gaviria co-led 

international mediation in support of the Venezuelan process of dialogue with the participation of all 

national sectors, including the government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in the wake of the 

April 2002 coup attempt, culminating in the August 15, 2004 recall referendum regarding the 

leadership of then-President Hugo Chávez Frías, which was observed by The Carter Center and the 

OAS; 

ACKNOWLEDGING that, in 2004, Carter convened the Friends of the Inter-American 

Democratic Charter, a group composed of former presidents, prime ministers, and cabinet ministers 

from throughout the region who seek to increase the visibility of the Democratic Charter, prevent 

democratic tensions from erupting into crises, and recommend ways for the OAS to utilize the Charter 

in a constructive and preventative manner; 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that Carter and The Carter Center, working with the UN Electoral 

Assistance Division and the OAS, played a major role in drafting the 2005 Declaration of Principles 

for International Observation, which established professional guidelines for election observation and 

has been endorsed by more than 50 organizations, including the OAS; 

BEARING IN MIND ALSO that Carter and The Carter Center accompanied the group of like-

minded States in the establishment of the International Criminal Court and the position of United 

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, in 2006, the States in the reform of the United 

Nations Commission on Human Rights, now the UN Human Rights Council; 

APPRECIATIVE OF the commitment of Carter and The Carter Center to the peace process in 

Colombia and noting the inclusion of The Carter Center in Point Two (Political Participation) of the 

2016 Peace Accord in the formation of the Special Electoral Mission; and 

AWARE ALSO OF the close and personal relationship between Carter and Judge Thomas 

Buergenthal, who passed away on May 29, 2023 and served as the only judge and President of the 

Inter-American Court of Human Rights from the United States (1979-1991, nominated twice by Costa 

Rica), founder and first President of the Inter-American Institute of Human Rights (1980-1992), 

director of The Carter Center’s human rights program (1986–1989), and judge and President of Inter-

American Development Bank’s Administrative Tribunal (1989-1994), - 11 -

DECLARES: 

1. Its heartfelt thanks and deep appreciation for the goodwill, commitment and dedication 

demonstrated by former President Jimmy Carter and First Lady Rosalynn Carter in efforts to advance 

the cause of human rights and representative democracy throughout the Americas. 

2. The recognition of the positive impact of President Carter on the Inter-American 

Human Rights System, and on the region's commitment to promote and protect the human rights and 

fundamental freedoms of all individuals, cognizant that democracy, development and respect for 

human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing concepts. 

3. Its conviction that the lasting cooperation between the United States and Panama, as 

championed by President Carter, serves as an enduring example to the Hemisphere and to the world of 

the value of negotiation, dialogue, and mutual respect. 

4. The commitment to continue strengthening inclusive and transparent democratic 

governance consistent with the Inter-American Democratic Charter and the legacy of President Carter, 

as well as to foster credibility and citizen confidence in democratic institutions, in particular the 

legitimacy of electoral processes, with full respect for the rule of law, and by enhancing transparency 

and accountability of institutions and democratic processes. 

5. Its reaffirmation of the need to combat inequality and discrimination, as advocated by 

President Carter and The Carter Center, so as to strengthen and promote the full, equal, and meaningful 

participation of women in forging peace and preventing and solving conflict. - 13 -

AG/DEC. 113 (LIII-O/23) DECLARATION FOR THE RIGHTS OF ALL WOMEN, ADOLESCENTS, AND GIRLS IN RURAL AREAS OF THE AMERICAS 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE HEADS OF DELEGATION OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (OAS), meeting in Washington, D.C., United States of America, from June 21 to 23, 2023, on the occasion of the fifty-third regular session of the OAS General Assembly, 

CONSIDERING: 

The multiplicity of legal and political international instruments adopted during the last five decades around the human rights of all women, adolescents, and girls under the principles of universality, indivisibility, progressiveness, interdependence, non-discrimination, and gender equality, including but not limited to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 1979) and the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convention of Belém do Pará, 1994); 

The instruments and specific recommendations adopted on the subject of all women and girls in rural settings, including General recommendation No. 34 (2016) on the rights of rural women and General recommendation No. 39 (2022) on the rights of indigenous women and girls of the CEDAW Committee; the Agreed Conclusions of the 62nd and 67th sessions of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) titled “Challenges and Opportunities in Achieving Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Rural Women and Girls” and “Innovation and Technological Change, and Education in the Digital Age for Achieving Gender Equality and the Empowerment of All Women and Girls,” the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas (UNDROP, 2018), and resolution No. 76/140 “Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas,” adopted by United Nations General Assembly on December 16, 2021, among others; 

That women, adolescents and girls, particularly those in rural areas, have experienced barriers to the exercise of their rights related to accessing, possessing and inheriting land for reasons that maintain subordination and structural invisibility, for which it is essential for States to promote policies aimed at eliminating all forms of discrimination against women, especially in relation to land; 

DECLARE: 

1. That the Inter-American Decade for the Rights of All Women, Adolescents, and Girls in Rural Settings in the Americas will be observed between 2024 and 2034 with the objective of promoting progressive measures for the advancement of all their rights and the eradication of all forms of discrimination that they face. 

2. That the Inter-American Decade for the Rights of All Women, Adolescents and Girls in Rural Settings in the Americas will be dedicated to the promotion, protection and defense of the rights and visibility of all women, adolescents and girls in rural settings under an intersectional - 14 -

approach, understood as the interconnection of multiple forms of discrimination, exclusion, and inequality; 

3. In observance of the Decade, the CIM is entrusted with coordinating the creation of spaces, actions, and specific activities to draw attention to the situation of all adolescent women and girls in rural settings and their rights, and to strengthen their capacity to lead and participate in decision-making processes and the public-policy formulation. As well as to identify opportunities for collaboration, coordination, and synergy with the organs, agencies, and entities of the OAS, the region, and the inter-American system that work for the promotion, protection and defense of the rights of all women, adolescents and girls in rural settings, including but not limited to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), the Executive Secretariat for Integral Development (SEDI), the Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity (SARE), the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA), the Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL), and the Network of Rural Women of Latin America and the Caribbean (REDLAC); 

4. That member states recognize the need to allocate and manage more resources for the organs and agencies of the OAS that work to protect and promote the rights of all women, adolescents and girls; therefore, they urge the provision of financial and material support, either through voluntary contributions or other mechanisms, to the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), the Follow-up Mechanism of the Belém do Pará Convention (MESECVI), the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), and the Working Group on the Protocol of San Salvador (WGPSS) 1/;

5. That in the fall of 2023 the OAS Permanent Council will meet to discuss the topics highlighted in this Declaration and designate Inter-American Rural All Women, Adolescents, and Girl's Day.  

> 1.The Republic of El Salvador reaffirms its firm resolve for the fulfillment of its obligations and commitments acquired in the area of human rights, within both…

- 15 -

FOOTNOTE 

1. … the inter-American and universal systems, especially in the protection of the rights of all women, adolescent girls, and girls in all areas, in an equitable manner, and without discrimination of any kind. 

For El Salvador, all the organs and agencies of the inter-American system play a fundamental and complementary role in pursuit of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the Organization of American States and, for that reason, it considers it essential to avoid lists that exclude other promotion and protection agencies. 

Within the inter-American human rights system, the resources allocated to the OAS organs and agencies working to protect and promote the rights of all women, adolescent girls, and girls must be distributed in a comprehensive and balanced way. - 17 -

AG/RES. 2997 (LIII-O/23) RENEWAL OF RESOLUTIONS AND MANDATES ENTRUSTED TO THE INTER-AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR INTEGRAL DEVELOPMENT NOT IMPLEMENTED IN THE 2022-2023 TERM 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING the decision of member states to hold the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, in Washington, D.C., June 21-23, 2023, with the aim of restoring the cycle of holding the Assembly in the second quarter of each year; 

RECOGNIZING the need to take measures to ensure compliance with and implementation of 

the mandates of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development and its subsidiary organs, as 

well as the most efficient use of resources; and 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT therefore the limited time available to the Inter-American Council for Integral Development and its subsidiary bodies during the 2022-2023 term to implement all the mandates arising from the fifty-second regular session, 

RESOLVES: 

1.  To approve that resolutions and mandates on integral development adopted by the General Assembly in previous sessions and by sectoral meetings of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development remain in full force. All of the foregoing does not prevent this regular session of the General Assembly, if deemed necessary, to approve new standalone resolutions that member states have submitted. 

2. To entrust the Inter-American Council for Integral Development to renew those resolutions and mandates that were unable to be implemented in the 2022-2023 term, and to continue with the implementation of the pending mandates unless otherwise stated in a specific resolution adopted during this regular session. 

3. To instruct the Executive Secretariat for Integral Development to provide support to member states in the work of updating and implementing mandates for this period. 

4. To express appreciation for the hospitality, leadership and commitment of the governments of the member states that hosted and chaired meetings of ministers and high-level authorities and of inter-American committees within the framework of Inter-American Council for Integral Development held since the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly, as well as to thank the governments of the member states who have committed to hosting the following sectoral meetings in the 2023-2024 term: - 18 -

Sectoral process  2023  2024 

1. Tourism  III Regular Meeting of the CITUR 

2. Ports  XIII Regular Meeting of CIP and 

XXIII CIP Executive Board Meeting 

(Roatan - Honduras, June )

XXIV Meeting of the CIP Executive Board 

(host to be defined) 

3. Education  X Regular Meeting of the CIE 

4. Cooperation  IV  Specialized CIDI Meeting of High-Level 

Authorities of Cooperation 

(host to be defined) 

5. Social 

Development  VI Regular Meeting of the CIDES 

6. Culture  VII Regular Meeting of the CIC 

7. Sustainable 

Development 

VI Regular Meeting of the CIDS (OAS 

General Secretariat Headquarters, 

April) 

IV Inter-American Meeting of 

Ministers and High-Level Authorities 

on Sustainable Development (The 

Bahamas, October) 

8. Science and 

Technology  X Regular Meeting of COMCyT  VII Meeting of Ministers and High 

Authorities of Science and Technology 

(host to be defined) 

9. Labor 

Meeting of the IACML Working 

Groups  XXII Inter-American Conference of 

Ministers of Labor (IACML) 

(Colombia) 

Other meetings 

(for reference only) 

XVI and XVII Americas 

Competitiveness Exchanges 

(hosts to be defined) 

VIII Inter-American Dialogue of High 

Authorities of MSME S

(host to be defined) 

XII Americas Competitiveness Forum 

(host to be defined) 

XVIII and XIX Americas Competitiveness 

Exchanges 

(hosts to be defined) 

5. To request that the Inter-American Council for Integral Development report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session on the implementation of this resolution. Execution of the activities envisaged in this resolution will be subject to the availability of financial resources in the program-budget of the Organization and other resources. - 19 -

AG/RES. 2998 (LIII-O/23) STRENGTHENING THE INTER-AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR THE INTEGRAL DEVELOPMENT (CIDI) 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

RECOGNIZING that the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI) is an organ of the Organization of American States (OAS) with decision-making capacity in matters of partnership for integral development, and a forum for Inter-American dialogue; 

RECOGNIZING that the OAS carries out its essential purposes though its four pillars: democracy, human rights, security, and development, which are mutually reinforcing and executed delivered through political dialogue, cooperation and various instruments and to that end, stressing the importance of ensuring an adequate balance between them, their agendas, their prioritization and allocation of appropriate resources; 

REITERATING the priority of promoting integral development among the OAS member states, as one of its essential pillars, as well as partnership for cooperation in the economic, social, educational, cultural, environmental, scientific, and technological fields; to contribute to building resilience; and to contribute to the elimination of extreme poverty and inequalities, including gender inequalities; 

CONCERNED by the current global context in which the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change, serious economic and financial conditions, and the international geopolitical situation have had a negative impact on the hemisphere, with the consequent increase in poverty and extreme poverty and the deepening of inequalities, significantly compromising the possibilities of the region to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda; 

BEARING IN MIND the resolutions related to strengthening CIDI and its subsidiary bodies approved since 2007, in particular resolution AG/RES. 2817 (XLIV-O/14) “Strengthening of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development: political dialogue and partnership for development,” approved by the General Assembly on June 7, 2014; resolution AG/RES. 2988 (LII-O/22), “Promoting hemispheric initiatives on integral development: promoting resilience,” approved on October 7, 2022; the “Revised General Guidelines for Ministerial Processes within the Inter-American Council for Integral Development”, document CIDI/CPD/doc.212/22, and specially the Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the OAS; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To continue promoting the strengthening of CIDI, in a permanent manner, particularly through substantive high-level political dialogue, which revitalizes its nature as a negotiating forum, encourages its efficiency, and maximizes synergies within it, with other OAS bodies, and with other international organizations, in the areas of its competence, in order to respond to the challenges in the short, medium and long term. - 20 -

2. To urge the member states to adopt and implement, among others, the following measures aimed at strengthening CIDI:  

> a.

Promote the strengthening of the high-level substantive policy dialogue of CIDI and its subsidiary bodies, including joint meetings with the Permanent Council, convened and hosted by CIDI;  

> b.

Encourage the participation of high authorities in CIDI’s sectoral processes, as well as the participation of relevant stakeholders;  

> c.

Encourage the presence of the permanent representatives of the member states in regular and special meetings;  

> d.

Reinforce its role as the principal OAS organ for inter-American dialogue, decision-making and cooperation on matters of partnership for integral development;  

> e.

Consider enhancing resources available for the work of CIDI, particularly for the areas most in need of resources, as well as for its regular and special meetings, and those of its permanent committees;  

> f.

Review its working methods; and  

> g.

Maximize synergies within and with other OAS bodies and international organizations and key actors. 

3. To instruct CIDI to consider and adopt the measures set forth in the preceding paragraph and others that it considers pertinent, taking into account the report “Strengthening the CIDI” that will be prepared by the Committee on Partnership for Development Policies and presented during the first quarter of 2024 for consideration by the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session. 

4. To instruct the Executive Secretariat for Integral Development to support member states for the implementation of the mandates established in this resolution. 

5. To request CIDI report to the General Assembly on the implementation of this resolution at its fifty-fourth regular session. Execution of the activities provided for in this resolution will be subject to the availability of financial resources in the Organization's program-budget and other resources. - 21 -

AG/RES. 2999 (LIII-O/23) PROMOTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF COMPETITIVE, SAFE, SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE PORTS 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

REITERATING that resolution AG/RES. 1573 (XXVIII-O/98), of June 2, 1998, in accordance with Articles 93 and 77 of the Charter of the Organization of American States (OAS), and Articles 5 and 15 of the Statute of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI), ordered the establishment of the Inter-American Committee on Ports (CIP); 

RECALLING that in 2023, the CIP celebrates its twenty-fifth anniversary as the only permanent inter-American governmental forum of the OAS member states to strengthen hemispheric cooperation for the development of competitive, safe, sustainable, and inclusive ports in the Americas, with the participation and active collaboration of the private sector; 

RECOGNIZING that the CIP is made up of the highest national government authorities in the port sector of the Organization's member states, that substantive dialogue is carried out within this framework at the highest level, and that it has working mechanisms that are different from those of the other Committees. Therefore, it has its own regulations independently of the rest of the Inter-American Committees; 

AWARE that the priority that member states give to the port sector is based on its fundamental role for trade, integration, and physical connectivity in the region, and that its modernization results in the growth and competitiveness of the economies of the Americas; and 

WELCOMING the creation of a new Strategic Line 7 specifically for the port sector in the Comprehensive Strategic Plan do the OAS, to “Foster the development of competitive, safe, sustainable and inclusive ports in the member states”, as well as the celebration of the XIII Regular Meeting of the CIP, from June 7 to 9, 2023, in Roatán, Honduras, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To continue to encourage substantive high level policy dialogue in the Inter-American Committee on Ports, with the objective of assisting member states with identifying solutions to port challenges in the region. 

2. To instruct CIDI to examine and propose measures aimed at strengthening and giving greater visibility to the CIP, taking into account the corresponding report to be prepared by the Committee on Partnership for Development Policies to be presented during the first quarter of 2024, for the consideration of the OAS General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session. 

3. To consider allocating more budgetary resources to strengthen the work of the CIP. - 22 -

4. To instruct the Executive Secretariat for Integral Development to provide support to member states for the implementation of the mandates established in this resolution. 

5. To request CIDI report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session on the implementation of this resolution. Execution of the activities provided for in this resolution will be subject to the availability of financial resources in the Organization's program-budget and other resources. - 23 -

AG/RES. 3000 (LIII-O/23) THE KEY ROLE OF THE INTER-AMERICAN TELECOMMUNICATION COMMISSION IN ADVANCING TELECOMMUNICATIONS/INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

RECALLING: 

Resolution AG/RES. 2987 (LII-O/22), “The Key Role of the Organization of American States in Advancing Telecommunications/Information and Communication Technologies through the Inter-American Telecommunication Commission,” adopted on October 6, 2022; and 

Resolution AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22), “Program-Budget of the Organization for 2023,” adopted on October 6, 2022, with respect to the CITEL-related mandates; 

NOTING resolution CITEL/RES. 80 (VII-18), “Strengthening CITEL within the OAS,” adopted by the Seventh Regular Meeting of the Assembly of CITEL, whereby CITEL invited the OAS General Assembly to reaffirm its commitment to the financial sustainability of CITEL; 

CONSIDERING: 

That telecommunications and information and communication technologies (ICTs) are key enabling tools for social, economic, cultural, and environmental development and, therefore, for implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; 

That CITEL is the specialized agency of the OAS for telecommunications and ICTs and, as such, effectively contributes to the implementation of the four pillars of the OAS as well as the mandates and initiatives of the Summits of the Americas, to which end it has encouraged, along with the region’s political leaders, actions such as the launch of the public-private initiative 2030 ICT Alliance for the Americas, calls for greater investment in broadband infrastructure, the promotion of broadband access in the interest of social inclusion, and the Rural Women’s Alliance – Empowering Rural Women Through ICTs; 

That, reflecting its unique membership-based role and its ability to bring together academia, the private sector, the technical community, and government, CITEL promotes the interests of the entire Hemisphere at the World Telecommunication and Radiocommunication Assemblies and Conferences of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) through the adoption of inter-American proposals; 

That, according to the ITU, to date one-third of the region’s population does not have access to broadband connectivity, and that it is important to continue strengthening CITEL as the crucial arena for cooperation in communications and ICTs in the Americas, most particularly in its role in the debate - 24 -

of and reaching agreement on digital inclusion, the development of telecommunication infrastructure, radio spectrum use, and the creation of an enabling environment for investment in ICTs; 

That resolution AG/RES. 2966 (LI-O/21) “Initiatives to expand Telecommunications/Information and Communication Technologies in Rural, Unserved, and Underserved Areas,” proposed by CITEL, has generated great interest in the OAS member states and the Executive Secretariat of CITEL is providing technical support to implement it in Ecuador and the Dominican Republic. Likewise, steps are being taken to implement it in Paraguay and in other states of the Americas; 

That it is necessary to improve coverage and identify the development of models to bridge the digital divide, with CITEL making recommendations for the expansion of telecommunications/ICTs in rural, unserved, and underserved areas; 

That CITEL has undertaken efforts in coordination with the ITU, CTU, and COMTELCA to improve communications and response capabilities with a view to building resilience to disasters and emergency situations in the region; and 

That, with an assessment having been done of the positive outcomes of the work it has been doing, CITEL’s financial sustainability must be safeguarded in order to ensure that it is equipped with the tools needed to continue with its work and to implement its 2022–2026 Strategic Plan in line with the Organization’s Comprehensive Strategic Plan; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To encourage Member States to intensify horizontal cooperation and the exchange of information, experiences and best practices among themselves in the area of telecommunications and information and communication technologies (ICTs), with the support of the Secretariat of the Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL). 

2. To encourage member states to pursue activities in their countries and in the region with the objective of further strengthening of telecommunications/information and communication technologies as key drivers of sustainable development, and to invite them to participate in the various activities organized by CITEL. 

3. To reaffirm that CITEL plays a vital role in facilitating and promoting digital inclusion and transformation, as well as in the sustainable development of telecommunications/information and communication technologies (ICTs) to support the key pillars of the Organization of American States (OAS). 

4. To request that, in the draft program-budget for 2024 for consideration by the Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs and adoption by the General Assembly, the OAS General Secretariat continue taking into account the financial needs of CITEL, in keeping with resolution CITEL/RES. 80 (VII-18), adopted at the Seventh Regular Meeting of the CITEL Assembly, and with resolution AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22), “Program-Budget of the Organization for 2022,” adopted at the fifty-second regular session of the OAS General Assembly, so that the Commission can continue fulfilling its goals and mission and optimize its operation. - 25 -

5. To request that the Secretariat of CITEL report to the OAS General Assembly, at its fifty-fourth regular session, on the implementation of this resolution, the execution of which will be subject to the availability of financial resources in the program-budget of the Organization and other resources. - 27 -

AG/RES. 3001 (LIII-O/23) TOWARDS ENHANCED ACCESS TO CLIMATE FINANCING 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

MINDFUL that the countries of the Americas are among those in the global community which are continuously and increasingly impacted by extreme weather events such as floods, drought, high temperatures, wildfires, and persistent hurricanes that destroy infrastructure, damage economies, disrupt healthcare and food production systems, erode coastal zones, decimate property, generate non-economic loss and damage, including cultural and indigenous knowledge, intensify inequality, including gender inequality and severely impair the lives and livelihoods of people; 

AWARE of the adverse impact of slow onset events related to climate change such as sea level rise, increasing temperatures, coral bleaching, ocean acidification, glacial retreat and related impacts, salinization, land and forest degradation, loss of biodiversity, and desertification; 

DEEPLY CONCERNED about the key findings of the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which clearly states that “the extent and magnitude of climate change impacts are larger than estimated in previous assessments”, with the ecosystems and human systems highly affected, in particular in the regions of Central and South America, LDCs and small island developing states; 

RECALLING Article 2.1 of the Paris Agreement, adopted under the UNFCCC, which includes 

the goals: to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial 

levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, 

recognizing that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change; to increase 

the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and foster climate resilience and low 

greenhouse gas emissions development, in a manner that does not threaten food production; and to 

make finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-

resilient development; 

FURTHER RECALLING article 2.2 of the Paris Agreement, which states that the Agreement 

will be implemented to reflect equity and the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities 

and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances; 

RECOGNIZING the current global conditions of elevated inflation and costly supply chain constraints, high indebtedness, sharp increases in food and energy prices, and the subsequent increased economic and financial strain being experienced by the countries of the Americas as they take action to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change; 

CONCERNED by the impacts on developing states and the related loss and damage generated by these climate events including sudden and slow onset, economic and non-economic loss and damage, in particular in LDCs, Small Island Developing States and all countries in the Hemisphere - 28 -

that have limited capacity to appropriately respond to loss and damage and adequately insure against them; 

TROUBLED that developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, including Small Island Developing States and Least Developed Countries, confront serious challenges in accessing financing for mitigation and adaptation measures and for averting, minimizing, and addressing loss and damage; 

REITERATING AG/RES. 2952 (L-O/20) on Advancing the Hemispheric Response to Climate Change in the Context of the Covid-19 Pandemic; 

UNDERSCORING the importance of supporting ambitious climate action, including through cooperation with developed countries related to climate financing, training and voluntary transfer and deployment]of technology on mutually agreed terms, including the commitment of developed countries to the goal of jointly mobilizing USD 100 billion per year in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation, and recalling the Glasgow Climate Pact’s urging of developed country Parties to fully deliver on the USD 100 billion goal urgently and through to 2025 and emphasis on the importance of transparency in the implementation of their pledges, as well as the Glasgow Climate Pact’s urging of developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from 2019 levels by 2025, in the context of achieving a balance between mitigation and adaptation in the provision of scaled-up financial resources, recalling Article 9, paragraph 4 of the Paris Agreement; 

RECALLING the outcomes of the 27th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27) convened in November 2022, in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, particularly the decision to establish funding arrangements, including a fund, for assisting developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change in responding to economic and non-economic loss and damage, and including the Sharm el-Sheikh Adaptation Agenda aimed at enhancing resilience for people living in the most climate-vulnerable communities by 2030, and the adoption of the Sharm el-Sheikh Implementation Plan, which highlights that a global transformation to a low-carbon economy is expected to require an investment of at least USD 4-6 trillion per year, which will require a swift and comprehensive transformation of the global financial architecture; 

NOTING the convening of the Fourth Inter-American Meeting of Ministers and High-Level Authorities on Sustainable Development and Climate Finance in the Americas Meeting to be hosted in Nassau, The Bahamas in October 2023, which will provide an opportunity for policymakers of the Hemisphere to craft strategic approaches for climate action in the areas of mitigation, adaptation, resilience, climate finance and collective regional action to better address the climate crisis and dialogue with key stakeholders on climate finance, including multilateral development banks; 

ACKNOWLEDGING the Meeting of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI) on Climate Financing, held on April 25, 2023, where partners of this Hemisphere such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Adaptation Fund, and the Green Climate Fund (GCF), among other experts, advised on the opportunities for increasing climate finance flows in the Americas to better meet the substantial and evolving financial needs of the region for climate change mitigation and adaptation, emphasizing adaptation, including the improvement of current climate finance mechanisms and instruments; - 29 -

MINDFUL of the upcoming 28th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28) in Dubai, United Arab Emirates in November 2023, and the opportunity that it provides OAS Member States to continue to highlight the vulnerabilities of the region to climate change including its disproportionate impact on all women and girls, and to advocate for an increased balance between mitigation and adaptation climate financing, highlighting the need to redouble ambition on mitigation and adaptation: as well as the operationalization of the new loss and damage fund; 

NOTING the launch of the “Bridgetown Initiative” at a high-level retreat in Barbados comprising regional leaders, senior UN officials, academia, and civil society which calls for comprehensive reform of the current global financial system to enable the mobilization of additional financing for climate transition and improved resilience in frontier countries; 

NOTING ALSO the six key action areas of the Bridgetown Initiative designed to develop concrete steps to support all developing countries: 

a) Provide immediate liquidity support including re-channeling at least $100 billion of Special Drawing Rights through the IMF and multilateral development banks. 

b) Restore debt sustainability in the short-term and support countries in restructuring their debt with long-term low-interest rates. 

c) Increase financing flows from all sources to support investments in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 

d) Mobilize more than $1.5 trillion per year of private sector investment in the green and sustainable transformation. 

e) Evolve international financial institutions to ensure they are equipped to support the 2030 Agenda and make them more representative, equitable, and inclusive. 

f) Ensure that the multilateral trading system supports the global green, sustainable and just transformations. 

NOTING further the call for an integrated development and resilience strategy to achieve the SDGs; 

CONSCIOUS that at their Forty-Fourth Regular Meeting in February 2023, the Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) agreed that the time had come to work collectively for the articulation of a restructuring of the global financial architecture, as a response to the existential threats facing SIDS and other developing countries and that the Bridgetown Initiative represents an important contribution in putting forward recommendations for consideration; 

ACKNOWLEDGING also the meeting on April 26, 2023, between The United Nations Secretary-General and the Prime Minister of Barbados to discuss the Bridgetown Initiative and the proposed large-scale SDG stimulus package 1/ and to address the immediate needs of countries facing 

debt distress and liquidity challenges, proposing a scale-up of investment to accelerate progress on the SDGs.,: while stressing the need for reform of the governance and operations of international financial institutions;  

> 1.The United States recognizes the urgency of mobilizing additional financing for development from all sources, a fundamental tenet of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the need to address…

- 30 -

MINDFUL of the upcoming Summit scheduled to be hosted by the President of France in Paris, France, June 22 nd to 23 rd , 2023, which provides the opportunity to further discuss the Bridgetown Initiative, among other initiatives; 

RECALL that the Bridgetown Initiative is closely aligned with the work and objectives of existing UN processes on the financing for development agenda, including the “Financing for Development in the Era of COVID-19 and Beyond Initiative;” 

EXPRESSING concern that, while climate change affects individuals and communities around the world, its adverse effects will be felt most acutely by those segments of the population that are already in vulnerable situations, owing to factors such as geography, poverty, gender, age, indigenous, Afro-descendent or minority status, and disability; 

ACKNOWLEDGING initiatives from the world’s most systemically climate-threatened countries, including the V20 countries, and their Accra-Marrakech Agenda; and 

RECALLING the Paris Agreement and recognizing the urgent need to develop and adopt gender-responsive strategies on mitigation and adaptation to climate change, particularly with regard to climate financing, and the necessity to promote the full, equal, and meaningful participation of women at all levels of decision-making, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To call on OAS Member States to take urgent action to address climate change and to continue to fulfill their commitments under the Paris Agreement and UNFCCC. 

2. To urge Member States to continue working together to enhance the access to, availability and effectiveness of climate finance inter alia through the development and adoption of 

innovative financing instruments for climate action, that could include debt-for-climate swaps, when 

tailored to countries needs and circumstances. 

3. To call on all Member States and Permanent Observers to support efforts to improve operations of international financial institutions and to use their convening power to promote discussions on various emerging initiatives relevant to Member States such as the Bridgetown Initiative in the regional and multilateral institutions of which they are members. 

4. To request the General Secretariat to facilitate and advance discussions on the 

Bridgetown Initiative and other innovative solutions on climate finance among Member States, 

Permanent Observers, Regional Organizations, and International Financial Institutions. 

5. To encourage OAS Member States and Permanent Observers to scale up the provision 

and mobilization of climate finance from a wide variety of sources, including which aims to strengthen 

the capacities of developing countries which are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate 

change. 

6. To encourage OAS Member States and Permanent Observers to support the work of 

the Transitional Committee established at COP 27, in developing recommendations on the 

operalization of new funding arrangements including a Fund for assisting developing countries that are - 31 -

particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, in responding to loss and damage, 

recognizing the increasing urgency of enhancing efforts to avert, minimize and address loss and 

damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change. - 32 -

FOOTNOTES 

1. …elevated debt vulnerabilities in order to accelerate progress toward the SDGs. However, the 

United States notes that, at this time, the proposed SDG Stimulus package has not been sufficiently discussed nor 

has it been agreed upon by member states in whole or in part. - 33 -

AG/RES. 3002 (LIII-O/23) INCREASING AND STRENGTHENING THE PARTICIPATION OF CIVIL SOCIETY AND SOCIAL ACTORS IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES AND IN THE SUMMITS OF THE AMERICAS PROCESS; AND SUPPORT FOR AND FOLLOW-UP TO THE SUMMITS OF THE AMERICAS PROCESS 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING the decision of member states to hold the fifty-third regular session of the 

General Assembly of the Organization of American States, in Washington, D.C., on June 21-23, 2023, 

with the aim of restoring the cycle of holding the Assembly in the second quarter of each year, 

RESOLVES: 

1.  To renew all the sections of resolutions  AG/RES. 2983 (LII-O/22), Increasing and Strengthening the Participation of Civil Society and Social Actors in the Activities of the Organization Of American States and in the Summits of the Americas Process, and AG/RES. 2984 (LII-O/22), Support for and Follow-up to the Summits of the Americas Process. 

2.  Both adopted by General Assembly at its fifty-second regular session, with the exception of activities implemented prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly and those which remain ongoing on the part of the OAS Secretariat with respect to civil society, social actors, and the Summits of the Americas Process. 

3.  To consider implementing, before the fifth-fourth regular session of the General Assembly, activities adopted by the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly and not yet fully realized prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly. 

4.  To this end, update the sections of resolutions  AG/RES. 2983 (LII-O/22) and AG/RES. 2984 (LII-O/22) by reaffirming those  mandates meriting subsequent action, as follows:  

> •

To encourage all member states, permanent observers, and other donors, as defined in Article 74 of the General Standards to Govern the Operations of the General Secretariat of the OAS and in other rules and regulations of the Organization, to consider contributing to the Specific Fund to Support the Participation of Civil Society Organizations in OAS Activities and in the Summits of the Americas Process, created by resolution CP/RES. 864 (1413/04), in order to sustain and promote the effective participation of civil society organizations and other social actors in OAS activities, in accordance with the goals set by the General Assembly and by the Heads of State and Government in the Summits of the Americas process, including the Dialogue of Heads of Delegation, the Secretary General, and representatives of civil society organizations. - 34 - 

> •

To instruct the General Secretariat to identify the human resources needed to implement the mandates entrusted by the member states with respect to the Relations with Civil Society Section of the Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity, and in particular, so that it can effectively coordinate efforts to promote, increase and strengthen civil society participation in OAS activities conducted by all areas of the Organization.  

> •

Involve the Section for Relations with Civil Society of the OAS Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity in all follow-up activities of the Summits of the Americas Process including civil society, in coordination with the Summits of the Americas Secretariat, keeping the Member States duly informed.  

> •

To instruct the General Secretariat, in its capacity as Chair of the Joint Summit Working Group (JSWG) to hold at least one meeting of agency heads each year to review progress made and plan joint activities, and to report thereon to the Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities and to the Summit Implementation Review Group (SIRG). 

5.  To request the  Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society 

Participation  in OAS Activities , through the Permanent Council, to report to the General Assembly, at its fifty-fourth regular session, on the implementation of this resolution. 

6. To applaud the cooperation agreement signed between the OAS General Secretariat and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Peru to transfer administration of the software containing the platform and contents of the Mechanism for Follow-up and Implementation of the Lima Commitment, to ensure continued management of this Mechanism, facilitate access to all citizens of the region, and promote regional cooperation initiatives to prevent and combat corruption, based on the mandates set forth in the Lima Commitment: “Democratic Governance against Corruption. - 35 -

AG/RES. 3003 (LIII-O/23) PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 1//

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING the decision of member states to hold the 53 rd regular session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, in Washington, D.C., on June 21-23, 2023, with the aim of restoring the cycle of holding the Assembly in the second quarter of each year, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To renew all the sections of Resolution  AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) , Promotion and 

Protection of Human Rights exactly as adopted by General Assembly at its 52 nd regular session, with the exception of activities implemented prior to the 53 rd Regular session of the General Assembly as listed in Annex A . 2/

2. To implement, before the 54 th regular session of the General Assembly, the activities assigned by the 52 nd regular Session of the General Assembly not yet implemented prior to the 53 rd regular session of the General Assembly,  as listed in Annex B. 

3. Update the sections of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) and incorporate new sections, as follows: 

I. RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS 

1. To recognize the enormous value of Inter-American Children's Institute (IIN) activities – especially human resource training activities – to policies to protect the rights of children and adolescents, carried out through the Inter-American Training Program (IATP); as well as its establishment of various working groups and networks of children and adolescents, within existing resources and the ongoing work carried out to define strategic guidelines and innovative methodologies in operating them. 

2. To instruct the IIN to consider advancing in, within existing resources, implementation of the recommendations from the hemispheric diagnostic assessment on prevention, eradication, and punishment of abuse of and all forms of violence against children and adolescents, presented by the IIN in 2022, in coordination with Member States.    

> 1.The State of Guatemala declares its decision to renew its footnotes to resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22), adopted at the fourth plenary meeting, held on October 7, 2022. Guatemala reaffirms….
> 2.The United States renews all six footnotes included in AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) in their entirety.

- 36 -

II. PRINCIPLES ON EFFECTIVE INTERVIEWING FOR INVESTIGATIONS AND INFORMATION GATHERING AND THE ROLE OF THE OFFICIAL PUBLIC DEFENDER 3/

In follow-up to sections ii. and v. of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights”. 

1. To affirm the importance of the “Principles on Effective Interviewing for Investigations and Information Gathering” for competent public entities that conduct interrogations and interviews to obtain confessions and for the free legal aid services provided by official public defender offices in the Americas; to encourage those institutions, within the framework of their autonomy and independence, to implement internal action protocols that adopt the Principles in the performance of their daily work, disseminate them, and provide training on the subject; to work towards the development of a regulatory framework on effective interviewing that avoids human rights violations and abuses, specifically torture and other cruel, inhumane, or degrading treatment or punishment; and to involve the public defender from the very beginning of the proceedings and at all stages of the process. 

2. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP) to hold a special meeting in the first quarter of 2024 on the “Principles on effective interviewing for investigations and information gathering and the role of the official public defender” in order to promote exchanges of experience and best practices for guaranteeing legal and procedural safeguards during interviews, to be attended by member states and their respective official public defender institutions that provide legal aid, members of the American Association of Public Defender Offices (AIDEF) (whose attendance will be guaranteed by that organization), and experts from the academic community, civil society, including women’s rights organizations and international organizations. 

III. HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 4/

Complementing section xvi. of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights”: 

1. To invite the member states to send in written observations and opinions as part of the request for an advisory opinion on “Climate Emergency and Human Rights,” submitted to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights by the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Colombia. 

2. To invite the member states to sign and ratify, in accordance with its legal system as soon as possible, the Treaty on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ).  5/    

> 3.The United States of America does not believe the “Mendez Principles” are ready for adoption by public
> authority officers as these principles and the accompanying guidance have yet to be…
> 4.Human Rights and the environment” of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22), which considers United
> Nations General Assembly resolution 76/300 on a right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable…
> 5.The United States supports the objectives of the BBNJ Agreement and supports broad signature and ratification of the Agreement by as many member states as possible. That being said,…

- 37 -

IV. STRENGTHENING THE FOLLOW-UP MECHANISM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL OF SAN SALVADOR 

In follow-up to section viii of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights”: 

1. To encourage States Parties to put forward candidates for vacancies in the Working Group, both for the current call and for the one to be issued in August 2023, and to invite the Working Group of Protocol of San Salvador (WGPSS), in its new composition that includes newly appointed experts, to hold a meeting with States to exchange views on priorities, a work plan, and existing constraints. 

2. To invite member states, permanent observers, and other interested actors to contribute to the Specific Fund for the WGPSS, and to call on States Parties to consider hosting meetings of the Working Group in their countries as a means of supporting and disseminating its work. 

V. STRENGTHENING THE MECHANISM TO FOLLOW UP ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION OF BELÉM DO PARÁ (MESECVI) 

To urge the states parties, OAS member states that have not yet ratified the Convention, and permanent observer states, as well as other donors, to make voluntary contributions to the specific fund dedicated to financing the activities of the Mechanism, including offers to organize and host meetings of its bodies. 

VI. PROGRAM OF ACTION FOR THE DECADE OF THE AMERICAS FOR THE RIGHTS AND DIGNITY OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 2016-2026 (PAD) AND SUPPORT FOR THE COMMITTEE FOR THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 

RESOLVES: 

1. To encourage OAS member states: (i) to submit, in due time and form, reports on the subject by 2023, such as the Fourth National Report on the Implementation of the Inter-American Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities (CIADDIS) and the Program of Action for the Decade of the Americas for the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities (PAD) in the case of member states part of the Convention; or in the framework of the Program of Action-PAD for member states that are not party to said Convention; and, ii) to include persons with disabilities considering children, adolescents, and women with disabilities and their families as well as organizations of persons with disabilities in the consultation processes for the formulation of public policies to incorporate their perspective in a cross-cutting manner; and to take actions to strengthen respect for and guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities by raising awareness of their abilities and contributions to society and by combating stereotypes, prejudices, and harmful practices , including gender-based violence against them in all areas of life. 

2. To reiterate the importance of making voluntary contributions to the Specific Fund for the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities - 38 -

(CEDDIS) [CP/RES. 947 (1683/09)], and to the Specific Fund of the Joint Group for Follow-up of the PAD, created to ensure the sustainability of both bodies, or make in-kind contributions, such as offering to host meetings of these bodies, and congratulate the successful conclusion of the thirteenth meeting of CEDDIS held in Panama in May of this year with the support of the Department of Social Inclusion and the National Secretariat for Disability of Panama. 

VII. FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND JOURNALISM IN THE AMERICAS 

RESOLVES: 

1. To request the IACHR Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression to prepare, with the available resources, a report that compiles the practices of the Member States in terms of decentralization and plurality of the media, content moderation, and actions against hate speech in the media, which must be presented prior to the fifty-fourth regular session of The General Assembly. 

2. Encourage the Member States of the Organization of American States to continue with the development of activities that contribute decisively to the prevention of violence against journalists, especially women journalists, increase efforts to protect them, create the conditions to eradicate impunity against crimes against the press, and, in keeping with the Statute and Regulation of the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights, make it easier for the Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression to gather on-site all the necessary information so that the Inter-American System can objectively and impartially analyze the scope of reports on freedom of expression and of the press in the hemisphere. 6/

VIII. HUMAN RIGHTS OF OLDER PERSONS 

In follow-up to section x of resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22) “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights”: 

1. To congratulate Mexico on depositing its instrument of accession to the Inter-American Convention on Protecting the Human Rights of Older Persons, thus reaching the 10 States Parties required to activate the Follow-up Mechanism; and also Suriname on being the latest country to deposit its instrument of accession to the Convention. 

2. To request the General Secretariat to convene the first Conference of States Parties and the Committee of Experts of the Follow-up Mechanism to the Convention, and to request the States Parties to move forward with the designation of experts for the aforementioned Committee. 

IX. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ONLINE 

RECALLING the presentation by the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression to the PC/CAJP-3734/23 of the preliminary version of the “Report on Inclusion, Digital Ownership and Content Governance” prepared in response to AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/22),  

> 6.The Republic of El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to the right to freedom of expression, which contributes to the strengthening of a democratic society and consolidation…

- 39 -

RESOLVES: 

1. To request that the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression to incorporate the relevant inputs received from the member states into the preliminary version of the “Report on Inclusion, Digital Ownership, and Content Governance” and engage in dialogue with other relevant bodies of the OAS General Secretariat in finalizing it. 

2. To instruct the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression to submit to the General Assembly a final version approved by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) prior to the regular session of the Assembly in 2024. 

X. ERADICATION OF STATELESSNESS IN THE AMERICAS 

RESOLVES: 

1. To urge States actively to participate in the next Global Refugee Forum, presenting new commitments related to the prevention and eradication of statelessness, and to continue, as appropriate, with the fulfillment of previous commitments made in those regards. 

2. To urge all States in the region to respect international and regional human rights law, particularly provisions concerning arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of nationality. 

XI. UNIVERSAL CIVIL REGISTRY AND THE RIGHT TO 7/

RESOLVES: 

1. To instruct the General Secretariat, through its Universal Civil Identity Program in the 

Americas (PUICA) and the Latin American and Caribbean Council for Civil Registration, Identity, and 

Vital Statistics (CLARCIEV) to continue providing support to those member states that so request for 

the strengthening of their civil registration systems in order to ensure the protection and upholding of 

the right to identity, the universal registering of births, deaths, and other changes and deeds related to 

civil status, and of interconnections between registration systems and national identity systems in order 

to ensure legal identity for everyone, and thereby strengthen the protection of all human rights, 

particularly those of all members of populations that are vulnerable, displaced, and/or historically 

subject to discrimination, as well as prevent and eradicate statelessness and allow universal and 

equitable access to essential public services.  

> 7. The United States notes that this section references “rights” that do not exist in customary international
> law or in any international law or in any treaties to which the United States …

- 40 -

XII. HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS 

RESOLVES: 

1. Urge member states to adopt the necessary measures to create the social, economic, and political conditions for human rights defenders, including those individuals that face particular risks such as women human rights defenders, to freely go about their work and to incorporate a comprehensive perspective of protection, including differentiated and collective protections, and intersectionality, understood as the effect of the interconnection of multiple and compound forms of discrimination, exclusion, and inequality on the protection of human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, communicators, and environmental defenders, and their families, and the creation of an environment conducive to the defense of all human rights, granting the necessary legal guarantees so that all persons, individually or collectively, may enjoy all their rights and freedoms, without any type of discrimination, especially those who defend and exercise the rights to freedom of expression, association, and peaceful assembly in contexts where human rights violations are committed. 

2. Urge states to respond effectively to the particular situation of women human rights defenders, as well as women environmental defenders, who unfortunately face specific gender-based risks, including sexual and gender-based violence. 

XIII. HUMAN RIGHTS AND PEOPLE LIVING WITH A RARE DISEASE AND THEIR FAMILIES  8/

To instruct the Permanent Council, with existing resources and in collaboration with the Department of Social Inclusion, to include in its work program the commemoration of the International Day of Persons with Rare Diseases as one of the agenda items of its regular meeting closest to the February 28 of each year, with a human rights approach and with a gender perspective. 

XIV. PROTECTION OF ASYLUM SEEKERS AND REFUGEES IN THE AMERICAS 

In follow-up to section ix of the Resolution “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights” -AG/RES. 2991 (LII- O/22)-: 

1. To urge States to actively participate in the next Global Refugee Forum, to be held in December 2023, reaffirming the region’s commitment to the objectives of the Global Compact on Refugees, as well as the recommendations emerging from the first High-Level Meeting held in 2021, presenting new political commitments and continuing as appropriate with the fulfillment of the commitments previously made on the matter. 

2. To encourage States, as a follow-up to the Forum, to commemorate the 40 th anniversary of the Cartagena Declaration in 2024, advancing with an approach of contemporary displacement challenges and promote innovative solutions in a spirit of solidarity, cooperation, and shared responsibility.  

> 8.The United States does not support declarations or resolutions that single out a particular disability. The commemoration of a specific day for persons with a rare disease separates this community…

- 41 -

XV. HUMAN RIGHTS AND PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE AGAINST LGBTI PERSONS  9/10 /11 /12 /13 /14 /15 /

RESOLVES: 

1. To encourage Member States to recognize that LGBTI persons also face multiple and differentiated forms of violence based on their, sexual orientation, gender identity and/or expression, and sex characteristics, race, ethnicity, disability, age and social class which leads to aggravated forms of discrimination, exclusion and violence in the public and private spheres and further affects the full guarantee of their rights. 

2. To urge Member States: i) to use institutional mechanisms, strengthen the plexus of equal rights and develop public policies on violence against trans persons, particularly trans women, with emphasis on crimes due to prejudice and discrimination, to guarantee and respect equality before the law, as well as to promote access for trans persons to fully enjoy all human rights.; ii) to acknowledge the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination against LBTQI women, enact laws and policies to prevent gender-based violence and promote gender equality, disaggregate data about LBTQI violence, and encourage Member States to implement public policies to prevent, punish, and eradicate discrimination and violence against LBTQI women; iii) to urge States to foster respect for sexual diversity in rural and nearby coast areas, among others and promote policies or activities to generate a favorable social environment with safe and free spaces so that LGBTI persons living in same areas can develop and form their families without fear of discrimination, exclusion, and vulnerability. 16 /

XVI. FOLLOW-UP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AMERICAN DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND THE PLAN OF ACTION ON THE AMERICAN DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES (2022-2026) 17 /

WELCOMING WITH SATISFACTION the First Inter-American Meeting on the Implementation of the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples -ADRIP-, which was attended by the highest authorities in charge of public policies for Indigenous Peoples and representatives of Indigenous Peoples, from 20 to 22 March 2023, in the city of Antigua, Guatemala,  

> 9.The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago will present a footnote.
> 10 . The Republic of Paraguay reiterates its commitment to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international conventions concluded on the subject reaffirming.,…
> 11 . Guatemala promotes, defends and protects the human rights of all persons without discrimination, in accordance with international treaties. It does so by considering the language,.…
> 12 . The delegation of St. Vincent and The Grenadines will present a footnote.
> 13 . The delegation of St. Lucia will present a footnote.
> 14 . The Government of Peru joins the consensus; however, with regard to paragraph 2 of this Section, it wishes to state that it does so in accordance with the provisions of the international...
> 15 . The delegation of Jamaica will present a footnote.
> 16 . The Republic of El Salvador reaffirms its firm commitment to the fulfillment of its human rights obligations and commitments at both the inter-American…
> 17 . The United States recalls the distinction between human rights, the beneficiaries of which are
> individuals, and collective rights, the beneficiaries of which are….

- 42 -

from which the Consensus Document on the creation of the Working Group for the implementation of the Action Plan of said Declaration emanated. 

RESOLVES: 

1. To establish the Working Group for Follow-up on the Implementation of the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples -ADRIP-, in accordance with the Consensus Document on the creation of the Working Group for the implementation of the agreed Plan of Action of said Declaration during the First Inter-American Meeting on the Implementation of the ADRIP, which was attended by the highest authorities in charge of policies for Indigenous Peoples and representatives of Indigenous Peoples, from March 20 to 22, 2023, in the city of Antigua, Guatemala. 

2. Urging the States that have become part of the consensus for the adoption of ADRIP to present candidacies of experts at the highest level, and INSTRUCTING the Secretariat of Access to Rights and Equity to call for the presentation of candidacies of the legitimate organizations of Indigenous Peoples, with the purpose of to carry out the election and respective appointments to integrate, in observance of the criteria of geographic and cultural representation, gender equality, intergenerational representation and belonging to Indigenous Peoples, the aforementioned Working Group; and INVITE States that have not yet done so to consider joining ADRIP. 

3. Invite all Member States, permanent observers, as well as public or private, national or international persons or entities, to contribute to the Voluntary Fund for Specific Contributions for the Implementation of the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the Plan of Action on the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2022-2026). 

4. To urge the General Secretariat to promote the financial transparency and accountability of the Working Group, by submitting to the Permanent Council an annual budget and a report on spending at the end of each period, specifying the amounts required, the sources of financing obtained by said Group and the exercise of resources to cover the technical support personnel, the costs of virtual and face-to-face meetings; translations of documents and interpretations; the Inter-American Platform on the Implementation of the ADRIP; and any other relevant aspect. 

XVII. CONSUMER PROTECTION IN THE AMERICAS 

To invite non-members to join the Consumer Safety and Health Network of the OAS (CSHN) 

and urge member states of the CSHN and observer countries to contribute to the volunteer fund to 

guarantee the sustainability of the work done by the CSHN. 

XVIII. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE 2022 ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTER-AMERICAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS 

RESOLVES: 

1. To reaffirm the commitment of the member states to the inter-American system for protection of human rights. - 43 -

2. To encourage those member states that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying, or acceding to all the inter-American human rights instruments, particularly the American Convention on Human Rights. 

3. To reaffirm the importance for the Organization of maintaining a sustainable financial budget allocation that allows the IACHR and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to fulfill all their mandates and continue their work. 

XIX. SITUATION OF PEOPLE OF AFRICAN DESCENT IN THE HEMISPHERE AND RACISM 18 /

RESOLVES: 

1. To urge member states to continue promoting the generation of disaggregated statistical data incorporating the gender and age perspective and the dimension of intersectionality in 

the design and implementation of targeted, comprehensive public policies to address the serious labor, health, housing, access to justice, and education inequalities affecting women and men of African descent, in order to address associated and systemic inequalities, as well as the structural causes of systemic racism, while giving increased attention to the economic and social challenges that seem likely to emerge in the post-pandemic context and the need to ensure decent living conditions, as well as promoting and respecting the principles of equality and non-discrimination. 

2. To hold a special meeting within the framework of the CAJP, with the participation of regional experts and member states, on more effective regional cooperation to advance recognition, protection, and promotion of the rights of persons of African descent, including all women and girls of African descent and, in particular, on the advisability of adopting a Declaration on promotion, protection, and full respect for the human rights of persons of African descent in the Americas, reaffirming the political commitment of the member states on the occasion of the conclusion of the PLAN OF ACTION FOR THE DECADE FOR PEOPLE OF AFRICAN DESCENT IN THE AMERICAS (2016-2025). 

Section xx. GENDER PARITY AND BALANCED GEOGRAPHIC AND LEGAL-SYSTEM REPRESENTATION ON THE INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE INTER-AMERICAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS 

To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs to deepen its work on this issue in 

the 2023-2024 work plan, building upon observations from the report prepared by the Inter-American 

Commission of Women entitled “Best Practices to Consolidate Gender Parity and Equitable 

Geographical Distribution, as well as the Representation of Different Legal Systems in the Inter-

American Court and Commission on Human Rights”. This should include within existing 

resources a meeting with member states, civil society – including women’s organizations –, academia, 

the Inter-American Commission of Women, and relevant OAS entities in the first semester of the 

CAJP’s work plan to discuss follow-up on the report’s recommendations and to further exchange best 

practices on the selection process for IACHR and IA Court candidates. 

> 18 . The delegation of the United States will present a footnote.

- 44 -

4. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs, through the Permanent Council, to report to the General Assembly, at its 54th regular session, on the implementation of this resolution. - 45 -

ANNEX A 

List of mandates from resolution AG/RES. 2991 (LII-O/23) implemented before the 53rd regular session of the General Assembly 

• Section iv. Mental health and deprivation of liberty. The work of autonomous official public 

defenders 

6. To request the Permanent Council to instruct the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP) to include in its work plan prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly the following item of this resolution, in order to promote the exchange of experiences and best practices: "Mental health and deprivation of liberty. The work of the autonomous official public defender.” To hold an eleventh special meeting of the CAJP on good practices aimed at ensuring access to justice for mental health service users by each official public defender institution in the region in the first quarter of 2023, to be attended by member states and their respective official public defender institutions that provide legal aid, members of the American Association of Public Defender Offices (AIDEF), experts from the academic community, civil society, including women’s organizations, and international organizations. AIDEF will guarantee the attendance of its members. 

Note: Special session of the CAJP held on April 27, 2023 

• Section vi. Freedom of expression and journalism in the Americas 

4. To request the CAJP, within existing resources, to hold a special meeting in consultation with 

the states, to collectively reflect, share lessons learned, and exchange best practices on the right 

to freedom of expression and journalism in the Americas, and to present the results of that 

meeting to the Permanent Council prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General 

Assembly. 

Note: Special session of the CAJP held on May 18, 2023 

• Section xii. Promotion of the Inter-American Convention against Racism, Racial 

Discrimination, and Related Forms of Intolerance and the fight against all forms of 

discrimination 

1. To request the Permanent Council to organize within existing resources a follow-up meeting 

aimed at gathering input from member states for countering intolerance and discrimination in 

the region. 

Note: Special session of the Permanent Council held on March 29, 2023 

• Section xix. Human rights and prevention of discrimination and violence against LGBTI 

persons 

8. To instruct the Permanent Council to organize, with existing resources and in coordination with the Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity and civil society, a special meeting on “Human rights and prevention of discrimination and violence against LGBTI persons in the Americas” - 46 -

with special attention to access to the labor market in the context of the economic crisis triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors and in recovery measures. 

Note: Special session of the Permanent Council held on November 25, 2022 

• Section xxvi. Gender parity and balanced geographic and legal-system representation on the 

Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 

5. To instruct the CAJP to continue to deepen its work on this topic, including in its 2022-2023 work program, by holding a follow-up meeting for member states, experts, and civil society – including women’s organizations – to share best practices in the nomination and selection of candidates to the organs of the inter-American human rights system, including information on existing national procedures and policies, as well as best practices of other human rights bodies, with a view to producing a report with recommendations aimed at promoting at the IACHR and the Court gender parity, gender equality and non-discrimination, and balance among the different regions and legal systems of the Hemisphere, to be presented during the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly, and request the Inter-American Commission of Women to prepare – based on that meeting and including all opinions and participation – a report with recommendations to be presented at the 53rd General Assembly, including information on procedures, domestic policies, and existing best practices. 

• Note: Special session of the CAJP held on March 15, 2023 

• Report of the CIM:  CP/CAJP-3748/23 - 47 -

ANNEX B 

Activities assigned by the 52 nd regular session of the General Assembly, not implemented prior to the 53 rd regular session 

• Section vii. “The Power of Inclusion and the Benefits of Diversity” 

6. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs to organize, within existing resources and in coordination with the Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity, SEDI, and the  Subcommittee  on Partnership for Development Policies a special meeting where member states may engage in dialogue with experts, share lessons learned, and exchange good practices to advance the goals of this resolution, with a special focus on aspects identified in the preceding operative paragraph 5, and that the Committee present the results of that meeting to the Permanent Council prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly. 

Request for postponement to the second semester of 2023: see note verbale from the Permanent Missions of Canada and Panama - CP/CAJP/INF-1014/23 

• Section xvi. Human rights and the environment 

2. To instruct the Permanent Council to include the issue of access to information, public participation, and justice in environmental matters in Latin America and the Caribbean at one of its regular meetings and to invite the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), its Special Rapporteurship on Economic, Social, Cultural and Environmental Rights, and the Working Group to Examine the Periodic Reports of the States Parties to the Protocol of San Salvador to give a status report on this issue in Latin American and the Caribbean. 

Note: Special session of the Permanent Council pending 

• Section xix. Human rights and prevention of discrimination and violence against LGBTI 

persons 

9. To request from the IACHR, subject to the availability of resources, a follow-up report on the 2015 “Violence against LGBTI persons” report, and in collaboration with other bodies and agencies, such as the Pan American Health Organization, to also report about medical discrimination and degrading medical practices, especially in relation to intersex persons, as well as a report on the practice of so-called “conversion therapies” in the region. 

Note: Thematic/Special Report pending 

• Section xx. “Promotion and protection of human rights online” 

9. To request that the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) prepare – within existing resources and taking into account the contributions of multiple stakeholders and rights holders, such as states, the private sector, academia, civil society and the technical community – an inter-American report on international standards, challenges, and best practices on accessibility and digital inclusion, which includes a literacy component for digital civic skills and content moderation online in - 48 -

order to ensure and promote the free and equal access to, use, and appropriation of the Internet and new information and communication technologies by all people, in accordance with international obligations and norms. 

Note: Thematic/Special Report pending 

• Section xxv. Strengthening protection and promotion of the right to freedom of conscience and 

religion or belief 

1. To request the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to present before the Permanent Council its study on the right to freedom of conscience and religion or belief, once completed. 

Note: Thematic/Special Report pending - 49 -

FOOTNOTES 

1. … its commitment to promote, defend, and protect the human rights of all persons without discrimination, as agreed in international treaties ratified by Guatemala and in accordance with an interpretation consistent with the proper meaning of their words and their context, as well as the country’s Constitution and laws. 

In that regard, in accordance with Article 7(3) of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ratified on April 2, 2012), the term “gender” refers to the two sexes, male and female, and does not indicate any meaning different from that. 

3. … reviewed by authorities having responsibility for such activity, including Attorneys General, 

Ministries of Justice, and other government agencies responsible for policing, nor have the relevant law 

enforcement bodies of the OAS had an opportunity to review and comment. 

4. … environment and urges member states to consider signing, ratifying, or acceding to the 

Escazu Agreement. Although the United States congratulated Latin American and Caribbean states on the 

adoption of this agreement in 2018, we also expressed concerns at that time regarding certain elements of the 

Agreement. These concerns remain. Namely, with regard to paragraph 1 of Article 4 of the Agreement, the United 

States has consistently reiterated that there are no universally recognized human rights specifically related to the 

environment as a matter of international law, such as a human right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable 

environment, notwithstanding the adoption of UNGA resolution 76/300, which the United States supported for 

its moral and political aspirations. A right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environment has not yet been 

established as a matter of customary international law; treaty law does not yet provide for such a right; and there 

is no legal relationship between such a right and existing international law. The United States supports 

development of a right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environment in a manner consistent with international 

human rights law, with a common understanding as to its content and scope.". 

5. … the BBNJ Agreement is about the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. It is not a human rights instrument, nor does it have a nexus to a right to a clean, healthy, and sustainable environment. Thus, it is not appropriate to include this OP in this context. 

6. … of the rule of law. 

El Salvador considers all the organs and agencies of the inter-American system as playing a vital and complementary role, in fulfillment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the Organization of American States. 

Without any distinction, individualization, or privilege whatsoever, all rapporteurships under the inter-American human rights system are called upon to faithfully comply with Directive 1/19 on conducting the activities and discharging the functions envisaged in the mandates of the IACHR's special rapporteurships. 

7. … is party. The United States further notes that the American Declaration of the Rights and 

Duties of Man is a non-binding instrument and that the United States is not party to the American Convention. 

The United States further understands that OAS General Assembly resolutions do not change the current state of 

conventional or customary international law. - 50 -

8. … from the greater disability community and suggests that individuals with disabilities resulting from rare disease are somehow not a part of the disability community. Furthermore, this may encourage other groups to seek similar single resolutions or policies, which further erodes existing protections which are far from being implemented. 

9. … the provisions of Title II “On Rights, Duties, and Guarantees,” Chapter III “On Equality,” and Chapter IV “On the Rights of the Family” of the National Constitution and concordant provisions. Accordingly, it states its reservation on the contents of this section that are not congruent with its constitutional and legal framework. In addition, the references to "gender identity and/or expression" contained in this resolution shall be interpreted in accordance with its domestic law. 

10. … context, and intended purpose of treaties from a common-sense perspective, as well as with full respect for its domestic law. 

14. … human rights instruments to which it is a party, the Political Constitution of Peru, and domestic laws on the subject. 

16. …and universal levels. 

El Salvador establishes a reservation to any interpretation or application of the terms contained in this resolution that, by their nature and scope, conflicts with constitutional principles and its internal system of laws. The same applies to those that, in the legal sphere, are not in accordance with public policies aimed at favoring the great majorities, or that would tend to modify language agreed upon in international treaties ratified by the country. 

El Salvador ratifies its commitment to the full application of the constitutional principle of equality and non-discrimination of persons and compliance with the obligations under that principle that apply to its national legislation. 

It also reaffirms its responsibility to continue working in a coordinated manner to transform sociocultural patterns that generate violence, inequality, and discrimination in all areas. 

17. …peoples. The United States further recalls that, with limited exceptions not relevant here, the 

international human rights obligations of States do not extend to the conduct of private actors. The United States 

underscores our persistent objections to the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples initially 

placed on the record in 2007 and further elaborated in our footnote to OAS General Assembly resolution 

AG/RES. 2888 (XLVI-O/16) of June 15, 2016. In particular, the United States reiterates its view that the focus 

of the member States of the OAS should be on implementation of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 

Peoples. To the extent the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples is discussed herein, the 

United States notes that the language used should be consistent with the non-binding nature of the instrument. - 51 -

AG/RES. 3004 (LIII-O/23) STRENGTHENING DEMOCRACY 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING the decision of member states to hold the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, in Washington, D.C., on June 21-23, 2023, with the aim of restoring the cycle of holding the Assembly in the second quarter of each year, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To renew all the sections of resolution  AG/RES. 2989 (LII-O/22) , “Strengthening 

Democracy” exactly as adopted by General Assembly at its fifty-second regular session, with the exception of activities implemented prior to the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly as listed in Annex A .

2. To implement, before the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly, the activities assigned by the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly not yet implemented prior to the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly, as listed in Annex B. 

3. Update the sections of resolution AG/RES. 2989 (LII-O/22) and incorporate new sections, as follows: 

I. TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND ELECTORAL OBSERVATION MISSIONS 1/

RESOLVES: 

1. To urge the General Secretariat to continue producing and disseminating—as well as updating, when necessary—the different guides on electoral processes, and that in that framework it continue considering international standards and existing best practices, including contributions from member states and their electoral bodies and authorities. 

2. To instruct the Department of Electoral Cooperation and Observation (DECO) that, 

once concluded the mandate contained in resolution AG/RES. 2989 (LII-O/22) to update the Manual 

for OAS Electoral Observation Missions, considering the valuable experience and good practices of 

electoral authorities of the member states, and having taken into account the recognized international 

standards on the subject, as well as the recommendations and suggestions of the member states, it 

publish the Manual and present its content afterwards in a session of the Permanent Council before the 

LIV regular session of the General Assembly. 

> 1. Bolivia will present a footnote.

- 52 -

II. EFFECTIVE PUBLIC MANAGEMENT STRENGTHENING AND INNOVATION IN THE AMERICAS 

1. To request the General Secretariat, through the Department for Effective Public Management's School of Governance, to organize, within the framework of the CAJP, a course on digital diplomacy for delegates from the permanent missions, foreign ministries, and public servants in general, to promote awareness of the role of emerging technologies in strengthening democratic governance. 

2. To invite the member states to participate in the INGP Competition on Innovation in Government Procurement and the XVIII Annual Conference of the Inter-American Network for Government Procurement (INGP) to be held on a date and at a venue to be determined; and to request the General Secretariat, through the Department for Effective Public Management, to render advisory services and technical assistance to member states that so request in the following areas: 

a. Implementation of the Sustainable Supplier Self-Assessment Tool (HAPS) for public market capacity-building and strengthening institutional decision making with reference to public procurement processes. 

b. Design and implementation of a professionalization strategy to improve the performance of public procurement managers. 

c. Design of a roadmap with indicators for measuring the environmental, social, and economic impact of member states' procurement, including environmental estimates in monetary terms, with respect to reducing the carbon footprint. 

III. MEETING OF MINISTERS OF JUSTICE OR OTHER MINISTERS OR ATTORNEYS GENERAL OF THE AMERICAS (REMJA) 

1. To instruct the Permanent Council to convene, in accordance with the provisions of 

the “Document of Washington” that governs the REMJA process and the “Conclusions and 

Recommendations to REMJA XI” (REMJA-XI/DOC.2/21 rev.1), the relevant meetings of the REMJA 

working groups, within the resources allocated in the program-budget of the Organization and other 

resources. 

2. To request the Department of Legal Cooperation of the Secretariat for Legal Affairs, 

in its capacity as technical secretariat to the REMJA, to continue conducting regional training 

workshops on cybercrime, for judges and prosecutors, and continue providing the REMJA and its 

working groups with support, legal advice, and technical assistance; executing the technical 

cooperation programs, projects, and activities in pursuit thereof; administering and maintaining the 

networks under its purview; taking steps to secure funding for the REMJA activities; strengthening 

coordination and collaboration with the secretariats of other organizations, entities, or mechanisms for 

international cooperation in REMJA matters; and performing the other functions assigned to it under 

the “Document of Washington.” 

IV. MISSION TO SUPPORT THE PEACE PROCESS IN COLOMBIA (MAPP/OAS) -

To invite member states to continue strengthening political and financial support for MAPP/OAS in its work to promote peace in Colombia, and to request the General Secretariat to assist - 53 -

and promote MAPP/OAS as a means of firm support for the Colombian government and People in building peace under an innovative, flexible, and useful cooperation model, based on accumulated experience. 

V. FOLLOW-UP ON THE INTER-AMERICAN CONVENTION AGAINST CORRUPTION AND ON THE INTER-AMERICAN PROGRAM FOR COOPERATION IN THE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION 

1.  To instruct the Committee of Experts of the Follow-up Mechanism for the Implementation of the Inter-American Convention against Corruption (MESICIC), with the support of the Department of Legal Cooperation of the Secretariat for Legal Affairs, in its capacity as Technical Secretariat of this mechanism, and in accordance with its Rules of Procedure and other provisions governing it and with the timetable adopted by said Committee for the Sixth Round, to continue and conclude in the framework of said Round the review processes for the Dominican Republic, Canada, the Bahamas, the United States, Guyana, and Jamaica. In addition, to request the MESICIC Committee of Experts, with the support of the Technical Secretariat of that mechanism, to proceed with the consideration of the “Proposed Indicators to Prevent, Detect, and Reduce Impunity related to Results in the Protection of Whistleblowers and Witnesses of Acts of Corruption in Criminal Matters” and conclude with the adoption of said indicators. 

2.  To request the Technical Secretariat of the MESICIC to continue, within the sphere of its competencies and within the funds allocated in the program-budget of the Organization and other resources, to carry out the mandates arising from the “Recommendations of the Fourth Meeting of the Conference of States Parties to the MESICIC” and the Summits of the Americas, in addition to providing technical support and legal advice to the Conference of States Parties and the Committee of Experts and facilitating the exchange of best practices, horizontal cooperation among States, and synergies with other international anticorruption mechanisms by organizing special meetings for those purposes within the framework of the fortieth and forty-first meetings of the MESICIC Committee of Experts. 

VI. FOLLOW-UP ON THE INTER-AMERICAN DEMOCRATIC CHARTER 

1. To instruct the Permanent Council to promote the holding of a special meeting to follow up on the topics addressed at the special meeting of the Permanent Council of May 30, 2023, focused on the implementation of all aspects of the Inter-American Democratic Charter and its challenges, and to report on the conclusions and results of that meeting to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session. 

2. Encourage the creation of an open-participation voluntary group of member states to 

foster, with the support of the Secretariat for Strengthening Democracy, dialogue, horizontal 

cooperation, and the sharing of best practices among its members, and to identify opportunities within 

the principles of the OAS Charter and the Inter-American Democratic Charter to strengthen their 

democracies. 

3. Consistent with Chapter VI of the Democratic Charter “Promotion of a Democratic 

Culture,” to instruct the General Secretariat that, through existing resources and voluntary - 54 -

contributions, through the Executive Secretariat for Integral Development, in coordination with the 

Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity, and in consultation and coordination with the 

corresponding national authorities, to submit for consideration by member states an integrated and 

updated workplan reflective of the goals and objectives included in AG/RES. 2732 (XLII-O/12) 

“Human Rights Education in Formal Education in the Americas” and the Inter-American Program on 

Education for Democratic Values and Practices. 

VII. INTER-AMERICAN JUDICIAL FACILITATORS PROGRAM 

RESOLVES: 

1. To request the General Secretariat, together with the Inter-American Judicial Facilitators Program (PIFJ), to continue supporting the performance evaluation studies of the national judicial facilitators service in the Program’s member countries, so that this instrument can become a valuable tool for evaluating progress, informed decision-making, designing effective strategies, and areas for improvement in the implementation of the national judicial facilitator systems (SNFJs). 

2. To urge national judicial facilitation services to continue with Phase II of the PIFJ/OAS, as adapted to the particular needs of each country and institutionalized in a satisfactory manner, and to urge the SNFJ to promote open justice and the application of restorative and therapeutic justice components that enable redress for harm and the reintegration of persons involved in the resolution of the conflict. 

3. To recognize the priority and strategic nature of the work carried out by the PIFJ and national judicial facilitators services as a flagship project of the Organization of American States, which is aligned with the strategic pillars of the Organization, so that they may continue to perform their functions on behalf of disadvantaged communities and populations and of the judiciaries of the Americas. 

4. To commend the Minister of Justice of Colombia, the National Program for Equal Justice of Colombia, the National Program for Judicial Guidance Counselors of Peru, and the judiciary of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for the outstanding achievement in signing cooperation agreements with the OAS General Secretariat. These agreements represent significant milestones and are clear examples of the commitment of the judiciaries and justice institutions to promote peace and ensure full enjoyment of the right of access to justice in their countries. 

VIII. OPEN, DIGITAL, INCLUSIVE, AND TRANSPARENT GOVERNMENT 

RESOLVES: 

1. To request the General Secretariat, through the Department for Effective Public Management: 

a. To present a report to the CAJP on the progress made in the implementation of the Inter-American Open Data Program (PIDA) in countries. - 55 -

b. To work on the continued development of an inter-American agenda regarding emerging technologies in the digital governments of the Americas, particularly in relation to the ethical use of artificial intelligence policies, algorithms, and data governance, providing advice, accompaniment, technical support, or management funds to the Member States and inform the CAJP on the progress achieved. 

2. To invite member states to participate in the following regional meetings: 

a. Tenth Regional Open Data Conference (Abrelatam and Condatos) in Montevideo, Uruguay, from October 30 to November 3, 2023, and to request that the DEPM support the staging of the Conference and report to the CAJP on its outcomes. 

b. Twentieth annual meeting of the Electronic Government Network of Latin America and the Caribbean (RedGealc) to be held in Santiago, Chile, on November 21 and 22, 2023, and to request that the DEPM support the staging of the Conference and report to the CAJP on its outcomes. 

IX. DEMOCRACY, HATE SPEECH, AND HUMAN RIGHTS 2/

RECALLING that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent, and inter-related and that everyone is entitled to enjoy these rights without any distinction; 

MINDFUL that the Charter of the OAS provides in its preamble “that representative democracy is an indispensable condition for the stability, peace and development of the region” and proclaims that one of the essential purposes of the Organization is “to promote and consolidate representative democracy, with due respect for the principle of nonintervention”; 

REAFFIRMING that the Inter-American Democratic Charter, adopted by the member states in 2001, recognizes that the “peoples of the Americas have a right to democracy and their governments have an obligation to promote and defend it,” and that the “effective exercise of representative democracy is the basis for the rule of law and of the constitutional regimes of the member states of the Organization of American States”; 

HIGHLIGHTING Article 13.5 of the American Convention on Human Rights, which establishes the prohibition by law of all propaganda in favor of war and all advocacy of national, racial, or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to violence or any other similar illegal action against any person or group of persons, for any reason, including race, color, religion, language, or national origin; 

RECALLING the Declaration of Asunción: “Development with Social Inclusion,” adopted by the States of the Americas in 2014, in which they expressed the imperative to promote fair, equitable and inclusive societies;  

> 2.The Republic of Panama abides by the principles of freedom of thought and expression, as set forth in the American Convention on Human Rights.

- 56 -

CONSIDERING that it is necessary to address the root causes of hate speech and intolerance and concrete actions especially oriented towards education, culture of peace and human rights to strengthen healthy democratic coexistence; 

REITERATING that hate speech impacts the lives of people, undermines democratic systems, and respect for diversity, and that it constitutes a serious common concern for our region, in that such speech and forms of expression fuel incitement to extreme violence and related forms of intolerance, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To reaffirm the commitment to promoting and protecting all human rights for all persons and with the defense of democracy and the constitutional order of the States, which emphasize the need to promote the values of tolerance, non-discrimination, pluralism, and respect for the rule of law and international law. 

2. To reaffirm that democracy, development, the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all people are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is one of the most significant achievements of our region and is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their own political, economic, social, and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of life; and emphasizes the need for universal observance and implementation of human rights and adherence to the rule of law at both the national and international levels, while respecting the principle of non-intervention. 

3. To reaffirm that everyone has the right to freedom of expression, but that the exercise of that right entails special duties and responsibilities as expressed in article 13.2 of the American Convention of Human Rights and in article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 

4. To strongly condemn hate speech, including online and on the basis of political ideology, among other reasons, which violate human rights, with the aim of preventing acts of violence, including political violence, violent extremism, terrorism, racism, discrimination, intolerance, xenophobia, and other serious violations of human rights, condemned in various international instruments, and which are contrary to the constitutional order, security, stability, and peace of our countries. 

5. To strengthen public policies to prevent pre-existing inequalities from deepening due to hate speech and expressions, especially when they target people and groups in situations of vulnerability and/or historically discriminated against. 

6. To urge states to cooperate in order to better understand the causes and implications of hate speech for democracy and human rights, as well as to adopt effective measures to combat hate speech and its structural causes, based on international human rights law and other international commitments and obligations assumed by states. - 57 -

X. STRENGTHENING CADASTRE AND PROPERTY REGISTRY IN THE AMERICAS 

CONSIDERING the sections on “Strengthening cadastre and property registry in the Americas” of resolutions AG/RES. 2927 (XLVIII-O/18), AG/RES. 2931 (XLIX-O/19), AG/RES. 2958 (L-O/20), AG/RES. 2975 (LI-O/21), and AG/RES. 2989 (LII-O/22), “Strengthening Democracy,” under which the General Secretariat is instructed to continue supporting, through the Department for Effective Public Management, efforts by member states that so request to strengthen their cadastre and property registry management and to share experiences and good practices that will advance the regional agenda on this matter; and 

TAKING NOTE of the 2022 activity report of the Inter-American Network on Cadastre and Property Registry (RICRP) delivered at its VIII Assembly held in-person on November 16, 2022; and to the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs on May 11, 2023, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To invite the member states to attend the IX Conference and Annual Assembly of the Inter-American Network on Cadastre and Property Registry (RICRP), which will be held in Ecuador with the support of the National Public Registries Directorate (DINARP) and the National Institute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico (INEGI) as RICRP Chair; instructing the RICRP to implement a line of work with judiciary branches to exchange experiences toward developing a set of inter-American guidelines on mechanisms for settling real estate-related conflicts through specialized bodies, and to report to the OAS Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs on the outcomes. 

2. To push for the creation of a knowledge management group under the RICRP with a view to joining efforts and promoting the exchange of experiences among national cadastre and registry agencies, in order to design and produce diagnostic assessments, instructing the Department for Effective Public Management to render its support on these aspects in order to make public policy recommendations in this area, emphasizing digitalization of procedures and services, reduction of under-registration of properties, increased efficiency and transparency in real estate transactions, and data governance, taking into account the importance of privacy and interoperability to land ownership certainty and to social order. 

XI. PROMOTION OF INTER-AMERICAN PARLIAMENTARY ENGAGEMENT 

RECOGNIZING the essential role that legislators play in the exercise and promotion of representative democracy in the Americas,  3/

RESOLVES: 

1. To instruct the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP) and the Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities (CISC) to promote the holding of a special meeting to follow-up on the best practices, recommendations, and outcomes resulting from the related meeting of the Permanent Council held on May 19, 2023 with  

> 3.As supported by the "Organization of American States Legislative Engagement Act of 2020" (Public Law 116-343) of the United States, which seeks to strengthen the participation of…

- 58 -

parliamentarians through ParlAmericas and other regional parliamentary organizations, the results of which will be reported to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session. - 59 -

4. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs, through the Permanent Council, to report to the General Assembly, at its fifty-fourth regular session, on the implementation of this resolution. - 60 -

ANNEX A 

List of mandates from resolution AG/RES. 2989 (LII-O/23) implemented before the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly 

• Section i. Strengthening cadastre and property registry in the Americas 

4. To urge cadastre and registry institutions in member states to participate in the development of initiatives to meet the objectives set forth in this resolution, through the sharing of experiences to strengthen cadastre and registry management as part of digital transformation and in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic with a view to economic and social recovery, through the use of traditional and, in particular, emerging systems, databases, and technological models; and to instruct the Department for Effective Public Management to conduct the biannual survey of cadastre and property registry and to report its findings to the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP). 

Note: Thematic/Special Report  CP/CAJP/INF.1035/23 

• Section vii. Follow-up on the Inter-American Democratic Charter 

5. To instruct the Permanent Council to promote, in broad consultation with member states on recommendations for panelists, the holding of a special meeting on the implementation of all aspects of the Inter-American Democratic Charter and its challenges, and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third regular session on the outcomes of that meeting. 

Note: Special meeting of the Permanent Council held on May 30, 2023 

• Section ix. Promotion of inter-American parliamentary engagement 

3. To instruct the Permanent Council, working through the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP) and the Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities (CISC), to promote the holding of a special meeting with parliamentarians through ParlAmericas and other regional parliamentary organizations to share best practices and recommendations with the member states, with a particular focus on the gender perspective, in order to enhance inter-American parliamentary dialogue, the results of which will be reported to the General Assembly at its fifty-third regular session. 

Note: Special meeting of the Permanent Council held on May 19, 2023 - 61 -

ANNEX B 

Activities assigned by the fifty-second regular session of the General Assembly, not implemented prior to the fifty-third regular session 

• Section ii.  Technical  cooperation and electoral observation missions 

3. To instruct the Department of Electoral Cooperation and Observation (DECO) to formally report to the member states, prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly, on the status of the process of updating the “Manual for OAS Electoral Observation Missions,” taking into account recognized international standards on the subject, as well as the valuable experience and good practices of the electoral authorities of the member states, and communicating to them the results of this process, so that they may formulate their recommendations and suggestions for the consideration of DECO. 

Note: Report pending 

6. To instruct the General Secretariat to provide to any member state that so requests, and once electoral observation missions are concluded, additional information available on the electoral observation missions deployed in its territory in accordance with the regulations of the inter-American system, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter. 

• Section viii. Consumer protection in the Americas 

1. To request the OAS Consumer Safety and Health Network (CSHN) to prepare a report describing the measures that have been adopted to protect the health and safety of consumers in the period 2021-2022. 

Note: Report pending 

• Section xi. Deepen the relationship between inclusive, democratic governance and sustainable 

development 

8. To instruct the Permanent Council to promote, in broad consultation with  member  states for recommendations for panelists, the holding of a special meeting on the importance of deepening the relationship between inclusive democratic governance and sustainable development, with special emphasis on the issues identified in the commitments adopted on democracy and sustainable development at the Ninth Summit of the Americas, and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third regular session on the results of that meeting. 

Note: Special meeting of the Permanent Council pending - 62 -

FOOTNOTE 

3. …elected national legislators in the work of the OAS and catalyze the formation of a parliamentary assembly, as well as the outcomes of the meeting organized and held at the U.S. Congress on May 18, 2023 to advance the Act's implementation. With passage of the Legislative Engagement Act, the U.S. Congress has articulated a vision to strengthen regional inter-parliamentary dialogue consistent with the values and principles contained in the OAS Charter and the Inter-American Democratic Charter – especially the principle of the separation of powers. The United States is committed to strengthening regional legislative collaboration and dialogue, reflective of our resolve to realize fully shared Inter-American objectives on representative, responsive and inclusive governance. - 63 -

AG/RES. 3005 (LIII-O/23) INTERNATIONAL LAW 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

RECALLING resolution AG/RES. 2990 (LII-O/22) adopted on October 7, 2022 and all previous resolutions adopted on this subject; and 

HAVING SEEN the “Annual Report of the Permanent Council to the General Assembly,” in particular the section on the activities of the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP); 

CONSIDERING the decision of the member states to hold the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in Washington, D.C., from June 21 to 23, 2023, with the object of restoring the cycle of holding the General Assembly in the second quarter each year; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To urge member states and the Permanent Council, through the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs, to continue contributing to the achievement of the objectives established in the area of international law. 

2. To reaffirm as current and consider automatically renewed the General Assembly mandates in the area of international law that could not be implemented prior to the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly, and to instruct the General Secretariat and the other organs covered by Article 53 of the Charter of the Organization of American States to continue working on their implementation, unless determined otherwise by a specific resolution. 

3. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs to report, through the Permanent Council, to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session on the implementation of this resolution. 

I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE ON JURIDICAL AND POLITICAL AFFAIRS 

i. Inter-American Program for the Development of International Law 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that artificial intelligence has been thrust headlong into people’s daily lives, generating the concern, as expressed by different social actors, to have in place regulations enabling the benefits and development possibilities of this technology to be leveraged, while mitigating the risks and biases inherent to machine-learning algorithms; and highlighting the importance of international law in developing principles and standards that strengthen the efforts of States to implement regulations of this kind at the domestic level; - 64 -

RESOLVES: 

1. To express its appreciation to the Department of International Law for its efforts in the promotion and dissemination of international and inter-American law and to request that it continue to implement the actions contained in the Inter-American Program for the Development of International Law and present a report on its activities to the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP); and to request the Permanent Council to organize a meeting similar to the one it held in 2022 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Program, so that member states can continue to have a space to discuss activities that they consider priorities within the Program’s framework. 

2. To request the Department of International Law to continue organizing analytical activities on topics that require examination from an international law standpoint, including legal implications of the use of artificial intelligence, so that the staff of permanent missions, public officials in member states, and the staff of the General Secretariat have the appropriate tools to address those topics in a timely fashion, in an informed manner, and from a comprehensive perspective, as well as seeking the collaboration from professionals and entities with expertise in that regard. 

ii. Inter-American Juridical Committee 

CONSIDERING the observations and recommendations of the member states on the Annual Report of the Inter-American Juridical Committee, contained in document  CP/CAJP-3733/23 corr. 1 

of July 20, 2023; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To recognize the latest contributions of the Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI) to international law, namely, the Report on Compulsory Primary Education [document CJI/doc.690/23 rev. 1]; the Declaration of Inter-American Principles on the Legal Framework for the Creation, Operation, Financing, and Dissolution of Non-profit Civil Entities [document CJI/RES. 282 (CII-O/23 corr. 2)]; the Declaration of Inter-American Principles on Neuroscience, Neurotechnologies, and Human Rights [document CJI/RES. 281 (CII-O/23 corr. 1)]; the Second Report on International Law Applicable to Cyberspace [document CJI/doc.671/22 rev. 2 corr. 1]; and the Declaration on the inviolability of diplomatic premises as a principle of international relations and its relationship to the concept of diplomatic asylum [document CJI/DEC.03 (CI-O/22)]; to instruct the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs of the Permanent Council to give them due consideration; and to request that the Department of International Law, as its technical secretariat, continue to disseminate these documents and those pertaining to other topics on its work agenda as widely as possible, including through virtual media. 

2. To request the Inter-American Juridical Committee to expand the content of the 2020 Inter-American Model Law 2.0 on Access to Public Information to include issues that could not be considered at the time, such as access to public information held by the judiciary, considering the provisions of the internal legislation of each State, as well as those it deems most appropriate, in order to continue strengthening access to public information in the region. - 65 -

iii. International legal framework for arms and ammunition manufacturing, distribution and 

marketing companies  1/

TAKING NOTE of the results of the meeting held by the Permanent Council to reflect on the promotion and protection of human rights and the role of arms companies; 

RECOGNIZING that arms and ammunition manufacturers, distributors, and marketers, by defining the capabilities of weapons, their modifiability, portability, assembly, and commercial practices for their sale play an important role in the prevention of armed violence and human rights violations and abuses and should act with due diligence; 

UNDERSCORING the role of civil society , and especially of human rights defenders, and other social actors in defending people adversely affected by human rights violations and abuses, particularly of the right to life; 

TAKING NOTE OF the attention given by the Inter-American Juridical Committee to the topic 

“responsibility of arms production and trading companies in the area of human rights” by the Inter-American Juridical Committee; 

RECALLING the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and its “Protect, Respect, and Remedy” framework, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To recall the importance of further discussions on the responsibility of companies that manufactue, distribute and market arms to respect human rights and, therefore, to invite member states to discuss the issue within the relevant bodies. 

2. To request the rapporteur of the Inter-American Juridical Committee on the topic “responsibility of arms production and trading companies in the area of human rights,” to enrich his work with an analysis of the due diligence that production, distribution and trading companies should exercise, as well as actions and steps that States should take to promote access to justice in the event of non-performance of due diligence measures. 

3. To request the Department of International Law, in order to strengthen the study on the responsibility of arms and ammunitions production, distribution and marketing companies, to promote the widest dissemination and reflection on the subject, including the Advisory Opinion requested from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights on the activities of private companies and their effects on human rights, when issued by the Court. 

iv. Use of international law for strengthening the OAS 

TAKING NOTE of the meeting held by the Permanent Council to reflect collectively on the principles of international law on which the inter-American system is founded, as the normative framework that governs the work of the Organization of American States;  

> 1.Promoting and advancing respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is a top priority for the United States. Combatting insecurity and protecting human rights for all are challenges…

- 66 -

RECOGNIZING the work of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights for the observance, promotion, and protection of human rights in the region; 

AWARE of the importance of the inter-American human rights system for strengthening the capacity of member states to meet their human rights obligations; 

EMPHASIZING that the Inter-American Court of Human Rights is one of three regional human rights tribunals exercising contentious and advisory functions for the States that accept its jurisdiction; 

UNDERLINING that, as a court of law, the case law of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights is binding upon States that have accepted its jurisdiction as stipulated in article 68.1 of the American Convention on Human Rights and stands as an ancillary source of international law; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To acknowledge the contributions of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to the strengthening of the rule of law in the region. 

2. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs to hold a meeting to discuss, from an international-law perspective, the practices and experiences of Member States in proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. 

3. To request that the Joint Meeting with Legal Advisors to Ministries of Foreign Affairs, organized every two years by the Inter-American Juridical Committee, include this topic in its discussions. 

v. Promotion of and respect for international humanitarian law  2/

RECOGNIZING that new applications of emerging technologies, such as those in autonomous weapons, may pose concrete challenges to international peace and security, and raise new questions about the role of human beings in armed conflicts; 

EXPRESSING CONCERN about the risk that autonomous weapons systems will not be used in compliance with international law, particularly with the regulations and principles of international humanitarian law, such as distinction, proportionality, and precautions in attack, in armed conflict, and the risk that new technologies could be used to exacerbate discrimination against certain already vulnerable groups, including biases with regard to disability, race, gender, age, and other similar factors; 

EMPHASIZING the need to maintain meaningful human control in the use of autonomous weapons systems to uphold compliance with international law, in particular international humanitarian law, including the principles and requirements of distinction, proportionality and precautions in attack,  

> 2.The United States does not support section v. for the reasons stated in this footnote. The United States believes that the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) Group of…

- 67 -

as well as the importance of avoiding further dehumanization of armed conflicts, and ensuring individual accountability and state responsibility; 

RECALLING the obligation to determine whether the study, development, acquisition, or adoption of a new weapon, means, or method of warfare, as well as its use, in certain or in all circumstances, are prohibited by any norm of international law applicable to States Party, based on article 36 of Additional Protocol I (1977) of the Geneva Conventions of 1949; 

HIGHLIGHTING the work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging Technologies in the Area of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (GGE LAWS) of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCCW), an appropriate forum for in-depth debate on the subject, and where the first draft of Protocol VI to the CCCW on Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems was presented in 2022; 

TAKING NOTE of the work carried out in the framework of the Regional Conference on the Social and Humanitarian Impact of Autonomous Weapons, held in San José, Costa Rica on February 23 and 24, 2022, and the Belen Communiqué adopted; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To encourage Member States to contribute to discussions on emerging technologies and on autonomous weapons systems. 

2. To request the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs and the Committee on Hemispheric Security to, before the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly, hold a joint meeting to consider the challenges posed by emerging technologies and autonomous weapons systems in terms of compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law, and to request the Department of International Law to prepare a report on the outcomes of that meeting. 

vi. Promotion of the International Criminal Court  3/

RECOGNIZING the work of the International Criminal Court in the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for the most serious crimes of concern to the international community, such as genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression; 

MINDFUL of the importance of cooperation from states and international and regional organizations for the effective functioning of the International Criminal Court; 

REITERATING its commitment to uphold and defend the principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute, and to preserve its integrity in the face of threats against the Court, its officials, and those who work with it, and the importance that the Court have the full support of the OAS Member States in order to fulfill its mandate;  

> 3.Although the United States is not a party to the Rome Statute, we underscore our firm and deep commitment to justice and accountability, particularly for the worst crimes known …

- 68 -

TAKING NOTE of the outcomes of the technical working meeting to strengthen cooperation with the International Criminal Court held on June 16, 2022, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To reiterate its support for the International Criminal Court (ICC), which acts in favor of the common commitment to combat impunity for the most serious crimes of concern to the international community, in accordance with the Rome Statute, in a complementary manner to domestic criminal jurisdictions. 

2. To encourage member states that are neither party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court nor to its agreement on privileges and immunities to consider ratifying or acceding to it. 

3. Call upon member states that are party to the Rome Statute to strengthen cooperation and assistance with the International Criminal Court in accordance with their international obligations. 

vii. The Law of the Sea 

A. Sea-level rise in relation to international law 

TAKING NOTE of the results of the special meeting of the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs on the consequences and legal implications of sea-level rise on May 4, 2023, which considered the particular challenges facing the region in relation to the potential consequences of sea-level rise and its legal implications, and examined the response and adaptation measures that member states of the Organization have implemented; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To request the Permanent Council to hold a special meeting to foster an exchange on possible challenges that the region may face with respect to the consequences of sea-level rise and its legal ramifications, including the legal implications for maritime borders, food security, and human displacement as a result of sea level rise, in order to identify the main challenges for the member states of the Organization. 

viii. Centenary of the Treaty to Avoid or Prevent Conflicts between the American States (“Gondra 

Treaty”) 

CONSIDERING that May 3, 2023, marked the one hundredth anniversary of the adoption of the Treaty to Avoid or Prevent Conflicts between the American States, also known as the “Gondra Treaty” in recognition of one of its proponents, Mr. Manuel Gondra, a Paraguayan national; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To celebrate with satisfaction the centenary of the adoption of the Treaty to Avoid or Prevent Conflicts between the American States (“Gondra Treaty”) signed at the Fifth International Conference of American States, held in Santiago, Chile, from March 25 to May 3, 1923. - 69 -

2. To recognize the historical importance for international law of the Gondra Treaty, considered the first regional instrument on peaceful settlement of international disputes, in the construction of the inter-American legal framework in that regard. - 70 -

FOOTNOTES 

1. … every nation faces and a challenge we can all work together to overcome. It is important to note that obligations arising under international law generally apply to States and not to non-state actors such as individuals or business enterprises. The actions by private actors as a general matter in and of themselves do not constitute violations of international human rights law. In addition, the United States is unaware of any existing advisory opinion that meets the description in the text, nor is it clear that any such opinion would be within the advisory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Moreover, to the extent that the text refers to a request currently pending before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the United States would note that the Inter-American Court has not yet ruled on the jurisdiction and admissibility of that request. The United States considers it inappropriate and inconsistent with the roles of the political and judicial organs of the inter-American system for the General Assembly to presuppose the outcome of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights' analysis of both the technical criteria for jurisdiction and admissibility as well as Court's own discretionary powers to decide whether to render an advisory opinion concerning any given request. Therefore, the United States interprets the resolution as requesting the Department of International Law to reflect on any future action by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and to defer decision on any dissemination of any document it might produce to a further resolution of the appropriate OAS political organ. We encourage all states to cooperate closely to stem illicit trafficking of firearms in the region. 

2. … Governmental Experts (GGE) on Emerging Technologies in the Area of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (LAWS) is the appropriate multilateral forum for discussions on autonomous weapons, as demonstrated by the GGE’s extensive work and the robust, cross-regional participation of States and civil society in the LAWS GGE. The United States appreciates the focus of this resolution on international humanitarian law (IHL)—in particular the principles and requirements of distinction, proportionality, and precautions in attack. This focus reflects the work of the LAWS GGE, which affirmed by consensus, inter alia, in its 2023 report, “[c]ontrol with regard to weapon systems based on emerging technologies in the area of LAWS is needed to uphold compliance with international law, in particular IHL, including the principles and requirements of distinction, proportionality and precautions in attack.” Although the LAWS GGE has extensively discussed the term “meaningful human control”, the GGE has not found consensus on it. This term is not a requirement or standard under existing IHL. For reasons that the United States has explained in the LAWS GGE, which other States have supported, we oppose the reference to this term in this resolution. In addition, although the United States appreciates the preambular paragraph highlighting the work of the LAWS GGE, the United States does not support the reference in that paragraph to a proposal submitted to the GGE regarding a draft CCW Protocol VI. This proposal did not gain the consensus of the GGE and other proposals that have been submitted to the GGE, such as the proposal submitted by Australia, Canada, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Poland, the United Kingdom, and the United States, are not reflected in this paragraph, which does not accurately portray the GGE’s work. The United States also opposes the preambular paragraph related to Article 36 of the 1977 Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions because this paragraph does not accurately reflect the requirements of Article 36 for States Parties to Additional Protocol I. Finally, with respect to the second operative paragraph, the United States reiterates that IHL should be the focus of this meeting. 

3. … to humanity. The United States recognizes that the International Criminal Court can play a meaningful role in bringing those responsible for the worst atrocities to justice. To that end, we have provided -and continue to provide - specific support to the ICC in connection with certain investigations and prosecutions, consistent with U.S. law and policy. The United States understands that any OAS support rendered to the ICC would be drawn from specific-fund contributions rather than the OAS regular budget. - 71 -

AG/RES. 3006 (LIII-O/23) THE HUMAN RIGHTS CRISIS IN NICARAGUA 1/

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

RECALLING that the promotion and defense of democracy for the peoples of the Americas is an obligation of every government under the Inter-American Democratic Charter which also states that “essential elements of representative democracy include, inter alia, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms”, and NOTING that the obligation falls upon every government of the member states individually; 

CONSCIOUS of the deepening political and humanitarian crisis in Nicaragua since 2018 despite several resolutions and mandates adopted by the Member States and General Secretariat of the OAS to engage constructively with the Government of Nicaragua to support the restoration of democratic institutions and protection of human rights in accordance with International Law; 

EXPRESSING CONCERN at the multiple reports by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) of the escalation of repression, the closure of civic space, violations of human rights, deterioration of the situation of women, indigenous peoples and afrodescendants, including the denial of basic civil and political rights of Nicaraguan citizens, as well as the violation of property and social security rights; 

NOTING that Article 15 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that everyone has a right to a nationality, and urging states to refrain from the arbitrary deprivation of nationality, which undermines the enjoyment of human rights, and that the right to the use and enjoyment of one’s property is set forth the American Convention of Human Rights; 

FURTHER NOTING that resolution A/HRC/52/L.38, adopted by the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC), on March 27, 2023 at its 52nd session, condemned these violations, called for the implementation of the GHREN’s recommendations and resumption of cooperation by Nicaragua and extended the mandate of the GHREN for a period of 2 years; 

ALARMED by the reported cases of more than 3,000 national and international non-governmental and humanitarian organizations that have had their legal status cancelled and their property confiscated in Nicaragua since 2018, including in May 2023 the Red Cross, leaving thousands of citizens without access to the services and assistance that these non-governmental and humanitarian organizations provided;  

> 1.The Republic of El Salvador reaffirms its principled position in matters of international law, in the sense of not intervening or interfering in the internal affairs of another State.

- 72 -

NOTING the work of the Red Cross in Nicaragua and the importance of its activity as a humanitarian organization in 191 countries with a mandate to prevent and alleviate human suffering, thereby contributing to the maintenance and promotion of human dignity and peace in the world; 

DEEPLY CONCERNED by reports of persecution of members and clergy of religious communities who suffer, inter alia, arbitrary detention, harassment and unjustified expulsion; the serious and systematic violation of the right to religious freedom in the public and private sphere, the forced closure of primary, secondary and university educational establishments established by the Catholic Church; the closure of entities dedicated to works of charity and social assistance; denial of access to places of worship and preventing the dissemination of religious beliefs through the suppression of Catholic media; 

DEEPLY CONCERNED the Report of March 2023 of the Group of Experts on Human Rights on Nicaragua of the United Nations Human Rights Council stating that there are factual elements to conclude, prima facie, the existence of a crime against humanity of persecution; 

CONSCIOUS that the worsening conditions have resulted in an estimated 260,000 Nicaraguans leaving the country since 2018, as of June 2022, as reported by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in January 2023 (HCR/PC/NIC/2023/01); 

CONCERNED by Nicaragua’s disregard for its international human rights obligations and by its refusal to engage with international human rights mechanisms, as stated in reports of the United Nations and the inter-American human rights system; 

WILLING to constructively engage with Nicaragua and the international human rights mechanisms aiming at the fulfillment of its international human rights obligations, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To urge the Government of Nicaragua to  cease  all violations of human rights and to respect civil and political rights, such as religious freedoms, and the rule of law; and to  refrain from  all forms of intimidation and harassment against journalists, media outlets, faith communities and non-governmental organizations, respecting the right to freedom of expression and right to peaceful assembly. 

2. To urge the Government of Nicaragua to comply with the decisions and recommendations of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to immediately and unconditionally release all political prisoners. 

3. To urge the Government of Nicaragua to immediately and unconditionally release all political prisoners, in compliance with the decisions and recommendations of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. 

4. To urge the Government of Nicaragua to refrain from repressing and arbitrarily detaining leaders of the Catholic Church and provide information regarding the physical and psychological health of Bishop Rolando Alvarez, who is reportedly being held in isolation at a maximum-security facility. - 73 -

5. To call on authorities in Nicaragua to revoke immediately legislation that: (i) allows for citizenship striping on arbitrary grounds and that (ii) restricts civil and public liberties; and to refrain from instrumentalizing legal and legislative mechanisms against dissidents. 

6. To call on the Government of Nicaragua to cooperate fully with international human rights bodies in, including through access to its territory, and to implement recommendations issued by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and other international human rights bodies. 

7. To request the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, to continue monitoring the human rights situation in Nicaragua, through its Special Monitoring Mechanism for Nicaragua (MESENI), to seek cooperation from the Nicaraguan Government in this regard, and to provide all reasonable assistance to the United Nations Group of Human Rights Experts on Nicaragua in support of the execution of its ongoing mandate. 

8. To request that the Permanent Council remain seized of the political and human rights situation in Nicaragua, by receiving regular updates from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and other expert bodies, and to consider all further actions that could be conducive to the effective exercise of representative democracy, the rule of law and the protection of human rights in the country, including encouraging the Working Group on Nicaragua to make the agenda for any dialogue with the Nicaraguan authorities as broad as possible within the framework of respect for democracy, international law and the principle of non-intervention. 

9. To call on Member States to use their best efforts to encourage Nicaraguan authorities to engage in dialogue at the highest levels. - 75 -

AG/RES. 3007 (LIII-O/23) TOWARDS THE IMMEDIATE RESTORATION OF SECURITY, STRENGTHENING OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, AND SUPPORT FOR PROTECTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY IN HAITI 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

CONSIDERING the unabated escalation of problems in the multidimensional security situation, the increased calls for urgent hemispheric cooperation to support the strengthening of democracy, and the provision of humanitarian assistance to address the severe food insecurity and high food inflation being experienced by the people of Haiti; 

REAFFIRMING its concerns and considerations expressed in resolution AG/RES. 2982 (LII-O/22), adopted at its fifty-second regular session; 

REAFFIRMING ALSO the commitment to renew support for security and humanitarian assistance, inclusive, free, fair, and credible elections, and the democratic transition in the Republic of Haiti as expressed in resolution CP/RES. 1214 (2414/23) of February 10, 2023, which established the Working Group on Haiti, with a mandate to facilitate such support by OAS member states, permanent observers, and the General Secretariat, as well as to serve as a mechanism for regular meetings of the OAS on the situation in Haiti, and to maintain an ongoing dialogue with the Government of Haiti; 

REITERATING that improving the multidimensional security situation, addressing the humanitarian crises, and protecting human rights, are very important and much-needed requirements for the preparations for inclusive, free, fair, and credible elections in Haiti; 

REITERATING ALSO that any solution to the current multidimensional crisis in Haiti requires the efforts of all stakeholders of the Haitian nation, including the government, the opposition, civil society, including women’s organizations, and the private and religious sectors; 

ENCOURAGING increased inclusion and participation of Haitian stakeholders in implementing the accord, entitled, ‘National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections’ signed on December 21, 2022, by the Government, and representatives of the business sector, social sector, and political parties in the Republic of Haiti; 

RECOGNIZING the need for continued compromise between all stakeholders in Haiti, including the Government, the opposition, civil society, women's organizations, and the private and religious sectors, in order to forge a broader political consensus; 

TAKING NOTE of the Dialogue led by the Haut Conseil de Transition on May 23 - 25, 2023; - 76 -

WELCOMING the CARICOM-facilitated discussions among Haitians, held in Kingston, Jamaica, from June 11 to 13, 2023 and the decision by all Haitian stakeholders to continue dialogue at home in the Republic of Haiti; 

RECALLING the Haitian Government’s requests, contained in a letter dated October 9, 2022, to the Secretary General of the OAS, for effective support from Haiti’s international partners to enforce the Rule of Law and to address the security and humanitarian crises that have been exacerbated by, among other things, the criminal actions of armed gangs and their sponsors; 

CONCERNED by the findings of the most recent report from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights “Situation of Human Rights in Haiti” released in January 2023; 

ACKNOWLEDGING the priorities communicated by the Government of Haiti on March 8, 2023, to the Working Group on Haiti for support and assistance in the areas of security; political dialogue; elections – technical, administrative, financial, and legal; and for food security; 

ACKNOWLEDGING ALSO the importance of the Security, Humanitarian, Electoral, and Democracy Strengthening Assistance Dialogue held on March 15, 2023, by the Working Group on Haiti as mandated in resolution CP/RES. 1214 (2414/23), for initiating a fact-finding process for enabling the provision of assistance and support to Haiti through further stakeholder consultation, and for addressing the most critical requirements for more inclusive political dialogue to enable broader consensus, strengthen democracy, and increase the achievability of an agreed electoral calendar, such as those presented by the Chair of the High-Level Transition Council (HTC) established pursuant to the accord, ‘National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections’ signed on December 21, 2022, including for a new constitution, re-establishment of the Cour de Cassation, public administration reform, and a multidimensional security assistance effort; 

RECALLING the major observations from the Security, Humanitarian, Electoral, and Democracy Strengthening Assistance Dialogue held on March 15, 2023, and the immediate opportunities for facilitating integrated and innovative assistance and support to Haiti by OAS member states, permanent observers, and the General Secretariat, in coordination and collaboration with international, Inter-American, regional and sub-regional public sector, private sector and civil society stakeholders and strategic partners, identified and articulated in the initial report of the Working Group on Haiti presented to the Permanent Council on April 20, 2023, as mandated in resolution CP/RES. 1214 (2414/23); 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the further consultations with international, Inter-American, regional, and subregional public and civil society sector partners undertaken by the Security, Humanitarian, and Electoral and Democracy Strengthening Assistance Clusters of the Working Group on Haiti during the period April to June 2023, to explore opportunities for immediate assistance and support to the people and Government of Haiti; 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT ALSO the invaluable presentations, reports, and situational analyses provided by the Special Representative of the OAS Secretary General in Haiti, and by international partners, including  United Nations  agencies, during the consultations undertaken by the Working Group on Haiti; and - 77 -

CONSIDERING the recommendations from the Security, Humanitarian and Electoral and Democracy Strengthening Assistance Clusters of the Working Group on Haiti for facilitating the provision of immediate assistance and support to the people and Government of Haiti, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To recognize the need for the OAS to facilitate immediate technical assistance to Haiti, 

for security, the preservation and strengthening of representative democracy, the promotion and 

protection of human rights, for humanitarian assistance, and for inclusive, free, fair and credible 

elections, as soon as conditions allow. 1/

2. To urge member states and permanent observers that are in a position to do so, to prioritize, integrate, facilitate, and provide immediate security assistance to Haiti and provide specific funds on: 

a. Institutional strengthening and improving the operational capacity and readiness of the Haitian National Police (HNP) by providing anti-gang and anti-kidnapping equipment and training, through contributions to the Joint Program for the HNP (United Nations Basket Fund); and by considering and formalizing the commitment of police and/or other security contributions; 

b. Increasing border and port security capabilities and capacity; 

c. Supporting the implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Security Council resolution 2653 on sanction measures; and 

d. Eliminating illegal firearms trafficking and supporting the implementation of the relevant commitments and provisions of the Inter-American Convention Against Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials (CIFTA) and the provisions of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2645 on arms and ammunition trafficking, including by reinforcing coordination and collaboration with the OAS Department against Transnational Organized Crime (DTOC), and the OAS Department of Public Security (DPS) through its Program of Assistance and Control of Arms and Munition (PACAM), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC), and the CARICOM Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (IMPACS) through the Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition in a Sustainable Manner by 2030 (Caribbean Firearms Roadmap). 

3. To encourage member states, permanent observers, and the General Secretariat, with the benefit of the ongoing consultations facilitated by the Humanitarian Assistance Cluster of the Working Group on Haiti, to focus on and integrate their humanitarian assistance commitments and  

> 1.

Mexico states that, in accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the establishment of an international armed force, or the like, with enforcement… - 78 -

contributions with those being provided by established and effective international and regional partners, including the World Food Program (WFP), the World Bank Group (WBG), the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the Pan American Development Foundation (PADF), the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), and other relevant organizations and agencies, to address the identified immediate priorities of food insecurity, nutrition, and health insecurity. 

4. To encourage all relevant OAS civil society partners, to support the activities of humanitarian NGOs and entities, including those of a religious character, and especially the local organizations in Haiti. 

5. To invite member states and permanent observers to contribute specific funds for the provision of human rights and electoral and democracy strengthening assistance to Haiti, for the immediate implementation of activities that have been identified by the Working Group on Haiti, with the technical assistance of the Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity and the Secretariat for Strengthening Democracy. 

6. To call on member states and Permanent Observers that have not yet done so, and are in a position to do so based on their national legislation, to consider providing security, humanitarian, and electoral assistance to Haiti, in a collaborative and integrated manner, in accordance with the OAS Charter. 

7. To request the Working Group on Haiti to advocate for and advance the interests of the Organization, in the establishment of a Joint OAS-CARICOM Electoral and Democracy Strengthening Mission, to enable regular reporting to both organizations, with regard to developments on the ground, and to facilitate the provision of assistance with the infrastructural, legal, security and technical aspects of the preparation for inclusive, free, fair, and credible elections, as well as democratic transition in Haiti, as soon as conditions allow. 

8. To instruct the Working Group on Haiti to continue to facilitate the ongoing exchange of information among member states, permanent observers, the General Secretariat, and international, Inter-American, regional, and subregional public and civil society sector partners to enable the identification, integration and innovative formulation of opportunities for providing immediate assistance and support to the people and Government of Haiti. 

9. To instruct the Special Representative of the OAS Secretary General in Haiti to coordinate and facilitate increased information-sharing, networking, integration, and community-based implementation of the humanitarian, human rights, and electoral and democracy strengthening assistance activities of Inter-American and OAS agencies and entities and the General Secretariat. 

10. To request that the General Secretariat provide the necessary technical, administrative, and financial support to the Working Group on Haiti to fulfill its assigned mandates based on available resources. - 79 -

FOOTNOTE 

1. …functions is the exclusive purview of the United Nations Security Council. - 81 -

AG/RES. 3008 (LIII-O/23) IN COMMEMORATION OF THE 50 TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE COUP D'ÉTAT IN CHILE 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

BEARING IN MIND that the Charter of the Organization of American States affirms that democracy is an indispensable condition for the stability, peace, and development of the region; 

NOTING that in the American Convention on Human Rights, the states parties reaffirmed their “intention to consolidate in this Hemisphere, within the framework of democratic institutions, a system of personal liberty and social justice based on respect for essential rights of man”; 

EMPHASIZING that the Inter-American Democratic Charter establishes that “democracy is essential for the social, political, and economic development of the peoples of the Americas” and that these peoples have a right to it and their governments have an obligation to promote and defend it; 

RECALLING that the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights have upheld the right to the truth, including the preservation of memory; 

RECALLING ALSO the coup d'état that occurred in Chile fifty years ago, on September 11, 1973; 

RECALLING that similar events have occurred in other countries of the Hemisphere, resulting in a breakdown in democratic process, including the repression of human, civil, and political rights and the destruction of democratic institutions; 

NOTING that the State of Chile has considered this commemoration as an opportunity for broad-based dialogue; to thank those who defended democracy; and to honor the memory of the victims of persecution, with a view to building a future based on steadfast defense of democracy and human rights; and 

MINDFUL that Chile has also viewed this commemoration as an occasion to express its gratitude for the international solidarity conveyed to the people of Chile in response to the coup d'état 

and the subsequent dictatorship, including solidarity expressed through the widely-acclaimed inter-American tradition of asylum; 

RESOLVES: 

1. To recognize the 50 th anniversary of the coup d'état in Chile as an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to democratic values, including representative democracy, social justice, human rights, and personal freedoms. - 82 -

2. To acknowledge the solidarity conveyed by various countries of the Americas to Chileans who left their country during the dictatorship in search of better living conditions, security, and refuge for themselves and their families. 

3. To applaud the hemispheric progress made in consolidating democracy and human rights, while encouraging continued vigilance against and effort to defeat any threat in these areas. 

4. To reaffirm its commitment to the consolidation of inclusive democratic institutions to promote the participation of all people in the exercise of their rights. 

5. To request that the Permanent Council, in September 2023, include “In commemoration of the 50 th anniversary of the coup d'état in Chile” on the order of business of a regular meeting, with the participation of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), through its Rapporteurship on “Memory, Truth, and Justice.” 

6. To favorably consider the request from the Government of Chile for an appropriate recognition for former President of Chile Salvador Allende Gossens, on the same terms as those afforded the historical figures of the Hemisphere who are honored at the headquarters of the Organization. 

7. To instruct the General Secretariat to collaborate and coordinate, within the scope of its functions and with available resources, in hosting events at the Organization's headquarters on the 50 th anniversary of the coup d'état in Chile. - 83 -

AG/RES. 3009 (LIII-O/23) ADVANCING HEMISPHERIC SECURITY: A MULTIDIMENSIONAL APPROACH 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

HAVING SEEN the “Annual Report of the Permanent Council to the General Assembly November 2022 – June 2023” ( AG/doc. 5xxx/22 add. 1 ), in particular the section on the activities of 

the Committee on Hemispheric Security (CSH); 

HAVING SEEN the annual reports presented to the General Assembly at its fifty-second regular session by the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD) ( CP/doc.5875/23 ), 

the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE) ( CP/doc.5853/23 ), and the Inter-American 

Defense Board (IADB) ( CP/doc.5877/23 ); and 

BEARING IN MIND the results, reports, and recommendations of the meetings and conferences on security-related matters held in implementing the mandates of the General Assembly, 1/

RESOLVES: 

I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEMISPHERIC SECURITY 

AND MEMBER STATES 

1.  To reaffirm ongoing validity of the applicable General Assembly mandates on hemispheric security ( CP/CSH/INF.566/22 ); to urge the Permanent Council, through the Committee 

on Hemispheric Security (CSH), and member states to continue contributing to the attainment of the objectives established in those mandates through the development, execution, evaluation, and reporting of programs, the exchange of information, and the adoption of cooperation measures and policies, as well as through mutual assistance, and technical and financial contributions and support; and to instruct the General Secretariat to provide the necessary support to those ends and continue its implementation of those mandates. 

2.  To request that the SMS and the IADB present, during the second half of 2023, a study on the compatibility between the results of the prioritization exercise of mandates related to multidimensional security issues carried out by the Secretariat pursuant to resolution AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22), “2023 Program-Budget of the Organization,” to IADB PDCIA5806/JID Priority of Mandates assigned to the IADB (7 Sept 22), and the list of pending mandates prepared in compliance with the mandate established in the second operative paragraph of resolution AG/RES. 2986 (LII-O/22) “Advancing Hemispheric Security: A Multidimensional Approach.” In addition, to request that they present a plan to implement the pending mandates, which should include the measures to be taken to acquire the required capabilities and resources.  

> 1. Tenth Meeting of the Forum on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures, March 2, 2023; Twenty-third regular meeting of the CIFTA Consultative Committee, April 5, 2023; ...

- 84 -

I. Hemispheric multidimensional security outlook and review 

A. Declaration on Security in the Americas 

3.  To take note of the outcome of the dialogue mechanism established by the CSH document  CP/CSH-2200/23 , whereby the member states concluded that the Declaration on Security in 

the Americas is a valid and sufficiently comprehensive document that does not warrant modification at this time. 

B. Declaration of Bridgetown: Multidimensional Approach to Hemispheric Security 

4.  To take note of the analysis conducted by the CSH in compliance with the mandate contained in the fourth operative paragraph of resolution AG/RES. 2986 (LII-O/22), whereby the member states underscored the importance of the Declaration of Bridgetown for the incorporation of the multidimensional approach to hemispheric security in the programs and activities undertaken within the Organization. 

II. Commitments to peace, disarmament and non-proliferation 

A. Disarmament and nonproliferation in the Hemisphere 

5.  To urge the members states to strengthen implementation of the Chemical Weapons 

Convention, highlighting the holding of the Fifth Review Conference from May 15 to 19, 2023, and 

endorsing the view that chemical weapons should never again be used, anywhere, by anyone, and under 

any circumstance. 

6.  To take note of the holding of the IX Review Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention on November 28 - December 16, 2022, and of the establishment of the Working Group on strengthening the convention. 

7.  To reaffirm that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, stressing the need for States Parties to the NPT to reaffirm the commitment to full implementation of all three of its pillars (disarmament, non-proliferation, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy). 

8.  To take note of the Second Meeting of States Parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition 

of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), to be held at United Nations headquarters in New York from November 

27 to December 1, 2023, with Mexico as chair. 

III. Strengthening hemispheric security and defense cooperation 

A. Confidence- and security-building measures in the Americas 

9.  To adopt the recommendations of the Chair of the Tenth Meeting of the Forum on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures, held in Washington, D.C., on March 2, 2023, document 

CP/CSH-2207/23 .- 85 -

10.  To thank the Government of Mexico for hosting the fourth meeting of the CICTE Working Group on Cooperation and Confidence-Building Measures in Cyberspace in Mexico City on October 27, 2022, and to adopt the five confidence-building measures agreed upon at the meeting and 

include them in the OAS consolidated list of CBMS in cyberspace: 

i. To encourage and promote the full, equal, effective, and meaningful inclusion, participation, and leadership of women in decision-making and leadership processes linked to information and communication technologies by promoting specific actions at the national and international levels with the aim of addressing the different dimensions around gender equality, and the reduction of the gender digital divide, in order to ensure their human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the Women, Peace, and Security agenda. 

ii. To promote studies, debate, development, and capacity building at the national and international levels in relation to the application of international law and international humanitarian law regarding the use of information and communications technologies in the context of international security by promoting voluntary exchanges of positions and national vision statements, opinions, legislation, policies, and practices on the subject, in order to promote common understandings. 

iii. Promote the implementation of the 11 voluntary, non-binding norms on responsible State behavior in cyberspace adopted by resolution 70/237 of the General Assembly of the United Nations and promote reporting on those activities, taking into account the national implementation survey. 

iv. In the information and communication technology space, to promote work and dialogue with all stakeholders, civil society, including women’s rights organizations, the academy, the private sector, and the technical community, among others. 

v. Develop national cyber incident severity schemes and share information on cyber incidents. 

11.  To adopt the List of Confidence and Security Building Measures (CSBMs) ( CP/CSH-

2123/22 rev. 1 ) as a regional guide to possible measures to address the new and traditional threats, 

concerns, and other challenges in the Hemisphere and report annually, no later than July 15 of each year, with information on the application of those CSBMs. 

12.  To request the IADB and the SMS to report to the Committee on Hemispheric Security, in the second half of 2023, on the actions taken to update the digital platform for reporting of CSBMs and express appreciation for the valuable contribution of Brazil to bring to fruition the OAS database on CSBMs. 

IV. Public security, justice, and violence and crime prevention 

A. Advancing police cooperation 

13.  To request that the SMS, through REDPPOL, continue developing a quality management standard for police institutions within the framework of ISO and promoting the certification of police processes in member states’ police forces. - 86 -

B.  Advancing cybersecurity 

14.  To welcome the efforts of CICTE to implement norms and confidence-building measures; responsible state behavior in cyberspace; cooperation in cyberspace; and capacity building to continue to address shared threats in cyberspace, including malicious cyber activities against critical infrastructure. 

15.  To take further steps to promote information sharing and technical cross-regional support, including by/with UN organs, on the impact of cybercrime, with the aim of preventing and mitigating its effects. 

16.  To request that SMS, through the CICTE Secretariat, continue to support Member States in developing and/or revising cybersecurity strategies and/or programs, and to continue to foster the exchange of information, experiences and good practices, as well as to continue supporting cybersecurity capacity development. In that regard, to foster synergies with other multilateral cybersecurity processes, including analysis of existing and potential threats; international law; international humanitarian law, norms, rules and principles of responsible state behavior; confidence-building measures; capacity building; and a gender perspective. 

17.  To request that in 2024, the SMS, through CICTE, convene a hemispheric meeting of high-level authorities on cybersecurity and ICTs in order to reflect on the current cyber threat landscape and develop a regional agenda on cybersecurity and critical infrastructure protection. 

V. Transnational organized crime 

A. Combating transnational organized crime 

18.  To request that the SMS, through the DTOC, provide member states with technical assistance upon request to: 

a) improve or strengthen institutional capacities in the fight against transnational organized crime linked to illegal mining and the illicit trafficking of precious metals, logging and illegal timber trafficking, illicit trafficking in wildlife and wildlife products, and other actions by criminal groups that affect public security and the environment; 

b) support state capacity-building for the implementation of the 2013 Minamata Convention on Mercury, in order to more effectively promote international cooperation in this area. 

19.  To adopt the Statutes of the RANDOT process, document  CP/CSH-2208/23 .

20.  To hold the Fourth Meeting of National Authorities on Transnational Organized Crime (RANDOT IV) on October 19 and 20, 2023, at the headquarters of the Organization of American States in Washington, D.C. 

21.  To comprehensively strengthen regional and national systems for preventing and combating illicit finances through effective international cooperation and assistance offered by - 87 -

international agreements and mechanisms, such as the OAS Group of Experts against Money Laundering (GELAVEX) and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). 

22.  To promote, within the framework of national legislation and international law, the recovery of assets derived from transnational organized crime located in the various jurisdictions of the member states, particularly those associated with the crime of corruption, as a pillar of efforts to protect the financial and democratic systems of the region. 

23.  To instruct the General Secretariat to establish a specific fiduciary fund to support the activities of GELAVEX. The fund will be open to voluntary contributions from Member States, permanent observers and the international community. The Secretariat will report on the use and results of such funds based on the activities carried out within the framework of GELAVEX. 

B. Hemispheric cooperation efforts to combat trafficking in persons 

24.  To adopt the Third Work Plan for Comprehensive Responses to Trafficking in Persons in the Western Hemisphere, “Third Work Plan on Trafficking in Persons,” contained in document 

CP/CSH-2209/23 , and to request that the Seventh Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in 

Persons analyze ways to implement it. 

25.  To request that the SMS, through the DPS, continue to support the efforts of OAS member states to prevent, investigate, and counteract criminal activity related to the exploitation of refugees and migrants in the region. 

26.  To hold the VII Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons on November 6 and 7, 2023, at the headquarters of the Organization of American States in Washington, D.C. 

C. Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects 

27.  To request that the SMS, through the DPS and within the framework of the Program of Assistance for the Control of Arms and Munitions (PACAM), which is a voluntary program: 

a) support the development and implementation of the Central American Roadmap for the Prevention of Illicit Trafficking and Proliferation of Arms and Munitions in coordination with SICA and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC), including the creation of a follow-up mechanism to monitor progress and promote effective coordination among governments, implementing partners, and donors; 

b) continue to provide technical assistance for the implementation of the Roadmap for Implementing the Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition across the Caribbean in aSustainable Manner by 2030; 

c) in coordination with the CICTE Secretariat, develop and seek funding for initiatives to strengthen the institutional capabilities of border control personnel to identify, detect, and intercept illicit firearms and munitions at ports and border crossings, taking into account the provisions of CIFTA and - 88 -

its model laws; and 

d) continue to raise funds for and increase donors’ contributions to the provision of technical and material assistance to member states, upon request, in the areas of legislative assistance, firearms, management of arms and munitions, and the reduction and prevention of armed violence. 

VI. Regional and specialized security concerns and challenges 

A. Security concerns of member states of the Central American Integration System 

(SICA) 

28.  To request the Secretariat for Multidimensional Security (SMS), against the backdrop of the outcomes of the Meeting on the Security Concerns of Member States of SICA, held on May 30, 2023, to: 

a) instruct the Executive Secretariat of CICTE, to continue supporting States of the subregion that so require, in matters of critical infrastructure, cyberdiplomacy, and any other initiative to help strengthen the subregion’s cyber capabilities; 

b) instruct the DSP, once the Central American Roadmap for the Prevention of Illicit Trafficking and Proliferation of Arms and Ammunition has been approved, to organize a meeting to share experiences with a view to identifying potential areas of collaboration instructed among the Points of Contact of the Central American and Caribbean Roadmap processes, in coordination with the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC), CARICOM IMPACS, and SICA; 

c) request that CICAD continue to support the efforts of SICA member states to counteract illicit small-quantity drug trafficking, including interinstitutional exchanges of information at the national level to better understand its scope and adverse effects on public health, the economy, social cohesion, and citizen security; 

d) instruct the DTOC to continue to support the efforts of the subregion's states to prevent and combat transnational organized crime by providing technical assistance to strengthen institutional capacities to support the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, for asset recovery, and for combating money laundering and crimes that affect the environment; and to promote the use of special investigation techniques in the prosecution of all those crimes. 

B. Special security concerns of the small island and low-lying coastal developing States 

of the Caribbean 

29.  To urge member states to continue to strengthen their efforts to prevent and combat illicit trafficking in firearms and ammunition in the small island and low-lying coastal developing states of the Caribbean, acknowledging the severe implications of such activities on the security, stability, and sustainable development of the region. 

30.  To continue encouraging member states to further strengthen a comprehensive and coordinated approach to hemispheric cooperation that promotes robust information and intelligence sharing, law enforcement collaboration, and institutional capacity-building initiatives, to address the - 89 -

complex challenges posed by the illicit trafficking of firearms and ammunition and transnational organized crime in the Caribbean. 

31.  To encourage member states, in partnership with the General Secretariat and relevant regional organizations, in particular CARICOM-IMPACS AND THE RSS to develop, integrate, and implement existing agreements, treaties, instruments and strategies to prevent and combat the illicit trafficking in firearms and ammunition in the Caribbean, and which support and strengthen law enforcement capabilities, border security mechanisms, and regional cooperation efforts to dismantle these trafficking networks, prevent illicit trafficking in firearms and ammunition, and promote security and resilience in the region. 

32.  To call upon the General Secretariat, through the SMS and the IADB, in collaboration with CARICOM-IMPACS and the Regional Security System (RSS), to increase the provision of technical assistance, capacity-building programs, and the exchange of best practices to the small island and low-lying coastal states of the Caribbean that request such support to improve their capabilities to detect, investigate, and prosecute illicit trafficking in firearms and ammunition and related transnational criminal activities, while also promoting cooperation and information sharing among public security agencies in the region. 

33.  To endorse the continued collaboration between the SMS, UNLIREC, and CARICOM-IMPACS, through the DPS and within the framework of OAS PACAM, and to provide sustained support for the "Road Map for the Implementation of Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition across the Caribbean in a sustainable manner by 2030", with a focus on enhancing regional capabilities to prevent, combat, and eradicate illicit trafficking in firearms and ammunition; foster a secure and stable environment conducive to social, economic, and environmental/climate resilience, and accomplish the Sustainable Development Goals in the small island and low-lying coastal developing states of the Caribbean. 

C. Security implications of climate change  2/

34.  To request that the established CHS Working Group follow through on its mandates in order to develop in collaboration with the SMS, SEDI, and the IADB, an action plan and a program management process to support member states that may request technical and advisory assistance in accordance with operative paragraph 56 of resolution AG/RES. 2986 (LII-O/22). 

D. Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing 

35.  To request the Secretariat for Multidimensional Security (SMS), in coordination with OAS organs, agencies, and entities, such as the Inter-American Defense Board, and subregional organizations such as CARICOM IMPACS and the Permanent Commission for the South Pacific (CPPS), as appropriate, to render technical assistance to member states that so request in order to enhance or strengthen institutional capabilities to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, particularly as regards crimes in the fisheries sector.  

> 2. The delegation of Brazil does not subscribe to the current language of this section. Starting with the title, the expression “security implications of climate change” is not supported ...

- 90 -

VII. Inter-American instruments and institutions 

A. Inter-American instruments 

i. Inter-American Convention against Terrorism 

36.  To request that OAS member states implement the Final Declaration (OEA/Ser.K/L.1/RCEPTER/DEC. 1/22) and Recommendations (OEA/Ser.K/L.1/RCEPTER/doc.5/22 rev. 6) of the States Parties to the Inter-American Convention Against Terrorism issued on September 12, 2022. 

ii. Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in 

Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials (CIFTA)  3/

37.  To ask the Department of Public Security to report on the implementation status of the Arms and Ammunition Inventory System (SAM) and of the Regional Communication Mechanism for Arms Transfers (MCTA), and to request that the CIFTA Technical Secretariat, as part of the development and implementation of the Hemispheric Study on Illicit Trafficking in Arms and Ammunition, prepare a comparison of the CIFTA Model Regulations for the Control of the International Movement of Firearms, their Parts and Components, and Ammunition and the guidelines set out in the corresponding module of the United Nations Modular Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium (MOSAIC), including the relevant recommendations for harmonizing the tools at the inter-American level. 

38.  To instruct the Department of Public Security to develop, in coordination with the State Parties of CIFTA and in consultation with the Inter-American Defense Board (IADB) and pertinent expert organizations, an Operational Procedures Manual for the Destruction of Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) and an Operational Procedures Manual for the Physical Security and Management of Arsenals, taking into account existing international standards, national good practices and regulations, and the experience of the Program of Assistance for Control of Arms and Munition (PACAM) in the region, and to submit them to the CIFTA Consultative Committee to be considered for inclusion in the complementary documents of the CIFTA, which are of voluntary use by CIFTA State Parties. 

39.  To urge member states to continue studying, at the twenty-fourth regular meeting of the CIFTA Consultative Committee and the Sixth Conference of the CIFTA States Parties, the links between the illicit manufacturing of, commercialization, and trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materials, the different manifestations of national and transnational organized crime, the strengthening of inspection and control mechanisms of the materials covered by this Convention, and the activities of private arms companies and their impact on human rights.  4/

40.  To convene the twenty-fourth regular meeting of the CIFTA Consultative Committee, in accordance with Article XXI of the Convention, for a duration of one day, during 2024, and the Sixth Conference of the CIFTA States Parties, during 2024; and to request that the CIFTA Technical Secretariat support the preparation and follow-up of both meetings. Likewise, that both meetings   

> 3. The United States remains committed to combating illicit trafficking in firearms. Although not a state party, practices within the United States are consistent with CIFTA. We encourage ...
> 4. The delegation of the United States announced that it would submit a footnote.

- 91 -

consider participation by national authorities responsible for granting authorizations or licenses for the export, import, and transportation of firearms, ammunition, explosives, and other related materials, by customs and border authorities, and by other officials responsible for enforcing the Convention. 

B. Inter-American institutions: Observations and recommendations on the annual reports 

of the organs, agencies, and entities of the Organization (Article 91.f of the Charter of 

the Organization of American States) 

i. Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE) 

41.  To reiterate that dialogue, capacity building, the exchange of best practices and experiences, and international and regional cooperation are key elements for comprehensively addressing in our region the multidimensional challenges arising from terrorism and violent extremism that can lead to terrorism, and, therefore, to approve and support the implementation of the CICTE Work Plan 2023–2024, both financially and politically. 

42.  To promote the creation and strengthening of synergies and collaboration mechanisms that benefit and support member states in preventing and combating terrorism and violent extremism, from a comprehensive approach, with a gender perspective and inclusiveness, based on the particular needs of the region, in full accordance with the rule of law, international law, international humanitarian law, and human rights, and consistent with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. 

43.  To request that the CICTE Secretariat support member states that so request and, to the extent that human and financial resources are available, to strengthen their national coordination mechanisms to prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism, and facilitate the exchange of information and lessons learned, and capacity building, in order to prevent and address existing, emerging, and potential threats to peace and security in the Hemisphere. 

44.  To request that the CICTE Secretariat, in accordance with its approved annual Work Plan, continue to support member states that so request with technical and legislative assistance in order to strengthen and underscore the importance of: 

a) efforts to prevent and combat violent extremism that can lead to terrorism, paying particular attention to the study of the trends and challenges of the 

offline effects of online activity, as well as to preventing and combating the use of information and communication technologies for terrorist purposes and violent extremism; the foregoing from a multidisciplinary perspective and with the voluntary collaboration of the private sector, civil society, and academia; 

b) the role of sport as an agent of change to prevent terrorism and violent extremism that can lead to terrorism, as well as the need to further strengthen security measures in the context of major sporting events; 

c) Resilience to the growing threat that malicious cyber activities pose to the critical infrastructure/essential services of the region, and strengthen hemispheric cooperation and coordination to prevent and mitigate those threats, including through the hemispheric Network of Government Cyber Incident Response Teams (CSIRTAmericas Network). - 92 -

45.  To thank the Government of Mexico for organizing the twenty-third meeting of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE), held on May 17 and 18, 2023, in Mexico City, and to convene the twenty-fourth meeting of CICTE during the first half of 2024. 

ii. Inter-American Defense Board (IADB) 

46.  To request the IADB to continue carrying out activities that contribute to strengthening the management and response capacities of member states to current and future challenges in matters related to military and defense issues and opportunities in the land, maritime, air, outer space, and cyberspace environments, including: Cyberdefense and artificial intelligence; maritime security; illegal use of airspace; humanitarian demining; management of arsenals of weapons, ammunition, and explosives; migratory flows; environmental protection; disaster prevention and response; human rights and international humanitarian law; gender perspective, implementation of the Women, Peace, and Security agenda; confidence- and security-building measures; and higher education in the framework of the Inter-American Defense College; among others. 

47.  To request the IADB to maintain coordination and support with OAS entities and instruments, with the Conference of Defense Ministers of the Americas (CMDA), and with other related international organizations, for the achievement of its institutional security and defense objectives. 

48.  To urge the IADB to continue improving its internal processes pertaining to technical services, academics, governance, culture, and conduct, taking into account the gender perspective, recognizing the importance of ensuring the Board has the necessary financial resources to develop its priorities, and encouraging it to establish associations that allow it to obtain the necessary extra-budgetary resources, with transparency and control. 

49.  To urge the education authorities in the member states that have not yet done so to consider developing mechanisms for acknowledging and revalidating degrees granted by the Inter-American Defense College, so that they are on a par with those issued by institutes of high education in their countries. 

iii. Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD) 

50.  To encourage member states to implement, strengthen, and promote supply reduction measures, in accordance with and in response to the results obtained from the eighth round of the Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism (MEM), including the use of international tools and information sharing platforms, with particular attention given to promoting interagency cooperation; collaboration among the public and private sectors and the international community; and the development of innovative control approaches – such as generic, analogue legislation, temporary or emergency controls, and early warning systems – to allow for improved national controls on new psychoactive substances (NPS), synthetic drugs, particularly in relation to fentanyl-related substances for non-medical use and chemical substances used to manufacture synthetic drugs. 

51.  To encourage member states to develop or strengthen mechanisms to facilitate effective coordination and collaboration among government agencies and entities for the formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and enhancing of evidence-based national drug policies and - 93 -

strategies, under the principles of common and shared responsibility, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, with special attention on those focused on at-risk populations. 

52.  To continue strengthening the development and implementation of alternatives to incarceration based on evidence, gender, and human rights for drug-related offenses, with special attention given to at-risk populations, as well as promoting actions incorporating a gender perspective in criminal justice policies and programs, in accordance with each country’s current legislation. 

53.  To urge member states to strengthen and expand the post-pandemic coverage of drug use preventive programs, treatment, and recovery support services, as well as initiatives and measures aimed at minimizing the adverse public health effects of drug use in the education, family, work, and community settings, as well as for at-risk populations, through capacity building and promoting the active participation of persons and institutions involved, in accordance with international quality standards and with special attention given to women, children and adolescents: 

a) Improving access to and expanding the offer of treatment programs for women, in accordance with international quality standards, respect for human rights, and that provide physical space and flexibility for those women in treatment who are caregivers. 

b) Developing strategies to support children and adolescents returning to the school system and strengthening care and prevention activities for them. 

c) Addressing the growing problem of non-medical use of fentanyl and other drugs through initiatives and measures aimed at minimizing the adverse public health effects of drug use. 

54.  To encourage member states to conduct specialized training programs on the safe handling, transportation, storage, and final disposal of drugs and chemical precursors and other chemical substances used in the illicit manufacture of drugs, taking into account the safety of relevant personnel and mitigating the harmful environmental impact that such substances may have on ecosystems, in line with Resolution E/CN.7/2023/L.4/Rev.1 of the sixty-sixth session of the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs. 

55.  To encourage member states to strengthen hemispheric and regional cooperation and the exchange of good practices, including the use of existing international data and information exchange platforms, and, following the principle of common and shared responsibility, to promote comprehensive and sustainable alternative development programs, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development that respond to the needs of at-risk populations, reduce inequalities, and increase community safety, public health, and social inclusion. 

56.  To encourage member states to: 

a) Strengthen national drug surveillance and early warning systems in order to gather real-time information and respond quickly and effectively to the problem of new and emerging drugs, which threaten public health and safety, and through these systems report to CICAD’s Early Warning System of the Americas (SATA, by its Spanish-language acronym). 

b) Establish and strengthen, as appropriate and within their means, drug analysis laboratories, provide resources to them, and strengthen information exchange - 94 -

among national, regional, and international drug analysis laboratories with a view to detect, analyze, and identify new psychoactive substances and chemical precursors, in line with Resolution E/CN.7/2023/L.5/Rev.1 of the sixty-sixth session of the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs. 

II. FOLLOW-UP AND REPORTING 

57.  To request the Permanent Council to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session on the implementation of this resolution. Execution of the activities envisaged in this resolution will be subject to the availability of financial resources in the program-budget of the Organization and other resources. 

III. SCHEDULE OF MEETINGS AND SPECIAL EVENTS 5/

Sequence  Topic  Estimated date  Name  Place 

1 MISPA  2023  Eighth Meeting of Ministers 

Responsible for Public Security in 

the Americas (MISPA-VIII) 

To be determined 

2 Trafficking in 

Persons 

November 6, 

2023 

Seventh Meeting of National 

Authorities on Trafficking in 

Persons (RTP VII) 

Washington, D.C. 

3 CITAAC  2023  First Meeting of the CITAAC 

Consultative Committee 

To be determined 

4 TOC  October 19 

and 20, 2023 

Fourth Meeting of National 

Authorities on Transnational 

Organized Crime (RANDOT IV) 

Washington, D.C. 

5 MISPA  2023  Third meeting of the Subsidiary 

Technical Working Group on the 

Prevention of Crime, Violence, and 

Insecurity 

To be determined 

6 Justice, 

penitentiary, 

and prison 

systems 

2023  Fifth Meeting of Officials 

Responsible for the Penitentiary 

and Prison Policies of the OAS 

Member States 

To be determined 

7 CICTE  Second half of 

2023 

Fourth Meeting of the CICTE 

Working Group on Cooperation 

and Confidence-Building Measures 

in Cyberspace 

To be determined 

8 CICAD  Second half of 

2023 

74th Regular Session of CICAD  To be determined 

9 GELAVEX  Second half of 

2023 

55th Meeting of GELAVEX  To be determined 

10  CICAD  First half of 

2024 

75th Regular Session of CICAD  To be determined  

> 5. Provisional list of meetings.

- 95 -

Sequence  Topic  Estimated date  Name  Place 

11  CICTE  First half of 

2024 

Twenty-fourth regular session of 

CICTE 

To be determined 

12  GELAVEX  First half of 

2024 

56th Meeting of GELAVEX  To be determined 

13  CIFTA  2024  Twenty-fourth Meeting of the 

CIFTA Consultative Committee 

To be determined 

14  CIFTA  2024  Sixth Meeting of CIFTA States 

Parties 

To be determined - 96 -

FOOTNOTES 

1. ... Annual meeting on the security concerns of member states of the Central American Integration System (SICA), May 5, 2023; Meeting on the special security concerns of the small island and low-lying coastal developing states of the Caribbean, May 30, 2023; Twenty-second Regular Session of CICTE, May 17 and 18, 2023, 72 nd Regular Session of CICAD, 54 th Meeting of GELAVEX, May 23 and 24, 2023. 

2. … by any multilaterally adopted language in the framework of the United Nations on the subject, which refers merely to the “adverse effects of climate change,” according to operative paragraph 26 of Security Council resolution 2349 (2017). 

In Brazil's opinion, the OAS Committee on Hemispheric Security is not the appropriate forum to address the issue of climate change. The appropriate instance for dealing with that agenda is the negotiating context associated with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Brazil defends the premise that potential adverse effects of climate change do not necessarily constitute a threat to hemispheric peace and security. Therefore, such a relationship should be seen as entirely nuanced and dependent on the level of socioeconomic development reached by the region's countries, which substantially affects the capacity of those societies to respond and adapt adequately to climate change's possible adverse effects. It is not clear, therefore, how the security language of the section could contribute to adequately tackling the possible adverse impacts of climate change on the security of the region's countries, taking into account the demands of the sustainable development paradigm and the multilateral provisions on climate change agreed on at the international level. 

3. … all States Parties to CIFTA to ensure its effective implementation. We welcome other measures taken at the regional, sub-regional and national levels to combat illicit trafficking. The United States continues to encourage States to implement these and other commitments they have made. This also means focusing on recommendations submitted by States Parties and relevant experts that are within the scope of CIFTA and support its implementation. The United States does not recognize any recommendations that exceed the scope of CIFTA. - 97 -

AG/RES. 3010 (LIII-O/23) HEMISPHERIC LEGACY OF FORMER OAS SECRETARY-GENERAL JOÃO CLEMENTE BAENA SOARES 

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

BEARING IN MIND the passing of the Brazilian Ambassador João Clemente Baena Soares, at 92 years of age, on June 7, 2023, in the city of Rio de Janeiro; 

RECALLING that Ambassador Baena Soares served as Secretary General of the Organization of American States (OAS) from 1984 to 1994; 

BEARING IN MIND that during Baena Soares' first term as Secretary General, the Organization adopted in 1985 the Cartagena Protocol, a package of amendments to the OAS Charter that provided the Organization with more effective tools and mechanisms to combat crises in the Hemisphere and underscored the importance, in its Article 33, of economic and social rights; 

CONSIDERING that during Baena Soares' second term at the helm of the OAS, the Organization approved the Declaration of Santiago in 1991, which led to the adoption of resolution 1080 on "Representative Democracy," one of the embryos of the 2001 Inter-American Democratic Charter; 

RECOGNIZING the facilitative role then-Secretary General Baena Soares played in the search for peaceful solutions in the context of political crises in Central America in the mid-1980s and in Haiti in the early 1990s, which contributed to the creation of the "International Support and Verification Commission for Central America (CIAV)" and the "Inter-American Fund for Priority Assistance to Haiti"; 

BEARING IN MIND that the efforts of Ambassador Baena Soares contributed decisively to the signing of the Headquarters Agreement between the OAS and the Government of the United States of America, as well as to the inclusion of three new member states (Belize, Canada, and Guyana) into the Organization, which gave greater scope and legitimacy to OAS initiatives; 

RECOGNIZING that during the two terms of office of Secretary General Baena Soares, the Organization of American States strengthened and solidified one of its primary functions in defense of democracy, that of observation of elections in the countries of the Hemisphere; 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that in 1994, during Baena Soares' second term as Secretary General of the OAS, the organization approved the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women, also known as the "Convention of Belém do Pará," an instrument that formally recognized at the hemispheric level that violence against women constitutes a violation of human rights, warned that such aggression is also reproduced in the public sphere and extends to all interpersonal relationships, thereby contributing to the defense of women's - 98 -

human rights and to confronting challenges in the response of new forms of violence suffered by women in the countries of the region; and 

RECOGNIZING that, by the end of his two terms at the helm of the OAS, Secretary General Baena Soares had strengthened the organization's capacities and functions in conflict resolution, in the consolidation of democracy, and in the promotion and protection of the human rights of citizens of the Hemisphere, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To express sincere gratitude and deep appreciation for the legacy of Ambassador João Clemente Baena Soares as Secretary General of the OAS. 

2. To recognize the positive impact of Ambassador Baena Soares' actions in maintaining peace, strengthening representative democracy, and promoting and protecting human rights in the Hemisphere with respect for the sovereignty of member states. 

3. To mandate the Permanent Council of the OAS to hold, in the third quarter of 2023, using existing resources, a special meeting with high-level government participation on the hemispheric legacy of former Secretary General Baena Soares, as well as his importance to the Organization and its member states, open to testimonies from family members and civil society. - 99 -

AG/RES. 3011 (LIII-O/23) PROGRAM-BUDGET OF THE ORGANIZATION FOR 2024 1/

(Adopted at the first plenary session, held on June 22, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT: 

That, in accordance with Articles 54.e and 55 of the Charter of the Organization of American States, the General Assembly approves the program-budget of the Organization and establishes the basis for setting the quota that each government is to contribute to the maintenance of the Organization, taking into account the respective countries’ ability to pay and their determination to contribute in an equitable manner; 

That, based on Article 86 of the General Standards to Govern the Operations of the General Secretariat of the Organization of American States (General Standards), the General Secretariat shall submit to the Permanent Council a proposed budget for use of the indirect cost recovery (ICR) resources, which shall be based on projected revenue equivalent to 90 percent of the average ICR obtained in the three years immediately preceding the year in which the program-budget is adopted, and that the General Assembly shall also adopt the ICR budget; 

That the revenue to finance the program-budget includes quota income, income from interest and refunds, and other funds in accordance with Chapter IV of the General Standards; 

The proposed 2024 program-budget of the Organization ( CP/doc. 5894/23 ), presented by the 

General Secretariat on June 9, 2023 and the annual report of the Audit Committee to the Permanent Council ( CP/doc. 5874/23 ), presented on May 31, 2023; 

The “Report of the Chair of the Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs on the activities of the CAAP and the Proposed Program-Budget of the Organization for 2024” (CP/CAAP-

3918/23), presented in accordance with Article 60.b of the Charter of the Organization of American 

States; 

The following resolutions: 

AG/RES. 1319 (XXV-O/95 ) “Modification and Clarification of Resolutions AG/RES. 1275 

(XXIV-O/94) and CP/RES. 631 (989/94) for the Modification of the General Secretariat’s Staff Compensation System;” 

AG/RES. 1757 (XXX-O/00), “Measures to Encourage the Timely Payment of Quotas,” modified by resolutions AG/RES. 2157 (XXXV-O/05) and  AG/RES. 1 (XLII-E/11)  rev. 1;  

> 1. The Republic of El Salvador enters its reservation on the entire contents of this resolution, since it was negotiated and adopted without considering alternatives designed to prioritize…

- 100 -

AG/RES. 1 (XXXIV-E/07) rev. 1 “Methodology for Calculating the Scale of Quota 

Assessments to Finance the Regular Fund of the Organization;” 

CP/RES. 1103 (2168/18) rev. 1  “Amendments to the Methodology for Calculating the Scale 

of Quota Assessments to Finance the Regular Fund of the OAS 2019-2023;” 

AG/RES. 2942 (XLIX-O/19) “Strengthening Ethics, Oversight, and Transparency of the Organization of American States;” 

AG/RES. 1 (LI-E/16) rev. 1  “Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization;” 

CP/RES. 1121 (2209/19)  “Strategic Planning of the Organization;” 

CP/doc. 5852/23 rev. 1  “Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization of American States 

For 2023-2025;” 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22) “Program-Budget of the Organization for 2023;” 

BEARING IN MIND: 

That, the Regular Fund notwithstanding, the specific funds are an important source of supplementary financing for the activities of the Organization and, therefore, should be consistent with the nature, purposes, and principles of the Organization, as envisaged in the Charter of the Organization of American States; 

That, in accordance with Article 78 (b) of the General Standards, to ensure the regular and continuous financial operations of the General Secretariat, the amount of the Reserve Subfund of the Regular Fund shall be 30 percent of the total of the annual quotas of the member states; 

That said fund lacks sufficient resources to fulfill its purpose, and it is advisable, accordingly, that efforts be made to increase such reserves, such as by setting, a priori, Regular Fund spending limits at a level below the gross total of quotas; 

That the Permanent Council can continue to examine, through the CAAP, measures to encourage prompt payment of quotas and increase liquidity; 

That it is fundamental for the General Secretariat to maintain a culture and practice of austerity, efficacy, accountability, efficiency, transparency, and prudence in the use, execution, and management of the Organization’s resources and ensure the allocation of adequate and sustainable financing to perform its work; and 

The importance of the four pillars of the Organization – democracy, human rights, multidimensional security, and integral development – considers it necessary that they all be allocated adequate funding to operate properly with an equitable allocation of resources aimed at ensuring fulfillment of the mandates agreed upon by the political organs of the Organization, - 101 -

RESOLVES: 

I. FINANCING OF BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS 

1. To approve resolution  CP/RES. 1225 (2434/23)  “Financing of the Program-Budget of 

the Organization for 2024,” adopted by the Permanent Council on May 31, 2023. 2/

2. To authorize the General Secretariat to utilize up to US$1,800,000 from the Indirect Cost Recovery Reserve Subfund (ICRRS) to finance the following projects, and to instruct the General Secretariat that resources from this appropriation that are not used for this purpose be reimbursed to ICRRS: 

a. up to US$ 1,000,000 to finance an external third-party review; 

b. up to US$ 300,000 to finance an external assessment of the EU Pillar Agreement; 

c. up to US$ 500,000 to finance Enhanced Program Management Oversight, in accordance with parameters to be approved by the Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs (CAAP). 

3. The funds from the ICRRS approved to finance the projects in 2 above, should be made available for immediate use. 

4. To request General Secretariat to report to the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, on a quarterly basis, a detailed report on implementation of the expenditures from the ICCRS itemized in number 2 continuing until all the projects are completed. 

II. BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS 

1. To approve and authorize the program-budget of the Organization for the fiscal year from January 1 to December 31, 2024, financed by funds not to exceed: 

a. Regular Fund (RF) US$90,403,700 

b. Indirect Cost Recovery (ICR) US$ 6,941,000 

2. To approve the appropriation levels for the Regular Fund and ICR, by chapter and subprograms, with the recommendations, instructions, or mandates detailed below:  

> 2.Mexico places on record its opposition to any consideration and adoption of resolution CP/RES.1225 (2434/23), “Financing of the Program-Budget of the Organization for 2024,” by the…

- 102 -

RF  ICR 

(US$1,000)  (US$1,000) 

Chapter 1 - Office of the Secretary General 

14A  Office of the Secretary General  2,211.2  41.1 

14B  Office of Protocol  629.2  0.0 

Chapter 1 - Office of the Secretary General Total  2,840.4  41.1 

Chapter 2 - Office of the Assistant Secretary General 

24A  Office of the Assistant Secretary General  2,223.2  0.0 

24B  Office of the Secretariat to the General Assembly, the Meeting of Consultation, the Permanent Council, and Subsidiary Organs 

1,343.8  0.0 

24C  Coordinating Office for the Offices and Units of the General Secretariat in the Member States 

4,911.1  0.0 

24D  Conferences and meetings  3,162.5  0.0 

Chapter 2 - Office of the Assistant Secretary General Total  11,640.6  0.0 

Chapter 3 - Principal and Specialized Organs 

34A  Secretariat of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights  5,325.4  0.0 

34B  Executive Secretariat of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) 

10,727.9  128.0 

34C  Executive Secretariat of the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM) 

1,781.5  107.5 

34D  Office of the Director General of the Inter-American Children’s Institute 

983.1  19.5 

34E  Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI)  427.8  0.0 

34F  Secretariat of the Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL) 

690.2  54.5 

34G  Meetings of the CITEL Assembly  56.2  0.0 

34H  Inter-American Defense Board (IADB)  790.1  0.0 

34I  Pan American Development Foundation (PADF)  70.1  0.0 

34J  Trust for the Americas  255.0  0.0 

34K  IADB - Maintenance of the Casa del Soldado  181.3  0.0 

Chapter 3 - Principal and Specialized Organs Total  21,288.6  309.5 

Chapter 4 - Office of the Strategic Counsel for Organizational Development and Management for Results 

44A  Office of the Strategic Counsel for Organizational Development 

and Management for Results 

318.5  0.0 

44C  Department of Press and Communication  1,041.4  132.7 

44E  Department of External and Institutional Relations  691.5  367.7 

Chapter 4 - Office of the Strategic Counsel for Organizational Development and Management for Results Total 

2,051.4  500.4 

Chapter 5 - Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity 

54A  Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity  569.8  0.0 

54B  Department of Social Inclusion  1,488.3  0.0 

Chapter 5 - Secretariat for Access to Rights and Equity Total  2,058.1  0.0 

Chapter 6 - Secretariat for Strengthening Democracy 

64A  Secretariat for Strengthening Democracy  1,163.9  958.4 

64C  Department of Electoral Cooperation and Observation  1,678.2  0.0 - 103 -

64D  Department of Sustainable Democracy and Special Missions  827.2  0.0 

64F  Department for Promotion of Peace and Coordination with Subnational Governments 

250.3  0.0 

Chapter 6 - Secretariat for Strengthening Democracy Total  3,919.6  958.4 

Chapter 7 - Executive Secretariat for Integral Development 

74A  Executive Secretariat for Integral Development  1,849.6  345.2 

74C  Department of Economic Development  1,570.9  0.0 

74D  Department of Human Development, Education, and Employment  3,384.9  0.0 

74F  CIDI ministerial and inter-American committee meetings  132.5  0.0 

74G  Secretariat of the Inter-American Committee on Ports  238.5  0.0 

74I  Department of Sustainable Development  1,037.0  0.0 

Chapter 7 - Executive Secretariat for Integral Development Total  8,213.4  345.2 

Chapter 8 - Secretariat for Multidimensional Security 

84A  Secretariat for Multidimensional Security  1,255.4  371.3 

84D  Secretariat of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE) 

602.4  158.1 

84E  Department of Public Security  736.0  102.2 

84F  Multidimensional security meetings  33.4  0.0 

84G  Executive Secretariat of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD) 

1,224.1  196.1 

84H  Department against Transnational Organized Crime  447.2  0.0 

Chapter 8 - Secretariat for Multidimensional Security Total  4,298.5  827.7 

Chapter 9 - Secretariat for Hemispheric Affairs 

94A  Secretariat for Hemispheric Affairs  342.7  40.1 

94B  Department of Effective Public Management  833.0  0.0 

94D  Art Museum of the Americas  431.0  0.0 

94E  Summits Secretariat  406.0  0.0 

94F  Columbus Memorial Library  417.8  0.0 

Chapter 9 - Secretariat for Hemispheric Affairs Total  2,430.5  40.1 

Chapter 10 - Secretariat for Legal Affairs 

104A  Secretariat for Legal Affairs  911.7  116.6 

104B  Department of Legal Services  1,364.6  60.0 

104C  Department of International Law  1,244.9  0.0 

104F  Department of Legal Cooperation  825.9  0.0 

Chapter 10 - Secretariat for Legal Affairs Total  4,347.1  176.6 

Chapter 11 - Secretariat for Administration and Finance 

114A  Secretariat for Administration and Finance  897.0  0.0 

114B  Department of Human Resources  2,660.5  113.5 

114C  Department of Financial Services  2,656.4  901.3 

114D  Department of Information and Technology Services  2,309.2  0.0 

114E  Department of Procurement Services and Management Oversight  1,428.1  758.3 

114F  Department of General Services  1,675.0  108.8 

Chapter 11 - Secretariat for Administration and Finance Total  11,626.2  1,881.9 

Chapter 12 - Basic Infrastructure and Common Costs 

124A  DOITS Core Infrastructure Operations  1,413.9  0.0 - 104 -

124B  Office Equipment and Supplies  43.8  0.0 

124C  DOITS Application Development Operations  401.2  154.9 

124D  Building Management and Maintenance  965.3  310.0 

124E  General Insurance  408.4  50.0 

124F  Post Audits  40.9  0.0 

124G  Recruitment and Transfers  117.9  0.0 

124H  Terminations and Repatriations  555.5  50.0 

124I  Home Leave  278.5  10.0 

124J  Education and Language Allowance, Medical Examinations  60.5  0.0 

124K  Pensions for Retired Executives and Health and Life Insurance for Retired Employees 

4,296.2  0.0 

124L  Human Resources Development  64.8  0.0 

124M  Contribution to the Staff Association  5.0  0.0 

124N  Contribution to AROAS  5.0  0.0 

124S  OASCORE Licensing  302.1  247.9 

124T  Demand Notes  750.0  0.0 

124U  Cleaning Services  1,303.1  304.3 

124V  Security Services  920.6  207.5 

124Y  Cloud Computing and Cybersecurity Operations  243.0  0.0 

124Z  Public Utilities  1,027.9  242.4 

Chapter 12 - Basic Infrastructure and Common Costs Total  13,203.6  1,577.0 

Chapter 13 – Monitoring and Oversight Bodies 

133A  Secretariat of the OAS Administrative Tribunal (TRIBAD)  298.5  52.0 

134B  Office of the Inspector General  914.0  74.2 

134C  Audit Committee  97.5  93.3 

134D  Office of the Ombudsperson  230.7  63.6 

Chapter 13 – Monitoring and Oversight Bodies Total  1,540.7  283.1 

Chapter 14 - Meetings of the Political Bodies 

144A  Regular sessions of the General Assembly  110.0  0.0 

144B  Permanent Council meetings  345.0  0.0 

144C  Preparatory Committee meetings  30.0  0.0 

144D  General Committee meetings  20.0  0.0 

144E  Meetings of the Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs (CAJP) 

105.0  0.0 

144F  Meetings of the Committee on Hemispheric Security (CSH)  105.0  0.0 

144G  Meetings of the Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs (CAAP) 

105.0  0.0 

144I  Meetings of the Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities (CISC) 

25.0  0.0 

144J  Meetings of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI) 

60.0  0.0 

144K  Committee on Partnership for Development Policies (CPD)  20.0  0.0 

144L  Committee on Migration Issues (CAM)  20.0  0.0 

Chapter 14 - Meetings of the Political Bodies Total  945.0  0.0 

TOTAL  90,403.7  6,941.0 - 105 -

3. To authorize the General Secretariat to utilize, in addition to the budget allocation for this purpose in the 2024 program-budget, up to US$174,475 from potential savings accrued during the 2024 budget execution in the event that the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly is held at headquarters, as envisaged at Article 57 of the OAS Charter. 

4. To submit in advance to the Permanent Council through the CAAP, should it be necessary to use those resources, a detailed estimate of the expected expenditures of up to US$174,475. The General Secretariat shall also provide an accounting of the use made of the resources within 90 days after the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly if held at headquarters. 

5. To instruct the Secretary General to make such adjustments, reductions, and restructurings as may be needed to comply with the level of expenditure of the Regular Fund for 2024, as well as with this resolution, in accordance with the legal framework of the General Secretariat and in line with the principles of austerity, efficacy, accountability, efficiency, transparency, and prudence. 

6. To instruct the General Secretariat to identify savings during the fiscal year 2024, in order to redirect to finance up to US$50,000 proportionally per item as listed below: 

34A – InterAmerican Court on Human Rights 

34B – InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights 

74D – Department of Human Development, Education and Employment 

74G – Secretariat of the Interamerican Committee on Ports 

74I – Department of Sustainable Development (for Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas -ECPA) 

84E – Department of Public Security 

94D – Art Museum of the Americas 

94F – Columbus Memorial Library 

144J –CIDI meetings 

This instruction will be applicable only for the fiscal year 2024. 

III. PROVISIONS OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY NATURE 

1. Renewal of mandates 

a. That the operative paragraphs listed in Annex I shall remain in force throughout the 2024 budgetary cycle with the respective amended timelines, if applicable, as established in the fourth column, “Change in Timeline and/or Periodicity,” of the table contained in said Annex. 

b. To urge member states to continue to contribute to the fulfillment of the mandates from past resolutions that remain in force during the 2024 budgetary cycle, and to instruct the General Secretariat to continue to arrange the required measures and/or support for their implementation, as provided in those same mandates. - 106 -

2. Accountability to member states 

a. To request the General Secretariat, specialized entities, and oversight bodies to submit the reports, strategies, and plans mentioned in this resolution to the 

Permanent Council and the CAAP, as appropriate, in keeping with Annex I and Annex II, such that the member states will be able to corroborate the information provided in a timely fashion and effectively follow-up on the fulfillment of mandates, Regular Fund budget execution, and execution of voluntary, specific, trust, and service funds, including ICR. 

b. The General Secretariat shall continue to publish the following updated information on the Organization’s website, in accordance with the Organization’s legal structure: 

(1) Organizational structure of each organizational unit. 

(2) On an annual basis, the report “Compliance of the Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization” (strategic lines and objectives) approved in resolution AG/RES. 1 (LI-E/16) rev.1 and resolution CP/RES.1121 (2209/19). 

(3) The results of evaluations, monitoring, and audits of programs and operations. 

(4) Staffing per organizational unit, also including the salary scale adding the salary of the positions of the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General and other benefits, as well as vacant positions. 

(5) Performance contracts (CPRs) awarded to natural and legal persons for the provision of services or a specific work product, pursuant to applicable regulations. 

c. To request the General Secretariat to reimplement on a semiannual basis the instructional briefings on the basic elements of the administrative and 

financial management of the Organization .

3. Direct and indirect cost recovery 

a.  To request that the General Secretariat, in the first three years of 

implementation of the new Cost Recovery System adopted through CP/RES. 

1204 (2391/22), conduct an annual analysis of the impact of the new policy 

and report on the results to CAAP by no later than the end of the 3rd quarter 

of each year. The analysis should highlight: results achieved; financial impacts 

for areas which previously received ICR as a substantial portion of funded 

positions or activities; cover, inter alia , the impact of the new policy on the 

level of incoming voluntary funds and the nature and scope of donor-funded 

projects; and include results from consultations with donors and OAS project - 107 -

managers/executing entities and identify areas for improvement for the 

consideration of member states. 

b. Considering that resolution AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22) deleted the requirement that the Development and Cooperation Fund (DCF) contribute to the Regular Fund, it is also necessary to amend paragraph (m) of Article 86 of the General Standards to eliminate the obligation of making periodic deductions from the DCF to the Regular Fund. 

4. OAS Scholarships and Training Program funds 

a. To authorize the General Secretariat to use, in 2024, up to US$1,740,000 from the Regular Fund for the OAS Scholarships and Training Programs to finance the activities of the following programs: Partnerships Program for Education and Training (PAEC) , Professional Development Scholarships Program (PDSP ), and the OAS Academic Programs, in a way to be defined by the Management Board of the Inter-American Agency for Cooperation and Development (IACD). 

b. To authorize the Management Board of the Inter-American Agency for Cooperation and Development to use the $75,000 allocated to the Professional Development Scholarships Program (PDSP) under OAS Scholarship and Training Program, to execute a language proficiency training and certification program in the four languages of the OAS, to the extent that funding allows but in at least two languages. To instruct the SEDI to pursue additional resources to complement the PDSP funding, including but not limited to Cooperation with OAS member states and Observer member states. To urge member states and permanent observer states to provide human, financial and technical resources to support the program. Said training and certification should be made available to all citizens of all OAS member states through the OAS Scholarships and Training Program, which should adjust its procedures to effectively implement this language proficiency training and certification program. 

5. Human resources 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat to continue with the implementation of the Organization’s Comprehensive Human Resources Strategy for the Organization and to submit to the CAAP by March 30, 2024, an updated report showing the progress that has been made. The updated document should also reflect the advances in the implementation of the new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to certify that the terms of reference for independent consultants and contractors/performance contracts (CPRs) financed by the Regular Fund or ICR Fund are relevant to and within the Secretariat that finances their contracts. Also, to instruct the Office of the - 108 -

Inspector General to perform an annual review of those terms of reference which would be presented to CAAP, to ensure compliance. 

c. The member states recognize that in order to deal with possible spending reductions needed to fully account for the effects of inflation in the 2024 program-budget, the secretaries and executive secretaries should provide an accounting of and be authorized to make necessary changes to their organizational units, including to reorganize, consolidate, and cut resources as necessary. Consequently, in recognition of this principle, the General Secretariat will: 

(i) Allow the hiring of needed personnel under reorganization plans and not implement any hiring freezes until that reorganization is complete; 

(ii) Proceed with the reclassification of positions only when dependencies determine that the reclassification is consistent with the organizational changes driven by the reallocation of responsibilities derived from the approved budget levels and once the necessary financing has been secured. 

d. To instruct the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, to review General Standards Chapter III, Subchapter C, and related policies of the General Secretariat, to enhance the OAS Employment Performance Evaluation System (PES) and provide a proposal, no later than the third quarter of 2023. 

e. To request the Office of the Inspector General to prepare by June 30, 2024, an annual report on actual personnel transfers, internal and external competitions concluded, and reclassifications included in this program-budget, and to ascertain that they are done in strict accordance with the applicable standards. 

f. To instruct the General Secretariat to cite the specific provisions of Chapter III, Sub-Chapter D, item (f)(i)-(iii) at all stages of the advertising, hiring and employment notices and processes of the Organization. 

g. To instruct the Permanent Council through the CAAP to draft a proposal to replace resolution AG/RES.328 (VIII-0/78), "Pensions for the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General," adopted during the fifth plenary session of July 1, 1978, and the resolution AG /RES.677 (XII-0/83), “Pensions for the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General” adopted during the seventh plenary session on November 18, 1983; or offer alternative pension options for the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General, to be approved by the Permanent Council ad referendum of the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly, to be effective upon the appointment of the next Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General. 

h. To instruct the General Secretariat to prepare a proposed update of the current Code of Ethics of the Organization, so as to include a gender focus, clear definitions of conduct to be evaluated, clear standards of conduct of the - 109 -

Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General, procedures in cases of conflict of interest in the framework of an investigation, definitions of conduct that would qualify for each category, and any other matter deemed relevant, with a view to adoption by the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, in the first quarter of 2024. 

i. To entrust the CAAP to establish a mechanism that it considers appropriate, for beginning a process of evaluation of the appropriateness of including in the regulations of the Organization, including the General Standards, comprehensive case handling and investigative procedures, as well as disciplinary actions applicable to the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General of which it should present the Permanent Council during the first half of 2024. 

6. Gender equity and equality policies 

Taking note of the General Secretariat’s progress in accomplishing the hiring of women who now make up the majority of the OAS staff, with roughly 50% representation or higher at all professional levels, to urge the General Secretariat to continue the work of implementing and executing gender equity and equality policies in the workplace and, as part of the implementation of the General 

Secretariat's Gender Parity Plan, to promote access for women in categories where they are currently underrepresented in the Organization, in addition to ensuring accountability in the implementation of those policies and fulfillment of the provisions outlined in resolution  CP/RES.  1149 (2278/20) ,

“Women’s Representation and Participation in the OAS.” 

7. Geographical representation 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat to prepare and present a report with the progress made in the implementation of the Geographic Representation Strategy, taking into consideration the indicators and the action plan developed, to achieve an equitable geographic representation of staff in accordance with Article 120 of the Charter of the Organization of American States, which should include, in addition, consultants and interns. The report should be presented to the CAAP no later than May 31, 2024. 

b. To instruct the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, to review General Standards Chapter III, Subchapter D, and related policies of the General Secretariat, to eliminate barriers to equitable geographic representation that relate to language requirements of the OAS, no later than the second quarter of 2023. 

8. Trust personnel 

To waive the enforcement of Article 21.b.v of the General Standards to authorize the financing by the Regular Fund of the 21 trust positions contained in Annex III, as well as the financing of the position of “Secretary Treasurer of the Pension Fund” by specific funds, during the execution of the 2024 program-budget. - 110 -

9. Mandate prioritization 

To instruct the General Secretariat to proceed with updating the prioritization of mandates, including the mandates approved by the General Assembly during its fifty-third regular session, and to present the results of said update to the Permanent Council through the CAAP in such a way that the mandates thus prioritized serve as a basis for the committees of the Permanent Council and CIDI when preparing the draft resolutions to be presented for consideration by the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session. 

10. Annual Outreach and Implementation of Mandate Costing 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat, in order to continue with the process of calculating the costs of new mandates that will be submitted for consideration of the General Assembly to guarantee their implementation and prioritization, to present for the consideration of the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, an evaluation of the use of the costing template for new mandates that were submitted at the  fifty-third  regular session of the General Assembly, as well as the criteria for its use, and, where appropriate, suggest improvements to the process. 

b. Likewise, in preparation for the costing of new mandates to be submitted for consideration at the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly, the General Secretariat, through the Secretariat for Administration and Finance (SAF), must: 

(1) Hold regular outreach and training meetings on using the template with Secretaries and Executive Secretaries, no later than three months before General Assembly. 

(2) Together with the Chair of the CAAP, make a presentation to the Permanent Council on using the template, no later than two months before the General Assembly. 

(3) In addition, hold dissemination sessions on the use of the costing template with the chairs of the Committees of the Permanent Council and CIDI before the start of the negotiations, to ensure that all chairpersons require the use of the template for the 2024 General Assembly round of negotiations. Also, provide the Chairs with the option to request an additional presentation within their Committees. 

(4) Conduct an evaluation of the template for new mandates and the criteria for its use, in terms of its application and use, in order to improve the process when necessary and present it to the Permanent Council through the CAAP. 

c. To request the CAAP Chair to include an update and presentation, including details on the outreach detailed above, as well as comments on potential - 111 -

improvements, on the “Mandate Cost Template” in the CAAP Annual Work Plan. 

11. Mandates Management System (SIGMA) 

To instruct the General Secretariat to update SIGMA with the mandates from the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly through the following actions: 

a. Debugging of the general mandate inventory to determine those that are current. 

b. Update the prioritization module with the results from the prioritization process of the mandates from the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly. 

c. Update the new mandate costing module with the costs of the new mandates submitted for consideration of the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly. 

d. Ensure access to SIGMA by all member states and train delegations on its use. 

12. Recommendations of the Audit Committee 

a. Following the presentation of the annual report of the Audit Committee, the CAAP shall prepare a formal written response to the recommendations of the Committee, which shall be transmitted to the Permanent Council by March 1. The Permanent Council shall transmit the approved response to the Audit Committee by March 31. 

b. The response shall be prepared in collaboration with the General Secretariat and include the current status, measures taken, and next steps, as well as identifying those with leadership responsibility. 

13. Offices of the General Secretariat in member states 

a. To recall and renew the mandate entrusted to the General Secretariat in resolution AG/RES. 2971 (LI-O/21) (III.15) to prepare a strategic plan for the Offices and Units of the General Secretariat in the Member States (hereafter “the National Offices”) for adoption by the fifty-third regular session of the General Assembly. To further instruct the General Secretariat to present to the CAAP, by the end of the first quarter of 2024, a draft of said strategic plan, which outlines a concept of operations for the National Offices for the 2023-2028 period (including, but not limited to, a renewed mandate and key strategic objectives and operational activities) and includes options for optimizing the use of resources and maximizing their value and benefits for the General Secretariat and all OAS member states. - 112 -

14. Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization 

To request the General Secretariat to prepare, on an annual basis, the report “Compliance with the Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization ,” CP/doc. 5852/23 rev. 1 , with the next report 

to be presented by March 31, 2024. 

15. Proposed Program-budget for the 2025 budget cycle 

To instruct the General Secretariat, to incorporate into the proposed overall Regular Fund budget level the estimated annual adjustments required for the Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA) (including inflation), having regard for paragraphs a., b., and c. of Article 40 of the General Standards, resolution AG/RES.1319 (XXV-O/95) and Judgement No. 124 of the OAS Administrative Tribunal from 1994. 

16. Technical Study to Analyze the Methodology for Calculating the Scale of Quota 

Assessments to Finance the Regular Fund of the OAS 

a. To take note of the analysis prepared and submitted by the Secretariat for Administration and Finance (SAF) on how a socio-economic and environmental criterion could be incorporated into the methodology to calculate the quota assessments. ( CP/CAAP-3871/23 ). 

b. To extend the mandate issued by the General Assembly through AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22) for the CAAP to continue the analysis of all options for the possible incorporation of socio-economic and environmental criteria into the quota assessment methodology and, if so determined, to submit, to the Permanent Council for consideration by the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth regular session a recommendation of modification to the quota methodology that could take effect in 2026. 

17. Real Assets Strategy 

a. Real Assets Strategy: To instruct the General Secretariat to keep the CAAP apprised of options to optimize the use of all real assets and to report on how proceeds of a potential sale or disposal of those assets deemed as under-utilized could support resourcing of infrastructure, maintenance or other under-funded Regular Fund obligations. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to present an assessment of the total cost of the vehicles used by the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General. 

18. External Resource Mobilization 

a. To request that the General Secretariat present a plan regarding enhancing external resource mobilization, including from the private sector where relevant, by the close of the 1st quarter of 2024 for the consideration of the CAAP. - 113 -

b. To request the Secretary General to continue with the next steps as outlined in the March 2022 Report “Funding Options to Contribute to the Inter- American Human Rights System,” and to provide an update to the CAAP in March 2024 with the intention of ensuring that additional funding options can supplement the Regular Fund Program-Budget of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court on Human Rights. 

19. Timely decision to process vacant positions 

To request the General Secretariat to ensure that recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Selection and Promotion for vacant positions are considered and addressed within two months after background checks have been conducted and that further delays are justified in writing to the Permanent Council through the CAAP. 

20. Inter-American Emergency Aid Fund 

To request that the General Secretariat present options for strengthening the sustainability of the FONDEM for the consideration of the CAAP by the second quarter of 2024. 

21. Third-party comprehensive review of the Organization of American States 

a. The third-party comprehensive review of the Organization of American States should be carried out by a multinational consulting firm with divisions in several of the areas to be defined within the terms of reference. 

b. To instruct the CAAP to prepare the terms of reference for the third-party comprehensive review to submit for approval by the Permanent Council, no later than August 15, 2023. In drafting said proposal, the CAAP may consult with the Audit Committee. 

c. The third-party comprehensive review should be completed in time to inform the 2025 budget process and should include recommendations. The terms of reference should be two-part and at least include: 

i. Operational: A review with recommendations of the OAS organizational structure; staff compensation and benefits; personnel structure and staffing levels; finances; risk assessment; telework policies; real asset management (to include a detailed analysis of current space utilization based on in-office staffing requirements); internal processes of the Secretariats; detailed analysis of the OAS health plan/benefits and alternative options; In addition, the review shall identify strengths and areas for improvement in the organization, seeking to increase the organization’s capacity to be more effective and with the purpose of improving efficiency and cost effectiveness in implementing the Organization’s mandates, or other alternative sources; accountability and communication between the Secretariats and Member States. - 114 -

ii. Governance: A review with recommendations of the entire OAS governance structure to include the Councils (Permanent Council and the Inter-American Council for Integral Development), the General Secretariat, all OAS committees and working groups with a view to streamline and improve effectiveness of governance structures, processes, decision making, communication, and flow of information. 

d. To instruct the General Secretariat to present to the Permanent Council for approval through the CAAP within 30 days of receipt of the external review, a proposed implementation plan for the recommendations resulting from section c.i. of the above. - 115 -

ANNEX I – Renewal of operative paragraphs for budget cycle 2024 

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

1.  Semiannual 

reports on budget 

execution by the 

Inter-American System of Human Rights 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph I.4 

Mandate: 

To request the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) to present a semi-annual report on budget execution to the Permanent Council and, in due time, a detailed plan of expenditures corresponding to its budget. 

Annual 

2.  Accountability to 

member states 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII -O/22), paragraph III.2 

Mandate: 

b. In order to strengthen fiscal governance, compliance and reporting 

functions of the Permanent Council, instruct the General Secretariat, to 

produce semi-annual reports to the CAAP on financial and budgetary 

compliance within the Secretariat, with a view to improving 

efficiencies and maintaining fidelity to the obligations outlined in 

General Standards Article 120. 

c. To instruct the Secretariat of the Administrative Tribunal to keep the 

Permanent Council, through the CAAP, apprised of the status of 

judgments issued by the Administrative Tribunal once the decisions 

become final. 

3.  Direct and 

indirect cost 

recovery 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII -O/22), paragraph III.3 

Mandate: 

c.  The semi-annual financial report produced by the General Secretariat 

will also include analysis on intake and distribution of ICR and 

proceeds from the Cost Recovery System across the General 

Secretariat. 

4.  Program-budget 

for the 2022 

budgetary cycle 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.1 

Mandate: 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat to submit to the Preparatory 

Committee of the General Assembly a proposed overall budget level 

for 2022, as well as the tentative overall budget level for 2023, 

including the adjustment for cost of living and inflation, as appropriate, 

in accordance with the current rules. 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI-O/21), paragraph III.13 

Mandate: 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat to include all statutory increases and 

comply with all the requirements mandated by the General Standards 

when presenting the draft budget of the Regular Fund and the ICR 

Fund. The draft program-budget for the cycle must also take into 

account the following guidelines: 

2025 - 116 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

i. It does not propose to cut the reserve subfunds or use them in order 

to fund vacancies. 

ii. If the budget ceiling is set to decrease relative to the preceding year, 

whether in actual or expected inflation-adjusted terms, those cuts 

would be distributed in a way that seeks to ensure an adequate and 

sustainable financial allocation that minimizes possible negative 

impacts on the work of all areas. 

iii. It allocates the necessary amount to cover all costs of the 

Organization included in Chapter 12. 

iv. It is presented at the chapter and subprogram levels. 

b. The negotiations of member states will initially focus on establishing 

agreements at the chapter level and, in the case of Chapters 3 and 13, 

at the subprogram level; their allocations will be included at the 

subprogram level in the section on budget appropriations of the 

program-budget resolution. Subsequently, all appropriations at the 

subprogram level may also be included in the section on budget 

appropriations if member states so decide. 

5.  External Resource Mobilization 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.3 

Mandate: 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat, in its pursuit of the mandate on external resource mobilization, to emphasize the equal importance of the four pillars of the Organization –democracy, human rights, integral development, and multidimensional security– and to ensure that advocacy undertaken to fulfill this mandate includes the pursuit of resources governed by the principles of balance, proportionality, and equity of the pillars, and that it reflects the mandates agreed upon by the representative bodies of the Organization. 

c. To instruct the Secretary General to include in the semiannual reports on resource management and performance, under the chapter on projects submitted by the Project Evaluation Committee, additional information on approved and ongoing projects, including on their scope, supporting mandates, periodicity, implementation status, and sources of financing, so as to have a consolidated document on the use of specific fund resources. 

d. To instruct the Secretary General to continue, in consultation with the Permanent Council, with the implementation of a strategic plan for mobilizing the external support and funding needed to implement the mandates of the member states and the priorities of the Organization; and to instruct the General Secretariat to report on the progress of that - 117 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

implementation in the semiannual reports on resource management and 

performance. 

f. To instruct the General Secretariat, in accordance with resolution 

AG/RES. 617 (XII-O/82) :

i. In the case of projects not included in the program-budget of the Organization that receive contributions from non-member states that are permanent observers to the Organization, to submit semiannual reports to the appropriate competent organs of the Organization; 

ii. In the case of projects whose external contributions come from non-member states that are not permanent observers to the Organization, to consult first with whichever council is appropriate to the subject matter; 

iii. In the case of global cooperation agreements with permanent 

observer countries or with other non-member states, to request prior approval of the Permanent Council. 

g. To inform member states of any agreements, contracts, and/or memoranda of understanding being discussed or agreed for the cases described in item f.(i) of this paragraph, and to submit semiannual reports to the CAAP and the appropriate competent organs of the Organization. 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22), paragraph III.17 

Mandate: 

a. To reiterate to the Secretary General the need to continue efforts toward external resource mobilization for the implementation of the mandates of the General Assembly, especially for those that are unfunded or underfunded, in order to ensure fulfillment of the mandates presented by the member states, as well as the need to keep the CAAP apprised of his endeavors to identify such external resources, and to maintain transparency and accountability in the utilization of those funds in the semiannual report on resource management and performance. 

6.  OAS Scholarships and Training Program funds 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.5 

Mandate: 

a. To reiterate paragraph 22 of resolution AG/RES. 2916 (XLVIII-O/18), which endorses the provisional and comprehensive recommendations that were issued by the Working Group to analyze and assess the functioning of all OAS scholarship and training programs and adopted by the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI) - 118 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

(CIDI/doc.239/17  y CIDI/doc.256/18 ), and which tasks CIDI with 

overseeing the implementation of those mandates. 

b. To recognize resolution CIDI/RES. 337 (LXXXVIII-O/19), “Allocation of Resources in 2019 for the OAS Scholarships and Training Programs,” adopted by CIDI on April 9, 2019, endorsing the decision taken by the Management Board of the Inter-American Agency for Cooperation and Development (IACD) to facilitate the transition to a more sustainable and cost-effective scholarship program. 

d. To instruct the General Secretariat to pursue options for strengthening partnerships, including the incorporation of language training wherever possible. 

f. To authorize the General Secretariat to deposit in the Capital Fund for the OAS Scholarship and Training Programs, in accordance with Article 18 of the Statutes of the IACD, any unused or deobligated scholarship funds under Object 3, to the extent permitted under Article 106 of the General Standards. In implementing this mandate, the General Secretariat shall consult with CIDI through the IACD Management Board and obtain approval from the Permanent Council through the CAAP. 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI-O/21), paragraph III.4. 

b. To take note of the decision adopted by the Management Board of the 

IACD (in document AICD/JD/DE-129/21 corr. 1) instructing the Department of Financial Services (DFS) to invest the funds of the Capital Fund for the OAS Scholarship and Training Programs in accordance with the mandate established in section IV, operative paragraph 5.e of resolution AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20); and to instruct the DFS to report to CIDI and the Management Board of IACD biannually on the status of the investment strategy under implementation. 

7.  Foundations supported by the OAS 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.6 

Mandate: 

To request foundations supported by the OAS, the Pan American 

Development Foundation and the Trust for the Americas, to maintain a culture and practice of austerity, effectiveness, efficiency, transparency, prudence, and accountability in the use, execution, and management of resources allocated by the Organization. - 119 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

8.  Establishment of a 

structured budget preparation and presentation process 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.7 

Mandate: 

a. To instruct the General Secretariat to entrust the Secretariat for 

Administration and Finance with the analysis and preparation of the program-budget of the Organization, with adequate human resources having relevant budgetary expertise, and in coordination with all areas and organs of the Organization. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat, in direct collaboration with the different secretariats of the Organization, to adopt a rigorous approach to developing, clearly presenting, executing, and evaluating the program-budget in accordance with Chapters IV to VIII of the General Standards. The draft program-budget shall include the rationale for proposals as well as explanations of variances from the previous year and of human and financial resources requirements in line with expected results. The General Secretariat shall also include expenditure forecasts for two additional years in the preparation of each annual proposed program-budget. 

c. To instruct the General Secretariat to continue using the standard 

template approved by the member states ( CP/CAAP-3664/20 rev.  1)

when the secretariats present information to the CAAP about the impact of proposed budgets prepared by the Secretariat for Administration and Finance in their areas. The template completed with information from the secretariats shall be reviewed by the Secretariat for Administration and Finance prior to presentation to the CAAP together with the presentation of the draft program-budget of the Organization. In turn, the Secretariats should be cognizant of the final versions of the templates circulated to the CAAP . The template should include but is not limited to the following: 

i. A table indicating the previous year’s approved budget, the amount allocated, execution level, and the new budget proposal level. 

ii. Bullet points on the key impacts of the proposed funding level. 

d. To instruct the Permanent Council to continue analyzing, through the CAAP and with support from the General Secretariat, options for establishing a separate and independent budget process for OAS oversight mechanisms, including the Office of the Ombudsperson, the Inspector General, and the Administrative Tribunal (TRIBAD). The Permanent Council is authorized to adopt such measures in this area, taking into account the recommendations of the CAAP. - 120 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

e. To instruct the General Secretariat to take into consideration, when the circumstances so allow, the need for equity among the four programmatic pillars in the budget preparation process, with a view to ensuring that the proposed allocations allow the mandates agreed upon by the political organs of the Organization to be fulfilled; and also to instruct the General Secretariat to present to the CAAP, by February 28, 2021, considerations about the feasibility of achieving equity in the allocation of resources between the pillars from the program-budget for 2022. 

July 31, 2024 

9.  Review of the General Standards to Govern the Operations of the General Secretariat of the Organization of American States 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.9 

Mandate: 

a. To renew the mandate contained in resolution  AG/RES.  1 (XLVIII-

E/14)  rev. 1, which instructed the Permanent Council, through the 

CAAP, to conduct a comprehensive review of the General Standards, particularly Chapters VII and VIII thereof, and to instruct the CAAP to review those chapters and present the findings of that review and analysis and/or such recommendations as may emanate therefrom to the General Assembly at its fifty-first regular session. Said proposal will contain rules on financial and budgetary stability and discipline for ensuring the Organization’s medium- and long-term sustainability. 

b. To instruct the Secretary General to accompany all fund transfer 

requests that require Permanent Council approval with options, based 

on program-budget chapter savings and efficiencies, for where the funds can be sourced and a rationale for each option. 

Fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly 

10.  Official travel  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.10 

Mandate: 

a. To instruct the Secretary General, the Assistant Secretary General, and the secretaries for all the chapters, including those for the specialized agencies and entities, to submit quarterly to the Permanent Council a detailed report on the activities of their offices away from headquarters, including, inter alia , dates of travel, destination, 

delegation, and purpose of travel, with a mention as to the mandate 

approved by the member states that justifies the travel. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to publish on its website the reports requested in the preceding paragraph. 

Semiannual - 121 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

11.  Human resources  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.12 

Mandate: 

c. The General Secretariat will provide a detailed report to the CAAP on the status of all open Regular Fund positions. If an open position has not been publicly announced, the General Secretariat will provide a detailed explanation regarding the reason for the delay, with cash flow not being an appropriate justification. The status report on the Regular Fund recruitment process shall be provided on a monthly basis.  Quarterly 

12.  Honoraria  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.15 

Mandate: 

That the honoraria paid to members of the IACHR, Inter-American Court of Human Rights, TRIBAD, Board of External Auditors, and Inter-American Juridical Committee shall be US$300 per day, and that the cost of those honoraria shall be covered with the resources allocated in this program-budget. 

13.  Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII -O/22), paragraph III.19 

Mandate: 

To authorize the IACHR to cover payments to members of the 

Commission for special services, up to US$5,000 per month per member. This budgetary measure shall be taken without prejudice to the right to the payment of honoraria, as provided by the General Assembly in paragraph IV.15 of resolution AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20). 

14.  Inter-American Court of Human Rights 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII -O/22), paragraph III.20 

Mandate: 

To maintain the budgetary authorization to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to cover the payment of emoluments to judges of the Court, up to US$5,000 per month per judge. This budgetary measure shall be taken without prejudice to Article 26 of the Statute of the Court and without prejudice to the right to the payment of honoraria, as provided by the General Assembly in paragraph IV.15 of resolution AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20). 

15.  Cost efficiencies  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.19 

Mandate: 

To instruct the General Secretariat to include in its semiannual resource management and performance report to the CAAP any savings generated as a result of efficiencies in the operations of the General Secretariat, including those related to common costs. - 122 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

16.  Department of 

Press and Communication 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.20 

Mandate: 

To request the Secretary General to instruct the Department of Press and Communication to submit progress reports on implementation of the Communication Strategy and that they be included in the semiannual resource management and performance report. 

17.  Trust personnel  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.21 

Mandate: 

c. That personnel hired under a trust appointment shall not be eligible for the payment of accumulated unused annual leave upon their separation from the Organization. This provision shall not apply to Career Service, continuing contract, or Series A and Series B personnel who accepted a trust appointment. 

18.  International Public Sector Accounting Standards 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.25 

Mandate: 

To instruct the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, to identify the 

necessary funding for the project on Implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) within the General Secretariat once the new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system has been implemented, and within a reasonable timeframe. 

19.  Recommendations of the Inspector General 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.30 

Mandate: 

a. To instruct the Inspector General to continue presenting to the CAAP on a quarterly basis an analysis on the status of implementation of recommendations made. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to present for consideration by the CAAP in preparation for the discussions on the 2022 program-budget, an overview of the proposed organizational changes to strengthen the Office of the Inspector General and resource requirements associated with those proposed changes. 

Semiannual 

b. change to 2025 

20.  Ethics/harassment  AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.31 

Mandate: 

To instruct the Office of the Inspector General and the Office of the 

Ombudsperson to present to member states a report detailing the number of cases –including fraud, harassment, and whistleblower cases– handled annually, the time spent in the course of each proceeding in those investigations, the measures generally adopted, as well as identifying potential weaknesses and violations observed in the implementation of the Organization’s policies on fraud, harassment, and whistleblowers and whistleblower protection. - 123 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

21.  Real estate 

strategy 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.32 

Mandate: 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat, in close collaboration with the CAAP and within the framework of the real estate strategy, to explore alternatives to achieve the optimal use of the Organization's real estate and, to that end, to analyze the possibilities of obtaining the necessary resources for their maintenance. 

22.  Implementation of the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System 

AG/RES. 2957 (L -O/20), paragraph IV.33 

Mandate: 

To instruct the General Secretariat to continue with the implementation of the ERP system, pursuant to resolution  CP/RES.  1155 (2290/20)  and to 

report on progress to the CAAP on a monthly basis. 

23.  Use of the Organization's resources for the fulfillment of mandates 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI -O/21), paragraph II. 5. 

Mandate: 

To instruct the General Secretariat to ensure that the Organization’s 

resources are used to fulfill the mandates from the political organs, 

pursuant to Article 107 of the Charter of the Organization of American States. 

24.  Meetings of the Permanent Council 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI -O/21), paragraph II. 8. 

Mandate: 

a. To recall Article 36 of the Rules of Procedure of the Permanent Council, which establishes that regular meetings should be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month, and to urge the Chair of the Permanent Council to rationalize the scheduling of meetings and the preparation of their agenda, establishing that the member states have a shared responsibility in that regard, and always taking into account the need to strictly observe assigned budgetary allocations. To instruct the Office of the Assistant Secretary General to hold a joint briefing at the start of each year with all incoming Permanent Council chairs to provide information on the overall budget allocation for meetings, including an approximate breakdown per chairpersonship. To request a quarterly briefing report to the Permanent Council on the status of budget expenditure for Permanent Council meetings. 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to present to the Permanent Council, through the CAAP, any requests for reinforcements for meetings of the Permanent Council which exceed 2.5% of transfers across chapters and to mandate the Permanent Council to make a decision within 15 days of the date of any such request in order to ensure timely consideration of potential funding options available for the Chair to be able to convene meetings in response to the political exigencies in the Hemisphere. - 124 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

25.  Per diem  AG/RES. 2971 (LI -O/21), paragraph III. 5. 

To request that the General Secretariat present a proposal for a policy to govern payments of travel related expenses within 90 days of the implementation of the OASCORE business process modernization program. OASCORE will automate OAS travel management in accordance with the best practices of other international organizations, with an aim of simplifying and improving the current allowance system. Once the OASCORE travel management process is implemented, the General Secretariat shall conduct a rate comparison, analyze what benefits, if any, would arise from the presentation of invoices and receipts for certain components of any applicable daily subsistence allowances, and present a travel-related expenses proposal to CAAP for its consideration. 

26.  Creation of new mandates 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI -O/21), paragraph III.9 

Mandate: 

b. To instruct the General Secretariat to prioritize its resources upon receipt of a template for new mandates submitted by a member state, in order to complete the sections of the template under its responsibility and return it within five business days or within another timeframe agreed by the proponent member state(s). 

c. To urge the councils of the Organization to modify their working procedures to consider the instruments approved by the Permanent Council and ratified by this resolution. 

d. To request the CAAP Chair to ensure that, prior to the commencement of General Assembly negotiations, the Permanent Council, CIDI, and committee chairs are briefed on the new-mandate template and criteria process approved by the Permanent Council. 

27.  Methodology for calculating the scale of quota assessments to finance the Regular Fund of the Organization 

AG/RES. 2971 (LI -O/21), paragraph III.14 

Mandate: 

To take note of the presentation made by the General Secretariat to the CAAP Working Group on June 22, 2021, regarding progress on the mandate established by resolution CP/RES. 1104 (2168/18) rev. 1, as ratified by the General Assembly through resolution A G/RES. 1 (LIII -E/18), and on the SAF opinion document of October 19, 2021, on the Independent Group of Technical Experts for the quota assessment methodology. Also, to instruct the Permanent Council to continue monitoring, through the CAAP, the review of the quota assessment methodology conducted by the United Nations Committee on Contributions and, on the basis of the findings of those proceedings reappraise, with the urgency that the present socioeconomic situation in - 125 -

TITLE  MANDATES  CHANGE IN 

TIMELINE 

AND/OR 

PERIODICITY 

the region requires, going ahead with the creation of an independent 

expert group and how to consider the methodology for calculating the 

scale of quota assessments to finance the Regular Fund of the 

Organization of American States. - 126 -

ANNEX II. Reporting schedule 

Frequency and 

deadlines 

Most recent 

reference  Report/Theme  Responsible Area 

Annual 

(No later than the end of January 2024) 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.12.d.iii 

Report on re-organization of the Secretariat for new financial year, if applicable, in particular hiring and reclassification plans. 

SAF (DHR and DFS) 

Annually 

(no later than 45 days after end of year) 

AG/RES. 2957 

(L-O/20) 

I.4 

Annual Report and plan of expenditures of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) 

IACtHR and IACHR 

Annual 

(no later than 60 days after end of year) 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.31 

Report of the Inspector General and of the Ombudsperson on the annual number of cases that were handled during the previous year and recommendations with respect to the implementation of the Organization’s policies on fraud, harassment, whistleblowers and whistleblower protections. 

OIG and Ombudsperson 

Annual 

(no later than 60 days after the end of the year) 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.24 

Report on activities of Columbus Memorial Library  SHA/CML 

Annual (no later 

than 60 days after the end of the year 

AG/RES.1 (LI-E/16) 

Compliance with the Comprehensive Strategic Plan of the Organization  SAF 

Semiannual 

(no later than 45 days after the end of the semester) 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.2 

IV.3 (“a”, “c”, “d”) 

IV.13 

IV.14 

IV.18.a 

IV.19 

IV.20 

Semiannual Report on Resource Management and Performance 

[in accordance with Annex I of resolution AG/RES. 1 (XLVIII-E/14) rev. 1]  SAF/SCODMR/OGMS 

Semiannual 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.10.a 

IV.10.b 

Report of the Secretary General, the Assistant Secretary General, and the secretaries for all the chapters, including those for the specialized 

OSG, ASG and all secretariats - 127 -

Frequency and 

deadlines 

Most recent 

reference  Report/Theme  Responsible Area 

(no later than 45 

days after end of semester) 

agencies and entities, on the activities of their offices away from headquarters. 

Semiannual 

no later than 45 days after the closing of the semester 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.3.f.i 

IV.3.g 

Report on projects not included in the program-budget that receive contributions from non-member states that are permanent observers to the Organization, as well as on any related agreements, contracts, and/or memoranda of understanding being discussed or agreed. 

SCODMR 

Annual 

no later than 

June 30 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22) 

III.5.e 

Report of the Inspector General on actual personnel transfers, internal and external competitions concluded, and reclassifications included in the current program-budget. 

OIG 

Semiannual 

no later than 45 days after the closing of the semester 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.30.a. 

Report of the Inspector General on the status of implementation of recommendations made.  OIG 

Quarterly 

no later than 30 days after the closing of the quarter 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.12.c 

Detailed report on the status of all open Regular Fund positions and, if applicable, an explanation of reasons for the delay in the public announcement of open positions. 

SAF(DHR) 

Monthly  AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.33 

Report on the progress of the OASCORE business process modernization program.  SAF(EO/SAF) 

Monthly 

whenever there is an outstanding loan balance 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

I.6 

Report to CAAP on the status of the Treasury Fund  SAF(DFS) 

Ongoing 

AG/RES. 2985 (LII-O/22) 

III.2 

Publication of updated information on the Organization’s website  SCODMR/SAF - 128 -

Frequency and 

deadlines 

Most recent 

reference  Report/Theme  Responsible Area 

Immediately, whenever an applicable fund transfer request occurs 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.9.b 

Report presenting options of sources to fund transfer requests that exceed limits set on Article 110 of the General Standards. Options should preferably be based program-budget chapter savings and efficiencies, if available. 

SAF 

March 30, 2024 

AG/RES. 2957 (L-O/20) 

IV.12.a 

IV.13 

IV.14 

Updated implementation plan for the Comprehensive Human Resource Strategy for the Organization. 

SAF (DHR) - 129 -

ANNEX III 

POSITIONS  DESCRIPTION  LEVEL  SOURCE OF FUNDING 

1 Chief of Staff of the Secretary General  D01  Regular Fund 

1 Chief of Staff of the Assistant Secretary General  D01  Regular Fund 

1

Strategic Counsel for Organizational Development and Management for Results  D02  Regular Fund 

7 Secretaries  D02  Regular Fund 

• Executive Secretary for Integral Development  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Access to Rights and Equity  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Strengthening Democracy  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Multidimensional Security  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Hemispheric Affairs  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Legal Affairs  Regular Fund 

• Secretary for Administration and Finance  Regular Fund 

2 Advisers to the Secretary General  D01  Regular Fund 

P05  Regular Fund 

1 Adviser to the Assistant Secretary General  P04  Regular Fund 

1 Executive Assistant to the Secretary General  G07  Regular Fund 

1 Junior Adviser to the Assistant Secretary General  P01  Regular Fund 

1 Office of Protocol  P05  Regular Fund 

1 Director of CICAD 3/ P05  Regular Fund 

1 Director of CICTE 4/ P05  Regular Fund 

ADDITIONAL TRUST POSITIONS 

1 Adviser to the Secretary General  P05  Regular Fund 

2 Adviser to the Assistant Secretary General  P05  Regular Fund 

SPECIFIC FUNDS (not included in regulated positions count) 

1 Secretary Treasurer of the Pension Fund  D01  Specific Funds   

> 3.These positions will continue to be trust positions until such time as the General Assembly adopts the amendments to the relevant statutes required for the Executive Secretary to be selected through a competition process
> 4. Ibid.

- 130 -

FOOTNOTES 

1. … the efficient and transparent use of the public resources that the member states allocate to the Organization. 

El Salvador also reaffirms that, under a responsible policy of austerity, by which State resources are prioritized with a view to ensuring the full welfare of the Salvadoran population, it does not support an increase in quotas in any international organization. 

2. Permanent Council of the Organization of American States. As acknowledged in the preamble to the aforementioned resolution, the Charter of the Organization of American States bestows exclusively on the General Assembly the authority to approve the program-budget of the Organization and set the quotas of the member states. Not having received any mandate on this matter, the Permanent Council had no legal authority to approve a resolution that expressly establishes quotas and takes decisions on budgetary matters, flagrantly usurping the role of the General Assembly. Mexico wishes to point out that the resolution in question was not approved ad referendum of the General Assembly, given that at no time did the General Assembly request the Permanent Council to act as its substitute on this matter, hence not only does this paragraph lack support but it also reaffirms Mexico’s stated position that the resolution “Financing of the program-budget of the Organization for 2024” encroaches upon the functions of the General Assembly and that its approval by the OAS Permanent Council violated the Charter of the Organization of American States, particularly Articles 54.e, 55, 70, 82 and 112.c, as well as Articles 1, 14, 18, and 19.a, g, and i of the Statutes of the Permanent Council and other pertinent articles of the internal rules of the Organization. - 131 -

AG/RES. 3012 (LIII-O/23) PLACE AND DATE OF THE FIFTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

(Adopted at the fourth plenary session, held on June 23, 2023) 

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 

TAKING INTO ACCOUNT Articles 43 and 44 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly relating to the holding of regular sessions of the General Assembly and the determination of the date and place for those sessions; and 

CONSIDERING: 

That the General Assembly of the Organization of American States shall hold a regular session each year, preferably during the second quarter; and 

That the government of Suriname, by note  AG/INF. 776/23 , has offered to host the fifty-fourth 

regular session of the General Assembly of the Organization, which is to be held in 2024, as a reaffirmation of its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the OAS and as a demonstration of its firm resolve to continue participating actively in strengthening the Organization, 

RESOLVES: 

1. To determine that the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly be held in Suriname on a date to be determined later within the Permanent Council of the Organization of American States. 

2. To thank the Government of Suriname for its generous offer to host the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly.
