Title: Indoor Air Quality in Commercial and Institutional Buildings

URL Source: https://www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/publications/3430indoor-air-quality-sm.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 04 Feb 2021 17:46:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
Indoor Air Quality in Commercial and Institutional Buildings  

> OSHA 3430-04 2011

## Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 

“To assure safe and healthful working  conditions 

for working men and women;  by authorizing 

enforcement of the stan dards developed under 

the Act; by assisting and encouraging the States in 

their efforts to assure safe and healthful working 

conditions; by providing for research, information, 

education, and training in the field of occupational 

safety and health.” 

This publication provides a general  overview of 

a particular standards-related topic. This publication 

does not alter or determine compliance responsibili -

ties  which are set forth in OSHA standards, and the 

Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 . More -

over, because interpretations and enforcement  poli -

cy may change over time, for additional guidance  on 

OSHA compliance requirements, the reader should 

consult current administrative interpretations and 

decisions by the Occu pational Safety and Health 

Review Commission and the courts. 

Material contained in this publication is in the public 

domain and may be reproduced,  fully or partially, 

without permission. Source credit is requested 

but not required. 

This information will be made available to sensory-

impaired individuals upon  request. Voice phone: 

(202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: 1-877-

889-5627. Indoor Air Quality in 

# Commercial and Institutional 

# Buildings 

# Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

# U.S. Department of Labor 

OSHA  3430-04 

2011 

The guidance is advisory in nature and informational in 

content. It is not a standard or regulation, and it neither 

creates new legal obligations nor alters existing obligations 

created by OSHA standards or the Occupational Safety and 

Health Act. Pursuant to the OSH Act, employers must 

comply with safety and health standards and regulations 

issued and enforced by either OSHA or by an OSHA-

approved State Plan. In addition, the Act’s General Duty 

Clause, Section 5(a)(1), requires employers to provide their 

workers with a workplace free from recognized hazards 

likely to cause death or serious physical harm. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 2

# Contents 

Introduction  3

Background  3

Benefits of Mitigation of IAQ Problems  4

Health Effects  4

Sources of Indoor Air Pollutants  5

Common Pollutant Categories  6

Prevention or Control IAQ  Problems  6

IAQ Management Approach  6

Identification and Assessment  7

Control Methods  7

Seeking Professional Assistance  8

Applicable Standards and 

Regulations  9

OSHA Standards  9

Standard Interpretations  9

State Programs  10 

National Consensus Standards  10 

OSHA Assistance, Services 

and Programs  11 

Appendix A: Common Indoor Air 

Contaminants  16 

Appendix B: Steps to Improve 

Indoor Air Quality  19 

Appendix C: HVAC  System 

Maintenance Checklist  20 

Appendix D: Investigating IAQ 

Problems and Complaints  21 

Appendix E: Selected Resources  22 

Hazard Recognition  22 

Evaluation and Control  23 

Appendix F: OSHA-Sponsored 

Environmental Tobacco Smoke 

Workshops  25 

Workshops I - III  25 

References  26 I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 3

# Introduction 

Indoor air quality (IAQ) is a major concern to 

businesses, schools, building managers, tenants, 

and workers because it can impact the health, 

comfort, well-being, and productivity of the building 

occupants. OSHA recognizes that poor IAQ can be 

hazardous to workers’ health and that it is in the 

best interest of everyone that building owners, 

managers, and employers take a proactive approach 

to address IAQ concerns. 

This OSHA guidance document on IAQ provides 

practical recommendations that will help prevent 

or minimize IAQ problems in commercial and 

institutional buildings, and help resolve such 

problems quickly if they do arise. It provides flexible 

guidance to employers to help them keep their build -

ings free of pollutants or conditions that lead 

to poor IAQ. It also provides information on good IAQ 

management, including control of airborne 

pollutants, introduction and distribution of adequate 

make-up air, and maintenance of an acceptable 

temperature and relative humidity. Temperature and 

humidity are important because thermal comfort 

underlies many complaints about “poor air quality.” 

Some of the information presented here has been 

derived from the Environmental Protection Agency’s 

(EPA) report, “ An Office Building Occupant’s Guide 

to IAQ ” (1) 1 and other documents listed in Appendix 

E, Selected Resources. The issue of environmental 

tobacco smoke will only be addressed in Appendix 

F, or indirectly in discussions of air quality relative to 

some possible components of tobacco smoke, e.g., 

carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, particulates, etc. 

In 1998, OSHA conducted a series of three workshops 

on this issue and the proceedings of these work -

shops were published in 1999. See Appendix F for 

more information. 

This document is directed primarily at employers, 

building owners and managers, and others 

responsible for building maintenance, but may also 

be used as a basic reference for all those involved 

in IAQ issues. Furthermore, information present -

ed here can help with the decision of whether or 

not the services of an outside professional may be 

needed. The advice of a medical professional should 

always be sought if there are any immediate health 

issues. Contractors and other professionals (e.g., 

industrial hygienists or other environmental health 

and safety professionals) who respond to IAQ 

concerns, as well as members of the general public, 

may also find this information helpful. 

# Background 

IAQ has been identified by the EPA as one of the 

top five most urgent environmental risks to public 

health (2). The Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention (CDC) estimates that the majority of 

Americans spend approximately 90 percent of their 

time indoors (3). On average, office workers spend 

approximately 40 hours a week in office buildings. 

These workers also study, eat, drink, and, in cer -

tain work settings, sleep in enclosed environments 

where make-up air (i.e., fresh air added to re-

circulated air) may be compromised. For this 

reason, some experts believe that more people may 

suffer from the effects of indoor air pollution than 

from outdoor air pollution. 

Each building has its own set of circumstances. 

Air quality may be determined by the site of the 

building, its original design, renovations, whether 

air handling systems have been maintained, 

occupant densities, activities conducted within the 

building, and the occupants’ satisfaction with their 

environment. IAQ problems can arise from a single 

source or any combination of factors. Inadequate 

IAQ may begin with poor building design or failure 

of the building enclosure or envelope (roof, facade, 

foundation, etc.). Other issues may be associated 

with the location of the building and mixed uses of 

the building. Many common IAQ problems are 

associated with improperly operated and maintained 

heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) 

systems, overcrowding, radon, moisture incursion 

and dampness, presence of outside air pollutants, 

and the presence of internally generated contami -

nants such as use of cleaning and disinfecting 

supplies and aerosol products, off-gassing from 

materials in the building, and use of mechanical 

equipment. Improper temperature and relative 

humidity conditions can also present problems, 

especially concerning comfort. 

Many IAQ complaints are associated with flaws 

in building design and by inadequate routine 

preventive maintenance of building enclosures 

(envelopes), plumbing, and HVAC systems (2, 4, 5). 

To resolve many IAQ problems, a preventive main -

tenance program should be established based on 

the system’s recommended maintenance schedule 

outlined by the architect or engineer, the manufac -

turer, or an HVAC professional. Regular preventive 

maintenance not only ensures that systems are 

operating properly, but also can result in cost 

savings, improved operating efficiency, and 

increased worker productivity (6). The U.S. Green 

> 1The numbers in parentheses refer to specific entries in the last
> section of this document titled “References.” Occupational Safety and
> Health Administration 4

Research has linked building dampness with 

significant health effects. Numerous species of 

bacteria and fungi, in particular filamentous fungi 

(mold), can contribute significantly to indoor air 

pollution (4, 15-20). Whenever sufficient moisture is 

present within workplaces, these microbes can grow 

and affect the health of workers in several ways. 

Workers may develop respiratory symptoms, 

allergies, or asthma (8). Asthma, cough, wheezing, 

shortness of breath, sinus congestion, sneezing, 

nasal congestion, and sinusitis have all been 

associated with indoor dampness in numerous 

studies (21-23). Asthma is both caused by and 

worsened by dampness in buildings. The most 

effective means to prevent or minimize adverse 

health effects is to determine the sources of 

persistent dampness in the workplace and elimi -

nate them. More details on preventing mold-related 

problems can be found in the OSHA publication 

titled: “Preventing Mold-Related Problems in the 

Indoor Workplace” (17). Other environmental fac -

tors such as poor lighting, stress, noise, and thermal 

discomfort may cause or contribute to these health 

effects (8). 

Building Council (USGBC), among others, has 

demonstrated that IAQ  issues can be readily and 

practically addressed when  building systems are 

retrofitted for energy efficiency.  (http://www.usgbc.org/ 

> DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=221#v2008)

Benefits of Mitigation of IAQ Problems 

Good IAQ in buildings is an important component 

of a healthy indoor environment. It contributes to a 

favorable and productive environment for building 

occupants, giving them a sense of comfort, health, 

and well-being. Significant increases in worker 

productivity have also been demonstrated when 

the air quality was adequate (6). Research has also 

shown that workers in buildings with adequate air 

quality have reduced rates of symptoms related to 

poor air quality (7). 

Health Effects 

Symptoms related to poor IAQ are varied depend -

ing on the type of contaminant. They can easily be 

mistaken for symptoms of other illnesses such as 

allergies, stress, colds, and influenza. The usual clue 

is that people feel ill while inside the building, and 

the symptoms go away shortly after leaving the 

building, or when away from the building for a 

period of time (such as on weekends or a vacation). 

Health or symptom surveys, such as the one 

included in Appendix D, have been used to help 

ascertain the existence of IAQ problems. 

Failure of building owners and operators to respond 

quickly and effectively to IAQ problems can lead to 

numerous adverse health consequences. Health 

effects from indoor air pollutants may be experi -

enced soon after exposure or, possibly, years later 

(8, 9, 10). Symptoms may include irritation of 

the eyes, nose, and throat; headaches; dizziness; 

rashes; and muscle pain and fatigue (11, 12, 13, 14). 

Diseases linked to poor IAQ include asthma and 

hypersensitivity pneumonitis (11, 13). The specific 

pollutant, the concentration of exposure, and the 

frequency and duration of exposure are all 

important factors in the type and severity of health 

effects resulting from poor IAQ. Age and preexisting 

medical conditions such as asthma and allergies 

may also influence the severity of the effects. Long-

term effects due to indoor air pollutants may include 

respiratory diseases, heart disease, and cancer, all of 

which can be severely debilitating or fatal (8, 11, 13). I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 5

Renovation Activities:  When painting and other 

renovations are being conducted, dust or other 

by-products of the construction materials are sourc -

es of pollutants that may circulate through a build -

ing. Isolation by barriers and increased 

ventilation to dilute and remove the contaminants 

are recommended. 

Local Exhaust Ventilation:  Kitchens, laboratories, 

maintenance shops, parking garages, beauty and 

nail salons, toilet rooms, trash rooms, soiled laundry 

rooms, locker rooms, copy rooms and other 

specialized areas may be a source of pollutants 

when they lack adequate local exhaust ventilation. 

Building Materials:  Disturbing thermal insulation or 

sprayed-on acoustical material, or the presence of 

wet or damp structural surfaces (e.g., walls, ceilings) 

or non-structural surfaces (e.g., carpets, shades), 

may contribute to indoor air pollution. 

Building Furnishings:  Cabinetry or furniture made 

of certain pressed-wood products may release 

pollutants into the indoor air. 

Building Maintenance:  Workers in areas in which 

pesticides, cleaning products, or personal-care 

products are being applied may be exposed to 

pollutants. Allowing cleaned carpets to dry without 

active ventilation may promote microbial growth. 

Occupant Activities:  Building occupants may be 

the source of indoor air pollutants; such pollutants 

include perfumes or colognes. 

# Sources of Indoor Air Pollutants 

The relative importance of any single source 

depends on how much of a given pollutant it emits, 

how hazardous those emissions are, occupant 

proximity to the emission source, and the ability 

of the ventilation system (i.e., general or local) to 

remove the contaminant. In some cases, factors 

such as the age and maintenance history of the 

source are significant. 

Sources of indoor air pollution may include: 

Building Site or Location:  The location of a building 

can have implications for indoor pollutants. 

Highways or busy thoroughfares may be sources 

of particulates and other pollutants in nearby 

buildings. Buildings sited on land where there was 

prior industrial use or where there is a high water 

table may result in leaching of water or chemical 

pollutants into the building. 

Building Design:  Design and construction flaws 

may contribute to indoor air pollution. Poor 

foundations, roofs, facades, and window and door 

openings may allow pollutant or water intrusion. 

Outside air intakes placed near sources where 

pollutants are drawn back into the building (e.g., 

idling vehicles, products of combustion, waste con -

tainers, etc.) or where building exhaust reenters into 

the building can be a constant source of pollutants. 

Buildings with multiple tenants may need an 

evaluation to ensure emissions from one tenant do 

not adversely affect another tenant. 

Building Systems Design and Maintenance:  When 

the HVAC system is not functioning properly for any 

reason, the building is often placed under negative 

pressure. In such cases, there may be infiltration 

of outdoor pollutants such as particulates, vehicle 

exhaust, humid air, parking garage contaminants, etc. 

Also, when spaces are redesigned or renovated, the 

HVAC system may not be updated to accommodate 

the changes. For example, one floor of a building 

that housed computer services may be renovated 

for offices. The HVAC system would need to be 

modified for office employee occupancy (i.e., modi -

fying temperature, relative humidity, and air flow). Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 6

# Prevention and Control of IAQ Problems 

IAQ Management Approach 

Ideally, an employer should use a systematic 

approach when addressing air quality in the work -

place. The components of a systematic approach for 

addressing IAQ are the same as those for an overall 

safety and health program approach, and include 

management commitment, training, employee 

involvement, hazard identification and control, and 

program audit. Management needs to be receptive 

to potential concerns and complaints, and to train 

workers on how to identify and report air quality 

concerns. If employees express concerns, prompt 

and effective assessment and corrective action is 

the responsibility of management. 

It is recommended that building owners/managers 

develop and implement an IAQ management plan to 

address, prevent, and resolve IAQ problems in their 

specific buildings. The EPA’s report,  IAQ  Tools for 

Office Buildings , provides a set of flexible and 

specific activities that can be useful to building 

owners/managers for developing such a plan. A key 

feature of the plan is the selection of an IAQ Coordi -

nator. The role and functions of an IAQ Coordinator 

are described in Section 3 of the EPA’s report,  IAQ 

Tools for Schools Action Kit  (24). Other critical 

features of the plan include establishing necessary 

IAQ policies, assessing the current status of IAQ in 

buildings through periodic inspections, maintaining 

appropriate logs and checklists, performing 

necessary repairs and upgrades, and implementing 

follow-up assessments or other needed actions. 

Employers who lease space should be familiar with 

the building management’s program and methods 

for mitigating or resolving indoor air quality prob -

lems. It is especially important for employers to 

know who to contact in buildings where there is 

mixed use and pollutants are emanating from other 

sources in the building. Employers should negotiate 

leases that specify IAQ performance criteria. For 

example, a lease should specify that the space be 

ventilated with outdoor air while occupied and at a 

rate described in ASHRAE 62.1 Ventilation for 

Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. 

An important management strategy is to foster a 

team approach for problem solving and consensus 

building. The IAQ Team should include, but not 

necessarily be limited to, building occupants, 

administrative staff, facility operators, custodians, 

building healthcare staff, contract service providers, 

and other interested parties. 

# Common Pollutant Categories 

Although there are numerous indoor air pollutants 

that can be spread through a building, they typically 

fall into three basic categories: biological, chemical, 

and particle (1). 

Biological 

Excessive concentrations of bacteria, viruses, fungi, 

dust mites, animal dander, and pollen may result 

from inadequate maintenance and housekeeping, 

water spills, inadequate humidity control, 

condensation, or water intrusion through leaks in 

the building envelope or flooding. 

Chemical 

Sources of chemical pollutants (gases and vapors) 

include emissions from products used in the 

building (e.g., office equipment; furniture, wall 

and floor coverings; pesticides; and cleaning and 

consumer products), accidental spills of chemicals, 

products used during construction activities such 

as adhesives and paints, and gases such as carbon 

monoxide, formaldehyde, and nitrogen dioxide, 

which are products of combustion. 

Particle (Non-biological) 

Particles are solid or liquid, non-biological, sub -

stances that are light enough to be suspended in the 

air. Dust, dirt, or other substances may be drawn 

into the building from outside. Particles can also be 

produced by activities that occur in buildings such 

as construction, sanding wood or drywall, printing, 

copying, and operating equipment. 

Some of the most common indoor air pollutants, 

and the means to control or prevent them, are 

discussed in Appendix A. I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 7

the effectiveness of ventilation (5, 26), and exces -

sive population density (e.g., overcrowding). 

• Ensure that good housekeeping practices are 

being applied. 

• Ensure that routine preventive maintenance and 

upkeep of buildings is being performed. A 

preventive maintenance program provides the 

care to all building systems and components that 

keeps them operating at peak performance 

according to manufacturer’s specifications, and 

also allows for early detection of problems 

(1, 18). 

• Ensure that scheduled renovations are isolated 

from the building’s general dilution ventilation 

system when occupants are in the building. 

Control Methods 

There are three basic control methods for lowering 

concentrations of indoor air pollutants: 

1. Source management 

Source management includes removal, substitution, 

and enclosure of sources. It is the most effective 

control method when it can be applied practically. 

For example, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety 

Commission recommends installing carpets that are 

low-volatile organic compound (VOC) emitters, and 

encourages consumers to ask retailers or installers 

about the carpet industry’s voluntary “green label” 

program for new carpets (27). According to the 

carpet industry, the green and white logo displayed 

on carpet samples informs the consumer that the 

specific manufacturer’s product has been tested by 

an independent laboratory and has met the criteria 

for very low emissions (28). The label, however, 

is not a guarantee that the carpet will not cause 

health problems (27). Another example is that the 

employer can set up temporary barriers or place the 

space under negative pressure relative to adjoining 

areas to contain the pollutants during construction 

activities. 

2.  Engineering controls 

a. Local exhaust 

Local exhaust, such as a canopy hood, is very 

effective in removing point sources of pollutants 

before they can be dispersed into the building’s 

indoor air. 

b.  General dilution ventilation 

General dilution ventilation systems, when 

properly designed, operated, and maintained, 

will control normal amounts of air pollutants. 

A well-designed and functioning HVAC system 

controls temperature and relative humidity levels 

Lastly, following up with affected personnel will 

serve to validate the effectiveness of the mitigation 

activities. For more information about the IAQ 

management approach, refer to OSHA’s Safety and 

Health Topics Page on Injury and Illness Prevention 

Programs.  (http://www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/safetyhealth/ 

> index.html).

Identification and Assessment 

Methods used in an IAQ investigation may include 

identifying pollutant sources, evaluating the HVAC 

system performance, observing production process -

es and work practices, measuring contamination 

levels and employee exposures, providing medi -

cal testing or physical examinations, conducting 

employee interviews, and reviewing records of 

medical tests, job histories, and injuries and illness -

es. The Appendices provide resources and check -

lists that building owners, managers, and occupants 

can use to investigate IAQ complaints, document 

walkthrough inspections, and correct IAQ problems. 

To prevent IAQ problems effectively and efficiently, 

building managers should know and understand 

the history of the building (construction, uses, 

maintenance, etc.). If possible, owners and man -

agers should maintain blueprints and construction 

documents, including information about any 

renovations of the building. 

Some important practices include: 

• Inspect and assess the building envelope, includ -

ing the roof, walls, and foundation, and promptly 

respond to identified problems. Routinely check 

the building for water leaks, seals around doors 

and windows, and any visible damp or moist 

parts of the building. Clean and dry any damp or 

wet building materials and furnishings within 24 

to 48 hours after detection to prevent the growth 

of mold. 

• Ensure and validate that the building is 

maintained under a slight positive pressure 

(i.e., air comes out of the building when exterior 

doors are opened). 

• Check whether the temperature and humidity are 

maintained in a recommended comfort range 

(temperature: 68 to 78 degrees and relative 

humidity: 30% to 60%) (25). 

• Ensure that routine maintenance of the HVAC 

system is being performed, including the 

performance of the system bringing outdoor air 

into the building. (1). 

• Monitor carbon dioxide (CO 2) levels. The carbon 

dioxide levels can be used as a rough indicator of Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 8

storing food properly, and choosing cleaning 

products and methods that minimize the 

introduction of pollutants into the building (18). 

These steps are outlined in Appendix B. 

Seeking Professional Assistance 

Some indoor air problems can be resolved when 

good practices are put in place to control 

contaminants and building personnel follow good 

housekeeping approaches. Other problems may be 

difficult to resolve, however, and may require 

outside assistance. A building owner or manager 

may first want to consult local, state, or federal 

government agencies (e.g., education, health, 

environmental protection, or agriculture agencies) 

for assistance or direction in solving IAQ problems. 

These governmental agencies may be able to help 

an employer identify the types of experts who could 

best assist them. 

Examples of experts include: 

• Structural engineers - address issues with 

structural elements such as corrosion problems 

in a building’s foundation; 

• Architects - responsible for designing the 

building envelope and can mitigate water 

intrusion problems by designing vapor barriers; 

• Mechanical engineers - test and balance HVAC 

systems and may be able to assess and recom -

mend repairs/replacement of HVAC systems and 

local exhaust ventilation systems; and 

• Industrial hygienists - assess general IAQ 

parameters such as air changes in a building, 

carbon dioxide levels, carbon monoxide levels, 

and other indoor pollutants, and also evaluate 

contaminant levels. 

There may be private firms or consultants in your 

area with experience in IAQ work. Such firms may 

be found in general resources such as a telephone 

directory (e.g., under “Engineers,” “Environmental 

and Ecological Services,” “Laboratories-Testing,” or 

“Industrial Hygiene Consultants”), on the Internet, 

or by asking building owners/managers for refer -

rals. Some professionals who work with IAQ issues 

must meet licensing and certification requirements 

to practice in their disciplines. A consultant should 

base any testing recommendations or protocol on 

a thorough visual inspection, walkaround, and 

interviews with building occupants. 

to provide thermal comfort, distributes adequate 

amounts of outdoor air to meet the ventilation 

needs of building occupants, and also dilutes and 

removes odors and other contaminants. Testing 

and rebalancing of HVAC systems are essential 

when partitions are moved in buildings. Appen -

dix C contains an HVAC System Maintenance 

Checklist that can be used to assist in routine 

maintenance of the HVAC system. For certain 

situations, such as painting and carpet cleaning, 

temporarily increasing ventilation can help dilute 

the concentration of vapors in the air. 

c.  Air cleaning 

Air cleaning primarily involves the removal of 

particles from the air as the air passes through 

the HVAC equipment. Most HVAC system 

filtration is provided to keep dirt off of coil 

surfaces to promote heat transfer efficiency. 

Most smudging observed around air supply 

diffusers in a ceiling result from entrainment 

(trapping) of dirt particles in the space that 

accumulate there because of poor housekeeping. 

3.  Administrative controls 

a. Work Schedule 

Through scheduling, managers can significantly 

reduce the amount of pollutant exposure in their 

buildings. For instance: 

1.  Eliminate or reduce the amount of time a 

worker is exposed to a pollutant (i.e., schedul -

ing maintenance or cleaning work to be 

accomplished when other building occupants 

are not present). 

2.  Reduce the amount of chemicals being used 

by or near workers (i.e., limit the amount of 

chemicals being used by the worker during 

maintenance or cleaning activities). 

3.  Control the location of chemical use (i.e., 

perform maintenance work on moveable 

equipment in a maintenance shop as opposed 

to the general area, or locate the equipment 

(e.g., printers, copiers) in a separate room). 

b. Education 

Education of building occupants regarding IAQ 

is important (29). If occupants are provided with 

information about the sources and effects of 

pollutants under their control, and about the 

proper operation of the ventilation system, they 

can alert their employer and/or take action to 

reduce their personal exposure. 

c.  Housekeeping 

Housekeeping practices should include prevent -

ing dirt from entering the environment (using, for 

example, walk-off mat systems), removing dirt 

once it is in the building, disposing of garbage, I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 9

# Applicable Standards and Regulations 

OSHA does not have a general IAQ standard, but does provide guidelines addressing the most common 

workplace complaints about IAQ, which are typically related to temperature, humidity, lack of outside air 

ventilation, or smoking. OSHA standards address potential hazardous conditions leading to serious physical 

harm or death. Such standards may include those for specific air contaminants, ventilation systems, or the 

General Duty Clause of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH Act). This section highlights 

OSHA standards, standards interpretations (official OSHA letters of interpretation of its standards), and 

national consensus standards related to IAQ. 

OSHA Standards 

All OSHA regulations, interpretations, and the OSH Act can be found on www.osha.gov. Important OSHA 

statues and standards include: 

• Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 

Section 5(a)(1),  often referred to as the General Duty Clause, requires employers to “furnish to each 

of his employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards 

that are causing or are likely to cause  death or serious physical harm to his employees.” 

Section 5(a)(2)  requires employers to “comply with occupational safety and health standards 

promulgated under this Act.” 

Some of the applicable OSHA Standards are: 

• 29 CFR 1904, Recording and Reporting Occupational Injuries and Illnesses. 

• 29 CFR 1910.94, Ventilation. 

• 29 CFR 1910.1000, Air Contaminants. 

• 29 CFR 1910.1048, Formaldehyde. 

• 29 CFR 1910.1450, Occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals in laboratories. 

Standard Interpretations 

• Enforcement policy for respiratory hazards not covered by OSHA Permissible Exposure Limits. 

(January 24, 2003.) https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=INTERPRETA -

TIONS&p_id=24749. 

• Air monitoring results, citations, and employee exposure records. (March 27, 2002.) https://www.osha. 

gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=INTERPRETATIONS&p_id=24261. 

• The use of ozone gas from ozone generators in a large room. (April 3, 1995.) https://www.osha.gov/pls/ 

oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=INTERPRETATIONS&p_id=21753. 

• Request for a list of all OSHA-regulated air contaminants. (March 22, 1995.) https://www.osha.gov/pls/ 

oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=INTERPRETATIONS&p_id=21731. 

• Record retention requirements for indoor air quality documents and reports. (August 1, 2002.) http:// 

www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=INTERPRETATIONS&p_id=24255. 

• Reiteration of existing OSHA policy on indoor air quality: office temperature and environmental tobacco 

smoke. (February 23, 2003.) http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=IN -

TERPRETATIONS&p_id=24602. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 1 0

State Programs 

The  Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970  (OSH Act) encourages states to develop and operate their 

own job safety and health plans. States with plans approved and monitored by OSHA under section 18(b) 

of the OSH Act must adopt standards and enforce requirements that are at least as effective as federal 

requirements. There are currently 27 State Plan states and territories: Twenty-two of these states and 

territories administer plans covering both private and public (state/territory and local government) workers; 

the other plans, Connecticut, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and the Virgin Islands, cover public-sector 

workers only. 

Additional information on State Plans may be found at http://www.osha.gov/dcsp/osp/index.html. 

For the most part, these OSHA-approved State Plans adopt standards that are identical to the federal OSHA 

standards. However, some states have adopted state-specific standards that are at least as effective as the 

Federal OSHA standards, including the New Jersey IAQ standard. The New Jersey IAQ standard, (N.J.A.C. 

12:100-13; 2007) sets standards for indoor air quality in existing buildings occupied by public employees 

during their regular working hours. 

State of California IAQ Program. (http://www.cal-iaq.org/about-us/about-cal-iaq) 

This program is a part of the California Department of Public Health (CDPH), separate from the State OSHA 

program. The purpose of the California IAQ  program is to conduct and promote the coordination  of research, 

investigations, experiments, demonstrations, surveys, and studies relating to the causes, effects, extent, 

prevention, and control of indoor pollution in California. 

National Consensus Standards 

Note: These are  NOT  OSHA regulations. However, they do provide guidance from their originating 

organizations related to worker protection. 

American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air 

Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). 

• 62.1-2010,  Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. This standard specifies recommended outdoor 

air ventilation rates. The recommended outdoor ventilation rates are based on olfactory studies, and 

acceptable indoor air quality is met when 80% or more of the exposed people do not express dissatis -

faction. Whereas ASHRAE Standard 62 has always been considered a design standard for ventilation, 

building owner/operators should pay particular attention to Section 8 titled Operations and Maintenance. 

Section 8 offers guidance to the building owner/operator as to what outdoor air ventilation components 

should be maintained, what tasks should be performed, and the minimum frequency for performing 

those tasks. 

• 55-2010,  Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. Specifies temperatures that 

approximately 80 percent of building occupants should find acceptable. 

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 

• E1971–05,  Standard Guide for Stewardship for the Cleaning of Commercial and Institutional Buildings. I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 1 1 

Each year, responding to requests from small 

employers looking to create or improve their safety 

and health management programs, OSHA’s On-site 

Consultation Program conducts over 29,000 visits to 

small business worksites covering over 1.5 million 

workers across the nation. 

On-site consultation services are separate from 

enforcement and do not result in penalties or 

citations. Consultants from state agencies or 

universities work with employers to identify 

workplace hazards, provide advice on compliance 

with OSHA standards, and assist in establishing 

safety and health management programs. 

For more information, to find the local 

On-site Consultation office in your state, or to 

request a brochure on Consultation Services, 

visit www.osha.gov/consultation, or call 1-800-321-

OSHA [6742]. 

Under the consultation program, certain exempla -

ry employers may request participation in OSHA’s 

Safety and Health Achievement Recognition 

Program (SHARP). Eligibility for participation 

includes, but is not limited to, receiving a full-service, 

comprehensive consultation visit, correcting all 

identified hazards and developing an effective 

safety and health management program. Worksites 

that receive SHARP recognition are exempt from 

programmed inspections during the period that the 

SHARP certification is valid. 

Cooperative Programs 

OSHA offers cooperative programs under which 

businesses, labor groups and other organizations 

can work cooperatively with OSHA. To find out 

more about any of the following programs, visit 

www.osha.gov/dcsp/compliance_assistance/index_ 

programs.html. 

Alliance Program 

Through the Alliance Program, OSHA works with 

groups committed to worker safety and health to 

prevent workplace fatalities, injuries and illnesses. 

These groups include trade or professional 

organizations, employers, unions, consulates, faith-

based and community-based organizations and 

educational institutions. OSHA and the groups work 

together to develop compliance assistance tools 

and resources, share information with workers and 

employers, and educate workers and employers 

about their rights and responsibilities. 

# OSHA Assistance, Services and Programs 

OSHA offers free compliance assistance to employ -

ers and workers. Several OSHA programs and ser -

vices can help employers identify and correct job 

hazards, as well as improve their injury and illness 

prevention program. 

Establishing an Injury and Illness Prevention Program 

The key to a safe and healthful work environment 

is a comprehensive injury and illness prevention 

program. 

Injury and illness prevention programs are systems 

that can substantially reduce the number and 

severity of workplace injuries and illnesses, while 

reducing costs to employers. Thousands of employ -

ers across the United States already manage safety 

using illness and injury prevention programs, and 

OSHA believes that all employers can and should do 

the same. Thirty-four states have requirements or 

voluntary guidelines for workplace injury and illness 

prevention programs. Most successful injury and ill -

ness prevention programs are based on a common 

set of key elements. These include management 

leadership, worker participation, hazard identifica -

tion, hazard prevention and control, education and 

training, and program evaluation and improvement. 

Visit OSHA’s illness and injury prevention program 

web page at www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/safetyhealth 

for more information. 

Compliance Assistance Specialists 

OSHA has compliance assistance specialists 

throughout the nation located in most OSHA offices. 

Compliance assistance specialists can provide 

information to employers and workers about OSHA 

standards, short educational programs on specific 

hazards or OSHA rights and responsibilities, and 

information on additional compliance assistance 

resources. For more details, visit www.osha.gov/ 

dcsp/compliance_assistance/cas.html or call 1-800-

321-OSHA [6742] to contact your local OSHA office. 

Free On-site Safety and Health Consultation Services for Small Business 

OSHA’s On-site Consultation Program offers free 

and confidential advice to small and medium-sized 

businesses in all states across the country, with 

priority given to high-hazard worksites. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 1 2

For more information on training, contact the 

OSHA Directorate of Training and Education, 2020 

Arlington Heights Road, Arlington Heights, IL 60005; 

call 1-847-297-4810; or visit www.osha.gov. 

Susan Harwood Training Grants 

OSHA awards grants to nonprofit organizations to 

provide workers and small employers with safety 

and health training and education about hazard 

identification and prevention. Grants focus on small 

business, hard-to-reach workers and high-hazard 

industries. 

Grantees develop programs that address safety and 

health topics selected by OSHA, recruit workers and 

employers for the training and conduct the training. 

They are also expected to follow up with students to 

find out how they have applied the training in their 

workplaces. 

For more information on training grants, contact 

the OSHA Directorate of Training and Education by 

calling 1-847-297-4810 or visiting www.osha.gov. 

OSHA Educational Materials 

OSHA has many types of educational materials in 

English, Spanish, Vietnamese and other languages 

available in print or online. These include: 

• Brochures/booklets that cover a wide variety of 

job hazards and other topics; 

• Fact Sheets, which contain basic backgroundin -

formation on safety and health hazards; 

• Guidance documents that provide detailed exam -

inations of specific safety and health issues; 

• Online Safety and Health Topics pages; 

• Posters; 

• Small, laminated QuickCards™ that provide brief 

safety and health information; and 

• QuickTakes , OSHA’s free, twice-monthly online 

newsletter with the latest news about OSHA 

initiatives and products to assist employers and 

workers in finding and preventing workplace 

hazards. To sign up for  QuickTakes  visit OSHA’s 

website at www.osha.gov and click on  Quick -

Takes  at the top of the page. 

To view materials available online or for a listing 

of free publications, visit OSHA’s website at www. 

osha.gov. You can also call 1-800-321-OSHA [6742] 

to order publications. 

OSHA Strategic Partnership Program (OSPP) 

The OSPP provides the opportunity for OSHA to 

partner with employers, workers, professional or 

trade associations, labor organizations, and/or 

other interested stakeholders. OSHA Strategic 

Partnerships (OSP) are formalized through unique 

agreements designed to encourage, assist, and 

recognize partner efforts to eliminate serious 

hazards and achieve model workplace safety and 

health practices. 

Challenge Program 

OSHA Challenge provides interested employers 

and workers the opportunity to gain assistance in 

improving their safety and health management 

programs. OSHA Challenge is available to general 

industry, maritime and construction employers in 

the private and public sectors under OSHA’s federal 

jurisdiction. 

Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) 

The VPP recognize employers and workers in 

private industry and federal agencies who have 

implemented effective safety and health manage -

ment programs and maintain injury and illness 

rates below the national average for their respective 

industries. In VPP, management, labor, and OSHA 

work cooperatively and proactively to prevent 

fatalities, injuries, and illnesses through a system 

focused on: hazard prevention and control, worksite 

analysis, training, and management commitment 

and worker involvement. To participate, employers 

must submit an application to OSHA and undergo 

a rigorous on-site evaluation by a team of safety 

and health professionals. Union support is required 

for applicants who are represented by a bargaining 

unit. VPP participants are re-evaluated every three 

to five years to remain in the programs. VPP 

participants are exempt from OSHA programmed 

inspections while they maintain their VPP status. 

Occupational Safety and Health Training 

The OSHA Training Institute in Arlington Heights, 

Illinois, provides basic and advanced training and 

education in safety and health for federal and state 

compliance officers, state consultants, other federal 

agency personnel and private sector employers, 

workers, and their representatives. 

In addition, 25 OSHA Training Institute Education 

Centers at 44 locations throughout the United 

States deliver courses on OSHA standards and 

occupational safety and health issues to thousands 

of students a year. I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 1 3 

the workplace through its Health Hazard Evaluation 

(HHE) Program. 

Workers, union representatives and employers can 

request a NIOSH HHE. An HHE is often requested 

when there is a higher than expected rate of a 

disease or injury in a group of workers. These 

situations may be the result of an unknown cause, 

a new hazard, or a mixture of sources. To request 

a NIOSH Health Hazard Evaluation go to www.cdc. 

gov/niosh/hhe/request.html. To find out more about 

the Health Hazard Evaluation Program: 

• Call (513) 841-4382, or to talk to a staff member in 

Spanish, call (513) 841-4439; or 

• Send an email to HHERequestHelp@cdc.gov. 

OSHA’s website also has a variety of eTools. These 

include utilities such as expert advisors, electronic 

compliance assistance, videos and other informa -

tion for employers and workers. To learn more 

about OSHA’s safety and health tools online, visit 

www.osha.gov. 

# NIOSH Health Hazard Evaluation Program 

Getting Help with Health Hazards 

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and 

Health (NIOSH) is a federal agency that conducts 

scientific and medical research on workers’ safety 

and health. At no cost to employers or workers, 

NIOSH can help identify health hazards and recom -

mend ways to reduce or eliminate those hazards in Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 1 4

OSHA  Regional Offices 

Region I 

Boston Regional Office 

(CT*, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT*) 

JFK Federal Building, Room E340 

Boston, MA 02203 

(617) 565-9860 (617) 565-9827 FAX 

Region II 

New York Regional Office 

(NJ*, NY*, PR*, VI*) 

201 Varick Street, Room 670 

New York, NY 10014 

(212) 337-2378 (212) 337-2371 FAX 

Region III 

Philadelphia Regional Office 

(DE, DC, MD*, PA , VA*, WV) 

The Curtis Center 

170 S. Independence Mall West 

Suite 740 West 

Philadelphia, PA 19106-3309 

(215) 861-4900 (215) 861-4904 FAX 

Region IV 

Atlanta Regional Office 

(AL, FL, GA, KY*, MS, NC*, SC*, TN*) 

61 Forsyth Street, SW, Room 6T50 

Atlanta, GA 30303 

(678) 237-0400 (678) 237-0447 FAX 

Region V 

Chicago Regional Office 

(IL*, IN*, MI*, MN*, OH, WI) 

230 South Dearborn Street 

Room 3244 

Chicago, IL 60604 

(312) 353-2220 (312) 353-7774 FAX 

Region VI 

Dallas Regional Office 

(AR, LA, NM*, OK, TX) 

525 Griffin Street, Room 602 

Dallas, TX 75202 

(972) 850-4145 (972) 850-4149 FAX 

(972) 850-4150 FSO FAX 

Region VII 

Kansas City Regional Office 

(IA*, KS, MO, NE) 

Two Pershing Square Building 

2300 Main Street, Suite 1010 

Kansas City, MO 64108-2416 

(816) 283-8745 (816) 283-0547 FAX 

Region VIII 

Denver Regional Office 

(CO, MT, ND, SD, UT*, WY*) 

Cesar Chavez Memorial Building 

1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 551 

Denver, CO 80204 

(720) 264-6550 (720) 264-6585 Fax 

Region IX 

San Francisco Regional Office 

(AZ*, CA*, HI*, NV*, and American Samoa, 

Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) 

90 7th Street, Suite 18100 

San Francisco, CA 94103 

(415) 625-2547 (415) 625-2534 FAX 

Region X 

Seattle Regional Office 

(AK*, ID, OR*, WA*) 

1111 Third Avenue, Suite 715 

Seattle, WA 98101-3212 

(206) 553-5930 (206) 553-6499 FAX 

* These states and territories operate their own 

OSHA-approved job safety and health plans and 

cover state and local government employees as 

well as private sector employees. The Connecticut, 

Illinois, New Jersey, New York and Virgin Islands 

programs cover public employees only. (Private 

sector workers in these states are covered by 

Federal OSHA). States with approved programs 

must have standards that are identical to, or at least 

as effective as, the Federal OSHA standards. 

Note:  To get contact information for OSHA 

area offices, OSHA-approved state plans and OSHA 

consultation projects, please visit us online at www. 

osha.gov or call us at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742). I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 1 5 

How to Contact OSHA 

For questions or to get information or advice, to 

report an emergency, report a fatality or catastrophe, 

order publications, sign up for OSHA’s e-newsletter 

QuickTakes , or to file a confidential complaint, con -

tact your nearest OSHA office, visit www.osha.gov or 

call OSHA at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-

5627. 

For assistance, contact us. 

We are OSHA. We can help. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 1 6

Carbon dioxide (CO 2)

CO 2 is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas (36). 

It is a product of completed carbon combustion and 

the by-product of biological respiration. ASHRAE 

states that CO 2 concentrations in acceptable out -

door air typically range from 300-500 ppm. Adverse 

health effects from CO 2 may occur since it is an 

asphyxiant gas. At concentrations above 15,000 

ppm, some loss of mental acuity has been noted 

(36). The OSHA PEL is 5,000 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. 

The CO 2 levels can be used as a rough indicator of 

the effectiveness of ventilation (26), and excessive 

population density in a structure. CO 2 increases in 

buildings with higher occupant densities, and is 

diluted and removed from buildings based on 

outdoor air ventilation rates. Therefore, examining 

levels of CO 2 in indoor air can reveal information 

regarding occupant densities and outdoor air 

ventilation rates. High CO 2 levels may indicate a 

problem with overcrowding or inadequate outdoor 

air ventilation rates. 

Carbon Dioxide Poisoning – Symptoms 

CO 2, a by-product of normal cell function, is 

removed from the body via the lungs in the exhaled 

air. Exposure to high levels of CO 2 can increase the 

amount of this gas in the blood, which is referred to 

as  hypercapnia  or  hypercarbia . As the severity of 

hypercapnia increases, more symptoms ranging 

from headache to unconsciousness appear, and it 

can also lead to death (36, 37). 

Pesticides 

Pesticides are any substances or mixture of 

substances used for preventing, destroying, 

repelling, or mitigating any pest. These substances 

include insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, and 

various other substances used to control pests. 

Pesticides can cause harm to humans, animals, and 

the environment because they are designed to kill 

or otherwise adversely affect living organisms. 

Pesticides can also kill potential disease-causing 

organisms (8, 38). 

Pesticide Poisoning Symptoms 

Symptoms of pesticide poisoning depend heavily 

on the pesticide to which the worker was exposed. 

Symptoms often appear within minutes of pesticide 

exposure, but may take much longer to develop. 

The most common symptoms include headache, 

tears in the eyes, vomiting, sweating, and general 

weakness. Exposure to high doses may cause sei -

zures and death. 

# Appendix A: Common Indoor Air Contaminants 

The purpose of this section is to provide additional 

information about several common indoor air 

contaminants. 

Carbon monoxide (CO) 

CO is a colorless, odorless gas produced by the 

incomplete burning of material containing carbon. 

CO poisoning 2 can cause brain damage and death. 

Common sources of CO are leaking vented 

combustion appliances, automobile exhaust, 

parking garages, etc. When not properly ventilated, 

emitted CO can build up. Employees exposed to 

low levels of CO may feel sick with headache and 

nausea, and will feel better when exposed to fresh 

air outside. However, their symptoms will recur 

shortly after returning to their workplace if CO is 

not eliminated. 

CO Poisoning Symptoms 

Poisoning due to low levels of CO can be confused 

with influenza symptoms, food poisoning, or other 

illnesses, and can be a long-term health risk if left 

unattended. Some of the symptoms of low-level CO 

poisoning are shortness of breath, mild nausea, and 

mild headaches (30-35). 

Prolonged exposure to high levels of CO can lead to 

brain damage and even death. Adequate ventilation 

is an important control measure. The OSHA 

Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) for CO is 50 parts 

per million (ppm) as an 8-hour time-weighted aver -

age (TWA); the National Institute for Occupational 

Safety and Health has a Recommended Exposure 

Limit (REL) of 35 ppm as a 10-hour TWA. According 

to the American Conference of Governmental 

Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), the threshold limit 

value for CO is 25 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. 

Carbon Monoxide Detectors 

In addition to having a professional inspect 

appliances and furnaces, commercially available 

carbon monoxide detectors can be used to monitor 

the levels of carbon monoxide in buildings through -

out the year. The manufacturer’s instructions on 

placement and maintenance should be followed.         

> 2CO is a chemical asphyxiant; it displaces O 2in the blood, there -
> by suffocating the person exposed. I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 1 7

Small dust particles may remain airborne for long 

periods, while large particles settle more quickly. 

However, particles that have settled may be easily 

resuspended in the ambient air by currents of air 

or other disturbances. Drapery, carpet and other 

places where dust collects can harbor these con -

taminants; dirty cooling coils, humidifiers, conden -

sate drains, and ductwork can incubate bacteria and 

molds. Areas with high humidity can accelerate 

their growth. 

The most common sources of biological air 

contaminants are moisture-laden areas that support 

the growth of mold and bacteria present in the air 

(8, 16, 19, 44). Also, wet surfaces can provide a 

breeding ground for insects such as dust mites. 

Moisture-induced microbial growth can result from 

water leaks and/or by condensation due to high 

humidity. Persistent dampness and microbial 

growth on interior surfaces and in building 

structures should be avoided or minimized as they 

may lead to adverse health effects (15). Common 

sources of moisture in buildings include: plumbing; 

roof and window leaks; flooding; condensation on 

cold surfaces, e.g., pipe sweating; poorly maintained 

drain pans; and wet foundations caused by land -

scaping or gutters that direct water into or under 

the building. Water vapor from unvented or poorly 

vented kitchens, showers, combustion appliances, 

or steam pipes can also create conditions that 

promote microbial growth. The most effective 

means to prevent or minimize adverse health effects 

is to determine the sources of persistent dampness 

in the workplace and eliminate them. Also, strict 

adherence to a housekeeping schedule and use of 

HEPA-filtered vacuum cleaners will help reduce 

ambient levels of allergens. 

Damp Indoor Environments 

Damp indoor environments have been associated 

with many serious health effects, including asthma, 

hypersensitivity, and sinusitis. Moisture incursion 

leading to dampness can result from water leaks 

and/or by condensation due to high humidity. 

Common sources of moisture in buildings include: 

plumbing; roof and window leaks; flooding; 

condensation on cold surfaces, e.g., pipe sweating; 

poorly-maintained drain pans; and wet foundations 

due to landscaping or gutters that direct water into 

or under the building. Water vapor from unvented 

or poorly-vented kitchens, showers, combustion 

appliances, or steam pipes can also create 

conditions that promote microbial growth. 

Steps to Reduce Exposure 

Integrated Pest Management Principles should 

always be implemented. Pesticide products should 

be used according to application and ventilation 

instructions provided by the manufacturer. In 

addition: 

• Mix or dilute pesticides outdoors; 

• Increase ventilation when using pesticides; 

• Use non-chemical methods of pest control when 

possible; 

• Do not store unneeded pesticides; 

• Dispose of unwanted containers safely; and 

• Keep indoor spaces clean, dry, and well ventilat -

ed to avoid pest problems. 

Radon 

Radon is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless 

radioactive gas (6, 13, 17, 39, 40). It comes from the 

natural decay of uranium and some other radionu -

clides that are present in soil. Radon is responsible 

for most of the public’s exposure to ionizing radia -

tion (39, 40). It is often the single largest contributor 

to an individual's background radiation dose, and 

levels can vary widely from location to location. 

Radon gas can accumulate in buildings, especially 

in confined areas such as attics and basements. 

Radon penetrates cracks and drain openings in 

foundations, basements, and crawl spaces. Some 

building materials will also release radon into the 

air. It can also be found in some spring waters and 

hot springs, where it can be released into the air 

when the water is drawn for use indoors. Exposure 

to radon may cause lung cancer in humans. 

The EPA recommends taking actions to reduce 

radon exposure if levels exceed four picocuries per 

liter of air (4 pCi/L) (25). Active soil depressurization 

and building ventilation are the two most common -

ly used strategies for controlling radon in buildings. 

Radon reduction methods include sealing concrete 

slab floors, basement foundations, and water drain -

age systems, and increasing ventilation. 

These techniques are usually cost-effective, and 

can greatly reduce or eliminate contamination and 

the associated health risks. 

Biological Contaminants 

Animals, plants, and microbes are sources of air 

pollutants. Dander from animals, pollens from 

plants, and microbes, may act as allergens when 

they are inhaled. These biological contaminants are 

usually attached to dust particles of various sizes. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 1 8

Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) 

VOCs refer to organic chemical compounds that 

have significant vapor pressures, and that can 

adversely affect the environment and human health. 

VOCs are emitted as vapors from certain solids or 

liquids, and include a variety of chemicals, some 

of which may have short- and long-term adverse 

health effects (17, 45, 46). Concentrations of many 

VOCs are consistently higher indoors (up to ten 

times higher) than outdoors. VOCs are emitted by a 

wide array of products numbering in the thousands. 

Examples include paints and lacquers, paint 

strippers, cleaning supplies, pesticides, building 

materials and furnishings, office equipment such as 

copiers and printers, correction fluids and carbon -

less copy paper, and graphics and craft materials, 

including glues and adhesives, permanent markers, 

and photographic solutions (8). More commonly 

known VOCs include benzene, formaldehyde, 

methylene chloride, trichloroethylene, and tetra -

chloroethylene (13). Exposure to VOCs can result in 

both acute and chronic health effects, depending on 

many factors such as the level of exposure and the 

length of exposure. A few VOCs, such as benzene, 

have been directly linked to cancer in humans, and 

others are suspected of causing cancer. 

Since people today spend most of their time at 

home or in an office, long-term exposure to VOCs 

in the indoor environment can contribute to IAQ 

related problems (31). In offices, VOCs result from 

new furnishings, wall coverings, and office equip -

ment such as photocopy machines, which can off-

gas VOCs into the air (47, 48). Good ventilation and 

air-conditioning systems are essential to reduce 

VOC emissions in the indoor environment (47). 

Steps to Reduce Exposure  (http://www.epa.gov/iaq/ 

voc.html) 

• Use products according to manufacturer’s 

directions. 

• Make sure that plenty of fresh air is provided 

when using these products. 

• Discard used containers safely. 

• Buy quantities that can be used in short periods 

of time. 

Well-designed, -constructed and –maintained 

building envelopes are critical to the prevention and 

control of excess moisture and microbial growth by 

avoiding thermal bridges and preventing intrusion 

by liquid or vapor-phase water. Management of 

moisture requires proper control of temperatures 

and ventilation to avoid high humidity, condensation 

on surfaces, and excess moisture in materials. 

Ventilation should be distributed effectively in spaces, 

and stagnant air zones should be avoided (5, 8). 

ASHRAE recommends relative humidity levels 

between 30 and 60 percent for optimum comfort 

(25). Higher humidity may result in microbial 

growth. A consistently implemented good-house -

keeping plan is essential to eliminate or reduce the 

microbial growth in the building. 

Legionella 

Legionellosis or Legionnaires’ Disease is caused by 

a waterborne bacterium,  Legionella , which grows 

best in slow-moving, or still warm water (42-44). 

The primary route of exposure is aerosolization, 

most commonly from domestic hot-water systems 

(e.g., showers, sprays, etc.). Mist from evaporative 

cooling towers without biocide treatment is another 

reported source. Outbreaks in medical facilities can 

occur because the patients often have weak or 

suppressed immune systems. 

For cooling towers and evaporative condensers, 

prevention efforts center on improving the location 

and maintenance of the cooling towers to limit the 

growth and spread of  Legionella  bacteria. These 

devices should be inspected and thoroughly cleaned 

at least once a year. Corroded parts, such as drift 

eliminators, should be replaced, and algae and 

accumulated scale should be removed. Cooling 

water should be treated constantly with antimicro -

bial agents. Ideally, an automatic water-treatment 

system should be used that continuously controls 

the quality of the circulating water. 

For domestic hot-water systems, prevention efforts 

focus on controlling water temperature, avoiding 

dead-legs, avoiding stagnation, and cleaning 

storage tanks to limit the growth and spread of 

Legionella  bacteria. I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 1 9 

# Appendix B: Steps to Improve Indoor Air Quality 3

What employers can do 

• Maintain a good working relationship with 

building management on indoor environmental 

issues. 

• Place office furniture and equipment in locations 

based on the adequate air circulation, tempera -

ture control, and pollutant removal functions of 

the HVAC system. 

• Coordinate with building management when 

responsibility for design, operation, and 

maintenance of the ventilation system is shared. 

• Avoid procedures and products that can cause 

IAQ problems. 

• Integrate IAQ concerns into purchasing 

decisions. 

• Work with the building manager to ensure use 

of only necessary and appropriate pest-control 

practices; use nonchemical methods when 

possible. 

• Work with building management and the 

contractor before starting to remodel or renovate 

to identify ways of minimizing building-occupant 

exposure, and to ensure that the air-distribution 

system is not disrupted. 

• Encourage building management to develop a 

preventive IAQ management program following 

guidance issued by the EPA and the National 

Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 

> 3See Item 29 in the last section of this document titled
> “References.”

What workers can do 

• Do not block air vents or grilles. 

• Water and maintain office plants properly. 

• Dispose of garbage promptly and properly. 

• Store food properly. 

• Avoid bringing products into the building that 

could release harmful or bothersome odors 

or contaminants. 

• Notify the building or facility manager 

immediately if you suspect an IAQ problem. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 2 0

Duct and Plenum equipment 

# n Written inspection and maintenance program. 

# n Supply, exhaust, return grilles, and ducts clear 

and clean. 

# n Routine inspection of ducts, debris, and microbial 

growth (e.g., semi-annually). 

# n Provisions of cleanout (e.g., within four feet 

downstream of duct expansions, supply air 

openings, or where particulate deposition may 

occur). 

# n Ductwork attached, not dented. 

# n Insulation intact, not wet, and no microbial 

growth. 

# n Ductwork properly balanced. 

Filtration systems 

# n Written maintenance, operating, and inspection 

programs. 

# n Routine inspection. 

# n Provision for measuring pressure drops across 

the filtration system. 

# Appendix C: HVAC System Maintenance Checklist 4

The following checklist can be used to investigate 

the HVAC system to make sure it is operating 

properly (e.g., the right mix of fresh air, proper 

distribution, and filtration systems are working, etc.) 

Cooling Towers 

# n Written maintenance and inspection program. 

# n Operated in accordance with manufacturer 

specifications. 

# n Inspected regularly (monthly, or as required). 

# n Treatment of waste to control microorganisms, 

as required. 

# n Recordkeeping of biocide use – brand, volume, 

and results. 

# n Training of workers for hazards involved. 

Humidifiers 

# n Written maintenance and inspection program. 

# n Inspected weekly during operation. 

# n Cleaned and disinfected as required. 

# n No visual buildup of mold or slime. 

# n Disinfectants removed before reactivating 

humidifiers. 

Cooling Coils 

# n Written maintenance and inspection program. 

# n Monthly (or, as required) inspections during 

operation. 

# n Removal of dirt, slime, and mold, as required. 

# n Upstream filters operating properly. 

Drain Pans, drainage systems 

# n Written maintenance and inspection program. 

# n Monthly inspection (or, as required). 

# n Drains maintained in free-flowing condition. 

# n No accumulation of stagnant water. 

# n No buildup of slime, mold, or dirt. 

# n Removal of dirt, slime, and mold, as required. 

# n Sample water for microbes, as required.        

> 4See Items 24 and 37 in the last section of this document titled
> “References.” I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 2 1

# Appendix D: Investigating IAQ Problems and Complaints 

Identifying the cause(s) of IAQ problems and 

complaints may be difficult if an obvious source 

is not evident. Investigating unclear IAQ problems 

should take into account patterns and factors, such 

as occupant complaints and symptoms, location(s) 

in the building, time of day, seasonal differences, 

and relationship to activities inside or outside the 

building. Below are suggestions of information that 

may be helpful to collect. 

Once information is gathered, it should then be 

analyzed for patterns and possible causes of the 

IAQ problem. The analysis may point to specific 

methods, such as those discussed on page 7 

(Identification and Assessment). The next step is to 

fix problems identified and evaluate the results. 

Has the fix resolved the problems or complaints? 

If not, then further investigation will need to be 

pursued. Consultation with safety and health 

professionals or other experts should be considered 

at any point during an IAQ investigation. 

Information that may be helpful in IAQ 

investigations: 

General office conditions: 

• Housekeeping 

• How often is the office vacuumed? 

• How often are carpet and drapes shampooed? 

• How often are floors waxed? 

• Are there any visible signs of dust? 

• Have pesticides been applied recently? 

• Is there any evidence of moisture intrusion into 

the building? 

Air quality in the office: 

• Odor 

• Dry 

• Humid 

• Dusty 

• Warm 

• Cool 

• Drafts 

• Temperature fluctuation 

• Within office 

• Between offices 

• Between floors 

• Any recent changes in: 

• Work space 

• General office 

• Building 

• New equipment added to the office 

When occupant complaints are related to symptoms 

or health problems, medical evaluation may be 

required. Persons with respiratory diagnoses that 

may be caused or exacerbated by workplace 

exposures should discuss these with their treating 

physician, and treating physicians may access 

additional expertise through the network of Nation -

al Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

(NIOSH)-funded Education and Research Centers, 

or through the member clinics of the not-for-profit 

Association of Occupational and Environmental 

Clinics. Workers’ compensation systems differ by 

states, but may also be available to support medical 

care for work-related diseases. 

EPA and NIOSH have published two excellent 

resources to screen and investigate IAQ problems. 

The first, published in 1991, is  Building Air Quality: 

A Guide for Building Owners and Facility Managers 

(http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/baqtoc.html). Chapter 6-

“Diagnosing IAQ Problems” provides a systematic 

approach and includes tools, such as logs, ques -

tionnaires, diaries, and checklists. The second, pub -

lished by EPA and NIOSH in 2002, is a companion 

document that updates and expands on the 1991 

publication. The 2002 publication,  Indoor Air Quality 

Education and Assessment Model (I-BEAM)  (http:// 

www.epa.gov/iaq/largebldgs/i-beam/index.html) ,

is separated into modules, and includes online 

interactive examples of problems and solutions. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 2 2

# Appendix E: Selected Resources 

Hazard Recognition 

IAQ problems can be caused by improperly operated and maintained HVAC systems, overcrowding, 

microbiological contamination, outside air pollutants, and off-gassing from materials in the office and 

mechanical equipment. Related problems also may include discomfort problems due to improper 

temperature and relative humidity conditions. 

The following references aid in recognizing IAQ hazards in the workplace: 

• OSHA Technical Manual. OSHA Directive TED 01-00-015 [TED 1-0.15A] (1999, January 20). https://www. 

osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/otm_toc.html 

• Indoor Air Quality Investigation. Contains guidelines for IAQ investigations, recommendations on 

sampling instrumentation and methods, as well as guidelines for employers to prevent or alleviate IAQ 

problems. https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/otm_iii/otm_iii_2.html 

• Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. OSHA Fact Sheet (2002) . http://www.osha.gov/OshDoc/data_General_ 

Facts/carbonmonoxide-factsheet.pdf 

• Mold. OSHA Safety and Health Topics Page. https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/molds/index.html 

• Stachybotrys Chartarum. OSHA Safety and Health Topics Page. 

https://www.osha.gov/dts/chemicalsampling/data/CH_267785.html#General 

• Indoor Environmental Quality. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Safety and 

Health Topic Page. Links to several other NIOSH publications, including the NIOSH fact sheet on IEQ. 

http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/indoorenv 

• Preventing Carbon Monoxide Poisoning from Small Gasoline-Powered Engines and Tools. U.S. 

Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

Publication No. 96-118, (1996). Gives examples of the many situations in which people have been 

poisoned because they did not recognize the danger of using small gasoline-powered engines indoors. 

These poisonings can occur quickly, even in the presence of what many would consider “adequate 

ventilation,” and in areas that many would define as relatively open spaces, such as parking garages. 

http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/carbon2.html 

• Fact Sheet: Ventilation and Air Quality in Offices. Environmental Protection Agency. Gives an overview 

of sources of indoor air pollution, health problems and ventilation, control, ventilation standards and 

building codes, ventilation system problems and solutions, air cleaners, economic considerations, and 

resolving air-quality problems. http://www.epa.gov/iedweb00/pubs/ventilat.htm 

• Air - Indoor Air Quality (IAQ). Environmental Protection Agency. Contains an introduction to IAQ, a listing 

of common pollutants, and references to IAQ publications, hotlines, and links. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/ 

pubs 

• Mold Remediation in Schools and Commercial Buildings. March 2001. Presents guidelines for the 

investigation, evaluation, and remediation/cleanup of mold and moisture problems in schools and 

commercial buildings. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/molds/mold_remediation.html 

• An Office Building Occupant’s Guide to Indoor Air Quality. Describes factors that contribute to indoor air 

quality and comfort problems, and the roles of building managers and occupants in maintaining a good 

indoor environment. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/occupgd.html 

• The Inside Story: A Guide to Indoor Air Quality. Office of Radiation and Indoor Air, U.S. Consumer 

Product Safety Commission. April 1995. Provides a comprehensive online booklet on IAQ concerns in 

homes. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/insidest.html 

• IAQ Resources. Provides a listing of various hotlines and resources related to IAQ. http://www.epa.gov/ 

iaq/iaqinfo.html I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 2 3 

• Guidelines on Assessment and Remediation of Fungi in Indoor Environments. New York City Depart -

ment of Health. Addresses mold contamination of building components (walls, ventilation systems, sup -

port beams, etc.) that are chronically moist or water damaged. 

http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/html/epi/moldrpt1.shtml 

• Indoor Air Quality Publications. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). Contains an index of 

CPSC publications related to IAQ. http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/iaq.html 

Evaluation and Control 

Methods used in an IAQ investigation may include: identification of pollutant sources; evaluation of 

HVAC system performance; observation of production processes and work practices; measurement of 

contamination levels and employee exposure; medical testing or physical examinations; employee 

interviews; and review of records of medical tests, job histories, and injuries and illnesses. 

The following resources provide information about evaluating and controlling IAQ in the workplace. 

Evaluation 

• Volatile Organic Compounds in Air. OSHA Method PV2120. May 2003. https://www.osha.gov/dts/sltc/ 

methods/partial/pv2120/pv2120.html 

• Ozone in Workplace Atmospheres (Impregnated Glass Fiber Filter). OSHA Method ID-214. March 1995. 

https://www.osha.gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id214/id214.html 

• Carbon Monoxide in Workplace Atmospheres (Direct-Reading Monitor). OSHA Method ID-209. March 

1993. https://www.osha.gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id209/id209.html 

• Sulfur Dioxide in Workplace Atmospheres (Impregnated Activated Beaded Carbon). OSHA Method 

ID-200. April 1992. https://www.osha.gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id200/id200.html 

• Carbon Monoxide in Workplace Atmospheres. OSHA Method ID-210. March 1991. https://www.osha. 

gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id210/id210.html 

• Formaldehyde in Workplace Atmospheres (3M Model 3721 Monitor). OSHA Method ID-205. 

December 1990. https://www.osha.gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id205/id205.html 

• Carbon Dioxide in Workplace Atmospheres. OSHA Method ID-179. June 1987. https://www.osha.gov/ 

dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id172/id172.html 

• For additional information, see OSHA's Safety and Health Topics Pages on: 

- Formaldehyde https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/formaldehyde/index.html 

- Hazardous and Toxic Substances https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/hazardoustoxicsubstances/index.html 

- Legionnaires’ Disease https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/legionnairesdisease/index.html 

- Sampling and Analysis https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/samplinganalysis/index.html 

- Styrene  https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/styrene/index.html 

• EPA: IAQ Tools for Schools Action Kit. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/schools/actionkit.html 

• The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), through its Health Hazard Evaluation 

(HHE) Program, responds to requests from employers, employees and their representatives, and 

government agencies. NIOSH conducts workplace assessments to determine if workers are exposed to 

hazardous materials or harmful conditions, and whether these exposures are affecting workers’ health. 

NIOSH has conducted more than 200 IAQ-related HHEs. Recent reports can be found on NIOSH’s Indoor 

Environmental Quality website at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/indoorenv 

• Department of Energy. Guide to Operating and Maintaining EnergySmart Schools. Building Technology 

Program. U.S. Department of Energy. Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. http://apps1. 

eere.energy.gov/buildings/publications/pdfs/energysmartschools/ess_o-and-m-guide.pdf 

• GSA 2003 Facilities Standards (P100) Overview. Environmental Policies & Practices. http://www.gsa.gov/ 

portal/content/101230 Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 2 4

• U.S. Green Building Council LEED for Existing Buildings. Leadership in Environmental and 

Energy Design for Existing Buildings. http://www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=221#v2008 

Control 

• A Brief Guide to Mold in the Workplace. OSHA Safety and Health Information Bulletin. October 10, 2003. 

https://www.osha.gov/dts/shib/shib101003.html 

• Ventilation. OSHA Safety and Health Topics Page.  https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/ventilation/index.html 

• Building Air Quality: A Guide for Building Owners and Facility Managers. U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Publication No. 91-114. 

Also, referenced as Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Publication No. 400/1-91/003. December 

1991. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/baqtoc.html 

• Building Air Quality: Action Plan. Publication No. 98-123. Also, referenced as EPA Publication No. 

402-K-98-001. June 1998. Provides an 8-step building air-quality action plan for building owners and 

managers to be used with NIOSH Publication No. 91-114 and EPA Publication No. 400/1-91/033. http:// 

www.cdc.gov/niosh/98-123a.html I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 2 5 

# Appendix F: OSHA-Sponsored Environmental Tobacco Smoke Workshops 

Workshop I 

Workshop Summary:  Assessing Exposure to 

Environmental Tobacco Smoke in the Workplace. 

Jonathan M. Samet.  Environmental Health 

Perspectives Supplements , vol. 107, no. S2, May 

1999. 

Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) is a term now 

widely used to refer to the mixture of sidestream 

smoke and exhaled mainstream smoke that pollutes 

air in locations where tobacco smoking is taking 

place. A multidisciplinary workshop was convened 

to address key issues related to ETS exposure in the 

workplace in order to prepare the groundwork for a 

risk assessment of the hazard ETS poses to workers. 

Workshop participants concluded that substantial 

evidence was now available on worker exposure to 

ETS using both direct and indirect approaches to 

exposure assessment, and that these data could be 

used to project distribution of exposures to ETS in 

the nation's workplaces. This summary of the 

discussions at the workshop is an overview of the 

suggested approach to exposure assessment.  http:// 

> ehpnet1.niehs.nih.gov/docs/1999/Suppl-2/309-312samet/abstract.html

Workshop II 

OSHA/ACGIH ® Environmental Tobacco Smoke 

Workshop Proceedings, Publication #99-078 

Proceedings of the OSHA/ACGIH ® Environmental 

Tobacco Smoke Workshop held June 6, 1998, in Cin -

cinnati, OH. The workshop brought together a panel 

of ventilation experts, along with hospitality industry 

managers and design engineers, to discuss effective 

and non-effective ventilation strategies for smoking 

sections in restaurants and bars. 

Workshop III 

Workshop Summary:  Workshop on Health Risks 

Attributable to ETS Exposure in the Workplace. 

Maritta S. Jaakkola and Jonathan M. Samet (Johns 

Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA). 

Environmental Health Perspectives , vol. 107, supp. 

6, December 1999. 

This 1998 workshop was convened to address the 

health risks of exposure to environmental tobacco 

smoke (ETS) in the workplace. It was paired with a 

1997 workshop on issues related to ETS exposure in 

work environments. The 1998 workshop involved 

a multidisciplinary group of participants who 

reviewed evidence on the quantitative risks to health 

posed by ETS and discussed the development of 

risk assessment methodology for the future. Occupational Safety and 

> Health Administration 2 6

# References 

1.  U.S. EPA. An Office Building Occupant's Guide to Indoor Air Quality. 

http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/occupgd.html 

2.  U.S. EPA. Indoor Air Quality. The Inside Story: A Guide to Indoor Air Quality. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/ 

pubs/insidest.html 

3.  CDC. Healthy Housing Reference Manual. Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials. http:// 

www.cdc.gov/nceh/publications/books/housing/cha05.html 

4.  NIOSH Recommendations for the Cleaning and Remediation of Flood-Contaminated HVAC Systems: A 

Guide for Building Owners and Managers.  http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/emres/Cleaning-Flood-HVAC.html 

5.  American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2010). ASHRAE 

Standard 62.1. Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. Atlanta, GA. 

6.  Fisk, W.J. (2000). Health and Productivity Gains from Better Indoor Air Environments and Their Rela -

tionship with Building Energy Efficiency. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 25: 537-566. 

7.  Spengler, J. D., Samet, J. M., and McCarthy, J. F. (2001). Indoor Air Quality Handbook. McGraw-Hill. 

8.  U.S. EPA. An Introduction to Indoor Air Quality (IAQ). 

http://www.epa.gov/iaq/ia-intro.html#Indoor%20Air%20Pollution%20and%20Health 

9.  American Thoracic Society. Environmental Controls and Lung Disease. American Review of 

Respiratory Disease, 1990, 142: 915-939. 

10.  American Lung Association. Health Effects and Sources of Indoor Air Pollution, Parts I and II, 1989, 

Publication No. 0857C. http://www.indoorpollution.com/air_pollution.htm 

11.  European Concerted Action. Indoor Air Quality & Its Impact on Man. Environment and Quality of Life. 

Report 10. Effects of Indoor Air Pollution on Human Health (1991). 

12.  U.S. EPA. Indoor Air Pollution: An Introduction for Health Professionals. (Last updated April 28, 2010). 

http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/hpguide.html 

13.  Bernstein, J. A., Alexis, N., Bacchus, H., Bernstein, I. L., Fritiz, P., et al. (2008). The Health Effects of 

Nonindustrial Indoor Air Pollution. Journal of Allergy and Immunology, 12(3): 585-590. 

14.  Stapczynski, J.S., 2004. Chapter 62: Respiratory Distress. Tintinalli, J.E., Kelen, G.D., Stapczynski, J.S., 

Ma, O.J., and Cline, D.M. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine, 6th Edition. 

15.  World Health Organization (WHO) (2009). WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: Dampness and Mould. 

http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/43325/E92645.pdf 

16.  CDC Online Source for Credible Health Information: Mold. http://www.cdc.gov/mold 

17.  OSHA. Preventing Mold-Related Problems in the Indoor Workplace. OSHA 3304-04N 2006. http://www. 

osha.gov/Publications/preventing_mold.pdf 

18.  CDC. Healthy Housing Reference Manual. Chapter 5, Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials. http:// 

www.cdc.gov/nceh/publications/books/housing/cha05.html 

19.  U.S. EPA. IAQ Building Education and Assessment Model (I-BEAM): TIA Maintenance and 

Housekeeping Programs. 

> http://www.epa.gov/iaq/largebldgs/i-beam/text/maintenance_and_housekeeping.html#IAQ%20Housekeeping%20
> Tasks

20.  OSHA. A Brief Guide to Mold in the Workplace. OSHA Safety and Health Information Bulletin, October 

10, 2003. http://www.osha.gov/dts/shib/shib101003.html 

21.  Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2004). Damp Indoor Spaces and Health. Washington, DC: National 

Academy of Sciences. 

22.  Fisk, W. J., Lei-Gomez, Q., Mendell, M. J. (2007). Meta-analysis of the Associations of Respiratory 

Health Effects with Dampness and Mold in Homes. Indoor Air 17(4):284-296. 

23.  World Health Organization (WHO) (2009). WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: Dampness and Mould. 

WHO Regional Office for Europe. http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/43325/E92645.pdf I N D O O R A I R Q U A L I T Y I N C O M M E R C I A L A N D I N S T I T U T I O N A L B U I L D I N G S 2 7 

24.  U.S. EPA. Indoor Air Quality. Tools for Schools Action Kit IAQ Coordinator’s Guide: A Guide to 

Implementing an IAQ Program. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/schools/tools4s2.html 

25.  ASHRAE Standard 55 (2010). Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. 

26.  ASTM Standard D-6245-98. Using Indoor Carbon Dioxide Concentrations to Evaluate Indoor Air 

Quality and Ventilation. 

27.  U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Tips for Purchasing and Installing New Carpet. 

CPSC Document #454. http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/454.html 

28.  Carpet and Rug Institute (1999). Carpet and Indoor Air Quality Technical Bulletin. 

http://www.carpet-rug.org/technical_bulletins/9902_Carpet_and_IAQ.pdf 

29.  NIOSH. Building Air Quality: Action Plan. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/baqact4.html 

30.  U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. The Senseless Killer. 1993 GAO Publication 

No. 1993-0-356-764. 

31.  Mott, J. A., Wolfe, M. I., Alverson, C. J., Macdonald, S. C., Baily, C. R., Ball, L. B., et al. (2002). National 

Vehicle Emissions Policies and Practices and Declining U.S. Carbon Monoxide Mortality. JAMA, 288: 

988-995. 

32.  American Lung Association. Carbon Monoxide Indoors. 

http://www.lungusa.org/healthy-air/home/resources/carbon-monoxide-indoors.html 

33.  U.S. EPA. An Introduction to Indoor Air Quality: Carbon Monoxide. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/co.html 

34.  OSHA. Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. Fact Sheet, 2002. 2 pages. http://www.osha.gov/OshDoc/data_ 

General_Facts/carbonmonoxide-factsheet.pdf 

35.  OSHA. Carbon Monoxide in Workplace Atmospheres. OSHA Method ID-210, March 1991. http://www. 

osha.gov/dts/sltc/methods/inorganic/id210/id210.html 

36.  Health Canada. Indoor Air Quality in Office Buildings. Carbon Dioxide. 

http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/air/office_building-immeubles_bureaux/co2-eng.php 

37.  Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. Health Effects of Carbon Dioxide Gas. http:// 

www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/chemicals/chem_profiles/carbon_dioxide/health_cd.html 

38.  U.S. EPA. An Introduction to Indoor Air Quality: Pesticide. http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pesticid.html 

39.  U.S. EPA. A Citizen’s Guide to Radon. The Guide to Protecting Yourself and Your Family from Radon. 

EPA 402/K-09/001. January 2009. http://www.epa.gov/radon 

40.  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Radon. September 2008. 

CAS ID #: 14859-67-7. http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/substances/toxsubstance.asp?toxid=71 

41.  OSHA. Mold. Safety and Health Topics Page. http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/molds/index.html 

42.  Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. Legionnaires Disease. 

http://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/diseases/legion.html 

43.  CDC. Legionellosis Resource Site (Legionnaires’ Disease and Pontiac Fever). Patient Facts: Learn More 

about Legionnaires’ disease. http://www.cdc.gov/Legionella/patient_facts.html 

44.  OSHA. Legionnaires’ Disease. Safety and Health Topics Page. 

http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/legionnairesdisease/index.html 

45.  OSHA. Volatile Organic Compounds in Air. OSHA Method PV2120, May 2003. http://www.osha.gov/ 

dts/sltc/methods/partial/pv2120/pv2120.html 

46.  U.S. EPA. An Introduction to Indoor Air Quality: Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs). http://www.epa. 

gov/iaq/voc.html 

47.  Yu, C. and Crump, D. (1998). A Review of Emission of VOCs from Polymeric Materials Used in 

Buildings. Building and Environment, 33(6): 357-374. 

48.  Hrigaray, P., Newby, J. A., Clapp, R., Hardell, L., Howard, V., et al. (2007). Lifestyle-Related Factors 

and Environmental Agents Causing Cancer. An Overview. Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy, 61(10): 

640-658.
