Title: Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum: Chapter 4

URL Source: https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/documents/esmcchapter4.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 11 Feb 2025 19:19:09 GMT

Markdown Content:
ETHNIC 

# S T U D I E S 

# MODEL CURRICULUM 

Adopted by the California State Board of Education March 2021 

Published by the California Department of Education Sacramento, 2022 

# MOD EL CU RRI CULU M

Adopted by the California State Board of Education March 2021 

Published by the California Department of Education Sacramento, 2022 ETHNIC 

# S T U D I E S 

# MODEL CURRICULUM 

Adopted by the California State Board of Education March 2021 

Published by the California Department of Education Sacramento, 2022 PUBLISHING INFORMATION 

The Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum was adopted by the State Board of Education on March 18, 2021. The members of the State Board were as follows: Linda Darling-Hammond, President; Ilene Straus, Vice President; Sue Burr, Cynthia Glover-Woods, James J. McQuillen, Matt Navo, Kim Pattillo Brownson, Haydee Rodriguez, Patricia A. Rucker, Ting L. Sun, and Zaid Fattah, Student Member. It was developed by the Curriculum Frameworks and Instructional Resources Division, California Department of Education (CDE). This publication was edited by the staff of CDE Press. It was designed and prepared for printing by the staff of CDE Press, with the cover designed by Aristotle Ramirez. It was published by the Department of Education, 1430 N Street, Sacramento, CA 95814. It was distributed under the provisions of the Library Distribution Act and Government Code 

Section 11096. 

© 2022 by the California Department of Education 

All rights reserved 

ISBN 978-0-8011-1822-7 

Reproduction of this document for resale, in whole or in part, is not authorized. 

# Additional Publications and Educational Resources 

This document is posted on the CDE website at  https://www. cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/esmc.asp . For information about additional publications and educational resources available from the California Department of Education, please visit the CDE’s Educational Resources Catalog page at  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ re/pn/rc/ , or call the CDE Press sales office at 1-800-995-4099. 

# Notice 

The guidance in the Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum is not binding on local educational agencies or other entities. Except for the statutes, regulations, and court decisions that are referenced herein, the document is exemplary, and compliance with it is not mandatory. (See Education Code Section 33308.5.) TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum Preface 1

Chapter 1: Introduction and Overview 7

Chapter 2: District Implementation Guidance 23 

Chapter 3: Instructional Guidance for K–12 Education 33 

Chapter 4: Sample Lessons and Topics 73 

Chapter 5: Lesson Resources 411 

Chapter 6: UC-Approved Course Outlines 425 [Page iv intentionally left blank.] 73 

# CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Contents 

Chapter 4: Sample Lessons and Topics 73 

Fostering Democratic Classrooms 77 

General Ethnic Studies 81 

Sample Lesson 1: Migration Stories and Oral History 81 

Sample Lesson 2: Social Movements and Student Civic Engagement 85 

Sample Lesson 3: Youth-Led Participatory Action Research (YPAR) 91 74  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Sample Lesson 4: Introducing Narratives 94 

Sample Lesson 5: Introducing Dominant Narratives 98 

African American Studies 106 

Sample Lesson 6: Classical Africa and Other Major Civilizations 106 

Sample Lesson 7: US Housing Inequality: Redlining and Racial Housing Covenants 110 

Sample Lesson 8: An Introduction to African American Innovators 118 

Sample Lesson 9: #BlackLivesMatter and Social Change 129 

Sample Lesson 10: Afrofuturism: Reimagining Black Futures and Science Fiction 132 

Additional Sample Topics 139 

Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Studies 141 

Sample Lesson 11: Salvadoran American Migration and Collective Resistance 141 

Sample Lesson 12: US Undocumented Immigrants from Mexico and Beyond: Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles 154 

Sample Lesson 13: The East LA Blowouts: An Anchor to the Chicano Movement 159 

Additional Sample Topics 164 

Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 166 

Sample Lesson 14: Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and the Model Minority Myth 166 

Sample Lesson 15: Cambodian Americans— Deportation Breaking Families Apart 174 

Sample Lesson 16: Chinese Railroad Workers 188 75 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Sample Lesson 17: Little Manila, Filipino Laborers, and the United Farm Workers (UFW) 194 

Sample Lesson 18: Hmong Americans— Community, Struggle, Voice 201 

Sample Lesson 19: Indian Americans: Creating Community and Establishing an Identity in California 210 

Sample Lesson 20: The Japanese American Incarceration Experience Through Poetry and Spoken Word—A Focus on Literary Analysis and Historical Significance 216 

Sample Lesson 21: Korean American Experiences and Interethnic Relations 241 

Sample Lesson 22: The Immigrant Experience of Lao Americans 251 

Sample Lesson 23: Historical and Contemporary Experiences of Pacific Islanders in the United States 255 

Sample Lesson 24: South Asian Americans in the United States 268 

Sample Lesson 25: Vietnamese American Experiences—The Journey of Refugees 311 

Additional Sample Topics 323 

Native American Studies 325 

Sample Lesson 26: This is Indian Land: The Purpose, Politics, and Practice of Land Acknowledgment 325 

Sample Lesson 27: Develop or Preserve? The Shellmound Sacred Site Struggle 334 

Sample Lesson 28: Native American Mascots 339 

Additional Sample Topics 347 

Affirming Identity 350 

Exploring and Embracing Your Own Community 350 76  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Complicating Single Stories 351 

Sharing a Wide Picture of Democratic Participation 352 

Widening Our Universe of Obligation 353 

Seeking Models of Interethnic Bridge Building 354 

Sample Lesson 29: The Sikh American Community in California 356 

Sample Lesson 30: Antisemitism and Jewish Middle Eastern Americans 360 

Sample Lesson 31: Jewish Americans: Identity, Intersectionality, and Complicating Ideas of Race 366 

Sample Lesson 32: An Introduction to Arab American Studies 383 

Sample Lesson 33: Armenian Migration Stories and Oral History 400 77 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Ethnic studies is for all students. The model curriculum focuses on the four ethnic groups that are at the core of the ethnic studies field. At the same time, this coursework, through its overarching study of the process and impact of the marginalization resulting from systems of power, is relevant and important for students of all backgrounds. By affirming the identities and contributions of marginalized groups in our society, ethnic studies helps students see themselves and each other as part of the narrative of the United States. This helps students see themselves as active agents in the interethnic bridge-building process we call American life. 

This chapter provides specific lesson plans to support educators as they explore the four primary themes of the model curriculum: 

y Identity 

y History and Movement 

y Systems of Power 

y Social Movements and Equity 

As this progression of themes suggests, in ethnic studies it is crucial to focus not only on understanding oppression and fostering compassion, but also on recognizing advances in ways that promote student agency. This begins with each teacher seeing the assets and strengths every student brings to the classroom. Students should leave an ethnic studies class knowing their choices matter and compelled to think carefully about the decisions they make, realizing that their choices will ultimately shape the world. 

# FOSTERING DEMOCRATIC CLASSROOMS 

One way for ethnic studies teachers to ensure that their courses affirm and value the identities of all of their students is to engage in the process of fostering democratic and empowering classroom learning communities. In such classrooms, students whose voices have not been heard can grow in understanding and agency, while students from the diversity of social, personal, and academic backgrounds that live together in California are able to participate in the conversation from their personal and community perspectives. Such a learning environment provides a powerful foundation and model for students’ future civic participation. 

Ethnic studies teachers cultivate in their students the skills and dispositions for effective civic participation by using teaching techniques that create a sense of trust and openness, encourage students to speak and listen to each other, make space and time for silent reflection, offer multiple avenues for participation and learning, and help students appreciate the points of view, talents, and contributions of all members. 

By prioritizing student-centered approaches and using a wide variety of discussion protocols, teachers can provide opportunities for students to engage critically in the gray 78  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

areas of controversial topics, delving into the nuance and complexity of human history. These techniques and strategies are equally important in classrooms where there is relative social, personal, or political homogeneity, which present their own challenges in facilitating honest dialogue. Many teachers of such classes also seek out opportunities for their students to engage with counterparts of very different backgrounds. These lessons will help. 

The following sample lessons are aligned to the ethnic studies values, principles, and outcomes from chapter 1 and the state-adopted content standards in history–social science, English language arts and literacy, and English language development. As a reminder, the values and principles are as follows: 

1.  Cultivate empathy, community actualization, cultural perpetuity, self-worth, self-determination, and the holistic well-being of all participants, especially Native People/s and Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) 

2.  Celebrate and honor Native People/s of the land and communities of Black, Indigenous, and People of Color by providing a space to share their stories of success, community collaboration, and solidarity, along with their intellectual and cultural wealth 

3.  Center and place high value on the pre-colonial ancestral knowledge, narratives, and communal experiences of Native People/s and people of color and groups that are typically marginalized in society 

4.  Critique empire building in history and its relationship to white supremacy, racism, and other forms of power and oppression 

5.  Challenge racist, bigoted, discriminatory, and imperialist/colonial beliefs and practices on multiple levels 

6.  Connect ourselves to past and contemporary social movements that struggle for social justice and an equitable and democratic society, and conceptualize, imagine, and build new possibilities for a post-racist, post-systemic-racism society that promotes collective narratives of transformative resistance, critical hope, and radical healing 

The lessons are sorted by disciplinary area and categorized around the sample themes (Identity, History and Movement, Systems of Power, and Social Movements and Equity) described in chapter 3, although many of the lessons fit with more than one theme. And while each lesson is placed within one or more disciplinary areas of ethnic studies, many can be adapted to include additional groups or disciplinary areas. 

Each of the sample lessons provided in this chapter is organized around a number of essential questions that guide student inquiry. Here are some additional questions that can 79 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

direct exploration of the guiding themes from chapter 1. These questions are intended to help spark discussion and student reflection. This is not an exhaustive list. 

Guiding Outcome 1: Pursuit of Justice and Equity 

1.  What is justice? What is injustice? How do people’s cultures, experiences, and histories influence how they understand and apply these terms? 

2.  What is equity? How is equity different from equality? 

3.  How have individual and collective efforts challenged and overcome inequality and discriminatory treatment? 

4.  How can individuals or groups of people overcome and dismantle systemic discrimination and marginalization, including systemic racism? 

Guiding Outcome 2: Working Toward Greater Inclusivity 

1.  What does it mean to be inclusive? How is inclusivity achieved? What barriers to inclusivity exist? 

2.  What does it mean to be marginalized? What does that look like? What does that feel like? 

3.  Whose voices or perspectives have been historically emphasized when studying this topic/event? Whose voices or perspectives have been historically silenced or marginalized? 

4.  How have those groups attempted to make themselves heard? To what extent have these attempts been successful? 

Guiding Outcome 3: Furthering Self-Understanding 

1.  What does ethnicity mean? What does race mean? What is the difference between ethnicity and race? 

2.  How are our identities formed? To what extent can a person’s identity change over time? To what extent do our own upbringing and culture instill bias? 

3.  How much control do we have over our own identities? What external factors influence our identities? 

Guiding Outcome 4: Developing a Better Understanding of Others 

1.  How do we develop a better understanding of other people, cultures, and ethnic groups? Why is this important? 

2.  What does it mean to show respect for others? What does that look like? 80  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

3.  What do we need to be able to do to hear perspectives and experiences that are different from ours? How do we effectively engage with opposing or unfamiliar views as part of exercising civil discourse? 

Guiding Outcome 5: Recognizing Intersectionality 

1.  What is intersectionality? Why is it important to recognize and understand intersectionality? 

2.  Beyond ethnicity, what other kinds of social groups exist? How are these social groups formed and defined? 

3.  How is intersectionality related to identity? 

4.  How is intersectionality related to systemic discrimination, racism, and marginalization? 

Guiding Outcome 6: Promoting Self-Empowerment for Civic Engagement 

1.  What is civic engagement? What does civic engagement look like? 

2.  How can civic engagement lead to or contribute to social change? 

3.  Guiding Outcome 7: Supporting a Community Focus 

4.  How have different ethnic groups contributed to your community? 

5.  How has the ethnic makeup of your community changed over time? 

6.  Which groups have been historically marginalized or discriminated against in your community? To what extent has the treatment and experiences of those groups changed over time? 

7.  To what extent have members of your community tried to achieve social or political change? To what extent were they successful? 

Guiding Outcome 8: Developing Interpersonal Communication 

1.  How do we communicate with others? To what extent do our cultural contexts affect the way we communicate? To what extent does our audience affect the way we communicate? 

2.  What are some strategies for effectively and respectfully discussing difficult, sensitive, or controversial topics? 

3.  In what ways are discussions and debates similar? In what ways are they different? What purposes do these two methods of communication serve? 

4.  How can we model and foster empathetic listening skills? 81 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# GENERAL ETHNIC STUDIES 

# Sample Lesson 1: Migration Stories and Oral History 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 3, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Historical Interpretation 1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 3, 8, 10; WHST.9–10.2, 4, 6, 7; SL.9–10.1, 4, 5, 6 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 5, 9, 10a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

As part of a larger unit on migration, this lesson guides students to explore their personal stories around how migration has impacted their families. The students will learn about how their own family migration stories connect to their local history. 

Key Terms and Concepts: oral history, migration, interviewing, archive, memory 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Conduct oral history interviews, transcribe narratives, develop research questions, and build upon interpersonal communication skills 

y Learn from each other by being exposed to the unique migration stories of their peers 

y Strengthen their public speaking skills through interviewing and presenting their research findings 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How does your family and/or community’s story connect to your local history? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Develop an electronic visual presentation for the lesson opening that highlights several major waves of migration (both voluntary and forced). The slides should also include data on migration to the local community and racial and ethnic demographics. 82  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

2.  Introduce the oral history project to the students by letting them know that they will have an opportunity to learn more about their family’s and/or community’s migration histories. Task each student with interviewing one family member (preferably an elder) and one community member. The interviews will focus on the interviewee’s migration stories, childhood, and memory of the area. The interviews should also seek opinions on how changes in policy, institutions, and community attitudes could (have) improve(d) the interviewee’s experience. You may want to show a clip of an interview from a digital oral history archive (see recommended sources for examples) to provide students an example. Teachers should be sensitive to varying family dynamics and have alternative assignments or activities for students that may have difficulty identifying a family member to interview. 

3.  After introducing the project, provide an overview of the mechanics of oral history. Discuss the types of equipment and materials students will need (an audio or video recording device or application, a field notebook); help students come up with questions, discussing the differences between closed and open-ended questions; and begin to introduce transcribing. 

4.  During the next few class sessions, allow students to engage in peer interviewing. Students should conduct mini oral history interviews (no more than seven to ten minutes) with each other. After each interview, give students time to reflect on the interviewing process, what they learned, memory, and storytelling. Using the “think, pair, share” method, have students write their own reactions to the interviewing process on a sheet of paper, then have them share with a peer, and finally to the larger class. Alternatively, students can add their ideas to a whole-group virtual discussion board, or write their ideas on a slip of paper as an exit ticket or as a warm up to prepare them for a whole-class discussion at the beginning of the next class period. 

y If students have access to headsets and computers in the classroom or nearby, they can use the remaining time to practice transcribing their mini oral history interviews. After two to three mock oral history interviews with their peers, students should be prepared to carry out their own full interviews with a family elder and a community member. 

5.  For the overall project, students are expected to conduct a 30-minute oral history interview with their interviewees and transcribe at least one interview. This is given as a homework assignment and should be completed over two weeks. Students are also encouraged to ask their interviewees for copies of old pictures, images of relics that hold some significant meaning or value to them, and/or other primary sources that speak to their migration story. 83 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

6.  After completing the interview and transcribing, students take excerpts from the interview, as well as pictures or other primary sources they may have from their interviewee, and create a three to five minute presentation (either a video, electronic visual presentation, Prezi, or poster board) discussing their interviewee’s migration story, connection to the area, and a brief reflection on their experience conducting the interview. Students are allotted three days to work on their presentations in class and as a homework assignment. Students are given an opportunity to practice their presentations with peer-to-peer and peer-to-small-group sessions before their presentation to the whole class. 

7.  Before students begin their presentations, teachers review or establish norms about presenting and audience expectations. During the presentations, students in the audience should be active listeners, taking notes and asking follow-up questions at the end of each presentation. Presenters should use this time to demonstrate their public speaking skills—maintaining eye contact, using “the speaker’s triangle,” and avoiding reading slides or poster boards. 

8.  As part of the culmination of this project, using these guiding questions students make broader connections among all the migration stories represented in the classroom. 

y How are our migration stories similar? 

y How are they different? 

y How does knowing the shared migration stories of your peers impact how we relate to one another? 

9.  After completing the assignment, teachers and students can share the projects with the broader student body, their families, and communities by posting them on a class/school website, displaying poster boards around the class, or by coordinating a community presentation event. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Peer assessments are used to help students refine their oral history presentations prior to presenting them to the class. The teacher should visit the practice groups and provide constructive feedback to students who are having difficulty with the assignment. 

y During the student presentations, the teacher can evaluate the students’ presentation skills in the context of the grade-level expectations in the CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy, especially the standards for Speaking and Listening. 

y Teachers can use the students’ graphic organizers to determine how effectively they have absorbed the key concepts and connections from the student presenters. 84  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Materials and Resources: 

y Oral History Association, “How Do I Engage Students in Oral History Projects?”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link1 

y Online Archive of California:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link2 

y SNCC (The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee) Digital Gateway: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link3 85 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 2: Social Movements and Student Civic Engagement 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 2, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1; Historical Interpretation 1, 3, 4 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 8; WHST.9–10.1, 2, 4, 7 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 6a, 6c, 11 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This primary source analysis assignment turns students into researchers, while simultaneously allowing them to orient themselves with the history of the Ethnic Studies Movement and contemporary social movements. 

The purpose of the lesson is for students to learn, analyze, and discuss current social movements happening both in the United States and abroad. By learning about past and present social movements, students will learn firsthand how communities of color have resisted and fought for their human rights and self-determination. 

Key Terms and Concepts: social movement, Third World Liberation Front, solidarity 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Conduct a primary source analysis in relation to social movements and the development of ethnic studies 

y Consider how social movements emerge, understand tactics employed, and identify their overall contributions/impact to society 

y Engage in critical analysis, learn to decipher credible and noncredible sources, further develop public speaking skills, and work collaboratively 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What causes social movements? 

2.  What strategies and tactics are most effective within social movements? What gives rise to the proposals and demands of social movements? 86  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

3.  What impact have past and present social movements had on society? Why might people have different responses to social movements? What social movements exist today? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Begin the lesson by defining what social movements are and how they start. Introduce the history of the Ethnic Studies Movement and the Third World Liberation Front (TWLF) strike to students. Include in the introduction or overview pictures and brief video clips of San Francisco State College students protesting. Throughout the overview, highlight that the Ethnic Studies Movement was successful due to unity and solidarity building, as well as to drawing on momentum from other movements that were happening simultaneously, such as Black Power, American Indian, anti-war, Asian American, Chicano, United Farm Workers, and Women’s Liberation movements. Acknowledge the pros and cons of any movement discussed.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 16 of the framework includes an extensive section on the Civil Rights Movement and other movements that fought for social change (beginning on page 414). As part of their research for this ethnic studies lesson, teachers may also ask students to reflect upon past movements and how these modern-day social movements build upon the accomplishments and limitations of those who came before. 

2.  Divide students into pairs, providing each group with two primary source documents, including: 

a.  The original demands of the TWLF 

b.  Student proposals for Black, Asian American, Chicano, and Native American studies 

c.  Images from the strike 

d.  Speeches and correspondence written by San Francisco State College administrators concerning the TWLF strike 

e.  Student and Black Panther Party newspaper clippings featuring articles about the TWLF strike 87 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

3.  Introduce each of the materials, providing a small amount of context and a brief overview of what is a primary source. Instruct each pair to read each document carefully, conduct additional research to better contextualize and situate the source within the history of this period, and complete a primary source analysis worksheet for each source (see below). 

4.  Provide students with class time to work on this assignment. They should also have an opportunity to work on the assignment as homework. 

5.  After completing the primary source worksheet each group is paired with another group, where they share their primary source analyses with each other. The groups are also tasked with finding themes, commonalities, connections, or discrepancies or conflicts between their four sources while exploring their perspectives and points of view. 

6.  Ask each group to write on a large piece of paper or poster board what they believe were the key tactics/strategies, vision, and goals of the TWLF movement based on their research findings. They can also decorate the poster board with pictures, a copy of their primary source, and other materials. 

7.  While still in groups of four, assign each group a contemporary social movement. Alternatively, students can work with the teacher to select the movement that they wish to research. 

8.  Let each group of four know that they are now responsible for completing the two previous assignments (primary source analysis and poster board) with their new social movement. Students are to identify two primary sources on the movement, conduct research (including a review of secondary sources like credible news articles, scholarly research, interviews, informational videos, etc.), and complete the primary source analysis worksheet. They are also to complete a poster board displaying the goals, vision, and tactics/strategies of their assigned contemporary social movement. 

9.  At the end of the unit, each group presents their poster board and social movement to their peers. After all group presentations have been completed, students will have an opportunity to have a class discussion around the impact of social movements. The class will ultimately return back to the original guiding questions for the lesson. 88  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Source Analysis Worksheet 

What Kind of Source? (Circle All that Apply.) 

Letter  Chart 

Photo  Legal document (city ordinance, legislation, etc.) 

Newspaper article  Diary 

Speech  Oral history interview 

Photograph  Artistic piece (poem, song, poster, etc.) 

Press release  Event flyer 

Report  Identification document 

Other: 

Describe your source. (Is it handwritten or typed? In color or black and white? Who is the author or creator? How long is it? What do you see?) 

Identifying the Source 

1.  Is it a primary or secondary source? 

2.  Who wrote/created the source? 

3.  Who is the audience? 

4.  When and where is it from? 89 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Making Sense of the Source 

1.  What is the purpose of the source? 

2.  What was happening at the time in history when this source was created? Provide historical context. 

3.  What did you learn from this source? 

4.  What other documents or historical evidence will you use to gain a deeper understanding of this event or topic? 

5.  What does this source tell you about the Ethnic Studies Movement and Third World Liberation Front strike? 

6.  How does this source relate to current movements for equity? 90  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Peer assessments are used to help students refine their primary source worksheets and poster boards prior to presenting them to the class. The teacher should visit the groups and provide constructive feedback to students who are having difficulty with the assignment. 

y During the student presentations, the teacher can evaluate the students’ presentation skills in the context of the grade-level expectations in the CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy, especially the standards for Speaking and Listening. 

y Teachers can use the completed poster boards and the final discussion session to determine how effectively the students have absorbed the key concepts and connections from the lesson. 

Materials and Resources: 

y For Primary Sources on the Third World Liberation Front: 

○ University of California, Berkeley Third World Liberation Front Archive (includes oral histories, bibliography of sources, access to dissertations on the topic, primary sources and archived materials, etc.): 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link4 

y For Information on Contemporary Social Movements: 

○ #BlackLivesMatter/The Movement for Black Lives 

y The Standing Rock Movement: 

○ National Geographic Article, “These Are the Defiant ‘Water Protectors’ of Standing Rock”:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link5 91 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 3: Youth-Led Participatory Action Research (YPAR) 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: All disciplinary areas 

Youth-Led Participatory Action Research 

Getting students to engage primary sources, develop Youth-Led Participatory Action Research (YPAR) projects, or create service-learning projects are just a few examples of how an inquiry-based approach encourages students to become engaged actors within the learning process. Youth-Led Participatory Action Research provides young people with opportunities to study social problems affecting their lives and then determine actions to rectify these problems. Students will take what they learned in earlier units to do a college preparatory research project that utilizes sound methodology to study a problem identified, for its culminating unit. This YPAR project has a guided process that allows the students then to use their research to develop an action plan to address the problems that they have studied. 

A course can utilize an ethnic studies framework based on the goal of deepening students’ understanding of both the past and the present through continual reflection on the interaction between the two. Students learn to shift analytical lenses between their personal lives and the larger social and historical context that has created the environment within which they live. This process deepens students’ understanding of themselves by grounding it in history, and it deepens their appreciation of history by connecting it to their contemporary lives. 

This dynamic can be demonstrated with a specific focus on a particular subgroup, such as Asian Americans. Each unit is constructed to build upon the previous unit. Each unit draws from primary documents, students’ personal experiences, community and/or family members’ experiences, and scholarly essays. All of these sources come together to value knowledge that goes beyond what is published in history textbooks. 

The culminating project for the course also requires students to employ both their personal, contemporary analytical lens and their historical analytical lens. Students work in teams to develop lessons based on the content of their ethnic studies course and teach the lessons to students at middle or elementary schools in their communities. Lesson development emphasizes the connections that the high school students must find between the historical material and the lives of the middle school students in order to assure the success of the lessons. Student writing is the principal form of assessment in this course. Short in-class or homework writing assignments provide formative assessment of daily activities, and the collection of writing assignments outlined above provides a summative assessment for each unit. 92  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

In addition, oral presentations are used to assess student learning, as in Unit 1 (sharing the document box), Unit 3 (performance of a five-minute play), Unit 4 (teaching project), and Unit 6 (oral history project). Most units include a project by which student work is assessed. Unit 4 features a teaching project. Students should be taking what they learned in the first semester (Units 1–3) and develop a lesson plan on a specific topic within the subgroup focus. They will follow the lesson plan to teach the topic at a nearby middle or elementary school. They will be taught how to do the research to develop a well-structured lesson plan with interactive exercises that will engage the students in the class that they are teaching. The lesson plan must draw from the concepts presented in Units 1–3. This becomes the major assessment for semester 1. 

Ultimately, the main assessment will be the outcome of the Youth-Led Participatory Action Research Project, where both writing and oral skills will be tested. Students will take what they learned in Units 1–7 to do a college preparatory research project that utilizes sound methodology to study a problem in the identified subgroup community. This YPAR project has a guided process that allows the students to then use their research to develop an action plan to address the problems that they studied. The writing assignments described below are produced through a writer’s workshop process that includes structured brainstorming activities, multiple drafts, peer editing, and publication within the classroom or school. 

The following shows how each term in YPAR is operationalized. 

YOUTH: Young people between the ages of 14 and 24. 

PARTICIPATORY: All participants, including youth, are seen as experts who have important experiences and knowledge. 

ACTION: The goal is to use youth research to develop a plan of action toward bettering their communities. 

RESEARCH: A systematic investigation of a problem facing youth. 93 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

This course implements culturally and community responsive pedagogy by focusing on marginalized histories that are often neglected in mainstream history courses and connecting them to community issues that need to be addressed. Geneva Gay defines culturally responsive teaching as using the cultural knowledge, prior experiences, and performance styles of diverse students to make learning more appropriate and effective for them; it teaches to and through the strengths of these students. Gay also describes culturally responsive teaching as having these characteristics: 

Culturally Responsive Pedagogy Course Implementation: 

y It acknowledges the legitimacy of the cultural heritages of different ethnic groups, both as legacies that affect students’ dispositions, attitudes, and approaches to learning and as worthy content to be taught in the formal curriculum. 

y The course would look at the diversity amongst one marginalized subgroup but also the collective experiences impacted by racism. This is evidenced by the use of primary sources. 

y It builds bridges of meaningfulness between home and school experiences, as well as between academic abstractions and lived sociocultural realities. 94  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 4: Introducing Narratives 

Theme: Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

To understand dominant narratives about ethnic groups, students must first grasp the concept of a narrative. A narrative is an account of an event or series of events, usually in the form of a story. 

The story that is told shapes how a person views, or forms an opinion about, the event behind the story. 

Consider how “conservative” and “liberal” news outlets, for example, often cover the same event but tell completely different stories about it. Depending on which news outlet you read/watch/listen to, you will form an opinion about an event that will vary slightly or greatly from one news outlet to the next. This is because the story that is being told will vary depending on who is telling the story and how they interpret the event. The story told will differ from one source to another in what different storytellers choose to highlight and in whom and what they include and whom and what they leave out. 

This lesson introduces students to how narratives are formed about events or a people by probing the sources of narratives in two ways: a) identifying who the storyteller is, their prior or preconceived knowledge of the event or person, the assumptions they make, and their personal biases; and b) how different storytellers have interpreted the events or people they’re talking about in what they’ve selected to feature and highlight in the story and what they’ve chosen to leave out. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to ... ): 

y Identify sources of narratives 

y Articulate how narratives are shaped by who is telling the story 

y Explain how what is featured and left out in a story produces an interpretation 

y Critically evaluate the sources of narratives they come across in their own lives 

Key Terms and Concepts: 

y Narrative (an account of an event or series of events, usually in the form of a story) 

y Bias (an attitude of favor or disfavor toward something or someone) 

y Opinion (a view or judgment formed about something or someone) 

y Perspective (point of view; a particular attitude toward something or someone) 95 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Preconceptions (opinions formed prior to actual knowledge or experience) 

y Assumptions (a thing that is accepted as true or as certain to happen, without proof) 

Materials: 

y Reflection Worksheet for homework (included in this lesson) 

Preparation: 

y Tailor a list of discussion questions for the class. 

y Make copies of the Reflection Worksheet for homework (one per student). 

In-Class Activities: 

1.  Activate Prior Knowledge —Write the following questions on the board and ask students to write down their answers independently. Explain to students that you will revisit their answers to these questions at the end of class. 

y What does the word “narrative” mean to you? 

y Where do we get information from? 

y How do we form opinions about events or a people? 

y Do other people’s opinions in narratives influence our behavior? 

2.  Comparing Narratives Partner Activity —Pair each student with a classmate. Within each pair, one student will write an autobiography and the other student will write a biography of their partner. Give the pairs 15 minutes to write independently. Once students are done writing, ask each partner to read to their partner what they wrote. Write the following questions on the board, and ask the pairs to discuss the following questions among themselves: 

y How do the two narratives differ? What is similar about them? 

y What information did the autobiographer choose to highlight about themself? What information did their partner highlight? 

y Which biography is more reliable? Can either be seen as an “objective source”? 

3.  Class Discussion About Activity —Bring the class back together and lead a discussion about students’ answers to the questions they discussed in their pairs. Use this activity to open a class discussion about how narratives are shaped by the assumptions and biases of the author. Explain that the narratives we read or hear on a daily basis also shape our viewpoints, so we have to be careful to examine authors’ motivations, underlying assumptions, and bias. Explain to students that narratives 96  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

also influence our perceptions of members of different ethnic groups. Discussion questions might include: 

y Where do we encounter narratives about other people? 

y What role do prior knowledge, preconceptions, or bias play in shaping someone’s narrative about other people? 

y How do narratives shape our opinions and affect our behavior toward others? 

y What are some examples of narratives about you? How would your parents or guardians talk about you? How would your siblings, your friends, your teachers? And why would their narratives about you be different from each other? And does it influence how they behave toward you? 

4.  Revisit Introductory Activity —Ask students to revisit the Activate Prior Knowledge questions that they answered at the beginning of class. Based on what they learned today, answer the questions again. How has their understanding of narrative changed? What questions are they left with? What do they want to learn more about? 

Homework: 

1.  Reflect on Lesson’s Takeaways —Students answer the questions on the Reflection Worksheet to help them consolidate and reflect upon what they learned in this lesson. 

Additional Resources: 

y Equality and Human Rights Commission, “Lesson 11 – Influencing Attitudes” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link6 

y UC Berkeley Greater Good Magazine, “How to Avoid Picking Up Prejudice from the Media” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link7 

y Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR), “How to Detect Bias in News Media” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link8 

y Civic Online Reasoning, “News Versus Opinions,” “Who’s Behind the Information?” “What’s the Evidence?” “What Do Other Sources Say?” “How to Find Better Information Online,” and “Civic Online Reasoning” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link9 

y Center for Media Literacy, “Questions and Tips: Media Deconstruction/ Construction Framework” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link10 97 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Reflection Worksheet 

Please answer each question in two or three sentences. (The suggested answers should, of course, be omitted in the worksheet given to the students.) 

1.  Where do we encounter narratives that shape our opinions? 

(everywhere, from the people around us to the news to television) 

2.  How does an author’s underlying assumptions shape their narrative? 

(It shapes how they interpret information that they’re writing about.) 

3.  Why is it important to know the author’s assumptions, preconceptions, or biases in the narrative? 

(It helps us understand where they’re coming from and whether we agree with them or not.) 

4.  How do authors demonstrate their opinions in narratives? 

(by the choices they make in what they highlight in the story and what voices they choose to feature) 

5.  What questions do you still have about narratives? 

(Students will ask: if all narrative is biased, how do I get to the truth of an event or a group of people?) 98  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 5: Introducing Dominant Narratives 

Theme: Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

This lesson is modeled on the University of Michigan Inclusive Teaching Collaborative (ITC) ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link11 ) discussion guide on dominant narratives ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link12 ). According to the ITC, a dominant narrative is 

an explanation or story that is told in service of the dominant social group’s interests and ideologies. It usually achieves dominance through repetition, the apparent authority of the speaker (often accorded to speakers who represent the dominant social groups), and the silencing of alternative accounts. Because dominant narratives are so normalized through their repetition and authority, they have the illusion of being objective and apolitical, when in fact they are neither. 1 

> 1

Dominant Narratives. 2020. University of Michigan Inclusive Teaching Collaborative. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link13 .

This lesson plan is designed to teach students how to identify and critically evaluate dominant narratives they encounter in their daily lives. This lesson plan also addresses the role of power in perpetuating dominant narratives and determining who benefits from or is harmed by the persistence of these narratives. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Identify examples of dominant narratives 

y Critically interrogate authoritative sources of information 

y Recognize bias in dominant narratives 

y Question whose voices are missing from dominant narratives and why 

y Articulate how dominant narratives benefit dominant groups and harm oppressed groups 

Key Terms and Concepts: 

y Dominant narrative (an explanation or story that is told in service of the dominant social group’s interests and ideologies) 

y Power (political or social authority) 

y Authority (the power or ability to make rules and influence others) 

y Oppression (unjust treatment of and control over an individual or group) 99 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Normalization (making something conform to, or reducing something to, a norm or standard) 

Materials: 

y Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s TED Talk “The Danger of a Single Story” ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link14 )

y “What is a Dominant Narrative?” handout 

y “What is a Dominant Narrative? Notetaking Sheet” for class discussion 

Preparation: 

y Make copies of “What is a Dominant Narrative?” handout (one per student). 

y Make copies of the notetaking sheet (one per student). 

y Visit WordClouds ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link15 ) to prepare for the in-class introductory activity. 

In-Class Activities: 

1.  Activate Prior Knowledge —Begin by writing the words “Dominant Narrative” on the whiteboard. Ask students to say what words or phrases come to mind when they hear the term “dominant narrative.” Using WordClouds ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ ch4.asp#link16 ), create a word cloud based on the students’ answers. You will create another word cloud at the end of the class to compare how students’ understanding of dominant narratives has progressed through the lesson. 

2.  Show Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s TED Talk “The Danger of a Single Story” 

(https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link17 )—This TED Talk further explores the concept of dominant narratives by explaining the damaging effects of being exposed to only one powerful narrative. This video will help students to recognize one-sided perspectives, missing voices, and bias in the dominant narratives they encounter about ethnic groups. 

3.  Class Discussion about Narrative, Perspective, and Power —Lead a class discussion based on the main takeaways from Adichie’s TED Talk to help students understand the importance of critically engaging with and interrogating the dominant narratives they come across in their daily lives. 

4.  Class Discussion on Confronting Dominant Narratives —Write an example of a contemporary dominant narrative on the whiteboard. Some examples are: 

y “America is a land of equal opportunity. If someone does not succeed, it is because they did not try hard enough.” 100  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y “South and Central American migrants come to the United States to get free public benefits and take American jobs.” 

5.  (Note: you may also want to ask students to brainstorm examples of dominant narratives that they have heard of, but only do so if you believe your students have the appropriate maturity to do this.) Some of these examples may be uncomfortable for students. As the class facilitator, try to create an accepting environment where students feel “comfortable being uncomfortable” but never feel unsafe or triggered. Students are exposed to dominant narratives like the ones above in many different settings of their lives, so the goal of this lesson is to help students explicitly identify these narratives in order to confront them. In other words, students must recognize and understand dominant narratives before they can contribute to changing them. 

Lead a class discussion around the example you wrote on the board. Guiding questions may include: 

y Have you ever heard this narrative? If so, where? 

y Whom does this narrative serve? (Or who benefits from this narrative?) 

y Whom does this narrative harm? 

y What assumptions are being made? 

y What stereotypes are being used? 

y Whose perspective is represented by this narrative? 

y What narratives or perspectives is it trying to silence? 

y Why do you suppose this narrative has power? 

y What is your personal reaction to this narrative? 

y How has this narrative impacted you? Do you benefit from it? Does it harm you? 

y How have you participated in or resisted this narrative? 

6.  Group Break-Out Reading —Provide each student with a copy of the “What is a Dominant Narrative?” article and the notetaking sheet. Explain that this article will help students deepen their understanding of how dominant narratives function and why they are so persistent. Divide the class into groups of three or four students. Ask the students to read the article with their group members and take notes on the provided notetaking sheet. 

7.  Reflective Discussion —After students have finished reading and taking notes, bring the class back together to lead a reflective discussion about the main takeaways from the article and from the earlier class discussion. Guiding questions may include: 

y How has your understanding of dominant narratives changed? 101 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y How do dominant narratives benefit dominant groups? 

y How do dominant narratives harm oppressed groups? 

y What are some ways we can challenge dominant narratives? 

y What questions do you still have? What more would you like to learn about dominant narratives? 

8.  Reflective Activity —Now that students have a better understanding of dominant narratives, ask students to say what words or phrases come to their mind when they hear the term “dominant narrative.” Using WordClouds ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link18 ), create a word cloud based on the students’ answers. Compare this word cloud with the one created at the beginning of class to help students visualize how their understanding of dominant narratives has progressed through the lesson. 

Homework: 

1.  Create a Reference Guide —Ask students to create a reference guide for how to evaluate the various narratives they encounter in their lives. Students should use this homework assignment to design a plan for how to determine a narrative’s reliability, motivation, and bias. If students need inspiration, refer them to the lateral reading technique ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link19 ) or to the discussion questions presented in class. 

Additional Resources: 

y University of Michigan Inclusive Teaching Collaborative, “Dominant Narratives”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link20 

y Reclaim Philadelphia, “What Is a Dominant Narrative?” by Kelly Morton: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link21 

y Teaching Tolerance, “Shifting Out of Neutral” by Jonathan Gold: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link22 

y Learning for Justice, “The Danger of a Single Story” by Jonathan Gold: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link23 

y Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain, “The First Six Weeks: Create a Counter Narrative” by Zaretta Hammond: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link24 

y Journal of Language and Literacy Education, “Disrupting the Dominant Narrative: Beginning English Teachers’ Use of Young Adult Literature and Culturally Responsive Pedagogy” by Elsie Lindy Olan and Kia Jane Richmond: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link25 102  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Facing History and Ourselves, “Teaching with The 1619 Project in Ethnic Studies” by Kimberly Young:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link26 

y The Opportunity Agenda, “Vision, Values, and Voice: A Communications Toolkit”:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link27 103 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

What is a Dominant Narrative? 

Every day we encounter narratives that shape the way we view the world around us. The narratives we hear or read every day on the news or in movies and books often represent the voices or perspectives of a society’s dominant group. These narratives therefore often portray information in a way that is meant to serve the dominant social group’s interests. These narratives are called “dominant narratives.” 

Dominant narratives “achieve dominance through repetition, the apparent authority of the speaker (often accorded to speakers who represent the dominant social groups), and the silencing of alternative accounts.” 2 Dominant narratives are normalized by being presented as objective facts.  

> 2Dominant Narratives. 2020. University of Michigan Inclusive Teaching Collaborative.
> https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link28 .

According to Kelly Morton, an activist from Philadelphia, 

narratives around gender roles, body types, power, family, immigration, age, ability are all around us. They repeat to us who is dangerous, who is a hard worker, who is lazy, who is attractive, who deserves power. Even if we become aware of them and resist them, the world around us is still playing them on loop and holding us to those narratives. 3 

> 3Kelly Morton. “What Is a Dominant Narrative?” Reclaim Philadelphia, February 11, 2019.
> https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link29 .

Even though everyday people’s experiences often contradict the information dominant narratives tell us, dominant narratives are so powerful because they are repeated with the clout of authority that comes with a mainstream source. Think of the American government: many Americans see the government as a credible source of information, so when a governmental official tells us something, we tend to believe it. This information is often presented as apolitical, objective truth, but often governmental officials have motivations for telling us certain information or framing a policy in a certain light. 

For example, the harmful War on Drugs campaign began in the 1970s. The government framed this initiative as an attempt to create law and order and combat a drug epidemic by increasing prison sentences for drug-related offenses. 4 The dominant narrative of the War on Drugs was that drug dealers and users were causing violence, poverty, and addiction in cities across the country. In actuality, this narrative was used to justify disproportionate   

> 4Betsy Pearl. “Ending the War on Drugs: By the Numbers.” Center for American Progress, June 27, 2018. https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link30 .

104  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

arrests of communities of color, even though Blacks and whites use drugs at similar rates. These discriminatory policies were meant to perpetuate racialized social control. 5 

> 5

“Parallels Between Mass Incarceration and Jim Crow.” 2021. Southern Poverty Law Center Teaching Tolerance.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link31 .

Dominant narratives in the United States often target nonwhite ethnic groups who face oppression at the hands of the dominant social group. We must constantly be vigilant when we read the news, study our textbooks, watch movies, or listen to politicians. Dominant narratives are so pervasive because they are everywhere and are repeated by the illusion of authority that comes with mainstream media, educational, and governmental sources. When we encounter dominant narratives, we must always ask “What is the motivation behind this narrative?” and “Whose voice or voices am I missing?” 105 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

“What is a Dominant Narrative?” Notetaking Sheet 

1.  What is a dominant narrative? 

2.  Whom do dominant narratives serve? 

3.  How do dominant narratives achieve their dominance? (If you aren’t familiar with the term “normalize,” look up a definition.) 

4.  Where do we often find dominant narratives? 

5.  What should we do when we encounter dominant narratives? 106  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDIES 

# Sample Lesson 6: Classical Africa and Other Major Civilizations 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: African American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 3 ,4 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 10.4 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking: 1, 2, 3; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View: 4; Historical Interpretation: 3, 4 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: SL.9–10.5, SL.11–12.5 

CA ELD Standards: 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 1.10 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will explore the classical African backgrounds of African Americans, perhaps giving them the first information about the origin of African civilization. They will examine the beginning of writing, mathematics, architecture, and medicine in the Nile Valley civilization, specifically Kemet, Nubia, and Axum. Students will also be introduced to other major African civilizations such as ancient Ghana, Mali, Songhay, Yoruba, Kongo, and Zimbabwe. Students will conduct research on numerous topics surrounding the emergence of cultural forms, music and dance, political organization, art, and philosophy in the Nile Valley cluster of civilizations, as well as in the Western and Southern African civilizations. Students will be exposed to African philosophers such as Ptahhotep, Imhotep, Akhenaten, and Merikare. Among the themes of this course will be the origin of the universe, that is, the creation myths from ancient Kemet, the ethical concept of Maat as an African cultural concept and its use as a philosophy underpinning social development. Maat represents balance, truth, harmony, and justice. Female and male roles across ancient African society were based on the principles of Maat. Women played central leadership roles in classical African civilization. Students will be asked to think about how the people of Axum built stelae as examples of historical memory. 

Key Terms and Concepts: civilization, culture, philosophy, architecture, Maat, Nile Valley 107 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the importance of culture to African values and beliefs 

y Develop an understanding of and analyze the classical history of African people 

y Identify how African classical cultures set the models for future civilizations in terms of philosophy, architecture, medicine, spirituality, and mathematics 

y Understand the relationship to Africa of all people and the nature of world development from an African perspective, which challenges the particular racial constructions of enslavement, colonialization, and imposition on African women, men; and children; thus, students will be able to deconstruct racial imaginations regarding their common humanity 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What were the antecedents to the Classical African civilizations? Use references to archaeological creations such as Inzalo Y’Langa, or Adam’s Calendar, as a point of departure to examine the ancient past of Africa. 

2.  How did Africans in the Americas and many in Africa lose sight of their contact with their own classical past? How was it erased, distorted, and colonized? 

3.  What is the point of today’s modern African Americans making links to their African cultural past? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  To access this lesson, have the students think of something in today’s society that came from Africa. Prompt them with the Washington Monument (show an image if possible), then show an image of the obelisks of Egypt and Ethiopia (in Aksum, also spelled Axum). Show them the pyramid on the back of the dollar bill, and let them know it is an African architectural design. Think of other connections, for example, the calendar and the 24-hour day. 

2.  Begin the lesson by discussing why Inzalo Y’Langa, popularly named Adam’s Calendar, is called the oldest human-made structure in the world. Show on the map where it is located in Southern Africa. Point out that even if it is not more than 100,000 years old as suggested, it is still older than the Great Pyramid on the same continent and Stonehenge in England. 

3.  On the map of Africa point to the Nile Valley and explain that the Nile River, the earth’s longest, flows through only one continent, Africa. Explain to the students that the Nile River runs down to the Mediterranean from the interior of Africa around Uganda and Rwanda, almost touching the other great river of Africa, the Congo. 108  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

4.  Engage students in a study of the history of the Sahara Desert, the world’s largest, showing how it was not always a massive desert and that humans in the past occupied it for thousands of years. 

5.  Divide the students into three groups, and assign each group a civilization to report on (e.g., Kemet, Nubia, Axum). Each group is responsible for researching the following: 

a.  Describe the region where the civilization is located by stating on which continent it is found, its chronology, that is, when it was developed, and its major contributions that could be considered permanent. Identify the people who may have been influenced in language, customs, and traditions by this civilization. 

b.  Allow the students to choose one of these cultures—Yoruba, Zimbabwe, or Asante—and ask them to write a two-page narrative of the history of the people. 

c.  What were the borders, as far as scholars are concerned, of these civilizations? What other kingdoms, empires, or nations were connected to them? 

d.  Show evidence of the impact of these civilizations in contemporary life in the United States that might be invisible to most people. Do you see pyramids anywhere? For example, the American dollar has a pyramid on it. Anywhere else? What does the Washington Monument look like when you think of ancient Axum or Kemet? 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will research examples of American and European museums that have African art. Have students write about the Boston Museum Nubian collection, the Brooklyn Museum Egyptian collection, or the University of California, Los Angeles African art collection. 

y Students will complete their own collages of photos and information they have learned from reading materials. Ask them to divide into three groups, where some students will be producer-designers, some will be scriptwriters, and others will present the information to the class. 109 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Materials and Resources: 

Print Sources: 

Asante, Molefi Kete. 1994. Classical Africa. Saddle Brook, NJ: Peoples Education Holdings. 

Asante, Molefi Kete. 2000. The Egyptian Philosophers . Chicago, IL: African American Images. 

Asante, Molefi Kete. 2019. T he History of Africa. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Routledge. 

Bauval, Robert, and Thomas Brophy. 2011. Black Genesis . Rochester, VT: Bear and Company. 

Videos: 

Senegal:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link32 

Adam’s Calendar:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link33 

Ancient Egypt:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link34 

Kush:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link35 

Axum:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link36 

Yoruba:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link37 

Great Zimbabwe:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link38 110  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 7: US Housing Inequality: Redlining and Racial Housing Covenants 

Theme: Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: African American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 4, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1, 3, 4; Historical Interpretation 1, 2, 3, 5 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 4, 7; WHST.9–10, 6, 7 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 5, 9, 10a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson introduces students to the process of purchasing a home, while addressing the history of US housing discrimination. Students will learn about redlining and racial covenants, and better understand why African Americans, as well as other racial and religious minorities, have faced housing discrimination and have historically settled in certain neighborhoods, whether voluntarily or involuntarily. Additionally, students will be able to better contextualize the state’s current housing crisis. With regard to skills, students will analyze primary source documents, such as original house deeds, conduct research (including locating US Census data), and write a brief research essay or complete a presentation on their key findings. 

Key Terms and Concepts: segregation, racial housing covenants, gentrification, redlining 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Draw connections between what they learned from the lesson overview, A Raisin in the Sun , and their own narratives, highlighting the overarching theme of housing inequality 

y Understand how housing inequality has manifested in the form of institutional racism through racial housing covenants, redlining, and other forms of legalized segregation 

y Engage and comprehend contemporary language being used to describe the current housing crisis and the history of racial housing segregation (i.e., gentrification, resegregation, and redlining) 111 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Analyze Lorraine Hansberry’s play A Raisin in the Sun , identifying key themes as they relate to housing discrimination, and become familiar with the use of dramatic devices in written plays 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How are wealth and housing inequality connected? 

2.  How is housing discrimination and segregation a form of institutional racism? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Introduce the lesson by posting the definition of racial housing covenants and redlining to engage students in a discussion on the housing conditions African Americans often encounter in urban cities, both in the past and currently. 

2.  Provide an abbreviated walk-through of how to purchase a home (identifying a realtor, finding a lender, learning about the Federal Housing Administration and loan underwriters, etc.). See the videos in the resources section for more context. 

a.  Request that students research and find evidence of how African Americans have historically been subjected to housing discrimination. If necessary, provide the examples of the Federal Housing Administration’s refusal to underwrite loans for African Americans looking to purchase property in white neighborhoods through 1968 and the California Rumford Fair Housing Act (1963–1968) as backup information. Furthermore, ask students to find more contemporary examples of housing discrimination against African Americans. If needed, provide backup information on the disproportionate provision of poor quality housing loans (subprime) to African Americans (which ultimately resulted in many African American families losing their homes during the 2008 economic crash and recession). The use of primary sources such as digital maps are suggested for this part of the lesson. 

3.  Consider using Lorraine Hansberry’s A Raisin in the Sun as a supporting text. Have students read Act II Scene Three. Following the in-class reading, ask students to reflect on Mr. Lindner’s character and how he is connected to the larger discussion of housing inequality. How is Mr. Lindner contributing to housing discrimination? 

4.  After completing A Raisin in the Sun , continue to build on this lesson by introducing students to “Mapping Inequality” and “T-RACES,” two digital mapping websites that include primary sources on redlining and racial housing covenants in the US (see the Materials and Resources section in this lesson for hyperlinks). Then provide students with an overview of the two websites, highlighting the various features and resources. 112  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

5.  For the culminating activity, assign students to pairs and task them with delving into the “Mapping Inequality” and “T-RACES” archives. Each pair will first identify a California city in the T-RACES digital archive that they would like to study, then complete the following over two weeks: 

a.  Describe how race factors into the makeup of the city being studied. 

b.  Identify any racial housing covenants for the city being studied. 

c.  List any barriers that may have kept African Americans from living in certain neighborhoods within the city. 

d.  Identify areas where African Americans were encouraged to live or where they were able to create racial enclaves. 

e.  Identify current US Census data and housing maps on how the city or neighborhoods look now, specifically noting racial demographics.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 14 of the framework includes an outline of an elective ethnic studies course. This course outline includes a classroom example (page 313) in which students engage in an oral history project about their community. This example includes discussion of redlining and other policies that resulted in white flight and the concentration of communities of color into certain neighborhoods. 

Teachers can expand upon the current lesson by using this example and connecting it to the themes described in this model curriculum. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will conduct research (identifying primary sources) on the history of housing discrimination and redlining across California cities, current housing issues, and how different ethnic groups are impacted. 

y Students will write a standard four-paragraph essay or give a five to seven-minute oral presentation on their research findings. 

y Have students reflect on how this history of housing discrimination has (or has not) impacted their own families’ housing options and livelihoods. 

y Students will share their research findings with an audience, such as family, community members, an online audience, elected officials, etc. 113 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Materials and Resources: 

A Raisin in the Sun by Lorraine Hansberry 

Mapping Inequality:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link39 

T-RACES Archive:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link40 

The Case of Dorothy J. Mulkey:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link41 

“Race—The Power of an Illusion”:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link42 

Excerpt from A Raisin in the Sun by Lorraine Hansberry 

Act II Scene Three 

( ... BENEATHA is somewhat surprised to see a quiet-looking middle-aged white man in a business suit holding his hat and a briefcase in his hand and consulting a small piece of paper )

MAN Uh—how do you do, miss. I am looking for a Mrs.—( He looks at the slip of paper ) Mrs. Lena Younger? ( He stops short, struck dumb at the sight of the oblivious WALTER and RUTH) 

BENEATHA ( Smoothing her hair with slight embarrassment ) Oh—yes, that’s my mother. Excuse me ( She closes the door and turns to quiet the other two ) Ruth! Brother! (E nunciating precisely but soundlessly: “There’s a white man at the door!” They stop dancing, RUTH cuts off the phonograph, BENEATHA opens the door. The man casts a curious quick glance at all of them ) Uh—come in please. 

MAN ( Coming in ) Thank you. 

BENEATHA My mother isn’t here just now. Is it business? 

MAN Yes … well, of a sort. 

WALTER ( Freely, the Man of the Hous e) Have a seat. I’m Mrs. Younger’s son. I look after most of her business matters. (RUTH and BENEATHA exchange amused glances )

MAN ( Regarding WALTER, and sitting ) Well—My name is Karl Lindner … 

WALTER ( Stretching out his hand ) Walter Younger. This is my wife—(RUTH nods politely )— and my sister. 

LINDNER How do you do. 

WALTER ( Amiably, as he sits himself easily on a chair, leaning forward on his knees with interest and looking expectantly into the newcomer’s face ) What can we do for you, Mr. Lindner! 

LINDNER ( Some minor shuffling of the hat and briefcase on his knees ) Well—I am a representative of the Clybourne Park Improvement Association— 114  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

WALTER ( Pointing ) Why don’t you sit your things on the floor? 

LINDNER Oh—yes. Thank you. ( He slides the briefcase and hat under the chai r) And as I was saying—I am from the Clybourne Park Improvement Association and we have had it brought to our attention at the last meeting that you people—or at least your mother—has bought a piece of residential property at—( He digs for the slip of paper again )—four o six Clybourne Street … 

WALTER That’s right. Care for something to drink? Ruth, get Mr. Lindner a beer. 

LINDNER ( Upset for some reason ) Oh—no, really. I mean thank you very much, but no thank you. 

RUTH ( Innocently ) Some coffee? 

LINDNER Thank you, nothing at all. (BENEATHA is watching the man carefully )

LINDNER Well, I don’t know how much you folks know about our organization. ( He is a gentle man; thoughtful and somewhat labored in his manner ) It is one of these community organizations set up to look after—oh, you know, things like block upkeep and special projects and we also have what we call our New Neighbors Orientation Committee … 

BENEATHA ( Drily ) Yes—and what do they do? 

LINDNER ( Turning a little to her and then returning the main force to WALTER) Well— it’s what you might call a sort of welcoming committee, I guess. I mean they, we—I’m the chairman of the committee—go around and see the new people who move into the neighborhood and sort of give them the lowdown on the way we do things out in Clybourne Park. 

BENEATHA ( With appreciation of the two meanings, which escape RUTH and WALTER) Un-huh. 

LINDNER And we also have the category of what the association calls—( He looks elsewhere )—uh—special community problems … 

BENEATHA Yes—and what are some of those? 

WALTER Girl, let the man talk. 

LINDNER ( With understated relief ) Thank you. I would sort of like to explain this thing in my own way. I mean I want to explain to you in a certain way. 

WALTER Go ahead. 

LINDNER Yes. Well. I’m going to try to get right to the point. I’m sure we’ll all appreciate that in the long run. 115 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

BENEATHA Yes. 

WALTER Be still now! 

LINDNER Well— 

RUTH ( Still innocently ) Would you like another chair—you don’t look comfortable. 

LINDNER ( More frustrated than annoyed ) No, thank you very much. Please. Well—to get right to the point I—( A great breath, and he is off at last ) I am sure you people must be aware of some of the incidents which have happened in various parts of the city when colored people have moved into certain areas—(BENEATHA exhales heavily and starts tossing a piece of fruit up and down in the air) Well—because we have what I think is going to be a unique type of organization in American community life—not only do we deplore that kind of thing—but we are trying to do something about it. (BENEATHA stops tossing and turns with a new and quizzical interest to the man ) We feel—( gaining confidence in his mission because of the interest in the faces of the people he is talking to )—we feel that most of the trouble in this world, when you come right down to it—( He hits his knee for emphasi s)— most of the trouble exists because people just don’t sit down and talk to each other. 

RUTH ( Nodding as she might in church, pleased with the remark ) You can say that again, mister. 

LINDNER ( More encouraged by such affirmation ) That we don’t try hard enough in this world to understand the other fellow’s problem. The other guy’s point of view. 

RUTH Now that’s right. (BENEATHA and WALTER merely watch and listen with genuine interest )

LINDNER Yes—that’s the way we feel out in Clybourne Park. And that’s why I was elected to come here this afternoon and talk to you people. Friendly like, you know, the way people should talk to each other and see if we couldn’t find some way to work this thing out. As I say, the whole business is a matter of caring about the other fellow. Anybody can see that you are a nice family of folks, hardworking and honest I’m sure. (BENEATHA frowns slightly, quizzically, her head tilted regarding him ) Today everybody knows what it means to be on the outside of something. And of course, there is always somebody who is out to take advantage of people who don’t always understand. 

WALTER What do you mean? 

LINDNER Well—you see our community is made up of people who’ve worked hard as the dickens for years to build up that little community. They’re not rich and fancy people; just hard-working, honest people who don’t really have much but those little homes and a dream of the kind of community they want to raise their children in. Now, I don’t say we are perfect and there is a lot wrong in some of the things they want. But you’ve got to admit that a man, right or wrong, has the right to want to have the neighborhood he lives 116  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

in a certain kind of way. And at the moment the overwhelming majority of our people out there feel that people get along better, take more of a common interest in the life of the community, when they share a common background. I want you to believe me when I tell you that race prejudice simply doesn’t enter into it. It is a matter of the people of Clybourne Park believing, rightly or wrongly, as I say, that for the happiness of all concerned that our Negro families are happier when they live in their own communities. 

BENEATHA ( With a grand and bitter gesture ) This, friends, is the Welcoming Committee! 

WALTER ( Dumbfounded, looking at LINDNER) Is this what you came marching all the way over here to tell us? 

LINDNER Well, now we’ve been having a fine conversation. I hope you’ll hear me all the way through. 

WALTER ( Tightly ) Go ahead, man. 

LINDNER You see—in the face of all the things I have said, we are prepared to make your family a very generous offer … 

BENEATHA Thirty pieces and not a coin less! 

WALTER Yeah? 

LINDNER ( Putting on his glasses and drawing a form out of the briefcas e) Our association is prepared, through the collective effort of our people, to buy the house from you at a financial gain to your family. 

RUTH Lord have mercy, ain’t this the living gall! 

WALTER All right, you through? 

LINDNER Well, I want to give you the exact terms of the financial arrangement— 

WALTER We don’t want to hear no exact terms of no arrangements. I want to know if you got any more to tell us ’bout getting together? 

LINDNER ( Taking off his glasses ) Well—I don’t suppose that you feel … 

WALTER Never mind how I feel—you got any more to say ’bout how people ought to sit down and talk to each other? … Get out of my house, man. ( He turns his back and walks to the door )

LINDNER (L ooking around at the hostile faces and reaching and assembling his hat and briefcase ) Well—I don’t understand why you people are reacting this way. What do you think you are going to gain by moving into a neighborhood where you just aren’t wanted and where some elements—well—people can get awful worked up when they feel that their whole way of life and everything they’ve ever worked for is threatened. 117 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

WALTER Get out. 

LINDNER ( At the door, holding a small card ) Well—I’m sorry it went like this. 

WALTER Get out. 

LINDNER ( Almost sadly regarding WALTER) You just can’t force people to change their hearts, son. ( He turns and put his card on a table and exits. WALTER pushes the door to with stinging hatred, and stands looking at it. RUTH just sits and BENEATHA just stands ... )118  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 8: An Introduction to African American Innovators 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: African American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 3 ,4 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standards: 10.3, 11.5, 11.10, 12.4 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking: 2; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View: 4; Historical Interpretation: 4 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: SL.9–10.5, SL.11–12.5 

CA ELD Standards: 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 1.10 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson guides students to explore some of the African American contributions to the United States. Students will be introduced to and explore the contributions of African Americans in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM); literature and journalism; education; government; and business and entrepreneurship. 

Key Terms and Concepts: technology, science, innovation, space, journalism, literature and literary genres, armed forces, government, business, entrepreneurship, ingenuity, segregation, economic advancement, Harlem Renaissance, Jim Crow 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Develop research questions in order to conduct exploratory research into historical events and figures 

y Interpret historical narratives in order to develop a more robust understanding of historical events and figures 

y Learn from each other by presenting the histories and contributions of African Americans that are often unknown or untold; explain the role African Americans have played in the advancement of science, technology, and other areas in American society 

y Strengthen public speaking skills through presenting their research findings 

y Build upon interpersonal communication skills in order to adequately receive and convey information 119 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Compile research and information in order to create a visual presentation or display of a historical event or figure 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What contributions have African Americans made to the United States, and how has society benefited from them? 

2.  Why are some of these contributions not widely known? 

3.  How can these contributions be given greater recognition in society today? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Part 1: Research Presentation 

1.  Develop an electronic visual presentation for the lesson opening that shows images of various contributions in the five areas of science and mathematics, literature and journalism, education, government, and business and entrepreneurship. The presentation ends with the quote: “There is nothing new in the world except the history you do not know,” by Harry S. Truman, 33rd President of the United States. As students view the presentation, invite them to write down what they know and what they want to know about the images. 

2.  Introduce the lesson by asking students what they believe all of these things have in common. This should be a class conversation. 

3.  Present the five stations of African American contributions, being sure to connect them with the images and discussions from steps 1 and 2. 

4.  Invite students to explore the five stations in the in-person or virtual classroom and view the introductory resources on each topic. As students view the introductory resources, they write down their learnings, as well as their wonderings, and identify one station for further research. 

5.  Students should find additional sources of information on their topic of choice to conduct further research. 

6.  After students have completed their exploration of the different stations, they should compose a written response to the three essential questions that includes information they have learned from the lesson. Students should be encouraged to identify possible topics or areas of focus for further research in their responses. Time permitting, students can share these responses in small groups or with a partner. 120  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Part 2: Museum Curation 

1.  Review the five stations that were discussed in Part 1. Then ask students to briefly discuss Essential Questions 1–3. 

2.  After the discussion, transition to discussing the value of museums as a way to bring the contributions of African Americans to the broader society. Provide examples of the African American Museum in Washington, DC and other museums or public displays in the local or surrounding areas. Also provide examples of digital museum exhibits for local and national collections. 

3.  Introduce the project: museum curation. Each student will be creating a museum exhibit based on one historical figure or contribution from the stations that they explored previously. Instruct students to look for primary and secondary sources that can teach them more about their subject. These sources could be texts or oral histories found in the available databases. Students can also interview experts to gather more information. Interviews can be conducted in person or remotely. 

4.  After introducing the project and providing examples of museum exhibits, provide an overview of the expectations for the research and presentations. Discuss the types of equipment and materials students will need. Help students understand the difference between secondary and primary sources. 

5.  Allow the use of the next few class periods for students to conduct further research. Assist students with narrowing or broadening their research topic based on the amount of information available on their topic of choice. 

a.  Students may use relevant resources that they discovered during the first part of this lesson. 

b.  For more rigor, students can be required to have a specific number of primary sources and secondary sources. 

6.  Once students have completed their research, ask them to create their own museum exhibit complete with pictures and artifacts related to their topic. The resources that they collected should be used as source materials for their exhibit. 

a.  The exhibit should have at least one picture of the subject and a written description of the exhibit. 

7.  Students will develop a presentation to describe their learnings from their station and their historical event or figure. Each presentation should be no more than two minutes in length. 

a.  Students will be the curators of their own classroom museum. The classroom should be arranged in stations where corresponding exhibits will be displayed. 121 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

b.  Alternate display for distance learning: Students will create a one-slide PowerPoint display, which will be displayed via the share screen option of the distance learning platform. 

8.  After presentations are completed, the teacher facilitates the discussion of the essential questions. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Assessment: 

y Peer assessments of preliminary research can be used to help students refine or focus their research for the museum curation project. 

y The teacher should evaluate students’ research based on grade-level expectations in the history–social science content standards. Students can be assessed on their ability to pose relevant research questions, compare documentary sources, differentiate between primary and secondary sources, and vet potential resources for credibility, validity, and bias. 

y The teacher can use students’ museum exhibits to assess how well they synthesized their research and applied it to their displays and presentations. 

y The teacher should evaluate students’ presentation skills based on grade-level expectations in the CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy standards. 

Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will conduct research on the station of their choosing using appropriate grade-level skills as outlined in the history–social science content standards and recommended by the History–Social Science Framework .

y Students will create and present museum exhibits to demonstrate their abilities to conduct a grade-level appropriate synthesis of research and orally convey information learned. 

y The teacher should provide an opportunity for students to reflect on the essential questions, either as a whole group or in small groups or breakout sessions. The teacher may choose to guide students through the reflection process prior to letting them engage in the reflection of the essential questions. 

Materials and Resources: 

Note: The lists contained in these resources are in no way exhaustive. They should be used as an initial suggestion of possible events or historical figures that can be expanded and modified to meet the needs of individual classrooms. Students are encouraged to find other events and historical figures not on these lists. 122  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Station 1: Science, Technology, and Mathematics 

Station Purpose and Overview: 

Students will discover the amazing history of African American inventors, designers, and scientists who have contributed to the making of the contemporary American society. Students will learn about the use of African creative strategies during the period of enslavement and the burst of inventions that occurred at the end of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Numerous inventors who had not been recognized during the enslavement for their innovations became known as designers and creators of useful objects and processes for a modern society. It is not striking that a people who had been responsible for so much of the daily operations of farms, plantation houses, mechanical systems, and construction would now emerge from the shadows as some of the creators of the most common elements used in work. Students will be able to understand how and why the agricultural worker or the mechanic would be inclined to innovate. Consequently, this lesson will pave the way for the student to see how integral the inventions, innovations, and scientific work of African Americans are to everyday life. 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any innovator of their choice, including those not listed here. 

Invite students to watch one or more of these introductory videos: 

Five African American Inventors Who Improved the World: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link43 

19th Century Black Discoveries:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link44 

Awesome Inventions by African Americans: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link45 

Students then explore African American innovators such as the following: 

Scientists and Inventors 

The A–Z List of Black Inventors:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link46 

Famous African American Women in STEM: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link47 

16 Black STEM Innovators Who Have Defined Our Modern World: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link48 

Black Explorers:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link49 123 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

African Americans at NASA 

NASA’s African American Astronauts:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link50 

NASA Figures:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link51 

“Black In Space” Explores NASA’s Small Steps and Giant Leaps Toward Equality: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link52 

African American Doctors 

California Academy of Sciences Library: African American Scientists Bibliography: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link53 

Black Scientists Timeline:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link54 

Other African American Scientific Contributions 

The Disturbing History of African Americans and Medical Research Goes Beyond Henrietta Lacks:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link55 

Resources: 

Otha Richard Sullivan. 2002. Black Stars: African American Women Scientists and Inventors .San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Keith C. Holmes. 2008. Black Inventors: Crafting Over 200 Years of Success. Brooklyn, NY: Global Black Inventor Research Projects, Inc. 

Black Scientists and Inventors:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link56 

Station 2: Literature, Journalism, and the Arts 

Station Purpose and Overview: 

Students will explore the intellectual, journalistic, and artistic achievements of African Americans throughout history. Students will engage in the works of icons of the Harlem Renaissance, as well as those who came before, and more contemporary innovators. 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any innovator of their choice, including those not listed here. 

Invite students to watch the introductory video on the Harlem Renaissance: 

History Brief: The Harlem Renaissance:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link57 124  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Introduction to the Harlem Renaissance: Students will explore the vibrant artistic and intellectual life brought to New York and other Northeastern American cities by African Americans fleeing the South in a large and massive migration to the North and away from the brutality of the post-Reconstruction era. At the same time, Africans from the African continent, South America, and every Caribbean island entered the northern section of New York’s Manhattan Island, and this area, Harlem, became the liveliest gathering place of African ideas on the earth. Politicians, novelists, musicians, artists, newspaper publishers, business people, dancers, choreographers, lawyers, playwrights, and poets assembled in the parlors, salons, and stately houses in uptown New York to revive and remake the Black tradition. Students will learn how the Great Migration changed the way African Americans saw themselves and the way others saw them. The book The New Negro by Philadelphian Alain Locke is often called the work that began the Harlem Renaissance. The literary aspect of the Harlem Renaissance is the most noted and known by virtue of the writers who articulated the ideas of African Americans who resisted segregation, discrimination, and second-class citizenship. 

Students explore African American writers, journalists, and artists. 

Journalists 

Black Press Comprehensive Timeline:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link58 

The Black Press: Past and Present:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link59 

The Black Press: From Freedom’s Journal to The Crisis, Ebony & Jet (video): 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link60 

Authors 

African American Literature: A Timeline:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link61 

Musicians 

The Birth of Jazz:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link62 

African American Music History Timeline:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link63 

Notable African American Musicians:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link64 

Additional Resources: 

Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, eds., Harlem Renaissance Lives 

Nathan Irvin Huggins, Harlem Renaissance 

James Weldon Johnson, Black Manhattan 125 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Alain Locke, The New Negro 

Steven Watson, The Harlem Renaissance: Hub of African-American Culture, 1920–1930 

Station 3: Education 

Station Purpose and Overview: 

Students will explore the history-making individuals and institutions that shaped education for African American students and beyond. Historical Black colleges and universities highlight the tremendous gains made by African Americans whose access to education was severely restricted and even forbidden for centuries. Students will learn the history and the evolution of the US educational system, including precedent-setting legislation as it pertains to equal access, and will learn about the struggles of African American students who fought for their right to education. 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any innovator of their choice, including those not listed here. 

Invite students to listen to the following podcast and watch the introductory video: 

Brown v. Board of Education Podcast:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link65 

African American Higher Education:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link66 

Students explore the history and contributions of African Americans to education. 

Have students research and identify outstanding African educators such as Booker T. Washington, Mary McLeod Bethune, and Octavius Catto. What historically Black colleges are they associated with? 

Historically Black Colleges and Universities 

Timeline of Historically Black Colleges and Universities: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link67 

Tell Them We Are Rising: The Story of Historically Black Colleges and Universities: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link68 

African American Higher Education:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link69 

Pioneers in African American Education 

Important Milestones in African American Education: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link70 126  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Key Events in Black Higher Education:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link71 

Booker T. Washington – Mini Biography:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link72 

Station 4: Government, Military, and Civics 

Station Purpose and Overview: 

Students will explore the contributions that African Americans have made to US legislation, governmental institutions, and armed forces from the early days of the republic to the present day. 

Movements like the Civil Rights Movement are responsible for the passage of major legislation such as the Voting Rights Act and the Civil Rights Act. Additionally, scholars have identified more than 1,500 African American office holders during the Reconstruction Era (1863–1877) who helped to shape government and provide representation for African Americans. By the year 2020, there had been 162 African Americans who served in Congress or as delegates from US territories and the District of Columbia. 

This station will also highlight the various accomplishments of African American military leaders and units such as the Harlem Hellfighters and African American office holders. 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any innovator of their choice, including those not listed here. 

Invite students to watch this introductory video: 

African Americans in Congress in the 19th Century: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link73 

It may be helpful to frame the discussion around this topic. Facing History and Ourselves 

provides sample lessons and resources that may help with this:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link74 

Students explore African Americans in US Government, such as the following examples: 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any government official of their choice, including those not listed here. 127 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

African Americans in Office 

Major African American Office Holders Since 1641: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link75 

Black Legislators:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link76 

The Black Congressmen of Reconstruction: Death of Representation: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link77 

African Americans in the White House Timeline: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link78 

Black Americans in Congress:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link79 

Moments in History: Remembering Thurgood Marshall: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link80 

African Americans in the Armed Forces 

Tuskegee Airmen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link81 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link82 

African Americans in the US Army:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link83 

African Americans in the US Armed Forces: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link84 

African Americans in the US Army: Profiles of Bravery: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link85 

The History of Allensworth, California (1908– ): 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link86 

African American Social Movements and Civic Engagement 

“Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights Movement” PBS series: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link87 

“Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights Movement” accompanying lessons: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link88 

The Reconstruction Era and the Fragility of Democracy , Section 4: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link89 128  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Station 5: Business and Entrepreneurship 

Station Purpose and Overview: 

Students will explore African American business innovators and entrepreneurs, as well as successful African American business ventures such as those found in Tulsa, Oklahoma’s Black Wall Street. Students will be introduced to well-known figures such as Oprah Winfrey and lesser-known figures such as Annie Malone. 

Note: This is in no way an exhaustive list. Teachers are encouraged to add to this list, and students are encouraged to research any innovator of their choice, including those not listed here. 

Invite students to view the introductory video: 

The Rise of African American Entrepreneurs in America (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link90 )

Students explore and research African American businesspersons, entrepreneurs, and related historical events such as those found in the following links: 

Black in Business: Celebrating the Legacy of Black Entrepreneurship: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link91 

Black Wall Street and Its Legacy in America: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link92 

Black Excellist: Most Powerful Black CEOs in Corporate America: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link93 129 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 9: #BlackLivesMatter and Social Change 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: African American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 4, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 4; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 1, 2 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9; WHST.9–10.2, 4, 5, 6, 7 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will be exposed to contemporary discussions around policing in the US, specifically police brutality cases when unarmed African Americans have been killed. They will conduct research on various incidents, deciphering between reputable and scholarly sources versus those with particular political bents. Students will also begin to think about how they would respond if an incident took place in their community. Students will have the opportunity, via the social change projects, to describe what tools or tactics of resistance they would use. With regard to skills, students will learn how to develop their own informational videos, conduct research, and work collaboratively. 

Key Terms and Concepts: racial profiling, oppression, police brutality, social movements, resistance 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Develop an understanding and analyze the effectiveness of #BlackLivesMatter and the broader Movement for Black Lives (M4BL), specifically delving into the movement’s structure, key organizations, and tactics or actions used to respond to incidents of police brutality 

y Identify how African Americans have historically been disproportionately impacted by racial profiling and police brutality in the US 

Essential Questions: 

1.  Why, how, and when did #BlackLivesMatter and the Movement for Black Lives emerge? 

2.  What can be done to help those impacted by police brutality and racial profiling? 130  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Begin the lesson by discussing a recent incident in your community when an African American has been subjected to racial profiling or police brutality. If you are unable to find a specific incident that took place in your community, highlight a national incident. 

2.  Link this incident to the broader Movement for Black Lives. Be sure to provide some context on the movement, including its history, organizations associated with the movement, key activists and leaders, the Movement for Black Lives policy platform, tactics, and key incidents the movement has responded to. 

3.  After completing the reading and discussion, provide an overview of the Movement for Black Lives for students, detailing key shootings, defining and framing terms (e.g., riot vs. rebellion, anti-Blackness, state-sanctioned violence, etc.), highlighting the narratives of Black women and LGBTQIA, identifying people that have been impacted by police brutality, and providing various examples of the tactics of resistance used by activists and organizers within the movement. 

4.  In groups of four, students select an issue relating to the justice system that has been a focal point within the Black movement. Each group is responsible for researching the following: 

a.  Describe the issue and the surrounding details. 

b.  What are the arguments? Present all sides. 

c.  Investigate the underlying context: research the root causes of the issue. 

d.  What is the legal context surrounding the issue (e.g., stand your ground, stop and frisk, noise ordinance, Police Officers Bill of Rights, cash bail system, three strikes laws, prison abolition, the death penalty, etc.)? 

e.  What was/has been the community’s response? Were there any protests or direct actions? If so, what types of tactics did activists employ? 

f.  What organizations are working to address this issue? 

g.  What social changes, political changes, or policy changes occurred or are being proposed to address the underlying issue? 

5.  Students are encouraged to identify sources online (including looking at social media posts or hashtags that feature the name of the person they are studying), examine scholarly books and articles, and even contact nonprofits or grassroots organizations that may be organizing around the case that they were assigned. Stress the importance of students being able to identify credible first-person sources. 131 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

6.  As a second component of this lesson, each student (individually) is tasked with responding to the last question required for their project: “What can you do to help support those impacted by police brutality?” In response, students must come up with an idea or plan of how they would help advocate for change in their communities if an issue around police brutality were to arise. Please note that this exercise is to explore the possible actions of advocacy for social justice and social change. Students should not be encouraged to place themselves or others in a situation that could lead to physical conflict. 

7.  Students should be provided an additional week to produce their individual social change projects, whether it be drawing a protest poster or drafting a plan to organize a direct action. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will research issues surrounding the impact of the justice system on African American communities and respond to key questions. 

y Students will complete an action-oriented social change assignment in which they are expected to consider how they would respond if an incident of police brutality occurred in their community. 

Materials and Resources: 

y Teaching Tolerance “Bringing Black Lives Matter into the Classroom: Part II”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link94 132  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 10: Afrofuturism: Reimagining Black Futures and Science Fiction 

Theme: Identity, Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: African American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 4, 5 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1, 2, 4; Historical Interpretation 1, 2, 4 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9; WHST.9–10.4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Afrofuturism serves as a framework to better understand the growing popularity of Black science fiction and how the genre is being used to reimagine Black life. It is also a cultural aesthetic that incorporates technoculture and the supernatural while explicitly centering people of African descent. More recently, artists, musicians, filmmakers, and writers— including Octavia Butler, Janelle Monáe, Ryan Coogler, the Movement for Black Lives, Roxane Gay, Tananarive Due, and Nalo Hopkinson, to name a few—have drawn from this analytic framework and aesthetic as an inspiration for their own projects. While their work often features Black life suspended in space or utilizing imagined technologies, Afrofuturism also calls upon authors and artists to reimagine Black life beyond the status quo and to explore the infinite possibilities of the world of tomorrow. Increasingly, activists have used the framework to reimagine a world void of oppression and exploitative systems of power. 

This lesson is designed to introduce students to the analytic framework and aesthetic of Afrofuturism through literature, science fiction, art, music, and theoretical texts. By engaging Afrofuturism, students will be able to better understand how authors and artists are using literature, music, film, and other modes of cultural production to describe Black experiences and theorize new possibilities. More specifically, students will be able to identify and engage social and political critiques that manifest in Afrofuturist texts. With regard to skills, students will primarily gain experience with the qualitative method of cultural analysis. Drawing on various cultural texts, students will analyze the various ways in which Afrofuturist themes manifest and articulate how they act (or do not act) as social or cultural critiques; are indicative of cultural phenomena, practices, ideologies, or trends; or are used to make an intervention and state something entirely new. With an emphasis on developing analytical skills, students will also gain more experience with conducting 133 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

research, evaluating primary and secondary source materials, and practicing close reading and expository and creative writing. 

Lesson Note: While this lesson has been developed with a focus on Black experiences and futures, it should also be noted that Chicana futurism, Latinx futurism, and Desi futurism (which refers to the forward-looking or future-focused mediums that relate to South Asian culture, including literature, music, art, film, and visual and performing arts) are also budding fields and genres. Thus, this lesson can be adapted for other ethnic experiences with the inclusion of appropriate source materials. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Afrofuturism, reimagine, science fiction (sci-fi), time, space, aesthetic 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Identify and analyze Afrofuturism as it manifests within various forms of art and cultural production, including literature, music, comic books, and film 

y Understand how systems of power and history are being reimagined through the lens of Afrofuturism 

y Discern how authors and artists use literary and poetic devices and technology within Afrofuturist texts 

y Develop and reflect on new strategies, policies, and systems of power that address current social, economic, and political issues 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is Afrofuturism? 

2.  What does it mean to reimagine life beyond the status quo? 

3.  What is the role of art and cultural production? 

4.  How does Afrofuturist art and cultural production serve as a critique of history, the status quo, and systems of power? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Introduce the lesson by asking students to pull out a sheet of paper and write what they believe Afrofuturism is. Give students up to five minutes to complete this quick writing exercise. 

2.  After everyone has had an opportunity to reflect on the prompt, have students share their responses with a partner or neighbor or two first, then with the class. 134  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

3.  Following this discussion, provide each student with an article on Afrofuturism (options are provided in the resources below). Break the students into groups of four and have each group read the text amongst themselves. Let students know that they should make annotations as they read, noting keywords, themes, quotes that stand out, and terms that they may not be familiar with. 

4.  After each group has finished reading the excerpt, task them with writing a quick summary (no more than three sentences) of how the author frames Afrofuturism. Ask them to discuss how the excerpt echoes, differs from, or builds upon what they wrote in their quick writing exercise. 

5.  Have the groups share some of their takeaways and summaries of the article with the entire class. Also use this time to define any terms that students may have been unfamiliar with. 

a.  Potential Terms to Define: 

i.  Subaltern—this term is primarily used to describe people socially and politically marginalized within society, those who are deemed powerless, especially within colonial territories. 

ii.  Pulp—this term has historically been used to describe early magazines that were printed on low quality paper made from wood pulp. However, the term has been used more broadly to describe works of art and literature (e.g., fiction, music, zines, etc.) that often included sensational material, short fiction works, and what was often viewed as “low-quality literature.” Pulp fiction and other works are often seen as the predecessors of superhero comic books. 

iii.  Speculative fiction—is a broad artistic genre that is defined by its inclusion of supernatural, futuristic, and dystopian elements. Speculative fiction includes the genres of science fiction, fantasy, horror, fairy tales, superhero fiction, and more. 

iv.  Appropriate/appropriation—to take elements of something for one’s own use, often without permission. 

v.  Antebellum—refers to the period in the United States prior to the Civil War. 135 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Day 2 

1.  Start the second day by discussing the diversity of Afrofuturism. Coined in the 1990s, the term “Afrofuturism” describes a cultural aesthetic, philosophy of science, and philosophy of history that explores the developing intersection of African diaspora culture with technology. It is grounded in the belief of a better future for African Americans and aims to connect those from the Black diaspora with their African ancestry. 

Show students that Afrofuturism can be found in artwork, literature, fashion, film, and music by providing students with a sampling of classroom and age-appropriate Afrofuturistic examples of the teacher’s choosing. 

Afrofuturism is often marked visually with African iconology, for example through the use of Adinkra symbols or Ancient Egyptian artifacts (e.g., the ankh, Eye of Horus, and pyramids). Sun Ra, Earth, Wind & Fire, and George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic were well known for incorporating such symbolism into their music and album art. Also present in the aesthetic repertoire of Afrofuturism is a bright and diverse color palette, mysticism, extraordinary abilities and powers, and technology and technoculture. Steampunk also has found its place in the Afrofuturistic aesthetic. More contemporary artists like Missy Elliott, Beyoncé, Jay-Z, Kamasi Washington, and Janelle Monáe are known for incorporating such elements in their music videos. The Studio Museum in Harlem showcased Afrofuturistic artwork in some of their exhibits as well. The Ford Theater production of “The Wiz” fused these elements into a classic retelling of The Wizard of Oz. Additionally, writers such as W. E. B Du Bois and Octavia Butler explore Afrofuturism in their works. 

Afrofuturism is intriguing because of its visual aesthetic, but its purpose is much bolder. By design, it is intended to challenge the status quo by reimagining and confronting everyday challenges that African Americans face. Topics like racism, disenfranchisement, social inequality, and the pursuit of justice often find a home in Afrofuturistic works. Characters like Luke Cage explore the alternate possibilities for African Americans men—in this case by imagining an African American man impervious to bullets. The fictional country of Wakanda in Black Panther portrays a society where Africans or African Americans are economically, technologically, and socially advanced. 

Essentially, Afrofuturism is a vehicle through which artists, writers, musicians, filmmakers, fashion designers, and others express their frustrations with the current condition of African Americans in society and posit a new theory of what could be, what could have been, and what will be if these issues are addressed and resolved. While a utopian society without social injustice and racism may 136  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

seem like a dream, it is one the contributors to this genre are willing to aspire to and work toward through their own contributions in the Afrofuturistic space. 

2.  Engage students in a discussion around what is and is not Afrofuturism, grounded in contemporary examples that students may be familiar with. 

a.  Guide the students through features like settings, characters, and other literary devices and elements of Afrofuturism. 

i.  Option: Utilize the recent Black Panther film and comic books. 

ii.  Option: Teachers can select a podcast, text, short story, or novel. 

3.  Break the students into groups and ask them to brainstorm other elements that may be found in Afrofuturism. 

4.  Once students have had a chance to discuss some ideas, ask them to imagine an Afrofuturistic setting in which a story may take place. 

a.  Students write down their ideas on butcher paper or large sticky notes. 

5.  Ask student groups to share their settings with the class and explain why they chose the details that they did. 

Day 3 

1.  As a class, revisit the texts from day 2 and begin to discuss how the texts draw on Afrofuturism. If possible, bring in copies of comic books, short stories, and zines. 

2.  After discussing the cultural texts for 10 to 15 minutes, let the students know that they will create their own cultural text that engages Afrofuturism or reimagines their own community’s future. 

3.  Select a short story, a poem, or song lyrics for students to read, and guide them through a discussion of the elements of Afrofuturism. 

4.  Introduce the assignment by telling students that they have the option of creating a zine, comic book, short story, or poem that incorporates what they’ve learned about Afrofuturism, specifically drawing on the overall aesthetic and analytical framework. They will also write a one-page artist’s statement describing their work and rationale. It is highly recommended that teachers create their own rubrics for this assignment and distribute them to students at the onset. 

5.  To start this project, have students spend the remainder of the class drafting an outline of their project and researching other Afrofuturist art that might serve as a source of inspiration. Be sure to remind students to consider how they want 137 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

to develop the project. For example, will they create a digital or hard copy zine or comic book? 

6.  For homework, have students complete their outlines. 

Day 4 

1.  Start class by showcasing what art materials students will have access to (e.g., markers, construction paper, card stock, colored pencils, rulers, felt-tip pens, graphics software) in order to complete their project. 

2.  After students have completed their projects, dedicate a final class day for sharing and reflection. Have each student place their work on display around the classroom. Allow students to walk around and examine their peers’ projects for 15 to 20 minutes. 

3.  After perusing the projects on display, have each student briefly present their artist’s statement aloud to the entire class. 

4.  Students then prepare a brief reflection on their key takeaways from the lesson overall, as well as on their experience creating Afrofuturist-inspired projects and on viewing the creations of their classmates. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will complete a written reflection on their understanding of Afrofuturism before and after the lesson. 

y Students will analyze cultural texts. 

y Students will actively think about how Afrofuturism is being engaged as an analytic framework for reimagining systems of power. 

y Students will complete a culminating project in which they are responsible for creating a cultural text that engages Afrofuturism. 

Materials and Resources: 

Examples of materials that can be used in this lesson are provided below. There is a growing body of online resources and instructional materials available for teachers interested in teaching this topic. As with all materials, local educational agencies should consider content carefully for appropriateness for their classrooms. 

y This American Life podcast, “We Are in the Future”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link95 138  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Time magazine article, “It’s Not Just Black Panther. Afrofuturism Is Having a Moment”:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link96 

y Myron T. Strong and K. Sean Chaplin. 2019. “Afrofuturism and Black Panther,” 

Contexts 18 (2): 58–59.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link97 

y CBS Mornings news clip and interview with author Tomi Adeyemi, “Afrofuturism gains new momentum as artists reclaim black history”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link98 

y PBS It’s Lit! video, “Afrofuturism: From Books to Blockbusters”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link99 

y TED-Ed video, “Why should you read sci-fi superstar Octavia E. Butler?”: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link100 139 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Additional Sample Topics 

The following list of sample topics is intended to help ethnic studies teachers develop content for their courses. It is not intended to be exhaustive; however, it should be instructive as to the pedagogical approach that allows African agency to be at the center of any discourse or lesson about African American people. 

y Emergence of Humans in Africa 

y Classical Africa 

y Great African Empires and Kingdoms: Ghana, Mali, Songhay, Zimbabwe, Kongo, Asante, and Yoruba 

y The European Slave Trade (Portuguese, British, Dutch, French, Italian, Spanish, German, Swedish, etc.) and the New African Diaspora 

y The African Presence in the Americas: Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, and the Caribbean 

y Modes of Resistance to Enslavement 

y African American Philosophy and Philosophers 

y African Americans in the West 

y African Americans and Progressive Politics 

y The NAACP and the Anti-Lynching Movement 

y The Harlem Renaissance and the Blues and Jazz Tradition 

y Literary Contributions 

y The Great Migration and Blacks in the West during the World War II Era 

y African Americans React to Mass Incarceration 

y Contemporary Immigration from the African World 

y African Americans and the Military 

y Approaches and Accomplishments of the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements 

y Black Women Respond to Sexism/Racism/Patriarchal Discrimination 

y Hip-Hop: The Movement and Culture 

y The African American Influence on Sport and Entertainment 

y African Americans in the City 

y African American Food, Medicine, Healing, and Spirituality 

y The Black LGBTQIA Experience 140  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y #BlackLivesMatter Responds to Police Brutality 

y African American Political Figures 141 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# CHICANA/O/X AND LATINA/O/X STUDIES 

# Sample Lesson 11: Salvadoran American Migration and Collective Resistance 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 4

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View: 1, 2, 4; Historical Interpretation: 1, 4 

CCSS for ELA/Literacy: W.9–10.9; RH.9–10.1; RH.9–10.3; W.11–12.9; RH.11–12.1; RH.11–12.3 

CA CCSS ELD Standards: ELD.PI.1a 1–4, 1b 5–6, 1c 9–12 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

In this lesson students will study how the effects of the Civil War in El Salvador in the 1980s prompted the initial surge of migration from El Salvador to the United States, and the push and pull factors that have impacted immigration from El Salvador since then. Next, students will research the various immigration policies that have regulated immigration from El Salvador since 1965. 

Key Terms and Concepts: agency, asylum, citizenship, inequality, migration, naturalization, resilience, war refugee. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the root causes of the waves of migration from El Salvador to the United States since the 1980s 

y Identify the major shifts in US immigration policy since 1965, explaining the events that caused the changes in policies, groups impacted, specific regulations, positive and negative effects, and restrictions or limitations of the policies 

y Determine the accuracy of commonly held beliefs about immigration by investigating statistical evidence 

y Analyze the pros and cons of current policies that affect different groups of immigrants from El Salvador 142  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Apply their understanding of the four I’s of oppression to their analysis of the history and policies of migration in El Salvador 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What push and pull factors were responsible for the waves of migration from El Salvador to the United States beginning in the 1980s? 

2.  What values and principles guided US immigration policy? 

3.  How can the United States resolve the current controversies surrounding immigration policy and detention practices? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1: Building Background Knowledge: Four I’s of Oppression and Relationship to Salvadoran Migration to the United States 

1.  In this activity students will be learning about the history and systems of oppression related to the migration of people from El Salvador to the United States. Students work in groups of five. 

2.  Begin the activity with the following guiding question: “Why have people emigrated from El Salvador to the United States?” Students should write/pair/ share within their group on the Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout 

(located at the end of the lesson). 

3.  Have students view and comment on the primary text image (“Child’s Drawing, San José Las Flores, El Salvador”) from the handout. Which type(s) of oppression does this text best exemplify? Record the answers on the Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout. The primary text can be accessed at the following website: When We Were Young There Was a War  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link101 .

4.  Have students watch the documentary “Juan’s Story” from the When We Were Young There Was a War website:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link102 . Have students reflect on, analyze, and discuss the main themes and type(s) of oppression in “Juan’s Story.” Record the types of oppression on Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout. 

5.  Distribute one of the five informational texts (links are listed at the end of the lesson in the Materials and Resources section) to each student in the groups of five. Each student will read and annotate one of the texts for important ideas and record key ideas in the Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout. When sharing ideas, each group member should teach the other group members about the content and discuss the type of oppression in their respective article. 143 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

6.  Ask students to collaborate to answer the following two discussion questions. Ask one member from each of the groups to present the group’s response. 

a.  What did you appreciate about this lesson? 

b.  What new insights do you have about immigration to the United States? 

Day Two: Youth Scholars Teach US Immigration Policy Shifts to the People 

In this activity, students will investigate how US immigration policies evolved in response to historical events. Small groups will be assigned to research one of five shifts in immigration policy and collaborate to create presentation slides on the new policy. 

1.  Distribute the Push and Pull Factors Handout (located at the end of the lesson) to students. Instruct students to work independently first to rank the factors in terms of which have historically been the three most significant push and pull factors prompting immigration to the United States. They must then select the top three most significant current push and pull factors and explain why they chose those factors. 

2.  Once students have determined their rankings, group them in fours and instruct them to compare their rankings and try to come to a consensus on the top three factors. Instruct each group to share their top factors with the class and then facilitate a short discussion, noting similarities and differences between each group’s answers while asking probing questions to get students to support their arguments with evidence. 

3.  Inform students that they will be learning about how the actual immigration system determines who is able to immigrate and who isn’t. They will work in small groups to research one of six immigration policies beginning with the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965. Distribute the Immigration Presentation Assignment Sheet (located at the end of the lesson) and explain the expectations. (For more background on the racist origins of the Immigration Act of 1924, teachers can read with students the Huffington Post article “DACA, the 1924 Immigration Act, and American Exclusion”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link103 .) 

4.  Next, assign students to small groups to research one of the six policies that have regulated the American immigration system since 1965. 

5.  Have students start their research by reading the relevant section of Juan’s story on the tab marked “US Immigration: A Policy in Flux” to get basic background overview of their assigned policy ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link104 ). Directions for which paragraph of “US Immigration: A Policy in Flux” to read for each topic are in parentheses after the topic title on the 144  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

assignment sheet. Additional links are provided for each of the other topics, and students can also use additional online resources to create their presentations. 

6.  Instruct students to use the Immigration Presentation Assignment Sheet to prepare the research for presentation on a slide presentation program. Have students analyze which of the four I’s of oppression explain the implementation of the immigration policy and include it in the slide presentation. 

7.  Have students refer back to the opening activity and ask which of the factors determining immigration preference influenced each of the policies. Naturally, this will lead to a discussion of whether the United States is implementing a fair and principled immigration policy. 

8.  Students may investigate how local communities are affected by immigration policies and what institutions are being used to support current immigration policies and practices. At the same time, students may examine what resources are available for those afflicted by current policies. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

1.  Students will represent their mastery of the lesson objectives via group presentations based on the knowledge gained from each day’s activities. 

2.  Students will research various US immigration policies. Students will demonstrate knowledge of the policies and how they affect immigrants by preparing a slide presentation. 

Materials and Resources: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link105 

Day 1 

Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout (located at the end of the lesson) 

Primary Text: “Child’s Drawing, San José Las Flores, El Salvador” from the When We Were Young There Was a War website:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link106 

Documentary Text: “Juan’s Story” from the When We Were Young There Was a War website: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link107 145 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Informational Texts 

y Informational Text #1: The Civil War in El Salvador 

Susan Gzesh. 2016. “Central Americans and Asylum Policy in the Reagan Era.” Migration Policy Institute.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link108 .

y Informational Text #2: Family Reunification 

Edgardo Ayala. 2009. “Migration—El Salvador: Broken Homes, Broken Families.” Inter Press Service.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link109 .

y Informational Text #3: Lack of Economic Opportunity 

The Economist. “Unhappy Anniversary: El Salvador Commemorates 25 Years of Peace,” January 21, 2017.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link110 .

y Informational Text #4: Natural Disasters 

Eric Schmitt. “Salvadorans Illegally in US Are Given Protected Status.” The New York Times, March 3, 2001.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link111 .

y Informational Text #5: Gang Violence 

Kate Linthicum. “Why Tens of Thousands of Kids from El Salvador Continue to Flee to the United States.” Los Angeles Times, February 16, 2017. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link112 .146  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 1 

Four I’s of Oppression: El Salvador Handout 

Background Knowledge/Guiding Question: 

“Why have people emigrated from El Salvador to the United States?” Students should write/pair/share. 

These are the texts we will be using for this lesson: 

1.  Primary Text: Child’s Drawing, San José Las Flores, El Salvador from the When We Were Young There Was a War website 

2.  Documentary Text: Juan’s Story from the When We Were Young There Was a War website 

3.  Informational Texts: 

a.  Informational Text #1: The Civil War In El Salvador 

Susan Gzesh. 2016. “Central Americans and Asylum Policy in the Reagan Era.” Migration Policy Institute. 

b.  Informational Text #2: Family Reunification 

Edgardo Ayala. 2009. “Migration—El Salvador: Broken Homes, Broken Families.” Inter Press Service. 

c.  Informational Text #3: Lack of Economic Opportunity 

The Economist. “Unhappy Anniversary: El Salvador Commemorates 25 Years of Peace,” January 21, 2017. 

d.  Informational Text #4: Natural Disasters 

Eric Schmitt. “Salvadorans Illegally in US Are Given Protected Status.” The New York Times, March 3, 2001. 

e.  Informational Text #5: Gang Violence 

Kate Linthicum. “Why Tens of Thousands of Kids from El Salvador Continue to Flee to the United States.” Los Angeles Times, February 16, 2017. 147 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Instructions: Which texts go with each type of oppression? Write the name of the text in the correct oppression box and explain the connection. 

Four I’s of Oppression  Student Answer 

Ideological Oppression 

The idea that one group is better than another and has the right to control the “other” group. The idea that one group is more intelligent, more advanced, more deserving, superior, and holds more power. The very intentional ideological development of the ______isms Examples: dominant narratives, “othering.” 

[student response] 

Institutional Oppression 

The network of institutional structures, policies, and practices that create advantages and benefits for some, and discrimination, oppression, and disadvantages for others. (Institutions are the organized bodies such as companies, governmental bodies, prisons, schools, nongovernmental organizations, families, and religious institutions, among others.) 

[student response] 148  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Four I’s of Oppression Student Answer 

Interpersonal Oppression 

The idea that one group is better than another and has the right to control the other, which gets structured into institutions and gives permission and reinforcement for individual members of the dominant group to personally disrespect or mistreat individuals in the oppressed group. Interpersonal racism is racism that occurs between individuals. Examples of interpersonal racism—what some members of a racial group do to members of a different racial group up close— include the following: racist jokes, stereotypes, beatings and harassment, threats, etc. 

[student response] 

Interpersonal Oppression 

(continued) 

Similarly, interpersonal sexism is sexism that occurs between people. Examples of man to woman interpersonal sexism may include the following: sexual abuse and harassment, violence directed at women, belittling or ignoring women’s thinking, sexist jokes, etc. Many people in each dominant group are not consciously oppressive. They have internalized the negative messages about other groups and consider their attitudes toward other groups quite normal. 

[student response continued] 149 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Four I’s of Oppression Student Answer 

Internalized Oppression 

The process by which a member of an oppressed group comes to accept and live out the inaccurate myths and stereotypes applied to the group by its oppressors. Internalized oppression means the oppressor doesn’t have to exert any more pressure, because we now do it to ourselves and each other. Oppressed people internalize the ideology of inferiority; they see it reflected in the institutions; they experience mistreatment interpersonally from members of the dominant group; and they eventually come to internalize the negative messages about themselves. 

[student response] 150  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 

Push and Pull Factors Handout 

What is a push factor? 

What were the three most historically significant push factors, and what are the three most significant ones now? 

What is a pull factor? 

What were the three most historically significant pull factors, and what are the three most significant ones now? 

Be prepared to explain your answers. 

y Proximity of country of origin to US 

y Wealth of the immigrant 

y Family relationships to citizens of the US 

y Special talents or skills to contribute to US 

y Natural disaster in country of origin 

y Closeness of political ties between US and country of origin 

y Increasing diversity of countries represented in US 

y Religious or racial persecution in country of origin 

y Shares language, religion, or culture of majority population in US 

y Level of education of immigrant 

y Civil war or violence in country of origin 

y US military or political involvement in country of origin historically 151 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Immigration Presentation Assignment Sheet 

Purpose: To gather and share accurate information about changes to US immigration policy since 1965 in the form of a presentation. Information to include in an electronic visual presentation: 

y Title slide with name of policy, date, and an evocative image 

y One slide that explains the historical events that prompted the policy 

y One slide that explains the basic regulations of the new policy 

y One slide that explains who the policy affects and how 

y One slide with a connection to at least one of the four I’s of oppression 

Topics and Resources 

Each group should read the short overview of its assigned policy using the tab “U.S. Immigration, A Policy in Flux” in Juan’s story on the When We Were Young There Was a War website ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link113 ). Use the directions next to your topic below to see which paragraph of “A Policy in Flux” to read. Then groups can use the links provided (and others you find) to find information to use in the creation of the slides. 

Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 (second paragraph of “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link114 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link115 

1980 Refugee Act (third paragraph of “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link116 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link117 

Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (fourth paragraph of “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link118 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link119 

Temporary Protected Status (1990) (not covered in “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link120 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link121 152  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (fifth paragraph of “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link122 .

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (2012) (eighth paragraph of “A Policy in Flux”) 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link123 

y https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link124 153 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Timeline Document for Group Presentations 

Significant Events  Historical Background 

Policy Summary  Effects and Impact 

Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 

[student response]  [student response]  [student response] 

1980 Refugee Act  [student response]  [student response]  [student response] 

Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 

[student response]  [student response]  [student response] 

Temporary Protected Status 

[student response]  [student response]  [student response] 

Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 

[student response]  [student response]  [student response] 

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (2012) 

[student response]  [student response]  [student response] 154  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 12: US Undocumented Immigrants from Mexico and Beyond: Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles 

Theme: Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 5 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 1, 2, 4; Historical Interpretation 1, 4 

CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.2–5, 8; WHST.9–10.1, 2, 4 

CA CCSS ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 3, 5, 6a, 10 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

The lesson is applicable to many US urban areas but is written specifically about the Los Angeles Boyle Heights area. Some students in urban working class communities have been impacted by gentrification (the process of upgrading a neighborhood while pushing out working class communities), the growing housing crisis, and being undocumented/ DACAmented. Consequently, many families have experienced detention and deportation, while others express growing concerns of being pushed out of their community altogether. 

This lesson introduces students to the plight of undocumented immigrants, gentrification in the greater Los Angeles area, cultural preservation versus assimilation, and Greek mythology and tragedy. Students will learn about the use of immigrant laborers for the construction and garment industry; the impact of drug cartels and lack of opportunities in Mexico and how that factors into people’s decision to emigrate; and how contemporary playwrights of color are leveraging ancient literature and theater to discuss modern-day issues. 

Key Terms and Concepts: colonialism, cultural preservation, assimilation, gentrification, undocumented, patriarchy, machismo, barrios 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Develop an understanding about the process of migration, assimilation, cultural preservation, and gentrification 

y Engage key English language arts content, such as literary and dramatic devices 

y Explain how organizing and advocacy counteract institutional racism as it relates to housing and immigration 155 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is gentrification and why is it disproportionately impacting communities of color? What are the short and long-term effects on communities of color? 

2.  How and why were barrios created? How did it influence the identity and experiences of the communities living there? 

3.  Why do Indigenous populations from Mexico and Latin America migrate to the US? What are the push and pull factors? To what extent has migration been a positive or negative experience for these populations? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Begin the lesson by posting the definitions of bruja , chisme , curandera , el guaco , migra , mojada , and Náhuatl 6 on the board. Provide definitions of multiculturalism and assimilation or provide time for students to research these topics. Discuss the similarities and differences between the two. Also provide a compare and contrast chart of the ancient Greek playwright Euripides and the contemporary Xicanx playwright Luis Alfaro—author of Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles . In this introduction, thoroughly cover the tenets of Greek mythology and tragedy, the traditional roles of women in Ancient Greece, the garment industry in Los Angeles, the use of immigrant labor to construct the edifices of gentrification development, and drug cartels in the Mexican state of Michoacán.       

> 6Bruja : witch; Chisme : a rumor, a piece of gossip; Chismosa/o : a gossiper; Curandera : healer;
> El guaco : migrating falcon of the Americas, often referred to as a laughing falcon because of its call; it is an ophiophagous (snake-eating) bird; Migra : immigration police; Mojada :offensive term used for a Mexican who enters the United States without documents;
> Náhuatl : an Uto-Aztecan language, which is widespread from Idaho to Central America and from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean; Náhuatl specifically refers to the language spoken by many tribes from Southeastern Mexico to parts of Central America; it translates to an agreeable, pleasing, and clear sound

a.  If available, consult with the English Department of your site to collaborate on a reader’s theater approach to the play Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles .Students could be provided time to engage the play in both classes. 

2.  Following the in-class readings, ask the students to reflect on the characters and their relationship to immigration, gentrification, and cultural preservation versus assimilation. Later divide students into small groups where they are tasked with responding to the following questions. The questions can be divided equally per group, or the teacher can choose to focus on some of them as time allows. 156  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

a.  Have students take 5 to 10 minutes to research online the definition of tragic hero. After completing this task, ask the students to respond to the following questions: (1) To what extent does Medea fit the definition of a tragic hero? (2) What is her tragic flaw? (3) What does Medea learn from her journey? (4) What does the audience learn from her journey? 

b.  At the beginning of the play, Tita says that being in the United States is Hason’s dream. What is his dream? How do Medea and Acan fit into his dream? What is Medea’s dream? 

c.  Have students refer to their research on multiculturalism versus assimilation. Which characters are able to assimilate to living in the United States? What are the benefits for characters that are able to assimilate? Which characters are not able to? What is the cost of their inability to assimilate? Which characters are able to be in the United States and still maintain their native culture? 

d.  Have students find Michoacán and Boyle Heights using print or electronic maps. How is the physical environment of Michoacán different from that of Boyle Heights? Why can’t Medea leave her yard? What role does Medea’s environment play in her inability to assimilate? 

e.  In what ways are Medea and her family in exile? How does immigration and specifically the idea of exile help the audience understand Medea’s journey in the play? 

f.  What abilities does Medea possess that keep her connected to her Mexican culture? In what ways does this connection conflict with Hason and Acan’s desire to fit in and become “American”? 

g.  What is Hason willing to do to achieve success in the United States? Does he make those choices for his family or for personal fulfillment? What are the consequences of his ambition? 

h.  In what way does the assault Medea experienced during her journey affect her ability to adjust and thrive in the United States? When accosted by the soldiers at the border why does Medea sacrifice herself? How does Medea’s sacrifice affect her relationship with Hason? 

i.  Compare and contrast Medea, Armida, and Josefina. What were their journeys to get to the United States? How does each react to being in a new country? In what ways does each woman’s choices bring them success? What is the cost of some of their choices? 

j.  Refer to your research on and discussion of multiculturalism and assimilation. What comparisons do Medea, Tita, Josefina, and Armida make between Mexico and the United States? In what ways is the love of their 157 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

culture and Mexican way of life seen as anti-American, and by whom? How does each character reconcile the division they experience between old and new worlds, if at all? 

k.  In what ways is Euripides’s Medea hindered by a male-dominant society? In what ways is Alfaro’s Medea hindered by a male-dominant society? How do Tita, Josefina, and Armida work with or against their gender roles to survive and achieve success? In what ways is Hason privileged by these traditional gender roles? In what ways is he hindered by traditional expectations? 

l.  In what ways is Acan torn between the old world of his mother and the new world his father has decided to embrace? In what ways does he contribute to Medea taking vengeance? 

m.  How does the revelation of Medea’s circumstances in Mexico and the reason for leaving heighten the stakes surrounding the eviction from her apartment? What is Medea running from and why? What does her past tell us about her in the present? 

n.  Why does Medea refer to herself as a mojada or wetback with Armida? In what ways does she believe she is a mojada? In what ways does she not? What is the significance of the title, Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles ?

o.  What events contribute to Medea taking vengeance on Hason and Armida? In what ways does the story of Medea’s life in Michoacán contribute to her killing Armida and Acan? Why does Medea kill Acan? 

p.  Who has betrayed Medea in Mexico and in the US, and in what ways? What effect do these betrayals have on her? How do the betrayals contribute to her actions at the end of the play? 

q.  Refer to the definition of el guaco provided at the beginning of the lesson. In what ways is Medea like el guaco? What becomes of Medea at the end of the play? What could her final transformation symbolize? 

r.  If you are seeing Julius Caesar , compare and contrast what Brutus and Medea want to pass on to the next generation versus Hason and Caesar. In what ways is violence a part of the legacies of Brutus and Medea? In what ways is it a part of Hason and Caesar’s legacies? How do Hason and Caesar contribute to their own downfalls? What other actions could Brutus have taken toward Caesar and Medea toward Hason? 

3.  Have students demonstrate their knowledge by developing and delivering a brief presentation that applies the concepts learned from the play to current topics of immigration and gentrification in their respective communities. 158  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework and the English Language Arts/English Language Development (ELA/ELD) Framework :

These two curriculum frameworks contain an extensive lesson example that shows how teachers can work with colleagues across disciplines to address a common topic. In this case, the example is how a language arts teacher and a history–social science teacher collaborate to teach the novel Things Fall Apart , addressing both language arts and history–social science standards in their instruction (the example begins on page 338 in the History–Social Science Framework , and on page 744 in the ELA/ELD Framework ). 

Ethnic studies educators should also consider how they can collaborate with their peers to integrate ethnic studies instruction with content in other areas. Depending on at which grade level the ethnic studies course is being offered, the ethnic studies educator can include a literary selection that connects to the content students are studying in their history–social science classroom, or work with the language arts teacher on lessons that address grade-level standards in reading or writing. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will work in groups to analyze and discuss the text while responding to the provided questions. 

y Students deliver a presentation to an authentic audience that connects the play to experiences in their communities. 

Materials and Resources: 

y Mojada: A Medea in Los Angeles , a play by Luis Alfaro 159 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 13: The East LA Blowouts: An Anchor to the Chicano Movement 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 4, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1–3; Historical Interpretation 1, 3, 4 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.2, 3, 4; WHST.9–10.4, 8, 9 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 5, 6a, 9 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson will introduce students to the East Los Angeles student blowouts (or walkouts) of 1968 and the Chicano Movement. They will have an opportunity to explore the range of student response to discrimination and injustices that were manifesting in public education. At the onset, students will engage in critical dialogue and inquiry about early Chicana/o/x youth and social movements, and conclude the lesson by drawing connections to current injustices and issues confronting Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Americans in schools. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Gain a better understanding of root causes of protests and uprisings 

y Articulate the history of the East Los Angeles student blowouts and the Chicano Movement, with a focus on key leaders, movement demands, and outcomes 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How did the students from East Los Angeles respond to discrimination and injustice within the educational system, and to what extent did it lead to change? 

2.  How were the East Los Angeles blowouts and the broader Chicano Movement connected to the same root causes? 

3.  How is transformative social change possible when working within existing institutions, such as the public school system? 

4.  What is the role of education, and who should have the power to shape what is taught? 160  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Open the class by displaying the following excerpt from the Los Angeles Times article “East L.A., 1968: ‘Walkout!’ The day high school students helped ignite the Chicano power movement”: 

LOS ANGELES—Teachers at Garfield High School were winding down classes for the approaching lunch break when they heard the startling sound of people—they were not sure who—running through the halls, pounding on classroom doors. “Walkout!” they were shouting. “Walkout!” 

They looked on in disbelief as hundreds of students streamed out of classrooms and assembled before the school entrance, their clenched fists held high. “ Viva la revolución !” they called out. “Education, not eradication!” Soon, sheriff’s deputies were rumbling in. 

It was just past noon on a sunny Tuesday, March 5, 1968—the day a Mexican American revolution began. 

2.  Proceed to ask students why they think students at Garfield were shouting “Walkout,” and what the phrases “Viva la revolución!” and “Education, not eradication!” mean. In pairs, students discuss the above questions, later sharing their thoughts with the entire class. Following discussion, provide definitions for the following terms: protest, eradication, revolución, uprising, Chicano, Brown Berets, and unrest. Then instruct students to read “East L.A., 1968: ‘Walkout!’ The day high school students helped ignite the Chicano power movement.” 

3.  After giving students about 15 minutes to read the article and discuss their immediate reactions in think, pair, and share format, proceed to write down on the board any questions students may have about the article and respond to them. 

a.  To supplement the article, play a short video clip on the youth movement: “The 1968 student walkout that galvanized a national movement for Chicano rights.” 

4.  Following the screening, lead a discussion about how the students experienced police aggression and were even targeted with federal charges for “invoking riots.” Be sure to emphasize that the students were resilient and persisted in other forms of protest by organizing their peers and parents and attending school board meetings where they presented a list of demands. 

5.  Hand each pair a copy of the two primary sources listed below. “Student Walkout Demands” proposal drafted by high school students of East Los Angeles to the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) Board of Education 161 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

No student or teacher will be reprimanded or suspended for participating in any efforts which are executed for the purpose of improving or furthering the educational quality in our schools. 

Bilingual–Bicultural education will be compulsory for Mexican-Americans in the Los Angeles City School System where there is a majority of Mexican-American students. This program will be open to all other students on a voluntary basis. 

In-service education programs will be instituted immediately for all staff in order to teach them the Spanish language and increase their understanding of the history, traditions, and contributions of the Mexican culture. 

All administrators in the elementary and secondary schools in these areas will become proficient in the Spanish language. Participants are to be compensated during the training period at not less than $8.80 an hour and upon completion of the course will receive in addition to their salary not less than $100.00 a month. The monies for these programs will come from local funds, state funds, and matching federal funds. 

Administrators and teachers who show any form of prejudice toward Mexican or Mexican-American students, including failure to recognize, understand, and appreciate Mexican culture and heritage, will be removed from East Los Angeles schools. This will be decided by a Citizens Review Board selected by the Educational Issues Committee. 

Textbooks and curriculum will be developed to show Mexican and Mexican-American contribution to the U.S. society and to show the injustices that Mexicans have suffered as a culture of that society. Textbooks should concentrate on Mexican folklore rather than English folklore. 

All administrators where schools have majority of Mexican-American descent shall be of Mexican-American descent. If necessary, training programs should be instituted to provide a cadre of Mexican-American administrators. 

Every teacher’s ratio of failure per students in [their] classroom shall be made available to community groups and students. Any teacher having a particularly high percentage of the total school dropouts in [their] classes shall be rated by the Citizens Review Board composed of the Educational Issues Committee. 

“Student Rights” proposal drafted by high school students of East Los Angeles to the Board of Education: 

Corporal punishment will only be administrated according to State Law. 

Teachers and administrators will be rated by the students at the end of each semester. 

Students should have access to any type of literature and should be allowed to bring it on campus. 162  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Students who spend time helping teachers shall be given monetary and/or credit compensation. 

Students will be allowed to have guest speakers to club meetings. The only regulation should be to inform the club sponsor. 

Dress and grooming standards will be determined by a group of a) students and b) parents. 

Student body offices shall be open to all students. A high grade point average shall not be considered as a prerequisite to eligibility. 

Entrances to all buildings and restrooms should be accessible to all students during school hours. Security can be enforced by designated students. 

Student menus should be Mexican oriented. When Mexican food is served, mothers from the barrios should come to the school and help supervise the preparation of the food. These mothers will meet the food handler requirements of Los Angeles City Schools and they will be compensated for their services. 

School janitorial services should be restricted to the employees hired for that purpose by the school board. Students will [not] be punished by picking up paper or trash and keeping them out of class. 

Only area superintendents can suspend students. 

6.  After reading the primary source documents, proceed to have the pairs construct what their own demands would be if they were to organize a presentation to the Board of Education on flip chart paper. Once the pairs have completed their own demands, then task the students with responding to the following reflection questions related to the primary sources listed above: 

a.  What student demand do you think is the most important, and why? 

b.  What is one student right you would add to this list? 

c.  Which student rights and/or demands do you view as less important, and why? 

d.  The East Los Angeles Walkouts were led by students. Do you think they would have been more effective if they had been led by teachers or other adults? Why or why not? 

e.  What do you think happened after the East Los Angeles Walkouts? 

f.  What is happening in the US currently that relates to the 1968 East Los Angeles Walkouts? 

g.  What other youth-led movements have occurred within contemporary US history? 163 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

h.  Beyond walkouts, what are other ways students can best advocate for themselves? 

7.  Finally, each pair is given the opportunity to present their proposed student demands and response to the question in step 6(h) to the entire class. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will show understanding of the content by discussing and responding to the questions provided. 

y Students will create a presentation of demands on how to improve schools in their district. 

Materials and Resources: 

y “East L.A., 1968: ‘Walkout!’ The day high school students helped ignite the Chicano power movement”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link125 

y PBS “Los Angeles Walk Out”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link126 

y KCET “East L.A. Blowouts: Walking Out for Justice in the Classrooms” (“Student Walkout Demands” and “Student Rights” primary sources are embedded.) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link127 

y Mario T. Garcia and Sal Castro. 2014. Blowout!: Sal Castro and the Chicano Struggle for Educational Justice. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. 164  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Additional Sample Topics 

The following list of sample topics is intended to help ethnic studies teachers develop content for their courses. It is not intended to be exhaustive. 

y Precontact Indigenous Civilizations and Cultures 

y Doctrine of Discovery and Indigenous Cultures Under the Colonization of the Americas 

y The Casta System and Identity Formation 

y Simón Bolívar and José Martí’s “Nuestra América” 

y The Map of Disturnell, The Mexican–American War, and the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo 

y Migration Trends to the United States: From the Bracero Program to the Dreamers and the Contemporary Immigrants’ Rights Movement 

y The Lynching of Mexicans in the Southwest 

y Mexican Repatriation (1930s) and Operation Wetback (1954) 

y Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Participation in the US Labor Force 

y Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x US Military Veterans: GI Forum, LULAC, and the Community Service Organization 

y The Lemon Grove Incident ( Alvarez v. Lemon Grove ), Mendez v. Westminster , and 

Hernandez v. Texas 

y Pachuco Culture, the Zoot Suit Riots, and the Sleepy Lagoon Case 

y The Chicano Movement, the East Los Angeles Student Walkouts of 1968, and the Making of Chicano/a Studies 

y Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x in Higher Education, the Plan of Santa Barbara, and the Birth of the Student Organization Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán (MEChA) 

y The United Farm Workers (UFW) Movement 

y Brown Berets and Chicana/o/x Cultural Nationalism 

y Chicana/o/x Art, Muralism, and Music 

y Latinx Foodways 

y US Interventions in Chile, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Panama 

y The Implications of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and other Trade Policies on Latina/o/x Communities 

y The Politics of Fútbol in Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x Communities 165 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Contemporary Resistance to Ethnic Studies (e.g., Tucson School District) 

y Chicana Feminism 

y Afro-Latinidad 

y La Raza Unida Partido 

y Bilingual Education Movement 

y Barrio Creation (Urban Renewal, Fair Housing Act, Federal Highway Act, Gentrification) 166  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# ASIAN AMERICAN AND PACIFIC ISLANDER STUDIES 

# Sample Lesson 14: Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and the Model Minority Myth 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 5 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Historical Research Evidence and Point of View 1–3 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 8, 9; WHST.9–10.1A and B; SL.9–10.1A–D, 9–10.3 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 5, 9, 10a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This three-day lesson introduces students to the complexity of the term “Asian American,” ultimately coming to understand the various ethnic groups and politics associated with the identity marker. Additionally, students will be exposed to the concept of the model minority myth. This course will provide for students the implications that result when lumping all Asian groups together and labeling them the model minority. For example, marginalized groups (e.g., Pacific Islanders, Southeast Asians) suffer from being cut out of programs and resources. It presents a false narrative that Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (AAPIs) have overcome racism and prejudice. It glosses over the violence, harm, and legalized racism that AAPIs have endured, for example, the 1871 Chinese massacre in Los Angeles, the annexation of Hawaii, shooting of Southeast Asian schoolchildren in Stockton. Furthermore, students will understand how this label for AAPIs becomes a hindrance to expanding democratic structures and support, and, worse, how it creates a division among the AAPI community and places a wedge between them and other oppressed groups, including, but not limited to, African American, Latinx, and American Indian communities. 

Key Terms and Concepts: assimilation, stereotype, identity, model minority myth, racism, anti-Blackness, data disaggregation 167 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Analyze the misconceptions of the model minority to describe Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders 

y Differentiate the various identities, nationalities, and ethnicities that make up the Asian American and Pacific Islander community 

y Learn to analyze statistical data and legislation that directly impacts communities of color 

y Actively dispel stereotypes and the model minority myth 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What does Asian American mean? And who is Asian American and Pacific Islander? 

2.  How has the model minority myth been used to oppress and/or stymie certain Asian American and Pacific Islander communities? 

3.  What are the dangers of the model minority myth? 

4.  What are ways you can dispel the model minority myth? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Place four large pieces of flip chart paper in each corner of the room along with three to five markers. Engage the class by asking students: What does Asian American mean? What does Pacific Islander mean? 

2.  Before delving too deeply into discussion, divide the class up into four groups. Assign each group to a corner and instruct students to take 10 minutes as a group to respond to the aforementioned questions. Also ask the groups to list the various ethnic groups that comprise “Asian American and Pacific Islander.” 

3.  After about 10 minutes, signal for the groups to stop what they are doing. Allow each group to share what they discussed with the class. After each group has shared, provide a definition for Asian American and Pacific Islander and begin listing some of the various ethnic groups (see below for a sample list). 

Sample Ethnic Groups: 

(This list is in the order of population according to the 2010 Census and is in no way exhaustive.) 168  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Chinese 

Filipino 

Indian 

Vietnamese 

Korean 

Japanese 

Pakistani 

Cambodian 

Hmong 

Thai 

Laotian 

Bangladeshi 

Burmese 

Indonesian 

Malaysian 

Fijian 

Samoan 

Hawaiian 

Micronesian 

Polynesian 

Definition of Asian American: The term “Asian American” was born out of the Asian American Movement (1968–1975) as a means of identifying people of Asian descent living in the United States. During the late 1960s, the term was largely seen as radical and unifying, a rejection of “oriental” and other pejoratives that were associated with people of Asian descent. The collective coining of the term was an act of self-naming and self-determination, and it aligned with the broader goals of the Asian American and Pacific Islander movement—equality, justice, and anti-racism. 169 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

4.  After sharing the definition and ethnic groups listed above, reiterate that “Asian American and Pacific Islander” is a loaded term that encompasses dozens of different Asian ethnic groups that have settled in the US, with large populations settling in California. 

5.  Ask students whether they know what the model minority myth is. If students are able to answer, move to the article. If not, describe the model minority myth and explain to the students that they will be examining how the effects of racial stereotypes that are perceived to be positive can in fact be harmful. For example, the teacher can describe the effects of stereotype threat. 

6.  Ask students to read the article “‘Model Minority’ Myth Again Used as a Racial Wedge Between Asians and Blacks” in NPR Code Switch (see the link in the Materials and Resources section). Note that this article references William Petersen’s 1966 New York Times article that inherently pitted Japanese Americans (and arguably Asian Americans more broadly) against African Americans, with Petersen identifying the latter group as the “problem minority.” Following internment, Japanese Americans were able to achieve some level of social and economic mobility, rendering them the “model minority,” for their ability to thrive in the face of adversity unlike their African American counterparts. After reading the NPR piece, explain to students that the Petersen article is first time the term “model minority” was used (or coined) and marks the beginning of the stereotyping of Asian Americans as inherently “smart” and “successful.” Ask students to reflect on the main points of the NPR article and discuss how and why the model minority myth is used as a wedge group. 

7.  Tell students that they will gain an understanding of the diversity of AAPI communities by exploring statistics on education and poverty. Split the class into groups of three and instruct half of the groups to review educational data and the other half economic data. 

Education: Guide groups to investigate high school and college graduation rates. ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link128 )

Economic: Guide groups to investigate income and poverty among AAPI groups and compare with the rest of the US. ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link129 )

Each student group will report their findings to the class. Each group will write the findings for their assigned part on the board or a sheet of poster paper. For example, one group can describe how Asian American and Pacific Islander groups vary in terms of reading and math test scores, and another group can summarize the educational attainment of various Pacific Islander groups. 170  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

For homework, have students answer the following questions. Students can use the resources at the end of the lesson to help them answer the questions. Tell students that each question requires at least two examples or arguments: 

y How are Asian American and Pacific Islander ethnic groups similar and different in terms of education and economic experiences? 

y How might the model minority myth be an obstacle for advancement for Asian Americans? 

y How can the model minority myth be used to drive a wedge between Asian Americans and other communities of color in policies and services? 

y Knowing that AAPIs are not a monolithic “model minority” and that each ethnic group fares differently economically and educationally, how might policies change to be more inclusive of those groups in need, in terms of jobs, services, government funding, employment, small business, education, etc.? 

8.  During the second half of class, hand out copies of the law signed by Governor Brown on September 25, 2016, California Assembly Bill 1726 (Data Collection). Have students take turns reading the bill aloud popcorn style. After the in-class reading, provide necessary context on what a bill is and summarize how bills become laws. Additionally, define any words or terms students may need support to understand. In groups, have students discuss the purpose of the bill, the impact that it will have on AAPI communities, and how the legislation helps dispel the model minority myth. 

9.  As homework, ask students to complete a “mini bill analysis” of Assembly Bill 1726 using the Bill Analysis Worksheet (located at the end of the lesson). 

Day 2 

The key method to dispel the model minority myth is telling the true stories of yourself, your family, and your community. By writing down, speaking aloud, and sharing your stories, you actively counteract the stereotypes and master narrative developed to pigeonhole Asian American and Pacific Islanders as a monolithic group with one identity, one experience, and one role. No AAPI individual fits the model minority stereotype in all its facets. Take time in your class for students to first think, write, and then share on three questions: 

1.  What is your ethnic background? 

2.  What stereotype of your ethnic group do you not identify with? Why? Explain in detail with facts about your experiences, your background, your values, your goals, your dreams, your family, and your community. 

3.  How will you actively dispel these stereotypes? 171 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Students will read and analyze an article, demographic data, and a legislative document, providing their own informed critiques, opinions, and feedback on the sources. Students will also tell their stories as a way to dispel the harmful stereotypes that the media and society impose on their ethnic group. 

Materials and Resources: 

“Why Data Matters When It Comes to Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and Education” article and videos  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link130 

“How Does a Bill Become a Law?” infographic/handout 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link131 

“Asian Americans Are Still Caught in the Trap of the ‘Model Minority’ Stereotype. And It Creates Inequality for All” article  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link132 

California Assembly Bill 1726 (2016)  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link133 

Kat Chow. “‘Model Minority’ Myth Again Used as a Racial Wedge Between Asians and Blacks.” NPR Code Switch, April 19, 2017.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link134 

Ellen D. Wu. 2015. The Color of Success: Asian Americans and the Origins of the Model Minority. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

NPR. 2014. “Asian-Americans Are Successful, but No Thanks to Tiger Parenting” article 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link135 

PBS America By the Numbers “Model Minority Myth” video 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link136 

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s 2009 TED talk “The Danger of a Single Story” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link137 

Chris Fuchs. “Behind the ‘Model Minority’ Myth: Why the ‘Studious Asian’ Stereotype Hurts.” NBC News, August 22, 2017.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link138 

AAPI Data demographic data and policy research on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link139 

Asian Americans Advancing Justice Los Angeles – Model Minority Myth Lesson Resources 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link140 

National Commission of Asian American and Pacific Islander Research in Education “iCount: A Data Quality Movement for Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and Higher Education”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link141 172  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Background Information/Context: 

How can being an upstanding American citizen be a double-edged sword? During the post-World War II era, after nearly a hundred years of anti-Asian sentiment and legislation, many Asian Americans hoped to be seen as more American and accepted by American society. They didn’t want to be viewed as a threat to national security like Japanese Americans were when they were imprisoned during WWII. Instead, they wanted to be seen as “good Americans” and desired to assimilate and Americanize, which developed into the idea of the model minority myth, recasting Asian Americans as prime examples of representing the quintessential American values of opportunity, meritocracy, and the American Dream. Toy Len Goon, the first ever Asian American named American Mother of the Year in 1952, was an early example of what it meant to be a “model minority.” 

During the 1960s, as the Civil Rights Movement continued the fight for equality of all Americans and the federal government invested in social welfare programs such as the War on Poverty and the Great Society, the concept of the “model minority” became a stereotype used to pit Asian Americans against other communities of color, particularly Black Americans. News publications ran articles extolling the ways Asian Americans capitalized on the American Dream with their work ethic and emphasis on education. By doing this, it delegitimized centuries of systemic oppression and racist policies that shaped the experiences of Black Americans. 

This stereotype also hid how Asian Americans were discriminated against based on racist policies, such as being excluded from living in certain neighborhoods and from being fully accepted members of American society. It created a limited perspective on the Asian American community, where they were seen as one monolithic group. In reality, this community consisted of diverse ethnicities from a variety of countries and cultures, comprising over ten different languages. Thus, socioeconomic success was not universal, and praising Asian Americans as a “model minority” called into question the fact that there were many within the community who did not get the services and government assistance they needed. 

The model minority myth has persisted long after the stereotype originated. Media publications such as the 1987 Time Magazine cover story “Those Asian-American Whiz Kids” and articles analyzing the work ethic of Asian Americans in response to Amy Chua’s 2011 book Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother illustrate that the model minority myth is still being perpetuated. 173 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Bill Analysis Worksheet 

Bill Information (Name, Legislative Year, and Author): 

What does this bill aim to do? What does it address? 

What, if any, are the social and/or economic benefits of this bill? 

Does this bill directly or indirectly impact your community and/or family? If so, how? 

Do you agree with what this bill seeks to do? Please explain. 

Beyond legislation, what can be done to address the issue this bill calls attention to? 174  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 15: Cambodian Americans— Deportation Breaking Families Apart 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1–6 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standards: 10.9.3, 11.9.3, 11.11.7 

Literacy Standards for History/Social Science: CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RH.9–10.1, RH.9– 10.2, RH.9–10.3, RH.9–10.6, RH.9–10.7, W.9–10.1, SL.9–10.1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Overview: Cambodian Americans are an Asian American group that is experiencing numerous deportations as a result of a repatriation act passed in the 1990s. This act focuses on deporting Cambodian Americans with felony convictions for petty crimes, even after they have served their time. Over 1,000 Cambodian Americans have been deported to Cambodia to live in a society that is unwelcoming to them and where they often do not have any family or social connections. They are culturally American, yet they are barred from ever returning to the US. Many of them have spouses and children in the US. These family separations are causing generational trauma to spouses, children, and parents. Deported Cambodian Americans are forced to live in a “borderland” as they are also not treated as equals in Cambodia. The criminalization of Cambodian male youth mirrors the experiences of Chicana/o/x and Latina/o/x youth. Fortunately, there are organizations that recognize this is a human rights issue and are making this issue known. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Cambodia, Immigration Naturalization Act, US involvement in the Vietnam War, US secret bombing of Cambodia, Pol Pot, Killing Fields, refugee, Khmer Rouge, genocide, trauma 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the history of how US involvement in the Vietnam War drew Cambodia into the conflict 

y Understand the rise of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia in the context of wartime political turmoil and how this violent regime instigated the Killing Fields genocide, forcing many Cambodians to flee to the US as refugees 

y Understand the specific issues that Cambodian Americans face, including high poverty rates, high incarceration rates, and high rates of deportations 175 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Understand the school-to-prison-to-deportation pipeline affecting Cambodian American youth 

y Understand the impact of these deportations on the Cambodian American community 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the history of Cambodian immigration to the US? Why and how did Cambodians come to the US? What are the social and cultural implications of Cambodia’s turbulent history for Cambodian Americans today? 

2.  Describe the Cambodian American community today, and in particular the issue of deportations that they are dealing with. 

3.  What impact are these deportations having on Cambodian American families, and why are advocacy groups calling it a human rights issue? 

4.  What are the similarities in experiences faced by the Latinx families dealing with deportations of family members? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Ask the question, how many people know where Cambodia is on the world map? If a student raises their hand, ask them to come point out where it is on a world map or globe. Also project a picture of the Cambodian flag on the screen if you are able to. 

2.  Tell the class: today we are going to learn about Cambodian Americans, the history of their immigration to the US, and what issues they are facing today. (Read essential questions 1–4 aloud.) 

3.  Have students, in pairs, bring up the source “Cambodian Americans”  https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link142  and answer the questions on the 

Cambodian Americans – Immigration and Experience in America handout. 

4.  Have students work in pairs to answer the questions on the handout. They can take turns reading to each other and listening, then turn in the handout at the end of class. 176  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 

1.  Jigsaw Expert/Home groups – break students into groups of four and number them 1–4. Tell them they are currently in their home groups, and that each number is going to become an expert on a source that will give them more information about the deportation issue within the Cambodian American community. 

2.  Before they break into the expert groups – Discuss the deportation issue with your class, give a short 5–10 minute lecture on why and how are Cambodian Americans who were born in refugee camps, have green cards, and have lived in the US the majority of their lives are now at risk of being deported. 

Mini Lecture – According to the NPR article, “The US Immigration and Nationality Act,” outlines how non-US citizens may be deported back to their country of origin, even if they’re in the country legally. “Violation of law” is listed as a deportable offense. 

The US has been repatriating Cambodian immigrants since 2002, when an agreement was made between Washington and Phnom Penh that said Cambodia would accept deportees. That deal fell apart last year, prompting the Trump administration to impose visa sanctions on some Cambodian officials and families. The two governments eventually worked out a new agreement in early 2018, and Cambodia began accepting Cambodian nationals, this time in even greater numbers than before. Many times Cambodian Americans are deported for a crime they committed when they were young and they did their time, they move on with their lives, marrying and having kids. As mature husbands and fathers, they are now being deported for something they thought was a part of their past and dealt with. (Check for understanding) 

3.  Expert Groups – Tell them they will be given a source to access online through their Chromebooks, or teachers can make hard copies and set up video watching stations and that while they are reading and watching to use critical literacy to think about the information they are learning. Questions they should think about while they are analyzing their sources are: 

a.  What is the legal basis for these deportations? 

b.  Are these deportations unfair? Why or why not? 

c.  What effect are these deportations having on the deportees and the families still living in the U.S? 

d.  What groups are doing something about the deportations and what are they doing? 177 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Since they will be the only person reporting back to their homegroup on their source, they really need to pay attention and take good notes. (All of these directions are on the two page handout. Make hard copies for every student). 

4.  Home Groups – Tell students to return to their home groups and report to their groups their findings from their sources. They take turns from 1–4 presenting their facts, quotes, and evidence while the rest of the group takes notes from listening to the expert. At the end of the time period, all of their quadrants should be filled out completely.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 15 asks students to learn about how the Cold War impacted Southeast Asian countries and the emergence of human rights concerns for the United States. Chapter 16 goes further to ask students to analyze the impact and experiences of refugees who fled Southeast Asia after war. Guiding questions from these chapters include: In what directions is California growing in the twenty-first century? How does the life of a new immigrant to the United States today compare with what it was in 1900? How do policies from the second half of the twentieth century compare with those of the early twenty-first century? 

5.  Assessment – 

a.  Reflect on your learning: 

y What effects are these deportations having on the Cambodian American community? 

y Why are advocacy groups calling these deportations a human rights violation? 

6.  Action: 

To show evidence of your learning from this lesson you can choose one of the two options below: 

y Write a letter or essay explaining your understanding of these issues based on your own critical analysis. 

y Create a public service announcement that educates others about this issue. 178  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Materials and Resources: 

Dunst, Charles, “Cambodian Deportees Return to a ‘Home’ They’ve Never Known”, The Atlantic, 16 Jan 2019.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link143 

Couture, Denise, “U.S. Deports Dozens More Cambodian Immigrants, Some For Decades-Old Crimes”, NPR, 18 Dec 2018.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link144 

“Deported from U.S., Cambodians fight immigration policy” PBS Newshour, 7 May 2017 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link145 

“Deported: Forced Family Separation (Part 2 of 5) | NBC Asian America”, NBC News, 16 Mar 2017  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link146 

“Cambodian Americans”, Asian Nation, Asian American History Demographics and Issues (This article is an edited chapter on the major historical events and contemporary characteristics of the Cambodian American community, excerpted from The New Face of Asian Pacific America: Numbers, Diversity, and Change in the 21st Century , edited by Eric Lai and Dennis Arguelles in conjunction with Asian Week Magazine and published by the UCLA Asian American Studies Center.)  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link147 

Sullivan, Meg, “UCLA demographer produces best estimate yet of Cambodia’s death toll under Pol Pot”, UCLA Newsroom, 16 Apr 2016  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link148 179 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Cambodian Americans – Immigration and Experience in America 

Using the source “Cambodian Americans” on the website Asian Nation: Asian American History, Demographics, and Issues ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link149 ), students answer the questions on the handout provided below. 

Handout: Cambodian Americans – Immigration and Experience in America 

Background information: 

y Key Terms and Concept Definitions: 

○ Cambodia – Southeast Asian country that got caught in the Vietnam War due to the secret bombings 

○ Immigration Naturalization Act – This law defines who can immigrate to the US and causes for deportation. 

○ US involvement in the Vietnam War – During the Cold War era, the US became militarily involved in the Vietnam War to stop the spread of communism. The war spread to neighboring Southeast Asian countries, including Cambodia and Laos, causing instability, chaos, death, destruction, and a refugee crisis. 

○ US secret bombing of Cambodia – From 1969 to 1973, under the Nixon administration, the US Air Force secretly dropped bombs in Cambodian near the border of Vietnam to try to destroy the Ho Chi Minh Trail that the Viet Cong used to travel down to South Vietnam to attack. 

○ Pol Pot – The communist leader who fought the US-backed Cambodian government. He took power and tried to weed out US or Western influence and any specific dissent. In this effort, Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge carried out a genocide called the Killing Fields in which 10 to 30 percent of the population, or 1.2 million to 2.8 million people, were killed. 

○ Killing Fields – Genocide in which the Cambodian government killed any person suspected of siding with the US, as well as ethnic minorities, dissenters, educated persons, and eventually many Khmer Rouge leaders and loyal supporters at all levels 

○ Refugee – A person forced to leave their home country for fear of losing their lives, or of suffering 

○ Khmer Rouge – Pol Pot’s political organization that was staffed with youth and child soldiers 

○ Genocide – Mass murder of an entire group of people 

○ Trauma – A deeply distressing or disturbing experience that causes negative psychological effects (e.g., depression, anxiety, etc.) 180  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Refugees from Cambodia were the last large group of refugees to arrive in the United States following the end of the US war in Southeast Asia. Most were not able to leave Cambodia until the overthrow of the Pol Pot dictatorship in 1979, and many had to spend years in Thai refugee camps before they were allowed to come to the US. 

y By the time Cambodian refugees finally arrived in the US, some local communities were facing economic challenges and were even less welcoming to the Cambodian refugees than they had been to earlier refugee groups. Government assistance programs were harder to qualify for. Cambodian refugees were often resettled in some of the most challenging American neighborhoods, with issues of poverty, crime, and violence. 

y Adults who dealt with post-traumatic stress issues from surviving the Khmer Rouge genocide, which killed 1.2 to 2.8 million people—10 to 30 percent of the Cambodian population—were not trained in the detailed steps they needed to take so that they and their children could become fully naturalized US citizens. Family members at times experienced discrimination and hatred. 

y Some young people growing up in rough neighborhoods got involved in youth gangs and crime. When a young Cambodian refugee was arrested, their parents did not know how to navigate the US justice system. The arrested youths were often advised to plead guilty and take a plea deal, sometimes in exchange for a reduced sentence. In the years after the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001, these young refugees who had already completed their prison terms, sometimes decades earlier, faced deportation to Cambodia since they had not become naturalized US citizens. 

y Most of the young people who faced deportation did not remember Cambodia, as they had spent most of their lives in the United States. Some facing deportation to Cambodia had never been there—they were born in Thai refugee camps. Many had already moved on with their lives, gotten jobs, bought homes, formed families, and had children who were US citizens. Over 1,000 Cambodian refugees have been deported; the numbers of annual deportations have decreased and increased under different presidential administrations. 181 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the history of Cambodian immigration to the US? 

2.  Why and how did Cambodians come to the US? 

Leading questions from the reading: 

Connecting to history 

1.  What secret actions did the US do to Cambodia from 1969 to 1973? 

2.  What effect did these actions have on Cambodia politically? 

3.  Describe how the Khmer Rouge ruled over Vietnam from 1975 to 1979. 

4.  What effect did the Khmer Rouge have on the Cambodian population? 

5.  What year did the Khmer Rouge fall? And as a result, how many Cambodian refugees fled Cambodia? 

6.  How many Cambodian refugees were admitted to the US by 1980? 182  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

7.  Why does the Census data not reflect the true number of Cambodians living in the US? 

8.  What is the poverty rate of Cambodian Americans? Compare this rate to the average US poverty rate of 13–15%. 

9.  What is the average educational level among Cambodian Americans? Why is it so low? 

10.  Why do you think there is such a high rate of incarceration of young Cambodian men? (Think of the conditions they faced in Cambodia and in the US.) 

Write a paragraph describing the Cambodian American community. (Continue on the back of the page when you run out of room.) 183 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Deporting Cambodian Americans—Jigsaw Expert/Home Groups Directions 

Essential Question: What effect are the deportations having on Cambodian communities? 

Break into groups of four, numbered 1–4. This is your home group. Each number represents an expert group. 

Your task: Using evidence from the primary and secondary sources provided, become an expert on that source. It may be a video or an article with interviews of Cambodian Americans who have been deported or their families that are affected. You can work in your expert groups to help each other read, listen to, and analyze the source. Be ready to share out with your home group. Remember, you will be the only person in your group that is an expert on your source, so be thorough and detailed in your notes. If your source is a video, you can play the video several times or pause it to take notes. 

As you analyze your source, think about these questions: 

y What is the legal basis for the deportations? 

y Why are these deportations unfair? 

y What effect are the deportations having on the deportees and the families still living in the US? 

y What groups are doing something about the deportations, and what are they doing? 

Your assigned source: 

#1s – Article: “Cambodian Deportees Return to a ‘Home’ They’ve Never Known,” The Atlantic, January 16, 2019.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link150 

#2s – Article: “U.S. Deports Dozens More Cambodian Immigrants, Some for Decades-Old Crimes,” NPR, December 18, 2018.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link151 

#3s – Video: “Deported from U.S., Cambodians Fight Immigration Policy,” PBS NewsHour, May 7, 2017.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link152 

#4s – Video: “Deported: Forced Family Separation” (Part 2 of 5), NBC News, March 16, 2017. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link153 

(Use your laptops, tablets, or resource stations to access the source.) 184  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Expert Groups 

Take notes in your quadrant on the Deporting Cambodian Americans notetaking sheet. Make sure to note down the author, title, and date of your source. Take down as many notes as you can, which should include names, quotes, and facts. 

Home Groups 

Return to your home groups. Each number takes turns reporting out what they learned from their source, citing evidence, facts, and quotes. As you are reporting out, the rest of your group is writing notes in the appropriate quadrants. After everyone has reported out, each person should have a wealth of notes on their sources. 185 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Deporting Cambodian Americans – Jigsaw Expert/Home Groups – Notetaking Sheet 

#1s Source Info: (Author, Title) 

Notes: 

#2s Source Info: (Author, Title) 

Notes: 

#3s Source Info: (Author, Title) 

Notes: 

#4s Source Info: (Author, Title) 

Notes: 186  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Quick Fact Sheet on Deportations of Cambodian Americans 

After escaping the repressive regime of the Khmer Rouge and genocide, Cambodian refugees began immigrating into the US after 1979. They were dispersed into various cities and states throughout the US to encourage cultural assimilation. Many were resettled into underserved cities and neighborhoods that did not provide adequate educational, economic, and social support. Without an understanding of the circumstances these refugees had endured due to war and genocide trauma and their unique needs, American society treated Cambodians like voluntary migrants who were expected to achieve self-sufficiency and assimilate very quickly. 

y Cambodian Americans experience disparate socioeconomic impacts and face issues of poverty, lack of education, poor mental and physical health, and, in more recent times, deportations to Cambodia. According to 2020 statistics: 

○ 38% of Cambodians have limited English proficiency 

○ 34% have less than a high school education 

○ Only 17% have had any type of higher education 

○ 23% fall under low income, with 20% living in poverty 

○ The per capita income of Cambodians in California is $16,249 

y Cambodian refugees and immigrants after 1975 lawfully entered the United States and were legally resettled into this country. The Immigration and Naturalization Service adjusted their status to lawful permanent residents after they had lived in the US for more than one year, which also protected them from deportation. 

y However, the United States criminal justice system went through many changes in the last few decades, pushing toward a system of mass incarceration. Specifically, in 1996 President Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) and the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, which made Southeast Asian Americans and other immigrants who have certain criminal convictions subject to harsh mandatory detention and automatic deportation laws with very few opportunities for relief. 

y Additionally, Cambodia signed a repatriation agreement with the US in 2002. Deportations increased during the fall of 2017 when the Trump administration started placing visa sanctions on certain high-level Cambodian government officials until they cooperated with US deportation policy. A nationwide temporary restraining order currently requires Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to send written notice to some Cambodians only two weeks before re-arresting them. 

y Southeast Asian detentions and deportations cannot be understood without knowing how these communities are policed and sentenced. During the prison 187 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

boom of the 1990s, the Asian American and Pacific Islander prisoner population grew by 250 percent. During this time, Asian juveniles in California were more than twice as likely to be tried as adults as white juveniles who committed similar crimes. Arrests of AAPI youth in the United States increased 726 percent from 1977 to 1997. In cities such as Oakland, AAPI youth have had very high arrest rates: Cambodians with 63 per 1000 and Laotians with 52 per 1000. Many were advised to accept plea deals for shortened prison time without being made aware that this decision would make them eligible for deportation. 

y With the 1996 laws, Southeast Asian Americans, which includes Cambodian, Vietnamese, and Laotian Americans, are three to four times more likely to be deported based on past criminal convictions than any other immigrant group. Since 1998, at least 15,000 Southeast Asian Americans have received final orders of deportation, including over 2,000 orders for deportation to Cambodia, despite many arriving in the US with refugee status and obtaining a green card. 

y Many times Cambodian Americans are deported for a crime they committed when they were young, even though they did their time and moved on with their lives, often marrying and having kids. As mature spouses and parents, they are now being deported for something they thought was dealt with and a part of their past. 

Sources: 

y 2011 US Census. 

y Southeast Asia Resource Action Center. 2020. “Southeast Asian American Journeys: A National Snapshot of Our Communities.” 

y National Education Association. 2015. “Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders Behind Bars: Exposing the School to Prison to Deportation Pipeline.” 188  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 16: Chinese Railroad Workers 

Theme: Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 4 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 2; Historical Interpretation 1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 6, 9, SL.9–10.1.A, 1.B, 1.C 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

The contributions of people of color to the economic development and infrastructure of the United States are too often minimized or overlooked. Chinese Americans are Americans and have played a key role in building this country. Had it not been for this workforce, one of the greatest engineering feats of the nineteenth century (the first transcontinental railroad and others that followed), would not have been achieved within the allotted timeline. Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (AAPIs) have played an integral part as active labor organizers and strikers throughout history to fight racism and exploitation. A popular image of the transcontinental railroad meeting at Promontory Summit on May 10, 1869, with no Chinese workers exemplifies the conscious refusal to recognize the contributions of AAPI workers. 

Key Terms and Concepts: systems of power, assimilate, transcontinental, Central Pacific Railroad Company, congenial, amassed, worker exploitation 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand how Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders have been active labor organizers and strikers throughout history to fight racism and exploitation 

y Develop an appreciation for the contributions of Chinese Americans to US history and infrastructure 

y Develop their speaking skills through a Socratic seminar discussion 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How have AAPIs responded to repressive conditions in US history? 

2.  What role have AAPIs played in the labor movement? 189 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

3.  Why is it important to recognize the contributions of immigrant labor in building the wealth of the United States? 

4.  Why is it important to remember the Chinese Railroad Strike? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Overview: 

Day 1 –  Transcontinental Railroads and Chinese Immigration 

Day 2 –  Chinese Labor and the Building of the Transcontinental Railroads 

Day 3 –  Commemoration of the Golden Spike 

Detailed Daily Lesson Procedures 

Day 1 – Transcontinental Railroads and Chinese Immigration 

1.  Post an image of a Chinese railroad worker on the screen. 

a.  Ask students to estimate when the photo was taken, who is shown in the photo, and what historical event or events they think are connected to the photograph. 

b.  Ask students what they know about Chinese Americans and their contributions to the US. 

2.  Introduce the lesson with the following key overarching questions: 

a.  To what extent did immigrant labor contribute to building the wealth of the US? 

b.  To what extent did those laborers benefit from the wealth they helped build? 

3.  Read “The Chinese Experience in 19th Century America – Background for Teachers” and the “Chinese Railroad Workers in North America Project” at Stanford University. 

a.  Have students read in pairs using any reading strategy for the level of the class (annotation, marking the text, Cornell notes, choral reading, etc.). 

b.  Have students respond to the Key Questions and answer the questions on Handout A (located at the end of the lesson). 190  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 – Chinese Labor and the Building of the Transcontinental Railroads 

1.  Discuss the answers to the questions students have completed and do the following: 

a.  Ask students: To what extent have Chinese railroad workers been given the appropriate historical acknowledgment for their contribution to the building of the railroad system? 

b.  Have students look up “transcontinental railroad” in the index of their US history textbook and look for text on Chinese laborers. 

2.  Show on the screen the image of the May 10, 1869, Promontory Summit celebration. 

3.  Have students analyze the photograph. 

a.  Who is featured in the photo? Where and when was the photo taken? Why was the photo taken? 

b.  Who is not featured in the photo? Why do you think that is? 

4.  Show the Chinese Historical Society of America “CHSA Tribute to the Chinese Railroad Workers” video ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link154 ). Tell students to pay special attention to Connie Young Yu’s interview from 1:59 to 2:31. The whole video is 5:31 minutes. 

5.  Provide students time to reflect on what they have seen in the video by having them complete a five-minute free write brainstorm on the following questions: Based on the interviews in the video, why is it important to recognize the contributions of Chinese laborers? Why is that recognition meaningful to people within the Chinese American community? How does the exclusion of Chinese and Chinese American contributions to the United States, including the railroad, affect our understanding of history? 

6.  After students have completed their free write, have them assemble in pairs or groups of three and share their responses with one another. When the discussion begins to wind down, have the class reconvene as a whole group. Have students share their thoughts and ideas with the class. 

7.  Tell students that the video they just watched shows the importance of recognizing the contributions of Chinese laborers more than one hundred years after the building of the railroad. Ask students these final questions: How do you think Chinese laborers and Chinese immigrants were treated at the time? Provide students with copies of excerpts from David Phillips’s discussion of “The Chinese Question” in his Letters from California (pages 120–123) and “Enactments So Utterly Un-American” from Granite Crags by Constance 191 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Frederica Gordon-Cumming (pages 253–255). As students read, have them identify the conflicting attitudes toward the presence of Chinese laborers in California, noting the arguments presented for the exclusion and inclusion of Chinese laborers. 

8.  After students have read the document excerpts, explain to them that the United States passed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. Have students look up this event in their textbooks and discuss with a partner whether or not they think the information provided is satisfactory. Have students come up with a list of questions they have about the Chinese Exclusion Act. 

Day 3 – Taking Action 

Every year on May 10, the Golden Spike Foundation commemorates the coming together of the Central Pacific Railroad and the Union Pacific Railroad to create the first transcontinental railroad. Until recently, there has been little to no representation of the Chinese laborers who built the Central Pacific Railroad. 

1.  Show “The Work of Giants” video ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link155 ). Ask students to focus on the contributions and hardships experienced by Chinese laborers while building through the Sierras. 

2.  Split students into groups and have them brainstorm a list of ways that the Golden Spike Foundation can further recognize the contributions of Chinese laborers and how they can increase awareness of their contributions. Then instruct students to do the following: 

Compose a professional, persuasive letter to the commemoration committee that explains why the Chinese contributions to the railroad should be recognized and how that can be achieved, including concrete information from the resources examined over the course of the lesson and specific quotes and examples. 

Address your letter to Golden Spike Foundation, 60 South 600 East, Suite 150, Salt Lake City, Utah 84102. 

Materials and Resources: 

y NBC News “150 Years Ago, Chinese Railroad Workers Staged the Era’s Largest Labor Strike,” June 21, 2017  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link156 

y University of Illinois “The Chinese Experience in 19th Century America – Background for Teachers”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link157 192  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Gordon H. Chang and Shelley Fisher Fishkin, Chinese Railroad Workers in North America Project at Stanford University, Key Questions 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link158 

y The Chinese Railroad Workers in North America Project Exhibit: This exhibit from Stanford University contains interviews, historical documents, and artifacts.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link159 

y Chinese Historical Society of America “CHSA Tribute to the Chinese Railroad Workers” video (from 1:59 to 2:31 Connie Young Yu describes how Chinese railroad workers are not recognized at the 100th anniversary of the transcontinental railroad on May 10 at Promontory Point) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link160 

y Image of the celebration of the final golden spike being pounded into the track at Promontory Summit where the Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroads met to create the transcontinental railroad. (No Chinese laborers are in the picture.) 

y “Enactments So Utterly Un-American,” from Granite Crags by Constance Frederica Gordon-Cumming (pages 253–255) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link161 

y David Phillips, Letters from California (pages 120–123) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link162 

y “The Work of Giants” (Chinese workers building a tunnel through the Sierras) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link163 

Other sources: 

y William F. Chew. 2004. Nameless Builders of the Transcontinental Railroad . Trafford Publishing. 

y Stanford University Chinese Railroad Workers in North America Project 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link164 

y Gordon H. Chang and Shelley Fisher Fishkin, eds. 2019. The Chinese and the Iron Road: Building the Transcontinental Railroad . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link165 

y CBS Sunday Morning “Building the Transcontinental Railroad”: This video covers the 150th anniversary of the transcontinental railroad and highlights the Chinese labor force.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link166 193 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Handout A 

Transcontinental Railroad and Chinese Immigration 

Read “The Chinese Experience in 19th Century America – Background for Teachers,” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link167 

Answer the questions below: 

1.  When did the Chinese first start emigrating to the US? 

2.  What were the push factors (conditions in China that pushed Chinese out) for Chinese immigrating to the US in the 1800s? 

3.  What were the pull factors (conditions in the US the pulled Chinese in)? 

Use this source to answer the questions below: 

Read the Key Questions section at  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link168 

(Gordon H. Chang and Shelley Fisher Fishkin, Chinese Railroad Workers in North America Project at Stanford University). 

1.  Explain why and how Chinese were sought after to come to the US to build the transcontinental railroad. 

2.  Describe the types of repression and discrimination Chinese railroad workers endured under the railroad companies’ management. 

3.  Identify the key details of the Chinese railroad strike that occurred in 1867. 

4.  Identify the strikers’ demands. 

5.  To what extent was the strike a success? 194  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 17: Little Manila, Filipino Laborers, and the United Farm Workers (UFW) 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 3; Historical Interpretation 1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 4, 5, 9; WHST.9–10.1, 2, 4, 9 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will be introduced to the history of the United Farm Workers (UFW), Filipino migration to Stockton, the formation of “Little Manila,” and protest music. Students will also be introduced to the organizing and intercultural relations between Filipino and Mexican farmworkers. Students will complete a cultural analysis assignment on the topic. 

Key Terms and Concepts: United Farm Workers (UFW), Pinay and Pinoy, strike, protest music, labor union, intercultural relations 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the history of the UFW and the farm worker movement and how it brought together Filipino and Mexican laborers 

y Understand Filipino migration to Stockton, California 

y Further develop their oral presentation, public speaking, and analysis skills via the cultural analysis assignment 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How are we taught to view and value labor? 

2.  How do you build solidarity within social movements? 

3.  What is the role of art and culture within social movements? 195 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Initiate a class discussion by asking students: What is one word that describes hard work? (Ask whether any students are currently employed, and if so, ask how many hours per week they work and how much they are making. Are they earning minimum wage? Do they receive any benefits? How do they feel about their work conditions? Do they know their rights as workers under federal, state, and local laws? Are they or their parents members of labor unions?) 

2.  From the initial discussion, connect the responses from the students to the experiences of Filipina/x/o farm workers. Using the following points to emphasize the experiences of Filipina/x/o farm workers: 

Farm work is hard work: Farm work is back breaking and difficult, but it was work that Filipinas/xes/os and other groups did with great skill, efficiency, pride, and dignity. Their labor greatly contributed to creating incredible wealth for the State of California in the twentieth century and even to this day. There is nothing wrong with jobs that entail hard work, as long as the workers are laboring in the best conditions, are well paid and receive benefits, and can collectively bargain for their wages and working conditions through unions. 

Role of the unions: Unions and other forms of organized labor were integral in ensuring fair wages and working conditions. 

Fair wages and working conditions: Fair wages and working conditions are basic human rights that every worker deserves. 

Right to organize: The right of workers to collectively organize and demand fair wages and working conditions through labor unions was important to Filipina/ x/o workers throughout the 20th century. Filipinas/xes/os were key to the farm worker’s movements of the last century. 

3.  Ask students to reflect on what “justice” means to them. On sticky notes or scrap paper, have each student write a word that represents what justice means to them. Write the word “Justice” on the board and have students place their sticky notes or scrap paper around the word. After students have placed their sticky notes on the board, go over what they wrote and ask questions to clarify what they meant. Ask the students, “Why is there a need for justice?” or “What causes the need for justice?” 

4.  Show the video “Journey for Justice: The Life of Larry Itliong Read Aloud”  https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link169 . The class will listen to the read aloud and follow along if they have the book. 196  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

5.  After listening to the read aloud, ask students to reflect on who Larry Itliong is. On sticky notes or scrap paper, have each student write a word that represents who Larry Itliong is. Write “Larry Itliong” on the board next to the “Justice” brainstorm. Have students walk up to the board and place their sticky notes around “Larry Itliong” on the board. After students have placed their responses on the board, go over what they wrote and ask questions to clarify what they meant. Connect some of their responses on the “Justice” brainstorm to the “Larry Itliong” brainstorm. 

6.  After connecting the “Larry Itliong” and “Justice” brainstorms, assign each student or small group of students an illustration from the book and have them use the following questions to develop a short analysis essay: 

a.  What does the image tell us about the experience of Filipino farm workers? 

b.  How does the image explain Filipino farm workers’ “Journey for Justice?” 

Day 2 

1.  Provide an introduction to the farm workers movement, highlighting the work of Larry Itliong, Philip Vera Cruz, Cesar Chavez, Dolores Huerta, and others, while foregrounding the goals, tactics, and accomplishments of the movement. Teachers can refer to The Content, Literacy, Inquiry, and Citizenship (CLIC) Project Filipino Farm Worker Movement website:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link170 .

2.  Following the introduction, screen the PBS short film Little Manila: Filipinos in California’s Heartland . Before starting the video, tell students that they are responsible for taking thorough notes (refer to a graphic organizer or notetaking tool) and will be expected to have a discussion around the following guiding questions: 

a.  Why was Stockton a popular landing place for Filipino immigrants? 

b.  What crop did Filipinos primarily harvest in Stockton? 

c.  How did Filipino farm workers build community and develop a new social identity in Stockton? 

d.  How did colonialism shape Filipino immigrants’ impression of the US? 

e.  What US policies were implemented to limit Filipino immigration? How did Filipinos in Stockton resist these policies? 

f.  What were some political and strategic differences between Cesar Chavez and Larry Itliong? 

g.  What role did Filipinos play in the formation of the United Farm Workers? 197 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

h.  How did urban redevelopment aid in the destruction of Little Manila? 

3.  Provide the following key terms for students to define using context clues from the film: 

a.  Mestizos 

b.  Anti-miscegenation 

c.  Race riots 

d.  Naturalization 

e.  War brides 

f.  Pinay and Pinoy 

g.  Urban redevelopment 

h.  Labor union 

4.  Following the film, divide students into groups of four to five. Give them 20 minutes to read the following excerpt, discuss the film, respond to the aforementioned guiding questions, and come up with definitions for the terms listed above. 

Excerpt from Our Stories in Our Voices “Filipinos and Mexicans for the United Farm Workers Union” by James Sobredo: 

By the 1950s and 1960s, the remaining Filipinos in the United States are now much older. They were also working side by side with other Mexican farm workers. Then in 1965, under the leadership of Larry Itliong, Filipinos went on strike for better salaries and working conditions in Delano. Itliong had been a long-time labor union organizer, but although they won strikes in the past, they had never been able to gain recognition as a union for farm workers. To make matters worse, when Filipinos went on strike, Mexican farm workers were brought in by the farmers to break the strike; in the same way, when Mexican farm workers went on strike, Filipinos were brought in to break their strike. Itliong recognized this problem, so he asked Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta, who had been organizing Mexican farm workers, to meet with him. Itliong asked Chavez to join the Filipino grape strike, but Cesar refused because he did not feel that they were ready. It was Huerta, who had known Itliong when she lived and worked in Stockton, who convinced Chavez to join the Filipino strike. Thus, for the first time in history, Filipinos and Mexicans joined forces and had a unified strike for union recognition and workers’ rights. This led to the establishment of the United Farm Workers union (UFW), which brought together the Filipino workers of the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee (AWOC) and the Mexican workers of the National Farm Workers Association (NFWA) in a joint strike. 

One of the important labor actions the UFW did to gather support for the Grape Strike was a 300-mile march from the UFW headquarters in Delano 198  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

in the Central Valley to the State Capitol in Sacramento. The march started on March 17, 1966, when 75 Filipino and Mexican farm workers started their long trek down from Delano, taking country roads close to Highway 99, all the way up to Sacramento. They were stopping and spending the night at small towns along the way, giving speeches, theater performances, and singing songs. They were following the tradition of nonviolent protests started by Mahatma Gandhi in India and Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the South. The march to Sacramento was very successful. By the time the Filipinos and Mexicans arrived in Sacramento, they were now 10,000 marchers strong, and the march brought more media coverage and national support to the UFW grape strike ... 

The connection to the Filipino and Mexican farmworkers remains a strong thread in the California Assembly. Rob Bonta (Democrat, 18th District) is the first Filipino American Assembly Member to be elected to office. He is the son of Filipino labor union organizers and grew up in La Paz, in Kern County, in a “trailer just a few hundred yards from Cesar Chavez’s home.” His parents were civil rights activists and labor union organizers who worked with the UFW to organize Filipino and Mexican farm workers … 

5.  While students are working in groups, write down the eight key terms on the whiteboard, leaving plenty of room between each. After the time has expired, signal to students that it is time to come back together. Facilitate a discussion in which students respond to each of the guiding questions aloud. Finally, ask one member from each group to go to the board. Assign each student at the board a word and have them write their definition of the word with their group’s support. After completing this task, the class talks through each term. Provide additional information, examples, and support to better clarify and define the terms. 

6.  Close with student and community reflection. 

Day 3 

1.  Bring to class a carton of strawberries and grapes, several pieces of sugar cane, and a few asparagus spears. Engage the class by asking how many students have ever worked on a farm or have grown their own food? Then ask whether anyone knows how the food items brought in are grown and harvested? Let students know that these types of food are among the most labor intensive to harvest, are in high demand, and are largely handpicked or cut by often underpaid farm workers. Proceed to display images detailing the process of each crop being harvested. Be sure to highlight that farm labor is often repetitive, menial, and damaging to the body. After completing this overview, allow the students to eat the food items brought in. 

2.  After the discussion about harvesting crops, play the song “Brown-Eyed Children of the Sun” sung by Daniel Valdez that was popularized during the United Farm 199 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Workers movement. After listening to the song, ask students what the song is about. Allow for about 10 minutes of discussion followed by an overview of protest songs and music that were played and sung while Filipino and Mexican workers toiled in the fields and during protests. The overview should foreground the Filipino contribution to the UFW, for example like the book Journey for Justice: The Life of Larry Itliong does ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link171 ). Then proceed to describe how protest and work songs provided a unifying message, energized crowds during rallies and marches, and helped amplify dissent. 

3.  Following this overview, divide students into pairs. Assign each pair a protest or work song from the list below (also give students the option to create their own protest song): 

a.  “Brown-Eyed Children of the Sun” by Daniel Valdez, Sylvia Galan, and Pedro Contreras 

b.  “Huelga en General” / “General Strike” by Luis Valdez 

c.  “El Esquirol” / “The Scab” by Teatro Campesino 

d.  “No Nos Moverán” / “We Shall Not Be Moved” 

e.  “Pastures of Plenty” by Woody Guthrie 

f.  “Solidaridad Pa’ (Para) Siempre” / “Solidarity Forever” 

g.  “Nosotros Venceremos” / “We Shall Overcome” 

4.  Let the pairs know that they will be responsible for completing a two-page cultural analysis essay that must address the following steps and prompts: 

a.  Find the lyrics and an audio recording of your assigned song. 

b.  Analyze the song and identify three to five key themes or points. 

c.  What is the purpose and/or meaning of this song? 

d.  Who is the intended audience? 

e.  What types of instruments, sounds, poetic devices, etc. are used? 

f.  How does this song situate within the history of Filipino farm workers and the broader United Farm Workers movement? 

5.  Allow the pairs to use the remainder of the class period to listen to their songs and take notes. In addition, students can invite other classes and have a listening party. Give the students ample time in class for the next two days to work on their essays. During those days offer writing support, carving out time to help each pair craft their thesis statement and core arguments and better structure their essays overall. 200  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

6.  On the final day, have each pair exchange their essay with another pair. The pairs are given 15 minutes to conduct a brief peer review of each essay. After the review, have a listening party. Give the entire class the opportunity to listen to the various songs. After each song is played, have the pair that wrote an essay on the song and the pair that reviewed the song briefly share their thoughts and analysis of the cultural text to the class. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Students will complete a cultural analysis essay in which they are expected to analyze protest songs (or other cultural texts) that were assigned to them in class. Their analysis should include themes that emerged in the songs, connecting them back to the history, struggles, tactics, leaders, and goals of the UFW. 

Materials and Resources: 

y Little Manila: Filipinos in California’s Heartland (short film) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link172 

y Dawn Bohulano Mabalon. 2013. Little Manila Is in the Heart: The Making of the Filipina/o American Community in Stockton, California. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 

y Craig Scharlin and Lilia V. Villanueva. 2000. Philip Vera Cruz: A Personal History of Filipino Immigrants and the Farmworkers Movement. University of Washington Press. 

y “Delano Manongs: Forgotten Heroes of the United Farm Workers Movement” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link173 

y “Dollar a Day, 10 Cents a Dance”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link174 

y Hindu American Foundation “Examining the Impact of Mahatma Gandhi on Social Change Movements”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link175 

y “Journey for Justice: The Life of Larry Itliong Read Aloud” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link176 

y Filipinos and the Farm Worker Movement 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link177 201 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 18: Hmong Americans— Community, Struggle, Voice 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 4 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 11.11.1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 7; W.9–10.1; SL.9–10.1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Overview: Hmong Americans are seen as Asian Americans, yet they have a very unique experience and history in the US. The goal of this lesson is to delve deeply into their experience and understand their formation as a community and as a voice within American society. This lesson uses the voices of Hmong women, men, girls, and boys, as well as an article from the Amerasia Journal, to create an understanding of the issues and experiences of the Hmong American community. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Hmong, oral history, Laos, CIA, Refugee Act of 1980, Asian American, Secret War in Laos, patriarchy, refugee 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Better understand the diversity of experiences of Hmong Americans by engaging a range of primary and secondary sources, including oral histories, poems, and scholarly articles 

y Write their own spoken word piece about their lived experiences. In doing so, students will gain key skills in how to develop and structure poetry, as well as techniques for performing 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What are the Hmong refugee and resettlement experiences in the US? 

2.  How did first generation Hmong immigrants’ experiences differ from those of their children who were born in the US? How did gender factor into differing experiences? 202  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1—Hmong Immigrant Experience and Hmong Americans 

1.  The teacher tells the class: If anyone here has experiences or a personal identity that they feel could help others better understand this content, feel free, but you are not required, to add to our discussions. 

2.  The teacher tells students that they are going to learn about the Hmong community in America and focus on two essential questions, then reads essential questions 1–2 aloud. 

3.  The teacher presents some basic information about the Hmong community. The teacher asks students what type of information would be useful in learning more about the Hmong community and writes their questions on the whiteboard. 

4.  The teacher leads a read aloud of the Quick Fact Sheet About the Hmong Community in the US (located at the end of the lesson). Alternate choral reading—the teacher reads one fact, the whole class reads the next fact, while the teacher walks around the room. 

5.  The teacher asks which of the essential questions have been answered by the information presented. Go through the questions and answers. 

6.  The teacher leads a deeper discussion about the Hmong experience in the US, focusing on the essential questions. The teacher shows “Starting Again in the Refugee Camp,” a video interview of a Hmong couple who immigrated to the US. Note that students should think about the hardships that these immigrants endured to get to the US as they watch the video. Teachers should tell students that the following videos can be traumatizing for some. After each video the teacher can provide students time to process the information through discussion and reflection facilitated by the teacher. 

“Starting Again in the Refugee Camp” is a short documentary about Pang Ge Yang and Mee Lee. It is an incredible story of love, loss, and hope. At the end of the Secret War, Pang Ge Yang escapes from Laos into Thailand. During the harsh journey through the jungle Pang Ge’s pregnant wife dies, and he is unable to leave her body for three days. Mee Lee is also fleeing war-torn Laos, and her husband dies during the escape. Mee found herself as a widow, near death in a Thailand refugee camp. After they lose everything, a miracle happens and these two widows find each other and a new reason for life.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link178  (9 mins) 

7.  As homework, students can conduct research on outstanding questions from the first activity of the lesson. 203 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Day 2—Compare and Contrast of Genders in the Hmong Community 

1.  The teacher shows spoken word poems by two teenage Hmong young women. As students watch the videos, they should think about how these individuals have developed their identity as Hmong American and consider what it is like to be a young Hmong American woman. 

“Spoken Word ‘Being a Hmong American’” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link179 

2.  After the videos, students do a think, write, pair/share, group share exercise. The teacher writes this question on the board: How do these poets describe their experiences and young Hmong American women? Students think about the question for one minute in silence, write for two to three minutes, and then share their written thoughts with a partner. 

Some important things to point out in the discussion: 

y Facing challenges of navigating two worlds, the world of their parents and the pressures of American society, the language barrier with their parents, and not being fully accepted into American society 

y Feeling frustration when they are not recognized or identified as Hmong, but rather called Chinese or from Hong Kong 

y Living in a patriarchy, family expectations, and family hypocrisies 

y Feeling like they need more support to succeed in school but failing to receive that support within the American education system 

y Feeling proud to be Hmong and a daughter 

y Learning how to embrace their heritage and culture but at the same time pursue their dreams of going to college 

y Developing an identity of their own as proud Hmong Americans 

3.  Students read pages 113–116 of the article “Criminalization and Second-Generation Hmong American Boys” by Bao Lo. As they read, students should think about a question similar to the one in the previous step: What have been the general experiences of young Hmong American men? 

a.  Students use the annotation chart (located at the end of the lesson) and annotate as they read the article by adding a symbol next to a sentence that corresponds to their thinking or feeling about the text. Students should prepare to answer the question using evidence from the text. 204  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

b.  The class has a reflective discussion on the following question: According to the author, Bao Lo, what have been the general experiences of young Hmong American men? 

c.  Some important things for the teacher to point out in the discussion: 

i.  Similar to young African American and Latino males, young Hmong males are thought of as gangsters, dropouts, and delinquents by some law enforcement and authority figures. 

ii.  The invisibility of Asian American and Pacific Islander groups regarding incarceration and criminalization in research and public policy indicates a need to understand it better. 

iii.  Teachers often treat baggy clothing, quietness, and swaggering of Hmong boys as deviant. 

iv.  This implicit bias among authority members leads to racial profiling of Hmong boys and leads to the boys feeling isolation and frustration. 

v.  The criminalization of men and boys of color goes hand in hand with the decriminalization of white males. As a result, white criminality is less controlled, surveilled, and punished, while Black, Latino, and Southeast Asian criminality is treated as threatening and in need of punishment.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 16 of the framework includes a description of the impact of the Vietnam War, including the experiences of refugees. On pages 423–425 there is a classroom example where students study the impact of the war on the United States. Teachers can extend that context to this lesson by asking students to research the following questions: 

y How did the Vietnam War affect Hmong immigration to the United States? 

y How the experience of the war affect perceptions of Hmong immigrants? 

4.  Assessment—To show evidence of what students have learned the teacher can choose one of two assignments: 

a.  Students write a paragraph of five to ten sentences answering each essential question using evidence from the sources in the lesson. 

b.  Students write a spoken word poem expressing their identity. 205 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

See step 4 above. 

Materials and Resources: 

y “Starting Again in the Refugee Camp” (a short documentary about Pang Ge Yang and Mee Lee)  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link180 

y Bao Lo. 2018. “Criminalization and Second-Generation Hmong American Boys,” 

Amerasia Journal 44 (2): 113–126. 

y Hmong Story 40 Project (a series of video interviews and documentaries of Hmong refugees and immigrants)  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link181 

y Quick Fact Sheet About the Hmong Community in the US (below) 

y Think Write Pair/Share Group Share Handout (below) 

y Annotation Chart (below) 206  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Quick Fact Sheet About the Hmong Community in the US 

y The Hmong are an ethnic group that lives in the mountains primarily in southern China, Laos, Burma, northern Vietnam, and Thailand. They are a subgroup of the Miao ethnic group and have more than one dialect within and among the different Hmong communities. 

y During the Vietnam War, Laos also experienced a civil war in which three princes sought control over the Royal Lao Government. One of the princes sought support from the Vietnamese communists, while the other sought support from the US. Both sides recruited Hmong to join their military forces. 

y The most successful in recruiting Hmong was the Royal Lao Government, which was backed by the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). 

y In 1961, 18,000 young Hmong men joined the US-backed armies in the Secret War in Laos with the promise that the Royal Lao Government and the US would take care of them if Laos fell to the communists. 

y When Vietnam and Laos fell to the communists in 1973, the Hmong were persecuted by the communists, causing most to flee their homeland. The majority crossed the Mekong River and made their way to Thailand to live in refugee camps. 

y Several families stayed in these camps for years until being processed and either returned to their home countries or sent to the US. 

y The US Refugee Act of 1980 brought over 200,000 Hmong families to live in cities spread across the US from 1980 to 2000. 

y Over the years, the Hmong migrated to Hmong ethnic enclaves within US cities in California, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. 

y From the mid-1980s to the 2000s there has been a gradual rise in Hmong undergraduate college enrollment, particularly in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and California. This has led to college courses on the Hmong language and Hmong American history and culture. 

y Today there are large Hmong communities in Fresno, St. Paul, Minneapolis, Sacramento, Merced, Milwaukee, Wausau, and Green Bay, with the total population over 300,000. 

y The Hmong have played a key role in helping farm communities grow and flourish. 

y The rich Hmong culture includes embroidery, story clothes, ghost stories, and many rituals. 

y Although the Hmong fall under the category of Asian American in the US, they endure one of the highest poverty rates, at 37.8% in 2004, among all ethnic 207 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

groups in the US. They do not receive the services they need because they have been categorized under the Asian American group, which has a lower poverty rate as a whole. Asian American as a category is an aggregate of more than 25 ethnic groups that have diverse histories and experiences in the United States. 

y The Hmong struggle with the dual identities of being labeled as the model minority and as criminals for the young males. 

Sources: 

Minnesota Historical Society. Hmong Timeline. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link182 .

Vincent K. Her, and Mary Louise Buley-Meissner, eds. 2012. Hmong and American: From Refugees to Citizen. St. Paul, MN: Minnesota Historical Society Press. 

Dee Thao, director. 2013. “Searching for Answers: Retracing a Hmong Heritage.” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link183 .

Yang Sao Xiong. 2012. “An Analysis of Poverty in Hmong American Communities.” In Diversity in Diaspora: Hmong Americans in the Twenty-First Century , edited by Mark Edward Pfeifer, Monica Chiu, and Kou Yang. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Press. 208  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Think Write Pair/Share Group Share 

Essential Question: … 

# Think for one minute about how the source had details that answered the essential question. 

# Write for one minute about the details and facts you can remember from the source that address the essential question. 

# Pair/Share for one minute per person. Share out your thinking and writing about the essential question using the sources provided. Be ready to share out the information your partner provided if the teacher calls on you. 

# Group Share for five to ten minutes. After group share, the class will share out information, giving you a chance to present to your peers. 209 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Annotation Chart 

Symbol  Comment/Question/ Response 

Sample Language Support 

? Questions I have 

Confusing parts for me 

The sentence … is unclear because … 

I don’t understand what is meant when the author says … 

+ Ideas/statements I agree with  I agree with the author’s statement that … because … 

Similar to the author, I also believe that … because … 

- Ideas/statements I disagree with  I disagree with the author’s statement that … because … 

The author claims that … However, I disagree because … 

* Author’s main points 

Key ideas expressed 

One significant idea in this text is … 

One argument the author makes is that … 

! Shocking statements or parts 

Surprising details/claims 

I was shocked to read that … (further explanation) 

The part about … made me feel … because … 

0 Ideas/sections you connect with 

What this reminds you of 

This section reminded me of … 

I can connect with what the author said because … 

This experience connects with my own experience in that … 210  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 19: Indian Americans: Creating Community and Establishing an Identity in California 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 3; Historical Interpretation 1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 4, 5, 9; WHST.9–10.1, 2, 4, 9 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Indian Americans are thought to be relatively new immigrants to the United States and California, but their story in California starts much further back in history. The contributions of Indian Americans in California to STEM fields and arts and culture are rich and diverse. 

Students will be introduced to the history of Indian American migration and to the diversity of the Indian American community with respect to religion and geography. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Immigration Act, model minority, Bollywood, media literacy, intercultural relations 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the diversity inherent in the Indian American community with respect to language, religion, and geography 

y Understand Indian American migration to Northern California 

y Articulate the contributions of Indian Americans to the information technology and telecommunications lexicon and the fields of STEM, arts, and culture 

y Further develop their oral presentation, public speaking, and analysis skills via the cultural analysis assignment 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the history of Indian American migration to the United States and, in particular, to California? 211 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

2.  What role did opportunities for education and gender equality play in decisions to emigrate to California? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Introduce the first group of Indians who landed on Angel Island in the early 1900s and describe how they settled in Northern California and created a farming community. Also discuss how a second generation of Indians came to the United States in the later 1900s, mainly seeking education, career opportunities, and gender equality. 

2.  Following the introduction, show the video “Sikh Pioneers and their Contributions to California’s History.” Before starting the video, tell students that they are responsible for taking thorough notes (refer to a graphic organizer or notetaking tool) and will be expected to have a discussion around the following questions: 

a.  Why did the first Indian Americans settle in Northern California? 

b.  What crops did these Indian Americans specialize in growing? 

c.  What US laws negatively affected their liberty and freedom? 

i.  California Alien Land Law of 1913 – prohibited foreigners “ineligible for citizenship” under the law from owning agricultural land 

ii.  Immigration Act of 1917 – restricted the entry of Asians into the country, preventing immigrants from bringing their families 

d.  How did these laws affect social changes in these communities? 

e.  How have current immigration and naturalization laws changed since 1917? 

3.  Provide the following key terms for students to define using context clues from the film: 

a.  Punjabi 

b.  Sikh 

c.  Immigration Act 

d.  Naturalization 

e.  Indian–Mexican marriages 212  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

4.  Following the video, divide the students into groups of four to five. Each group is given 20 minutes to read the paragraph below, discuss the video, and respond to the questions from step 2. 

The origins of the Punjabi–Mexican community lie in the Imperial Valley along California’s southern border. Men from India’s Punjab province stood out from the start among the pioneers who flocked there to work the newly arable land. Their fortunes, their legal status, and local opinion of them varied over the years. At first, South Asians could obtain American citizenship, but later they lost that right. Then not only the physical landscape but the political landscape and their place in it struck the Punjabi men as decidedly similar to their status in British India. They fought hard for their rightful place in society, and particularly for a place on the land, a very important component of Punjabi identity. The Imperial Valley was being transformed from a barren desert to a major center of agricultural production in California at the time the Punjabis arrived; the pioneer Anglo settlers there did not easily accept the Punjabis’ claims to membership in the community they were building. Legal constraints and social stereotypes based on race and national origin helped determine the opportunities and working conditions the Punjabis encountered as they worked alongside others to develop the valley. 

5.  While students are working in groups, write down the key terms on the whiteboard, leaving plenty of room between each. After the time has expired, signal to students that it is time to come back together. Facilitate a discussion where students are able to respond to each of the guiding questions aloud. Finally, ask one member from each group to go to the board. Each student is assigned a word and is expected to write their definition of the word with their group’s help. After completing the task, the class talks through each term. Provide additional information, examples, and support to better clarify and define the terms. 

6.  Close with student and community reflection. 

Day 2 

1.  Show an excerpt from the PBS documentary “Asian Americans Episode 1: Breaking Ground” about Bhagat Singh Thind. Ask students to read an article on the PBS “Roots In the Sand” webpage that discusses the ruling of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind (https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link184 ). 

2.  Ask students to pay special attention to why Bhagat Singh Thind was not considered to be an American citizen. 213 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

3.  After watching the film, split the class into smaller groups or stay as a complete class to discuss the following questions: 

a.  Community Builder/Cultural Energizer: Identifying Our Biases 

i.  Ask the questions: How do you (or your family members) answer the race question on a form? What are the options listed? 

ii.  How is the term “white” defined racially? 

b.  In United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind , the court conceded that Indians were “Caucasians” and that anthropologists considered them to be of the same race as white Americans, but argued that “the average man knows perfectly well that there are unmistakable and profound differences.” 

i.  What do you think of the argument that courts made about people from Indian origin? What do you know about people from Indian origin today? 

4.  Provide the following key terms and concepts for students to define using context clues from the film: 

a.  “Caucasian” versus “white” 

b.  Aryan 

Additional Materials and Resources for Day 2 

Pre-1800s 

Beginning in the seventeenth century, the East India Company began bringing indentured Indian servants to the American colonies. 

The Naturalization Act of 1790 made Asians ineligible for citizenship. 

Nineteenth Century 

The first significant wave of Indian immigrants entered the United States in the nineteenth century. Emigration from India was driven by difficulties facing Indian farmers, including the challenges posed by the British land tenure system for small landowners and by drought and food shortages, which worsened in the 1890s. 

At the same time, Canadian steamship companies, acting on behalf of employers on the Pacific Coast, recruited Sikh farmers for economic opportunities in British Columbia. 214  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Racist attacks in British Columbia, however, prompted Sikhs, including new Sikh immigrants, to move down the Pacific Coast to Washington and Oregon, where they worked in lumber mills and in the railroad industry. 

Many Punjabi Sikhs who settled in California around the Yuba City area formed close ties with Mexican Americans. 

The presence of Indian Americans helped develop interest in Eastern religions in the US and would result in its influence on American philosophies such as transcendentalism. 

Swami Vivekananda arriving in Chicago at the World’s Fair led to the establishment of the Vedanta Society. 

Twentieth century 

Between 1907 and 1908, Sikhs moved further south to warmer climates in California, where they were employed by various railroad companies. Some white Americans, resentful of economic competition and the arrival of people from different cultures, responded to Sikh immigration with racism and violent attacks. 

The Bellingham riots in Bellingham, Washington on September 4, 1907 epitomized the low tolerance in the US for Indians and Sikhs, who were called “Hindoos” by locals. 

In the early twentieth century, a range of state and federal laws restricted Indian immigration and the rights of Indian immigrants in the US. In the 1910s, American nativist organizations campaigned to end immigration from India, culminating in the passage of the Immigration Act of 1917, also known as the Barred Zone Act. 

Passed in 1913, the California Alien Land Act prevented Sikhs, in addition to Japanese and Chinese immigrants, from owning land. 

Although interracial marriage was illegal in California in the early 1900s, it was legal for “brown races” to intermarry. Many Indian men, especially Punjabi men, married Hispanic women, and Punjabi–Mexican marriages became a norm in the West. 

Bhicaji Balsara became the first known Indian to gain naturalized US citizenship. As a Parsi, he was considered a “pure member of the Persian sect” and therefore a “free white person.” In 1910, the New York Circuit Court of Appeal agreed that Parsis are classified as white. Between 1913 and 1923, around 100 Indians were naturalized. 215 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

In 1923, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind that Indians were ineligible for citizenship because they were not “free white persons.” Between 1923 and 1927, over 50 Indian Americans had their US citizenship revoked after this decision. No further naturalization was permitted after the ruling, which led to about 3,000 Indians leaving the United States. 

In Sandhu v. Lockheed Missiles and Space Company , Sandhu sued his employer, Lockheed, for discrimination based on race. Lockheed’s position was that they did not discriminate against Sandhu, a Punjabi Indian, because he was considered Caucasian. Lockheed argued that the “common popular understanding [was] that there are three major human races—Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and Negroid.” This comes from a nineteenth century classification of races. In 1993, the court ruled in favor of Lockheed. In 1994, the California Sixth District Court of Appeals overturned that decision and ruled in favor of Sandhu, stating that Indians were a distinct ethnic group of their own. 

(Source for sections above:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link185 )

Bhicaji Framji Balsara court case: 

Michael W. Hughey, ed. 2016. New Tribalisms: The Resurgence of Race and Ethnicity .London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 

1923 United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind :

History Matters. The US Survey Course on the Web. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link186 

History Matters. The US Survey Course on the Web. “Not All Caucasians Are White: The Supreme Court Rejects Citizenship for Asian Indians.” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link187 

PBS. “Asian Americans Episode 1: Breaking Ground.” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link188 

Sandhu v. Lockheed Missiles and Space Company (1994): 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link189 216  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 20: The Japanese American Incarceration Experience Through Poetry and Spoken Word—A Focus on Literary Analysis and Historical Significance 

Theme: Identity, Systems of Power 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 4, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RL.9–10.1; RL.9–10.10; RI.9–10.1; RI.9–10.2; W.9–10.1; W.9–10.9; SL.9–10.1; L.9–10.5, RH.9–10.1; RH.9–10.2 

HSS Content Standards: 11.75, 12.2.1 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View: 1, 2; Historical Interpretation: 1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

The unjust and unconstitutional incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II is a significant moment in American history with a profound effect on the lives of individuals, a community, and our nation. In the short term, it uprooted Japanese American families and individuals, including immigrants and American citizens, from their homes on the West Coast to be incarcerated in American concentration camps throughout the nation. During this incarceration, Japanese Americans suffered family separation, the loss of homes and businesses, harsh day-to-day living conditions, and the denial of basic civil rights guaranteed in the United States Constitution. After the war the camps were closed, but Japanese Americans continued to grapple with the legacy of that experience and how it impacted their lives as individuals, as families, and as a community. Even though the nation itself eventually apologized for what it had done, marking a turning point for the Japanese Americans, the horrors of incarceration remain and generations of Japanese Americans and the country as a whole still grapple with its legacy. 

This lesson begins with an overview of the history of the incarceration and the findings of a 1983 congressional report that led to an apology issued to the Japanese American community by the United States government. The report concluded the incarceration was an injustice fueled by “race prejudice, war hysteria, and a failure of political leadership.” However, it was not until 2019 when the mass incarceration of Japanese Americans was found to be unconstitutional by the US Supreme Court. 217 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Students will then employ the historical analysis skills of working with evidence and historical empathy to investigate how the incarcerees used poetry and other art forms to illuminate the incarceration’s profound impact on their individual and family lives. Students will also investigate contemporary poetry and spoken word pieces that retell the stories of what happened to Japanese Americans during World War II for a new generation and address the import of those stories for us today as we grapple with government policies and rhetoric that echo that dark time in American history. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Japanese America, Issei, Nisei, Sansei, Yonsei, Executive Order 9066, American concentration camp, resettlement, mass incarceration, redress, forced eviction, incarceration camp 

See the vocabulary list in the Materials and Resources section at the end of the lesson for additional terms. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Use a variety of sources, including text, poetry, and videos, to analyze the basic history of the Japanese American incarceration 

y Analyze and read poetry as a literary form and as a historical source document 

y Analyze how the historical context of their World War II incarceration shaped and continues to shape the perspectives of Japanese Americans 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What does the poetry and art produced by Japanese Americans during their World War II incarceration reveal about the impact of this experience on their lives as individuals and family members? What is the legacy of these experiences? 

2.  What were the causes that led up to the mass incarceration of all people of Japanese ancestry during World War II? What was the impact of incarceration on individuals, communities, and the nation? 

3.  What can we learn from poetry written during the incarceration and poetry written today about the impact of incarceration on individuals, communities, and the nation? 

4.  What evidence do you see that supports the argument that incarceration was a significant moment in history and peoples’ lives? 218  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

Materials and Resources: 

Notetaking paper, pens, Historical Overview of the Japanese American Incarceration handout, time line, incarceration sites map 

1.  Community Builder/Cultural Energizer: Students will view photographs and art documenting the mass incarceration of all people of Japanese ancestry on the West Coast. Teachers may begin the lesson by modeling how to use an image as a source. After showing the first photo teachers might share what they noticed and thought about the photo. This would include: 

a.  A photo of a white woman pointing to a large sign hanging from the roof of a house that reads “Japs keep moving—This is a White Man’s Neighborhood.” She has a stern look. The sign is hostile to Japanese Americans and suggests racism and prejudice toward them. 

b.  The caption informs that the two signs in the window of the house read “Japs Keep Out” and “Member Hollywood Protective Association.” The woman really does not want to have Japanese Americans in her neighborhood. 

c.  “Member of Hollywood Protective Association” suggests that there was an organized effort to keep Japanese Americans out of neighborhoods. It suggests racism toward Japanese Americans in that time. 

d.  The date on the photo is 1920. That’s two decades before World War II. Why is it included in this slideshow about the incarceration of people of Japanese ancestry in World War II? 

e.  The teacher models how to work with the essential questions (presented in step 2) by working with essential question 2: What were the causes that led up to the mass incarceration of all people of Japanese ancestry during World War II? The teacher presents the theory that racism was one reason Japanese Americans were incarcerated. 

f.  After modeling, teachers have students silently examine additional photos and documents. Following this, students can share their thinking with a partner before a short class discussion. 

2.  Teachers will present the essential questions and inquiry questions. 

3.  Students will read and then discuss the Historical Overview of the Japanese American Incarceration handout and time line, annotating the overview with overlapping dates from the time line that reinforce and inform the arguments 219 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

framed in the overview and noting questions that the time line raises. This gives students the opportunity to begin developing an argument about the causes and impact of the incarcerations. The two secondary sources provide historical context that allows students to better understand what they viewed in the primary source photographs and art created by incarcerees (see step 1). Students may also consult the map. 

4.  To close and to prepare for day 2, the class reads aloud selected poems, pausing after each one so the language of the incarcerees resonates with students. This allows students to experience empathy with the poets. For each poem, students should briefly answer the following questions in the context of what happened during the removal and incarceration: 

y What events or experiences led the poet to write the poem? 

y What does the poem reveal about the impact of the incarceration on individuals, families, and communities? 

y What words and phrases in the poem support your response to the previous question? 

Homework: 

Minidoka: An American Concentration Camp 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link190 

View “Kenji” from Fort Minor 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link191 

Note to Teachers and Students: 

To learn more about the constitutional and civil rights related to the mass incarceration go to  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link192 .

Day 2 

Materials and Resources: 

Day 2 Handout, The Power of Primary Source Poetry handout, pens, markers, and chart paper 

1.  Students do a ten-minute quick write (with bullets) to review the basic overview of the incarceration. 

y Writing Prompt: Why were people of Japanese ancestry incarcerated during World War II? What was the impact of the incarceration on individuals, families, and the community? 220  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Students should informally cite evidence as much as possible (for example, lesson sources including the historical overview, time line, images and art, poems, and videos). 

y One or two students share their writing with the class. 

2.  The teacher introduces inquiry questions for the day. 

a.  What can we learn from poetry written during the incarceration and poetry written today about the impact of incarceration on individuals, communities, and the nation? 

b.  What evidence do you see that supports the argument that incarceration was a significant moment in history and in peoples’ lives? 

○ To help students respond to this question, they can consider the following questions that focus on criteria for identifying historical significance: 7   

> 7Adapted from: Stéphane Lévesque. 2008. Thinking Historically: Educating Students for the Twenty-First Century. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press, 45–52.

i.  Who was affected by the event? Why was it important to them? 

ii.  Was the experience profound, deeply affecting people’s lives? 

iii.  Did the experience affect many or few people? 

iv.  Was the impact of the event long lasting or only short lived? 

v.  Is the event relevant to our understanding of the past and/or present? 

3.  Students will dig deep into the historical and contemporary poems and interpret them to answer the inquiry questions. Teachers will pass out The Power of Primary Source Poetry handout and review directions with class. 

4.  Individual Work (10 minutes): Individual students or the teacher scans the poems then selects two to three, including both poems written while in camp and a contemporary poem. After the poems are selected, write the name of each poem at the top of the handout, and then students respond to the questions provided. 

5.  Directions for Group Work (20 minutes): 

Share your poems. Then make a poster of a word drawing using words and drawing to show the impact of the incarceration on Japanese Americans and the nation. Think about why this experience is significant today. Include lines and words in the graphic from both the historical and the contemporary poems. Your 221 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

drawing, lines, and words are your evidence. Have fun! Post and share your word drawing for a gallery walk. 

6.  Gallery Walk and Discussion: 

If possible, work as a whole group during the gallery walk. As students look at the posters, they consider the inquiry questions and discuss how the posters address them. 

7.  Final Reflection: 

Students consider the materials studied in this lesson and explain why the incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II is a significant moment in American history and an important story to include in an ethnic studies course. The teacher may ask students to write a one-page reflection as homework and for assessment.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 14 of the framework includes a section (pages 294–297) on California’s involvement in World War II and specifically mentions the breach of civil rights for Japanese Americans. The chapter highlights using sources including literature, art, and music to understand the experiences of AAPI communities. Two guiding questions for this chapter include: 

How did World War II impact California? 

What external forces shape people’s lives and make them who they are? 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Embedded in the lesson: quick write, group poster, final reflection 

Materials and Resources: 

y Historical Overview of the Japanese American Incarceration reading handout (see below) 

y Chart paper and marking pens 

y The Power of Primary Source Poetry handout (see below) 

y Day 2 Handout (see below) 

y Japanese American National Museum Previsit Resources: Fact Sheet, Timeline, and Vocabulary List  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link193 222  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Japanese Incarceration photos, art, and poems 

y Map of American Concentration Sites  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link194 

y Two student poster samples (see below) 223 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Historical Overview of the Japanese American Incarceration 

Between 1942 and 1945, the US government forced more than 120,000 Japanese Americans from their homes, farms, schools, jobs, and businesses, in violation of their constitutional civil rights and liberties. Within hours after the attack by the imperial forces of Japan on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii on December 7, 1941, Japanese community leaders, language school instructors, Buddhist and Shinto priests were rounded up as “enemy aliens.” The United States soon entered World War II. Three decades of anti-Japanese prejudice culminated into hate and suspicion. All people of Japanese descent in Hawaii and the West Coast were looked upon as saboteurs, spies, and scapegoats for the attack in Hawaii. 

On the West Coast, in the aftermath a hysteria of fear against Japanese Americans as “the enemy within” was created by inflammatory journalism, pressure groups, agricultural interests, politicians, and the US Army. This suspicion of Japanese Americans quickly led to cries for their expulsion. On February 19, 1942, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, which called for the mass exclusion and incarceration of all Japanese Americans from the West Coast—where the majority of Japanese Americans lived, outside of Hawaii. 

Mass exclusion and incarceration of Japanese Americans began in March 1942. Some communities like Terminal Island were given only 48 hours’ notice. During the first phase, incarcerees were transported on trains and buses under military guard to the hastily prepared temporary detention centers. 

Twelve temporary detention centers were in California and one was in Oregon. They were set up on race tracks, fairgrounds, or livestock pavilions. Detainees were housed in horse stalls or windowless shacks that were crowded and lacked sufficient ventilation, electricity, and sanitation facilities. Food was often spoiled. There was a shortage of food and medicine. The War Relocation Authority, or WRA, was established to administer the centers. 

The second phase began midsummer and involved moving approximately 500 incarcerees daily from the temporary detention centers to permanent concentration camps. These camps were located in remote, uninhabitable areas in the interior of the US. In the desert camps, daytime temperatures often reached 100 degrees or more. Subzero winters were common in the northern camps. 

Japanese Americans filed lawsuits to stop the mass incarceration, but the wartime courts supported military necessity. The US Supreme Court ruled in Hirabayashi v. US , Yasui v. US , and Korematsu v. US that the denial of civil liberties was based on military necessity. In a later ruling in Endo v. US , the Supreme Court decided in 1945 that a loyal citizen could no longer be detained, but not until the war was winding down. Tule Lake camp closed in 1946. 

The American concentration camps were surrounded by barbed wire and guard towers. Armed guards patrolled the perimeter and were instructed to shoot anyone attempting to leave. The barracks consisted of tar paper over two-by-sixes and no insulation. Many families were assigned to one barrack and lived together with no privacy. Meals were taken communally in mess halls and required a long wait in line. A demonstration in Manzanar over the theft of food by personnel led to violence in which 224  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

two died and many were injured. The attempt at screening for loyalty and registering inmates for military induction with the WRA’s questionnaire “Application for Leave Clearance,” was conducted in a manner fraught with such confusion and distrust that violence broke out at both California camps. 

Through the incarceration program, the Japanese Americans suffered greatly. They first endured the shock of realizing they could not return to their communities, but were imprisoned behind barbed wire without due process without charges, hearings, or a trial. They lost their homes and businesses. Their education and careers were interrupted and their possessions lost. Many lost sons who fought for the country that imprisoned their parents. They suffered the loss of faith in the government and the humiliation of being confined as “enemy aliens” and prisoners in their own country. 

Many young Japanese American men fought for the United States while their families were imprisoned. The segregated, all-Japanese American 100th Battalion/442nd Regimental Combat Team that fought in Europe and became the most highly decorated unit for its size and length of service in US military history is one example of this irony. Other Japanese Americans also served secretly and with distinction in the Military Intelligence Service in the Pacific theater, becoming America’s “secret weapon.” 

Throughout World War II, not a single incident of espionage or sabotage was found to be committed by Japanese Americans. Japanese Americans living in Hawaii were spared en masse removal because of the logistical difficulty of transporting a third of the state’s population to the mainland. With their numbers exceeding the entire Japanese population on the mainland, Japanese Americans in Hawaii proved an essential part of the state’s labor force and defense. 

On December 17, 1944, President Roosevelt announced the end of the exclusion of Japanese Americans from the West Coast, thus allowing the return home of the incarcerees. Resettlement after incarceration was difficult, especially since prejudice still ran high on the West Coast. Many Issei (first generation Japanese Americans) never regained their losses, living out their lives in poverty and poor health. 

On July 31, 1980, Congress established the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians (CWRIC) to investigate causes of the Executive Order 9066. The commission concluded “the promulgation of Executive Order 9066 was not justified by military necessity and the decisions which followed from it—detention, ending detention, and ending exclusion—were not driven by analysis of military conditions. The broad historical causes which shaped these decisions were race prejudice, war hysteria, and a failure of political leadership.” 

In October 1983, in response to a petition for a writ of error Coram Nobis by Fred Korematsu, the Federal District Court of San Francisco vacated his 1942 federal conviction based on new evidence that revealed the government knew about unconstitutional race-based rationale behind military necessity, and intentionally covered it up all the way up to the Supreme Court. 

After two decades of civic engagement and public advocacy, a petition for redress was won, an incredible milestone in American constitutional history. On August 10, 1988, 225 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

President Ronald Reagan signed into law the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, which offered an apology on behalf of the nation and monetary restitution to the former incarcerees still living. Nearly half of those who had been imprisoned died before the bill was signed and monetary compensation was issued. The federal Civil Liberties Public Education Fund was created by the passage of the Civil Liberties Act of 1988 to educate the public on the issues surrounding the wartime incarceration of individuals of Japanese descent and to publish and distribute the hearings, findings, and recommendations of the CWRIC. After its expiration, in 1998, the California State Legislature passed a bill to create the California Civil Liberties Public Education Program, which would support the development of educational resources about WWII incarceration and the importance of protecting civil liberties, even in times of national crisis. 

–National Japanese American Historical Society 226  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Handout: The Power of Primary Source Poetry 

Inquiry Questions: 

What can we learn of the experience of Japanese American incarcerees from poetry? How can poetry be a primary source? 

You will work in a group. First individually scan the poems, then read a poem or several short poems (15 minutes). Be sure to read poems written while in camp and contemporary poems. Consider what events the writer experienced that would have led them to write the poem. What led you to this conclusion? How does the poet seem to feel about the event? What key words and phrases led you to this conclusion? Write down the line or phrase (or word) that you find most powerful. What do you like about that line or phrase? What question does the poem prompt you to ask (either about the poet or life in general)? 

Poetry Written in American Concentration Camps by People of Japanese Ancestry 8   

> 8Jiro Nakano and Kay Nakano, eds. 1984. Poets Behind Barbed Wire: Tanka Poems. Honolulu, HI: Bamboo Ridge Press.

Haiku and Senyo 

In this desolate field 

Where only weeds have grown 

For millions of years, 

We mournfully bury 

Three comrades 

Who died in vain. 

Sojin Takei 

When the war is over 

And after we are gone 

Who will visit 

This lonely grave in the wild 

Where my friend lies buried? 

Keiho Soga 

There is no fence 

High up in the sky. 

The evening crows 

Fly up and disappear 

Into the endless horizon. 

Sojin Takei 227 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Two Poems by Tojo Suyemoto Kawakami 9 

> 9https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link195

Barracks Home 

This is our barracks, squatting on the ground, 

Tar papered shacks, partitioned into rooms 

By sheetrock walls, transmitting every sound 

Of neighbor’s gossip or the sweep of brooms 

The open door welcomes the refugees, 

And now at least there is no need to roam 

Afar: here space enlarges memories 

Beyond the bounds of camp and this new home. 

The floor is carpeted with dust, wind-borne 

Dry alkali, patterned with insect feet, 

What peace can such a place as this impart? 

We can but sense, bewildered and forlorn, 

That time, disrupted by the war from neat 

Routines, must now adjust within the heart. 

Gain 

I sought to seed the barren earth 

And make wild beauty take 

Firm root, but how could I have known 

The waiting long would shake 

Me inwardly, until I dared 

Not say what would be gain 

From such untimely planting, or 

What flower worth the pain? 228  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

That Damned Fence 10  

> 10 https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link196

They’ve sunk the posts deep into the ground 

They’ve strung out wires all the way around. 

With machine gun nests just over there, 

And sentries and soldiers everywhere. 

We’re trapped like rats in a wired cage, 

To fret and fume with impotent rage; 

Yonder whispers the lure of the night, 

But that DAMNED FENCE assails our sight. 

They’ve sunk the posts deep into the ground 

They’ve strung out wires all the way around. 

With machine gun nests just over there, 

And sentries and soldiers everywhere. 

We’re trapped like rats in a wired cage, 

To fret and fume with impotent rage; 

Yonder whispers the lure of the night, 

But that DAMNED FENCE assails our sight. 

We seek the softness of the midnight air, 

But that DAMNED FENCE in the floodlight glare 

Awakens unrest in our nocturnal quest, 

And mockingly laughs with vicious jest. 

With nowhere to go and nothing to do, 

We feed terrible, lonesome, and blue: 

That DAMNED FENCE is driving us crazy, 

Destroying our youth and making us lazy. 

Imprisoned in here for a long, long time, 

We know we’re punished—though we’ve committed no crime, 

Our thoughts are gloomy and enthusiasm damp, 

To be locked up in a concentration camp. 

Loyalty we know, and patriotism we feel, 

To sacrifice our utmost was our ideal, 

To fight for our country, and die, perhaps; 

But we’re here because we happen to be Japs. 

We all love life, and our country best, 

Our misfortune to be here in the west, 

To keep us penned behind that DAMNED FENCE, 

Is someone’s notion of NATIONAL DEFENCE! 

Anonymous 229 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Children’s Poetry 11  

> 11

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link197 

Be Like the Cactus 

Let not harsh tongues, that wag in vain, 

Discourage you. In spite of pain, 

Be like the cactus, which through rain, 

And storm, and thunder, can remain. 

Kimii Nagata 

Plate in hand, 

I stand in line, 

Losing my resolve 

to hide my tears 

I see my mother 

In the aged woman who comes 

And I yield to her 

My place in line 

Four months have passed 

And at last I learn 

To call this horse stall 

My family’s home 

Yukari 

Contemporary Poems and Spoken Word 

Kenji 12  

> 12

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link199 

(Spoken word poem:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link198 )

My father came from Japan in 1905 

He was 15 when he immigrated from Japan 

He worked until he was able to buy respect and build a store 

Let me tell you the story in the form of a dream, 

I don’t know why I have to tell it but I know what it means, 230  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Close your eyes, just picture the scene, 

As I paint it for you, it was World War II, 

When this man named Kenji woke up, 

Ken was not a soldier, 

He was just a man with a family who owned a store in LA, 

That day, he crawled out of bed like he always did, 

Bacon and eggs with wife and kids, 

He lived on the second floor of a little store he ran, 

He moved to LA from Japan, 

They called him “Immigrant,” 

In Japanese, he’d say he was called “Issei,” 

That meant “First Generation In The United States,” 

When everybody was afraid of the Germans, afraid of the Japs, 

But most of all afraid of a homeland attack, 

And that morning when Ken went out on the doormat, 

His world went black ’cause, 

Right there; front page news, 

Three weeks before 1942, 

“Pearl Harbour’s Been Bombed And The Japs Are Comin’,” 

Pictures of soldiers dyin’ and runnin’, 

Ken knew what it would lead to, 

Just like he guessed, the President said, 

“The evil Japanese in our home country will be locked away,” 

They gave Ken, a couple of days, 

To get his whole life packed in two bags, 

Just two bags, couldn’t even pack his clothes, 

Some folks didn’t even have a suitcase, to pack anything in, 

So two trash bags is all they gave them, 

When the kids asked mom “Where are we goin’?” 

Nobody even knew what to say to them, 

Ken didn’t wanna lie, he said “The US is lookin’ for spies, 

So we have to live in a place called Manzanar, 

Where a lot of Japanese people are,” 

Stop it don’t look at the gunmen, 

You don’t wanna get the soldiers wonderin’, 

If you gonna run or not, 

’Cause if you run then you might get shot, 

Other than that try not to think about it, 

Try not to worry ’bout it; bein’ so crowded, 

Someday we’ll get out, someday, someday. 

As soon as war broke out 

The FBI came and they just come to the house and 231 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

“You have to come” 

“All the Japanese have to go” 

They took Mr. Ni 

People didn’t understand 

Why did they have to take him? 

Because he’s an innocent laborer 

So now they’re in a town with soldiers surroundin’ them, 

Every day, every night look down at them, 

From watchtowers up on the wall, 

Ken couldn’t really hate them at all; 

They were just doin’ their job and, 

He wasn’t gonna make any problems, 

He had a little garden with vegetables and fruits that, 

He gave to the troops in a basket his wife made, 

But in the back of his mind, he wanted his family’s life saved, 

Prisoners of war in their own damn country, 

What for? 

Time passed in the prison town, 

He wondered if they would live it down, if and when they were free, 

The only way out was joinin’ the army, 

And supposedly, some men went out for the army, signed on, 

And ended up flyin’ to Japan with a bomb, 

That 15 kilotonne blast, put an end to the war pretty fast, 

Two cities were blown to bits; the end of the war came quick, 

Ken got out, big hopes of a normal life, with his kids and his wife, 

But, when they got back to their home, 

What they saw made them feel so alone, 

These people had trashed every room, 

Smashed in the windows and bashed in the doors, 

Written on the walls and the floor, 

“Japs not welcome anymore.” 

And Kenji dropped both of his bags at his sides and just stood outside, 

He, looked at his wife without words to say, 

She looked back at him wiping tears away, 

And, said “Someday we’ll be OK, someday,” 

Now the names have been changed, but the story’s true, 

My family was locked up back in ’42, 

My family was there it was dark and damp, 

And they called it an internment camp 

When we first got back from camp ... uh 

It was ... pretty ... pretty bad 

I, I remember my husband said 232  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

“Are we gonna stay ’til last?” 

Then my husband died before they close the camp. 

Mike Shinoda 

SILENCE ... NO MORE 13    

> 13 Kiku Hori Funabiki. 1992. “Silence No More.” U.S.–Japan Women’s Journal 2:56–62.

Silence, forty years of silence 

Forty years of anger, pain, helplessness 

Shackled in the hearts of Issei, Nisei, Kibei. 

Many died in silence 

Some by their own hands 

Some by others. 

Today 

The survivors Stood tall, strong, proud 

Issei, Nisei, Kibei, all vowed 

No more enryo, giri, gaman 

Shattering the silence. 

Today 

the survivors 

Cried out redress, restitution, reparations 

for a father detained in five 

prisoner-of-war camps in America 

for the crime of being Japanese 

and joined his loved ones 

in yet another barbed wire compound 

then returned home to die at seventy-three 

in San Francisco 

for a mother whose demons drove her 

to hammer her infant to death 

now skipping merrily after butterflies 

in the snow 

for a brother, honor student, 

star athlete, Purple Heart veteran 

now alone in a sleazy Seattle hotel room 

sitting on the edge of a cot rocking, rocking 

for 

a girl of fourteen 233 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

mother to the Japanese American children 

in Petersburg 

orphaned by the FBI seizure 

of all Japanese adults 

now agonizing in guilt 

at having detoured the jailhouse 

too ashamed at the sight of her father 

waving desperately to her 

for 

a baby whose whimpers 

were silenced forever 

in a camp hospital 

the Caucasian doctor who never came 

was a father of a son killed 

in the Pacific 

Silence 

Silence, no more 

... no more 

Kiku Funabiki 

We Came Back for You 14   

> 14 Satsuki Ina. “We Will Come Back for You.” Lion’s Roar, August 1, 2019. https://www.cde.
> ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link200 .

We came back for you because … we know mass incarceration. 

We came back for you because … we know family separation. 

We came back for you because … we know deportation. 

Because … we know barbed wire. 

Because … we know indefinite detention. 

We came back for you because … we care. 

Some say, “It’s not our fight, it’s not the same.” 

But we say incarceration of innocent people is inhumane, 

we say mothers and children are not to blame. 

Back in 1942, we disappeared. 

Empty chairs in the classroom, 

empty homes, shops, and farms. 

America turned their backs on us. 

No one marched, no one protested, 

there were no petitions, there was no outrage. 

Silence filled the empty spaces of our invisibility. 234  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Silence was the scourge of our trauma. 

Silence filled our hearts, our homes, our community so … 

We came back to let you know that we will not forget you. 

We came back to drum our message loud and clear. 

We came back to hang paper cranes of hope and caring. 

We didn’t know there would be a healing for us. 

We didn’t know that you would cry listening to our stories. 

We didn’t know that the power of our shared voices 

would be like shards ripping away the scabs of silence. 

We didn’t know that the small act of folding a paper crane 

would speak to so many people in our community. 

In protest we chanted, we raised our fists, 

we sang in Spanish, “De colores.” 

We held hands, 

we sang in Japanese, “Kutsu ga Naru.” 

We sang for our grandmothers and grandfathers, 

We sang for our mothers and fathers, 

And we sang for you. 

And in return you reached into your brown paper bag 

and tied a string bracelet to my wrist, 

You pushed a tortilla through the chain-link fence, 

You welcomed us wearing ties and hats, 

You even saved a rock from the old swimming pool, 

placed it in my hand, saying 

You had been waiting years for me to come back. 

Your big brown eyes stared up at me as tears welled up in mine. 

Little child, you are me. I am you. 

We will not forget you. 

We will not be silent. 

We will come back for you. 

And we will bring others until you are free! 

Satsuki Ina 235 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Bibliography 

“Kenji” Lyrics by Fort Minor. 2021. AZLyrics. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link201 .

Kiku Hori Funabiki. 1992. “Silence No More.” U.S.–Japan Women’s Journal 2:56–62. 

Satsuki Ina. “We Will Come Back for You.” Lion’s Roar, August 1, 2019. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link202 .

Japanese-American Internment Memories. 2012. “Examples of Japanese Internment Poetry.”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link203 .

Jiro Nakano and Kay Nakano, eds. 1984. P oets Behind Barbed Wire: Tanka Poems. Honolulu, HI: Bamboo Ridge Press. 

Japanese-American Internment Memories. 2012. “Tojo Suyemoto Kawakami Internment Poetry.”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link204 .236  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 Handout 

I.  Quick write: Using what you learned yesterday, write a brief response to the following questions. 

Why were people of Japanese ancestry incarcerated during World War II? What was the impact of the incarceration on individuals, families, and the community? 

Which sources of information viewed and read yesterday most informed your response? Identify specific images, dates and events, words and statements, and poems. 237 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

II.  Returning to the poetry 

Poems to Consider: 

What events or experiences led the poet to write the poem? 

What does the poem reveal about the impact of the incarceration on individuals, families, and communities? 

What words and phrases from the poem support your response to the previous question? 

What else do you want to say about this poem and what it reveals about the incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II? 

Final reflection: Considering the materials you studied in this lesson and the criteria for establishing historical significance, write a brief response to the following question. 

Why is the incarceration of Japanese Americans during World a significant moment in American history and an important story to include in an ethnic studies course? 238  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Student Poster Sample 1 239 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Student Poster Sample 2 240  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Materials and Resources: 

Angel Island Immigration Station 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link205 

Asian American Curriculum Project 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link206 

Densho: Japanese American Legacy Project 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link207 

Fred T. Korematsu Institute 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link208 

Go For Broke National Education Center 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link209 

Japanese American Museum of Oregon 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link210 

Japanese American Museum of San Jose 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link211 

Japanese American National Museum 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link212 

Japanese American National Museum Timeline of Japanese American History and Vocabulary List 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link213 

National Japanese American Historical Society 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link214 

PBS Learning Media 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link215 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link216 

Smithsonian National Museum of American History 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link217 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link218 

Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link219/ 241 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 21: Korean American Experiences and Interethnic Relations 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 4, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 11.11.1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 7; W.9–10.1; SL.9–10.1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Overview: Koreatown in Los Angeles is a transnational enclave whose formation and development are an integral part of America’s multicultural history. The heart of Korean America is in Koreatown Los Angeles. Koreatown was a central hotspot of violence during the 1992 Los Angeles Civil Unrest/Uprising, and Korean Americans were thrust onto the national and international scenes where they were scapegoated, marginalized, and discriminated against. The media inflamed the so-called Black–Korean conflict at the time, exposed the deep-seated interethnic issues plaguing inner-city communities. The shooting of Latasha Harlins on March 16, 1991, happened about two weeks after the beating of Rodney King. Harlins and King were both African American. The murder of Harlins by liquor store owner Soon Ja Du stirred the interethnic conflict between Korean Americans and African Americans. The case went to court, and Du received a light sentence and no jail time. The African American community was outraged, and tensions mounted between the two communities. Interethnic relations and conflicts, racism, and police brutality against African Americans fanned the flames of unrest in 1992. When the court found the police officers involved in the case of the beating of Rodney King not guilty, inner-city community residents rose up and protested. 

Today, the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising resonates strongly with communities of color whose voices are being channeled through the Black Lives Matter movement. Studying the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising provides a framework for students to understand and apply to current events. The manufactured interethnic conflict between Korean Americans and African Americans, created by the racially systemic lack of resources and coupled with socioeconomic issues and police brutality issues, are relevant to this day. The interethnic, socioeconomic, and police brutality issues that African Americans protested against in 1992 are the same issues the BLM movement is fighting against now. Thus, it is important to include such a major event in ethnic studies curriculum because the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising is a perfect case study in the field and is applicable to current events. In 242  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

the aftermath of the uprising, the Korean American community transformed and became visible by exercising their political, social, and community voices. 

The goal of this lesson is to provide an overview of the historic, ethnic, political, and sociocultural background of Koreatown to understand the formation of the Korean American community as we know it today. The goal is also to introduce concepts in interethnic relations and studies through the lens of Korean Americans during the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising and contextualize this with current events. The lesson uses the voices of Korean Americans, articles, textbooks, documentaries, and interviews. 15  

> 15 In addition to this lesson, teachers can discuss the causes of events in Los Angeles in 1992 and African American experiences during this tumultuous time.

Key Terms and Concepts: Korean Americans, oral history, Koreatown, 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising, 1965 Immigration Act, Los Angeles, interethnic relations 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Better understand the diverse experiences of Korean Americans by engaging a range of primary and secondary sources, including oral histories, textbooks, documentaries, and scholarly articles 

y Introduce concepts in interethnic relations and studies through the lens of the so-called Black–Korean conflict and contextualize this with current events 

y Conduct an interview of someone who experienced the LA Civil Unrest/Uprising or who is Korean American; develop and ask questions that explore the lived experiences of the subject being interviewed; transcribe the interview; and write a short essay on what they learned about the Korean American community through the interview—in doing so, students will gain key skills in how to develop and structure interviews, transcriptions, and essays 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the history of Koreatown and its formation? 

2.  How did the 1992 Los Angeles Civil Unrest/Uprising affect and transform the Korean American community? 

3.  Why is the Korean American experience important to understand within the context of Asian American studies and US history? 243 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  The teacher tells the class: If anyone here has experiences or knows someone with experiences that they feel could help others better understand this content, feel free to add to our discussions. 

2.  The teacher tells students that they are going to learn about Korean Americans and focus on three essential questions, then reads essential questions 1–3 aloud. 

3.  The teacher presents some basic information about Korean American history and identity via PowerPoint or another presentation method. The teacher asks students whether they have questions about Korean Americans and writes them on the whiteboard. The class watches Arirang, a documentary on Korean American history by Tom Coffman ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link220 ). 

4.  The teacher leads a read aloud of the Quick Fact Sheet About Koreans in the US (located at the end of the lesson). Alternate choral reading—the teacher reads one fact, the whole class reads the next fact, while the teacher walks around the room. 

5.  The teacher and students discuss the quick facts and determine which of the essential questions were answered by the information presented. The class goes through the questions and answers together. 

The teacher leads a deeper discussion about the Korean American experience in the US, focusing on the essential questions. The teacher shows a short history video about the Korean American community. The teacher asks students to think about the hardships and difficulties immigrants experienced coming to the US and to take note of how the film addresses racism and discrimination. In the Korean American community, the Los Angeles Civil Unrest/Uprising is remembered as Sa-i-gu (April 29 in Korean). For the Korean American community, Sa-i-gu is known as its most important historical event, a “turning point,” “watershed event,” or “wake-up call.” Sa-i-gu profoundly altered the Korean American discourse, igniting debates and dialogue in search of new directions. Many believe that as Los Angeles burned, the Korean American was born—or reborn—on April 29, 1992. The riot served as a catalyst to critically examine what it meant to be Korean American in relation to multicultural politics and race, economics, and ideology. 

6.  The class watches “Footsteps of Korean Americans,” a short (37-minute) documentary about the experiences of Koreans in the United States. The film gives a concise overview of when, how, and why Koreans came to America. The film also identifies major moments in Korean American history that helped define the United States and discusses the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising, 244  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

racism, marginalization, and discrimination. The film touches on the so-called Black–Korean conflict that was fueled by negative media coverage and the lack of economic resources brought on by systemic racial redlining and lack of understanding. The documentary’s narrative shows the development of the Korean American community within the context of race relations in the United States. The film ends on a positive note with an overview of how Korean Americans are facing and dealing with the racial divide in the US and, at the same time, learning to deal with the community’s newfound identity. The teacher should warn students that some images in the video could be disturbing (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link221 ). 

7.  The teacher shows two to three videos from the Korean American Oral Histories Project Archives hosted by the Young Oak Kim Center for Korean American Studies at University of California, Riverside. In the videos, Korean Americans talk about their lives and experiences in the United States. As students watch them, they should think about how these individuals have developed their identity as being Korean American within the context of race and identity. Suggestions on which oral histories to show include Ralph Ahn, Cindy Ryu, Julie Ha, and Philip Yu ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link222 ). 

8.  After the videos, do a think, write, pair/share, group share exercise. Students think about this question: How do these Korean Americans describe their experiences and how racism and discrimination affected their lives? Students think quietly for about a minute, then write individually for two to three minutes. Afterward, students share their thoughts with a partner. Students can be put into breakout sessions for online courses or paired in class at random for in-person teaching. 

Some important things to point out in the discussion: 

y Being caught between two worlds, Korean Americans (immigrants) feel the pressures and the divide in the US along racial lines, especially as they enter small businesses and inner-city communities 

y Koreatown’s development over the century; its evolution from a small unknown community to a recognized ethnic enclave 

y The racial inequalities and mistreatment of Korean Americans during the 1992  LA Civil Unrest/Uprising, the historic nature of this scenario, and how it applies to other Asian American communities 

y The racial and socioeconomic disparities that exist in the United States for minority communities, including Asian Americans, African Americans, and others 245 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Learning how Korean Americans embraced their new host society and became visible after the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising and how Koreatown emerged from the ashes of the violence and became a hotspot for culture, food, and all things Korean in America 

y Developing an identity of their own as proud Korean Americans 

9.  Students read pages 57 to 62 in Memoir of a Cashier: Korean Americans, Racism, and Riots by Carol Park. As they read, students should think about this question: What was it like to be a young Korean American during the tumultuous 1990s and during the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising? 

a.  As students read the excerpt, they use the Annotation Chart (included at the end of the lesson) to annotate as they read, adding a symbol next to a sentence that corresponds to their thinking or feeling about the text. Student should be ready to answer the question using evidence from the text. 

b.  The class has a reflective discussion on the following question: According to the author, Carol Park, what was the Black–Korean conflict? 

c.  Some important things to point out in the discussion: 

i.  Similar to other minorities, Korean Americans were marginalized and discriminated against throughout US history. 

ii.  The invisibility and categorization of Asian American and Pacific Islander groups as model minorities needs to be recognized and discussed. 

iii.  Korean American history is important and should be taught because of pivotal moments like the 1992 LA Civil Unrest/Uprising.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework :

Chapter 14 of the framework includes a section (pages 297–299) on California’s involvement in the Civil Rights Movement during the 1960s, discrimination, modern immigration, and the state’s post-1965 Immigration Act demographics. The chapter asks two essential questions which could also be relevant to the Korean American experience and the LA Civil Unrest/Uprising in the Asian American studies curriculum: 

y What did protests and frustrations expressed by Californians in the late Cold War Era reveal about the state? 

y In what directions is California growing in the twenty-first century? 246  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

10.  Assessment—To show evidence of what students have learned the teacher can choose one of two assignments: 

a.  Students write one to three paragraphs of five to ten sentences answering each essential question using evidence from the sources in the lesson. 

b.  As a discussion group exercise, in groups of two or three students collectively write a paper about the Korean American experience, answering the two essential questions. Each student in the group writes one paragraph. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

See step 10 above. 

Materials and Resources: 

“Footsteps of Korean Americans” – A short documentary on Korean American history, identity, the LA Civil Unrest, and current issues 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link223 

Carol Park. 2017. Memoir of a Cashier: Korean Americans, Racism, and Riots . Riverside, CA: Young Oak Kim Center for Korean American Studies at University of California Riverside. 

Korean American Oral Histories Project – A series of video interviews with and documentaries on Korean Americans in the United States discussing their immigrant experiences, the LA Civil Unrest, and more 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link224 

Legacy Project – An oral history project preserving the collective history of Korean Americans  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link225 

“Global Perspectives: Angela Oh” – An interview with Angela Oh, a civil rights attorney 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link226 

“Angela Oh’s Views on LA Riots, Five Years Out” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link227 

Quick Fact Sheet About Koreans in the US (below) 

Think Write Pair/Share Group Share handout (below) 

Annotation Chart (below) 

Additional resources for teaching Korean American studies can be found at  https://www. cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link228 . These resources include lessons on Colonel Young Oak Kim, Dosan Ahn Chang Ho, the Korean independence movement, Dr. Sammy Lee, and Korean pop culture in the United States. 247 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Quick Fact Sheet About Koreans in the US 

y The Korean American population is about 1.8 million today. The heart of Korean America resides in Los Angeles, where Koreatown flourishes amid a diverse demographic. Official Korean immigration to the United States began on January 13, 1903, with the arrival of 102 Koreans in Hawaii. 

y In March 1920, Korean Americans establish the Willows Korean Aviation School/Corps in Willows in Northern California. Today, the school is considered the origin of the Korean Air Force. Many Korean Americans donated to the foundation of the school, including Kim Chong-lim, the first Korean American millionaire. 

y On April 12, 1960, Alfred Song is elected to the Monterey Park City Council. He later becomes the first Korean American admitted to the California Bar and the first Asian American elected to the California State Legislature. 

y On October 3, 1965, the Hart–Celler Act of 1965 opens the door for immigration in the United States. Koreans immigrate to the United States, and the population of Koreans grows from 69,150 in 1970, to 354,953 in 1980, and 798,849 by 1990. 

y On April 29, 1992, the Los Angeles Civil Unrest/Uprising erupts. Koreatown is burned and looted and businesses are destroyed. Korean Americans are left to fend for themselves and are marginalized and scapegoated by media. This moment in US history is considered the birth of the Korean American identity as we know it today. 

y On November 4, 1992, Jay Kim is elected to the US House of Representatives and becomes the first Korean American to be elected to the United States Congress. 

y On September 14, 1994, the sitcom All-American Girl , starring Korean American actor Margaret Cho, premiers on ABC and is the first network sitcom to feature a predominantly Asian American cast. 

y Korean American Day is declared by the US government in 2005. 

y In 2015, David Ryu becomes the first Korean American elected to the Los Angeles City Council. 

y At the 2018 Winter Olympics, held in Pyeongchang, South Korea, Korean American Chloe Kim becomes the youngest woman to win an Olympic gold medal in snowboarding. 

y At the 2020 Academy Awards, Parasite wins four Oscars—for best picture, best director, best international feature, and best original screenplay. It was the first foreign language film and the first Korean film to win best picture. 248  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Sources: 

Edward T. Chang. 2017. “A Concise History of Korean Americans.” In Teaching East Asia: Korea: Lessons and Resources for K–12 Classrooms , edited by Mary Connor. Los Angeles, California: National Korean Studies Seminar and Korean Cultural Center Los Angeles. 

Edward T. Chang and Jeannette Diaz-Veizades. 1999. Ethnic Peace in the American City: Building Community in Los Angeles and Beyond. New York, NY: New York University Press. 

Edward T. Chang and Carol K. Park. 2019. Korean Americans: A Concise History. Riverside, CA: The Young Oak Kim Center for Korean American Studies at the University of California Riverside. 

Wayne Patterson. 1994. The Korean Frontier in America: Immigration to Hawaii 1896–1910. 

Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Press. 

Root Park, director. “Footsteps of Korean Americans.” May 23, 2019.  https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link229 .

Carol Park. 2017. Memoir of a Cashier: Korean Americans, Racism, and Riots. Riverside, CA: Young Oak Kim Center for Korean American Studies at University of California Riverside. 

Tom Jennings, director. “The Lost Tapes: LA Riots.” Smithsonian Channel, April 16, 2017. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link230 .249 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Think Write Pair/Share Group Share 

Essential Question: (See sample essential questions from the Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework section above). 

# Think for one minute about how the source had details that answered the essential question. 

# Write for one minute about the details and facts you can remember from the source that address the essential question. 

# Pair/Share for one minute per person. Share out your thinking and writing about the essential question using the sources provided. Be ready to share out the information your partner provided if the teacher calls on you. 

# Group Share for five to ten minutes. After group share, the class will share out information, giving you a chance to present to your peers. 250  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Annotation Chart 

Symbol  Comment/Question/ Response 

Sample Language Support 

? Questions I have 

Confusing parts for me 

The sentence … is unclear because … 

I don’t understand what is meant when the author says … 

+ Ideas/statements I agree with  I agree with the author’s statement that … because … 

Similar to the author, I also believe that … because … 

- Ideas/statements I disagree with  I disagree with the author’s statement that … because … 

The author claims that … However, I disagree because … 

* Author’s main points 

Key ideas expressed 

One significant idea in this text is … 

One argument the author makes is that … 

! Shocking statements or parts 

Surprising details/claims 

I was shocked to read that … (further explanation) 

The part about … made me feel … because … 

0 Ideas/sections you connect with 

What this reminds you of 

This section reminded me of … 

I can connect with what the author said because … 

This experience connects with my own experience in that … 251 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 22: The Immigrant Experience of Lao Americans 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 4, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 11.11 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 7; WHST.9–10.2, 4, 5; SL.9–10.1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will discuss the reasons for the changing immigration policies of the United States, with emphasis on how the Immigration Act of 1965 and successive acts transformed American society with focus on the unique challenges confronting Lao American immigrants and the different groups among them (for example, Lao, Hmong, Iu-Mien, Akha). 

Students will learn how the lesser-known immigrants from Laos have contributed to greater diversity in American society since the middle of the twentieth century. 

Key Terms and Concepts (This section ties into larger unit key terms but may also include terms specific to the lesson.) : the evolving US immigration policies since 1965, the effects of the policies on Lao Americans, the contributions of the policies to the diversity of the population of the United States, refugee 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Discuss the reasons for the nation’s changing immigration policy, with emphasis on how the Immigration Act of 1965 and successive acts have transformed American society 

y Understand the unique challenges confronting Lao American immigrants and the different groups among them (for example, Lao, Hmong, Iu-Mien, Akha) 

y Examine the origins and stages of Lao American immigration and its effects on Lao Americans 

y Learn how the lesser-known immigrants from Laos have contributed to greater diversity in American society since the middle of the twentieth century 

y Understand how the Vietnam War changed US immigration policy since 1975 252  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Essential Questions: 

1.  During which period of US policy immigration did your family arrive in the United States? How has that policy supported or not supported your family? 

2.  How have the immigration policies of 1975 and 1980 benefited the United States? 

3.  What current policies exist to support the original intentions of the United States to be a country that receives all who are oppressed? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  The teacher opens class by giving a brief lecture on the following: At the end of the Vietnam War, the Royal Lao Government was overthrown by the Pathet Lao in a communist revolution. Lao individuals or families politically aligned with the United States were allowed entry to the US with the passage of the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act in 1975. The Refugee Act of 1980 authorized further Lao refugee migration to the US. Between 1975 and 1992, over 230,000 (up to 400,000 by some estimates) Lao, Hmong, Khmu, Iu-Mien, Tai Dam, Tai Lue, Lua, Akha, Lahu, and other ethnic communities from Laos immigrated to the US, primarily to California, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Texas. 

2.  The teacher then shows a short film clip, “The Betrayal,” on the Lao immigrant experience. 

3.  Classroom 

a.  Individual: Students read packet materials in class to prepare for student presentations and discussion comparing and contrasting experiences of Lao immigrants, independently organizing information in the notetaking guide while viewing the video and reading, identifying and evaluating sources in each media format. (The teacher models writing down points on the organizer.) 

b.  Small Group: Each group is assigned one memoir or oral history account. Students discuss the main ideas and details. They then create a visual display/poster that communicates the immigrant experience (e.g., isolate one quotation for presentation). The teacher will demonstrate before the small group discussion. 

c.  Large Group: The class holds a discussion on the immigrant experience of Lao Americans. Each student shares their response to the discussion. Students compare and contrast the unique and common/general aspects of each memoir or oral history account. 253 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

4.  Homework: Students write an essay or letter describing their critical analysis and their opinion on how federal, state, or local government policy should be changed to better aid new immigrants in their integration into American society. This may include the student’s opinion of the US government’s role in assisting migrants from Laos stemming from the US involvement in the war in Laos. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Accurately present facts from the videos and readings as support for their opinion on the war 

y Clearly express their position on the war during class debate and small group discussion 

y Correctly identify its influence on US foreign policy 

Materials and Resources: 

Materials 

y Video: “The Betrayal” (Nerakhoon) 

y Packet: 

○ Thavisouk Phrasavath. 2010. Stepped Out of the Womb: A Memoir of a Journey to the Land Where the Sun Falls . Lao Century Media. Chapter 6, Coming To America. 

○ Khamsamong Somvong. 1989. “Not so wonderful was that time.” In 

Indochina’s Refugees: Oral Histories from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam , by Joanna Catherine Scott. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company. 

○ Kao Kalia Yang. 2008. The Latehomecomer: A Hmong Family Memoir. 

Minneapolis, MN: Coffee House Press. Chapter 8, Before the Babies. 

y Writing Prompt: Homework (see step 4) 

Resources 

General Works: 

y Jeremy Hein. 1995. From Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia: A Refugee Experience in the United States . New York, NY: Twayne Publishers. 

y Jonathan H. X. Lee and the Center for Lao Studies. 2012. Laotians in the San Francisco Bay Area. Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing. 

y W. Courtland Robinson. 1998. Terms of Refuge: The Indochinese Exodus and the International Response. London, UK: Zed Books. 254  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lao Immigrant Memoirs: 

y Bounsang Khamkeo. 2006. I Little Slave: A Prison Memoir from Communist Laos. 

Cheney, WA: Eastern Washington University Press. Interview:  https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link231 .

y Kao Kalia Yang. 2008. The Latehomecomer: A Hmong Family Memoir. Minneapolis, MN: Coffee House Press. 

y Kao Kalia Yang. 2016. The Song Poet: A Memoir of My Father. New York, NY: Metropolitan Books. 

y Joanna Catherine Scott. 1989. I ndochina’s Refugees: Oral Histories from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company. 

y Nakhonkham Bouphanouvong. 2004. Sixteen Years in the Land of Death: Revolution and Reeducation in Laos. Bangkok, Thailand: White Lotus Press. 

y Sucheng Chan, ed. 1994. Hmong Means Free: Life in Laos and America. 

Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. 

y Thavisouk Phrasavath. 2010. Stepped Out of the Womb: A Memoir of a Journey to the Land Where the Sun Falls. Lao Century Media. 

Documentary Film 

y “The Betrayal” (Nerakhoon), written and directed by Ellen Kuras and Thavisouk Phrasavath 

Ethnic Studies Outcomes: 

y Students expand on previous lessons covering US foreign policy during the Cold War, including the Vietnam War, the anti-war movement, and the US Civil Rights movement. 

y Students recognize the Laotian American refugee experiences, their unbreakable spirit through survival and resilience, and that visibility, acknowledgment, and celebration through ethnic studies provides Southeast Asian American youth and their colleagues with an understanding around a subject that is historically overlooked. 255 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 23: Historical and Contemporary Experiences of Pacific Islanders in the United States 

Theme: History and Movement, Identity 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 3, 4 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 11.4.2 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 6, 7; W.9–10.1; SL.9–10.1, SL.11–12.4 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson is designed to introduce the study of people of Pacific Islander descent in the United States, while drawing connections to the Pacific Islands and the Pacific Island diaspora more broadly. Pacific Islanders in the United States are often left out of conversations about communities of color in America. The purpose of this lesson is to understand the ways in which American expansion in the Pacific since the 1800s has grown and created a variety of issues among growing Pacific Islander communities in Oceania and in the US today. This lesson will use geography, data disaggregation, and narratives to explore the US experiences of Pacific Islanders from Guam, American Samoa, Palau, the Marshall Islands, Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga. This lesson is designed to be an introduction to the study of Pacific Islander migrations to the continental United States, including the history, culture, and politics of Hawai‘i and US Pacific territories. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Pacific Islanders, race, annexation, migration, militarization, citizenship, Oceania, Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia, data disaggregation, census 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Identify varying experiences of Pacific Islanders in relation to the United States 

y Analyze differences and similarities between Pacific Islander experiences and history 

y Explore the relationships between colonialism, citizenship, and identity 

Essential Questions: 

1.  Who are Pacific Islanders in the United States? What is their history with immigration and settlement? 256  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

2.  What systems, structures, and events have contributed to the racialization of Pacific Islanders in the US? Why is it important to disaggregate census, educational, and demographic data to understand the Pacific Islander population? 

3.  What are the contemporary experiences of Pacific Islanders in the United States? How do they respond to discrimination and displacement? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1: Pacific Islander Immigration to the US 

Who are Pacific Islanders in the United States? What is their history with immigration and settlement? 

1.  Students write down seven words that describe their identity, which will be shared later in the lesson. 

2.  The teacher displays an example of a world map. 

3.  The teacher leads a discussion by asking students the following questions and writing down their responses: 

a.  What are maps and what do they tell us? 

b.  Who and what gets left out of understanding people through maps? 

c.  What do maps tell us about who created them? 

Teacher notes: Concepts include borders, boundaries, difference, and power. 

4.  Students answer the following question on a piece of paper and then share out to class: How might maps connect to the seven words you chose? 

5.  The teacher shares examples of maps of the Pacific Islands and presents the following: 

a.  The Pacific includes 1200 distinct cultural groups among the 7–10 million people living in and around the world’s largest and oldest ocean, in some of the world’s most vulnerable and precious ecosystems. These groups maintain their respective cultural, political, and familial knowledge systems under categories known as Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link232 ). However, when encountering the US, they are defined by their relationships to maps, borders, and the American empire in the Pacific. 

Teacher notes: 

y Melanesia: Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, and Fiji 257 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Micronesia: Guam, the Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia (Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, Kosrae), Kiribati, Nauru, the Marshall Islands, and Palau 

y Polynesia: The Hawaiian Islands, Samoa, American Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu, Tokelau, Wallis and Futuna, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Niue, Easter Island, Pitcairn, Norfolk Island, and New Zealand 

6.  The teacher displays and explains the “U.S. Immigration Status by Pacific Island of Birth” infographic, which shows the varying US immigration statuses of Pacific Islanders that continue to shift over time. 

7.  Students share observations of the graphic, while answering the following question: What do you immediately recognize about the different statuses? 

Source: Empowering Pacific Islander Communities. 2014. “Native Hawaiian & Pacific Islanders: A Community of Contrasts in the United States.” Policy Report. Los Angeles, CA. 

Long description of South Pacific map 258  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

8.  The teacher passes out the day 1 worksheet, Pacific Islanders in the US (located at the end of the lesson), and explains the write-up for each video prior to viewing, while students follow along. 

a.  US Citizens: Hawai‘i 

i.  Hawai‘i was colonized by Euro-American capitalists and missionaries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In 1893 Americans invaded Hawai‘i, overthrew Indigenous peoples, and secured an all-white oligarchy of planters in place of the reigning ali‘i (nobility) ruled by Queen Lili‘uokalani, which led to annexation in 1898. This included dispossession of the Hawaiian government, lands, and citizenship, which colonized Indigenous Hawaiians. 

ii.  Students watch a clip of the PBS Hawai‘i documentary Act of War 

(21:45–36:25) ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link233 )and write down seven to ten explicit details or facts from the video. Teachers can also provide the full documentary online for students to watch outside of class. 

b.  Compact of Free Association: Marshall Islands 

i.  In 1946, the United States started testing nuclear bombs in the Marshall Islands under the code name Operation Crossroads. To clear the way for the tests, the US Navy negotiated with leaders of Bikini Atoll to move 167 residents east to Rongerik Atoll—a move that Bikinians understood as temporary and believed would be “for the good of mankind.” When Rongerik’s food supply proved insufficient to support the population, the US relocated the Bikinians to Kwajalein Atoll and finally to Kile Island. On Kile, Bikinians faced numerous challenges, including insufficient food supplies, lack of fishing grounds, drought, typhoons, dependence on canned food supplied by the US Department of Agriculture, and accompanying health problems (e.g., high blood pressure and diabetes). 

ii.  Students watch Kathy Jetnil-Kijiner’s “Anointed” ( https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link234 ) and write down five to seven explicit details or facts from the video. 

c.  US Nationals: American Samoa 

i.  In the 1890s, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States were locked in a dispute over who should have control over the Samoan Islands. In 1899, these countries came to an agreement in which Germany had influence in the western islands and the US would 259 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

maintain influence in the eastern islands. The US Navy wanted to utilize Pago Pago Harbor as a coaling site for their ships, which became key during World War II until the closing of the base in 1951. 

ii.  Students watch the first 10 minutes of Omai Fa‘atasi (1978) by Takashi Fujii and write down seven to ten explicit details or facts from the video. 

9.  Using examples from the lecture and videos, students work in groups to complete the worksheet and provide an analysis of American influence in the Pacific. 

10.  As a class, each group shares its reflections and answers to the following questions: What does this lesson tell us about “American expansion” in the Pacific? How might this impact migration to the US? 

Extension Assignment: 

Teachers can assign an essay that utilizes the information on the worksheet to write about the impact of American expansion on the Pacific Islanders. 

Day 2: Analyzing Racialization of Pacific Islanders Through Data 

What systems, structures, and events have contributed to the racialization of Pacific Islanders in the US? Why is it important to disaggregate census, educational, and demographic data on the Pacific Islander population? 

1.  The teacher begins with a group discussion. 

a.  The teacher asks: What is a Pacific Islander? Who is a Pacific Islander? Is it one group or many groups? 

b.  The teacher presents the following: In this lesson, we are going to learn that the broad label Pacific Islander is composed of many groups, and we are going to analyze what has contributed to this label and what the outcomes are of relying only on this label. 

The teacher notes: 

y The poverty rate of Pacific Islanders is 20 percent, versus 12 percent of the general population. 

y Pacific Islanders are half as likely to have a bachelor’s degree compared to the general population (27 percent for the total population and 49 percent of Asian Americans). 

y Bachelor degree attainment rate is 69.1 percent for Asian Indians, but only 9.4 percent for Samoans. 260  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y This data shows there is a large difference between the Pacific Islander community and the Asian American community and overall population. 

y This data also shows there is a need for more services and programs for the Pacific Islander community (for example, to get into and graduate from college). 

y It is important to disaggregate the data to identify the needs of the Pacific Islander community. 

y By lumping Pacific Islanders under Asian Americans, Pacific Islander issues become invisible. 

2.  Students read and analyze the following sources: 

a.  What Census Calls Us: A Historical Timeline (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link235 ; PDF at 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link236 )

b.  Excerpt of Community of Contrasts: Executive Summary and Demographics (pp. 5–10) ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link237 )

c.  The State of Higher Education in California ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link238 )

d.  Lisa Kahaleole Hall, “Which of These Things Is Not Like the Other” (pp. 729–733, 736–738) ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link239 )

3.  The teacher will pass out the worksheet The Disaggregation of Pacific Islander Data, which has a number of content questions. Students can work in pairs or in groups to help each other answer the questions. 

4.  Before students answer the last question on the worksheet and write their paragraph, they will have a class discussion on what they have learned. The teacher will ask the questions: How have racial categories impacted Pacific Islanders? Provide one example. Why is it important to disaggregate census, educational, and demographic data on the Pacific Islander population? 

Extension Assignment: 

The handout and paragraph can develop into a larger assignment that uses data disaggregation to do a report on Pacific Islanders. This report can be an infographic or in essay form. This can also lead into a Youth Participatory Action Research project that provides students an opportunity to do more research on Pacific Islander communities. This could consist of interviews and oral histories. This could potentially add to the growing research on Pacific Islanders. 261 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Day 3: Contemporary Pacific Islander Experiences 

What are the contemporary experiences of Pacific Islanders in the United States? How do they use storytelling to share about these experiences and reframe dominant narratives about Pacific Islanders? 

1.  Students will draw two images, side by side, showing 1) how they think the world/ society views them and 2) who they really are. Students will share and explain their drawings. 

2.  The teacher hands out an excerpt of “Our Sea of Islands” by Epeli Hau‘ofa ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link240 , pp. 6–11). After students finish reading it they participate in a think, pair, share to answer the following questions: 

a.  How does Hau‘ofa discuss the perspectives of the Pacific as islands in a far sea versus Oceania as our sea of islands? 

b.  The teacher facilitates a class discussion to tie in mapping, race, genealogy, and the importance of storytelling. 

3.  Students will review the following narratives to read and listen to examples of Pacific peoples’ stories on contemporary issues of land displacement, climate change, and movements for independence. 

a.  Standing Above the Clouds ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link241 )—short documentary 

b.  Frontline Truths by the Pacific Climate Warriors ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link242 )—first person narratives of Climate Justice Warriors 

c.  The Question of Guam ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link243 )— United Nations testimony (2:48:13–2:52:02) 

Discussion: What stood out to you about these stories? Why is it important to learn about Pacific experiences by listening to and reading the stories of Pacific peoples? 

4.  Students will create “I Am” poems to share. 

For each of the items, write three to five things that answer each item about you. Use the list to create a poem which repeats the line, “I am from … ” followed by your lists. Be creative. 

a.  Items that were important to you growing up or had significance in your upbringing 

b.  Events that changed your life 262  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

c.  Names of relatives and/or community members, especially ones that link you to your past 

d.  Names of food and dishes that are always at family or community gatherings 

e.  Places important to you 

f.  Sayings and beliefs important to you 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Assessment: The summative assessment has three parts in this lesson: part 1: an essay on the impact of American expansion on the immigration of Pacific Islanders, part 2: data analysis infographic, and part 3: “I Am” poem. These three parts come together to build the analytical skills of the students and provide direct opportunities for them to connect to the lesson. 

Application: Students will apply the ethnic studies principles to their essay, data analysis, and poems. 

Action: Students can do a number of things with what they learned. First, they can use the material to analyze immigration policy that is important today. The teacher can include an extension activity to compare Pacific Islander immigration with immigration of other Asian American groups. These immigration patterns and trends can be connected back to American expansion and imperialism. Another option is to have students choose another racialized group and compare their experiences to those of Pacific Islanders. The teacher could also have students apply the content and skills of this lesson to develop a more robust Youth Participatory Action Research project to learn more about Pacific Islanders by conducting interviews with or collecting oral histories from community members. This could contribute to the growing research and literature on Pacific Islanders. 

Reflection: Students will use the “I Am From” poems to reflect on how the lesson on Pacific Islanders connects to their own lives. 

Materials and Resources: 263 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Day 1 Worksheet 

Name:  Period:  Date: 

Pacific Islanders in the US 

Learning Target(s): 

y Identify varying experiences of Pacific Islanders in relation to the United States. 

y Analyze differences and similarities between Pacific Islander experiences and history. 

y Explore the relationships between colonialism, citizenship, and identity. 

Essential Question: 

1.  Who are Pacific Islanders in the United States? 

2.  What is their history with immigration and settlement? 

Directions: Read the three descriptions below about US involvement in various islands. For each island nation, you will watch a short video. While watching the video, you will write down explicit details and facts. Afterward, you will work with your group to write a collective response. 

1. Hawai‘i – US Citizenship 

Hawai‘i was colonized by Euro-American capitalists and missionaries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In 1893 Americans invaded, overthrew Indigenous peoples, and secured an all-white oligarchy of planters in place of the reigning ali‘i, ruled by Queen Lili‘uokalani, which led to annexation in 1898. This included dispossession of the Hawaiian government, lands, and citizenship, which colonized Indigenous Hawaiians. 

Video: Act of War – produced by PBS Hawai‘i (write 7–10 explicit details) 264  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

2. Marshall Islands – Compact of Free Association 

In 1946, the United States started testing nuclear bombs in the Marshall Islands under the code name Operation Crossroads. To clear the way for the tests, the US Navy negotiated with leaders of Bikini Atoll to move 167 residents east to Rongerik Atoll—a move that Bikinians understood as temporary and believed would be “for the good of mankind.” When Rongerik’s food supply proved insufficient to support the population, the US relocated the Bikinians to Kwajalein Atoll and finally to Kile Island. On Kile, Bikinians faced numerous challenges, including insufficient food supplies, lack of fishing grounds, drought, typhoons, dependence on canned food supplied by the US Department of Agriculture, and accompanying health problems (e.g., high blood pressure and diabetes). 

Video: Anointed by Kathy Jetnil-Kijiner (write 5–7 explicit details) 

3. American Samoa – US Nationals 

In the 1890s, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States were locked in a dispute over who should have control over the Samoan Islands. In 1899, these countries came to an agreement in which the Germans had influence in the western islands and the US would maintain influence in the eastern islands. The US Navy wanted to utilize Pago Pago Harbor as a coaling site for their ships, which also became key during World War II. 

Video: Omai Fa‘atasi by Takashi Fujii with Pacific Islander Communications (write 7–10 explicit details) 

Analysis 

In your group, share your notes from each of the videos. Using your notes from the lecture and videos, discuss and write on a separate lined sheet of paper a collective response explaining US influence in the Pacific. 

** Remember to use a proper heading and include all member names. 265 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Day 2 Worksheets: 

Name:  Period:  Date: 

The Disaggregation of Pacific Islander Data 

Learning Target(s): 

y Identify varying experiences of Pacific Islanders in relation to the United States. 

y Analyze differences and similarities between Pacific Islander experiences and history. 

y Explore the relationships between colonialism, citizenship, and identity. 

Essential Question: 

1.  What systems, structures, and events have contributed to the racialization of Pacific Islanders in the US? 

2.  Why is it important to disaggregate census, educational, and demographic data on the Pacific Islander population? 

Directions: Using the four different readings discussed and analyzed in class, answer the following questions about disaggregating Pacific Islander data. Answer in complete sentences. 

1.  How has the US Census changed over time? 

2.  How do these sources define Pacific Islanders? 

3.  List all the Pacific Islander ethnicities. 

4.  List three important data points for Pacific Islanders. 266  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

5.  What does this data tell us about race and Pacific Islanders? 

Part B: 

Write a paragraph using evidence from the sources you have read and analyzed. Answer the following questions: 1) How have racial categories impacted Pacific Islanders? Provide at least one example. 2) Why is it important to disaggregate census, educational, and demographic data on the Pacific Islander population? 267 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Long Description Text for Graphic: 

US Immigration Status by Pacific Island of Birth 

US Citizens (Guam, Hawai‘i [US state], and Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands) 

y Live and work in the US legally 

y Qualify for public benefits (e.g., health care) 

y Vote in elections 

y Eligible to serve in US military 

Compact of Free Association Migrants (Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of the Marshall Islands, and Republic of Palau) 

y Live and work in the US legally 

y Labeled “nonimmigrants” but are not considered citizens or nationals 

y Not eligible for most federal benefits, some US states may provide limited benefits 

y Eligible to serve in US military 

US Nationals (American Samoa) 

y Live and work in the US legally 

y Similar to other immigrants, must obtain citizenship to obtain full benefits 

y Qualify for most federal benefits, some state or local benefits 

y Cannot vote when living in states 

y Eligible to serve in US military 

Immigrants from Islands without US Association (Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Samoa, Tokelau, Kiribati, and others) 

y Not citizens or nationals 

y Must apply for legal permanent resident status to work and live in the US legally, similar to other immigrants 

y Must wait five years to apply for public benefits 

y Cannot vote or serve in US military 

Return to South Pacific map. 268  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 24: South Asian Americans in the United States 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Day 1: South Asian Americans in the United States 

Time: 45 minutes 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How does history shape present-day attitudes toward South Asian Americans? 

2.  What are the challenges faced by immigrants (and their children and grandchildren)? 

3.  How do we make our society more inclusive? 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Define key terms related to bullying and xenophobia 

y Understand the historical migration of South Asians to the United States 

y Explore instances of discrimination and xenophobia at the individual, community, and policy level 

Materials and Resources: 

y Handout: Who Are South Asian Americans? (one page, one copy per student) 

y Handout: Glossary (one page, one copy per student) 

y Printouts of images (11 pages, one image per group) 

y Handout: Short Time Line of South Asian Americans in the US (two pages, one copy for each student) 

y Chart paper with a time line from the 1870s to the present (This can also be written on a blackboard or whiteboard as long as it’s large enough for the images to be posted.) 

y Sticky notes and pens or markers 269 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Main Activity (30 minutes) 

1.  Make sure that a time line from the 1850s to the present is drawn (or a clothesline can be hung with dates dangling and clothespins for students to attach their images) somewhere in the classroom with room for students to affix their images. 

2.  Divide students into 11 groups (ideally of no more than 2–3 students per group). 

3.  Distribute the Short Time Line of South Asian Americans in the US handout (one per student) and the images (one per group). 

4.  Ask students to discuss their image and utilize any terms from the glossary that apply to the example and situation given. Students can apply sticky notes with keywords that apply to their historical image on the bottom of the page or, if using a clothesline, on the back of the printed image. 

5.  After students have discussed their image, have them look at the Short Time Line of South Asian Americans in the US handout and decide where on the time line their image goes. 

6.  Once all images are lined up, have students read out chronologically the historical time line of events and examine the images. (Variations: Students can line up with their images and read out chronologically. Students can do a silent gallery walk to read about the images and look at the historical time line.) 

Discussion/Closing (15 minutes) 

Pose the questions: 

1.  What did you learn in today’s lesson that you didn’t know before? 

2.  What things can lead to a rise in xenophobia (historically or in the present)? 

3.  How can tolerance be promoted? 

Homework: 

Ask students to investigate their migration stories using the Migration Worksheet at the end of the day 1 section. 270  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Images 

1885 

A memento of the Dean’s reception, held October 10, 1885; Photograph of Anandabai Joshee, Kei Okami, and Tabat M. Islambooly, students from the Woman’s Medical College of Pennsylvania (left); Gurubai Karmarker (from India) graduated from Woman’s Medical College of Pennsylvania in 1892 (right) 

With international ships and missionary societies, people from India began visiting the United States as early as the late 1700s. In the late 1800s, international students from India attended the Woman’s Medical College of Pennsylvania, such as the women pictured above. 

Image 1 “Students posing for photo” Source: Legacy Center Archives, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia 

Image 2 “Gurubai Karmarker” Source: Legacy Center Archives, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia 271 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1912 

The first gurdwara (Sikh temple) in the United States was established in 1912 in Stockton, California. Immigrants from India, usually men and generally from the region of Punjab, came to the United States to study or work on the Pacific and Eastern Railroad as construction workers, in lumberyards, or in agriculture. By 1910, 5,000 people had migrated to the West Coast of the United States from colonial India. 

Many early immigrants were not able to bring family members with them to the United States, and few women were allowed to migrate, so many migrants intermarried with other groups, such as European Americans, Mexican Americans, or other Asian Americans. The PBS film Roots in the Sand documents the history of this community. 

“Exterior photograph of the Stockton Gurdwara,” January 1916, The Hindusthanee Student ;Source: South Asian American Digital Archive (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link244 )272  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

1917 

In February 1917, during World War I, the US Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1917 (also known as the Asiatic Barred Zone Act). Although President Woodrow Wilson previously vetoed it in 1916, the congressional majority overrode the president’s veto. The act added people originating from the Asiatic Barred Zone (see above) to the list of people who were considered “undesirable” for immigration to the US; the list also included: “homosexuals,” “idiots,” “feeble-minded persons,” “criminals,” “epileptics,” “insane persons,” “alcoholics,” “professional beggars,” all persons “mentally or physically defective,” “polygamists,” and “anarchists.” 

The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 had barred Chinese from entering the US, and the 1917 legislation expanded the categories to the entire Asian region. The rising nativism and xenophobia in the US led to the passage of the act to prohibit immigration of certain groups. Congress repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943, and the Luce–Celler Act of 1946 ended immigration policy discrimination against Asian Indians and Filipinos, who were accorded the right to naturalization and allowed a quota of 100 immigrants from each group per year. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, known as the McCarran–Walter Act, allowed other Asian groups (Japanese, Koreans, and others) to become naturalized US citizens. 

Accessed from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link245 273 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1918 

“Bhagat Singh Thind at Camp Lewis.” Photograph dated November 18, 1918, of Bhagat Singh Thind with his battalion at Camp Lewis, Washington. His unit was called Washington Company No. 2, Development Battalion No. 1, 166th Depot Brigade. 

Bhagat Singh Thind (who lived from 1892 to 1967) was born in Punjab, India, and came to the US to study in 1913. In 1918, he was enlisted in the US military during World War I. He was first granted US citizenship because of his military service in 1918, but it was revoked four days later because citizenship was only available at the time for “free white men.” In 1923, Thind brought a case to the Supreme Court arguing that immigrants to the US from India should be allowed to be naturalized citizens. The Supreme Court disagreed, since only commonly understood “Caucasian” immigrants were eligible to become citizens. Thind finally became a citizen in 1936. He went on to study spirituality and lecture extensively in the US. 

Source: South Asian American Digital Archive (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link246 )274  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

1937 

“East India Store Section,” Honolulu Advertiser , Hawaii (1937) 

Description: This four-page advertisement insert from the June 3, 1937, edition of the 

Honolulu Advertiser , marked the opening of the Watumull Building on 1162 Fort Street. It includes several short articles about G. J. Watumull and J. Watumull and advertisements for the stores, products, and boutiques housed in the building, as well as photographs of the East India Store interior and its employees. 

Source: South Asian American Digital Archive (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link247 )275 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1961 

Congressional Coffee Hour (House of Representatives) at the White House with President John F. Kennedy, May 18, 1961. 

From left to right: Congress Member Dalip Singh Saund (California), Congress Member Harold C. Ostertag (New York); Congress Member James A. Haley (Florida); President John F. Kennedy; Congress Member Frank W. Boykin (Alabama); Congress Member Harold T. Johnson (California); Congress Member John W. Byrnes (Wisconsin). Photographer Robert Knudsen. 

Dalip Singh Saund (who lived from 1899 to 1973) was the first Asian American member of the US House of Representatives (Congress). He served as the Congress Member from the 29th District of California from 1957 to 1963. He was born in Punjab, India, while it was under British rule. He migrated to the United States (via Ellis Island) in 1920, and pursued masters and doctoral degrees at the University of California, Berkeley. He campaigned for the rights of South Asian immigrants in the United States. After the Luce–Celler Act was signed into law by President Harry Truman in 1946 (allowing for people from India and the Philippines to become naturalized US citizens), Saund could become a US citizen, and later he successfully ran for national office. 

“President John F. Kennedy at Congressional Coffee Hour,” May 18, 1961, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum 276  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

1965 

President Lyndon B. Johnson signing the 1965 Immigration Act , with Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Senator Edward (Ted) Kennedy greeting the president. Source: LBJ Library and Museum, Photo credit: Yoichi Okamoto. 

In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Immigration Act of 1965, which changed US immigration policy. Previously, immigrants from Asia and Africa were allowed into the United States in very small numbers (even if they were highly educated or had family living in the US). The Act of 1965 was signed in front of the Statue of Liberty, on Liberty Island, and reflected the Civil Rights Movement’s gains for racial equality. US immigration policies had been severely discriminatory, given decades of exclusion of non-European immigrants. 

Departing from the previous system of country-based quotas, US immigration after 1965 has focused on the skills that immigrants bring and reunification of families (immigrants sponsoring their families to join them in the United States). 

Image from the LBJ Library Archive 277 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1987 

Long Description Text for Bar Graph Graphic 

In 1987, a 30-year-old immigrant from India who worked in a bank, Navroze Mody, was brutally beaten to death by a group of teenagers who called themselves “Dotbusters.” This group was active in New Jersey, where a large South Asian immigrant community is concentrated, and they had been harassing immigrants from South Asia for months. A month before Mody’s killing, Dotbusters (referring to the bindi that many Hindu women and others wear on their foreheads), sent a letter to a local newspaper. Part of their letter read: 

I’m writing about your article during July about the abuse of Indian People. Well I’m here to state the other side. I hate them, if you had to live near them you would also. We are an organization called dot busters. We have been around for 2 years. We will go to any extreme to get Indians to move out of Jersey City. If I’m walking down the street and I see a Hindu and the setting is right, I will hit him or her. We plan some of our most extreme attacks such as breaking windows, breaking car windows, and crashing family parties ... They are a week [sic] race physically and mentally. We are going to continue our way. We will never be stopped. 

In Jersey City, after Mody’s death, another person of South Asian descent was assaulted by three men with baseball bats. Laws against hate crimes are in existence in New Jersey though incidents still continue. 

Source: Pluralism.org and the FBI hate crimes statistics 278  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

2011 

Photo caption: The federal government has ordered Hamtramck to print election ballots and other materials in the Bangla language. 

“Feds order city to print Bengali ballots” 

by Charles Sercombe 

Here’s more proof that Hamtramck’s Bengali community is a major voting bloc. 

The federal government is now requiring the city to print all election material, including ballots and candidate nominating petitions, in the Bangladeshi language as well as in English. 

That’s because, according to the US Census, the Bangladeshi community is sizeable enough to warrant separate ballots. The agency said it used a variety of data to determine this mandate, but just what exactly the decision was based on was not immediately known. 

Hamtramck is not alone in being ordered to print separate ballots. Some 248 voting districts across the country have been told to print up separate ballots for their dominant ethnic group. 

City Clerk Ed Norris said the mandate will mean an additional cost to the city, but he did not know how much more elections will now run. 

He said there is not enough time to ready ballots for the Bengali community for the Nov. 8 General Election. The next election after the November election is the Republican Primary on Feb. 28. 279 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Norris said he’s not sure if the additional ballots will be ready by then, either. 

“We’re going to try to comply the best we can, as soon as we can,” he said. 

Part of the problem in getting ballots ready is finding both a reliable translation service and a printer that has the proper font for the Bangla language. Another issue to figure out is who is responsible for preparing and paying for the separate ballots when elections are under the jurisdiction of the county or state. 

Not all elections are solely city elections. Norris said trying to coordinate this mandate with county and state officials is another hurdle to jump. 

In the online social network site Facebook, there has been criticism of this mandate. There are some who believe that if you are a citizen and are eligible to vote, you should be able to understand the English language. 

But the Voting Rights Act of 2006 mandates special language ballots for [when] there is a significant ethnic presence in a community. 

Norris said that there is no appeal option to challenge the mandate. Norris added that the city has already provided some election material in Polish, Arabic, and Bangla. 

Source:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link248 280  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Post-2001 

New York Neighbors is an interfaith organization that uses the symbols of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam to symbolize how people of different backgrounds can get along. 

In the weeks following the attacks on 9/11/2001, there were significant increases to bias incidents aimed at persons believed to be of Middle Eastern or South Asian descent. Many groups came together to unite against extremism and to understand individuals from different backgrounds in order to make sure that unfair laws and practices don’t result in discriminatory treatment. One organization included the New York Neighbors, an interfaith coalition of over 130 groups in New York City that strive to “defend the constitutional and American values of religious freedom, diversity, and equality, while fighting against anti-Muslim bigotry and discrimination against our neighbors no matter what their national origin or religion.” 281 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

2012 

On Sunday August 5, 2012, an armed gunman entered a gurdwara (Sikh house of worship) in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, and opened fire on people praying in their house of worship. Six people were killed (Sita Singh and Prakash Singh, who were responsible for official duties and leading services at the gurdwara; Ranjit Singh; Satwant Singh Kaleka, president of the gurdwara committee; and Suveg Singh and Paramjit Kaur, members of the gurdwara community). Two other worshippers were injured. The gunman, Wade Michael Page, aged 40, committed suicide after being shot by a police officer. Wade Michael Page is reported to have been affiliated with white supremacist and hate groups and was on the watchlist of organizations that track hate crimes, such as the Southern Poverty Law Center. 

After the shooting, President Obama released a statement: “At this difficult time, the people of Oak Creek must know that the American people have them in our thoughts and prayers, and our hearts go out to the families and friends of those who were killed and wounded. My Administration will provide whatever support is necessary to the officials who are responding to this tragic shooting and moving forward with an investigation. As we mourn this loss which took place at a house of worship, we are reminded how much our country has been enriched by Sikhs, who are a part of our broader American family.” 

The White House statement is from the White House blog, August 8, 2012. 

The map is adapted from Wikipedia:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link249 282  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Glossary 

Ally: Someone who acts to help an individual of a group targeted by bullying or discrimination. Allies can help by standing up on behalf of (and together with) the victim or advocating for changes in attitudes or policies. 

Bigotry: Intolerance or inability to stand people who have different opinions or backgrounds. 

Empathy: The ability to understand someone else’s feelings, challenges, or problems. Empathy for another’s difficult situation should ideally lead to some action to help address that situation or its causes. 

Harassment: Any type of repeated or persistent behavior that is unwanted, unwelcome, and causes emotional distress in the person it is directed at. It is typically motivated by gender, race, religion, national origin, etc. 

Institutionalized Racism: A system, policy, or agency that discriminates based on race or ethnic origin through its policies or practices. 

Islamophobia: Irrational fear and strong dislike of anyone who is, or appears to be, Muslim. 

Microaggressions: Interactions between people of different races, genders, cultures, or sexual orientations where one person exhibits nonphysical aggression. Microaggressions can be intentional or unintentional, but they convey hostility, discrimination, and attitudes of superiority. 

Nativism: Literally refers to the practice of favoring the interests of those of a particular place over immigrants. In the 1900s, nativist policies in the United States made immigration policies restrictive to non-European countries. 

Naturalized Citizen: Someone born in one country who becomes a citizen of another country. In the US, there are three ways people become citizens: (1) jus sanguinis (right of blood) in which case if one parent is a US citizen, then the child is also entitled to US citizenship, even if the child is born outside the US; (2) jus soli (right of birthplace) in which case if a person is born in the US, they are granted citizenship; or (3) through naturalization in which case, after living in the US for multiple years, a person must apply for citizenship and complete a citizenship test. 

Prejudice: Negative feelings and stereotyped attitudes toward members of a different group. Prejudice or negative prejudgments can be based on race, religion, nationality, economic status, sexual orientation, gender, age, or other factors. 

Refugee: Someone who is outside of the country where they are from or have lived because they have been targeted, harassed, or persecuted because of their race, religion, sexual orientation, political beliefs, etc. Refugees often seek asylum in other countries. 283 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Second Generation: This term refers to the US-born children of immigrant parents. Second-generation children and youth sometimes face discrimination because of their appearances or religion even though they are Americans. 

Solidarity: Demonstrating unity or cooperation to work with others who may or may not share the same interests or challenges. Being an ally and working in solidarity go hand in hand. 

Tolerance: The ability to be fair and open to people who are different than oneself and beliefs that are different than one’s own. Being tolerant means being free from prejudice and bigotry. 

Xenophobia: A strong and unreasonable hatred of people who are from other countries or other ideas and things that are foreign. 284  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Who Are South Asian Americans? 

Population of South Asians in the US (density) 

According to the 2010 Census, approximately 4.3 million South Asians live in the US. South Asian Americans trace their origins to Afghanistan , Bangladesh , Bhutan , India , Nepal ,

Pakistan , Sri Lanka , and the Maldives . Some were born outside of the US, while others are descended from immigrants from these nations. 

The community also includes double migrants—members of diasporic communities in the Caribbean (Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago), Africa (Kenya, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zanzibar), Canada, Europe, the Middle East, and the Pacific Rim (Fiji, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore) who have subsequently migrated to the US. 

The South Asian American community is diverse not just in terms of national origin, but also in terms of ethnicity, religion, and language. South Asian Americans practice Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Jainism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism, and Zoroastrianism, and some are not religious. The most common languages spoken by South Asians in the United States, other than English, include Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Punjabi, Telugu, and Urdu. 

South Asians are diverse also in terms of immigration and socioeconomic status. While many are citizens or permanent residents, thousands live in the US on short-term work visas or are undocumented. With respect to employment, there are notable concentrations of South Asians in tech and health professions, education, and service work, taxi work, domestic work, and the hotel and restaurant industry. 

Adapted from the South Asian Americans Leading Together (SAALT) factsheets and from the curriculum “In the Face of Xenophobia: Lessons to Address the Bullying of South Asian American Youth” (2013) available online at 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link250 .285 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Short Time Line of South Asian Americans in the US 

[Key moments in US and world history are presented in brackets.] 

1838 

By 1838, approximately 25,000 Indian laborers have been transported as indentured workers to the British sugar colony of Mauritius. By 1917, more than 3.5 million South Asians will have been transported to European colonies in Africa, Caribbean, and the Pacific as indentured “coolies,” often undertaking harsh work once performed by slaves for a “penny a day,” as historians have noted. [Slavery was abolished throughout the British Empire in 1834 and in the US in 1865.] 

1880s and 1890s 

Approximately 2,000 South Asians are residing in the US on the West Coast. Many are farmworkers from the Punjab region who are members of the Sikh faith. Others are students. [The modern nations of India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Burma were all part of the British Empire from the mid-nineteenth century to the late 1940s.] 

1907–1908 

The Asian Exclusion League, an anti-immigrant nativist group, opposes immigration from Asia and sparks violent race riots against South Asians in Washington, California, and Oregon in order to drive out “cheap labor.” The Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization issues directives to dissuade citizenship applications from “Hindoos” (a derogatory term inaccurately applied to all South Asians; of the early migrants, 85% were Sikh, about 13% Muslim, and only 2% Hindus). 

1912–1913 

In 1912, Sikh migrants build the first gurdwara (Sikh house of worship) in the US, in Stockton, California. Founders of the gurdwara were also founders of the Ghadar Party in 1913. Ghadar leaders galvanized a cross-class community of laborers and students to fight the British by connecting colonialism to the racist conditions of labor and life they experienced in the US. As the Ghadar Party expanded, it established official headquarters in San Francisco. Its leaders attracted the attention of the British government, who recruited US immigration officials to keep tabs on Indian nationalists in America to limit the growing strength of the Ghadar Party’s revolutionary aims. 286  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

1917 

Immigration Act of 1917 defines a geographic “barred zone” in the Asia-Pacific (including South Asia) from which no immigrants can come to the US. [World War I lasts from 1914 to 1918.] 

1920 

State alien land laws prohibit transfer and ownership of land to noncitizens; as a consequence Indian farmers lose over 120,000 acres in California. In the following years, over 3,000 Indians return to their homeland due to xenophobic pressures. Migrants still come to the US as traders or merchants through port cities such as New Orleans or New York, and some settle in African American or Puerto Rican communities. [Women in the US are granted the right to vote in 1920.] 

1923 

In the United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind decision, the US Supreme Court found that Asian Indians are ineligible for US citizenship because they are not white. [In 1924, US President Calvin Coolidge signs the Snyder Act giving Native Americans US citizenship, but many states still denied them the right to vote until 1948.] 

1946 

The Luce–Celler Act grants right of naturalization and small immigration quotas to Asian Indians and Filipinos, including a national quota of 100 per year for immigrants from India. [World War II lasts from 1939 to 1945.] 

1957 

Dalip Singh Saund, an Indian American from Imperial Valley, California, is elected to the US House of Representatives and serves from 1957 to 1963. South Asian Americans number more than 12,000. [In 1955, the Montgomery Bus Boycott starts in Alabama. In 1956, the Supreme Court declares segregation on buses to be illegal.] 

1965 

The Immigration and Nationality Act, which removes quotas for Asian immigrants, triggers the second wave of South Asian immigration. [In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signs the Voting Rights Act.] 287 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1966–1977 

Eighty-three percent of South Asians enter the United States under employment visas, including 20,000 scientists, 40,000 engineers, and 25,000 medical doctors. Most have been educated at great public expense in their nations of origin. 

1987 

In Hoboken, New Jersey, Navroze Mody is beaten to death by “Dotbusters”—a violent hate group active in the state. South Asian Americans number more than 200,000 in the United States. [1989 marks the fall of the Berlin Wall and the beginning of the end of the Cold War.] 

1990 

The third wave of South Asian immigrants begins, including H-1B visa holders (many working in high tech), students, and working class families. 

2000 

Hamtramck, Michigan, is the first jurisdiction to provide language assistance in a South Asian language—Bengali—to voters following a lawsuit by the Department of Justice. 

September 11–17, 2001 

Attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon take place on September 11, 2001. In the week following 9/11, there are 645 reports of bias incidents aimed at persons perceived to be of Middle Eastern or South Asian descent. South Asians Balbir Singh Sodhi of Arizona, Waqar Hasan of Texas, and Vasudev Patel of Texas are all killed in post-9/11 hate crimes. Harassment and threats make up more than two-thirds of all reported bias incidents. 

September 2001–February 2002 

The US government detains without charge about 1,100 individuals (many from India and Pakistan). Many are denied access to counsel and undergo secret hearings. Many are detained for months on end; others are deported with no evidence ever presented of terrorist activity. 

2002 

The FBI reports that after 9/11, reports of violence against Muslims rose by 1600%. Nineteen people are murdered in hate crimes prompted by the events of 9/11. 288  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

2002 

The Special Registration program (NSEERS) requires men and boys—ages 16 and older— from 25 Asian and African countries (24 of them predominantly Muslim, including Pakistan and Bangladesh) to report to their local immigration office for fingerprinting and interrogation. Over 93,000 people register throughout the country. None are ever charged with any terrorist-related activity. More than 13,000 people were placed in deportation proceedings, while thousands more voluntarily leave the country. 

2005 

Piyush Bobby Jindal becomes the second South Asian American member of Congress. Many South Asians are elected to state office. [In 2007, Jindal is elected the first ever South Asian American state governor (Louisiana). Nikki Haley becomes the second in 2011 (South Carolina). In 2016, Haley becomes the US ambassador to the United Nations under Donald Trump.] 

2012 

Wade Michael Page, a white supremacist, walks in and opens fire during services at a Sikh gurdwara in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, killing six and wounding four. Page subsequently commits suicide after police arrived on the scene. The shooting is labeled an act of “domestic terrorism.” 

2012/2013 

According to the 2010 US Census, there are 4.3 million people of South Asian descent in the United States. In 2012, Ami Bera from California becomes the third Indian American to be elected to the US House of Representatives. 

2015 

The assault of Sureshbhai Patel occurred on February 6, 2015. Patel, a 57-year-old Indian national who was visiting his son in Madison, Alabama, was seriously injured after being detained by three police officers in a residential neighborhood responding to a call from a neighbor that there was a “skinny Black man” walking around the predominately white neighborhood. There is video footage of the officer slamming Patel to the ground. He had to be hospitalized and is partially paralyzed as a result of the injuries. The police officer (Eric Parker) was at first fired due to international uproar, but then reinstated in 2016, and was later acquitted of all charges. 289 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

2016–2019 

After the November 2016 election of Donald Trump, hate crimes have skyrocketed across the US. Islamophobia and xenophobia targeting anyone with brown skin have resulted in many deaths and injuries. In February 2017, two men originally from India chatted after work at a bar in Kansas. Asking them about their legal status and yelling at them to “get out of my country,” Adam Purinton opened fire, killing Srinivas Kuchibhotla and wounding his friend Alok Madasani as well as Ian Grillot who was at the bar and tried to help the men who were being attacked. 

2020/2021 

Kamala Devi Harris, a Black and South Asian Senator, becomes the first woman of color nominated to a major party’s ticket as Vice President. She is sworn in as Vice President in January 2021. 

Adapted from “South Asians in the US: A Social Justice Timeline,” developed by SAALT 290  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Migration Worksheet 

Use this worksheet to find out as much information as possible about how your family came to the United States. If your ancestors are Native American, find out any stories of migration within the US over the past few centuries. It is hard to pinpoint many historical dates, but just get as much information as you can to share with classmates. 

What can you find out about the first person in your family (on either or both sides) who migrated to the US? Around what year did that migration take place? 

Any additional details? 291 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Feel free to affix copies of any photos or documents you can find to the back of this sheet. 292  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2: South Asians and Xenophobic Violence 

Time: 60 minutes 

Essential Questions: 

y What turns xenophobia into violence? 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the Oak Creek tragedy in historical context 

y Build empathy 

Materials Needed: 

1.  Handout 1: BBC News Article 

2.  Handout 2: Graphic Organizer (optional) 

3.  Handout 3: Oak Creek Testimony 

4.  Projector or smart board for YouTube viewing 

Performance tasks 

Understanding and Situating the Oak Creek Tragedy 

Activity (3 minutes) 

Connect students to the activity from the previous lesson where they represented their own migration story and the xenophobia their families may have faced and to the South Asians in America time line that they walked through for the previous lesson. 

Part I: Opening Activity (15 minutes) 

Before beginning the lesson, the teacher should warn students that this lesson contains details and stories from a recent mass shooting. 

Direction for Students: 

1.  Today, we will examine the treatment of South Asians and Muslims in the US. We will begin class by reading and reacting to a current event. In the fall of 2012, a white supremacist opened fire in a gurdwara (Sikh house of worship), and killed seven innocent people. As you read this article, pay attention to what happened and why it happened. Use the headings to take note of the key ideas the author wants to illustrate and pay attention to how you are feeling. Annotate the article 293 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

as you read for key ideas and your reactions. Draw on information you learned in the previous two lessons as you respond to the text. 

Instructions for the Facilitator/Teacher: 

When implementing this lesson, teachers should take care to ensure that students do not conflate Islam with terrorism. Questions 3–4 in this section have been added to address this point. 

1.  Give students 7–10 minutes to read and react to the article and follow with a facilitated discussion. After reading the article, the teacher should provide time for comment and reflection to help the student process the traumatic events. 

y Handout 1: BBC News Article 

y Handout 2: Graphic Organizer (optional) 

2.  Guiding Questions for Discussion: What are your reactions to this article? What do you see happening here? Why do you think this happened? How do you see xenophobia and racism at play? 

3.  What is problematic about the following statement in the article which makes reference to mistaken identity and negative stereotypes? “Members of the community have been attacked in the past by assailants mistaking them for Muslims.” Why should Islam not be conflated with terrorism? What challenges occur when people who are Muslim, or are perceived to be Muslim, are targeted with Islamophobic sentiment? 

4.  Compare the above statement from the article with the following one from Harpreet Singh Saini’s testimony. “So many have asked Sikhs to simply blame Muslims for attacks against our community or just say ‘We are not Muslim.’ But we won’t blame anyone else. An attack on one of us is an attack on all of us.” Why do you think many Sikhs refrain from using the phrase “we are not Muslim”? 

Part II: Historicize Oak Creek – 9/11 Connections (15 minutes) 

1.  If a student doesn’t mention this, highlight that a key idea the article mentions is that this is not the first of these kinds of incidents. Twenty years ago, after the World Trade Center attack on 9/11, Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans became targets of xenophobic harassment and attack. 

2.  Guiding Questions: 

y What do you know about 9/11? 

y What knowledge do you have of what happened to members of the Muslim, Sikh, South Asian, and Arab American communities after 9/11? 294  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Why do you think this happened? 

3.  Use a T-chart/graphic organizer to capture student responses. 

y Key Understanding: 

○ After 9/11, Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans have experienced increased incidents of racial profiling, harassment, discrimination, bullying, and hate crimes. 

4.  Have students watch the opening sequence of the documentary Divided We Fall 

(0–4:30)  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link251 . Frame the viewing by telling students that you will now watch a segment of a film that captures the aftermath of 9/11 faced by Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans. Tell students to record their reactions. 

5.  Discussion: What are your thoughts regarding the connections between the Oak Creek tragedy and post-9/11 aftermath? 

Part III. Building Empathy: Oak Creek Testimony and Response Letter (25 minutes) 

1.  Bring students back to the Oak Creek tragedy by suggesting that hearing people’s testimonies and narratives deepens our understandings. Tell students that you will now read a testimony from the Oak Creek tragedy. 

2.  Engage in a shared reading of the Oak Creek testimony (the teacher reads aloud, students follow along). 

y Handout 3: Oak Creek Testimony 

3.  Ask students to reread the Oak Creek testimony independently and respond by writing a letter to Harpreet. As they read the Oak Creek testimony again, guide them to capture their emotional reactions and think about what they would like to share with teenagers who share Harpreet’s religious background. 

4.  Before the end of the class period, ask whether any students would like to share an excerpt from their letter. Ask students: How did it feel to write the letter? 

If useful, share with the students this infographic prepared by the Sikh Coalition (based in New York): Who Are the Sikhs?  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link252 295 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Handout 1: BBC News Article 

August 6, 2012 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link253 

“Sikhs express shock after shootings at Wisconsin temple” 

Sikhs living in the United States have expressed their shock and fear after a shooting at a temple in Wisconsin on Sunday which left seven people dead. 

Some community members could not believe what happened. Others said they had feared such attacks since 9/11. 

A gunman entered the Sikh temple on Sunday morning and opened fire, killing six people and injuring a policeman. 

The suspect has been named as Wade Michael Page, a 40-year-old army veteran, in US media reports. 

But his identity has not been independently confirmed to the BBC. 

A vigil for the victims was held in nearby Milwaukee as police searched the suspect’s home. 

FBI and bomb squad officers have surrounded the property of the alleged gunman in Cudahy, about 2.5 miles (4km) north of the Wisconsin Sikh Temple, and evacuated local residents. 

In total, seven people died in the attack in Oak Creek, a suburb of Milwaukee, including the gunman. A police officer and two other men were critically injured. 

Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who is himself a Sikh, said he was “deeply shocked and saddened” by the attack. 

“That this senseless act of violence should be targeted at a place of religious worship is particularly painful,” Mr. Singh said in a statement. 

Muslim confusion 

Officials have not yet identified the gunman or a possible motive, but Sikh organisations in the US say the community has been vulnerable since the 9/11 attacks. 

“This is something we have been fearing since 9/11, that this kind of incident will take place,” said Rajwant Singh, chairman of the Washington-based Sikh Council on Religion and Education. 296  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

“It was a matter of time because there’s so much ignorance and people confuse us [as] being members of Taliban or belonging to [Osama] bin Laden,” he told Associated Press. 

“We never thought this could happen to our community,” Devendar Nagra, 48, told Associated Press. “We never did anything wrong to anyone.” 

Sikhism hails from the Indian subcontinent, and observant Sikhs wear turbans. Members of the community have been attacked in the past by assailants mistaking them for Muslims. 

“That turban has tragically marked us as automatically suspect, perpetually foreign and potentially terrorists,” Valarie Kaur, a filmmaker based in the US who has chronicled attacks on Sikhs, told AP. 

Several hundred people turned up to an impromptu candlelit vigil in Milwaukee on Sunday evening for the victims. Cab driver and Oak Creek resident Kashif Afridi went to the temple after he heard about the attack. 

“When the shooting happened, I was at home watching the news. I went straight out and drove to the temple. There were lots of police and the area was closed off. 

“The press was already there and there were lots of people from the Sikh community. I spoke to one girl who was in the temple when the shooting happened. 

“She said when the shooting started, everyone panicked. People were running around trying to hide. She said she lost her uncle. 

“People here are in a state of a shock. This is a very small and peaceful place, you would never imagine this kind of attack could happen here. Nobody can believe it. 

“Lots of people have gathered in the area. People just stop by to express their sympathies.” 

“Terrorist-type incident” 

There are an estimated 2,500–3,000 Sikh families in and around the city worshipping at two gurdwaras, or temples, including the Wisconsin Sikh Temple. 

Lakhwinder Singh, a member of the congregation there, told Reuters that two of the victims were believed to be the president of the temple and a priest. 

“It will take a long time to heal. We’re hurt very badly,” he said. 

President Barack Obama expressed his condolences with victims of the attack, which comes just over two weeks after a gun massacre left 12 people dead at a Colorado cinema. 

“As we mourn this loss which took place at a house of worship, we are reminded how much our country has been enriched by Sikhs, who are a part of our broader American family.” 297 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

The US embassy in India said it was “deeply saddened by the senseless loss of lives and injuries” caused by the shooting. 

“Our hearts, thoughts, and prayers go out to the victims and their families,” a statement said. 

“The United States takes very seriously the responsibility to respect and protect people of all faiths. Religious freedom and religious tolerance are fundamental pillars of US society.” 

Local politician Mark Honadel called the attack “craziness.” 

The state representative told CNN: “Unfortunately, when this type of stuff hits your area, you say to yourself, ‘why?’ But in today’s society, I don’t think there’s any place that’s free from idiots.” 

Police have described it as a “domestic terrorist-type incident.” The FBI are taking over the criminal investigation. 

There was believed to be only one attacker, with eyewitness reports suggesting it was a white male. 

Information from the Article 

My Reactions 298  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Handout 3: Oak Creek Testimony 

Testimony before the US Senate of Harpreet Singh Saini (age 18) (Survivor of the Oak Creek Shooting) 

Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights and Human Rights Committee on the Judiciary on “Hate Crimes and the Threat of Domestic Extremism” 

September 19, 2012 (excerpts) 

My name is Harpreet Singh Saini. I am here because my mother was murdered in an act of hate 45 days ago. I am here on behalf of all the children who lost parents or grandparents during the massacre in Oak Creek, Wisconsin. A little over a month ago, I never imagined I’d be here. I never imagined that anyone outside of Oak Creek would know my name. Or my mother’s name: Paramjit Kaur Saini. 

As we all know, on Sunday, August 5, 2012, a white supremacist fueled by hatred walked into our local gurdwara with a loaded gun. He killed my mother, Paramjit Kaur, while she was sitting for morning prayers. He shot and killed five more men—all of them were fathers, all had turbans like me. And now people know all our names: Sita Singh, Ranjit Singh, Prakash Singh, Suveg Singh, Satwant Singh Kaleka. 

This was not supposed to be our American story. This was not my mother’s dream. My mother and father brought Kamal and me to America in 2004. I was only 10 years old. Like many other immigrants, they wanted us to have a better life, a better education. More options. In the land of the free. In the land of diversity. 

It was a Tuesday, two days after our mother was killed, that my brother Kamal and I ate the leftovers of the last meal she had made for us. We ate her last rotis—which are a type of South Asian flatbread. She had made the rotis from scratch the night before she died. Along with the last bite of our food that Tuesday … came the realization that this was the last meal, made by the hands of our mother, that we will ever eat in our lifetime. My mother was a brilliant woman, a reasonable woman. Everyone knew she was smart, but she never had the chance to get a formal education. 

She couldn’t. As a hard-working immigrant, she had to work long hours to feed her family, to get her sons educated, and help us achieve our American dreams. This was more important to her than anything else. 

Senators, my mother was our biggest fan, our biggest supporter. She was always there for us, she always had a smile on her face. But now she’s gone. Because of a man who hated her because she wasn’t his color? His religion? I just had my first day of college. And my mother wasn’t there to send me off. She won’t be there for my graduation. She won’t be there on my wedding day. She won’t be there to meet her grandchildren. I want to tell the 299 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

gunman who took her from me: You may have been full of hate, but my mother was full of love. She was an American. And this was not our American dream. 

We ache for our loved ones. We have lost so much. But I want people to know that our heads are held high. We also know that we are not alone. Tens of thousands of people sent us letters, attended vigils, and gave us their support—Oak Creek’s mayor and police chief, Wisconsin’s governor, the President and the First Lady. All their support also gave me the strength to come here today. 

Senators, I came here today to ask the government to give my mother the dignity of being a statistic. The FBI does not track hate crimes against Sikhs. My mother and those shot that day will not even count on a federal form. We cannot solve a problem we refuse to recognize. 

Senators, I also ask that the government pursue domestic terrorists with the same vigor as attackers from abroad. The man who killed my mother was on the watch lists of public interest groups. I believe the government could have tracked him long before he went on a shooting spree. 

Finally, Senators, I ask that you stand up for us. As lawmakers and leaders, you have the power to shape public opinion. Your words carry weight. When others scapegoat or demean people because of who they are, use your power to say that is wrong. 

So many have asked Sikhs to simply blame Muslims for attacks against our community or just say “We are not Muslim.” But we won’t blame anyone else. An attack on one of us is an attack on all of us. 

I also want to be a part of the solution. That’s why I want to be a law enforcement officer like Lt. Brian Murphy, who saved so many lives on August 5, 2012. I want to protect other people from what happened to my mother. I want to combat hate—not just against Sikhs but against all people. 

Senators, I know what happened at Oak Creek was not an isolated incident. I fear it may happen again if we don’t stand up and do something. 

I don’t want anyone to suffer what we have suffered. I want to build a world where all people can live, work, and worship in America in peace. 

Because, you see, despite everything, I still believe in the American dream. In my mother’s memory, I ask that you stand up for it with me. Today. And in the days to come. 

Accessed and excerpted from full testimony available at:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ ch4.asp#link254 300  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 3: South Asian Americans: Past and Present 

Time: 60 minutes 

Essential Question: 

How can examining historical manifestations of xenophobia and racism help us understand present forms of bias-based bullying? 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Examine historical roots of xenophobia against Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans in America 

y Compare past occurrences with modern day forms of bias-based bullying 

Materials Needed: 

1.  Background Information handout 

2.  Past and Present sets 

3.  Graphic Organizer 

Performance Tasks: Connecting the past to the present 

Before beginning the lesson, the teacher should warn students that this lesson describes acts of violence that led to death. Time for process and reflection should be given to students because each of the sets can be traumatic for some students. 

Activity: (5 minutes) 

Connect students to the previous lesson in which they developed an understanding that the Oak Creek tragedy was not a new phenomenon. Rather, hate crimes against Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans have significantly increased after the attacks on the World Trade Center. Tell students that today they will further historicize this and understand how xenophobia is most often linked to what is happening in the political landscape. 

Quick Write (5 minutes) 

y Ask students to recall when the earliest South Asians came to the United States. Draw upon the time line. 

y Prompts: What do you think early arrivers might have experienced? What leads you to make these inferences? 301 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Part I: Background Information (10 minutes) 

Instructions for the Facilitator/Teacher: 

For the main activity for this lesson, students will be working in groups in order to compare the harassment of South Asians and Muslims in the past and present. In the next 10 minutes, you will provide students with background knowledge to set them up effectively for their independent work. As a class you can read through Handout 1, which provides a brief synopsis of each historical occurrence that students will examine. You may want to include the following visual media: 

1907 Bellingham Riots: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link255 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link256 

The Persian Gulf War:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link257 

Dotbusters:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link258  (begin at 0:42) 

Part II: Small Group Work (25 minutes) 

Break students into three larger groups and then create subgroups of 3–4 students. Before you break students into groups, discuss terms: 

Microaggressions: contemporary form of racism—invisible, intentional or unintentional, and subtle in nature; usually outside the level of conscious awareness, but which cumulatively and over time create an uncomfortable or hostile environment for the victim 

Bullying: verbal, physical, or psychological acts of intimidation where there is an imbalance of power 

Harassment: systemic and/or continued unwanted actions, including threats and demands, often based upon race, sex, religion, gender, etc. 

Hate crimes: acts of violence against individuals, groups, places of worship, and others, typically motivated by some form of prejudice 

Ask students to independently read their set of events (Handout 2). Thereafter, they should work together to complete the graphic organizer (Handout 3). (This could be completed using chart paper as well.) Students will summarize each event and identify whether the occurrence is an example of microaggression, bullying, or hate crime. Next, they will analyze the language used to describe Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and Arab Americans in each excerpt either by perpetrators or by media sources. Finally, they will use guiding questions to synthesize the exercise and compare and contrast the xenophobic and racist treatment of the past and present. Students should prepare a quick (three-minute) presentation for the class on their event set. 302  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Note: You may want to model or use guided practice for the first set to give students an example of the type of thinking they will need to do. 

Part III: Whole Class Share (15 minutes) 

After each group shares, debrief the comparison of the past and present and discuss why the analysis of historical forms of xenophobic and racist phenomena is significant. 

y Guiding Questions: 

○ What did you realize as you read about the Bellingham Riots, the hate crimes that occurred during the Persian Gulf War, and the Dotbusters? 

○ Why do you think the events of the past occurred? What was happening between the United States and other countries during this time that influenced those events? 

○ What about present-day occurrences? 

○ What was similar to the present-day forms of harassment? What was different? 

○ What can be done? 303 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

South Asians Past and Present—Background Information 1907 

Bellingham Riots 

“Located in the northwest corner of Washington State, just shy of the Canadian border, Bellingham boomed in the early twentieth century as a center of extractive industries like mining, fishing, and timber. Workers from all over the world arrived in Bellingham looking for jobs, including a sizable number from Asia. 

In the early 1900s, Asian immigrants numbered in the hundreds and were a substantial presence in Bellingham, sustaining small communities with their own restaurants, pool halls, and barbershops. Yet, due to sustained campaigns of racism and exclusion, little to nothing of these communities remains in the city today. By 1950, city census numbers reported a mere eight individuals of Asian ancestry. 

The most visible manifestation of these campaigns was the riot of 1907. A group of South Asian migrant workers arrived in Bellingham in 1906, employed mostly in the city’s lumber mills. 

Immediately, white labor leaders demanded the South Asian workers be expelled from the city, claiming the newcomers took jobs away from white workers and drove down wages.” 

Information excerpted from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link259 

Dotbusters: Anti-Indian Hate Group in New Jersey 

In the fall of 1987, an anti-Indian hate group formed in New York and New Jersey that committed their crimes in Jersey City. Their hate crimes include burglary, vandalism, assault, and murder. While the violence seemed to be aimed at the Hindu community, where the wearing of the bindi is most common, it is believed that the Dotbusters actions were based on racial grounds, aimed at South Asian immigrants. 

See  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link260 

Hate Crimes During the Persian Gulf War 

The Persian Gulf War against Iraq was led by the United States, backed by a UN coalition of 34 nations, and followed Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. This conflict led to an eruption of hate crimes against Arabs and Muslims and other ethnic communities perceived to be Middle Eastern in the United States. 

Information excerpted from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link261  and 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link262 304  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Xenophobic Racism Against South Asians and Muslims in the United States: Past and Present 

Set 1 

Event 1: 1907 

Description: 

On September 4, 1907, 500 white working class men in Bellingham, Washington, attacked South Asian millworkers and their families. Within 10 days, the entire South Asian population departed town. 

It should be noted that the use of the term “Hindu” in this article is inaccurate and actually refers to Sikhs. “Hindu” or “Hindoo” was a common label in Canada and the US for all South Asians, though most early twentieth century immigrants from India were Sikhs from the Punjab region. ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link263 )

The Sikh Coalition’s teacher resources about the Bellingham Riots provide greater detail about the Sikh community specifically being targeted and can supplement this source. (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link264 ). 305 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Morning Reveille September 6, 1907, p. 4 (Editorial) 

“The Hindus Have Left Us” 

While any good citizen must be unalterably opposed to the means employed, the result of the crusade against the Hindus cannot but cause a general and intense satisfaction. The school kids, who made up the greater portion of the mob that put the heathen out of business, should, of course, be spanked and sent to bed and the hoodlums should go to jail, but the fact that the fear instilled into the hearts of the Hindus induced them to return to the land which owes them protection [note: reference here is to Canada] is a cause for rejoicing. Two wrongs never make a right, it is true, and such riotous demonstrations are to be discouraged and prevented, but the departure of the Hindus will leave no regret. 

From every standpoint it is most undesirable that these Asians should be permitted to remain in the United States. They are repulsive in appearance and disgusting in their manners. They are said to be without shame and, while no charges of immorality are brought against them, their actions and customs are so different from ours that there can never be tolerance of them. They contribute nothing to the growth and up-building of the city as the result of their labors. They work for small wages and do not put their money into circulation. They build no homes and while they numerically swell the population, it is of a class that we may well spare. ... They have been working here because of the labor shortage, but now that they have decamped their places will be filled by white men. ... There can be no two sides to such a question. The Hindu is a detriment to the town, while the white man is a distinct advantage. 

Information sourced from: Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link265 

Event 2: 2005 

“In the fall of 2005, seventh-grader Mandeep Singh’s daily routine included fighting off classmates who pulled and yanked at his jurdha (the topknot worn by Sikh men) while calling him “Bin Laden” and “meatball head.” Though Mandeep and the Sikh Coalition repeatedly complained to his school’s administration, nothing was done to stem the harassment for almost two years. In February 2005 students hit the seventh-grader twice on his head, leading to contusions and a severe injury that left Mandeep confined to bed rest for weeks. Unconvinced that the school could do anything to ensure their son’s safety, Mandeep’s parents sent him back to his native England to finish his schooling.” 

Information sourced from the Sikh Coalition 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link266 306  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Set 2 

Scenario 1: 1987 

In 1987, a 30-year-old immigrant from India who worked in a bank, Navroze Mody, was brutally beaten to death by a group of teenagers who called themselves “Dotbusters.” This group was active in New Jersey, where a large South Asian immigrant community is concentrated, and they had been harassing immigrants from South Asia for months. A month before Mody’s killing, Dotbusters (referring to the bindi that many Hindu women and others wear on their foreheads), sent a letter to a local newspaper. 

Part of their letter read: 

“I’m writing about your article during July about the abuse of Indian People. Well I’m here to state the other side. I hate them; if you had to live near them you would also. We are an organization called dot busters. We have been around for 2 years. We will go to any extreme to get Indians to move out of Jersey City. If I’m walking down the street and I see a Hindu and the setting is right, I will hit him or her. We plan some of our most extreme attacks such as breaking windows, breaking car windows, and crashing family parties. … They are a week [ sic ] race physically and mentally. We are going to continue our way. We will never be stopped.” 

In Jersey City, not long after Mody’s death, another person of South Asian origin was assaulted by three men with baseball bats. Incidents still continue even though laws against hate crimes have been instituted in New Jersey. 

Scenario 2: 2003 

“On November 27, 2003, Metro West reported that an Ashland, Massachusetts, teenager defaced a Hindu temple in Ashland on Halloween. Anthony Picciolo, 17, was convicted of spray-painting hate messages. Police said Piccioli spray-painted ‘Sand NRRRRRR beware,’ and ‘head,’ on a rock near the Hindu temple. Police said ‘head’ was short for ‘towel head.’ On June 25, 2003, in Boston, an Indian graduate student named Saurabh Bhalerao, who was working part time as a pizza deliveryman, was the target of deplorable abuse. He was robbed, beaten, burned with cigarettes, stuffed in a trunk, and stabbed twice before finally being dumped along a road. Police suspect that the attackers mistook the Hindu man for a Muslim. As they were beating him, the attackers supposedly taunted, ‘go back to Iraq.’” 

Information sourced from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link267 307 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Set 3 

Event 1: 1991 

“Suspicious Fires Probed for Ties to Gulf Tension: Crime: An arson unit studies a West Los Angeles market blaze and police label the torching of a Sherman Oaks store a likely hate crime. Owners of both businesses are of Mideast descent.” 

… The Los Angeles Fire Department, meanwhile, opened an arson investigation into the other blaze that seriously damaged the Elat Market on West Pico Boulevard and destroyed an adjoining stationery store and storage area. The fire, which occurred about 11 p.m. Tuesday, caused an estimated $325,000 damage. 

“Because of the situation in the Middle East, we called for an arson unit right away,” said Assistant Fire Chief Ed Allen. “The market is owned by a gentleman from Iran.” 

“The fire had a very good start,” Allen added. “There was a lot of heavy smoke when the first companies arrived. It very quickly broke through the roof. When that happens, you take a hard look at it.” 

Although the owner, Ray Golbari, said repeatedly he thought the fire was “just an accident,” some neighbors said it was possible someone had started the fire in the mistaken belief that Golbari is of Arab, rather than Jewish, descent. 

The Elat Market has signs in both Hebrew and Persian script on the front, but Golbari said the Persian script is sometimes misread as Arabic. 

There have been two other suspicious fires in the Pico-Robertson district in recent weeks. One occurred Dec. 27 at an insurance agency, and another on the night of Jan. 17 at a hot dog stand. 

“This is the kind of violence that we have been warning the authorities that the Arab-American community would be subjected to,” said Nazih Bayda, regional director of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee. 

Information sourced from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link268 308  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Event 2: February 2009 

As an eighth-grade student at Beckendorf Junior High School in Katy, Texas—the same town where residents infamously held pig races to protest a proposed mosque in 2006— Abdul Hamed initially accepted a classmate’s explanation that jibes like “terrorist” and “your family blows things up,” were just jokes. 

But the teasing continued almost daily, and soon escalated into shoving. 

Abdul alerted his teachers, who separated the boys in class, but the bullying would continue in the hallways. In early February 2009, on the school’s track field, Abdul shoved back. 

According to Abdul, the boy left but returned several minutes later and sucker punched him, knocking him out and breaking his jaw. That was how Abdul’s Palestinian parents first learned about the bullying. 

Abdul said school officials made the boy go to anger management counseling. “For what I went through, that punishment wasn’t even close,” said Abdul, whose jaw was wired shut and missed several weeks of school. 

Abdul, now a 15-year-old sophomore at Seven Lakes High School where his attacker also goes, said he’s “moved on.” 

Information sourced from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link269 309 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

SUMMARIZE! 

What’s happening in each event? Which acts are microaggressions, which might be called bullying, and which are hate crimes? 

Event 1 

Event 2 

ANALYZE! 

What terms are used to describe Muslims, Sikhs, South Asians, and/or Arab Americans in each event? 

Event 1 

Event 2 

SYNTHESIZE! 

Why does this matter? What does this show us? How? 

Event 1 

Event 2 310  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Long Description Text for Bar Graph Graphic: 

2010 Hate Crimes: Behind the Bias 

Motivation percentages of the 6,624 single bias incidents in 2010: 

Race: 47.3 percent 

Religion: 20.0 percent 

Sexual Orientation: 19.3 percent 

Ethnicity/National Origin: 12.8 percent 

Disability: 0.6 percent 

Return to Bar Graph Graphic. 311 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 25: Vietnamese American Experiences— The Journey of Refugees 

Theme: History and Movement 

1.  What does it mean to live on this land? Who may become an American? What happens when multiple narratives are layered on top of each other? 

2.  How should societies integrate newcomers? How do newcomers develop a sense of belonging to the places where they have arrived? 

3.  How does migration affect the identities of individuals, communities, and nations? 

4.  How do ideas about who may belong in a nation affect immigration policy, the lives of immigrants, and host communities? 

5.  What role have immigrants played in defining notions of democracy? 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Content Standard: 11.11.1: Discuss the reasons for the nation’s changing immigration policy, with emphasis on how the Immigration Act of 1965 and successor acts have transformed American society. 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.11–12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; W.11–12.1; SL.11–12.1 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

The lesson focuses on the history, politics, culture, contributions, challenges, and current status of Vietnamese Americans in the United States. 

Overview: Vietnamese Americans play an integral part in shaping the US’s multicultural and multilingual transformation. To understand this process, we must examine the following: 

y Vietnamese Refugees: Vietnamese refugees arrived in waves from 1975 to 1995. Some refugees escaped Vietnam in boats, while others were repatriated to other counties. There are estimates that up to two million people escaped by boats and approximately half of them perished in the high seas. Many faced hunger, thirst, piracy, or other traumatic experiences during their journeys. Many others who were not able to flee remained in Vietnam and faced economic hardships, persecution, and reeducation camps, from the totalitarian government led 312  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

by the Communist Party. The international community made great efforts to support these coming waves of refugees, but that was exhausted around 1995 when countries began to stop accepting these refugees and forced them to return to their homeland. The boat people saga and the hypervisibility of the plight of refugees forced the US, and the international community, to negotiate with Vietnam to allow immigration of subsequent waves of Vietnamese leaving Vietnam through other humanitarian programs under the auspices of family reunification, particularly for former political prisoners, Amerasian children, and former employees of the US government. Most of the refugees were accepted for resettlement to sanctuary countries all over the world, and many resettled in the US. The resettling refugees were first scattered all over the US, but most of them eventually congregated around the largest concentrations of Vietnamese communities, in Orange County, San Jose, Houston, Virginia, and Florida. 

y New Life in America. Most Vietnamese refugees arrived in America without any preparation economically, educationally, or culturally. Children were enrolled in schools at their age level with a new language and education system and limited support. Adults were either enrolled in adult schools or began new lives with new job skills or life experiences which were totally different from their lives in Vietnam. Many refugees who settled in the US had no proof of certification of their trades or professional careers. They worked in manually laborious jobs that did not require a mastery of the English language. Many Vietnamese children adapted well in American schooling, but their parents or adult relatives were less successful. Overall, they adapted well in their new homeland, but the scars of the war, life under communist rule, boat escapes, and cultural shock upon arrival in America remained with many of them in varying degrees. 

y Vietnamese American Success and Contributions. The Vietnamese have been resettled throughout the US with varying degrees of success, and California is home to many of the largest Vietnamese communities outside of the Vietnam. In California, there are large Vietnamese American communities in Orange County, San Jose, Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco, and Sacramento. Vietnamese students make up one of the highest performing groups academically. Vietnamese Americans have made large contributions in high tech businesses, health care, and education, and as high-ranking military officers and government officials. Despite some successes, the Vietnamese American community continues to have some of the lowest levels of education and income and is one of the most linguistically isolated and English proficiency limited communities compared to the general population. 

Key Terms and Concepts: Vietnamese Americans, refugees, oral histories 313 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Enhance understanding and analyze the refugee experiences of Vietnamese Americans by engaging in a variety of primary and secondary sources, including oral histories, books, documentaries, scholarly articles, and community programs and resources 

y Introduce the distinction between refugees, those who seek political and economic refuge as a result of the various wars that took place on Vietnam soil, and immigrants in America seeking opportunity for a better life 

y Conduct an interview with someone who is a Vietnamese refugee or listen to archived interviews of Vietnamese refugees; develop and ask questions that explore the lived experiences of Vietnamese refugees; record and transcribe the interviews; and analyze the transcription and create a presentation (using various formats such as PowerPoint, video, paper) on the experiences of Vietnamese refugees 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the history of Vietnamese Americans in the US? 

2.  How has the cultural perception of Vietnamese people and Vietnamese Americans been shaped and framed by mainstream discourse in the US? 

3.  How did the first-generation Vietnamese refugees’ experiences differ from those of their children who were born in the US? How did their refugee status factor into differing experiences? 

4.  Why is the Vietnamese American experience important to understand within the context of Asian American studies and US history? What are the differences between the refugee and immigrant experience? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  The teacher begins the lesson by asking students, “Tell me one thing about you that shapes your experiences and how you see the world.” This provides students with the opportunity to hear the various perspectives. 

a.  Students engage in writing an “I Am From … ” poem. Students write a three-stanza poem that speaks to their identity, background, and experience, and where they are from. Each line of the poem begins with “I am from … ” and students should follow with something specific about their life, upbringing, and identity. Teachers can provide examples. Allow students 10 to 15 314  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

minutes to write their poem. After everyone has finished writing, students can share their poems in class throughout this lesson. 

2.  The teacher tells students that they are going to learn about Vietnamese Americans and focus on four essential questions (read essential questions 1–4 aloud). 

3.  The teacher asks students what they know about Vietnam and its relationship to the United States. “What comes to mind when you think of Vietnam?” 

4.  The teacher presents some basic information about Vietnamese American history and Vietnamese Americans via article, poem, PowerPoint, or other presentation method. See the following for suggested short video clips to share with students. Teachers should note that some materials may be sensitive for some students. 

a.  PBS American Experience: Last Days in Vietnam Collection – Refugees: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link270 

b.  PBS Asian Americans Collection – Southeast Asian Refugees: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link271 

5.  The teacher leads a read aloud of the Quick Fact Sheet about Vietnamese Americans in the US. Alternate choral reading—the teacher reads one fact, the whole class reads the next fact, while the teacher walks around the room. The Quick Fact Sheet is attached. 

a.  After the watching the videos and reviewing the Quick Fact Sheet, the teacher asks students to draft a set of questions on what they would like to learn more about the Vietnamese refugees based on the information provided. Prompting questions may include: What questions do you have about the refugee experience? What would you like to know more about the refugee experiences of Vietnamese Americans? Whose story is being told? Whose narrative is being left out? The class writes down and compiles a list of shared questions. 

For homework, students can conduct research on the outstanding questions. 

Day 2 

1.  The teacher begins a deeper discussion about the Vietnamese refugee experience in the US, focusing on the essential questions. The teacher then shows additional video clips showcasing the diversity of experiences for refugees and their families in the United States and asks students to reflect on how the video clips address how refugees are being portrayed in the context of racism and discrimination in the US. 315 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

a.  PBS WQED Specials: Vietnam: Another View 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link272 

b.  PBS Finding Refuge in KC: Hank 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link273 

c.  PBS Borders and Heritage: In Washington, a Vietnamese Refugee Lives Life in Limbo 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link274 

2.  After watching the video clips, students engage in a think, write, pair/share exercise, followed by a group share exercise, guided by the following questions: 

a.  How do Vietnamese Americans describe their refugee experience? How do experiences differ for Vietnamese refugees and their families and children who were raised in the US? 

b.  How were/are Vietnamese refugees being perceived by both Vietnamese Americans and the American public? 

c.  How was/is the Vietnamese refugee experience being shaped by racial and discrimination policy and practices in the US? 

d.  How are the Vietnamese refugee experiences similar to and different from other immigrant groups? 

Some important things to point out in the discussion: 

y The wars in Southeast Asia have been framed by a general understanding in mainstream discourse of the Vietnam War as a proxy war to a global Cold War between two international superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, as a precursor to discussions surrounding communist/anti-communist political ideological difference and divide that would exacerbate the experiences of resettling Vietnamese later. 

y Many Vietnamese refugees experience loss, trauma, and suffering as they flee their homeland and seek political and economic refuge in a foreign land. 

y Being caught between two worlds, Vietnamese Americans are neither accepted by the country they left behind nor by the United States given their refugee status, a reminder of the war that the US played a role in. 

y Discuss the Vietnamese American community development over the past four decades—its resettlement from refugee camps to recognized ethnic enclaves throughout California and the US. 

y Explore the racial inequalities and discriminatory practices experienced by Asian Americans and how they negatively impact the Vietnamese community. The COVID-19 pandemic shed light on the racial and socioeconomic disparities 316  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

that communities of color experience. (The California governor’s remarks about nail salons as the center of community spread of the widespread illness has a negative impact on the industry and its workers.) 

y Recognize the growth, development, and contributions that many Vietnamese Americans are making to shape the diversity of America. 

Homework/Action/Assessment 

To demonstrate learning of the material, students can choose between two activities to complete as a homework assignment. The options are: 

1.  The teacher provides students with a resource list of various articles and short books narrated through the perspective of Vietnamese American refugees. Students are to choose at least three resources and write a two-page essay answering the reflection questions below. 

a.  Book: Being Vietnamese in America (Hãy Sống “Mỹ” Một Cách Rất “Việt Nam” )by Nguyen Ha Tran:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link275 

b.  Book: The Best We Could Do by Thi Bui 

c.  Article: “Vietnamese American Art and Community Politics: An Engaged Feminist Perspective” by Lan Duong and Isabelle Thuy Pelaud, in Journal of Asian American Studies : https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link276 

d.  Article: “Toward a Critical Refugee Study: The Vietnamese Refugee Subject in US Scholarship” by Y ến Lê Espiritu, in Journal of Vietnamese Studies :

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link277 

e.  Article: “April 30” by Viet Thanh Nguyen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link278 

f.  Article: “Our Vietnam War Never Ended” by Viet Thanh Nguyen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link279 

g.  Article: “Author Viet Thanh Nguyen on the Struggles of Being a Refugee in America” by David Canfield: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link280 

h.  Article: “Asian Americans Are Still Caught in the Trap of the ‘Model Minority’ Stereotype. And it Creates Inequality for All” by Viet Thanh Nguyen:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link281 

i.  Excerpt: Prologue and introduction from Nothing Ever Dies: Vietnam and the Memory of War by Viet Thanh Nguyen 317 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Reflection Questions: 

y Viet Thanh Nguyen’s book Nothing Ever Dies begins with the statement, “all wars are fought twice, the first time on the battlefield, the second time in memory.” Drawing from the chosen articles and books, how might this make sense in different ways for the first generation of Vietnamese refugees and their second-generation Vietnamese American children? 

y What is it like to be Vietnamese American today? 

y How is the identity of Vietnamese Americans being shaped? What is visible and what is invisible? 

2.  Students conduct oral histories by interviewing Vietnamese refugees using the set of questions that the class has compiled in activity 5(a) of day 1. Students can personalize their project by considering how their personal and/or family stories connect to the Vietnamese American experience, how the Vietnamese American experience connects to the larger historical narratives, and how and why some narratives have been privileged over others. For students who do not have personal or family connections, the teacher can prepare ahead of time to help connect students to Vietnamese American-serving organizations. Lastly, students may consider how to improve their own community, what constructive actions can be taken, and whether they provide a model for change for those in other parts of the state, country, and world. 

See: REFUGENE “The Family Stories Project” storytelling kit for oral history resources in partnership with the Union of North American Vietnamese Student Associations:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link282 

Students will write a two-page essay answering each of the guiding questions below using evidence from the oral histories collected. 

Guiding Questions: 

a.  How has the refugee experience shaped the identity of Vietnamese Americans? 

b.  What are the stories that were told and what remains invisible? 

y Why did some remain invisible? What conversation topics or themes were more difficult to talk about? 

c.  What emotions and/or trauma arise from refugees in sharing their experiences? 

d.  How do Vietnamese Americans see themselves in relation to other Asian American communities? 

e.  What are the hopes and dreams for the next generation of Vietnamese Americans? 318  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework

Chapter 14 of the framework includes the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s, which brought attention to the discrimination faced by various ethnic groups after generations of prejudice, discrimination, and discriminatory policies and practices against communities of color. (Hispanic farm workers, Native Americans, and African Americans, among others, protested against the heavy hand of racism in housing, employment, and educational opportunities.) Following the Civil Rights Movement, California’s diversity increased only after President Johnson signed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, opening the door to increasingly large numbers of immigrants from Asia and Central America (page 297). Students may analyze the push and pull factors that contributed to shifting immigration patterns, but they should also learn about changes in immigration policy (page 299). Two guiding questions for this chapter include 1) What did protests and frustrations expressed by Californians in the late Cold War Era reveal about the state? and 2) In what directions is California growing in the twenty-first century? 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: See above 

Materials and Resources: 

y Video: PBS American Experience: Last Days in Vietnam Collection – Refugees: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link283 

y Video: PBS Asian Americans Collection – Southeast Asian Refugees: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link284 

y Book: Being Vietnamese in America ( Hãy Sống “Mỹ” Một Cách Rất “Việt Nam” ) by Nguyen Ha Tran:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link285 

y Book: The Best We Could Do by Thi Bui 

y Article: “Toward a Critical Refugee Study: The Vietnamese Refugee Subject in US Scholarship” by Y ến Lê Espiritu, in Journal of Vietnamese Studies :

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link286 

y Article: “April 30” by Viet Thanh Nguyen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link287 

y Article: “Our Vietnam War Never Ended” by Viet Thanh Nguyen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link288 

y Article: “Author Viet Thanh Nguyen on the Struggles of Being a Refugee in America” by David Canfield:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link289 319 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Article: “Asian Americans Are Still Caught in the Trap of the ‘Model Minority’ Stereotype. And it Creates Inequality for All” by Viet Thanh Nguyen: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link290 

y Audio/Podcast: “Viet Thanh Nguyen—‘Nothing Ever Dies: Vietnam and the Memory of War’”:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link291 

y REFUGENE “The Family Stories Project” storytelling kit for oral history resources in partnership with the Union of North American Vietnamese Student Associations:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link292 

Supplemental Resources: 

y Voices of Vietnamese Boat People , edited by Mary Terrell Cargill and Jade Quang Huynh (stories directly from refugees) 

y Hearts of Sorrow by James M. Freeman (stories directly from refugees) 

y The Gangster We Are All Looking For by Thi Diem Thuy Le 

y Immigrant Acts: On Asian American Cultural Politics by Lisa Lowe 

y When Heaven and Earth Changed Place s by Le Ly Hayslip 

y I Love Yous Are for White People by Lac Su 

y Body Counts: The Vietnam War and Militarized Refuge(es) by Y ến Lê Espiritu 

y Nothing Ever Dies: Vietnam and the Memory of War by Viet Thanh Nguyen 320  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Quick Fact Sheet about Vietnamese Americans in the US 

y Vietnamese Americans ( Người Mỹ gốc Việt ) make up about half of all overseas Vietnamese ( Người Việt hải ngoại , also known as Việt Kiều ) and are the fourth-largest Asian American ethnic group after Chinese, Filipinos, and Indian Americans. 

y The Vietnamese community in the United States was minimal until the South Vietnamese refugees arrived in the US following the Vietnam War, which ended in 1975. Early refugees were refugee boat people who fled political persecution or sought economic opportunities as a result of US involvement in the war in Vietnam. 

y More than half of Vietnamese Americans reside in the two most populous states, California and Texas, primarily in large urban areas. Orange County, California, is home to the largest Vietnamese population outside of Vietnam. 

y As a relatively recent immigrant group, most Vietnamese Americans are either first or second-generation Americans. As many as one million people five years of age and older speak Vietnamese at home, making it the fifth most spoken language in the US. 

y April 30, 1975, marked the fall of Saigon, which ended the Vietnam War. It prompted the first large-scale wave of immigration. Many immigrants had close ties to the US or the South Vietnam government and feared communist reprisals. Most of the first-wave immigrants were well educated, financially comfortable, and proficient in English. 

y The period from 1978 to the mid-1980s marked the second wave of Vietnamese refugees. Political and economic instability under the new communist government led many to escape Vietnam by small, crowded, and unsafe fishing boats. The second wave of refugees generally had a lower socioeconomic status, as most were peasant farmers or fishermen, small-town merchants, or former military officials. Survivors were picked up by foreign ships and brought to asylum camps in countries that agreed to accept them. 

y After suffering war and psychological trauma, Vietnamese immigrants had to adapt to a very different culture. Language was the first barrier Vietnamese refugees with limited English proficiency had to overcome. Still today, Vietnamese Americans have the highest rate of limited English proficiency compared to Asian Americans as a whole and compared to other racial groups. This adversely affects many socioeconomic outcomes due to poor language access for resources and support. 

y Emotional health is still considered an issue common to many Vietnamese refugees. 321 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Sources 

Southeast Asian Americans State Populations 2010 US Census. 

2012 American Community Survey: Selected Population Profile in the United States. United States Census Bureau. 

ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates. United States Census Bureau. 

Migration Policy Institute. 2021. Vietnamese Immigrants in the United States. 

Rosalie Wieder. 1996. “Vietnamese American.” In Reference Library of Asian America Vol. 1 ,edited by Susan B. Gall and Irene Natividad. Detroit, MI: Gale Research Inc. 

Carl L. Bankston. 1995. “Vietnamese American.” In Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America Vol. 2 , edited by Judy Galens, Anna Sheets, and Robyn V. Young. Detroit, MI: Gale Research Inc. 

Lucy Nguyen-Hong-Nhiem and Joel M. Halpen. 1998. “Vietnamese.” In American Immigrant Cultures Vol. 2 , edited by David Levinson and Melvin Ember. New York, NY: Macmillan. 

R. C. Chung, F. Bemak, and S. Wong. 2000. “Vietnamese refugees’ level of distress, social support, and acculturation: Implications for mental health counseling.” Journal of Mental Health & Counseling (22): 150–161. 

Jacob L. Vigdor. 2008. “Measuring Immigrant Assimilation in the United States.” Manhattan Institute, May 1, 2008. 

Ana Gonzalez-Barrera and Jens Manuel Krogstad. 2018. “Naturalization rate among US immigrants up since 2005, with India among the biggest gainers.” Pew Research Center, January 18, 2018. 

Loan K. Le and Phi H. Su. 2016. “Vietnamese Americans and Electoral Participation.” In 

Minority Voting in the United States , edited by K. L. Kreider and T. J. Baldino. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger Press. 

Countries of Birth for US Immigrants 1960–Present. 2021. Migration Policy Institute. 322  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Think Write Pair/Share Group Share 

Essential Question: 

# Think for one minute about how the source had details that answered the essential question. 

# Write for one minute about the details and facts you can remember from the source that address the essential question. 

# Pair/Share for one minute per person. Share out your thinking and writing about the essential question using the sources provided. Be ready to share out the information your partner provided if the teacher calls on you. 

# Group Share for five to ten minutes. After group share, the class will share out information, giving you a chance to present to your peers. 323 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Additional Sample Topics 

The following list of sample topics is intended to help ethnic studies teachers develop content for their courses. It is not intended to be exhaustive. 

y Asian and Pacific Islander Immigration to the United States 

y The History of Anti-Asian Immigration Policies (e.g., Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, Gentleman’s Agreement of 1907) 

y Anti-Asian Violence (e.g., Chinese massacre of 1871 in Los Angeles, Rock Springs massacre, Tacoma Method of removing Chinese in 1885, Galveston Bay KKK attacks on Vietnamese fishermen in the 1970s, Stockton school yard shooting in 1989) 

y The Formation of US Asian Enclaves (e.g., Koreatowns, Chinatowns, Japantowns, Little Saigon, Cambodia Town, Pachappa Camp) 

y Coolie Labor and the Early Asian American and Pacific Islander Work Force 

y Yellow Peril and Anti-Asian Sentiment (e.g., Dr. Seuss racist political cartoons during World War II, William Randolph Hearst’s racist propaganda against Asian Americans) 

y World War II and Japanese Incarceration 

y The Model Minority Myth 

y The Asian American and Pacific Islander Movement, Yellow Power, and Asian American and Pacific Islander Radicalism 

y Deportations of Cambodian Americans 

y The Vietnam War and the Southeast Asian Refugee Crisis and Resettlement in the United States 

y Hurricane Katrina: Vietnamese Americans and African Americans unite to get more resources 

y Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and Access to Higher Education 

y Desi American Cultural Production 

y Filipino/a/x Americans and the Farm Labor Movement 

y Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in California Politics 

y The Hapa Movement 

y Pacific Islander Cultures 

y Asian American and Pacific Islander Feminism 

y Asian American and Pacific Islander Foodways 324  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Contemporary Asian American and Pacific Islander Youth Movements 

y Asian American and Pacific Islander Entrepreneurship and Co-operative Economics 

y From K-pop to Kawaii: Asian Popular Culture in the US 

y Mixed Asian Identities and Colorism 

y Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the Media Challenging Stereotypes (e.g., Margaret Cho, Awkwafina, Jacqueline Kim, Ken Jeong, Mindy Kaling, Hasan Minhaj, Ali Wong) 

y Asian Law Caucus 

y Asian Women United 

y Center for Asian American Media (National Asian American Telecommunications Association) 

y Gidra 

y International Hotel Tenants Association 

y Katipunan ng Demokratikong Pilipino (KDP) (Union of Democratic Filipinos) 

y Kearny Street Workshop 

y Yellow Brotherhood 325 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# NATIVE AMERICAN STUDIES 

# Sample Lesson 26: This is Indian Land: The Purpose, Politics, and Practice of Land Acknowledgment 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Areas: Native American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 3, 5 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 3; Historical Interpretation 4 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will be introduced to the purpose, politics, and practice of Indigenous land acknowledgment in order to show respect for Indigenous peoples and recognize their enduring relationship to the land, raise awareness about histories that are often suppressed or forgotten, recognize that colonization is an ongoing process, and inspire critically conscious action and reflection. Students will be introduced to the concept of settler colonialism, and identify counterhegemonic truth telling and reconciliation efforts. 

Key Terms and Concepts: hegemony, counterhegemony, Indigenous, land acknowledgment, precontact, settler colonialism, genocide, master narrative, counternarrative 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Recognize Indigenous people’s enduring relationship to the land 

y Analyze histories that are often suppressed or forgotten and critique ongoing systems of colonization 

y Collaborate to create, deliver, and propose their own First Nations land acknowledgment statement as part of a broader historical truth-telling campaign 

y Understand the environmental issues that affect the Native American traditions and the fragility of Mother Earth 326  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What makes someone a guest? Do you consider people in your community to be guests? Why or why not? 16  

> 16

The use of “guests” throughout this lesson draws on Native American epistemology that highly reveres land and the environment and considers all human beings as “guests” on Earth. However, this analogy of “guests” can also be used to discuss settler colonialism and how non-Native people are also “guests” on lands that formerly belonged to Indigenous people. When using the latter analogy, it is important to recognize that some non-Native people, such as African Americans, have more complex histories of forced migration, thus the notion of “guests” will not always adequately capture the nature of non-Native positionalities on the land. 

2.  What does “guests” mean to Native and non-Native communities? 

3.  What are the Indigenous protocols involved in being a “guest,” and what are our responsibilities toward our host, Mother Earth? To what extent are our events and actions benefiting our host, Mother Earth? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1.  Start the lesson by asking the class the following questions and having students respond to them in small groups. After each group has responded to the questions, have one point person share their group’s discussion with the larger class. 

a.  When guests come to your home or neighborhood, what, if anything is expected of them? As a host, how do you communicate hospitality? 

b.  When you are a guest in someone’s house or neighborhood, how might you show respect? 

2.  Next, have each student write a response to the following quotes/prompts: 

a.  “When the blood in your veins returns to the sea, and the earth in your bones returns to the ground, perhaps then you will remember that the land does not belong to YOU, it is YOU that belong to the land.” –Chief Seattle 

b.  “We all need relationships. I don’t believe in fake relationships, instead I try to establish genuine relationships everywhere I go. As a guest/visitor, you do that by being respectful and then this will be reciprocated ... because in the end, we’re only from one place.” –Nipsey Hussle 327 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

3.  After providing students with 10–15 minutes to respond to the aforementioned quotes, ask students to share their writing and thoughts with the larger class. Below are some key takeaways that should be emphasized as the teacher facilitates this discussion: 

a.  Indigenous peoples have had, and continue to have, an enduring relationship to Mother Earth. 

b.  We should strive for genuine and respectful relationships wherever we go. 

4.  After discussing the quotes above, have students reflect on one of the lesson’s essential questions: 

a.  What are the Indigenous protocols involved in being a “guest” and what are our responsibilities toward our host Mother Earth? 

5.  After splitting the class into two groups, have the first group read an excerpt from An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link293 , click on “Excerpt”). Meanwhile, have the second group read the introduction to A Patriot’s History of the United States: From Columbus’s Great Discovery to the War on Terror (excerpted below). Ask each group to have a discussion addressing the following prompts and questions after they have finished reading their assigned text: 

a.  What are the main arguments? What does the author assume? Do you agree or disagree? 

b.  In mixed pairs (one person from each group), compare and contrast the two authors’ perspectives on how the nation was built and why this matters. 

c.  In those same pairs, discuss which perspective you would identify as the master narrative and why? Which perspective might be the counternarrative? 

6.  Create four stations around the room that have copies of the articles and handouts listed below. Allow students to spend at least five minutes at each station to review the provided handouts. 

a.  Station 1: Purpose of Land Acknowledgment: “Indigenous Land Acknowledgement, Explained” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link294 )

b.  Station 2: Politics of Land Acknowledgment: Native Artists Speak: This is [fill in] Land Artistic Posters ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link295 )328  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

c.  Station 3: Practice of Land Acknowledgment: “TDSB schools now pay daily tribute to Indigenous lands they’re built on” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link296 )

d.  After reading and sharing thoughts about the enduring relationship to Mother Earth, students will explore different tribal creation stories that demonstrate the importance of the environment and the Native American people. Students are given chapter 2, “Naming,” of California Through Native Eyes: Reclaiming History by William J. Bauer Jr. to read before researching a creation story from different local or regional tribes to review the relationship of the people and the land. 

7.  After each student has visited all three stations, have students reflect on the following in pairs: 

a.  What are First Nations land acknowledgments and why are they done? 

b.  Should our school begin assembly announcements with a land acknowledgment? If so, what might this announcement sound like, and would it be part of a broader historical truth-telling campaign? 

8.  While still in pairs, have students work together to create their own land acknowledgment statement and poster. Start this activity by having each pair identify an area in the state that they would like to learn more about, specifically around the Indigenous people from that area. Have each pair visit  https://www. cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link297  to research which tribes inhabit the area that they’ve identified, as well as any traditions, customs, languages, practices, and similar. 

9.  After each pair has finished conducting research on the area of their choosing, they should begin to draft language to formulate a land acknowledgment statement. Express that there is no exact template or script, so they will need to incorporate their research and draw from examples. Be sure to provide students with an example of your own or the one below: 

a.  At minimum, a land acknowledgment should include the following: “We acknowledge that we are on the traditional land of the  ____  People.” Beginning with just this simple sentence would be a meaningful intervention in most US gathering spaces. However, this statement could also include a recognition of sacred sites, elders, the local environment, and history specific to the tribe, among other topics, to make the statement more tailored and robust. Here are other examples: 329 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

1.  Often, statements specifically honor elders: 

“I would like to acknowledge that this meeting is being held on the traditional lands of the  ____  People, and pay my respect to elders both past and present.” 

2.  Some allude to the caring, reciprocal relationship with land: 

“I want to respectfully acknowledge the  ____  People, who have stewarded this land throughout the generations.” 

3.  Acknowledgments may also make explicit mention of the occupied nature of the territory in which a gathering is taking place: 

“We would like to begin by acknowledging that the land on which we gather is the occupied/unceded/seized territory of the  ____  People.” 

“I would like to begin by acknowledging that we are in  ____ , the ancestral and unceded territory of the  ____  People.” 

10.  After each pair has come up with their land acknowledgment statement and written it on a poster board (this can also be decorated), have them share their statement with the class. Teachers should consider hosting a larger event where other students, faculty, parents, and community members can hear the students present their school land acknowledgment statements for possible adoption by school community. 

11.  To close out the lesson, reiterate the following: 

a.  Acknowledgment should not be approached as a set of obligatory words to rush through. These words should be offered with respect, grounded in authentic reflection, presence, and awareness. 

b.  Statements of acknowledgment do not have to be confined to spoken words. 

c.  Any space presents an opportunity to surface buried truths and prime our collective culture for deeper truth and reconciliation efforts. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will conduct research on different Native American tribes and draft a land acknowledgment statement and corresponding poster. 330  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Materials and Resources: 

y Honor Native Land Guide ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link298 )

y Native Artists’ Posters on Land Acknowledgment (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link299 )

y “Indigenous Land Acknowledgement, Explained” (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link300 )

y Map of Native Lands ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link301 )

y “What does it mean to acknowledge the past?” (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link302 )

y “America Before Columbus” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link303 )

y Interactive Time-Lapse Map of the Conquest of America (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link304 )

y An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link305 )

y A Patriot’s History of the United States (see excerpt below) 

y “TDSB schools now pay daily tribute to Indigenous lands they’re built on” (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link306 )

y “Beyond Territorial Acknowledgments” (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link307 )

Excerpt from the Introduction of A Patriot’s History of the United States: From Columbus’s Great Discovery to the War on Terror by Larry Schweikart and Michael Allen 

Is America’s past a tale of racism, sexism, and bigotry? Is it the story of the conquest and rape of a continent? Is US history the story of white slave owners who perverted the electoral process for their own interests? Did America start with Columbus’s killing all the Indians, leap to Jim Crow laws and Rockefeller crushing the workers, then finally save itself with Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal? The answers, of course, are no, no, no, and NO. 

One might never know this, however, by looking at almost any mainstream US history textbook. Having taught American history in one form or another for close to sixty years between us, we are aware that, unfortunately, many students are berated with tales of the Founders as self-interested politicians and slaveholders, of the icons of American industry as robber-baron oppressors, and of every American foreign policy initiative as imperialistic and insensitive. At least Howard Zinn’s A People’s History of the United States honestly represents its Marxist biases in the title! 331 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

What is most amazing and refreshing is that the past usually speaks for itself. The evidence is there for telling the great story of the American past honestly—with flaws, absolutely; with shortcomings, most definitely. But we think that an honest evaluation of the history of the United States must begin and end with the recognition that, compared to any other nation, America’s past is a bright and shining light. America was, and is, the city on the hill, the fountain of hope, the beacon of liberty. We utterly reject “My country right or wrong”— what scholar wouldn’t? But in the last thirty years, academics have taken an equally destructive approach: “My country, always wrong!” We reject that too. 

Instead, we remain convinced that if the story of America’s past is told fairly, the result cannot be anything but a deepened patriotism, a sense of awe at the obstacles overcome, the passion invested, the blood and tears spilled, and the nation that was built. An honest review of America’s past would note, among other observations, that the same Founders who owned slaves instituted numerous ways—political and intellectual—to ensure that slavery could not survive; that the concern over not just property rights, but all rights, so infused American life that laws often followed the practices of the common folk, rather than dictated to them; that even when the United States used her military power for dubious reasons, the ultimate result was to liberate people and bring a higher standard of living than before; that time and again America’s leaders have willingly shared power with those who had none, whether they were citizens of territories, former slaves, or disenfranchised women. And we could go on. 

The reason so many academics miss the real history of America is that they assume that ideas don’t matter and that there is no such thing as virtue. They could not be more wrong. When John D. Rockefeller said, “The common man must have kerosene and he must have it cheap,” Rockefeller was already a wealthy man with no more to gain. When Grover Cleveland vetoed an insignificant seed corn bill, he knew it would hurt him politically, and that he would only win condemnation from the press and the people—but the Constitution did not permit it, and he refused. 

Consider the scene more than two hundred years ago when President John Adams—just voted out of office by the hated Republicans of Thomas Jefferson—mounted a carriage and left Washington even before the inauguration. There was no armed struggle. Not a musket ball was fired, nor a political opponent hanged. No Federalists marched with guns or knives in the streets. There was no guillotine. And just four years before that, in 1796, Adams had taken part in an equally momentous event when he won a razor-thin close election over Jefferson and, because of Senate rules, had to count his own contested ballots. When he came to the contested Georgia ballot, the great Massachusetts revolutionary, the “Duke of Braintree,” stopped counting. He sat down for a moment to allow Jefferson or his associates to make a challenge, and when he did not, Adams finished the tally, becoming president. Jefferson told confidants that he thought the ballots were indeed in dispute, but he would not wreck the country over a few pieces of paper. As Adams took the oath of office, he thought he heard Washington say, “I am fairly out and you are fairly in! See which 332  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

of us will be the happiest!” So much for protecting his own interests! Washington stepped down freely and enthusiastically, not at bayonet point. He walked away from power, as nearly each and every American president has done since. 

These giants knew that their actions of character mattered far more to the nation they were creating than mere temporary political positions. The ideas they fought for together in 1776 and debated in 1787 were paramount. And that is what American history is truly about—ideas. Ideas such as “All men are created equal”; the United States is the “last, best hope” of earth; and America “is great, because it is good.” 

Honor counted to founding patriots like Adams, Jefferson, Washington, and then later, Lincoln and Teddy Roosevelt. Character counted. Property was also important; no denying that, because with property came liberty. But virtue came first. Even J. P. Morgan, the epitome of the so-called robber baron, insisted that “the first thing is character … before money or anything else. Money cannot buy it.” 

It is not surprising, then, that so many left-wing historians miss the boat (and miss it, and miss it, and miss it to the point where they need a ferry schedule). They fail to understand what every colonial settler and every Western pioneer understood: character was tied to liberty, and liberty to property. All three were needed for success, but character was the prerequisite because it put the law behind property agreements, and it set responsibility right next to liberty. And the surest way to ensure the presence of good character was to keep God at the center of one’s life, community, and ultimately, nation. “Separation of church and state” meant freedom to worship, not freedom from worship. It went back to that link between liberty and responsibility, and no one could be taken seriously who was not responsible to God. “Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” They believed those words. 

As colonies became independent and as the nation grew, these ideas permeated the fabric of the founding documents. Despite pits of corruption that have pockmarked federal and state politics—some of them quite deep—and despite abuses of civil rights that were shocking, to say the least, the concept was deeply imbedded that only a virtuous nation could achieve the lofty goals set by the Founders. Over the long haul, the Republic required virtuous leaders to prosper. 

Yet virtue and character alone were not enough. It took competence, skill, and talent to build a nation. That’s where property came in: with secure property rights, people from all over the globe flocked to America’s shores. With secure property rights, anyone could become successful, from an immigrant Jew like Lionel Cohen and his famous Lionel toy trains to an Austrian bodybuilder-turned-millionaire actor and governor like Arnold Schwarzenegger. Carnegie arrived penniless; Ford’s company went broke; and Lee Iacocca had to eat crow on national TV for his company’s mistakes. Secure property rights not only made it possible for them all to succeed but, more important, established a climate of competition that rewarded skill, talent, and risk taking. 333 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Political skill was essential too. From 1850 to 1860 the United States was nearly rent in half by inept leaders, whereas an integrity vacuum nearly destroyed American foreign policy and shattered the economy in the decades of the 1960s and early 1970s. Moral, even pious, men have taken the nation to the brink of collapse because they lacked skill, and some of the most skilled politicians in the world—Henry Clay, Richard Nixon, Bill Clinton— left legacies of frustration and corruption because their abilities were never wedded to character. 

Throughout much of the twentieth century, there was a subtle and, at times, obvious campaign to separate virtue from talent, to divide character from success. The latest in this line of attack is the emphasis on diversity—that somehow merely having different skin shades or national origins makes America special. But it was not the color of the skin of people who came here that made them special, it was the content of their character. America remains a beacon of liberty, not merely because its institutions have generally remained strong, its citizens free, and its attitudes tolerant, but because it, among most of the developed world, still cries out as a nation, “Character counts.” Personal liberties in America are genuine because of the character of honest judges and attorneys who, for the most part, still make up the judiciary, and because of the personal integrity of large numbers of local, state, and national lawmakers. 

No society is free from corruption. The difference is that in America, corruption is viewed as the exception, not the rule. And when light is shown on it, corruption is viciously attacked. Freedom still attracts people to the fountain of hope that is America, but freedom alone is not enough. Without responsibility and virtue, freedom becomes a soggy anarchy, an incomplete licentiousness. This is what has made Americans different: their fusion of freedom and integrity endows Americans with their sense of right, often when no other nation in the world shares their perception. 334  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 27: Develop or Preserve? The Shellmound Sacred Site Struggle 

Theme: Social Movements and Equity 

Disciplinary Area: Native American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 2, 3 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 4; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 1, 2, 4; Historical Interpretation 1, 5 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 4, 6, 9; WHST.9–10.1, 4, 5, 6, 7 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10. 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 11 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson exposes students to a highly contentious and ongoing debate around Native American sacred sites. Students will be introduced to the history of the Ohlone people, the significance of shellmounds, and ongoing protests that have been organized to protect sacred sites. Students will engage sources that support the preservation of these sites and those that are in favor of development. Finally, students will develop a persuasive essay where they are able to offer their own opinion on the issue supported by primary and secondary source research. 

Key Terms and Concepts: marginalization, sacred sites, shellmounds, preservation, repatriation 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Learn about the significance of shellmounds and sacred sites for Native Americans, specifically for the Ohlone people 

y Analyze how redevelopment and gentrification further settler colonial practices and violate the sovereignty of Indigenous lands and sacred sites 

Essential Questions: 

1.  Should Indigenous lands and sacred sites be saved and protected? If so, what are the challenges in doing so? 

2.  Who should determine what happens to Indigenous lands and sacred sites? 

3.  What should be done to reclaim and restore sacred lands? 335 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

4.  What laws protect modern cemeteries and why aren’t ancient cemeteries given the same protections? What happens to the burials? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Lesson Note: This lesson focuses on the San Francisco Bay Area, but can be adapted to highlight a number of sacred sites that are currently or have been a space of contention. For example, a similar lesson on the Puvungna burial site located at California State University, Long Beach or the Standing Rock movement would also introduce students to contemporary debates and struggles regarding the use of sacred lands. 

Day 1 

1.  Begin with a community-building activity (5–10 minutes). A sample list of community-building activities is provided in chapter 5. 

2.  Engage the class by asking how many students have shopped or visited the movie theater at the Emeryville Bay Street mall. While students briefly discuss their experiences at Bay Street mall, project a current image of the mall next to a 1924 image of the Emeryville Shellmound. 

3.  Explain to students that the second image depicts what parts of Berkeley and Emeryville looked like prior to development, specifically noting that the Bay Street mall was constructed atop one of the largest shellmound sites in the area. Mention that shellmounds often served as burial grounds and sacred sites where Ohlone people would meet for rituals and traditions thousands of years before the formation of the United States. Point out that there were once over 400 shellmounds all around the San Francisco Bay Area, making the region part of the Ohlone people’s sacred geography. 

4.  As a class, read aloud the local news article “Emeryville: Filmmaker tells story of forgotten Indian burial ground disrupted by quest for retail.” After reading the article, screen two short videos, “A New Vision for the West Berkeley Shellmound” and “The Shellmound: Berkeley’s Native Monument.” Prior to screening the videos, remind students to be attentive and take notes. 

5.  After screening the videos, ask students to define the following terms in their own words: shellmound, monument, sacred geography, burial grounds, development, and repatriation, using context clues from the sources they recently read and watched. After taking five minutes to define the terms on their own, have students talk through each term aloud. 336  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 

1.  After reviewing the previous day’s discussion, divide the class into four groups and ask students to respond to the following questions: 

a.  What is the significance of shellmounds and land in the Berkeley/ Emeryville area to the Ohlone people? 

b.  Why are the West Berkeley and Bay Street sites highly sought after by non-Native American groups? 

c.  How does the struggle for shellmounds intersect with environmental issues in the region? 

d.  Do you think places where shellmounds are or once stood should be preserved? 

e.  Are there any sacred or historical sites that members in your community and/or family revere? If so, please share with the group. 

2.  After allowing the groups to discuss the five reflection questions for 15 to 20 minutes, provide a few minutes for the class to come together and debrief what was discussed in groups. 

Day 3 

1.  Continue the theme on the third day of class by introducing a new assignment. Have students conduct research on both sides of the Berkeley/Emeryville Shellmound struggle (the position of the Ohlone people and those in support of further developing the area) and write a persuasive essay in response to the essential question based on the evidence they have gathered, class discussions, and their own observations and insights. The persuasive essay should be assigned as homework; however, students should be provided ample time in class over the next three days to conduct research, draft an outline and thesis statement, and have their work peer reviewed. 

2.  For additional guidance, collaborate with an English language arts teacher to create a grading rubric for the persuasive essay (or ask to use an existing rubric), compile a brief list of recommended sources, and let students know that their essays must include the following: 

a.  Your persuasive essay must be five paragraphs (an introduction, three body paragraphs, and a conclusion), be typed in 12 point Times New Roman font, and include a bibliography listing at least four sources (scholarly and credible) in MLA format. 337 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

b.  Your persuasive essay must have a well-conceived thesis statement that includes your three major talking points/arguments. 

c.  Each of your talking points/arguments must be supported with evidence. 

d.  Your essay should be well organized and include rhetorical devices. 

3.  After a week, students should submit their persuasive essays in class. Provide each student with a 3x5 index card on which they are tasked with writing down their three talking points/arguments. After everyone has finished filling out an index card, have students form groups of three to five students. Group members should take turns sharing their talking points. When all students have shared, they should collectively decide what their three or four strongest points are, create a thesis statement based on those points, and select one group representative to share the points with the class. Group members should help their representative write a short (two to three-minute) explanation that includes a thesis statement and their key points.  

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework

Chapter 16 of the framework discusses a number of civil rights movements that were created in response to political, economic, and social discrimination. Teachers can build upon the example of the struggle to preserve the shellmound sites and have students compare that to some of the other movements referenced in the framework, such as the 1969–1971 occupation of Alcatraz or the American Indian Movement 1972–73 standoff at Wounded Knee in South Dakota. This lesson can also be connected to the Social Movements and Student Civic Engagement lesson. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will conduct research on Native American sacred lands. They will analyze the positions of both the Ohlone people and developers in the ongoing movement around sacred sites. 

y Students will write a five-paragraph essay detailing the significance of these sites as well as the social, cultural, and environmental impact of development on and near sacred sites. They will present their research findings and arguments to the class. 338  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Materials and Resources: 

y West Berkeley Shellmound website includes articles, history, and visuals 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link308 

y Beyond Recognition documentary explores the struggle to preserve Native American and Ohlone culture and homeland in the ever-shifting Bay Area 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link309 

y Sogorea Te’ Land Trust Lisjan (Ohlone) History and Territory discusses current work in the Bay Area  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link310 

y “A New Vision for the West Berkeley Shellmound” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link311 

y “The Shellmound: Berkeley’s Native Monument” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link312 

y “Emeryville: Filmmaker tells story of forgotten Indian burial ground disrupted by quest for retail”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link313 

y Sacred Land Film Project  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link314 

y Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology “San Francisco Bay Shellmounds” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link315 

y “There Were Once More Than 425 Shellmounds in the Bay Area. Where Did They Go?” (article and audio interview) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link316 

y N.C. Nelson, “Shellmounds of the San Francisco Bay Region” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link317 

y “Shellmound” is a documentary produced by Andrés Cediel at the UC Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism about the Emeryville Shellmound and mall 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link318 

y Indian People Organizing for Change 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link319 

y An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States , by Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz 

y California Through Native Eyes: Reclaiming History , by William J. Bauer Jr. 

y Films: Beyond Recognition and In the White Man’s Image 

y A Cross of Thorns , by Elias Castillo 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link320 

y An American Genocide , by Benjamin Madley 339 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 28: Native American Mascots 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: Native American Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1–6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.11–12.1, 2, 7; WHST.11–12.1, 4 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

Students will examine past and present portrayals of Native American iconography and culture used as mascots for major US sports teams. Students will explore and discuss how mascots can be viewed as negative or prideful. Students will have an opportunity to read and analyze various articles and sources on the topic and determine whether the use of Native American mascots should be continued or banned. 

Key Terms and Concepts: stereotypes, colonialism, disenfranchisement, hegemony 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Understand the historical context of Native American iconography and symbolism used in American sports and popular culture 

y Compare and contrast differing arguments around the debate on the use of Native American iconography and symbolism within American sports 

y Analyze why some sports teams have opted to change their mascots or nicknames from Native American figures, and why others have not. Students will document potential social, economic, legislative, and historical factors that have contributed to these decisions 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How have Native Americans in the US historically been portrayed by non-Indigenous peoples? 

2.  How has the use of Native American iconography, imagery, and culture by non-Indigenous peoples impacted Native Americans today? 

3.  Should sports teams continue to use these mascots? Use evidence from the texts and documents you have analyzed to support your claim. 340  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day 1 

1.  Show public images of American Indians returned by an internet search. How might these images portray public opinion of American Indians? 

2.  Introduce the lesson by writing the following on the board: “Why are Native American mascots considered offensive by some but considered prideful to others?” Have students respond to this question on a sheet of paper. After they complete their written responses, have each student share their work with a neighbor. After allowing about three to five minutes for the pairs to share, have a whole-class discussion responding to the question. 

3.  Ask two students to come to the board and list sports teams that use Native American imagery, iconography, or cultural traits as part of their mascots, team names, or nicknames. Below is a sample list in case students struggle to identify teams: 

y Atlanta Braves 

y Kansas City Chiefs 

y The former Washington Redskins 

y Florida State Seminoles 

y Chicago Blackhawks 

y The former Cleveland Indians 

y San Diego State Aztecs 

4.  After drafting the list, project images of the mascots, logos, and other icons used by the teams on the other side of the board. Feel free to use the images provided in this lesson. Again, ask students whether they find the images to be disrespectful. 341 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

5.  Ask students whether they are aware of the Washington Redskins name change. Ask students to share what they have heard about the decision to rename the team, including the reasons for the change, how people responded to the change, and what events preceded and coincided with the decision (for example, BLM, the decision to remove Confederate statues, the decision to remove statues of Christopher Columbus and the push to rename the city of Columbus, Ohio, as well as other relevant events). If time permits, a news clip, article, or headlines can be shown to students. 

6.  After projecting the images, show the following video clip of the Florida State Seminoles pregame ceremony performed by Chief Osceola on his horse Renegade, as well as a clip of the Kansas City Chiefs and Atlanta Braves tomahawk chop. Ask that students take notes on the videos and reflect on the earlier questions. 

a.  Florida State Seminoles:  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link321 

b.  Kansas City Chiefs tomahawk chop: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link322 

c.  Atlanta Braves tomahawk chop: 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link323 

7.  Hand out a copy of the NPR article “Are You Ready for Some Controversy?” and have students read it in class. Then ask students to respond to the following questions: 

a.  What do those who refuse to say the name “Redskins” call the team? 

b.  What media outlets have protested the use of the name Redskins? 

c.  When was the term “redskin” first recorded, and whom was it used by? Why was it used? 

d.  How did Earl Emmons’s book, “Redskin Rimes” portray Native Americans and the name redskin? 

e.  What did the Washington Redskins owner say about the possibility of changing the name? 

8.  Provide students with two additional NPR articles, “After Mounting Pressure, Washington’s NFL Franchise Drops Its Team Name” and “Washington NFL Team’s Sponsor FedEx Formally Asks for Team Name Change,” and have students respond to the following questions. If there is not enough time in class, this can be assigned for homework. 

a.  How long after the first article was the second article written? The third article? 

b.  What events took place during that time? What prompted the decision to change the name? How have attitudes about the name changed over time? 342  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Day 2 

1.  Start the second day of the lesson by asking students to take out their homework. Ask students to discuss their answers with a neighbor. After about five minutes of discussion be sure to collect the homework assignment. 

2.  First play the video “Proud to Be” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link324 ). Next, play “Redskins Is a Powerful Name” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link325 ). 

3.  Ask students to identify the differences between these two videos. Discuss in pairs and then as a whole class. Also ask students, “Is there a difference between what Chief Osceola does at the beginning of the Florida State University games and what occurs at the Kansas City Chiefs and Atlanta Braves games? 

4.  If time permits, have student research the Florida State University’s relationship with the Seminole tribe. This can also be assigned as homework. As a starting point, have students review the websites listed below: 

a.  Seminole Tribe of Florida  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link326 

b.  Florida State University “Relationship with the Seminole Tribe of Florida” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link327 

c.  National Congress of Indian Americans “Anti-Defamation and Mascots” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link328 

Day 3 

1.  Start the day by having students report back to the whole class what they learned from the homework assignment. 

2.  Show images of mascots from Indian schools like Haskell University and Sherman Indian High School. Students are asked to use the information given on day 2 to analyze and write in letter form why these mascots are acceptable or not acceptable. 

3.  Ask students whether there are any sports teams that have removed/retired Native American mascots or names. If students are unable to respond to the question, emphasize that the following teams and institutions have removed or retired the use of Native American imagery from their sports team marketing: Stanford University, the University of Illinois, Golden State Warriors, the University of Oklahoma, Marquette University, Dartmouth College, Syracuse University, Coachella Valley High School, and Fremont High School in Sunnyvale. Provide some images of the retired mascots for additional reference. Here are two examples: 343 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

4.  Show an excerpt of the film In Whose Honor  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ ch4.asp#link329 

5.  After they watch the film, have students complete the handout provided at the end of the lesson. 

6.  After they complete the handout, have students share their answers with each other in pairs. 

7.  Students will go beyond sports to evaluate other uses of American Indian images in popular culture. Show images of products and Halloween costumes that use Native American imagery. Students are asked to write an essay providing a critical analysis of the use of these images.   

> Making Connections to the History–Social Science Framework and the
> California Arts Education Framework for Public Schools (Arts Framework)

The History–Social Science Framework (chapter 20) and the Arts Framework (chapter 7) both include a discussion of culturally responsive pedagogy. These sections could add insight to this lesson, which is about how cultural symbols can be appropriated by an outside culture without regard for the potential impact upon those affected by that appropriation. 

Possible discussion questions that you can use to explore this topic include: 

y How has your culture been portrayed in the US media? How is that similar or different to the portrayal of Native Americans? 

y How has the use of your culture’s iconography, imagery, and culture impacted your community or culture? 

y How can we combat the perpetuation of stereotypes and cultural appropriation in today’s media? 344  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

y Students will conduct research on the history of Native American iconography, culture, and imagery used in the marketing of US sports teams. 

y Students will engage in class dialogue and debate around Native American tribes using or allowing use of their tribe as a mascot. This can take the form of a Socratic seminar where the teacher asks open-ended questions and invites students to react to their peers’ responses. Students should be given questions and resources ahead of time to allow them to prepare relevant notes to support the discussion. The teacher should reiterate that the focus of the discussion is ideas and evidence. This activity can also be done using philosophical chairs or a fishbowl discussion to allow students to work in pairs or groups. 

y Students will have several opportunities to reflect on the differing positions of Native American tribes related to this topic. 

y Students will analyze and evaluate the impact of Native American imagery beyond sports in a five-paragraph essay on social, economic, legislative, and historical factors. 

Materials and Resources: 

y “Anti-Defamation and Mascots”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link330 

y “Sports Teams That Retired Native American Mascots, Nicknames” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link331 

y “Redskins Is a Powerful Name”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link332 

y “Proud to Be (Mascots)”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link333 

y “The Final Chop at Turner Field”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link334 

y “Kansas City Chiefs Tomahawk Chop – Loudest Crowd in the World (Guinness World Record)”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link335 

y “FSU Football Chief Osceola and Renegade at Doak Tomahawk Chop” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link336 

y “Are You Ready for Some Controversy? The History of ‘Redskin’” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link337 

y “Washington NFL Team’s Sponsor FedEx Formally Asks for Team Name Change” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link338 

y “After Mounting Pressure, Washington’s NFL Franchise Drops Its Team Name” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link339 345 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y “Relationship with the Seminole Tribe of Florida” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link340 

y “Two Years Later, Effect of California Racial Mascots Act Looks Diminished” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link341 346  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

“In Whose Honor” Video Questions 

This documentary profiles Charlene Teters, a Native American activist who tries to educate the University of Illinois community about the negative impact of the “Chief Illiniwek” mascot, which is an inaccurate, stereotypical portrayal of a Native American. 

1.  Why is Charlene Teters upset? 

2.  Why does she find the use of Native American iconography and imagery in mascots offensive? 

3.  What forms of resistance does she use against the university? 

4.  What is the reaction from the community? 

5.  What is the university’s response to Charlene’s protest? 

6.  What resolution is made? 

7.  What is your opinion of the university’s use of the mascot? 347 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Additional Sample Topics 

The following list of sample topics is intended to help ethnic studies teachers develop content for their courses. It is not intended to be exhaustive. 

y Five Phases of American Indian History 

○ Pre-contact – Creation Stories 

○ Contact – Benevolent to Confrontational 

○ Reservations – Governmental Patrilineage 

○ Termination – Political Genocide 

○ Self-Determination – Indian Definition 

y Pre-contact Native American Knowledge, Epistemologies, and Culture 

y Cahokia Pyramids Cliff Dwellings 

y Settler Colonialism and Land Removal 

y Land Acknowledgment and the Recognition of the Different Regions (California Region, Plains, Northeast, Northwest, Southwest, Southeast) 

y Doctrine of Discovery and Manifest Destiny 17  

> 17

The Doctrine of Discovery is a papal policy created in Europe that gave the right to Europeans to take the land of non-Christians around the world. 

y History and Implications of Broken Treaties 

y Enslavement of California Native Americans during the Mission Period and the Gold Rush 

y Symbolism of Regalia Worn at Pow Wows 

y Destruction of the Ecology, Sacredness of Nature, and Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) 

y Medicine Wheel 

y Peace and Dignity Journeys 

y Prophecy of the Eagle and the Condor 

y Genocide against Native Americans 

y American Indian Religious Freedom Act 

y Native American Graves Protection and Reparation Act 

y Forced Assimilation and American Indian Boarding Schools 

y Native American Foodways and Seed Protection 348  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Contributions of Native Americans During World War II 

y American Indian Movement (AIM) 

y Native American Cultural Retention 

y Occupation of Alcatraz 

y Struggle for and Separation of Native American Sacred Lands 

y Native Americans and the Environmental Justice Movement 

y Contemporary Debates on the Appropriation of Native American Culture 

y Native American Identity and Federal Recognitions 

y Native American Literature and Folklore 

y Native American Oral Tradition 

y Identification of Contemporary Debates on Claiming Indigeneity and Blood Quantum Restrictions 

y Life on Reservations and Rancherias and Forced Urban Relocation 

y Native American Intergenerational Health Disparities and Healing 

y Native American Feminism 

y Eighteen California Treaties That Were Unratified 

y Native American Mascot Controversy in Mainstream Sports 

Potential California Tribes to Cover: 18  

> 18

It is recommended that teachers do intensive research on local Indigenous groups and their current status. 

y Cahuilla 

y Chumash 

y Hupa 

y Kumeyaay 

y Maidu 

y Miwok 

y Ohlone 

y Patwin (Wintun) 

y Shoshone 

y Tataviam 349 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Tongva 

y Tuolumne Band of Me-Wuk 

y Winnemem Wintu 

y Yurok 

When developing lessons for Native American studies, it may be helpful to include a time line of major events for the tribe or tribes being studied. It is important that educators work together with local tribal organizations to gather accurate and relevant information for a tribe-specific time line. A sample time line courtesy of the North Fork Rancheria of Mono Indians of California can be found at  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link342 .

The Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian provides resources for educators who wish to engage students in Native American studies. In addition to “Americans: A Dialogue Toolkit for Educators,” the Smithsonian offers “Native Knowledge 360 Degrees Educational Resources,” which provides teacher support and resources, virtual field trips for students, and professional development ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link343 ). 350  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# AFFIRMING IDENTITY 

While raising the voices and experiences of the four core groups, ethnic studies is not intended to silence other voices. Many students have experienced some type of othering, whether individually or collectively with their community. Intersectional identities heighten the possibility that different elements of one’s identity will make such experiences even more likely. 

You may have students in your class who do not identify with the groups at the core of the ethnic studies curriculum. The lessons here can help you provide identity-affirming moments in your class and help students connect their own identities and experiences with the themes of the course. These lessons do not replace the core curriculum, but provide avenues to enter and expand upon the themes in the core curriculum. In particular, these lessons provide students opportunities to 

y explore parallel experiences and connections between populations; 

y look for commonalities and related strengths across groups; 

y identify points of contact between groups, including tension points and resolutions; and 

y allow all students to see their own identity affirmed such that the curriculum can move away from a sense of competition between groups and toward compassion for each other. 

As an example, the lesson “Armenian Migration Stories and Oral History” presents a window into one particular community’s story of living in diaspora, while also serving as a mirror for considering migration experienced by others. The Armenian community in California grew over the course of the twentieth century as thousands of Armenians fled violence in their home country. The Hamidian massacres, the Armenian Genocide during World War I, the escape from Soviet rule of Armenia, and other conflicts launched multiple waves of immigration to the United States. This serves as a reminder that even within a community that may seem similar from the outside, there can be many differences. Someone who migrated from communist Armenia may have a very different mindset than someone whose family has lived in the United States for a century. Interviewing elders in a community—in this lesson and at other points within ethnic studies—allows history to be told by those who both experienced marginalization (in their country of origin and in the United States) and acted as agents of change for their own life. Who tells history matters. 

# EXPLORING AND EMBRACING YOUR OWN COMMUNITY 

To fully support the growth and learning of all of California’s students, it is necessary for schools to engage their communities in the process of building and strengthening 351 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

connections across the ethnic groups they serve. An ethnic studies curriculum is just one component of this work. The entire educational program should promote this endeavor, even while the social studies bear particular responsibility for helping students develop a deep understanding of the community’s history—within the context of state, national, and world histories—and the legacy of the past. Beyond classrooms, there is an opportunity for adult learning that engages whole faculties and the community at large. This wider engagement strengthens the community restoration noted in chapter 1. 

Some of the ways students can be involved in exploring their own community include the following: 

y Oral History: The best resources for learning about a community are often the people who live there. By bringing voices from the community into the classroom, teachers can help ensure that students’ identities are affirmed and the community’s stories are told. 

y Cultural Institutions: Cultural organizations in your community play a key role in raising up the histories and contributions of the groups who live there. They also highlight those interactions between groups that have shaped the character of the community. 

y Memorials: Memorials, monuments, and murals are key markers of a community’s identity and history. They offer students opportunities to analyze critically whose voices are shared and whose history is acknowledged and to identify opportunities for giving voice to additional stories and histories within the community. 

These lessons support educators in differentiating their instruction in order to reflect the diversity of Californians and the diversity of their own classrooms. When integrating these lessons, students from all backgrounds have the opportunity to recognize their role as agents of change. 

# COMPLICATING SINGLE STORIES 

These lessons provide opportunities for students to reflect explicitly on unnoticed or unintended marginalization and the increase in stereotyping during times of heightened fear. As students become civic actors, they have an opportunity to challenge misperceptions which contribute to oppression. This begins with challenging our own misperceptions, as noted in author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s thought-provoking TED Talk “The Danger of a Single Story.” (See a related lesson at  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ ch4.asp#link344 .) 

Deborah Tannen, a professor, linguist, and author, notes, “We all know we are unique individuals, but we tend to see others as representatives of groups. It’s a natural tendency, 352  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

since we must see the world in patterns in order to make sense of it; we wouldn’t be able to deal with the daily onslaught of people and objects if we couldn’t predict a lot about them and feel that we know who and what they are. But this natural and useful ability to see patterns of similarity has unfortunate consequences. It is offensive to reduce an individual to a category, and it is also misleading.” This tendency toward patterns can lead to a single narrative about groups which are not our own. Ethnic studies provides a space to challenge that single narrative and fosters the space for all members of society to define their own identities rather than be defined by others. 

For example, “Arab American” can refer to individuals with roots in 22 Arab countries. These countries are located across land stretching roughly from Northern Africa through Western Asia, which in itself suggests a far greater range of diversity than a single experience. Contrary to popular representation, not all Muslims are Arabs, and not all Arabs—or Arab Americans—are Muslim. Many Arab countries include Christian communities, and some have also had Jewish communities. Arabs have migrated to the United States for a variety of reasons, including economic need, educational opportunity, political conflict, and even war. Like many groups in the United States, the demographics of Arab Americans has shifted over time and continues to be fluid in nature. Also like many groups, the misperceptions about Arab Americans is often exacerbated by representation in the media which focuses on single stories. The lesson “Introduction to Arab American Studies” presents resources to guide students through discussions of the immigrant experiences of Arab Americans. 

The lesson “Jewish Americans: Identity, Intersectionality, and Complicating Ideas of Race” provides another example for complicating single stories. Jewish Americans are connected through many ties, and yet each identity is a unique combination of facets. In this lesson, the single story is challenged by presenting experiences and perspectives from diverse voices who all identify with being Jewish American. 

# SHARING A WIDE PICTURE OF DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATION 

These lessons include narratives that emphasize the contributions of diverse individuals in shaping US democratic life. It is important for students to see the widest range of individual backgrounds as well as forms of engagement to recognize the contributions already made to our democracy by different groups. Sometimes we look to the national stage for representation, but Californians can also look to local government and community leaders for examples of how individuals from many different backgrounds can and have already engaged in our democracy. 

One example of this comes from the Sikh community. Sikhs have lived in California for over a century and have served as civic leaders at local, state, and national levels. The first 353 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Sikh place of worship in the United States was established in Stockton, California, and California is now home to the largest Sikh population in the United States (approximately 250,000 with 74 Sikh houses of worship in 2020). The first-ever Asian and the first Indian to be elected to the United States Congress (serving from 1957 to 1963) was Dalip Singh Saund, who was Sikh. His civic leadership set an example and opened doors not just for the Sikh community, but for others as well. The lesson “The Sikh American Community in California” provides more detail. 

# WIDENING OUR UNIVERSE OF OBLIGATION 

These lessons draw out another crucial opportunity for all students: to examine closely those moments in our history that cause increased fear in society and are often accompanied by heightened distrust of others, increased “othering” treatment, and even the violent targeting of individuals based on the identities they are perceived to hold. In many cases, these events exacerbate or make more visible historical divisions between groups. We have seen such behavior in times of war, following the September 11 terrorist attacks, and during the COVID pandemic. Such targeting leaves entire groups vulnerable, and in some cases has led to mass violence including ethnic cleansing and genocide. 

Within high school classrooms, students should be expected to explore this level of exclusion and violent targeting at a number of points. There are historical periods to use in reference during ethnic studies as well, and will include: 

y The Armenian Genocide during World War I 

y The Holocaust during World War II 

y The incarceration of Japanese Americans in California and across the nation during World War II 

y The increased targeting of Muslims and others perceived to be different after the 9/11 terrorist attacks 

The lesson “Antisemitism and Jewish Middle Eastern Americans” provides one example for looking into how long-lasting division and misperceptions become exacerbated in particular moments. Antisemitism is an ancient hatred that has persisted for centuries. It is also a contemporary hatred and form of prejudice, and reported incidents of antisemitism are increasing around the world and in California. Something that has been seen throughout history is that antisemitism has been fluid in shape—sometimes taking the form of religious targeting, at other times defined around ethnic or racial arguments. It has also been interwoven at times with white nationalism and other forms of prejudice and discrimination. 

In conjunction with these lessons, teachers might consider introducing their students to the concept of “universe of obligation” to help them better understand and discuss how 354  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

societies define who is protected and who is not. Sociologist Helen Fein coined this term to describe the group of individuals within a society “toward whom obligations are owed, to whom rules apply, and whose injuries call for amends.” In other words, a society’s universe of obligation includes those people that society believes deserve respect and whose rights it believes are worthy of protection. 

A society’s universe of obligation can change. History has shown that in times of fear and uncertainty—such as war, economic depression, or pandemic—a society’s universe of obligation often narrows. Widely shared beliefs and attitudes about such social categories as religion, gender, and race also influence which people a society protects and which people it does not. 

Although Fein conceived universe of obligation to describe the way nations determine membership, we might also refer to an individual’s universe of obligation to describe the circle of other individuals that a person feels a responsibility to care for and protect. Applying this concept to individuals gives us the opportunity to recognize the internalized hierarchies that influence how we think about and respond to the needs of others. While it is neither practical nor possible that one’s universe of obligation could include everyone equally, acknowledging the way we think about and prioritize our obligations toward others can help us act in a more thoughtful, compassionate manner. 

The universe of obligation concept offers a powerful lens through which students can examine both their individual beliefs and actions and the systems and structures in our society that indicate who belongs and who does not, as well as how these thoughts change over time. The concept also lays the foundation for discussions about how students can use their own agency to help widen the circle of people who are included, respected, and protected in our society. 

# SEEKING MODELS OF INTERETHNIC BRIDGE BUILDING 

As ethnic studies students explore social movements and equity, it is valuable to share examples of interethnic initiatives in which individuals from different groups have worked together for change. Depending on the history, interests, concerns, and demographics of your class and community, here are a few additional examples to add to those in the model curriculum: 

y When the Mendez v. Westminster case challenged school segregation in California, amicus curiae briefs in support of Mendez were submitted by the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Lawyers Guild, the Japanese American Citizens League, the American Jewish Congress, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 355 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y When his Japanese American friends were incarcerated during World War II, Mexican American high school student Ralph Lazo entered the camps with them. 

y Black Civil Rights leaders provided critical support for the Asian American Civil Rights Movement after the killing of Vincent Chin. 

y Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta are perhaps the best-known names associated with the United Farm Workers movement, but Larry Itliong and Nagi Daifullah mobilized participation from Filipino and Arab American communities, respectively, which contributed to the impact for a common goal. 

y As the genocide in Darfur became visible globally, Armenians were one of the groups particularly vocal in advocating for action. 

y In 2017, as talk increased about a “Muslim ban,” many Japanese Americans mobilized to actively oppose it and increase education on civil rights. 

Social movements present a complicated history, with spaces of more singular advocacy living side by side with collaboration. These examples are not intended to replace the presence and importance of civil rights movements dedicated to single groups. However, as we move forward as a diverse state, these examples can provide models for how to work together for change that benefits all. Such interethnic collaboration toward a shared purpose is, after all, crucial to strengthening democracy in the United States. 

These lessons support educators in differentiating their instruction in order to reflect the diversity of Californians and the diversity of their own classrooms. When integrating these lessons, students from all backgrounds have the opportunity to recognize their role as agents of change. 356  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 29: The Sikh American Community in California 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 3 

Standards Alignment: 

HSS Framework Alignment 

y Chapter 7: Grade Four, California: A Changing State 

y Chapter 11: Grade Seven, World History and Geography: Medieval and Early Modern Times 

y Chapter 12: Grade Eight, United States History and Geography: Growth and Conflict 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson introduces students to the history of Sikh immigration to the United States West Coast, patterns of settlement, and how the Sikh community has responded to the challenges and opportunities it has encountered in California over time. This lesson plan can be used at any time immigration is being discussed but is designed to explore the history of Sikh contributions to California. 

Key Terms and Concepts: assimilation, integration, stereotype, identity, racism, religion, culture, migration, diaspora, farming, industry, economy 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Students will be able to understand Sikh identity, Sikh migration to California, and Sikh contributions to California’s history through articles and videos. 

y They will have opportunities to address essential and compelling questions through tasks such as creating lists and graphics, writing paragraphs, and conducting arguments with evidence from featured historical and contemporary sources. 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is Sikhism? 

2.  How did Sikhs immigrate to California? 

3.  How did Sikhs shape California’s history? 357 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

This lesson has been structured into three parts to address the three essential questions. It is expected to take four to five 40-minute class periods but can be adapted as necessary. 

1. What is Sikhism? 

The first essential question has students understand the fundamental beliefs and practices of the Sikh religion. The formative performance task asks students to list the important tenets of Sikhism using featured sources. 

The featured sources for this question are two short video clips from the CNN show United Shades of America with W. Kamau Bell and an informational chapter about Sikhism from the National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS). Featured source A ( https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link345 ) is a video clip (4 minutes and 40 seconds) that provides an introduction to Sikhism. Featured source B ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link346 ) is a video clip (3 minutes and 8 seconds) on the Sikh turban. Featured source C ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link347 ) is a short chapter about Sikhism from the National Council for the Social Studies bulletin, Teaching About Religion in the Social Studies Classroom. 

Formative Performance Task: Make a list of the important tenets of Sikhism. 

2. How did Sikhs immigrate to California? 

For this question, students create a graphic that shows how Sikhs immigrated to America, noting the contextual factors that impacted the community using featured sources. 

Featured source A ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link348 ) is another short video segment from United Shades of America with W. Kamau Bell. The clip discusses farming and Sikh immigration to the United States. Featured source B ( https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link349 ) is a world map of Punjab, India, illustrating the route Sikhs took to the United States. Featured source C ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link350 ) is a 2012 newspaper article by Benjamin Gottlieb in T he Washington Post 

entitled “Punjabi Sikh-Mexican American community fading into history.” Featured source D ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link351 ) is a 2011 speech by Bruce La Brack entitled “A Century of Sikhs in California.” 

Formative Performance Task: Create a graphic that shows how Sikhs immigrated to California, noting the contextual factors that impacted the community. 

3. How did Sikhs shape California’s history? 

For this question, students write a paragraph about one of the featured case studies, focusing on how that example shaped an aspect of American history. 358  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Featured sources A–C are case studies on the following: Narinder Singh Kapany ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link352 ), Dalip Singh Saund ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link353 ), and the 2012 Assembly Bill 1964 policy ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link354 ). Together, these sources focus on three unique and compelling stories of how the Sikh community has shaped American history. 

Formative Performance Task: Write a paragraph about one of the case studies and how that example shaped an aspect of California’s history. 

Summative Performance Task: 

Argument 

How have Sikh Americans responded to the challenges and opportunities in California? Construct an argument (in detailed outline, poster, or essay format, for example) that discusses this compelling question using specific claims and relevant evidence from the historical and contemporary sources. 

Taking Informed Action 

y Assessment: Examine how the CNN show United Shades of America on the Sikh community in Northern California attempts to raise awareness about Sikhism. 

y Application: Discuss how using popular media and pop culture may shape attitudes toward Sikhs. 

y Action and Reflection: Determine how you might help the Sikh community with their campaign. 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

These areas are integrated into the lesson plan and summative performance task. 

Materials and Resources: 

Sources for Essential Question 1: Source A : Video, United Shades of America , W. Kamau Bell, “Introduction to Sikhism” segment ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link355 ); 

Source B : Video, United Shades of America , W. Kamau Bell, “Sikh Turban” segment ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link356 ); Source C : Chapter, “Teaching About Sikhism” (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link357 ) in an NCSS publication. 

Sources for Essential Question 2: Source A : Video, United Shades of America , W. Kamau Bell, “Farming and Immigration” segment ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link358 ); Source B : “World Map of Punjab, India, and immigration route to United States” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link359 ); Source C : Article, “Punjabi 359 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Sikh-Mexican American community fading into history” by Benjamin Gottlieb ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link360 ); Source D : Speech, “A Century of Sikhs in California” by Bruce La Brack ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link361 ). 

Sources for Essential Question 3: Source A : Case study, Narinder Singh Kapany ( https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link362 ); Source B : Case study, Dalip Singh Saund (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link363 ); Source C : Case study, AB 1964 policy (https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link364 ). 360  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 30: Antisemitism and Jewish Middle Eastern Americans 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 3, 4, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 1; Historical Interpretation 1, 3, 4 

CCSS ELA/Literacy: W.9–10.7; CCSS ELA/Literacy: W.11–12.7; CCSS ELA/Literacy: 

W.11–12.8; CCSS ELA/Literacy: W.11–12.9 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson introduces students to antisemitism and its manifestations through the lens of Jewish Middle Eastern Americans, also known as Mizrahi and Sephardic Jews, whose contemporary history is defined by recent struggles as targets of discrimination, prejudice, and hate crimes in the United States and globally. Students will analyze and research narratives and primary and secondary sources about Mizrahi Jews. The source analysis contextualizes the experience of Jewish Middle Eastern Americans within the larger framework of systems of power (economic, political, social). 

Key Terms and Concepts: Mizrahi, antisemitism, Indigeneity, ethnicity, prejudice, refugees, diaspora, immigration, intersectionality 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to ... ): 

y Develop an understanding of Jewish Middle Eastern Americans (who are also referred to as Arab Jews, Mizrahi Jews, Sephardic Jews, and Persian Jews) and differentiate the various identities, nationalities, and subethnicities that make up the Jewish American community 

y Develop an understanding of contemporary antisemitism and identify how the Jewish Middle Eastern American community today is impacted by prejudice and discrimination against them, as intersectional refugees, immigrants, and racialized Jewish Americans 

y Students will construct a visual, written, and oral summary of antisemitism in the United States using multiple written and digital texts 361 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Essential Questions: 

1.  Who are Jewish Americans? Who are Jews of Middle Eastern descent? 

2.  What is antisemitism? What are the manifestations of antisemitism as experienced by intersectional, Jewish Middle Eastern Americans? 

3.  What new possibilities can students imagine and actions can they take to address antisemitism? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Day One: Antisemitism and Jewish Ethnic Diversity 

Introduce the lesson by posting the words “antisemitism” and “Jewish Americans” to engage students in a discussion of who Jewish Americans are and about the discrimination that they face. 

1.  Begin by asking students, what is antisemitism and who are Jewish Americans? Write their responses on the board under the headings “Antisemitism” and “Jewish Americans.” After responses have been written on the board, list the various subethnic groups in the “Jewish Americans” column, such as Ashkenazi/ Eastern European, Mizrahi and Sephardic/Middle Eastern and North African, Iranian/Persian, Israeli, Ethiopian, Russian, and Latinx. 

2.  Tell students that following expulsions by the Babylonians in 586 BCE and the Romans in 70 CE from the land of Israel, many Indigenous Jews established new homes in the Middle East and beyond, forming the Jewish diaspora. In a Jewish historical context, the term “diaspora” refers to Jews living outside of Israel. More broadly, the diaspora refers to ethnic or religious populations that are dispersed from modern-day Israel. Today, Jews are a racially and ethnically diverse group that continues to face antisemitism in the United States and in countries around the world. 

Tell students that today they are going to delve deeper into the experience of discrimination, hate, and violence against Jewish Middle Eastern Americans at present while imagining a response to it. Explain that since the 1940s, one million Jewish refugees from the Middle East, who are also known as Mizrahi and Sephardic Jews, fled antisemitic persecution to countries around the world. 

Today, the US has a population of an estimated 900,000 Jews who descend from Mizrahi and Sephardic Jewish refugees from the Middle East, including an estimated 250,000 to 300,000 in California. Individuals in these communities have intersectional identities as a result of experiencing prejudice and discrimination as Jewish Americans, as Middle Eastern refugees and immigrants, and as people of color for some. 362  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Today and for homework, students will explore primary and secondary sources to understand antisemitism as it is experienced by Jewish Middle Eastern Americans in the US. 

3.  Provide Handout A and read it together. 

4.  Distribute Handout B to each student in groups of six. These graphic organizers have hyperlinks for all the sources, but students will need to take notes in a notebook. If computers are available, students can use them to read material and watch videos. Within groups, students can work in elbow pairs to complete one or two sources on the graphic organizer. 

5.  Explain the columns of the graphic organizer and provide a small amount of context for the sources (for example, highlight primary or secondary sources, identify narratives, and include a review of secondary sources, such as credible news articles, scholarly research, interviews, statistics, and informational videos). 

6.  Provide students with class time to work on the assignment. They should also work on the assignment as homework. 

a.  For individual student assessments, each student is required to hand in their graphic organizer notes in the form of an essay. 

7.  As a follow-up, teachers should facilitate a discussion about antisemitism experienced by Jewish Middle Eastern Americans utilizing the following questions: 

a.  How have the intersectional identities of Jewish Middle Eastern Americans resulted in multiple experiences of discrimination? How have other ethnic groups experienced similar forms of discrimination? 

b.  What is the effect of hateful images and speech? Do images and words reflect existing attitudes or create them? 

c.  How is antisemitism similar to or different from other forms of group hatred? 

d.  What can we do to make a difference? 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

1.  Students will conduct research on antisemitism (past and present) of Mizrahi Jews in the United States through primary and secondary sources. 

2.  Students will write a five-paragraph essay detailing the impacts of antisemitism and linking them to past and present events. Students are encouraged to imagine new possibilities to combat antisemitism by developing potential responses to it. 363 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Materials and Resources: 

Day One: 

Handout A: Defining Antisemitism 

Handout B: Graphic Organizer (note sources are hyperlinks) 

Articles and Reports 

y Devin E. Naar. “The Myth of Jewish Immigration.” Jewish in Seattle Magazine ,August 29, 2018.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link365 

y Sigal Samuel. “For Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews, Whiteness Was a Fragile Identity Long Before Trump.” Forward , December 6, 2016.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link366 

y Karmel Melamed. “We survived Khomeini, we’ll survive this attack on Nessah.” 

The Times of Israel , December 16, 2019.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link367 

y Emma Grey Ellis. “The Internet Protocols of the Elders of Zion.” Wired , March 12, 2017.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link368 

y Facing History and Ourselves. “Antisemitism on UC College Campuses.”  https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link369 

y Los Angeles County Commission on Human Relations. 2018 Hate Crime Report. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link370 

Please note that this resource contains explicit language that will need to be redacted or contextualized for students. 

Video 

y CNN. “Has antisemitism returned with a vengeance?”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link371 

Podcast 

y UCLA. “Are Jews White? A Conversation on Race, Erasure, and Sephardic History with Devin Naar.” Then and Now , September 8, 2020. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link372 364  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Handout A: Defining Antisemitism 

History: Antisemitism as a Form of Racism 

In the late 1800s, many European and American scientists continued to divide humankind into smaller and smaller “races.” One of these was the “Semitic race,” which they used to categorize Jews. The term “antisemitism” was coined by German Wilhelm Marr, who published a pamphlet in 1878 titled “The Victory of Judaism over Germandom.” Filled with lies and myths about Jews, Marr’s pamphlet argued that Jews were more than a distinct “race.” They were dangerous and alien, intent on maliciously destroying German society. 

Historian Deborah Dwork explains that “the move from anti-Judaism—against the religion—to antisemitism with this notion of ‘race’ was only possible when Europeans conceived of the idea of race. And once they had conceived of the idea of race in the 19th century, Wilhelm Marr had the notion that Jews constituted a ‘race.’ And thus, antisemitism can be seen as a form of racism.”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link373 

Modern Definitions of Antisemitism 

According to the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) , the world’s leading organization committed to stopping the defamation of the Jewish people, antisemitism is “the belief or behavior hostile toward Jews just because they are Jewish. It may take the form of religious teachings that proclaim the inferiority of Jews, for instance, or political efforts to isolate, oppress, or otherwise injure them. It may also include prejudiced or stereotyped views about Jews.” 

According to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) , the only intergovernmental organization mandated to focus solely on Holocaust-related issues, “antisemitism is a certain perception of Jews, which may be expressed as hatred toward Jews. Rhetorical and physical manifestations of antisemitism are directed toward Jewish or non-Jewish individuals and/or their property, toward Jewish community institutions and religious facilities.” 365 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Handout B: Graphic Organizer 

Use the graphic organizer below to gather pertinent information from the articles. Each student is required to take notes and write a five-paragraph essay. Your essay could provide information on the historical background, factors that led to antisemitism, the impact of antisemitism, and what resolutions/responses have been or could be created to combat antisemitism. Use your binders to take notes! 

Article  Source (Primary or Secondary) 

Historical Background, Summary 

Factors Leading to Antisemitism 

Effects/ Impact of Antisemitism 

Response, Advocacy, Resolution 

https://www. cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link374 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 

https://www. cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link375 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 

https://www. cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link376 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 

https://www. cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link377 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 

https://www. cde.ca.gov/ ci/cr/cf/ch4. asp#link378 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 

LA 2018 Hate Crime Report 

(Read pages 34–37) 

[fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in]  [fill in] 366  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 31: Jewish Americans: Identity, Intersectionality, and Complicating Ideas of Race 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 4, 5 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 2, 4; Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 2, 4; Historical Interpretation 1, 2, 3 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10; WHST.9–10.2, 4, 7; SL.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

This lesson examines the diversity of the Jewish American community and what unites it. Learning about Jewish diversity illustrates the concept of intersectionality, the idea that people have different overlapping identities (visible and invisible) and that the unique combination of identities shape individuals’ experiences. While individual identity is personal, Jewish Americans are connected through ties of history, culture, language, religion, ancestry, celebrations, communal and familial traditions, common values, and a sense of a common ethnic peoplehood. 

By examining perceptions of Jews, the lesson will address how conceptions of race and labels change over time and place (racial formation), adding another lens to the study of race. The lesson explains some of the challenging experiences of Jewish Americans, including prejudice, discrimination, antisemitism, racialization, hate crimes, Holocaust denial, and targeting by white supremacists. Jews have also experienced acculturation and assimilation, with associated benefits and losses. 

Jewish Americans’ many positive experiences include cultural retention through celebration of Jewish traditions, strong communities and sense of belonging, and contributions to many spheres of life. Jewish tradition and communal experiences of persecution and the Holocaust have led to a widespread commitment among Jews to pursue justice and equity for all people and a vigilance against rising antisemitism. Jews are a distinct ethnic group connected by rich traditions, thousands of years of history, ancestry, language, and religion. 

Key Terms and Concepts: antisemitism, white supremacy, conditional whiteness, identity, intersectionality, racial formation, racialization, Jews of color, Mizrachi, Sephardi, Ashkenazi 367 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Explain how identities are composed of visible and invisible attributes and are intersectional and multifaceted 

y Learn about diversity within the Jewish American ethnic community 

y Understand the varied intersectional identities of Jewish Americans and how Jews see themselves 

y Identify the range of Jewish American experiences in relation to race and racial hierarchies over time and how Jews are seen by others 

Essential Questions: 

1.  How do visible and invisible components make up each person’s unique identity? 

2.  How does the concept of intersectionality help us understand Jewish American experiences? 

3.  How do conceptions of race change over time and place? What is racialization? 

4.  How does the diversity of Jewish Americans deepen our understanding of the concepts of race and ethnicity? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Diversity of Jewish Americans: Identity and Intersectionality 

1.  The Iceberg of Identity Activity — Only a small part of an iceberg is visible above the waterline, while most of the iceberg’s mass lies below the waterline and is invisible. Share an image of an iceberg or a blank copy of the Iceberg of Identity worksheet. Tell students that some parts of identity are visible to others, while other parts of identity are invisible to others. 

Distribute two blank copies of the Iceberg of Identity worksheet handout. 

Ask students to write on one worksheet categories of identity that are: 

y Usually visible to others above the waterline, in the top third 

y Sometimes visible and sometimes invisible, close to the waterline 

y Usually invisible to others, in the bottom third of the iceberg 

Teachers may give the option to add examples of these categories, either about a hypothetical student or about themselves. Emphasize that this is optional and there is no need to disclose private information unless they are comfortable sharing. 368  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Refer students to the Iceberg of Identity categories list below. Suggest they add at least three visible and three invisible examples from these categories to the first Iceberg of Identity worksheet: 

a.  Gender 

b.  Race 

c.  Ethnic appearance 

d.  Visible religious signs (such as head coverings, kippah, yarmulke, hijab, turban, tzitzit [Jewish ritual fringes], cross, kirpan, Star of David) 

e.  Age (for example, child, middle schooler, teen, young adult, middle age, elderly) 

f.  Body type 

g.  Ability/disability 

h.  Sexuality 

i.  Clothing (casual, formal, brands, ethnic clothing) 

j.  Language(s) (accent, second language, regional dialect, formality of speech) 

k.  Religion, level of religious practice, spirituality, philosophy 

l.  Family’s national origin, immigrant, refugee, forced migration 

m.  Nationality/citizenship 

n.  Violence, trauma, or intergenerational trauma 

o.  Activity, passion, or a job that’s an important part of identity 

p.  Other cultural or group or family aspect of identity 

2.  Explain the concept of intersectionality. Intersectionality is the idea that people have different overlapping identities and that the unique combination of identities shape individuals’ experiences and how a person is perceived and treated by others. 

3.  Ask students to, as they watch the videos, note down on the second blank Iceberg of Identity worksheet as many aspects of identity of the speaker as they can. 

4.  Watch one or two short videos: 

a.  Be’chol Lashon “Diverse Jewish Voices: Jonah” with Jonah Tobin, April 17, 2019  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link379 

This is a thr ee-minute video about a 13-year-old African American Jewish teen on his bar mitzvah and Jewish community. 369 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

b.  Elon University “Kosher/Soul: Black Jewish Identity Cooking” with Michael W. Twitty, November 11, 2015, (00:59 to 4:23) 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link380 

This is a three-minute excerpt from a one-hour video with Jewish African American food historian Michael W. Twitty, author of The Cooking Gene , on his intersectional identity, being a Jewish gay African American, and about Jews of color. It’s an excerpt from a video on Jewish and African American food and identity. 

5.  To conclude the Iceberg of Identity activities above, ask the class to share their thoughts on how visible and invisible identities shape personal and communal identity. 

6.  Ask students to read the Fact Sheet on Jewish American Diversity .

7.  Ask students the following questions: 

a.  In what ways is the Jewish American community diverse? (Examples include race and physical appearance, language, food and cultural traditions, religious observance, origins, and ethnic subgroup.) 

b.  What bonds all Jewish Americans together despite other cultural, racial, or ethnic differences? (Examples include shared Jewish history, values, sacred texts, religious rituals, traditions, celebrations, culture, ancestry, and sense of peoplehood.) 

8.  Divide students into small groups and assign each group to read two or three short excerpts from I Am Jewish: Personal Reflections Inspired by the Last Words of Daniel Pearl .

9.  Questions for students on personal and communal identity in the excerpts: 

a.  Ask students to highlight or underline one key sentence or phrase in each excerpt to share with the class. 

b.  What elements of their identity does the author stress? (Examples include culture, family, ancestry, history, religion, social justice, and community.) 

c.  Why do Jewish Americans not fit neatly into racial and religious categories? 

d.  Ask students to share one word that jumps out on what being Jewish means to the writers. The teacher will compile them in a shared visual medium. 

Jewish Americans and Complicating Ideas of Race 

10.  The teacher leads a read aloud of the Fact Sheet on Jewish Americans and Complicating Ideas of Race , including key word definitions on racialization, conditional whiteness, racial formation, antisemitism, and white supremacy. 370  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

11.  Questions for students: 

a.  What is racialization? What is racial formation? What is a racial hierarchy? 

b.  When and how have Jews been racialized as nonwhite? 

c.  What is conditional whiteness? 

d.  When and how have Jews experienced conditional whiteness? Which Jews have experienced conditional whiteness? What benefits and losses might people experience when whiteness is conditional? 

e.  Why do people acculturate or assimilate? What does a member of an ethnic group gain from assimilation? What does a member of an ethnic group lose from assimilation? 

f.  How did the Holocaust shift the position of Jewish Americans in American society? 

g.  Can you determine someone’s membership in a racial group based only on external appearance? Referring to the fact sheet or reflecting on your own knowledge of racial groups, what other factors go into racial identity? 

h.  Based on what we have learned about changes in how Jews as a whole have been racially categorized, what conclusions can we draw about race as a social construct? 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Have students reflect and answer the following questions to conclude the lesson: 

a.  Ask students to choose one aspect of their own identity and write a one-paragraph reflection on why that aspect of their identity is important to them. Please complete: “I am (choose an aspect of identity) because … and it is important to me because … ” 

b.  In what ways is the Jewish American ethnic group diverse? What bonds Jews together across this diversity? 

c.  What have we learned about the changeability of racial classifications and hierarchies? How does this complicate or help us understand race more broadly? 

Materials and Resources: 

y Two copies of the Iceberg of Identity worksheet 

y Video: Be’chol Lashon “Diverse Jewish Voices: Jonah” with Jonah Tobin, April 17, 2019, (3:08):  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link381 371 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

y Video: Elon University “Kosher/Soul: Black Jewish Identity Cooking” with Michael W. Twitty, November 11, 2015, (00:59 to 4:23):  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/ cr/cf/ch4.asp#link382 

y Fact Sheet on Jewish Americans and Complicating Ideas of Race 

y Excerpts from I Am Jewish: Personal Reflections Inspired by the Last Words of Daniel Pearl , edited by Judea Pearl and Ruth Pearl, Woodstock, VT: Jewish Lights Publishing, 2004. 

y Handouts: 

○ Fact Sheet on Jewish American Diversity 

○ Fact Sheet on Jewish Americans and Complicating Ideas of Race 

○ Key Word Definitions 

Ethnic Studies Outcomes 

Students will: 

1.  Recognize intersectionality and understand how it is related to identity and to systemic discrimination, racism, ethnic bigotry, discrimination, and marginalization. (Outcome 5) 

2.  Develop a better understanding of other people, cultures, and ethnic groups. (Outcome 4) 

3.  Further self-understanding by asking what ethnicity and heritage mean and to what extent identity can change over time. (Outcome 3) 372  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 373 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Fact Sheet on Jewish American Diversity 

y Jewish Americans have come to the United States from all over the world and have brought a rich variety of Jewish cultural traditions with them. 

y The Jewish people originated about 3,000 years ago in Southwest Asia, in the land of Israel. 

y Jews do not fit neatly into predefined categories and meet the criteria for being both a religious group and an ethnic group. 

y Jews are a distinct ethnic group connected by rich traditions, thousands of years of history, ancestry, language, and religion. Jewish American ethnic identity may be expressed through food, language, holidays, celebrations, expressions of peoplehood, remembrances of historical and ancestral experiences, connections to the land of Israel, a commitment to social justice, and cultural elements such as music, literature, art, and philosophy that are also part of Jewish life. 

y There are several major Jewish ethnic subgroups: 

○ Mizrachi Jews are racially diverse Arabic and Farsi-speaking Jews indigenous to the Middle East and North Africa for over 2,500 years. 

○ Sephardic Jews are Jews who originally spoke Judeo-Spanish, or Ladino, and were expelled from Spain and Portugal to North Africa and the Ottoman Empire, beginning with their expulsion from Spain in 1492. 

○ Ethiopian Jews are Amharic-speaking Jews originally from Ethiopia. 

○ Ashkenazi Jews are or were Yiddish-speaking Eastern and Central European Jews. 

y Major languages and literature of Jewish expression include English, Hebrew, Arabic, Yiddish, Ladino, and Farsi. Hebrew, the language of Jewish scripture, is often a lingua franca that has united different Jewish ethnic subgroups. The physical appearance of Jewish Americans is very diverse, and skin color can range from light skinned to dark skinned. Jewish Americans include Middle Eastern Jews, African American Jews, Asian American Jews, Latino/a/x Jews, and Native American Jews. Jewish families include multiracial households, and there are diverse appearances both within families and within communities. 

y The majority of Jewish Americans emigrated from Eastern Europe, and while their racial appearance often reflects this, there is a range of physical appearances, reflecting the movement of Jews over time and place. 

y For many Jews with light skin, Jewish identity is primary, but they may be viewed as white by others. Therefore, Jews often experience a divergence between internal identity and external classification. 374  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y Other Jewish Americans or their families emigrated from the Middle East (Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Turkey, Yemen), North Africa (Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco), East Africa (Ethiopia), and Central Asia (Bukharan Jews from Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) and are of Mizrachi and Sephardic heritage. 

y American Judaism has a range of religious denominations, including Reform, Reconstructionist, Conservative, and Orthodox, with a range of observances and practices. At the same time, Jews are united by shared sacred texts, such as the Torah, and by celebrations, traditions, and a feeling of connection to other Jews around the world. 

y American Jews have a wide range of opinions and beliefs about what it means to be Jewish and how Jewish identity is defined. 

y Across Jewish denominations, ancestry marks a person as Jewish regardless of the individual’s personal level of religious observance. Traditionally, a person was considered Jewish if born to a Jewish mother. Reform Jews, among others, also consider a person with a Jewish father to be Jewish. 

y Jews consider a person without Jewish ancestry who converts to Judaism to be as Jewish as any other Jew. 

y Jews are part of the Jewish American community by birth, adoption, marriage, throwing their lot in with the Jewish people through conversion, or being part of a Jewish family. 375 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Reflections on Jewish American Identity 

Excerpts from I Am Jewish: Personal Reflections Inspired by the Last Words of Daniel Pearl ,edited by Judea Pearl and Ruth Pearl. In memory of their son, Daniel Pearl’s parents asked a diverse range of Jews to reflect on what being Jewish means to them. Daniel Pearl was an American raised in California who became a journalist for The Wall Street Journal . He was murdered in Pakistan by terrorists for being Jewish soon after 9/11. Pearl’s last words were “My father is Jewish, my mother is Jewish, I am Jewish.” 

1. Rabbi Angela Warnick Buchdahl is an Asian American rabbi ordained by Hebrew Union College. She spent her college summers working as head song leader at Camp Swig, a Reform Jewish camp in Saratoga, California. 

“My father is a Jew and my mother is a Korean Buddhist. As the child of a mother who carried her own distinct ethnic and cultural traditions—and wore them on her face—I internalized the belief that I can never be ‘fully Jewish’ because I could never be ‘purely’ Jewish. My daily reminders included strangers’ comments (‘Funny, you don’t look Jewish’), other Jews’ challenges to my halakhic [Jewish law] status, and every look in the mirror. 

Jewish identity is not solely a religious identification, but also a cultural and ethnic marker. While we have been a ‘mixed multitude’ since biblical times, over the centuries the idea of a Jewish race became popularized. After all, Jews have their own language, foods, and even genetic diseases. But what does the Jewish ‘race’ mean to you if you are Black and Jewish? Or Arab and Jewish? Or even German and Jewish, for that matter? How should Jewish identity be understood, given that Am Yisrael [people of Israel] reflects the faces of so many nations? 

Years ago ... I called my mother to declare that I no longer wanted to be Jewish. I did not look Jewish, I did not carry a Jewish name, and I no longer wanted the heavy burden of having to explain and prove myself every time I entered a new Jewish community. My Buddhist mother’s response was profoundly simple: ‘Is that possible?’ At that moment I realized I could no sooner stop being a Jew than I could stop being Korean, or female, or me .Judaism might not be my ‘race,’ but it is an internal identification as indestructible as my DNA. 

Jewish identity remains a complicated and controversial issue in the Jewish community. Ultimately, Judaism cannot be about race, but must be a way of walking in this world that transcends racial lines. Only then will the ‘mixed multitude’ truly be Am Yisrael .” (pages 19–20) 

2. Naim Dangoor was a leader of Iraqi Jewry outside Iraq. 

“When I was a young boy a teacher at school asked me, ‘Why are you a Jew?’ I, with all the practicality of youth, replied, ‘because I was born one!’ 376  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

There is, however, something in this sentiment that rings truer than one might think. Judaism is a birthright, a glorious gift from one’s forefathers of faith, culture, and heritage. 

For me, it is this: my strong Babylonian heritage, the heritage that Daniel Pearl also shared, his mother having been born in Baghdad, that makes me so proud to be a Jew. 

Babylonia was one of the main birthplaces of the Jewish people, from where Abraham emerged as a founder, and later from where the Babylonian Talmud, forming the framework for Rabbinic Judaism, was created. Its glorious Jewish intellectual eminence fanned out across the known world for more than a thousand years. Currently, the descendants of this tradition are spread throughout the globe.” (pages 97–98) 

3. Julius Lester was an African American civil rights activist, writer, and professor at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. 

“It is the particular responsibility of the Jew to suffuse history with holiness. This is not something that, done once, is done for all time. It must be done every day, for every day a Jew must choose anew the responsibility of holiness. 

To be holy is to be apart from, the Torah teaches us. We must be apart to possess our unique identity as a people. We must be apart to offer the world those aspects of the holy which God put into our keeping. 

There is a paradox: The world needs us to be apart as Jews, though it may be loath to acknowledge it. It does not need us to be just another ethnic group. It does not need us to dissolve our particularity into an undifferentiated and colorless mass. 

The world needs us to assume the difficult task of living as Jews and to do as Jews have sought to do through the ages—merge past and present and future into a Holy Now. 

We do this by becoming a continuous bracha [blessing]—a blessing of joy that refuses to be suppressed or destroyed despite what others have said and done, despite what others say and do. To be a Jew is to be a bracha of laughter expressing our surprise, delight, and wonder in creation and our place in it as Jews. We are called to be a bracha of unending love because to be a Jew is to be in love—with a God, a people, and a land. To be a Jew is to live that love—boldly, defiantly, joyously—to become that love and live with the fluidity of a melody understood in the silence of the soul. 

To be a Jew is to be a love song—to the God of our people—and to the world.” (page 144) 

4. Norman Lear is a writer, producer, and social activist. 

“I identify with everything in life as a Jew. The Jewish contribution over the centuries to literature, art, science, theater, music, philosophy, the humanities, public policy, and the field of philanthropy awes me and fills me with pride and inspiration. As to Judaism, the religion: I love the congregation and find myself less interested in the ritual. If that 377 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

describes me to others as a ‘cultural Jew,’ I have failed myself. My description, as I feel it, would be: total Jew.” (page 34) 

5. Douglas Rushkoff is a writer, journalist, and professor of media studies. 

“Jews are not a tribe but an amalgamation of tribes around a single premise: that human beings have a role. Judaism dared to make human beings responsible for this realm. Instead of depending upon the gods for food and protection, we decided to enact God, ourselves, and to depend on one another. 

So out of the death cults of Mitzrayim [Egypt] came a repudiation of idolatry, and a way of living that celebrated life itself. To say ‘l’chaim ’ [to life] was new, revolutionary, even naughty. It overturned sacred truths in favor of living sacred living … 

It’s important to me that those who, throughout our history, have attacked the Jews on the basis of blood not be allowed to redefine our indescribable process or our eternally evolving civilization. We are attacked for our refusal to accept the boundaries, yet sometimes we incorporate these very attacks into our thinking and beliefs. 

It was Pharaoh who first used the term Am Yisrael [People of Israel] in Torah, fearing a people who might replicate like bugs and not support him in a war. It was the Spanish of the Inquisition who invented the notion of Jewish blood, looking for a new reason to murder those who had converted to Catholicism. It was Hitler, via Jung, who spread the idea of a Jewish ‘genetic memory,’ capable of instilling an uncooperative nature in even those with partial Jewish ancestry. And it was Danny Pearl’s killers who defined his Judaism as a sin of birth. 

I refuse these definitions. 

Yes, our parents pass our Judaism on to us, but not through their race, blood, or genes—it is through their teaching, their love, and their spirit. Judaism is not bestowed; it is enacted. Judaism is not a boundary; it is the force that breaks down boundaries. And Judaism is the refusal to let anyone tell us otherwise.” (pages 90–91) 

6. Senator Joe Lieberman served as a US Senator from Connecticut from 1989 to 2013 and was a vice presidential candidate in 2000. 

“What does being Jewish mean to me to me? To me, being Jewish means having help in answering life’s most fundamental questions. How did I come to this place? And, now that I am here, how should I live? 

My faith, which has anchored my life, begins with a joyful gratitude that there is a God who created the universe and then, because He continued to care for what He created, gave us laws and values to order and improve our lives. God also gave us a purpose and a destiny—to do justice and to protect, indeed to perfect, the human community and natural environment. 378  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Being Jewish in America also means feeling a special love for this country, which has provided such unprecedented freedom and opportunity to the millions who have come and lived here. My parents raised me to believe that I did not have to mute my religious faith or ethnic identity to be a good American, that, on the contrary, America invites all its people to be what they are and believe what they wish ... 

Jews around the world and all who love freedom—the freedom to think, to speak, to write, to question, to pray—will hold Daniel [Pearl] near to our hearts, and from his courage we will draw eternal light and strength.” (pages 107–108) 

7. Senator Dianne Feinstein is the senior US Senator from California, since 1992. 

“I was born during the Holocaust. If I had lived in Russia or Poland—the birthplaces of my grandparents—I probably would not be alive today, and I certainly wouldn’t have had the opportunities afforded to me here. When I think of the six million people who were murdered, and the horrors that can take hold of a society, it reinforces my commitment to social justice and progress, principles that have always been central to Jewish history and tradition. 

For those of us who hold elected office, governing in this complex country can often be difficult. My experience is that bigotry and prejudice in diverse societies ultimately lead to some form of violence, and we must be constantly vigilant against this. Our Jewish culture is one that values tolerance with an enduring spirit of democracy. If I’ve learned anything from the past and from my heritage, it’s that it takes all of us who cherish beauty and humankind to be mindful and respectful of one another. Every day we’re called upon to put aside our animosities, to search together for common ground, and to settle differences before they fester and become problems. 

Despite terrible events, so deeply etched in their souls, Jews continue to be taught to do their part in repairing the world. That is why I have dedicated my life to the pursuit of justice; sought equality for the underdog; and fought for the rights of every person regardless of their race, creed, color, sex, or sexual orientation, to live a safe, good life. For me that’s what it means to be a Jew, and every day I rededicate myself to that ideal.” (pages 228–229) 

8. Rabbi Eric H. Yoffie is President Emeritus of the Union for Reform Judaism. He focuses on interfaith relations and social justice. 

“I am Jewish. This means, above all else, that I was present at Sinai, and that when the Torah was given on that mountain, my DNA was to be found in the crowd … 

A people is usually defined by race, origin, language, territorial or statehood, and none of these categories is an obvious common denominator for the worldwide Jewish people. Peoplehood is a puzzling concept for modern Jews, particularly the younger ones, who often cannot understand what connects them to other Jews in Moscow, Buenos Aires, and 379 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Tel Aviv. But I am convinced, to the depth of my being, that Jewish destiny is a collective destiny … It is the covenant at Sinai that links all Jews, including nonobservant ones, in a bond of shared responsibility. And if we hope to strengthen the unity and interdependence of the Jewish people, we will have to revive the religious ideas on which these notions are based.” (pages 114–115) 

9. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was a justice of the US Supreme Court from 1993 to 2020 and an advocate for women’s rights. 

“I say who I am in certain visible signs. The command from Deuteronomy appears in artworks, in Hebrew letters, on three walls and a table in my chambers. ‘ Zedek, zedek, tirdof ,’ ‘Justice, Justice shalt thou pursue,’ these artworks proclaim; they are ever-present reminders to me of what judges must do ‘that they may thrive.’ There is also a large silver 

mezuzah [Torah verses in a small case] mounted on my door post … 

I am a judge, born, raised, and proud of being a Jew. The demand for justice runs through the entirety of Jewish history and Jewish tradition. I hope, in all the years I have the good fortune to serve on the bench of the Supreme Court of the United States, I will have the strength and courage to remain steadfast in the service of that demand.” (pages 201–202) 

10. Kerri Strug is an Olympic Gold medalist in gymnastics. 

“I have heard the same question over and over since I received my gold medal in gymnastics on the Olympic podium. ‘You’re Jewish?’ people ask in a surprised tone. Perhaps it is my appearance or the stereotype that Jews and sports don’t mix that makes my Jewish heritage so unexpected. I think about the attributes that helped me reach that podium: perseverance when faced with pain, years of patience and hope in an uncertain future, and a belief and devotion to something greater than myself. It makes it hard for me to believe that I did not look Jewish up there on the podium. In my mind, those are attributes that have defined Jews throughout history.” (page 98) 

11. Sarah Rosenbaum is fifteen years old and from Southern California. 

“When I say that I am Jewish, I am identifying myself as part of a tradition, connected to our foremothers and fathers, and carrying on to the future a culture, a religion, a way of life. I feel pride, and am overwhelmed with joy when I declare that I am part of this incredible people, our people Israel.” (page 54) 380  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Fact Sheet on Jewish Americans and Complicating Ideas of Race 

y The first Jews to arrive in 1654 to what became the United States were Sephardic Portuguese Jews from Brazil, who fled the Portuguese expulsion and inquisition. 

y In US immigration and naturalization law from 1898 to 1941, Jews were categorized as part of the “Hebrew race.” This racialization deemed Jews as nonwhite. 

y A large wave of Jewish immigrants came to the US from Eastern Europe between 1880 and 1924. White supremacist prejudice against Jews and Catholics from Eastern and Southern Europe motivated the passing of the Johnson–Reed Immigration Act of 1924, greatly restricting Jewish immigration through 1965. 

y In addition to targeting African Americans, the white supremacist racism of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) deemed Jews as nonwhite, a separate and lesser race that was a threat to American “racial purity,” and targeted Jews, such as with exclusionary immigration legislation and intimidation in large marches in Washington, DC. 

y For the first half of the twentieth century, Jews were usually not considered white in the US racial formation. 

y From the 1880s through the 1960s, antisemitic employment discrimination with overt and covert “no Jews allowed” notices often led Jews to enter new industries with less discrimination. Housing covenants prohibited Jews or “Hebrews” from purchasing houses in many areas. Elite universities also had quotas until the early 1960s limiting the number of Jews who could attend them. 

y In the 1920s and 1930s, anti-Jewish conspiracy theories (later used in Nazi propaganda) were openly distributed in the US, for example by Henry Ford’s newspaper, The Dearborn Independent , and Father Edward Coughlin’s radio show. 

y Drawing upon white supremacist ideas about Jews and pseudoscientific eugenics “theories,” Nazi racial theories deemed Jews a separate nonwhite race (racialization), and the lowest race in their racial hierarchy, leading to the genocide of the Holocaust. 

y In the 1930s, growing anti-Jewish prejudice in the US led to the US government’s refusal of entry to Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany until 1944 after millions were already murdered. 

y Jews often changed Jewish-sounding names to avoid discrimination, to assimilate, or for reasons of internalized oppression. Starting with immigrants, and common with actors, this practice of name changing continues to the present day. 

y In the decades after the Holocaust, American attitudes toward Jews gradually changed, and overt anti-Jewish discrimination decreased. Descendants of light-381 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

skinned Jewish immigrants were able to acculturate or assimilate, which brought gains and losses. 

○ Acculturation refers to the adoption of many of the practices and values of the majority or dominant culture while still retaining a connection to one’s culture of origin, or a balance between cultures. 

○ Assimilation is a process by which a minority group or culture comes to resemble that of the majority culture. 

y Assimilation allowed the children of Jewish immigrants to change their position on the racial hierarchy from that of their immigrant parents, though they remained vulnerable to antisemitism. Assimilation also brought loss of community, identity, and cultural traditions and practices. 

y While anti-Jewish prejudice became less socially accepted over time, antisemitism persisted and persists in various forms today. 

y White supremacists continue to racialize Jews as nonwhite. This was evident when participants at the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville chanted “the Jews will not replace us,” with “us” referring to white Americans. See  https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link383 .

y Jewish institutions continue to be targets of hate crimes, including synagogue shootings in Poway, California, in 2019, and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 2018. 

y In different contexts, an individual may have very different experiences. 

○ Light-skinned Jews may experience the benefits of conditional whiteness on the basis of their appearance, for example, safer encounters with law enforcement, but also experience antisemitic prejudice and discrimination on the basis of their Jewishness from both extremes of the political spectrum. 

○ Jews of color, like all communities of color, face systemic racism and also face antisemitic prejudice and discrimination on the basis of their Jewishness. 

y Jews of all skin colors who are visibly Jewish, from their appearance, name, self-identification, or religious clothing or symbols, such as a Star of David necklace, experience more overt antisemitism. 382  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Key Word Definitions 

racialization: When a group becomes categorized as a stigmatized group, and that group is seen as a separate race by another dominant group. 19  

> 19

See: Daniel Martinez HoSang and Oneka LaBennett. 2014. “Racialization.” In Keywords for American Cultural Studies . 3rd ed., edited by Bruce Burgett and Glenn Hendler. New York, NY: New York University Press.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link384 

conditional whiteness: When a person or group can gain the benefits of whiteness by dropping ethnic markers of difference or assertions of belonging to a separate group. The word “conditional” is significant as whiteness may be bestowed on light-skinned members of a community (Jewish, Arab, Latina/o/x, or Native American, for example) on the condition that individuals assimilate and lose their religious or ethnic distinctiveness. 

racial formation: Racial formation is the combination of 1) a socially constructed system of racial definitions and 2) hierarchies that can vary and change in different times and places. Assignment to racial categories can change over time and place, and a group can become racialized. 20  

> 20

See: Michael Omi and Howard Winant. 2014. Racial Formation in the United States . 3rd ed. New York, NY: Routledge. 

antisemitism: Hatred, discrimination, fear, and prejudice against Jews based on stereotypes and myths. 

white supremacy: The belief that white people are a superior race and should dominate society. White supremacists target other racial and ethnic groups, such as African Americans and Jews, who they view as inferior. 21  

> 21

“White Supremacy.” 2020. Lexico.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link385 .383 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

# Sample Lesson 32: An Introduction to Arab American Studies 

Theme: Identity 

Disciplinary Area: Asian American and Pacific Islander Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 2, 5, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.11–12.9; WHST.11–12.9 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

From entrepreneurs and innovators to politicians and entertainers, Arab Americans have formed an integral part of American society for centuries. Despite this, American media, government, and education has often put forth biased and inaccurate stereotypes of Arab Americans. This lesson asks students to critically interrogate these biased stereotypes and to listen to the authentic voices of Arab Americans. 

With an estimated 3.5 million people who trace their ancestry to 22 different Arab countries, Arab Americans are one of the most diverse ethnic groups in the United States, with many different lived experiences, customs, and beliefs. 22  This lesson introduces students to the diversity of experiences of Arab Americans, with a focus on humanizing members of this population to combat the monolithic stereotypes that students often encounter elsewhere.  

> 22

Pierre Tristam. “Arab Americans Are a Growing Electoral Force in Swing States.” ThoughtCo. April 14, 2019. 

Part one of this lesson features an overview of the Arab region, the history of Arab immigration to the United States, and current Arab American demographics. Part two introduces students to the origins of dominant narratives about Arab Americans and the impact of these stereotypes. Finally, part three highlights the voices and contributions of Arab Americans and invites students to explore strategies for combating bias. 

Because this lesson covers a large amount of content, educators should consider spreading the lesson across several class periods to allow sufficient time for class discussion and reflection. 

While the term “Arab” was originally used to only refer to those whose native language is Arabic, the definition of Arab has broadened as more Arab Americans consider English their first language. Today, Arabs are primarily defined as individuals who trace their ancestry to one or more of the 22 Arab countries (see map below). While these 22 countries have majority Arab populations, they are also incredibly diverse and include other ethnic groups, such as Kurds, Imazighen, and Persians. 384  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

The first wave of Arab immigration to the United States began in 1880 as significant Christian populations from modern-day Syria and Lebanon came to the United States to pursue new economic opportunities and to flee war in their homelands. 23  From 1880 to 1920, more than 95,000 Arabs moved to the United States and began lives as merchants or small business owners. The second wave of Arab immigration occurred after World War II and included mostly urban, highly educated Christians and Muslims. The third wave of Arab immigration began in the 1970s when the United States lifted many of its restrictive immigration laws. 24  Since 2000, many Arab immigrants and refugees, particularly from Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, the Palestinian Territories, Egypt, and Somalia, have come to the United States to escape political instability or seek new economic and educational opportunities. 25  

> 23

Mattea Cumoletti and Jeanne Batalova. 2018. “Middle Eastern and North African Immigrants in the United States.” Migration Policy Institute, January 10, 2018.  https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link386 . 

> 24

Arab American Immigration. 2011. Reclaiming Identity: Dismantling Arab Stereotypes. Arab American National Museum.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link387 . 

> 25

Randa Kayyali. 2019. Arab Americans: History, Culture, and Contributions. Dearborn, MI: Arab American National Museum. 

Today’s Arab American population is one of the most diverse and fastest growing diasporic groups in the United States. Although the majority of Arabs worldwide are Muslim, the majority of Arab Americans are Christian. Almost 95 percent of Arab Americans live in 385 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

urban areas, with California, Michigan, and New York having the highest Arab American populations. 26  The average income of Arab Americans is 22 percent higher than the national average, and over 40 percent of Arab Americans have obtained at least a college degree, compared to the national average of 34 percent. 27  

> 26

“AMEMSA Fact Sheet.” 2011. Asian Americans/Pacific Islanders in Philanthropy, November 2011.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link388 . 

> 27

Demographics. 2021. Arab American Stories. Arab American National Museum.  https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link389 .

Despite the diversity and long history of Arab Americans in the United States, American media, governmental institutions, and educational sources often put forth harmful and inaccurate stereotypes of Arab men as violent and un-American and of Arab women as oppressed and submissive. 28  For example, Professor Jack Shaheen studied over 900 American films and found that 95 percent of the films presented Arabs as “heartless, brutal, [and] uncivilized.” 29  

> 28

Randa Kayyali, Arab Americans: History, Culture, and Contributions.  

> 29

Jack G. Shaheen. 2003. “Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 588 (1): 171–193. 

These negative and inaccurate stereotypes stem from the colonial era and are referred to by scholars as “Orientalist ideas.” Professor Edward Said, a pioneer in the field of Middle Eastern and Arab American studies, coined the term “Orientalism” to describe the pervasive Western (European and American) tradition of prejudiced interpretations of the East (particularly the Middle East), shaped by the attitudes of European imperialism in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 30  Said argued that colonial figures defined the Arab world in opposition to the West and characterized its people as barbaric and uncivilized to justify the colonization and subjugation of Arab populations. 31  Said and others argue that this legacy has persisted through the present day because it allows Western countries to assert themselves as superior to the Arab countries over whom they seek to exert power. 32  

> 30

Susan Douglass. “Orientalism.” Slideshow retrieved from  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ ch4.asp#link390 . 

> 31

What is Orientalism? 2011. Reclaiming Identity: Dismantling Arab Stereotypes. Arab American National Museum.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link391 . 

> 32

Tayyab Mahmud. 1999. “Colonialism and Modern Constructions of Race: A Preliminary Inquiry.” University of Miami Law Review 53 (4): 1219–1246.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/ cf/ch4.asp#link392 .386  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

These negative stereotypes have a tangible impact on Arab Americans every day. 33  Hate crimes against Arab Americans and those perceived to be Arab or Muslim rose by 1700 percent in 2001. 34  Arab American youth in particular have reported feeling “afraid, unsafe, and insecure” at school because of prejudiced rhetoric and actions by their peers and school officials. It is also important to note that not only Arabs are impacted by anti-Arab bias. Often members of other ethnic minority groups from the Middle East and other Asian regions, including Kurds, Imazighen, Persians, Sikhs, and South Asians, are targeted because they are mistakenly perceived to be Arab.      

> 33 For more information on the lived experiences of Arab Americans after 9/11, consider the book How Does It Feel to Be a Problem? Being Young and Arab in America by Moustafa Bayoumi.
> 34 “’We Are Not the Enemy’: Hate Crimes Against Arabs, Muslims, and Those Perceived to Be Arab or Muslim after September 11.” Human Rights Watch, November 14, 2002. https:// www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link393 .

Despite these challenges, Arab Americans have continued to persist and succeed in their careers, education, and daily lives. Arab Americans are central figures in fields as diverse as science, technology, politics, and entertainment. Many organizations have dedicated their attention to improving the lives of Arab Americans through educational efforts and social justice campaigns. By elevating the voices and lived experiences of Arab Americans, educators can combat the widespread stereotypes and contribute to the humanization and appreciation of our fellow Americans. 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Explain the long history and diversity of Arab American communities across the United States 

y Develop their media literacy skills by recognizing and critiquing stereotypes of Arab Americans in popular culture 

y Explain Arab American contributions and accomplishments in the face of adversity 

Essential Questions: 

1.  Who are Arab Americans and what factors shape their lived experiences? 

2.  Where do dominant stereotypes about Arab Americans come from and what can we do to improve them? 

3.  How have Arab Americans demonstrated resilience and success in the face of adversity? 387 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Key Terms and Concepts: Arab, Arab American, Arabic, diaspora, Orientalism, stereotype, xenophobia 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

1. Pre-Class Homework – Background Information 

In preparation for the first class, provide each student with a copy of the Know, Wonder, Learn (KWL) worksheet. In the “Something I Know” column, ask students to write down two to three bullet points on facts they know about Arab Americans. In the “Something I Wonder” column, ask students to write down questions they have about Arab Americans or ideas they want to explore in class. Students will revisit the KWL worksheet at the end of the lesson. 

Next, assign the introduction and chapter 1 (pages 1–15) of the short book Arab Americans: History, Culture, and Contributions for homework to be completed before the first class period dedicated to this lesson. The book provides an overview of the history and demographic background of Arab Americans. The book is available for free download on the Arab American National Museum website (the hyperlink is included in the Materials and Resources section). 

2. Main Activity Part 1 – Arab American Identity and History 

Pass out the student version of the worksheet “True or False: Facts about Arab Americans.” As a class, read out each of the statements and ask students to write down whether they think each statement is true or false. After students have written down their answers, read off the correct answers from the teacher version of the worksheet. 

Next, pass out a copy of the article “Arab American Stories: History” and the corresponding worksheet Arab Immigration Timeline. Divide the class into groups of three to four students and ask students to read the article together, which discusses the history of Arab immigration to the United States. As they read, students should take notes on the worksheet. 

If time permits, ask students to read an interview with Mary Juma, an Arab American who immigrated to North Dakota from Syria in the nineteenth century. The interview focuses on her experience in the United States and humanizes the immigration process. 

3. Discussion Part 1 

Use the Part 1 Discussion Questions to guide students through a 10 to 15 minute class discussion about what they learned from the podcast and article. 388  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

4. Main Activity Part 2 – The History and Impact of Stereotypes 

Show the segments at 00:00–03:06 and 47:23–48:23 in the documentary R eel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People , which discusses Hollywood’s long history of portraying negative stereotypes about Arabs. Distribute a copy of the Cornell notes worksheet and ask students to take notes as they watch. Note: We do not recommend showing other clips of the film due to images of violence and nudity. The suggested clips (00:00–03:06 and 47:23–48:23) have been carefully selected to feature the central arguments of Jack Shaheen and to avoid inappropriate scenes. 

Once students have had the opportunity to identify and reflect upon dominant stereotypes about Arabs in Hollywood, show the short video about Orientalism, which explains the origins of these biased depictions of Arabs. Provide the “What is Orientalism?” worksheet and ask students to take notes as they watch. We recommend pausing the video at one-minute intervals to give students time to ask clarifying questions and take notes, since the material is dense. You may want to ask a student to volunteer to summarize each one-minute interval to ensure students have grasped the main arguments. 

5. Discussion Part 2 

Divide the class into groups of four to five students and ask each group to discuss the following questions: 

1.  Where do stereotypes about Arabs come from? 

2.  What is Orientalism? 

3.  How do negative stereotypes impact Arab Americans? 

Next, bring the class back together and use the Part 2 Discussion Questions to guide students through a fifteen to twenty-minute reflective discussion. 

6. Main Activity Part 3 – Highlighting the Voices of Arab Americans 

Choose one or two episodes from Arab American Stories to show to the class. These episodes feature diverse Arab American individuals discussing their own experiences, successes, and challenges. We recommend the following episodes: 

 Episode 2: Bridge Builders 

 Episode 10: Civic Leaders 

 Episode 13: A New Generation 389 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

7. Discussion Part 3 

Use this discussion to ask students to collectively brainstorm strategies to combat bias and discrimination against Arab Americans. Use the Part 3 Discussion Questions to guide the conversation. 

8. Reflection 

Dedicate the last ten to fifteen minutes of class to leading a reflective discussion about the main takeaways from the lesson and any questions students may still have. Revisit the KWL worksheet that students completed at the beginning of the lesson and ask students to spend five minutes to write four or five facts they learned in the “Something I Learned” column. 

9. Extension Activities – Consider these ideas for further student exploration: 

○ Ask students to independently research Arab American advocacy organizations in their communities. For community engagement activities, consider encouraging students to reach out to these organizations to interview them about their efforts, inquire about volunteer opportunities, or write about the achievements of these groups. 

○ Ask students to conduct research on the issue of Arab American representation on the US Census. 

Discussion Questions 

Part 1: Arab American Identity and History 

1.  What is one fact that surprised you? 

2.  How did your understanding of Arab Americans change? 

3.  How would you describe Arab Americans to your friends or family? 

4.  What questions do you still have? 

Part 2: The History and Impact of Stereotypes 

1.  Other than popular culture and the media, where else do you find stereotypes? 

2.  Why do stereotypes from the colonial era still exist today? 

3.  How do you think stereotypes impact Arab American youth in particular? 

4.  What questions do you still have? 390  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Part 3: Highlighting the Voices of Arab Americans 

1.  Where can we find accurate, unbiased information about Arabs and Arab Americans? 

2.  What types of advocacy or social justice efforts do you know of that work to combat prejudice? 

3.  How can you as an individual become involved in combating prejudice? 

4.  How can we as a community become involved in combating prejudice? 

Homework 

Educators may choose to assign one or more of the following homework assignments. 

y Option 1 : Choose one of the projects from the Arab American National Museum “Counter-Narratives: Importance of Positive Images” worksheet ( https://www. cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link394 ) to complete at home. These projects ask students to independently research and create multimedia presentations about Arab American contributions. This activity reinforces students’ understanding of the integral role of Arab Americans in US culture, politics, innovation, and other fields. 

y Option 2 : Listen to the NPR podcast “Being Young and Arab in Post-Sept. 11 America” ( https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link395 ). In the podcast, Moustafa Bayoumi discusses his book How Does It Feel to Be a Problem? Being Young and Arab in America , which highlights the lived experiences of young Arab Americans after 9/11. 

y Option 3 : Choose an Arab American that has made a significant contribution to American history, technology, or culture. Students can use the episodes in Main Activity Part 3 as a starting place. Additional significant figures can be located on websites such as  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link396 .

y Option 4 : Develop an individualized “commitment to personal action plan” that builds off of the list of strategies to combat bias and discrimination against Arab Americans that students brainstormed in the Part Three Discussion. In this action plan, students will commit to using what they learned in class to help combat prejudice and improve perceptions of Arab Americans. Ideas for their action plan could include the following: 

○ Volunteer at an Arab American organization 

○ Visit an Arab American cultural center to learn more about Arab history and culture 391 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

○ Create a video, poster, or podcast educating their community about Arab Americans 

○ Develop a social media campaign to raise awareness about bias against Arab Americans 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

Refer to steps 2–8 in the In-Class Activities section. 

Materials and Resources: 

y Arab American National Museum: Arab Americans: History, Culture, and Contributions  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link397 

y Arab American Stories: History  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link398 

y WPA Interview with Mary Juma, 19th Century Syrian Immigrant in North Dakota 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link399 

y Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People (00:00–03:06 and 47:23–48:23) 

y “An Introduction to Edward Said’s Orientalism: A Macat Sociology Analysis” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link400 

y Detroit Public TV: Arab American Stories 

○ Episode 2: Bridge Builders  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link401 

○ Episode 10: Civic Leaders  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link402 

○ Episode 13: A New Generation 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link403 

y Arab American National Museum “Counter-Narratives: Importance of Positive Images” worksheet  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link404 

y NPR podcast “Being Young and Arab in Post-Sept. 11 America” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link405 392  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

KWL Worksheet 

Something I know …  Something I Wonder …  Something I Learned … 393 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People Cornell Notes Worksheet 

Topic:  Name: 

Class: 

Source:  Period: 

Date: 

Questions  Notes 

(00:00–03:06) 

According to Jack Shaheen, Hollywood portrays Arabs as … 

Jack Shaheen studied more than … films. 

These negative stereotypes rob Arabs of their … 394  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Where did we inherit these stereotypes from? 

(47:23–48:23) 

Why is Jack Shaheen optimistic about the future? 

What should we do when we see anyone being vilified? 

Summary 395 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

True or False: Facts About Arab Americans (Student Version) 

Read the following statements and mark which ones you think are true and which ones you think are false. 

1.  Most Arab Americans are Muslim. 

2.  All Arab Americans speak Arabic. 

3.  Arab Americans are an integral part of US culture, economics, and politics. 

4.  California has the largest population of Arab Americans. 

5.  Arab Americans have a higher average income than the national average. 

6.  “Arab American” is an official minority group listed on the US Census. 

7.  Arab Americans are very well educated. 

8.  All Arab American women wear hijabs (head scarves). 

9.  Arab American food includes dishes like mansaf , hummus , tabouleh , and 

shawarma .

10.  Many Arab Americans consider family incredibly important. 

Adapted from the Arab American National Museum “Ten Things You Should Know About Arab Americans”  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link406 396  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

True or False: Facts about Arab Americans (Teacher Version) 

1.  Most Arab Americans are Muslim. 

FALSE. Approximately 50–60% of the Arab American population is Christian. The first Arab immigrants to the United States were mostly Christians from modern-day Lebanon and Syria. More recently, more Arab Muslims have immigrated to the United States from countries such as Iraq, Somalia, and Egypt. 

2.  All Arab Americans speak Arabic. 

FALSE. While many Arab Americans speak Arabic as their first language, some Arab American families have lived in the United States for generations and in many cases don’t speak Arabic. 

3.  Arab Americans are an integral part of US culture, economics, and politics. 

TRUE. For generations, Arab Americans have made strides in all facets of American society. Famous Arab Americans include Salma Hayek (actor), Ramy Youssef (actor), Steve Jobs (cofounder of Apple), Kahlil Gibran (writer and poet), Ilhan Omar (US Congress Member), and Robert Saleh (head coach for the New York Jets). 

4.  California has the largest population of Arab Americans. 

TRUE. California is home to an estimated 400,000 Arab Americans. Other states with large Arab American populations include Michigan, New York, Illinois, and Texas. 

5.  Arab Americans have a higher average income than the national average. 

TRUE. The average income of Arab Americans is 22% higher than the national average. 

6.  “Arab American” is an official minority group listed on the US Census. 

FALSE. The US Census does not yet recognize Arab Americans as an official minority group in the United States. According to the Census, Arab Americans are considered white, but many do not self-identify as white. For years, there has been a push by Arab American groups to have the US Census recognize Arab Americans as a racial minority. 

7.  Arab Americans are very well educated. 

TRUE. Compared to the national average, twice as many Arab Americans earn graduate degrees. Over 40% of Arab Americans have at least a college degree, compared to the national average of 34%. Arab Americans go on to use these degrees in fields as diverse as medicine, technology, law, and politics. 397 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

8.  All Arab American women wear hijabs (head scarves). 

FALSE. Although some Muslim Arab American women choose to wear the hijab as part of their faith, many women do not. The decision to wear a scarf is made on an individual or family basis. 

9.  Arab American food includes dishes like mansaf , hummus , tabouleh , and shawarma .

TRUE. Arab American food is rich with spices and savory flavors. Arab Americans who trace their roots to different parts of the Arab region share different types of food. Mansaf, hummus, and tabouleh are well-known Levantine (Lebanese, Palestinian, Jordanian, Syrian) dishes. Notable Egyptian dishes include koshari (lentils, pasta, chickpeas, and onions) and foul mudammas 

(fava bean stew). Somali food includes sambusas (fried pastries with meat and vegetables) and anjero (sourdough flatbread). 

10.  Many Arab Americans consider family incredibly important. 

TRUE. Family is often considered the foundation of Arab American cultures. Arab American families often include extended relatives who gather together for celebrations and to support one another. For newer Arab immigrants to the United States, the family unit has provided a way to preserve cultural and religious traditions. 398  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

“What is Orientalism?” Worksheet 

Take notes as you watch the video “An Introduction to Edward Said’s Orientalism: A Macat Sociology Analysis.” 

> Word Bank

Orient: Edward Said’s term for Asia, particularly the Middle East 

Enigmatic: mysterious 

Romanticizing: describing something in an idealized or unrealistic way 

Raucous: making a disturbingly loud noise 

Deviate: to differ from 

Domineering: asserting one’s power over another in an arrogant way 

Dubious: of questionable value 

Deduce: come to a conclusion by reasoning 

Patronizing: treating someone as if you are better than them 

1.  In Edward Said’s 1978 book Orientalism , he argued ... 

2.  According to Said, because Western scholars could not understand Eastern cultures, they portrayed the Orient as ... 

3.  Said believed the West thought ... 399 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

4.  Why did Said argue that Western scholarship was political? 

5.  Stereotyping became a justification for ... 

6.  Edward Said’s book became the foundational text for … 

7.  The term “Orientalism” describes … 400  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

# Sample Lesson 33: Armenian Migration Stories and Oral History 

Theme: History and Movement 

Disciplinary Area: General Ethnic Studies 

Ethnic Studies Values and Principles Alignment: 1, 3, 6 

Standards Alignment: 

CA HSS Analysis Skills (9–12): Historical Interpretation 1 

CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.9–10.1, 3, 8, 10; WHST.9–10.2, 4, 6, 7; SL.9–10.1, 4, 5, 6 

CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.9–10.1, 5, 9, 10a 

LESSON PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW: 

As part of a larger unit on migration and oral history, this lesson guides students to explore the role of oral histories in historiography, with a particular focus on Armenian personal stories. The goal of this lesson is to understand the history of Armenian migration to the US and delve deeply into the Armenian American experience. This lesson uses the voices of Armenian adults and children through oral histories to create an understanding of the nuances and experiences of the Armenian American community. 

Students will learn about how Armenian migration stories connect to their local history. 

Key Terms and Concepts: oral history, Armenian migration, interviewing, archive, memory 

Lesson Objectives (Students will be able to … ): 

y Evaluate perspectives on history making and historiography through the lens of oral history 

y Watch, listen to, and conduct oral history interviews, transcribe narratives, develop research questions, and build upon interpersonal communication skill 

y Better understand the diversity of experiences of Armenian Americans by synthesizing and analyzing oral history sources 

Essential Questions: 

1.  What is the significance of oral history in the construction of minority histories in the US? 

2.  What is the history of Armenian immigration to the US? 401 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

3.  How did the experiences of various cohorts and generations of Armenian immigrants differ from each other’s and from those of their children who were born in the US? 

Lesson Steps/Activities: 

Part I: What is Oral History? 

1.  Ask students to write down a response to the question, What is history? This could be in one word, a quick response, or a paragraph response to a writing prompt. Have students share responses in a class discussion. See in which areas students have similar ideas about what defines history. 

2.  Ask the following follow-up questions: How do we know what happened in the past? Who writes history? 

a.  There are many ways we know about what happened in the past (through journals, objects, legal documents, photos, letters). Discuss the students’ answers and how they relate to what we know about the past. 

b.  Point out that historians look at a lot of different topics when they study history. They might study politics, wars, big national events, and other important things we might see on the news. But historians also study the everyday lives and activities of “regular people.” 

c.  For upper high school grades and college students, the discussion can focus on historiography and notions of what makes good, proper history. 

3.  All of these ways we know what happened in the past are considered primary sources. Where do you usually go if you want to learn something? (Common answers include books, internet, Wikipedia.) 

4.  These are considered secondary sources. Primary sources are first-hand accounts of an event or moment in time and are in their original form. Secondary sources are books or articles that use a variety of primary sources to provide commentary on an event, but these are created by people who do not have first-hand knowledge of the event. 

5.  Have students do basic research using key search terms such as Armenian Americans, Armenians in America, Armenians in California, Armenians in Los Angeles. 

a.  Look at the scope of various existing resources for documenting Armenian communities worldwide and in California in particular. 402  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

b.  Divide students into groups and assign each group one of the following categories to explore. 

c.  Each group should discuss and report on what each of these resources brings to the study of Armenian Americans and what each resource may lack. Questions of sample size, representation, depth, disciplinary lens, scope, date of publication, geography, and more can be addressed in this discussion. 

i.  Academic Books: 

y Anny Bakalian: Armenian-Americans: From Being to Feeling American , 1992 

Based on the results of an extensive mail questionnaire survey, in-depth interviews, and participant observation of communal gatherings by sociologist Anny Bakalian, this book analyzes the individual and collective struggles of Armenian Americans to perpetuate their Armenian legacy while actively seeking new pathways to the American Dream. 

y Robert Mirak: T orn Between Two Lands: Armenians in America, 1890 to World War I , 1983 

This first comprehensive study of the Armenian American community examines the rich background, patterns of migration and settlement in the New World, complex economic and social adjustments, family life, and religious and political institutions of the newcomers. 

ii.  Scholarly Articles: 

y “But Why Glendale? A History of Armenian Immigration to Southern California,” 2017 

Despite its many contributions to Los Angeles, the internally complex community of Armenian Angelenos remains enigmatically absent from academic print. As a result, its history remains untold. While Armenians live throughout Southern California, the greatest concentration exists in Glendale, where Armenians make up a demographic majority (approximately 40 percent of the population) and have done much to reconfigure this homogenous, sleepy, sundown town of the 1950s into an ethnically diverse and economically booming urban center. This article presents a brief history of Armenian immigration to Southern California and attempts to explain why Glendale 403 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

has become the world’s most demographically concentrated Armenian diasporic hub. It does so by situating the history of Glendale’s Armenian community in a complex matrix of international, national, and local events. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link407 

iii.  Food Journalism: 

y Liana Aghajanian: “In L.A., Armenians’ Disparate Food Traditions Live Side by Side” 

A food journalist looks at the various components that make up part of the modern Armenian food lexicon in Los Angeles. In fact, in order to understand the ancient, diverse, and often tragic history of Armenians, one can start by looking at the food they eat. But this story isn’t an easy one. It’s complex, reflecting the frequency with which Armenians have had to remake their lives as refugees or immigrants in foreign lands. 

Armenians have been conquered over millennia by the Byzantines, Romans, Turks, Persians, and Russians. They have also been displaced across the world because of war, revolution, and genocide. Because of this, Armenians are not made up of one place, but of many. Nowhere is this more apparent than in their cuisine, and in no American city is this better reflected than Los Angeles. It is here where these fragmented histories merge and blend, where Armenians have managed not only to find some permanence but to use food as a way to showcase and unify their diverse and scattered nation. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link408 

iv.  Demographic Studies: 

y James P. Allen and Eugene Turner: The Ethnic Quilt: Population Diversity in Southern California , 1997 

The Ethnic Quilt is a demographic study of the various ethnic groups in Southern California, including Armenians, using maps, census data, and economic patterns. 

v.  Literary Works and Nonfiction Memoirs: 

y Peter Balakian: Black Dog of Fate: A Memoir , 2009 

This nonfiction memoir is about an Armenian American family and a young man’s transformation into adulthood. 404  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

y William Saroyan: My Name Is Aram 

This collection of tales chronicles the various ventures of Aram Garoghlanian, a boy of Armenian descent growing up in Fresno, California. 

vi.  Archives: 

y Project Save – Armenian Photograph Archives “Preserving Armenian History Through Photographs” includes over 45,000 historical photos from 1860 to the present.  https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link409 

y Houshamadyan Digital Archives were created to reconstruct and preserve the memory of Armenian life in the Ottoman Empire through research. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link410 

vii.  Museums: 

y William Saroyan House Museum is a museum built in the house of Pulitzer Prize and Oscar-winning Armenian American writer William Saroyan.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link411 

viii.  Podcasts: 

y “Armenian Enough” is about life and identity in the Armenian diaspora.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link412 

6.  One way we know about the past is by doing oral history. What is oral history? 

Oral history is the systematic collection of living people’s testimony about their own experiences. Oral history is not folklore, gossip, hearsay, or rumor. Oral historians attempt to verify their findings, analyze them, and place them in an accurate historical context. Oral historians are also concerned with storage of their findings for use by later scholars. 

As an example, the teacher leads students to look at the USC Institute of Armenian Studies Displaced Persons Documentation Project , which documents the community of Armenians Americans that formed during and after WWII, through oral histories. Students can take a look at the photos, historical overview, and sample oral history testimonies. 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link413 405 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Part II: Why is oral history important? How does it add to history? 

7.  Discuss as a class why oral history is important. Emphasize that it is important to understand people’s stories and their experiences related to an event. We all have stories to tell, stories we have lived from the inside out. We give our experiences an order. We organize the memories of our lives into stories. Oral history listens to these stories. Historians currently recognize that everyday memories of everyday people, not just the rich and famous, have historical importance. If we do not collect and preserve those memories, then one day they will disappear forever. 

8.  Oral history accounts add the life to the facts. And they give voice to people, regular people, who often aren’t involved in writing history. 

9.  Review publicly available segments from the #MyArmenianStory archive and follow up with the following questions: After reviewing the example, why do you think oral history is important? How does it add to historical accounts? Do you understand the facts differently after listening to the oral history account? Sometimes statistics and numbers are difficult to relate to. But we might be able to relate to an account of someone’s life as told in their own words. 

a.  Compilation of #MyArmenianStory oral history submissions 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link414 

*More segments of individual oral histories will be available on the USC Institute of Armenian Studies page by January 2021 at  https://www.cde. ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link415 

b.  USC Displaced Persons Documentation Project oral history segment 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link416 

Students can use this map from The Ethnic Quilt demographic study to look at Armenian settlement patterns in Southern California. They can compare the visual data from the map to the details from the oral history accounts. 406  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

Part III: Doing Oral History 

10.  Explain to the class that they will be conducting some of their own oral histories to learn about the Armenian experience .

11.  Advise students to think of the person they wish to interview. The teacher can provide a list of Armenian organizations, institutions, and community centers students can utilize. This will serve the dual purpose of familiarizing students with the Armenian presence in California and helping them find an interview subject. 

a.  USC Institute of Armenian Studies 

3518 Trousdale Parkway 

CPA 351, MC 0043, Los Angeles, CA 90089 

213-821-3943 407 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

b.  Armenian Society of Los Angeles 

117 S. Louise St., Glendale, CA, 91205 

818-241-1073 

c.  Tekeyan Cultural Association 

1901 N. Allen Ave., Altadena, CA 91001 

626-296-1806 

d.  Armenian General Benevolent Union 

1720 Fulton St., Fresno, CA 93721 

e.  Ararat Home 

15105 Mission Hills Road, Mission Hills, CA 91345 

818-365-3000 

f.  Unified Young Armenians 

1110 Sonora Ave. Unit 106, Glendale, CA 91205 

818-857-5892 

g.  Homenetmen Western USA 

2324 Colorado, Los Angeles, CA 90041 

323-344-4300 

12.  Have students determine what they hope to discover about the person’s life. In 

preparation for the interview , students should research the following: 

a.  Historical and significant events 

b.  Social and economic conditions 

c.  Culture and other interesting information about the time 

d.  Appropriate linguistic skills based on in which language(s) they’ll be conducting the interview 

13.  Have students review the #MyArmenianStory Guidelines, Interview Guides, and FAQs from the USC Institute of Armenian Studies #MyArmenianStory project in detail.  https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link417 .

14.  Review best practices in interviewing , watch/listen to several sample oral history recordings, and conduct mock interviews in class. 

15.  Students should set up an appointment with the interviewee. They should be prepared with recording equipment and the question guides. 

16.  Students can ask the interviewee whether they have any letters, photographs, or objects that they would like to share. If so, they can use them for their final product in class. 408  ETHNIC STUDIES MODEL CURRICULUM 

17.  Students may be asked to transcribe the interview. The process of transcription offers new insights on the content in a written medium. 

Part IV: Analysis and Reflection 

18.  Students are given a choice in the creative medium (interpretive paper, PowerPoint presentation, newspaper article, digital history videos, podcast, portfolio, etc.) with which they would like to present their findings and analysis of their interview. The analysis may focus on: 

a.  A summary of their findings 

b.  Some of the most interesting things they learned 

c.  What they found out that was surprising 

d.  What the stories of the interviewee tell us about a certain time period or event 

i.  Perhaps discuss how what they learned from the interview conflicts with what they know or what they have learned about in school 

e.  Further questions they would ask if they could go back to learn more and clarify some points 

f.  After all students present their findings, you may want to discuss and reflect on some themes, such as: 

i.  The constant movement and migration 

ii.  The process of adaptation and integration 

iii.  The common threads and unique elements of the various interviews 

iv.  Intersectionality of identities 

v.  The value of oral histories as primary resources 

19.  Students should carry out a series of reflections throughout the process at various stages. The reflections can cover sociocultural, sociolinguistic, and historical observations. For example, students can journal about their expectations before the interview, the experience during the interview, and how their oral history interview reflected or changed their thinking about central themes. Encourage students to compare and contrast themes, perspectives, and experiences based on the oral history projects. 

20.  Share students’ oral history projects with the larger school community by organizing an oral history viewing and listening event. 409 SAMPLE LESSONS AND TOPICS 

Assessment, Application, Action, and Reflection: 

See steps 18 to 20 above. 

Materials and Resources: 

y Oral History Association “How Do I Engage Students in Oral History Projects?” 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link418 

y USC Institute of Armenian Studies #MyArmenianStory Oral History Project 

https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/cr/cf/ch4.asp#link419 [Page 410 intentionally left blank.]
