Title: Microsoft Word - Charap_JoshThesisFinal.docx

URL Source: https://repository.upenn.edu/bitstreams/7e3794a7-fb8f-40d0-8e38-c0a9624f617b/download

Markdown Content:
A Historical Analysis of the Democratic Primary Debate Requirements : An Approach for 

Understanding the Democratic National Committee’s 2020 Rules Change 

By 

Joshua Evan Charap 

Advisor: Mat thew Levendusky 

This thesis is submitted in fulfillment of 

Bachelor of Arts Degree 

Department of Political Science with Distinction 

College of Arts and Sciences 

University of Pennsylvania 

2020 Charap 

2

Abstract 

In Februar y 2019 , the Democratic National Committee (DNC) create d a set of comprehensive 

rules governing the qualifications for participating in the 2020 primary debates. The rules, the 

first of their kind, were the result of over a decade of primary debate mishaps and disagreements. 

Historically, it was not difficult for candidates to qualify for primary debates . There were usually 

fewer than eight candidates on the stage and the debates did not play a large role in the primary 

winnowing process. But as the number of candidates rose, and in light of the Republican ’s

exp erience in 2016, the Democrats moved to create new rules to re -assert control over the 

process in 2020. This had three important effects. First, it help ed to winnow down the field 

during the 2020 primary, as once candidates were not on the stage, they were effectively shut out 

of the media spotlight and thus out of the public’s consideration . Second, the new rules 

demonstrate an effort by the pa rty to reduce the media’s power and increase their own, though 

that process is incomplete. Third, these rules ill ustrate a key dilemma for the DNC in the modern 

era. They are attempting to assert control without appearing to assert control, thus posing an 

interesting challenge moving forward. Charap 

3

Introduction 

In early August 2019, Democratic presidential candidate Se nator Kirsten Gillibrand was offering 

branded t -shirts in exchange for a $1 donation. Assuming the custom t -shirt cost $5, the shipping 

and handling cost $5 and the digital advertisement cost $2 per realized donation, she was 

spending $1 2 to acquire a $1 do nation. 1 Why would a candidate —especially a candidate 

struggling for money and recognition —spend so much to acquire so little? Normally, we would 

say such an attempt defies logic, but here, there is clear logic: she was attempting to meet the 

Democratic Na tional Committee’s (DNC) grassroots fundraising threshold for the third primary 

debate on September 12 th , 2019. 

To qualify for the September debate, Gillibrand or any other candidate would need to 

receive at least 130,000 individual donations and/ or recei ve 2% percent in at least four qualifying 

polls. 2 At the time of her request, Gillibrand failed to meet the donor threshold and only had one 

poll with over 2% support. 3 To her chagrin, she failed to make the debate and subsequently 

dropped out of the race .4 Gillibrand’s story is not unique. M any other candidates —from Kamala 

Harris to Cory Booker to Steve Bullock —would use similarly counterintuitive tactics to try to 

Author’s note : I would like to express my great appr eciation to Dr. Matthew Levendusky for his 

insightful and constructive suggestions during the planning and development of this thesis. His 

willingness to give his time so generously has been much appreciated.  

> 1

Shirt price on customink.com; Standard Gro up on UPS.com; digital advertising 

assuming .5% penetration on Facebook.  

> 2

“DNC Announces Details for Third Presidential Primary Debate,” Democrats, May 29, 

2019, https://democrats.org/news/third -debate/  

> 3

Burns, Alexander. “Gillibrand Drops Out of 2020 De mocratic Presidential Race.” The 

New York Times. The New York Times, August 28, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/28/us/politics/kirsten -gillibrand -2020 -drop -out.html.  

> 4

Dan Merica, “Kirsten Gillibrand Drops out of 2020 Presidential Race,” CNN (Cable 

News Network, August 29, 2019), https://www.cnn.com/2019/08/28/politics/gillibrand -drops -

out -of -race/index.html) Charap 

4

make the primary debate stage during the 2020 campaign . The DNC’s decision to include 

fundra ising qualifications fundamentally changed the 2020 Democratic primary race. 

This thesis works to understand why th e DNC added these rules in 2020 and what effect 

they had on the process. Looking at the historical process, I argue that the party learned —or at 

least tri ed to learn —from earlier cycles and they developed rules that would help them control 

which candidates would appear on the debate stage, without appearing to shape it too much. 

These conflicting incentives reverberated through this process, and ultimately determined which 

candidates surviv ed and which did not. 

Primary debates are so central because primary voters cannot use partisanship as a 

heuristic device. In a general election, most voters simply vote for the candidate from their party. 

But in a primary election, all candidates share the same party, so the heuristic provides little help 

in making the decision. Candidates therefore must work hard to clearly differentiate themselves 

from their rivals on some salient dimension . However, in a crowded field and in a fractured 

media market, capturing and holding the public’s attention is extremely difficult. The primary 

debates offer candidates —especially those struggling to receive media coverage —an opportunity 

to do just that. In fact, t he fi rst 2020 Democratic debates on June 26 and 27 th , 2019 had a total of 

33.4 million viewers , or 13 million more viewers than an average Sunday Night F ootball game .5

Unsurprisingly then, a strong debate appearance —and a consensus among post -debate 

commentato rs that a candidate scored political points —boost s a candidate’s standing in the polls  

> 5

Cline, Seth. “Americans Have Stopped Watching the Democratic Debates.” U.S. News 

& World Report. U.S. News & World Report, December 20, 2019. 

https://www.usnews.com/news/elections/articles/2019 -12 -20/americans -have -stopped -watching -

the -democratic -debates. Charap 

5

and increase s donations to his or her campaign .6 For example, Senator Kamala Harris’ breakout 

performance in the first Democratic debate in June 2019 contributed signifi cantly to her rise in 

the polls and perceived legitimacy. 7 About an hour into the first Democratic debate for 2020, Ms. 

Harris, a black former prosecutor, criticized frontrunner Joe Biden who was leading the polls at 

the time, for working with segregationi st senators in the 1970s and 1980s. 8 Then, she attacked 

Joe Biden’s opposition to bussing in the 1970s, saying “there was a little girl in California who 

was a part of the second class to ingrate her public schools….and that girl was me.” 9 She not 

only gai ned popularity for her comments toward Joe Biden, but also from the post -debate 

coverage that replayed the exchange and exalted her performance . She capitalized on her debate 

performance , boosting her polling numbers at the expense of Joe Biden ’s .10 The deb ates are 

especially significant for long -shot candidates , such as Harris, who do not have many other 

opportunities to present their campaign’s pitch to a broad captive audience . Primary debate s

therefore are a critical aspect of the presidential nomination process and are capable of changing 

voters’ attitudes toward candidates .11  

> 6

Fridkin, Kim L., Patrick J. Kenney, Sarah Allen Gershon, Karen Shafer, and Gina 

Serignese Woodall. “Capturing the Power of a Campaign Event: The 2004 Presidential Debate in 

Tempe.” The Journal of Politics 69, no. 3 (2007): 770 -85.  

> 7

Schouten, Fredreka. “Kamala Harris Shines in Commanding Democratic Debate 

Performance.” CNN. Cable News Network, June 28, 2019. 

https://www.cnn.com/2019/06/27/poli tics/kamala -harris -democratic -debate -

performance/index.html.  

> 8

Stevens, Matt. “When Kamala Harris and Joe Biden Clashed on Busing and 

Segregation.” The New York Times. The New York Times, July 31, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/31/us/politics/kamala -harris -biden -busing.html.  

> 9

Ibid.  

> 10

Stevens, Matt. “Kamala Harris Surges in 3 Polls After Strong Debate Performance.” 

The New York Times. The New York Times, July 2, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/02/us/politics/kamala -harris -polls.html.  

> 11

Fridkin et al. Charap 

6

Despite the importance of presidential primary debates, the topic is remarkably 

understudied. Political science research has primarily focused on the party’s role in the 

nomination pr ocess and communications scholars have largely directed their attention to 

identifying the effects of the media’s coverage of primaries, debate rhetoric and formats .12 Here, 

I examine the requirements for making the primary debate stage and how that process has 

changed over time, focusing on the 2008 , 2012 , and 2016 presidential primaries and on the 

Democratic party . I analyze these earlier elections to try to understand how these events 

influenced the Democratic p arty’s decision in the 2020 cycle . I also analyze the 2016 Republican 

primaries, as the Democrats no doubt had this experience in their mind as they deliberated about 

how to execute their own 2020 primary .

I argue that there were four crucia l factors that explain why the DNC changed the 

primary debate process in 2020. First, I hypothesize that the increase in the number of candidates 

vying for the party’s nomination contributed to the DNC’s decision to take control of the debate 

requirements . The party would like a short -lived and relatively controversy free primary 

process —a small field where a party insider could easily capture the nomination. The ir fear is 

that a long primary may weaken the ultimate candidate and make it more difficult to u nite the 

party, so the party would prefer a short and relatively conflict -free process. In addition, after 

witnessing the chaos during the Republican Party’s primary in 2016 , the DNC decided they 

wanted a more controlled process. Prior to 2020, the Democra tic primary debates played a 

limited role in winnowing the field , instead allowing candidates to drop out naturally . In 2020,  

> 12

Cohen, Marty. The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations before and after Reform .

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.; Jamieson, Kathleen Hall, and Christopher 

Adasiewicz. “What Can Voters Learn from Election Debates?” Televised Election Debates ,

2000, 25 –42. Charap 

7

the DNC would attempt to use strict debate qualification rules to pressure candidates to drop out 

earlier . They believed that fail ure to make the debate stage would be a signal to voters that a 

candidate is no longer viable and therefore pressure the candidate to drop out . Stricter rules 

would help to winnow the field. 

Second, I hypothesize that the DNC made the primary requirement change to clarify 

previous inconsistencies in the rules. In previous cycles, primary debate rules were either set by 

the party or news networks. In many cases, the rules were not clearly communicated to 

candidates. The ensuing confusion and complaints made the DNC seem disorganized and biased. 

Third, I hypothesize that the DNC created the rules to take power out of the hands of for -

profit media outlets. While media outlets are incentivized by profit , the DNC is concerned with 

producing a viable candidate i n the general election. The misaligned incentives created friction 

between the party and news outlets. The DNC create d a policy that works in the party’s favor. 

Finally, I hypothesize that the new criteria, which are strict er than in past cycles ,

dispropor tionately hurt longshot candidates. T he rules make it more difficult to qualify for 

debates and function to winnow the field quickly. Better known candidates with organized 

campaigns and early funding are much more likely to make the debate stage and stand out to 

voters. 

This thesis begins with a discussion of the previous political science and communications 

literature on the topic , and then presents a historical analysis of previous debate requirements 

with a focus on the 2008, 2016 and 2020 election cycl es . After the analysis , I discuss my 

hypothese s and the evidence that supports them . Finally, I conclude by summarizing the findings 

and their importance and offering advice on future research. Charap 

8

Literature Review 

A political party , according to Edmund Burke , is an association of persons united by a common 

principle. 13 In Political Parties, Durverger classifies political parties as organized groups seeking 

power through Democratic elections or revolution. 14 While these two scholars define parties 

using political theory , Robert Huc ksburn offers a more pragmatic definition. He believes parties 

are “an autonomous group of citizens having the purpose of making nominations and contesting 

elections in the hope of gaining control over governmental power through the capture of public 

offic es and the organization of government.” 15 Similarly, Aldrich believes that competition for 

office is the “singular, defining characteristic of the major American political party.” 16 Aldrich 

concludes that these groups are ultimately concerned with winning ab ove all else. 17 A political 

party is thus an organized group of people that try to elect politicians that share their common 

principles. 

Political scholars are consistent in their view that parties seek to recruit candidates that 

can win elections to implem ent their policy goals. In Down’s view, parties seek to win elections 

and translate them into legislative achievements. 18 The party’s new policies will help them gain 

new supporters in future elections. In theory, the relationship between elections and poli cy 

creates a positive feedback loop. In sum, parties are tasked with finding the candidates that are  

> 13

Burke, Edmund. Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents: Volume 1 

Paperback . New Edition ed., Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2012. muse.jhu.edu/book/18234.  

> 14

Duverger, M. Political Parties . London: Methuen, 1978.  

> 15

Huckshorn, R . J. Political Parties in America . Monterey: Brooks -Cole Publishing 

Company, 1984.  

> 16

Aldrich, John H. Why Parties?: Origin and Transformation of Political Parties in 

America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995, 283, 12.  

> 17

Ibid, 21.  

> 18

Downs, Anthony . “ An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy. ” Journal 

of Political Economy 65, no. 2 (1957): 135 -50. Accessed February 19, 2020. Charap 

9

best able to win elections and support the party agenda . Using this definition, scholars have 

attempted to determine the specific groups within a party t hat set the party’s platform and control 

the nomination process. 

Scholars disagree on who wields power in political parties . Schattsneider ’s theory 

emphasizes the importance of interest groups. His theory assumes that government authority is 

for specific policy purposes. 19 He finds that a party that can serve interest groups and enact their 

policies will be successful in the long -run . Similarly, McCarty and Schickler conclude that 

parties are best viewed as coalitions of intense policy demanders. 20 Cohen not es that “across the 

entire span of American history, parties behave in the same basic way —as vehicles by which the 

most energized segments of the population attempt to pull government policy toward their own 

preferences.” 21 These scholars place interest gro ups and activists at the center of the party. While 

these theories are important for understanding how party platforms and policy are crafted , the 

influence of intense -policy demanders and interest groups is subdued early in the presidential 

primary proces s. Instead, t he political elite play an outsized role at the beginning of the 

nomination season .

Unlike congressional primaries, to succeed in a presidential primary, a candidate needs to 

develop a large organization, a strong fundraising base, and endors ements from key political 

leaders. In congressional and local primary elections, the barrier s to ent ry are relatively low and  

> 19

Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pie rson. “After the ‘Master Theory’ : Downs, 

Schattschneider, and the Rebirth of Polic y-Focused Analysis.” Perspectives on Politics 12, no. 3 

(2014): 643 –62. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1537592714001637.  

> 20

Mccarty, Nolan, and Eric Schickler. “On the Theory of Parties.” Annual Review of 

Political Science 21, no. 1 (November 2018): 175 –93. https ://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -polisci -

061915 -123020.  

> 21

Cohen, Marty. The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations before and after Reform .

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008. Charap 

10 

a robust grassroots campaign can carry the day. In 2018, Alexandria Ocasio -Cortez famously 

defeated Joe Crowley, a 20 -year vetera n in the House and establishment Democrat, in the 

primary for New York’s 14 th district. In this sort of local contest, a long -shot has at least a 

chance to defeat an establishment candidate .

However, d ue to the complex nature of the presidential nominati on process , the barriers 

to entry are extremely high. To be competitive, ca ndidates must establish a large cash base and a

strong campaign organization even before the first primary or caucus .22 First, candidates are 

forced to campaign in states in which many of t hem have never competed. They need to develop 

new relationships with local organizers that can help them host events and increase their name 

recognition. Candidates without national appeal or connection s have a lot of trouble developing 

these networks. Mor eover , candidates have dozens of expenses that they need to cover, including 

campaign offices, staff salaries and advertisements. In addition, Democratic campaigns need 

hundreds of thousands of dollars for voter registration files for early primary states . These files 

help the candidates determine where to focus their campaign’s energy in the early state s.23 If a

candidate does well in the early states , they will need additional funds to mobilize their campaign 

across over a dozen states for Super Tuesday , assu ming they have not already done so . The vast 

network and extreme costs associated with presidential primaries make it difficult for lesser 

known local politicians or non -billionaires to compete.  

> 22

Adkins, Ran dall E., and Andrew J. Dowdle. “ The Money Primary: What Influen ces the 

Outcome of Pre -Primary Presi dential Nomination Fundraising?” Presidential Studies 

Quarterly 32, no. 2 (2002): 256 -75. Accessed February 19, 2020. 

www.jstor.org/stable/27552387.  

> 23

DeSilver, Drew. “Voter Files: What Are They, How Are They Used and Ar e They 

Accurate?” Pew Research Center. Pew Research Center, February 15, 2018. 

https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2018/02/15/voter -files -study -qa/. Charap 

11 

Primary candidates are more dependent on those with connection s, also known as the 

party elite, than they are in congressional primaries —for example, think of the crucial role 

played by South Carolina Representative Jim Clyburn in 2020 . His endorsement of Vice 

President Joe Biden galvanized supp orters and catapulted Biden to an overwhelming victory in 

the state. 24 After that victory , the rest of the party cons olidated behind him and Biden was able to 

accumulate an effectively insurmountable delegate lead by mid -March, despite having been 

declared effectively dead a fe w weeks prior. While this case is perhaps the most vivid example in 

recent decades, one could tell a similar (albeit less dramatic) story about Hillary Clinton’s 

eventual win over Sanders in 2016. Even before the first primary, Hillary Clinton had raised 

significantly more money and gained more endorsements than Sanders. Being able to unite the 

party behind you is crucial in a presidential campaign. 

Many scholars have focused on how the party elite exercise s its power in presidential 

primary elections. Thi s takes place before the first primary, known as the invisible primary. The 

group consists of present a nd former congressmen, senators, governors and wealthy donors .

They influence the process by endorsing candidates in the race. 25 Elite endorsements can he lp 

candidates by serving as a sign to voters of legitimacy . Elites can also help candidates by tapping 

into their local connections to integrate the candidate and their campaign staff in the community .

Moreover, elites can influence media coverage on behal f of a candidate and help them raise 

money . Cohen asserts that endorsement s are predictors of a candidate ’s support, media coverage  

> 24

Davis, Susan. “Joe Biden Gets Boost With Endorsement Of Influential South Carolina 

Democrat.” NPR, Feb ruary 26, 2020. https://www.npr.org/2020/02/26/808856350/clyburn -

endorses -biden -ahead -of -south -carolina -primary.  

> 25

Steger, Wayne P. “Conditional Arbiters: The Limits of Political Party Influence in 

Presidential Nominations.” PS: Political Science & Politic s 49, no. 4 (2016): 709 –15. Charap 

12 

and fundraising. 26 He conclude s that party support is the judgement of a small group of party 

members. Successful candidates are those that have built strong campaigns during the invisible 

primary .

Finally, Anderson finds that party elite have an incentive to “nominate an electorally 

viable and ideologically unifying candidate.” 27 For the elite, supporting a losing candidate is an 

extremely risky decision. While they may receive a high -level position in the administration if 

the candidate wins, they can also be ostracize d if the candidate loses. The political elite are 

incentivized to pick candidates that will win and best repres ent the party. 

The Democratic National Committee is the epitome of the political elite. The group is 

composed of 200 chairs and vice -chairs chosen by primary voters or a state’s Democratic Party’s 

central committee. 28 The group coordinates the party’s off icial platform and policy goals. In 

addition, it controls the party’s official financing and the primary convention. After the 

convention, the party works with the nominee to raise funds, commission polls and establish a 

campaign strategy. The DNC, however , is supposed to remain neutral until the convention. 

Nevertheless, elites in the DNC exert their will on the presidential election process by setting 

nomination rules and requirements. 

Seniors officials create procedures that benefit their desired nominee and that hurt 

outsiders. For example, all DNC members exert power during the convention as super delegates .

Super delegates can pledge support to their desired candidate at the party’s presidential  

> 26

Cohen, Marty. The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations before and after Reform .

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.  

> 27

Anderson, Christopher L. “Which Party Elites Choose to Lead the Nomination 

Process?” Political R esearch Quarterly 66, no. 1 (2013): 61 -76. Accessed February 18, 2020.  

> 28

“The Charter and Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States,” 2018. Charap 

13 

convention. These unelected and unpledged delegates make up 15% of the total delegate count .29 

In 2016, these delegates were critical for Hillary Clinton’s victory over Bernie Sanders . Clinton, 

who had support from the party elite , had a significant advantage . The DNC c hanged the rules in 

2020 to allow super delegates to vote only if there is no winner after the first ballot at the 

convention. 30 Sanders complained that it was unfair for super delegates to influence the 

nomination process because they are supposed to be neutral. 31 Moreover, he alleged that supe r

delegates take away from the d emocratic nature of the primary process. The 2020 super delegate 

rule change demonstrates how the party elite influence s the nomination process. While the DNC 

changed the super delegates rules, they also made other rules changes, like the strict deb ate 

requirements, that were intended to favor more establishment candidates. 

In addition to the party elite , the media plays a large role in the primary process . Geer et 

al find that it is often difficult for voters to differentiate primary candidates on major policy 

issues. 32 Thus, primary candidates organize their campaigns in a manner that increases their 

media coverage. 33 The media educates voters on differences in primary candidates in two major 

ways. First, media outlets educate voters through news rep orts and commentary. Second, 

candidates use the media to speak directly to voters through advertisements and interviews. Per  

> 29

Ibid.  

> 30

Levy, Adam. “DNC Changes Superdelegate Rules in Presidential Nomination 

Process.” CNN, Cable Ne ws Network, 25 Aug. 2018, 

www.cnn.com/2018/08/25/politics/democrats -superdelegates -voting -changes/index.html.  

> 31

Strauss, Daniel, et al. “Sanders Supporters Revolt against Superdelegates.” POLITICO, 

14 Feb. 2016, www.politico.com/story/2016/02/bernie -sander s-superdelegates -democrats -

219286.  

> 32

Geer, John, Richard Lau, David Nickerson, and Lynn Vavreck. "Advertising in an Era 

of Choice." manuscript. Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at Vanderbilt University 

(2012). 33 Aldrich, John H. “A Dynamic M odel of Presidential Nomination 

Campaigns.” American Political Science Review 74, no. 3 (1980): 651 –69. Charap 

14 

DeFleur’s media dependency theory, the media plays a substantial role in altering an audience’s 

beliefs, behaviors and feelings. 34 Th us, it is important for primary candidates to get media 

coverage. The coverage can help a candidate spread their message and increase their name 

recognition. Debates and post -debate coverage give candidates access to critical media attention. 

The media als o creates momentum during the campaign . In their book, Media and 

Momentum, Orren and Polsby emphasize the bandwagon effect whereby “a candidate portrayed 

in the media as viable and as improving begins to attract more and more support.” 35 Positive 

media cove rage of early winners contributes to a voter’s awareness and perception of 

candidates. 36 Debate media coverage gives candidates the opportunity to expand their base and 

demonstrate their qualifications, character and viability .

Primary debates also help to inform the public about where the candidates stand on the 

issues. Benoit et al determine that “primary debates increase issue knowledge, influence 

perceptions of candidates’ character, and can alter voter preferences.” 37 These effects are larger 

in primary debates, largely because the candidates are less well -known to voters, so their 

attitudes are more pliable and susceptible to persuasion . Best and Hubbard reach similar 

conclusions on the impact of primary debates. The authors conclude that “televised prim ary  

> 34

Ball -Rokeach, S.J., and M.L. DeFleur. “A Dependency Model of Mass -Media 

Effects.” Communication Research 3, no. 1 (January 1976): 3 –21 . 

> 35

Gary R. Orre n and Nelson W. Polsby, Media and Momentum: the New Hampshire 

Primary and Nomination Politics (Chatham, NJ: Chatham House, 1987), p.6  

> 36

John G. Geer, Nominating Presidents (New York: Greenwood, 1989); Scott Keeter and 

Cliff Zukin, Uniformed Choice: The Fai lure of the New Presidential Nominating System (New 

York: Praeger, 1983); Thomas E. Patterson, The Mass Media Election: How Americans Choose 

Their President (New York: Praeger, 1980).  

> 37

Benoit et al., The Primary Decision , 344, 346; Kendall, Communication in Presidential 

Primaries, 88. Charap 

15 

debates can exercise considerable influence on voter preferences.” 38 After being exposed to 

primary debates, voters increase their political engagement and will use debate performance to 

evaluate candidates. Americans that do not watch the debates are l ess knowledgeable and less 

willing to evaluate candidates. Finally, the authors note that Americans are more likely to change 

their policy views after watching a debate. 39 By learning about the policy views and arguments 

of different candidates, Americans bec ome more open to change. 

Since a voter watching the debate becomes more willing to change their views, a solid 

debate performance is extremely important to candidates. Viewers may alter their views to match 

that of a candidate who performed exceptionally well on the debate stage. Moreover, the rising 

number of debates gives voters more opportunities to change their minds. Thus, primary debates 

are increasingly important in determining the eventual nominee. 

It is critically important for candidates to try to make the debate stage. If a candidate 

cannot make the debate, they cannot get the boost their campaign may need to attract a wider 

audience. Subsequently, they will not rise in the polls and it will be difficult for them to raise 

more money. Those that are not allowed on the debate stage face a downward spiral that is 

difficult to escape. Therefore, candidates clearly make it a priority to make the campaign stage .

Historical Analysis 

Presidential primary debates have become a common tool for voters and candidates in the 

nomination process. The history of primary debates is surprisingly longer than that of general  

> 38

Best, Samuel, and Clark Hubbard. “The Role of Televised Debates in the Presidential 

Nomination Process.” In In Pursuit of the White House 2000 . New York: Chatham House, 2000, 

278. 39 Ibid. Charap 

16 

election debates. In fact, since 1976 every presidential primary cycle has featured at least two 

debates. These events are highly publicized and routinely draw m illions of viewers. 40 Yet, it is 

unclear how the debate participants were chosen and thus afforded the privilege to speak to these 

viewe rs and gain free media coverage. 

As debates have become more important, so have debate requirements. Making the 

debate s tage can be key to fundraising and garnering new supporters. Thus, media outlets and 

parties need to make difficult decisions regarding debate inclusion. Pew’s Chartable Trust’s 

“Report of the Task Force on Campaign Reform” sums up the problem: 

“Perhaps th e most consequential decision that must be made by any debate 

sponsor is which candidates should be invited to participate. Here, we see a 

powerful tension between the competing values of inclusiveness and 

coherence. On one hand, providing access to minor -party and independent 

candidates may stimulate interest in the campaign and inject new issues and 

ideas into the debate. That is all good. On the other hand, participation by 

minor candidates may reduce and fragment the time and attention available to 

the major candidates, diluting their best opportunity to convey their 

perspectives and proposals to the electorate. ”41 

Before 1972 , the primary process was entirely controlled by elites and the party. 

The Frazier -McGovern reforms democratized the process and rewarded candidates that 

had run successful campaigns. After the reforms, the elite and the DNC struggled to  

> 40

Ibid, 255.  

> 41

“New Realities, New Thinking”: Report of the Task Force on Campaign Finance 

Reform. PS: Political Science and Politics 30, no. 3 (1997): 487 -89. Charap 

17 

influence the nomination process. The DNC wanted to prevent the rise of outsider 

candidates and let the invisible primary do its job. In the prima ry cycles prior to 2020, it 

became clear to officials that they could use the primary debates to winnow candidates. 

After the GOP 2016 primary debate debacle and complaints about media sponsors and 

candidates during the Democratic primary debates, the DNC decided to create 

comprehensive debate qualification . The DNC could reassert its influence and winnow 

the field with its own rule s while appearing to remain impartial. 

Debates from 1956 -1976 

The first Democratic primary debate took place in 1956 betw een Estes Kefauver and 

Adlai Stevenson. During the 1960, 1968, 1972 and 1976 cycles there were a total of ten primary 

debates and e ach debate had an average of 3.2 candidates on the stage. The primaries and 

primary debates themselves were not determinative of the overall result . During the 1950s, 

William Carleton notes that an “astute politician [could] reach the presidency merely by the quiet 

search for delegates and the lining up of congress local leaders and bosses.” 42 This was the era of 

the smoke -filled con ference room where Democratic congressional leaders would meet to decide 

their party’s nominee. While the debates contributed to voters’ assessment of the candidates, it 

played almost no role in determining the eventual nominee. 

The Frazier -McGovern refor ms , instituted in 1971 , f orced party elite to accept the 

nomination of those that had run successful national pre -convention campaigns. 43 The reforms 

occurred after what Cohen calls “the outrageous nomination of Herbert Humphrey.” 44 Humphrey  

> 42

Carleton, William G. “The Revolution in the Presidential Nominating 

Convention.” Political Science Quarterly 72, no. 2 (1957): 2 27.  

> 43

Ibid.  

> 44

Cohen, 3. Charap 

18 

did not particip ate in any of the primary debates and did not run on the ballot in any of the ten 

primary states. The Democratic presiden t, Lyndon Johnson, did not want George McGovern or 

Eugene McCarthy , the two candidates on the ballot, to win the nomination because the y were 

against the Vietnam War . Instead, a pro -war Humphrey won th e nomination at the convention by 

garnering support form party bosses. 45 The Frazier -McGovern reforms were agreed to by the 

DNC after the nomination. The rules took power away from the politi cal elite and ensure d that 

party bosses could not hand -pick nominees. The reforms required states to hold primary elections 

to select which delegates would be sent to the party convention . Each state was allocated 

delegates based on their state’s populatio n. The reforms made campaigns and winning primary 

elections more important. 

Primary Debate Qualification 1984 -2004 

The Democratic primary debate qualifications continued to be unimportant from 1984 to 

2004 . The number of established candidates vying for their party’s nomination in each cycle in 

this period was under ten . There was n o need for a multi -night debate, nor strict debate 

requirements. 

In 1984, the Democratic party decided to increase the number of primary debates from 

three to ten. The first debate was held that year in Hanover, New Hampshire and included eight 

candidates. This was the most candidates the Democrats would have on one debate stage until 

the first debate in 2004. The first debate in 1984 occurred just days before the New Hampshi re 

primary. At the time, the debates did not play a role in the winnowing process because n one of 

the candidates were excluded from the stage. Instead, candidates dropped out after they fell  

> 45

Ibid, 5. Charap 

19 

behind in the dele gate count. By the seventh debate, which occurr ed after Super Tuesday, there 

were only three candidates left on the stage . In 1984, the winnowing on the debate stage occurred 

after the can didates began to lose delegates, not because they were excluded from the debate. 

Thus, c andidate qualifications for the debates during the 1984 primary were not significant. 

The Democratic debate qualifications in 1988, 1992 and 2000 were also not critical and 

did not impact the winnowing process . There was a total of 37 debates between the se three 

primary cycles and each debate had an average of 3.8 candidate s. In 1988, the debate schedule 

was moved forward. Instead of starting in January of the election year, it started in August of the 

year before. Nevertheless , the original seven candidates participated in most of the debates until 

Super Tuesday . After Super Tuesday, the number of candidates dropped to three. Like 1984, 

most of the candidates waited until after Super Tuesday to drop out of the race based on their 

delegate count . Again, failing to meet debate qualif ications does not appear to contribute to 

dropping out of the race. In 1992 and 2000, the same phenomenon is apparent. The 1992 primary 

cycle had six candidates on the stage after New Hampshire. After Super Tuesday, the field 

winnowed to three . In 2000, th ere were only two candidates on the debate stage, Senator Bill 

Bradley of New Jersey and former Vice President Al Gore of Tennessee. During this primary 

cycle neither candidate dropped out prior to the convention . It is clear from these historical 

examples that losing state primary elections was the determining factor in dropping out of the 

race not participation in the debates. During this period, debate qualification did not play a role 

in the nomination process .Charap 

20 

2004 Debates 

The 2004 Democratic debates featured an unprecedented number of candidates. The first 

debate in September 2003 included nine candidates , including Vermont governor Howard Dean, 

North Carolina Senator John Edwards, House minority leader Richard Gephardt, Florida Senator 

Bob Graham , Massachusetts Senator John Kerry , Ohio Representative Dennis Kucinich ,

Connecticut Senator Joe Lieberman , Illinois Senator Carol Mosely -Braun and the Reverend Al 

Sharpton . Ag ain, the debate requirements were not impactful in the winnowing of the candidates. 

Seven candidates were on the debate stage before the New Hampshire and South Carolina 

primaries. By Super -Tuesday on March 2 nd , there were only four candidates left. The de bate 

requirements in this campaign did not exclude candidates, rather candidates were dropping out 

on their own after they failed to accumulate delegates. 

There was another factor at play in the winnowing p rocess during the 2004 debates :

front -loading. In the 2004 primaries, the DNC and state parties decided to schedule all the 

primaries within several weeks of each other. 46 Previously, candidates had several weeks 

between primaries, allowing them time to campaign in each state. In 2004, it was difficult for 

candidates to effectively communicate their positions to voters in many states. In addition, th e

candidates were forced to be strategic with their limited funds and were unable to campaign 

widely or advertise effectively in each state. The DNC justified t he front -loaded schedule by 

claiming “the most important part of any primary schedule is that it needs to identify a strong 

Democratic nominee early and lead to a Democratic victory in the general.” 47 Busch and Mayer 

find the schedule put pressure on non -fr ont runners by making it difficult to retain a reliable flow  

> 46

Busch, Andrew, and William Mayer. “The Front -Loading Problem.” In The Making of 

the Presidential Candidates 2004. New York: Rowan & Littlefield, 2004, 33.  

> 47

Ibid. Charap 

21 

of campaign funds. 48 Second, they conclude the schedule increased the organizational demands 

on non -front runner candidates. The changes pushed six out of nine candidates out of the race by 

mid -Fe bruary . Here, the debates did not put pressure on candidates, but rather the primary 

schedule did. 

2008 Debates : Debate Requirements Matter 

In the 2008 Democratic primary cycle, the debate qualifications became more important 

in the winnowing process. Th is cycle featured an unprecedented 20 debates, four more than 

2004. There were eight candidates on the stage in Orangeburg, South Carolina for the first debate 

in April of 2007. In December, there were six candidates and after the New Hampshire primary 

the re were only four candidates. Unlike previous years, two semi -major candidates , Dennis 

Kucinich and Mike Gravel, were excluded from the debates prior to the first caucus in Iowa 

because of differing debate qualifications imposed by media outlets in New Ham pshire and 

Nevada . The debates qualifications played a significant role in winnowing the field . Moreover, it 

was not the DNC excluding the candidates, but rather the media outlets that arranged the debates. 

The exclusion of the two candidates and the media ’s role in the debates represents a dramatic 

shift in the primary debate system. 

Starting in September of 2007, six months before Iowa, media outlets were trying to 

exclude Dennis Kucinich from participating in the Democratic debates . Kucinich was the May or 

of Cleveland and a former congressman from Ohio . He ran for the Democratic nomination in 

2004 and dropped out in March . While he was included in all the debates during the 2004 cycle, 

he frequently criticized the news media for not covering him. He cond emned ABC News for  

> 48

Ibid, 26. Charap 

22 

removing a reporter that was following his campaign . ABC responded by claiming they were 

focusing more viable candidates. 49 A similar trend followed his candidacy in 2008. 

Early i n the 2008 nomination process, media outlets sought to excl ude the former 

congressma n. In an unsanctioned debate hosted by AARP in New Hampshire on September 20 th ,

2007, Kucinich was excluded for not meeti ng the debate requirements. AARP claimed that he 

had not me t their debate standard by failing to have an “Iowa campaign office and the 

employment of an Iowa campaign staff representative by no later than August 1, 2007. ”50 

Kucinich had an office in the state, but it was run out of a friend’s house and did not meet 

AARP’s requirements. 51 The same requirements were us ed for the Des Moines Register debate 

on December 13 th . Again, Kucinich was excluded because the organizers concluded “that a 

person working out of his home did not meet our criteria for a campaign office and full -time paid 

staff in Iowa.” 52 In another deba te , A BC News decided to exclude him “because [he] did not 

place first through fourth in Iowa, poll 5 percent or higher in one of the last four major New 

Hampshire surveys, or poll 5 percent or higher in one of the last four major national surveys .” 53 

Althou gh these debates were weeks before the first caucus in Iowa, media outlets were 

attempting to exclude Kucinich.  

> 49

Robison, Josh, and Lorna Tychostup. “How t he Media Picks Candidates.” _Z 

Magazine_. 03 Jan. 2007. 1 Dec. 2006. _Internet Archive_. < 

https://web.archive.org/web/20070103230928/http://zmagsite.zmag.org/Feb2004/tychostup0204. 

html l>. 50 Getler, Michael. “Debates Are On; Debaters Are Off.” PBS. Public Broadcasting 

Service, September 20, 2007. 

https://www.pbs.org/ombudsman/2007/09/debates_are_on_debaters_are_off.html.  

> 51

Ibid.  

> 52

Marre, Klaus. “Kucinich Booted from Iowa Debate.” The Hill, December 12, 2007. 

https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/902 -kucin ich -booted -from -iowa -debate.  

> 53

Gough, Paul J. “ABC Sees 2 Sides to New Hampshire Debate.” Reuters. Thomson 

Reuters, November 26, 2007. https://www.reuters.com/article/television -debates -dc/abc -sees -2-

sides -to -new -hampshire -debate -idUSN2643539320071126. Charap 

23 

The last straw for Dennis Kucinich was being disinvited from the NBC Las Vegas debate 

on January 15 th , 2008. NBC changed the requirements to prevent him from appearing . At first, he 

was included in the debate because he had averaged three to four percent support in recent 

Nevada polls. 54 NBC changed the criteria to include only candidates who had placed first, second 

or third in either the Iowa c aucuses or New Hampshire primaries. 55 He sued NBC in Nevada 

claiming that NBC was infringing on his first amendment right to free speech. He complained 

that NBC was attempting to muzzle a “candidate who has duly qualified to participate in the 

political pro cess in violation of the prior offer to allow the participation.” 56 To his chagrin , the 

Supreme Court of Nevada ruled against him. His campaign failed to meet the standard of 

irreparable harm. The court ruled that NBC is a private company and there was no c ontract that 

guaranteed Kucinich’s participation. Kucinich’s exclusion from the debates before and after the 

first primaries demonstrate the media’s attempt to control the nomination process. After missing 

the next four debates and failing to accumulate de legates or funding, Kucinich dropped out of the 

race. He was not the o nly the candidate during the 2004 Democratic primaries to be excluded 

from debates before Iowa. 

Mike Gravel was also excluded from debates before the first primary. Gravel is a former 

Senator from Alaska and is famous for reading the Pentagon Papers on the floor of the Senate in 

1971 . Media outlets first tried to exclude Gravel from the debate stage in July 2007 , four months 

before Iowa . CNN and You Tube, the debate organizers, claimed that th eir “criteria simply 

identifies candidates that have measurable public support for their campaign. Because Mike  

> 54

Stelter, Brian. “NBC Wins Battle Over Debate.” The New York Times. The New York 

Times, January 16, 2008. https://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/15/nbc -wins -battle -over -

debate/. 55 Ibid.  

> 56

Ibid. Charap 

24 

Gravel has not demonstrated measurable public support for his campaign to date, he has not 

received an invitation.” 57 After complaining about the de cision, Gravel participated in the eight 

candidate CNN debate. On August 7th , Gravel was yet again excluded from a debate for not 

filling out a questionnaire that the host, AFL -CIO, required. 58 On August, 9 th , Gravel was not 

invited to the LGBT Network deba te because he failed to meet the $100,000 fundraising 

threshold. 59 After arguing against the unfair requirement, clai ming it limited free speech, they 

allowed him to participate .60 The LGBT Network’s requirement marks the first t ime that 

fundraising was use d as a debate requirement for Democratic candidates . On October 30 th ,

Gravel was excluded from an NBC debate because he had not “campaigned in New 

Hampshire and/or Iowa at least 14 times in the past year, did not poll high enough in national 

polls and had not raised more than US$1 million.” 61 Upon this news, a hedge fund manager 

famously donated $1 million to Gravel’s campaign. 62 Nonetheless, he was not included . Gravel 

left the Democratic party in March of 2008 to run for the nomination as a Libertarian. 

The campaigns of Gravel and Kucinich demonstrate the power of the media and the 

importance of consistent debate qualifications . Both candidates were excluded from debates. 

They argued against the decisions, understanding the importance of debates in creating campaign  

> 57

Haley, Jeff . “ Gravel Dismisses CNN, WMUR -TV And Union Le ader Statement .” 

_CNN_. 21 Mar. 2007. _Internet Archive_. < 

https://web.archive.org/web/20071227034815/http://www.gravel2008.us/?q=node%2F471 >.  

> 58

“Organized Labor and the 2008 Presidential Primary Campaign.” Eric M. 

Appleman/Democracy in Action. http://p2 008.org/interestg08/labor08.html.  

> 59

Belonsky, Andrew. “Gravel Pissed Over HRC Diss.” Queerty. Queerty, July 11, 2007. 

https://www.queerty.com/gravel -pissed -over -hrc -diss -20070711.  

> 60

Ibid.  

> 61

“Gravel Supporter Putting Money Where Mouth Is.” Boston Globe, Oct ober 27, 2007. 

http://www.boston.com/news/local/new_hampshire/articles/2007/10/27/gravel_supporter_putting 

_money_where_mouth_is/  

> 62

Ibid. Charap 

25 

momentum. Moreover, the inconsistent and seemingly arbitrary requirements of 2008 were a 

signal to the Democratic party that changes need ed to be made. The media had demonstrated it 

had too much control over the proces s and the party realized it h ad too little . These 2008 debate 

qualifications troubles compounded with the GOP’s chaotic debate stages in 2016, made it clear 

to senior DNC officials that they needed to make a change. 

2008, 2012 and 2016 Debates : A Les son from the GOP 

The 2008 GOP primary debates were equally as inconsistent as those of the Democrat s in 

2008 . The GOP had 20 debates from May 20 07 to February 2008. In Intraparty Democracy and 

the 2016 Election , Julia Azari and Seth Masket find only three instances during that time in 

which the debate requirements were clearly enumerated. The second debate, which occurred in 

May, required a threshold of one percent in South Carolina and national polls. 63 A businessman, 

named John Cox, sued Fox Broadcasting Network for excluding him from the debate. A judge 

later ruled that free speech rights did not apply because a primary debate is not a public forum. 64 

This was the same argument used by the Supreme Court of Nevada to exclude Kucinich. Ron 

Paul, a Texas cong ressmen, was also excluded from a Fox News debate before the New 

Hampshire primary . Paul performed well in Iowa and his campaign had succeeded in its 

fundraising efforts. 65 With the respect to the 2008 GOP debates, Azari and Masket found that  

> 63

Azari, Julia, and Seth Masket. “Intraparty Democracy and the 2016 Election.” 

In Conventional Wisdom, Parties and Bro ken Barriers in the 2016 Election . Lanham, MD: 

Lexington Books, 2018., 146.  

> 64

Ibid.  

> 65

Falcone, Michael. “Ron Paul Makes an Appeal for Third -Party Candidates.” The New 

York Times. The New York Times, September 9, 2008. 

https://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2 008/09/09/ron -paul -makes -an -appeal -for -third -party -

candidates/. Charap 

26 

“the networks appear [ed] to have cherry -picked the polls it used, crafting criteria to exclude 

specific candidates.” 66 

In 2012, the GOP attempted to reconcile the errors they made in 2008. M edia outlets 

created clearer standards for their debates. They included specific lists of polls that could be used 

to qualify for debate inclusion. 67 The GOP had nine candidates that made at least one of the 

debates. Fur ther, aside from Mitt Romney’s exclusion from the first debate and Jon Huntsman ’s 

exclusion from the second debate, the deb ate requirements were not a meaningful issue of the 

primaries. While the 2012 debates were less contentious than 2008, 2016 would bring its own 

host of problems. 

The 2016 GOP primary debates were unlike any other in the country’s history. Expecting 

many ca ndidates, the GOP created a commission called the Growth and Opportunity Project that 

was tasked with creating unilateral rules to govern the party’s primary debates .68 The 

commission limited the number of party -sanctioned debates and prescribed the locatio n of the 

debates . The commission, however, did not establi sh rules for polling thresholds, leaving the 

networks in ch arge of who could participate . Media outlets took it upon themselves to establish 

more consistent debate qualifications . Since the GOP prim aries had 21 candidates and twelve 

debates , media outlets and the party wanted to create a fair process for debate invitations . The 

GOP and their media partners accomplished this in two ways. First, the party featured undercard -

debates for those who did no t make the primetime debate stage. This gave lower -polling 

longshot candidates the opportunity to present their ideas . Second, media outlets independently 

created comprehensive rules for debate requirements. Due to the increased size of the field and  

> 66

Azari, 146.  

> 67

Ibid, 147.  

> 68

Ibid, 156. Charap 

27 

the G OP’s intervention in the process , t he 2016 GOP debates were the most procedurally 

developed and consistent in primary history .69 

Although the debate rules were consistent, the crowded field hurt the GOP’s ability to 

control the outcome of the nomination . Th e invisible primary failed to produce an establishment 

candidate. The top candidates in the early summer , which included Cruz, Bush, Kasich, Rubio 

and Carson, had a similar number of endorsements and had accumulated comparable funds .70 

The large field and l ack of a clear establishment candidate worked in Donald Trump’s favor. The 

first debate on August 6 th featured two debates with a total of 20 candidates. The first included 

the ten highest polling candidates, in order of their national polling averages. 71 The under -card 

debate originally had a 1% polling threshold that was later removed to allow three additional 

candidates. In the S eptember debate, a lack of polling allowed additional candidate s to compete 

in the under -card debate. 72 A week befor e the first primary, the GOP was stil l using a two -debate 

format featuring the eleven candidates in the race. After Iowa, the number of candidates allowed 

on the primetime stage was reduced to seven .73 Regardless, the damage was done. Candidates 

stayed in t he race longer because th ey were making the debate stage in only the under -card stage .

Only half of the 20 original candidates dropped out before the Iowa caucuses. Although the GOP  

> 69

Ibid, 156.  

> 70

“The 2016 Endorsement Primary.” FiveThirtyEight, June 7, 2016. 

https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016 -endorsement -primary/#endorsemen ts.  

> 71

Allen, Mike, and Adam B. Lerner. “Fox Lowers Threshold for Early Debate.” 

POLITICO, July 30, 2015. https://www.politico.com/story/2015/07/fox -republican -debate -

lowers -threshold -120748.  

> 72

Preston, Mark. “CNN Amends GOP Presidential Debate Criteria - CNNPolitics.” 

CNN. Cable News Network, September 2, 2015. https://www.cnn.com/2015/09/01/politics/cnn -

debate -criteria -amendment/.  

> 73

“ABC News Announces Criteria For New Hampshire Republican Debate.” ABC 

News. ABC News Network. Accessed March 2, 2020. https: //abcnews.go.com/Politics/abc -

news -announces -criteria -hampshire -republican -debate/story?id=36550263. Charap 

28 

had created a consistent and developed debate process, an outsider still b ecame the party 

nominee. The large debate stage and Trump’s rise in the polls allowed him to qualify for the 

debates and spread his message. 

In 2016, t he debates were chaotic and resulted in the opposite of what the GOP 

establishment wanted. The political elite did not want Trump to be their party’s nomine e and 

believed he could not win . In Identity Crisis: The 2016 Presidential Campaign and the Battle for 

the Meaning of America , John Sides , Lynn Vavreck, and Michael Tessler assess the media’s role 

in Trump ’s nomination. They found that Trump’s constant media presence and attention -

grabbing debate performance s made up for his organizational short -falls .74 He received more 

media coverage than the other candidates and did not pay a cent for it. The Democrats le arned 

from this experience. They wanted a consistent system like the GOP debates, but without an 

extremist candidate on the ticket. 

2016 Democrat ic Debates 

The 2016 Democratic primary was the opposite of the GOP experience . The primaries 

only contained a handful of candidates and featured a clear establishment candidate in Hillary 

Clinton. Not only was she arguably the most experienced candidate to ever run for the position, 

but also had a plethora of endorsements and a massive war chest. She won the invis ible primary. 

In addition, she benefitted from the support of super delegates, who represent ed 15% of the total 

delegates at the convention. 75 It was Hillary Clinton’s nomination to lose in 2016.  

> 74

Sides, John, Michael Tesler, and Lynn Vavreck. Identity Crisis: The 2016 Presidential 

Campaign and the Battle for the Meaning of America . Princeton; Oxfo rd: Princeton University 

Press, 2018.  

> 75

Barnes, James, and Jerrick Adams. “2016 Presidential Nominations: Calendar and 

Delegate Rules.” Ballotpedia. Charap 

29 

Nonetheless , she faced four other candidates in the first deb ate , including Vermont 

Senator Bernie Sanders, Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley, Virginia Senator Jim Webb and 

Rhode Island Governor Lincoln Chafee . The Democratic debates originally only featured six 

debates, minimizing the likelihood a non -establishment candidate would have a breakout debate 

performance. The first debate in October hosted by CNN required candidates to have 1% or more 

support in three or more national polls. 76 Lawrence Lessig, a law professor at Harvard, running 

for President was not invited to any of the debat es for fa iling to register any support. Many saw 

his candidacy as perfunctory and considered his absence as un controversial. 77 By the next debate 

in November, Chafee and Webb had both dropped out . Both of their campaigns failed to 

accumulate momentum. Mart in O’Malley, the former Governor of Maryland, was almost left off 

the fourth debate in January for failing to reach 5% nationally. 78 He complained that “this 

election is not up to NBC executives, not up to pollsters, its up to you, the people of Iowa.” 79 He 

was later allowed on the debate stage after the chair of the party intervened on Twitter, writing 

she expected to see all the candidates on the stage. 80 After New Hampshire, O’Malley dropped 

out leaving two candidates, Clinton and Sanders. The party also ef fectively got rid of 

https://ballotpedia.org/2016_presidential_nominations:_calendar_and_delegate_rules.  

> 76

“Candidate Criteria for the October 13, 2015 CNN -Facebook Democratic Presidential 

Primary Debate.” Turner Broadcasting, October 13, 2015. 

http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2015/images/09/28/final -democratic -criteria -2016.pdf.  

> 77

Frizell, Sam. “Lawrence Lessig Would Not Have Qualifi ed for CBS Debate.” Time, 

November 5, 2015. https://time.com/4102049/democratic -debate -cbs -lawrence -lessig/  

> 78

Masonhall, Erika. “Qualifying Criteria for NBC NBC -YOUTUBE Democratic 

Candidates Debates.” NBCNews. NBCUniversal News Group, January 8, 2016. 

http ://press.nbcnews.com/2016/01/08/qualifying -criteria -for -nbc -news -youtube -democratic -

candidates -debate/.  

> 79

Ibid.  

> 80

Jackson, David. “New NBC Debate Criteria Could Pose Problems for O'Malley.” USA 

Today. Gannett Satellite Information Network, January 11, 2016 .

https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/01/08/nbc -democratic -debate -

criteria -clinton -sanders -omalley/78502784/. Charap 

30 

unsanctioned debates by refusing to give delegates to candidates that participated in them. 81 This 

ensured that candi date would comply with the party’s rules. While the debate rules were 

consistent throughout the process, the DNC’s role in t he primary process became a point of 

contention. 

The 2016 primaries left the Sanders campaign fuming. Although Hillary Clinton won the 

nomination on the first ballot, accumulating 54% of the total pledge d delegates, Sanders alleged 

the DNC was working aga inst him. 82 First, his campaign complained that the lack of debates 

prevented Sanders from getting his name out. The DNC added three mo re debates after Senator 

Sanders became more relevant and complained. There were five debates that featured only 

Sanders and Clinton. While the GOP had twelve in 2016, the Democrats only had nine. His 

campaign also complained that the debates were on Saturday nights when people are out or 

watching sporting events The GOP debates in 2016 were on weekday nights. Third , they 

co mplained about the super delegate rules that supported Clinton. 83 Leaked emails from Debbie 

Wasserman Shultz, the chair of the DNC, on ly reinforced Bernie ’s campaign theories. The 

emails revealed th at Ms. Shultz questioned Sander s’ com mitment to the party, cla iming he 

speaks like “someone who has never been a member of the Democratic Party and has no 

understanding of what we do.” 84 There is also evidence a Clinton lawyer advised the DNC on  

> 81

Gold, Hadas, and Gabriel Debenedetti. “MSNBC, Union Leader Team up for 

Unsanctioned Democratic Debate.” POLITICO, Janua ry 26, 2016. 

https://www.politico.com/blogs/on -media/2016/01/nbc -union -leader -team -up -for -unsanctioned -

debate -218249.  

> 82

Barnes, James, and Jerrick Adams. “2016 Presidential Nominations: Calendar and 

Delegate Rules.”  

> 83

Detrow, Scott. “Clinton Campaign Had A dditional Signed Agreement with DNC In 

2015.” NPR. NPR, November 3, 2017. https://www.npr.org/2017/11/03/561976645/clinton -

campaign -had -additional -signed -agreement -with -dnc -in -2015.  

> 84

Blake, Aaron. “Here Are the Latest, Most Damaging Things in the DNC's Le aked 

Emails.” The Washington Post. WP Company, July 25, 2016. Charap 

31 

how to deal with Sanders and c reated a narrative that Sanders never had an organized campaign. 

The complaints against the DNC and leaked emails required them to act to ensu re a fairer 

nomination process for 2020. 

The 2020 Debate s

Prior to 2020, the Democratic primary debate qualification rules were inconsistent. The 

requirements for some debat es were set by the media outlet hosting them. In other instances, the 

DNC intervened, setting their own guidelines. In addition, the requirements varied by debate. In 

the 2008 cycle, some debates required a candidate to have a campaign staff in early prima ry 

voting state s to qualify, while other debate s relied simply on polling numbers. The 

inconsistencies frustrated candidates that were left off the stage, many of whom argued the rules 

were unclear and harmed their candidacy. In February of 2019, the DNC created a unilateral set 

of rules for its primary debates and made an unprecedented decision to create a new system for 

debate qualification. In addition to needing a minimum percentage in national and state polls, 

candidates were incentivized to raise money from as many Americans as possible. I hypothesize 

that these prior inconsistencies pushed the Democrats to create comprehensive debate 

requirements. Moreover, I believe the decision allows the party to create rules that work in their 

favor rather than in the favor of media outlets .

By taking the debate threshold out of the hands of media outlets, and setting them for 

themselves, the DNC works to re assert its power in the process . The requirements, which are the 

strictest in primary debate history, were created with the intent to winnow the field quickly. The 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the -fix/wp/2016/07/24/here -are -the -latest -most -

damaging -things -in -the -dncs -leaked -emails/. Charap 

32 

DNC did not want as many under -card debates as the Republicans had in 2016. As such, 

candidates that fail ed to meet the progressively strict requirements will be forced to drop out of 

the race. Not making the debate makes i t harder for candidates to raise money and garner media 

attention. The strict debate requirements also make it difficult for long -shot candidates to gain 

momentum. This further ensures that an establishment candidate will win the party’s nominee. 

Backgrou nd on the 2020 Decision 

In 2017, Tom Perez was elected by the senior members of the DNC, in part to lead the 

nomination process . His qualifications were impressive, serving as the Secretary of Labor and 

Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights under Pres ident Obama. Perez outlined his party’s 

goals for the 2020 presidential election. Perez made it a priority to improve the debate structure 

of his party. In a press re lease, Perez announced his goals, stating that he wanted to “give the 

grassroots a bigger voice than ev er before; showcase [Democratic] candidates on an array of 

media platforms; present an opportunity for vigorous discussion about issues, ideas and 

solutions; and reach as many potential voters as possible.” 85 In addition, Perez wanted a 

nomination process t hat could handle a large primary field and winnow it quickly. He noted that 

he was a not a fan of under -card debates and wanted a discussion of substantive issues instead of 

“debates about hand -size,” referring to the 2016 GOP primary debates. 86  

> 85

“DNC Announces Details for The First Two Presidential Primary Deb ates,” 

Democrats, February 14, 2019, https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -details -for -the -first -

two -presidential -primary -debates/  

> 86

Thompson, Alex. “Perez Nixes 'Undercard' Debates for 2020 Primary.” POLITICO, 

December 20, 2018. https://www.politico.co m/story/2018/12/20/dnc -2020 -democrats -debate -

1071031. Charap 

33 

Perez had a little over a year to create rules that aligned with his agenda. Media reports 

claim that DNC officials created a committee that met 80 to 100 times to discuss the debate 

structure. 87 The most difficult decision was how to create new debate qualifying requ irements. 

Several options were presented. They could use the minimum polling percentage they had used 

in 2016. Second, they considered requiring candidates to have a certain number of paid staffers 

in early primary states. Third, they considered adding a f undraising component and requiring 

candidates to raise a minimum amount of money or have a minimum number of donors. They 

spoke with former candidates and campaign managers and conducted research to make their 

decision. 88 The criteria were announced in Febr uary 2019: 

Democratic candidates may qualify for the first and second debate by meeting 

one of the two following sets of criteria: 

Polling Method: Register 1% or more support in three polls (which may be 

national polls, or polls in Iowa, New Hampshire, Sou th Carolina, and/or 

Nevada) publicly released between January 1, 2019, and 14 days prior to the 

date of the Organization Debate… Any candidate’s three qualifying polls must 

be conducted by different organizations, or if by the same organization, must 

be in different geographical areas. 

Grassroots Fundraising Method. Candidates may qualify for the debate by 

demonstrating that the campaign has received donations from at least (1)  

> 87

Russell Berman, “The DNC Isn't Apologizing for Its Debate Rules,” The Atlantic 

(Atlantic Media Company, June 13, 2019), 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/06/democratic -debate -rules/591 550/  

> 88

Ibid. Charap 

34 

65,000 unique donors; and (2) a minimum of 200 unique donors per state in at 

lea st 20 U.S. states. To demonstrate that the fundraising threshold has been 

reached, candidates must provide verifiable evidence, which they may do by 

authorizing ActBlue and/or NGP VAN to provide that evidence. 

If more than 20 candidates qualify for the de bate, the top 20 candidates will be 

selected using a methodology that gives primacy to candidates meeting both 

thresholds, followed by the highest polling average, followed by the most 

unique donors. 89 

In May 2019 , the DNC announced they were going to use similar criteria for the third and 

fourth debates. The polling requireme nt was increased to 2% and the grassroots f undraising 

threshold increased to 130,000 donors with at least 400 unique donors in at least twenty states. 90 

In September, the DNC announced a change to the polling requirements for the fifth and sixth 

debates. Candidates needed either four polls above 4% or two polls above 5% in early states. 91 

The DNC wanted to incentivize candidates to focus on early states. In addition, the g rassroots 

fundraising t hresho ld increased to 165,000 donors and 600 unique donors in at least 20 states. 92 

The seventh debate further increased the standards for polling and fundraising .93 The eighth 

debate rules are like the seventh, except for the added provision that all candidates that gain one  

> 89

“DNC Announces Details for The First Two Presidential Primary Debates”  

> 90

“DNC Announces Details for Third Presidential Primary Debate,” Democrats, May 29, 

2019, https://democrats.org/news/third -debate/  

> 91

“DNC Announces Qualification Criteri a for Fifth Presidential Primary Debate,” 

Democrats, September 23, 2019, https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -

criteria -for -fifth -presidential -primary -debate/)  

> 92

Ibid.  

> 93

“DNC Announces Details f or Seventh Democratic Presidential Primary Debate.” 

Democrats , December 20, 2019. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -details -for -seventh -

democratic -presidential -primary -debate/. Charap 

35 

pledged delegate in the Iowa caucus automa tically qualify. 94 Delegates in Iowa are only awarded 

to candidates that garner more than 15% of the final vote . The ninth and tenth debates are similar 

to the eighth, but remove the fundraising threshold .95 Finally, t he eleventh debate require s

ca ndidates to have at least 20% of the pledge d delegates awarded by March 15 th to qualify. 96 The 

DNC has not yet announce d the rules for a possible twelfth debate. 

The number of donors was deci ded in consultation with ActBlue. ActBlue is campaign 

fundraising website that makes it easy for people to donate to their candidate of choice. The site 

keeps a donor’s disclosure documents and credit card on file. The DNC decided the number of 

donors by w orking with the site and consultants who analyzed historical donor trends from the 

2016 election and FEC disclosures from Congressional elections. Those that made the decisions 

asserted that it was the best way to meet their grassroots goal. Tom Perez beli eves that “if you 

want to be president of the United States, you have to develop a proficiency at grassroots 

fundraising.” 97 Thus, he dubbed it the grassroots fundraising t hreshold. It incentivizes campaigns 

to build their fundraising infrastructure. A cand idate that is not necessarily polling well early, but 

is developing their fundraising techniques will benefit from the donor requirement. Moreover, 

Perez hopes that it will help the DNC in the general election. This large base of donors may not 

only donate in the general election, but also may volunteer or participate in other ways to support  

> 94

“DNC An nounces Qualification Criteria f or New Hampshire Democratic Presidential 

Primary Debate.” Democrats, Jan uary 17, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -

qualification -criteria -for -new -hampshire -democratic -presidential -primary -debate/.  

> 95

“DNC Announces Qualification Criteria for Nevada Democratic Presidential Primary 

Debate.” Democrats, February 3, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -

criteria -for -nevada -dem ocratic -presidential -primary -debate/.  

> 96

“DNC Announces Qualification Criteria For Arizona Democratic Presidential Primary 

Debate.” Democrats, March 9, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -

criteria -for -arizona -democratic -presidential -primary -debate/.  

> 97

“DNC Announces Details for Third Presidential Primary Debate” Charap 

36 

the Democrats. By encouraging donations of any size, Perez wanted to encourage as many 

people as possible to participate in politics. 

After the decision was made ther e was pushback from campaigns and pundits. Michael 

Bennett, who qualified for the first two debates and failed to qualify for the subsequent three 

debates, believes the DNC has mixed priorities. The DNC should not “be favoring national 

fundraising and cabl e television over the early states like New Hampshire.” 98 A senior Democrat 

campaign advisor shares Bennett’s view. It forces candidates to choose “between focusing on 

Iowa or New Hampshire or focusing on making these national requirements.” 99 These comments 

were made before the early state polling criteria for debate five and six . Some have also 

complained about the lack of transparency in the process. They argue that the new criteria were 

released without consulting candidates or middle to lower level DNC o fficials. The resistance to 

the change prompted the need for a thorough analysis on the decision to include strict 

requirements .

The debate requirements announced by the DNC for 2020 were the result of several 

conflicting incentives. First, the Democrats did not want ten candidates g oing into Iowa . The 

DNC, under the direction of Tom Perez, wanted to sufficiently winnow the field before the first 

primary. Less candidates translates into a shorter primary season and an increased focus on the 

general. He also wanted to avoid a repeat of the GOP’s process where a long -shot candidate was 

nominated as Trump had been in 2016 . He expected a big primary field for 2020 with candidates 

looking to raise their profile and defeat a widely unpopular incumbent. He wanted a barrier to  

> 98

Max G reenwood, “Tougher Debate Threshold Sets off Scramble among 2020 

Democrats,” The Hill (The Hill, June 8, 2019), https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/447500 -

tougher -debate -threshold -sets -off -scramble -among -2020 -democrats  

> 99

Ibid. Charap 

37 

entry that “was not a layup, but also not a half -court shot.” 100 Second, he wanted to prevent any 

suspicion that the party favored one candidate over another. The DNC needed to respond to the 

previous complaints from O’Malley and Sanders. The party wanted candidates to believe it ha d

taken its foot o ff the scale with consistent qualification thresholds set by the party, not 

independent media outlets. Only the DNC could control this vital responsibility. The DNC had to 

weigh its internal desire to the control the outcome of the process, while appearing to be 

impartial. The untested 2020 requirements were created to remedy these conflicting interests. 

Discussion 

Hypothesis One : The DNC changed the criteria to combat the rise in the number of candidates 

The increasing number of candidates in modern prima rie s particularly the GOP’s 2016 

primary is one reason why the Democrats instituted strict debate rules for 2020 . There were a

total of twenty -nine major Democratic presidential candidates v ying for their party’s nomination 

in 2020 , eight more than the GOP in 2016. The unprecedented number o f candidates required a 

comprehensive system for winnowing. Thus, the DNC turned to debate rules. Those that fail ed to 

make the debate stage were likely to experience a drop in poll numbers and poor fundraising 

causing them to end their candidacy . The stricter requirements would also speed up the 

winnowing process, forcing voters to choose from a handful of candidates as opposed to over 

twenty -five. 

In the history of Democratic presidential debates, the largest number of candidates that 

had appeared on a debate stage was ten in 2004. Still, th e 2004 primaries did not host an  

> 100

Berman, Russell. “The DNC Isn't Apologizing for Its Debate Rules.” The Atlantic. 

Atlantic Media Company, June 13, 2019. 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/06/democratic -debate -rules/591550/. Charap 

38 

undercard debate. In addition, the Democrats and media outlets have allowed most major 

candidates, with some exceptions in 2008, to compete in the debates up until the first primary. In 

2008, Gravel and Kucinich were excluded from ea rly debates because they failed to meet some 

aspects of the debate requirements. While some of the rules seem ed arbitrary, their campaigns 

failed to gain traction. Both were outsider candidates that lacked formal campaign organizations 

in many early primary states. The 2020 campaign was a new test for Democrats. They could no 

longer rely on media outlets and candidates voluntarily dropping out to winnow the field. 

Instead, they decided to use debate requirements. 

In anticipation of more candidates in 2020 than 2016, the DNC announced the rule 

changes in February, before most candidates had officially announced their candidacy. Potential 

Democratic candidates had three major incentives to run in 2020. First, there was no clear 

favorite in the rac e as there was in 2016 , despite Vice President Joe Biden ’s, S enator Corey 

Booker ’s and Senator Bernie Sanders ’ early endorsements and fundraising . Second, as more 

candidates entered the race, a candidate on the edge became more likely to run. With twenty 

candidates alr eady in the race, the so -called marginal candidate had little to lose by joining the 

race . Third, all the Democratic candidates believe d that they could beat Trump. Since Hillary 

Clinton, an establishment candidate lost in 2016, many non -establishment cand idates joined the 

race to offer an alternative . Their campaigns appealed to voters by claiming Democrat s needed a

new approach to beating Trump. The confluence of these factors meant that the DNC knew they 

were going to see more candidates in 2020 and needed a method for quickly winnowing the 

field .

The str icter debate rules change force d candidates to continually reassess their campaigns 

long -term viability. Even before th e first primar y, candidates face decisions on whether to Charap 

39 

remain in the race. Prior to the rule change in 2020, low -polling candi dates could hope for a 

breakout debate performance to increase their name recognition and fundraising efforts. This 

process has sped up and longshot candidates now have a limited number of attempts to have an 

outstanding debate performance. 

Regardless of when a candidate drops out of the race, the decision -making process is the 

same. Norrander’s comprehensive study analyzes presidential primaries from 1980 to 2004. 

Those dropping out after the first primary are considering initial assets and characteristic s

(national poll standings, fund -raising totals and occupational background), initial contest 

outcomes (Iowa and New Hampshire) and structural variables (proportional representation 

delegate distribution rules, party, front -loaded calendar). 101 Besides the New Hampshire and 

Iowa results, her duration model predicts that poll standings, occupational background and 

funding shaped the length of a candidates bid for the nomination. 102 The long primary season 

with stricter and stricter debate requirements make s candidates constantly rethink their 

candidacy. Moreover, w ithout access to debates, candidates face difficulties increasing their 

polling and fundraising efforts. The new debate thresholds and failure to make the debate stage 

make it harder for candidates to justify their campaign. 

Hypoth esis Two : Change in Democratic requirements due to previous inconsistencies 

Another reason the DNC changed the debate requirements for 2020 was because they 

want ed to establish consistent requirements . The inconsistencies in 2008 and 2012 created  

> 101

Barbara Norrander, “The Attrition Game: Initial Resources, Initial Contes ts and the 

Exit of Candidates During the US Presidential Primary Season,” British Journal of Political 

Science 36, no. 3 (2006): pp. 487 -507 . 

> 102

Ibid. Charap 

40 

confusi on and avenue s of attack for candidates that missed the debate thresholds. The 

Democrats’ rules build upon the Republican ’s attempt in 2016. The De mocrats wanted unilateral 

control over the entire process, to ensure fair and comprehensive debate rules. 

Prior to 2008, the Democratic debate requirements were not meant to exclude candidates .

Most candidates made the debate stage and dropped out of the race after the first primaries , not 

after failing to make a debate . In 2008, however, inconsistencies in the debate rules led to 

multiple complaints. When Gravel and Kucinich were excluded in December of 2007 , the two 

candidates gained media attention for their legal battles and put the party in a difficult position. 

The party did not want it to appear like they were excluding candidates and stifling the process. 

However, they also did not want to give a voice to candidates that were unlikely to garner 

delegates in the primaries and would more likely take attention from the individual who w ould in 

fact be the Democratic n ominee . Furthermore, at the time it was not the parties making the 

decisions, but rather media outlets. The 2008 debate cycle was a signal to Democrats that their 

process needed to be reformed. 

In 2016, the Democrats only had six candidates on the first debate stage. Nonetheless, 

Martin O’Malley complained about being excluded from a debate after the New H ampshire 

primary . He was later allowed to participate, despite failing to meet the requirements. In the 

same cycle, the GOP created the most comprehensive rules in their history. The DNC recognized 

it needed its own comprehensive system to account for the large number of cand idates . The 

Democrats, under the direction of Tom Perez, created the new system for 2020 . With the new 

rules, candidates would no longer be able t o complain about lack of clarity or inconsistencies in 

debate rules. Charap 

41 

Hypothesis Three : Democrats want more co ntrol over setting r ules, taking it away from the 

media 

Before 2020, neither major party had control over who made the primary debate stage. 

The criteria were set by media outlets and candidates who were excluded channeled their 

complaints toward the part y. Due to the inconsistent rules among the major media outlets, the 

Democrats needed to intervene . Since the media and the DNC do not have the same incentives 

regarding primary debate system, the DNC believed it was necessary to take unilateral control .

In the United States, media outlets are run as a for -profit business. Newspapers, cable and 

online news outlets profit from viewership and advertising revenue . In fact, the revenue of major 

media outlets is cyclical and rises and falls with election years. 103 For the largest media 

companies , debates often give them their highest viewership numbers of the year . The first 

Democratic debate in 2020 had 15.3 million viewers on the first night and 18.1 million viewers 

on the second night. 104 This beats the prev ious primary debate record -holder made in 2015. For 

comparison, the most watched news program in Octob er 2019 was Hannity on Fox News and it 

had 3.5 million viewers per night. 105 

The se primary events are highly publicized and lead the headl ines. A debate that creates 

headlines leads to more views, more expensive advertising slots and subsequently more profit. 

One journalist notes that “ the high [debate] viewership is likely to turbocharge an already  

> 103

Berr, Jonathan. “Media Companies Profit Handsomely from the Political Ads Voters 

Despise.” Forbes Magazi ne, November 2, 2018. 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonathanberr/2018/11/02/media -companies -profit -handsomely -

from -the -political -ads -voters -despise/#2b2180833828.  

> 104

Grynbaum, Michael. “Record Ratings for Democratic Debate as America Tunes In to 

2020.” The N ew York Times, June 28, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/28/business/media/democratic -debate -nbc -ratings.html.  

> 105

Ibid. Charap 

42 

significant investment in political coverage, which has pushed up reven ues and ratings.” 106 Thus, 

the outlet that has the privilege of holding the debate has an incentive to increase viewership .

While the business office of most major media outlets does not explicitly tell their debate staff to 

create a spectacle, a non -controversial debate is not in their best interest . Controversy is linked to 

clicks, views and profit. Media outlets must weigh this with their desire to seem like they are 

impartial . Otherwise, the outlet may lose their ability t o host debates in the future and viewers 

will not consider them trustworthy. In 2013, the GOP announced that it would prohibit CNN and 

NBC from hosting the Republican 2016 presidential primary debates. 107 The GOP alleged that 

outlets were “undermining the p erceived objectivity of the coverage of the 2016 presidential 

campaign.” 108 The GOP noted that these two new s outlets had a pro -Democrat agenda in the 

2012 election, claiming they were trying to appeal to their liberal viewers. Media outlets try to 

increase viewership and profit, while also trying to stay impartial and maintain the right to host 

debates .

In addition to trying to increase viewership and appearing impartial , media outlets want 

to host a meaningful debate to educate potential voters on the cand idates . While media outlets 

want voters to make an informed decision, they must also grapple with the fact that not all 

candidates are equal. Why should a candidate polling with less than 5% favorability be allowed 

to participate in a debate with candidate s t hat have 20% favorability ? Each media outlet solves 

this problem differently. CNN reversed its decision to exclude Gravel in July, 2007 , although he  

> 106

Ibid.  

> 107

O'Keefe, Ed. “RNC Votes to Exclude CNN, NBC from 2016 Presidential Primary 

Debates.” The Washington Post. WP Company, Aug ust 16, 2013. 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post -politics/wp/2013/08/16/rnc -to -consider -excluding -

cnn -nbc -from -2016 -presidential -debates/?arc404=true.  

> 108

Ibid. Charap 

43 

did not meet the requirements . In November 2007 , CNN added a fundraising component, which 

excluded him from the debat e stage . NBC included all the candidates in their first debate in April 

2007 . In October, the company excluded Gravel in October for missing the fundraising 

threshold . The changes in requirements were up to the discretion of the media outlets. 

Nonetheless, candidates blamed both media companies and the party for failing to include them. 

Many claimed that they were stifling free speech. To be more even -handed and give clarity to the 

process, the DNC took unilateral control of the requirements for 2020. 

Unlik e the major media companies, the DNC is not driven by profit. It does not benefit 

directly from the advertising revenue generated during debates, nor does it gain financially from 

high viewership. A highly viewed debate in the eyes of the DNC helps the vot ers decide on their 

candidate more quickly and encourages people to become more politically involved. The DNC 

wants their debates to produce a favorite , educate voters and increase political activism. 

Hypothesis Four: Democratic change created t o streamline the process hurt s long -shot candidates 

There is no question that the new debate requirements were created to bring order to the 

primary process. After the GOP in 2016, senior party officials recognized the need to be more 

clear in their qualification thresholds. Moreover, the DNC’s control allows them to create 

thresholds that align with meeting their goals. These goals are again to produce an electable 

candidate and to create a strong organization for the general. The order created by the DNC, 

however, comes at the cost of long -shot candidates that had previously been in the race until the 

Iowa caucuses. 

Prior to 2020, candidates allocated their resources in a manner that would increase their 

chances of winning the nomination. Per Paul -Henri Gurian, there are two strategies for resource Charap 

44 

allocation in primaries that are determined by the competitiveness of the candidate. 109 Long -shot 

candidates try to develop momentum by allocating their resources in early primaries, which are 

expected to be cover ed extensively by the media. On the other hand, established candidates will 

focus on garnering the largest number of delegates to secure the nomination. Self -funded 

candidates are excluded from this discussion because they are not constrained by a limited 

amount of money. 

In 2020, the long -shot candidates have unsurprisingly been the first to be excluded from 

the debate stage. The DNC only featured two debates with two debate stages. Since the ABC 

September debate, there have been a maximum of twelve cand idates on the stage. The long -shot 

candidates that have failed to garner material support include Julián Castro, Beto O’Rourke, Tim 

Ryan, Bill de Blasio, Jay Inslee, Tim Ryan , Joe Sestak, Steve Bullock, John Hickenlooper and 

Eric Swalwell. These candidates had dropped out of the race by December 2019, a month before 

the first primary. Many of these candidates explicitly cited the heightened debate requirements in 

describing their failure to gain momentum. In a fundraising email circulated in September, Beto 

O’Rourke wrote it would be the “end of [his] campaign” if he did not qualify for the November 

debate. 110 Similarly, Bill de Blasio told CNN that “i t's really tough to conceive of continuing” a

campaign without making the October debate. 111 While the debate requirements are not entirely 

to blame for their failures, they are consistently cited as hurting unlikely candidacies . 

> 109

Paul -Henri Gurian, “Resource Allocation Strategies in Presidential Nomination 

Campaigns,” American Journal of Political Sc ience 30, no. 4 (1986): p. 802.  

> 110

Svitek, Patrick. “Key Goal for Texans Julián Castro and Beto O'Rourke in Tuesday's 

Debate: Make the next One.” The Texas Tribune, October 15, 2019. 

https://www.texastribune.org/2019/10/15/j ulian -castro -and -beto -orourke -campaigns -need -

strong -debate -performanc/.  

> 111

Kelly, Caroline. “De Blasio: 'It's Really Tough to Conceive of Continuing' Campaign 

without Making October Debate.” CNN. Cable News Network, September 4, 2019. 

https://www.cnn.com/20 19/09/04/politics/bill -de -blasio -campaign -october -debate/index.html. Charap 

45 

The debate criteria rules will fundamentally alter the resource allocation of long -shot 

candidates both staff wise and financially . Instead of focusing on winning, they must focus on 

meet ing the DNC’s strict debate thresholds. This is what led to Senator Gillibrand’s outrageous 

t-shirt promotion on Facebook. Her campaign knew that failing to make the debate stage would 

be the end of her campaign. She would not be considered viable if she did not make the stage. 

No longer does failing to acquire delegates in Iowa winnow the field, instead the Democrat ic 

debates do. 

Conclusion 

How do primary debate rules shape the contours of the process? Previous political science 

li terature on the pr imary process focuses on the role of parties and the elite , typically centering 

on the invisible primary . Political communication scholars have researched general election 

debates and the role of media and momentum in primary campaign s. However, there is no 

existing literature on the importance of primary debate thresholds and the DNC’s 2020 criteria .

This thesis provides a contemporary analysis of primary debate requirements and their 

importance in the n omination process. It outlines the responsibiliti es and incentives of parties ,

media outlets and candidates. Furthermore, the historical analysis demonstrates how the debate 

criteria have changed over time. The increased number of candidates, previous inconsistencies in 

the requirements and media ’s contr ol of the debates have created numerous problems for the 

DNC. More importantly, it made the DNC seem like it was not in control of the process and led 

to accusations of bias. Thus, the DNC implemented comprehensive requirements for 2020. In 

doing so, they creat ed rules that would benefit the party and hurt long -shot candidates. Charap 

46 

The DNC’s new rules on primary debate requirements have a material impact on the 

candidate selection process . On the one hand, t he DNC must try to appease all the candidates and 

avoid appearing bias ed toward establis hment candidates. On t he other h and, the DNC wants to 

have a smooth process and prevent an unknown outsider candidate from taking over the party, as 

Trump did to the GOP in 2016. The Democrats needed a mechanism to winnow candidates 

quickly and prevent the rise of an outsider c andidate. The Democrats wanted to appear 

trustworthy and in -control in the eyes of the American people. The 2020 rules set out to 

accomplish both goals . When they are attacked for being biased, the DNC has argued that the 

rules have been in place for months and are consistent . Nonetheless, the rules are significantly 

stricter than previous years and make it harder for disorganized candidates to make the stage. 

The DNC is thus shaping the outcome, without appearing to do so .

In 2016 , the Democratic party atte mpted to walk this tight -rope with Vermont Senator 

Bernie Sanders in 2016. Sanders was the only candidate that could compete with Hillary Clinton 

for the Democratic nomination. To the surprise of the DNC, his campaign became competitive, 

relying on grassroots f unding and organizing. The DNC did not want a self -identified 

Democratic Socialist to represent the party. His stances differed staunchly from those in the 

DNC’s party platform, which were agreed to at the party’s convention , and more aligned with 

Clint on ’s positions . Therefore , the DNC elite agreed to support Clinton at the party’s convention 

in 2016 . Nonetheless , the party also did not want to appear to be influencing the process. The 

days of nominees being chosen by the political elite in smoke -filled conference rooms were over. 

Emails released by WikiLeaks after the convention have confirmed some of the suspicions of the 

Sanders campaign regarding the DNC’s objectivity . The DNC’s embarrassment when the emails 

were revealed further underscored their need to appear impartial. The 2020 debate rules Charap 

47 

attempted to achieve the DNC’s objectives in controlling the primary field without appearing to 

influ ence it. 

While the rules are extremely detailed, they do not address all the DNC’s issues . For 

example, the DNC will continue to rely on media outlets to commission the polls used for 

polling thresholds. The DNC neither has the resources, nor the desire to i nvest in the resources to 

conduct expensive and laborious polls. The 2020 debate requirements list the polling companies 

that candidates can use to qualify for the debates. 112 Media companies, however, do not only 

conduct polls for the DNC. They are for -prof it companies that issue polls that their company can 

use on television and report on. This was a problem for Tom Perez in January, 2020 because 

there were not enough polls commissioned that could help candidates qualify for the DNC 

debates. 113 Candidates And rew Yang and Tom Steyer complained that they would not make the 

debate due to the lack of polls perf ormed between the end of December to early January. In 

December, a DNC spokeswoma n asked the “expansive list of 16 qualifying poll sponsors [to] 

conduct more independent polling” that could be used as debate criteria. 114 In this case, the DNC 

is ceding authority to the media as a result of not owning the entire process . This is exactly what 

the DNC wanted to prevent when the y unilaterally c reated the debate rules without input or 

alignment with the pollsters or media outlets. 

In addition, the DNC never clarified how they would ha ndle candidates that did not 

conduct any fundraising. Billionaire Tom Steyer spent his own money to meet the DNC’s  

> 112

“DNC Announces Details for The First Two Presidential Primary Debates”  

> 113

Epstein, Reid J. “D.N.C. Tells Pollsters to Do More Polls.” The New York Times, 

January 3, 2020. https://www.nyt imes.com/2020/01/03/us/politics/dnc -debate -polls.html.  

> 114

Ibid. Charap 

48 

grassroots funding threshold. 115 On the other hand, billionaire Michael Bloomberg entered the 

race late , skipped early prima ries and refuse d to spend his money to meet the threshold. 116 Thus ,

he was excluded from several debates in late January and early February . The DNC got rid of the 

funding threshold in February and changed the requirements to 10% or higher in four qualifying 

polls or winni ng at least one delegate in an early primary state. 117 The party changed the rules 

because they believed that “now that the grassroots support is actually captured in real voting, 

the criteria will no longer require a donor threshold.” 118 The rules can change if the party wants 

them to change. This gives the party flexibility during the primary process to control the debate 

stage. While Bloomberg qualified for the February 19 th NBC debate, Yang and Steyer did not. 119 

Their exclusion eventua lly contributed to the end of their respective campaigns. The DNC’s 

decision to change the criter ia in the middle of the process demonstrates their ability to 

manipulate the process and candidate selection . Despite instituting early clear qualific ations for 

inclusi on in debates, the D NC can still bend rules to keep certain candidates off the debate stage 

and allow others to participate.  

> 115

Seitz -Wald, Alex. “New DNC Debate Rules Open Door for Mike Bloomberg to Make 

Stage.” NBCNews.com. NBC Universal News Group, January 31, 2020. 

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020 -election/n ew -dnc -debate -rules -open -door -mike -

bloomberg -make -stage -n1127676.  

> 116

Niquette, Mark. “Bloomberg Says He Won’t Accept Contributions to Make the 

Debates.” Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg, January 30, 2020. 

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020 -01 -30/bloomberg -says -he -won -t-accept -

contributions -to -make -the -debates.  

> 117

“DNC Announces Qualification Criteria for Nevada Democratic Presidential Primary 

Debate ” 

> 118

Seitz -Wald, Alex. “New DNC Debate Rules Open Door for Mike Bloomberg to Make 

Stage.” NBCNews.com. NBCUniversal News Group, January 31, 2020. 

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020 -election/new -dnc -debate -rules -open -do or -mike -

bloomberg -make -stage -n1127676.  

> 119

Ibid. Charap 

49 

The DNC’s new debate rules for 2020 also help ed the party grow its grassroots 

connections, which in turn strengthens the party itself . By incentivizing candidates to prioritize 

donations using the grassroots funding threshold for the debates, the DNC h as expanded its 

network of activists. Tom Perez was chosen to lead the DNC in part due to his experience in this 

type of organizing . A day before the 2018 midterm elections, Perez met with Robert Siegel from 

National Public Radio to speak about his priorities as DNC Chair. He asserted that “mobilizing is 

that sprint up to the election. But [the Dem ocrats] weren’ t good at organizing. Organizing is the 

marathon. It's talking to people 12 months a year. It's building relationships with people. And 

[the Democrats] used to be the best at that.” 120 Perez hopes that the threshold requirement will 

help the DNC in the general election. By encouraging don ations of any size, Perez wants to 

inspire as many people as possible to participate in politics. This large base of donors may not 

only help fund the ge neral election, but also may encourage people to v olunteer or participate in 

other ways to support the Democrats. In addition, the DNC is requiring campaigns to use 

ActBlue to collect the donations and to report them to the DNC. 121 The site c ollects information 

about donors including their credit card number, address and occupation. The valuable data is 

stored by the site and can be used by the DNC for future solicitations. This data, now owned by 

the DNC, strengthens the party by expanding its network and it s fun draising capacity. The new  

> 120

“All Things Considered,” All Things Considered (National Public Radio, November 

8, 2017), https://www.npr.org/2017/11/08/562903167/dnc -chair -tom -perez -on -what -this -years -

election -means -for -the -party  

> 121

Mitche ll, Ben, and Caitlin Huey -Burns. “The Revolution Will Be Online: How 

Democrats Are Trying to Catch up to Trump.” CBS News, June 3, 2019. 

https://www.cbsnews.com/news/the -revolution -will -be -online -how -democrats -are -trying -to -

catch -up -to -trump/. Charap 

50 

2020 debate rules not only cultivate more donors for the party, but also strengthens the party 

itself. 

Future research on the topic should include on a comprehensive analysis of the 2020 

nomination process. Since this paper was written during the 2020 nomination process, it was 

difficult to include all aspects of the debates. In addition, future research should include 

interviews with members of each campaign and interviews with DNC officials. These sources 

could provide more in -depth perspectives on the debate criteria rules and their impact. Charap 

51 

Bibliography 

“ABC News Announces Criteria f or New Hampshire Republican Debate.” ABC News. ABC 

News Network. Accessed March 2, 2020. https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/abc -news -annou nces -

criteria -hampshire -republican -debate/story?id=36550263. 

Adkins, Randall E., and Andrew J. Dowdle. "The Money Primary: What Influences the Outcome 

of Pre -Primary Presidential Nomination Fundraising?" Presidential Studies Quarterly 32, no. 2 

(2002): 25 6-75. Accessed February 19, 2020. www.jstor.org/stable/27552387. 

Aldrich, John H. “A Dynamic Model of Presidential Nomination Campaigns.” American 

Political Science Review 74, no. 3 (1980): 651 –69. 

Aldrich, John H. Why Parties?: Origin and Transformation of Political Parties in 

America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995, 283, 12. 

Allen, Mike, and Adam B. Lerner. “Fox Lowers Threshold for Early Debate.” POLITICO, July 

30, 2015. https://www.politico.com/story/2015/07/fox -republican -debate -lowers -threshold -

120748. 

“All Things Considered,” All Things Considered (National Public Radio, November 8, 2017), 

https://www.npr.org/2017/11/08/562903167/dnc -chair -tom -perez -on -what -this -years -election -

means -for -the -party 

Anderson, Christopher L. “Which Party Elites Choose to Lead the Nomination 

Process?” Political Research Quarterly 66, no. 1 (2013): 61 -76. Accessed February 18, 2020. 

Azari, Julia, and Seth Masket. “Intraparty Democracy and the 2016 Election.” In Conventional 

Wisdom, Parties and Broken Barrie rs in the 2016 Election . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 

2018., 146. 

Ball -Rokeach, S.J., and M.L. DeFleur. “A Dependency Model of Mass -Media 

Effects.” Communication Research 3, no. 1 (January 1976): 3 –21 

Barbara Norrander, “The Attrition Game: Initial Resou rces, Initial Contests and the Exit of 

Candidates During the US Presidential Primary Season,” British Journal of Political Science 36, 

no. 3 (2006): pp. 487 -507, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007123406000251. 

Barnes, James, and Jerrick Adams. “2016 Presidenti al Nominations: Calendar and Delegate 

Rules.” Ballotpedia. 

https://ballotpedia.org/2016_presidential_nominations:_calendar_and_delegate_rules. 

Belonsky, Andrew. “Gravel Pissed Over HRC Diss.” Queerty. Queerty, July 11, 2007. 

https://www.queerty.com/gravel -pissed -over -hrc -diss -20070711. Charap 

52 

Benoit et al., The Primary Decision, 344, 346; and Kendall, Communication in Presidential 

Primaries, 88. 

Berman, Russell. “The DNC Isn't Apologizing for Its Debate Rules.” The Atlantic. Atlantic 

Media Company, June 13, 201 9. 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/06/democratic -debate -rules/591550/. 

Berr, Jonathan. “Media Companies Profit Handsomely from the Political Ads Voters Despise.” 

Forbes Magazine, November 2, 2018. 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonathanber r/2018/11/02/media -companies -profit -handsomely -

from -the -political -ads -voters -despise/#2b2180833828. 

Best, Samuel, and Clark Hubbard. “The Role of Televised Debates in the Presidential 

Nomination Process.” In In Pursuit of the White House 2000 . New York: C hatham House, 2000, 

278. 

Blake, Aaron. “Here Are the Latest, Most Damaging Things in the DNC's Leaked Emails.” The 

Washington Post. WP Company, July 25, 2016. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the -

fix/wp/2016/07/24/here -are -the -latest -most -damaging -thin gs -in -the -dncs -leaked -emails/. 

Burke, Edmund. Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents: Volume 1 Paperback . New 

Edition ed., Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2012. muse.jhu.edu/book/18234. 

Burns, Alexander. “Gillibrand Drops Out of 2020 Democratic Pre sidential Race.” The New York 

Times. The New York Times, August 28, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/28/us/politics/kirsten -gillibrand -2020 -drop -out.html. 

Busch, Andrew, and William Mayer. “The Front -Loading Problem.” In The Making of the 

Presidentia l Candidates 2004. New York: Rowan & Littlefield, 2004, 33. 

“Candidate Criteria for the October 13, 2015 CNN -Facebook Democratic Presidential Primary 

Debate.” Turner Broadcasting, October 13, 2015. 

http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2015/images/09/28/final -demo cratic -criteria -2016.pdf. 

Carleton, William G. “The Revolution in the Presidential Nominating Convention.” Political 

Science Quarterly 72, no. 2 (1957): 227. 

Cline, Seth. “Americans Have Stopped Watching the Democratic Debates.” U.S. News & World 

Report. U.S. News & World Report, December 20, 2019. 

https://www.usnews.com/news/elections/articles/2019 -12 -20/americans -have -stopped -watching -

the -democratic -debates. 

Cohen, Marty. The Party Decides: Presidential Nominations before and after Reform . Chicago: 

Uni versity of Chicago Press, 2008. Charap 

53 

Dan Merica, “Kirsten Gillibrand Drops out of 2020 Presidential Race,” CNN (Cable News 

Network, August 29, 2019), https://www.cnn.com/2019/08/28/politics/gillibrand -drops -out -of -

race/index.html) 

Davis, Susan. “Joe Biden Get s Boost With Endorsement Of Influential South Carolina 

Democrat.” NPR, February 26, 2020. https://www.npr.org/2020/02/26/808856350/clyburn -

endorses -biden -ahead -of -south -carolina -primary. 

DeSilver, Drew. “Voter Files: What Are They, How Are They Used and A re They Accurate?” 

Pew Research Center. Pew Research Center, February 15, 2018. 

https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2018/02/15/voter -files -study -qa/. 

Detrow, Scott. “Clinton Campaign Had Additional Signed Agreement With DNC In 2015.” 

NPR. NPR, November 3, 2017. https://www.npr.org/2017/11/03/561976645/clinton -campaign -

had -additional -signed -agreement -with -dnc -in -2015. 

“DNC Announces Details f or Seventh Democratic Presidential Primary Debate.” Democ rats, 

December 20, 2019. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -details -for -seventh -democratic -

presidential -primary -debate/. 

“DNC Announces Details for The First Two Presidential Primary Debates,” Democrats, 

February 14, 2019, https://democrats.org/news/dnc -annou nces -details -for -the -first -two -

presidential -primary -debates/ 

“DNC Announces Details for Third Presidential Primary Debate,” Democrats, May 29, 2019, 

https://democrats.org/news/third -debate/ 

“DNC An nounces Qualification Criteria f or Arizona Democratic Presidential Primary Debate.” 

Democrats, March 9, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -criteria -for -

arizona -democratic -presidential -primary -debate/. 

“DNC An nounces Qualification Criteria f or Fifth Presidential Primary Debate,” Democrats, 

September 23, 2019, https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -criteria -for -fif th -

presidential -primary -debate/ 

“DNC Announces Qualification Cri teria for Nevada Democratic Presidential Primary Debate.” 

Democrats, February 3, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -criteria -

for -nevada -democratic -presidential -primary -debate/. 

“DNC An nounces Qualification Criteria for New Hampshire Democratic Presidential Primary 

Debate.” Democrats, Jan uary 17, 2020. https://democrats.org/news/dnc -announces -qualification -

criteria -for -new -hampshire -democratic -presidential -primary -debate/. 

Downs, Anthony. “ An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy. ” Journal of 

Political Economy 65, no. 2 (1957): 135 -50. Accessed February 19, 2020. Charap 

54 

Duverger, M. Political Parties . London: Methuen, 1978. 

Epstein, Reid J. “D.N.C. Tells Pollsters to Do More Polls.” The New York Times, January 3, 

2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/03/us/politics/dnc -debate -polls.html. 

Falcone, Mic hael. “Ron Paul Makes an Appeal for Third -Party Candidates.” The New York 

Times. The New York Times, September 9, 2008. 

https://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/09/09/ron -paul -makes -an -appeal -for -third -party -

candidates/. 

Fridkin, Kim L., Patrick J. Kenney , Sarah Allen Gershon, Karen Shafer, and Gina Serignese 

Woodall. “Capturing the Power of a Campaign Event: The 2004 Presidential Debate in Tempe.” 

The Journal of Politics 69, no. 3 (2007): 770 -85. 

Frizell, Sam. “Lawrence Lessig Would Not Have Qualified fo r CBS Debate.” Time, November 

5, 2015. https://time.com/4102049/democratic -debate -cbs -lawrence -lessig/ 

Gary R. Orren and Nelson W. Polsby, Media and Momentum: the New Hampshire Primary and 

Nomination Politics (Chatham, NJ: Chatham House, 1987), p.6 

Geer, John, Richard Lau, Davi d Nickerson, and Lynn Vavreck. “ Advertising in an Era of 

Choice.” manuscript. Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at Vanderbilt University 

(2012). 

Getler, Michael. “Debates Are On; Debaters Are Off.” PBS. Public Broadca sting Service, 

September 20, 2007. 

https://www.pbs.org/ombudsman/2007/09/debates_are_on_debaters_are_off.html. 

Gold, Hadas, and Gabriel Debenedetti. “MSNBC, Union Leader Team up for Unsanctioned 

Democratic Debate.” POLITICO, January 26, 2016. https://www. politico.com/blogs/on -

media/2016/01/nbc -union -leader -team -up -for -unsanctioned -debate -218249. 

Gough, Paul J. “ABC Sees 2 Sides to New Hampshire Debate.” Reuters. Thomson Reuters, 

November 26, 2007. https://www.reuters.com/article/television -debates -dc/abc -sees -2-sides -to -

new -hampshire -debate -idUSN2643539320071126. 

“Gravel Supporter Putting Money Where Mouth Is.” Boston Globe, October 27, 2007. 

http://www.boston.com/news/local/new_hampshire/articles/2007/10/27/gravel_supporter_putting 

_money_where_mouth_is/ 

Grynbaum, Michael. “Record Ratings for Democratic Debate as America Tunes In to 2020.” The 

New York Times, June 28, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/28/business/media/democratic -debate -nbc -ratings.html. Charap 

55 

Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. “After the ‘Master Theory’: Downs, Schattschneider, and the 

Rebirth of Policy -Focused Analysis.” Perspectives on Politics 12, no. 3 (2014): 643 –62. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/s1537592714001637. 

Haley, Jeff . “ Gravel Dismisses CNN, WMUR -TV And Union Leader Statement .” _CNN_. 21 

Mar. 2007. _Internet Archive_. < 

https://web.archive.org/web/20071227034815/http://www.gravel2008.us/?q=node%2F471 >. 

Jackson, David. “New NBC Debate Criteria Could Pose Problems for O'Malley.” USA Today. 

Gannett Satellite Information Network, J anuary 11, 2016. 

https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/01/08/nbc -democratic -debate -

criteria -clinton -sanders -omalley/78502784/. 

Jamieson, Kathleen Hall, and Christopher Adasiewicz. “What Can Voters Learn from Election 

Debates?” Telev ised Election Debates , 2000, 25 –42. 

John G. Geer, Nominating Presidents (New York: Greenwood, 1989); Scott Keeter and Cliff 

Zukin, Uniformed Choice: The Failure of the New Presidential Nominating System (New York: 

Praeger, 1983) 

Kelly, Caroline. “De Blas io: 'It's Really Tough to Conceive of Continuing' Campaign without 

Making October Debate.” CNN. Cable News Network, September 4, 2019. 

https://www.cnn.com/2019/09/04/politics/bill -de -blasio -campaign -october -debate/index.html. 

Levy, Adam. “DNC Changes Supe rdelegate Rules in Presidential Nomination Process.” CNN, 

Cable News Network, 25 Aug. 2018, www.cnn.com/2018/08/25/politics/democrats -

superdelegates -voting -changes/index.html. 

Marre, Klaus. “Kucinich Booted from Iowa Debate.” The Hill, December 12, 2007. 

https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/902 -kucinich -booted -from -iowa -debate. 

Masonhall, Erika. “Qualifying Criteria for NBC NBC -YOUTUBE Democratic Candidates 

Debates.” NBCNews. NBCUniversal News Group, January 8, 2016. 

http://press.nbcnews.com/2016/01/08/q ualifying -criteria -for -nbc -news -youtube -democratic -

candidates -debate/. 

Max Greenwood, “Tougher Debate Threshold Sets off Scramble among 2020 Democrats,” The 

Hill (The Hill, June 8, 2019), https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/447500 -tougher -debate -

thresho ld -sets -off -scramble -among -2020 -democrats 

Mccarty, Nolan, and Eric Schickler. “On the Theory of Parties.” Annual Review of Political 

Science 21, no. 1 (November 2018): 175 –93. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -polisci -061915 -

123020. Charap 

56 

Mitchell, Ben, and Cait lin Huey -Burns. “The Revolution Will Be Online: How Democrats Are 

Trying to Catch up to Trump.” CBS News, June 3, 2019. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/the -

revolution -will -be -online -how -democrats -are -trying -to -catch -up -to -trump/. 

Niquette, Mark. “Bloomberg S ays He Won’t Accept Contributions to Make the Debates.” 

Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg, January 30, 2020. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020 -

01 -30/bloomberg -says -he -won -t-accept -contributions -to -make -the -debates. 

“New Realities, New Thinking”: Report of the Task Force on Campaign Finance Reform. PS: 

Political Science and Politics 30, no. 3 (1997): 487 -89. 

O'Keefe, Ed. “RNC Votes to Exclude CNN, NBC from 2016 Presidential Primary Debates.” The 

Washington Post. WP Company, August 16, 2013. https://www.w ashingtonpost.com/news/post -

politics/wp/2013/08/16/rnc -to -consider -excluding -cnn -nbc -from -2016 -presidential -

debates/?arc404=true. 

“Organized Labor and the 2008 Presidential Primary Campaign.” Eric M. Appleman/Democracy 

in Action. http://p2008.org/interest g08/labor08.html. 

Paul -Henri Gurian, “Resource Allocation Strategies in Presidential Nomination 

Campaigns,” American Journal of Political Science 30, no. 4 (1986): p. 802, 

https://doi.org/10.2307/2111274) 

Preston, Mark. “CNN Amends GOP Presidential Debate Criteria - CNNPolitics.” CNN. Cable 

News Network, September 2, 2015. https://www.cnn.com/2015/09/01/politics/cnn -debate -

criteria -amendment/. 

Robison, Josh, and Lorna Tychostup. “How the Media Picks Candidates.” _Z 

Magazine_. 03 Jan. 2007. 1 Dec. 2006. _I nternet Archive_. < 

https://web.archive.org/web/20070103230928/http://zmagsite.zmag.org/Feb2004/tychostup0204. 

html l>. 

Russell Berman, “The DNC Isn't Apologizing for Its Debate Rules,” The Atlantic (Atlantic 

Media Company, June 13, 2019), 

https://www.thea tlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/06/democratic -debate -rules/591550/ 

Schouten, Fredreka. “Kamala Harris Shines in Commanding Democratic Debate Performance.” 

CNN. Cable News Network, June 28, 2019. https://www.cnn.com/2019/06/27/politics/kamala -

harris -demo cratic -debate -performance/index.html. 

Seitz -Wald, Alex. “New DNC Debate Rules Open Door for Mike Bloomberg to Make Stage.” 

NBCNews.com. NBC Universal News Group, January 31, 2020. 

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020 -election/new -dnc -debate -rules -open -do or -mike -

bloomberg -make -stage -n1127676. Charap 

57 

Sides, John, Michael Tesler, and Lynn Vavreck. Identity Crisis: The 2016 Presidential 

Campaign and the Battle for the Meaning of America . Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University 

Press, 2018. 

Steger, Wayne P. “Condi tional Arbiters: The Limits of Political Party Influence in Presidential 

Nominations.” PS: Political Science & Politics 49, no. 4 (2016): 709 –15. 

doi:10.1017/S1049096516001694. 

Stelter, Brian. “NBC Wins Battle Over Debate.” The New York Times. The New Yor k Times, 

January 16, 2008. https://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/15/nbc -wins -battle -over -debate/. 

Stevens, Matt. “Kamala Harris Surges in 3 Polls After Strong Debate Performance.” The New 

York Times. The New York Times, July 2, 2019. 

https://www.nyt imes.com/2019/07/02/us/politics/kamala -harris -polls.html. 

Stevens, Matt. “When Kamala Harris and Joe Biden Clashed on Busing and Segregation.” The 

New York Times. The New York Times, July 31, 2019. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/31/us/politics/kamala -har ris -biden -busing.html. 

Strauss, Daniel, et al. “Sanders Supporters Revolt against Superdelegates.” POLITICO, 14 Feb. 

2016, www.politico.com/story/2016/02/bernie -sanders -superdelegates -democrats -219286. 

Svitek, Patrick. “Key Goal for Texans Julián Castro and Beto O'Rourke in Tuesday's Debate: 

Make the next One.” The Texas Tribune, October 15, 2019. 

https://www.texastribune.org/2019/10/15/julian -castro -and -beto -orourke -campaigns -need -

strong -debate -performanc/. 

“The 2016 Endorsement Primary.” FiveThirtyEigh t, June 7, 2016. 

https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016 -endorsement -primary/#endorsements. 

“The Charter and Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States,” 2018. 

Thomas E. Patterson, The Mass Media Election: How Americans Choose Their President (New 

York: Praeger, 1980). 

Thompson, Alex. “Perez Nixes 'Undercard' Debates for 2020 Primary.” POLITICO, December 

20, 2018. https://www.politico.com/story/2018/12/20/dnc -2020 -democrats -debate -1071031.
