Title: Trump says he wants to deport ‘the worst of the worst.’ Government data tell another story - Los Angeles Times

URL Source: https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2025-07-13/trump-says-he-wants-to-deport-the-worst-of-the-worst-government-data-tells-another-story

Published Time: 2025-07-13T16:42:10.279Z

Markdown Content:
President Trump has pledged to deport “the worst of the worst.” He frequently speaks at public appearances about the countless “dangerous criminals” — among them murderers, rapists and child predators — from around the world he says entered the U.S. illegally under the Biden administration. He promises to expel millions of migrants in the largest deportation program in American history to protect law-abiding citizens from the violent threats he says they pose.

But government data around ongoing detentions tell a different story.

There has been an increase of arrests by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement since Trump began his second term, with reports of raids across the country. Yet the majority of people currently detained by ICE have no criminal convictions. Of those who do, relatively few have been convicted of high-level crimes — a stark contrast to the chilling nightmare Trump describes to support his border security agenda.

“There’s a deep disconnect between the rhetoric and the reality,” said Ahilan Arulanantham, co-faculty director of the UCLA Law School’s Center for Immigration Law and Policy. “This administration, and also in the prior Trump administration, they consistently claim to be going after the worst of the worst and just talk about immigration enforcement as though it is all about going after violent, dangerous people with extensive criminal histories. And yet overwhelmingly, it’s people they’re targeting for arrest who have no criminal history of any kind.”

A look at the numbers
---------------------

The latest ICE statistics show that as of June 29, there were 57,861 people detained by ICE, 41,495, or 71.7%, of whom had no criminal convictions. That includes 14,318 people with pending criminal charges and 27,177 who are subject to immigration enforcement but have no known criminal convictions or pending criminal charges.

Each detainee is assigned a threat level by ICE on a scale of 1 to 3, with 1 being the highest. Those without a criminal record are classified as having “no ICE threat level.” As of June 23, the latest data available, 84% of people detained at 201 facilities nationwide were not given a threat level. An additional 7% had been graded as a level 1 threat, 4% were level 2 and 5% were level 3.

“President Trump has justified this immigration agenda in part by making false claims that migrants are driving violent crime in the United States, and that’s just simply not true,” said Lauren-Brooke Eisen, senior director of the justice program at the Brennan Center for Justice. “There’s no research and evidence that supports his claims.”

Tricia McLaughlin, an assistant secretary at the Department of Homeland Security, called the assessment that ICE isn’t targeting immigrants with a criminal record “false” and said that Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem has directed ICE “to target the worst of the worst — including gang members, murderers, and rapists.” She counted detainees with convictions, as well as those with pending charges, as “criminal illegal aliens.”

Nonpublic data obtained by the Cato Institute show that as of June 14, 65% of the more than 204,000 people processed into the system by ICE since the start of fiscal year 2025, which began Oct. 1, 2024, had no criminal convictions. Of those with convictions, only 6.9% had committed a violent crime, while 53% had committed nonviolent crimes that fell into three main categories — immigration, traffic or vice crimes.

Total ICE arrests shot up at the end of May after White House Deputy Chief of Staff Stephen Miller gave the agency a quota of 3,000 arrests a day, up from 650 a day in the first five months of Trump’s second term. ICE arrested nearly 30% more people in May than in April, according to the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. That number rose again in June, by an additional 28%.

The Cato Institute found that from Feb. 8 to May 17, the daily average of “noncriminals” processed into the system ranged from 421 to 454. In the following two weeks at the end of May, that number rose to 678 and then rose to 927 from June 1 through June 14.

“What you’re seeing is this huge increase in funding to detain people, remove people, enforce immigration laws,” Eisen said. “And what we’re seeing is that … these are not people who are dangerous.”

Focus on dangerous criminals
----------------------------

Abigail Jackson, a White House spokesperson, said the administration is intensely focused on rooting out unvetted criminals who are in the country illegally.

“Just this week, the Administration conducted a successful operation rescuing children from labor exploitation at a marijuana facility in California, and continued arresting the worst of the worst — including murderers, pedophiles, gang members, and rapists,” she wrote in a recent email. “Any suggestion that the Administration is not laser focused on these dangerous criminals is flat out wrong.”

During his campaign, Trump highlighted several cases in which immigrants in the country illegally were arrested for horrific crimes. Among them: the killing of 22-year-old Laken Riley, a Georgia nursing student who was slain last year by a Venezuelan man in the U.S. illegally. Jose Ibarra was found guilty of murder and other crimes in Riley’s February 2024 killing and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. Ibarra is seeking a new trial.

Trump in January signed into law the Laken Riley Act, which requires the detention of unauthorized immigrants accused of theft and violent crimes.

Immigrants not driving violent crime
------------------------------------

Research has consistently found, however, that immigrants are not driving violent crime in the U.S. and that they commit fewer crimes than native-born Americans. A 2023 working paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research, for example, reported that immigrants for 150 years have had lower incarceration rates than those born in the U.S. The rates have declined since 1960, according to the paper, and immigrants were 60% less likely to be incarcerated.

Experts say the false rhetoric coming out of the Trump administration creates real harm.

“It makes people in immigrant communities feel targeted and marginalized,” Arulanantham said. “It creates more political and social space for hate in all its forms, including hate crime against immigrant communities.”

Eisen noted that the effect extends to other communities as well.

“All Americans should want safe and thriving communities and this idea that the president of the United States is making misleading statements about the truth and distorting reality is not the way to deliver public safety,” she said.

_Goldin writes for the Associated Press_.

### More to Read
