Title: 

URL Source: https://www.sos.alabama.gov/sites/default/files/election-2024/2023%20Candidate%20Filing%20Guide.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 31 Mar 2025 03:35:11 GMT

Markdown Content:
Notes, Acknowledgements, and Disclaimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Notes, Acknowledgements, and Disclaimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 

## Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 

## Campaign Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Campaign Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

## Campaign Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Campaign Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

## Frequently Asked Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 Frequently Asked Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

## Elected Officials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 Elected Officials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 

## Appendix A: Independent Candidacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 Appendix A: Independent Candidacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

## Appendix B: Changes in Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 Appendix B: Changes in Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 

## Appendix C: Online Filing System Quick Overview. . . . . . . . . .54 Appendix C: Online Filing System Quick Overview. . . . . . . . . .54 

# Contents Contents 

For General Questions and Obtaining Forms For General Questions and Obtaining Forms        

> Contact the Office of the Secretary of State
> Mailing Address: Elections Division
> Office of the Secretary of State
> P.O. Box 5616
> Montgomery, Alabama 36103-5616
> Telephone: (334) 242-7210 or (800) 274-8683
> General FAX: (334) 242-2444
> FAX for Reporting: (334) 353-2295
> Website: alabamavotes.gov
> E-mail: alavoter@vote.alabama.gov

For Online Filing Questions For Online Filing Questions     

> Website: fcpa.alabamavotes.gov
> Help Desk: (888) 864-8910
> Contact the Alabama Ethics Commission
> Telephone: (334) 242-2997
> Website: ethics.alabama.gov
> 2

For Ethics Act Compliance Questions For Ethics Act Compliance Questions SPECIAL NOTE FOR FEDERAL CANDIDATES SPECIAL NOTE FOR FEDERAL CANDIDATES 

This filing guide applies to candidates for state, county, and municipal 

offices. Federal candidates must follow reporting guidelines and deadlines 

administered by the Federal Elections Commission (FEC). For more 

information, please contact the FEC at: 

Federal Elections Commission 

999 E Street Northwest 

Washington, D.C. 20463 

1 (800) 424-9530 

www.fec.gov 

PUBLICATION NOTES PUBLICATION NOTES FCPA CANDIDATE FILING GUIDE—EIGHTEENTH EDITION 

FCPA CANDIDATE FILING GUIDE—EIGHTEENTH EDITION 

Prepared by the Office of the Secretary of State 

Editors Editors 

Wes Allen, Secretary of State 

Clay Helms, Chief of Staff 

Mike Jones, General Counsel 

Meridith Blackburn, Deputy General Counsel 

Jeff Elrod, Director of Elections 

Candace Payne, Elections Analyst 

Vicki Wittenborg, Elections Analyst 

Kennedy Banks, Elections Staff 

Jack Burns, Elections Staff 

Mary Kohls, Elections Staff 

Cover Art 

Jonathan Jones 

University of Alabama at Huntsville 

Acknowledgements Acknowledgements 

The Office of the Secretary of State appreciates the guidance provided by the 

Office of the Attorney General through its Opinions Division. The Secretary 

of State would like to extend a special thanks to former Assistant Attorney 

General Brenda Smith for the time she devoted to reviewing previous editions. 

The Secretary of State appreciates Gregory P. Butrus, partner of Balch & 

Bingham LLP, for his contributions to and review of previous editions of this 

guide. Appreciation is also extended to the Administrative Office of Courts 

and the Alabama Ethics Commission. 

Legal Disclaimer Legal Disclaimer 

This document is not a substitute for the  Code of Alabama 1975.  It is provid -

ed as a guide and is not intended to be an authoritative statement of law. For 

further legal information, please consult the  Code of Alabama 1975 , other 

appropriate legal resources, or your attorney. 

3CHAPTER ONE CHAPTER ONE 

# GETTING STARTED GETTING STARTED 

The Fair Campaign Practices Act (FCPA), the state’s campaign 

finance law, is found in the  Code Of Alabama 1975,  § 17-5-1 through § 17-5-1 through 

§ 17-5-21. § 17-5-21.  This act sets the rules for how and when candidates can 

raise and spend money. The law also specifies how campaign finance 

activities are reported. 

MANDATORY CAMPAIGN FINANCE COMMITTEE MANDATORY CAMPAIGN FINANCE COMMITTEE 

The law requires every candidate to organize a campaign finance 

committee and file an  APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN 

COMMITTEE COMMITTEE  form, which lists who serves on the committee. (§ 17-

5-4) 

The committee form must be filed within 

five (5) days  of 

becoming a candidate. For purposes of the FCPA, the law defines 

two (2) ways to become a candidate, the first of either [See § 17-5-

2(a)(1)]: 

1.  reaching the disclosure threshold by either receiving 

contributions in excess of $1,000 or making expenditures 

in excess of $1,000, regardless of the office sought; or 

2.  qualifying as a candidate with a political party or filing a 

petition as an independent candidate. 

Effective August 1, 2023, all principal campaign 

committees for municipal candidates that previously filed 

with the judge of probate shall file electronically with the 

Secretary of State. (Act 2021-314) 

A candidate may either serve as the sole member of their principal 

campaign committee or may appoint from two (2) to five (5) persons. 

If a candidate serves as their own principal campaign committee, 

they shall designate a  COMMITTEE DISSOLUTION DESIGNEE , a 

person responsible for dissolving the principal campaign committee 

in the event of the candidate’s death or incapacity. If the designated 

4person is unable to serve in this capacity at the time of the candidate’s 

death or incapacity, the principal campaign committee shall be 

dissolved by the candidate’s personal representative as appointed by 

the judge of probate. [§ 17-5-4(c)] 

Candidates and PACs may also select a  DESIGNATED FILING DESIGNATED FILING 

AGENT AGENT  when appointing their campaign finance committee. That 

agent will be authorized to file all required reports for the candidate 

during the election cycle. 

Political Action Committees need to fill out a  STATEMENT OF STATEMENT OF 

ORGANIZATION OF POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE ORGANIZATION OF POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE  form online 

with the Secretary of State in order to register the PAC. Once a PAC 

raises or spends more than $1,000 to influence an election cycle, the 

filing of regular reports is required. 

STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 

Except for federal candidates and office holders with a current 

STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS  on file, candidates at 

every level of government must file a  STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC 

INTERESTS INTERESTS  form with the State Ethics Commission no more than 

five (5) days after the date they file their qualifying papers  with 

the appropriate election official. (§ 36-25-15) This form covers the 

previous calendar year. A candidate who has a current  STATEMENT STATEMENT 

OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS  form on file with the Ethics Commission 

does not have to file a duplicate form. For questions about filing the 

STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS  form, please visit ethics. 

alabama.gov or contact them at (334) 242-2997. 

If the individual becomes a candidate by qualifying with a 

political party, the  STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS  must 

be submitted to the State Ethics Commission no more than five (5) 

days after the date such candidate files their qualifying papers with 

the appropriate political party. (Ethics Commission Advisory Opinion 

2016-17) 

If the individual is seeking ballot access by submitting a

petition for independent candidacy, the  STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC 

INTERESTS INTERESTS  must be submitted to the State Ethics Commission 

no more than five (5) days after the date such candidate files their 

petition to the appropriate election official, the Secretary of State for 

state candidates and the judge of probate for county candidates. [§ 

36-25-15(a); Ethics Commission Advisory Opinion 2016-17] 

5Each election official who receives a declaration of candidacy or 

petition to appear on the ballot shall, within five (5) days of receipt, 

notify the State Ethics Commission of the name of the candidate 

and the date on which the person became a candidate. The State 

Ethics Commission shall, within five (5) business days of receipt of 

such notification, notify the election official whether the candidate 

has complied with the requirement to submit a  STATEMENT OF STATEMENT OF 

ECONOMIC INTERESTS ECONOMIC INTERESTS .. [§ 36-25-15(b)] 

A filing that is properly addressed, postage prepaid, postmarked, 

and mailed on the date the candidate qualifies complies with the 

statute. A candidate may file a STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC 

INTERESTS INTERESTS  form online. (Ethics Commission Advisory Opinion 

2016-02) 

If a candidate does not submit a  STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC 

INTERESTS INTERESTS  in accordance with the requirements of § 36-25-15, their 

name shall not appear on the ballot, and they shall be deemed not 

qualified as a candidate in that election. The appropriate election 

official shall remove the name of that candidate from the ballot. 

(AG’s Opinion 98-00200) 

6

AFTER THE MANDATORY COMMITTEE FILING AFTER THE MANDATORY COMMITTEE FILING 

While every candidate must appoint a principal campaign 

committee, candidates who have not reached the 

$1,000  threshold 

are exempt from filing the monthly, weekly and daily FCPA reports 

until the threshold is reached. (AG’s Opinion 90-00343) Otherwise, 

these reports are due prior to an election. (§ 17-5-8) 

After reaching the threshold, a candidate or PAC files each FCPA 

report at the required times. All contributions and expenditures, 

including those received or spent to reach the threshold, are reported. 

It is important to note that the payment of any qualifying fee 

or other cost associated with qualifying to run for office is 

considered an expenditure of the campaign; therefore, it should 

be reported as such. If a candidate spends their own money on 

their campaign, each transaction must be reported as an in-kind 

contribution. [§ 17-5-2(a)(7)] 

Contributions from a single source and expenditures made to a 7

single recipient that are greater than $100 must be itemized on these 

reports. Therefore, it is important for a candidate to maintain some 

type of internal record for contributions of $100 or less, since an 

additional donation from the same contributor could bring the total 

to more than $100 and result in a need to itemize that contributor’s 

contributions. The same is true for expenditures of $100 or less. 

All candidates for all legislative, state school board, and 

statewide offices who receive more than 

$5,000  in contributions 

during an election cycle must file their FCPA reports online. [§ 17-

5-8(g)] The online FCPA reporting system contains everything a 

candidate needs to record contributions and expenditures and to file 

the required reports. Act 2021-314, which becomes effective August 

1, 2023, requires all candidates for any office, including municipal, 

to file electronically. 

A municipal candidate may request forms for filing these reports 

from either the Office of the Secretary of State or from the local probate 

judge. These forms are also available on alabamavotes.gov. However, 

a candidate is not required to use the forms developed by the Office 

of the Secretary of State, as long as the information required by the 

FCPA is included in the report. (AG’s Opinion 90-00211) 

Electronic filing  is required  for all state and county candidates 

and all PACs. Beginning in August 2023, municipal candidates must 

file electronically with the Office of the Secretary of State and will no 

longer file with the judge of probate. 

Candidates and PACs who spend more than 

$1,000  on an 

“electioneering communication” will have met the filing threshold for 

campaign finance reporting. In accordance with  Code of Alabama 

1975 , § 17-5-8, the candidate or PAC must disclose their contributions 

and expenditures relating to the electioneering communication. 

However, the candidate or PAC is not required to duplicate any 

reporting. See CHAPTER THREE, CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING, for 

further information on electioneering communication. 8

1. 1.  Reports for County, District, Circuit, Legislative, and Reports for County, District, Circuit, Legislative, and 

Statewide Offices Statewide Offices 

These candidates must submit their campaign finance reports 

and forms online at fcpa.alabamavotes.gov. 

All Political Action Committees must also file their reports 

electronically. 

FILING LOCATIONS FILING LOCATIONS 

2. 2.  Reports for Municipal Offices Reports for Municipal Offices 

Municipal reports are submitted to the office of the probate 

judge in the county where that municipality’s city hall is 

located.  Beginning August 1, 2023, municipal candidates are Beginning August 1, 2023, municipal candidates are 

required to file electronically. required to file electronically. 

Please note that paper filings will no longer be accepted as of August Please note that paper filings will no longer be accepted as of August 

1, 2023. 1, 2023. 

According to the FCPA, forms must be received 

on  or 

before 

the due date.  The FCPA electronic system will send automatically 

generated reminders ahead of each deadline. Complete FCPA filing 

calendars for each regularly scheduled election cycle are also available 

on the Secretary of State’s website. 

DEADLINES DEADLINES During the election cycle, but no earlier than twelve (12) months 

prior to an election, campaign finance disclosure reports are filed at 

specific times before the election. 

The FCPA filing calendar for the current election year is available 

from the Secretary of State’s Office and is published on its website. 

Please take careful note of all deadlines as they may be subject to 

change. 

The online FCPA reporting system contains a filing calendar 

for each election cycle. Each candidate and PAC should select their 

election cycle and the system will automatically generate the correct 

calendar for the candidate or PAC to follow. 

Additionally, principal campaign committees and PACs must 

disclose the receipt of any single contribution of 

$20,000  or more 

within 

two (2) business days  of receiving the contribution if the 

contribution is not reported in a monthly, weekly, or daily report. 

[§ 17-5-8.1(c)] 

9

FILING SCHEDULE FILING SCHEDULE 

1. 1.  Monthly Report Monthly Report 

Monthly reports are due no later than the second business 

day of the following month and must include all reportable 

transactions for the previous full month. [§ 17-5-8(a) 

(1)] The candidate’s first monthly report must include all 

unreported activity to date. 

2. 2.  Weekly Report Weekly Report 

Weekly reports are due on the Monday of the following week 

for each of the four (4) weeks before the election date. For 

reporting purposes, a week is defined as running from a 

Saturday to a Friday. The first weekly report shall include 

all reportable transactions that occurred since the most 

recently filed prior report. [§ 17-5-8(a)(2)] 

PRE-ELECTION REPORTS PRE-ELECTION REPORTS 10 

3. 3.  Daily Report (if applicable) Daily Report (if applicable) 

Daily reports apply only to candidates for state legislature, 

state school board, and statewide offices. Daily reports 

do not apply to candidates for county and city offices or 

to candidates for district or circuit court, circuit clerk, or 

district attorney. 

In some instances, campaign committees for state offices 

and PACs are required to file daily reports. Beginning on 

the eighth day prior to the election, daily reports are due 

for principal campaign committees or PACs that receive 

or spend 

$5,000  or more on that day with a view toward 

influencing the election. [§ 17-5-8(a)(3)] To clarify, daily 

reports would only be due on those days that the 

$5,000 

daily threshold is met. 

Daily reports are due each filing day by 11:59 PM, 

including 

Saturday  and 

Sunday . The last daily report, if applicable, 

is due by 12:01 PM on the day before the election. [§ 17-

5-8(a)(3)(a)] 

Principal campaign committees and PACs must disclose 

the receipt of any single contribution of 

$20,000  or more 

within 

two (2) business days  of receiving the contribution 

if it is not included in a monthly, weekly, or daily report. 

[§ 17-5-8.1(c)] The term “contribution” includes monetary 

and in-kind contributions, as well as loans and other 

transfers to the principal campaign committee or PAC. 

If not included on a monthly, weekly, or daily report, the 

contribution is to be filed on a  MAJOR CONTRIBUTION MAJOR CONTRIBUTION 

REPORT REPORT  form available in the electronic filing system or 

from the Secretary of State’s Elections Division. 

4. 4.  Major Contribution Report (if applicable) Major Contribution Report (if applicable) 

5. 5.  Duplicate Reports Duplicate Reports 

No duplicate reports are required by the law. A political 

action committee or principal campaign committee that is 

required to file a daily report is not required to also file 

a weekly report for the week preceding an election. A

committee required to file a weekly report is not required 

to also file a monthly report in the month in which the 

election is held. A committee required to file a monthly 

report is not required to also file an annual report in the 

year in which the election is held. [§ 17-5-8(k)] An annual report covering each calendar year is due no later 

than January 31 st  of the succeeding year. [§ 17-5-8(b)] 

Each principal campaign committee, political action committee, 

and elected state and local official subject to the requirements of the 

FCPA who has not closed their committee, shall file annually with the 

Secretary of State or judge of probate no later than January 31 st  of 

each year. [§ 17-5-8(b)] 

No annual report is required to be filed by a person who holds 

office because they were appointed to serve the remainder of a term 

vacated by another person, until the person serving has created a 

principal campaign committee. [§ 17-5-8(b)] 

11 

ANNUAL REPORTS ANNUAL REPORTS 

PENALTIES PENALTIES 

A candidate who intentionally violates a reporting requirement 

in §§ 17-5-4, 17-5-5 or 17-5-8 is guilty, upon conviction, of a Class 

A misdemeanor. [§ 17-5-19(b)] 

A candidate who intentionally violates any section other than 

§ 17-5-7 of the FCPA is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. [§ 17-5-

19(a)] 

Any person who intentionally violates § 17-5-7, which 

addresses limits on candidates receiving campaign contributions 

and spending campaign money, is guilty, upon conviction, of a Class 

B felony. [§ 17-5-19(c)] See CHAPTER TWO, CAMPAIGN FUNDS, for 

further information on this section of the law. 

The FCPA prohibits any candidate from accepting more than $1,000  from a principal campaign committee of a federal candidate. 

[§ 17-5-15.1(a)] A candidate who intentionally violates this provision 

is guilty, upon conviction, of a Class C felony. [§ 17-5-15.1(b)] 12 

The appropriate election official, either the Secretary of State 

or the judge of probate, shall levy an administrative penalty against 

any person who fails to timely file a required report and who does not 

remedy the filing of the required report. The State Ethics Commission 

shall have the authority to levy an administrative penalty against any 

person who files a materially inaccurate report and who does not 

remedy the filing of the report. [§ 17-5-19.1(a)] 

Failure to file a timely report shall not be considered an offense 

or subjected to a civil penalty so long as it is the first failure by that 

candidate or political action committee for the election cycle and the 

report is filed within 48 hours of the time it was due. [§ 17-5-19.1(h)] 

Civil penalties levied shall be paid to the appropriate filing official 

within 45 days of the finality of any review. All penalties collected 

by a judge of probate shall be distributed to that county’s general 

fund, and all penalties collected by the Secretary of State shall be 

distributed to the State General Fund. [§ 17-5-19.1(e-f)] 

The schedule of civil penalties is as follows [§ 17-5-19.1(b)(1-3)]: 

Ö the lesser of $300 or 10% of the amount not properly 

reported for a first offense in an election cycle; 

Ö the lesser of $600 or 15% of the amount not properly 

reported for a second offense in an election cycle; or 

Ö the lesser of $1,200 or 20% of the amount not properly 

reported for a third and all subsequent offenses in an 

election cycle. 

A fourth failure to properly file a required FCPA report creates a 

rebuttable presumption that the candidate is intentionally violating 

the reporting requirements. The Secretary of State or judge of 

probate shall notify the Attorney General and the appropriate district 

attorney of all persons who violate the filing requirements four (4) or 

more times in an election cycle. [§ 17-5-19.1(c)] 

Any penalties assessed may be paid with campaign funds. 

[§ 17-5-19.1(i)] 

Any person upon whom a civil penalty has been imposed may 

seek a review by filing written notice with the Secretary of State or 

judge of probate within 14 days after notification of the imposed 

penalty. The Secretary of State or judge of probate shall refer such 

review to the State Ethics Commission. [§ 17-5-19.2(a)] 13 

FILINGS FILINGS 

The Commission may set aside or reduce a civil penalty upon 

a showing of good cause. The person seeking review shall bear the 

burden of proof. [§ 17-5-19.2(b)] 

Any candidate who voluntarily files an amended report to 

correct an error without being prompted by the filing official will not 

be subjected to the civil penalty. In the case of a candidate, the 

correction must be filed prior to the election at issue. In the case of 

a political action committee, the correction must be filed prior to the 

close of the calendar year. [§ 17-5-19.1(g)] 

## COMMITTEE FORMS 

## COMMITTEE FORMS 

Candidates have two (2) committee filings, the 

APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE 

form, used to set up the committee, and the  STATEMENT OF STATEMENT OF 

DISSOLUTION DISSOLUTION ,, filed when the committee is closed. 

The importance of the mandatory committee filing has 

already been discussed on pages 4 and 5. Once a committee 

is formed and the $1,000 threshold is crossed, a candidate 

continues filing disclosure reports until the committee is 

dissolved. 

CHANGES/UPDATES CHANGES/UPDATES .. Whenever a change takes place 

in the committee, such as the addition or removal of officers 

or members, change of phone number or address, or change 

of name for the political committee, candidates may provide 

the new information online by updating their  COMMITTEE 

REGISTRATION  at fcpa.alabamavotes.gov. 

STATEMENT OF DISSOLUTION STATEMENT OF DISSOLUTION .. Once a candidate 

determines that they will no longer receive contributions or 

make expenditures, a  STATEMENT OF DISSOLUTION STATEMENT OF DISSOLUTION  form 

must be filed. [§ 17-5-5(d)] This form should be accompanied 

by a  TERMINATION REPORT TERMINATION REPORT  which itemizes all contributions/ 

expenditures of more than $100 received or made since the 

last itemized report. The  TERMINATION REPORT TERMINATION REPORT  is filed using 

FORMS 1A-5, discussed under the  ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  and pre-

election report forms sections on this and the following pages. 

If the  TERMINATION REPORT TERMINATION REPORT  is not filed with the  STATEMENT STATEMENT 

OF DISSOLUTION OF DISSOLUTION ,, then the candidate must file the requisite 

ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  covering the last year of activity. 14 

The candidate must also disclose how any excess funds 

will be used. See pages 21 and 22 for information on the law 

and excess funds. 

## FCPA DISCLOSURE FILINGS 

## FCPA DISCLOSURE FILINGS 

Upon crossing the disclosure threshold by either raising 

or spending more than 

$1,000 , a candidate is responsible for 

filing the following disclosure reports, itemizing contributions 

or expenditures of more than 

$100 :

ÖÖ Monthly Reports Monthly Reports  — due no later than the second 

business day of the following month and must 

include all reportable transactions for the previous 

full month. 

ÖÖ Weekly Reports Weekly Reports  — due on the Monday of the 

following week for each of the four (4) weeks before 

the election date. For reporting purposes, a week is 

defined as running from a Saturday to a Friday. 

ÖÖ Daily Reports Daily Reports  — beginning on the eighth day prior 

to the election, daily reports are due for principal 

campaign committees and PACs that receive or 

spend 

$5,000  or more on that day with a view toward 

influencing the election. [§ 17-5-8(a)(3)] To clarify, 

daily reports would only be due on those days that 

the 

$5,000  daily threshold is met.  Daily reports do Daily reports do 

not apply to circuit, district, county, and municipal not apply to circuit, district, county, and municipal 

candidates. candidates. 

ÖÖ Major Contribution Report Major Contribution Report .. — Principal campaign 

committees and PACs must file a report disclosing 

the receipt of any single contribution of 

$20,000  or 

more within 

two (2) business days  of receiving the 

contribution if the contribution has not already been 

reported in a finance disclosure report. 15 

Summary of Contributions and Expenditures :

This FCPA form must be signed by the candidate 

or elected official and notarized. However, for 

electronically filed reports, the form is electronically 

signed and does not require notarization. 

Cash Contributions : The FCPA requires that 

cash contributions of more than $100 be itemized. 

If they choose to do so, candidates may itemize 

contributions of $100 or less, but this is not 

required by law. However, if contributions of $100 

or less are not itemized, the law does require that 

they be totaled and reported. They may be reported 

as “non-itemized” contributions on  FORM 1 FORM 1 .

As mentioned earlier, some type of campaign 

bookkeeping system should be used to track 

contributors making small donations of $100 or 

less per contribution. If the combined contributions 

from any one contributor total more than $100, an 

itemized entry on  FORM 2 FORM 2  is then required. 

For purposes of reporting contributions, the date of 

receipt of a contribution shall be the first date the 

recipient of the contribution is able to make use of 

the contribution. In the case of a contribution in the 

form of a check, the date of the receipt is the earlier 

of: 1) ten (10) days from the date that the check came 

within the recipient’s control; or 2) the date that the 

check was deposited into the recipient’s account. 

[§ 17-5-2(a)(3)(c)] 

A political action committee and a principal campaign 

committee shall maintain a checking account, money 

market account, or other similar banking account. 

(§ 17-5-6) 

In-kind Contributions : An “in-kind” contribution 

is made when equipment, furniture, office space, 

or some other item of value other than money is 

contributed or used. A reasonable market value 

should be listed. In-kind contributions do not affect 

the committee account balance. 

Form 1: Form 1: 

Form 2: Form 2: 

Form 3: Form 3: 

## FCPA REPORT FORMS (FORMS 1-6) 

## FCPA REPORT FORMS (FORMS 1-6) Receipts from Other Sources : Receipts from other 

sources are usually funds received through interest 

payments on a political committee bank account, 

loans made to the committee, or refunds and returned 

contributions to the committee. 

Expenditures : The FCPA requires that 

expenditures of more than $100 be itemized. 

Candidates may itemize expenditures of $100 or 

less, but this is not required by law. However, if the 

expenditures of $100 or less are not itemized, the law 

does require that they be totaled and reported. They 

may be reported as “non-itemized” expenditures on 

FORM 1. FORM 1. 

As with contributions, some type of campaign 

bookkeeping system should be used to track small 

expenditures. If expenditures to the same vendor 

total more than $100, an itemized entry on  FORM 5 FORM 5 

is then required. 

For purposes of reporting expenditures, the date 

an expenditure is made is the date the instrument 

authorizes the expenditure. In the case of an 

expenditure made by check or electronic payment, 

the date of expenditure is the date of the check or 

electronic payment. [§ 17-5-2(a)(7)(c)] 

No expenditure of funds may be made by any such 

committee except by check drawn on such account, 

electronic transfer from such account, a credit card, 

the balance of which is paid from such account, or 

petty cash fund from which it may make expenditures 

not in excess of $100 to any person in connection 

with a single purchase transaction. (§ 17-5-6) 

16 

Form 4: Form 4: 

Form 5: Form 5: 

Form 6: Form 6:  Expenditures on Line of Credit : Committees may 

utilize a credit card or other line of credit to pay for 

expenditures, the balance of which must be paid 

from the committee checking account, money market 

account, or other similar banking account. (§ 17-5-6) ANNUAL REPORT 

## ANNUAL REPORT 

The FCPA requires PACs, candidates, and elected officials 

to file an  ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  by January 31 st , which covers all 

contributions and expenditures for the campaign committee 

for the preceding calendar year. Each principal campaign 

committee, PAC, and elected state and local official who has not 

closed their committee shall annually file with the Secretary of 

State or judge of probate for municipal candidates. [§ 17-5-

8(b)] 

Note: Persons who have been appointed to a public office 

are not required to file an  ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  until they become 

a candidate by either running for the same office or another 

office. Municipal candidates will begin filing reports with the 

Secretary of State beginning on August 1, 2023. 

The  ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  is composed of the same forms as 

the other FCPA disclosure reports discussed in the previous 

section with one exception. 

FORM 1 FORM 1  of the disclosure reports is replaced by  FORM 1A FORM 1A ,,

a form specifically designed for the purposes of the  ANNUAL ANNUAL 

REPORT. REPORT.  FORM 1A FORM 1A  is designed with two (2) sections ..Section I  summarizes totals of contributions/expenditures 

since the last filing. 

In the itemized sections of the  ANNUAL REPORT (FORMS ANNUAL REPORT (FORMS 

2-6), 2-6),  candidates include those entries of more than $100 that 

have been received or spent since the last itemized report. Section II  is a  summary summary  of contributions/expenditures 

for January 1 – December 31 of the previous year. 

17 

Expenditures paid with a line of credit must be 

entered on  FORM 6FORM 6. These expenditures will not 

affect the committee account balance. A debt total 

must be entered on the applicable line on the  ANNUAL ANNUAL 

REPORT SUMMARY FORM 1A REPORT SUMMARY FORM 1A  and must be updated 

to reflect any expenditures on line of credit and any 

payments on the amount owed. Interest charges on 

the line of credit balance must be entered on this 

form. The FCPA requires the Secretary of State and probate judges to 

make filed campaign finance reports available for public inspection 

during regular office hours. All reports are also publicly available at 

fcpa.alabamavotes.gov. 

However, the law specifies that information copied from the 

reports may not be sold or used by any political party or any political 

committee to solicit contributions or for commercial purposes, 

without the express written permission of the candidate or the 

committee reporting such information. [§ 17-5-11(2)] 

PUBLIC ACCESS PUBLIC ACCESS 

18 

Campaign Activities. Campaign Activities.  The FCPA contains other provisions, in 

addition to those dealing with campaign finance reporting. The 

Office of the Secretary of State recommends a complete reading of 

the act, which is contained in the  Code of Alabama 1975 , § 17-5-1 

through § 17-5-21. 

Prohibitions. Prohibitions.  Candidates should note the statutes on conduct 

that are contained in § 17-17-33 and § 17-17-34 of the  Code of 

Alabama . Among the prohibited activities are: making a contribution 

in someone else’s name, buying votes, interfering with a person’s 

right to freely cast a vote, soliciting money or anything of value by 

physical force, job discrimination, financial reprisal, or threats, or 

fraudulently misrepresenting oneself as acting for a candidate. Other 

sections of state law also address campaign behavior. See pages  20 

through 24  for highlights of those statutes. 

Other sections of state law also address campaign behavior. See 

pages  19 through 23  for highlights of those statutes. 

A Note for PACS. A Note for PACS.  The Secretary of State shall have the authority 

to dissolve any political action committee that has maintained a zero 

(0) balance for one (1) calendar year. A certified letter will be sent 

to any such committee. If no response is received after 90 days, the 

Secretary of State may then terminate the committee. [§ 17-5-5(d)] 

POINTS TO NOTE POINTS TO NOTE 19 

# CHAPTER TWO CHAPTER TWO 

# CAMPAIGN FUNDS CAMPAIGN FUNDS 

The FCPA has strict controls on the purposes for which a

candidate may solicit campaign funds, how the funds can be spent, 

and when candidates can raise money. In the 2010 special legislative 

session, the Legislature, through Act of Alabama 2010-765, enacted 

new rules regarding from whom a candidate may receive funds and 

to whom a candidate may make contributions. 

Additionally, Act 2013-311 and Act 2015-495 revised a number 

of provisions relating to fundraising and contribution limits. 

1. 1.  Limitations on Campaign Committees Limitations on Campaign Committees 

It is unlawful for one candidate’s campaign committee to 

contribute to another candidate’s campaign. However, a 

candidate is permitted to conduct a transfer of anything of 

value from one campaign committee to another campaign 

committee when the committees are for the same person. 

Political action committees (PACs) are permitted to make 

contributions to principal campaign committees (PCCs). 

[§ 17-5-15(b)] 

State and local campaign committees are prohibited from 

receiving more than $1,000 from a principal campaign 

committee of a federal candidate. [§ 17-5-15.1(a)] 

PAC PAC 

At-a-Glance Contribution Guide 

At-a-Glance Contribution Guide **

# ¨ RR

# XX

# XX*Note—this guide is for general illustrative purposes only.  

> Please refer to
> Section 1 above for special circumstances.

# XX

# ¨

# ¨

# ¨

> PAC PAC

Political Action Committee 

> PCC PCC

Principal Campaign Committee 

PAC PAC 

PAC PAC 

PAC PAC 

PCC PCC 

PCC PCC 

PCC PCC 

PCC PCC 

FUNDRAISING FUNDRAISING 20 

The law states that a candidate may only accept campaign 

contributions for three (3) purposes [§ 17-5-7(b)(1-4)], 

namely to: 

(( Influence the outcome of an election. 

(( Pay off a campaign debt or to reach the $1,000 

qualifying threshold or both. 

(( Pay all expenses associated with an election 

challenge, including quo warranto challenges. 

Campaign funds, including excess funds left after the 

election, may be spent only for the following purposes 

[§ 17-5-7(a)(1-7)]: 

( Expenditures of the campaign. 

( Expenditures that are reasonably related to 

performing the duties of the office held (does not 

include personal and legislative living expenses). 

( Donations to the State General Fund, the 

Education Trust Fund, or equivalent county or 

municipal funds. 

( Donations to an organization to which a federal 

income tax deduction is permitted under 

subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subsection 

(b) of Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code 

of 1986, as amended, or any other charitable, 

educational, or eleemosynary cause of Section 501 

of Title 26 of the U.S. Code. 

( Inaugural or transitional expenses. Warning: the 

Ethics Act prohibits converting to personal use 

contributions from an inaugural or transitional 

fund. (§ 36-25-6) 

( Donations to a legislative caucus organization 

registered with the Clerk of the House, Secretary 

of the Senate, or both in the case of a bicameral 

caucus, which does not operate as a political 

action committee. (§ 17-5-5.1) 

( Legal fees and costs associated with any civil action, 

2. 2.  Accepting and Spending Campaign Funds Accepting and Spending Campaign Funds 21 

Candidates may begin raising money twelve (12) months prior 

to the election in which they intend to be on the ballot. However, 

candidates for legislative and statewide offices cannot 

raise  money 

while the Alabama Legislature is in session, except within 120 days 

of a primary, primary runoff, or general election. These restrictions 

do not apply to loans candidates make to their own committee. [§ 

17-5-7(b)(2)] 

The fundraising prohibition does not affect expenditures. 

Candidates may spend campaign funds more than twelve (12) 

months prior to their election. State candidates may continue to 

spend campaign funds while the Alabama Legislature is in session. 

The fundraising prohibition does not apply to candidates for 

county or city offices. They may continue raising money when the 

Legislature is in session. 

State law limits state and local campaign committees from 

receiving more than $1,000 from a principal campaign committee of 

a federal candidate. [§ 17-5-15.1(a)] 

FUNDRAISING PERIOD FUNDRAISING PERIOD 

CONTRIBUTION LIMITS CONTRIBUTION LIMITS 

The FCPA permits a campaign committee, during a two-year 

period beginning on the day after each general election and 

ending on the day of the next regularly scheduled general 

election, to pay qualifying fees to a political party and pay 

up to a cumulative total of $5,000 to the political party 

for any tickets to party functions, and state or local party 

dues. Campaign committees for independent candidates 

or write-in candidates can pay for similar expenses. 

[§ 17-5-7(d)] 

3. 3.  Use of Excess Campaign Funds While in Office Use of Excess Campaign Funds While in Office 

criminal prosecution, or investigation related to 

conduct reasonably related to performing the duties 

of the office held. 22 

Candidates should take particular note that the FCPA limits 

the fundraising period to clear campaign debts up to 120 days after 

the election. They are limited to raising only up to the amount of the 

debt plus the entire amount of the qualifying fee for that office. (AG’s 

Opinion 99-00090) 

If no debt, candidates can only raise up to the entire amount of 

the qualifying fee for that office. 

All contributions received after the election to retire any debt 

must be reported in the next regular report the campaign files: “Under the FCPA, all contributions...by candidates, 

their principal campaign committees, and other political 

committees are to be reported regardless of the time when the 

contributions are received.”  (AG’s Opinion 96-00120) 

The FCPA prohibits a candidate or campaign finance committee 

from accepting, soliciting, or receiving a contribution as a bribe or for 

the intention of corruptly influencing the official actions of a public 

official or a candidate for public office. [§ 17-5-7(c)] 

Act 2013-311 specifically repealed previous statutes that limited 

corporate contributions to $500 per candidate per election. [§ 17-5-

14(a)] 

State law prohibits contributions, transfers of funds, or 

expenditures to any political action committee, or 527 political 

organization, from any political action committee, 527 political 

organization, or a principal campaign committee. [§ 17-5-15(b)] 

It also prohibits contributions from one campaign committee to 

another campaign committee, except where an individual is giving 

from their campaign committee for one office to their campaign 

committee for another office. [§ 17-5-15(b)] 

A utility regulated by the Alabama Public Service Commission 

may not make any contribution to a candidate for the Public Service 

Commission. [§ 17-5-14(c)] 

CAMPAIGN DEBT CAMPAIGN DEBT 

BRIBES AND CORRUPT INFLUENCE BRIBES AND CORRUPT INFLUENCE Any person who intentionally violates the section that governs 

how and when money can be raised is guilty, upon conviction, of a 

Class B felony. [§§ 17-5-7, 17-5-19(c)] A Class B felony carries a 

penalty of up to $30,000 and/or not less than 2 and not more than 

20 years imprisonment. (§§ 13A-5-6, 13A-5-11) 

In general, the statute of limitations for a violation of the Fair 

Campaign Practices Act (Title 17, Chapter 5 of the Code of Alabama) 

is 2 years from the commission of the offense. However, the statute 

of limitations for a violation of § 17-5-7 is four (4) years. [§ 17-5-

19(e)] 

Violators can be prosecuted by either a district attorney or the 

Attorney General. [§ 17-5-19(d)] 

23 

PENALTY PENALTY 24 

# CHAPTER THREE CHAPTER THREE 

# CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING 

The FCPA specifies that campaign advertising and 

electioneering communications appearing in print, broadcast, and 

electronic media must clearly and distinctly identify the entity 

responsible for paying for the advertisement or electioneering 

communication. [§ 17-5-12(a)] 

Campaign literature and advertisements must carry this 

information and broadcast materials must be identified at the 

beginning, during, or the end of the radio or television spot. [§ 17-5-

12(a)] 

Act 2011-697 created the definition of “electioneering 

communication”. Electioneering communication involves any of the 

following types of communication: 

1.  Any communication circulated through federally regulated 

broadcast media; 

2.  Any mailing or other distribution; 

3.  Any electronic communication; 

4.  Any phone bank; or 

5.  Any publication. [§ 17-5-2(a)(6)] 

These types of communication must also fulfill all of the four 

(4) following elements in order for them to meet the “electioneering 

communication” definition: 

1.  Must contain the name or image of a candidate; 

2.  Made within 120 days of an election in which the candidate’s 

name appears on the ballot; 

3.  The only reasonable conclusion from the presentation 

and content of the communication is that it is intended to 

influence the outcome of the election; and 

4.  The expenditure exceeds $1,000. [§ 17-5-2(a)(6)] Any person, including a candidate, who spends more than 

$1,000 

on an electioneering communication is required to file a disclosure 

report. The report must identify the source or sources of the funds 

used for the electioneering communication and the recipients of 

expenditures related to the electioneering communication. [§ 17-5-

8(h)] 

The FCPA does not give a specific format for wording the 

disclaimer. However, the FCPA does state that political advertisements 

or electioneering communication must clearly and distinctly 

identify the entity responsible for paying for the advertisement or 

electioneering communication. The disclaimer must also be displayed 

on printed advertisements. Disclaimers for broadcasts must occur 

at the beginning, during, or end of a radio or television spot, stating 

that the communication was a paid advertisement and identifying 

the paying entity. [§ 17-5-12(a)] 

Such words as “paid advertisement by,” “paid for by,” and “paid 

political ad” meet the requirements of the act; however, an advertiser 

is not limited to just those phrases. The attorney general has advised 

that:  “…words which indicate that the advertisement is a paid 

political advertisement meet the requirements of the law.”  (AG’s 

Opinion 94-00227) 

In addition, the disclaimer must contain the identification of 

the person, nonprofit corporation, principal campaign committee, 

or entity placing the ad. Under the FCPA, the term “identification” 

means 

full name and complete address.  [§ 17-5-2(a)(7)] The attorney 

general has stated that a complete address includes the street or 

post office box, city, and state. (AG’s Opinion 94-00227) 

Refer to page 26 for sample illustrations of typical political 

advertisements with disclaimers. 

25 

ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATION ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATION 

DISCLOSURE REPORTS DISCLOSURE REPORTS 

DISCLAIMER REQUIREMENT DISCLAIMER REQUIREMENT 26 

# Elect Elect 

# John Doe John Doe 

Paid for by the 

Committee to Elect John Doe 

PO Box 5551212 

Inacounty, AL 99999 

# Elect 

# Elect 

# Jane Doe to 

# Jane Doe to 

# Public Office 

# Public Office 

Paid political advertisement by 

Committee to Elect Jane Doe 

PO Box 1212555 

Ourfair City, Alabama 99999 

Figure 1: Example of a political 

advertisement with a disclaimer. 

Figure 2: Example of a political 

advertisement with a disclaimer. 

1.  Act of Alabama 2011-697 lists nine (9) types of paid political 

advertisements and electioneering communications that 

SAMPLE DISCLAIMER ADVERTISEMENTS SAMPLE DISCLAIMER ADVERTISEMENTS 

DISCLAIMER EXCEPTIONS DISCLAIMER EXCEPTIONS are excluded from the identification requirement. The 

disclaimer requirements do not apply if the advertisement 

is: 

a.  Designed to be worn by a person; [§ 17-5-12(b)(1)] 

b.  Placed as a paid link on an Internet website, if the 

message does not exceed 200 characters in length, and 

the link directs to another Internet website that has a 

disclaimer; [§ 17-5-12(b)(2)] 

c.  Placed as a graphic or picture link where a disclaimer 

is not practical due to the size of the picture, and the 

link directs to another Internet website that has a

disclaimer; [§ 17-5-12(b)(3)] 

d.  Placed at no cost on an Internet website where there is 

no cost to post content for public users; [§ 17-5-12(b) 

(4)] 

e.  Placed on an unpaid profile account available to the 

public without charge or a social networking website if 

the source of the message is obvious from the content 

or format of the message; [§ 17-5-12(b)(5)] 

f.  Distributed as a text message or other message via 

Short Messages Service if the message does not exceed 

200 characters in length or requires the recipient sign 

up or opt in to receive it; [§ 17-5-12(b)(6)] 

g.  Connected with or included in a software application 

where the user actively chooses to access the application 

from or through a website that has a disclaimer; [§ 17-

5-12(b)(7)] 

h.  Sent by a third-party from or through a campaign 

website that has a disclaimer; [§ 17-5-12(b)(8)] 

i.  Contained in or distributed through any other form of 

technology where a disclaimer is not practical due to its 

size or nature. [§ 17-5-12(b)(9)] 

2. 

McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission , 514 U.S. 334 

(1995) 

27 

A U.S. Supreme Court ruling in 

McIntyre v. Ohio Elections 

Commission  seems to provide one very limited exception 

for advertising identification. In that case, the court upheld the right of an individual to distribute anonymous 

leaflets opposing a proposed school tax levy. However, the 

impact on the FCPA disclaimer requirements is minimal. 

Alabama’s Attorney General has written that the ruling: “…is limited to individuals who distribute anonymous 

written material (particularly leaflets) in a non-

candidate election.”  (AG’s Opinion 95-00218) 

In all other circumstances, the advertising must carry 

identification. 

28 

The advertising disclaimer must be on all types of non-excluded 

advertising, such as billboards, yard signs, bumper stickers, and 

pencils. 

Every automated or pre-recorded communication made through 

an automated telephone dialing service (often referred to as a robocall) 

must contain a clear notice at the end of the communication stating 

that it is a paid political advertisement and identifying the person or 

other entity that paid for the communication. [§ 17-5-16(b)] 

The Attorney General or a district attorney may prosecute any 

person who violates the FCPA. [§ 17-5-19(d)] Failure to comply 

with the advertising requirements is a Class A misdemeanor and, 

upon conviction, is subject to a fine of not more than $6,000 and/ 

or imprisonment of not more than one year. [§§ 13A-5-7, 13A-5-12, 

17-5-19(a)] 

APPLICATION OF DISCLAIMER APPLICATION OF DISCLAIMER 

ROBOCALL DISCLOSURE ROBOCALL DISCLOSURE 

PENALTY PENALTY The FCPA requires that all campaign advertising must be clearly 

marked. Another section of law, § 17-9-50, prohibits anyone from 

campaigning within 30 feet of the polling place. Generally, that 

distance is interpreted as 30 feet from the door of the building in 

which the polling place is located. (AG’s Opinion 82-00113) 

Candidates frequently ask if supporters may wear campaign 

T-shirts or buttons when they go to the polling place to vote or when 

campaign workers are asked to accompany a voter who has requested 

assistance. There is no provision that specifically prohibits an elector 

from wearing campaign buttons, badges, or T-shirts while inside the 

polling place to vote or assist another voter. (AG’s Opinion 93-00118) 

Also, nothing prohibits a voter from taking a sample ballot into 

the polling place, but a sample ballot should not be left in the polling 

place. 

It should be noted that poll watchers, who can be appointed by 

the candidate or a political party, are prohibited from campaigning 

while inside the polling place, and the Attorney General has held 

that wearing buttons, badges, or T-shirts suggests, either directly 

or indirectly, how a citizen should vote and therefore, constitutes 

campaigning. (AG’s Opinions 93-00118 and 84-00020) 

29 

MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

SECTIONS 17-17-36 THROUGH 17-17-45 

SECTIONS 17-17-36 THROUGH 17-17-45 

This section of law prohibits such illegal voting as casting more 

than one ballot for the same office or knowingly attempting to vote 

when not entitled to do so. 

Citizens are prohibited from bribing or attempting to influence 

voters, buying or selling votes, altering or changing the vote of an 

elector, or disturbing an elector on election day. 

CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN ADVERTISING 

AT THE POLLING PLACE AT THE POLLING PLACE 

OTHER CODE SECTIONS OF INTEREST OTHER CODE SECTIONS OF INTEREST A candidate convicted of bribing or attempting to influence a 

voter is not allowed to hold the office to which he or she was elected 

for that term. 

30 

RIGHTS OF CITY, COUNTY, STATE EMPLOYEES 

RIGHTS OF CITY, COUNTY, STATE EMPLOYEES 

SECTION 17-1-4 

SECTION 17-1-4 

City, county, and state employees have the right to participate 

in city, county, or state political activities to the same extent as 

any other citizen of the state, including endorsing candidates and 

contributing to campaigns. City, county, and state employees also 

have the right to join local political clubs and organizations and state 

and national political parties. They may also publicly support issues 

of public welfare. 

IMPROPER USE OF STATE PROPERTY, TIME, ETC. 

IMPROPER USE OF STATE PROPERTY, TIME, ETC. 

FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES SECTION 17-17-5 

FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES SECTION 17-17-5 

No state, county, or city employee shall use public funds, 

property, or time for any political activity. 

It is unlawful for any officer or public employee to solicit any 

type of political campaign contributions from other employees who 

work for the officer or employee in a subordinate capacity. 

It is unlawful for an officer or public employee to coerce or 

attempt to coerce a subordinate employee to work in a political 

campaign or cause. 

USE OF STATE-OWNED PROPERTY 

USE OF STATE-OWNED PROPERTY 

SECTIONS 36-12-60 THROUGH 36-12-64 

SECTIONS 36-12-60 THROUGH 36-12-64 

It is unlawful for any state officer or employee to use or to permit 

the use of any state-owned property including stationery, stamps, 

office equipment, office supplies, or automobiles for political activity. 

State employees are also prohibited from transporting campaign 

literature in either a state vehicle or in a private vehicle while mileage 

is being paid for by the state. 31 

# CHAPTER FOUR CHAPTER FOUR 

# FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS 

The Elections Division receives many questions from 

candidates regarding the FCPA and how it relates to a particular 

situation or set of circumstances. The following is a discussion of 

some of those questions that are asked most frequently. 

Should you have a question that is not addressed in this section, 

please contact the Elections Division for further assistance. 

What is the difference between a “state office” and a “statewide 

What is the difference between a “state office” and a “statewide 

office?” 

office?” 

The term “state office” refers to any elected position that is 

an official in Alabama 

state government . The term includes 

constitutional officers, legislative members, state school board 

members, and circuit and district judges, to name a few. The 

term does not include those positions in 

county or municipal 

government , such as county commissioner, county school 

board member, mayor, or city council member. 

The term “statewide office” refers to any state office that is 

elected in a statewide vote, such as Governor, Lieutenant 

Governor, Secretary of State, Treasurer, and Attorney General, 

to name a few. 

“Statewide office” does not include any state offices that are 

elected by district, such as members of the Legislature, circuit 

or district judges, or state school board members. 

I am a candidate and have met the filing threshold for the 

I am a candidate and have met the filing threshold for the 

office I want to hold. However, I do not have any opposition in 

office I want to hold. However, I do not have any opposition in 

my election. Do I have to file a campaign finance report? 

my election. Do I have to file a campaign finance report? 

Yes. All candidates who have reached the filing threshold must 

file all campaign finance reports, even if the candidate has no 

opposition. 32 

Must I set up a separate bank account for my principal 

Must I set up a separate bank account for my principal 

campaign committee? 

campaign committee? 

Yes. The FCPA specifies that principal campaign committee 

funds must be segregated and that there can be no commingling 

of personal funds with campaign funds. (§ 17-5-6) 

A political action committee and principal campaign committee 

shall maintain a checking account, money market account, 

or other similar banking account and shall deposit any 

contributions received by such committee into such account. 

No expenditure of funds may be made by any such committee 

except by check drawn on such account, electronic transfer 

from such account, a credit card the balance of which is paid 

from such account, or out of a petty cash fund from which it 

may make expenditures not in excess of $100 to any person in 

connection with a single purchase transaction. (§ 17-5-6) 

Am I allowed to campaign before qualifying as a candidate for 

Am I allowed to campaign before qualifying as a candidate for 

an office? 

an office? 

Alabama’s elections laws do not place a restriction on when 

a candidate can begin campaigning for office. As a practical 

matter, the FCPA provides that a campaign can raise or receive 

funds only for a period of twelve (12) months prior to an election. 

This restriction does not apply to a loan from a candidate to 

their own campaign committee. [§ 17-5-7(b)(2)] 

I am running for a federal office. Do I have to report under the 

I am running for a federal office. Do I have to report under the 

FCPA? 

FCPA? 

No. Alabama participates in the FEC State Filing Waiver 

program that waives the requirement that campaign finance 

reports filed with the FEC also be filed with the state election 

office, provided that the state has an adequate system to serve 

the public with electronic access to and duplication of reports 

and statements. 

Do I have to keep receipts for the expenditures made during 

Do I have to keep receipts for the expenditures made during 

the campaign? 

the campaign? 

Yes. The FCPA states that the political committee treasurer must “each person to whom expenditures have been made... 

within the calendar year in an aggregate amount 

greater than $100.00, the amount, date and purpose 

of each such expenditure…”  [§ 17-5-8(c)(7)] 

This issue is also addressed in AG’s Opinion 95-00132 that 

says:  “Several expenditures should not be lumped together 

under a general heading of credit card expenses.” 

If a candidate could legally enter only the name and full 

identification of the credit card company, many expenditures of 

more than $100 could be hidden. 

Credit card expenditures to any person or entity in an aggregate 

that exceeds $100 must be itemized on  FORM 6 FORM 6 : Expenditures 

on Line of Credit. Any payments to the credit card company 

must be reported as an expenditure on  FORM 5 FORM 5 .

33 

Do I have to file an APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN 

Do I have to file an APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN 

COMMITTEE form even if I do not reach the campaign finance 

COMMITTEE form even if I do not reach the campaign finance 

contribution/expenditure threshold of $1,000? 

contribution/expenditure threshold of $1,000? 

Yes. All candidates must file an  APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL 

CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE  form within five (5) days of qualifying 

(with a political party or as an independent candidate) or within 

five (5) days of reaching the campaign finance contribution/ 

expenditure threshold. 

No. The FCPA requires itemization and identification (full 

name and complete address) of: 

I charge many of my campaign expenses on a credit card. 

I charge many of my campaign expenses on a credit card. 

Can I itemize only the total amount I pay to the credit card 

Can I itemize only the total amount I pay to the credit card 

company? 

company? 

keep a receipted bill or canceled check for every expenditure 

greater than $100 and for expenditures of $100 or less, if the 

aggregate amount of such expenditures to the same person or 

entity during a calendar year is greater than $100. The receipts 

should be kept for a period of two (2) years from the date of the 

expenditure. I paid my qualifying fee out of my personal checking account. 

I paid my qualifying fee out of my personal checking account. 

Does the qualifying fee go towards my filing threshold? 

Does the qualifying fee go towards my filing threshold? 

Yes. In-kind contributions, money paid on behalf or for the 

campaign from your personal checking account or credit card 

and any money paid by someone else outside the campaign 

account all go toward the filing threshold amount of $1,000. 

Once the filing threshold has been met, you must continue filing 

your campaign finance reports as long as you are a candidate or 

on the ballot. All active committees must file an Annual Report 

by January 31 st  of the succeeding year. 

I currently have money in my campaign account from a

I currently have money in my campaign account from a

previous election for the same office. I have not received any 

previous election for the same office. I have not received any 

contributions, but I paid my qualifying fee and some other 

contributions, but I paid my qualifying fee and some other 

campaign expenses in excess of $1,000 out of my campaign 

campaign expenses in excess of $1,000 out of my campaign 

account. Do I have to start filing reports? 

account. Do I have to start filing reports? 

Yes. You have met the threshold amount of $1,000. Once the 

filing threshold has been crossed, you must continue filing your 

campaign finance reports as long as you are a candidate or on 

the ballot. All active committees must file an Annual Report 

by January 31 st  of the succeeding year. When running for the 

same office, you can use the same account in each election 

cycle as long as the account remains active. Dissolving your 

committee after an election will require that you open a new 

account if you run for that office again. 

I loaned my campaign committee $20,000. Is this considered 

I loaned my campaign committee $20,000. Is this considered 

a major contribution? 

a major contribution? 

Yes. Committees must disclose the receipt of any single 

contribution of $20,000 or more within two (2) business days 

of receiving the contribution; if this transaction is not already 

included on a monthly, weekly, or daily report. [§ 17-5-8.1(c)] 

The term “contribution” includes monetary contributions, in-

kind contributions, loans, and other transfers to the principal 

campaign committee or political action committee. 

34 Does the FCPA require that I put the address of my political 

Does the FCPA require that I put the address of my political 

committee on a campaign button? 

committee on a campaign button? 

§ 17-5-12(b)(1) provides that disclaimer requirements do not 

apply if the advertisement is designed to be worn by a person. 

If the campaign button is designed to be worn by a person, a 

disclaimer is not required. 

Is there any prohibition against my borrowing money from my 

Is there any prohibition against my borrowing money from my 

campaign account, provided that I pay back the money plus 

campaign account, provided that I pay back the money plus 

the prevailing rate of interest? 

the prevailing rate of interest? 

The Ethics Act states in § 36-25-6: 

35 

“Contributions to an office holder, a candidate, or to 

a public official’s inaugural or transitional fund  shall 

shall 

not be converted to personal use. 

not be converted to personal use. ”

The Office of the Secretary of State further believes that such 

action is also prohibited by these sections: 

§ 17-5-7(b)(1) of the FCPA — “...a candidate, public official, or principal campaign 

committee may only accept, solicit, or receive 

contributions:  to influence the outcome of an 

to influence the outcome of an 

election. 

election. ”

Act 2013-311 specifically amended the FCPA to authorize the 

return or refund of any lawful campaign contribution. A refund 

is permitted so long as the original contribution was reported 

in an itemized manner and the refund is also itemized in a 

report. [§ 17-5-7.1(a)] If the contribution is not deposited in 

the committee’s bank account, it may be returned without any 

reporting requirement. The new provision requires candidates 

or PACs to refund or return any unlawful contribution within 

ten (10) days of receipt. [§ 17-5-7.1(b)] 

I received an unwanted, unsolicited check from a PAC, and I 

I received an unwanted, unsolicited check from a PAC, and I 

returned it. Must I report that as a contribution? 

returned it. Must I report that as a contribution? 36 

§ 17-5-7(a) of the FCPA — 

“...A candidate, public official, or treasurer  of a principal 

campaign committee as defined in this chapter, may 

only use campaign contributions, and any proceeds 

from investing the contributions that are in excess 

of any amount necessary to defray expenditures of 

the candidates, public official, or principal campaign 

committee, for the following purposes: 

1.  Necessary and ordinary expenditures of the 

campaign. 

2.  Expenditures that are reasonably related 

to performing the duties of the office held. For 

purposes of this section, expenditures that are 

reasonably related to performing the duties of the 

office held do not include personal and legislative 

living expenses, as defined in this chapter. 

3.  Donations to the State General Fund, the 

Education Trust Fund or equivalent county or 

municipal funds. 

4.  Donations to an organization to which a

federal income tax deduction is permitted under 

subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subsection 

(b) of Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code 

of 1986, as amended, or any other charitable, 

educational, or eleemosynary cause of Section 501 

of Title 26 of the U.S. Code. 

“No public official or public employee shall use or 

cause to be used his or her official position or office to 

obtain personal gain for himself or herself, or family 

member of the public employee or family member of the 

public official, or any business with which the person 

is associated unless the use and gain are otherwise 

specifically authorized by law. Personal gain is 

achieved when the public official, public employee, or a 

family member thereof receives, obtains, exerts control 

over, or otherwise converts to personal use the object 

constituting such personal gain.” 

§ 36-25-5(a) of the Ethics Act — I have several volunteers who work in my campaign. Must 

I have several volunteers who work in my campaign. Must 

I assess a fair labor wage and report that as an in-kind 

I assess a fair labor wage and report that as an in-kind 

contribution? 

contribution? 

No. The FCPA lists several services that are not considered 

contributions, including: 

Ö Value of services provided by individuals who volunteer 

37 

I have several groups, such as the Young Republicans or the 

I have several groups, such as the Young Republicans or the 

Democratic Women, who want to work in my campaign. May 

Democratic Women, who want to work in my campaign. May 

I use campaign funds to donate to a group in return for its 

I use campaign funds to donate to a group in return for its 

members’ help? 

members’ help? 

No. A candidate may not transfer campaign funds to any 

political action committee or 527 political organization, 

which generally covers most political groups except county 

and state parties, which are recognized as political action 

committees under the FCPA. [§ 17-5-15(b)] Candidates can 

only transfer funds to a political party, as a political action 

committee, within the restrictions of § 17-5-7(d). 

However, candidates are not prohibited from paying 

individuals directly who assist with the campaign. 

Yes. As with other candidates, the contributions or 

expenditures must reach the filing threshold of $1,000 to trigger 

the  APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE 

form and the reporting requirements. (AG’s Opinion 91-00084) 

Does a write-in candidate have to comply with the FCPA? 

Does a write-in candidate have to comply with the FCPA? 

5.  Inaugural or transitional expenses. 

6.  Donations to a legislative caucus organization 

registered under this chapter which does not 

operate as a political action committee. 

7.  Legal fees and costs associated with any civil 

action, criminal prosecution, or investigation related 

to conduct reasonably related to performing the 

duties of the office held.” I am a member of the Alabama Legislature and am considering 

I am a member of the Alabama Legislature and am considering 

renting an apartment in Montgomery. Can I pay the rental 

renting an apartment in Montgomery. Can I pay the rental 

expense from my campaign account? 

expense from my campaign account? 

No. The FCPA prohibits using campaign funds for personal 

or legislative living expenses. The Act lists such prohibited 

expenses as: 

“Household supplies, personal clothing, tuition 

payments, mortgage, rent, or utility payments for a 

personal residence; admission to an entertainment 

event or fees for a country club or social club, unless 

tied to a specific campaign event or functions involving 

constituents; and any other expense, excluding food 

and beverages, that would exist irrespective of the 

candidate’s campaign or duties as a legislator. Personal 

and legislative living expenses shall not include 

expenses for food, beverages, travel, or communication 

incurred by the legislator in the performance of the 

office held. ” [§ 17-5-2(a)(12)] 

38 

their time on behalf of a candidate. 

Ö The use of real or personal property and the cost of 

invitations, food, or beverages, voluntarily provided 

by an individual to a candidate when the voluntary 

personal service is on the individual’s residential or 

business premises. 

Ö Any unreimbursed payment for travel expenses made by 

an individual who volunteered on behalf of a candidate. 

Ö The amount spent by a state or local political party for 

the preparation, display, mailing, or other distribution 

of a printed slate card or sample ballot, or other printed 

listing of two or more candidates for any public office. 

(Note: this exemption does not extend to the costs 

incurred by the committee when such a listing is placed 

on broadcasting stations, or in newspapers, magazines, 

or similar types of general public political advertising.) 

Ö The value or cost of polling data and voter preference data 

and information, if provided to a candidate or political 

committee, unless the information was compiled with 

the advance knowledge of and approval of the candidate 

or the political committee. [§ 17-5-2(a)(3)(b)] Yes. Under the 

Harris v. Siegelman  federal court order, a voter 

may request assistance from anyone other than those persons 

prohibited by federal law. [700 F. Supp. 1083 (1988)] Federal 

law prohibits assistance from the voter’s employer or an agent 

of the employer or from an officer or agent of the voter’s union. 

§ 17-9-13 was revised to incorporate this language and bring 

the text of this section into compliance with the terms of 

Harris 

v. Siegelman .

However, candidates should note that they may assist only if 

the voter requests the help. The voter is then required to sign 

the poll list in a designated column showing that assistance is 

requested, and the person providing the assistance must also 

sign the poll list. Additionally, candidates are not permitted to 

witness absentee ballots unless the candidate is unopposed. 

[§ 17-11-7(c)] 

May a candidate assist a voter? 

May a candidate assist a voter? 

39 

Yes, provided that the individuals handing out the sample 

ballots are at least 30 feet from the door of the building in 

which the polling place is located. Also, individuals distributing 

sample ballots should not in any manner attempt to intimidate 

or harass voters. Voters may take marked sample ballots into 

the polling place for personal use but should not leave them in 

the polling place. 

Is it legal to pass out sample ballots at the polling place? 

Is it legal to pass out sample ballots at the polling place? 

That’s a question that must be addressed with the property 

owner. Any enforcement of “no soliciting” would be between 

the owner and an individual who wishes to campaign. (AG’s 

Opinion 96-00306) 

Can I pass out campaign materials on private property, such 

Can I pass out campaign materials on private property, such 

as an apartment complex, if there is a “no soliciting” sign? 

as an apartment complex, if there is a “no soliciting” sign? 

At the end of the campaign, what must I do to dispose of 

At the end of the campaign, what must I do to dispose of 

campaign property? 

campaign property? 

Property purchased by or contributed to a principal campaign 

committee with a value of $500 or more shall be liquidated at 

fair market value or donated to a qualified entity not more than 

120 days following the election. Any funds generated by the 

liquidation of the property shall be deposited in the candidate’s 

principal campaign committee account. [§ 17-5-7.2(a)] 40 

Property purchased by or contributed to a principal campaign 

committee that can be used by the person in the performance 

of their duties of the office they were elected to hold need not be 

liquidated as long as they hold office. [§ 17-5-7.2(b)] 

Are there any additional requirements for running for office? 

Are there any additional requirements for running for office? 

Some offices, such as county superintendent, may require 

additional documents to be filed when you qualify to run. 

Please check the  Code of Alabama, 1975 , or visit our website, 

sos.alabama.gov, for more information. You may also contact 

your local party chair to make sure that you have all of the 

necessary paperwork. 

Judicial candidates should also remember to file their 

“Statement of Economic Interests” with both the Ethics 

Commission and and the Clerk of the Alabama Supreme 

Court. 

How do I report campaign travel? 

How do I report campaign travel? 

The mileage traveled for campaign purposes needs to be 

reported. Please contact the Alabama Department of Finance 

for the current mileage reimbursement rate. Fuel transactions 

are only reported if using a designated campaign vehicle. 

How do I change the committee members I have listed for my 

How do I change the committee members I have listed for my 

campaign? 

campaign? 

You can change any information associated with your 

committee members by logging into your FCPA account. Click 

on the “Administration” tab and then you will see an option to 

update the committee registration. 

I lost, do I still need to file an annual report? 

I lost, do I still need to file an annual report? 

Any committee that is not closed must file an annual report 

no later than January 31st of each year. If your committee 

remains open through December 31st after the election, then 

you must file the annual report. 41 

# CHAPTER FIVE CHAPTER FIVE 

# ELECTED OFFICIALS ELECTED OFFICIALS 

The Secretary of State congratulates each candidate who wins 

their election! Before getting immersed in the details of the job, each 

elected official should take a few minutes to note the information in 

this chapter. 

Certain state and county officials must be commissioned by 

the Secretary of State and Governor before assuming office. County 

officials who meet certain requirements may also receive commissions. 

For more information, please consult § 36-2-6. 

The law dictates what documents must be filed and where for 

obtaining a commission. Generally, an elected official must file an 

oath and/or a bond at the state or county level, depending upon 

the office. County officials must also have a certification from their 

probate judge. The law requires the Office of the Secretary of State 

to charge everyone a $5 commissioning fee. 

Information packets providing the specific requirements for 

each office are available from the Government Support Division in 

the Office of the Secretary of State. You may contact the Government 

Support Division at (334) 242-7224. 

FCPA 

FCPA 

All elected officials who have not closed their principal campaign 

committee must file an  ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  by January 31 st  each 

year, even if they have had no activity. [§ 17-5-8(b)] Remember, an 

ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT  is due not just for the year you are elected but for 

every year you are in office if your principal campaign committee has 

not been closed. 

COMMISSIONS COMMISSIONS 

FILING REQUIREMENTS FILING REQUIREMENTS 42 

STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 

STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS 

All elected officials must file a  STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC STATEMENT OF ECONOMIC 

INTERESTS INTERESTS  with the Ethics Commission every year by April 30 th .

For more information, contact the State Ethics Commission at (334) 

242-2997. 

JUDICIAL REPORTS 

JUDICIAL REPORTS 

Judges have additional requirements and should consult 

Canons 6C and 7 of the Canons of Judicial Ethics relating to filing 

requirements and campaign conduct in general. 

The requirement previously set forth in § 12-24-2(a) to file a 

statement of disclosure two (2) weeks prior to the commencement 

of the term of office for any judge or justice was repealed during the 

2014 legislative session. 

No annual report is required to be filed by a person who holds 

office because they were appointed to serve the remainder of a term 

vacated by another person, until the person serving has created a 

principal campaign committee. [§ 17-5-8(b)] 43 

# APPENDIX A APPENDIX A 

# INDEPENDENT CANDIDACY INDEPENDENT CANDIDACY 

FEDERAL CANDIDATES 

FEDERAL CANDIDATES 

STATE OR COUNTY CANDIDATES 

STATE OR COUNTY CANDIDATES 

Those not qualifying through a political party may obtain ballot 

access by submitting a petition on or before 5 PM on the date of the 

statewide primary election. [§ 17-9-3(a)(3)] In 2022, the statewide 

primary is scheduled for May 24 th .

The petition must contain the required number of signatures 

of registered voters in the jurisdiction in which ballot access is 

sought (i.e., statewide, countywide, a district). The petition must be 

submitted to the Secretary of State, if seeking a state or federal office, 

or to the probate judge for a county office. 

The appropriate election official will then verify the petition 

signatures and subsequently notify the petitioner as to whether they 

gained ballot access. 

No qualifying fee is required. 

A congressional candidate must submit a petition with enough 

signatures to meet or to exceed three percent of the qualified electors 

who cast ballots for the office of governor in the last general election 

for the district in which they are running. [§ 17-9-3(a)(3)] For the 

number of signatures needed in each district, call the Office of the 

Secretary of State’s Elections Division at (334) 242-7210. Candidates 

seeking a U.S. Senate seat would need the number of signatures for 

statewide candidacy. 

The number of signatures on the petition must equal or exceed 

at least three (3) percent of the qualified electors who cast ballots for 

SIGNATURES SIGNATURES the office of governor in the last general election in the statewide, 

county, district, or other political subdivision for which they are 

seeking ballot access. For the number of signatures needed for 

a particular state office, call the Office of the Secretary of State’s 

Elections Division at (334) 242-7210. For the number of signatures 

needed for a particular county office, call the judge of probate in the 

county in which the office is located. 

Independent candidates, except for federal candidates, should 

be aware of their obligation to file an  APPOINTMENT OF PRINCIPAL 

CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE  form at the time they submit their petition 

or within five (5) days of exceeding the monetary threshold amount 

set forth by the FCPA. Act 2013-311 established a uniform $1,000 

threshold amount for all candidates in all races throughout the state. 

Independent candidates must file a STATEMENT OF 

ECONOMIC INTERESTS  with the State Ethics Commission no more 

than five (5) days after the date they file the ballot access petition 

to be a candidate. For information on filing the  STATEMENT OF 

ECONOMIC INTERESTS , call the Alabama Ethics Commission at 

(334) 242-2997 or visit its website at www.ethics.alabama.gov. 

A sample petition is available from the Secretary of State’s office. 

It may be downloaded from the website at alabamavotes.gov. The 

sample petition may be photocopied. 

44 

FAIR CAMPAIGN PRACTICES ACT FAIR CAMPAIGN PRACTICES ACT 

ETHICS ETHICS 

PETITION REQUIREMENTS & SUGGESTIONS PETITION REQUIREMENTS & SUGGESTIONS Each petition must include the following information: 

Ö A statement that includes the name of the independent 

candidate, the date of the general election for which ballot 

access is sought, and the name of the office sought, including 

district number, if applicable. Petitions for the establishment 

of independent candidacy in a special election shall not be 

required to include the date of the special election at the top 

of each page. [Ala. Admin. Code, Rule 820-2-4-.05(1)]; 

Ö Numbered pages; 

Ö Requested information for each person signing, which 

includes: name, residential address, date of birth and 

signature. A signature is required but shall not be deemed 

invalid for lacking any portion of the requested information 

if the disclosed information is sufficient for determining the 

validity of the signature and that the voter is a qualified 

elector for the jurisdiction the petition covers. 

The following are suggestions for the petition: 

Ö Have the voter sign in ink and write legibly. 

Ö Obtain signatures in excess of required number, as some 

signatures may not be valid or identifiable. 

Ö Keep a copy of the petition. 

45 46 

# APPENDIX B APPENDIX B 

# CHANGES IN LAW CHANGES IN LAW 

ACT OF ALABAMA 2019-318 ACT OF ALABAMA 2019-318 

In the 2019 session, the Alabama Legislature approved House 

Bill 247. The bill was signed by Governor Kay Ivey on May 29, 2019 

and subsequently assigned Act number 2019-318. 

Act 2019-318 changes the date of the statewide primary from 

the first Tuesday in June to the fourth Tuesday in May. The Act 

also changes the date of the runoff election from six (6) weeks after 

the primary to four (4) weeks after the primary. The presidential 

preference primary will still be held on the first Tuesday in March 

and in years in which a presidential preference primary is held, the 

statewide primary will be held at the same time. 

ACT OF ALABAMA 2019-529 ACT OF ALABAMA 2019-529 

In the 2019 session, the Alabama Legislature approved House 

Bill 259. The bill was signed by Governor Kay Ivey on June 10, 2019 

and subsequently assigned Act number 2019-529. 

Act 2019-529 allows candidates to submit their Statement of 

Economic Interests with the Ethics Commission no more than five (5) 

days after the candidate qualifies with a party or files ballot access 

petitions with the appropriate election official. 

ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-157 ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-157 

In the 2021 session, the Alabama Legislature approved Senate 

Bill 119. The bill was signed by Governor Kay Ivey on April 7, 2021 

and subsequently assigned Act number 2021-157. 

Act 2021-157 changes the date of regular municipal elections 

that were originally scheduled to occur in 2024 to 2025. This law 

does not affect municipalities that have a different election date set 

by statute. 

The effective date of Act 2021-164 is January 1, 2022. 47 

ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-164 ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-164 

In the 2021 session, the Alabama Legislature approved Senate 

Bill 31. The bill was signed by Governor Kay Ivey on April 6, 2021 

and subsequently assigned Act number 2021-164. 

Act 2021-164 changes the period for runoff elections to be four 

(4) weeks after the primary election for all special and municipal 

elections. 

The effective date of Act 2021-164 is January 1, 2022. 

ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-314 ACT OF ALABAMA 2021-314 

In the 2021 session, the Alabama Legislature approved House 

Bill 154. The bill was signed by Governor Kay Ivey on April 29, 2021 

and subsequently assigned Act number 2021-314. 

Act 2021-314 requires candidates for municipal office to file 

campaign finance reports with the Secretary of State’s Office. All 

filings must be done electronically. 

The effective date of Act 2021-314 is August 1, 2023. 48 

# APPENDIX C APPENDIX C 

# ONLINE FILING SYSTEM ONLINE FILING SYSTEM 

# QUIC K OVERVIEW QUIC K OVERVIEW 

ONLINE SYSTEM REGISTRATION ONLINE SYSTEM REGISTRATION 

1. Go to fcpa.alabamavotes.gov. 

2. Select the appropriate registration for your committee type. 

Candidates will click on the red “Candidate Committee Registration” 

button. PACs will click on the red “Political Action Committee 

Registration” button. 

3. The Appointment of Principal Campaign Committee (PCC for 

candidates) or Statement of Organization (for PACs) will open. Please 

enter the date, then complete the required committee information. 

4. Once the information has been entered, click the red “Submit” 

button at the bottom right corner of the page. 

5. The screen will indicate “Your registration has been submitted.” 

Click on the “**Click here to view and print a copy of this filing**” 

link. 

6. Print and sign the completed form. Every committee member must 

sign the completed form. Make a copy of the signed form for your 

records. 

7. Mail the original signed form to: ELECTIONS DIVISION, 

ALABAMA SECRETARY OF STATE, P. O. BOX 5616, 

MONTGOMERY, AL 36103-5616. 

8. Once the original signed Appointment of Principal Campaign 

Committee Form or Statement of Organization is received and 

approved, the account will be activated. The committee members will 

each receive login credentials (username and pin) in two (2) separate 

emails. 49 

Note: if an FCPA report is due within five (5) days, an emergency 

activation can be granted. In this circumstance, a committee should 

call the Elections Division at (334) 242-7210 and then fax a signed 

copy of the committee registration document to (334) 242-2444. Once 

received, the account can be activated immediately. However, the 

signed original committee registration document should be mailed to 

the Elections Division on the same day. 

ONLINE FILING SYSTEM ONLINE FILING SYSTEM 

The FCPA online filing system is operated by the use of a series of 

tabbed topic sections located at the top of the screen. This guide 

will give an overview of the contents within each section, as well as 

a brief description regarding the most frequently used functions in 

the individual tabbed sections. For special circumstances or specific 

guidance, please call the Elections Division at (334) 242-7210 or (800) 

274-8683. To reach the FCPA filing system HELP DESK, call (888) 

864-8910. 

1. Overview Page 

• Account Status—gives an overview of account ending balance and 

pending transaction balances 

• Transaction History Overview—gives an overview of ending 

balances by transaction 

• Reports Due—lists upcoming reports with the function to view 

and file sequential reports 

• Document Images—contains function to save report images and 

add supplemental documents 

2. Transactions Tab 

A. Contributions/InKind 

• Contribution History—listing of posted contributions with 

the function to add new contributions or update existing 

contributions 

• Contribution Maintenance—contains function to search by 

contributor and perform contributor informational changes 50 

B. Other Receipts 

• Receipt History—listing of posted receipts with the function to 

add new receipts or update existing receipts (i.e., loans/interest/ 

other) 

• Receipt Maintenance—contains function to search receipts and 

perform receipt source informational changes 

C. Expenditures 

• Expenditure History—listing of posted expenditures, only used 

for money spent out of the campaign account, with the function to 

add new expenditures or update existing expenditures 

• Payee Maintenance—contains function to search by payee and 

perform payee informational changes 

D. Transaction Search 

• Transaction Search—contains function to quick-search posted 

transactions 

3. File Reports Page 

• Filing History—listing of previously filed reports with the 

function to view and amend filed reports 

• Reports Due—lists upcoming reports with the function to view 

and file sequential reports 

• Supplemental Forms—contains function to submit the “Statement 

of Dissolution” 

4. Administration Page 

• Committee—contains function to update or perform committee 

informational changes 

• Officers—listing of current committee officers with the function to 

update or perform informational changes 

• Campaign—contains function to add the filing schedule for an 

election cycle 

• Filing Schedule—listing of all reports for an election cycle 

(includes all filed reports and reports due) 

• Import Data Files—contains function to import data files 51 

AMENDING REPORTS AMENDING REPORTS 

To amend a transaction that has been previously reported, go to 

the corresponding “Transaction” tab and select the corresponding 

transaction type (contribution, other receipt, or expenditure) from 

the drop-down menu. Find the transaction that needs amending 

in the Transaction History section of the correct transaction type 

administration page. To update or delete a transaction, click on the 

links to the right of the transaction. Once the transaction entry page 

opens, correct the record and then click the red “Save” button on the 

lower right corner of the screen. 

To add any previously omitted transactions, click the “Add” button in 

the corresponding transaction administration pages. 

Make the necessary changes (additions, deletions, or updates) to 

the transactions prior to amending the previously filed reports. 

Then, click on the “File Reports” tab and locate the report that 

needs to be amended in the “Filing History” section of the “Filing 

Administration” page. Click on the “Amend” link for the report that 

corresponds to your earliest made amendment. The preview of the 

amended report will open. Please review the report. Once you are 

satisfied that all necessary changes are reflected in the report preview, 

then click the red “File” button on the bottom right to submit the 

amended report. 

Important— The system will automatically amend any other 

subsequent reports that were affected by an amendment to an 

individual transaction. For this reason, it is important to amend the 

reports in the order of the amended transactions. 

PASSWORD RESET PASSWORD RESET 

If a user is unable to access the account due to an expired or lost 

PASSWORD/PIN, please call the Elections Division at 

(334) 242-7210 or (800) 274-8683. To reach the FCPA filing system 

HELP DESK, call (888) 864-8910.
