Title: 

URL Source: https://www.ise-online.org/app/uploads/71_Annual_meeting-BoA-2.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 07 Nov 2024 10:14:06 GMT

Markdown Content:
A Unifying Mechanistic Model of Mild Steel Corrosion in Weak Acid 

# Aqueous Solutions 

Srdjan Nesic , Aria Kahyarian, Bruce Brown 

Institute for Corrosion and Multiphase Flow Technology, Ohio University , Athens, OH , USA 

nesic@ohio.edu 

Recent advaces in underst anding of the mechanism of mild steel corrosion in the presence of carboxylic 

acids, dissolved carbon dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide has challenged the conventional views of aqueous 

corrosion in anoxic weak acid solutions. Conventionally, the high corrosivi ty of such environments was 

associated with the direct reduction of these weak acids. Within the last few years, experimental and 

theoretical investigations of the electrochemical behavior of these corrosive environments suggest that the 

buffering effect a rising from the dissociation of weak acids in the vicinity of metal surface is the main 

cause for the observed high corrosivity. These findings suggest that neither carboxylic acids, nor the 

dissolved carbon dioxide, nor hydrogen sulfide are themselves cor rosive, and that they merely exacerbate 

an existing acidic corrosion process. In this study, the buffering effect, being an inherent property of any 

weak acid, is shown to account for all characteristic behaviors observed in cathodic currents, in all of th e

cases considered. In order to further elucidate this general behavior, a comprehensive mathematical model 

was developed and used to simulate the behavior of a hypothetical weak acid, as a function of the kinetic 

and thermodynamic properties of its dissoc iation reaction. The mechanistic findings in the present study 

are framed in terms of a generic mechanistic view of corrosion in weak acid solutions. That enables a 

simple and generic categorization of weak acids based on their pKa values to serve as a bas is to assess the 

detrimental effect of any weak acid on mild steel corrosion in acidic solutions. Electrochemical Zero -Mode Waveguide Studies of Single Redox 

# Molecules in Nanopore Electrode Arrays 

Paul W. Bohn , Vignesh Sundaresan, Seol Baek 

Departments of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Chemistry and Biochemistry 

318 Stinson Remick Hall, Not re Dame IN 46556 USA 

pbohn@nd.edu 

It is critically important to understand the relationship between functional states of individual redox 

enzymes and the macroscopically observed phenotype, which results from averaging over all copies of 

the same enzyme. Optim ally, single enzyme molecules would be stud ied one -molecule -at -a-time and 

combine d to characterize population behavior. However, studying single electron transfer events in 

biological systems is quite challenging, principally because the generated cur rents are below, the noise 

floor of electrical measurements at accessible gain -bandwidth products. However , the Johnson noise floor 

can be circumvented by converting redox processes to photon emission events, i.e. luminescence, thereby 

converting the measu rements into the shot noise limited regime. Fortunately, flavoenzymes, i.e. enzymes 

with a flavin -based cofactor , exhibit electrofluorogenic behavior , in which the oxidized state of the 

isoalloxazine chromophore in either flavin mononucleotide (FMN) or fla vin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) 

is strongly emissive in the oxidized, but almost completely non -emissive in the reduced state. However, 

in order to take advantage of this, it is necessary to isolate single enzyme molecules. To address this 

problem, we have developed a bifunctional nanoelectrochemical -nanophotonic architecture - the 

electrochemical zero mode waveguide (E -ZMW) - that can couple biological electron transfer reactions to 

luminescence, making it possible to observe single electron transfer events in redox enzymes. 

Although E -ZMWs may be realized as single nanopores, we utilize parallel arrays of cylindrical 

nanopores containing either 1 or 2 embedded annular nanoband electrodes. These architectures exhibit 

several advantages, including: (1) the average occupancy of individual pores may be controlled by 

concentration, (2) the electrodes in each individual pore are connected to those in all the other pores, so 

they can all be controlled at the same potential, Eappl , and (3) the electrochemical beh avior is integrated 

over the entire array. Thus, single molecule spectroscopic and electrochemical data can be acquired 

simultaneously. We have used these E-ZMW nanopore electrode arrays to demonstrate strongly 

correlated single molecule population fluctua tions both by correlating the electrochemical currents at top 

and bottom electrodes and by cross -

correlating the electrochemical signals with 

luminescence signals at the bottom 

electrode, which also serves as the optical 

cladding layer of the E -ZMW. 1

Currently, dual -el ectrode E-ZMWs are 

being used to carry out single enzyme 

reduction experiments using the scheme ,

employing glutathione reductase, GR, as 

shown in Figure 1. The top electrode is 

used to produce reactive oxygen species in 

the zeptoliter volume nanopore, for 

example by the 1e - reduction of O2 to 

superoxide, O2-•, which then dismutates 

into H2O2 and O2. The resulting 

perturbation of the glutathione redox 

speciation is then monitored by t ransients 

in t he single molecule emission of GR .

1. Han, D.; Crouch, G. M.; Fu, K.; Zaino, L. P.; Bohn, P. W., Single -Molecule 

Spectroelectrochemical Cross -Correlation During Redox Cycling in Recessed Dual Ring Electrode Zero -

Mode Waveguides. Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 5345 -5355.  

> Figure 1. Schematic diagram i llustrating the conceptual
> approach to single electron transfer event observations in the
> GR -GSSG -GSH system.

# From Bioelectrochemistry to Bioelectronics, Biocomputing and 

# “Smart ” Materials 

Evgeny Katz 

Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University 

8 Clarkson Ave., Potsdam, NY 13699, USA 

ekatz@clarkson.edu 

The original goal of bioelectroche mistry has been in the fundamental study of biomolecules, particularly 

enzymes, communicating with electrically conducting/semiconducting interfaces (electrodes and 

semiconducting devices). Following the impressive achievements in bioelectrochemistry, espe cially in 

mediated and direct electron transfer between proteins/enzymes and electrodes, numerous 

bioelectrochemical systems have been designed resulting in various biosensors and biofuel cells. Later, 

more sophisticated systems have been approached, resul ting in implantable and wearable bioelectronic 

devices for sensing and power generation. Novel research directions have been formulated including 

bioelectrochemical information processing (biocomputing) systems, signal -triggered bioelectrochemical 

systems, “smart” bioelectrochemical interfaces switchable/tunable by various external signals and capable 

of electronically stimulated biomolecular release. Studies progressing from conventional electrochemistry 

to novel multidisciplinary research areas mostly nam ed “bioelectronics” rather than 

“bioelectrochemistry”, resulted in very impressive scientific results and practical applications. The lecture 

will briefly address general progress in the research areas of bioelectrochemistry and bioelectronics, 

concentrati ng on the author’s personal contribution to the areas. Additional information related to the 

lecture can be found in t he recently published books [1 -3]. 

[1] E. Katz (Ed.), Implantable Bioelectronics - Devices, Materials and Applications , Wiley -VCH, 

Weinhe im, Germany, 2014. 

[2] E. Katz, Signal -Switchable Electrochemical Systems - Materials , Methods, and Applications, 

Wiley -VCH, 2018. 

[3] E. Katz, Enzyme -Based Computing Systems , Wiley -VCH, 2019. Bioe lectrochemical Approaches towards the Detection and 

# Quantification of Drug Resistance in Bacteria and Cancer 

Sabine Kuss 

University of Manitoba, Department of Chemistry 

144 Dysart Road, Winnipeg, Canada, R3T2N2 

sabine.kuss@umanitoba.ca 

Drug resistanc e in bacteria and cancer is a growing problem that severely increases the number of deaths 

from bacterial infections and cancer. [1,2] According to the World Health Organization, drug resistance is 

present in every country, and various national and internat ional health organizations have called for the 

urgent development of new treatment and diagnostic strategies. [3] Cellular resistance mechanisms are at 

the root of drug resistance, which include cell membrane protein modifications, intracellular drug target 

alterations, and the over expression of efflux pumps. [4] 

This presentation outlines innovative and interdisciplinary approach es to recognize and quantify drug 

resistance in bacteria and cancer cells by electrochemistry. Electroanalytical techniques are co st efficient, 

sensitive and the transparency of a liquid sample is irrelevant, allowing direct in vitro analysis of blood, 

urine, and saliva samples. This presentation covers the characterization of some of the most important 

commercial drugs, and new inve stigational antibiotic hybrids by electrochemistry. [5] Building on this 

exploration of drug electrochemistry, the quantification of drug influx and retention in biological cells 

will be presented. This research forms the basis for the development of a poin t-of -care biosensor to 

identify drug resistance in patient samples. Such technology would advance clinical treatment from the 

current trial -and -error approach to the prescription of evidence -based personalized drug regimens. 

[1] J. Sun, A. R. Warden, J. H uang, W. Wang, and X. Ding, Anal. Chem., 91, 7524 –7530 (2019). 

[2] R. Article, J. Pathol., 205, 275 –292 (2005). 

[3] World Health Organization (WHO) . Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance; (2015). 

[4] H. Nikaido, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 78, 119 –146 (2 009) .

[5] R. Islam, H.T. Le Luu, S. Kuss, J. Electrochem. Soc., 167, 045501 (2020). 

Schematic summary of electrode modification strategies and techniques for the 

quantitative detection of analytes, such as cell metabolites or drug compounds. R = 

reduce d species; O = oxidized species. Soft interface s polari sation : The Helmho ltz model strikes back! 

Hubert H. Girault , Grégoire Gschwend 

Laboratoire d ’Electrochimie Phys ique et Analytique, 

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 

Rue de l ’Ind ustre 17, CH -1951 SION - Switzerland 

Hubert .girau lt@epfl.ch 

When considering the polari sation of sof t interfaces, such as at ion -selective electrode polymer 

membranes , li quid -li quid interfaces , bio lo gical membranes , most textbooks present the polari sation of the 

interface within the framework of the Gou y-Chapman diffuse layer model .

At a metal -electrolyte interface, the electro nic charge distribution is homogeneous at the electrode surface 

and is described by a homoge neous charge density. On the electrolyte side, the ions com pen sati ng the 

electronic char ges are either specifically adsorbed or distr ibuted in what is know n as the Gouy -Chapman 

diffuse layer. Many ye ars of studies at the mercury -electrolyte interface have validated this model. 

By extension, th e Gouy -Ch apman model is used to describe the pola rization at liquid -liquid interfaces i n

what is often refe rred to as the back -to -back diffuse layer s model, where a pos itively charge d diffuse 

la yer in one phase is facing another negatively charged diffuse layer in the adjacent phase. As a result, it 

is t hought that the po tential drop between the two phases occurs across a couple of nanometers. 

In this talk, we wish to show the limits of this model. 

Using different experi ment al techn iques such as impedance measur ements, electroca pillary curves, and 

non -linear spectroscopic techn iques together with molecular dyna mics simulations , we wish to propose 

an other vision where the polari sation of the interface oc curs across a bilayer of interfacial “ion -pairs ”

(more precisely interacti ng ions) in what could be cal led a “discr ete Helmholtz ” model by reference to the 

very early work of Helmholtz. 

Here, we show that the ion -ion interactions are such that ionic charges do not distribute themselves in a 

diffuse layer, but by direct formation of interfac ia l “ion pairs ”. In this way, all the potential drop occurs 

across this interfacial io nic bilayer in a stepwise manner . Also, the c ap acitance of the interface is found to 

be potential independent for a giv en “ion pair ” and the amount of interfacial “ion pair s” is proporti onal to 

the p otential difference between the two phase s.

We shall illustr ate the model to explain the distribution potential of a salt and the electrocapill ary 

phenome na observed with pol arised interfaces. 

This view of the interfacial polarization of the interface allows us to solve the old dilemma of the 

potential dependence of electron transfer reactions at liquid -liquid interfac es .

Finally, we shall discuss the extension of the so -called “discrete Helmholtz ” model to other interfaces 

where the charge distri bution is not evenly distributed but localized for ex ample in nano structure d s olid 

inter faces a s in supercapacitors, Single -particle microscopy of photoelectrodes 

Peng Chen 

Depart ment of Chemistr y and Chemical Biology, Cornell University 

Baker Laboratory, Ithaca, NY 14 853, USA 

pc252@cornell.edu 

This presentation will describe our single -molecule fluorescence and photoe lectrochemical imaging work 

on individual semiconductor nanorods under photoelectroch emical water oxidation conditions. I will 

describe the insights we gained into the charge carrier activities on these semiconductor particle surfaces, 

how they are related to the photocurrent generation, how deposition of cocatalysts at specific surface si tes 

alters their behaviors, and the efficiency losses from individual particle -particle interfaces. Reduced Graphene Oxide: Electrochemical Sensing and Therapy 

Sabine SZUNERITS 

Institut d’Electronique, de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie (IEMN), UMR CNRS 8520, University of Lille, 

Avenue Poincaré -BP 60069, 59652 Villeneuve d'Ascq , France ,

e-mail address : sabine.szuneri ts@univ -lille.fr 

Graphene and its derivatives (graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide) have drawn tremendous attention 

from the scientific community as a promising nanomaterial with applications ranging from optoelectronics, 

high -energy physics, to mate rial science and biomedicine. Different methods have been reported for the 

preparation of the different graphene -based matrixes. 

In this presentation, some of your work on the 

fabrication and interest of reduced graphene oxide 

(rGO) and rGO -based composite materials for 

electrochemical sensing and therapeutic applications 

will be discussed. In the sensing area, the choice of 

the way graphene is obtained is crucial and will 

influence strongly electron transfer rates and impact 

on sensitivity and selectivity to solution analytes. A 

special focus will be on the use of electrophoretic 

based approaches for the deposition of rGO and 

hybrid materials. On the other hand, rGO loaded 

hydrogels have proven to be versatile controlled -

release systems. Some ex amples on the formation of 

metformin hydrochloride and insulin loaded bandages for transdermal delivery will be discussed in 

addition. 

SELECTED REFERENCES: 

1. Q. Pagneux, R. Ye, L. Chengnang, A. Barras, N. Hennuyer, B. Staels, D. Caina, J. I. Avila Osse s, A. 

Abderrahmani, V. Plaisance, V. Pawlowski, R. Boukherroub, S. Melinte, S. Szunerits, Nanoscale Horizon, 

2020 , advanced article. 

2. C. Li, Q. Pegneux, A. Voronova, A. Barras, A. Abderrahmani, V. Plaisance, V. Pawlowski, N. Hennuyer, B. 

Staels, L. Ros selle, N. Skandrani, M. Li,R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, Nanoscale, 2019 , 11, 15810 

3. C. Li, R. Ye, J. Bouckaert, A. Zurutuza, D. Drider, T. Dumych, S.Paryzhak, V. Vovk, R. O Bilyy, S. Melinte, 

M. Li, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2017 , 9, 36665. 

4. Y. Oz, A. Barras, R. Sanyal, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, A. Sanyal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2017 , 9,

36665 –3667, 

5. F. Teodorescu, G. Quéniat, C. Foulon, M. Lecoeur, A. Barras, S. Boulahneche, M. S. Medjram, T. Hubert, A. 

Abderrahmani, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, J. Control. Release 2017 , 245, 137. 

6. Qi. Wang, A. Vasilescu, Q. Wang, Y. Coffinier, M. Li, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, A CS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces , 2017 , 9, 12823. Novel Phosphates and Fluoride -Phosp hates Electrode Materials for 

# Me -ion Batteries 

Evgeny V. Antipov 

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 119991, Russia 

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow 121205 , Russia 

e-mail : evgeny.an tipov @gmail.com 

The rapid progress in mass -market applications of metal -ion batteries intensifies the research on 

electrode materials for Na -ion and K -ion batteries as viable alternative s to the already mature Li -ion 

technology . Similar to the Li -ion inte rcalation systems, the Na and K -based mixed oxide s and polyanion 

materials are thoroughly scrutinized as potential cathodes aiming to enhance the specific energy, 

durability and rate capability. Whereas the layered oxides display greater volumetric energy density, the 

polyanion materials usually exhibit better cycling and thermal stability and higher C -rate capabilit ies due 

to covalently bonded structural frameworks . At the same time c ompared to the oxide structures based on a

clos e-packed arrangement of ox ygen atoms, the polyanion compounds reveal an extra dimension in their 

crystal chemistry , which significantly extends the playground for designing materials with superior 

electrochemical performance. Further advantages are expected from the synergistic eff ect of combining 

different anions (such as (XO 4)p- and F -) in the anion sublattice .

An overview of the research on novel transition metal phosphates, pyrophosp hates , and fluoride -

phosphates as prospec tive electrode materials for the Na -ion and K -ion batter ies will be presented with a 

special emphasis on the interrelation between chemical composition, synthesis conditions, crystal 

structure peculiarities and electrochemical properties of the materials intended for practical applications. 

Acknowledg ements 

Thi s work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (grant No.  17 -73 -30006). Nucleic acid hybridization -induced electrically reconfigurable network 

# of gold -coated magnetic nanoparticles enables ultrasensitive 

# microRNA detection in blood 

Sharmin Hoque 1, 2, 3 , Roya Tavallaie 1, 2, 3 , Joshua McCarroll 2,4,5 , Padmavathy Bakthavathsalam 1, 2, 3 , Maria 

Kavallaris 2,3,4,5 , Ric hard D. Tilley 1, 2, 3 , J. Justin Gooding *1,2,3 

> 1

School of Chemistry, University of New South Wales Sydney, Sydney, 2052, Australia 

> 2

Australian Centre for NanoMedicine, University of New South Wales Sydney, Sydney, 205 2, Australia 

> 3

ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio -Nano Science and Technology, University of New I South 

Wales Sydney, Sydney, 2052, Australia 

> 4

Tumour Biology and Targeting Program, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, Children’s Cancer Institute, 

Universit y of New South Wales Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 

> 5

School of Women’s and Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Sydney, NSW, Australia 

Justin.gooding@unsw.edu.au 

The intense interest in quantifying levels of microRNA is because of its importance a s a blood -borne 

biomarker . The challenge has been to develop methods that can monitor microRNA expression both over 

broad concentration ranges and ultralow amounts directly in a patient’s blood . Here, we show using gold -

coated magnetic nanoparticles modifi ed by probe DNA (DNA -Au@MNPs) that possess a redox label. 

The DNA -Au@MNPs diffuse through the sample for analysis and collect the majority of miRNA in a 

sample before being brought back to the electrode. The resultant microRNA sensor is able to detect 

conc entrations of microRNA from as low as 10 aM to 1 nM in unprocessed blood samples. The 

exceptionally low detection limits are a result of an unexpected amplification process where hybridisation 

of a single DNA -microRNA duplex switches off the electrochemist ry from hundreds of DNA -

Au@MNPs. This amplification system appears to be via an electric -field -induced reconfiguration of a 

network of DNA -Au@MNPs. The highly -sensitive biosensor is capable of direct analysis of nucleic acids 

in samples as complex as whole blood. It can distinguish small variations in microRNA concentrations in 

blood samples of animal models that occur due to the presence of a tumour with changes in miRNA 

levels detected by the biosensor correlated with real -time polymerase chain reaction ( qRT -PCR) analysis 

of the same blood samples. The ultrasensitive and direct detection of microRNA using electrically -

reconfigurable DNA -Au@MNPs network makes the reported device a promising tool for cancer 

diagnostics. Bipolar Electrochemistry: A Powerful Tool for Organic Redox 

# Reactions 

Shinsuke Inagi 

School of Materials and Chemical Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology 

4259 Nagatsuta -cho, Midori -ku, Yokohama 226 -8502, Japan 

inagi@ cap.mac .titech.ac.jp 

Electrosynt hesis is a powerful method for the synthesis of organic, inorganic and polymeric materials 

based on electron transfer -driven reactions at the substrate/electrode interface. The use of electricity for 

synthetic reactions without the need for hazardous chemi cal oxidants and reductants is recognized as a 

green and sustainable method. A different mode for driving electrochemical reactions has recently been 

proposed, in which bipolar electrodes (BPEs) are available as wireless electrodes that undergo anodic and 

cathodic reactions simultaneously. Bipolar electrochemistry is an old technology that has recently 

attracted attention again due to the interesting features of BPEs because (i) the wireless nature of a BPE is 

useful for sensors and material synthesis, (ii) the gradient potential distribution on BPEs is a powerful tool 

for the preparation of gradient surfaces and materials, and (iii) electrophoresis is available for effective 

electrolysis (Figure 1) .1 In addition to these unique features, a BPE system only r equires a small amount 

of supporting electrolyte in principle, whereas a large amount of electrolyte is necessary in conventional 

electrochemistry. Hence, bipolar electrochemistry is an inherently green and sustainable chemical process 

for redox reactions .

In this study , recent progress in bipolar electrochemistry for the electrosynthesis of organic functional 

materials is summarized. Potential gradients on a BPE interface have been successfully used as 

controllable templates to form molecular or polymeric gradient materials, which are potentially applicable 

for high throughput analytical equipment or as biomimetic materials. The wireless nature of BPEs was 

utilized for symmetry -breaking to produce anisotropic materials based on the site -selective modificati on 

of conductive objects by redox reactions including electropolymerization. The electric field necessary to 

drive BPEs is also potentially useful to induce the directed migration of charged species. The synergetic 

effects of electrophoresis and electrolys is were also successfully demonstrated to obtain various 

functional materials. These features of bipolar electrochemistry and the various combinations of 

techniques have the potential to change the methodologies of material synthesis. 

Figure 1. Featur es and applications of bipolar electrochemistry 

Reference 

1. N. Shida, Y. Zhou, S. Inagi, Acc. Chem. Res. 2019 , 52 , 2598. Cyclic Voltammetry: New Theoretical Challenges for Bring ing a

# Famed Electrochemical Lady up to Date 

Christian Amatore ,1,2 Irina Svir, 2 Ale xand er Ol einick 2

Xiamen University, CNRS , Sorbonne University and PSL University 

> 1

State Key Laboratory PCOSS, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, 

Xiamen, 361005, China 

> 2

PASTEUR, Département de chimie, École normale supérieure, PSL University, Sorbonne University, 

CNRS, Paris , 75005, France 

chr istian.amatore@ens.psl. eu 

Cyclic voltammetry has proven its large popularity compared to most other electroanalytical methods 

owing to its versatility for investigating electrochemical mechanisms and their kinetics. Many textbooks 

provide clues and laws for understanding and quantifying the main feature s displayed by a

voltammogram. However, this is unfortunately not often useful when confronted to complicated 

mechanisms as those investigated today. Indeed, most mechanistic situations encountered in molecular 

electrochemistry at the present time involve complex competitive and entangled reactions that occur 

indifferently in solutions and onto the surface of electrodes, quite often mixing a series of entwined 

surface -solution sequences. When confronted to such intricate problems, the classical voltammetric 

dogma prove helpless and even possibly misleading .

For example, w e recently introduced and investigated what is now cited as the “Laviron -Amatore 

paradox ” [1 ,2 ] to solve the case of the electrocatalyzed reduction of benzyl chloride at silver cathodes [ 3].

Although the critical steps were demonstrated to be essentially heterogeneous, involving adsorbed and 

chemisorbed intermediates, the voltammetric traces displayed none of the expected corresponding 

features. Conversely, they seemed fully coherent with di ffusion/reaction solution processes as if the silver 

cathodes were playing a strict outer -sphere role. Beyond their favorable catalytic consequences, the same 

type of essential but hardly detectable surface components present in a mechanism may result in s elf -

inhibitory effects whose drawbacks cannot be rationalized or predicted within classical frameworks [2]. It 

is presumable that many of such competitive reactions involving exchanges of intermediates between an 

electrode surface and the solution which fe eds the overall process have remained unnoticed due to the 

lack of dynamic theoretical models and computational approaches prone to detect and apprehend their 

curious behavior. This is in particular with the objective of allowing the investigations of such finely 

intertwined heterogeneous and homogeneous steps that we developed our multi -purpose simulation 

program KISSA © [4]. 

In this conference, aim ed to thank ISE and its Division 6 for the attribution of the Jaroslav Heyrovsky 

Prize in molecular electroch emistry to one of us, we will present some specific cases of complex 

voltammetric situations from two first examples studied in the past  [5,6]. 

Some References: 

[1] (a) O.V. Klymenko, I. Svir, C. Amatore. J. Electroanal. Chem., 688 , 2013 , 320 -327; (b) O. V. Klymenko, I. Svir, 

C. Amatore. Molecular Physics , 112, 2014 , 1273 -1283. 

[2] R. Chen, A.M. Najarian, N. Kurapati, R.J. Balla, A. Oleinick, I. Svir, C. Amatore, R.L. McCreery, S. Amemiya. 

Anal. Chem. , 90 , 2018 , 11115−11123. 

[3] (a) A. Wang, Y. -F. Huang, U . Kumar Sur, D. -Y. Wu, B. Ren, S. Rondinini, C. Amatore, and Z. -Q. Tian . J. Am. 

Chem. Soc ., 132 , 2010 , 9534 -9536 ; (b) Y.F. Huang, D.Y. Wu, A. Wang, B. Ren, S. Rondinini, Z.Q. Tian, 

C. Amatore. J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 132 , 2010 , 17199 -17210; (c) O. Klymenko, O. Buriez, E. Labbe, D.P. Zhan, S. 

Rondinini, Z.Q. Tian, C. Amatore. ChemElectroChem , 1, 2014 , 227 –240. 

[4] See e.g.: (a) C. Amatore, O. Klymenko, I. Svir. Electrochem. Commun ., 12 , 2010 , 1170 -1173; (b) C. Amatore, O. 

Klymenko, I. Svir. Electrochem. Commun ., 12 , 2010 , 1165 -1169; (c) C. Amatore, O. Klymenko, A. Oleinick, I. 

Svir. Russian J. Electrochem. , 48 , 2012 , 593 -599; (d) O.V. Klymenko, I. Svir, A. Oleinick, C. Amatore. 

ChemPhysChem , 13 , 2012 , 845 -859 ; ( e) O.V. Klymenko, I. Svir, C. Amatore. Anal. Chem. , 84, 2012 , 2792 -2798; 

(e) see also KISSA © web site, < www.kissagroup.com >, for a full bibliography of the simulation strategies and 

concepts elaborated in KISSA © as well as a series of its applications. 

[5] C. Amatore, J. Pinson, J. -M. Savéant, A. Thiébault. J. Electroanal. Chem. , 107 , 1980 , 59 -74. 

[6]  C. Amatore, J. Pinson, J. -M. Savéant, A. Thiébault. J. Electroanal. Chem. , 107 , 1980 , 75 -86. How Does a Polycrystalline Electrodeposited Film Grow? 

# Insights from High -Speed AFM 

Walther Schwarzacher *, Aswathi Koorikkat, Oliver Payton, Loren Picco #

H.H Wills Physics Laboratory , University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TL, UK  

> #

Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA 

> *

w.schwarzacher@bristol.ac.uk 

The problem of how the microstructure and surface topography of a polycrystalline electrodeposited film 

develop as the film thickness increases is a longstanding one. For examp le, although ex -situ measurements 

have shown that both the grain size and the surface roughness of electrodeposited films can increase with 

film thickness, the details of this process remain unclear 1.

We have used high -speed atomic force microscopy to monitor the surface topography of a Cu film 

electrodeposited on to a lithographically patterned gold microelectrode from an orga nic additive -free acid 

sulfate electrolyte. Measurements are made in real time during growth. The high -speed flexure sample 

stage of HS -AFM can provide a scan rate 1000 times great er than a conventional AFM , which is key to 

enabling us to probe much high er deposition rates than previous in -situ studies (currently around 90 nm/s) .

The data reveal a number of interesting phenomena. The lateral correlation length appears to increase 

because different grains grow at different rates. This is accompanied b y an increase in local slope , which 

is also revealed by scaling analysis because surface roughness as a function of deposition time exhibits 

anomalous scaling 2. Also, in some cases we clearly observe one grain overgrowing another. A further 

interesting o bservation is that , rather than the tip screening the substrate and reducing the deposition rate, 

tip movement enhanced mass transport significantly during growth : there was accelerated growth where 

scanning took place compared to other regions of the samp le. 

1) N. Vasiljevic, M. Wood, P. J. Heard and W. Schwarzacher, J. Electrochem. Soc. 157 , D193 -8 (2010). 

2) L.H. Liu and W. Schwarzacher, Electrochem.  Comm. 29, 52 -4 (2013). Li -ion batteries: from High Energy to Sustainability 

Stefano Passerini a,b , Matthias Kuenzel a,b , Dominic Bresser a,b  

> a

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> b

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Ka rlsruhe, Germany 

stefano.passerini@kit.edu 

The announcement of major car manufacturers worldwide to electrify their product line within less than a 

decade has triggered the large increase of battery cell manufacturing. This will gain even greater 

momentum once other OEMs will be following this ambition. Lithium -ion batteries are the energy storage 

technology of choice to enable the deployment of electric vehicles avoiding the use of fossil fuels. 

However, a transition to a more sustainable production of th ese cells is required. Consequently, efforts are 

being invested to develop non -toxic and abundant active materials, for instance, by reducing (if not 

excluding) the use of cobalt and nickel. Implementing aqueous processing for lithium -ion positive 

electrod es is another key step towards the achievement of environmentally benign battery production. 

Targeting these urgent necessities, we have developed along the years a simple approach leading to the 

aqueous processing of the high -voltage LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (LNMO ). This active material is, in fact, 

considered the most promising for the realization of cobalt -free next generation lithium -ion batteries. 

First, we demonstrated the feasible use of bio -derived polymers, e.g., sodium carboxymethylcellulose, 

guar gum and chitosan [1 -3], as electrode binders in combination with phosphoric acid, for active material 

particles and current collector protection, and citric acid, for polymers cross -linking. Thus, to achieve 

positive electrode tapes readily available for large -sca le, high -energy lithium -ion batteries, the use of 

carbon -coated current collector was introduced, which provides functional groups to crosslink the 

electrode coating layer to the underlying aluminum foil. The resulting electrodes demonstrate significant 

im provements concerning the electrode to current collector adhesion and their capacity retention. 

Through the further optimization of the initial formation cycles, these electrodes offer an electrochemical 

performance exceeding that of LNMO -based reference electrodes, comprising state -of -the -art 

poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVdF) as binder. 

References (10 pt) 

1. Bresser et al., Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 3096 -3127. 

2. Loeffler et al., J. Power Sources 2014, 248, 915. 

3. Kuenzel et al., ChemSusChem 2018 , 11, 562 –573 

Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 

within the Li -EcoSafe project (03X4636A & 03X4636D). The financial support of the Helmholtz 

Association is also acknowledged. instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting 

abstract should look like. Proper column and margin measurements are indicated. Abstract submission: Beatriz Roldan Cuenya / Keynote Symposium 19 ISE annual meeting 2020 Belgrad e

# Catalyst Design and Operando Structure -Composition -Reactivity 

# Correlations during CO 2 Electroreduction 

Beatriz Roldan Cuenya 

Department of Interface Science , Fritz Haber Ins titute of the Max Planck Society 

Faradayweg 4 -6, 14195 Berlin , Germany 

roldan@fhi -berlin.mpg.de 

The utilization of fossil fuels as the main energy source gives rise to serious environmental issues, including 

global warming caused by the continuously increasing level of atmospheric CO 2. Recently, the 

electrochemical conversion of CO 2 (CO 2RR) to chemicals and fuels driven by electricity derived from 

renewable energy has been recognized as a promising strategy towards sustainable energy. 

In my talk I will describe the challenges but also provide example s of recent advances in the development 

of highly active and selective catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of CO 2. The new materials include 

well -oriented Cu single crystals, plasma -modified nanostructured film s, and nanoparticle (NP) 

electrocataly sts (Cu, Ag, Zn, CuZn and AgSn ). Selectivity control in CO 2RR will be achieved through the 

rational design of the electrocatalyst structure (crystal orientation , atomic arr angement, size, shape, 

defects ), oxidation state and composition . Furthermore, I will also demonstrate how important 

morphological motives and chemical species can be created and re generated in pulsed electro lysis 

experiments. 

Finally , the determining role of the electrolyte in the surface restructuring, reaction activ ity and selectivity 

will be illustrated . Throughout my talk , the importance of in situ and operando microscopy and 

spectroscopy characterization methods to gain in depth understanding on the structure - and electrolyte -

sensitivity of real CO 2RR catalysts un der working conditions will be highlighted . Our results are expected 

to open up new routes for the reutilization of CO 2 through its direct selective conversion into higher value 

products such as ethylene and ethanol .Towards a Comprehensive Understanding of Platinum -based 

# Electrocatalysi s

Federico Calle -Vallejo 

Universitat de Barcelona 

Carrer de Martí i Franquè s 1, 08028, Barcelona, Spain 

f.calle.vallejo@ub.edu 

Platinum is at the same time one of the most versatile and scarce electrocatalysts. While considerable 

research efforts have been directed to its replace ment in many application s, another plausible strategy is 

the design of optimal Pt electrocatalysts. In the latter case , the most active sites for each Pt -catal yzed 

rea ction need to be unambiguously determined and full y exploited . A tool for that purpose are 

“generalized coordination numbers” (GCN s).

In this talk , I will show that GCN s accurately describe adsorption -energy trends for un strained a s well as 

strain ed Pt sites on nanoparticles of different shapes and sizes and extended surfaces [1, 2].

More over , I will briefly show that “coordination -activity plots” based on GCN s outline the geometric 

configuration of optimal Pt sites for three important electrocatalytic reactions : O2 reduction [3, 4], H2

evolution [5], and CO oxidation [6].

Finally, I will show that GCN s can be used to shed light in to two important topics in electrocata lysis, 

namely adsorbate solvation [7] and the intricate selectivity of organic reactions [8].

References 

[1] F. Calle -Vallejo, J.I. Martínez, J.M. García -Lastra, P. Sautet, D. Loffreda, Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed., 53 

(2014) 8316 -8319. 

[2] F. Calle -Vallejo, A.S. Bandarenka, ChemSusChem, 11 ( 2018) 1824 -1828. 

[3] F. Calle -Vallejo, J. Tymoczko, V. Colic, Q.H. Vu, M.D. Pohl, K. Morgenstern, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, 

W. Schuhmann, A.S. Bandarenka, Science, 350 (2015) 185 -189. 

[4] F. Calle -Vallejo, M.D. Pohl, D. Reinisch, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, A.S. Bandarenka, Chem. Sci., 8 

(2017) 2283 -2289. 

[5] M.D. Pohl, S. Watzele, F. Calle -Vallejo, A.S. Bandarenka, ACS Omega, 2 (2017) 8141 -8147. 

[6] F. Calle -Vallejo, M.D. Pohl, A.S. Bandarenka, ACS Catal., (2017) 4355 -4359. 

[7] F. Calle -Vallejo, R. F. de Morais, F. Illas, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, J. Phys. Chem.  C, 123 (2019) , 5578 -

5582 .

[8] C.J. Bondue, F. Calle -Vallejo, M.C. Figueiredo, M.T.M. Koper, Nature Catalysis, 2 (2019) 243 -250 .Probing the Solvated Electron at the Electrochemical Interface with a 

# Novel Optoelectronic Method 

Yujin Tong 

Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, Faradayweg 4 -6, 14195 Berlin, Germany 

Faculty of Physics, University of Duisburg -Essen, Lotharstrasse 1, 47057 Duisburg, Germany 

e-mail : tong@fhi -berlin.mpg.de 

The solvated electron has fundamental and practical significance in radiation and radical chemistry, 

catalysis and radiobiology. While its bulk properties have been ex tensively studied, its behavior at 

electrochemical interfaces is still unclear due to the lack of effective tools to characterize this short -lived 

species at the condensed matter interfaces . To solve this problem, our group developed a new technology 

base d on ultrashort laser and electrochemical detection (two -photon pump electrochemical probe 

technique). As shown in in the scheme, here we introduce ultra -short pulse lasers in the traditional 

electrochemical detection system. One of the lasers is used to e xcite charge transfer or dipole inversion, 

and the other laser is used to track the relaxation of the excited state that was trigged by the first laser, 

while detecting photocurrent or photovoltage in both processes. By adjusting the photon energy of two 

pulsed lasers and their time difference, we can both obtain the spectral information of the surface species 

and track ultrafast dynamic processes. In this report, I will use the example of the solvation process of hot 

electrons at the gold/water interface t o show you how this new technique works[1]. This technology will 

play an important role in the tracking and analysis of various processes in energy and environmental 

transition in chemistry. 

References 

[1] F. Lapointe, M. Wolf, R. K. Campen, Y. Tong, ChemRxiv. Preprint. 

https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.11739819.v1 Atomic Scale Electr o-Catalysis 

Jan Rossmeisl 

Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen 

Universitetsparken 5, 2100, København Ø, Denmark 

Jan.rossmeisl@chem.ku.dk 

The chemical industry should in the future be based on renewable energy. Therefore, material 

development for environmentally friendly, electrocatalytic production of valuable chemicals is needed. 

Chemicals could be produced using safe, cheap, more environmentally friendly and more abundant 

reactants than today. The products could be prov ided on demand at the place where they are needed, 

reducing expensive and hazardous transport of chemicals. However, stable, efficient and selective 

catalysts have to be discovered. This requires insight into the surface chemistry at the atomic scale. 

The challenge of discovering new catalyst materials is twofold: Firstly, the properties or descriptors of the 

wanted catalyst have to be identified. Secondly, real materials with the wanted properties should be 

found. 

I will give examples of determining desc riptors for different reactions and a method for identify 

promising catalyst materials based on high entropy alloy, which is a new class of materials with the 

promise to change the way we discover interesting catalyst materials. Electronic Interactions within Mixed Valent Compounds: 

# - The Influence of Anions, Solvents and Electrostatic Properties -

Alexander Hildebrandt 

Technische Universität Chemnitz, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Inorganic 

Chemistry  , D-09107 Chemnitz, Germany 

alexander.hildebrandt@chemie.tu -chemnitz.de 

The electrochemical properties of bi - and multi -metallic compounds are a convolution of several factors, 

among which th rough -bond electron transfer and through -space electrostatic features are the most 

prominent. [1,2] Besides intrinsic molecular properties, the measurement conditions have a considerable 

impact on the electronic interactions of mixed valent compounds. [2] 

Wi thin this presentation the dependency of inter valence charge transfer (IVCT) on the electrolytes and 

solvents will be discussed for analytes of different coupling strength. It can be shown that especially for 

weakly coupled systems the applied measurement conditions have a distinct impact on the energy and 

shape of the I VC T band while with an increase of the coupling strength the influence of the measurement 

media diminishes (Figure 1). 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000               

> 0100 200 300 400 500
> / cm -1
>  / L .mol -1 .cm -1
> / cm -1
>  / L .mol -1 .cm -1
>  / L .mol -1 .cm -1
> / cm -1
> [NBu 4][BArF] [NBu 4][PF 6]4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
> 01000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500

Figure 1. Electrolyte (blue = [NBu 4][BArF]; red = [NBu 4][PF 6]) dep endent shift of the IVCT bands of 

different mixed valent compounds in dichloromethane ( BArF - = B(C 6F5)4-).

In addition,  methods that can be used to identify and assess the often less well explored electrostatic 

contributions to the electrochemical behavi or are highlighted.  Advances in finding reliable models for 

intramolecular electrostatic interactions, inter - and intra -molecular influences on the electrostatic 

properties as well as the exploitation of different ion -pairing capabilities of various electr olytes in order to 

gain information on electrostatic repulsion energies are discussed. 

References 

[1] A. Hildebrandt, D. Miesel, H. Lang. Coord. Chem. Rev. 371 (2018) 56. 

[2] A. Hildebrandt, D. Miesel, Q. Yuan, J. Freytag, J. Mahrholdt, H. Lang . Dalton Trans. 48 (2019) 

13162. Spin -dependent Oxygen E volution Reaction by Magnetic Oxides 

Zhichuan J. Xu  

> 1

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.  

> 2

Solar Fuels Laboratory, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.  

> 3

Energy Research Institute@NTU, ERI@N, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. 

xuzc@ntu.edu.sg 

The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the bottleneck that limits the energy efficiency of water -splitting. 

The process involves four electrons’ tr ansfer and the generation of triplet state O 2 from singlet state 

species (OH - or H 2O). Recently, the OER reactants and products differing in their spin configurations 

have been thought to cause slow reaction kinetics. Catalysts with magnetically polarized channels could 

selectively remove electrons with opposite magnetic moment and conserve overall spin during OER, 

enhancing triplet state oxygen molecule evolution. This talk discuss our recent progress about using 

ferromagnetic ordered catalysts as the spin polarizer for spin selection under a constant magnetic field to 

enhance the OER. At the same condition, i t does not applicable to non -ferromagnetic catalysts. On the 

other hand, one example of antiferromagnetic oxides, an inverse spinel structure oxide Li CoVO 4, is 

discussed. It contain s d7 Co 2+ ions that can be stabilized under active octahedral sites, possessing high 

spin states S=3/2 (t 2g 5e g2). With high spin configuration, each Co 2+ ion has an ideal magnetic moment of 

3μB, allowing the edge -shared Co 2+ octahedra in spin el to be magnetically polarized, giving magnetically 

polarized channels. The average magnetic moment (μ ave ) per transition -metal atom in the spin conduction 

channel is around 2.66μB. Such channels are able to enhance the selective removal of spin -oriented 

electrons from the reactants during the OER, which facilitates the accumulation of appropriate magnetic 

moments for triplet oxygen molecule evolution. Biomolecular Wires of Electric Bacteria: 

# Themes and Variations 

Julea Butt 

School of Chemistry and School of Biological Sciences ,

University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7J, U.K. 

j.butt@uea.ac.uk 

Electric bacteria are n aturally ab le to exchange electrons between internal enzymes and electrodes [1 -4] .

As a consequence there is much interest in the electrochemistry of these fascinating microorganisms. 

They can produce clean electricity in micr obial fuel cells and value -added chemicals by microbial 

electrosynthesis. These processes require electron 

transfer across cell wall lipid bilayers and along 

extracellular ‘nanowire ’ structures of several microns. 

Molecular structures of the conductive pro teins 

allowing this electron transfer ha ve recently been 

revealed for species of Shewanella and Geobacter [5 -

7] . The proteins are multiheme cytochromes spanned 

by chains of close packed heme cofactors.  Th is 

contribu tion will review the structures of these 

proteins and rates of electron transfer across them [e.g. 

8-10 ] to inspir e future engineering of such 

biomolecular wires for disruptive biotechnology 

operating at both the ce llular and single protein levels. 

[1] Karthikeyan et al. Microbial electron uptake in microbial electrosynthesis: a mini -review. 

J Ind Microbiol Biot 2019, 46 , 1419 -1426. 

[2] Rosenbaum et al. Microbial catalysis in bioelectrochemic al technologies: status quo, challenges and 

perspectives. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98 , 509 -518. 

[3] Rosenbaum et al. Engineering microbial electrocatalysis for chemical and fuel production. 

Curr Opin Biotech 2014, 29 , 93 -98. 

[4] Gul et al. Bioel ectrochemical systems: Sustainable bio -energy powerhouses. 

Biosens Bioelectron 2019, 142 , 111576. 

[5] Edwards et al. The crystal structure of a biological insulated transmembrane molecular wire. 

Cell 2020 , 161 , 665 -673 .

[6] Wang et al. Structure of micro bial nanowires reveals stacked hemes that transport electrons over 

micrometers. Cell 2019, 177 , 361 -369. 

[7] Filman et al. Cryo -EM reveals the structural basis of long -range electron transport in a cytochrome -

based bacterial nanowire. Commun Biol 2019, 2, doi: 10.1038/s42003 -019 -0448 -9. 

[8] van Wonderen et al. Ultrafast light -driven electron transfer in a Ru(II)tris(bipyridine) -labeled 

multiheme cytochrome. J Am Chem Soc 2019, 141 , 15190 -15200. 

[9] van Wonderen et al. Photosensitised multiheme cytochromes a s light -driven molecular wires and 

resistors. Chem Bio Chem 2018, 19 , 2206 -2215. 

[10] Garg et al  Direct evidence for heme -assisted solid -state electronic conduction in multi -heme c-type 

cytochromes . Chem Sci 2018 , 9, 7304 -7310 .A Study of Charge Storage in Polyaniline by Electrochemical Means 

# and in situ Electron Spin Resonance Spectroscopy 

George Zheng Chen 

Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering,  

> 1

Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Nottingham Ning bo China, Ningbo 315100 China  

> 2

Faculty of Engineering, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK 

e-mail address:  george.chen@nottingham.ac.uk 

Polyaniline is well known for its high reversib ili ty and durability in redox chemistry and related changes 

in structure, conductiv ity and chromi sm . In the past two decades when supercapacitor research has been 

fast growing, polyaniline , as a model member of the family of conducting polymers, has been wide ly 

recognized as a representative of pseudocapaci tance [1 -4]. During the Covid -19 pandemic lockdown 

period , the author ha s paid a re -visit to his own past work that has collected results from experimental and 

th eoretical analyses of electrochemically grown polyaniline coatings [5-7]. Of particular interest to the 

ongoing effort to differentiat e between electric double layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance [7] is the 

simultaneously recorded electrochemical and electron spin resonance (ESR) signals . This is because 

double layer charging does not invoke redox chemistry and hence causes no ESR signal change, but 

electron transfer reactions associated with pseudocapacitance are more likely to generate or eliminate 

spins. It was revealed that the ESR spectra of 

polyaniline depended strongly on the electrode 

potential as shown in Fig. 1, indicating that 

charge storage in polyaniline is dominantly 

undertaken by Faradaic processes. It was also 

confirmed that “surface confined ” and 

“diffusion controlled ” charge stora ge 

processes can both take place in polyaniline, 

largely dependent on the conductivity and 

thickness of the polymer coating. The 

implication is that although it is highly 

challenging, if not impossible [1] , to 

differentiate between double layer capacitance 

and pseudocapacit ance by electrochemical 

means only , it can be realized using in situ 

spectroscopic techniques. 

References 

[1] B. E. Conway, V. Birss and J. Wojtowicz, J. Power Sources , 66 (1997) 1. 

[2] K. Lota, V. Khomenko and E. Frackowiak, J. Phys . Chem. Solids, 65 (2004) 295. 

[3] C. Peng, S. W. Zhang, D. Jewell and G. Z. Chen, Prog. Nat. Sci. , 18 (2008) 777. 

[4] C. Peng, D. Hu, and G. Z. Chen, Chem. Commun. , 47 (2011) 4105 .

[5] Z. Chen, PhD Thesis , University of London, 1992 

[6] W. J. Albery, Z . Chen, B . R. Horrocks, A . R. Mount, P . J. Wilson, D . Bloor, A . T. Monkman, C . M. Elliott, 

Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc. , 88 (1989) 247 

[7] G. Z. Chen, Curr. Opinion Electrochem. , 21 (2020) 358. 

Acknowledgement Th e author thanks the financial supports from t he World Bank ( PhD Scholarship, 

1988 -199 1), EPSRC (EP/J000582/1, GR/R68078), Royal Society (Braine Mercer Feasibility Award, 

2006), E.ON AG (Energy Storage 2007), Season Long Cleantech Ltd (Beijing), and Ningbo Municipal 

People’s Governments (3315 Plan and 2014A35001 -1). 

Fig. 1. Electron spin resonance spectra of polyaniline 

in 1.0 M HCl at the indicated potentials vs. SCE [5] .ESR / a.u . ESR / a.u . 

> H/G H/G

# Bioelectrical Engineering at the Semiconductor -enabled Biointerfaces 

Bozhi Tian 

Chemistry Department, the James Franck Institute, and the Institute for Biophysical Dynamics 

University of Chicago 

btian@uchicago.edu 

These instructions are an example of wha t a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper 

column and margin measurements are indicated. 

Biointerface devices can probe fundamental biological dynamics and improve the lives of human 

beings. However, direct application of traditional rigid electronics onto soft tissues or cells can cause 

signal transduction and biocompatibility issues, due to mechanical mismatch at the biointerfaces. One 

common mitigation strategy is the use of nanostructures or soft -hard composites to form more 

biocom patible interfac es with target cells or tissues. 

My group integrates nanoscience and soft matter physics with biophysics to study several 

semiconductor -based biointerfaces. In this talk, I will first pinpoint domains where semiconductor 

properties can be leveraged for biointerface studies, providing a sample of numbers in semiconductor -

based biointerfaces. Next, I will present a few recent studies from our lab and highlight key bioelectrical 

engineering mechanisms underlying the non -genetic optical modulat ion interfaces. In particular, I will 

present a biology -guided two -step design principle for establishing tight intra -, inter -, and extracellular 

silicon -based bioelectrical interfaces in which silicon and the biological targets have matched mechanical 

pro perties and efficient signal transduction. The non -genetic methods have the potential to overcome the 

limitations of current metal electrode -based devices such as bulk and cell membrane disruption, and are 

not dependent on genetic modifications. Research i n my lab has revealed how the physicochemical 

outputs from the photothermal, photofaradic, and photocapacitive effects of nanostructured 

semiconductors can be identified, quantified, and utilized at semiconductor -based biointerfaces to 

modulate electrical activities in neurons, cardiomyocytes and bacterial cells. Finally, I will discuss new 

materials and biological targets that could catalyze future advances. Preparation of Carbon Supported 2D Nanocomposite s for 

# Electrochemical Analysis, Biosensing, and E lectrocatalysis 

Shen -Ming Chen 

Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, National Taipei University of Technology, 

No.1, 10 Section 3, Chung -Hsiao East Road, Taipei 106, Taiwan 

smchen78@ms15.hinet.net 

Manufacturing of nanomaterials is an interdisciplinary field covering physics, chemistry, biology, 

materials science and engineering. The interaction between scientists with different disciplines will 

undoubtedly lead to the production of novel materials with tailored properties. Binary transition metal 

oxides (BTMOs) displayed the recognizable benefit in enhancing the sensitivity of analytes detection, 

these principles preserve all specific properties of both, nanomaterial and biomolecule . Recently, the 

layered molybdenum selenide with crystal structure has been pointed out as an efficient electrocatalyst for 

various electrochemical and energy storage applications due to its interesting properties. We have 

reported transition metals (M = Mn, Ni, Co and Fe) doped MoSe 2 and applied as the electrode materials 

for bio/electrochemical sensors, biofuel cells, and supercapacitors applications. Thus, the utilization of 

high -quality nanomaterials is now growing and coming to the industrial arena rendering them as the next 

generation attractive resources with promising applications. Undoubtedly, the existing gap between basic 

research relating nanomaterials and their application in real life will be overcome in th e coming decade. 

In addition, carbon based materials has been considered as an excellent platform for the preparation of 

nanocomposite due to its attractive properties including effective surface area, unique structures, 

mechanical and thermal stability, outstanding charge -transfer characteristics which enhances the 

electrocatalytic and photocatalytic activity of the supporting material. Moreover, the sulfide 

functionalities of carbon materials are more responsible for the incorporation of metal molybdates by the 

electrostatic attraction . Therefore, we are planning to develop an electrochemical sensor based on bimetal 

sulphides (MxSx, MSx where M =W, Mo, V, Bi, Zn) and sulphides (2D -MS) for the electrochemical 

detection of various electroactive biomolecules and Supercapactiors applications. 

References: 

1. Shen -Ming Chen et.al .,  Electrochemical Synthesis of Au -MnO2 on Electrophoretically Prepared 

Graphene Nanocomposite for High performance Supercapacitor and Biosensor Applications”. Journal of 

Materials Chemi stry A, 4 (2016) 3304 -3315. 

2. Shen -Ming Chen et.al .,  Bimetallic vanadium cobalt diselenide nanosheets with additional active sites 

for excellent asymmetric pseudocapacitive performance: comparing the electrochemical performances 

with M –CoSe2 (M= Zn, Mn, an d Cu) ” Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 7(2019)12565 -12581. 

3. Shen -Ming Chen et.al .,  Solvent -free mechanochemical synthesis of graphene oxide and Fe 3O4–reduced 

graphene oxide nanocomposites for sensitive detection of nitrite”, Journal of Materials Chem istry A, 

3(2015) 15529 -15539. 

4. Shen -Ming Chen et.al .,  Highly stable and active palladium nanoparticles supported on carbon porous 

materials for enhanced catalytic applications”, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2(2014) 16015 -16022. 

5. Shen -Ming Chen et. al .,  Innovative Strategy Based on a Novel Carbon -Black−β -Cyclodextrin 

Nanocomposite for the Simultaneous Determination of the Anticancer Drug Flutamide an d the 

Environmental Pollutant 4 -Nitrophenol. Analytical Chemistr y. 90(2018)6283−6291 .

6. Shen -Ming Chen et .al Honeycomb -like Porous Carbon−Cobalt Oxide Nanocomposite for High -

Performance Enzymeless Glucose Sensor and Supercapacitor Applications . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces .

2015, 7, 15812−15820 .Operando Surface X -ray Diffraction Studies of Structurally -defined 

# Transition Metal Oxide Electrocatalysts during Oxygen Evolution 

O.M. Magnussen 

Institute of Experimental and Applied Physics, Kiel  University, Kiel, Germany 

magnussen@physik.uni -kiel.de 

Iron -group o xides are among the best precious -metal -free catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction 

(OER) in alkaline media [1] and thus of great interest for large -scale electro chemical water splitting into 

O2 and H 2. A wide variety of different catalyst s, based on oxides of Co, Fe, and Ni, have been synthesized 

and studied, exhibiting rather diverse nanoscale morphologies and usually an unknown surface structure. 

This makes it difficult to compare their reactivity and correlate it with ab initio theoreti cal studies, which 

hinders the development of clear structure -reactivity relationships and unambiguous determin ation of the 

OER reaction mechanism. 

In this presentation, approaches for studying structurally well -defined transition metal oxides are 

discuss ed. It is shown that the combination of methods for the preparation of oxides with controlled 

surface orientation with synchrotron -based in situ and operando surface x -ray diffraction (SXRD) 

methods can provide detailed insights into these electrode materi als under reaction conditions. 

Specifically, the SXRD techniques allow characterization of the surface and bulk oxide structure over a 

wide potential range, including the OER regime . These can be performed simultaneously with electro -

chemical measurements, enabling direct correlations of structure and reactivity .

As an example, SXRD studies of ultrathin epitaxial films of Co 3O4(111) and  -CoOOH(001) electro -

catalysts [2] are discussed . These two materials show very different behavior.  While t he CoOOH(001) 

samples are  perfectly sta ble over a wide potential range, fast and fully reversible structural changes are 

observed for Co 3O4(111) , in good agreement with a previous study of polycrystalline Co 3O4 catalysts [3 ]. 

Specifically, the near surface region of Co 3O4(111) is converted to a new phase, which is assigned to 

highly disordered CoOOH. In addition, continuous changes of the  Co 3O4 unit cell volume are found over 

a wide potential range, which are assigned to cha nges in the oxide bulk, related to the pseudo -capacitive 

charging current in the pre -OER potential range. The kinetics of these structural changes is fast and 

highly reversible. Despite these differences, the catalytic activity of the skin layer covered Co 3O4(111) 

and that of the smooth -CoOOH(001) ar e almost identical, if the true microscopic surface area is taken 

into account. This indicates that the number of OER active sites on the two oxides is similar, despite the 

very different defect density, and is at variance with previous suggestions that di -μ-oxo bridged Co 

cations are exclusively responsible for the OER activity of Co oxides. 

[1] C. C. L. McCrory et al., Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015, 137, 4347. 

[2] F. Reikowski, et al., ACS Catalysis, 2019, 9, 3811 

[3] A. Bergmann, et al., Nature Communications, 2015, 6, 8625. Conducting Polymer Biointerfaces 

Jadranka Travas -Sejdic 

Polymer Biointerface Centre, School of Chemical Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1010, 

New Zealand 

The MacDiarmid Institute of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, Wellington 6140, Ne w Zealand 

j.travas -sejdic@auckland.ac.nz 

Conducting polymers (CPs) have been widely used as electroactive biointerfaces in applications such as 

electrically -stimulated tissue engineering and stretchable organic bioelectronics. In this talk we will 

presen t two different approached to electroactive biointerfaces. The first approach overcomes the issue of 

poor solubility and processability of CP by functionalization of CPs with various moieties, and in 

particular by grafting of CP backbones with polymeric si dechains. That enables modification of 

optoelectronic, chemophysical and mechanical properties of the CPs and their use as smart biointerfaces; 

e.g. responsive to various stimuli, intrinsically stretchable and self -healing. The second approach 

addresses th e issue that electrodes are commonly 2D and as such cannot fully probe the actual 3D cell 

environment within tissues and organs. Our approach to overcome that is based on a precise fabrication 

of individually addressable, high aspect ratio, 3D CP -pillar m icroelectrode arrays by means of ‘micro -

extrusion printing’. Such 3D microelectrode arrays could be employed in variety of applications, from 

biological sensing to recording and electrically stimulating cells and tissues, with the design of the arrays 

bein g easily adjustable to a particular application. Electrocatalysis and Bio -electrocatalysis at Nanoscale: 

# The Case for Heterogeneous Catalytic Cascades 

Plamen Atanassov 

Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, 

University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA 

plamen.atanassov@uci.edu 

Heterogeneous e lectrocatalysis in many practical applications is being performed on nano -sized or nano -

structured metals and metal alloys. Bioelectrochemistry often studies the charge transfer phenomena in 

immobilized proteins (en zymes) or enzyme aggregates (quaternary structures), which are also at nanoscale. 

Currently the most popular enzyme or DNA immobilization platforms and catalyst nano -particle support 

matrixes are either carbon nanotubes or graphene nano -sheets, both with c haracteristic dimensions in 

nanometer range. This implies that if we can master the processes of building the individual catalytic 

moieties in this scale and integrate also molecular catalysts through the so -called approach of 

“heterogenization”, or tether ing the redox catalysts at the interface with a spacer/linker molecule, we can 

have all those building b lock arranged, integrated and employed in model catalytic systems performing 

consecutive (cascade) or parallel reactions “as desired” at the interface. This is the notion of 

“heterogeneous catalytic cascades” developed by us in a consortium with several collaborators from 

University of Utah, Columbia, Michigan State University and UC Riverside. All the principals in this 

collaborative project have discuss ed the philosophy behind this effort and identified “ channeling ” as 

underlying principle for effective multi -step catalysis. 1 Our group have focused on research aiming the 

development of materials solutions for catalytic cascades, which would integrate bio -catalysis with 

molecular and heterogeneous catalytic steps. 2-4

In this talk we will review the technical approaches developed by aiming to integrate functional catalysts 

from these three quite distinct and often considered as “irreconcilabl e” types: enzymes, molecular catalyst 

and metallic nanoparticles and create a functional and practical materials platform allowing cascade 

reactions catalyzed by all these different species/moieties. We will present design and synthesis of a hybrid 

enzyme/ metal nanoparticle /atomically dispersed nano -material functional catalyst cascade . We will 

exemplify this idea with examples of building bio -electrochemical devices, where enzymatic catalysis will 

be enhanced by the heterogeneous and molecular one, with al l catalytic moieties co -present at a single 

“designer interface” based on graphene -like carbonaceous material. This heterogeneous catalytic cascade 

system is designed around 2D carbonaceous nanomaterial (graphene -like nano -flakes ), displayed as am 

aggregat e of those at meso -scale as spheroidal colloidal object: 3D -graphene nano -sheet (3D -GNS) . This 

material allows ease of integration by printing into a paper -based microfluidic analytical platform designed 

for a confocal Raman microscope for in situ spectro -electrochemical detection of the reactin intermediates 

and products .5,6 

1. Wheeldon, I., et al., Nature Chemistry, 8 (2016) 299 –309 

2. Abdellaoui, S., et al., Chemical Communications , 53 (2017) 5368 -5371 

3. Xia, L., et al., ACS Energy Letters. , 2 (2017) 1435 -1438 

4. Perry, A., et al., ChemElectroChem , 4 (2017) 2336 -2344 

5. Andersen, N., et al., ChemElectroChem , 6 (2019) 246 -251 

6. Andersen, N., et al., ChemElectroChem , 6 (2019) 2448 –2455 Chiral -Induced Spin Selectivity and its Implications for Spin 

# Chemistry and Asymmetric Electrochemistry 

Ron Naaman 

Dep. of Chemical and Biological Physics, Weizmann Institute 

Rehovot, Israel 

Ron.naaman@weizmann.ac.il 

Essential aspects of the chiral induc ed spin selectivity (CISS) effect and their implications for spin -

controlled chemistry and asymmetric electrochemical reactions will be described. The generation of 

oxygen through electrolysis will be discussed as an example in which chirality -based spin -filtering and 

spin selection rules can be used to improve the reaction’s efficiency and selectivity. Next the discussion 

will be shift ed to illustrate how the spin selectivity of chiral molecules (CISS properties) allow one to use 

the electron spin as a chi ral bias for inducing asymmetric reactions and promoting enantiospecific 

processes. Two enantioselective electrochemical reactions that have used polarized electron spins as a 

chiral reagent; enantioselective electroreduction to resolve an enantiomer from a racemic mixture and an 

oxidative electropolymerization to generate a chiral polymer from achiral monomers. A complementary 

approach that has used spin -polarized, but otherwise achiral, molecular films to enantiospecifically 

associate with one enantiomer from a racemic mixture will also be discussed. Each of these reaction types 

use magnetized films to generate the spin polarized electrons and the enantiospecificity can be selected by 

choice of the magnetization direction, North pole versus South pole. Pos sible paths for future research in 

this area and its compatibility with existing methods based on chiral electrodes will be presented .Electrocatalysis in Nanomaterial Modified Electrodes and Application 

# to Electrochemical Sensors 

Christopher M.A. Brett , W. da Silva 

University of Coimbra, CEMMPRE, Department of Chemistry ,

3004 -535 Coimbra, Portugal 

cbrett@ci.uc.pt 

The procurement of new materials and design of materials surface s for control and improvement of 

electrocatalysis is one of the primary goals of modern electrochemistry, with applications in many areas. 

This lecture will focus on strategies to promote electrocatalytic effects w ith the objective of increasing the 

selectivity and sensitivity of modified electrodes for electrochemical sensing. It is equally, if not more, 

important as increasing signals by enlargement of the active surface area , that can lead to lower detection 

limi ts and better long -term stability. This will be illustrated by recent results from two main approaches. 

The first is the use of carbon nanoma terials, carbon nanotubes or graphene, or gold nanoparticles as 

modifiers either singly or together to exploit syne rgistic effects , e.g. [1] , and combine this with 

voltammetric or impedance detection . The second concerns electroactive redox polymers formed as films 

by controlled potential electropolymerisation on multiwalled carbon nanotubes or on iron oxide 

nanopartic les . For this purpose, w e have explored the use of aqueous solutions, of room temperature ionic 

liquids and, more recently, of deep eutectic solvents (DES) [2] as media for polymer formation . It has 

been found that the surface morphology of the polymers pr epared in DES, particularly acid -doped 

ethaline DES, increases the polymer surface uniformity and leads to more robust sensing capabilities ,

whilst also promoting electrocatalytic effects – better kinetics – in the polymer itself. Characterisation of 

the m odified electrode platforms by voltammetric, electrochemical impedance and surface analysis 

techniques will be demonstrated. Electrocatalysis will be illustrated with model compounds and also 

showing how they can be used as successful mediators with fast k inetics in electrochemical sensors and 

enzyme biosensors , e.g. [3,4] .

1. N. Ben Messaoud, M.E. Ghica, C. Dridi, M. Ben Ali, C.M.A. Brett, Sens. Actuat. B , 253 (2017), 513 2. 

2. L.I.N. Tomé, V. Baião, W. da Silva, C.M.A. Brett, Appl. Mat. Today , 10 (2018) 30. 

3. W. da Silva, A.C. Queiroz, C.M.A. Brett, Electrochim. Acta , 347 (2020) 136284 .

4. W. da Silva, M.E. Ghica, C.M.A. Brett, Talanta , 208 (2020) 120427 .Electrostimulation of hyperthermophile Thermotoga neapolitana 

# cultures in a Power -to -gas perspective 

Pierangela Cristiani 1, G d’Ippolito 2, A. Fontana 2, G. Squadrito 3

> 1

RSE – Ricerca sul Sistema Energetico S.p.A., 

> 2

Institute of Biomolecular Chemsitry (ICB), National Research Council (CNR), Pozzuoli (Na) Italy 

> 3

Istitute of bAdvanced Tecnologies for Energy (ITAE), National Research Council (CNR), Messina Italy 

via Rubattino, 54, 20100 Milano, Italy 

Pierangela.cristiani@rse -web.it 

The environmental impact of unsustainable growth has led researchers to increasingly address the 

technologies able to supply clean energy and to minimize wastes. In this new vision, hydrogen is 

considered a suitable energy vector for renewable energy sources since its utilization is carbon -free and 

produces only water as a by -product. Particularly, the emerging Power -to -gas concept addresses great 

expectancy to bio -hydrogen production and also to innovative electromethanogenesis processes which 

both could exploit culture or coculture of microorganisms in bioelectrochemical systems [1]. The CO2 -

rich industrial discharged gases and organic wastes could be switched in values, in this way, contributing 

to solving emission issues and storing otherwise dispersed energy. Methanogenesis usual ly occurs in 

thermophile conditions. Nevertheless, thermophile and hyperthermophilic strains, have seldom been 

explored within the recent attempts to stimulate the bacteria metabolism for novel biotechnological 

applications. 

Thermotogales are among the mos t hyperthermophilic organotroph (>80 °C) within the bacterial branch 

of the phylogenetic tree. This bacteria group includes Thermotoga neapolitana (DSM 4359, ATCC 

49049), a rod -shaped, gram -negative, non -sporulating bacterium, found in the Solfatara crater s of 

Pozzuoli (the volcanic area close to Napoli, Italy), that can release hydrogen and lactic acid from waste 

organic matter by anaerobic fer mentation in marine water [2]. 

The capability of Thermotoga neapolitana to form biofilm and to interact with a pol arized carbon surface 

is presented here , aiming to study new electrochemical biotechnologies of electromethanogenesis in 

hyperthermophilic conditions. Different types of polarization were tested: i) potentiostatic, ii) 

potentiodynamic, and iii) no polariza tion (Open Circuit Potential) in comparison with Control bioreactors 

without electrodes. Cultures of T. neapolitana fed with 30mM of glucose in bioreactors equipped with 

carbon cloth electrodes, under CO 2 pressure (capnophilic condition) were tested, at 80 °C. Chemical 

analyses of glucose and of the principal glucose metabolites (hydrogen, acetic and lactic acids) were 

performed after 1-3 days of testing. Biofilm formation on carbon cloth after under different polarizations 

was documented by SEM observations .

Results from biofilm and electrostimulation tests indicated that a dynamic polarization is able to tune 

settlement and detachment processes on the electrodes, modifying the bacteria metabolism of glucose 

fermentation . The presence of electrodes in the b ioreactors and polarization caused temporary bacteria 

starvation on conductive surfaces, followed by high metabolite production . Cyclic potentiodynamic 

polarizations of ±0.8V between electrodes, with a scan rate of 0.5mVs -1, caused a n almost totally 

starva tion of bacteria on carbon cloth. An increased polarization of ±1.2V, caused bacteria detachment 

from electrodes . Some consideration on the type, mode , and intensity of polarization are discussed, from 

the perspective of a sy ntropy of this bacteria strain with methanogens in the perspective of an 

electromethanogenesis process. 

[1] F. Geppert, D. Liu, M. van Eerten -Jansen, E. Weidner, C. Buisman e A. Ter Heijne, 

«Bioelectrochemical power -to -gas: State of the art and future perspectives,» Trens Biotechnol, v ol. 34, 

pp. 879 -894, 2016 

[2] M. Dipasquale, G. d'Ippolito e A. Fontana, «Capnophilic lactic fermentation and hydrogen synthesis 

by Thermotoga neapolitana: An unexpected deviation from the dark fermentation model,» Int. J. 

Hydrogen Energy, vol. 39, pp. 485 7-4862, 2014. Study on the Initial Stage of Lithium Electrod eposition in 

# Pyrrolidinium -Based Ionic Liquid Electrolytes 

Jun -Wu He , Yu Gu, Hong -Yu Xu, Wei -Wei Wang, Jia -Wei Yan* , Bing -Wei Mao *

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and Department of Chemistry, College of 

Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University 

Xiamen 361005, China 

E-mails: bwmao@xmu.edu.cn , jwyan@xmu.edu.cn 

Lithium metal as one of anode material s of batter ies can greatly improve the energy density of the battery 

because of its highest theoretical specific capacity and lowest electrode potential (vs. SHE) [1 ,2], and Li 

electrodeposition and dissolution are most fundamental processes of the batteries during cycl ing . However, 

fundamental research es have been rarely reported on the initial stage of Li electrodeposition involving 

nucleation and growth partially because of the presence of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) which 

impose difficulties for monitoring the underneath deposition process . On the other hand, ionic liquids (ILs) 

having the characteristics of non -flammability, non -volatility, high ionic conductivity and wide 

electrochemical window can be used as elect rolytes for lithium batteries [3] . Herein , we employ traditional 

electrochemical techniques to study the formation of SEI and nucleation and growth behavior of lithium on 

Cu surfaces in pyrrolidinium -based IL electrolytes of mixed Py 14 TFSI and Py 14 FSI with different proportion 

and containing the corresponding lithium salt to understand the roles of the anions .

To reduce the impact of Faradaic currents arising from SEI formation during Li deposition , a stable SEI 

was formed in advance in the IL mixtures with different anion proportions . Electrochemical impedance 

measurements , in the same electrolytes for SEI prep aration, reveal that the impedances of the SEIs formed 

are different , and they decrease with increasing FSI − content . Chronoamperometr ic measurements were 

then applied to follow the initial stage of Li electrodeposition. Diffusion controlled nucleation and growth 

behavior s were observed with reduced overpotential at increasing FSI − content. Fitting by traditional 

nucleatio n model [4] , taking into account the residual current from SEI reformation [5], Li nucleation process 

is found close to 3D progressive , which gradually changes to 3D instantaneous nucleation as overpotential 

increases. The nucleation density N 0 increase s with the increase of the overpotential as well as the FSI −

content , indicating that the SEIs performed in higher content of FSI − are beneficial to the nucleation and 

growth of lithium. Our work demonstrates that the Li deposition behavior may be regulated by the FSI −

content to adjust the properties of SEI. 

This work was supported by the Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China (21972119, 

21673193 ) and the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of China (2019TQ0177). 

References: 

[1] P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, et al. Nat. Mater. 11 , 19 -29 (2012). 

[2] D. C. Lin, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol. 12 , 194 -206 (2017). 

[3] M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, et al. Nat. Mater, 8, 621 -629 (2009). 

[4] B. R. Scharif ker, J. Mostany, M. Palomar -Pardave, et al. J. Electrochem . Soc. 146 , 1005 -1012 (1999). 

[5] B. Thirumalraj, T. T. Hagos, C. J. Huang, et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 , 18612 -18623 (2019). The Nature and Role of Salt Films in Pits 

Gerald S. Frankel , Tianshu Li, Sarita Sahu 

Fontana Corrosion Center, The Ohio State University 

Columbus, OH 43210 USA 

frankel. 10@osu.edu 

A framework for pit stability has been established in a series of recent publications. 1-5 The maximum pit 

dissolution current density, idi ss ,max , whic h depends on temperature and maximum potential at the pit 

surface in a given pit environment, is proposed and compared with the diffusion current density to 

determine the conditions for pit stability and salt film formation. For an open pit, the criterion for pit 

stability is that idi ss ,max must be greater than or equal to the critical diffusion current density required for 

maintaining a cri tical local environment for active dissolution, idiff,crit . The critical condition of idi ss ,max =

idiff,crit is associ ated with three parameters that must be exceeded for stabilization of an open pit: critical 

temperature Tcrit , critical potential Ecrit an d critical pit depth rcrit . Analogously, the criterion for salt film 

formation is that idi ss ,max must further exceed the diffusion -limited current density ilim , and three 

parameters associated with salt film formation are: saturation temperature Tsat , satu ration potential Esat and 

saturation pit depth rsat . A salt film is not required for pit stabili zation ; it is just a consequence of a pit 

achieving diffusion -controlled growth . The main function of a salt film is to adjust the actual potential at 

pit surfa ce by regulating its thickness, thus to restrict the anodic dissolution rate of pit surface meta l at the 

value of ilim . The film thickness will respon d to any change s in the applied potential, temperature, pit 

depth , ohmic potential drop in the solution an d perforation radius of the pit cover . Downward potential 

scans from the diffusion -controlled co ndition were performed on SS316L one -dimensional (1D) artificial 

pit electrodes in 0.6 M NaCl , and experimental evidence is provided to support the validity of the new 

framework. Using pits of different depths, the maximum pit dissolution current density, idiss,max , was 

obtained as a function of maximum pit surface potential, Emax , at fixed pit surface metal cation 

concentration . Charge -transfer -controlled 1D pit gr owth is a transient state, which will spontaneously 

transition to diffusion -controlled growth. The salt film formed on a SS304 1D pit surface was preserved 

by flash freezing and characterized using cryo -based focused ion beam/scanning electron microscop y. 

The salt film exhibits a porous structure. Ni is co -located with Fe in the salt film, indicating the formation 

of co -precipitated salt containing Fe 2+ and Ni 2+ . A salt film growth model at steady state based on ion 

transport was proposed in which the sa lt film grows at the metal/salt film interface, while it dissolves at 

the salt film/solution interface. The growth rate at metal/salt film interface is determined by pit depth, 

film porosity and the ion mobility. The metal and chloride ion in the salt film ar e carried by both 

migration in channels formed by interconnection of the pores and the outward movement of the salt 

crystallites from the formation of salt below .

Acknowledgments: This work was supported as part of the Center for Performance and Des ign of Nuclear 

Waste Forms and Containers, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of 

Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award # DE -SC0016584. 

References :

1. G. S. Frankel, T. Li, and J. R. Scully, J. Electroc hem . Soc ., 164 (4), C180 -C181 (2017). 

2. T. Li, J. R. Scully, and G. S. Frankel, J. Electrochem . Soc ., 165 (9), C484 -C491 (2018). 

3. T. Li, J. R. Scully, and G. S. Frankel, J. Electrochem . Soc ., 165 (11), C762 -C770 (2018). 

4. T. Li, J. R. Scully, and G. S. Frankel, J. Electrochem . Soc ., 166 (6), C115 -C124 (2019). 

5. T. Li, J. R. Scully, and G. S. Frankel, J. Electrochem . Soc ., 166 (11), C33 41 -C3354 (2019). Novel Strategies to Enhance OER Electrocatalysis in Alkaline Media 

J.R. Galan -Mascaros , N. López, F. Garcés -Pineda, H. C. Nguyën, M. De Fez -Febré 

Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ) 

Av. Països Catalans , 16. 43007 – Tarragona, Spain. 

jrgalan @iciq. 

The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a key process in the general development of sustainable solar 

fuels, and essential in the progress/growth of an alternative hydrogen economy. This is a very demanding 

rea ction, since a OER catalysts must be fas t and efficient, but also stable and robust to high oxidation 

potentials, water, oxygen, radicals, acids or bases, etc. Several earth abundant metal oxides have appeared 

as excellent OER electrocatalysts in alkaline conditions, thanks to the robust stabili ty of metal oxides in 

high pH .1 The most common agreement suggests that FeNi oxo -hydroxides are arguably the best OER 

catalyst at pH > 13 ,2 although many other binary and ternary candidates appear close in activity. 3 The 

complexity of this reaction makes d ifficult to understand and optimize the performance of these catalysts, 

with the remaining goal to minimize overpotentials, and to maximize current densities. Indeed, after 

thousands of experiments with multiple phas es, the latest progress reports deal wit h further 

nanostructuration and smart processing of the materials to increase active surface area. 4

In this presentation we will introduce some novel strategies to enhance OER activity in alkaline 

conditions. On one end, we will demonstrate how the use of magnetic fields may boost the performance 

of classic magnetic metal oxides. 5 On the other end, we will show how a non -redox doping approach 

opens alternative (and faster) mechanistic pathways. 6 Both strategies were develope d from the 

combination of experi me nt and theory, as an example of the powerful contribution that computational 

chemistry can bring to the field , opening new alternatives difficult to disclose or understand exclusively 

from experimental data analysis .

(1) B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray, A. M. Mü ller, Chem. Rev. 2016 , 116 , 14120 –14136. 

(2) B. You, Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res. 2018 , 51 , 1571 –1580. 

(3) C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 2015 , 137 , 4347 –4357. 

(4) H. Zhou, F. Yu, Q. Z hu, J. Sun, F. Qin, L. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen, Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci. 

2018 , 11 , 2858 –2864. 

(5) F. A. Garcés -Pineda, M. Blasco -Ahicart, D. Nieto -Castro, N. López, J. R. Galan -Mascaros , Nat. 

Energy 4, 519 –525 (2019) 

(6) H. C. Nguyen, F. A. Garcés -Pi neda, M. De Fez -Febre, J. R. Galan -Mascaros, N. López , Chem. Sci. 

2020 , 11 , 2464 –2471 .Anodizing of various metallic substrates and alloys 

# over a large potential range 

Delphine Veys -Renaux , Emmanuel Rocca 

Institut Jean Lamour, Université de Lorraine -CNRS, 

Campus Artem, 2 allée André Guinier, Nancy, France 

delphine.veys -renaux@univ -lorra ine.fr 

The electrochemical behavior of various metals, namely magnesium, aluminium, titanium and zinc has 

been investigated over a large potential range. 

Whatever the substrate, three successive 

anodizing steps may be observed: 

i) a first “conventional anodizing” step controlled 

by the solid -state inward migration of O 2- and 

outward migration of M n+ ions under the electric 

field effect, 

ii) beyond the dielectric breakdown potential, a 

range over which the micro -arc phenomenon 

may oc cur , leading to the formation of a ceramic 

like layer, 

iii) a “current wall” induced by the increase of 

oxide conductivity and characterized by a high 

release of ox ygen due to water oxidation. 

The possible formation of a ceramic like coating 

under the effect of micro -ar c discharges depends 

on the physico -chemical and dielectric properties 

of the inner layer grown by conventional 

anodizing and governing the occurrence of the dielectric breakdown. The growth mechanisms and the 

related properties of this inner layer have be en finely characterized by combining in situ electrochemical 

techniques (voltamperometry, in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy) and ex situ 

characterizations of the anodic layers by scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, 

energy dispersive spectroscopy, X -Ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ellipsometry. 

The presence of alloying elements in the substrates may modify the composition and the dielectric 

properties of the inner layer as well, and consequently the conditions of bre akdown occurrence on the one 

hand and the corrosion resistance of the anodized samples on the other hand. 

Through different examples, it has been shown that the chemical composition of the electrolytic solution 

must be judiciously chosen to ensure an “eff icient” growth of the conventional inner anodic layer. 

Actually, the pH is a key factor to induce an optimal anodic layer growth rate. Moreover, the resistance of 

the inner layer may be reinforced by the incorporation of additive elements from the electrol yte (silicates, 

fluorides, etc..). The micro -arc anodizing process may therefore be optimized by lowering the current 

density necessary to reach the breakdown and the micro -arc regime. The incorporation of additive species 

in the external porous ceramic la yer may furthermore enhance the corrosion performances by acting as 

sealants during the degradation processes. 

Electrochemical behavior recorded on aluminium in 

alkaline medium and typical morphologies of 

anodic layers relative to different anodizing sta ges In situ studies of the atomic structure/charge distribution at the 

# electrochemical interface 

Y. Grunder 1, C.A. Lucas 1, J. W. Beane 1, Y. Joly2, Y. Soldo -Olivier 2

1 University of Liverpool, Oliver Lodge Laboratory, L69 7ZE Liverpool, UK 

2 CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N �el, 38042 Grenoble, France Addres s

grunder@liverpool.ac.uk 

The presence of specifically adsorbed anions can significa nt ly affect the electrochemical reactivity of a 

metal electrode which is of major interest for galvanic deposition, etching, c orrosion and electrocatalysis. 

In -situ surface x -ray diffraction has enabled an atomic/molecular -level understanding of the interface 

under reactive conditions, including its potential and time dependence, to be developed. While 

information about the atomi c structure of the electrode surface in electrochemical in -situ cells has been 

widely investigated, insight into the charge distribution and the structure of the electrolyte at the interface 

is still lacking. Advances in these directions offer possibilitie s in elucidating atomic scale models of the 

electrochemical interface and thus will help to establish structure -stability -reactivity relationships. 

A fundamental understanding of the nature of the charge transfer, especially the influence of the applied 

potential and the screening by the electrolyte, is a major goal in electrochemistry to better understand 

electrochemical processes and charge transfer during adsorption and deposition. [1] 

Thus combining x -ray spectroscopy and x -ray diffraction to gain sit e specific information about the 

charge distribution at buried interfaces is a promising tool. [2,3] 

Examples of how the use of surface x -ray scattering techniques can help to characterise electrochemical 

interfaces in -situ in order to link, structure, re activity and stability will be presented. [3,4] Advances in 

these directions offer possibilities in elucidating atomic scale models of the electrochemical interface and 

thus will help to establish structure -stability -reactivity relationships. 

References: 

[1] Y. Gründer and C. A. Lucas, Nano Energy 29, 378 (2016). 

[2] Y. Gründer, P. Thompson, A. Brownrigg, M. Darlington, and C. A. Lucas, Journal of Physical 

Chemistry C 116, 6283 (2012). 

[3] Y. Gründer, P. Thomppson, and C. A. Lucas, in preparat ion (2015). 

[4] Y. Joly et al., Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 14, 973 (2018). Mechanism of boosted electro n transf er in microbial electrochemical 

# systems with carbon -based materi als 

Yujie Fen g, Peng Zh ang, Da Li 

State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Sc hool of Environmen t, Harbin 

Institute of Technology 

No.73 Hu anghe Road, Nangang District, H arbin 150 090, P.R.China 

yujief@ hit.edu.cn 

Electrons can be transferred from electrochemically active bacteria to extracellular electron acceptors 

with the oxidation of organic matt ers, which plays important roles in are as of energy production, 

environmental remediation and  geochemical cycl e systems . He re we re viewed our late st works abou t the 

fundamental research involving  extracellular electron transfer (EET) process , and the role of carbon -

based materials for boost ing EET was also discussed .

Electr on transfer process from cell to the el ec trode : Carbon quantum dots (CD s) could increase the 

extracellular electron transfer and metabolic rate of S. oneidensis MR -1, with increased intracellular 

charge, higher adenosine triphosphate level, quicker substra te consumption and more abundant 

extrac el lular secretion like flavin . Meanwhile, the CDs promote d cellular adhesion, electronegativity, and 

biofilm formation. In bioelectrical systems the CDs -fed cells increase d the maximum current value, 7.34 

fol d, and po wer output, 6.46 fold. The enhancement ef ficacy wa s found to be strongly dependent on the 

surface charge of the CDs .

Inters pecies electron transfer process : The interspecies electron transfer between Geobac ter coculture 

could be pro moted by adding biochar as the exogenous mediator . This accel era tion process show ed a 

high ly positive relationship with the oxygen element content rather th an conductivity o f bi ochar .

Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT ) also displa yed the accelerat ion of the electron transfer p rocess 

in the Geobacter cocultures syst em due to its hi gh conductivity which play ed a role of electron transfer 

bridge by connecti ng cell s.

Electron transfer process through bio film : The electron transfer in a biofilm constr ucted by mixed 

cu ltures could b e promoted by inserting MWCNT into the hy brid biofilm . Such a desi gned biofilm can 

enhance the EET ability of the biofilm . The specific mechanism ana lysis showed that the MWCNT 

insert ion can reduce the resistance of the electron transfer through the biofil m. Additionally, it showed a 

superior sel ecti vity towar ds exoele trogens in the bio film which therefore optimized the community 

structure .

Illustra tion of the ele ctron transfer process in the  microbial electrochemical systems  with carbon -based 

materi als 

Keywords: mechanism of electron transfer ; microbial electrochemical systems ; carbon -based materi als Electric Microbes, Metals, and Nanowires 

Gemma Reguera 

Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics 

567 Wilson Rd, Rm 6190 

Michigan State University 

East Lansing, MI 4882 4

reguera@msu.edu 

The Reguera lab investigates electrochemical reactions catalyzed by microbes in natural and anthropogenic 

systems. Of particular significance is our seminal work investigating how microbes couple their 

metabolisms via electrical signals and the impact that these activities have in the mineralization of toxic 

metals and radionuclides. Our interests go beyond the basic research and seek to develop sustainable 

technologies that harness the electrical activities and conductive cellular components of these organisms in 

bioremediation and bioenergy applica tions. In this talk, I will describe novel methodologies we have 

developed to investigate the physiology of electric microbes and their interactions with biotic and abiotic 

components of their ecosystem. The basic research provides the fundamental knowledg e for applied 

projects we have developed t o harness the power of electric microbes and their components in 

biotechnology. The translational work also includes collaborations with industrial partners to advance 

electrochemical technologies for energy and bi oremediation applications while providing a training 

platform for students and postdocs to bridge the great divide between academia and industry. Pseudocapacitive Effects from Electrolytes and Electrode Materials 

Elzbieta Frackowiak 

Poznan University of Technology, Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry 

60 -965 Poznan , Berdychowo 4 

elzbieta. frackowiak@put.poznan.pl 

Electrochemical ca pacitors EC (named also electrical double -layer capacitors or supercapacitors) are the 

devices based on the reversible storage of energy by electrostatic (capacitive) attraction of ions. 

Performance of EC are strongly governed by the type of electrolytes, namely aqueous (acidic, basic, 

neutral), organic and ionic liquids. As a consequence, practical voltage range of EC in these electrolytes 

varies from 0.8 V to 3.5 V, respectively. The type of current collector will also affect EC voltage values. 

Capacit ive charge storage can be increased by faradaic reactions, frequently called pseudocapacitive 

effects. It must be underlined that only redox reactions which present capacitive behavior should be 

considered, i.e., capacitance should be proportional to the c harge accordingly to formula C = dQ/dE. 

Faradaic contribution can be originated from electrode materials but also from electrolytic solutions. 

Typical electrode materials with pseudocapacitive character consist of: i) electrically conducting 

polymers, ii) carbon materials rich in heteroatoms (oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur), iii) oxides, e.g., Mn, Ru, 

iv) carbon with electrosorbed hydrogen. Dichalcogenides such as sulfides, selenides of transition metals 

(e.g., Mo, Co , V, W ) can be used as electrode components t o increase capacitance, in turn, energy of 

supercapacitor. 

Exploring redox active species from electrolytic solution is another possibility for energy increase by 

pseudocapacitive effects [1,2] . Figure 1 shows a big variety of redox couples which could b e eventually 

used for this target. Practical application of such redox pairs will be determined by reversibility, pH of 

solution, concentration, price, availability, toxic character , influence on capacitor ag eing . Some of them 

can be used only as an additi ve to electrolyte. Taking into account their potential values , different redox 

species could serve for positive and negative electrode. 

Figure 1: Potential values for various redox couples versus their molecular weight. 

[1] G. Lota, K. Fic, E. Frackow iak, Alkali metal iodide carbon/interface, Electrochemistry Commun. 12 

(2011) 38 -41. 

[2] S -E. Chun, B. Evanko, X. Wang, D. Vonlanthen, X. Ji, G.D. Stucky, S.W. Boettcher, Design of 

aqueous redox -enhanced electrochemical capacitors with high specific energi es and slow self -discharge 

Nature Commun. 6 (2015) 7818. From Inhibitor Screening to Advanced Characterization of A ctive 

# Protective C oatings 

Arjan Mol 

Delft University of Technology, Department of Materials Science and Engineering 

Mekelweg 2, 2628CD, Delft, The Netherlands 

J.M.C.Mol@tudelft.nl 

A cost -efficient and effective corrosion protection measure for metals exposed to corrosive conditions is 

the application of active protective coatings. These organic coatings provide barrier protection when 

intact, but also rely on the release of corrosion inhibitors and /or self -healing to protect coating defects 

upon damage. For decades corrosion inhibitors were based on hexavalent chromium chemistries, but 

these are now recognized to be extremely toxic and carcinogenic and subject to strict international health 

and safe ty legislation .

Many different compounds have been studied to find a non -toxic and environmentally friendly alternative 

for hexavalent chromium based corrosion inhibitors in active protective coatings by rapid screening 

techniques and more in -depth mechan istic studies. As an example, o ver the recent years, lithium -salts 

have become of interest as a potential alternative for chromates as leaching corrosion inhibitor in organic 

coatings  and  demonstrated active protective properties on aerospace aluminium all oys . Further insights 

into the active protective mechanism of the lithium -based inhibitor coating technology will be presented :

leaching kinetics and in -coating inhibitor mobility, formation of a protective layer in a coating defect, the 

protective mechani sm . The results show the mechanistic ally different behavior of some high -potential 

inhibitor doped coating technology compared to other inhibitors and demonstrate the key characteristics 

that are essential for active protective coatings, providing fast lea ching, effective inhibition and formation 

of an irreversible protective layer in the defect area .

Besides inhibitor -based active protective coating concepts also other novel and smart coating 

technologies based on self -healing of coating defects show a w ide variety of promising concepts. With 

the implementation of a combined polymer and corrosion inhibitor healing concept, the individual and 

combined time frames for polymer healing and the active surface healing by corrosion inhibitive 

pigments is even of more importance. Also the analysis of irreversibility of the active protection as well 

as the time -evolution and duration of protection performance is shown to be of pivotal importance. 

This presentation provides an overview of recent advances in the de velopment and characterization of 

novel inhibitor systems, inhibitor -based and self -healing active protective coatings. Advanced 

microscopic, spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques will be presented to unravel local corrosion 

protection mechanisms , inhibitor mobility and leaching from organic coatings as well as inhibitor -based 

and self -healing coating performance. Light - versus voltage -driven electron transfer across multi -heme 

# proteins 

J. Blumberger 1*, J. H. van Wonderen 2, X. Jiang 1, X. Wu 1, K. Garg 3, Z. Futera 1, M. Sheves 4, D. Cahen 3, S. 

R. Meech 2, J. N. Butt 2

> 1

University College London 

Department of Physics a nd Astronomy, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK 

> 2

University of East Anglia 

School of Chemistry and School of Biological Sciences, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK  

> 3

Weizmann Institute of Science 

Department of Materials and Interfaces, Rehovot, Is rael 

> 4

Weizmann Institute of Science 

Department of Organic Chemistry, Rehovot, Israel 

*email: j.  blumberger@ucl.ac.uk 

Certain bacteria have evolved an astonishing survival mechanisms in response to low oxygen 

co ncentrations. When cytoplasmatic oxygen becomes scarce they start to grow μm -long electrically 

conducting cellular appendages to export electrons from the cytoplasm to extracellular space for reduction 

of extracellular substrates in place of O 2. Recently it was shown that arrays of Fe -containing multi -heme 

cytochromes (MHC) confer electric conductivity to those appendages, which garnered much interest for 

their use in bionanotechnological applications, e.g. bio -compatible field effect transistors. Here I will 

present recent experimental measureme nts probing light -driven electron transfer (ET) 1 and voltage -driven 

electron transport (ETp) 2 through MHCs as well as their interpretation by theory, electronic structure 

calculations and molecular dynamics simulation 1, 2, 3. Specifically, I will discuss rec ent pump -probe 

transient absorption spectroscopy results on photo -induced electron injection in Ru -labeled MHCs in 

solution . We find evidence that the initial ET step along the heme chain occurs via fast, nanosecond 

heme -to -heme electron hopping 1 in agreem ent with prior predictions from computations 3. These results 

are first experimental evidence for the hypothesis that in biology the micrometer -long electron transport 

in extracellular respiration occurs via a sequence of many (thousands) of heme -to -heme ho pping events. 

By contrast, w e find that voltage -driven ETp in dry MHCs mono -layer junctions is temperature 

independent and, very surprisingly, best described by coherent tunneling models with tunneling distances 

of several nanometers spanning the entire p rotein 2. The currents across MHCs are orders of magnitude 

higher (ca 0.1 nA at 0.5 V) than in proteins of similar size (e.g. Azurin) opening up exciting opportunities 

for the use of MHCs in bioelectronic applications. Taken together, these light and voltag e driven studies 

show that one and the same protein can support different electron flow mechanisms depending on how it 

is initiated in experiment. 

[1] J. van Wonderen, C. Hall, X. Jiang, K. Adamczyk, A. Carof, I. Heisler, S. Piper, T. Clarke, N. 

Watm ough, I. Sazanovich, M. Towrie, S. R. Meech, J. Blumberger, and J. Butt, “Ultra -fast light -driven 

electron transfer in a Ru(II)tris(bipyridine) -labelled multiheme cytochrome,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 

15190 -15200, 2019 

[2]  K. Garg, M. Ghosh, T. Eliash, J. H . van Wonderen, J. N. Butt, L. Shi, X. Jiang, Z. Futera, J. 

Blumberger, I. Pecht, M. Sheves, and D. Cahen, “Direct evidence for heme -assisted solid -state electronic 

conduction in multi -heme c -type cytochromes,” Chem. Sci. 9, 7304 -7310, 2018. 

[3] X. Jiang, B. Burger, F. Gajdos, C. Bortolotti, Z. Futera, M. Breuer, and J. Blumberger, “Kinetics of 

trifurcated electron flow in the bacterial deca -heme cytochromes MtrC and MtrF,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 

USA , vol. 116, pp. 3425 -3430, 2019. Ionic Liquids as Co -catalysts for CO 2 Electroreduction in Molecular 

# Electrocatalysis 

Carlos M. Sánchez -Sánchez 

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire Interfaces et Systèmes Electrochimiques, LISE, 

75005 Paris, France 

carlos.sanchez@upmc.fr 

Ionic liquids (ILs) in electrocataly sis have attracted a lot of attention fr om  the seminal work of  Rosen et 

al. [1] where they used a mixture with 18 mol% of 1 -Ethyl -3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate 

([EMIM][BF 4]) in wa ter as a solvent supporting electrolyte system and achieved a relevant overpotential 

decrease for CO 2 reduction on a silver electrode by forming adducts between CO 2 and reduced 

imidazolium cations . In fact, it has been demonstrated more recently that imida zolium cations are reduced 

on the electrode surface as a first step and then form adducts with  CO 2, [2 -3] which lowers the energy 

barrier of the unfavorable first one -electron reduction to CO 2. Nevertheless, most of those studies using 

ILs have been carrie d out mainly using heterogeneous electrocatalysts. In contrast, much less work has 

been done exploring the role of ILs in molecular electrocatalysis for CO 2 electroreduction .

The role of different ILs as simultaneous supporting electrolyte and co -catalyst in acetonitrile for CO 2

electroreduction in the presence of a model molecular catalyst [Re(bpy)(CO) 3Cl] is presented here . [4]

Thus, the structure -activity relationship of ILs on electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction is evaluated by cyclic 

voltammetry and control led potential electrolysis. In particular, the nature of the cation, anion and cation 

alkyl chain is varied by a choice of 5 different ILs, including imidazolium and pyrrolidinium cations and 

their results are compared to conventional benchmark supporting electrolyte. Under catalytic conditions 

an overpotential diminution of 0. 33 V for CO 2 to CO conversion is achieved in the presence of ILs .

Finally, a mechanistic explanation is provided to justify this behavior and the partial suppression of the IL 

co -cata lytic effect when CO 2 electroreduction takes place in the presence of a proton source. 

References 

[1] Rosen, B. A.; Salehi -Khojin, A.; Thorson, M.R.; Zhu, W.; Whipple, D.T.; Kenis, P.J.A.; Masel, R. I. 

Science 2011 , 334 (6056), 643 –644 .

[2] Hanc -Scherer, F. A.; Montiel, M.A.; Montiel, V.; Herrero, E.; Sánchez -Sánchez, C.M. Phys.  Chem. 

Chem. Phys. 2015 , 17 , 23909 –23916 .

[3] Wang, Y.; Hayashi, T.; He, D.; Li, Y.; Jin, F.; Nakamura, R. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 2020 , 264 ,

118495. 

[4] Vichou, E.; Xu -Li, Y.; Gomez -Mingot, M.; Fontecave, M.; Sánchez -Sá nchez, C.M. ACS Catal, 

submitted. Beyond Electrochemical ImpedanceSpectroscopy: Advanced Methods 

# forS tudying the Dynamics of Electrochemical Processes 

Tanja Vidakovi ć-Koch 

Electrochemical Energy Conversion, Max Planck Institute for dynamic s of Complex Technical Systems 

Sandtorstraße 1, Mag deburg, Germany 

vidakovic@mpi -magdeburg.mpg.de 

Understanding the dynamic regime of electrochemical processes is of great interest for applications such 

as water electrolysis for intermediate energy storage of fluctuating renewable energies. Furthermore, 

dynamic methods are widely used for the diagnosis of electrochemical devices such as fuel cells and 

batteries and for kinetic mechanism discriminations. In my group different dynamic methods based on 

periodic changes of electrical [1 -4] and non -electrical i nputs [ 5-6] for applications in fuel cells, 

electroenzymatic systems and kinetic determinations are in current focus. 

An example is a so -called non -linear frequency response analysis (NFRA). NFRA can be 

considered as a generalization of the traditional el ectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) where 

instead of small input amplitudes large input amplitudes are used. This drives the system out of a linear 

range. Therefore, the nonlinear system response contains a linear contribution which corresponds to t he 

electrochemical admittance, as well as nonlinear contributions. These nonlinear parts of the response give 

a nonlinear fingerprint of an electrochemical system which can be used for sounder kinetic parameter 

determination or for discrimination of differ ent rivaling model descriptions. However, the NFRA method 

is not widely understood and accepted, as it requires fundamental physico -chemical modeling for 

interpretation and advanced measuring tools. Consequently, research groups that use the NFRA method 

ar e very scarce, with no consensus on how the NFR data should be analyzed. In this talk applications of 

NFRA for kinetic mechanism determinations will be show cased using different examples of simple and 

multi -step electrochemical reactions [1 -4] .

In additi on to periodic changes of electrical inputs (like current or potential), my group uses also 

non -electrical inputs to study dynamics of electrochemical systems in a so called concentration -

alternating frequency response analysis (cFRA) as a new dynamic meth od to investigate the dynamics of 

electrochemical systems [ 5]. We demonstrated an experimental validation and a measurement routine of 

this new electrochemical method [ 6]. In cFRA the electrical response of the cell (current or potential) to 

periodic pertu rbation of specific reactant feeds is studied by means of linear system analysis. For the 

example of a polymer electrolyte fuel cell (PEMFC) we show that cFRA, in contrast to classical 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), detects selectively the e ffect of the dynamics of mass 

transport of reactants and products inside the different layers of the PEMFC. cFRA can also diagnose the 

humidification state of the fuel cell cathode. 

References: 

[1] T. Vidaković -Koch, V. Panić, M. Andić, M. Petkovska, K. Sundmacher, "Non -linear frequency 

response analysis of the ferrocyanide oxidation kinetics: Part I – A theoretical analysis", J. Phys. 

Chem. C, 115(35) (2011) 17341 - 17351 

[2] T. Vidaković -Koch, V.K. Mittal, T.Q.N. Do, M. Varničić, K. Sundmacher, "Applic ation of 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy for studying of enzyme kinetics", Electrochim. Acta, 110 

(2013) 94 -104 

[3] B. Bensmann, M. Petkovska, T. Vidaković -Koch, R. Hanke -Rauschenbach, K. Sundmacher, 

"Nonlinear frequency response analysis of electro chemical methanol oxidation kinetics: A theoretical 

analysis", J. Electrochem. Soc., 157 (2010) B1279 - B1289 

[4] S. Kandaswamy, A. Sorrentino, S. Borate, L.A. Živković, M. Petkovska, T. Vidaković -Koch ,

“Oxygen reduction reaction on silver electrodes under strong alkaline conditions”, Electrochimica 

Acta, 320 (2019)134517 

[5] A. Sorrentino, T. Vidaković -Koch, R. Hanke -Rauschenbach, K. Sundmacher, “Concentration -

alternating frequency response: A new method for studying polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell 

dynamics”, Electrochim. Acta, 243 (2017) 53 -64 

[6] A. Sorrentino, T. Vidaković -Koch, K. Sundmacher, “Studying mass transport dynamics in polymer 

electrolyte membrane fuel cells using concentration -alternating frequency response analysis”, J. 

Power Sources , 412 (2019) 331 -335 2D or not 2D: Graphene and r elated materials in electrochemistry 

Robert A.W. Dryfe 

Dept. of Chemistry, University of Manchester ,

Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K. 

robert.dryfe@manchester.ac.uk 

In the 12 or so years since the first paper s on graphene in the electrochemical context appeared [1] ,

applications of this material in electrochemistry have grown almost unabated. The use of graphene in 

most electrochemical applications (batteries, supercapacitors, electroanalysis, corrosion protection) has 

bee n widely evaluated and electrochemical methods have also been promoted as a route to prepare 2D 

materials [2] . Two approaches can be discerned in the literature: a “ top -down ” one, relying on solution 

exfoliated dispersions, generally of varying thickness a nd content of oxygen (and other) atoms [3] ; and a 

“bottom -up ” one where single flakes, with well -defined properties , are studied [4] .

The second approac h tends to be guided by advances in sample preparation, where the physics 

community is now focusing on the “hetero -structures” formed from layers of 2D materials [5] .

“Designer” structures can also be performed by assembly of 2D materials with, for example, organic 

molecules to form assemblies whose bulk properties differ from th ose of th e re -stacked 2D mat erial [6] .

A key question for the electrochemical community - which I believe is still largely unanswered - is how 

the pro perties of 2D materials – e.g. graphene – evolve as the material thickness increases toward the bulk 

value (graphite in this case ) [7 ]. Given that graphene is effectively an inte rfacial film, its behavior ( e.g. 

capacitance, electroactivity with respect to a redox couple , wetting [8 ]) is strongly affected by the 

presence of other interfacial films, whether deliberately or accidentally in troduced, and by the substrate 

on which it is supported. Examples of such effects will be presented, along with current thinking about 

the comparison with graphene and graphite electrochemistry. 

2D materials present interesting possibilities to create “mem brane” structures, either via random assembly 

of their flakes [6] , via charge transfer through the material (intrinsic [9 ], or through a drilled hole [10 ]) or 

by assembly of nanochannels from these materials [11 ]. These structure s allow unique studies of i on 

transport , which have only just begun to be exploited in the electrochemical arena .

This lecture will discuss some of the present and likely future directions for this field. 

REFERENCES: 

1. M.D. Stoller et al, Nano Letters, 8, (2008), 3498. 

2. A.M. Abdelkad er, A.J. Cooper, I.A. Kinloch and R.A.W. Dryfe, Nanoscale, 7, (2015), 6944. 

3. L. Wang, Z. Sofer, M, Pumera , ACS Nano, 14, (2020), 21 

4. M. Velický et al , ACS Nano, 8, (2014), 10089. 

5. R.A.W. Dryfe, Curr . O pin . Electrochem., 13, (2019), 119. 

6. W. Hirunpinyopas et al , ACS Nano, 11, (2017), 11082. 

7. M. Velický et al , ACS Nano, 14 , (2020), 993 .

8. C-J. Shih et al, Phys. Rev. Lett., 109, (2012), 176101. 

9. S. Hu et al., Nature, 516, (2014), 227. 

10. S. Garaj, et al., Nature, 467 , (2010 ), 190 .

11. A. Esfandiar et al, Science, 358, (2017) , 511. Electrochemical ly Gated Charge Transport 

# in Redox Proteins and Photosynthetic Complexes 

Pau Gorostiza 

Catalan Institution for Research and Advances Studies (ICREA) 

Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC) 

The Barcelona Institute of Science and Te chnol ogy 

pau@icrea.cat 

Interprotein e lectron trans port (ET) is an essential process in cell respiration and photosynthesis. It takes 

place between redox proteins and complexes , and it display s an outsta nding efficienc y and environmental 

adaptability. Although the biochemistry of ET processes is well characterised, nanoscale experimental 

methods are needed to understand electronic pathways in these redox protein structures, both for 

fundamental and for te chnological pur poses. Electrochemical Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (ECSTM) 

is an excellent tool to study electronic materials and redox molecules including proteins. It offers single 

molecule resolution and allows working in aqueous solution, in nearly ph ysiological con ditions in the 

case of proteins, and under full electrochemical control. ECSTM also allows performing conductance 

measurements by current -potential and current -distance tunneling spectroscopy. An overview of these 

methods and current project s in the labora tory will be presented , with special emphasis on cytochromes of 

the respiratory chain and on photosystem I complexes .

1. Lagunas A, Guerra -Castellano A, Nin -Hill A, Díaz -Moreno I, De la Rosa MA, Samitier J, Rovira C, 

Gorostiza P. Long distance electron tr ansfer through the aqueous solution between redox partner proteins. 

Nat Commun . 9:5157, 2018. 

2. Ruiz MP, Aragonès AC, Camarero N, Vilhena JG, Ortega M, Zotti LA, Pérez R, Cuevas JC, Gorostiza 

P, Díez -Pérez I. Bioengineering a Single -Protein Junction. J Am Chem Soc . 139 :15337, 2017. 

3. López -Martínez M, Artés JM, Sarasso V, Carminati M, Díez -Pérez I, Sanz F, Gorostiza P. Differential 

Electrochemical Conductance Imaging at the Nanoscale. Small . 13 :36, 2017. 

4. López -Martínez M, López -Ortiz M, Antinori ME, Wi entjes E, Nin -Hill A, Rovira C, Croce R, Díez -

Pérez I, Gorostiza P. Electrochemically Gated Long -Distance Charge Transport in Photosystem I. Angew 

Chem Int Ed Engl. 58 :13280 , 2019 .Deposition, Wetting and Ion -exchange of Polyaniline and Polyaniline 

# Composite Films in Deep Eutectic Solvents 

Robert Hillman 1, Hani K. Ismail 1,2 , Jamil A. Juma 1,2 , Hasan F. Alesary 1,3 , Andrew P. Abbott 1, Karl S. 

Ryder 1

> 1

School of Chemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Health, Koya University, Koya KOY45, Kurdistan 

Region - F.R. Iraq 

> 3

Department of Chemistry, College of Science, University of Kerbala, Karbala, Iraq 

arh7@le.ac.uk 

Realisation of practical electrochemical devices frequently requires a combination of properties not met 

by a single component; extension to composite materials is the obvious strategy. Further, e lectroactive 

film dynamics - encompassing polymer segmental motion, ion transport and, in certain applications, 

reactant influx – are dictated by internal electrolyte wetting of the film; the manner in which composite 

formation influences this is generally unknown. To address these im portant issues, we explore the 

relationships between film composition, structure and dynamics as a function of solvent and particulate 

characteristics for the specific case of polyaniline exposed to a range of protic and aprotic media, from 

conventional aq ueous solutions to deep eutectic solvents. 

Commencing from the established baseline of pristine polyaniline deposited from, and redox cycled in, 

aqueous acid solution, we explore the effect of shifting to the opposite extreme of aprotic ionic liquids 

(Et haline and Glyceline) and the intermediate case of a protic ionic liquid (Oxaline). Ion and solvent 

population changes are determined using acoustic wave measurements (with crystal admittance spectra 

validating gravimetric responses), as functions of times cale (voltammetric scan rate) and, in selected 

instances, temperature. Second, we explore the effect of inclusion of physically diverse particulates: 

multi -walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), graphite and molybdenum dioxide; simplistically, these 

represent ge ometries of 1D, 2D and 3D inclusions, respectively. 

We present the effects of varying solvent characteristics and particulate inclusions on the deposition 

process and efficiency. For all the combinations (of electrolyte and film components ) studied, coul ometric 

and gravimetric assays showed that the films are deposited less than quantitatively, but with acceptable 

yield. Unsurprisingly, inclusion of particulates influences film morphology. Inclusion of MWCNTs 

decreases solvation in aqueous medium and in E thaline shifts maintenance of electroneutrality to cation 

(choline) transfer, which is reliant upon an adequate internal ionic liquid reservoir , i.e. substantive 

internal wetting . Multiple redox cycling of Ethaline -deposited films in monomer -free Ethaline drives 

evolution of film behaviour, but somewhat differently for pristine polymer and MWCNT composite 

films: pristine polymer is progressively depleted of electrolyte, while the composite progressively 

accumulates it. More complex solvation changes accompa ny medium transfer experiments between 

aqueous and deep eutectic solvent media, indicative of longer term polymer relaxation processes. These 

and other effects will be rationalised in terms of the interaction between polymer, the nature of the 

particulate inclusion and solvent characteristics. The consequences of these outcomes for practical 

devices will be briefly considered. Novel highly lipophilic solid contact materials for ion -selective 

# electrodes with reproducible and preadjustable standard potentials 

Róbert E. Gyurcsányi , József Kozma, Soma Papp 

Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, BME Lendület Chemical Nanos ensor Research 

Group, Budapest University of Technology and Economic 

Szt. Gellert tér 4, H -1111 Budapest, Hungary 

robertgy@mail.bme.hu 

Ion -selective electrodes are one of the most successful class of chemical sensors that allow separation 

and sample prepa ration –free measurements of the activities (concentrations) of a range of essential ions in 

complex matrices such as whole blood. Even though the potential stability and potential predictability of 

the conventional liquid contact ion -selective electrodes ( ISEs) is hard to surpass, there is a clear trend to 

replace them with solid contact ISEs. Indeed, the robust miniaturization and mass production of 

ISEs would largely benefit from a solid contact (SC) configuration. Additionally, ion -selective 

electrodes emerged most recently as ideal candidates for wearable chemical sensors as they provide 

a passive transduction mechanism that is not affected by the size of the sensor. However, in case of 

single use, disposable electrodes it would be desirable if large ba tches of electrodes with reproducible 

E0 and slope could be produced so that the calibration properties of the whole batch could be assessed by 

calibrating only a limited number of electrodes. Therefore, this aspect gained lately a lot of interest beside 

ensuring all other criteria for optimal potentiometric behavior of SCISEs. 

The two most promising approaches for preparing solid contacts (SCs) for polymeric membrane 

based ion‐selective electrodes (ISEs) are based on the use of large surface areas conduct ing materials 

with high capacitance (e. g., various carbon nanotubes) and redox active materials ( e. g. conducting 

polymers). While many of the essential requirements for the potential stability of SCISEs were 

addressed, the E 0 reproducibility and its pred ictability, that would enable single use of such 

electrodes without calibration is still a challenge, i . e., the fabrication of electrodes with sufficiently 

close E 0 and slope values to enable the characterization of large fabrication batches through the 

calibration of only a small number of electrodes. The most generic solution seems to be the 

adjustment of the E 0 potential by polarization prior to the application of the ion‐selective membrane. 

> [1]

This approach prov ed to be successful in case of conducting polymer‐based solid contacts, and 

proved to be surprisingly effective also in case of capacitive solid contact based ISEs .[2] Here we are 

going to report a range of approaches based on chemically modified highly lipophilic carbon 

nanotubes and similarly lipophilic conducting polymer solid contact s (e.g. perfluorinated alkanoate 

side c hain functionalized poly(3,4‐ethylenedioxythiophene )[3] that ultimately led to SCISEs with 

reproducible potential responses and allowing even for a preadjustment of their E0 potential .

Acknowledgment: 

This work was supported by ERA‐Chemistry (OTKA NN117637), and by the BME‐Nanotechnology 

FIKP grant of EMMI (BME FIKP‐NAT). We thank Dr. M. Bojtár for the synthesis of the perfluorinated 

alkanoate side chain functionalized poly(3,4‐ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOTF). 

References: 

[1] N. He, S. Papp, T. Lindfors, L. Hofler, R. M. Latonen, R. E. Gyurcsanyi, Analytical Chemistry 

2017 , 89 , 2598 -2605. 

[2] S. Papp, J. Kozma, T. Lindfors, R. E. Gyurcsányi, Electroanalysis 2020 , 32 , 867 -873. 

[3] S. Papp, M. Bojtár, R. E. Gyurcsányi, T. Lindfors, Analytical Chemistry 2019 , 91 , 9111 -9118. Anodic TiO 2 Nanotubes : An Overview 

Patrik Sc hmuki 

Department of Materials Science WW -4, LKO 

University of Erlangen -Nuremberg 

Martensstrasse 7 

91058 Erlangen, German y

schmuki@ww.uni -erlangen.de 

In the past decade, anodically formed self -organized TiO 2 na notube layers attracted considerable 

scientific interes t. This is mainly due to the fact that these layers combine the defined nanotubular 

geometry with a broad range of functional features inherent to TiO 2. Such applications ra nge from solar 

cells to phot ocatalysis, over biomedical us es to battery or supercapacitor applications, to support for 

polymer ele ctrolyte membrane fuel cells. 

The presentation will give an overview of the literature available on key features of anodic nanotube 

layers , as well as c ritical methods and factors of their formation and most promising properties and 

applications. 

REFERENCES 

1. P. Roy, S. Berger, P. S chmuki, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (2011) 2904 

2. K. Lee, A. Mazare, P. Schmuki, Chemical Reviews 114 (2014) 9385 

3. H. Tsuchiya, P. Schmuki, Nanosc ale 12 (2020) 8119 

4. S. Ozkan, F. Valle, A. Mazare, I. H wang, N. Tacardi, J. Macak, I. Cerri, P. Schmuki, ACS 

Energy Materials, accepted. 

5. A. Naldoni, Z.A .Kudyshev , L. Mascaretti, S.P. Sarmah, S. Re j, J.P. Froning, O. Tom anec, J.E. 

Yoo, D. W ang, S. Kment, T. Montini , P. F orna siero , V.M. Shalaev, P. Schmuki, A. 

Boltasseva, R. Zboril, Nano Letters 20 (2020) 366 3

6. S. Hejazi, S . Mohajernia, B. Osuagwu, G. Zoppellaro, P. An drysko va, O. Tomanec, S. Kment, R. 

Zboril, P. Schmuki, A dvan ced Mat erials 32 (2020) 1908505 

7. G. Cha, S. Mohajernia, NT. Nguyen, A. Mazare, N. Denisov, I. Hwang, P. Sch muki, A dvanced 

Energy Materi als 10 (2020) 1903448 

8. J. Xhu, N. Liu, D. Wu , Z. Gao, Y. -Y. Song, P. Schmuki, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 337 

9. M. Hasanzadeh Kafshgari, D. K ah, A. Maz are, N.T. Ngu yen, M. Di staso, W. Peukert, W.H. 

Goldmann, P. Schmuki, B. Fabry, Scientifi c Reports 9 (2019 ) 13439 

10. A. Mazare, J. Pa rk, S. Simons, S. Mohajernia, I. Hwang, J.E. Yoo, H. Schneider, M.J. Fischer, P. 

Schmu ki, Acta Biomaterialia 97 (2019) 681 

11. E. W ierzbicka, X. Zhou, N. Denisov, J. Yoo, D. Fehn, N. Liu, K. Meyer, P. Schmuki, 

ChemSusChem 12 (2019) 1900 

12. M. Domaschke, X. Zho u, L. Wergen, S. Romeis, M.E. Miehlich, J. Me yer, W. Pe ukert, P. 

Schmuki, ACS Catalysis 9 (2019) 3627 

13. J.E. Yoo, P. Sch muk i, J. Ele ctrochem . Soc. 166 (2019) C 3389 

14. S. So, I. Hwang, J. Yoo, S. Mohajernia , M. Mackovic, E. Sp iecke r, G . Cha, A. Mazare, P. 

Schmuki, Advanced Energy Materials 8 (2018) 1800981 

15. S. Ozkan, A. Mazare, P. Schmuki , Elect rochimica Acta 268 (2018) 435 

16. N. L iu, X. Zhou , N.T. Nguyen, K. Peters, F. Zoller , I. Hwang, C. Schneider, M.E. Miehlich, D. 

Freitag, K. Meyer, D. Fattakhova -Rohlfing, P. Schmuki, ChemSus Chem 10 (2017) 62 

17. T. K ondo, S. Nagao, S. Hirano, T. Yanagishita, N.T. Nguyen, P. Schmuki , H. Masu da, 

Electrochemist ry Communi cations 72 (2016 ) 100 

18. N. Liu, V. Häublein, X. Zhou, U. Venkatesan, M. Hartmann, M. Mackovic, T. Nakajima, E. 

Spiecker, A. Osve t, L. F rey, P. Schmuki et.al. Nano Letters 14 (2014) 3309 

19. S. So, I. Hwan g, P. Schmuki , Energy and Environmental Science 8 (201 5) 849 

20. G. Loget, S. So, R. Hahn , P . Schm uki, J. Materials Chemistry A 2 ( 2014) 17740 Perspectives on Organic Electrochemistry – One Persons V iew 

R. Daniel Little 

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry 

University of California Santa Barbara 

little@chem.ucsb.edu 

This lecture will describe a few “perspectives on organic electrochemistry” that the author has developed 

through decades of experience in the area. Attention will be paid to both synthetic applications as well as 

mechanistic insights from this laboratory as well as those of other researchers .

References 

1. Waldvogel, S. R.; Janza, B. Renaissance of Electrosynthetic Methods for the Construction of Complex 

Molecules, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014 , 53 , 7122 – 7123. 

2. Baizer, M. M. Electroorganic processes practiced in the world. Pure & Appl. Chem. 1986 , 58 (6), 889 -

894. 

3. Litt le, R. D.: Weinberg, N. L. Eds. Electroorganic Synthesis: Festschrift for Manuel M. Baizer Marcel 

Dekker, Inc. New York, NY, 1991. 

4. Francke, R.; Little, R.D. Electrons and Holes as Catalysts in Organic Electrosynthesis, 

ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6, 4373 –4382 .

5. Francke, R.; Little, R. D. Redox catalysis in organic electrosynthesis: basic principles and recent 

developments. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014 , 43 , 2492 -2521. 

6. (a) Frontana -Uribe, B. A.; Little, R. D.; Ibanez, J. G.; Palma, A.; Vasquez -Medrano, R. Organic 

electrosynthesis: a promising green methodology in organic chemistry. Green Chem. 2010 , 12 , 2099 -

2119. 

7. Hilt, G. Basic Strategies and Types of Applications in Organic Electrochemistry, ChemElectroChem 

2020 , 7, 395 –405. 

8. Moeller, K. D. Using Physical Org anic Chemistry To Shape the Course of Electrochemical Reactions, 

2018 , 118 , 4817−4833. Facetted Nanoc hemistry of Compounds for Catalysis & Energy 

Aleksandra Vojvodic 

Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA 

alevoj@seas.upenn.edu 

Syst ematic computational materials modeling strateg ies using first -principles metho ds allow one to 

describe and understand chemistries of already known materials , and , importantly , they can be used to 

predict new materials through a careful analysis of the sur face chemistry at the atomic level. In this talk, I

demonstrate how we have been able to computationally predict several new catalyst materials . I begin by 

discussing catalysts for electrochemical reactio ns — the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on 2D 

car bide and nitride materials and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on transition metal oxides — that 

have been experimentally synthesized, characterized and tested. I then share recent theoretical insights on 

the sta bility -activity conundrum of oxide mater ials and present a computationally predicted 

nanostructured OER catalyst -system s that exhibit a new surface activation phenomenon leveraging our 

theoretical understanding . I conclude with new efforts to understand more complex nanostructured 

compound mater ials ’ chemistries and geometries used in energy applications beyond catalysis, such as 

fuel cells and batteries. Improving the design of electrochemical devices with theory and modelling 

## Clotilde S. Cucinotta 1 

> 1Dept. of Chemistry, Imperial College London

## In this talk I will highlight my research on materials and fundamental atomic process that underpin 

## different areas of energy and nanotechnology, such as in electrolysers, batteries and memristors. I 

## will introduce some issues connected with the simulation of electrified interfaces at the nanoscale 

## focusing on modelling the effect of an applied potential to a cell by simulating charged electrodes. I 

## will present some recent progress in our understanding of the interactions of the electrolyte with the 

## metal under applied potential in the technologically relevant Pt -water interface. Probing the Spatial Heterogeneity of Electrooxidation and the Oxygen 

# Evolution Reaction on Au Operando with Nonlinear Optical Micros-

# copy 

Gregor Zwaschka *, Igor Nahalka #, Yujin Tong *+, Arianna Marchioro #, Sylvie Roke # and R.Kramer 

Campen *+ 

> *

Fr itz Haber Ins titute of the Max Planck Society, 14195 Berlin, Germany; #Laboratory for Fundamental 

BioPhotonics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; *Faculty of 

Physics, University of Duisburg -Essen, 47057 Duisburg, 

richard.campen@uni -due.de 

Perhaps the most promising path to the creation of a global energy economy based on the combustion of 

hydrogen – with its attendant benefits for climate and environmental quality – employs devices based on 

electrolytic water splitting. Despite muc h effort , finding relatively inexpensive catalyst materials with 

high activity and stability has proven challenging. Decades of empirical studies suggest that optimizing 

the oxidative half reaction, i.e. the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), is particularly difficult. Building the 

best possible devices this underlying chemistry allows requires experimental insight into the mechanism 

of the OER. Gaining such insight requires overcoming at least two hurdles: (a) materials of practical in-

terest are most often h eterogeneous over a wide range of length scales and (b) for the most promising 

metal (oxides) electrodes oxidation of the metal cation occurs at similar potentials to that of the OER. The 

first limitation implies that a, preferably wide -field , microscopy i s required while the second suggests 

such a microscope should allow operando electrode characterization and be capable of imaging both elec-

trooxidation and the formation of molecular oxygen. 

In this talk I will discuss our recent efforts to meet these dua l challenges through appl ication of the 

nonlinear optical technique, second harmonic microscopy (SHM), to the operando characterization of 

electrooxidation and the OER on two different types of structurally heterogeneous Au working electrodes. 

Because SHM is a background -free probe of surface dielectric function it , allows more precise focusing 

on the solid/liquid interface and offers a window into surface polarization not available using more con-

ventional optical characterization techniques (with near vide o rate acquisition ). At potentials below the 

OER and electrooxidation two distinct types of surface optical responses are apparent 1. More than 80 % 

of the surface shows a clear positive quadratic response expected from a simple analytic model of 

electronic polarization of the metal/electrolyte interface. ~ 20 % of the electrode surface area , often near 

grain boundaries, shows a negative quadratic response with increasing potential consistent with a 

roughened surface at which anion adsorption occurs at poten tials significantly below that of the electrode 

as a whole.  Moving to still more oxidizing potentials we observe the appearance, growth and detachment 

of individual bubbles 2. The ability to quantify the flux of O 2 and its spatial distribution makes it stra ight-

forward to conclude that the reactivity of the surface with respect to the OER is dominated by < 1 % of 

the total surface area . These active areas are of two types: presumably deeply penetrating motifs that are 

stable under potential cycling and more r eactive sites that are unstable during surface reconstruction.  The 

later type of active areas are the active sites of Burke et al.’s incipient hydrous oxide/adatom mediator 

model of electrocatalysis 3.

References 

1. I. Nahalka, G. Zwaschka, R. K. Campen, A. Marchioro and S. Roke (2020) Mapping Elec-

trochemical Heterogeneity at Gold Surfaces: A Second Harmonic Imaging Study, submit-

ted 

2. G. Zwaschka , I. Nahalka, A. Marchioro, Y. Tong, S. Roke and R. K . Campen (2020) Imag-

ing the Heterogeneity of the Oxygen Evolutio n Reaction on Gold Electrodes Operando: Ac-

tivity is Highly Local, ACS Catal. , 10, 6084 -6093 

3. L. Burke, V. Cunnane and B. Lee (1992) Unusual Postmonolayer Oxide Behaviour of Gold 

Electrodes in Base , J. Electrochem. Soc. , 139, 399 -406 Correlative Electrochemical Multi -Microscopy: Towards a Multiscale 

# Understanding of Electrochemical Processes and Interfaces 

Patrick R. Unwin ,1 Cameron L. Bentley, 1 Minkyung Kang, 1 Viacheslav Shkirskiy, 1 Enrico Daviddi, 1

Daniel  Martín -Yerga ,1 Lewis C. Yule, 1,2 Binglin Tao, 1 Baoping Chen, 1 Oluwasegun J. Wahab ,1 Danqing 

Liu, 1 Xiangdong Xu, 1 Dimitrios Valavanis, 1 Ian J. McPherson ,1 Geoff West 2 and Alex W. Colburn 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, and 1WMG, University of Warwick 

Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom 

p.r.unwin@warwick.ac.uk 

Electrodes of practical importance are usually complex on a range of length scales , from the nanoscale to 

the device level. To address this complexity, we have introduced new approaches , where by nanoscale 

information on electrode activity is obtained by electrochemical microscopy in the form of activity maps 

and activity movies ,1,2 and t hese rich data sets are mapped on to co -located electrode structure an d

properties from complementary high -resolution microscopy and spectroscopy techniques. This 

correlative electrochemical multi -microscopy strategy helps us to resolve the relationship between local 

electrode structure and activity . With this detailed micro scopic information , an interesting question is can 

we predict the behavio ur of electrodes on larger length scales ? More generally, what do we learn about 

electrochemical systems from a multiscale approach? 

This contribution will highlight our recent work using nanoscale scanning electrochemical cell 

microscopy (SECCM), scanning ion conductance microscopy (SICM) and combined scanning 

electrochemical microscopy (SECM) -SICM as key techniques for the synchronous acquisition of 

electrochemical activity -electro de topography, 3,4 coupled with a wide range of microscopy techniques, 

spanning electron microscopy and electron backscatter diffraction, micro -Raman spectroscopy and atomic 

force microscopy to pinpoint the nature of particular active sites. With this appro ach, complex electrode 

surfaces are studied as set of “single entities” ( e.g. , individual steps, terraces, defects, crystal facets, grain 

boundaries, single particles) .1,5 The resulting nanoscale understanding of reactivity is used to create 

models for ele ctrochemical interfaces and determine how they translate across broader lengthscales and 

timescales . A wide range of i llustrative examples of this general approach will include investigations of 

2D materials, single particles and ensembles on electrode sup port s, and structurally and/or 

compositionally heterogeneous surfaces , such as polycrystalline metals and polymer composite 

electr odes. Applica tions include electrocatalysis, battery electrodes and corrosion. Ultimately, the 

approach es we advocate provide a roadmap that should facilitate the rational design of functional 

(electro)materials .

We thank our many collaborators, external to Warwick, who have contributed to our work in this 

area and will be mentioned throughout this lecture. 

## References 

1.  Bentley , C. L.;  Kang , M.; Unwin, P. R. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2019 , 141 , 2179 –2193. 

2. Kang, M.; Momotenko, D.; Page, A.; Perry, D.; Unwin, P. R., Langmuir , 2016 , 32 , 7993 -8008. 

3. Wahab , O. J.; Kang, M.; Unwin, P. R., Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 2020 , doi: 

10.1016/j.coelec .2020.04.018 4

4. Bentley, C . L.; Edmondson, J.; Meloni, G. N.; Perry, D.; Shkirskiy, V.; Unwin, P. R., Anal. Chem ., 

2019 , 91 , 84 -108 .

5. Bentley, C. L.; Kang, M.; Unwin, P. R., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139 , 16813 -16821. Electrocatalysis on Well -Defined Metal Oxides: 

# Combining Ultrahigh Vacuum Surface Science and Electrochemistry 

Ulrike Diebold 

Institute of Applied Physics, TU Wien 

Wiedner Haupts trasse 8 -10/134, A -1040 Vienna, Austria 

diebold@iap.tuwien.ac.at 

Transiti on metal oxides are promising materials for photo electrochemical and electrocatalysis. For a 

molecular -scale understanding of the underlying mechanisms and processes, experiments on well -

characterized samples are necessary, i.e., specific facets of single crystals with a known composition, 

geometry and defect structure. Here the advanced methods of surface science, particularly Scanning 

Probe Microscopy (SPM) with atomic resolution, Thermally Programmed Desorption (TPD) with 

accurately -determined coverages , and X -ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) with high resolution, 

together with first -principles computations based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) give unique 

insights. Bridging the gap to a (photo -) electrochemical environment is challenging, howeve r. 

In the talk we will address a first question, namely whether the atomic structure of oxide surfaces – once 

it is well -established in Ultrahigh Vacuum (UHV) – survives the exposure to liquid water. We use a 

novel apparatus that allows us to expose U HV -prepared samples to liquid water without exposure to air 

[1]. We find that the TiO 2(110) surface maintains its (1 ×1) termination and that a (2 ×1) superstructure 

that is typically observed after water exposure in air stems from an ordered layer of carbo xylates [2]. In 

contrast, the TiO 2(011) -(2×1) reconstruction is lifted upon exposure to liquid water, and the surface is 

fully hydroxylated [3]. The (√2 ×√2)R45° reconstruction [4] of the Fe 3O4(001) surface is also lifted in 

water, but the change proceeds slowly together with the growth of an oxy -hydroxide phase with a self -

limiting coverage of 0.4 monolayers [5]. By adding CO 2, the pH of the water drop can be adjusted; 

etching was found to commence below pH~4 . Fe 3O4 was also tested for OER in alkaline c onditions, and 

found to be stable at the nanoscopic scale, with a facet -dependent reactivity [6]. 

References 

[1] J. Balajka, et al., Rev. Sci. Instr. 89, 083906 –6 (2018). doi:10.1063/1.5046846 

[2] J. Balajka, et al., Science 361, 786 –789 (2018). doi:10.1 126/science.aat6752. 

[3] J. Balajka, et al., J . Phys . Chem . C 121 , 26424 –26431 (2017). doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b09674. 

[4] R. Bliem, et al., Science. 346, 1212 –1215 (2014). doi:10.1126/science.1260556. 

[5] F. Kraushofer, et al J. Phys.  Chem. C. 122 (2018) 1 657 –1669. doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b10515. 

[5] F. Mirabella, et al., submitted 

[6] M. Müllner, et al., J. Phys. Chem.  C 123, 8304 –8311 (2018). doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b08733 Interfacing Biocatalysts with Porous Metal Oxide Electrodes for Semi -

# artificial Photosynthesis 

Erwin Reisner 

Department of Chemistry, University of Cambri dge 

Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK 

E-mail:  reisner@ ch.cam.ac.uk 

Semi -artificial photosynthe sis interfaces biological catalyst s with synthetic materials to overcome 

limitations in natural and artificial photosynthesis .1-2 This presentation will summarise my research 

group’s progress in integrating biocat alysts in bespoke hierarchical 3D electrode scaffolds and 

photoelectrochemical circuits , including the characteri sation of the biocatal yst -material interface .3,4 I will 

first discuss the f undamental insights gained by integrat ing isolated enzymes such as the water oxidation 

enzyme Photosystem II and the CO 2-reducing formate dehydrogenase ,5-11 followed by the more recent 

exploration of live cells from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and Geobacter sulfurreducens .12-14

The resulting biohybrid electr odes can be expl ored in the develop ment of novel appro aches to solar -to -

fuel (and chemical ) conversion . For example , the wiring of Photosystem II to a formate dehydrogenase 

has enabled the in vitro re -engineering of natural photosynthetic pathways using semi -artificial Z -scheme 

architectures. 8,9 In contrast to natural photosynthesis, t hese hybrid systems allow panchromic light 

absorption by using complementary biotic and abiotic light absorbers. The underlying 

photo electrochemical circuit provides effective electronic comm unication without losses to competing 

side -reactions .

Selected Recent References 

(1) Fang et al., Chem. Soc. Rev ., 2020 , in print (DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00496c ).

(2) Ko rnienko et al., Nature Nanotech ., 2018 , 13, 890 –899 .

(3) Zhang and Reisner, Nature Rev. Chem ., 2020 , 4, 6 –21. 

(4) Kornienko et al., Acc . Chem. Res ., 2019 , 52 , 1439 –144 8. 

(5) Moore et al., ACS Energy Lett ., 2020 , 5, 232 –237. 

(6) Sokol et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 2019 , 141 , 17498 –17502. 

(7) Miller et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 2019 , 58, 4601 –4605 .

(8) Sokol et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 2018 , 140 , 16418 –16422 .

(9) Sokol et al., Nature Energy , 2018 , 3, 944 –951 .

(10 ) Kornienko et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 2018 , 140, 17923 –17931 .

(11 ) Nam et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed ., 2018 , 57 , 10595 –10599 

(1 2) Fang et al. , Proc. Natl. Acad . S oc. USA , 2020 , 117, 5074 –5080 .

(1 3) Heidary et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 20 20 , 142 , 5194 –5203. 

(1 4) Zhang et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc ., 2018 , 140 , 6 –9.Nanopore Electrochemistry for Single -Molecule Analysis 

Yi -Tao Long 

State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, P. R. China 

E-mail: yitaolong @nju.edu.cn 

Nanopore electrochemistry refers to the promising measurement science based on elaborate pore structures, 

which offers a well -defined geometric confined space to adopt and characterize single entities including 

single cells, single particles, and even single molecules by electrochemical technology. 1-3 The 

electrochemical confined effect within the nanopore displays the incredible ability to achieve single entity 

discrimination by focusing energy (e.g. electrochemical , light energies and et al.) into small areas, 

converting the intrinsic properties of singl e entities into visible electrochemical read -outs with ultra -high 

temporal -spatial resolution. Furthermore, the excellent resolution of confined nanopore technology also 

permits the possibility to resolve the transient signals for further revealing the inf ormation of single 

biomolecules dynamics. The chemical controlled confinement inside nanopore provides the advanced 

electrochemically confined effects to convert the transient single molecule difference into the enhancing 

signal with high temporal -spatial resolution. In our group , the nanopore electrochemistry has been further 

applied into disease diagnostics by identifying rare sub -populations, DNA/protein sensing by reading the 

sequential differences and uncovering the fundamental chemical reactions pathw ays by revealing the 

hidden intermediates. With the advents of advanced measurement mechanism, instrumentation and data 

algorithm, electrochemically confined nanopore is certainly an exciting and promising field. We expect the 

next avenue for the wide appl ications of nanopore electrochemistry in a variety of disciplines, leading us 

explore the new chemistry at a much smaller scale. 

Figure The nanopore electrochemistry for single molecule analysis. 

References 

1. Cao, C.; Long, Y. -T., Biological Nanopores: Confined Spaces for Electrochemical Single -Molecule 

Analysis. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (2), 331 -341. 

2. Ying, Y. L.; Long, Y. T., Nanopore -Based Single -Biomolecule Interfaces: From Information to 

Knowledge. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (40), 15720 -15729. 

3. Lu, S. -M.; Peng, Y. -Y.; Ying, Y. -L.; Long, Y. -T., Electrochemical Sensing at a Confined Space. 

Anal. Chem. 2020, 92 (8), 5621 -5644. Insights into the stability and reactivity of solid/liquid interfaces from ab 

## initio calculations 

## Mira Todorova, Suhyun Yoo, Sudarsan Surendralal and Jörg Neugebauer 

## Max -Planck -Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH, Düsseldorf, Germany 

## Processes at solid -liquid interfaces are at the heart of many present day 

## technological challenges related to the improvement of battery materials, electro -

## catalysis, fuel cells, corrosion and others. Obtaining the microscopic information 

## needed to d escrib e and quantify the underlying fundamental mechanisms is 

## equally challenging to experiment and theor y. Density functional theory (DFT) 

## calculations are able to resolve processes at the microscopic scale . H owever, 

## modelling electrochemical systems is particularly challenging , due to the presence 

## of different classes of materials and phenomena such as metal electrodes, liquid 

## water, huge electric fields within the same system. 

## Adapting concepts originally developed in the field of semiconductor physics 

## [Phys. Rev. Applied 1, 014001 (2014)] has enabled us to successfully address 

## questions related to electrochemical processes. This will be demonstrated by two 

## prototypical applications: the selective stabilisation of p olar ZnO(0001) surfaces by 

## an aqueous environment [ Phys. Rev. Lett.  120 , 066101 (2018 )] and the corrosion 

## of Mg surfaces [ Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 , 246801 (2018)]. Our development of a novel 

## potentiostat design, which can be easily implemented in all existing periodic DFT 

## codes, allowed us to identify the atomistic mechanism behind the anomalous H 2

## evolution reaction on anodically polarized Mg surfaces, which has puzzled 

## electrochemists for more than 150 years. From Lithium -Rich Cathodes to Solid Electrolyte Interfaces : Atomic -Scale 

Insights into Battery Materials 

Saiful Islam 

Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, UK 

m.s.islam@bath.ac.uk 

Further breakthroughs in lithium - and sodium -ion batteries require advances in new 

compositions and underpinning materials science. Indeed, a greater fundamental 

understanding and insights into these energy -related materials require atomic -scale 

characterization of their redox, transport and interface behaviour. In this context, 

combined modelling -experimental work is now a powerful approach for investigating 

these properties at the atomistic level. This presentation will describe such studies [1 -4]

in two  principal  areas: (i) transition metal and oxygen redox chemistry in Li -rich 

disordered rocksalt cathodes; (i i) ion conduction mechanisms and grain boundary 

effects in solid ele ctrolytes .

1. T. Famprikis et al., Nat. Mater., 18 , 1278 (2019) 

2. A.J. Naylor et al., J. Mater. Chem., 7, 25355 (2019) 

3. J.A. Dawson et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 140 , 362 (2018) 

4. N. Tapia -Ruiz et al., Energy Environ. Sci. , 11 , 1470 (2018) Iontronics and Reverse Electrodialysis towards Aqueous Circuits 

Seok Hee Han , Song Yi Yeon, Seung -Ryong Kwon , Seol Baek, Taek Dong Chung 

Department of Chemi stry, Seoul National University 

Seoul National University, Seoul 08826 503 -206, Republic of Korea 

tdchung@snu.ac.kr 

Ions are charge carriers , which are also m ain players along with electrons in electrochemistry. Non -

faradaic electrochemical systems driven by ion transfer are found i n human brains in which neurological 

circuits exploit difference in el ectrochemical potential to generate and propagate signals for information 

processing. Since the new term, iontronics , was defined in 2009, ionic circuit for information processing 

has been increasingly discussed . Starting with ionic diode s, a series of log ic gates and even transistor s

appeared so that aqueous information processor should be on the horizon in terms of the device function 

as well as material. While the majority of current iontronic systems have relied on electronic power 

source s like batterie s, r everse electrodialysis (RED) , an ionic system that produces electricity from 

salinity gradient s, suggest s an intriguing settlement of this issue . Recently, RED has evolved not only to 

increase the maximum power density but also to be miniaturized for applications to various small devices .

Highlighting recent advances of iontronics and RED, this talk will discuss the future of combining those 

two themes .

References 

1) Ji-Hyung Han, Kwang Bok Kim, Hee Chan Kim, and Taek Dong Chung*, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 

121, 3888 -3891 (2009). 

2) Seok Hee Han, Seung -Ryong Kwon, Seol Baek, and Taek Dong Chung* , Sci. Rep. 7, 14068 (2017). 

3) Seol Baek, Seung -Ryong Kwon, Song Yi Yeon, Sun -Heui Yoon, Chung Mu Kang, Seok Hee Han, 

Dahye Lee, and Taek Dong Chung*, Anal. Chem. 90, 7, 474 9-4755 (2018). 

4) Seung -Ryong Kwon, So Hee Nam, Clara Yongjoo Park, Seol Baek, Joomyung Jang, Xiangguo Che, 

Su Hong Kwak, Yu -Ra Choi, Na -Rae Park, Je -Yong Choi, Yan Lee, and Taek Dong Chung*, Adv. 

Funct. Mater. 1705952, (2018). 

5) Song Yi Yeon, Jeongse Yun,  Sun -heui Yoon, Dahye Lee, Woohyuk Jang, Seok Hee Han, Chung Mu 

Kang, Taek Dong Chung*, Chem. Sci. 9, 8071 -8076 (2018). Coupling Electrochemical Detection with DNA Amplification: an Attractive 

# Approach to the Point -of -Care Diagnosis of Virus 

## Benoît Limoges 

Laboratoire d'Electrochimie Moléculaire, Université de Paris/CNRS, 15, rue Jean -Antoine de Baïf, 75205 Paris 

Cedex 13, France 

The health threats posed by viral infections such as COVID -19, HIV, hepatitis, influenza, Zika, 

chikungunya or Ebola, have highlighted the need for rapid , sensitive and selective diagnostic tools to manage the 

spread of these diseases . In particular, controlling the severe acute respiratory syndrome -related coronavirus -2

pandemic depends critically on the use of genomic diagnostic tests over a large scale. While conventional 

technologies such as quantitative real -time polymerase chain rea ction (real -time PCR) have been broadly used to 

detect virus (detected through the presence of the viral RNA sequence in a biological fluid), they are expensive, 

time -consuming, labor -intensive and unavailable in remote settings. Consequently, the developm ent of low -cost 

and user -friendly p oint -of -care (POC) viral RNA/DNA testing devices, allowing detecti on of early infections at 

limited resource settings or on -field in close proximity to the patient , represent a powerful approach to 

systematic and decentralized virus detection . To be suitable for limited resource settings, genetic POC devices 

should ideally be affordable, highly sensitive (the concentration of virus in biological samples can be very l ow, 

especially early in the disease cycle, requiring sometime to detect as low as 10 4 RNA copies of viral genome per 

mL) , specific, portable, robust, user -friendly and capable of screening a large number of unprocessed samples in 

a short time . Toward this end, a major effort has gone into the integration of the gold standard method of nucleic 

acid analysis, i.e. the fluorescence -based real -time PCR, in portable lab -on -chip miniaturized devices. However, 

to date, real -time PCR has only seen slow transition t o POC, in part because of the need for precise thermal 

cycling, but also because of the requirement for a rather complex, fragile and costly miniaturized fluorescence -

based optical detection system. In order to circumvent these limitations, the substitutio n of PCR by an isothermal 

DNA amplification , and the replacement of the optical fluorescent read -out by a simpler electrochemical 

detector, is an attractive solution. [1, 2 ] Isothermal alternative to PCR have indeed the merit to reduce or eliminate 

the need for accurate temperature control and cycling, thus affording the development of simpler and smaller 

battery -operated portable devices. Also important are the numerous advantages offered by an electrochemical 

detection, namely a lower -cost, a facile integr ation in a miniaturized format that requires little energy , a good 

sensitivity, a high robustness without need for periodic rec alibration, and the ability to operate in non -transparent 

reaction mixtures and reaction vessels with c omplex biological samples. The presentation will be focused on the 

different approaches we have pioneered and developed, [1 -5] including thus the development of a small house -built 

automatized electrochemical read -out device, optimized for parallel monitoring of up to 48 samples. So me of the 

recent advances proposed by other groups including chip -based and paper -based POC devices will be also 

discussed. 

References:                                                

> [1] Kivlehan F., Mavré F., Talini L., Limoges B., Marchal D. Analyst, 2011 ,136 , 3635 –3642.
> [2] Martin A., Grant K. B., Stressmann F., Ghigo J-M. ,Marchal D., Limoges B.ACS Sens. 2016 , 1, 904 –912 .
> [3] Deféver T., Druet M., Evrard D. , Marchal D., Limoges B. Anal. Chem. 2011 ,83 , 1815 –1821.
> [4] Martin A. ,Bouffier L. ,Grant K. B. ,Limoges B. ,Marchal D. Analyst ,2016 ,141 , 4196 –4203 .
> [5] Moreau M. , Delile S. ,Sharma A. , Fave C. ,Perrier A. , Limoges B. , Marchal D. Analyst ,2017 ,142 , 3432 –3440 .

# Evolution of Tools in Undergraduate Electrochemistry Education 

Johna Leddy and Daniel L. Parr IV 

Department of Chemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 

johna-leddy@uiowa.edu 

The skills and tools of the modern undergraduate differ dramatically from those of generations past. Undergraduates have near instantaneous access to sources of information through electronic devices tied to the Internet. The amount of available information approach es overwhelming. Generations past assimilated scientific content by relianceon more limited information and more sophisticated arithmetic manipulations. Today’s undergraduates are facile at retrieving information but perhaps less w ell schooled algebraically. To help train effective chemical and electrochemical researchers in future generations, educational opportunities must capitalize on the inherent skills of undergraduates and provide tools to organize and manipulate the near unbounded amount of information. Where s kills and tools combined effectively, well-educated scientists will be enabled to tackle important problems in electrochemistry. 

A new approach to undergraduate education in electrochemistry has recently been undertaken at the University of Iowa. The basic approach is to design modules that couple undergraduates’ skills for facile information retrieval with ubiquitously available spreadsheets to build tools that can be used in the course and applied to research problems after completing their degrees. This approach tracks the rapid evolution of information technologies and capitalizes on the undergraduates’ inherent skills. 

The current course, Analytical Chemistry I, is taken by upper -level juniors and seniors who are largely majoring in chemistry and engineering. The two main topics for Analytical Chemistry I are equilibria and electrochemistry. Modules for equilibrium are based on the systematic treatment of equilibria. Modules for electrochemistry coverequilibrium measurements, spontaneous redox reacti ons and titrations, nonspontaneous processes such as electrolysis, and the dynamics of voltammetry. In each component, appreciation of the fundamental processes underlying electrochemical behavior is emphasized. The spreadsheets are a tool but also a vehicle for electrochemical education. 

Several spreadsheet modules will be demonstrated. 

Potential Axis Tool: A spreadsheet-based tool plots a potential axis. From the potential axis, students interpret spontaneous reactions as well as identify the order in w hich species are electrolyzed. Potential axis is an equilibrium tool with reference to the Nernst equation. 

Redox Titration Tool: Students develop a spreadsheet based on fractional concentrationsto model redox titrations. This is also based on an equilibrium model. 

Voltammetry Tools: Several spreadsheets are developed to appreciate dynamics in electrochemistry. A spreadsheet that emphasizes the critical ideas of flux, current, gradients, and diffusion is developed in a finite difference formatfor steady state voltammetry. The spreadsheet is modified to transient measurements for chronoamperometry and linear sweep and cyclic voltammetry. The simulations are not precise but suffice to demonstrate the concepts important in electroanalysis. Spreadsheets map the transition from reversible to quasireversible to irreversible electron transfers. Some simple following reactions are also demonstrated. 

In preliminary development of spreadsheets to demonstrate ideas of equilibrium and electrochemistry, student learning was enhanced by these tools. In the current Analytical Chemistry I course, students are allowed access to the tools they have built for exams and homework. They also have a final project to use their newly developed tools to either model a system of in terest, create a murder mystery problem, or write next year’s final. 

Acknowledgments 

Development of these modules for undergraduate education is supported by the Carver Curriculum Development Grant from the Roy J. Carver Charitable Trust. Monitoring plant physiology with organic electrochemical transistors 

## Eleni Stavrinidou 

## Laboratory of Organic Electronics, Department of Science and Technology, Linköping 

## University, 601 74, Norrköping, Sweden 

## Plants are the basis of food, providers of oxygen and regulators of the ecosystem . Plants 

## convert solar energy into chemical energy with the process of photosynthesis where carbon 

## dioxide is converted to sugar molecules.  Sugars are not only the energy source in plants but 

## also importan t signalling molecules, involved in regulation of physiology including stress 

## responses. Currently there are no methods that allow real time monitoring of sugar transport 

## in plants. Sugar detection is based on enzymatic assays , chromatography and/or mass 

## spectrometry; all of these methods require sample collection and preparation.  Organic 

## electrochemical transistors (OECTs) are ideal tools for interfacing with organisms, since they 

## can translate complex biological input to an e lectronic readout signal. OECT sensors can 

## operate in complex media and they can directly detect products from the biological unit. In 

## my group w e are developing sugars sensors based on the organic electrochemical transistor 

## for monitoring plant process es in -vitro and in -vivo. In a first example we measure the export 

## of glucose in real time, from isolated chloroplasts , with a temporal resolution of 1min. The 

## OECT based platform is able to distinguish the metabolic phase of the c hloroplast prior 

## isolation fr om the plant. In another example we developed implantable OECT -based sugar 

## sensors for in -vivo, real time monitoring of sugar transport in trees. The OECTs sensors show 

## high device to device reproducibility, stability during the operation in the in -vivo e nvironment 

## and most importantly they do not cause a significant wound response from the plant. The 

## sensors reveal kinetics of sugars transport that were not observed before. Our work 

## establishes the OECT -based s ensor s a s powerful tools for monitoring proce ss es in plants, in 

## real time in in -vivo and in -vitro system s. Electrodeposition of Platinum Metal Films and Alloys 

# Using Surface Limited Redox Replacement Method 

Dr Natasa Vasiljevic 

School of Physics, University of Bristol 

H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Tyndall Avenue, Bristol BS8 1TL, UK 

n.vasiljevic@bristol.ac.uk 

Electrode po sition methods to create epitaxial Pt films and alloys are attractive route s for the design of 

nanostructures of various shap es and size s ideal for many fundamental and practical applications . Surface 

Limited Redox Replacement (SLRR) method has been one of the most successful approach es dev eloped 

to d ate that can produce ultra -thin monola yers of Pt with high control of atomic structure [1] . This met hod 

is based on the galvanic replacement of a sacrificial underpotential ly deposited (UPD) layer of a less 

noble metal with a more noble Pt through an irreversible surface -controlled limited redox reaction. 

Different experimental configurations for the SLRR deposition developed so far incl ude : 1) electrode 

immersion and transfer between the two solutions con taining the sacrificial UPD metal and the 

replacement metal ; 2) the flow -cell set up where the two solutions are exchanged and 3) the dep osition in 

a one -cell configuration, where the UPD sacrificial layer formation and the galvanic replacement reaction 

wi th Pt are conducted in the same cell by optimi zing solution composition and the potential control .

In this talk , th e SLRR method in ‘one cell ’ configuration used for the growth of Pt epitaxial films, and 

alloys will be described . Electrochemical and surfa ce characteri zation studies were used to demonstrate 

the fabrication of high -quality 2D Pt bimetallic system s with controlled film thickness and surface 

composition . The nature of UPD sacrificial m etal and ions present in the solution affect the quality of 

epitaxial Pt films structure which was exploited i n fundamental studies of structure -electro catalytic 

activity correlat ion s [2 -4] . Besides Cu UPD and Pb UPD based SLRR growth, we demonstrated that 

hydrogen UPD c oul d be successfully used for Pt thin films growth [2 ] as well as P d. The incorporation of 

UPD sacrificial layer was exploited in the SLRR approach to control the formation of random alloy s. By 

interrupting the UPD galvanic replacement reaction , we showed tha t it is possible to have controlled 2D 

Pt x Pb 1-x all oys formation. [5] Th e SLR R deposition allowed us to examine changes of t he ad sorption (H 

and CO) and catalytic behavio ur of Pt -Pb alloys as a function of their composition [5].

References :

[1] N. Dimitrov, Recent Adva nces in the Growth of Metals, Alloys, and Multilayers by Surface Limited 

Redox Replacement (SLRR) Based Approaches, Electrochimica Acta, 209 (2016) 599 -622. 

[2] J. Nutariya, M. Fayette, N. Dimitrov, N. Va siljevic, Growth of Pt by surface limited redox 

repl acement of underpotentially deposited hydrogen, Electrochimica Acta, 112 (2013) 813 -823. 

[3] M. Fayette, Y. Liu, D. Bertrand, J. Nutariya, N. Vasiljevic, N. Dimitrov, From Au to Pt via surface 

limited red ox replacement of Pb UPD in one -cell configurat ion, Langmuir, 27 (2011) 5650 -5658. 

[4] Z. Al Amri, M.P. Mercer, N. Vasiljevic, Surface Limited Redox Replacement Deposition of Platinum 

Ultrathin Films on Gold: Thickness and Structure -Dependent Activity towa rds the Carbon Monoxide and 

Formic Acid Oxidati on re actions, Electrochimica Acta, 210 (2016) 520 -529. 

[5] M.P. Mercer, D. Plana, D.J. Fermín, D. Morgan, N. Vasiljevic, Growth of Epitaxial Pt 1-xPb x Alloys by 

Surface Limited Redox Replacement and Study of Th eir Adsorption Properties, Langmuir, 31 (2015) 

10904 -10912. Education at the Crime Scene: Visualisation of Latent Fingerprints 

# using Electrochemical Processes 

Robert Hillman , Rachel M. Sapstead, Ann Beresford -Laycock, Natalie Corden, Jodie Coulston, Mariyam 

Ula and Chloe Davis 

> 1

School of Chemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK 

arh7@le.ac.uk 

A key feature of criminal investigation s is establishing identit ies of suspect s, victim s and witness es . The 

most common physical evidence that accomplishes this is a fin germark, since it is unique to an individual 

and is time -invari ant. Its presence can establish contact between an individual and an object (a weapon or 

an item of value) , or place the individual at a fixed location (a crime scene). Most such marks are late nt 

(non -visible) fingermark s, which must be rendered visible by a suitable chemical or physical treatment. 

A number of latent fingermark techniques rely on electrochemical deposition processes. Interestingly, 

both students and practitioners commonly find redox chemistry and electrochemical control of surface 

processes confusing at a fundamental level and difficult to deliver in a practical context. There is a 

challenge in motivating practitioners to use these methods and students to engage with the underl ying 

science . However, the visual nature of the outcome and its real -world significance can be a potent 

educational motivator. This presentation conveys recent activities in these areas involving the deposition 

of conducting polymers and metals using elect rochemical control and redox chemistry ; in the latter case, 

we consider circumstances in which the redox chemistry may take place at a metal surface or in solution 

We have recently develop ed a new approach to the visualisation of latent fingermarks on met al surfaces, 

relevant to both violent crime (bullet casings, knives) and volume crime (tools, handles at points of entry). 

Simplistically, the fingerprint residue acts as an insulating mask, such that electrochemical processes can 

only occur on areas of ba re metal surface [1 -3] , to generate a negative image of the fingerprint. When the 

deposited reagent is a conducting polymer , its electrochromic properties permit electrochemical 

optimization of image contrast . Solution redox chemistry can also be used to e lectro -generate elemental 

silver or gold particles that deposit selectively on the fingermark residue, to generate a positive image of 

the fingerprint. We have been studying the underlying fundamentals in the application of this concept to 

the physical dev eloper (PD) method used on paper (documents, currency) and the multi -metal deposition 

(MMD) method used on polymer surfaces (drug and explosive wrappings). 

This presentation will describe translation of th ese research topic s to the educational arena. The primary 

focus is d evelop ment of an undergraduate teaching laboratory experiment for students undertaking a 

Chemistry with Forensic Science degree programme. Inclusion of material science , spectroscopic and 

imaging techniques has the educational benefit of demonstrating the inter -disciplinarity of contemporary 

scientific research. Educationally, the experiment offers an opportunity to discuss fundamental 

electrochemical concepts, including electron transfer, coupled chemical (EC -type) processes (proton 

tran sfers [1]), electrodeposition, nucleation and growth, redox -driven ion -exchange, and the development 

of a band structure (in a growing polymer) from the molecular orbital structure (in the monomer). 

Distinction between thermodynamic and kinetic electrochem ical aspects can also be addressed .

The experimental activity can be adjusted to suit students studying at different levels or with diverse 

backgrounds. It can be delivered in a c losed manner based on proscriptive instructions, or it can be 

extended in various technical directions , incorporating spectroscopic/imaging techniques . Students can 

also contribute to the experimental design, by selection of appropriate materials or by exploring more 

applied aspects such as exposure of the “exhibits” to differen t environments that mimic a crime scene. 

References 

[1] A.R. Hillman, and A. Beresford, Anal. Chem., 82 , 2010 , 483 -486. 

[2] R.M. Brown and A.R. Hillman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 14 , 2012 , 8653 -8661. 

[3] R.M. Sapstead, N. Corden, A.R. Hillman, Electrochi m. Acta, 162 , 2015 , 119 -128. Teaching Translational Research in Electrochemi stry: From Fundamental 

# to Product 

Woonsup Shin 

Department of Chemistry, BioMedical Engineering, Sogang University, shinws@sogang.ac.kr 

CareMedi Co., shinws@caremedi.co.kr 

Electrochemistry is a discipline of science and technology connecting electron transfer reactions with electrical 

input and output through electrodes. Therefore, electrochemistry has a fundamentally multidisciplinary nature, 

which relates chemistry, chemical engineering, material science, process engineering, electronics , and electrical 

engineering. The key element in electrochemistry is the electrode where electrochemical reaction, reduction , or 

oxidation, occurs. The charge separation , fo llowed by the electrochemical reactions at the interface , is a 

fundamental phenomenon in material/energy conversion and mass/ion transport. The understanding of electrode 

materials and electrochemical processes is the most important in developing the devic es and the processes in 

the fields of energy conversion, power sources, environmental process es, medical devices , and sensors. 

Therefore, electrochemistry is inherently translational research, which connects the fundamentals of 

electrochemical phenomena an d the applications in developing devices and processes. In this education lecture, 

I’ll use two examples of translationals research , which are currently under development in my lab. 1) CO 2-to -

formate or formic acid process is one of the actively pursuing C CU (carbon dioxide utilization) technologies. 

We succeeded in producing formate to 1.2 M concentration in 30 hrs with the current efficiency of 80~90% at 

100 mA/cm 2. The continuous electrolysis could be operated for more than a month. The developed process was 

applied to build a pilot system of 500 kg/day conversion unit in Hadong power plant , Korea , in 2019. 2) 

Electroosmosis is a phenomenon in which the fluid moves upon applying an electric field through a capillary 

or a porous ceramic membrane. This is a rare example where electrochemistry is utilized for a mechanical 

transducer. Electroosmotic pumps are the simplest one, consisting of two electrodes separated by a porous 

membrane. We developed a non -gassing electroosmotic pump, in which the traditional p latinum electrode is 

not in use, and made the pump system stable and efficient. It also enabled the pump battery -operable. The pump 

is currently being used to develop drug pumps such as an insulin patch pump and an implantable morphine 

pump. Activity of electrocatalysts. From common wording to common pitfalls 

Wolfgang Schuhmann 

Analytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, D -44780 Bochum, Germany. 

wolfgang.schuhmann @rub.de 

Activity of an electrocatalyst is an intrinsic property which essentially is related to the turn over frequency 

of an active site exposed at the surface of a catalyst modified electrode to the electrolyte and can be 

expressed as the current per active site at a given overpotential with respect to the thermodynamic value. 

Evidently, common laboratory p raxis is to integrate powder -based electrocatalysts into an ink together 

with a binder material (often Nafion) and/or conducting additives (typically carbon materials), to drop -

coat a rotating disk electrode or the disk of a rotating ring/disk electrode an d to investigate linear sweep 

voltammograms at a typically not too fast scan rate. Normalization is then often performed by dividing 

through the footprint of the electrode surface. This leads to a current density value at a chosen overpo -

tential which is t hen used to compare different catalyst activities. 

As a matter of fact, this is by far too simple to describe and even more to compare catalyst materials and 

later use the words “better” or “best” for the candidate with the highest value for a given reacti on. 

In this presentation the aim is to alert for the use of words like “onset potential”, consideration of how to 

calculate the potential against the reversible hydrogen electrode, the complex impact of catalyst film 

thickness, inter -particle conductivity, local pH values, ion movement, the role of the double layer, the 

presence of porous materials on the response in a simple linear sweep voltammograms. 

Furthermore, it will be described why using single entity electrochemistry by application of nanoelec -

tro chemical tools are contributing to an improved understanding of the processes ultimately govern the 

complex current response during electrocatalysis.          

> Acknowledgements :
> This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein schaft (DFG, German Research F oundation) within
> Germany´s Excellence Strategy –EXC 2033 –390677874 –RESOLV, the collaborative research center/transregio
> "Heterogeneous Oxidation Catalysis in the Liquid Phase" (TRR 247 [388390466]), as well as the FOR 2982
> [433304666] within the rese arch unit "UNODE -unusual anode reactions. Moreover, funding was received from the
> European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program
> (CasCat [833408]).

# Teaching electrochemistry with youtube. 

# Something new under the sun? 

Neso Sojic 

University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, ISM, UMR CNRS 5255, 16 avenue Pey -Berland. 

33607 Pessac, France. 

sojic @u -bordeaux .fr 

Electrochemistry is an experimental science with beautiful visual phenomema. There are many ways to 

teach electrochemistry, its methods, concepts, theories, models, laws, reactions, mechanisms, etc. The 

teaching may be based on historical or phenomenologic al approaches. It can also start from the concepts 

and then move to the applications. Whatever the selected approach is, it depends on the teacher, its 

pedagogical goals and of course the audience, in other words, the students. 

Most of our present and fut ure students belongs to the generation Z (the next one is the generation Alpha). 

This generation ha s never known a world without computers and cell phones. In fact, most of them 

integrated completely the multi media technology , internet and the social netwo rking sites (Facebook, 

MySpace, Twitter, LinkedIn , etc.) . The way they learned by sitting at a desk with a book, notebook and 

pencil is changing. Textbooks and notebooks are being replaced with tablets and t he pencil by the stylus. 

Touchscreen technology and cloud computing are transforming how, wher e, and even when students learn. 

They are much more stimulated by the visual impact of images and videos. Therefore, the teachers have to 

adapt to these new students. 

In this talk, we will present a few examples based on videos mainly from youtube to teach 

electrochemistry. Education, a vehicle of transformation. 

## Priscilla G . L. Baker 

## Chemistry department, University of the Western Cape, PB X1, Bellville, South Africa 

## Email: pbaker@uwc.ac.za 

## Historically education was based on knowledge as a transformation tool from poverty to wealth 

## as humanity dealt with inequalities brought about by colonialism, racism, geographic disparity 

## and many other obstacles. Education was the key, the wealth and the new bartering currency 

## as society transformed itself. The first industrial revolution brought industrialization and 

## urbanisation to agriculture. This was closely followed by a second transformation wave, with 

## advances in steel production, electricity and petroleum, leading to a series of innovations that 

## changed society. The third industrial revo lution saw a rise of electronics, telecommunications 

## and of course computers, opening the doors to space expeditions, research, and biotechnology. 

## For society to benefit fully from its investment in science education, knowledge must be 

## accessible and famil iar to a global community of users who have the skills, knowledge and 

## understanding to unpack and apply learning to societal challenges (1) . Scientists need to draw 

## on multiple data and information sources, data analysis skills, statistics and models to c reate 

## knowledge that is communicated effectively to decision -makers in government, industry, and 

## civil society. 

## The World Economic Forum (WEF) estimates that 65% of children entering primary schools 

## today will end up working in entirely new occupations or jobs that do not exist now. Therefore 

## the fourth industrial revolution appea rs threatening to many. It is perceived to be a threat to 

## job security as well as the ordinary way of doing things (2). The various technologies that 

## power the 4IR concept incl ude, artificial intelligence and robotics; ubiquitous linked sensors; 

## virtual and augmented realities; additive and distributed ledger technology; advanced materials 

## and nanomaterials; energy capture, storage, and transmission; and new computing 

## technologi es, biotechnologies, geoengineering technologies, neurotec hnology, and space 

## technologies. In this paper we will provide some perspectives on technology as a threat or 

## opportunit y, as we move from old into the new, examining relevant weaknesses and stren gths 

## of education as a vehicle of transformation. 

## References: 

## (1) Kapur R., Byfield V., Del Frate F., Higgins M., Jagannathan S. (2018) The Digital 

## Transformation of Education. In: Mathieu PP., Aubrecht C. (eds) Earth Observation 

## Open Science and Innovation. ISSI Scientific Report Series, vol 15. Springer, Cham. 

## https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -65633 -5_2 

## (2) Mhlanga D, Moloi T. COVID -19 and the Digital Transformation of Education: What 

## Are We Learning on 4IR in South Africa? Educ. Sci. 2020, 10(7), 180; 

## https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10070180 The Importance of Practical Elements in Electrochemistry Education 

Andrea E. Russell 

Sch ool of Chemistry, University of Southampton 

Highfie ld , Southampton, UK SO17 1BJ 

a.e.r ussell@soton.ac.uk 

Drawi ng on exper ience from outreach activities, such as the So uthampton Electrochemistry Circu s, and 

continuous professional development ac tivities , such as the South ampton Electro chemistry Summer 

School, I will show how hand s-on practical elements help to both in spire the next generation of 

ele ctrochemists and deepe n understandi ng of th e theoretical aspects , res pectively. Electrochemical Biosensors: A good example for teaching at the 

# boarder of disciplines 

Sabine SZUNERITS 

Institut d’Electronique, de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie (IEMN), UMR CNRS 8520, University of Lille, 

Avenue Poincaré -BP 60069, 59652 Villeneuve d'Ascq , France ,

e-mail address : sabine.szuneri ts@univ -lille.fr 

Quantification of biological or biochemical processes are of utmost importance for medical, biological and 

biotechnological applications. However, converting the biological information to an easily processed 

electronic signal is challen ging due to the complexity of connecting an electronic device directly to a 

biological environment. Electrochemical biosensors provide an attractive means to analyze the content of 

a biological sample due to the direct conversion of a biological event to a n electronic signal. 

The signal transduction and the general performance of electrochemical sensors are strongly determined by 

the surface architecture that connect the sensing element to the biological ligand. Furthermore, the choice 

of the surface linked receptor as well as of the electrode material used influence the ultimate sensitivity of 

the bio sensor. New nanotechnology -based approaches have become crucial in the development of advanced 

electrochemical biosensors. Some of these aspects will be presented here to make these aspects more 

understandable to the young generation of electrochemists interested in this field. 

SELECTED REFERENCES: 

1. H. Jafari, M. Amiri, E. Abdi, S. L. Navid, J. Bouckaert, R. Jijie, R. Bouk herroub, S. Szunerits 

Biosensors and Bioelectonics 2019, 124 -125, 161 -166 

Entrapment of uropathogenic E. coli cells into ultra -thin sol -gel matrices on gold thin films: A l ow cost alternative 

for impedimetric bacteria sensing .

2. S. Szunerits, V. Mishyn, I. Grabowska, R. Boukherroub 

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2019, 131, 287 -298 

Electrochemical cardiovascular platforms: Current state of the art and beyond. 

3. S. Szunerits, R. Boukherroub 

Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2018, 10, 24 -30 

Graphene based Bioelectrochemistry and Bioelectronics: A concept for the future? 

4. M. Amiri, A. Bezaatpour, H. Jafari, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits 

ACS Sensors 2018, 6, 1069 -10 86 

Electrochemical detection methodologies of pathogens and pathogen derived toxins. Effective online teaching in electrochemistry and beyond: teacher and 

# student perspectives 

David Read 

University of So utham pton 

Highfield, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK. 

d.read@soton.ac.uk 

Chemistry is recognized as one of the most difficult subjects at all levels of education , and 

electrochemistry is seen as on e of the most c hallengin g comp one nts of chemistry p rogram me s for

teachers and students ali ke. The worldwide shif t to online education in spring 2020 further compounded 

the difficulties faced by educat ors in making chemistry accessible to learners and , with the likel ihood that 

cam pus teaching will be dis rupted for some time to come , it is imper ative that we enhance our provision 

of remote learning goin g forwards. 

This presentation consider s the findin gs of research c arried out to investigate students ’ experience s of 

online learning on a chemistry course at the University of Southampton towards the end of the 2019/20 

academic year . The mode of deliv ery implemented was informed by previous work in the a rea of flipped 

teaching 1 and self -assessment activities for students 2. The findings of the research provide clear guidance 

regarding effective approaches that others might wish to adopt to ensure student engagem ent in online 

learning and maxim ize student achievement in electrochemistry and other areas of the subject .

1. Read, D., Watts, J. K., & Wilson, T. J. (2016). Partial flipping to support learning in lectures . In The 

Flipped Classroom Volum e 2: Results from Practic e (pp. 55 -79). American Chemical Socie ty .

2. Read, D., Barnes, S. M., Hyde, J., & Wright, J. S. (2019). 3 Nurturing reflection in science foundation 

year undergraduate students . Teaching Chemistry in Higher Education: A Festschrift in Honour of 

Professor Tina Overton, 23. Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Engineering :

# University of California Irvine comprehensive graduate program 

# at PhD, MS and ME levels 

Plamen Atanassov 

Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, 

University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA 

plamen.atanassov@uci.edu 

UCI Electrochemistry & Electrochemical Engineering graduate program initiative was born in a series of 

ad -hock meetings of groups of UCI faculty members early in the Fall of 2018 with realization of reaching 

a critical mass in this intrinsically interdisciplinary area of research , two decades of offering a “classic” 

electrochemistry class in Chemistry (part of School of Physical Sci ences), the existence of multiple 

electrochemistry modules and a set of Fuel Cell Technology classes at the Advaced Power and Energy 

Program, Samueli School of Engineering . Artur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of 

Sciences on Status and Chall enges in Science for Decarbonizing our Energy Landscape (October 10 -12, 

Beckman Center, Irvine, CA) saw the presence of some 17 UCI professors with a self -declared adherence 

to electrochemical science and engineering ranging from photo -electrochemistry, bi o-electrochemistry, 

sensors & actuators, high -temperature electro -chemistry and solid -state ionics, electrochemical energy 

technology and power systems and corrosion. It was this very fact of self -identification that is the most 

powerful impetus for this initiative to create a graduate program at both PhD and MS/ME levels. 1 It came 

with the spark realiza tion that at present, in the US, (and could be also in Europe or in Japan ), there is no 

other university campus with such high concentration of achievement and talent in the general area of 

electrochemistry. It came also with the call from the key constitu encies: the high -technology wave of 

renewable energy integration into the grid, highest demand for electricity storage, new mobility and 

propulsion and with the need to transform critical chemical processes, like Haber -Bosch ammonia 

synthesis , or Fischer -Tropsch processing of CO and hydrogen to liquid fuels. Electrochemical sciences 

will play fundamental role in freeing humanity from dependence on fossil fuels and associated high 

temperature / high pressure processes. Electrochemical engineering is one of the ways to introduce 

environmentally friendly, low -temperature, solution -based technologies and is the base of hydrogen 

economy, as a path to ultimate decarbonization. 

With this in mind, an initiative group had set -off to create a proposal for a graduat e program first as 

interdisciplinary engineering PhD degree program within Samueli School of Engineering , with Chemical 

& Biomolecular Engineering, Materials Science & Engineering and Mechanical & Aerospace 

Engineering initial participation , with an exte nsion to professional Masters in Engineering (ME) and then 

as a cross -disciplinary (campus -wide) program to include School of Physical Sciences, with Chemistry, 

Physics & Astronomy and Earth Systems Sciences participation. The initial thrust is to build on 

fundamental electrochemistry towards materials and energy applications. Extending the program to include 

sensors and sensor systems as well as water quality and treatment will naturally lead to inclusion of Electric 

Engineering & Computer Engineering, Bio medical Engineering and Civil & Environmental Engineering 

faculty. By this all departments in both schools would become contributive partners in the program. The 

class schedule for the first accomplish year of teaching is presented in Fig. 1. This flow cha rt incudes also 

some planned classes (not realized yet). All though classes are indicted with course number and instructor’s 

name and departmental affiliation. This first 3 teaching quarters have not been formally organized as a 

program but rather were “se lf -harmonized” between the faculty as a pedagogical experiment. This 

presentation will discuss curriculum links and program building challenges. 2 

> 1

In the United States PhD students must take formal scheduled classes for credit and grade , both core 

discip linary classes and technical electives, determining specialization . 

> 2

The University of California Irvine (as well as most of the UC System campuses) is teaching on a 

Quarter System: three 10 -week long teaching perio ds: Fall, Winter and Spring .IR VIN E EL EC TROCHEM IS TRY IN STIT UTE

F-2019 W-2020 S-2020 F-2020 

Seed F unding 

@Integrated S cience & Engineering Building 

> Graduate Program E lectrochemistry & E lectrochemical E ngineering

UC I E lectrochemistry 

Electrochemical Interfaces MAE-212 Marc Madou Electrochemical Kinetics CBE-249 Plamen Atanassov Fuel Cells Fund. (MAE-214A) Jack Brower Fuel Cells Tech. (MAE-214B) Jack Brower Fuel Cells Modeling (MAE-214C) Yun Wang Alternative Year 

Electro(analytical) Chemistry CHEM-248 Shane Ardo /Reg Penner Electrochemical Engineering CBE-149 Iryna Zenyuk Alternative Year 

Solid-State Electro-chemistry MSE-249 Will Bowman Alternative Year 

Bio-electrochemistry MSE/CBE Allon Hochbaum TBD 

Bio-sensors ECE/BME Hung Cao TBD 

Battery Technology XXX ME 

Corrosion Science & Engineering XXX ME  

> existing classes
> classes planned/committed classes discussed in the context of Masters of Engineering program

# Electrochemical Educati on for a Broad Range of Students in China 

Bin Ren 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, MOE Key Laboratory of Spectrochemical 

Analysis and Instrumentation, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry of Energy Materials, 

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 

bren@xmu.edu.cn 

The electrochemical education is encountering great change in the past 30 years in China. The differen t

background of the studen ts and the request from the Ministry of Education to reduce the course hours 

urgently call for the reform of electrochemical education. 

In the 1990’s, the electrochemical education in Xiamen University was divided into two parts. One was in 

the third year physical chemistry, teaching the basis of solution properties, potential and basic 

electrochemical reaction. The second part was in the four year of undergraduate study, which include d

kinetics of electrode process, the research methods in electrochemistr y, the electrochemical experiments, 

and applied electrochemistry (including corrosion, electro deposition, batteries) . These courses were also 

call ed the specialized course s, which allow the students to have a solid basis of electrochemistry. However, 

after 2000, the electrochemistry courses in the undergraduate level except that in physical chemistry are 

removed, which severely discounts the students’ understanding of electr ochemistry. Furthermore, the 

students graduated from other universities , who did not have the chance to attend the graduate 

electrochemistry courses, have very weak electrochemistry background. Therefore, f rom 2004, the 

electrochemistry division in Xiamen University started to reform the electrochemistry courses. The 

specialized courses were integrated into the graduate course, except for the applied electrochemistry as 

optional courses for both undergraduate and graduate students . The kinetics of electroch emistry was moved 

to graduate course. The research methods in electrochemistry was integrated with experimental 

electrochemistry to include the basis of electrochemical interfacial structure, the basis of electrochemical 

experiments, electrochemical instru ments, the transient methods, the steady state methods, the 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and advanced in situ methods for electrochemistry (including 

spectroelectrochemistry, infrared, Raman, X-ray and synchrotron based methods, scanning probe 

microscopies). The students allow to choose at least four experiments from totally 9 experiments , including 

construction of potentiostat, rotating disk electrodes and fuel cell, cyclic voltammetry and the factors 

influencing the electrochemical responses, research methods for lithium ion batteries, 

photoelectrochemsitry, electrochemical in situ methods (infrared, Raman, XRD, SPM). The experiments 

were arranged in parallel to the theoretical courses. This reform indeed helps improve the electrochemistry 

basis of the students in Xiamen University. 

However, with the increased use of electrochemistry for characterizing the performance of materials for 

lithium ion batteries, fuel cells, electrocatalysts from materials sciences and inorganic chemistry , we found 

ur gent needs of electrochemsitry from th ese types of researchers all over China . However, their home 

universit ies do not have the resources to teach them the most up -to -date electrochemistry. On considering 

this situation, we integrated our research methods’ course with the materials of the electrochemistry 

summer school originally run by Southampton group , to run the electrochemical summer school for Chinese 

students biannually, and recently annually . We invited professors from Xiamen University, Wuhan 

Unive rsity, Fudan University, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry of CAS , as well as professors 

from Southampton University to have a tutorial level lectures to selected audiences from all over China, 

including young faculty members, Postdocs, and PhD and Master students. This greatly help dissemination 

of electrochemistry for Chinese researchers and this year also to oversea China scientists. We hope in the 

future such a strategy can be adopted globally. Living biofilms for sense and respond with electrical current 

Sarah M. Glaven 1, Elizabeth L. Onderko 2, Lina J. Bird 1, Daniel A. Phillips 3, Matthew D. Yates 1, Brian J. 

Eddie 1, Anthony P. Malanoski 1, Christopher A. Voigt 4, and Lenny M. Tender 1

> 1

National Re search Council 500 5 th St. NW, Washington, DC 20001; 2Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 

Overlook Ave. SW, Washington, DC 20375; 3American Society for Engineering Education, 1818 N St. 

NW, Washington, DC 20036; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 500 Techn ology Square, 

Cambridge, MA 02139 

sarah.glaven@nrl.navy.mil 

lina.Bird.ctr@nrl.navy.mil 

elizabeth.On derko.ctr@nrl.navy.mil 

daniel.phillips.ctr@nrl.navy.mil 

matt.yates@nrl.navy.mil 

brian.eddie@nrl.navy.mil 

anthony.malanoski@nrl.navy.mil 

cavoigt@gmail.com 

leonard.tender@nrl.navy.mil 

Some bacteria establish line s of communication among themselves and electrodes by forming a network 

of conductive proteins and molecules that carry electrical current , a process known as extracellular 

electron transfer . Through genetic engineering, such natural electroactive biofilms are being redesigned to 

create new living microbial electronics for sense and respond applications. We have engineered the 

biofilm -forming marine bacterium, Marinobacter atlanticus , to sense chemicals in seawater and report 

using electrical current. Biofi lm formation and protein expression were first assessed in an 

electrochemical flow cell in real -time while also measuring current . An isopropyl β -D-1-

thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) inducible system driving yellow fluorescent protein was used to 

characterize the spatiotemporal activation of protein expression within the biofilm at different stages of 

growth and induction dynamics. The resp onse time ranged from 30 minutes to 5 hours, depending on the 

early or late stages of biofilm formation. Fluorescence was detected closer to exposure time and was 

brighter when biofilms were exposed earlier. More mature biofilms had a slower response time and 

decreased fluorescence intensity, particularly during transient exposure where most biofilm cells did not 

express YFP. Chemically induced expression of the Shewanella MtrCAB, CctA, and CymA protein 

electron transfer conduit in M. atlanticus resulted in 5 times higher electrical current than the non -

engineered strain. A second copy of the native M. atlanticus cytochrome c maturation system was 

required for detectable and reproducible expression of these c-type cytochromes. To confer bi -directional 

electr onic communication, we are designing inward electron transfer conduits based on the EET pathway 

of “ Candidatus Tenderia electrophaga”, a marine electroautotroph that grows by carbon fixation using an 

electrode as an electron donor. Critical EET pathways fo r “ Ca. Tenderia electrophaga” were determined 

by comparison of key proteins across 17 putative members of the family Tenderiaceae . Cloning and 

expression of those identified as membrane -associated , charge -carrying c-type cytochromes is currently 

underway . Combining the Marinobacter electrical reporter strain with the inward electron transfer 

conduit will result in a living electrical material for sense and respond applications. The Graphite/electrolyte Interface 

Robert A.W. Dryfe 

Dept. of Chemistry, University of Manchester ,

Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K. 

robert.dryfe@manchester.ac.uk 

Carbon -based electrodes are ubiquitous in electroanalysis and in electrochemical energ y

conversion/storage, however many of their fundamental properties are quite poorly understood. The 

heterogeneity of carbon materials is one reason for this. Graphite, particularly the basal plane of pyrolytic 

graphite, can serve as a useful model material . There has been debate in recent years about the 

electroactivity of the basal plane relative to the edge plane [1,2] . A related factor, which has also 

provoked debate in the literature, is the wetting properties of graphite and the susceptibility of conta ct 

angle measurements to ambient contamination [3,4] .

In this context, the capacitance of graphite electrodes is worthy of re -evaluation. The reference points in 

this field are the seminal works of Yeager and Gerischer, who studied the capacitance of graph ite in 

aqueous and non -aqueous electrolytes, respectively [5,6] . We have shown recently that capacitance is a 

sensitive probe of the contamination seen in contact angle measurement [7] . We have also observed 

specific ion effects within capacitance measurem ents, which may shed some light on the structure of the 

graphite/electrolyte interface [8] . As has been noted for single crystal studies of metal electrodes, a key 

component to understand the metal/electrolyte interface is the structure of interfacial wate r [9]. Such 

effects are at least as important at graphite/electrolyte interfaces, where unusual phenomena related to 

aqueous transport have been reported, including reversible electrowetting effects [10 -12]. 

The future direction of this field will require a “surface science” approach, which has transformed our 

understanding of the metal/electrolyte interface, to be applied to the graphite/electrolyte interface. 

REFERENCES: 

1. C.E. Banks, T.J. Davies, G.G. Wildgoose and R.G. Compton, Chem. Comm., (2005), 829 .

2. M.A. Edwards, P. Bertoncello and P.R. Unwin, J. Phys. Chem. C., 113, (2009), 9218. 

3. A. Kozbial et al , Carbon, 74, (2014), 218. 

4. Y.J. Shin et al, Langmuir, 26, (2010), 3798. 

5. J. -P. Rand in and E. Yeager, J. Electroanal. Chem., 36, (1972), 257 

6. H. Gerischer, R. McIntyre, D. Scherson and W. Storck, J. Phys. Chem., 91, (1987), 1930 

7. Y. Zou, A.S. Walton, I.A. Kinloch and R.A.W. Dryfe, Langmuir, 32, (2016), 11448. 

8. P. Iamprasertkun et al, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 10, (2019), 617. 

9. J.M. Feliu, J. Solid State Electrochem., in press (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10008 -020 -04690 -3 )

10. J.K. Holt et al, Science, 312, (2006), 1034 

11. B. Radha et al, Nature, 538, (2016), 222 

12. D.J. Lomax et al, Soft Matter, 12, (2016), 8798 Strategies for Sustainable Electrochemical Engineering 

# Education : Online In tegration 

Gerardine G. Botte 

Chemical Engineering Department 

Whitacre C ollege of Engineering , Texas Tech University 

Box 43121, Lubbock , TX 79409 , USA 

gerri.botte@ttu.edu 

One of the recent trends in education has to do with Education for Sustainability (EfS) .

EfS is defined as “a transformative learning process that equips students, teachers, a nd 

school systems with the new knowledge and ways of thinking we need to achieve 

econ omic prosperity and responsible citizenship while restoring the health of the living 

systems upon which our lives depend. [1]” Education for Sustainability presents a grea t

opportunity for Electrochemical Engineering, but it raises the question how could 

programs in Electrochemical Engineering Education (EEE) become sustainable? In 

addition to this singular challenge , the recent worldwide COVID -19 events have 

introduce d the complexity of l imited face to face education to the complete transition to 

online an d in an optimistic aspe ct, hybrid models. This brings the additional concern to 

identify how can we effectively transition to incorporate on line education in 

electrochemical engineering while maintaining the classical effectives and interaction 

with studen ts that face to face education brings into a classroom . Interestingly , effective 

e-le arning can be a platform for EfS [2] .

This talk will discuss experiences in developing sustainable electrochemical 

engineering education programs that involve course cur ricul a, independent design 

projects, outreach programs [3-4], curricula development for educating science 

teachers , and the integ ration of “Online Mode .”

[1] Education for Sustainability, The Cloud Institute for Sustainability Educa tion, 

available onlin e https://cloudinstitute.org/brief -history/  (accessed March 2017 ).

[2] Bjørke , S. A. E-learning for sustainable development - rationale, strategies, choices 

and actions. Experiences from the study programme MSc in Development 

Management , Seminar.net - Intern ational journal of media, technology and lifelong 

learning , Vol. 7, Issue 2, 2011. 

[3] Botte , G. G. . Introducing Electrochemical Engineering to Future Generations. 

Interface, The Electrochemical Society, 39 -43, summer 2010. Available Electronically: 

http://www.electrochem.org/dl/interface/sum/sum10/sum10_p039 -043.pdf (accessed 

December 2015). 

[4] G. G. Botte. Reaching Out to the Next Generation: The IE&EE Division Outreach 

Program. Interface, The Electrochemical Society, spring 201 6. Available 

Electronically: http://interface.ecsdl.org/content/25/1.toc (accessed March 2017 ). Corrosion of emerging materials 

## Nick Birbilis 

## Australian National University 

## As technologies rapidly advance , key factors that are critical to materials durability include, (i) 

## materials being utilised in previously unconsidered environments and unique scenarios, and (ii) the 

## durability of emerging materials (and new alloys) is not well understood. T he emergence of new 

## materials, and the ability to produce them, has markedly inc reased in the past decade - owing to a 

## widespread emergence of computational materials design and additive manufacturing. Such aspects 

## will be discussed quite generally, along with specific examples of the durability of emerging 

## materials . A contemporary p erspective on what alloy ‘passivity’ may mean in a practical sense is 

## explored ; al ong with new insights into what factors constitute corrosion resistance. Multi -scale Advanced Characterization s for Solid -State Lithium 

# Batteries 

Xiqian Yu , Junyang Wang , Rusong Chen , Hongyi Pan , Quan Li , Lufeng Yang , Jie -Nan Zhang, Hong Li, 

Liquan C hen, Xuejie Huang 

In stitute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 1 00190, China 

E-mail address: xyu@iphy.ac.cn 

In the critical area of next -generation batteries, solid -state batteries (SSBs) have drawn increasing 

attention because of their potential safety, energ y-density, and cycle -life benefits. 1 Though prom ising, 

the y still face challenges that impede their practical application, such as limited ionic conductivity and 

chemical stability, interfacial stability, electrochemical incompatibility between various c omp onents of 

the SSBs, and thus unsatisfied perfor mance. 2, 3 Recognizing this, multi -scale characterization techniques, 

such as synchrotron and neutron based techniques, are necessary to be e mpl oyed to study the complex 

and elusive chemical/physical process in SSBs. Thus, it can offer a deep perspective on various b ulk, 

interface and nanoscale phenomena of the SSBs within the scientific community. 

To be specifically, SSBs and the correspond ing key cathodes and anodes materials all include 

complex hierarchical structure and multi -scale interface within th e material or devices, those buried 

structures and interface play critical roles in determining the essential property of the SSBs, such as 

lit hium diffusion, charge transfer, the reactivity and reversibility of the interfacial reaction, structural 

stabili ty. In th is talk, I’m going to introduce the application of synchrotron X-ray spectroscop ic , imaging ,

and neutron scattering techn iques , particularly by ope rando method, on the probing of the fundamental 

wo rking mechanism s of the key battery materials , co mpon ents and in SSBs . With gaining a deep 

understanding of the correlation between the interfacial reaction within the composite electrode materials 

in multi -scale and the overall e lectrochemical performance of the SSBs, it inspired us to provide the 

optim izing stra tegies for the SSBs. 

Figure 1. The illus tration of the multi -level struc ture 

and complex interface between the electrode 

materials and solid electrolyte within SSBs .

Fig ure 2. 3D fluorecence X-ray image of 

LiCoO2 particle with trace Ti -Mg -Al co dopin g

(1) R . Chen; Q. Li; X . Yu ; L . Chen; H. Li ; Approaching Practically Accessible Solid -state Batteries: 

Stability Issues Related to Solid Electrolytes and Interfaces, Chemical Reviews , 2019 , DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00268. 

(2) J .-N. Zhang ; Q . Li; C . Ouya ng; X . Yu ; M . Ge; X . Huang; E . Hu; C . Ma; S . Li; R . Xiao; W . Yang; Y .

Chu; Y . Liu ; H . Yu; X .-Q. Yang; X . Huang; L . Chen; H . Li ; Trace Doping of Multiple Elements Enables 

Stable B attery Cycling of LiCoO 2 at 4.6 V, Nature Energy , 2019 , 4(7): 594 -60 3. 

(3) E . Hu; X . Yu ; R . Lin; X . Bi; J . Lu ; S . Bak; K .-W. Nam; H .L. Xin ; C . Jaye; D .A. Fischer; K . Amine; 

X.-Q. Yang; Evolution of Redox Couples in Li -and Mn -rich Cathode Materials and Mitigation of Voltage 

Fade by Reducing O xygen Release, Nature Energy , 20 18 , 3(8): 690 -698. A “simple” model system to understand the OER in alkaline media: 

# the Ni -doped Fe 3O4(001) surface 

Francesca Mirabella 

Institute of Applied Physics, TU Wien 

Wiedner Hauptstrasse 8 -10/134, A -1040 Vienna, Austria 

mirabella@iap.tuwien.ac.at 

Electrochemical water splitting is an environmentally friendly technology to store renewable energy in the 

form of chemical fuels. Among the Earth -abundant , first -row transition metal -based catalysts, mixed Ni -Fe 

oxides have sh own promising performance for effective and low -cost catalysis of the oxygen evolution 

reaction (OER) in alkaline media. However, the synergistic role s of Fe and Ni cations in the OER 

mechanism are unclear 1.

In this talk I will discuss using the well -defined Fe 3O4(001) surface as a model system for understanding 

the OER and establishing t he structure -reactivity relation on mixed Fe/Ni oxides. Reconstructed Fe 3O4(001) 

provides well -defined sites for the adsorption or incorporation of various metal atoms including Ni 2,3 . In an 

experimental approach going from UHV via neat liquid water all the way to electrolyte and operation 

conditions, we report how the Ni -modification changes the reactivit y. We use surface science techniques 

in ultra -high -vacuum (LEED, XPS, ISS, STM) as well as in air (AFM), in combination with 

electrochemical methods (CV and EIS) in alkaline media. 

To first test the stability of the Ni -modified Fe 3O4(001) surface in liqui d water, we used a novel 

experimental setup 4 that allows bringing a UHV -prepared surface in contact with liquid water without 

exposure to air. Finally, we performed cyclic voltammetry as well as impedance spectroscopy on the Ni -

modified surface , and we observed a significant improvement in the OER activity compared to the cle an 

Fe 3O4 (001). An optimum Fe:Ni ratio in the range 20 -40% is found, which is in good agreement with what 

is observed in powder catalysts 1,5. This observation makes our model system well suited to study the OER 

in alkaline medi a due to its high level of control of the surface and near -surface region, robustness and 

simplicity .

References 

1. Dionigi, F. & Strasser, P. NiFe -Based (Oxy)hydroxide Catalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction 

in Non -Acidic Electrolytes. Adv. Energy Mater. 6, (2016). 

2. Bliem, R. et al. Subsurface Cation Vacancy Stabilizatin of the Magnetite (001) Surface. Science 

346 , 1215 –1218 (2014). 

3. Bliem, R. et al. Adsorption and incorporation of transition metals at the magnetite Fe 3O4(001) 

surface. Phys. Rev. B 92 , 075440 (2015). 

4. Balajka, J. et al. Apparatus for dosing liquid water in ultrahigh vacuum, Rev. Sci. Instr . 89, 0 83906 –

6 (2018). 

5. Shinagawa, T., Garcia -Esparza, A. T. & Takanabe, K. Insight on Tafel slopes from a microkinetic 

analysis of aqueous electrocatalysis for energy conversion. Sci. Rep. 5, 1 –21 (2015). Electrochemical Biosensing based on Nanomaterial Labels 

Anastasios Economou 

Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens 

Panepistimiopolis, Athens 157 71, Greece 

aeconomo@chem.uoa.gr 

This work reports some examples of electroc hemical bio assays based on the use of quantum dots (metal 

salt nanocrystals) as labels. The principle of the bioassays is that the target biomolecules are selectively 

labeled with quantum dots of appropriate composition; subsequently, the labels are dissol ved releasing 

the respective metal cations which are quantified by electrochemical stripping analysis [1]. This bioassay 

format: i) ensures high sensitivity which is due to the synergistic effect of the high loading of each target 

biomolecule with labellin g moieties and the inherent electrochemical signal amplification afforded by 

stripping analysis ii) enables simultaneous multiplexed detection of more than one biomolecules based on 

the use of quantum dot labels of different composition. 

In this presentation, electrochemical tran sducers and integrated platfo rms for nanomaterial -based 

biosensing are described , fabricated via different microfabrication technologies (such as thin -film micro -

engineering approaches, screen -printin g, injection -molding and 3D -printing ) and representative 

applications of paper -based, flexible, foldable, fluidic and multiplexed devices are provided [2 -7]. Initial 

results of on -going research in this fie ld will be presented and discussed. 

References 

1. C. Kokkinos, A. Economou, Anal. Chim. Acta, 961, 12 -32 (2017) 

2. C. Kokkinos et al., Anal. Chem., 88, 6897 -6904 (2016) 

3. C. Kokkinos et al., Anal. Chem., 90, 1092−1097 (2018) 

4. C. Kokkinos et al,. Anal. Chem., 87, 853 -857 (2015) 

5. C. Kokkinos et al,. Anal. Chem., 85, 10686 -10691 (2013) 

6. C. Kokkinos et al., Electrochem. Commun., 60, 47 -51 (2015) 

7. C. Kokkinos et al., Anal. Chim. Acta, 886, 29 -36 (2015) Solid S tate Sodium Batteries: from Solid Electrolytes to Functional 

# Device 

Dina Fattakhova -Rohlfing a,b , Qianli Ma a, Frank Tietz a

> a

Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Institute of Energy and Climate Research IEK -1

Wilhelm -Johnen -Str., 52425 Jülich, Germany 

> b

Fac ulty of Engineering and Center for Nanointegration Duisburg -Essen (CENIDE), Universität 

Duisburg -Essen, Lotharstraße 1, 47057 Duisbur g

d.fattakhova@fz -juelich.de 

Li -ion batteries (LIBs) dominate the electrochemical energy storage technology because of th eir 

extraordinary performance, high energy density, and long cycle life. Still, the enormously growing 

demand of Li due to the expanding market raises concerns about the costs and the availability of lithium 

in the future, necessitating the development of beyond -lithium electrochemical energy storage concepts. 

Sodium is among the most investigated alternatives for lithium due to its abundance, widespread 

availability and much lower costs. The simple replacement of lithium with sodium in liquid electrolyte 

cells while keeping otherwise similar cell design results however in lower energy densities as compared 

to LIBs due to a higher molar mass, more positive redox potential and higher reactivity of sodium with 

liquid electrolytes as compared to lithium. In com bination with solid electrolytes, however, much higher 

energy densities can be expected due to a possible use of metallic sodium as an anode instead of currently 

used hard carbons, opening new perspectives for the development of Na -based electrochemical en ergy 

storage systems [1] .

Fundamental prerequisite for the development of high -performance solid state sodium batteries is a 

sufficiently high total conductivity of all its components at room temperature. The latter includes the ionic 

conductivity of the electrolyte (simultaneously acting as a separator in solid state batteries), the combined 

electronic/ionic conductivity of the cathode and the anode half -cells, as well as a high conductivity of key 

interfaces between the electrolyte and the electrode mate rials. The total conductivity critically relies on 

the bulk properties of individual materials, but also on their nanomorphology in the component 

assemblies as well as on the processing - and operation -dependent interface between the materials [2] . The 

mate rials challenge therefore goes far beyond the bulk structure level, including the other fundamental 

aspects of materials chemistry (such as integration of materials into components, optimization of 

component microstructure, interface properties), electroch emistry (individual contributions to the total 

impedance, degradation mechanisms upon cell operation), and engineering (development of processing 

technology enabling fabrication of optimized components). 

We will give an overview of the sodium solid state battery development that spans from the development 

of solid state sodium conductors to their processing to functional battery components and finally to the 

fabrication and testing of the complete cells. We will discuss bottlenecks in the battery performan ce and 

will show the concepts for the mitigation of critical steps. 

[1] Q. Ma, F. Tietz, ChemElectroChem , 2020 , 7, 1 -22 

[2] Q. Ma, C. -L. Tsai, X. -K. Wei, M. Heggen, F. Tietz, J. T. Irvine, J. Mater.  Chem. A 2019 , 7, 7766 -

7776. Electrochemical Characterization of Stochastic ity in Nanobubble 

# Nucleation 

Martin A. Edwards ,a,b Sean R. German, a Hang Ren, a,c Henry S. White a

> a

Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 841 12 , USA 

> b

Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701 , USA 

> c

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University,  Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA 

maedw@uark.edu 

Gas is evolved in many important electrocatalytic reactions, including those involved in energy conversion 

and storage, e.g., H 2 and O 2 production from water electrolysis , N2 and CO 2 generation in fuel cells, and in 

industrially important reactions, such as the chloralkali proce ss. Gas bubbles formed on electrode surfaces, 

block the transport of reactants to the electrode surface, creating an additional overpotential and lowering 

efficiency. Understanding the physical processes that lead to the formation of bubbles on electrode s urfaces 

is therefore of significant interest. 

Nucleation is the first -step in the generation of gas bubble s. It requires surmounting the energy barrier 

represented by the formation of a critical nucleus of 10s to 100s of gas molecules, after which bubble growth 

is thermodynamically favorable. Overcoming the barrier is a stochastic process, and so characterizing it 

requires repeated measurements in reproducible conditions. 

Driving a gas -evolving reaction at a nanoelectrode generates a controllable supersaturation of gas at the 

electrode surface, which can induce the formation of a single stable nanobubble. 1 In contrast to work with 

larger electrode s, in which multiple bubbles can simultaneously nucleate, grow , coalesce, and possibly 

detach , at a nanoelectrode only one bubble nucleates and can rapidly be detected (temporal resolution <1 

ms). As the nanobubble rapidly dissolves on cessation of the current (<50 ms), 2 nanoelectrod es can 

repeated ly measure the time to nucleat e a single bubble ; thus characterizing the distribution of times taken 

to overcome the nucleation barrier .

From these measured distribution of nucleation times, as a function of applied current (supersaturation ), we 

gain physical insight into bubble nucleation, including the shape and number of molecules in the critical 

bubble nucleus, rates, energetic barrier heights .3 Measurement of the nucleation of H 2, O 2, N 2, and CO 2

bubbles will be reported. 4,5,6 

1. L. Luo and H. S. White Langmuir , 2013 , 29(35), 11169 -11175. 

2. S. R. German, Q. Chen, M. A. Edwards, H. S. White J. Electrochem. Soc. 2016 163 (4), H3160 -H3166 

3. S. R. German, M. A. Edwards, H. Ren, and H. S. White J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2018 , 140 (11), 4047 –4053 

4. Á . Moreno Soto, S . R. German, H . Ren, D . van der Meer, D . Lohse, M . A. Edwards, and H . S. White 

Langmuir , 2018 , 34 (25), pp 7309 –7318 

5. M. A. Edwards, H. S. White, H. Ren ACS Nano , 2019 ,13 (6) 6330 -6340 

6. H. Ren, M. A. Edwards, Y. Wang, H. S. White J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2020 .11, 4, 1291 -1296. Nanoelectrochemistry for Studying Neurotransmission in Real -Time 

Prof. Mei Shen 

Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign, 600 S Mathews Ave, Urbana, 

Illinois, USA, 61801 

mshen233@illinois.edu 

Nanoelectrodes have the advantage of low background charging current, when coupled with 

scanning electrochemical microscope, 1 it can provide nanometer spatial resolution imaging with high 

temporal resolution. 2 My group developed the Nano -Interface between Two Immiscible Electro lyte 

Solutions (ITIES) as a unique analytical platform for the study of ionic species of biological interest such 

as neurotransmitters on living bio -structures , i .e. single cells and single syanpses. 3, 4, 5, 6 , 7, 8 A typical 

nano IT IES electrode co nsists of a laser pulled pipet wit h an orifice in the few nm range that can be filled 

with an immiscible organic solution for its immersion into biologically -relevant fluids, thus forming a 

liquid/liquid interface. We studied acetylchol ine neurotransmission activit y at single neuron structures 

from the model organism Aplysia californica . We employed scanning electrochemical microscopy 

(SECM) for accurate positioning of our nanoprobes on selected regions of cells and their synapses. By 

using nanoITIES electrodes , we circumvent challenges in the evaluation of redox inactive 

neurotransmitters using electrochemical methods. 

Our results show that our Nanoelectrochemistry platform, consisting of nanoITIES electrodes and 

SECM, is powerful for elucidat ing the me chanism s of cellular si gnaling. 8 A multitude of information 

including concentration of transmitters, number of transmitter molecules, dynamics of transmission have 

been measured in real time. 7, 8 Additionally, we have demonstrated the power of nanoe lectroc he mistry in 

determining the number of vesicles per unit area while providing real time transmission information ,8 a

big advantage compared to conventional methods using electron microscopy .

Acknowledge ment: This research was supported by the National In stitutes of Health under Award 

Number R21NS085665 and National Science Foundation with a CAREER award (CHE 19 -45274) to M. 

Shen .

1. Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy , edited by Bard, A. J.; Mirkin, M. V. 2nd edition, 2012, 

CRC press, Taylor & Francis Group , Boca Raton, FL. 

2. Chen, R.; Alanis, K.; Welle, T.; Shen, M. * Invited contribution on a special issue featuring 

“Female role models in Analytical Chemistry ”, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry ,

Accepted (2020 ). DOI: 10.1007/s00216 -020 -02655 -z

3. Shen, M.* ; Colombo, M. L. Analytical Methods , invited review, Emerging Investigator themed 

issue, 7, 7095 -7105 (2015) .

4. Colombo, M. L.; Sweedler, J. V.; Shen, M.* Anal. Chem. , 87, 5095 -5100 (2015) .

5. Colombo, M. L.; McNeil, S.; Iwai, N.; Chang, A.; Shen, M.* Journal of The Electrochemical 

Society , 163, H3072 -H3076 (2016) .

6. Chen, R.; Yang, A.; Chang, A.; Oweimrin, P.; Romero, J.; Vichitcharoenpaisarn, P.; Tapia, S.; 

Ha, K.; Villaflor, C.; Shen, M.* ChemElectroChem ., 7, 967 -974 (2020 ).

7. Shen, M. ; * Qu, Z.; Deslaurier, J.; Welle, T. ; Sweedler, J.; Chen, R. J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 140 ,

7764 -7768 (2018) .

8. Welle, T. M.; Alanis, K.; Colombo, M. L.; Sweedler, J. V.; Shen, M.* Chem. Sci. , 9, 4937 -4941 

(2018). Smart scaffolds for electrochemical monitoring of cell cultures 

Claudia Caviglia, Suhith Hemanth, Yasmin M. Hassan , Jesper Y. Pan, Babak Rezaei Stephan S. Keller 

National Centre of Nano Fabrication and Characterization – DTU Nanolab, Technical University of 

Denmark, Ørsteds Plads, Building 347, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 

suke@dtu.dk 

In bioelectrochemical applications, cells are typically incubated on 2D electrodes. The major limitation of 

this approach is that planar electrode geometry poorly mimics the natural environment of the cells. 3D 

polymer scaffolds have been developed to provide a more realistic environment for the cells but these 

structures usually lack integrated sensor functionality to perform in situ measu rement in the 3D cell 

culture. Here, we address these limitations and demonstrate the in situ electrochemical analysis of the 

alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity in a 3D bone tissue model with integrated electrochemical sensing 

using 3D pyrolytic carbon mi croelectrodes. Previously , pyrolytic 3D carbon electrodes have been 

introduced for electrochemical monitoring of human neural stem cells [1,2 ].

In this study , a novel approach for fabrication of multi -layere d 3D electrodes was developed [3 ] based on 

photol ithography followed by pyrolysis. 3D culturing of Saos -2 osteosarcoma cells in gelatin hydrogels 

deposited on 2D and 3D carbon microelectrodes was established (Figure A -B). Saos -2 cells cultured on 

the electrode express ALP on the surface of their cellular membrane. P -aminophenyl phosphate (PAPP) is 

added as substrate and hydrolysed by ALP to release p -aminophenol (PAP). The oxidation of PAP to 

quinoneimide (QI) is carried out during a potential scan in square wave voltammetry (SWV) that 

generates an oxidat ion peak c urrent used as signal (Figure C ) [4] .

In the 3D environment provided by the gelatine hydrogels slower increase of ALP activity was observed 

compared to 2D cell cultures probably due to reduced proliferation of the Saos -2 cells. Integration of 3D 

carbon microelectrodes allowed the recording of higher peak currents due to larger surface area of the 

electrodes (Figure D). For 3D cell culturing for more than one week, a decrease in ALP activity was 

recorded. This was attributed to the formation of sph eroids in the hydrogels, which was confirmed using 

imaging of the 3D cell cultures with confocal microscopy. 

In conclusion, the combination of 3D cell cultures with 3D carbon microelectrodes as smart cell scaffolds 

is a promising approach for development of in vitro cell models. 

Figure : Schematic illustration of the electrochemical assays: Saos -2 cells are encapsulated in gelatin/TG 

hydrogel deposited on (A) 2D electrodes and (B) 3D electrodes. (C) Representative SW voltammogra ms 

recorded at Day 2 and Day 8 for Saos -2 cells cultured on 2D and 3D electrodes after 1 hr incubation 

with PAPP. D) Time course of the oxidation peak current due to PAP formation. 

References: 

[1] L. Amato, A. Heiskanen, C. Caviglia, et al., Adv.  Funct. Mat. 24 (2014) 7042 

[2] E. Fuhrer, A. Bäcker, S. Kraft, et al., Adv.  Health. Mat. 7 (2018) 1700915 

[3 ] S. Hemanth et al., Carbon, 121 (2017) 226 

[4 ] C. Yildirim -Semerci, D. Benayahu, M. Adamovski, U. Wollenberger, Electroanalysis 27 (2015) 1350 

Acknowled gments: The authors acknowledge financial support from Villum Fonden, Grant No. 9301 and 

the European Research Council under the Horizon 2020 framework programme grant no. 772370 -

PHOENEEX. Borohydride Electrooxidation on Nickel : Towards Understanding of 

# the Reac tion Mechanism 

A. G. Oshchepkov 1,2 , G . Braesch 1, 3, G . Rostamikia 4, G . Maranzana 5, A . Bonnefont 6, M . J. Janik 4, M .

Chatenet 3 and E. R. Savinova 1

> 1

ICPEES Univ ersity of Strasbourg, Str asb ourg, France 

> 2

Boreskov Institute of Catalysis, Novosibirsk, Russia 

> 3

LEPMI, Grenoble, France 

> 4

Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State Univ., University Park, PA, USA 

> 5

LEMTA, Nancy, France 

> 6

IC, Univ ersity of Strasb ourg, Strasbourg, France 

Elen a.S avinova@unistra.fr 

Direct Borohydride Fuel Cells (DBFCs) are considered as promising power sources for portable and 

mobile applications. Their advantages are high t heoretical energy density , and high theoretical cell 

voltage . However, currently availab le platinum group metal -based (Pt, Pd) electrocatalysts do not allow 

one to take full advantage of the low standard potential of the BH 4-/BO 2- couple ( -0.41 V vs . RHE ) due to 

the competing faradaic hydrogen evolution reaction and non -faradaic heterogeneous hy drolysis of BH 4-

[1] .

We have recently demonstrated that electrodeposited Ni largely outperforms Pt in the borohydride 

oxidat ion reaction in the low overpotential interval , both in half -cell and in unit fuel cell configurations 

[2 , 3 ].

Here we combine el ectrochemical, operand o Fourier -Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR S), and 

differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) measurements with DFT calculations to propose 

a tentative mechanism of the borohydride oxidation reaction on Ni. 

Acknowle dgm ents 

This work has been performed in the frame of the MobiDiC project, funded by the French National 

Research Agency (ANR, grant # ANR -16 -CE05 -0009 -01) , and RSF Project No. 18 -73 -00143, funded by 

the Russian Science Foundation .

References 

[1] P. -Y. O lu, N. Job, M. Chatenet, J. Power Sources 327 , 235 (2016). 

[2] A. Os hchepkov, G. Braesch, S. Ould -Amara, G. Rostamikia, G. Maranzana, A. Bonnefont, V. 

Papaefthimiou, M. Janik, M. Chatenet, E. Savinova, ACS Catalysis, 9, 8520 (2019) .

[3] G. Braesch, A. G. Os hchepkov, A. Bonnefo nt , F. Asonkeng, T. Maurer, G. Maranzana, E. R. 

Savinova , M. Chatenet , Nickel 3D structures enhanced by electrodeposition of nickel nanoparticles as 

high performance anodes for DBFCs, ChemElectroChem; DOI: 10.1002/celc.202000254. Hollow Carbon Spheres Codoped with Nitrogen and Iron as Effective 

# Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction 

Qiaoxia Li , Yumeng Ma , Shasha Luo ,Qunjie Xu *

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Materials Protection and Advanced Materials in Electric Power, 

Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, China 

e-mail : xuqunjie@shiep.edu.cn 

Design and engineering of low -cost, effective catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 

plays a critical role in the development of fuel cell and metal -air battery. Herein, we report a facile 

template -assisted strategy for the fabrication of hollow porous carbon spheres codoped with nitrogen 

and iron species (FeNC) for ORR electrocatalysis. The samples were synthesiz ed via one -step 

pyrolysis of a core -shell precursor, which was prepared by in -situ growth of a Fe -doped zeolite 

imidazolate framework (ZIF) shell onto the surface of polystyrene nanoparticles. The obtained FeNC 

composites exhibited a unique hollow structur e with a large surface area, hierarchircal porosity, and 

abundant FeNx sites. Notably, the sample prepared at 950 ℃ (FeNC -950) exhibited the best ORR 

activity among the series in alkaline media (with an onset and half -wave potential at +0.9 4 and +0.84 V 

vs . RHE, respectively), a performance on par with that of Pt/C and markedly better than those of 

relevant catalysts reported in recent literature, where ORR proceeded mostly via the efficient 

four -electron reduction pathway. The FeNC -950 catalyst also displa yed superior stability and tolerance 

to methanol, as compared to commercial Pt/C. The results suggest that high -performance ORR 

catalysts can be derived by deliberate structural engineering of the metal -organic framework 

precursors. 

Acknowledgments This study was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (91745112)  and 

the Key Projects of Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology (15DZ1206902) .Ce -Containing pH Sensitive Additives for Corrosion Inhibition of

# Epoxy Coated Steel 

M.F. Montemor *1, Y. Morozov 1, L. M. Calado 1, A.C. Marques 2, R. A. Shakoor 3, R. Kahraman 4, M. 

Taryba 1

1- CQE, DEQ, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. R ovisco Pais, 1049 -001 Lisboa. 

2- CERENA, DEQ, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av.  Rovisco Pais, 1049 -001 

Lisboa. 

3- Center for Advanced Materials (CAM) Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar 

4- Department of Chemical Engineering, Qatar Uni versity, Doha, Qatar 

*mfmontemor@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

This work discusses the protective role of cerium tri(bis(2 -ethylhexyl)phosphate) - Ce(DEHP)3, a pH -

sensitive corrosion inhibitor additive in coatings for enhanced corrosion protection. The effect of th e

inhibitor on the coating barrier properties and corrosion protection performance was studied by 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 

Localized electrochemical techniques was used to probe the self -healing effect at microscopic level. For 

that purpose, a defect was created in the coating exposing the substrate. The corrosion inhibition effect 

was studied using localized impedance spectroscopy (LEIS), the scanning vibrating electrode technique 

(SVET) and localized potentiometry (SIET). Complementary expe riments were performed using SEM -

EDS. 

EIS results carried out for 2 years clearly demonstrated the enhancement of the coating barrier properties 

in the presence of the additive and its protective role. Localized electrochemical techniques illustrated the 

self -healing effect and evidenced the corrosion inhibition effectiveness of the pH sensitive additive. 

The corrosion inhibition mechanism seems to involve i) a cathodic inhibition effect due to the formation 

of a protective layer containing Ce -species; ii) inhibition of the anodic reaction due to formation of a 

stable film of DEHPA and iii) reduction of electrolyte uptake in the coating due to hydrophobization of 

the coating pores. 

Overall, the work demonstrates the improved corrosion protection of epoxy co atings modified with a 

novel corrosion inhibitor that is activated by local pH changes. 

Acknowledgments: 

This publication was made possible by NPRP Grant # 11S -1226 -170132from the Qatar National Research 

Fund (a member of the Qatar Foundation). Statemen ts made herein are solely the responsibility of the 

authors. Qatar Shell, Qatar, an end user and project partner. Sherwin Williams for providing the model 

coating formulation and Voestalpine for providing steel panels.  Fundação para a Ciência e a tecnolog ia -

FCT for funding CQE (UIDB/00100/2020) and CERENA UID/ECI/04028/2019. Environmental -electrosynthetic approach to produce selectively acetic 

# acid from cashew -nut shell liquid waste by using non -active ele ctrode 

Mateus C. Medeiros a, Elisama V. dos Santos b, Djalma R. da Silva a,

Suely S. L. Castro c, Carlos A. Martínez -Huitle a,d ,

> a

Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, P59078 -970 Natal, RN, Brazil 

> b

School of Science and Technology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Campus Universitário, 

P59078 -970 Natal, RN, Brazil 

> c

Faculty o f Exact and Natural Sciences, State University of Rio Grande do Norte, Campus Central, 

Mossoró P59625 -620, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil 

> d

Institut für Organische Chemie, Johannes Gutenberg -Universität Mainz, Duesbergweg 10 -14, 55128 

Mainz, Germany 

carlosmh@quimica.ufrn.br 

Over the past decades, great progress has been made on the electrochemical technologies for the 

treatment of effluents containing organic pollutants. The electrochemical oxidation (EO) of organics for 

wastewater treatment , the mos t popular technology, can be atta ined in different ways : (i) Direct EO, 

where electron transfer occurs at the electrode surface without partici pation of other substances [1 ]; (ii) 

Indirect EO where organic pollutants are oxidized through the mediation of s ome electroactive species 

generated at the anode surface, which act as intermediaries for electrons shuttling between the electrod e

and the organic compounds [1 ]. The efficiency of the process is affected by operating conditions and 

above all by the nature of the electrode material. In particular anodes with low oxygen evolution 

overpotential, such as IrO 2, RuO 2 or Pt have “active” behavior and favor the partial and selective 

oxidation of pollutants (i.e. electrochemical conversion), while anodes with high oxygen evolution 

overpotential, such as SnO 2, PbO 2 or boron -doped diamond (BDD) have “non -active” behavior and so are 

ideal electrodes for the complete electrochemical oxidation of organics to CO 2 in wastewater treatment. 

According to the literature, carbo xylic acids are common intermediates in the electrochemical oxidation 

of several organic substrates or real wastewaters [1 ]; and these substances are usually neglected. In the 

past decades, great advances have been made in synthesis o f different carboxylic acids [2 ]. However, 

expensive or air/water sensitive substrates were usually used in stoichiometric reactions, silanes and/or 

metallic reducing agents were often required; clean and cheap reductants were necessary to obtain higher 

yields and multi -steps p rocedures were also proposed. For this reason, the plan to obtain these chemicals 

from biomass [3 ] by electrosynthetic way is of practical importance because the development of green 

processes to produce compounds with technological application is still a real necessity [ 4]. In this context, 

this work aims to combine the distinctive characteristics of a non -active anode to obtain high -added value 

products (mainly, carboxylic acids) from cashew -nut shell liquid ( CNSL ) waste , an abundant and 

renewable raw mat erial in the Northeast Brazilian region. During the environmental -electrosynthetic 

approach (treatment of effluent to synthetize selectively high added -value products) ; the concentration of 

the carboxylic acids was monitored as well as the chemical oxygen demand and energy requirements 

were determined. The evolution of five carboxylic acids was followed over time for the experiments of 

the three different current densities using 0.1% of t -CNSL in 1.00 mol L -1 NaOH at Ti/TiO 2RuO 2IrO 2

anode. At 40 mA cm -2, the most notorious increase in the organic acids concentrations took place during 

the two last hours achieving selective electrochemical conversion of CNSL for producing acetic acid .

Reference s

[1] C.A. Martínez -Huitle, M. Panizza, Curr . Opin. Electrochem. 11 (2018) 62 –71. 

[2] Y. Wang, Q. Qian, J. Zhang, B.B.A. Bediako, Z. Wang, H. Liu, B. Han, Nat Commun 10, 5395 (2019). 

[3] D. Di Marino, T. Jestel, C. Marks, J. Viell, M. Blindert, S.M.A. Kriescher, A.C. Spiess, M. Wessling, 

ChemElect roChem 10.1002/celc.201801676 

[4] S. Möhle, M. Zirbes, E. Rodrigo, T. Gieshoff, A. Wiebe, S.R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 57 (2018) 

6018 –6041. 

Acknowledgements    

> Financial supports from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (Brazil) are gratefully acknowledged
> (CNPq –439344/2018 -2), as well as the support from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (Brazil) with the
> FAPESP project 2014/50945 -4. Carlos A. Martínez -Huitle acknowledges the funding prov ided by the Alexander von Humboldt
> Foundation (Germany) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Brazil) as a Humboldt fellowship for
> Experienced Researcher (88881.136108/2017 -01) at the Johannes Gutenberg -Universität Mainz, Germany . The authors thank the
> Núcleo de Processamento Primário e Reúso de Água Produzida e Resíduos (NUPPRAR) for providing HPLC analyses.

# Transport and Reactivity of Ionic Phases of the Lithium SEI 

Betar M. Gallant, Rui Guo 

Department of Mechanical Engineering 

77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, 02139 

bgallant@mit.edu 

The origins of major challenges faced by Li anodes – high reactivity, in sufficiently high Coulombic 

Efficiency, parasitic electrolyte consumption and loss of active Li - can be traced back to the chemical, 

ionic, and mechanical properties of the native solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). The SEI consists of 

nominally ionically -conductive, physically -blocking inorganic and organic phases derived from the 

reaction of Li with the electrolyte such as inorganic LiF, Li 2O, Li 2CO 3, organic semi -carbonates, and 

polyolefins. After decades of study, the native SEI formed on Li (< 100 nm) remains challenging to 

experimentally probe, and the individual and collective function of SEI phases is not well -understood. To 

identify strategies for improvement, understanding of the chemistry, structure, and function of sub -

components within the SEI will be beneficial. One challenge has been a lack of empirical data on the 

properties of individual SEI phases, and specifically when present at a metallic Li interface, where the 

chemical potential imposed by Li will yield different properties than bulk a nalogues typically invoked to 

understand behavior. 

In this talk, I present our recent studies of single -component interfaces on Li, which we have conducted to 

gain deeper insights into the possible roles of common interfacial constituents found in nearly all Li SEI. 

We have developed synthetic approaches based on gas -phase reactions of Li with oxide - and fluoride -

donating reactants that permit introduction of single phases with high spatial uniformity. We show results 

of controllable growth (10 – 100 nm th ickness) of ionic Li 2O and LiF directly onto Li foils. The formed 

layers are conformal, compact, polycrystalline, and thus serve as model interphases further qualitative and 

quantitative study. First, e lectrochemical impedance spectroscopy, combined with i nterface modeling, is 

used to extract transport properties (ionic conductivity, diffusivity, charge carrier concentration and 

activation energy barriers) of Li|Li 2O in symmetric cells with EC/DEC electrolyte. EIS analysis indicated 

that the ionic conductiv ity (~10 -9 S/cm) and diffusivity of Li 2O on Li were several orders of magnitude 

higher than reported values obtained using bulk pellet measurements of Li 2O, which is attributable to the 

dramatically different chemical, ionic, and microstructural environmen ts. The Li 2O SEI is further studied 

as a function of synthesis condition, revealing microstructural sensitivities that can be tuned to modulate 

transport behaviors. Results are compared with single -phase LiF interfaces, and with the native SEI, to 

isolate chemistry - and structure -specific differences. Finally, I will present our emerging understanding of 

the chemical stability of these individual phases, Li 2O and LiF, in contact with carbonate electrolytes. 

Using X -ray absorption near -edge spectroscopy, we have probed the reactivity of ionic SEI phases upon 

exposure to electrolyte, and find evidence of varying interfacial stability as a function of SEI and 

electrolyte composition due to reactions at the SEI -electrolyte interface. These results help illuminat e the 

origins of commonly -observed changes in symmetric -cell impedance over hours or days in certain 

electrolytes, whic h have lacked chemical specificity to date. The integration of this knowledge to guide 

design of improved SEI chemistries for transport a nd stability will be discussed. 

Reference: 

R. Guo and B.M. Gallant, Li 2O Solid Electrolyte Interphase: Probing Transport Properties at the 

Chemical Potential of Lithium, Accepted , Chemistry of Materials (2020) .

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c003 33 Electrochemical Study and Structural Aspects of New Copper 

# Complexes with Biomimetic Activity 

Tomáš Mikysek 1, Milan Sýs 1, and Miroslav Novák 2 

> 1

Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Technology, University of Pardubice, 

Studentská 573 , CZ -53210 Pardubice, Czech Republic, 

tomas.mikysek@upce.cz  

> 2

Institute of Chemistry and Technology of Macromolecular Materials , Faculty of Chemical Technology, 

University of Pardubice, Studentská 573, CZ -53210 Pardubice, Czech Republic 

In this contribut ion , synthesis and electrochemical characterization of recently synthesized copper 

complexes (artificial enzymes) mimicking tyrosinase activity are presented . Tyrosinase is a biologically 

important oxidase, which acts as the rate -limiting enzyme for contro lling the production of melanin. It 

belongs to the group of proteins with a bicopper active center [1]. Unfortunately, tyrosinase has limited 

lifetime and therefore d evelopment of artificial enzymes offers new approach towards the higher stability 

e.g. in electrochemical sensors [2 −4]. 

Figure 1: Example of studied [Cu 2L(OH)(H 2O)(EtOH)] (ClO 4)2 complex .

Factors controlling biomimetic (catalytic) activity of selected complexes (e.g. on Fig. 1) towards different 

substrates (3,5 -Di -tert -butylcatechol, 2, 5-Di -tert -butylhydroquinone , dopamine, serotonin, etc.) are 

summarized and explained. For this study, electrochemical as well as spectroscopic experiments in 

aqueous as well as in non -aqueous media were performed. Moreover, another important role plays 

dep osition of artificial enzyme complex on an electrode surface. The obtained results of kinetics of 

catalytic substrate conversion were compared with those obtained by using enzyme (tyrosinase). 

Acknowledgement: This work is supported by the Czech Science F oundation (GA ČR 19 -03160S). 

References 

1.  C. A. Ramsden, P. A. Riley, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 22 (2014) 2388. 

2. M. L. de Carvalho, M. Santhiago, R. A. Peralta, A. Neves, G. A. Micke, I. C. Vieira, Talanta 77 

(2008) 394. 

3.  A. C. Franzoi, R. A. Peralta, A. Neves, I. C. Vieira, Tal anta 78 (2009) 221. 

4. M. Sýs, M. Obluková , V. Kolivoška, R.Sokolová, L. Korecká, T.Mikysek, J. Electroanal . Chem .

864 (2020) 114066 .Fabrication of the Electrochemical Cilostazol Chemosensor 

# with Molecularly Impri nted Polymer Nanoparticle s

# as the Recognition Unit 

Jyoti ,1* Carlo Gonzato ,2 Fran ck Merlier, 2 Kar sten Haupt, 2 Pawel Borowicz, 1

Włodzimierz Kutner, 1,3 Krzysztof Noworyta 1 

> 1

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences (IPC PAS), 

Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -224, Warsaw, Poland,  

> 2

Génie Enzymatique et Cellulaire (GEC ) – UMR -6022, 

Université de Technologie de Compiègne, 

Rue Personne de Roberval, 60200, Compiègne, France,  

> 3

Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, School of Sciences, 

Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University, Woycickiego 1/3, 01 -815 Warsaw, Poland 

* jyoti@ichf.edu.pl 

In the presented paper , fabrication, and tests of a n electrochemical chemosensor for selective determination and 

quantification of cilostazol is described. Cilostazol, 6 -[4 -(1 -cyclohexyl -1H -tetrazol -5-yl)butoxy] -3,4 -dihydro -2(1H) -

quinolinone, is an antiplatel et agent and a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor. It is used for the treatment of intermittent 

claudication (IC), a preliminary symptom of peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD is most commonly caused by 

atherosclerosis. It affects millions of patients worl dwide and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. [1]

Fast, simple and reliable method of this drug determination along with its principal active metabolites is important from 

the point of view of personalized drug dosage.  In order to  devise  selective  chemosensor for determination of  cilostazol 

in biological matrices, molecularly imprinted polymer nanoparticles (nanoMIPs) were prepared by precipitation 

polymerization of the selected acrylate derivatives  and were characterized .[2] Furthermore, density functional theory 

(DFT) calculations were performed for better understanding of interactions between the acylate monomers and the 

target analyte, and also with its principal metabolites. The result indicated pre -polymerization complex formation 

mainly through H -bonding .

In the next step the nanoMIPs were immobilized on the gold electrode. Then, the obtained electrodes were characterized 

electrochemically and spectrally. Moreover , morphology of the obtained electrodes was studied by AFM microscopy. 

Finally, the analytical tests of the devised chemosensor were performed. 

Funding:  Polish National Science Center (grant No. 2015/19/B/ST4/03743) .

Acknowledgements : Authors are grateful for the cilostazol synthesis to E. Gilant, P. Rudzki and A. Kutner from 

Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland. 

References :

[1] Chi  Y, Lavie . C ; J, Milani . V. R ; White . J. C . Vasc. Health Risk Manag, 2008 , 4, 1197 -1203. 

[2] Bui T. S. B; Merlier F ; Haupt  K, Anal. Chem ., 2010 , 82 , 4420 -4427. Highly Energy -efficient Electrochemical Advanced Oxidation 

# Processes Based on Natural A ir Diffusion Electrode 

Minghua Zhou *, Qizhan Zhang, Yanchun Li, Yawei Li 

College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China. 

No.38 Tongyan Road, Jinnan District, Tianjin , P.R. China  300350 

zhoumh@nankai.edu.cn 

Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) based on in -situ H 2O2 electro -generation 

have acquired an extraordinary s ignificance for the removal of persistent organic pollutants from 

wastewater [1, 2]. High mineralization effici ency and low energy consumption are the core requirements 

for the application of EAOPs. The cathode plays an important role in EAOPs , which determines the 

production of H2O2 in the system [3]. However, low oxygen utilization efficiency (<1%) and high energy 

consumption ((3 -20 times electric energy consumption of treatment ) are still obstacles to in -situ synthesis 

of H2O2 on the cathode [4].

Herein we propose a superhydrophobic natural air diffusion electrode (NADE) to greatly improve 

the oxygen diffusion coefficient at the cathode about 5.7 times as compared to the normal gas diffusion 

electrode (GDE) system and apply it to the treatment of wastewater in EAOPs . NADE allows the oxygen 

to be naturally diffused to the reaction interface, eliminating the need to pump oxygen/air to overcome the 

resistance of the gas diffusion layer , resulting in fast H2O2 production (101.67 mg h -1 cm -2) with a high 

oxygen utilization efficiency (44.5% –64.9%). Long -term operation stability of NADE and its high current 

efficiency under high current density indicate great potential for environmental re mediation on an 

industrial scale [5].

In order to promote application of EAOPs for organic pollutants degradation, we studied innovative 

EAOPs using NADE to impr ove H 2O2 production without aeration and enhanced H2O2 utilization 

efficiency in electro -Fenton (EF), photoelectro -Fenton (PEF) and peroxi -coagulation (PC) processes. In 

the EF process, sulfamethazine (SMT) was removed effectively, but the mineralization d egree was not 

high due to the generation of organic acids which were difficult to be further degraded. While in the PEF 

process, organic contaminant can be destroyed by the combined action of Fe 2+/H 2O2, UV/H 2O2 and UV 

radiation, and more higher mineralizat ion (>83.5%) at low current (50 mA) was attained, which might be 

attributed to the high H2O2 utilization (70 -90%), rapid regeneration of Fe 2+ and photolysis of 

intermediates. In addition, it was verified that the PEF system had a good adaptability to pH an d pollutant 

concentration. Compared with aeration system, the use of this active gas diffusion cathode in EAOPs 

significantly reduced energy consumption [6]. 2,4 -dichlorophenoxiacetic acid (2,4 -D) was efficiently 

removed by peroxi -coagulation (PC) using NADE as the cathode. In PC using NADE, the 2,4 -D removal 

was 24.6% higher than that of PC using aerated air electrode (AAE), which resulted from higher 

generation of H 2O2. Besides, the energy consumption (12.01 kWh kg -1 TOC) in PC using NADE was 

lower than PC using AAE (20.51 kWh kg -1 TOC). PC also overcame the narrow pH limitation and 

showed relatively stable performance upon initial pH of 3 -9 when compared with EF system. 

The superior performance of NADE and high utilization efficiency of H 2O2 make it a good 

application prospect as cathode in EAOPs for environmental remediation .

Acknowledgement 

This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Found ation of China (nos. 21773129, 

21811530274, and 21976096 ).

References 

[1] I. Sires, E. Brillas, M.A. Oturan, M.A. Rodrigo, M. Panizza, Environmental Science and Pollution 

Research International 21 (2014) 8336 -8367. 

[2] P.V. Nidheesh, M. Zhou, M.A. Oturan, Chemosphere 197 (2018) 210 -227. 

[3] W. Yang, M. Zhou, J. Cai, L. Liang, G. Ren, L. Jiang, Journal of Materials Chemical A 5(2017) 8070 -

8080. 

[4] F. Yu, M. Zhou, L. Zhou, R. Peng , Environmental Science & Technology Letters 1 (2014) 320 –324. 

[5] Q. Zh ang , M. Zhou , G. Ren, Y . Li , Y. Li , X. Du , Nature Communications 11 (20 20 ) 1 731 .

[6] W. Wang , Y. Li , Y. Li , M. Zhou,  O. A. Arotiba , Chemosphere 25 0 (20 20 ) 126177 .Electropolymerization of Catechol and Bio -inspired Analogues –

# Performance of Thin Films as Biosensing Interfaces 

Luís C. Almeida a, Rui D. Correia a, Barbara Pa łys b, Jorge P. Correia a, Ana S. Viana a

> a

Centro de Química Estrutural, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa 

Campo Grande, 1749 -016 Lisboa, Portugal 

> b

Department of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw ; B iological and Chemical 

Research Centre, University of Warsaw , Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02 -089 Warsaw, Poland 

lmalmeida@fc.ul.pt 

Robust immobilization of biomolecules is one of the crucial steps when constructing biosensors, 

since biological activ ity may be compromise d in solid interfaces . Biocompatib le polymer s, with re active 

sites for biocompounds covalent atta chment, allow an effective immobilization of the biorecognition 

element and signal transduction. Polydopamine -based surface modifications have been widely studied [1] 

and employed in biomedical, energy and industrial applications, including biosensing . However ,

spontaneous oxidative polymerization does not allow control over structural homogeneity, oxidation state 

and conductivity of thin films . Recently , electrosynthesis of poly dopamine [2,3] has shown to yield better 

transduc ing interfaces in enzymatic biosensors than the standard chemical synthesis, highlighting the great 

potential of electrochemical methods to better tune the chemical and physical properties of polycatechols .

Although the catechol group is well known for providing the adhe sive characteristics of these films , the 

role of other chemical functionalities is far less studied and its effects on the final materials properties 

poorly understood [4] .

In this work, we carried out a detailed investigation of the potentiodynamic and po tentiostatic 

polymerization of catechol and distinct bioinspired catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine and L-

DOPA), disclosing novel insights of the ir electropolymerization mechanism s. The electrochemical data is 

supported by electrogravimetry, spectroscopy (FTIR, UV -vis, XPS), atomic force microscopy, ellipsometry 

and wettability assays . Poly(norepinephrine) displayed the most regular growth and the highest 

electroactivity. The effect of the different surface chemical groups is accessed towards the electrochemical 

behavio ur of several ionic and molecular species. Furthermore, real -time surface plasmon resonance assays 

are conducted to assess the adsorption of different proteins to the biomimetic films. Also, t he relative ability 

for polymers in situ functionalization is demonstrated with model electroactive compounds and 

biomolecules (e.g. enzymes, antibodies). Finally, the analytic performance of the different films as 

amperometric bio sensors towards phenolic compounds is also discussed. 

Acknowledgments: 

This work was funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia through PhD scholarship 

SFRH/BD/129566/2017 and project UIDB/00100/2020. 

References: 

[1] J. H. Ryu, P. B. Messersmith and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018 ) 7523 -7540. 

[2] L. C. Almeida, R. D. Correia, A. Marta, G. Squillaci, A. Morana, F. La Cara, J. P. Correia and A. S. 

Viana, Applied Surface Science 420 (2019) 979 -989. 

[3] L. C. Almeida, R. D. Correia, G. Squillaci, A. Morana, F. La Cara, J. P. Correia and A. S. Viana, 

Electrochim. Acta 319 (2019) 462 -471. 

[4] S. Li, H. Wang, M. Young, F. Xu, G. Cheng, and H. Cong, Langmuir 35 (2019) 1119 -1125 .All -solid state ion -selective carbon black -modified printed electrode for 

# sodium detection in s weat 

V.Mazzaracchio 1, A . Serrani 1, D. Moscone 1, F.Arduini 1,2 

> 1

Department of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome “Tor Vergata ”

Via della Ricer ca Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy 

> 2

SENSE4MED, via Renato Rascel 30, 00128, Rome, Ital y

fabiana. arduini@unirom a2.it 

As reported by World Economic Forum, by 2030, the very nature of disease will be further disrupted by 

technology. The fourth industrial r evolution will ensure that humans live longer and healthier lives, so 

that the hospitals of the future will become more like NASCAR pit -stops than inescapable black holes. 

You will go to hospital to be patche d up and put back on track , revolutionizing the healthcare from 

hospital to home -spita l. Currently commercially available wearable sensors are aimed at physical sensing 

to monitor physiological parameters including heart rate, electrical activity of the brain from the scalp and 

oxygen saturation in arte rial blood, but they do not provide any information at molecular levels (chemical 

sensing) . In the research field at academia level, several groups have recently demonstrated that 

miniaturised devices can potentially monitor electrolytes, metabolites, and heavy metals, directly on the 

body in various biofluids, such as sweat and wound exudate , however the chemical sensors need to 

further impr oved for deliver ing smart wearable sensors fo r effective and fast measurement in sweat 

samples. 

In this overall sc ena rio , we developed a miniaturized all -solid state ion -selective electrode for Na +

detection in sweat sample based on a low -cost fabricated screen -printed electrode modified with Carbon 

Black to effectively convert the ionic signal through the ion -selective membrane into an electronic signal. 

Two different membranes were used to modi fy CB -modified graphite working electrode surface for the 

selective sodium ion detection and the Ag/AgCl reference electrode for stab ilising the potential of

reference electrode. 

Several parameters were investigated incl uding the volume of carbon black to modify the working 

electro de, the volume of liquid membrane to mo dify working and reference electrodes , and the 

conditioning time. A calibration curve was obtained by potentiome tr ic measurements with a linear 

response in the range between 10 -3 M and 1 M described by the following equation y = 0.068 x + 0.262, 

R2= 0.9 73 . The i nterference and recovery studies demonstrat ed the selectivity and accuracy of the sensor 

developed. Finall y, sodium ions were det ected in sweat samples collected after physical activity of three 

volunteer s obtainin g values equals to (44 ± 4 ) mM , (55 ± 6 ) mM , (47 ± 3 ) mM . in agreement with the 

physiological r ange values (e.g. 46.8 mM ). Molecular imprinting of drugs and biomolecules in the conductive 

# polymer matrices – a controlled way of sensor recognition layer 

# fabrication 

Krzysztof R. Noworyta 

> a

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences 

Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -224 Warsaw, Poland 

knoworyta@ichf.edu.pl 

In t his contribution applicat ion of 

thiophene and carbazole -based 

conductive polymers , molecularly 

imprinted with range of analytes, as the 

selective recognition layers in 

chemosensors is described. 

Combination of electroch emical 

deposition of molecularly imprinted 

polymer (MIP) films with selected 

electrochemical transduction techniques 

allowed for development of sensors 

with good selectivity and appreciable 

limit of detection. 

Selective chemosensor fabrication typically re quires formation of a recognition layer coupled with 

suitable transduction element [ 1]. The recognition layer is not only allowing selective analyte binding but 

its properties are quite often important in overall sensor performance . Electrochemical depos ition of the 

recognition layer allows for facile control of the process via applied potential, current, as well as solution 

composition [ 2]. That way, i t is feasible to control deposited film thickness, morphology , porosity or 

electrical properties , there fore tuning the sensor parameters and response. Furthermore, this method can 

be easily used to deposit such films on the transduction elements with variety of shap es. Molecular 

imprinting is an elegant and relatively facile method for devising a sensor s elective recognition layer for 

variety of analytes ranging from small molecules to bacteria and viruses [ 3]. This approach is based on 

formation of a pre -polymerization complex between analyte template and functional monomers in 

solution , followed by its polymeriz ation in presence of cross -linking monomer . Thus, MIP film with 

molecular cavities with shape, functional groups set -up and properties allowing for selective binding of 

the imprinted analyte is formed . Application of monomers capable of electroc hemical polymerization 

allows for coupling of this approach with electrochemical de position of conductive polymers [ 4]. Such 

conductive MIPs offer advantages of controlled film deposition , as well as possibility of changing their 

electrical properties wit h applied potential, which could allow for development of stimuli -responsive 

“smart” materials. 

Over few years, we have devised and fabricat ed variety of chemosensors with recognition layers 

based on conductive polymers molecularly imprinted with variety o f analytes . The analytes imprinted in 

such polymers range from small molecule biomarkers, to drugs , to proteins. In our studies t hiophene and 

carbazole derivatives were used as functional and cross -linking monomers. Deposited conductive MIP 

films morpho logy and properties were studied and analytical parameters of the final chemosensors were 

tested. Possibility of c ontrolled formation of hig hly porous polym eric structures is also presented. 

Fina lly, advantages and disadvantages of this approach are disc ussed. 

Bibliography: 

1. A. Hulanicki et al., Pure Appl. Chem . 63 (1991), 1247. 

2. T. Nezakati et al., Chem. Rev ., 118 (2018 ), 6766 .

3. L. Chen et al., Chem. Soc. Rev., 45 (2016), 2137. 

4. R. Gui et al., Biosens. Bioelectron., 100 (2018) 56. 

Acknowledgeme nts: 

This work was financially supported by Polish National Science Center through grants OPUS No. 

2014/15/B/ST4/04642 and 2015/19/B/ST4/03743 .

Scheme 1. Formation of NGAL -imprinted porous polymer 

films with help of sacrificial metal -organic frameworks. Sewage Sludge Treatment by a Novel Electrochemical Technique 

Maasoomeh Jafari , Gerardine G. Botte 

Chemical and Electrochemical Technology and Innovation Laboratory (CETI -Lab) 

Department o f Chemical Engineering 

Texas Tech University 

1010 Boston Ave , Lubboc k, TX, USA 

maa jafar@ttu.edu 

gerri.botte@ttu.edu 

.

Sewage sludge is the main waste generated in the wastewater treatment . Solid waste mismanagement is 

posing the risk of environmental pollutions due to releasing the harmful pathogens (e.g Escherichia co li, 

etc .). Ana erobic digestion is the typical technology for sewage sludge treatment. However, sludge 

hydrolysis is the limiting step for sludge degradation in the anaerobic digesters . Therefore , it results in 

long residence time in the digester reactors (appr oximate ly 20-30 days) and considerable energy 

consumption. Moreover, it has been reported that waste disposal is a cost and energy intensive process 

and accounts for approximately 50 - 60 % of the operational cost in the wastewater treatment facilities. 

Hen ce, new tr eatment method s need to be developed to decrease energy consumption and capital cost .

It has been shown that alkaline treatment is efficient for the sludge biodegradation. Besides ,

electrochemical oxidation of the biomass is the clean alter nati ve technol ogy for sludge disintegration and 

pathogen destruction. To overcome the conventional treatment method limitations , our research group has 

developed a novel , energy -efficient pathway for wastewater treatment by integrating alkaline and 

electro chem ical oxida tion techniques at room temperature . The results showed a considerable solid 

reduction and energy consumption when compared to similar research studies. The biosolid 

characterization after treatment represented the potential of generating val ue -added chemi cals in the 

liquid phase and the successful removal of pathogens for safe disposal or agriculture application. Innovative Structuration of Carbon -Ink Electrodes for 

# Electrochemical Detection 

Michael Spann (a)* , Maxime Gougis (a) , Pascal Mailley (a) 

> (a)

Univ.  Grenoble Alpes, CEA , LETi, 

F-380 00 Grenoble , France 

*michael.spann@cea.fr 

Electrochemical sensors are powerful and versatile analytical tools in different fields, for example 

medical analysis and healthcare application . Today’s requirements on them correlate with the advances in 

electrode design: The fabrication of miniaturiz ed electrodes allows for the design of small -scale sensors 

or arrays , respectively, corresponding to the demand of portable and even implantable “point -of -care” 

devices for monitoring application , as well as the analysis of small sample volumes [ 1].

Elect rode miniaturization, however, imposes a physical limitation linked to the reduction of the 

electrochemically active electrode area.  For amperometric sensors (biosensors), this impl ies a loss in 

faradaic current, resulting in a lower signal. In case of sol id -state Ion -Selective -Electrodes (ISE), the 

charge storage capacity and the quality of the charge exchange on the selective membrane/collector 

interface are reduced , leading to a degradation of sensitivity, stability, dynamic range and limit of 

detection.  While t he impact of electrode structure has been profoundly studied [2] and numerous 

interesting approaches exist on the laboratory scale, the majority involve s complex , multi -step processes 

of time -consuming nature , which thus  seem unsuited for the produ ction on a larger scale . Printing 

techniques on the other hand , which are well established in the industrial production of low -cost solid -

state sensors , are not designed to generate structured electrochemical interfaces .

In this work, commercial carbon ink , suited for screen -printing , was deposited on polymer substrates and 

subjected to a process -oriented , environmentally friendly treatment (patent pending) with the aim to 

structure the surface and increase the electrochemically active area. Scann ing Elec tron Microscopy 

studies (SEM) confirm the surface structuration (Fig. 1 a) , as well as the generation of a porous network in 

the bulk . Electrochemical characterization consisted of Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electroc hemical 

Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) . Re sults were compared to a cured, unstructured electrode, for which fast, 

reversible electron transfer and semi -infinite linear diffusion were observed . Upon treatment, the 

reversible nature of the charge transfer was conserved ( Fig. 1 b) ; however the voltamm etric response 

indicates a temporal characteristic and a combination of semi -infinite and thin -layer finite diffusion [3].

Faradaic and capacitive currents increased by more than one order of magnitude. Impedance studies 

confirmed the pronounced capacitive nature of treated electrodes (Fig. c) . ISE and amperometric sensors 

containin g as -structured electrodes are currently under study and the potentiometric measurements 

already presented promising result s. 

Fig. 1: Untreated and treated electrode deposit char acterization, a) SEM : V acc =30 kV, V extr =5.6 k V,

b) CV : 1 M KCl, 1 mM Ru(NH 3)63+/2+ , 50 mV/s , c) EIS : 1 M KCl, 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz .

[1] Ferreira PC et al. Trends in Analytical Chemistry.  2019 Aug 9:115622 

[2] Bleda -Martínez MJ et al.  Carbon. 2006 Nov 1;44(13):2642 -51 

[3] Keeley GP et al. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2009  Jun 1;4:794 -809 Structure -Dependency on the Photoelectrochemical Performance of 

# Two -dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides 

Péter S. Tóth ,a,b Gábor Szabó ,b Csaba Janáky b

> a

MTA Premium Post Doctorate Research Program, 

> b

Department of Physical Chemistry and Materials Science, University of Szeged, 

Rerrich Sq. 1., Szeged, 6720, Hungary 

toth.peter.sandor@chem.u -szeged.hu 

The two -dimensional (2D) semiconductors, the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), have received 

great interest during the last decade because of their high chemical stability and good electrocatalytic 

properties [1]. The photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties of 2D nanoflakes depends on the structural 

prope rties (the number of layers, the basal -planes or edge s) [2 -4]. We need to understand their fundamental 

PEC properties in the function of their structural properties, using a microscopy -based approach with spatial 

resolution. 

Firstly, I will show our recently developed custom -designed PEC -microscope setup. The deposited 

10 –50 μm sized microdroplet acts as an electrochemical cell on the chosen sample area of the 2D flake, 

which will be illuminated by a spot at 25 –50 μm in diamet er. The TMDC nanosheets (MoS 2, MoSe 2, WSe 2)

were mechanically exfoliated to get bulk, few -layered, and monolayer specimens. Additionally, liquid 

phase exfoliation was used to prepare bulk and few -layer TMDC dispersions. The number of layers, and 

defect typ es in the separated nanosheets were characterised by Raman spectroscopy and atomic force 

microscopy. I present the use of model reversible redox species to mimic photoelectrocatalytic processes, 

proving the differences between basal -planes and edge sites . Then, I show t he effects of varying the number 

of layers and role of the edge -sites on the light harvesting, charge transport, and recombination properties 

with photoelectrochemical measurements unfolding reasons behind the poor PEC activity of exfoliated 2D 

samples. 

Finally, I demonstrate the effect of structural domains for PEC performance of 2D materials in 

three points. i) The photocurrent losses with growing the fraction of the heterogeneous surface (edge sites), 

with the parallel rise of dark current s. ii) The higher defect density changes the PEC activity for water 

oxidation as well, the activity is found to be larger for both basal -plane of bulk and few -layer MoSe 2 in the 

presence of hole scavenger, so the higher photocurrent cannot be harvested for oxidation. iii) The LPE 

produced MoSe 2 and WSe 2 bulk and few -layer flakes in kinetic control free water reduction and oxidation, 

achieving only μA cm −2 current densities . This decrease in the PEC performance can be explained by the 

growing of defect densi ties , because of the number of edge sites is increased and the lateral size (area) is 

decreased of LPE flakes. 

[1] M. Velický, and P. S. Toth, Appl. Mater. Today , 2017 , 8, 68 -103. 

[2] J. M. Velazquez, et al ., Energy Environ. Sci ., 2016 , 9, 164 -175. 

[3] M. Velický, et al ., Nano Lett ., 2016 , 16 , 2023 -2032. 

[4] A. E. Isenberg, et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2018 , 10 , 27780 -27786. Designing Cells to Detect Redox Potential Gradients within Conductive 

# Biofilms and Rectify Electron Flow 

Daniel R. Bond 1,2 , Komal Joshi 1,3 , Chi Ho Chan 1, Fernanda Jim enez 4

The BioTechnology Institute 1, Department of Plant and Microbial Biology 2

Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics 3, University of Minnesota Twin Cities ,

and Naval Research Laboratory 4, Washington DC 

dbond@umn.edu 

Geobacter sulfurreducens can grow as a conductive biofilm when utilizing a poised electrode as an electron 

acceptor . T hese biofilms show redox hydrogel -like behavior in scan rate analysis, confocal Raman 

spectroscopy, and interdigitated array electrode redox -gating experiments . Re cent NanoSIMS imaging 

revealed a gradient of anabolic activity within these biofilms, with the highest activity closest to the 

electrode 1. Based on the diffusion al limitations of electron transport within redox hydrogels and this 

evidence of a metabolic gradient, we hypothesize d that a redox potential gradient exists within these 

biofilms, becoming lower with distance from the electrode until it restricts respiration . We previously 

reported that there are two routes out of the inner membrane quinone pool i n G. sulfurreducens , one that 

predominantly functions above redox potential s of 0 V vs. SHE 2, and another that only operates between 

redox potential s of 0 and -0.2 3. With the discovery of a third pathway that only is expressed at redox 

potentials below -0.2 V vs. SHE , we can construc t double and triple mutants which will only grow in 

specific redox potential windows. We also screened a series of GFP -based reporters driven by constitutive 

or redox -dependent promoters , to produce mutants expressing green, red, or cyan fluorescent proteins at 

levels detectable by standard fluorescent or confocal microscopy after ~1 min of oxygen exposure . When 

two strains of G. sulfurreducens able to grow at different redox potential s are mixed together, cells favoring 

high redox potential only colonize the electrode surface, while cells favoring low er redox potential are only 

found at the top of the biofilm , away from the electrode surface. Similar results are obtained when a low 

redox -potential dependent promoter is u sed to drive GFP expression: expression is only detected far from 

the electrode. These results support a model of differential metabolic states within biofilms, with cells 

closest to the electrode being most metabolically active due to high redox potential . By cultivating these 

mutants on arrays of interdigitated electrodes, alternating bands of cells only able to respire at low - or high -

potential can self -assemble within 48 hours, and produce living conductive materials that rectify electron 

flo w to only one of two drain electrodes. 

References: 

1. Chadwick et. al . NanoSIMS imaging reveals metabolic stratification within current -producing 

biofilms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 , 20716 –20724 (2019). 

2. Levar et. al . An inner membrane cytochrome required only for reduction of high redox potential 

extracellular electron acceptors. mBio 5, e02034 -14 (2014). 

3. Zacharoff et. al. Reduction of low potential electron acceptors requires the CbcL inner membrane 

cytochrome of Geobacter sulfurre ducens . Bioelectrochemistry 107 , 7 –13 (2016). Chromium and Tungsten Be nzocondensed Heterocyclic 

# Aminocarbenes: Comparison of Redox Properties and Reactivity 

Miroslava Guricová a,c , Irena Hoskovcová a, Martin Pižl a,c , Tomáš Tobrman b, Dalimil Dvořák b

> a

Dept . Inorganic Chem ., bDept . Org anic Chem ., Universi ty of Chemistry and Technolog y, Technická 5, 

166 28 Prague , Cze ch Republic ; cJ. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of 

the Czech Republic, Dolejškova 3, 182 23 Prague, Czech Republic 

irena.hoskovcova@vscht.cz 

Carbene complexes are characterized by presence of a formally double bond M=CR 2. In electrophilic 

carbenes of Fischer type, the M δ– = C δ+ polarity of this bond is typical. An extended study of mononuclear 

complexes (CO) nM = C(NR’ )R showed that there are two rather independent redox -active centers 

present: oxidation is aimed at and influenced by, the metal atom, while reduction proce eds on the carbene 

moiety . Analogous behavi our was found at compounds bearing condensed benzene -heterocycle 

substituent. 

Studied compounds, M = Cr, W NNCH3  

> CH 3
> M(CO) 5
> CH3ONCH3
> CH 3
> M(CO)5 SNCH3
> CH 3
> M(CO) 5

Cr -bpyr; W -bpyr  Cr -bfur; W -bfur  Cr -bthi, W -bthi 

The molecules were studied using cyclic voltammetry on GC , Pt , and HMDE electrode , by IR and UV -

Vis spectro -electrochemistry . Preparative e lectrolysis was performed using Hg pool working electrode, 

the products were id entified by MS and IR spectra .

The oxidation process is quasi -reversible, it proceeds in two steps and oxidation potentials of the 

compounds with the same central atom lay within 50 mV range , depending on the substituent ; it increases 

in sequence M-bfur < M-bpyr < M -bthi. For W co mpoun ds, oxidation potentials are by 2 50 mV more 

positive. The inductive influence of the heterocycle itself (heteroatom) is evident .

The r eduction of the presented compounds is impacted by substit uents of the carbene carbon . It pr oceeds 

at similar potential values for both Cr and W compounds, potential range is about 200 mV . The most 

negative Ered value belongs to M-bpyr , the reduction of M -bfur and M -bthi proceeds at very similar 

potential values. 

The most pronounced difference be tween chromium and tungsten compounds was observed in their 

reductive electrolysis products . Whil e chromium complexes reduction leads to a dimeric product, the 

electrolysis product of tu ngsten complexes consist s only of monomeric products. Similar behaviour has 

been described [1] for chromium complexes substituted by simple heterocycles. 

Reducti ve electrolysis product of Cr complexes  Reducti ve electrolysis product of W complexes X 

> N
> CH3
> CH3
> CH3N
> CH3
> XX
> NH+
> CH3
> CH3

X = N(CH 3), O, S 

Acknowledgement: Financial support from specific university research (MSMT No 20 -SVV/201 9) is 

gratefully acknowledged .

References: 

[1] Metelková R., Hoskovcová I., Polášek M., Urban J., Da vid T., Ludv ík J., Electrochim. Acta 162 

(2015) 17 -23 Chemomechanical Models for Locally Non -neutral Solid Electrolytes 

Charles Monroe 

University of Oxford, Department of Engineering Science; The Faraday Institution 

Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PJ UK; Harwell Campus, Didcot OX11 0RA UK 

charles.monroe@eng.ox.ac.u k

Recently our group has focused on developing, parameterizing, and accurately solving models that 

describe chemomechanical phenomena in electrolytes, i.e. , situations in which stress in a material may be 

coupled with its electr ochemical state. Our approa ch, based in irreversible thermodynamics [1] , has 

follow ed the general transport modelling programme initiated by Newman [ 2], but extends that theory to 

account for a phase’s compressibility or elasticity, as well as local deviations from electroneutrality .

Although we have produced informative preliminary results by applying the chemomechanical theory in 

idealized cases [3,4], a number of foundational problems remain unresolved. The development of 

thermodynamically consistent flux laws applicable to non -ideal , non -neutral, elastic electrolytes poses 

several problems at the most elementary level. One desires a straightforward parameterization of 

electrochemical potentials in terms of familiar thermodynamic properties, such as partial molar volumes 

and Dark en factors for dissolved salts and solvents, and a transport model that includes familiar transport 

properties, such as Fickian salt diffusivity, ionic conductivity , and cation transference number . When 

electroneutrality is relaxed, the standard definition s for the transport properties become s substantially 

more complicated [5] , and the thermodynamic property set become s ambiguous [6] . Further , it is unclear 

how classical properties involved in electrostatic equilibria , such as permittivity, or elastic prop erties, 

such as the bulk modulus, should be brought into models in a self -consistent way. 

This talk will address the general problem of multicomponent mass -transport modelling for non -isobaric, 

non -neutral elastic electrolytes. We will discuss a new const itutive framework that can be deployed to 

formulate the electrochemical potentials, which brings colligative properties measured in an 

electroneutral state naturally into the non -neutral transport model. These new ‘core chemical potentials’ 

relate to the G uggenheim electrochemical potentials through a straightforward sequence of linear 

transformations , which can be expressed in terms of matrix multiplications and depend only on the 

species charges. The core potentials can be mapped into the popular electroc hemical -potential 

frameworks developed by Guggenheim [6], Smyrl and Newman [2], and Kokotov [7]. The new theory 

allows thermodynamically consistent modelling of, for example, voltage -dependent interfacial 

capacitance in concentrated double layers, transien t diffusion driven by the Gibbs –Donnan effect, or 

stress diffusion in solid ion conductors .

[1] P. Goyal and C.W. Monroe, J. Electrochem. Soc. 164 (2017) E3647 –E3660. 

[2] J. Newman and K.E. Thomas –Alyea, Electrochemical Systems, 3 rd Ed. , Wiley, USA , 2004. 

[3] G. Li and C.W. Monroe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 21 (2019) 20354 -20359. 

[4] C.W. Monroe, J. Electrochem. Soc. 167 (2020) 013550. 

[5] C. Monroe and C. Delacourt, Electrochim. Acta 114 (2013) 649 -657. 

[6] E.A. Guggenheim, Thermodynamics: An Advanced Treat ment for Chemists and Physicist, 5 th Ed. ,

North -Holland, Netherlands, 1967. 

[7] Y. Kokotov, Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 17 (1999) 1083 -1131. Constant Potential Amperometr y for Detection of Electroinactive Ions 

# and Molecules with Conducting Polymer -Based Electrodes 

Nikitina V.N. , Maksimova E.D. , Zavolskova M.D. , Karyakin A.A. 

M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Chemistry Department 

119991, Moscow, GSP -1, 1 -3 Leninskiye Gory, Russia 

niki -vita@yandex.ru 

It is well known that c onducti ng polymers can serve as solid -contacts of ion -selective electrodes . To 

improve the performance of solid -contact  ion -selective electrodes ( SC -ISEs)  alternative to classical 

potentiometry readout principles have been proposed [1] .

The constant potential techniques seem to be the most promising and solving the main problem of 

background drift and pote ntial instability of potentiometric SC -ISE s. However the constant potential 

amperometric flow -injection analysis (FIA) for conducting (electroactive) polymer -based sensors has not 

been reported yet. The proposed earlier amperometric FIA use s potential step methods. Thus the sensor 

readout principal is voltammetric rather than amperometric. 

We report on the flow -injection amperometry at constant potential with polymer -based sensors for 

detection of electroinactive inorganic ions and organic molecules. Polyaniline , poly(3,4 -

ethylenedioxythiophene), Prussian Blue films and nanoparticles were used as solid contacts of K + and 

Na +-selective electrodes. Sensors based on s elf -doped polyaniline, substituted with boronic acid, without 

ion -selective me mbranes were applied for amperometric detection of electroinactive organic compounds 

(lactate, fructose) , due to selective interaction of diol - moieties with boronic acid group. 

Fig.1. Amperometric response of PEDOT -modified sensor towards injections of KCl (1, 5, 10, 15 mM) .

Regardless of the polymer  support the amperometric response of the electrode towards analyte injection is 

a couple of oppositely directed peaks (Fig.1) . The peak current is dependent on th e concentration of 

analyte. We’ve shown that i n a constant analyte solution flow mode only one current peak is observed .

Th us the emerging current is a result of polymer  oxidation/reduction reaction  in order to maintain the 

constant electrode potential. Notabl y that current direction (cathodic or anodic) depends on the ability of 

ion to interact with the polymer functional groups.  The influence of applied potential also has been 

investigated.  Two cases were considered: 1) polarization of the electrode / p olymer interface due to ion 

transfer through the polymer / solution interface; 2) specific interaction of ions or molecules with polymer 

at the polymer / solution interface. The suggested technique was applied for flow -injection analysis of 

human sweat. Th e successful amperometric detection of lactate with boronate -substituted polyaniline -

based sensor has been performed. 

The constant potential amperometry provides the advantageous analytical characteristics : the signal -to -

noise ratio in amperometric mode is 20 –25 times higher in comparison to potentiometric one [2]. Thus it 

is a promising method for detection of ions and molecules with polymer -based sensors and SC -ISEs. 

The financial support  of the Russian Science Foundation (Grant No. 19 -13 -00131) is greatly 

acknowledged. 

References 

[1] U.  Vanamo, E. Hupa, V. Yrj �n�, J. Bobacka, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4369 

[2] M. Zavolskova, V.N. Nikitina, E. Maksimova, E. Karyakina, A. Karyakin, Anal.Chem., 2019, 91, 

7495 Tuning surface composition and transformation pathways in 

# atomically -flat LaNiO 3 thin films for enhanced water electrolysis 

Christoph Baeumer ,1,2,3 Jiang L i, 4 Qiyang Lu, 2,5 Allen Yu -Lun Liang, 2 Regina Dittmann, 3 Felix Gunkel, 3

Rainer Waser, 1,3 Michal Ba jdich, 4 Slavomír Nemšák, 5 Tyler Mefford, 2 William C. Chueh 2 

> 1

Institute of Electronic Materials & J ARA -FIT, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany  

> 2

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA  

> 3

Peter Gruenberg Institute & JARA -FIT, Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH, Juelich, Germany  

> 4

SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and electrocatalysis, SLAC National Laboratory, Menlo 

Park, CA 94025, USA  

> 5

Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA 

c. baeumer@ fz -juelich.de 

The need for highly efficient catalysts for sustainable energy has led to remarkable improvements and 

insights in the design rules for (electro -)catalyst materials. Many successful examples employ perovskite -

type oxide s (A BO 3) because of the large tunability of chemical and electrical properties . Because of 

inherent differences in surface and bulk properties , further advances in catalyst stability and activity 

engineering necessitate the derivation of surface -composition -ac tivity relationships in addition to 

descriptors based on the bulk properties. 

Single crystalline surfaces offer the ideal platform to derive such relationships. They enable direct 

comparison to surfaces investigated in density functional theory (DFT), whic h are typically limited to a 

single facet that may or may not be present in ca talysts fabricated using traditional routes. Epitaxial thin 

films allow investigation of perovskite catalysts fabricated with unit -cell precision. 1–3

Here , we will demonstrate surface -composition -activity relationships in epitaxial LaNiO 3 th in films, 

which are atomically flat both before and after application as electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution 

reaction ( OER) during water electrolysis, and which possess a controllable surface cationic composition. 

For the LaNiO 3 surface, the Ni -termination is electrocatalytically acti ve and undergoes a surface 

transformation that preserv es the surface cation stoichiometry of the as -prepared state , while La -

termination leads to high overpotentials and eventual failure . Our work thus suggest s that the (meta)stable 

surface layers evolving at the solid /liquid interface, and therefore the electro catalytic activity , can be 

select ively adjusted through the choice of as -synthesized surface composition. 

References 

1. Antipin, D. & Risch, M. Trends of epitaxial perovskite oxide films catalyzing the oxyg en 

evolution reaction in alkaline media. J. Phys. Energy 2, 032003 (2020). 

2. Weber, M. L. et al. Electrolysis of Water at Atomically Tailored Epitaxial Cobaltite Surfaces. 

Chem. Mater. 31 , 2337 –2346 (2019). 

3. Akbashev, A. R. et al. Activation of ultrathi n SrTiO 3 with subsurface SrRuO 3 for the oxygen 

evolution reaction. Energy Environ. Sci. 136 , 1012 –1021 (2018). 

Figure 1: Schematic of a 

LaNiO 3-δ electrocatalyst 

surface with prepared at low 

(a) and high (b) growth 

temperature , exhibiting Ni - and 

La - or double La termination ,

respectively Teaching Impedance using a Python -Based Regression Program 

Mark E. Orazem *

Department of Chemical Engineering , University of Florida, Gainesville , FL 32611 USA 

*meo@che.ufl.edu 

Interpretation of impedance spectra r equires in principle an evaluation of the error structure and a process 

model that accounts for the proposed reactions and physics. The measurement model was developed in 

our group in the 19990s as a tool to extract the stochastic part of the impedance mea surement from 

repeated measurements and to assess the consistency of the measured impedance with the Kramers -

Kronig relations. 1-3 Our measurement model approach has been difficult to explain , in no small part 

because our original measurement model program, written in a combination of FORTAN and Matlab ®

programming languages, was not generally available. We were reluctant to share the code because each 

new version of Matlab ® broke the Matlab ® part of the program, and a part of the FORTRAN code was not 

ours t o share. 

A new version of the measurement model has been written in the Python language and will be made 

available under the open -source license GNU GPL Version 3, which allows free use for scientific 

purp oses but limits commercial use . The new code was w ritten from the ground up in Python, although 

some portions of the backend libraries, such as numpy, use C. Unlike many Python -based impedance 

regression programs, the measurement model program provides a graphical -user -interface that facilitates 

navigatio n through the different stages of the measurement model analysis. This program also allows 

regression of arbitrary functions to impedance data. Rather than employ electrical circuit components 

such as resistors and capacitors, this part of the program is e quation -based. The formula is input as Python 

code and may make use of imported Python packages. The equation -based approach enables regression of 

a broad range of models. 

We have found that, by using this Python -based measurement model program, students develop a better 

appreciation for the power of impedance spectroscopy and for the importance of error structure in 

impedance measurements. The objective of this presentation is to demonstrate the program and suggest 

ways in which it can be employed in teac hing impedance spectroscopy. Our goal is that, by providing the 

tools needed for a more sophisticated analysis of impedance data, we will allow students to take full 

advantage of the information that can be extracted from electrochemical impedance spectros copy 

measurements. 

Reference s

1. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio , “Measurement Models for Electrochemical 

Impedance Spectroscopy: 1. Demonstration of Applicability,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society 

139 (1992) , 1917 -1927. 

2. P. Agarwal, Oscar D. Crisalle, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Application of Measurement 

Models to Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy: 2. Determination of the Stochastic Contribution 

to the Error Structure,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 142 (199 5), 4149 -4158. 

3. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Application of Measurement Models to 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy: 3. Evaluation of Consistency with the Kramers -Kronig 

Relations,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 142 (199 5), 4159 -4168. 

Acknowledgement 

Mark Orazem acknowledges financial support from the University of Florida Foundation Preeminence 

and the Dr. and Mrs. Frederick C. Edie term professorships. Spatially -Controlled Photoinduced Redox Processes 

# at Organic Semiconductor/ Liquid Interface 

# Revealed by Scanning ElectroChemical Microscopy 

Marco Malferrari ,a Ilaria Abdel Aziz, b Francesco Roggiani, a

Maria Rosa Antognazza, b and Stefania Rapino a 

> a

Dep t. of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, Univers ità di Bologna, Via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy  

> b

Center for Nano Science and Technology@Polimi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Pascoli 70/3, 

20133 Milano, Italy 

e-mail:  marco.malferrari2@unibo.it 

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced in living cells in several physiological and pathological 

processe s [1,2]. Reactive oxygen species production by organic polymer upon photostimulation is gaining 

more an d more interest for its high throughput capability, selectivity and resolution. Organic copolymers 

are generally good photo -transducers, with tunable opt ical properties, good photocatalytic efficiency and 

characterized by excellent biocompatibility. Nanopa rticles of poly -3-hexyl -thiophene (P3HT) have been 

showed to be internalized within the cell cytosol and generate ROS upon photo -stimulation [3]. 

We empl oyed electrochemical approaches, such as Scanning ElectroChemical Microscopy (SECM), to 

measure ROS pro duction by P3HT thin films and explored the impact on H 2O2 production in the presence 

of a model cellular redox protein, Cytochrome C [4]. Spatially -cont rolled illumination of substrates and 

simultaneous detection of hydrogen peroxide production at the mic rometric scale were achieved by 

coupling SECM with a fluorescence inverted microscope. Hydrogen peroxide was measured with high 

sensi tivi ty employing pla tinized -microelectrodes. ROS were recorded in dark and upon illumination in 

close proximity of the P3HT thin film substrate and compared to bare ITO substrates. We resolved the 

profile of H 2O2 production by P3HT thin films upon photostimulation at the micro metric scale. 

The interaction between P3HT thin films and Cytochrome C (in the dark or upon photostim ulation) was 

investigated exploiting our SECM/fluorescence microscope apparatus: our results indicate that upon 

photostimulation Cytochrome C is reduced a t the organic semiconductor/liquid interface. 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge European Union (H2020 -FETOPEN -2018 -2019 -2020 LION -HEARTED project – No 

828984) for foundings. 

[1] M. Malferrari , M. Becconi, S. Rapino, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411 (2019 ) 4365 -4374. 

[2] M. Malferrari, A. Ghelli, F. Roggiani, G. Valenti, F. Paolucci, M. Rugolo, S. Rapino, 

ChemElect roChem. 6 ( 2019 ) 627 –633. 

[3] E. Zucchetti, M. Zangoli, I. Bargigia, C. Bossio, F. Di Maria, G. Barb arella, C. D'Andrea, G. Lanzani, 

M.R. Antognazza, J. Mater. Chem. B 5 ( 2017 ) 565 -574. 

[4] I.A. Aziz, M. Malferrari, F. Roggiani, G. Tullii, S. Rapino, M.R. Antognazza, iScience 23 ( 2020 )

101091. Determination of ten underivatized biogenic amines by ion pair 

# chromatography using potentiometric detection 

Renato L Gil 1* , Célia G. Amorim 1, Maria C. B. S. M. Montenegro 1, Alberto N. Araujo 1

> 1

LAQV -REQUIMTE/Departamento de Ciências Químicas, 

Faculdade de Farmácia – Universidade do Porto 

R. Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, 228. 4050 -313 Porto, Portugal 

*renatogil19@gmail.com 

Biogenic amines are organic bases o f low molecular weight with a high impact in food quality con tr ol. 

The most common analytical methods used for their assessment are based on liquid chromatography 

coupled with spectrophotometric detection, such as UV -vis and fluor ometry [1] . However, the high 

polarity of biogenic amines difficult their retention on conve ntional reversed -phase chromatographic 

columns while their low  detectability by spectrophotometric techniques hinders the detection limits and 

sensitivity, which requires additional derivatization steps to circumvent these drawbacks. 

Alternatively, elect roanalytical detection offers high sensitivity with simple and inexpensive 

instrumentation, without the need for derivatization steps. Amperometric and conduct imetric detectors 

have been proposed for the determination of biogenic amines after se parati on by HPLC but those based 

on potentiometry seem overlooked [2]. 

In this work, a novel RP -HPLC method for the determination of ten underivatized biogenic amines is 

proposed based on ion -pair chromatography combined with a miniaturized potentiometric elect rode 

inserted in a low -dead volu me wall -jet flow -cell . Aliphatic amines – methylamine, ethylamine, 

cadaverine, putrescine, spermidine , and spermine as well as the aromatic heterocyclic amines - histamine ,

tyramine, phenethylamine , and tryptamine were se lec ted . It was used an amine -selective electrode based 

on cucurbit[6]uril as an ionophore, enhanced with MWCNT’ s for a better improvement of the ion -to 

electron transduc tion . A gradient elution method with butane 1 -sulfonic acid as ion -pair agent, and 

acetoni trile as an organic modifier, flows through a Luna® Omega 5μm Polar C18 150x4.6mm column 

with a flow -rate of 1.2 mL min -1. The optimized method allowed the separation of all studied amines with 

a good resolution . The total analysis time was 25 min. 

The p roposed method was validated according to the requirements of ICH (International Conference on 

Harmonisation). The analytical signal was transformed by using the eq uation  , where E

is the potential ( mV ) and S the slope of the typical Nikolsky -Eisenman equation [3 ]. When  was plotted 

against the analyte concentration  a linear regression model  was obtained  with R 2 varying  from 0.983 to 

0.996.  Repeatability was evaluated at three different concentration levels of stand ard solutions . T he 

relative standard deviation (RSD) values were lower than 10.9% . Detection limits ranged from  9.3 to 60.7 

μg L -1 and  quantification limits  from 31.1 to 202.3 μg L -1.

Biogenic amines in the different food samples are yet to be determin ed .

Acknowledg ments 

This work was supported by the National Funds through FCT/MCTES – Portuguese Foundation for 

Science and Technology within the scope of the project UIDB/5 0006/2020. Renato Gil thanks FCT 

(Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia) and ESF (European Social F und) through POCH (Programa 

Operacional Capital Humano) for his Ph .D. grant SFRH/BD/131504/2017. 

References 

[1] M. Papageorgio, D. Lambropoulou, C. Morrison, E. K łodzińska, J. Namieśnik, J. Płotka -Wasylka, 

Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 98 (2018) 128. 

[2] R. L. Gil, C. G. Amorim, M. C. B. S. M. Montenegro, A. N. Araújo, Journal of Chromatography A, 

1602 (2019) 326. 

[3] K. De Wael, D. Daems, G. Van Camp, L. J. Nagels, Use of potentiometric sensors to study 

(bio)molecular interactions, Anal ytical Chem istry , 84 (2012) 4921 .Surface Modified Carbon Nanomats Provide Cationic and Anionic 

# Rectifier Membranes in Aqueous Electrolyte Media : A Prospect For 

# Desalination 

L. Tshwenya 1, F. Marken 2 and O.A. Arotiba 1,2,* 

> 1

Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Johannesburg, South Africa 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, United Kingdom 

> 3

Centre for Nanomaterials Science Research, University of Johannesburg, South Africa 

Email: oarotiba@ uj.ac.za 

The current water crisis, caused by climate change (and lack of rainfall), has prompted researchers to find 

alternative and efficient ways for converting sea water into fresh drinkable water. Ionic diodes have been found 

recently to offer one such approach [1 ,2 ]. In the current work, c arbon nanofibers (CNF s) are converted from 

cationic current rectifiers t o anionic current rectifiers by surface modification with boron and amine functional 

groups using hydrothermal means (forming BNCNFs, with boric acid, generation -3 poly(propylene imine) 

dendrimer, and urea . To confirm surface charge, morphological changes and carbon nanomat thickness, zeta 

potential analysis, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), were used. 

When a dispersion of surface modified carbon nanofibers in D MF is drop -cast asymmetrically to form nanomats 

onto laser drilled microholes (5, 10, or 20 μm diameter) of poly (ethylene terephthalate) substrates and immersed 

into aqueous electrolyte solutions, anionic diode behaviour is observed (in contrast to prist ine carbon nanofibers, 

which exhibit cationic diode behaviour). The effects of electrolyte type, ionic strength, and microhole diameter 

on ionic diode performance were investigated using cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry, and impedance 

spectroscopy. Fu ture applications in desalination are proposed. 

References 

1. Madrid, E., Cottis, P., Rong, Y., Rogers, A.T., Stone, J.M., Malpass -Evans, R., Carta, M., McKeown, 

N.B. and Marken , F., 2015. Water desalination concept using an ionic rectifier based on a polymer of 

intrinsic microporosity (PIM). Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 3(31), pp.15849 -15853. 

2. Putra, B.R., Madrid, E., Tshwenya, L., Arotiba, O.A. and Marken, F., 2020. An AC -driven 

desalination/salination system based on a Nafion cationic rectifier. Desalination , 480 , p.114351. Electro chemical Protocols for determining Gallic Acid and Caffeic 

# Acid in Winery Cellar Effluent 

ABRAHAMS, D. , BAKER, P.G.L. 

University of the Western Cape, PB X17, Bellville 7535, Telephone 021 959 3051) 

(Department of Chemistry/ SensorLab/Cape Town/ Sou th Africa) 

Email: 3155482@myuwc.ac.za 

Phenolic compounds have been enlisted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) 

and the European Union (EU) as pollutants of priority concern. This enlistment is due to the fact that 

these chemical s are noted to be toxic and have severe short‐ and long‐term effects on humans and 

animals. The occurrence of phenolic compounds in the aquatic environment is therefore not only 

objectionable and undesirable but also poses a danger as far as human health a nd wildlife are concerned. 

South Africa is known to have used and abused most chemicals listed by developed and developing 

countries as endocrine -disrupting chemicals. Endocrine disrupting chemicals have been reported in water. 

The winemaking industry pro duces large volumes inorganic wastewater that pose an environmental threat 

if not treated correctly. The increasing numbers of wineries and the demand for wine around the world are 

adding to the growing problem. This increase has further aggravated the pre ssure which the industry 

exerts on natural resources such as water, soil and vegetation. [1]. 

No two effluent produced by Wine estates are the same. This variation is as a result to the differences that 

exists processing techniques, regions of farming and cultivar of grapes used. Thus electrochemistry is 

seen as a clean, versatile and powerful tool for the detection of pollutants in water and making these 

sensors a good tool for testing pollutants in winery water waste. 

Wastewater is regarded as the most s ignificant environmental risk at wineries and because water is a 

limited natural resource in South Africa, water monitoring and saving should be encouraged [2]. 

The aim of this study was to design, construct and develop a tyrosinase biosensor modified o n a Boron -

doped Diamond (BDD) platform in order to determine the levels of polyphenols in real aqueous winery 

wastewater samples. Specifically Gallic Acid and Caffeic Acid was chosen as the polyphenols of study .

The BDD surface was electrochemically coated with polythiophene (Pth) film, containing in -situ 

deposited tyrosinase (Tyr). Electropolymerization of Pth was done via cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 

50mV.s -1 versus Ag/AgCl). The morphologies of the composite films where studied by scanning electron 

micros copy (SEM). Detection of polyphenol substances was done and square wave (SQW). Further Uv -

Vis was used to verify the conservation of polyphenols during these electrochemical; and enzyme 

oxidation steps. 

References: 

[1] Dzviti, R. (2017). Investigating the effect of magnetisable glass foam particles (mgfp) in an uasb 

reactor treating synthetic winery wastewater by monitoring biofilm development and activity of colonised 

mgfp. Msc. Stellenbosch University 

[2] Van Schoor, L.H., 2000a: Some critical factor s in the development and 

implementation of ISO 14001 environmental management systems for wine 

cellars. Wineland, July. Capacitive Desalination w ith Sulfonated Nanoporous Carbon 

# Electrodes 

Yinke Chen 1, Eric N. Guyes 2, Charles E. Diesendruck 1, 3 , and Matthew E. Suss *1, 2 

> 1

Grand Technion Energy Program, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 

> 2

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 

> 3

Faculty of Chemistry, Technion – Israel Instit ute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 

> *

mesuss@ me. technion.ac.il 

Capacitive deionization (CDI) is an emerging technology for the removal of charged ionic species 

from water and is often applied to brackish water desalination and water softening [1] . CDI typically use s

inexpensive nanoporous carbon electrode s to desalinate , and carbon surface functionalization can increase 

the adsorption capacity, rate , and selectivity [2] . Sulfo nation , the attaching of strongly acidic sulfonic 

group s to the carbon material , create s a surface that is strongly negatively charged in an aqueous 

env ironment at all electrolyte pH values . This property i s highly desirable for CDI , yet such electrodes are 

largely unexplored .

In our study, t he sulfonated activated carbon fibers (SACFs) are prepared using the following 

protocol. Two grams of activated carbon fibers (ACFs) are sulfonated with 100 ml of 20% fuming sulfuric 

acid for 24 hours. The product is then washed with hexane and ice water, and dry in the oven at 50 oC. The 

final product is referred to as SACFs . Fourier -transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) tests were performed 

for both ACF and SACF samples. An acid -base tit ration was used to quantify the nanopore chemical charge 

concentration of the sulfonated material. The result are shown as in  Figure 1 (a), which are obtained from 

the fitting titration data to a micropore EDL model described in [3] . Results show sulfonation imparted a 

significant strong acid group micropore concentration, cA1,0 , of 2.75 M.

CDI test s were condu cted in a flow -through electrode CDI cell with either two ACF electrodes or 

one ACFs anode and one SACFs cathode . We used a 20 mM NaCl feed solution , 4 hours for each charge -

discharge cycle , a charge voltage of 1 V, and discharge voltage of 0 V. In  Figure 1 (b), we show measured 

salt absorption, demonstrating that the SACFs show enhanced performance in CDI specific salt capacity 

comparing to pristine ACFs. 

Figure 1: a) Nanopore chemical charge concentration versus pH, obtained from t itration model to data 

fitting, pK a and pK a,B are equilibrium constants for acid and a weak bas ic group s, c is the concentration 

of each group in the unit M , i.e. , mole per micropore volume. b) Measured salt electrosorption in a CDI 

cell versus cycle number, using either two ACF or one ACF and one SACF electrodes. 

Reference 

[1] M. E. Suss, S. Porada, X. Sun, P. M. Biesheuvel, J. Yoon, and V. Presser, “Water desalination via 

capacitive deionization: what is it and what can we expect from it?,” Energy Environ. Sci. , vol. 8, 

no. 8, pp . 2296 –2319, 2015. 

[2] M. E. Suss and V. Presser, “Water Desalination with Energy Storage Electrode Materials,” Joule ,

vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 25 –35, 2018. 

[3] E. N. Guyes, T. Malka, and M. E. Suss, “Enhancing the ion -size -based selectivity of capacitive 

deionization electrodes,” Environ. Sci. Technol. , vol. 53, no. 14, pp. 8447 –8454, 2019. 

b)a)Enhancement of Electrooxidation of Simple Organic Fuels at Noble 

# Metal Nanoparticles Supported onto Mixed -Metal -Oxides 

Pawel J. Kulesza , Iwona A. Rutkowska 

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, 

Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland. 

pkulesza@chem.uw.e du.pl 

There has been growing interest in utilizing small (simple) organic molecules, as alternative 

fuels to hydrogen, in electrochemical energy conversion systems. In addition to ethanol (biofuel), that can 

be ideally oxidized to carbon dioxide thus deli vering twelve electrons, recent important systems include 

dimethyl ether as well. But realistically the respective reaction is rather slow at ambient conditions. 

Obviously, there is a need to develop novel electrocatalytic materials. 

Platinum has been reco gnized as the most active catalytic metal towards oxidation of ethanol at 

low and moderate temperatures. But Pt anodes are readily poisoned by the strongly adsorbed 

intermediates, namely by CO -type species, requiring fairly high overpotentials for their re moval. To 

enhance activity of Pt catalysts towards methanol and ethanol oxidation, additional metals including 

ruthenium, tin, molybdenum, tungsten or rhodium are usually introduced as the alloying component. 

More recently it has been demonstrated that cat alytic activity of platinum -based nanoparticles towards 

electrooxidation of ethanol has been significantly enhanced through interfacial modification with ultra -

thin monolayer -type films of metal oxo species of tungsten, titanium or zirconium. 

We pursue a concept of utilization of mixed metal (e.g. zirconium/tungsten or titanium/tungsten) 

oxide matrices for supporting and activating noble metal nanoparticles (e.g. PtRu) during electrooxidation 

of methanol and ethanol. Among important issues is incorporation of Rh nanostructures capable of 

weakening, or even breaking, the C -C bond in the ethanol molecules. On the other hand, rhodium itself is 

not directly electrocatalytic toward oxidation of ethanol. The oxides and noble metal nanoparticles have 

been deposit ed in a controlled manner using the layer -by -layer method. Remarkable increases of 

electrocatalytic currents measured under voltammetric and chronoamperometric conditions have been 

observed. The most likely explanation takes into account possibility of spe cific interactions of noble 

metals with transition metal oxide species as well as existence of active hydroxyl groups in the vicinity 

of catalytic noble metal sites. In addition, formation of “nanoreactors” where ethanol is partitioned (at Rh) 

to methanol ic residues further oxidized at PtRu cannot be excluded. 

We also demonstrated here that deposition of Pt and bimetallic PtRu nanoparticles onto 

nanostructured zirconia (pristine or admixed with tungsten oxide) support leads to the enhancement of 

their cat alytic activities toward electrooxidation of dimethyl ether (DME). It is reasonable to expect that 

the ability of oxides to induce acid catalysis (weakening of C -O bond in the ether), increase proton 

mobility, and to donate active hydroxyl groups at the el ectrocatalytic interface are responsible for the 

observed catalytic enhancement effects. Mutual activating interactions between ZrO 2 and platinum or 

ruthenium components resulting in the formation of sub -stoichiometric oxide and changes in the 

electronic p roperties of Pt and Ru are also feasible. The fact, that the onset potential for the oxidation of 

DME is somewhat shifted toward less positive potentials in the presence of zirconia, is of practical 

importance. Microbial Fuel Cell Stack for Treatment and Off -grid Power from 

# Human Urine : Multi -parameter Analysis 

Iwona Gajda*, Tapuwa Sahondo**, Thubelihle M. Blose**, Xavier Alexis Walter*, Rebecca C. 

Sindall**, Chris Buckley**, John Greenman*, Ioannis Ieropoulos* 

*Bristol Bioenergy Centre, BRL, University of the West of England, Bristol, UK 

** Pollution Research Group, University of KwaZulu -Natal, Durban, South Africa 

Email:  Iwona.gajda@uwe.ac.uk , ioannis ieropoulos@brl.a c.uk 

An e stimated 4 billion people do not have access to safe -sanitation systems , which is one of the most 

critical global challenges . Numerous innovations are being pursued for cost -effective and resource -

conserving treatment of human waste [1] . The main aim of this study is to demonstrate the production of 

electricity from human urine in the field, using Microbial Fuel Cells (MFC) and at the same time, analyse 

the treatment performance in laboratory cond itions . The MFC technology is driven by a microbial 

"engine" in the anode (negative half -cell) that transforms chemical energy of the 'fuel' (urine ) directly into 

electrical current. As long as urine is supplied to the MFCs , the bacteria continuously metab olise urine 

producing electricity. 

This study focuses on the laboratory -based part of the work, carried out at UKZN, Durban, South Africa. 

Two lab oratory -based prototypes were tested , whose performance informed the monitoring and 

evaluation of the large field demonstration in an informal settlement in Durban. T he urine was supplied 

directly from one of the urinals in the community to the MFC field prototype to power LED lighting in 

the toilet block (reported in a separate publication) . The two lab oratory -based prototypes were 

constructed using two types of unglazed ceramic cylinders (membra nes) as follows i) small -cylinder 

cascade was constructed from 50 mm height cylinders and 66 MFCs (22 units/module), ii) large -cylinder 

(80 mm height) cascade consisted o f a total of 18 MFCs (6 MFCs/module). Anode electrodes were made 

of carbon veil fibre and cathode electrodes were constructed using activated carbon fitted inside the 

ceramic cylinders. All MFCs were electrically connected in parallel. Both cascades were f ed with human 

urine collected from the urinal a nd monitored over a 6 -month period for power performance , COD 

treatment, macro (N,P,K) and micronutrient content, pH and ionic strength. 

Power output from the small -cylinder cascade was 13 -39 mW, while the lar ge -cylinder cascade was 5 -26 

mW (Fig 1) which might be due to the increased surface to volume ratio in the small cylinder cascade .

The COD removal was up to 45 % (avg. 23%) in the small -cylinder cascade and up to 34 % (avg. 11%) in 

the large -cylinder casca de. Up to 73 % and 63 % COD removal was recorded in the catholyte extracted 

from the small and large cascades, respectively. An important feature of in situ electrochemical oxidation 

is the process of electro -filtration of the urine into a purified catholy te [2] . This finding is in agreement 

with previous studies. The electrochemical activity showed pH and ion separation between the anolyte 

and the newly for med catholyte in all tested systems as a function of MFC performance. 

Fig.1 Power performance of small -cylinder and large -cylinder MFC cascades over 6 months. 

Opportunities and challenges were identified during the long -term operation of MFC cascades to advance 

the technology further into self -sustainable sanitation systems and to emphasise the importance of stacked 

MFC prototypes for the production of off -grid power from human urine with simultaneous treatment. 

[1] Sahondo T, et al., Sci Total Environ 703, 2020,135469. 

[2] Gajda I, et al., Electrochim Acta 2020:136388. When the Whol e is better than the S um: Silver -Titania and 

# Gold -Titania Hybrid Nanomaterials for Electroanalytical Sensors .

Luigi Falciola a, Valentina Pifferi a, Anna Testolin a, Giovanni Di Liberto b 

> a

ELectro ANaliytical Chemistry Group , Department of Chemi stry, Università degli Studi di Milano 

Via Golgi 19, 20133, Mi lano, Italy  

> b

Department of Materials S cien ce, Univer sità di Milan o Bicocca , Via Cozz i 55 , 20125 M ilano, I taly 

Luigi .falciola @u nimi.it 

The interest of the scientific community for nanotechnolo gies and nanomaterials has increased in 

the last years due to their peculiar characteristics: i ncreased surface / volume ratio, new optical and 

physical properties, high active surface, increased or modified material transport, increased selectivity. 

All t hese features make nanomaterials extremely suitable fo r a wide range of applications, from ener gy to 

catalysis and, last but not least, sensors [1]. 

Recently, apart from the application of nanomateri als characterized by a single component, the 

use of "hyb rid" nanomaterials, composed of two or more components in "intimate" contact, is also rapidly 

growing [2]. This is connected to the fact that, since in a hybrid material the establishment of synergist ic 

properties is confined to the contact region between the different components, in nanomaterials, given the 

small size, these effects can become a do minant factor of the entire structure. The result is precisely the 

establishment of new and unexpected pr operties (often desired and interesting) which are not t he simple 

sum of individual contributions. Therefore, h ybrid materials are excellent candidates for applications in 

the most varied fields, including electroanalysis, which can greatly benefit from th ese systems. 

In this context, this work aims to present the construction of devices based on hybrid metal -

semi conductor nanomaterials (based on silver or gold nanoparticles and titanium dioxide) [3 -5]. In these 

systems, the presence of metal nanoparticles is exploited for the electroanalytical determination of 

analytes of medical / diagnostic or environmental inte rest, while the presence of TiO 2 is esse ntial for 

overcoming the problems of fouling and passivation of the electrode surface following the determination 

of th e molecule under examination. The possibil ity of renewing the electrode surface simply by 

irradia ting the device with ultraviolet light, allows to use the devices remotely for a long time, without 

their continuous recovery [5]. In the case of the Ag -TiO 2 system, an "intimate contact" interphase 

be tween the silver nanoparticles and titanium dioxide was also found [6], which makes the hybrid a real 

new material, with different characteristics and with interesting applications compared to its precursors. 

[1] Campbell, F. W.; Compton, R. G. The Use o f Nanoparticles in Electroanalysis: An Updated Review. 

Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2010, 396 (1), 241 –259. 

[2] Sanchez, C.; Belleville, P.; Popalld, M.; Lionel, N. Applications of Advanced Hybrid Organic –

Inorganic Nanomater ials: From Laboratory to Market. Chem. S oc. Rev. 2011, 40 (2), 588 –595. 

[3] Soliveri, G.; Pifferi, V.; Panzarasa, G.; Ardizzone, S.; Ca ppelletti, G.; Meroni, D.; Sparnacci, K.; 

Falciola, L. Self -Cleaning Properties in Engineered Sensors for Dopamine Electro analytical Detection. 

Analyst 2015, 140 (5), 1486 –1494. 

[4] Pifferi, V.; Soliveri, G.; Panzarasa, G.; Cappelletti, G.; Meroni, D.; Fal ciola, L. Photo -Renewable 

Electroanalytical Sensor for Neurotransmitters Detection in Body Fluid Mimics. Anal. Bioanal. Che m. 

2016, 408 (26), 7339 –7349. 

[5] Pif feri, V.; Soliveri, G.; Panzarasa,G.; Ardizzone, S.; Cappell etti, G.; Meroni, D.; Falciola, L. 

Electrochemical sensors cleaned by light: a proof of concept for on -site applications towards integrated 

monitoring systems. RSC Advances 2015, 5, 71210 -71214. 

[6] Di Liberto, G.; Pifferi, V.; Lo Presti, L.; Ceotto, M.; Fa lciola, L. Atomistic Explanation f or Interlayer 

Charge Transfer in Metal -Semiconductor Nanocomposites: The Case of Silver and Anatase. J. Phys. 

Chem. Lett. 201 7, 8 (21), 5372 –5377. Composite Nafion Membranes with CaTiO 3-δ

# Additive for Fuel Cell applications 

Maria Assunta Navarra 1, Luci a Mazzapioda 1, Carmelo Lo Vecchio 2, Kh alid Elamin 3, Francesco 

Trequattrini 4, Annalisa Paolone 5, Oriele P alumbo 5, Anna Martinelli 3, Vincenzo Ba glio 2

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy; 

> 2

CNR -ITAE, Via Salita S. Lucia 5, 98126 Messina, Italy ;

> 3

Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 

41296 Gothenburg, S weden ;

> 4

Department of Physics, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy; 

> 5

CNR -ISC , U.O.S. La Sapienza, Piazzale A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy 

mariassunta. navarra@uniroma1.it 

Manufacturing ion -conducting membranes with high ioni c conductivity and durability is a crucial 

challenge in the develo pment and large -scale distribution of electrochemical energy conversion devices. 

Perfluorosulfonic acid polymers are the state -of -the -art solid electrolytes used in low temperature proton 

ex change membrane (PEM) fuel cells and electrolyz ers [1]. Desirable PEMs must be highly proton 

conductive under hot and dry conditions, thermally and dimensionally stable, impervious to fuels, as well 

as to electrons. 

In the present work, composite membrane s based on a Nafion polymer matrix , incorporating a non -

stoichiometric calcium titanium oxide (CaTiO 3-δ) additive , were synthesized and characterized [2,3] .

Fundamental characterizations, by means of thermal and dynamic mechanical analys es, as well as of 

broadband dielectric spectroscopy , were carried out . Composite electrolyte s, c ontaining 5 and 10 wt.% of 

the CaTiO 3-δ additive, with respect to the dry Nafion content (respectively, M5 and M10) , we re compared 

to a plain, additive -free Nafion me mbrane .

The membrane with the lower amount of additive displayed the highest water a ffi nity and the highest 

conductivity, indicating that a too -high dose of additive can be detrimental for these particular properties .

The mechanical behavior of the composite membrane s is similar to th at of plain Nafion , slightly 

improved by the filler addition . These findings indicate that perovskite oxides can be useful as a water -

retention and reinforcing additive in proton -exchange membranes for fuel cell applications .

Indeed, the composite membranes developed in this study w ere evaluated in a DMFC single cell at 30 °C, 

60 °C, 90 °C and 110 °C . Interestingly, when the opera tion temperature is raised to 110°C, the cell 

adopting M5 composite membrane show s the best ele ctrochemical per formance, as a result of the 

enhanced M5 thermal stability .

[1] Siracusano, S.; Oldani, C.; Navarra, M.A; Tonella, S.; Mazzapioda, L.; Briguglio, N. ; Aricò, A.S. 

Chemically stabilised extruded and recast short side chain Aquivion® proton exchange membranes for 

high current density operation in water electrolysis . J. Membr. Sci. 578 (2019 ) 136 -148 .

[2] Mazzapioda, L.; Navarra, M.A.; Trequattrini, F.; P aolone, A.; El amin, K.; Martinelli, A.; Palumbo, O. 

Composite Nafion membranes with CaTiO 3-δ additive for possible applications in electrochemical 

devices . Membranes 9 (2019 ) 143 -154 .

[3] Mazzapioda, L.; Lo Vecchio, C.; Paolone, A.; Aricò, A.S.; Baglio, V.; Navarra, M.A. Enhancing 

oxygen reduction reaction catalytic activity using a sub -stoich iometric CaTiO 3−δ additive .

ChemElectroChem 6 (2019 ) 5941 –5945 .Sustainable electrocatalytic water treatment: Considering the use of 

# earth -abundant materials for nitrate remediation 

Ana S. Fajardo a,b , Paul Westerhoff a, Carlos M. Sanchez -Sanchez b and Sergi Garcia -Segura a 

> a

Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Na notechnology -Enabled Water Treatment, 

School of Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environ ment, Arizona State University, 

Tempe, AZ 85287 -3005, USA  

> b

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire Interfaces et Systèmes Electrochimiques (LISE), 

4 place Jussie u, F -75005, Paris, France 

adossan3@asu.edu 

Ensuring access to safe water and sanitation is essential to human health , and water quality is an 

integral part of several United Nations Sustainable Development Goals . One of the utmost concerns is 

associated t o Nitrogen cycle imbalance associated in part to anthropogenic NO 3- water pollution . Among 

the nitrate challenges, d rinking water with elevated NO 3- levels is harmful to human health and is 

associated to respiratory and reproductive system illness, some ca ncers and thyroid problems . Nitrate 

pollution is one of the top ten water quality violations reported worldwide [1] . Point -of -use (POU) 

treatment systems are small treatment units that can remove hazardous pollutants at household level or 

under your water tap. These types of units should be user -friendly, chemical -free, and avoid waste 

generation (i.e. brines, biosolids). In this frame, e lectro catalytic reduction of nitrate (ERN) is an emerging 

technology that can selectively reduce NO 3- to innocuous dinitr ogen (N 2). Actually, the current science 

challenge is how to step at a mid -point oxyanions state, like N 2 rather than NO 2- or NH 4+ [2] .

Fundamental research on ERN studied the electrocatalytic properties of noble metals and 

platinoid materials as cathodes . However, these electrocatalytic materials would be the cost driver of 

POU units and would hinder application and commercialization. Moreover, considering life cycle 

analysis of the operational life of such endangered elements suggests that their use woul d be non -

sustainable [3] . Therefore, t he aim of this paper is to provide a framework for selection of promising 

earth -abundant elements (carbon -based, cobalt, copper, iron, nickel, titanium, tin, or zinc ) that could be 

used to electrocatalytically degrade nitrate in drinking water to innocuous byproducts using identical 

conditions. Discussion is sustained in terms of the performed balance considering electroreduction 

kinetics, selectivity towards nitrogen evolution, electrical energy per order, and material cost/availability. 

Electrokinetic reduction rates of nitrate using earth -abundant elements were ~1.5 -fold faster than Pt ( k1 =

3.7×10 -5 s -1). BDD and Sn revealed the highest average selectivity over time towards nitrogen gases 

evolution (55% and 64%, resp ectively) and outperformed the Pt electrode which only had 1% . The earth -

abundant electrode materials allowed the highest Faradaic efficiencies (10 -22%) with electric 

consumption per order of about 39 -49 kWh m-3 order -1.

These encouraging results highlight the opportunity to apply low -cost materials, which global 

availability is still not endangered, to nitrate removal. Finally, the use of nanotechnology is a further 

strategy plan to enhance the com petitiveness of these materials .

References 

[1] World Heal th Organization (WHO ), Nitrate and nitrite in drinking -water, (2016). 

[2] S. Garcia -Segura, M. Lanzarini -Lopes, K. Hristovski, P. Westerhoff, Appl. Catal. B: Environ. 236 

(2018) 546 -568. 

[3] P. Chirik, R. Morris, Acc. Chem. Res. 48 (2015) 2495 -2495 .

Ackn owledgments 

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

programme under the Marie Sklodowska -Curie grant agreement No 843870 in collaboration with 

CNRS/Sorbonne Université. Supported by NEWT Project 1.8. First Evidence for Applicability of Microbial Electrochemical Snorkel 

# for Metal Recovery 

Mario Mitov 1,2 , Ivo Bardarov 1,2 , Elitsa Chorbadzhiyska 1,2 , Yolina Hubenova 3,4 

> 1

Innovative Center for Eco Energy Technologies (ICEET), South -West University “Neofit Rilski”, 66 Ivan 

Mihajlov str., 2700 Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, South -West University “Neofit Rilski”, Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria 

> 3

Department of Electrocatalysis and Electrocrystallization, Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy 

Systems “Acad. Evgeny Budevski”,1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 

> 3

Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Plovdiv University “Paisii Hilendarski”, 4000 Plovdiv, 

Bulgaria 

e-mail:  ivobardarov@swu.bg 

The microbial electrochemica l snorkel (MES) is a short -circuited microbial fuel cell, which does not 

produce power but ensures the highest possible electrochemical reaction rates that the system can support. 

Since proof -of -the principle [1], various possible applications of MES have been reported [2] , but not for 

metal recovery till now . In this study, we provide for the first time evidence for copper recovery 

performed by MES. A pl ain copper sheet, immersed in 1 g/L Cu 2+ solution, was directly connected to an 

anode of long -term opera ting sediment microbial fuel cell. In another identical set up a copper cathode 

and a n SMFC anode were connected through a 510  load resistor. The potential of copper electrodes 

and the current was monitored over time (Fig. 1a) , and the concentration of d issolved Cu 2+ in the 

catholyte was analyzed by spectrophotometric measurements (Fig. 1b) . In the frame of 7 days , 53.1% and 

56.3 % copper recovery w ere achieved for the MES and MFC , respectively. The high extent of copper 

recovery obtained paves the way fo r the scale -up of the MES technology for practical application. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450          

> MES (s.c.) MFC (510 )
> I / A
> t/ days
> a01234567200 400 600 800 1000
> C(Cu 2+ ) / mg.L -1
> t/ days
> MES (s.c.) MFC (510 )Control
> b

Fig. 1. Changes in : a) current during copper recovery by MES and MFC; b) copper concentration in 

solution over time. 

Acknowledgments: This study was supported by the National Scientific Program  "Low -carbon energy 

for transport and domestic use  - EPLUS" (grant agreement D0 1-214 /2018 ) and implemented in the 

Integrated Laboratory of the Research Infrastructure “Energy Storage and Hydrogen En ergetics” (grant 

agreement D01 -160/ 20 18). 

References: 

[1] B. Erable, L. Etcheverry, A. Bergel, From microbial fuel cell (MFC) to microbial electrochemical 

snorkel (MES): maximizing chemical oxygen demand (CO D) removal from wastewater., 

Biofouling. 27 (2011) 319 –326. https://doi.org/10.1080/08927014.2011.564615. 

[2] M. Hoareau, B. Erable, A. Bergel, Microbial electrochemical snorkels (MESs): A budding 

technology for multiple applications. A mini review, Electr ochem. Commun. 104 (2019) 106473. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2019.05.022. Mo deling Electrochemical CO 2 Red uction Across S cales 

Divya Bohra 1 and Wilson A. Smith 1,2,3 

> 1

Delft Univer sity of Technology 

2629HZ Delft, The Nethe rlan ds 

> 2

Nati onal Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) 

Golden, C O 80401 

> 3

University of Colorado Boulder 

Bou lder, CO 803 01

d.bohra@tudelft. nl 

The environment of a CO 2 electrored uction (CO 2ER) catalyst is intimately coupled with the 

surface reaction energetics and is therefore a critical aspect of the overall system performance. The 

immediate reaction environment of the el ectrocatalyst constitutes the electrical double layer (EDL) which 

extends a few nanometers into the electrolyte and screens the surface charge density. In this talk, we 

resolve the species concentrations and potential profiles in the EDL of a CO 2ER syst em by self -

consi stently solving the migration, diffusion and reaction phenomena using the generalized modified 

Poisson -Nernst -Planck (GMPNP) equations which include the effect of volume exclusion due to the 

solvated size of solution species. We demonstrate th at the concen tration of solvated cations builds at the 

outer Helmholtz plane (OHP) with increasing applied potential until the steric limit is reached. The 

formation of the EDL is expected to have important consequences for the transport of the CO 2 mole cul e

to the cata lyst surface. The electric field in the EDL diminishes the pH in the first 5 nm from the OHP, 

with an accumulation of protons and a concomitant depletion of hydroxide ions. This is a considerable 

departure from the results obtained using re act ion -diffusion models where migration is ignored. Finally, 

we use the GMPNP model to compare the nature of the EDL for different alkali metal cations to show the 

effect of solvated size and polarization of water on the resultant electric field. Our resul ts establish the 

significance of the EDL and electrostatic forces in defining the local reaction environment of CO 2

electrocatalysts. 

Furthermore, gas dif fusion electro de ( GDE ) based setups have shown promising performance for 

CO 2 electrocatalysis and furt her development of these systems will be important on the path to industrial 

feasibil ity. To better understand this system , her e we model an effective catalyst pore within a flow -cell 

to study the influence of the catalyst structure and operating condition s o n the reaction environment for 

CO 2 electrocatalysis at practically relevant current densities. We show t hat the length of the catalyst pore 

as well as the boundary conditions at the gas -electrolyte and electrolyte -electrolyte interfaces across this 

leng th are highly influential parameters for determining the conditions within the catalyst pore. Properties 

su ch as electrolyte pH and buffer breakdown, ionic strength and CO 2 concentration are sensitive to the 

catalyst layer thickness, gas pressure, electrol yte flow rate and the flow -channel geometry. The applied 

potential impacts the concentration of ionic speci es in the pore, which in turn determines the solubility of 

CO 2 available for the reaction. Our results underline the need to understand and manage tr ans port within 

GDE -based electrocatalysis systems as an essential means to control catalyst performance. Be nchmarking 

of GDE -based electrocatalytic systems against their structural and operational parameters will be 

important for achieving improvements in per formance that can be ultimately translated to large -scale 

operation. Semiconducting Transition Metal Dichalcogenide 2 D Nanoflakes for 

# Photoelectrochemical Applications 

Kevin Sivula 

Laboratory for Molecular Engineering of Optoelectronic Nanomaterials (LIMNO), Institute of Chemical 

Sciences and Engineering, Ecole Polytechni que Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 

e-mail: kevin.sivula@epfl.ch 

Given their established robustness and favorable optoelectronic properties, the layered semiconducting 

transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, e.g. MoS 2 and WSe 2) are attr active for optoelectronic 

applications including photoelectrochemical solar fuel production.[1] Recent advances in the liquid -phase 

exfoliation (LPE) of semiconducting TMDs into mono - or few -layered 2D nanoflake dispersions and their 

processing by inexpens ive roll -to -roll techniques suggests that large -area TMD -based devices can be 

fabricated scalably and at low cost .[2] However, the high concentration of defects in these materials act as 

recombination sites for photogenerated carriers and limit their perfo rmance. In this presentation the 

challenges with charge transport, separation, recombination, and interfacial transfer in LPE TMD 

nanoflake thin film devices will be discussed with respect to the 2D flake size and defect 

passivation/charge extraction treat ments.[3] Our results give insight into the roles of both edge and 

internal defects and suggest routes for improvement. Overall it is shown that LPE semiconducting TMDs 

with suitable defect mitigation can achieve internal quantum efficiency for photon harv esting similar to 

bulk single crystal samples. Specifically, we show that WSe 2 nanoflake thin films achieve absorbed -

photon -to -current efficiency over 50% and photocurrent densities for solar water reduction at 4 mA cm –2

under standard testing conditions.[ 4] These results suggest that roll -to -roll processed 2D WSe2 may be a 

suitable photocathode for economical solar -to -hydrogen conversion with a photoelectrochemical tandem 

cell. The role of the exfoliation methodology on the formation of defects and a path towards further 

performance enhancement (including increasing the photopotential of the TMD photocathodes), are also 

discussed. 

[1] X. Yu, K. Sivula, ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1, 315. 

[2] R. A. Wells , et. al ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2019, 2, 7705. 

[3] X. Yu, K . Sivula, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 6863. 

[4] X. Yu, et al Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 215. Electrochemical Insights of Multilayer CVD Graphene Decorated with 

# Colloidal TiO 2 Nanocrystals for electroanalytical applications 

Valentina Pifferi a, Anna Testolin a, Luigi Falciola a,

Chiara Ingrosso b, Giuseppe V . Bianco c, M. Lucia Curri b,d , Giovanni Bruno c

> a

Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Chimica, via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy; 

> b

CNR -IPCF S.S . Bari and cCNR -NANOTEC, 

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università di Bari, via Orabona 4I -70126 Bari, Italy; 

> d

Dipartimento di Chimica, Univ ersità di Bari, via Orabona 4I -70126 Bari, Italy; 

valentina.pifferi @unimi.it 

Optically transparent and UV -light photoactive hybrid s based on TiO 2 nanocrystals (NCs) 

surface modified graphene, were synthesized by a direct and facile solution -based procedure. Graph ene 

was grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) and tr ansfered on I TO coated glass substrate as single -

or multilayer (up to file layers ) films ., TiO 2 NC s synthesized by a chemistry colloidal route an d surface 

fun ctiona lized by 1 -pyrene butyric acid (PBA ) by a capping exchange procedure [1], were anchored on to 

the graphene film s thanks to π-π interactions. 

SEM, EDS, AFM and Raman spectroscopy were conducted to physico -chemically characterize 

the materials. It was verified the successful immobilization o f the colloidal NCs on to the graphene films ,

which preserves and concomitantly enhances the graphene intrinsic structural properti es. In particular, we 

observed an electrical conductivity higher than that measured for the bare graphene fil ms , which has bee n

accounted for by a p -doping effect , due to a hole transfer s from the nano -objects to graphene, mediated by 

the shor t aromatic ligand acting as charge channel. 

Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electrochemical Impedance Spectro scopy (EIS) measurements 

were th en employed to complete and enrich the characterization of the hybrid s. It w as observed that t he 

hybri ds properties are strongly dependent on the number of layers of the CVD graphene. The use of  two 

redox mediator probes , namely the inner -sphere, surface s ensitive (K 4Fe(CN) 6) and the outer -sphere, 

surface insensit ive (Ru(NH 3)6Cl 3), allowed understand ing these features from a morphological point of 

view. The results showed a strong di fference between the mono -, the bi - and the other multi -layers , in 

terms of different diffusional mechanism and redox active site s [2 -4]. 

Moreover, the stacked layers of the pyrene -coated TiO 2 NCs are fo und to increase the 

electroactivity, the capacitive behavior, as well as the photo -electrical response of graphene, 

concomitan tly maintaining its high charge mobility. 

For all the above reasons, the described hybrid s have a great potential as optically transparent 

component s for manufacturing photoanodes to be integrated in (photo)electrochemical sensors , as we ll as 

solar cells or photodetectors and in FETs .

[1] C. Ingrosso et al., ACS Appl.  Mater. & Interfaces , ( 2015 ), 7, 4151 -4159. 

[2] C. Ingrosso et al., J. Mat. Chem. A , ( 2017 ),  5, 9307 -9315 .

[3] D.A.C. Brownson, D.K. Kampouris, C.E . Banks, Chem. Soc.  Rev. , ( 2012 ), 41, 6944 -6976. 

[4] A. Ambrosi, M. Pumera, J. Phys.  Chem. C , ( 2013 ), 117, 2053 -2058. 

Acknowled gements 

The authors acknowledge the MIUR National Project PRIN 2012 (prot. 20128ZZS2H). Development of denitrifying bio -cathodes and study of their bacterial 

# communities 

Timo thé Philippon , Jianghao Tian 2, Théodore B ouchez 2, Frédéric B arriere 1

> 1

Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes 

263 Avenue Général Leclerc, 35700 Rennes, France  

> 2

IRSTE A,

1 Rue Pierre Gilles de Gennes, 92 160 Antony, France 

timothe.philippo n@univ -rennes1.fr 

One consequence of intensive agriculture is pollution of natural waters by nitrate. At high concentration 

nitrate coupled with phosphate pollution triggers eutrophica tion and green algae bloom in the 

environment. One possible application of microbial electrochemical technology is the stimulation of 

denitrification in natural waters. In 2007, the first denitrifying bio -electrochemical system (BES) was 

reported. 1

In th is study, denitrifying bio -cathodes with specific design were developed u nder constant polarization 

during incubation in natural sediments and water supplemented in nitrate at different time. The electrodes 

were built using stainless -steel with three diffe rent separated compartments for each electrode in which 

graphite granules were added and also polarized (cf. figure 1). The goal of this design is to see a possible 

difference in bacterial communities depending on the compartment the graphite granules were collected, 

the first compartment being buried in sediments, the second b eing half in water and half in sediments and 

the third being totally in water. To compare the efficiency of the bio -cathodes and to increase the 

reliability of the global experiment, six pilots were launched, three with the same polarized electrodes and 

th ree without as negative controls. 

Results collected during the incubation show both an electrochemical response to nitrate addition on 

chronoamperometry for two of the pilots with el ectrodes and a noteworthy increase of nitrate removal for 

all the three pi lots with electrodes although the increase, in the case of the third pilot showing no 

electrochemical response to nitrate, remains lower compared to the two others. 

This third elect rode showing no electrochemical response to nitrate addition became an inte resting tool of 

comparison for the 16S rRNA study, making possible to compare the bacterial communities between the 

two electrodes sensitive to nitrate on chronoamperometry and this last one in order to have a more precise 

idea of the strains involved in b io -electro -chemical denitrification. 

After 27 days of incubation under polarization, the three electrodes were dismantled and the graphite 

granules from the three compartments of e ach electrodes were submitted to DNA extraction protocol and 

sent to 16S rRN A sequencing. The first noticeable result was a higher abundance of the Proteobacteria 

group in the middle compartment (half in sediments, half in water), this group being known in literature 

to contain a large proportion of the identified electroactive de nitrifying species 2. After a closer look at 

microbial communities on the middle compartment of each electrodes, it is possible discern noticeable 

differences between the two electr ochemical nitrate responding electrodes and the last one showing no 

reaction to nitrate addition on chronoamperometry. 

The most interesting difference is the presence of a specific bacterial species named Azoarcus spp. in the 

middle compartment of the tw o first electrodes responding to nitrate (20 and 15% of relative abundance) 

and its near absence in the middle compartment of the third, indicating that this specie could be involved 

in the electroactive denitrification, Azoarcus spp. being already identif ied in many MFC but not yet 

characterized as electroactive 3.

1. P. Clauwaert . Environ. Sci. Technol.  41 (2007) 3354 -3360 

2. K. Scott & E. Hao Yu In: Microbial Electrochemical and Fuel Cells: Fundamentals and Applications 

(Editor Cambridge : Woodhead Publ ishing), p.88 chapter 3.3.2.2 

3. N. Shehab, BE Logan. Appl Microbiol Biotechno l. 97 (Nov 2013) 9885 -95 Electrochemical Redu ction of Substituted Nosylamidic I ntermediate –

# Precursors of New Anionic R eceptors 

Karolína Salvadori a,b,c , Ludmila Šimková a, Pavel Matějka b, Petra Cuřínová c, Jiří Ludvík a 

> a

J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry of the CAS, Department of Molecular Electrochemistry 

and Catalysis, Dolejškova 3, 182 23 Prague 8, Czech Republic, 

karolina.salvadori@jh -inst.cas.cz , jiri.ludvi k@jh -inst.cas.cz  

> b

University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Department of Physical Chemistry, Technická 5, 

160 00 Prague 6, Czech Republic  

> c

Ins titute of Chemical Process Fundamentals of the CAS,  Department of Analytical Chemistry ,

Rozvojova 2/135, 165 02 Prague 6 - Suchdol, Czech Republic 

Anions play an important role in biological systems. At the same time, many of them are the major 

environmental pollutants and substances endangering living organisms. Anion recognition, elimination and 

sensing would find application in many areas including medicin al or environmental chemistry. S uitable 

examples of anionic pollutants are phos phates, which could cause eutrophication of water and they are also 

known for their limited removal from body fluids , which could lead to serious health problems. Therefore, 

the aim of our research group is the design and preparation of new anionic receptors with suitable bi nding 

sites to bind these anions .

In the first step of our synthesis we prepared a series of substituted nosylamides ( fig. 1a, b). These 

substances are suitable intermediates in the synthesis of novel receptors bearing ureido functions. The 

sulfonamide motif is known from the literature as a neutral hydrogen bond donor . Therefore the main 

question in this study was the ro le of the sulphonamidic hydrogen, its acidity in correlation with the 

structure and substitution of the whole molecule. F or better understanding and for “tuning” of the behavior 

of the final urea receptors, the properties of these intermediate s were studie d electrochemically using 

polarography and cyclic voltammetry with mercury drop electrodes in dimethylformamide with Bu 4N PF 6

as electrolyte , and by various spectroscopic m ethods .

The nitro groups in our intermediate molecules are not only important substituents enabling continuation 

in synthesis, but also electrochemical "probes" reflecting the electron properties of the parent molecule. 

Their reduction in aprotic media is generall y known: after the first one -electron reversible reduction step 

where a stable radical anion is formed, a three -electron irreversible process follows resulting in the 

corresponding hydroxylamine. 

Whereas t he electroreduction of the series 1a (as models) occurs according to the expected pattern and the 

observed potential shifts follow the influence of the p-substituted R according to the linear free -energy 

relationship (LFER) of the Hammett type [1 -2] , the reduction pattern of the series 1b is entirely diff erent: 

After the first irreversible step (theoretically involving 4/5 of electron) a one -electron reversible reduction 

takes place followed by a multielectron process. This behavior corresponds to the a utoprotonation 

mechanism [3] where the acidic hydrogen of the amidic group is involved. In this way, the influence of 

substitution on acidity is followed. 

Figure 1 a b

Acknowledgements: The work was supported by the grant GAČR,  18 -12150S .

References: 

[1] P. Zuman, Subsituent Effects in Organic Polarography, Plenum Press, New York, 1967. 

[2] O. Exner, A critical compilation of substituent constants, in: N.B. Ch apman, J. Shorter (Eds.), 

Correlation Analysis in Chemistry, Plenum Press, N.Y., London, 1978, pp. 445. 

[3]  E. Brillas , G. Farnia , M. G. Severin , E. Vianello ; Electrochimica Acta 31 (1986) 759 -766. Photobioelectrode Based on 3D Reduced Graphene Oxide and 

# Photo sy stem I 

Sascha Morlock a, Senthil Subramanian b, Athina Zouni b, Fred Lisdat a 

> a

Biosystems Technology, Institute of Life Sciences and Biomedical Technologies, Technical University of 

Applied Scie nces Wildau, Hochschulring 1, 15745 Wildau, Germany  

> b

Biophysics of Photosynthesis, Institute for B iology, Humboldt -University of Berlin, Philippst raße 13, 

10115 Berlin, Germany 

sascha. morlock@th -wildau.de 

Technical advances in materials chemistry enable many ne w possibilities in electrochemistry . This is 

especially helpful in biohybrid systems. A very b road rang e of tunable surface characteristics is esse ntial 

to adapt the electrode to the specifics of the biomolecules. These developments are relevant to all sor ts o f

semi artificial systems , e. g. in the field of bioenergy. 

Photobioelectrodes , which use photoactive protein complexes to convert light into current and valuable 

chemicals , are a comparative ly recent field of research .[1] The goal of this work is the buildup of a 

photobioel ectrode based on 3D graphene and photosystem I (PSI). Here a facile , scalab le approach was 

targeted . The construction was realized by using reduced graphene oxide, which is relative cheap and 

accessible on a large r scale. [2] A 3D structure is generated by a template procedure based on latex beads 

and spin coating. Th e general template approach already proved to be successful for photobioelectrodes 

made of othe r mater ials. [3] Different reduction methods were tested and a hydrazine treatment was 

optimized for the co nstructed material. 

The obtained electrod e has b een evaluated regarding the interaction with PSI. An assembly as well as the 

direct electron transfer from electrode to the reaction center is ensured resulting in a cathodic 

photocurrent . As this communication is not effective, the redox protein cy tochrom e c is added to connect 

more PSI complexes . To improve the in teraction of the electrode and the proteins different surface 

modifications ha ve been tested . Th ese experiments indicate that the photo current can be further enhanced. 

The photobioelectrod e is ch aracterized with different electrochemical methods such as cyclic 

voltam metry, chopped light voltammetry and photo action spectroscopy. Additionally, analytical methods 

such as UV/VIS spectro scopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) have been appl ied. It is 

noteworthy that the thickness of the electrode material is adjustable in the manufacturing process. Even 

by preparing multiple layers the fina l electrode remains transparent, which is advantageous as it is 

therefore still suitable as photobioele ctrode. 

Literature: 

[1] I. Lee, J. W. Lee, E. Greenbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett.1997, 79, 3294. 

[2] J. Phiri, P. Gane, T. C. Maloney, Materials Science and Engineering: B2017, 215, 9. 

[3] D. Ciornii, A. Kölsch, A. Zouni, F. Lisdat, Nanosc ale2019, 11, 15862. Three -Dimensional Nanoparticle Structure, Surface Area and Activity 

Christopher Batchelor -McAuley ,a Neil P. Young, b Richard G. Compton a 

> a

Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory , Department of Chemistry, 

University of Oxford, 

South Parks Road , Oxfor d OX1 3QZ, United Kingdom  

> b

Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PH, United Kingdom 

christopher.batchelor -mcauley@chem.ox.ac.uk 

The characterization of nanomaterials is a key aspect of determining if the behavior and/or properties of a 

‘new’ material differs from that of it s bulk counterpart. However, determining structure at the nanoscale 

remains a challenging problem. This issue is compounded for platinum group based materials due to the 

tendency for them to form larger irregular structures. For platinum nanomaterials, a ggregation -based 

crystal growth i s an important synthetic pathway . In this case s eed particle coalescence leads to the 

production of larger semi -disordered mesoporous structures. In order to study the pos sible catalytic 

activity an electroanalytical utility of these materials we need to fully characterize their atomic structure 

and surface areas. This presentation starts by showcasing some advanced transmission electron 

microscopy techniques, such as tomog raphy (Fig. 1) and quantitative 2D image analysis, and 

demonstrating to what extent these tools can give us insight in the internal structure of the nanomaterial. 

Building on work focused on the measurement of single nanoparticle surface areas[1,2], two e xample 

catalytic reactions are studied [3,4] and the rate shown to directly reflect the measured surface area of the 

material, validating and demonstrating the use of this single nanoparticle electrochemical technique. 

Figure 1: Reconstructed tomographi c slice through a ca. 30nm mesoporous platinum nanoparticle, 

showing the internal structure of the nanomaterial. Image provided by and with thanks to Y. Wang and S. 

Haigh of Manchester University, UK. 

[1] X. Jiao, C. Batchelor -McAuley, C. Lin, E. K�telh �n, E.E.L. Tanner, N.P. Young, R.G. Compton , ACS 

Cat. 2018, 8, 6192 -6202. 

[2] X. Jiao, C. Batchelor -McAuley, N.P. Young, R.G. Compton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20 ,

23847 -23850 

[3] X. Chang, C. Batchelor -McAuley, R.G. Compton Chem. Sci. , 202 0, 11, 4416 

[4] J. Markham, N. P. Young, C. Batchelor -McAuley, and R. G. Compton , J. Phys. Chem. C 2020 (in 

press) EPR -Spectroelectrochemical Study of cone -Calix [4] arene nosylates 

Jiří Klíma a, Alan Liška a, Markéta Řezanková b, Jiří Urban a, Jiří Ludvík a, Jan Budka b, Pavel Lhoták b 

> a

Department of Molecular Electrochemistry and Catalysis, J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry of the 

CAS, v.v.i., Prague, Dolejskova 3/2155, 182 23 Prague 8, Czech Republic  

> b

Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 

Prague 6, Czech Republic 

jiri.klima@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Calix[4]arene nosylates are important intermediates during preparation of ureidocalix[4]arene -based anion 

receptors, double calix[4]arene derivatives for fluorescent applications, self -assembled calixarene nanotubes or 

calixarene based molecular capsules .

Series of seven cone -calix[4]arene sulphonates substituted by various groups (nitro, carbonyl, oxime and other) 

was investigated in terms of their electrochemical reduction mechanisms. The experimental study includes both 

DC -polarography and cyclic voltammetry results combined with in situ EPR -spectro electrochemistry in aprotic 

DMF. 

All the investigated aryl nosylates are reduced in three steps. First electron(s) reduce(s) the molecule reversibly 

under formation of nitro anion radicals. In case of calixarenes, both nitro groups are reduced simultaneo usly, which 

refers to their independency. No or only negligible mutual electronic interaction of both nitro radical centres is 

confirmed by well resolved hyperfine EPR spectra structure. In the following step, two electrons per one nitro 

group are accepted , which leads to splitting of the S−O bond, and therefore to formation of phenols and nitro 

substituted arylsulphinates. The interpretation is based on (i) EPR -spectroelectrochemical measurements 

(comparison of the EPR -spectra with standards), (ii) DC -pola rography and cyclic voltammetry (comparison of the 

reduction potentials with standards), and finally supported by quantum chemical calculations (identification of the 

thermodynamically most favourable reaction pathway). At more negative potentials , all nit ro anion radicals are 

reduced (with assistance of protons present in the solution from moisture) by next three electrons to corresponding 

hydroxylamines. 

This work wass supported by Grant No. 18 -12150 S (Grant Agency of the Czech Republic) with the instit utional 

support RVO: 61388955. Access to computing and storage facilities owned by parties and projects contributing to 

the National Grid Infrastructure MetaCentrum provided under the programme "Projects of Large Research, 

Development, and Innovations Infr astructures" (CESNET LM2015042), is greatly appreciated. Design of an electrochemically gated organic semiconductor for pH 

# sensing 

Federica Mariani 1, Isacco Gualandi 1, Domenica Tonelli 1, Francesco Decataldo 2, Luca Possanzini 2,

Beatrice Fraboni 2, Erika Scavetta 1 

> 1

Dipartimento di Chimica Industriale “Toso Montanari”, Università di Bologna, Viale del 

Risorgimento 4, 40136 Bologna, Italy  

> 2

Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, Viale Berti Pichat 6/2, 40127 Bologna, 

Italy 

federica.mariani8@unibo .it 

Since the development of potentiometric ion -selective electrodes, remarkable steps have been taken 

towards progressive simplification and improved robustness of pH sensing probes. In particular, the 

design of compact sensing architectures using solid -state components holds great potential for portable 

and wearable applications. In this scenario, the use of organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) to 

fabricate referenceless sensors with potentiometr ic transduction has been recently reported by our group 

[1]. Moreover, an innovative gateless (i.e. two -terminal only) configuration ha s been proposed for 

Chloride s ensing based spontaneous electrochemical gating [ 2].

In this contribution we report the dev elopment of an electrochemically gated device for pH sensing ,

combining the robustness of potentiometric -like transduction with an extremely simple and integrated 

geometry requiring no reference electrode [3]. The sensor is a two -point probe device compris ing two 

thin polymeric films, i.e. a charge transport layer based on poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene 

sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and a pH -sensitive layer . The latter is based on the Nernstian transducer 

PEDOT:Bromothymol Blue (PEDOT:BTB) [4]. T he transduction mechanism originating the sensitivity 

to pH variations is thoroughly discussed to introduce the concept of spontaneous electrochemical gating. 

The two -terminal pH sensor reported here shows remarkable potential for sensor miniaturisation and the 

development of portable and wearable electrochemical probes. Indeed, the chemiresistor -like geometry 

based on flexible, all -polymeric materials is compatible with photolithography -free, high throughput and 

low -cost fabrication techn iques, such as screen -printing, and adapts to conformable substrates with 

potential integration into clothes or other real -life objects . To prove the versatility of our architecture, we 

fabricated a two -terminal sensor on a bioceramic fabric for real -time pH monitoring (Figure 1).

Figure 1 . (A) Photo of the two -terminal wearable sensor . (B) Current vs time response to pH variations in 

Universal Buffer following 1M KOH additions obtained with the textile sensor.  Vapp = -200 mV. 

[1] I. Gualandi, M. Tessarolo, F. Mariani, D. Tonelli, B. Fraboni, E. Scavetta. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 

7 (2019) 354. 

[2] I. Gualandi, M. Tessarolo, F. Mariani, T. Cramer, D. Tonelli, E. Scavetta, B. Fraboni. Sens. Actuators 

B Chem. 273 (2018) 834 –841. 

[3] F. Mariani, I . Gualandi, D . Tonelli, F . Decataldo, L . Possanzini, B. Fraboni, E . Scavetta . Electrochem. 

Commun. 116 (2020) 106763. 

[4] F. Mariani, I. Gualandi, M. Tessarolo, B. Fraboni, E. Scavetta. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 

22474−22484. Combating self -corrosion of Mg anodes via synergistic inhibition 

Mikhail Zheludkevich , Linqian Wang, Min Deng, Bahram Vaghefinazari, Sviatlana Lamaka, Daniel 

Höche , Darya Snihirova 

MagIC —Magnesium Innovation Centre, Helmholtz -Zentrum Geesthacht, 

Max -Plan ck Str. 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany, 

e-mail:  mikhail.zheludkevich@hzg.de 

Mg -air primary battery recently become more and more attractive for special applications thanks to their 

environmental benignity, economic viability, and high theoretical specific power density. However, the 

high tendency to self -corrosion of Mg -based anodes and their fouling during discharge lead to relatively 

low specific energy efficiency. 

This work reports the strategy on decre asing the self -corrosion of Mg anodes via microalloying with Ca 

and design of the electrolyte additives in order to improve the energy efficiency of Mg -air batteries. 

It was shown previously [1], addition of Fe 3+ complexing agents into electrolyte signif icantly inhibits 

parasitic self -corrosion and improves the Mg behaviour under anodic polarization [2]. However, in many 

cases, hydrogen evolution reaction is not completely suppressed. The relevant method to thoroughly 

control hydrogen evolution reaction i s to use combination of different inhibitors. Herein we combined 

Fe 3+ -complexing agents, that prevent detrimental iron re -deposition, with efficient magnesium inhibitors 

(sodium nitrate and nitrite) that reduce parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction. The co mbination of 

inhibitors was chosen based on knowledge of magnesium corrosion mechanism and experience with 

corrosion inhibitors of Mg. In this work the effect of single additives and their combination was studied. 

Additionally, localised measurements of pH and dissolved oxygen above magnesium surface during 

polarisation were done in order to give insights on the inhibition mechanism. The results show that use of 

combination of inhibitors reduce significantly the self -corrosion and in addition prevent format ion of 

Mg(OH) 2. The most effective was the mixture of sodium salicylate -sodium nitrate. This work is a step 

further to the improvement of the Mg -air battery performance. 

References: 

1. J. Yang, C. Blawert, S.V. Lamaka, K.A. Yasakau, L. Wang, D. Laipple, M. S chieda, S. Di, M.L. 

Zheludkevich, Corrosion inhibition of pure Mg containing a high level of iron impurity in pH neutral 

NaCl solution, Corrosion Science, 142 (2018) 222 -237. 

2. D. Höche, S.V. Lamaka, B. Vaghefinazari, T. Braun, R.P. Petrauskas, M. Fichtner, M.L. 

Zheludkevich, Performance boost for primary magnesium cells using iron complexing agents as 

electrolyte additives, Scientific Reports, 8 (2018) 7578. Porous Carbons Derived from Alcohol -Treated 

# Bacterial Cellulose for Li -O2 Batteries 

Wenhai Wang ,a Siavash Khabazian, b Soledad Roig -Sanchez, a Anna Laromaine, a Anna Roig, a Dino Tonti a 

> a

Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 

(ICMAB -CSIC), Campus UAB Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.  

> b

Nanomaterials Group, Department of Materials Science and Engineeri ng, Tarbiat Modares University, 

Tehran, Iran. 

e-mail: wwang@icmab.es 

Porous carbons are important cath odes for Li -O2 batteries. But most ways of preparing porous carbons are 

high cost and complex. We present a simple and low -cost route to prepare porous carbons from food -

grade bacterial cellulose (BC). By carbonizing as -prepared aqueous hydrogel BC, usuall y the porosity of 

the nanofibre network is lost because of its partial melting, and a compact carbon is obtained. Porous 

carbons can be obtained when using alcohols to treat BCs. And the carbon resulted from 1 -butanol treated 

BC possesses outstanding disch arge capacity and good cycle life for Li -O2 batteries. This work presents a 

tunable, cost -effective and scalable method for obtaining porous carbons from sustainable sources .

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Spanish Go vernment, through the “Severo Ochoa” Programme for 

Centers of Excellence in R&D (SEV - 2015 -0496), the projects MAT2017 -91404 -EXP and RTI2018 -

096273 -B-I00 and the PhD scholarships of S. R. (BES -2016 -077533) with FEDER co -funding. W.W. 

gratefully acknowledge s the support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC No.:201808340076). The 

authors participate in the SusPlast and FLOWBAT 2021 platforms promoted by the Spanish National 

Research Council (CSIC) and in the Aerogels COST ACTION (CA 18125). They also ackno wledge the 

Generalitat de Catalunya (2017SGR765 and 2017SGR1687grants). Constructed Wetland -Microbial Electrochemical Snorkel system for 

# efficient denitrification 

Joanna Rogińska , Marc Hebrant, Michel Perdicakis, Christelle Despas, Julien Tournebize, Frédéric 

Jorand, Mathieu E tienne 

Unive rsité de Lorraine, CNRS, LCPME 

F-54000 Nancy, France 

joanna.roginska@univ -lorraine.fr 

The exceeded nitrate concentration in surface waters is caused by the use of nitrogen fertilizers i n

agriculture and may bring several negative consequences, e.g. excessive eutrophication. One solution for 

remediation is to collect water draining from the fields in constructed wetlands (CW) , in which nitrate can 

be used as terminal electron acceptor by bacteria present in the sedime nt. H owever , size of the wetland is 

often not sufficient for efficient treatm ent of the watershed , when the highest nitrate concentrations are 

observed. 

Microbial Electrochemical Snorkel (MES) 1 is a simplified version of Microbial Fuel Cell in which anode 

and catho de are short -circuited. The anodic part of the system reacts with electron donors (organic and 

inorganic compounds) and the cathodic part reacts with electron acceptor s (oxygen and nitrate) but no 

energy is produced by the device. The main advantage of MES is to maximize the current flowing 

between anodic and cathodic parts for a more efficient water treatment .

Currently, we are investigating MES in a constructed wetland with the aim to increase the denitrification 

rate. Stainless steel and graphite felt h ave been used as electrode material to build MES s which were 

compared with control experiments in wetland without any electrodes. After optimization of the device, a

significant improvement was achieved as it is illustrated on Figure 1. These series of exp eriment were 

performed in triplicate with a n initial nitrate concentration in the range of 33 to 40 mg N -NO 3-/l. The best 

fit to adjust the model to experimental data was obtained by considering a n apparent first order reaction 

with C = C0e-kt .

Here, we a chieved k values for the CW -MES (0 .117 0.012 hour -1) that are five times higher than the 

control experiment with CW only ( 0.022 0. 002 hour -1). We are now investigat ing the electro microbial 

mechanisms that allows such large increase in denitrification rate and we started evaluating on -field 

applications. This communication will summarize our latest results about denitrification with microbial 

electrochemical systems in constructed wetlands. 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 

> 0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0
> C/C 0
> Time / hours
> Nitrate removal in control experiment Nitrate removal in CW-MES

Figure 1 Experimental points and adjuste d model of n itrate removal in CW -MES and control 

1. Erable B, Etcheverry L, Bergel A. From microbial fuel cell (MFC) to microbial electrochemical 

snorkel (MES): maximizing chemical oxygen demand (COD) remova l from wastewater. 

Biofouling . 2011;27(3):319 -326. doi:10.1080/08927014.2011.564615 .

Acknowledgements: financial support from The French National Research Agency (ANR -17 -CE04 -0004) 

is gratefully acknowledged. Electrochemistry of Luminescent Cationic Group 4 Metallocene 

# Complexes Stabilized by Pendant N -donor G roups 

Ludmila Šimková a, David Dunlop a, Róbert Gyepes a,b , Pavel Kubát a, Alan Liška a, Martin Lamač a

a) J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academ y of Sciences of the Czech Republic, v.v.i., 

Dolejškova 2155/3, 18223 Praha 8, Czech Republic 

b) Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, Hlavova 2030, 

12840 Praha 2, Czech Republic 

ludmila.simkova@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Photoluminescent metal complexes have a broad application potential in various fields such as 

photocatalysis, photovoltaics, light -emitting devices, molecular sensors, bioimaging, etc., but among them 

the complexes of electron -deficient metals with LMCT excited states are rather scarce. We have observed 

phosphorescence of a new class of Zr and Hf metallocene complexes with intramolecularly tethered imine 

or pyridine moiety (obtained by protonation of t he ketimide group or abstraction of chloride anion in 

parent neutral complexes [1,2]) both in the solid state and in solution at ambient temperature with 

relatively high quantum yields and luminescence lifetimes up to tens of μs.[3] 

Because charge transfe r in photochemistry and electron transfer in electrochemistry are in close 

relationship, and because redox stability is a very important property in this case, electrochemical 

methods are inevitable in this research. In order to understand the energetic as well as kinetic relationship 

between various excited states and redox states, a series of cationic 4 metal locene complexes (Ti, Zr, Hf) 

stabilized by pendant N -donor groups was synthesized and studied by electrochemical methods. 

In the accessible potenti al range all studied compounds involved several reduction steps, suggesting a 

complicated mechanism. Almost all derivatives are reversible reduced in the first step. The influence of 

metal atom and the substitution of the ketimide or pyridine moiety on the potential is discussed. The 

results are compared with DFT calculations. -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0 -2.5 -3.0 -3.5 20-2 -4 -6 -8  

> i / A
> Evs Fc +/0 / V
> 1000mV/s 500mV/s 200mV/s 100mV/s

left – A solid -state structure of cationic zirconocene with coordinated imine moiety; the [B(C 6F5)4]–

anion is omitted for cl arity; right – The scan rate dependence of cationic zirconocene with coordinated 

imine moiety in THF on mercury electrode. 

The authors thank project 19 -00204S (GAČR) for financial support. 

References 

[1]  Večeřa, M.; Varga, V.; Císařová, I.; Pinkas, J.; Kucharczyk, P.; Sedlařík, V.; Lamač, M. 

Organometallics 2016 , 35 , 785 .

[2] Varga, V; Večeřa, M.; Gyepes, R.; Pinkas, J.; Horáček, M.; Merna, J.; Lamač, M. ChemCatChem 

2017 , 9, 3160. 

[3 ] Večeřa, M.; Dunlop, D .; Gyepes, R.; Kubát, P.; Lang, K.; Pinkas, J.; Horáček, M.; Šimková, L.; Liška, 

A.; Lamač, M.: manuscript in preparation. Electrodeposition of semiconductors on silver and silicon substrate 

# through E -ALD and bulk methods 

Walter Giurlani 1,2 , Martina Vizza 1, Lorenzo Fabbri 1, Luca Sergi 1, Maurizio Passaponti 1,2 , Massimo 

Innocenti 1,2 ,3 

Università degli Studi di Firenze 

> 1

Departme nt of Chemistry “Ugo Schi ff ”, via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto F .no (F I), Italy 

> 2

National Interuniversity Consortium of Materials Science a nd Technolog y (INSTM), Vi a G. Giusti 9, 

50121 Firenze (FI), Italy 

> 3

Center for Colloid and Surface Science (CSGI), Via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto F.no (FI), Italy 

walter. giur lani@unifi.it 

Semiconductors are com monly prepared using element at high temperature , in vapour phase and high 

vacuum conditions. Liquid solution using w ater , organic solvents , or ionic liqui ds are other possibilit ies to 

grow materials in the bulk form or as thin films. Electrodeposition can be performed with simple 

con ditions , at room tempera ture and amb ient pressure savi ng energy , money and performing gre en

synthesis . Moreover , the electrode position can be easily scaled u p from a sma ll electrochemical cell to 

indu strial leve l.

Today electrochemistry plays a crucial role in the material scienc e thanks to met hods that permits to

control the deposition a t ato mic level , e xploiting surface limited reactions like the underpotential 

deposition (UP D). The UPD is a well -known phenomenon but recently th ere is a re newed interest on it 

because o f the poss ible applica tion s in many technological fields from electrocatalysis (like water 

splitting) to thin fi lm photovoltaic , display and LEDs, light detectors and lasers . Based on UPD process , it 

is possible to perform th e electrochemical atomic layer epitaxy (E CALE) , or E-ALD when the deposits 

cannot be rigorously considered epitaxial , alternating the depositio n of a metal and of a non -metal 

element in a cycle . With the E -ALD it is possible to avoid the formation of three -dimensional crystallites 

and Stranski -Kr astanov grow th. Therefore E-ALD is a valid approach to obtain semiconductors on 

metal lic substrate. In our laboratory , with this metho d, we successfully synthesize d thin films of various 

12 -16 groups semiconductor compounds like ZnS , CdS, CdSe , CdTe, but also Cu2S, MoS e2 and Bi 2Se 3 on 

silver electrode 1,2 .

Moreover, we explored also the possibility to performing controlled electrodeposition on silicon. Despite 

its d iffusion i n the microelectronic industry, the realization of Si -based devices is extremely challenging 

due to its indirect band gap and a suitable candidate to integrate light in silicon and open the 

microelectronic world to the light remains to be found. Among semic onductors, other materials are 

emerging to face the important demand to produce novel optoel ectronic devices integrated in Si 

platforms. The possibility of integrating various materials on the Si surface o ffers the opportunity to 

produce compact and cost -effective electronic circuits with numerous applications . Finding UPD 

conditions on Si is ext remely difficult but operating in severe regimes of charge and time -controlled 

deposition it is possible to obtain a n E-ALD -like deposit 3.

The PRIN (“Progetti di Ricerca di Rilevante Interesse Nazionale”) is acknowledged for funding the 

project “Novel Multilayered and Micro -Machined Electrode Nano -Architectures for Electrocatalytic 

Applications (Fuel Cells a nd Electrolyzers)”, grant number 2017YH9MRK. 

References :

1. Giurlani, W. et al. Investigations on the Electrochemical Atomic Layer Growth of Bi2Se3 and the 

Surface Limited Deposition of Bismuth at the Silver Electrode. Materials (Basel). 11 , 1426 

(2018). 

2. Vizza, M. et al. Successes and Issues in the Growth of Moad and MoSe2 on Ag(1 11) by the E -

ALD Method. Metals (Basel). 9, 122 (2019). 

3. Giurlani, W. et al. Electrodeposition of Nanoparticles and Continuous Film of CdSe on n -Si 

(100). Nanomaterials 9, 1504 (2019). Redox charge storage in two -dimensional transition metal carbides (MXenes) 

Yury Gogotsi *, Tyler S. Mathis, Xuehang Wang and Narendra Kurra 

A.J. Drexel Nanomaterials Institute and the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Drexel University, 

Phi ladelphia, PA 19104, USA 

Email:yg36@drexel.edu 

Two -dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides known as MXenes , have received considerable attention for energy 

storage applications due to their tunable electronic and physical properties .1-2 MXenes have high specific 

capacitances due to their redox -active transition metal surfaces , and binder -free MXene films have electronic 

conductivities much higher than typical supercapacitor materials (>1000 S/cm compared to <0.1 S/cm). 3-4

Furthermore, MXenes are capable of storing charge in a wide variety of aqueous electrolytes and i t has been shown 

that MXenes are capable of electrochemically intercalat ing cations of various charges (K +, Na +, Mg 2+ , Al 3+ ) into the 

interlayer spaces between the ir 2D nanosheets .5-6

There is increasing interest in researching materials with nanoconfined fluids for ele ctrochemical energy 

storage applications due to the interesting modifications confined fluids can have on ion transport, ion desolvation 

and insertion, or solvent co -intercalation into host materials. Furthermore, layered materials with these confined 

flui ds can demonstrate higher rates of charge storage and transfer due to decreases in the activation energy of 

charge -transfer at their solvated surfaces. 7 Since the surface of the MXenes has abundant surface functional groups 

(e.g., O, F, and OH), surface redox reactions with intercalated protons result in very high volumetric capacitance in 

acidic aqueous electrolytes. The high electronic conductivity and the water confined within the MXene nanosheets 

in this system also enables ion transport rates that a re far superior to any other known pseudocapacitive material. 4 In 

organic electrolytes, simply changing the solvent of the electrolyte can dramatically alter the mechanism by which 

charge storing ions are intercalated into the MXene structure, resulting in significant changes in the amount of 

charge stored and the mobility of t he intercalated ions. 8

Different MXenes have been synthesized with a large variety of surface chemistries, many of which have 

demonstra ted promising properties for energy storage applications. By further selecting the proper combination 

between ions, polarization conditions, and the type of MXene, the changeable interlayer space may allow for tunable 

ion intercalation and improved superca pacitor performance. 

References 

1. Naguib, M.; Gogotsi, Y., Synthesis of Two -Dimensional Materials by Selective Extraction. Acc . Chem. 

Res. 2015, 48 (1), 128 -135. 

2. Lukatskaya, M. R.; Mashtalir, O.; Ren, C. E.; Dall’Agnese, Y.; Rozi er, P.; Taberna, P. L.; Naguib, M.; 

Simon, P.; Barsoum, M. W.; Gogotsi, Y., Cation Intercalation and High Volumetric Capacitance of Two -

Dimensional Titanium Carbide. Science 2013, 341 (6153), 1502. 

3. Alhabeb, M.; Maleski, K.; Anasori, B.; Lelyukh, P.; Cla rk, L.; Sin, S.; Gogotsi, Y., Guidelines for 

Synthesis and Processing of Two -Dimensional Titanium Carbide (Ti 3C2Tx MXene). Chem. Mater. 2017, 29 (18), 

7633 -7644. 

4. Lukatskaya, M. R.; Kota, S.; Lin, Z.; Zhao, M. -Q.; Shpigel, N.; Levi, M. D.; Halim, J.; Tab erna, P. -L.; 

Barsoum, M. W.; Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y., Ultra -high -rate Pseudocapacitive Energy Storage in Two -Dimensional 

Transition Metal C arbides. Nat. Energy 2017, 2, 17105. 

5. Ghidiu, M.; Lukatskaya, M. R.; Zhao, M. -Q.; Gogotsi, Y.; Barsoum, M. W., Condu ctive Two -Dimensional 

Titanium Carbide ‘C lay’ w ith High Volumetric C apacitance. Nature 2014 , 516 , 78 -81 .

6. Ghidiu, M.; Halim, J.; Kota, S.; Bish, D.; Gogotsi, Y.; Barsoum, M. W., Ion -Exchange and Cation 

Solvation Reactions in Ti 3C2 MXene. Chem. Mater. 201 6, 28 (10), 3507 -3514. 

7. Augustyn, V.; Gogotsi, Y., 2D Materials with Nanoconfined Fluids for Electrochemical Energy Storage. 

Joule 2017, 1 (3), 443 -452. 

8. Wang, X.; Mathis, T. S.; Li, K.; Lin, Z.; Vlcek, L.; Torita, T.; Osti, N. C.; Hatter, C.; Urbankow ski, P.; 

Sarycheva, A.; Tyagi, M.; Mamontov, E.; Simon, P. ; Gogotsi, Y., Influences from Solvents on Charge S torage in 

Titanium C arbide MXenes. Nat. Energy 2019, 4 (3), 241 -248. Electrochemical pH sensor for continu ous monitoring in minimal 

# in vasive devi ce 

Sofia Rodrigues Teixeira 1, Paul Galvin 1 

> 1

Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland,  T12 R5CP 

sofia. teixeira@tyndall.ie 

pH sensor is used in various applications utilizing redox reactions, encompassi ng both research and 

industrial fields. pH plays a significant role in multiple biological processes, like cell proliferation, 

endocytosis , ion transport and is also a factor in cardiopulmonary and neurodegenerative diseases, 

inc luding cancer [ 1]. Minimally invasive techniq ues enable diagnostics and surgery to be performed 

th rough a small incision reduc ing the damage to healthy tissue leading to faster recovery times for the 

patient. 

Iridi um Oxide ( IrOx ) is one of the electroc hem ical materials for display devices [ 2], a popular alternative 

to conventi onal glass and other metal -oxide electrodes. Advantages of IrOx sensors include fast response 

time, reduced chemical interference, and long -te rm stability , furthermore, these electrod es exhibit 

functionality at temperatures up to 250 °C, high pressures , in hydrof luoric acid , and in non -aqueous 

solutions [ 3]. When considering practical applicat ions, the properties of IrOx are very sensitive to 

str uct ure and composition, which are depende nt on fabrication methods and conditions used [ 4]. Thus, the 

different ch aracteristics of IrOx pH electrodes are mainly accounted for by different preparation m ethods. 

A pH sensor was developed involving electrodepo sit ion of IrOx films onto platinum films. Anodically 

electrodepos ition of IrOx f ilm were deposited on the electrod e via standard electrochemical cyclic 

voltammetry using a three -electrode setup (Figure 1 A). The number of cycles that are carried out 

corresp ond s to the level of deposition of IrOx on the electrode surface . Open -circuit potential 

measurements were perform ed to evaluate the potential electrode pH response at room temperature using 

a 2 -electrode cell . Comparison of different working electrodes on th e same chip and in different chips was 

carried out (Figure 1B ). The sensors showed an excellent reproducibility with a linear super -Nernstian 

response aroun d 69 mV/ pH unit in a wide pH range (pH 4−1 0). The present pH sensor include s excellent 

adhesion of the pH sensitive layer to the substrate and excell ent reproducibility of sensor fabrication, 

which can lead to a new generation of diagnostic tools for the simultaneous detection of various 

biological analyte s.

Figure 1 : (A) Synthesis of IrOx on Pt microdiscs array (20 cycles w ere performed with a scan rate of 50 

mV/s and a quiet time of 60sec) ; (B) Calibrations curve of different pH’s buffers. 

[1 ] M. Schindler , S. Grabski, E. Hoff , S. M. Simon . Defective pH Regulation of Acidic Compartments in 

Human Breast Cancer Cells (MCF -7) Is Normalized in Adriamycin -Resistant Cells (MCF -7adr) .

Biochemistry, 35(9) (1996) 2811 –2817 .

[2] K. Yamanaka, Anodically electrodeposited iridium oxide film s ( AEIROF) from alkaline solutions for 

electrochromic display devices, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 28(198 9) 632 –637. 

[3] K. Izutsu , H. Yamamoto, Response of an iridium oxide pH -sensor in non -aqueous solutions. 

Comparison with other pH -sensors, Anal. Sci. 12 (1996) 90 5–909. 

[4] S. Yao, M. Wang, M. Madou, A pH electrode based on melt -oxidized iridium oxide, J. Electrochem. 

Soc. 148 (2001) H29 –H36. 

(A)  (B) Room Temperature Electrodeposition of Titanium sub -oxides on Mild 

# Steel Electrode towards Corrosion Protection 

Zeliha Ertekin , Erhan Karaca, Merve Uğur, Kadir Pekmez, Nuran Özçiçek Pekmez 

Hacettepe University, Faculty of Science, 06800 Beytepe, Ankara, T urkey 

zelihaertekin@hacettepe.edu.tr 

Titanium sub -oxides are mixed -valence compounds containing Ti 3+ and Ti 4+ ions, which provides several 

possible configurations in the crysta l. The oxygen vacancies of the Ti -O system have important effects on 

interfaci al electronic structures. Such compounds are also known as Ti nO2n -1 (Ti 3O5, Ti 4O7, Ti 5O9, Ti 6O11 ,

etc.) , where 2 < n < 10.  Depending on the n value, their crystal structure, electronic structure, and color 

can change . In recent years, they have attracted considerable attention due to their excellent properties 

such as high electrical conductivity, remarkabl y visible light absorptivity , and  chemical stability in 

aggressive alkali and acidic media . These properties make them suitable for a variety of applica tions such 

as cathodic protection, electrode materials, batteries, catalytic support for fuel cells , degradation of 

pollutants, and electronic and optoelectronic devices  [1 -3]. 

In this study, a rapid and simple electrochemical process without a calcinati on step to prepare titanium 

sub -oxide coating on mild steel (MS ) surface is presented for the first time. The low -temperature 

synthesis of titanium sub -oxide is carried out on the MS electrode by cyclic voltammetry in acetonitrile 

solution containing titan yl perchlorate. The coatings obtained various potential intervals and cycle 

numbers are investigated by comparing with each other using EIS. According to the obtained resistances, 

the optimum experimental parameter is a potential range of 0.0 V and -2.2 V with 20 cycles . The broad 

reduction peak at about -1.9 V in the blank solution indicates the formation of Ti nO2n -1 (Fig.1A). The 

morphology and chemical composition of the coating are studied by SEM -EDX, XRD, and XPS. XRD 

result indicates the presence of different oxygen -containing phases (Ti 3O5, Ti 4O7, and Ti 5O9) together 

with Fe 2TiO 5 intermetallic phase . From XPS, t he Ti(III) and Ti(IV) oxidation states are demo nstrated in 

the electrodeposited Ti nO2n -1 film on MS (Fig.1B). Corrosion performance of the Ti nO2n -1 coated MS 

electrode is investigated using EIS, OCP, and Tafel measurements in 0.5 M H 2SO 4. It is determined that 

the resulting coating , synthesized in a solution containing TiOClO 4.6H 2O on the MS electrode, provides 

five times more protection in 0.5 M H 2SO 4 medium . The results demonstrate that the electrodeposited 

Ti nO2n -1 film on MS is a good alternative for practical application of metal -oxide based corrosion systems. 

Fig.1. A. Cyclic voltammogram recorded in blank solution (TBAP/ACN) for (a) bare MS electrode; MS 

electrodes coated in TBAP/ACN solution in the (a) absence and (b) presence of TiO(ClO 4)2, v=100 mVs -

> 1

. c TBAP = 0.05 M B. Ti 2p XPS spectrum of Ti nO2n -1 coating. 

References 

1. B. Xu, H -Y. Sohn, Y. Mohassab, Y. Lan, Structures, preparation an d applications of titanium suboxides, RSC 

Adv. 6 (2016) 79706 –79722. 

2.  Z. Ertekin, U. Tamer, K. Pekmez, Cathodic electrochemical deposition of Magnéli phases Ti nO2n -1 thin 

films at different temperatures in acetonitrile solution. Electrochim Acta 163 (2015) 77 –81. 

3. Z. Ertekin, N. Ö. Pekmez, K. Pekmez, One -step electrochemical deposition of thin -film titanium suboxide 

in basic titanyl sulfate solution at room temperature, Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry 24 (2020) 

975 –986. Pyrene -Cyc lobutene Conjugates – Spectro -elect rochemical Study of 

# Redox Mechanism 

Lucie Koláčná a, Peter Polák b, Jiří Klíma a, Tomáš Tobrman b and Jiří Ludvík a 

> a

Department of Molecular Electrochemistry and Catalysis,  J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemis try 

of the Czech Academy of Sciences , Dolejškova 3, 182 23 Prague 8, Czech Republic,  

> b

Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Tech nology Prague, Technická 5, 

160 00 Prague 6, Czech Republic 

E-mail: lucie.kolacna@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Conjug ated aromatic systems are commonly used for organic electronics as “green smart molecules” free 

of any metal . Specific properties of these molecules are simply adjustable by chemical modification. Our 

project is focused on molecules comprising pyrene deriv atives and/or other aromatics in combination with 

cyclobutene representing the tetrasubstituted double -bond bridge . Modifications and conjugations of 

mentioned molecules result in various extent of electron delocalization. Electrochemical data of pyren e,

cyclobuten and their conjugates are essential for u nderstanding the redox mechanism of these large 

delocalize d systems. 

Redox mechanism of conjugates was studied  in non -aqueous aprotic solutions (acetonitrile and 

dimethylformamide) at mercury and glassy ca rbon working electrodes by means of polarography, 

voltammetry at rotating disc electrode ( glassy carbon ) and cyclic voltammetry at hanging mercury drop 

electrode and stationary glassy -carbon electrode. Electron paramagnetic resonance with in situ 

electroch emical generation at platinum working electrode in dimethylformamide was used for detection 

and characterization of primary and secondary radical intermediates. 

Studied systems involved three types of reduction mechanism: I. pyrene with substituents exh ibiting 

induction /mesomeric effect, II. pyrene in combination with other independent reducible centre , III. 

cyclobutene conjugates with substituents extending the delocalized system (pyrene and/ or other 

aromatics). 

The reduction process of all studied co mpounds is not "electrode assisted" (mercury, glassy carbon) .

Potentials in DMF are systematically shifted to less negative values with respect to acetonitrile by approx. 

70 mV. T he reversibility is m ore pronounced in DMF, which means that the primary radi cal anions 

exhibit higher stability. During oxidation at glassy -carbon electrode, polymerization of pyrene and/or 

other components was observed. 

Pyrene is reduced in two one -electron steps – first to a stable radical anion and subsequently to unstable 

dia nion. Substituents shift the reduction potential in agreement with induction/mesomeric effect. 

Direct interconnection of two pyrene molecules by a single bond results in twisted molecule with limited 

pyrene interaction, proved by formation of stable radic al anions. 

The cyclobutene bridge enters in conjugation with aromatic substituents (pyrene, tolyl or anisyl) 

extend ing planar delocalized system , which was confirmed by partial reversibility of its first reduction 

step to unstable radical . In the next ste p, cyclobutene is reduced by simple reduction to cyclobutane 

(proved by analysis of products of preparative electrolysis by NMR – MS ), although the ring opening and 

splitting of the CH 2–CH 2 bond by the ECE mechanism was suggested in the literature [1, 2] .

Pyrene derivatives are g ood chromophores and redox centres and studied molecules are suitable for 

construction of organic semiconductor materials. Analysis and interpretation of spectro -electrochemical 

da ta of pyrene derivatives and conjugates revealed intramolecular communication of electrons and redox 

mechanism of conjugates. This knowledge is basic for tuning the required redox properties by chemical 

modification .

The research was supported by GA CR 18 -12150 S. 

References 

[1] N.L. Bauld, J. Cessac, F.R. Farr, R. Holloway: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 98 (1976) 4561. 

[2] A. Boehm, K .Mee rholz, J. Heinze, K. Muelllen: J. Am.  Chem. Soc. 114 (1992) 688. Three -Way Interactions of Two -Dimensional Crystals 

Nakkiran Arulmozhi , Viorica Tudor, Grégory F. Schneider, Marc T. M. Koper* 

Leiden Institute of Chemistry , Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 

e-mail address : m.koper@chem.leidenuniv.nl .

Graphene and related two -dimensional (2D) crystals, a new class of advanced materials, not only 

improves the performance of the current technological devices but also create new disruptive 

techno logies 1. From the interfacial electrochemistry ’s perspective, 2D crystals possess a porous double -

sided surface and its integration into a device can lead to multiple interactions namely: i) an 

electrochemical interaction 

between the 2D crystal and the 

el ectrolyte 2. ii) The protons (in 

the case of pristine 2D crystal 3) or 

ions (in the case of defect -

engineered 2D crystal 4)

permeation through the lattice of 

2D crystals. iii) A confined 

electrochemical interaction in -

between the region of 2D crystal 

and the conducting metal 

substrate 5.The three -way 

electrochemical interaction of 2D 

crystals makes it a unique 

material and performance tuning 

of these interactions can radically 

transform electrochemistry -based 

technologies. 

Therefore, the primary goal of the talk is to present a detailed analysis of a model metal – 2D material –

solution interface, i.e. Pt (111) – graphene – electrolyte interface 6, with an objective to emphasize and 

define the fundamental aspects behind the three -way electrochemical interactions . The strategy to 

examine the three -way electrochemical interactions of Pt(111) – graphene - electrolyte interface is to 

isolate the region for individual interaction and investigate them. The first part of the talk focuses on 

understanding electrochemical interaction between the graphene and the electrolyte (reaction over 2D 

crystals) : A detailed electrochemical analysis of graphene oxidation kinetics and graphene oxide 

reduction kinetics will be presented . The second part of the talk will focus on electro chemical p ermeation 

of protons through graphene: A comprehensive analysis of temperature dependence of electrosorption of 

proton on to Pt(111) via graphene permeation in the aqueous electrolyte will be presented . Finally, the 

talk will focus on understandi ng the electrochemical reaction below graphene . A comprehensive 

electrochemical study of hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on graphene – Pt (111) electrode in the 

aqueous electrolyte will be presented . These fundamental -level analys es of the three -way elec trochemical 

interaction of 2D materials would be of crucial importance for both the scientific and commercial success 

of 2D material. 

Reference: 

1) Ferrari, Andrea C., et al. "Science and technology roadmap for graphene, related two -

dimensional crystals, an d hybrid systems." Nanoscale 7.11 (2015): 4598. 

2)  Vinogradov, Nikolay A., et al.  "Impact of atomic oxygen on the structure of graphene formed on 

Ir (111) and Pt (111)." The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 115.19 (2011): 9568 -9577 

3) Hu, S., et al. "Proton trans port through one -atom -thick crystals." Nature 516.7530 (2014): 227. 

4)  Walker, Michael I., et al.  "Extrinsic cation selectivity of 2D membranes." ACS nano 11.2 (2017): 

1340. 

5)  Mu, Rentao, et al. "Visualizing chemical reactions confined under graphene." Angewand te

Chemie International Edition 51.20 (2012): 4856 -4859. 

6) Fu, Yongchun, et al. "Single graphene layer on Pt (111) creates confined electrochemical 

environment via selective ion transport." Angewandte Chemie 129.42 (2017): 13063. Atomic Pillar Effect in Pd xNbS 2 To Boost Basal Plane Activity for 

# Stable Hydrogen Evolution 

Xin Wang, # Chong Huang, †,‡ Dong Wang, † Wei Zhao, *,† Kejun Bu, †,‡ Jijian Xu, † Xieyi Huang, †,‡ 

Qingyuan Bi, † Jian Huang, *,†,‡ and Fuqiang Huang *,†,‡,§  

> †

State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute 

of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, P.R. China  

> ‡

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China  

> §

State Key Lab oratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications, College of Chemistry and 

Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China  

> #

College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P.R. 

China 

huangfq@pku.edu.cn ; wangxin0620@zzu.edu.cn 

ABSTRACT: Exploring novel electrocatalysts with prominent performance is highly demanded for 

electrochemical hydrogen evolu tion. As one family member of layered transition -metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDs), metallic niobium disulfide (NbS 2) with intrinsic basal plane activity might be a promising 

candidate once its electrical and structural characteristics are optimized. Here, we d evelop novel 

electrocatalysts by incorporating palladium (Pd) atoms into the van der Waals gaps of NbS 2 to form new 

compounds Pd xNbS 2 (x = 0 -0.23). On the basis of single crystal structure refinement and theoretical 

calculations, the Pd atoms act as atomic pillars to expand the interlayer spacing of NbS 2 and boost the basal 

plane activity with a drop of Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption to 0.06 eV on neighboring S atoms, 

resulting in more protons to adsorb and react. In addition, pillared Pd stabili zes the crystal structure by 

connecting the NbS 2 interlayers with [PdS 6] octahedra. All these merits endow Pd 0.23 NbS 2 with superior 

electrochemical activity and durability, achieving 10 mA cm −2 at a low overpotential of 157 mV with a 

negligible change in 12 h. This unique atomic pillar effect for optimizing the electrocatalytic performance 

of Pd xNbS 2 demonstrates a functional and powerful strategy to develop efficient TMD -based 

electrocatalysts. Guidelines for the Voltammetric Study of Electrode Reactions with 

# Coupled Chemical Kinetics at an Arbitrary Electrode Geometry 

Eduardo Laborda , Manuela L �pez -Ten �s and Angela Molina 

Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Química, Regional Campus of International 

Excellence“Campus Mare Nostrum”,Universidad de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain 

elaborda@um.es 

By suitable preliminary analysis of the boundary value problem, a remarkable generalization and 

simplification o f the theoretical treatment of homogeneous chemical reactions affecting the interfacial 

charge transfer is revealed for any electrode size and shape [1,2] . Thus, the multivariable boundary value 

problem of complex reaction mechanisms [3] , at both uniformly accessible (as(hemi)spheres) and non -

uniformly accessible (as discs) electrodes, can be reduced to a single variable problem the mathematical 

form of which is equivalent to that of an irreversible E mechanism. This is obviously very advantageous 

for the m athematical resolution of the problem either by analytical or numerical methods. 

In this communication, the use of the above theoretical approach is illustrated by treating the 

problem of the SQ mechanism and the simpler derived schemes oSQ, CEC, CE and EC [4,5] . The 

solutions obtained enable the comprehensive study of their voltammetric response as a function of the 

chemical rate and equilibrium constants and of the electrode size and shape. As a result, clues and 

experimental protocols for the identific ation and characterization of the charge transfer mechanism and 

for the determination of the corresponding kinetic and thermodynamic parameters are established. Also, 

the equivalence relationship between electrodes of different shape is critically examined within this 

context, finding that the constant relationship between the steady state current−potential response at 

microdiscs and micro(hemi)spheres (ratio between the current densities at electrodes of the same radius = 

4/π) does not hold in the presence of chemical kinetic effects, even though the electron transfer is 

Nernstian. 

Acknowledgements 

Fundación Séneca - Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología de la Región de Murcia (19887/GERM/15). 

References 

[1] L�pez -Ten �s, M.; Laborda, E.; Molina, A.; Compton, R.G. Anal. Chem . 2019 , 91 , 6072 -6079 .

[2] Molina, A.; L �pez -Ten �s, M.; Laborda, E. Electrochem.Commun . 2018 , 92 , 48−55. 

[3] Molina, A.; Laborda, E. Electrochimica Acta 2018 , 286 , 374 -396. 

[4] Morales, I.; Molina, A. Electrochem. Commun. 2006 , 8, 1453 -146 0. 

[5] Molina, A.; Morales, I.; López -Tenés, M. Electrochem. Commun. 2006 , 8, 1062 -1070. Spectrally Selective PANI/ITO Nanocomposite Electrodes 

# for Dual Band Dynamic Windows 

Mirko Magni ,a Pelin Yilmaz ,b Sandra Martinez, c Rosa Maria Gonzalez Gil, c Monic a Della Pirriera, c

Michele Manca b,c 

> a

Dipartimento di Scienze e Politiche Ambientali, Unive rsità degli Studi di Milano, Via Golgi 19, Milano, 

Italy  

> b

IIT - CBN - Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia - Center for Biomolecular Nanotechnologies, via 

Barsanti 14, 73010, Arnesano (Lecce), Italy  

> c

LEITAT Technological Center, Carrer de la Innovac iò 2, 08225, Terrassa (Barcelona), Spain 

e-mail: mirko.magni@unimi.it 

Chromogenic materials are able to change their optical properties as a response to an external stimulus, 

such as light irradiation (photochromic materials), temperature variation (therm ochromic materials) or 

electric potential (electrochromic materials). 

Glazing employing electrochromic materials can change their optical characteristics of transparency and 

absorption of solar radiation according to users’ needs by simultaneously reducing visible light and NIR 

transmission through the window. However, spectral selectivity has been becoming a key requirement in 

smart dynamic windows as it permits maximizing both visual and thermal comfort while minimizing 

energy consumption for heating, coo ling, and lighting [1] .

Herein, a dual band electrochromic system is presented, which consists of an engineered nanocomposite 

electrode capable of advantageously combining the broad band plasmonic response of nanocrystalline 

indium -tin -oxide (ITO) with hig h optical contrast of polyaniline (PANI) . Their synergistical 

spectroelectrochemical features make possible the implementation of a four -state tunable electrochromic 

system (here referred to as “plasmochromic”), which permits selectively regulating optical transmittance 

in the visible and near -infrared range and exhibits excellent spectral selectivity across a potentials 

window of only 1.2 V, with a visible light vs. solar transmittance ratio tunable from 0.67 to 1.61. 

Electrochemical and spectroscopic feat ures of the two constituting components ( i.e ., ITO nanocrystals 

and PANI) will be discussed, together with the study of how their single characteristics symbiotically 

combine each other in defining the performance of the resulting hybrid plasmochromic elec trode s.

Finally, a set of dual -band EC devices offering an excellent VIS/NIR spectral selectivity within a 

relatively small electrochemical window will be presented, discussing their main key features [2] .400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600                         

> 020 40 60 80
> Transmission (%) Wavelength (nm)
> OCP -1.3V -1.7V -2.1V -2.3V -2.4V -2.5V -2.6V -2.8V -3.2V +0.3V +0.5V +0.6V +0.7V +1.4V
> a-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 012345Rp
> CPE1
> CPE2 Rs Rs
> Rp
> Credox
> Voltage Applied vs Saturated AgCl/Ag (V)
> log  (R (W cm 2) )
> a
> -5 -4 -3 -2
> log  (C (F cm -2) )110 100 1000 10000 100000
> 020 40 60 80
> PANI /ITO at -0.25V PANI at -0.25V PANI /ITO at 0.10V PANI at 0.10V PANI /ITO at 0.95V PANI at 0.95V
> j ( o )
> w(rad s -1 )
> a–

References 

[1] F. Pacheco -Torgal, S. Jalali, Con str. & Build. Mater. , 25 (2011) 582. 

[2] P. Yilmaz, M. Magni , S. Martinez, R.M. Gonzalez Gil, M. Della Pirriera, M. Manca, ACS Appl. 

Energy Mater . 3 (2020) 3779 .Oxidation ratio of conducting polymer 

# in the conducting polymer -coated electrode 

Yumi Yoshida, Emi Kusakabe , Kohji Maeda 

Faculty of Molecular Chemistry and Engineering, Kyoto Institute of Technology 

Matsugasaki, Sakyo, Kyoto 606 -8585, Japan 

yyoshida@kit.ac.jp 

A solid electrode that can operate as both a reference electrode and a counter electrode —a

reference/counter electrode —for an organic phase, Org, is necessary for the fabrication of a micro and/or 

thin layer cell with an organic membran e such as a liquid membrane -type ion -selective electrode, ISE, and 

a voltammetric cell with the interface between aqueous phase, W and Org. 

A conducting polymer -coated solid electrode has been one of candidates for use as a reference/counter 

electrode in O rg. The conducting polymer has low solubility in Org and functions as an ion -electron 

transducer. In 1987 –1988, the conducting polymer -coated electrode was applied to an all -solid ISE in which 

the inner solution was replaced by the conducting polymer, and there are many reports on the all -solid ISE 

using the conducting polymer -coated electrode even in recent literatures. Recently, amperometric ISEs and 

the coulometric thin layer cell using the conducting polymer -coated electrode have been proposed and used 

for the realization of stripping voltammetry and absolute determination of redox -inactive ions. However, 

these ISEs and electrolysis cells with the conducting polymer -coated electrode have rarely been used in 

practical applications even though various appl ications of the conducting polymer -coated electrode have 

been proposed. 

Low stability and poor reproducibility of the electrode potential are the most serious problems for the 

conducting polymer -coated electrode. Poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT, is a chemically stable 

conducting polymer that improves the potential stability of the all -solid ISE; however, slow potential drift 

and a shift of the absolute value of the electrode potential in an aqueous standard solution have been 

observed for this ISE. The factors related to the potential stability and reproducibility of the conducting 

polymer -coated electrode have been extensively discussed based on the redox capacitance of the conducting 

polymer or the irreversibility of the ion transfer between the po lymer and the selective membrane. 

To get stable and reproducible potential for longer period, we adopted the potentiostatic adjustment of 

the oxidation ratio: the formal potential for the redox reaction of the conducting polymer was evaluated 

from the pot ential dependence of the absorption spectrum of the conducting polymer and was applied to 

the conducting polymer -coated electrode for adjustment of the oxidation ratio. The potentiostatic 

adjustment for long time made more homogeneous oxidation condition i n the conducting polymer while 

chronocoulometric adjustment for short time made inhomogeneous oxidation condition. The potential 

stability and potential reproducibility of the conducting polymer -coated electrode under open circuit or 

current -flowing were ex amined in hydrophobic Orgs for longer period such as 200 h by focusing on the 

oxidation ratio of the conducting polymer. Oxidation to the conducting polymer by oxygen in air was also 

examined for 800 h. The partially oxidized PEDOT electrodes were applied to the two -electrode system 

thin layer cell for the ion transfer between aqueous sample solution and organic membrane [1] .

[1] E. Kusakabe, Y. Nakamura, K. Maeda, M. Fukuyama , Y. Yoshida, J. Electroanal. Chem ., 825 (2018) 

8-15. 0.00        

> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> 0.12
> 0.14
> 0.16
> 0.18
> 0.20
> 350 450 550 650 750 850
> Absorbance
> Wavelength /nm

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 

> X %

E / V vs. TPenA -E

## (a)  (b)            

> Fig. 1Absorption spectra of PEDOT -ITOE (a) and oxidized ratio, X%, (b). Applied potential: -0.8, -0.5, -0.3, -0.1, 0.1, 0.2,
> 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.5 V; thickness of the PEDOT : 8mC cm -2
> ; electrolysis period: 10 s.

# Voltammetry of Reversible Electrode Reactions with Complex 

# Stoichiometry at Electrodes and Microelectrodes 

Angela Molina , Eduardo Laborda, Joaquín González, Francisco Martínez -Ortiz 

Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Química, Regional Campus of International 

Excellence “Campus Mare Nostrum”, Universidad de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain 

amolina@um.es 

In this communication, a general theory is presented for a reversible electron transfer reaction 

with complex st oichiometry, specifically, 2:1, 1:2, 3:1 or 1:3. Among other experimental systems, the 

case 2:1 has been reported to describe satisfactorily the hydrogen evolution from protons at platinum in 

aqueous media and from hydride ions in molten salts [1] , the 1:2 case corresponding to the electro -

oxidation/reduction of H 2, the 3:1 stoichiometry of the electro -oxidation of halide anions [2] and the a:1 

case (a=1,2,3,4) of the electro -oxidation of mercury in complexing media [3] .

A general explicit analytical solut ion is deduced in this work to investigate the response of 

electrode reactions of nonunity stoichiometry in any voltammetry technique, from normal pulse 

voltammetry to cyclic voltammetry (CV), and at electrodes of any size and shape [4] . The cyclic 

voltamm ograms of the 2:1, 1:2, 3:1 and 1:3 stoichiometries are analyzed comprehensively under transient 

and steady state conditions, revealing the existence of an isopoint (that is, a crossing point between 

voltammograms obtained at different scan rates) at micro discs and micro(hemi)spheres (Figure 1), the 

features of which can assist the experimental determination of stoichiometric coefficients (or the formal 

potential). Also, the peak current, the peak -to -peak separation and the shape of transient CV curves, as 

well as the slope of the stationary current -potential response, depend on the reaction stoichiometry. Based 

on this, simple diagnosis criteria are proposed. 2D Graph 4  

> X Data
> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
> E - E 1/2 / V
> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
> v (mV/s) = 10 3
> 10 2
> <1

Spherical 

> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> v (mV/s) = 10 3
> 10 2
> 10

(a) Planar 

(c) Steady state Spherical         

> ss, iso (= 0.17)
> iso, sph (= 0.17) Eiso, macro (= E 1/2 - 0.037) Eiso,sph (= E 1/2 - 0.037)
> iso,macro (= 0) E - E 1/2 / V
> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
> 2D Graph 4
> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
> v (mV/s) = 10 3
> 10 2
> <1

Disc 

> -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
> (a.u.)
> -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> v (mV/s) = 10 3
> 10 2
> 10

(b) Planar 

(d) Steady state Disc        

> ss,iso-macro (= 0.218) Eiso,disc (= E 1/2 - 0.04) Eiso, macro (= E 1/2 - 0.037)
> iso,macro (= 0)
> iso, disc (= 0.224)

Figure 1. Cyclic voltam metry of the 2:1 stoichiometry with n=2 at (hemi)spherical and disc electrodes of 

radius r 0= 25 μm 4.

Acknowledgements 

Fundación Séneca - Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología Región de Murcia (19887/GERM/15). 

References 

[1] Kätelhön, E.; Batchelor -McAuley, C.; Compton, R. G., J. Phys. Chem. C 2015 , 119 , 23203. 

[2] Bennett, B.; Chang, J.; Bard, A. J., Electrochim. Acta 2016 , 219 , 1. 

[3] Jaworski, A.; Stojek, Z.; Osteryoung, J. G., J. Electroanal.  Chem . 2003 , 558 , 141. 

[4] Laborda, E.; Gonzalez, J.; Martinez -Ortiz, F.; Molina, A. J. Electroanal. Chem . 2020 .Electrochemical detection of Prussian Blue Nanoparticles in flow 

Joanna Dolinska , Marcin Holdynski, Marcin Opallo 

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences 

Kasprzaka 44/52 01 -224 Warsaw 

jdolinska@ichf.edu.pl 

The last decade has abound ed in research on the electrochemical behavio ur of suspended 

nanoparticles. Most of them focused on their electrochemistry at an ultramicroelec trodes in quiescent 

conditions. De tection of single collisions of nanoparticles with the (ultra -micro) electrode s urface was 

claimed [1,2] . This is important from the point of view of acquiring knowledge about single nanopartic les, 

but it requires sophisticated equipment and skilled personnel. For many purposes including analytical 

ones other techniques involving the larger size of electrodes can be used. This requires acceleration of 

nanoparticles , namely experiments in forced convection conditions. Recently we demonstrated 

electrochemical detection of nanoparticles e xhibiting redox reaction: Prussian Blue nanoparticles at 

rotating disc electrode [3] . Here we would like to extend this study t o flow conditions . For this purpose we 

prepared 3D printed system consisting channels, mixer , inlets, outlets, place to fix working disc electrode 

and chamber for counter and reference electrodes and (see scheme below). Such an approach allows for 

simple a nd quick design and optimization of the whole system including the position of the working 

electrode (perpen dicular or parallel to the flow) .

We will demonstrate that Prussian Blue nanoparticles can be detected employing both 

electrochemical reduction or electrochemical oxidation. The effect of the cell design, electrode material 

and flow rate will be demonstrated. These results, including the detection limit , will be compared with 

those obtained with a rotating disc electrode. [3] 

## References 

[1] X. Xiao, A.J. Bard, Observing single nanoparticle collisions at an ultramicroelectrode by 

electr ocatalytic amplification, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 (2007) 9610 –9612. 

doi:10.1021/ja072344w. 

[2] K. Tschulik, C. Batchelor -McAuley, H. -S. Toh, E.J.E. Stuart, R.G. Compton, Electrochemical 

studies of silver nanoparticles: a guide for experimentalists and a pers pective, Phys. Chem. Chem. 

Phys. 16 (2014) 616 –623. doi:10.1039/C3CP54221A. 

[3] M. Holdynski, J. Dolinska, M. Opallo, Collisions of suspended Prussian Blue nanoparticles with a 

rotating disc electrode, Electrochem. Commun. 86 (2018) 130 –134. 

doi:10.1016/j. elecom.2017.12.006. Raman spectroelectrochemi stry of conducting polyme r films on 

# reflective electrode : role of double excitation of the solution layer 

A.A. Nekrasov , O.D. Ya kobson , O.L. Gribkova 

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry , RAS 

Leninskii prospect 31, Moscow, 119071, Russia 

е-mail:  secp@elchem.ac.ru 

Raman spectroelectrochemistry is a powerful tool to monitor structural transformations during 

electrosynthesis and doping/dedoping of conducting polymers. However, the excitation laser be am passes 

several interfaces, where absorption, refraction and reflection processes may occur. These are: air/glass 

(the wall of spectroelectrochemical cell); glass/electrolyte; electrolyte/film (of conducting polymer); 

film/electrode. Noteworthy, the film of conducting polymer changes its thickness, absorption and 

refraction during the electrosynthesis and doping/dedoping. All these phenomena influence the shape of 

in situ Raman spectra and are also dependent on the incident angle of the laser beam. This i nfluence was 

demonstrated on the example of i n situ Raman monitoring of galvanostatic polymerization of aniline on 

Pt -electrode in aqueous solutions of the following polymeric sulfonic acids: flexible -chain poly(2 -

acrylamido -2-methyl -1-propanesulfonic acid ), poly(styrenesulfonic acid) and rigid -chain poly -(4,4’ -(2,2’ -

disulfoacid) -diphenylen e-iso -phthalamide) , poly -(4,4’ -(2,2’ -disulfoacid) -diphenylen e-tere -phthalamide ). 

Firstly, i t was found that 532 nm lase r radiation caused fluorescence in the solutions of phenyl -containing 

polyacids resulted in the Raman spectrometer overload. One can reduce fluorescence (Fig.a) by 

increasing the incident angle of the laser beam on the electrode up to 20  (perpendicular direction is taken 

as 0 ). Secondly , some of the poly acids w ere found to have intensive Raman bands in the range of 

characteristic Raman frequencies (1000 -1800 cm -1) of polyaniline (PANI). In this case, subtraction of the 

solution background spectrum before star ting the electropolymerization monitoring cause s appearance of 

ever -growing negative Raman signals (Fig.b) as the PANI film absorbing the laser radiation grows on the 

reflective electrode. Th e above two issues are due to the double excitation of the thin solution layer before 

the electrode by the incid ent and reflected laser beams, the degree of this doubling decreasing as (1) the 

incident angle is increased and (2) the laser -absorbing PANI film grows. The distortive influence of the 

solution Raman spectrum on the real shape of PANI spectrum may be esti mated and diminished by using 

the amplitude of ever -growing negative Raman signal in the area of water O -H vibration (near 3440 cm -1)

as a measure of the ever -decreasing reflectance of the working electrode. Using the developed approach, 

it was shown that evolutions of the relative portions of the imine nitrogen ( near 1490 cm -1) and the 

radical -cation nitrogen ( near 1340 cm -1) fragments in the Raman spectra of PANI recorded in the course 

of electropolymerization can be used as informative criteria for the e xplanation of the differences in the 

aniline polymerization rate in the presence of polyacids of different chemical structure. 2050      

> 3850
> 3440
> 2950
> 2760
> 2440
> 010000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
> 200 1000 1800 2600 3400 4200
> Raman shift / cm -1
> Intensity / counts
> 12345
> 9
> 6

a) 3450  3446    

> -4000 -3000 -2000 -1000 01000 2000
> 2800 3200 3600 4000
> Raman shift / cm -1
> Intensity / counts
> -40000 -30000 -20000 -10000 010000 20000
> Intensity / counts
> 0 - 9 min
> naked Pt-electrode in electropolymerization aqueous solution
> Pt-electrode covered with growing PANI film (solution background spectrum subtracted)
> O-H stretching in H 2O

b) 

Fig. Raman spectra : a) of Pt -electrode at different incident 

angles of the laser beam in the polymerization baths based on 

i-PASA (1 – 0 (16 mW), 2 – 10  (16 mW), 3 – 15  (16 mW), 

4 – 20  (16 mW), 5 – 20  (14 mW)); PAMPSA (6 – 20  (14 

mW )); Pt -electrode in water (9 – 20  (14 mW)) ; b) of water 

O-H stretching vibration in the i-PASA bath and its evolution 

before growing PANI film (background subtracted). 

This study was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project No. 19 -29 -08048_mk. Greywater Treatment with Microbial Fuel Cell s: Organic Matter 

# Removal and Energy Production 

Daniele Cecconet 1,2 , Silvia Bolognesi 2,3 , Luca Piacentini 2, Arianna Callegari 2, Andrea G. Capodaglio 2

> 1

: Department of Chemistry, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy 

> 2

: Department of Civil Engineering and Architecture, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy 

> 3

: LEQUiA, Institute of the Environment, Universitat de Girona, Girona 17003, Spain 

daniele.cecconet@unipv.it 

A fraction between 60 and 75% of domest ic wastewater is represented by greywater, which can be 

defined as water coming from domestic sources, including kitchen sinks, washing machines, and hand 

basins excluding toilets, bidets, and urinals. Compared to unsegregated domestic wastewater, greywater 

contains a relatively lower amount of organic matter that needs to be removed in order to comply with the 

current regulations regarding water reuse for non -potable application. 

Among different options for greywater treatment , membrane filtration and its coupling with biological 

treatment, membrane biological reactor, are particularly diffused due to the simplicity and compactness of 

the treatment. However, those technologies are highly energy consuming, and may negatively imp act on 

the energy balance of a building .

Bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) have emerged in the last two decades as a multi -faceted platform for 

a variety of purposes, including organic matter removal, nutrients recovery, hazardous sites remediation, 

groun dwater treatment. The first and most common declination of BESs is represented by microbial fuel 

cells (MFCs), able to remove organic matter and produce electrical energy. 

In this work, 3 identical H -type MFCs were built, inoculated and then operated for the assessment of the 

suitability of greywater treatment for organic matter removal and energy production. Due to the large 

variabil ity of conductivity in greywater, a single MFC was operated with low conductivity greywater ( 348 

μS/cm ), a second one with h igh conductivity greywater (1578 μS/cm ); a third one was fed with acetate 

and used as control reactor. Each batch was repeated 3 times to ensure reproducibility. Organic matter 

concentration of greywater and acetate solution was measured at 489 mgCOD/L; ea ch batch lasted 500 

hours. 

A similar organic matter removal was observed in the different MFCs, with values between 85% 

(greywater, high conductivity) and 90% (acetate fed), showing that the MFCs were able to oxidize the 

complex organic compounds present i n greywater. As shown in table 1, the performances in terms of 

electrical production of the MFC fed with high -conductivity greywater were higher than in the case of 

low conductivity influent. In addition, the maximum voltage in the case of low conductivity greywater 

was reached more than 200 hours later compared to the high conductivity greywater -fed MFC. 

Table 1. Organic matter removal and electrical production data from the third batch of the 

experimentation. NER: Normalized energy recovery; CD max : maxi mum current density; PD max : maximum 

power density; V max : maximum voltage. 

Test 

NER s

(kWh/kg CODrem ) CD max (mA/L)  PD max (mW/L)  ηCOD (%)  Vmax (mV) 

Greywater, low 

conductivity  0.15  0.84  0.29  87%  346 

Greywater, high 

conductivity  0.21  0.98  0.40  85%  409 

Control, acetate  0.34  1.14  0.54  90%  474 

Low conductivity in wastewater usually causes increase of overpotentials, due to slow proton transport in 

the active biofilm , enhanced resistance in ion transport between anode and cathode, other than higher 

resistances originating from the diffusion boundary layer and electric double layer. The combination of 

these factors may have led to the observed decrease in MFC’s energy production. 

In conclusion, MFC technology showed to be able to successfully remove organic matter from greywater, 

allowing also the production of electrical energy. This findings may open a novel pathway for an on -site 

treatment of greywater for non -potab le reuse coupled with energy recovery that may be directly used in 

the building i n which greywater is collected and treated. Bimetallic O rganic Framework Deposited on Anodized TiO 2

# Nanotube Array s with E nhanced Photoelectrochemical Activity 

# for Water Oxidation 

Sheng -Mu You 1,2 *, W.M.A. El Rouby 1, Ruey -An Doong 2,3 , Pierre Millet 1* 

1. Paris -Sud University, ICMMO -Eriée, UMR CNRS 81 82, 91405 Orsay, France. 

2. National Chiao Tung University, Institute of Environmental Engineering, 30010, Taiwan. 

3. Materials Science and Nanotechnology Department, Faculty of Postgraduate Studies for Advanced 

Science (PSAS), Beni -Suef University, 62511 Beni -Suef, Egypt. 

4. National Tsing Hua University, Dpt Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sci ., 30013, Taiwan .

* e -mail s: -sheng -mu. you@u -psud.fr , pierre.millet@u -psud.fr 

Fossil fuel reserves are dwindling and their unrestricted use has led to i ncontrovertible changes in the 

Earth’s surface temperature and climate. Solar fuel generation through water splitting is an ideal route to 

store renewable energy sources and mitigate global warming. Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have 

recently been used as solid supports in photocatalytic water splitting. Their porosity and structural 

versatility offer a tantalizing consolidation of the components needed for solar light harvesting an d water 

dissociation. In this work, we report on the fabrication of iron -nickel bimetallic organic framework 

(FNBF) discretely deposited on top of anodized TiO 2 nanotube array (TNTA) . They were synthesized by 

electrochemical deposition of Ni 2+ and Fe 3+ species onto TNTA surface s and then chemically transformed 

(using a simple hy drothermal process) into MOF by using appropriate organic ligands. The structures of 

these photanodes was optimized and characterized by SEM, TEM, and XPS analysis. The optimized 

FNBF@TNTA photoanodes were then tested for water photo -oxidation. A photocurr ent of 1.40 mA cm -2

was measured under 100 mW/cm 2 UV + Visible light intensity . The performances were found stable (a 

photocurrent of 1.30 mA cm -2 was measured after 180 min ute s of continuous operation) . Th ese 

nanocomposite photoanodes successfully combine great light harvesting properties , a good conductivity 

and stability due to the carbon -based architecture , and show good oxygen evolution reaction activity 

under solar light. FNBF@TNTA photoanodes are promising materials for the development of water 

photo -dissociation devices. H+  

> H2
> H2OO2
> Solar light
> Fe Ni
> 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate
> Anodization TiO 2nanotube array
> NFBF

# Co upling microalgae and microbial fuel cells: process optimization for 

# sim ultaneous was tewater treatment a nd energy recovery 

Silvi a Bolognesi*,**, Daniele Cecconet*, A ri anna Callegari*, A ndre a G. Capodaglio* 

* Department of Civil Engineering and Architec ture, University of Pavia, Italy 

**LEQUIA. Institute of the Environme nt.  University of Girona Campus Montilivi, carrer Maria Aurèlia 

Capmany, 69, E -17003 Girona.  Catalonia. Spain 

e-mail address : silvia.bologne si@gmail.com 

Increasing energy demands and gr eenhouse gases (GHG) emission from wastewater treatment processes 

prompted the investigation of alternatives capable to achieve effective treatmen t, energy and materials 

recovery, and reduce global environmental footprint. 

Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are a promising technology for wastewater treatment, characteri zed by 

electrical energy recovery and low emissions and sludge production. MFC s convert the chemical energy 

of organic pollutants (substrate) directly into electrical energy, thanks to electrochemic ally active bacteria 

(EAB) in the anodic chamber, potentially achieving higher conversion efficiency (44%) than with a 

conventional anae robic treatment (28%). Microalgae, on the other hand, are well known as potential 

candidates in biorefineries for biofue ls and biomaterial production, because of the many products that 

they can potentially produce with lower land occupation and no compet ition for human nutrition needs. 

Coupling MFC technology with microalgal -based process in MFC -PBR (photobioreactor) syste ms could 

reduce GHG emissions from wastewater treatment facilities, ca pturing CO 2 emitted from industrial 

facilities or directly from the atmosphere and convert it in the desired terminal electron acceptor (TEA), 

oxygen . Microalgae production could enhance recovery of wastewater -embedded resources. Two 

identical MFC -PBR systems configurations were tested and compared with a control MFC, under 

different op erating conditions (li ght/dark ratio, oxygen providing method) , using both synthetic and agro -

industrial wastewater as anolytes. COD removal efficiency (ηCOD) and energy production were 

monitored throughout the experimentation , reaching ηCOD values up to 99% and po wer density (P d) up 

to 2.8 W m -3. Energy los ses were also evaluated to monitor how the presence of the microalgae affected 

the long -term operation of the system . The system equipped with microalgal biocathode proved to be 

capable to efficiently treat real wastewater, achieving values compa rable to the control s ystem . Oxygen 

provided by the algae imp rove d the overall energy balance of this system by lowering aeration costs ,

which could be further enhanced by post -processing of the cathodic mi croalgal effluent. Oxygen Supply Management t o Intensify Domestic Wastewater 

# Treatment by a Microbial Electrochemical Snorkel (MES )

Morgane HOAREAU , Benjamin ERABLE, Alain BERGEL 

Laboratoire de Génie Chimique, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT, UPS, Toulouse, France 

morgane.hoareau@toulouse -inp.fr 

Keywords: Electroactive biofilm, microbial electrochemical system , bioremediat ion process , microbial 

fuel cell 

Oxygen supply is the most cost -

intensive part of the aerobic 

biological wastewater treatment 

plants. The Microbial 

Electrochemical S norkel (MES ) is a

low -cost and low -maintenance 

solution that should considerably 

reduce this cost . A MES is 

generally in the form of a single 

electrode placed vertically in an 

environment where the composition 

of oxidizing and reducing species is 

spatially heterogeneous .

Figure 1 : (A) Principle of the Microbial Electrochemical 

Snorkel (B) Evolution of the dissolve oxygen concentration and 

the OCP 

In the context of wastewater treatment , the lower part of the MES (Figure 1 -A) , is positioned in the 

anaerobic environment and ensures the oxidation of the COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) present in the 

effluent to be treated [1,2]. Anaerobic bacteria spontaneously form an electroactive biofilm on the surface 

of that part of the MES and oxidizes the COD by transferring electrons to t he electrode . This part of the 

MES acts as the electron acceptor (microbial anode). The upper part of the MES , located in the aerobic 

zone, ensures the evacuation of the electrons via the oxygen reduction reaction (cathode). The objective 

of the work was t o optimize the oxygen supply in the upper aeration zone .

The challenge was to solubilize the amount of oxygen required for the extraction of electron s without 

disturbing the lower anaerobic zone . We have demonstrated that the efficiency of the COD abatement by 

MES depends on the open circuit potential (OCP) of the MES . Furthermore, the OCP and the soluble 

oxygen concentration are closely related (Figure 1 -B). This correlation was used to optimize the operating 

protocol of the MES. Several types of reactors have been set up by varying the height of the aeration 

zone, the aeration mode, continuous or sequential, and its frequency. 

The liquid phase of the reactors was aerated by air bubbli ng , which provides intensive gas -liquid transfer 

to ensure 100 % of O2 solubility in the upper cathodic part of the MES . In response to aeration, the OCP 

of the MES increase d by promoting the cathodic reaction until a high potential wa s reached around 

0 V vs. SCE (Figure 1 -B) . When the OCP of the MES wa s high, oxygen availability wa s no longer rate -

limiting and aeration was consequently stopped. The OCP then drop ped after aeration had been stopped if 

the anod e part of the MES is fully active and ensure d eff icient oxidation of the COD. Oxygen availability 

becomes rate -limiting again when the OCP of the MES is less than -0.4 V vs. SCE (Figure 1 -B) . This 

value was reached in around 30 minutes in our systems. When the OCP wa s lower than -0.4 V vs. SCE, 

there wa s no further COD treatment. In control reactors, COD abatement ceases as soon as aeration wa s

stopped. The MES therefore ma de it possible to abate COD, even after aeration has been stopped ,

contrary to the control. 

The a eration frequency was then optimi zed taking into account that too high aeration frequency can lead 

to aerobic oxidation of the COD (biological respiration), which is a nuisance to the desired 

bioelectrochemical oxidation. Finally, a sequential aeration wit h 30 minutes of aeration on top of the tank 

for 1h30 without aeration seem ed to be the most appropriate. 

The work is carried out within the framework of the ANR Biotuba project (ANR -17 -CE06 -0015 -02). 

[1] B. Erable, L. Etcheverry, A. Bergel, Biofouling, 20 11, 27, 319 –326 

[2] M. Hoareau, B. Erable, A. Bergel, Electrochemistry Communications, 2019, 104, 106473 New spectroscopic tools for single -molecule junctions 

Albert C. Aragon és1, Ismael Díez -Pérez 2 and K atrin F. Domke 1

> 1

Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany.  

> 2

King’s College London. Depar tment of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural & Mathematical Sciences, UK. 

albert.cortijos@mpip -mainz.mpg.de 

Biological charge transport (CT) is the key step in many basic cellular processes , such as respiration or 

photosynthesis , and nature has developed highly specialized molecular building blocks to achieve it with 

unprecedented efficiency. Understanding 

the mechanisms behind biological CT , is 

key to elucidate the changes in its regimes 

cau sed by specific structural variations of 

the associated molecular machinery. Such 

knowledge will ultimately lead us to tailor 

its electrical properties and exploit them , in 

the near future, as high performance 

bioelectronic devices with a wide variety of 

applications in organic electronics, sensing, 

biomanufacturing etc. 

To investigate CT in single -molecule 

bioelectronic devices, we exploit Scanning 

Tunnelling Microscopy -based approaches 

in the break -junction mode (STM -BJ) [1,2] 

under electrochemical contro l (EC -STM). It 

allows the trapping of individual molecules 

in a junction to characterize their main 

electrical signatures (Fig. 1).[2, 3] We carry on our tunnelling transport studies in bio -inspired wires 

employing Azurin molecules (blue copper proteins) un der electrochemical control. Azurin molecules 

present a classical metal -mediated two -step tunnelling transport , that results i n a molecular conductance 

maximum when the electrochemical gate potential is adjusted to its characteristic redox midpoint value .[4] 

Such distinctive electronic behaviour allow s to study deviation s of the electron transport mechanism 

through the molecule , making Azurin a suitable test -bench for singe -molecule transport measurements. 

We will base this contribution by showing the work in progress on the development of a new hybrid 

platform with spectro -electrical single -molecule detection 

capabilities under ambient conditions. It aims to explore several key 

structural and physicochemical aspects , that remain unknown ,

during the single -molecule junction formation. This is possible 

thanks to the operando capabilities of the hybrid platform to work 

in the near -field Raman between the two STM electrodes (TERS) 

under electrochemical control . TERS represe nts a high ultra -

sensitive non -destructive spectroscopic method with molecular 

resolution (Fig. 2). Th is new platform opens the gates to obtain 

detailed insights into the molecule’s physical and chemical 

properties by simultaneously capturing the current during the 

spontaneous formation of a molecular junction, i.e. the evolution of 

spectro -electrochemical characteristics of the junction. In addition, 

due to the development of the new platform, novel singe -molecule 

effects under red -laser illumination (633 nm) have been revealed . Effects over the molecular conductance 

and transport mechanisms consequence to expose individual molecular junction s to a plasmonic field .

[1] B. Xu and N. J. Tao, Science , 301, 5637, 221 (2003). 

[2] A. C. Aragonès et al., Nature , 531, 7592, 88 (2016). 

[3] A. C. Aragonès et al., Nat. Comun ., 8, 15056 (2017). 

[4] Juan M. Artés et al., Nano Lett . 2012, 12, 2679 –2684 

[5] N. Martín Sabanés et al., Anal. Chem ., 88, 7108 (2016).           

> Figure 1. Schematic representation of a metalloprotein molecule
> (Azurin) contacted between the S TM electrodes and the captured
> current signal with single -molecule events which define the
> characteristic telegraphic -like stochastic switching.
> Figure 2.TERS cell and 4-electrode
> configuration for electrochemistry. [5]

# Catalysis of Redox -Neutral Reactions by Electron Exchange Between 

# Electrodes and Organic Compounds 

Robert Franc ke , Arend F. Roesel , Timo Broese, Adrian Prudlik , Michal Májek 

Instiute of Chemistry, Rostock University 

Albert -Einstein -Str. 3a, 1805 9 Rostock, Germany 

robert .francke@uni -rostock.de 

To m ost chemists the term ‘electro catalysis ’ is known as the facilitation of a heterogeneous electron 

transfer via a chemical interaction between the electrode and a substrate .[1,2 ] The opposite case, the 

utilization of a heterogeneous electron exchange to catalyze a chemical reaction (‘ele ctrochemical 

catalysis ’), is a much less known but yet a very powerful approach in electrosynthesis .[3] Here , t he 

injection (or removal ) of an electron into (or from ) a substrate tr iggers a redox -neutral reaction (e. g. a

molecular rearrangement ) that may otherwise require harsh conditions and/or the use of reagents. Such 

processes in volve the electrogeneration of an ionic or radical ioni c species, which after a coupled 

chemical step either undergoes a backward elec tron exchange with the electrode (ECE b me chanism) or 

triggers a chain process in the bulk solution. Under these circumstances, sub -stoichiometric amounts of 

charge are sufficien t to achieve a full conversion and concept iona lly, the electrons and holes can be 

understood as being catalysts. 

In t his contribution, the concept of elect rochemical catalysis will be illustrated using the Newman -Kwart 

rearrangement (NKR) of O-aryl thiocarbamates 2 to the corresponding S-aryl compound s 3 as an example 

(see scheme below ).[4] Generally , the NKR represents th e key -reaction in the three -step synthesis of 

thiophenols 4 from phenols 1 and proceeds between 200 and 300 °C .[5] Electrochemical catalysis, 

however, allo ws f or operation at room tem perature and provides a complementary reactivity with respect 

to the are ne substitution .[4] Recently, we have carried out a detailed mechanistic study using cyclic 

voltammetry, control experiments and quantum chemical calculations ,[6] the results of which will be 

presented her ein. 

References 

[1] R. Francke , B. Schille, M. Roemelt, Chem. Rev . 2018 , 118 , 4631 .

[2] R. Francke, D. Little, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014 , 43 , 2492 .

[3] R. Francke , R. D. L ittle , ChemElectroChem. 2019 , 6, 4373 .

[4] T. Broese, A. F. Roesel, A. Prudlik, R. Franc ke , Org. Lett. 2018 , 20 , 7483 .

[5] G. Lloyd -Jones, J. Moseley, J. Renny,  Synthesis 2008 , 661 .

[6] A. F. Roesel, M . Ugandi, N . T. T. Huyen, M . M�jek, T . Broese, M. Roemelt, R. Francke , J. Org. 

Chem. 2020 , just accepted . DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.0c00831 .Electrochemical Properties of Ru and Os Organometallic Complexes :

# Effect of Adsorption 

Štěpánka Nováková Lachmanová ,a František Vavrek, a Táňa Sebechlebská, a Viliam Kolivoška, a

Jakub Šebera, a Michal Valášek, b Magdaléna Hromadová a 

> a

The Czech Academy of S ciences, J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry, Dolejškova 2155/3, 

18223, Prague 8, Czech Republic  

> b

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Nanotechnology, P. O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

stepanka.lachmanova@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Organo metallic complexes based on M(terpyridine) 22+ offer wide range of use for their photophysical and 

photochemical properties .1,2 These molecules rank among the promising group of compounds 

for molecular electronics , new electrochromic devices and sensors . Th e aim of this contribution is 

a preparation and characterization of compact film s of M (terpyridine) 22+ (M = Ru, Os) organometallic 

complexes on the electrode surface. Electrochemical behaviour of adsorbed molecules will be compared 

to their electrochemical properties in solution. One 

of the possibilities of molecul ar film preparation is 

structural addition of linker terminated by functional 

groups specialized for the formation of Au -S bond 

between molecule and gold electrode .3 Tripodal 

arrangement of anchor ing groups support s formation 

of fully c ompact self -assembled monolayers ( SAM s)

of redox active center s perpendicular to the electrode 

surface .4

The electrochemical properties of organometallic 

complexes 1 and 2 (for chemical structure see 

attached figure ) were studied by cyclic voltammetry 

at various scan rate values in acetonitrile in non -

adsorbed state on gold and glassy carbon electrodes and in the form of SAM s on the polycrystalline gold 

electrode . Cyclic voltammograms of 1 in non -adsorbed state show reversible voltammetric wave 

for Ru 2+ /Ru 3+ oxidation at E0 = +0.910 V vs. Fc/Fc +. Value of E0 obtained for Os 2+ /Os 3+ oxidation of 2

was +0.562 V vs. Fc/Fc +. These values are similar to E0 values obta ined for metal ion oxidation 

of the reference Ru (terpyrid ine) 22+ and Os( terpyridine) 22+ complexes. 2,5 Diffusio n-controlled process was 

proved by a linear dependence of the oxidation peak current on the square root of the scan rate. 

Terpyridine l igands of 1 and 2 are reduced in two one -electron reversible process es and their E0 values 

are shifted positively in comparison to M (terpyridine) 22+ complexes indicat ing easier reduction of newly 

prepared molecule s 1 and 2. SAMs of 1 and 2 were prepared by standard procedure. 4 Ru 2+ /Ru 3+ oxidation 

of 1 was observed at E0 = +0.948 V vs. Fc/Fc +, that of Os 2+ /Os 3+ oxidation of 2 was measured at +0.587 V 

vs. Fc/Fc +. Adsorption of 1 and 2 was proved by linear dependence of peak current on the scan rate. 

The determined values of the surface concentration of 1 and 2 indicate that t he molecules form compact 

monolayer, where all of the Au -S bonds are involved in the SAMs formation . SAMs of 2 are more 

compact compared to SAMs of 1 due to di fferent management of Co ulombic interactions within 

the SAMs. 

Financial support by the Czech Sc ience Foundation ( 18 -04682S ) and the Czech Academy of Sciences 

(L200402002 ) is gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

1. Sauvage, J. -P.; Collin, J. -P.; Chambron, J. -C.; Guillerez, S.; Coudret, Ch. ; Balzani, V.; Barigelletti, 

F.; De Cola, L.; Flamigni, L.: Chem. Rev. 1994 , 94 , 993−1019 

2. Zhou, X.; Ren, A. -M.; Feng, J. -K.: J. Organomet. Chem . 2005 , 690 , 338−347 

3. Salvatore, P.; Hansen, A. G.; Moth -Poulsen, K.; Bjørnholm, T.; Nichols, R. J.; Ulstrup, J.: Phys. 

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011 , 13 , 14394−14403 

4. Sebechlebsk á, T.; Šebera, J.; Kolivo ška, V.; Lindner, M.; Gasior, J.; M ész áros, G.; Val áš ek, M.; 

Mayor, M.; Hromadov á, M.: Elchim. Acta 2017 , 258 , 1191 -1200 

5. Beley, M.; Collin, J. -P.; Sauvage, J. -P.; Sugihara, H.; Heisel, F.; Miehé, A.: J. Chem. Soc. Dalton 

Trans. 1991 , 3157−3159 Unveiling the electronic properties of lithium ion materials trough 

# electrolyte gate transistor set -up 

Federico Poli 1, Tian La n2, Jose Ramon Herrer a2, Clara Santat o2, Fabio Cicoir a2 an d Francesca Soav i1

> 1

Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 40132 B ologna , Italy  

> 2

École Polytechnique de Montréal , 2500 Chemin de Polytechnique, Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada 

francesca.soavi@unibo.it 

Lithium ion batteries have been and are on e of the major components in the portable electronics 

revolution , as well as in the t ransition to a more sus tainable society based on electric mobility . To 

advance in this field , the research is strongly committed in the development of new nanostructured 

electrode materials, and in the deep understand ing of the process es that are inv olv ed during 

charge /discharg e.

Electronic and ionic transport at the electrolyte /electrode interface play a critical role during battery 

operation . In sit u and in operando technique s represent po werful tools to investigate such pheno mena .

Electrochemic al Impeda nce Spectroscopy (EIS) ha s been widely e xploited to study the respon se of the 

electrode at different state of charge . This techn ique demonstrated that electrode impedance evolves 

during lithium intercalation mainly because of the formation of the sol id ele ctrolyte interphase . However, 

in the case of metal oxides EIS has also indicated t hat the inherent electronic properties of electrodes 

change s with the degree o f lithiation . Despite excellen t models have been proposed , EIS still does not 

enable a cle ar disc rimination between the effect on the impedance of the charge transfer at the interpha se 

and th e electronic conductivity of the electro des .

To address this challeng ing issu e, h ere we report f or the first time a system atic s tudy on the electronic 

pro perties of electrode materials for lithium ion batteries at different state of charge by an electrolyte 

gated transistor set -up . This novel con figuration allow s to evaluate the evolution of the electronic 

characteristics of the materials in situ, i.e. duri ng the lithium ion intercalation /de -intercalation .

Specifically , a study carried out on Lithium Ti tanate and olivine and spinel cathode s is here reported and 

discussed .

Acknowledgments 

The research has been carr ied out under the Executive Bilateral Progr am Ital y-Quebec 2017 -2019 

"Electronic properties of nanostructured materials for energetics" (M02241, QU17MO01 ). 

Re ference :

[1] Nobili, F., et al.  "Electronic and Electrochemical Properties of Li x Ni1 -y Co y O2 Cathodes Studied 

by Impedance Spectroscop y. " Ch emistry of materials 13.5 (2001): 1642 -1646. 

[2] Amin, R ., and Yet -Ming C . "Characterization of electronic and ionic transport in Li1 -xNi0. 33Mn0. 

33Co0. 33O2 (NMC333) and Li1 -xNi0. 50Mn0. 20Co0. 30O2 (NMC523) as a function of Li content." 

Journal of The Electrochemical Society 163.8 (2016): A1512 -A1517. 

[3] Valitova, I ., et al. "Photolithographically patterned TiO2 films for electrolyte -gated transistors." ACS 

applied materials & interfaces 8.23 (2016): 14855 -14862. 

[4] Valitova, I ., et al. "Tin diox ide e lectroly te -gated transistors working in depletion and enhancement 

modes." ACS applied materials & interfaces 9.42 (2017): 37013 -37021. 

[5] Subramanian , A. et al . “Ion -gated transist ors based on porous and compact TiO2 films: Effect of Li 

ions in the g ating medium ”, AIP advances (2020) accepted for publication Electrochemical -driven Carbocatalysis as Highly Efficient Advanced 

# Oxidation Processes for Simultaneous Removal of Humic Acid and 

# Cr(VI) 

Binbin Huang 1*, Han shuagn Yin 1, Qian Guo 1, Chao Lei 2, * 

> 1

College of Environmental Scie nce and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China ; 

> 2

School of Hydraulic Engineering, Changsha Universit y of Science & Technology, Changsha 410114 .

e-mail address es : binbinhuang@hnu.edu.cn (B. Huang); leichao505@163.com (C. Lei). 

Abstra ct: Electrochemical advanced oxida tion processes (AOPs) represent an efficient and promising 

strategy for dealing with the ever -growing water pollution. Meanwhile, carbocatalysis has long and 

widely been applied in the fields of synthesis and catalysis because of high activity and selectiv ity. In this 

work, we combined the advantages of these two methods and for the first time proposed a conceptual new, 

novel and promising approach of electrochemical -driven carbocatalysis as highly efficient AOPs for 

water remediation , which was simply perf ormed by adding carbon -based pa rticles into the 

electrochemical system . This method shows great potentials for the simultaneous removal of both humic 

acid (HAC) and Cr(VI) in water , in which HAC was effectively mineralized with a TOC removal 

efficiency as high as 90 % and Cr(VI) was comp letely removed with a total Cr removal beyond 90%. The 

presence of carbon particulate materials and their physicochemical properties were first indicated to play 

critical roles in the developed electrochemical AOPs. Th ese add ed carbonaceous particles such as 

activated carbon (AC) and a series of modified AC materials, on one side exerted an important 

carbocataly tic function with typical AOPs features and on another side , they behaved like numerous 

galvanic cells with quasi -hom ogeneous cataly tic properties , greatly facilitating mass and electron 

transfers in the electrochemical system and resulting in a synergistic effect for the removal of combined 

pollutants . The physicochemical properties of these carbon particulate catalysts facilitated the 

simultaneous occurrence of adsorption and carbocatalysis, where a synergistic effect between adsorption 

and catalytic oxidation was confirmed in this electrochemical -driven carbocatalysis system . Moreover, 

the catalytic performances and me chanisms of this system were found to be dependent on the carbon 

structures (e.g., surface area, functional groups and hybridization structure, etc.). Very i mportantly, the 

energy -effective feature and the carbon materials stability show ed a promising pros pect of this approach 

with energy consumption much lower than the ever -reported electrochemical AOPs . This work details the 

first insight into electrochemical -driven carbocatalysis and provides a new, green and promising approach 

for effective water remedi ation , as well as gives new evidence for the synergistic effect between 

adsorption and catalytic oxidation. 

Schematic mechanisms of carbonaceous particles -promoted electrochemical AOPs for simultaneous 

removal of HA C and Cr (VI). 

References 

1. H. Yin, Q. Guo, C. Lei, W. Chen, B. Huang* . Electrochemical -driven carbocatalysis as highly efficient 

advanced oxidation processes for simultaneous removal of humic acid and Cr(VI). Chem. Eng. J. 396 

(2020) 125156. Carbon Paste Electrode s as Unique Membrane -Based Electrodes with 

# Unique Performance s

Ye Tian 1,2 , Kaixuan Li 1,3 , Jianguo Wang 2, *, Jianping Li 3, *, Guobao Xu 1, 4*

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Liaoning University, Shenyang 110036, China 

> 3

College of Chemistry and Bioengineering, Guilin University of Technology, Guilin 541004, China 

> 4

University of Science and T echnology of China, Hefei 230000, Anhui, China 

E-mail address : guobaoxu@ciac.ac.cn 

Carbon paste electrodes are composed of at least ca rbon materials and pasting liquids. Frequently some 

additives are added to make modified carbon paste electrodes . Commonl y, carbon paste electrodes are 

well known as bulk electrodes. However, electrochemical reactions occur in the surface of carbon paste 

electrodes . Therefore, carbon paste electrodes can be regarded as unique renewable membrane -based 

electrodes. The presence of both solid materials (carbon materials etc) and liquid materials ( pasting 

liquids ) in carbon paste electrodes endow s them many unique fe atures in comparison with pure solid 

electrodes. 

We present here the application of carbon paste electrodes to enhan ce the stability of electrochemical 

generated intermediates and the electrochemical oxidation activity o f azide as well as to expand 

electrochemical window and improve reproducibility for stripping analysis by pasting liquid s (1 -3) .

## Fig. 1 . Cyclic voltam mogram of Ru(bpy) 32+ at the tricresyl phosphate -based CPE at 

## different scan rate on in 0.1 M pH 7.5 phosphate buffer solution. 

Acknowledgements . Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( Nos. 

21675148 and 21505128), Innovati on Team Fund of Liaoning Provincial Education Department ( No. 

2009T40), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi Province of China (project no. 

2015GXNSFFA139005), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (no. 

2016YFA0201300) 

Reference s

(1) Ye Tian, Shuang Han, Lianz he Hu, Yali Yuan, Jianguo Wang, and Guobao Xu. Cathodic 

elect rochemiluminescence and reversible electrochemistry of [Ru(bpy) 3]2+/1+ in aqueous solutions on 

tricresyl phosphate -based carbon paste electrode with extremely high hyd rogen evolution potential. 

Anal. Bioanal. Chem. , 2013, 405(11), 3427 -3430. 

(2) Kaixuan Li, Moyan Han, Fengxia Wu, Anaclet Nsa bimana, Wei Zhang, Jianping Li , Guobao Xu. 

Sensitive electrochemical detection of sodium azide based on the electrocatalytic activity o f pasting 

liquid of carbon paste electrode. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 4953 –4957. 

(3) Ye Tian , Lianzhe Hu, Shuang Han, Yali Yuan, Jianguo Wang, and Guobao Xu . Electrode s with 

Extremely High Hydrogen Overvoltages as Substrate Electrodes for Stripping Anal ysis Based on 

Bismuth -coated Electrode s. Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 738, 41 -44. Optimized bioreactor for coupling efficiently H 2 oxidation to NADH 

# regeneration 

Wassim El Housseini a,b,c , François Lapicque b, Elisabeth Lojou c, Neus Vilà a, Alain Walcarius a,

Mathieu Etienne a 

> a

Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et l’Environnement (LCPME), 

CNRS -Univ. Lorraine, 54600 Villers -lès -Nancy, France 

> b

Laboratoire Réactions et Génie des Procédés (LRGP), CNRS -Univ. Lorraine, 54000 Nancy, France  

> c

Bioénergétique et Ingénierie des Protéines, CNRS -Univ. Aix Marseille, 13000 Marseille, France 

wassim.el -housseini@univ -lorraine.fr 

There is a growing interest for the regeneration of the cofactor NAD(P)H due to its large -scale biosynthetic 

applications and its high price. Different methods including: chemical, electrochemical, photochemical, 

microbial, and enzymatic reactions have been developed for this aim. Among all the cited cofactor’s 

regeneration methods, the electrochemical regeneration is a conti nuous electron -transfer process, where the 

regeneration of NAD(P)H is loaded only with an electrode. In this work, we focus on coupling efficiently 

hydrogen oxidation to NAD + reduction. To reach this objective, we combined the electrochemical 

regeneration of NADH mediated by a dissolved rhodium complex on the carbon felt electrode of the 

cathodic compartment 1, the application of continuous flow reaction, and the hydrogen oxidation using a 

GDE at the anodic compartment in a single system. The Nafion membrane between the anodic and the 

cathodic compartments allows transfer of H + from the anodic to the cathodic compartment. To optimize the 

proposed process, various factors have been varied e.g. rhodium complex concentration, NAD +

concentration, pH, the activation procedure for the carbon -based electrode, as well as the cell operating 

conditions such as the hydrogen and the solution flow rates. 

Figure 1. Functional scheme of the flow bioreactor 

The efficient regeneration of NADH featured with a complete conversion and with a high faradaic yield 

can be reached by fixing different parameters for the used reactor: hydrogen and solution flow rates (20 

mL/min), Ratio [NAD +] over [Cp*Rh(bpy)Cl] + at 40, pH near 7 to avoid NADH and NAD + degradation), 

and with a c arbon felt electrode activated in solution instead of a carbon felt thermally activated. 1

Based on this optimized process, our actual work focuses on the covalent immobilization of the rhodium 

complex, that is economically desired on the laboratory and ind ustrial scales, on the surface of a carbon felt 

electrode was achieved by following a two steps protocol described by us recently using a bucky paper 

electrode. 2,3 In addition, the rhodium complex covalent immobilization allows us to involve two reactions 

in the cathodic compartment: the regeneration of NADH simultaneously followed by an enzymatic reaction 

such as the bioconversi on of D -sorbitol into D -fructose while immobilizing D -sorbitol dehydrogenase on 

another carbon felt. In addition, the bioconversion of D -sorbitol proves that the regenerated NADH is active 

and allows us to apply the regenerated cofactor as an electron carr ier in enzymatic systems catalyzing 

stereo - and regioselective reactions having a great biotechnological potential.                 

> (1) El Housseini, W. ; Lapicque, F. ; Lojou, E. Vilà, N., Walcarius, A., Etienne ,M. Optimized bioreactor for coupling efficiently
> H2oxidation to NADH regeneration ,to be submitted.
> (2) Zhang, L.; Etienne, M.; Vilà, N.; Le, T. X. H.; Kohring, G. -W.; Walcarius, A. Electrocatalytic Biosynthesis Using a Bucky
> Paper Functionalized by [Cp*Rh(Bpy)Cl] + and a Renewable Enzymatic Layer. ChemCatCh em 2018 ,10 (18), 4067 –4073.
> (3) Huong Le, T. X.; Etienne, M.; Lapicque, F.; Hehn, A.; Vilà, N.; Walcarius, A. Local Removal of Oxygen for NAD(P)+
> Detection in Aerated Solutions. Electrochim. Acta 2020 , 136546.

# Electrochemical void pinning and liqui d metal effect on 

# electromigration resistance in 2D aluminium and copper alloys 

Andrei Ionut Mardare , Sae edeh Ravandi, Jan Philipp Kollender, Cezarina Cela Mardare, 

Achim Walter Hassel 

Johannes Kepler University Linz 

Altenberger Straße 69 

4040 Linz 

andrei .mardare @jku.a t

Bidimensional (2D ) conducting materials in form of thin and ultra -thin films are extensively u sed in our 

da ily life. The proper functioning of e very s olid -state or electr ochemical device relies on ele ctrical current 

flowing through the working electrode . I n extre me situations the current density passing through a 2D 

wire may lead to an irrever sible morphological change resultin g in an open circuit condition and total 

device failure . This occurs due to the effect of high electron flux es on atoms residing in the conducting 

material that are forced to migrate along the wire in the curren t flow direction. Such electromigrat ion 

phenomenon is present with different intensities in any electrical device and is enhanced in 2D electrodes 

due to the small cross -sections through which e ven low voltages may induce subs tantial current densities .

The nowadays recognized model describing electromigration is based on the concept of voids and 

hillocks formation. During hi gh electron fluxes atoms will migrate pilling up material close to anode 

whi le at the cathodic side voids with increasing size will form. Thus, one way of retarding or even 

blocking electromigration may be thought in decreasing the surface void mobil ity. 

The current work addresses this issue. 

Various thin film combinatori al libraries 

based on Al and Cu were tested for this 

purpose. Two different approaches were 

involved . First ly , anodic passivation of Al 

and Cu alloys was applied in an attempt to 

remove th e free metallic surface availab le to 

voids and thus pin them down making the 

material migration more difficult .

Additionally, amorphization of Al and Cu 

alloys was tested by alloying them with 

larger atoms such as Sm. The main 

advantage of an amorphous 2D conducting 

wire would be found in a complete lac k of 

surface grain structuring impeding the void 

migration . Secondly, Al and Cu 2D test 

wires were alloyed with Ga in a combi natorial fashion and high throughput experimentation was 

performed for assessing th e influence of the liquid metal atoms on the electromigration process. The 

dynamic s of such electron flux induced atomic movement was modeled and the grain boundaries pinning 

by Ga was demonstrated. This is briefly illustrated in the figure for one Al -Ga alloy de posited on SiO 2

substrate (a) or polymer substra te ( b) for flexible electronics applications. The direction of the current 

flow and hence anodic and cathodic regions of the 2D test wire are visible in the figure together with the 

centra l irreversibl y damage d zone . In concl usion, several routes for improving electromigration resistance 

of Al and Cu 2D alloys were tested. Even though an elect rochemical surface treatment did not prove a 

clear void pinning effect, still i t remains a n avoidable approach f or improved devices . Additionally, the 

use of small Ga amounts alloyed with Al or Cu resulted in a clear enhancement of resistance against 

electromigration even in flexib le electrodes de posited of polymeric substrates. 

References 

S. Ravandi, T . Zenger, M . Eibelhuber, A .W. Hassel, A.I. Mardare , Phys. Status Solidi A 2019 , 216, 

1800869 

S. Ravandi, C.C. Mardare, T. Zenger, M . Eibelhuber, A .W. Hassel, A.I. Mardare , Thin Solid Films 

2020 , 702 , 137949 

S. Ravandi, C.C. Mardare , A .W. Hassel, A.I. Mardare , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces , submitted Microcrystalline Natural Graphite –Polystyrene Composite Film – Ten 

# Years of Its Application in the Development of Electro chemical 

# (Bio)Sensors 

Vlastimil Vyskočil , Pavel Dvořák 

Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Analytical Chemistry, UNE SCO Laboratory of 

Environmental Electrochemistry, Hlavova 2030/8, 12843 Prague 2, Czech Republic 

e-mail: vlastimil.vyskocil@natur.cuni.cz 

A microcrystalline natural graphite –polystyrene composite film electrode (CFE , see the Figure ) [1] 

represents a very promising alternative to electrode surfaces modified by carbon nanoparticles with profitable 

electrocatalytic properties (e.g., nanotubes or graphene) as well as to commercially available disposable 

screen -printed carbon working electrodes . Its simple, fas t, and inexpensive preparation ( surface of a classical 

solid working electrode in a glass or plastic electrode body is covered with a carbon ink suspension – a

mixture of 0.09 g of micronized natural graphite with a particle size of 3.5 –5.5 μm and 0.01 g o f polystyrene 

in 0.5 mL of 1,2 -dichloroethane ),  simple mechanical renewal of the electrode surface (by wiping off the 

old film with a filter paper and forming a new one), good reproducibility of measurements, elimination of 

problems connected with the "ele ctrode history", and simple chemical modification are among the main 

advantages [2]. Recently, it has also been shown that the CFE is a suitable transducer for the preparation 

of electrochemical DNA biosensors [3]. 

In this contribution, a complex elect rochemical and microscopic characterization of the composite film 

will be presented, and possibilities, advantages, and limitations of this beneficial electrode material will 

be demonstrated on a number of electroanalytical methods utilizing the CFE -based (bio)sensors for the 

determination of various biologically active organic compounds (drugs [2], agrochemicals [4], environmental 

pollutants [5,6 ]) and for the detection of DNA damage induced by mutual interaction s between DNA and 

various xenobiotic agents (chemical carcinogens [3] , hydroxyl radicals [7] ).

This research was carried out within the framework of the Specific University Research (SVV 260560) . Its 

financial support provided by the Czech Science Foundation (Project GACR 20 -01589S ) is gratefully 

acknowledged. 

References 

1. B. Yosypchuk, J. Barek, M. Fojta, Electroanalysis 18 (2006) 1126 –1130 .

2. A.R. Khaskheli, J. Fischer, J. Barek, V. Vysko čil, Sirajuddin, M.I. Bhanger, Electrochim. Acta 101 

(2013) 238 –242 .

3. V. Vysko čil, J. Barek, Procedia Chem. 6 (2012) 52 –59 .

4. H. Šmejkalová, V. Vyskočil, Chem. Listy 108 (201 4) 264 –270 .

5. D. Deýlová, V. Vyskočil, J. Barek, J. Electroanal. Chem. 717 –718 (2014) 237 –242. 

6. T. Rumlova, I. Jiranek, V. Vyskocil, J. Barek, Monatsh. Chem. 147 (2016) 153 –158. 

7. Z. Jure čková, Diploma Thesis, Charles University, Prague (201 5). Impact of Cr on physical and electrochemical properties of Li 2Mn 1-xCr xSiO 4/C 

# cathode material for lithium ion batteries 

Ambesh Dixit 1,* , Kuldeep Kaswan 1, Aleksander V. Ivanischev 2

> 1

Department of Physics & Center for Solar Energy, Indian Institute of T echnology Jodhpur , 342037 , India 

> 2

Institute of Chemistry, Saratove State University, named after N.G. Chernyshevsky, 83 Astrakhanskaya str., Saratov 

410012, Russian Federation 

*ambesh@iitj.ac.in 

Abstract: Lithium ion battery (LIB) attracted massive attention because of its high energy density, light weight, and 

good capacity retention like characteristics . Li 2MSiO 4 (M = Fe, Mn , V, Cr, Co, Ni, etc. ) attracted attention recently 

due to their high theoretical energy density ~ 333m Ahg -1. However, these materials suffer with strong 

electrochemical capacity fading because of intrinsic J ahn -Teller distortion [1] in the active cathode material together 

with insulating characteristics . We synthesiz ed phase pure Li 2MnSiO 4 material and doped chromium at Mn site to 

circumvent some of the issues with present cathode material . The Cr 3+ doped Li 2Mn 1-xCr xSiO 4/C (x = 0, .01, .03, 

.06) nanocomposite s are synthesized using s ol -gel method. A coating of graphitic c arbon on nanostructured cathode 

material i.e. Li 2Mn 1-xCr xSiO 4/C is achieved by using carbon precursor during synthesis , Fig 1 . The carbon coating is 

used to increase the electric conductivity and reduce the particle size by restricting the growt h after carbon covering. 

The detailed structural and microstructural characterizations are carried out using X-ray diffraction and scanning 

electron microscopic measurements. Thermogravimetric (TGA) measurements are carried out to understand the 

amount of carbon loading and thermal degradation of cathode materials. The cyclic voltammetry and AC i mpeda nce 

measurements are carried out to understand the electrochemical properties and ionic conductivity of synthesized 

materials . XRD measurements, Fig 1, showed o rthorhombic crystal structure with Pmn2 1 phase space group. The 

crystalline size for pure Li 2MnSiO 4/C samples is the largest and decreases with increasing Cr doping at Mn site s for 

x=0.01 and 0.06 concentration. The c arbon coating is substantiating by the observed C=O vibration modes in FTIR ,

which disappeared in the sample after TGA measurements (up to 900 ºC ). The Cr 3+ doping in Li 2Mn 1-xCr xSiO 4/C is 

substantiated by the observed shifting in XRD, and FTIR peaks . The o xidized carbon reduces with increasing Cr 3+ 

doping, as observed in FTIR [2] . The work will discuss the impact of Cr 3+ in terms of structural stability, and 

electrochemical properties such as ionic conductivity and impedance characteristics. 

Figure 1. Schematic representation of carbon coating on cathode nanoparticles with characteristic XRD for 

Li 2MnSiO 4/C sample. 

References: 

1. Babbar, Prince, et al. "Charge/discharge characteristics of Jahn –Teller distorted nanostructured 

orthorhombic and monoclinic Li 2 MnSiO 4 cathode materials." RSC advances 7.37 (2017): 22990 -22997. 

2. Wang, Chao, et al. "Enhanced electrochemical properties of F -doped Li2MnSiO4/C for lithium ion 

batteries." Journal of Power Sources 378 (2018): 345 -352. Nanomaterial Modified Electrodes for Electrochemical Hydrogen 

# Detection in Ionic Liquids 

Debbie S. Silvester ,1 Muhammad Rizwan Azhar, 2 Ghulam Hussain, 1 Moses O. Tade ,2 Shaobin Wang ,2

Mengchen Ge ,3 Chuan Zhao 3 

> 1

School of Molecular and Life Sciences , Curti n University, GPOBox U 1985, Perth, WA 6846, Australia  

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University , Perth, Australia  

> 3

School of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 

d.silvester -dean@curtin.edu.au 

Hydrogen is a promising “clean ” fuel that produces only water when consumed in a fuel cell . However, it 

is explosive in nature (in air at concentrations of 4 –75 % by volume ), which makes it a dangerous gas to 

store and transport. The detection of leaks of hydrogen is of utmost im portance to ensure safety in future 

applica tions . Among other techniques that can be used for hydrogen detection , amperometric sensors are 

one type of technology that can be used for this purpose .1 Room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) solvents 

are gaining interest as replacement solvents in amperometric gas sensor s as a result of the ir low -volatility ,

combined with other useful properties such a s high chemical and thermal stability, wide electro chemical 

windows and good solvation properties . However, a chal len ge w ith RTIL solvents is the higher viscosity 

compared to conventional solvents can slow down diffusion and response times .

In the first part of my talk, I will discuss our work on a new design of modified electrode that can detect 

hydrogen very q uickl y upon introduction of the gas . The sensor consists of an array of gold microchannel 

electrodes, electrodeposited with platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) to enable hydrogen electroactivity. Very 

thin layers (~9 m) of room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) res ult ed in an extremely fast response time 

of only 2s, signi fi cantly faster than the conventional electrodes studied .

In the second part of my talk, I will describe the modification of electrode surfaces with a metal -organic 

framework (MOF) as a low -cost a lternative electrode material for hydrogen detection. A common MOF, 

HKUST -1, with copper nodes and 1,3,5 -benzenetricarboxylic acid struts between them, was 

electrodeposited from aqueous solvents onto a glassy carbon (GC) ele ctrode (see Figure 1) . The MOF -

modif ied GC electrode exhibited significantly enhanced activity t owards the detection of hydrogen gas in 

the RTIL [C 2mim][NTf 2]. The response of HKUST−1/GC electrode in the presence of hydrogen was four 

times higher than a pure Pt electrode under similar conditions (Figure 1 . Hydrogen appeared to become 

trapped in the pores of the MOF structures. This study highlights the success ful application of cost -

effective pristine MOF thin -films in combination with RTILs for low -cost gas leak -detection applications. 

Figure 1. (left) Scanning electron microscopy image of the electrodeposited MOF, HKUST -1, on a glassy 

carbon electrode , (r ight) Cyclic voltammetry for hydrogen oxidation in an ionic liquid on the HKUST -1

modified GC electrode (r ed) compared to a conventional noble metal (Pt) electrode. 

References: 

[1] G. Korotcenkov, S.D. Han , J.R. Stetter “Review of Electrochemical Hydrogen Sensors ” Chem. Rev. 

2009, 109, 1402 –1433 .

[2] G. Hussain, M . Ge , C. Zhao, D.S. Silvester “Fast responding hydrogen gas sensors usin g platinum 

nanoparticle modified microchannels and ionic liquids ” Anal . Chim . Acta 2019 , 1072, 35 –45 .

[3] M. R. Azhar, G . Hus sain, M .O. Tade, D .S. Silvester , S. Wang “Electrodeposited Metal Organic 

Framework toward Excellent Hydrogen Sensing in an Ionic Liquid ” ACS Appl. N ano Mater. 2020 , 3 , 5 ,

4376 –4385 .Organic electrodes For Energy Storage and Conversion 

Yonggang Wang 

Department of Chemistry and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative 

Materials, Institute of New Energy, iChEM (Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy 

Materials), Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 

e-mail : ygwang@fudan.edu.cn 

Organic electrode materials are attracting extensive attention, because they offer new possibilities for 

high energy/power density, cost -effective, environmentally friendly, and functional rechargeable 

batteries. [1] Charge storage of organic compounds involves an n -type doping/de -doping mechanism (e.g., 

the reversible enolization C=O ⇌ C-O-M, where M is a small electrolyte cation such as Li +, Na +, or K +)

and/or a p -type dopin g/de -doping mechanism (e.g., the redox reactions accompanied by the reversible 

adsorption/desorption of large electrolyte anions). 

In this talk, we will introduce our recent work about charge storage characteristics of organic electrode 

materials, includin g the electrode kinetics, electrochemical stability, chemical stability , and de -solvent at 

interface. According to these characteristics, we design the organic based aqueous Li (or Na) ion battery 

with a super -long life of 50 ,000 cycles, [2 -3] organic base d Mg (or Zn) ion aqueous battery for grid energy 

storage, [4 -7] organic based battery operated at -70 ͦ C, [8-10 ] and the new application of organic electrode as 

proton buffer electrode for decoupled water electrolysis .[11,12 ] Finally, the challenge and opp ortunity of 

organic electrode materials will be briefly discussed. 

References: 

[1] Y. L. Liang, Z. L. Tao, J. Chen , Adv. Energy Mater. 2012 , 2, 742 -769. 

[2] X. L. Dong, L. Chen, J.Y. Liu, S. Haller, Y.G. Wang, Y.Y. Xia. Sci. Adv. 2016 , 2, e1501038. 

[3] X. L. Dong, H. C. Yu, Y. Y. Ma, J. W. Lucas Bao, D. G. Truhlar, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Chem. Eur. 

J. 2017 , 23 , 2560 -2565 .

[4] L. Chen, J. L. Bao, X. Dong, D. G. Truhlar, Y. Wang, C. Wang, and Y. Xia . ACS Energy Lett. 2017 , 2, 

1115 -1121. 

[5] Z. W. Guo, Y. Y. Ma , X. L. Dong , J. H. Huang, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 ,

57, 11737 -11741. 

[6] J. H. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Y. Hou, X. L. Dong , Y. Liu, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Nat. Commun. 2018 , 9, 

2906. 

[7] Y.R. Wang, C.X. Wang, Z.G. Ni, Y.M. Gu, B.L. W ang, Z.W. Guo, Z. Wang, D. Bin, J. Ma, Y.G. 

Wang. Adv. Mater. 2020 , 32, 2000338. 

[8] X. L. Dong , Z. W. Guo , Z. Y. Guo , Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Joule 2018 , 2, 902 -913. 

[9] Y. Liu, B. C. Yang, X. L. Dong , Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017 , 56, 16606 -

16610. 

[10] N. Wang, X. L. Dong, B. L. Wang, Z. W. Guo, Z. Wang. R. H. Wang, X. Qiu , Y. G. Wang, Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. doi.org/ 10.1002/anie.202005603 . 2020 .

[11] Y. Y. Ma, Z. W. Guo , X. L. Dong , Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019 , 58, 4622 -

4626. 

[12] Y. Y. Ma, X. L. Dong , Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia . Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 57, 2904 -2908. Model -assis ted Analysis of Kinetics and Transport in Porous 

# Electrodes by Species Frequency Response Analysis 

Fabian Kubannek , Ulrike Krewer 

Institute of Energy and Process Systems Engineerin g, TU Braunschweig 

Franz -Liszt -Str. 35, 381 68 Braunschweig , Ger many 

f.kubannek@tu -braunschwei g.de 

Institute for Applied Material s, Karlsruhe Institute of Te chnolo gy 

Aden au erring 20b , 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 

ulrike .krewer@kit.edu 

Numerous interacting processes affect electr ochemical reactions at technical e lectrodes . Mass transfer ,

reactions and double layer charging are strongly coupled , which makes the quantitative description of 

porous electrodes a challenging task. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the transport and reaction 

phen omena is indispensable for designing better electrodes and processes .

Dynamic techniques such as e lectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) are often used to disentangle 

the individual processes and gain a b etter understanding . However , not a ll proc esses can be identified by 

EIS. In such cases, a dditional information may be obtained by recording fur ther quantities besides current 

and potential .

In this w ork we present a new method to observe t he dynamics of the transport of volatile s pecies in

porous electrodes during electrochemical reactions in addition to current and potential. W e call this 

technique species frequency response analysis (sFRA). Model -based a nalysis is used to extract transport 

and kinetic parameters from the experime ntal results. 

We demonstrate the capabilities of the new method by investigating the electrochemical methanol 

oxidation reaction on a porous Pt/Ru electrode. Diff erential electrochemi cal mass spectrometry is used to 

measure the dynamic s of current, poten tial and t he fl ux of the gaseous reaction product CO 2. A one -

dimensional mathematical model of the processes in the el ectrodes is developed and employed to analyse 

the transfer function that relates current density with CO 2 fl ux .

We sho w how reaction and t ransport phenomena can be separated in the sFRA Nyquist plot by the model -

based analysis . Effective electrode t ransport parameters and kinetic parameters are determined and we 

demonstrate that particula rly transport p arameters can be estimated with a bette r sensitivit y by sFRA than 

by EIS .

Fig. 1 Left : MS Signal over normalized time dur ing sFRA measurem ent . Right: Ny quist plot of the sFRA 

spectrum [1].

[1] F. Kubannek, U. Krewer, submitted to Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 2020 Electrochemical reactivity of S-Phenacyl -O-Ethyl -Xanthates in 

# hydroalcoholic (MeOH /H2O 4:1 ) and anhydrous acetonitrile media 

Bernardo A. Frontana -Uribe ,*a,b Ernesto Emmanuel López -López ,a Sergio J. López -Jiménez, a Joaquín 

Barroso -Flores ,a,b Esdrey Rodrí gue z-Cárdenas ,c Melina Tapia -Tapia ,a,b and Gustavo López -Téllez b

> a

Centro Conjunto de Investigación en Química Sustentable UAEM -UNAM, Carretera Toluca -Ixtlahuaca Km 

14.5, Toluca, 50200, Estado de México, M éxico 

> b

Instituto de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México , Circuito Exterior, Ciudad Universitaria, 

Coyoacán , 04510 CDMX , México .

> c

Univ er sidad Politécnica de Otzolotepec, Barrio Dos Caminos, 52080, Villa Cuauhtémoc, Otzolotepec, 

Estado de México. 

> 

Similar contribution was done by these two aut hors *Email: bafrontu@unam.mx 

The electrochemical behavior of a series of S-phenacyl -O-ethyl -xanthates (O-ethyl -dithiocarbonate 

acetophenone derivatives) in hydroalcoholic (MeOH/H 2O 4:1) and anhydrous media ( ACN anh /TBAPF 6) using 

carbon electrodes was st udied . Cyclic voltammetry showed in hydroalcoholic media only two cathodic 

waves, whereas in ACN anh one anodic and two cathodic waves were present. The first cathodic wave 

corresponded to the reduction of the phenylketone group , whereas the first anodic wa s attributed to the 

xanthate unit . Macroelectrolysis on graphite and vitreous carbon at anodic and cathodic potentials , let us to 

explore the synthetic potential of this electrochemical reactions . With some compounds in hydroalcoholic 

media and using carbo n electrodes , polymeric material was deposited on the electrode impeding the reaction; 

this deposit was characterized by AFM and SEM -EDS . The electroreduction on Ti electrode overcome this 

problem and gave the corresponding acetophenones (>95%) . On the oth er hand, in ACN ahn , small qua ntities 

of the dimeric 1,4 -dicarbonyl compound s X-PhCOCH 2CH 2COPh -X (7 -15%) , as well as the corresponding 

acetophenones (ca . 50%) were isolated. Oxidation macroelectrolysis showed a very complicated 

transformation without synthe tic value. The reaction mechanism for the reduction and the homolytic 

dissociation into the phenacyl radical was confirmed by DFT calculations. 

References :

Ernesto Emmanuel López -López ,a Sergio J. López -Jiménez , et -al. J. Org . Chem ., 2020  Submitted .

Batanero, B.; Picazo, O.; Barba, F. , J. Org. Chem. 2001 , 66, 320 -322. 

Picazo, O.; Batanero, B.; Barba, F. J. Chem. Research (S) , 2000 , 332 -333. Liquid/liquid interfaces: a new platform to prepare and process thin 

# films of complexes and multi -component electroactive materials 

Aldo J.G. Zarbin , Lais C. Lopes, Jessica E. Fonsaca, Ariane Schmidt, Eduardo G.C. Neiva, Maria 

Karolina R amos , Caroline M. Ferreira, Samantha Husmann 

Materials Chemistry Group (GQM), Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Paraná (UFPR) 

Centro Politécnico, CP 19031, CEP 815310980, Curitiba -PR -Brazil 

aldozarbin@ufpr.br 

This work aims to present a novel, simple and effic ient strategy to both synthesize and process complexes 

and multi -component electroactive materials as thin films, developed by our research group, based on the 

interface between two immiscible liquids [1 -10]. This one -pot and single -step methodology takes 

advantage of the high interfacial energy at a liquid/liquid (L/L) interface to induces a spontaneous self -

assembly of different solids , as a thin film (few nanometers in thickness) that can be easily deposited over 

different kind of substrates, plastics in cluded. The technique allows the deposition of high homogeneous 

thin films of e lectroactive single - or multi -component materials (as different nanocomposites) that cannot 

be deposited using conventional routes. Here, we will present the fundaments of the l iquid/liquid 

interfacial route (LLIR) to thin films, and demonstrate several examples of preparation and application in 

different fields. Films of carbon nanotubes - or graphene -based nanocomposites with conducting polymers 

[1 -5] , oxide/hydroxide nanopartic les [6 -8] or Prussian blue analogues [9 -12] , as well as nanocomposites 

of 2D materials -based nanocomposites (as MoS 2 [13] or black phosphorous [14] ) will be demonstrated, 

and their application as high -performance active components in transparent and flexib le electrodes [4] ,

transparent Na - [12,13] and K -ion [3,9] or alkaline [7,8] batteries , supercapacitors [2] , electrochromic 

materials [1,5,9] , photovoltaic devices [5,11] , electrodes for HER, electrochemical sensors [1,7] , among 

others, will be discussed. 

Authors acknowledge financial support from CNPq, CAPES, INCT Nanocarbon. 

References: 

1. Inagaki, C.S.; Oliveira, M.M. ; Bergamini, M.F.; Marcolino -Junior, L.H.; Zarbin, A. J.G., J. 

Electroanal.  Chem. , 840, 208 -217, 2019. 

2. Souza, V.H.R .; Oliveira, M .M.; Zarbin, A .J.G. , J. Pow er Sourc . 348, 87 -93, 2017. 

3. Fonsaca, J.E.S. ; Domingues, Sergio H. ; Orth, E.S. ; Zarbin, A .J G. Sci . Rep ., 7, 0165, 2017. 

4. Souza, V.H.R., Husmann, S. ; Neiva, E.G.C ; L isboa, F.S. ; L opes, L.C. ; Salvatierra, R.V.; Zarbin, 

A.J.G. , El ectrochim . Acta, 197, 200 -209, 2016. 

5. Salvatierra, R.V. ; ava, C.E. ; Roman, L.S.; Oliveira, M .M.; Zarbin, A .J.G. , Chem . Comm ., 52, 1629 -

1632, 2016. 

6. Ramos, M.K. ; Zarbin, A .J.G. , Appl. Surf. Sci. 515, 146000, 2020. 

7. Neiva, E.G.C .; Oliveira, M . M.; Berg amini, M .F.; Marcolino -Jr., L.H. ; Zarbin, A .J. G., Scientific 

Reports, v. 6, p. 33806, 2016. 

8. Neiva, E.G.C .; Zarbin, A.J.G. Appl.  Surf. Sci. To be published ( 2020) 

9. Lopes, L.C. ; Husmann, S.; Zarbin, A .J.G., Electrochim. Acta 345, 136199, 2020. 

10. Husma nn, S. ; Zarbin, A .J.G. ; D ryfe , R .A.W. , Electrochim.  Acta , 349, 136243, 2020. 

11 . Husmann, S. ; Lima, L. ; Roman, L. S. ; Zarbin, A .J.G., Chemsuschem, 11, 1238 -1245, 2018. 

12. Husmann, S. ; Zarbin, A .J.G. Electrochim. Acta , 283, 1339 -1350, 2018. 

13. Fonsaca, J. E.S ; Domingues, S .H. ; Orth, E.S. ; Zarbin, A .J. G. , Chem. Comm. 56, 802 -805, 2020. 

14. Schmidt, A. ; Zarbin, A .J.G ., J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 554, 80 -90, 2019. Redox -enabling the electrical double -layer: 

# redox -electrolytes vs. redox -materials 

Volker Presser 

IN M – Leibniz Institute for New Materials & Saarland University, 

Campus D2 2, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany 

volker. pre sser @leibniz -inm.de 

Ion electrosorption , in combination with highly porous carbon electrodes , enables high power energy 

storage and re covery. As our understanding of the delicate nature of the electrical double -layer has 

improved, and with the use of advanced electrolytes with incre ased voltage s tability, electrical double -

layer capacitors ha ve seen an increase in performance metrics. However, the charge storage ca pac ity is 

fun damentally limited whe n excluding charge -transfer processes. 

A straightforward approach is the compounding of carbon wit h a redox -active material (mechanical 

mixing). Electrode s based on comp osite materials are a n easy way to transition from superc apacitor to 

battery seamlessl y and allows cost -effect ive technology hybridization. The optimization must carefully 

consider materi al properties and perfor mance metrics . For example, lithium manganese oxide bene fits 

from a comp osite with activated carbon while lithium titanate al ready provides fast charge/discharge 

metrics to such an extent that no real benefit is gained from composit e electrode s. 1, 2 

Another approach is the implementation of redox -active materi als at the fluid/solid interface – basically, 

via nano -decoration of carbon surfaces with, for e xample, metal oxide materials. We discus s the benefits 

(and limitations) of doing so with advanced technology ( esp. atomic layer depos ition) . In particular, the 

choice of carbon and its pore architecture is a crucial aspect of material hybridization. 3-7

Final ly, instea d of using a solid/sol id material combination, redox -activity can also elegantly be unlocked 

by combining highly porous carbon with redox -active electrolyt es. The latter may contain a fluid /solid 

transition (electrodeposition ), or the redox -ions may remain dissol ved in the electrolyte during the entire 

charge/discharge process. Again, the carbon pore architecture is an important aspect to consider in 

addition to mitigating ion shuttling (which may cause rapid self -discharge). 8-10 Yet, the synergy of fast 

charge transfer and enhanced charge storage capacity accessible with redox -electrolytes make them a 

desirabl e domain for beyond -EDL -systems. 

Reference: 

1. H. Shim, Ö. Budak, V. Haug , M. Widmaier and V. Presser, Electrochimica Acta , 2020, 337 ,

135 760. 

2. M. Widmaier, N. Jäckel, M. Zeiger, M. Abuzarli, C. Engel, L. Bommer and V. Presser, 

Electrochimica Acta , 2017, 247 , 1006 -1018. 

3. S. Fleischmann, N. Jäckel, M. Zeiger, B. Krüner, I. G robelsek, P. Formanek, S. Choudhury, D. 

Weingarth and V. Presser, Chemistry of Materials , 2016, 28 , 2802 -2813. 

4. S. Fleischmann, D. Leistenschneider, V. Lemkova, B. Krüner, M. Zeiger, L. Borchardt and V. 

Presser, Chemistry of Materials , 2017, 29 , 8653 -866 2. 

5. S. Fleischmann, A. Tolosa and V. Presser, Chemistry - A Eur opean Journal , 2018, 24 , 12143 -

12153. 

6. S. Fleischmann, A. Tolosa, M. Zeiger, B. Krüner, N. J. Peter, I. Grobelsek, A. Quade, A. Kruth 

and V. Presser, Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 2017, 5, 2792 -2801. 

7. M. Zeiger, T. Ariyanto, B. Krüner, N. J. Peter, S. Fleischmann, B. J. M. Etzold and V. Presser, 

Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 2016, 4, 18899 -18909. 

8. J. Lee, B. Krüner, A. Tolosa, S. Sathyamoorthi, D. Kim, S. Choudhury, K. -H. Seo and V. 

Presser, Energ Environ Sci , 2016, 9, 3392 -3398. 

9. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, S. Carpier, J. Choi, R. L. Zornitta, C. Kim, M. Aslan , and V. Presser, 

Chemsuschem , 2018, 11 , 3460 -3472. 

10. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, S. Fleischmann, X. Su, T. A. Hatton and V. Presser, Pr ogress in Materials 

Science , 2019, 101 , 46 -89. Strategies for enhancing Corrosion Protection by Organic Coatings 

Michael Rohwerder 

Max -Planck -Institut für Eisenforschung 

Max -Planck -Str.1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany 

rohwerder@mpie.de 

Organic coatings are an important pillar of corrosion protection. Usua lly they are mainly viewed as 

passive barriers that prevent the access of corrosive species to the metal. However, they often have also 

an active function, as they often contain active pigments that can release corrosion inhibitors. For high 

passive delami nation resistance , usually the metal has to be pretreated prior to application of the organic 

coating, e.g. by phosp hating, in order to prevent cathodic delamination, which is the fastest delamination 

mode . The main function of such conversion coatings is to impede electron transfer to oxygen that has to 

diffused through the coating the interface between coating and metal. Novel approaches how inhibit 

cathodic delamination without use of any conversion layers will be discussed. Concerning active 

protection by organic coatings the focus of current research is on so called self -healing coatings, often 

also referred to as smart or intelligent self -healing coatings. For realizing such intelligent coatings 

showing high level self -healing performance the design st rategies differ from those that have to be 

followed for achieving optimum passive performance. The basic principles of passive and active 

performance will be highlighted in detail and implications for developing novel strategies will be 

discussed and lates t research examples will be presented. Electrolyte Influence on the Electrochemical Oxidation of Terbium and its 

# Stabilization in Aqueous M edia 

Meryem Ozge Arman a,b* , Bart Geboes a, Karen Van Hecke a, Koen Binnemans b, Thomas Cardinaels a,b  

> a

SCK CEN, Belgian Nuclear Research Centre, Institute for Nuclear Materials Science, Boeretang 200, B -2400 Mol, 

Belgium  

> b

KU Leuven, Department of Chemistry, Celestijnenlaan 200F, P.O. 2404, B -3001 Heverlee, Belgium 

*E -mail: meryem.arman@sckcen.be 

Lanthanides are used in various applications such as luminescent materials, magne ts, catalys ts, MRI reagents and 

(radio -)pharmaceuticals. Characteristic of their chemistry is the dominance of the trivalent oxidation state. As the 4 f

subshell is filled with electrons that are shielded by 5s and 5p electrons, 4f electrons are not participating in ligand 

inte ractions and chemical bond formation, resulting in similar chemical properties across the lanthanide series . The 

combination with their variable nuclear properties inspired their use in the field of nuclear medicine .

Apart from the generally dominant trivalent oxidation state, several lanthanides can occur in other oxidation states as 

well. For example, Sm, Eu and Yb have a relatively stable divalent state. Among these lanthanides, Eu(II) shows higher 

stability compared to Sm(II) and Yb(II) in aqueous media. There are several studies on the reduction of Eu by using 

either chemical, electro chemical or phot ochemical techniques for subsequent use in lanthanide separation. Whereas 

the most common electrolyte used in the reduction of Eu is chloride, recently reduction and stabilization of Eu(III) was 

achieved in concentrated nitrate media as well [1] . On the ot her hand the tetravalent stat e is well established for Ce ( E0

= +1.72 V vs. SHE ), both i n the solid state and in solution . Besides Ce, Tb (E0 = +3.1 V vs. SHE ) can also be oxidized 

to its tetravalent state, for example in mixed valence states in its oxide form. However , there is limited information on 

the oxidation of Tb (III) besides that it can be stabilized in conce ntrated carbonate solutions [2] .

In this study, the oxidation of terbium is investigated via electrochemi cal methods. Tb(III) is oxidized in carbon ate 

media via bulk electrolysis and the Tb(IV) product is identified via UV -Vis spectroscopy . A detailed parameter analysis 

is done to gain further insight in th e reaction rate, stability and pH sensitivity of Tb(I II ) oxidation . Additionally, Tb(III) 

is oxidized in different electrolytes such a s periodate and nitrate . Among all electrolytes the oxidation and stabilization 

is found to be the mos t efficient in conce ntrated carbonate solution s at relatively high pH . In addition , the kinetics of 

the Eu(III)/Eu(II) redox couple are studied using a rotating disc electrode . The gain ed in sight in Eu(III) reduction in 

nitrate and chloride media , could also improve our understand ing o f Tb(III) oxidation . Once full control is achieved 

over the Tb(III) oxidation process, it could be applied in the separation of Tb from other lanthanides .

[1] M. Van De Voorde, B. Geboes, T. Vander Hoogerstraete, K. Van Hecke, T. Cardinaels, and K. Binnemans, 

“Stability of europium(II ) in aqueous nitrate solutions,” Dalt. Trans. , vol. 48, no. 39, pp. 14758 –14768, 

2019. 

[2] D. E. Hobart, K. Samhoun, J. P. Young, V. E. Norvell, G. Mamantov, and J. R. Peterson, “Stabilization of 

Praseodymium(IV) and Terbium(IV) in Aqueous Carbonate Solution,” Inorg. Nucl. Chem. Lett. , vol. 16, pp. 

321 –328, 1980. Revising the Proton -Coupled Electron Transfer of Immobilized Hemin 

Inmaculada Márquez , José Luis Olloqui -Sariego, Miguel Molero, Rafael Andreu, 

Emilio Rold án and Juan José Calvente 

Physical Chemistry D epartment, University of Seville 

C/ Profesor García González, 1. C.P. 41012, Sevilla, Spain 

imarquez1@us.es 

The combined study of the redox and acid/base properties of iron porphyrins is important to 

understand the effect of both the oxidation state of the metal center and the ionizatio n state of the 

acid /base groups on the coordinative chemistry of heme .1 In general, t he interfacial electron transfer of 

metalloporphyrins is coupled to protonation / deprotonation processes involving the ir ionizable groups, 2

aimed at stabilizing one of the redox states invo lved in the process. Quantification of these 

proton -coupled electron transfer processes in hemin is useful to identify the molecular factors that control 

the redox potential of hemoproteins, and to rationalize the conformational changes induced by the 

exch ange of ionizable ligands. 3

Motivated by the discrepancy of the titration curves reported in literature for hemin immobilized onto 

graphite electrode s, we have revisited the effect of the solution pH on its voltammetric features. It has 

been found that it s proton -coupled electron transfer is accompanied by binding events with the commonly 

used phosphate and acetate buffers that provoke significant deviations from the 1e -/1H + transfer 

expectations in the acid region . It is shown that t hese bindings involve the oxidized aquo -hemin complex 

and the ionized forms of the buffer, so that they are restricted to the pH interval where these particular 

forms coexist. A theoretical expression has been derived for the pH dependence of the redox potential 

taking into acc ount the binding and acid/base speciation of the relevant species. Theoretical titration 

curves are characterized by an intermediate plateau, whose onset and extent vary with the buffer 

concentration in a similar way to that found experimentally. Fit of th e theoretical expression to the 

experimental voltammetric titration curves allowed us to quantify the pK a value of the iron -bound water 

molecule (3.85) as well as the hemin -acetate and hemin -dihydrogen phosphate binding equilibrium 

constants ( 1.1·10 4 and 6.4·10 3, respectively), that reveals a greater affinity of hemin for the acetate anion 

than for dihydrogen phosphate. The negligible binding of hemin to the monohydrogen phosphate dianion 

is ascribed to both i) the electrostatic repulsion with the negative ly charged propionate residues of hemin 

and ii) the low population of the aquo -hemin complex , since most of the water ligand has been replaced 

by hydroxide in the pH region of coexistence with monohydrogen phosphate. 

Overall, this work provides a more co mplete speciation of immobilized hemin than previously 

considered, showing the substitutional lability of the aqua ligand in the oxidized state of the iron center 

and the reluctance of its hydroxyl counterpart to participate in an anion exchange with the b uffer 

components .

References 

(1) Warren, J. J.; Mayer, J. M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011 , 133, 8544 –8551. 

(2) De Groot, M. T.; Koper, M. T. M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2008 , 10, 1023 – 1031. 

(3)  Alvarez -Paggi, D.; Hannibal, L.; Castro, M. A.; Oviedo -Rouco, S.; Demicheli, V.; Tórtora, V.; 

Tomasina, F.; Radi, R.; Murgida, D. H. Chem.  Rev . 2017 , 117, 13382 –13460. 

Acknowledgements 

Authors acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Science and Innovation (CTQ2014 -52641 -P

and RED2018 -102412 -T),  I.M. acknowledges a FPI grant from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and 

Competitiveness (BES -2015 -071247) .Smart Electrochromic /Thermotropic Windows of Energy -Efficient 

# Buildings based on Different Electrolytes 

Verónica de Zea Bermudez 

Department of Chemistry and CQ -VR , University of Trás -os -Montes e Alto Douro, 5000 -801 Vila Real, 

Portugal 

vbermude@utad.pt 

Progress, economic growth, and well -being depend critically on energy. To meet environmental 

challenges and to address the energy demand of future generations, a global energy technological 

transition based on low -carbon alternatives and renewable sources is urgent. The ultimate target is to 

guarantee affordable, reliable, safe and universal access to energy. At least part of the energy solution lies 

in the building sector which accounts for about 40% of the primary energy use and related greenhouse gas 

emi ssions. Modern buildings use energy to provide occupants with thermal (heating, cooling and 

ventilation) and visual (lighting) comfort, and to power major appliances. Windows, a component of the 

buildings envelope, offer key opportunities in terms of energ y saving, as they are responsible for ca. 10% 

of the total energy consumed in the building. The development of dynamic windows enabling the control 

in real time of sunlight transmittance (visible radiation) and solar heat gain (near -infrared (NIR) radiatio n) 

to internal or external conditions, or to the occupant’s choice, and adapted to all types of climat es, is 

extremely attractive. In particular, electrochromic windows have huge potential to reduce energy use ,

increase indoors thermal/visual comfort, and improve outdoors view [1] .

Device systems with an archetypal five layer configuration comprising cathodically coloring tungsten 

oxide (WO 3), anodically coloring nickel oxide (NiO), two visible - and NIR -transparent conductive oxide 

layers (amorphous indium zinc oxide (a -IZO) [2 -4] and indium molybdenum oxide (IMO) [5 ]) , and an 

electrolyte layer were assembled . Three classes of electrolytes differing in the nature of the host matrix, 

dopant species, and synthesis procedure, were investigated: (1) Hybrid polym er/siloxane electrolytes 

prepared by the sol -gel process and doped with a protonic ionic liquid [2] , a mixture of lithium and 

erbium salts [5 ], or a mixture of a lithium salt and an erbium complex [ 5]; (2) P olymer electrolytes 

composed of seaweeds -derived k-carrageenan polysaccharide and an erbium salt [3]; (3) N on -Newtonian 

nanofluid electrolytes based on glucose -derived carbon dots functionalized with a thermotropic ionic 

liquid [4 ,6 ]. The three electrolyte design strategies adopted resulted in sustainabl e electrochromic [2,3,5], 

thermotropic [4 ,6 ] or integrated thermotropic/electrochromic [4] devices with outstanding performance. 

Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by FEDER, through COMPETE and Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia 

(FCT) (FCOMP -01 -0124 -FEDER -037271, Pest -OE/QUI/UI0616/2014, project LUMECD (POCI -01 -

0145 -FEDER -016884 and PTDC/CTM -NAN/0956/2014), and project UniRCell (SAICTPAC/0032/2015 

and POCI -01 -0145 -FEDER -016422)). 

References 

[1] C. G. Granqvist, M. A. Arvizu, İ. Bayrak Pehlivan, H. Y. Qu, R. T. We n, G. A. Niklasson, 

Electrochimica Acta, 259 (2018) 1170 -1182 

[2] M. A. Cardoso, R. F. P. Pereira, S. Pereira, H. Gonçalves, M. M. Silva, L. D. Carlos, S. C. Nunes, E. 

Fortunato, R. A . S. Ferreira, R . Rego, V. de Zea Bermudez, Advanced Sustainab le Systems, 2018, 

1800115 

[3] S. C. Nunes, S. Saraiva, R. F. P. Pereira Pereira, S. Pereira, Sonia; M. M. Silva, L. D. Carlos, E. 

Fortunato, R. A. Sá Ferreira, R. Rego, V. de Zea Bermudez , ACS A pplied Energy Materials, 2(3) (2019) 

1951 -1960 

[4] H. M. R. Gonçalves, R. F. P. Pereira, S. Pereira, A. J. M. Valente, E. Fortunato, A. J. Duarte, V. de 

Zea Bermudez, Advanced Sustainab le Systems, 7 (2019) 1900047 

[5 ] M. Fernandes, V. Freitas, S. Pereira, R. Leones, M. M. Silva, L. D. Carlos, E. Fortunato, R. A. S. 

Ferreira, R. Rego, V. de Zea Bermude z, Energies, 11(12) (2018) 3513 

[6] H. M. R. Gonçalves, R. F. P. Pereira, E. Lepleux, L. Pacheco, A. J. M. Valente, A . J. Duarte, V. de 

Zea Bermudez, Small, (2020) 1907661 ; https:/ /doi.org/10.1002/smll.201907661 Powering Catalysis and Growth in Microorganisms Using 

# Electr ochemistry and Synthetic Biology 

Caroline M. Ajo -Franklin , Sara Tejedor -Sanz, Moshe Baruch, Lin Su 

Department of BioScicences, Rice University 

6100 Main St., Mailstop 140, Houston, TX, USA 77005 

cajo -franklin@rice.edu 

Microorganisms precisely control biological processes , including biosynthesis and cell growth, 

by regulating the redox state of different biomolecules . These processes can be modulated by 

electrochemically coupling intracellular bio molecules to an external electrode, but current approaches 

afford only limited control and specificity. Here we describe using electrical current to reduc e specific 

biomolecules, allowing control of biosynthesis and cell growth in two industrially relevant 

microorganisms, Escherichia coli and Lactobacillus plantarum .

To enable electrochemical control of E. coli , we used synthetic biology to introduce a

heterologous electron transfer pathway. E. coli expressing mtrCAB from Shewanella oneidensis MR -1

consume d electrons directly from a cathode when fumarate or nitrate, both intracellular electron 

acceptors, were present. The fumarate -triggered current consumption occurred only when fumarate 

reductase was present, indicating all the electrons passed through thi s enzyme. Moreover, MtrCAB -

expressing E. coli used current to stoichiometrically produce ammonia. Thus, our work introduces a 

modular genetic tool to reduce a specific intracellular redox molecule with an electrode, opening the 

possibility of electronicall y controlling biological processes such as biosynthesis and growth in any 

microorganism. 

Complementing this approach, we discovered that L. plantarum , a lactic acid bacteria used 

industrially to produce fermented foods, can uptake electrons . This electron uptake occurs under 

anaerobic conditions when a terminal electron acceptor and its corresponding oxidioreductase are present .

Unlike other anaerobic respiratory modes in L. plantarum , this current consumption does not require 

addition of co -factors such a s heme or riboflavin. Electron uptake promotes cell growth and acidification 

of the media, both processes essential for food fermentation . We find that the L. plantarum metabolism is 

shifted towards ATP producing pathways in the presence of both a cathode and a suitable electron 

acceptor . This surprising discovery opens the possibility of using electrical current to drive industrial 

production of fermented foods using lactic acid bacteria. A Voltammetric Study of Nitrogenase Catalysis 

# Using Electron Transfer Mediators 

Artavazd Badalyan , Zhi -Yong Yang , Lance C. Seefeldt 

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Utah State University 

0300 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322, USA 

a.badalyan@ usu.edu 

The selective reduction of N 2 to NH 3 is a major challenge for industrial, biological , and synthetic 

chemistry .1 In nature, the enzyme nitrogenase catalyzes the nitrogen reduction under mild conditions. 2

The molybdenum -dependent nitrogenase consists of tw o component proteins (Figure 1a): the 

molybdenum -iron protei n (MoFeP) and the iron protein (FeP). MoFeP houses two unique cofactors, the 

electron carrier [8Fe -7S] (P -cluster) and the ca talytic [7Fe -9S -1Mo -C-homocitrate] (FeMo -co). FeP 

contains a single [4F e-4S] cluster and two MgATP binding sites. During the catalytic cycle, the FeP is 

red uced either by flavodoxin or ferredoxin ( in vivo ), or sodium dithionite or reduced methyl viologen ( in 

vitro ), and binds two MgATP molecules. Then FeP transiently associat es with the MoFeP, transfers an 

electron followed by hydrolysis of two MgATP molecules and dissociation from MoFeP. The released 

oxidized FeP is reduced, the two MgADP are replaced by two MgATP, making FeP ready for another 

round of MoFeP reduction. In the presence of N 2, t his cycle (called the FeP cycle) is repeated eight times 

to achieve the reduction of the N 2 to two ammonia molecules (eq 1). In the absence of N 2, nitrogenase 

catalyzes the reduction of proton s to H 2 (eq 2). 

N2 + 16 MgATP + 8 H + + 8 e - → 2 NH 3 + H 2 + 16 MgADP + 16 P i (1) 

4 MgATP + 2 H + + 2 e - → H 2 + 4 MgADP + 4 P i (2) 

In this study, a mediated cyclic voltammetry approach was developed that provides a quantitative analysis 

of electron flow through nitrogenase. 3 Conditi ons were optimiz ed to reveal the catalytic reaction rate -

limiting step. Analysis of the current response by an electrochemical approach yielded a catalytic rate 

constant ( kcat ) of 14 s -1, consistent with earlier studies. The current approach was used to re solve a long -

sta nding conundrum in nitrogenase research, the apparent inhibition of electron flow through nitrogenase 

with increasing partial pressures of N 2. It was demonstrated using this voltammetric approach in the 

absence of the reductant dithionite that total electr on flow through nitrogenase remains constant up to an

N2 partial pressure of 1 atm. 

[1] Chen, J. G. et al. Beyond fossil fuel –driven nitrogen transformations.  Science 2018 , 360 , eaar6611 .

[2] Seefe ldt, L. C. et al. Energy Transduction in Nitrogenase. Acc . Chem. Res. 2018 , 51 , 2179 –2186. 

[3] Badalyan, A., Yang, Z. -Y. , Seefeld t, L. C. ACS Catal. 2019 , 9, 1366 -137 2. Scalable biofilm electrodes 

Haluk Beyenal , Abdelrhman Mohamed 

The Gene and Linda Voiland School of Chemical Engineering and Bioengineering, Washington State 

University, Pullman, Washington, United States 

beyenal@wsu.e du 

Bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) suffer from scale -up limitations. This is one of the major bottle necks 

preventing the utilization of technology in practical applications. For example, Figure 1 sh ows how 

maximum current dens ity changes with anode su rface area in microbial fuel cells . It is clear that the 

current density is negatively correlated with electrode surface area . There have been many a ttempt s to 

show scalability and improve current densities in BESs . However, most of systems reporting high current 

density when impractically small electrodes are used or in short term operations. It is possible to observe 

a higher power generating (or consuming) BES s in short term due to the capacitance of the electrodes .

However, this is not practical. Previo usly our group published several research papers on scalability of 

BESs. Our recen t works mainly focused on polarized biofilm electrodes and their scalability. We 

hypothesized that scalability of biofilm electrodes is controlled by mass transport. In this presentation, we 

summarize our recent work on the scalability of biofilm electr od es and the effect of substrate 

concentration on the current density of anodic and cathodic biofilm electrodes. We concluded that biofilm 

electrodes can be linearly scaled unde r controlled conditions, and we suggest a framework for scaling up 

BES for practi cal applications. A/cm 2         

> 02000 4000 6000
> jmax /(mA/m 2)
> 02000 4000 6000 8000 10000
> A/cm 2
> 050 100 150 200 250 300
> jmax /(mA/m 2)
> 02000 4000 6000 8000 10000

Figure 1. Maximum current density versus anode surface area. The inset shows the data for smaller anode 

surface areas. The data d emonstrates that the bio electrochemical systems scale at significantly low current 

densities. Design ing interphase s for lithium, zinc and aluminum anode s

Qing Zhao *, Jingxu Zheng, Lynden L. Archer 

Robert Frederick Smith School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 

qz2 89@cornell.edu 

The ever -growing demand s of portable electronic devices accelerate the development of energy 

storage/conversion devices with high energy density. 1 Rechargeable metal batteries, applying high 

capacity and rea ctive metal s (Li, Na, Zn, Al et al .) as anodes have been recently paid i ncreasing attentions 

due to their high specific capacit ies (e.g. ~38 50 mAh/g for Li) that are ten times higher than traditional 

graphite anode. 2 However, comparing with the graphite anode, the solid electrolyte interphases (SEI) 

formed on metal anode s are not stable, resulting in low Coulombic efficiencies of metal plating/stripping ,

and irregular shape s of metal deposition .3,4 In specific situation , th e growth of metal can even lead to a 

dendrite like structure , which shows potential risk to penetrate the separator and cause short circuit of 

batteries. 

Various approaches have been developed to build stable interphases on metal surface, such as 

modification of electrolytes, preparation of 3D host for metal deposition, design of artificial SEI. 2 Here 

some emerging feasible strategies will be discussed to build stable interphases on metal surface, not only 

for lithium metal but also for other low cost metals such as Zn and Al. 5-7 In particular, for Zn and Al, the 

growth of metal can be orderly arranged by an interphase that shares similar crystal structures with 

deposited metal, named as epitaxial growth. Meanwhile, the demand of solid electrolyte interphase is 

different for various metals. For example, the Al metal naturally possesses a dense and high band -gap 

oxide layer, leading to sluggish kinetic of Al stripping. The design of ionic liquid based interphase on Al 

surface can replace the original oxide layer and facilitate the kinetics of Al anode. 

References: 

1 Armand, M. & Tarascon, J. M. Building b etter batteries. Nature 451 , 652 -657 (2008). 

2 Cheng, X. B., Zhang, R., Zhao, C. Z. & Zhang, Q. Toward safe lithium metal anode in 

rechargeable batteries: A review. Chem . Rev . 117 , 10403 -10473 (2017). 

3 Xu, K. Electrolytes and interphases in Li -Ion batteri es and beyond. Chem . Rev . 114 , 11503 -

11618 (2014). 

4 Tikekar, M. D., Choudhury, S., Tu, Z. & Archer, L. A. Design principles for electrolytes and 

interfaces for stable lithium -metal batteries. Nature Energy 1, 16114 (2016). 

5 Zhao, Q., Tu, Z., Wei, S., Zha ng, K., Choudhury, S., Liu, X. & Archer, L. A. Building 

Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Interphases for Fast Interfacial Transport in Rechargeable Metal 

Batteries. Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 57 , 992 -996 (2018). 

6 Zheng, J., Zhao, Q., Tang, T., Yin, J., Quilty, C. D., Renderos, G. D., Liu, X., Deng, Y., Wang, 

L., Bock, D. C., Jaye, C., Zhang, D., Takeuchi, E. S., Takeuchi, K. J., Marschilok, A. C. & 

Archer, L. A. Reversible epitaxial electrodeposition of metals in battery anodes. Science 366 ,

645 -648 (2019). 

7 Zhao, Q., Zachman, M. J., Al Sadat, W. I., Zheng, J., Kourkoutis, L. F. & Archer, L. Solid 

electrolyte interphases for high -energy aqueous aluminum electrochemical cells. Sci . Adv . 4,

eaau8131 (2018). Capacitive Performance of Polyaniline Modified Conductive Bacterial 

# Cellulose as Anode in Supercapacitive Microbial Fuel Cell 

Mehrdad Mashkour 1,2 , Federico Poli 1, Mostafa Rahimnejad 2, Mahdi Mashkour 3, Carlo Santoro 4,

Francesca Soavi 1

> 1

Department of Chemis try “Giacomo Ciamician”, Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna, 

40126, Bologna, Italy 

> 2

Biofuel and Renewable Energy Research Center, Babol Noshirvani University of Technology, Babol, 

Iran 

> 3

Laboratory of Sustainable Nanomaterials, Faculty of Wood an d Paper Engineering, Gorgan University 

of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran  

> 4

School of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Science, The University of Manchester, Sackville Street, 

The Mill, M13AL, United Kingdom 

m.mashkour1990@gmail.com 

Microbial fuel cell (MFC) is a developing technology for producing bioelectricity from organic 

compounds of waste materials that has cough the eye of scientists in recent years. In MFC, 

microorganism s as active biocatalysts decompose organic matters to electrons and protons [1]. Electrons 

by the anode as electron acceptor and by external circuit are transferred to cathode electrode to take part 

in oxygen reduction reaction. In spite of low cost feed in MFC, this technology is not still economic. 

Electrode materials are the high cost compartments of MFC. To decrease the cost of this technology, 

using low cost material is a solution [2]. Furthermore, exploiting the supercapacitive features of the MFC 

has been demonstrated a viable solution to boost power perfo rmance of supercapacitive MFCs [3].

Bacterial cellulose (BC) as a cheap biopolymer has be en exploited as a flexible substrate for electrode 

fabrication. It is a porous media hydrogel pure cellulose produced by Acetoba cter [4]. In this w ork, BC 

was coated by carbon nano tube (CNT) to become conductive and then coated electrochemically by 

polyaniline (PANI) . It was used as anode in MFC. PANI as a conductive polymer has been utilized as 

anode modifier by the scientist [5]. In this research the capacitance behavior of PANI modified BC -CNT 

was studied before and after biofilm for mation and also was compared with the effect of biofilm on BC -

CNT ’s capacitance. For this purpose, impedance spectroscopy is a useful method which was run in the 

MFC. The resu lts showed that for BC -CNT, the capacitance was decreased after biofilm formation while 

for the PANI modified electrode the capacitance was increased. Moreover, cyclic voltammetry and 

galvanostatic discharging demonstrated higher capacitance of PANI modified anode after biofilm 

formation. Additionally, power density of MFC showed highe r performance of modified anode. Finally, 

FESEM images showed higher biocompatibility of PANI modified anode by h igher density of formed 

biofilm on electrode surface. As a result , the PANI modified bioanode provided an active biofilm and 

resulted in higher capacitance which was verified by different electrochemical methods. 

References: 

[1] C. Santoro, C. Arbizzani, B. Erable, I. Ieropoulos, Journal of power sources, 356 (2017) 225 -244. 

[2] C. Santoro, F. Soavi, A. Serov, C. Arbizza ni, P. Atanassov, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 78 (2016) 

229 -235. 

[3] F. Soavi, C. Santoro, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry, (2020). 

[4] M. Mashkour, M. Rahimnejad, M. Mashkour, G. Bakeri, R. Luque, S.E. Oh, ChemElectroChem, 4 

(2017) 648 -654. 

[5] M. Mashkour, M. Rahimnejad, M. Mashkour, Journal of Power Sources, 325 (2016) 322 -328. 

Acknowledgement: 

This work was supported by Iran National Science Foundation (INSF), grant number: INSF -958 19857 

and Babol Noshirvani University of Technology. Also, the research has been carried out under the Italy -

South Africa joint Research Programme 2018 -2020, Italian Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of the 

Environment. The Electron as a Probe to Measure the Thickness Distributions of 

# Electroactive Films 

Darren Buesen , Huaiguang Li, N icolas Plumer é

Center for Electrochemical Sciences 

Ruhr -Universität Bochum, 44780 Bochum, G ermany 

darren .bues en@ru hr -uni -bochum.de 

Electron conducting films are ubiquitous in applications such as energy conversion, and their ability to 

fulfil their catalytic function can be greatly limited by inhomogeneities in their thickness or breaks within 

the film. Knowing the electroactive film thickness distribution would greatly facilitate optimization 

efforts, but techniques to measure this are lacking. Here, we present an electroanalytical method that 

provides the thickness distribution o f the electrochemically accessible fraction of redox -active films in 

which the transfer of electrons is diffusional, i.e. by electron hopping. In this method, as the time scale of 

the experiment (the scan rate) is changed, the location of the diffusion lay er bou ndary relative to the film 

roughness features is varied, allowing for the extraction of the film thickness distribution. In addition to 

being conveniently carried out in the solvated state, which is often the operational state of these 

conductive fil ms, th is approach is highly complementary to classical microscopy methods since it 

samples the entire modified electrode and is specific to the electroactive portions of the film. Therefore, 

this approach provides information on film morphology that is tru ly rel evant for the catalytic processes 

being optimized, and thus can guide the optimization of catalyst integration in films towards macroscale 

cohesion and thickness homogeneity which are essential for optimal performances. The results of this 

research h ave re cently been published [1], and are relevant to conditions of reversible electron transfer. 

Efforts are currently underway to extend the model to include quasi -reversible and irreversible electron 

transfer kinetics. 

# References 

[1] Buesen , D.; Li , H.; Plumeré, N . The Electron as a P robe to Measure t he Thickness Distributions of 

Electroactive Films Chem. Sci. 2020 , 11 , 937 -946 .Effect of the S ynthesis Parameters of in situ growth LDHs 

# on the filiform corrosion susceptibility of painted  AA5005 

Michele Fedel 1,* , Luca Ferrari 1, Flavio Deflorian 1, Caterina Zanella 2

> 1

Department of Industrial Eng ineering, University of Trento 

via Som marive 9, Povo (TN), 38123, Italy. 

> 2

Department of Materials and Manufacturing, Jönköping University, 

box 1026, 55111 Jönköping, Sweden 

*e-mail addres s: michele.fedel@unitn.it 

AA5005 is an aluminum alloy whose main alloying element is Mg. This alloy is e mployed for 

constructions, furniture, packaging, in the chemical industry and marine structures. These applications 

often involve the exposure to aggressive environments: for this reason, very often an organic coating is 

applied to extend the service life of the structure/manufacture. Among the different failure mechanisms 

which are responsible for the reduction of the service life of painted aluminium sheets, filiform corrosion 

frequently occurs in humid and saline environment. Filiform corrosion , which co nsists in small threadlike 

delami nation tracks driven by differential aeration conditions, usually triggers from surface defects in the 

protective film in the presence of soluble ionic species in presence of a r.h. between 50 and 90% and 

relatively high te mperature. 

Among the different chemical conversion treatments of the aluminium substarte which can be employed 

to reduce the filiform corrosion phenomenon an alternative can be the use of Layered Double Hydroxides 

(LDHs) grown in situ over the AA5005. In t his study, the effect of the synthesis parameters of Layered 

Double Hydr oxides (LDHs) based thin layers on AA 5005 is investigated in order to develop a filiform 

corrosion resistant solution . LDHs consist in a class of synthetic anionic clays having a layer ed structure 

based on magnesium hydroxide (brucite, Mg(OH) 2). LDHs are currently studied for different 

applications, such as additives in functional polymeric materials, as a mean for water decontamination, as 

osmotic membranes for water desalination and a lso for exchange and ionic species by absorption. 

In this work, Al/Mg based LDHs have been developed in autoclave under different synthesis conditions: 

the effect of the synthesis time and urea presence have been investigated. The morphology of the 

develo ped LDH layer have been investigated by SEM and AFM. The thickness and the structure of the 

developed coatings have been assessed by FIB -SEM. XRD pattern have been collected over the sample to 

check the LDH structure and to characterize the interplanar dis tance obtained by playing with the 

different synthesis parameters. The corrosion protection properties of the as synthetized layers have been 

investigated by means of polarization curves and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) .

In the second stag e of the work, an epoxy clearcoat has been applied over the AA5005 plates covered by 

the different LDH layers (in terms of morphology, thickness and composition). The effect of the different 

LDH layers on the filiform corrosion susceptibility has been asse ssed in compliance with the ASTM 

D2803 − 09 standard. The effect of the different surface condition on the formation of filiform filaments 

has been unravelled. Free Charge Density Gradients in Room Temperature Ionic Liquids 

# and The Factors that Cont rol Them 

G. J. Blanchard , Yufeng Wang, Md. Iqbal Hossain 

Michigan State University, Department of Chemistry 

578 S. Shaw Lane, East Lansing, MI USA 48824 

blanchard@ch emistry.msu.edu 

Free charge density gradients that exten d over macroscopic distances (ca . 100 m) ha ve been 

seen in room temperature ionic liquid s (IL) . These gradients, the magnitude and sign of which is 

controlled by the surface charge of the support o n which a film of ionic liquid resides , can be 

controlled in both magnitude and spatial extent by the molecular structure and organization of IL 

sy st ems . Our recent work has demonstrated the ability to quantitate the magnitu de of the 

gradient using molecu lar diffusion measurements . Both the structure s of the IL constituents and 

the presence of diluent a ffect the gradient in a predictable manner. Current work is focused on 

identi fying the best way to model these systems and devising nonlinear optical spec troscopic 

strategies for characterizing the charge density gradi ent .Electrochemical Approach to Durability of Reinforced Concrete 

# Structures 

X.R. Nóvoa , A. Collazo, B. Díaz. C. Pérez 

CINTECX, Universidade de Vigo, ENCOMAT group 

Campus Universitario As Lagoas, Marcosende, 36310 Vigo, Spain 

rnovoa@uvigo.es 

The Eurocode -2 “ Design of concrete structures” approved in 2004 introduces t he concept of durability for 

construction works. Several parameters related to the mixing compositions or to the safety levels for 

chloride content are defined, that need of reliable methods for c orrect assessment of the structure’s 

integrity. 

Corrosion of reinforcing steel bars is recognised as one of the main factors involved in the durability 

concept, which brings to the need for developing techniques and procedures able to assess corrosion 

ini tiation and development. The corrosion potential and polarization resistance are the main 

electrochemical techniques considered for on -site inspection, under the assumption that the cathodic 

process corresponds to oxygen reduction and the anodic process to steel corrosion. Although these 

assumptions are mostly true, they are not able to explain some transitions from passive to active states, as 

well as some corrosion potential evolutions. 

This talk will review recent achievements in understanding the electr ochemical response of the steel -

concrete interface with the aim of evaluating the possibilities of the electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy technique (EIS) for providing quantitative information on the rebar’s corrosion process, and 

also on the transport of aggressive ions through the concrete cover, thus dealing with durability 

assessment issues .Multielectrochromic Conjugated Polymers Based on 2,5 -

# Di(thienyl)pyrrole Derivatives 

Jorge L . Neto 1, Luis P.A. Silva 1, Joel B. da Silva 1, Ana Júlia C. da Silva 2, Dimas J.P. Lima 1, Adriana S. 

Ribeiro 1 

> 1

Federal University of Alagoas, Campus A. C. Simões, 57 072 -970, Maceió -AL, Brazil  

> 2

Federal Institute of Alagoas, Campus Viçosa, Centro, 57700 -000, Viçosa -AL , Brazil 

aribeiro@qui.ufal.br 

Among various π-conjugated polymers described in the literature, a ‘trimeric’ -extended system based 

on thiophene bonded to a central pyrrole moiety , namely 2,5 -dithienylpyrrole (SNS), has receiving a great 

deal of attention , since its correspondent polymer can be o bta ined either by chemical or electrochemical 

polymerization [1 ,2]. Furthermore, t he oxidation potential of the monomer is less anodic when compared 

to pristine pyrrole or thiophene and the so -obtained polymer films show mul ti electrochromic response 

[3, 4] . 2, 5-di(thienyl)pyrrole derivative s bearing dansyl (SNSD) or fluor ene (SNSF) substituent s were 

prepared by simple synthetic route s, and successfully electropolymerized or copolymeriz ed with 3,4 -

ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) on ITO electrodes by using tetrabut ylammonium tetrafluoroborate 

((C 4H9)4NBF 4) / acetonitrile (CH 3CN) as electrolyte . The electrochromic properties of the so -produced 

polymer films , P(SNSD -co -EDOT) and PSNSF, were investigated by spectroelectrochemical techniques .

P(SNSD -co -EDOT) films depo sited on ITO with 1:5 feed ratio presented multielectrochromism with 

rainbow -like colors depending on the applied potential , whilst PSNSF films shows color variation from 

yellow in the neutral state to green and blue in the oxidized state , as can be seen i n the track of the CIE 

1931 xy chromaticity coordinates , Figure 1. Both polymer films also presented high absorption in the near 

infrared region , chromatic contrast ( Δ%T) in the range of 11 – 40 % depending on the , coloration 

efficiency (η) from 110 to 350 cm 2 C-1, fast switching time ( < 1.0 s ), and stability to redox cycling . Such 

properties make th ese materials potentially applicable as active layer in optoelectronic devices. 

a)  b) 

Fig ure 1 . Calculated colour trajectory in the CIE 1931 color space and images of the a) P(SNSD -co -

EDOT) film deposited on ITO with 1:5 feed ratio and b) PSNSF film deposited on ITO, registered during 

potential scan from -0.6 to 0.7 V and 0.0 to 0.4 V vs. Ag/Ag +, re spectively. 

[1] P. Camurlu, C. Gültekin, Sol . Energy Mater . Sol . Cells 107 ( 2012 ) 142 -147. 

[2] Y. Dai, W. Li, X. Qu, J. Liu, S. Yan, M. Ouy ang, X. Lv, C. Zhang, Electrochim . Acta 229 ( 2017 ) 271 -

280. 

[13] A. Cihaner, F. Algi, Electrochim . Acta 53 ( 2008 ) 2574 -2578. 

[14] S. Tirkeş, J. Mersini, Z. Öztaş, M.M. Algi, F. Algi, A. Cihaner, Electrochim . Acta 90 ( 2013 ) 295 -

3001. Microbial Electrochemical Technologies: False Leads, Open 

# Perspectives and Ethics 

Alain BERGEL 

Laboratoire de Génie Chimique, CNRS, University of Toulouse (France) 

LGC, 4 allée Emile Monso, 31432 Toulouse, France 

alain.bergel@toulouse -inp.fr 

For almost two decades, microbial electrochemical technologies (MET) have been opening up amazing 

perspectives in various application sectors: production of electrical energy from wastewaters, replacement 

of fossil fuels by bio -hydrogen, mitigation of global warming by the transformation of carbon dioxide 

into renewable fuels, etc. Basic knowledge on extracellular electron transfers and electroacti ve biofilms is 

growing rapidly, revealing fascinating aspects of microbial life but, i n spite of great fundamental 

advance s, the technological promises seem to be a very long way from being fulfilled. 

The presentation points out some major bottlenecks that preclude the development of the large -scale MET 

applications that have been announced. This analysis shows that some in itial leads are obvious dead ends. 

It also reveals research avenues that seem more reasonable (in the author’s opinion). 

First of all, as a basic principle, conventional electrochemical reactors require electrolytes of high ionic 

conductivity to be effic ient. Designing electrochemical cells that should operate with urban wastewater, 

i.e. electrolyte with ionic conductivity commonly less than 0.5 S.m -1, is consequently an unattainable 

challe nge …at least in the absence of really groundbreaking concept s. An alternative that is sometimes 

evoked would consist in compensating for the poor efficiency of weakly conductive media by designing 

low -cost electrochemical reactors. Unfortunately, industrial electrochemical reactors are necessarily 

expensive and have to work at high current density to be economically efficient [1] .

Saline and hypersaline electrolytes may offer inte resting leads for the development of large -scale MET 

[3] . In this context, analysis of ion fluxes shows that in creasing salt concentrations results in reduced 

mitigation of the bioanode acidification, which is a severe inhibiting step [4] . This should be a major 

research axis to be explored. When the objective is no longer to produce electrical energy or to perform 

electrolysis, but to treat effluents or to enhance some microbially -ca talyzed redox reactions, possible low -

cost MET options such as microbial snorkel [2] or interspecies electron transfer mediated by conductive 

particles , can be regarded with hope , even for im plementation in media of low ionic conductivity. 

Scaling -up MET for CO 2 reduction is definitively hampered by the proximity of the reduction potentials 

of CO 2 and water. A microbial electrosynthesis cell working at high current density consequently result s

in the evolution of hydrogen, which peels off the biofilm from the cathode surface. Microbially -catalyzed 

hydrogenation carried out in two separate steps is a much more promising process configuration [5] .

Finally, the question is raised as to whether we should feign ignorance of some obvious deadlocks and 

propose appealing but unrealistic a pplications to scientific policy makers in order to be able to continue 

our work in this exciting research field. 

[1] R. Rousseau, L. Etcheverry, E. Roubaud, R. Basséguy, M. -L. Délia, A. Bergel, Microbial electrolysis 

cell (MEC): Strengths, weaknesses and research needs from electrochemical engineering standpoint, 

Appl. Energy. 257 (2020) 113938. 

[2] M. Hoareau, B. Erable, A. Bergel, Microbial electrochemical snorkels (MESs): A budding 

technology for multiple applications. A mini review, Electrochem. Commun. 104 (2019) 106473. 

[3] M. Grattieri, S.D. Minteer, Microbial fuel cells in saline and hypersaline environments: 

Advancements, challenges and future perspectives, Bioelectro chemistry. 120 (2018) 127 –137. 

[4] M. Oliot, S. Galier, H. Roux de Balmann, A. Bergel, Ion transport in microbial fuel cells: Key roles, 

theory and critical review, Appl. Energy. 183 (2016) 1682 –1704.. 

[5] E. Blanchet, F. Duquenne, Y. Rafrafi, L. Etcheverry, B. Erable, A. Bergel, Importance of the 

hydrogen route in up -scaling electrosynthesis for microbial CO2 reduction, Energy Environ. Sci. 8 

(2015) 3731 –3744. Antibiofilm activity of di nuclear silver(I) complexes with pyridine -

# based macrocyclic type of ligand agai nst clinically relevant species 

Enrico Marsili a, Kayode Olaifa a, Nada D. Savić b, Jasmina Nikodinović -Runić c, Biljana Đ. Glišić b

> a

Nazarbayev University 53 Kabanbay Batyr Avenue, 010000 Nur -Sultan, Kazakhstan 

> b

University of Belgrade , Vojvode Stepe 444a, 11042 Belgrade 152, Serbia 

> c

University of Kragujevac, R. Domanovića 12, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia 

enrico.mars ili@nu.edu.kz 

Electrochemical techniques allow monitoring of antimicrobial activi ty in early biofilms [1]. Biofilms of 

the unicellular fungal pathogen (Candida parapsilosis ATCC 22019) and a Gram -negative bacterium 

(Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606) we re grown on screen -printed electrodes (SPE) in potentiostat -

controlled electrochemical cells and exposed to tw o dinuclear silver(I) complexes at a concentration equal 

to the minimum inhibitory concentration ( MIC ) determin ed against planktonic bacteria , in the presence of 

the exogenous redox mediator [Fe(CN)₆]³⁻. [Fe(CN) 6]3- applied in this concentration (100 μM), does not 

block growth of the microbial biofilms at the concentration tested in this study, as appreciable current 

outputs, which depend strictly o n biofilm growth, were obtained when the cells were grown in the 

presence of the redox mediator [Fe(CN) 6]3- only . The working electrode was maintained at constant 

electrochemical potential (0.4 V vs . Ag pseudo -reference electrode). Under these conditions, part of 

electron flow due to the oxidation of nutrient in the growth medium is transferred extracellularly to the 

electrode. We have previously shown that the instantaneous current output and the overall charge output 

after a defined time are correlated to the formation of the biofilm or its inhibition due to a n antibiofilm 

agent in solution. Chronoamperometry (CA) resul ts confirmed that complex 1 has a ntibiofilm activity 

against C. parapsilosis , as observed by the lower instantaneous current, while it has limited effect on the 

biofilm activity of A. baumannii (Fig. 1 ). This result also suggested that the minimum inhibitory 

concentration for biofilm is higher than that in the planktonic phase, being in accordance with the results 

obtained from the standard m icrotiter plat e based in vitro assay . The CA for the other two strains did not 

show a well -defined pattern. The non -turnover cyclic voltammograms (CVs) at 0 h are similar with and 

without the antimicrobial complex 1, while the turnover CVs at 24 h in the p resence of complex 1 is 

much lower than in its absence, as complex 1 affects the bacterial metabolism and reduces the 

extracellular electron transfer rate. The effect of complex 1 on biofilm formation was also determined 

through the crystal violet assay in this set up. The amount of biofilm on the working electrode was 

determined for A. baumannii and C. parapsilosis with crystal violet assay, which underestimates the 

attached biomass, due t o the multiple washing steps [ 2]. Overall, electrochemical experimen ts show that 

much higher concentration of complex 1 is needed to exert a strong antibiofilm inhibiting activity, while 

the effect is observable at planktonic MIC concentration. The difference between the CA, CV and crystal 

violet assays shows that multiple analytical methods are needed to determine the true nature of the 

antibiofilm effect of a given antimicrobial agent. 

References 

[1] Keogh D et al. (2018) MBio 9, e00626. 

[2] Azeredo J et al. (2017) Critical Reviews Microbiology 43, 313. 

Fig. 1 CA of C. parapsilosis (A) and A. 

baumannii (B) biofilms in 

bioelectrochemical cells. Cells with 

[Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ (black trace s); cells with 

[Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ and DMSO (red trace s); cells 

with [Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ and 0.9 or 1.7 μM of 

complex 1 in DMSO (blue trace s). Cells 

with complex 1 in DMSO without 

[Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ (green traces) . CV of C. 

parapsilosis (C) and A. baumann ii (D) at 

0 h (dashed traces) and 24 h (solid 

traces). Cells with [Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ (black 

trace); cells with [Fe(CN)₆]³⁻ and 0.9 and 

1.7 μM of complex 1 in DMSO (blue 

traces). Husbanding Biological Heat to Optimise Energy Conversion in 

# Bioelectrochemical Systems (BES) 

Pavlina Theodosiou *, Elizabeth Heidrich 

Newcastle University, School of Engineering , Cassie Building , Newcastle upon Tyne , NE1 7RU 

*pavlina.theodosiou@newcastle.ac.uk 

Elizabeth.heidrich@newcastle.ac.uk 

Bio -electrochemical systems (BES) use bacteria as biocatalysts to decompose organic matter and ge ne rate 

electricity, in the case of Microbial Fuel Cells (MFCs), or generate hydrogen, in the case of Microbial 

Electrolysis Cells (MECs). Since the early 2000s, research around the subject has surged due to the 

capability of this technology to treat and co nv ert wastewater into useful byproducts, i.e. green energy. To 

test the propensity of the technology in real world scenarios different pilot -scale studies have been 

deployed around the globe from different research groups. 

These studies have shown that B ES holds a great potential as a sustainable technology however, the 

performance of pilot scale studies (100 -1000L) is 1 -3 order of magnitude lower than the lab scale (0.1 -

0.2L) ones. Primarily the research towards addressing this disparity, has been focuse d for a long time on 

materials rather than the biology of the system itself . It has been observed that BES can show resilience 

and continue operating at temperatures below 20 oC, where normal anaerobic sewage treatments struggle. 

Hence it is suggested tha t t he heat energy produced during bioconversion of chemical energy to electrical 

energy is an important energy vector which has not been accounted for. 

Thermodynamic calculations show that counter intuitively biological anode s when fed ace tate in BES 

take in heat energy, i.e. they get colder, preliminary data shows this may be an observable phenomenon 

even in mixed cultures (Figure 1) . However, the digesti on of upstream substrates such as longer chain 

starches to glucose will produce heat, this was significan t and measurable in 120L pilot scale study [1]. 

These data suggest that heat transfers are observable and substrate dependent . Further exploration of the 

thermodynamics, and in particular enthalpy, of the reactions involved in the anaerobic digestion of 

wa stewaters is warranted .

Balancing the energy inputs and outputs will be important for the industrial credibility of BES 

technology . Additionally, l inking heat energy to growth will offer deeper understanding of the biology of 

anaerobic systems . These are vi tal steps in the process of engineer ing efficient biological systems to 

extract energy, either through classical anaerobic digestion, or with BES . Through a new project 

(BIOHEAT), the authors will investigate the heat energy transfers in microbial syste ms in order that we 

are able to efficiently engineer and husband them. 

Figure 1 Measured temperature in a BES reactor fed on acetate. 

[1] Elizabeth S. Heidrich, Stephen R. Edwards, Jan Dolfing, Sarah E. Cotterill, Thomas P. Cu rt is (2014) 

Performance of a pilot scale microbial electrolysis cell fed on domestic wastewater at ambient 

temperatures for a 12month period, Bioresource Technology , 173, 87 -95. Recent Advances in Electrochemical Surface Oxidation -Enhanced 

# Raman Spectroscopy .

Alvaro Colina 1, Sheila Hernandez 1, Martin Perez -Estebanez 1, William Cheuquepan 1, Juan V. Perales -

Rondon 1,2 , Elvira Gomez 3, Aranzazu Heras 1.

1. -Universidad de Burgos . Plaza Misael Bañuelos, 09001 Burgos . Spain. 

2. - Department of Analytical Chemistry, Physical Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of 

Alcala.  Ctra. Madrid -Barcelona, Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain. 

3. - Grup d'Electrodeposició de Cape s Primes i Nanoestructures (GE -CPN), Dep. Ciència de Materials i 

Química Física and Institut de Nanociència i Nanotecnologia (IN2UB), Universitat de Barcelona, E -

08028, Barcelona (Spain). 

acolina @ubu.es 

The enhancement of the Raman signal is fundamental t o analyze molecules since it overcomes the low 

sensitivity of Raman spectroscopy . Usually , the Raman signal has been improved with plasmonic 

nanostructures using the Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) effect . For many years , this 

phenomenon has been studied and , even today, some critical aspects are not fully understood . In 2018 ,

our group discovered a new phenomenon that was denoted as Electrochemical Surface Oxidation 

Enhanced Raman Scattering (EC -SOERS) ,[1] because it only takes place during the oxidation of a silver 

substrate under specific conditions . EC -SOERS is a n electrochemical phenomenon because, as far as we 

know , the e nhancement of the Raman signal can only be obtained when an anodic overpotential or current 

is applied to the silver electrode. Therefore , this effect can only be studied using spectroelectrochemistry. 

The enhance ment of the Raman signal was initially ob served during the oxidation of a silver substrate , in 

acidic medium with small amounts of chloride [2] . The origin of EC -SOERS still remains unclear ;

however, this phenomenon has been successfully used for quantitative analysis of differ ent compounds [3] ,

such as , uric acid, citric acid or caffeine . More over, EC -SOERS exhibits a high reproducibility and also a 

remarkable selectivity that can be used to resolve complex mixtures , as has been demonstrated in the 

quantification of vitamin B3[4] . The enhancement factors calculated for EC -SOERS indicate that not only 

a chemical effect but also an electroma gnetic effect influences on the enhancement of the Raman signal .

Therefore , some type of plasmonic nanostructure s are being generated during the oxidation of the 

electrode. 

In this communication, we show the latest developments achieved in the study and application of EC -

SOERS . On the one hand, t he structures of the molecules plays a fundamental role in the enhancement of 

the Raman signal. On the other hand, n ew electrolytic mediums can be used to improve the selectivity in 

the determination of different molecules . Moreover, this phenomenon has been observed in very different 

conditions , giving evidence of a more general phenomenon .

This work shows the most recent advances obtained in the study of EC -SOERS, a phenomenon similar to 

SERS, but with clear di fferences that can be used to analyze compounds that sometimes are not easily 

observed in SERS .

References 

[1] J. V Perales -Rondon, S. Hernandez, D. Martin -Yerga, P. Fanjul -Bolado, A. Heras, A. Colina, 

Electr ochim. Acta 2018 , 282 , 377. 

[2] J. V. Perales -Rondon, S. Hernandez, A. Heras, A. Colina, Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019 , 473 , 366. 

[3] S. Hernandez, J. V. Perales -Rondon, A. Heras, A. Colina, Anal. Chim. Acta 2019 , 1085 , 61. 

[4] S. Hernandez, J. V. Perales -Rondon, A. Heras, A. Colina, Electrochim. Acta 2020 , 334 , 135561. 

Acknowledgements: 

Authors acknowledge the financial support from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Grants 

CTQ2017 -83935 -R-AEI/FEDERUE), Junta de Castilla y León (BU297P18) and Ministerio d e Ciencia, 

Innovación y Universidades (RED2018 -102412 -T).  J.V.P -R. thanks JCyL for his postdoctoral fellowship 

(Grant BU033 -U16). W.CH. thanks JCyL for his postdoctoral fellowship (Grant  BU297P18 ). S.H. thanks 

JCyL and European Social Fund for her predoctoral fellowship and M.P -E. thanks its contract funded by 

JCyL, the European Social Fund and the Youth Employment Initiative Gold nanoparticles -hybrid nanostructures in electrochemical 

# immunosensing of metastatic cancer and neurodegenerative diseases 

S. Campuzano a, V. Serafín a, A. Montero -Calle b, R. Barderas b, A. Valverde a, M. Gamella a, M. Pedrero a, A. 

González -Cortés a, C. A. Razzino a, M. Calero c, P. Yánez -Sedeño a, J.M. Pingarrón a

> a

Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Sciences, Complutense University of Madrid, 

Madrid, 28040, Spain 

> b

Chronic Disease Programme, UFIEC, Carlos III Health Institute, Majadahonda, Madrid, 28220, Spain 

> c

Alzheimer’s Center Reina Sofía Foundation – CIEN Foundation and CIBERNED, Carlos III Institute of 

Health, Majadahonda, Madrid, 28220, Spain 

susanacr@quim.ucm.es 

Nowadays , neurodegenerative disorders (NDD) and cancer diseases , due to their increasing prevalence and 

prolonged duration , pose a major global health problem for worldwide population , and a tremendous 

financial impact associated with medical care for families and so ciety . Despite this, their early detection 

and follow up are complex tasks, usually performed by techniques, which , although being sensitive and 

reliable, show some limitations regarding their costs, assay time, invasiveness, complicated protocols and 

trained personnel for their execution or interpretation . Therefore,  the development of low -cost and 

accessible methods,  compatible with point -of -care technolog y (POCT),  for quantifying  closely related 

biomarkers  is of great interest .

In this field, electrochemical immunosensors are flourishing as promising alternative tools for diagnosing, 

prognosing and characterizing this  heterogeneous group of  diseases , while meeting the POCT requirements :

simple but high -performance devices, ensuring sensitive and selective analysis in non -laboratory 

environments and with limited resources, with easy -to -use equipment and minimal analysis time . The 

analytical performance of these biodevices can be considerably improved by means of rational surface 

chemistries such as the use of diazonium salts and/or the coupling with smart nanomaterials , like gold 

nanoparticles (AuNPs) . The latter constitute one of the most widely used n anomaterial in single or multiple -

component nanostructures and nanocomposites, due to their unique properties. AuNPs /multi -walled carbon 

nanotubes (AuNPs/MWCNTs ) nanocomposites and dendrimer -encapsulated AuNPs are particularly 

attractive options to be expl oited in electrochemic al biosensing due to their remarkable conductivity, 

catalytic abilit y, biocompatibility and high density of active groups for biomolecules immobilization. 

In this presentation, the most relevant aspects of pioneering use of AuNPs/MWCNTs [1] and AuNPs -

poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer nanocomposites [2], prepared in the laboratory , as nanocarriers 

of multiple detector antibodies and peroxidase ( HRP ) molecules or electrode modifi ers , respectively, in 

electrochemical immunosensing approaches recently developed to determine biomarkers of emerging 

relevance in metastatic cancer (Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor -κB Ligand, RANKL) and 

neurodegenerative diseases (tau protein) will be critically discussed . These approache s are based on 

sandwich immunoassay formats and involve the use of commercial reagents and disposable electrodes 

modified by electrochemical grafting with 4 -aminobenzoic acid ( p-ABA) and amperometr ic transduction 

using the H 2O2/hydroquinone (HQ) system. 

The excellent characteristics that these AuNPs -based nanostructures impart to the resultant immunosensing 

platforms in terms of sensitivity, selectivity , and operational and storage stability for determining the target 

biomarkers in the required clinical ranges will be critically discussed . Moreover, their potential to direct 

and accurate determine the endogenous target biomarker levels in human serum, pla sma and brain tissues 

samples from colorectal cancer or NDD -diagnosed patients, simply by placing a 5 -L drop of the undiluted 

biofluid or containing 2.5 μg of the tissue extract over the immunoplatform , and involving simple -handling 

and short turnaround protocols (1 -2 h) will be presented .

Our recent experimental results confirm that the se electrochemical immunosensor s are competitive with 

commercial methodologies in terms of simplicity and assay time, which along with the amenability to be 

implemented in single or multiplexed formats and using affordable, low -power requirement and portable 

instrumentation, make them very attractive tool s to further advance in the cons olidation of candidate 

clinical biomarker s in metastasis and neurodegenerative processes , and their implementation in POC T

devices to perform decentralized and rapid routine determinations. 

[1] Valverde et al . ChemElectroChem 7 (2020) 810 –820. 

[2] Razzino et al . Biosens. Bioelectron. 163 (2020) 112238 ; doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112238. Towards Electrodeposition of InSb at the Nanoscale from Weakly 

# Coordinating Solvents 

S.J. Reeves a, Y.J. Noori b, L. McDonnell c, W. Zhang a, R. Beanland d, G. Reid a, D. Smith c, C. H. (Kees) de 

Groot b, P.N. Bartlett a

> a

School of Chemistry, University of Southa mpton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 

> b

Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 

> c

School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 

> d

Department of Physics, University of Warwick, C oventry CV4 7AL, UK. 

s.reeves@soton.ac.uk 

InSb is an infrared detector material which would have enhanced properties and tunability if deposited at 

the n anoscale . Electrodeposition provides a bottom -up approach to filling high aspect ratio nanostructured 

templates which conventional gas phase deposition can struggle with . Weakly coordinating solvents are 

useful for this purpose due to low surface tension and the solvent not affecting the electroactive species or 

any of the intermediates during electrodepo sition .

The suitability of using tetrabutylammonium halometallate precursors in dichloromethane has 

been demonstrated for a number of p -block elements [1] . The electrodeposition of Ge 2Sb 2Te 5 [2] and 

Bi 2Te 3 [3] from this system has also been demonstrated . This presentation will cover the electrodeposition 

of InSb from this system at different length scales . The electrochemical behaviours of the precursors, t he 

different challenges associated with producing and using templates at each length scale, and the 

co mposition control of the resulting deposits, will be highlighted. 

Macro - d = 4 mm  Micro - d = 1 μm  Nano - d = 60 nm 

Figure 1: SEM images of InSb electrodeposits at different length scales 

This work has been supported by the EPSRC through the Progra mme Gr ant , Advanced Devices by 

Electroplating (ADEPT – EP/N0354371/1), and through Enabling microfocus & thin film X-ray 

scattering at the University of Southampton (EP/K009877/1 ). 

[1]  P.N. Bartlett, D. Cook, C.H. (Kees) de Groot, A.L. Hector, R. Huang, A . Jolleys, G.P. Kissling, W. 

Levason, S.J. Pearce, G. Reid, Non -Aqueous Electrodeposition Of P -Block Metals And Metalloids From 

Halometallate Salts, RSC Adv. 3 (2013) 15645 –15654. DOI: 10.1039/c3ra40739j .

[2] G.P. Kissling, R. Huang, A. Jolleys, S.L. Benja min, A.L Hector, G. Reid, W. Levason, C.H. (Kees) de 

Groot, P.N. Bartlett, Electrodeposition of a Functional Solid State Memory Material: Germanium 

Antimony Telluride from a Non -Aqueous Plating Bath, J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 (2018) D557 -D567. 

DOI: 10.1149/ 2.0981811jes .

[3] L. Meng, K. Cicvaric, A.L. Hector, C.H. de Groot, P.N. Bartlett, Electrodeposition of Bismuth 

Telluride from a Weakly Coordinating, Non -Aqueous Solution , J. Electroanal. Chem. 839 (2019) 134 -

140. DOI:  10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.03.021 .Proton Coupled Electron Transfer Catalysts. 

# Principles and Applications 

Cyrille Costentin  

> a

Département de Chimie Moléculaire, Université Grenoble -Alpes, CNRS, UMR 5250, 38000 Grenoble, 

France . b Université de Paris, 75013 Paris, France. 

cyrille.costentin @univ -grenoble -alpes.fr 

Proton Coupled Electron Transfer (PCET) catalysts will be presented in the framework of cyclic 

voltammetry (CV). Formal kinetic analysis of the various responses expected in the case of PCET catalyst 

following either stepwise or co ncerted pathways will be described . Both buffered solution and non -

buffered aque ous media are co nsidered . In the first case we show that, besides possible limitation by 

buffer diffusion, the PCET sequence may be rate limiting. CV wave shape, position and i ntensity are 

discussed in terms of thermodynamic and kinetic penalties associated to each mechanism. In the second 

case, we show that a non -classical pseudo -canonical cyclic voltammogram with hysteresis due to 

hydronium production is obtained for a Nernsti an PCET catalyst with water as proton acceptor. 

Thermodynamic and kinetic penalties resulting from water based PCET specific pathways are analyzed. 

Then , we use this framework investigate the electrochemical catalysis of alcohol oxidation in water with a 

PCET catalyst, N -hydroxyphthalimide . We have found that the rate constant for benzyl alcohol oxidation 

is independent of pH strongly suggesting a true hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) as rate determining step. 

When water is the proton acceptor to generate the a ctive form of the catalyst, i.e. N -oxyl PINO radical, 

the catalytic process follows a stepwise PTET pathway which kinetics partially limits the catalytic 

current .

Finally extension to heterogeneous PCET catalysts will be discussed with an application to an Oxygen 

Evolution catalyst. ?All -in -one: removal of oxidizable (hydrocarbons) and reducible 

# (sulfate) contaminants from contaminated groundwater in a single 

# bioelectrochemical reactor 

Matteo Tucci 1,*, Carolina Cruz Viggi 1, Paolo Tomei 1, Bruna Matturro 1,

Simon a Crognale 1, Ilaria Piet rini 2, Simona Rossetti 1, Federico Aulenta 1    

> 1Water Research Institute (IRSA), National Research Council (CNR), 00015 Monterotondo (RM), Italy
> 2Eni S.p.A. –Decarbonization & Environmental R&D, 20097 S. Donato Milanese (MI), Italy
> *Email address :

matteo.tucci @irsa.cnr.it 

Due to their high sustainability and low energy footprint, Microbial E lectrochemical Systems (MES )

represent promising candidates for in -situ remediation of contaminated groundwater . Still , only few 

studies have verified the capability of such systems to address c omplex mixtures of organic and inorganic 

contaminants so far .

This study concerned the performance s of a lab -scale “bioelectric well” [1 –3] , a membrane -less tubular 

reactor contain ing a carbon -based anode (e.g., graphite, biochar) and a concentric stainless -steel mesh 

cathode, having the two electrodes hydraulically connected , yet physically separated by a polyethylene 

mesh. This system was tested for the treatment of “real” pollute d groundwater obtained from a

petrochemical site (Italy) , containing a complex mixture of oxid iz able (e.g., BTEX , PAHs, and other 

petroleum hydrocarbons) and reducible (e.g. , sulfate, nitrate) contaminants. The “bioelectric well” was 

initially operated in fed -batch mode , and a potential of +0.2 V vs . SHE was imposed to the anode . After 

an initial acclimation phase , the system reached high oxidation rates of toluene (i.e., the main 

groundwater pollutant), with a Coulombic efficiency typically exceeding 90%. Interestingly, the 

molecular hydrogen generated at the cathode was then fully exploited for the biological ly -driven 

reduction of sulfate . In a later stage, t he reactor was also operated in continuous -flow mode by means of a 

peristaltic pump and its perform ance under pseudo steady -state conditions was thoroughly characterized. 

Finally, t he analysis of the microbiome composition and the quantification of key functional genes 

corroborated the chemical data and provided further insights into the performance of this novel 

bioremediation technology. 

[1] E. Palma, A. Espinoza Tofalos, M. Daghio, A. Franzetti, P. Tsiota, C. Cruz Viggi, M.P. Papini, F. 

Aulenta, Bioelectrochemical treatment of groundwater containing BT EX in a continuous -flow 

system: Substrate interactions, microbial community analysis, and impact of sulfate as a co -

contaminant, N. Biotechnol. 53 (2019) 41 –48. doi:10.1016/j.nbt.2019.06.004. 

[2] E. Palma, M. Daghio, A. Espinoza Tofalos, A. Franzetti, C. C ruz Viggi, S. Fazi, M. Petrangeli 

Papini, F. Aulenta, Anaerobic electrogenic oxidation of toluene in a continuous -flow 

bioelectrochemical reactor: Process performance, microbial community analysis, and 

biodegradation pathways, Environ. Sci. Water Res. Tech nol. 4 (2018) 2136 –2145. 

doi:10.1039/c8ew00666k. 

[3] E. Palma, M. Daghio, A. Franzetti, M. Petrangeli Papini, F. Aulenta, The bioelectric well: a novel 

approach for in situ treatment of hydrocarbon -contaminated groundwater, Microb. Biotechnol. 11 

(2018) 11 2–118. doi:10.1111/1751 -7915.12760. Exoti c Pla smonic Excitation of Electron s beyon d The Normal Limit of 

# Electrochemical Potential for Novel Photo chemical Reactions 

Kei Murakoshi 

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, 

Sapporo, JAPAN 

e-mail: kei@sci.hokudai.ac.jp 

Plasmon -powered processes to expand the ability of the spectroscopy regarding sensitivities in space, 

time, and energy resolutions. As their characteristics on localization of surface plasmons into molecule 

scale, huge intensity gradient of electromagneti c field would break the limit of light -matter interactions 

via the modification of the selection rule of the electronic excitation process. I have discussed about the 

possibility for the surface -enhanced -Raman scattering (SERS) as the probe to monitor the exotic 

electronic excitation processes [1 ]. Based on the observation of a small number of molecules at the 

plasmonic metal nanostructures by SERS [2-4], possibilities leading to the future innovativ e photo -

functionalities were demonstrated by showing impr oved properties at optical manipulation of electrons 

and molecules, and ions [5-7]. We have show n that the localized surface plasmons of the Au nanodimer 

structures prepared on defect -free graphene provide highly -confined electromagnetic field to generate 

holes and electrons of the electrochemical potentials beyond the limit of far field light illumination [8]. 

Novel non -zero wavevector excitation results in the generation of highly red uctive and oxidative powers 

for electrochemical reactions. Recent findi ng s also prove the modification of electr onic distribution of 

electrons under plasmonic excitation [9]. The se findings provide a novel way to breaking the limit of 

photochemical reactions using various plasmonic materials. 

References 

[1] K. Murakoshi and L. M. Liz -Marzán e t al., ACS nano , 14, 28 -117 (2019) 

[2] T. Konishi et al ., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 1009 -1014 (2013). 

[3] F. Nagasawa et al. , J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 14 -19 (2014). 

[4] M. Takase et al., Nature Photonics , 7, 550 -554 (2013) 

[5] H. Minamimoto et al., Faraday Discuss. 205, 261 -269 (2017). 

[6] F. Kato et al., ACS Photonics 5, 788 -796 (2018). 

[7] X. Li et al., PCCP 20, 14818 -14827 (2018) 

[8] J. Zhang et al., Nano Lett. 19, 7887 -7894 (2019). 

[9] K. Suzuki and X. Li et al., ACS Energy Lett. 5, 125 2-1259 (2020). Electrochemiluminescence sensing and light generation confined in 

# nanochannels 

Klaus Mathwig 

University of Groningen, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Analysis, 

P.O. Box 196, 9700 AD Groningen, The Netherlands 

k.h.mathwig@gm ail.com 

Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) is light emission which triggered electrochemicall y in solution: reactive 

ECL species are generated by at electrode surface s and undergo an electron -transfer reaction in solution 

generating the excited state of a luminophor e, it subsequently returns to the ground state and emit s a

photon. ECL is widely and commercially used for bio detection , specifically in clinical immunos ensing. 

Many diseases and other biomarkers can be detected by labelling antibodies with luminophores. T he 

method several advantaged: se nsing is background -free and allows straightforward highly sensitive 

detection in a very broad measuring range. 

We employ nano fluidic electrochemical devices for light emission by ECL [1]. Microfabrication of 

nanochann els using photol ith og raphy , deposition and dry etch ing techniques all ow s the confi nement of 

the reaction vo lume to a well -define d channel of 10 femtoliters . There , smallest quantities of 

luminophores participate in reaction s. Nanoscale distances to electrode s enable very efficient reaction s

and bright light emission as well as novel reaction pathways. 

The microfabricated nanochannel is connect ed to a bulk liquid reservoir v ia two small access ho les. Thus ,

the reaction volume insi de the channel can be geometric ally decoupled from the reservoir , and the 

composition of reacta nts within the nanochannel , i.e. , thei r oxidat ion state s, d epend s on the pote ntial 

applied to the elect rodes embedded in the channel walls. 

We demonst rate that, uniqu e for ECL in nanochannel s, reaction s and ligh t emission can be contr olled by 

different biasing an d reaction schemes to yield very distinct emission patterns . In particular, driv ing a

annihilation electrochemilumi nescence of tris(bispyridine)ruthenium(II) Ru(bpy) 32+ leads to const ant light 

emission along the entire nanochannel, while a co -reactant pathway in which Ru( bpy) 32+ ox idation is 

triggered by tripropy lamine limits light emission to nanoc hannel access holes [1].

Coreact ant ECL reaction s at the nanoscale could be employed f or sensitive biosensing , e. g., ECL -labeled 

detection in immun oassays. 

[1] S. Voci, H. Al -Kutubi, L. Rassaei, K. Mathwig, N. Sojic , Anal . Bioanal . Chem . (2020). 

https://doi.org/10. 1007/s00216 -020 -02630 -8Improving the Electron Transport of Sing le Molecular Junction with 

# Redox -Active Center through Conjugated Chains 

Xiao -Shun Zhou ,1, * Jun -Qing Su, 1 Fan Zhang ,1 Xiao -Hui Wu, 2 Ya -Hao Wang, 1 Ju -Fang Zheng, 1 Shan 

Jin 2

> 1

Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Advanced Catalysis Materials, Institute of Physical 

Chemistry, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China 

> 2

Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, 

Central China Normal University, Wuhan 4300 79, China 

*Email:  xszhou@zjnu.edu.cn 

Using single molecules to build a field -effect transistor is the critical step forward realizing future 

nanodevices with hig h efficiency and low energy consumption, 1-2 which has motivated a lot of researches 

over the world to achieve this ultimate goal. Redox -active molecules that could be converted between the 

oxidized or reduced sta tes upon different electrochemical potentials, have been widely studied to illustrate 

the electrochemical gating at single molecular level . Their conductance could switch on as the energy 

levels of electrode shift to resonance with molecules. With this uni que family of redox -active molecules, 

ongoing interest is to obtain a higher on/off ratio of conductance. However, achieving a high on/off ratio 

between the conductance of molecular junctions remains a great challenge and more factors of this single 

molecu le system, like the molecular backbone, are needed to be explored. 

Here a feasible strategy that connecting the redox -active moieties with conjugated chains was proposed 

to improve the electrochemical gating efficiency of molecular junctions using STM brea k junctions 

technique .3-5 Benefiting from the low energy offset of frontier molecular orbitals, C=C -Fc -Py shows 

about one order larger maximum conductance enhance ment and 160% improvement of conductance 

on/off ratio compared to C-C-Fc -Py at the equilibrium potential of Fc +/Fc (Figure 1) .

Figure 1. (a) Molecular structures of the investigated molecules. (b) The conductance of C-C-Fc -Py (red) 

and C=C -Fc -Py (blue) d epend s on the applied gate potential .

This research was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Gra nt Nos. 21872126, 

and 21 573298 ) and Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. LR15B030002) .

Reference 

(1) Perrin, M. L.; Burzuri, E.; van der Zant, H. S. J., Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44 (4), 902 -919. 

(2) Diez -Perez, I.; Li, Z.; Hihath, J.; Li, J.; Zhang, C.; Yang, X.; Zang, L.; Dai, Y.; Feng, X.; Muellen, K.; 

Tao, N., Nature Commun . 2010, 1 (1), 3 1. 

(3) Huang, B.; Liu, X.; Yuan, Y.; Hong, Z. W.; Zheng, J. F.; Pei, L. Q.; Shao, Y.; Li, J. F.; Zhou, X. S.; 

Chen, J.; Jin, S.; Mao, B. W., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (50), 17685 -17690. 

(4) Leary, E.; Roche, C.; Jiang, H. W.; Grace, I.; Gonzalez, M. T.; Rubio -Bollinger, G.; Romero -Muniz, 

C.; Xiong, Y. Y.; Al -Galiby, Q.; Noori, M.; Lebedeva, M. A.; Porfyrakis, K.; Agrait, N.; Hodgson, A.; 

Higgins, S. J.; Lambert, C. J.; Anderson, H. L.; Nichols, R. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (2), 710 -718. 

(5) Zhang, F .; Wu, X. H.; Zhou, Y. F.; Wang, Y. H.; Zhou, X. S.; Shao, Y.; Li, J. F.; Jin, S.; Zheng, J. F., 

ChemElectroChem 2020, 7 (6), 1337 -1341. Electrochemical synthesis of Ni/Al Layered Double Hydroxide and 

# reduced Graphene Oxide composites for eco -friendly e nergy stora ge 

Elisa Musella ,a Isacco Gualandi, a Erika Scavetta, a Marco Giorgetti, a Vittorio Morandi, b Reinhard 

Denecke ,c Domenica Tonelli a

a) Dipartimento di Chimica Industriale “Toso Montanari”, Università di Bologna, Viale Risorgimento 4, 

40136 Bologna, Italy ;

b) Istituto per la Microelettronica e i Microsistemi (IMM), Consiglio Na zionale delle Ricerche (CNR), 

Sede di Bologna, via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy; 

c) Wilhelm‐Ostwald‐Institut für Physikalische und Theoretische Chemie, Universität Leipzig, Linnéstraße 

2, D‐04103 Leipzig, Germany. 

elisa.musella3@unibo.it 

Layered doub le hydroxides (LDHs), also known as anionic clays, containi ng redox active transition 

metals are attractive compounds for electrochemical applications such as energy storage, sensors, fuel 

cells and catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction. [1] However, man y LDH applications are still largely 

restricted due to thei r low electrical conductivity. Of course, this reduces the performances of 

electrochemical devices: in particular, supercapacitors need high currents flowing during fast 

charge−discharge cycles. The se weak points can be overcome by combining LDHs with carbon 

nanomaterials, such as graphene. In the present work, we propose a one -step electrosynthetic prot ocol that 

produces nanostructured films of composites based on Ni/Al -LDH and reduced graphene oxid e (GO).[2] 

This procedure contemporaneously allows for the LDH synthesis, the reduction of GO and its 

intercalation inside the layered structure. Up to date, the only interlayer anions introduced in LDHs 

coming from electrochemical syntheses are small mole cules. This greatly constrains their applicability: in 

particular, our work could pave the way for further studies in the field of electrochemically induced 

intercalation chemistry. The films obtained have been thoroughly characterized by many techniques i n

order to verify the structure and morphology of the LDH/ERGO composites and to propose a theorization 

of the synthetic and growth mechanisms. Ultimately, we were able to employ these composites in the 

field of energy storage: the proposed hybrid super ca pacitor had a starting discharge specific capacity of 

880 F g−1 which decreased and stabilized at 820 F g−1 after 300 cycles. The potential applicability of t he 

device was also demonstrated by powering a red light -emitting diode. This work embraces the nec essity 

of the development of systems with low environmental impact: in fact, we have proposed a binder -free 

device, safe, composed of hearth abundant element and able to work in aqueous electrolyte system with 

high performances. [3] 

Figure 1: Sketch of the proposed work 

[1] Gorrasi, G., & Sorrentino, A. Layered double hydroxide polymer nanocomposites for food -packaging 

applications. In Layered Doubl e Hydroxide Polymer Nanocomposites2020 (pp. 743 -779). Woodhead 

Publishing. 

[2] Gu alandi, I.; Vlamidis, Y.; Mazzei, L.; Musella, E.; Giorgetti, M.; Christian, M.; Morandi, V.; 

Scavetta, E.; Tonelli, D. Ni/Al Layered Double Hydroxide and Carbon Nanomaterial Composites for 

Glucose Sensing.  ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2019, 2 (1), 143 –155. 

[3] Musella, E.; Gualandi, I.; Ferrari, G.; Mastroianni, D.; Scavetta, E.; Giorgetti, M.; Migliori, A; 

Christian, M.; Morandi, V.; Denecke, R; Tonelli, D . submitted .Cation -Disordered Materials with Pseudocapacitive Characteristics 

Etsuro Iwama , Keisuke Matsumura 1, Kenta Takagi 1, Itsuki Takizawa 1, Wako Naoi 3,

Yuki Orikasa 4, Patrick Rozier 2,5,6 , Patrice Simon 2,5,6 , Katsuhiko Naoi 1,2  

> 1

Department of Applied Chemistry, Tokyo Univ. of Agri. & Tech., 2 -24 -16 Naka -cho, Koganei, Tokyo 184 -8588, 

Japan  

> 2

Institute of Global Innovation Research Organization, Tokyo Univ. of Agri. & Tech., 2 -24 -16 Naka -cho, 

Koganei, Tokyo, 184 -8588 Japan 

> 3

Divisio n of Art and Innovative Technologies, K & W Inc., 1 -3-16 -901 Higashi, Kunitachi, Tokyo 186 -0002, 

Japan 

> 4

Department of Applied Chemistry, College of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, 1 -1-1 Noji -higashi, Kusatsu, 

Shiga 525 -8577 Japan 

> 5

CIRIMAT, Universit é de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT, UPS, 118 route de Narbonne 31062 Toulouse cedex 9, France  

> 6

Réseau sur le Stockage Electrochimique de l’Energie, RS2E FR CNRS 3459 

> *

E-mail:  iwama@cc.tuat.ac.jp 

Cation -disordered Li 3VO 4 (LVO) has been identified as a promising negative electrode material 

for hybrid supercapacitors with theoretical specific capacity of 394 mAh g -1 (2 lithium accommodation) 

operating at a safe but still low potential range between 0.4 and 1.3 vs. Li/Li +[1]. Recent our studies unveiled 

that cation -disordered LVO can be electrochemically obtained from the pristine cation -ordered LVO during 

initial cycling, which we termed as electrochemical activation process [1 -2]. This electrochemical 

activ ation process induces the transformation of β -LVO from the pristine cation -ordered structure into an 

activated LVO, which has a Li +/V 5+ cation -disordered structure. Charge discharge curves also change from 

battery -like plateau to pseudocapacitive slope via such cation -disordering of LVO, along with its reaction 

mechanism change from two -phase to solid -solution reaction[2]. Yet, the preparation method of cation -

disordered LVO has been a major issue as the electrochemical activation process is impractical fro m the 

industrial point of view. Such electrochemical process requires a precycling of β -LVO, which is difficult 

to control and inevitably produces undesirable irreversible capacity for a full cell assembling. 

In this talk, we introduce two alternative pro cess es to the electrochemical activation , i.e ., the 

direct synthesis of pseudocapacitive cation -disordered LVO materials (Figure 1) . One is a simple 

mechanical milling of the pristine β -LVO powder , which brings about the full randomized Li +/V 5+ 

arrangement and thus enables to obtain thermodynamically metastable cation -disordered LVO phase 

without any precycling. Another is a partial substitution of V 5+ with Si 4+ in β -LVO, which results in a 

transformation of β-LVO 

into γ-Li 3+x V1-xSi xO4.

We present those two 

approaches, “fully” or 

“partially” cation -

disordering, as  new paths for 

transformation of battery -

type materials into 

pseudocapacitive materials 

with improved 

electrochemical 

performances by simple 

cation mixing. 

References        

> [1] E. Iwama et al ., ACS Nano ,
> 10 (5) 5398 (2016).
> [2] P. Rozier et al. ,Chem.
> Mater. ,30 (15), 4926 (2018).

Figure 1. Schematic illustrations of two strategies for material 

transformation from “battery” into “psuedocapacitive” materials .Trace Metals Dramatically Boost Oxygen Electrocatalysis of N -doped 

# Coal -derived Carbon for Zinc -air Battery 

Xinning Huang a, Huimin Liu a, Zhenjie Lu a, Tao Wang b, Don gling Wu b, Zhen yu Sun c, Xingxing Chen a 

> a

Research Group of Functional Materials for Electr ochemical Energy Conversion , School of Chemical 

Engineering, University of Science and Technology Liaoning, Qianshan Middle Road 185, 114051 

Anshan, P. R. China  

> b

Key Laboratory of Energy Materials Chemistry, Institute of Applied Chemistry, Xinjiang Univer sity, 

Shengli Road 14, 830046 U rumqi, P. R. China  

> c

State Key Laboratory of Organic -Inorganic Composites, College of Chemical Engineering, Beijing 

University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China 

xingchenstar79@163.com 

The commercialization of metal -air batteries requires efficient, low -cost , and stable bifunctional 

electrocatalysts for reversible electrocatalysis of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen 

evolution reaction (OER). The modification of natural coal by heteroatoms su ch as N and S, or metal 

oxide species, has been demo nstrated to form very promising electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER. 

However, it remains elusive and underexplored on how the impurity elements in coal may impact the 

electrocatalytic properties of coal -derived catalysts. Herein, we explore the influence of the presence of 

various trace metals that are notable impurities in coal, including Al, Si, Ca, K, Fe, Mg, Co, Mn, Ni , and 

Cu, on the electrochemical performance of the prepared catalysts. The construc ted Zn -air batteries are 

further shown to be able to power green LED lights for more than 80 h . The charge -discharge polarization 

curves exhibited excellent and durable rechargeability over 500 (ca . 84 h) continuous cycles. The 

promotional effect of the tr ace elements is believed to accrue from a combination of electronic structure 

modification of the active sites, enhancement of the active site density, and formation of a conductive 3 -

dimensional hierarchical network of carbon nanotubes. 

References 

[1] X. Chen, X . Huang, T . Wang, S . Barwe, K . Xie, Y . U. Kayran, D . Wintrich, W . Schuhmann, J . Masa, 

Electrochim . Acta , 2016, 211, 568 -575. 

[2] X. Chen, J . Wang, X . Huang, X . Zhao, P . Liu, B . He, T . Wang, J . Masa, Catal . Sci . Technol ., 2018, 8, 

1104 -1112. 

[3] H. Liu, J . Cheng, Z . Lu, X . Huang, Y . Zhu, X . Zhao, T . Wang, J . Masa, X . Chen, Electrochim . Acta ,

2019, 312, 22 -30. 

[4] H. Pan, D . Wu, X . Hu ang, K . Xie, B . He, Z . Lu, P . Liu, J . Cheng, X . Zhao, J. Masa, X . Chen, J.

Electrochem. Soc ., 2019, 166, F479 -F486. 

[5] H. Liu, X. Huang, Z. L u, T. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Cheng, Y. Wang, D. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Robertson and X. 

Chen, Nanoscale , 20 20, 12, 9628 -9639. Nanostructured mixed transition metal spinel oxide thin films as efficient 

# electrocatalysts – composition, structure and properties 

Sreena Thekkoot , Rehana Islam, and Sylvie Morin 

Department of Chemistry, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3 Canada 

Transition metal oxides have received renewed attention with their demonstrated usefulness as 

cathodes in dye -sensitized solar cells and as anodes in fuel cell [1, 2] . In addition, careful choice of the synthesis 

method and experimental co nditions allow for the tailoring of the film nanostructure and surface area. However, 

it is clear from the literature  [3,4] and our own work [ 5,6] that the experimental parameters used for the material 

preparation can greatly affect its electrocatalytic properties mak ing it difficult to compare material 

performances. We have prepared various spinel oxides, namely Cu xCo 3-xO4 (0  x  1), Ni 1-xCu xCo 2O4 (0  x

 0.75), Fe yCu x-yCo 3-xO4 and Fe yNi x-yCo 3-xO4 (for y = 0.1 or 0.15 and x = 1 or 0.5 for both Fe -Cu and Fe -Ni 

containing oxides), using the thermal decomposition method. The films were analyzed, using several structural, 

chemical and electrochemical methods such as x -ray diffraction (XRD), scanning el ectron microscopy (SEM), 

energy dispersive x -ray spectroscopy (EDX), cyclic voltammetry and X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 

The oxygen evolution reaction and electroreduction of hydrogen peroxide reaction were used as model reactions 

to determine t he electrocatalytic activity of the electrodes. 

The SEM analysis shows that the prepared thin films are quite porous and uniform. EDX analysis 

shows that a good correlation exists between stoichiometric and the resulting composition of the films. The 

form ation of the spinel structure is confirmed by XRD analysis. For all our samples , the X-ray data also support 

the existence of the spinel structure.  The addition of Cu to Co 3O4 to form Cu xCo 3-xO4 resulted in an increase in 

roughness for x values from 0.25 t o 1. When Ni is added to form the ternary oxides, the roughness more than 

doubles. For spinel oxides containing iron, nickel and cobalt, the roughness is much lower, i.e., around 80. 

Electrodes prepared by thermal decomposition method exhibit overall good catalytic activity towards oxygen 

evolution reaction and electroreduction of hydrogen peroxide. X -ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), which 

probes the surface of the catalyst, wa s also used to understand the structure, composition and oxidation state of 

the metal ions in the ternary oxide materials.  The high -resolution spectra for the Co, Cu and Ni 2p peaks indicate 

the existence of different Co 2+ /Co 3+ , Cu +/Cu 2+ and Ni 2+ /Ni 3+ ratio for these materials (the Fe signal was often 

too small in the XPS spectra to yield meaningful results) . The analysis of O 1s spectra indicate s that the main 

peak is composed of th ree components that can be assigned to lattice oxygen, adsorbed oxygen containing 

species such as hydroxides and surface b onded water.  A detailed quantitative analysis will be provided in our 

presentation. 

Electrochemical measurements show that for our samples, a dding Cu to Co 3O4 to form Cu xCo 3-xO4

and Ni to CuCo 2O4 to form Ni 1-xCu xCo 2O4 does not increase the material’s electrocatalytic activity towards the 

oxygen evolution reaction, when the current is corrected for the real surface area. However, compared to Co 3O4,

our Fe 0.15 Ni 0.35 Co 2.5 O4, and Fe 0.1 Ni 0.9 Co 2O4 ternary spinel oxides show significant enhancement with almost 

double the current density for the oxygen evolution reaction at 1 V under the same conditions. Our results will 

be compared with the morphology, structure, surface and bulk compositions, and electrochemical properties of 

spinel oxides films of similar compositions reported in the literature. 

Reference s

[1]  C.Gao, Q. Han, M. Wu, J. Energy Chem. 27 (2018) 703 - 712 

[2] M. P. Browne, Z. Sofer, M. Pumera, J.  Energy Environ. Sci . 12 (2019) 41 - 58 

[3] M. S. Burke, S. Zou, L. J. Enman, J. E. Kellon, C. A. Gabor, E. Pledger, S. W. Boettcher , J. Phys. Chem. 

Lett. 6 ( 2015 ) 3737 −3742 

[4] R.L. Doyle, I.J. Godwin, M.P. Brandon, M.E.G. Lyons, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys . 15 ( 2013 ) 13737 -13783. 

[5] S. Thekko ot, “Nanostructured mixed transition metal spinel oxide as efficient electrocatalysts” M.Sc. 

Thesis, York University, 2015. 

[6] R. Islam, “Nanostructured ternary transition metal spinel oxide as efficient electrocatalysts” M.Sc. Thesis, 

York University, 2019 .Enhanced of ethylene glycol electrooxidation by hybrid catalytic 

# systems 

Jesimiel Glaycon Rodrigues Antônio a, Sidney Aquino Neto a, Maria de Lourdes T. M. Polizeli b , Shelly D. 

Minter c, Jefferson Honório Franco a, Adalgisa R. de Andrade a

> a

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Philosophy Sciences and Letters at Ribeirão Preto, University of São 

Paulo, 14040 -901 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. bDepartment of Biology, Faculty of Philosophy Sciences and 

Letters at Ribeir �oPreto, University of S�oPa ulo,14040 -901 Ribeir �oPreto,SP,Brazil ; cDepartments of 

Chemistry and Materials Science and Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT84112,United 

States of America 

E-mail: ardandra@usp.br 

Several types of fuels can be used in biofuel cells ( BFC s) to generate clean energy. However, the low power 

density obtained is one of the main problems that limit s the application of enzymatic biofuel cells. One 

strategy to improve power density of BFC is to increase the degree of oxidation of the fuel, so a higher 

number of electrons can be harvested [1]. Hybrid system combines the advantages of metallic or small 

molecular catalysts with biological catalysts (enzymes) in order to provide a gain in terms of the energy 

withdrawn from the biofuel and generate electricity [2]. We will discuss two different hybrid s system s for 

the electrooxidation of ethylene glycol. The first system combine s metallic nanoparticles of PtSn deposited 

on multi -walled nanotubes functionalized with COOH (MWCNTs -PtSn) and the oxalate oxidase enzyme 

(OxOx). The second hybrid system investigated combines an organic catalyst (4-amino -TEMPO (TEMPO -

NH 2)) and OxOx. Both catalysts (MWCNTs -PtSn and Amino -TEMPO ) showed electrochemical activity 

towards ethylene glycol oxidation presenting a well -defined oxidation peak. However, the onset potential 

for the inorganic catalyst is shifted 200 mV towards less positive potentials compared with the TEMPO 

one , making MWCNTs -PtSn more advantageous for power generation applications. Addition of the 

enzyme OxOx enhance the current densities observed. I norganic hybrid system (OxOx+MWCNTs -PtSn) 

double the current peak in the presence of the enzyme. A mino -TEMPO/OxOx the enzyme act s only when 

the concentration of EG is higher than 100 mmol L -1. Comparison of both approaches shows that 

OxOx+MWCNTs -PtSn is 10 times more efficient that the homogenous organic catalyst furnish ing a good 

prototype to produce energy devices. The chronoamperometric experiments also confirms the good active 

of the hybrid systems; both MWCNT -PtSn -OxOx and amino -TEMPO -OxOx presented an enhancement of 

ethylene glycol oxidation, 3 4 % and 2 3 %, respectively, compared with the system in the absence o f

enzyme. Product analysis by HPLC confirmed th e multiples catabolic steps of EG oxidation, enabling the 

oxidation of EG to more oxidable compounds when the hybrid system is applied . Overall, this study 

illustrates the development of an enzymatic biofuel cell using hybrid systems combining either an organic 

catalyst or metallic nanoparticles and enzymes in order to obtain a novel hybrid anode architecture to 

ethylene glycol oxidation . It constitutes a simple methodology with useful application in the develo pment 

of enzymatic biofuel cells. 

Keywords: Energy, Ethylene glycol, Oxalate oxidase, Inorganic catalyst, Organic catalyst, Enzymatic 

biofuel cell. 

Acknoledgements: Fapesp (2014 -50945 -4; 2017 -20431 -7) and C APES (001) .

References: 

[1] - Sokic -Lazic, D. & Minteer, S. D. Citric acid cycle biomimic on a carbon electrode. Biosens. 

Bioelectron. 24 , 939 –944 (2008). 

[2] - Franco, J. H., Neto, S. A., Hickey, D. P., Minteer, S. D. & de Andrade, A. R. Hybrid catalyst cascade 

architecture enhancement for complete ethanol electrochemical oxidation. Biosens. Bioelectron. 121 , 281 –

286 (2018). Unconventional Electrochemical Precursor Stack s, Zn/ Sn /Cu & Zn/ Cu /Sn , for 

# the Synthesis of CZTS           

> G. Panzeri ,R.Dell’Oro ,L. Magagnin
> Department of Chemistry, Materials and Che mical Engineering Giulio Natta –Politecnico di Milano
> Via Mancinelli, 7 –20131 Milano (Italy)
> luca.magagnin@polimi.it

Electrochemical stacked elemental layer (SEL) approach is one of the most exploited routes for the synthesis 

of Cu 2ZnSnS 4 (CZTS) [1] . This methodology typically involves the sequential deposition of the metallic layer 

followed by reactive annealing in a sulfur atmosphere. However, due to the limitations of aqueous chemistry, 

in the framework of electrodeposition the SEL approach has almost exclusively relied on the Cu/Sn/Zn 

sequence so f ar [1] . The zinc layer readily reacts upon the immersion in a copper/ tin -based solution due to the 

difference between its reduction potential and that of the metallic dissolved ions . On the other hand, almost no 

limitations were observed for vacuum -based processes allowing to exploit different stacking order 

combinations [2] , showing advantages with respect to the conventional one , such as the lower Zn and Sn loss 

after the high -tempe rature annealing. Th erefore , the development of a suitable electrodeposition bath can 

bridge the technological gap between vacuum based and wet fabrication route in terms of possible stack 

sequences. 

In our work , we investigated organic solutions based on ethylene glycol to overcome the intrinsic limitation of 

aqueous system [3] by reducing the reactivity between zinc and copper/tin ions in the solution . D isplacement 

reaction s are studied as a function of diethanolamine content in the bath, a suitable complexing agent for 

copper/tin ions. The solutions are characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrospray mass spectrometry 

(ESI) and, eventually, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). Zn/Sn/Cu and Zn/Cu/Sn stacks were 

fabricated by galvanostatic deposition and were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 

electron dispersive spectroscopy (EDX), glow -discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GDOES) and X -ray 

diffraction (XRD). The copper -poor zinc -rich precursors obtained, were annealed in a sulfur atmosphere at 

560 °C to obtain the CZTS, analyzed by Raman spectroscopy .     

> References
> [1] D. Colombara et al. ,"Electrodeposition of kesterite thin films for photovoltaic applications: Quo vadis?." physica
> status solidi (a) 212.1 (2015): 88 -102.
> [2]H. Araki et al. "Preparation of Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films by sulfurization of stacked metallic layers." Thin Solid Films
> 517.4 (2008): 1457 -1460.
> [3] A. Lahiri et al., "A review on the electroless deposition of functional materials in ionic liquids for batteries and
> catalysis", Front. Chem. 7 (2019). doi:10.3389/fchem.2019.00085

# Biofilm electrodes – can we push the limits? 

Uwe Schröder 

> 1

Institute of Environmental and Sustainable Chemistry, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Hagenring 

30, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany 

*author of correspondence: e -mail:  uwe.schroeder@tu -bs.de , phone: +49 5313918425 

Biofilm electrodes are the living heart of the great majority of bioelectrochemical systems. 

Despite the recent progress, the further increase of the biofilm electrode performance is still a 

key issue for the future success of the deriving microbial electrochemical technologies. The 

current density of high -performing anodic microbial biofilms at flat, macroscopically smooth, 

electrode surfaces (e.g., at sm ooth polycrystalline graphite) reaches about 1 mA cm -2, a further 

increase appearing hampered. Is this final limit in the performance of biofilm electrodes? 

Different approaches have been proposed to increase the electrode performance. They reach 

from surf ace structuring on a nanometer scale to a wealth of 3D electrode structures. How 

effective are such approaches ? This presentation shows a systematic approach to the role of 

structural electrode dimensions on the short -term and long -term performance of biof ilm 

electrodes . It also discuss es opportunities by using promoting effects of unusual electrode 

materials, such as copper. 

References 

Schröder U., Harnisch F., Angenent L. (2015) Microbial electrochemistry and technology: terminology and 

classificatio n. Energy and Environmental Science , 8: 513 -519 

Baudler A., Riedl S., Schröder U. (2014) Long -term performance of primary and secondary electroactive biofilms 

using layered corrugated carbon electrodes. Frontiers in Energy Research, section Bioenergy and Biofuels , doi: 

10.3389/fenrg.2014.00030 

Baudler A., Schmidt I., Langner M., Greiner A., Schröder U. (2015) Does it have to be Carbon? Metal Anodes in 

Microbial Fuel Cells and related Bioelectrochemical Systems. Energy and Environmental Science , 8: 2048 -20 55 

Moß C., Patil S.A., Schröder U. (2019)  Scratching the surface – How decisive are microscopic surface structures on 

growth and performance of electrochemically active bacteria? Frontiers in Energy Research 7 (2019) 18; doi: 

10.3389/fenrg.2019.00018 

Moß C. , Behrens A. , Schröder U. (2020) The limits of three‐dimensionality ‐ Systematic assessment of effective anode 

macro‐structure dimensions for mixed culture electroactive biofilms ; ChemSusChem 13 (2020) 582 -589 

Beuth L., Pfeiffer C.P., Schröder U. Coppe r-bottomed: electrochemically active bacteria exploit conductive sulphide 

networks for enhanced electrogeneity - submitted Continuous separation of ionic contaminants and particles from water 

# by shock electrodialysis 

Mohammad A . Alkhadra 1, Huanhuan Tian 1, Martin Z. Bazant 1,2, *

Affiliation 

Ad dres s

> 1

Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States 

> 2

Mathematics , Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States 

Email:  alkhadra@mit.edu  and *bazant@mit.edu 

Abstract : Shock electr odialysis (or shock ED) is an emerging technology for water purification and 

separations based on splitting fluid streams on either side of a deionization shock wave propagating through 

a charged porous medium at overlimiting current. This talk will introduce the basic physics a nd design 

principles of shock ED and will demonstrate possible applications in water remediation. When the feed is 

dilute, shock ED can be used for deionization (> 99%) with high ( 85%) water recovery, which we 

demonstrated by re moving ions of cobalt and cesium from model radioactive water. We also observed high 

(>90x) selectivity for multivalent ions by the continuous removal of magnesium (Mg 2+ ) from a dilute 

solution of sodium chloride as well as from artificial seawater. Select ivity for toxic heavy metals (which 

are often multivalent) at low salinity guarantees an ultra -low cost of electrical energy (~$0.01/m 3 feed), 

which could lead to a practical solution to purify drinking water from corroded pipes or contaminated 

sources. In addition to ionic separations, this talk will also explore exotic separations such as removal of 

biological contaminants (disinfection) and nanoparticles (dielectrophoresis). 

Figure 1 : (top) Photographs and 3D illustration of the shock ED device to sho w assembly. (bottom) 

Rectangular cross section of the shock ED device to demonstrate the operating principles. For more details, 

please refer to Alkhadra et al., Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020 , 54 (1), 527 –536 .Fingerprint of Fe -N-C Catalysts Poisoning for ORR Application in 

# Microbial Fuel Cells 

Valerio C.A. Ficca 1, Carlo Santoro 2, Plamen Atanassov 3, Barbara Mecheri 1 

> 1

Department of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 

Scientifica, 00133, Rome, Italy.  

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Science, The University of Manchester, The Mill 

Sackville Street, Manchester, M13 PAL, United Kingdom . 

> 3

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Henry Samueli School of Engineering University of 

California, Irvine, Irvine, CA USA. 

Email:  valerio.ficca@uniroma2.it 

The platinum -group metal -free catalysts (PGM -free) are the most performing and most affordable 

alternative solution to platinum catalyst into fuel cells . These catalysts are carbonaceous materials 

containing central atomic transition metals like Fe, Co, Mn coo rdinated to nitrogen bonded into the 

carbon matrix. The metal -nitrogen -carbon (M -Nx-C) in which the nitrogen coordination is 2, 3, 4 nitrogen 

is the most desired active site [1] to enhance oxygen reduction reaction ( ORR ) kinetics at all pH values 

[2,3]. Despite the intrinsic difference in active sites between PGM and PGM -free catalysts , PGM -free are 

able to deliver very satisfactory current density especially in a contaminated working environment where 

Pt is easily deacti vated. This is particularly beneficial in Microbial Fuel Cells (MFC) application field ,

where wastewater can be exploited as a new source of energy. The Fe -Nx-C coordination ability to 

withstand very harmful contaminants has been studied in detail to ident ify the fingerprint of coordination 

contamination in the case of typical wastewater contaminants , namely nitrite, nitrate, chloride, 

perchlorate, sulfide, and sulfate. Rotating Disk Electrode (RDE) analysis, Koutecky -Levich analysis, and 

Tafel analysis hav e been exploited to identify specific trends at pH 7 in terms of Onset Potential (E on ), 

Halfwave potential (E 1/2 ), Limiting Current Density (J lim ), Number of Transferred Electrons (#e -), Tafel 

slopes, and exchange current density (J 0) at the variation of contaminants concentration. The results 

showed a very peculiar trend in the case of direct active site poisoning with J 0 as the predominantly 

parameter able to exactly distinguish between specific and unspecific bonded contaminan ts .

[1] T. As set, P . Atanassov. Joule 4 (2020) 33 -44 .

[2] B. Mecheri, V.C.A. Ficca, M.A. Costa de Oliveira, A. D’Epifanio, E. Placidi, F. Arciprete, S. 

Licoccia. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 237 (2018) 699 –707. 

[3] S. Rojas -Carbonell, K. Artyushkova, A. Serov, C. Santoro, I . Matanovic, P. Atanassov . ACS Catalysis 

8(4) (2018) 3041 -3053. The Electric Double Layer in Carbon Nanotubes and -slits 

W. Schmickler , F. Juarez, F. Flores -Dominguez, E. Santos, P. Quaino 

Ulm University 

Institute of Theoretical Chemistry, Ulm, Germany 

Wolfgang.Schmickler@uni -ulm.de 

The diameters of nanotubes and nano pores can be much smaller than the Debey lengths of electrolyte 

solutions. In this case, conventional double -layer theory cannot be applied. In order to understand the 

behavior of electrolytes under such conditions, we explore the interactions between ions , molecules, and 

carbon nanostructures such as graphene and nanotubes. Because of the low density of electronic states the 

adsorption or insertion of ions modifies the electronic properties of the carbon structures. In particular, 

they make semiconducti ng nanotubes locally conducting, converting them into degenerate n - or p -type 

semiconductors. 

In contrast, the interaction of water with carbon structures is weak. In the case of narrow 

nanotubes, the image charge on the walls of the tube weakens the solvat ion of ions with water. Also, the 

presence of water hardly affects the interaction of ions across the walls of a nanotube. 

On the basis of the elementary interaction of ions with carbon materials we have performed 

Monte Carlo simulations for an ensemble o f ions inside a carbon nanoslit in the grand -canonical 

ensemble. Two regimes can be distinguished: A gas -like filling of the slit with a low density of ions, and 

a disordered , glass -like structure at high ionic concentrations. The two regimes are separated by a 

transition region reminiscent of a phase transition, in which transient, string -like structures are formed –

see figure. Both the charge and the electrochemical potential are well defined in these ensembles. This 

allows us to calculate capacity curve s without introducing adjustable parameters. The structure of these 

curves, in particular the number of capacity humps, depends on the details such as the hydrophilicity of 

the slit, and the charge number of the ions. A few typical examples will be present ed. 

Transient structures at the transition between a gas -like and a solid -like 2D ensemble of ions. 

References 

1 W. Schmickler and D. Henderson, Charge Storage in two -dimensional systems, J. Electroanal. Chem. 

DOI 10.1016/j.jelechem.2020.114101 

2 F. Juarez, P. Quaino, F. Dominguez -Flores, E. Santos, W. Schmickler, Interactions of ions across 

carbon nanotubes ,PCCP, DOI:  10.1039/C9CP04463A Influence of e lectrolyte selection on anodic memristors behavior 

Ivana Zrinski , Jan Philipp Kollender, Cezarina Cela Mardare, Achim Walter Hassel ,

Andrei Ionut Mardare 

Johannes Kepler University Linz 

Altenberger Straße 69 

4040 Linz 

ivana .zrinski@jku.at 

As a borderline case amongst electroactive process es , the electrical field activat ed charge transport 

through a solid state material is responsible for the switching of a memristor between its differen t

electrical conductivity states. These have a permanen t character , thus the term of memory -resistor 

shortened as memristor is widel y used. Among various materials , Ta oxide memristors play a very 

important r ole in the next -generation of th in film micro - and nano -electronic devices mainly due to 

applications i n non -vo latile redox -based resistive switching memories (ReR AMs) and artificial neural 

networks . Thus, t here is a strongly motivated research inter est for understanding the mechanism of device 

operation based on the electric field assisted formation of con ductive filament s inside an insulating metal 

oxide layer . Due to its valve metal characteristics , anodic oxide formation on Ta is a reliable, controllable ,

reproducible, cost -efficient and ind ustrially implementable approach for memristor fabri cation. Such 

anodic oxide , also regarded as a solid electrolyte , is interposed between the Ta parent met al and a Pt thin 

film top electrode for defin ing a memristive device .

In this work, metal -insula tor -metal (MIM ) structure s defined using thin and ultra -thin fi lm s of 

Pt/ Ta 2O5/Ta were investigated in order to study ion migratio n during filament form ation . Using 

sputtering, 330 nm thick Ta films were deposited on SiO 2/Si wafers . The meta llic films were anodized 

potentio dynamically up to 20 nm thickness in three di ff erent electrolytes : phosphate buffer (PB ) ci trate 

bu ffer (CB ) and borate buffer (BB ) solutions with different rates of potential increase. Befo re electrical 

cha racterization, Pt top electrodes 200 μm in diameters were patterned on top of the oxide layer. The 

nature of anodic oxide was questioned from the point of view of anodization parame ters. Electrolyte 

species m ay get trapped inside the memristive device du e to anodization conditions and they can directly 

affect the filament formation during the memri st ive switching. Different compliance currents ( Icc ) were 

studied during the memristor formation phase and their effects on fina l device properties are reported. 

The obtained memris tors ha ve shown very good switching properties , e.g. abili ty of long endura nc e, long 

retention (>10 5 cycles, >10 6 cycles with Icc < 150 mA ), low power consumption (Vset /Vreset < ±1.5 V ) and 

multiple switching leve ls . Thermo – electrical measurements were also performed resulting in reliable 

memri stor formation dependence on the app lied compliance curre nt . The f igure shows anodi zation 

pro cess of Ta film wi th the schematic representation of the memristive devices and their I-V response. 

In conclusion, the current study offers optimized routes for fabrication of anodic Ta oxide mem rist ive 

devices offering possibilit ies for f uture sens ing applications and lar ge scale -up opportunities with the 

main advantage of a very simple and che ap fabrication procedure .Electrochemical nitrite sensor based on PEDOT and hollow AuPt 

# nanoparticles 

G. Lucero , A. Bund 

Fachgebiet Elektrochemie und Galvanotechnik, Technische Universität Ilmenau 

Gustav -Kirchhoff -Str. 6, 98693 Ilmenau 

gisella -liliana.lucero -lucas@tu -ilmenau.de 

Nitrite s are chemical compounds that can pose a threat to the environment and human health at 

concentrations above 3 mg/L in drinking and waste water (World Health Organization [1] ). These 

compounds can react wit h amines and form N – nitroso compounds, some of which are potentially 

carcinogenic products, and can lead to cyanosis through the formation of methemoglobin by the reaction 

of nitrites and hemoglobin. Therefore, monitoring the concentration of nitrite in water is an essential task. 

Traditionally, n itrite ions are detected and quantifi ed by techniques that require complex devices, are time 

consuming or demand the pretre atment of the sample with some harmful reagents or the production of toxic 

compounds. These detection methods encompass colorimetry, chemiluminescence and chromatographic 

and spectrophotometric techniques. 

Electrochemical sensors are an appropriate altern ative for the detection of nitrite in water. Nanocomposites 

based on multiwall carbon nanotubes , graphene, conducting polymers and metal nanoparticles have been 

reported as nitrite sensors [2,3] ; however, to the authors´ best knowledge, sensors based on PE DOT and 

hollow bimetallic nanoparticles have not been tested as potential material s for the electrochemical detection 

of nitrite .

In this work, hollow AuPt nanoparticles were synthesized by galvanic dis placement and characterized by 

SEM, EDX and TEM/STEM. The results confirmed the hollow structure of the bimetallic nanoparticles 

(particle size: 20 -30 nm; Fig 1). EDX analysis revealed that the particles contain Au and Pt and showed 

the elemental profile through the nanoparticles. The nanoparticles were cent rifuged, resuspended in water 

and co -deposited from a solution of the surfactant SDS, the monomer EDOT and LiClO 4 at 0.9 V. The 

performance of the composite PEDOT/AuPt was evaluated by differential pulse voltammetry (Fig. 2) in 

the range of 50 to 250 μM. T he sensitivity of the sensor was 0.0 4 +/ -0.01 μA μM -1.

Figure 1 – Hollow AuP t TEM micrograph Figure 2 – DPV curves for nitrite detection 

[1] World Health Organization , Guidelines for Drinking – water Quality. (2017) 398 pp. Available from: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK442376/ 

[2] Li G., Xia Y. Tian Y., Wu Y., Liu J., He Q. and Chen D. J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) B881. 

[3] Zou H., Zhang F., Wang H., Xia J., Gao L. a nd Wang Z . New J. Chem. 43 (2019) 2464 . 

> y = 0.04 +/ -0.01μAμM -1

AuPt/PEDOT Nernstian Li + Intercalation into Few -Layer Graphene and its Use for 

# the Determination of K + Co -Intercalation Processes 

Jingshu Hui ,a A. Nijamudheen, b Dipobrato Sarbapalli, c Chang Xia, a Zihan Qu, a Jose L. Mendoza -

Cortes, b, * and Joaquín Rodríguez -López a, *

a. Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana –Champaign, 600 South Mathews Avenue, 

Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States 

b. Department of Chemical Engineering & Materials Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 

Michigan 48824, US A. 

c. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, 1304 

West Green Street, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States. 

E-mail : huijingshu@gmail.com 

Alkali ion batteri es (AIB) based on Li +, and emerging technologies based on K +, are important 

high -performance rechargeable energy storage devices. Alkali ion intercalation is fundamental to those 

battery technologies for a wide spectrum of potential applications that perme ate our modern lifestyle, 

including portable electronics, electric vehicles, and the electric grid. In spite of its importance, the 

Nernstian nature of the charge transfer process describing lithiation of carbon has not been described 

previously. 

Here we use the ultrathin few -layer graphene (FLG) with micron -sized grains as a powerful 

platform for exploring intercalation and co -intercalation mechanisms of alkali ions with high versatility. 

Using voltammetric and chronoamperometric methods and bolstered by density functional theory (DFT) 

calculations, we show the kinetically facile co -intercalation of Li + and K + within an ultrathin FLG 

electrode. Furthermore, distinct Nernstian -type responses for Li + only and Li +/K + co -exist systems with 

respect to solution concentration were observed, with the previous one showing a single Li + charge 

transfer property upon (de)intercalation and the latter one showing a two -phase Li +/K + co -intercalation 

behavior. Bulk ion diffusion coefficients in the carbon host, as measure d using the potentiometric 

intermittent titration technique (PITT) were similarly sensitive to solution composition. While previous 

studies of co -intercalation on graphitic anode typically focus on co -intercalation of solvents and one 

particular alkali ion , this is to the best of our knowledge the first study elucidating the intercalation 

behavior of two monovalent alkali ions. This study demonstrates the concept of alkali ion co -intercalation 

for elucidating fundamental charge transfer processes for batter ies beyond Li -ion , and establishes ultrathin 

graphitic electrodes as an enabling electroanalytical platform to uncover thermodynamic and kinetic 

processes with high versatility. Spatially resolved model of oxygen reduction reaction in porous gas -

# diffusion electrodes 

David Franzen , Barbara Ellendorff, Thomas Turek 

Clausthal University of Technology, Institute of Chemical and Electrochemical Process Engineering 

Leibnizstraße 17, 386 78 Clausthal -Zellerfeld, Germany 

franzen@icvt.tu -clausthal.de 

Chlorine is one of the most important basic chemicals , which is predominantly manufactured by the 

energy -intensive chlor -alkali electrolysis process. By introducing the so -called oxygen depolar ized 

cathode (ODC), the electrical energy demand can be reduced by up to 30 % compared to the state -of -the -

art membrane process. The ODC is designed as a gas diffusion electrode (GDE), due to the low solubility 

of oxygen at the high process temperature (80 °C). To improve the efficiency of GDE further it is 

necessary to understand the complex interaction of transport and reaction processes inside the electrodes. 

In order to investigate these processes a stationary mathematical model is developed, which incl udes the 

physical transport processes inside the gas and liquid phase as well as phase transformation and 

electrochemical reaction kinetics at the three -phase boundary (Fig. 1 , left ). Gas       

> Chamber Diffusion Layer
> Electrolyte
> Electrode
> Thin -film
> O2
> H2O
> O2
> H2O
> Reaction Layer
> z
> Electrolyte
> H2O(l)
> OH -
> O2
> H2O
> OH -
> H2O(l)
> H2O(l)
> OH -0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1
> 02468
> η / V
> | j | kA m -2
> 100 % O 2
> 80 % O 2
> 60 % O 2
> 40 % O 2
> 20 % O 2
> exp.
> sim.

Fig. 1: Left: Schematic of the approach according to the TFFA model . Right: Measured and simulated 

polarization curves (80 °C, 30 wt.% NaOH) for different oxygen concentrations. 

In contrast to earlier assumptions [1], recent findings by Botz et al. [2] showed the importance of the 

electrolyte transport inside the GDE whic h was underestimated in the current thin -film flooded -

agglomerate (TFFA) models. In the improved version of the TFFA model, the electrolyte transport is 

considered adequately. The electrolyte properties inside the GDE and the resulting process parameters, 

such as the oxygen solubility, are spatially resolved, allowing a detailed glimpse into the physical and 

electrochemical processes inside the GDE. 

The model is validated by a custom build test setup designed for stationary conditions . A large circulating 

electrolyte system, accurate gas dosing, as well as individual pressure and temperature control for the 

electrolyte and gas phase guarantee stationary conditions for long -term measurements. A wide range of 

process conditions can be adjusted and used for mo del validation. The results show a good agreement 

between measured and simulated overvoltages for different oxygen concentrations (Fig. 1, right ). 

References: 

[1] S. Pinnow, N. Chavan, T. Turek (2011) Thin -film flooded agglomerate model for silver -based 

oxygen depolarized cathodes. J Appl Electrochem 41(9): 1053 –1064. doi: 10.1007/s10800 -011 -

0311 -2

[2] A. Botz, J. Clausmeyer, D. Öhl, T. Tarnev, D. Franzen, T. Turek, W. Schuhmann (2018) Local 

Activities of Hydroxide and Water Determine the Operation of Ag‐B ased Oxygen Depolarized 

Cathodes. Angew Chem Int Ed 57: 12285 -12289. doi: 10.1002/anie.201807798 

Acknowledgements 

The authors are grateful to the German Research Foundation (DFG) in the framework of the Research 

Unit “Multi -scale analysis of complex three -phase systems: oxygen reduction on gas -diffusion electrodes 

in aqueous electrolyte” (FOR2397) Novel Non -precious Metal Nanocomposites as Potential Cathod ic 

# Electrocatalysts for Microbial Electrolysis Cells 

Elitsa Chorbadzhiyska 1,2 , Ivo Bardarov 1,2 , Yolina Hubenova 3,4 , Elitsa Petkucheva 3, Evelina Slavcheva 3,

Mario Mitov 1,2 

> 1

Department of Chemistry , South -West University, Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria 

> 2

Innovative Centre for Eco Energy Technologies, South -West University “Neofit Rilski”, Blagoevgrad, 

Bulgaria  

> 3

Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy Systems “Academician Evgeni Budevski” - Bulgarian 

Academy of Sciences (IEES -BAS), Sofia, Bulgaria  

> 4

Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Plovdiv University “Paisii Hilendarski” , Plovdiv ,

Bulgaria 

e-mail:  elli_e1@swu.bg 

Microbial electrolysis cell ( MEC ) is an emergin g bioelectrochemical technology for hydrogen production 

from wastewater and other renewable resources, which major advantage is the relatively low voltage 

input (0.2 –0.8 V) compared to the conventional water electrolysis (1.23 –1.8 V) . Because MECs use the 

same bioanodes as microbial fuel cells, t he most critical challenge for the ir practical application is the 

development of cost -effective cathodes for near -neutral pH and ambient temperature conditions. 

In this study, two - and three -component nano structures , denoted as Fe 2Ni, Fe 3Ni Fe 2Co, Fe 3Co, CoNi, 

CoNiFe 2, and CoNiFe 3, were deposit ed on nickel foam (NF) by a new method called ”Dip and Drying” 

(DDM)  [1 ,2 ]. The DDM allows a fast self -deposition of nanoparticles up on the metal substrate at room 

temperature. The deposition was performed from mixed 0.1M solutions of FeCl 2, FeCl 3, CoCl 2 and NiCl 2,

in different combinations for 30 minutes. The morphology and the chemical composi tion of the developed 

materials were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 

(XPS) , respe ctively . The electrocatalytic activity of the modified electrodes for the hydrogen evolution 

reaction (HER) in neutral phos phate buffer solution (PBS) was explored by l inear sweep voltammetry 

(LSV), cyclic vol ta mmetry (CV), chronoamperometry (CA) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 

(EIS). The results obtained show that the nanocomposites, deposited from Fe 2+ solutions , po ssess higher 

electrocatalytic activity than those from Fe 3+-containing electrolytes . The highest hydrogen production 

rate of 38±2 ml.cm -2.min -1 at -1. 2 V ( vs . Ag/AgCl) was achieved with Fe 2Co -NF electrode. Further 

studies, aiming at the practical applica tion of this type of electrodes as cathodes in MECs, are going to be 

performed. 

Acknowledgements: This study was supported by the Bulgarian National Science Fund through contract 

KP06 -N29/8/2018 and implemented in section “Bioelectrolysis” of Lab 3 of the Center of Competence 

HITMOBIL – Technologies for generation, storing and consumption of clean energy (grant agreement 

BG05M20P001 -1.002 /2019 ). The authors are thankful to Ognian Dimitrov (IEES -BAS) for the SEM 

imaging, and to Krasimir Kostov (IGIC -BAS) for the XPS analysis .

References: 

[1] F. Song, M.M. Busch, B. Lassalle -Kai ser, C. -S. Hsu, E. Petkucheva, Micha �L Bensimon, Hao, 

M. Chen, C. Corminboeuf, X. Hu, An Unconventional Iron Nickel Catalyst for the Oxygen 

Evolution Reaction, ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 558−568; ttps://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.9b00053. 

[2] E. Petkucheva, G. Borisov, E. Lefterova, E. Slavch eva, Application of the "Dip and Drying" 

method (DDM) for the synthesis of electro -catalysts with application in industrial alkaline 

electrolysis, In: Proc. of XVI National Youth Scientific -practical C onference , 7 -8 Nov. 2019, 

Sofia, Bulgaria, pp. 17 -22. 

NF  Fe 2Ni Intelligent Microelectrodes Arrays for In Situ Analysis of Biofluids 

Rajendra P. Shukla, Remi Cazelles, Dima Mayzus, Avia Lav on, Hadar Ben -Yoav 

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben -Gurion University of the Negev 

P.O.B. 653 Beer -Sheva 8410501 Israel 

benyoav@bgu.ac.il 

Electrochemical lab -on -a-chips (LoCs) are translational and mobile analytical micro -systems that enable 

rapid and label -free analyses of redox biomarkers, bringing benchtop medical diagnostic metho ds to the 

point -of -care. However, the selectivity of these LoCs towards the biomarkers -of -interest dramatically 

decreases in the presence of biofluids due to other redox molecules generating masking and overlapping 

electrochemical signals, requiring pretre atment steps to filter the interfering molecules and limiting the 

LoC’s real -time analysis capabilities. Here we report a new electroanalytical technique that will enable 

biofluids analysis without pretreatment step and lies in the use of an array of micro electrodes that are 

modified by coating with bioelectronic films and generating a set of complex electrochemical signals that 

is analyzed by using intelligent machine learning algorithms (chemometrics) (Fig. 1A). We utilize 

electrodeposition method [1,2] to modify electrodes with bioelectronic nano -films (e.g., reduced -

graphene -oxide and biopolymer chitosan). The modified array controls the electrochemical signal 

characteristics based on the diffusion and electron transfer rate coefficients of the redox mol ecules. We 

analyze biofluids in two detection modes: (1) direct detection of a specific biomarker and (2) 

simultaneous detection of multiple biomarkers by using machine learning algorithms. We demonstrate the 

proof -of -concept detection of: (1) amplifying a ntipsychotic clozapine electrochemical signal by using the 

reduced -graphene -oxide film that enables in situ detection in 20 μL of whole blood (within 5 minutes; 

limit of detection of 0.64 ± 0.04 μM, which is better than the clinical threshold) and will provide better 

schizophrenia treatment outcomes (Fig. 1B); and (2) utilizing an array of microelectrodes modified with 

various selectivities (chitosan and chitosan -carbon nanotubes) to different neurotransmitters and 

analyzing the set of signals generated from profiles of neurotransmitters by using a machine learning 

algorithm (artificial neural network and partial least square regression) enables their simultaneous 

differentiation (dopam ine limit of detection of 9.3 mM and norepinephrine limit of detection of 6.7 mM) 

in undiluted urine (Fig. 1C). 

Figure 1: (A) Electrochemical lab -on -a-chip integrated with functional bioelectronic films for real -time 

and in situ probing of redox biomarkers in biofluids. (B) Amplification of antipsychotic clozapine 

electrochemical signal. (C) Intelligent electrode s array for neurotransmitters profiling. 

References: 

[1] S. K. Shukla et al., Talanta , 181, pp. 57 -64, 2018. 

[2] R.P. Shukla and H. Ben -Yoav, Advanced Healthcare Materials , 8, pp. 1900462, 2019. Electrochemical and spectroscopic properties of Green Synthesized 

# Gold Nanoparticles Doped in Polyacrylonitrile Nanofibers     

> Moeng G. Motitswe 1,2 ,Omolola E. Fayemi 1,2* ,Helen P. Drummond 1,2
> 1Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sc iences, North -West University
> (Mafikeng Campus), South Africa
> 2Material Science Innovation and Modelling (MaSIM) Research Focus Area, Faculty of Natural and
> Agricultural Sciences, North -West University (Mafikeng Campus), South Africa.
> *Corresponding auth or: Email: Omolola.Fayemi@nwu.ac.za; Faculty of Natural and Agricultural
> Sciences, North -West University (Mafikeng Campus), Private Bag X2046, Mmabatho 2735, South Africa

Abstract 

The paper provides insights on the less costly and eco -friendly green tech nique used for 

the synthesis of gold metal nanoparticle from banana (Musa paradisiaca) peel extracts. 

Electrospinning method was used to fabricate a stabilized nanocomposite 

polyacrylonitrile functionalized with green synthesized gold (PAN/Au) into nanofib ers. 

The nanoparticle and its nanocomposite were characterized by using spectroscopy and 

surface morphology techniques. Surface characterization techniques like transmission 

electron microscope (TEM) was used to determine the shape and size of the nanopart icles. 

Other spectroscopy characterization was done by using UV -Visible spectroscopy, and X -

ray diffraction (XRD), respectively. The spectroscopic studies for the gold nanoparticles 

were conducted at various volumes, concentrations, and synthesis time. The nanoparticle 

diameters were calculated to be on an average of 9 nm. Shape uniformity, stability and 

particle size distribution of the nanoparticles and nanocomposite were confirmed by TEM 

and Zeta Potential study. The electrochemical characterization of synthesized 

nanoparticles Au and its nanocomposite PAN/Au was carried out by using cyclic 

voltammetry (CV), Furthermore, the nanocomposites of gold nanoparticles doped in 

polyacrylonitrile nanofibers showed improved electrochemical information as compared 

to the monometallic nanoparticles, unmodified PAN molecule, and the bare glassy carbon 

electrode. These properties exhibited by the nanocomposite PAN -Au suggests that it can 

be used as electrochemical sensors for the detection of biological molecules such as 

neurotransmitters. Preparation of Covalently Attached and Robust PANI Nanorod 

# Array s Using an Oriented Mesoporous Silica Film as Hard Template 

Wahid Ullah , Neus Vil à, Gregoire H erzog, Alain Walcarius 

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, LCPME, F-54600 Nancy , France. 

wahid.ullah@univ -lorraine.fr 

Polyaniline (PANI ) is a thoroughly studied conducting polymer known for its structural diver sities, high 

electrical conductivities , doping/de -doping and protonating/deprotonating chemistry, facile synthesis and 

environmental stability . Distinguishable among the family of conjugated polymers , it offers interest for 

numerous applications including sensors, energy harvesting and storage , memory devices, filtration 

membrane or anticorrosive coat ing .1 For practical applications the structural design a nd fabrication at 

nanoscale (with controlled size and shape) is important for tuning their physical propert ies. Polyaniline 

nanostructures have been synthesized in different morphological shapes including nanofiber s, nanorods 

and nanotubes , by using various synthetic methods such as template synthesis, emulsion, self -assembly 

and interfacial polymerization .2 Aligned and ordered nanostructures are expected to exhibit better 

electrochemical and electronic properties than the randomly oriented nanoscale materials , as exemplified 

for polyaniline nanostructure s show ing high and reproducible performance as material of device .3. 

One of the major issue is the PANI stability wh en deposited by drop -casting or electropolymerized over 

the surface . The lack of proper chemical bond s between the polymer chain s and the conducting substrate ,

limit s the practical applicability of PANI regardless of its excellent chemistry. It is thus necessary to get 

stable and covalently bonded PANI nanostructure s.

In this work , PANI nanowires have been electropolymerized on ITO substrate covered with a mesop orous 

silica membrane and containing aniline molecules covalently attached at the bottom of the pores. The 

oriented mesoporous silica thin film was generated on ITO by electrochemically assisted self -assembly .4

The ITO surface was first derivatized with aminophenyl molecules by in situ e lectro grafting , according to 

a reported procedure ,5 followed by potentiostatic polymerization of PANI (for selected times) from a bath 

containing aniline in sulfuric acid media 6.

The electrografted arylamine molecules stabilize the PANI nanorods arrays and ac ts as catalysts during 

electro polymerization (see Fig. 1 indicating fast er filling of mesochannels observed for the aniline -grafted 

sample , and mechanically stable deposits upon silica removal ). The PANI nanowires exhibit excellent 

electrochemical redox be havior inside the silica pores and after removing the template. Its redox behavior 

was further studied by spectro -

electrochemistry . Other physico -

chemical methods including X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy, grazing -

incidence small -angle X -ray scattering 

an d transmission electron microscopy ,

were also used to characterize the 

materi al s.

References 

1 C. O. Baker, X. Huang, N. Nelsonc 

and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev. ,

2017, 46 , 1510 –1525. 

2 H. D. Tran, J. M. D. A rcy, Y. Wang, 

P. J. Beltramo, A. Strong and R. B. 

Kaner, J. Mater. Chem. , 2011, 21 ,

3534 –3550. 

3 B. K. Kuila and M. Stamm, J. 

Mater. Chem. , 2010, 20 , 6086 –6094. 

4 A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. 

Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, Nat. 

Mater. , 2007, 6, 602 –608. 

5 J. L yskawa and D. Bélanger, Chem. Mater. , 2006, 18 , 4755 –4763. 

6 G-Q. Alonso, C. Karman, N. Vila. G Herzog and A. Walcarius, Langmiur, 2017, 33 , 4224 -4234. Combined Spectroe lectrochemical and EQCM Study 

# of Magnesium Porphin e Electrop olymerization Proc ess 

D. V. Konev 1,2 , O. I. Istakova 1, O.A. Goncharova 3, C. H. Devillers 4, M. A. V orotyntsev 1,2, 3,4,5  

> 1

Institute for Problems of Chemic al Physics, Russian Acade my of Sciences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 2

Me ndeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , Moscow, Russia  

> 3

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Dijon, France  

> 5

Frumkin Institut e of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow ,

Russia 

Email:  dkfrvzh @gmail .com , oistakova @gmail .com , mivo2010@yandex.com 

Mg(II) p orphin e ( MgP, Fig. 1 _left ) can be polymeriz ed by its oxidation in ace tonitrile (AN) solution. If 

the potential is sufficiently low ( below 0. 4 V vs . Ag/ 10 mM Ag NO 3 in AN for potentiostatic deposition) 

an electroactive polymer film is steadily growing [1] . It is known that MgP oxidation under mild 

conditions should lead to sin gle bond ’s formation in meso -meso positions . It implies that a porphine 

mon omer unit may form from 2 to 4 such bonds inside the polymer. 

Recently this process has been studied via both spectro electrochemical [2] , EQCM and redox -charge [3] 

methods i n order to determine the average number of such bonds and consequently to establish the 

polymer structure .

The former technique monitors the variation of the UV -visible spectrum of the monomer soluti on in the 

course of its oxidati ve electrolysis , with separation of the m onomer and solute oligomer contributions . It 

provides the relation between the electrolysis charge and the amount of the oxidized monomer . Their ratio 

reflects the charge consumption f or formation o f bonds inside the polymer and solute oligomers as well as 

for their transition to the oxidized (conducting) state .

Even though the latter contribution may be evaluated on the basis of the redox -charge variation of the 

deposited film in th e monomer -free solution , one cannot find the number of bonds per m onomer unit 

since a significant fraction of the oxidized monom er gives solute oligomers and polymer particles in 

solution or on the bottom of the cell. 

Supplementary informa tion for determinat ion of th e monomer frac tion inside the polymer film on the 

elect rode surface is available from the EQCM technique via measurements of the variation of the film ’s

mass in the course of both its deposition and redox -charg e variation in contact with backgroun d solution .

Data for all these three methods have been combined via the set of equations based on the mass and 

charge co nservation laws. 

Their solution has shown that the variation of the redox -charge of the film is accompanied by exchange 

with the backgr ound solution by not only counterion s but also by solvent molec ules , due to the film 

rigidity at this time scale. This analysis has confirmed a 

very high yield of the fil m deposition at the electrode 

surface : about 90% of all MgP monomers oxidi zed in the 

course of the oxidative electrolysis were tran sformed into 

monom er units inside the film. The average charging 

degree of the monomer unit inside the film at the 

deposition potential has tu rned out to be in agreement with 

our previous estimates , about 0.15. At last, the average number of the bonds between monomer units 

inside the film is around 2.3 -2.4. It means that the polymer in general has got a chain structure (Fig. 

1_right) but with a significant number of interchain links (around 3 to 4 links per 10 m onomer units of the 

chain ).

Fig. 1. Left: MgP monomer . Ri ght: Mg(II) polyporphine deposited at very low oxidation pote ntial , pMgP -

I

References: 

1. M. A. Vorotyntse v, D. V. Konev, C. H. Devillers, I. Bezverkhyy, O. Heintz , Magnesium(II) 

Polyporphine: The First Electron -Conducting Polymer with Directly Linked Unsubsti tuted Porphyrin 

Units Obtained by Electrooxidation at a Very Low Potential , Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6703 -6714 

2. D. V. Konev, O. I. Istakova, О. А. Sereda, М. А. Shamraeva, C.H. Devillers , M. A. Vorotyntsev , In 

situ UV -visible spectroelectrochemistry in the cour se of oxidative monomer electrol ysis as a tool to characterize the molecular structure of poly(Mg(II)porphi ne) , Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 315 -325 

3. O. I. Istakova , D. V. Konev , O. A. Goncharova , C. H. Devillers , M. A. Vorotyntsev , EQCM Study of

Magnesium Porphine Elec tropolymerization Process , J. Solid State Electrochem., submitted Copper nanowires as higly sensitivite electrode for nitrate ions in 

# water 

Bernardo Patella , Roberta Russo, Carmelo Sunseri, Giuseppe Aiello, Rosalinda Inguanta 

University of Palermo , Viale delle scienze Bd. 6 

Bernardo.patella@unipa.it 

Agricultural and l ivestock sectors are the main sources of nitrate ions contamination in water 

and foodstuff. [1]. High nitrate concentration is dangerous for both environment (algae overgrowth) and 

human health. Nitrate ions can be converted in different harmful nitrogen based compound such as NO 2-,

NO , N -nitroso compounds [2] that are responsible of several diseases such as cancer, Parkinson [3-4]. For 

these reasons, the Environmental Protection Agency, has established the maximum amount of nitrate ions 

in drinkable water at 44 mg/l, limit that is valid in many European countries [5]. Generally, spectroscopy 

techniques are the most used because allow to carry out analyses with high precision and reaching low 

LOD but it require s skilled workforces and specific instrumentati ons, besides the procedure is long and 

hard [6]. In this frame, electrochemical sensors can be used as easy, fast , cheap and not -lab -depended 

technology to detect nitrate ions with high selectivity and sensitivity. Copper is one of the more sensitive 

mater ial to detect nitrate due to its low overpotential for reduction of NO 3- to NO 2- [7-9]. In this work , we 

have developed a Cu -NWs based electrode obtained by template galvanic deposition into nanoporous 

membrane . The overall process is cost effective, scala ble, fast and Cu NWs of well anchored to a copper 

current collector can be easily obtained. Using this kind of nanostructured electrode, the surface area of 

the sensor is of about 70 time higher of bare ones and this is a special property for electrochemic al 

devices . A low LOD of about 9.1 μM, (≈ 100 times lower than EPA limit ) and a wide linear range were 

found. The effect of many interferents (Mg 2+ , CO 3--, Cu 2+ , Pb 2+ , Zn 2+ , Ni 2+ , Hg 2+ , Ag +, Al 3+ , SO 4--, Na +)

was studied and nitrate ions were also successfully detected in real water samples (riv er, rain and drinking 

water) .

References 

[1] Ward, M., Jones, R., Brender, J., de Kok, T., Weyer, P., Nolan, B., Villanueva, C., van Breda, S., 2018. Drinking Water N itrate 

and Human Health: An Updated Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health 15, 15 57. 

[2] Lijinsky, W., 1999. N -Nitroso compounds in the diet. Mutat. Res. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 443, 129 –138. 

[3] Mirvish, S.S., 1995. Role of N -nitroso compounds (NOC) and N -nitrosation in etiology of gastric, esophageal, nasopharyngeal 

and bladder ca ncer and contribution to cancer of known exposures to NOC. Cancer Lett. 93, 17 –48 

[4] Bosnir, D.B.J., Bevardi, M., Boskovic, A.G., Lasic, S.M.D., Krivohlavek, A., Racs, A., Mojosovic -Cuic, A., Trstenjak, N.U., 

2017. NITRATE IN LEAFY GREEN VEGETABLES AND E STIMATED INTAKE. Afr. J. Tradit. Complement. Altern. Med. 14, 

31 –41 

[5]  https://www.epa.gov/ground -water -and -drinking -water/national -primary -drin king -water -regulations 

[6]Suggs, J.C., Margeson, J.H., Midgett, M.R., 1980. Reduction of Nitrate to Nitrite with Cadmium. Anal. Chem. 52, 1955 –1957. 

[7]Reyter, D., 2014. Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrate, in: Kreysa, G., Ota, K., Savinell, R.F. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Applied 

Electrochemistry. Springer New York, New York, NY, pp. 585 –593. 

[8] Stortini, A.M., Fabris, S., Saorin, G., Falzacappa, E.V., Moretto, L.M., Ugo, P., 2019. Plasma Activation of Copper Nanow ires 

Arrays for Electrocatalytic Sensing of Nitrate in Food and Water. Nanomaterials 9, 150 

[9] Davis, J., Moorcroft, M.J., Wilkins , S.J., Compton, R.G., Cardosi, M.F., 2000. Electrochemical detection of nitrate and nitrite at 

a copper modified electrode. The Analyst 125, 737 –742. Ascorbic Acid detection using linear sweep voltammetry on flexible 

# electrode based on gold nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide 

Francesca Mazzara , Bernardo Patella , Giuseppe Aiello , Carmelo Sunseri , Rosalinda Inguanta 

Department of Engineering 

Univers ity of Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, 90128 – Palermo (Italy) 

francesca.mazzara04@unipa.it 

In the last years, sensors are taking more and more relevance in many fields such us, sport [1] ,

environmental [2] , health [3] . In the food field sensors can help to maintain the quality index for example 

by measuring the freshness, the allergens and the content of the contaminants or to improve the food -

status monitoring by minimizing the waste and increasing the shelf -life. 

In this wor k, an electrochemical sensor for ascorbic acid determination is shown whit a real validation for 

its determination in milk. 

Ascorbic acid (AA), also known as vitamin C, is a water -soluble compound with antioxidant properties. It 

can be found in nature in m any fresh fruits and vegetables like oranges, potatoes and cauliflower [4] . Due 

to its antioxidant properties, it is widely used in the food industry. It may be added to many foods and 

beverage to improve keeping qualities an d it can be also used as a color/flavor stabilizer. Moreover, AA 

can be employed as a browning inhibitor to increase antioxidant food capacity. It plays a fundamental role 

in many biological functions such as iron absorption, collagen synthesis, immune sys tem activation, 

osteogenesis [5] . Most plants and animals synthesize ascorbic acid from carbohydrate precursors 

including glucose and galactose. Humans and other animals are unable to produce this vitamin and thus it 

is necessary to be taken from the d iet [6] . A lack of AA can cause scurvy pathology that affects collagen 

synthesis. Ascorbic acid deficiency leads to symptoms of weakness, anaemia, gum disease and skin 

problem s. An excess of AA leads to gastric irritation and renal problem. Moreover, it can react with the 

heavy metals as pro -oxidant, increasing the oxidative stress in human cells. 

For all these reasons, it is important to evaluate ascorbic acid concentration in food and beverage. In this 

work indium tin oxide (ITO) coated on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate electrode was 

modified with reduced graphene oxide and gold nanoparticles by simple co -electrodeposition performed 

at room temperature . Al l samples were characterized by electron scan microscopy and EDS analysis. 

Because the AA oxidation highly depends on the pH of the sensing solution, a systematic investigation on 

the effect of this parameter was performed .

The as prepared electrode was u sed as electrochemical sensor to selective detection of ascorbic acid using 

linear sweep voltammetry. Promising results were obtained . In particular, a linear range from 20 to 150 

μM of ascorbic acid and a limit of detection of about 3.1 μM was found . The sensors have a 

reproducibility of about 5.5% and also show high selectivity towards different milk interferents such as 

chlorine, calcium, magnesium, sulphate ions, sodium and glucose. Ascorbic acid was detected also in 

different commercial milk samples demonstrating the possibility to quantify this analyte in real samples 

with a very cheap method. 

[1] G. Aroganam, N. Manivannan, e D. Harrison, «Review on Wearable Technology Sensors Used in 

Consumer Sport Applications», Sensors , vol. 19, n. 9, pag. 1983, apr. 2019. 

[2] M. Li, H. Gou, I. Al -Ogaidi, e N. Wu, «Nanostructured Sens ors for Detection of Heavy Metals: A 

Review», ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. , vol. 1, n. 7, pagg. 713 –723, lug. 2013. 

[3] H. Huang et al. , «Graphene -Based Sensors for Human Health Monitoring», Front. Chem. , vol. 7, 

pag. 399, giu. 2019. 

[4] A. Valente, T. G. Al buquerque, A. Sanches -Silva, e H. S. Costa, «Ascorbic acid content in exotic 

fruits: A contribution to produce quality data for food composition databases», Food Research 

International , vol. 44, n. 7, pagg. 2237 –2242, ago. 2011. 

[5] S. J. Padayatty et al. , «Vitamin C as an Antioxidant: Evaluation of Its Role in Disease Prevention», 

Journal of the American College of Nutrition , vol. 22, n. 1, pagg. 18 –35, feb. 2003. 

[6] D. R. Gallie, «L -Ascorbic Acid: A Multifunctional Molecule Supporting Plant Growth and 

Development», Scientifica , vol. 2013, pagg. 1 –24, 2013. Electro -chemo -mechanical coupling: a novel approach to micro 

# actuation 

Evgeniy Makagon 1, E llen Wachtel 1, L othar Houben 2, Sidney R. Cohen 2, Y uanyuan Li 3, J unying Li 3,

Anatoly Frenkel 3, Igor Lubomirsky 1 

> 1

Department of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann I nstitute of Science, Rehovot, Israel  

> 2

Department of Chemical Research Support, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel  

> 3

Department of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 

USA 

Email address: evgeniy.maka gon@weizmann.ac.il 

The chemo -mechanical effect in solids refers to dimensional change due to change in 

stoichiometry. Dimensional change due to electrochemically -induced compositional change has been 

termed the electro -chemo -mechanical (ECM) effect . The mechanical instability inherent in this effect is 

clearly deleterious for batteries or fuel cells, but, as recently suggested, has potential for use in 

actuation [1] . The structure of an actuator device that operates on the ECM principle comprises a

micrometer thick solid electrolyte (SE) sa ndwiched between two ECM -active , working body (WB) 

layers . An electrochemical reaction must occur in these layers, causing them to alternately expand or 

contract. In order to facilitate the ECM response, the WB layers should have mixed ionic and electronic 

conductivity and a large chemical expansion coefficient. 

We have constructed a 2mm diameter thin film membrane ECM actuator device comprising 

20mol% Gd doped CeO 2 (20GDC) as the SE and [Ti O2-δ\20GDC] composite s as the WB s. Selected area 

electron diffraction measurements showed the composite to be nanocrystalline, a morphology that 

promotes interfacial oxygen ion diffusion. Synchrotron X -ray absorption measurements detected a

mixture of Ce 3+ /Ce 4+ (~[0.4]/[0.6]) and Ti 3+ /Ti 4+ (~[0.1]/[0.9]) oxidation states in the WB . The 

deformation of the ECM actuator was observed to be in the bending regime producing large vertical 

displacements (~ 3 μm) and ~ 4 MPa stress. The stress/voltag e ratio yields a pseudo piezoelectric stress 

coefficient of e 31 =1.26 C/m 2, comparable to common lead free piezoelectrics such as lithium niobate, 

lithium tantalate and alkali niobates .

[1] J. G. Swallow et al., Nat. Mater. (2017) 16 , 749 Electrochemical synthesis of Prussian blue from iron impurities in 3D -

# printed graphene electrodes: Amperometric detection of H2O2

Raquel G. Rocha, 1 Jéssica S. Stefano, 1 Eduardo M. Richter ,1 Priscil la J. Zambiazi, 2 Juliano A. Bonacin ,2

Rodrigo A. A. Mu ñoz 1

> 1

Center for Re search on Electroanalysis , Instit ute of Chemi stry, Federal University of Uberlandia 

Av Joao Naves de A vi la 2121, Uberlandia , MG, Brazil 

> 2

Institute of Chemist ry, University of Campinas, P.O. Box 6154, 13083 -970 Campinas, SP, Brazil 

munoz@u fu.br 

Three -dimensional (3D) printing has been exponentially applied in chemistry with relevant applications 

in material science and electrochem istry . Fused deposition modelling is the most affordable 3D printing 

technique and thus has been widely used fo r the fabrication of electrodes for energy storage and sensors. 

Commercially -available conductive filaments made of polylactic acid (PLA) contain ing graphene or 

carbon black as conducting agents have been proposed .1 However , recent publications have report ed the 

presence of metallic impurities (Fe, Ti and Al) in commercial filaments of graphene/PLA, such as Black 

MagicTM , which can be accessible af ter a chemical treatment of the 3D printed surface with 

dimethylformamide (immersion for 15 min) . These impurit ies affect the electrochemical properties of the 

3D -printed material, such as for water splitting .2 In this context, we demonstrate the electro chemical 

synthesis of iron hexacyanoferrate (Prussian blue) by cyclic voltammetry in the presence of ferricyanide 

using iron impurities present in such 3D -printed graphene/PLA electrode s as the iron so urce . It is well 

known that Prussian blue (PB) films can be formed electro chemically in the presence of iron (III) cations 

and ferricyanide . In this procedure , the iron (III) source is provided by the bulky 3D -printed G/PLA 

electrode after electrode immersion in dimethylformamide for 15 min to remove the excess of PLA and 

expos e iron sites. After continuous voltammetric cycles in a 0.1 mol L -1 KCl solution , PB films were 

grown . Figure 1 shows PB film formed after 50, 1 00, 150 and 200 cycles. X-ray fluorescence rev ealed the 

presence of iron after solvent tre atment, in agreement wi th previous works 2 and Raman spec tra confirmed 

the presence of PB at the modified surface . The generated PB/gra phene/PLA electrodes was evaluated for 

H2O2 detection under flow conditions and applying 0 .0 V vs Ag/AgCl/KCl sat . The results showed a 

remarkable perf ormance of this novel platform in the detection of H 2O2 within a linear range from 1 to 

1000 μmol L -1 and with a limit of detection of 0.56 μmol L -1. These results are well compared with 

previous ly reported electrochemical sensors based on PB -modified ele ctrodes. 

Fig. 1. Cyclic voltammograms in electrolyte 

of 3D -printed G/PLA electrodes aft er 

modification with PB (I and IV correspond to 

the redox pairs Prussian blue/Prussian white 

and II and III to Berlin green / Prussian blue )

Untreated electrode (black line) ;

DMF treated surface and PB formation after 

50 cy cles ( pink line) ;

After 100 cycl es (red line) ;

After 150 (green line) and after 

200 cycles (blue line). 

Scan rate : 50 mV s -1; Step potential: 5 mV; 

Electrolyte: 0.1 mol L -1 KCl + 0.01 mol L -1

HCl. 

1. R.M. Cardoso, C. Kalinke, R.G. Rocha, P.L. dos Santos, D.P. Rocha, P.R. Oliveira, B. C. Janegitz, J.A. 

Bonacin, E.M. Richter, R.A.A. Munoz, Additive -manufactured (3D -printed) electrochemical sensors: A 

critical review, Anal. Chim. Acta 1118 (2020) 73 –91. 

2. M.P. Browne, M. Pumera, Impurities in graphen e/PLA 3D -printing filaments dramatical ly influence 

the electrochemical properties of the devices, Chem. Comm. 55 (2019) 8374 –8377. 

Ac knowledgments : CAPES (001) , CNPq, INCTBio and FAPEMIG .How Can Details of Processes of Conducting Polymers Be Uncovered 

# by Means of In -situ Combined Electrochemical Techniques 

Csaba Visy 

Department of Physical Chemistry & Materials Sciences, University of Szeged 

H-6720 Szeged, Rerrich tér 1. Hungary 

visy@chem.u -szeged.hu 

Since the discovery of electronically conducting polymers, not only their large -scale of potential 

applications has been evidenced, but many of them have been already put on realization. To improve 

functioning of such polymer based d evices, the multi -faceted cognition of these materials is indispensable. 

Especially, the elucidation of their redox switching between non -conducting and conducting states is of 

prime importance. In situ electrochemical techniques are widely applied to stud y this phenomenon, because 

they deliver extra information about the processes from an additional aspect, such as spectral modifications, 

mass, structural, volume and conductivity changes, occurring in parallel with either the 

electropolymerization process or the redox transformation of the film. A recent book [1] was dedicated to 

the advantages of such combinations. Moreover, recent technical developments have led to combination of 

two in situ analytical methods to extend further the understanding of the re dox behavior of conducting 

polymers by furnishing information on the self -same polymer film from several aspects at the same time 

by employing two in situ electrochemical techniques in a hyphenated mode. 

This contribution intend s to present examples how fundamental questions can be answered by designing 

and p erforming adequate experiments. 

Answer to the question and longtime uncertainty whether the chain growth takes place via a coupling 

between two cation radicals or in a reaction of the cation radical with the mo nomer could be answered by 

UV -VIS spectroelectrochemistry. 

A series of spectr ally followed polymerizations revealed that the film has to be left to relax before its first 

electrochemical reduction, in order to avoid irregularities and irreversi ble damages. Parallel EQCM, in situ 

conductance and pH changes indicated that still existing protonated segments are transforming during the 

relaxation .

An extraordinary cation exchange behaviour evidenced by EQCN measurements has been found with 

poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene), synthesized in the presence of chloride or fluoride ions. Thus, the idea 

of simple charge compensation role of the counter ions has to be completed by eventual specific interaction 

of the charge carrier with the d opant. 

Voltabso rptiometric data during the first section of the return from the conducting state indicated a 

dissociation -type step in both anodically and cathodically doped films. 

Role of the formation of optically distinguishable charge carriers in the development of the conducting state 

have been studied by using the hyphenation of spectroelectrochemistry with in situ conductance. It has been 

evidenced that fast redox switching – essential for practical applications - is expected only with polymers 

doped by immobile a nions. 

Sophisticated use of these techniques are not restricted to studies on conducting polymers, but can be 

extended for all kinds of electroactive layers. 

[1] C. Visy: In situ Combined Electrochemical Techniques for Conducting Polymers, SprigerBriefs in 

Applied Sciences & Technology, 2017, DOI 10.1007/978 -3-319 -53519 -9_5 Imaging Effect s of Hyperosmolality on Indivi dual Tricellular 

# Junctions 

Kaixiang Huang , Lushan Zhou, Kristen Alanis, Jianghui Hou and Lane A. Baker 

Department of Chemistry, Indiana University Bloomington 

800 E Kirkwood Avenue, Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

lan baker@indiana.edu 

Transport process across the blood -brain barrier (BBB) takes place by either transcellular pathways or 

passive paracellular pathways. At cell -cell junctions, paracellular pathways consist of tight junctions (TJs) 

regulated by TJ proteins to protect the brain from harmful substances in the blood. However, some drugs 

related to neurological cares are known to transiently upset TJ proteins which disrupt the integrity of the 

BBB, such as hyperosmolar agents, the drugs of a major treatment for intracranial hypertension resulted 

from brain trauma. Thus, it is of great importance for people to fully understand the effects of these drugs 

on TJs to inform current therapies of possible side -effects. To measure the effect of a specific drug on 

parace llular transport, techniques using Ussing chamber and two -path impedance spectroscopy can be 

utilized to monitor paracellular conductance/resistance. While informative, they are not able to collect 

characteristic responses from a single cell, or the permea bility change at small but important subcellular 

structures like tricellular TJs (tTJs). In this study, we utilized potentiometric -scanning ion conductance 

microscopy (P -SICM) conductance mapping to provide nanometer scale analysis of the response of the 

TJs at Madin –Darby Canine Kidney strain II (MDCKII) cells to hyperosmolar agent mannitol, from 

which tTJs and its counterpart bicellular TJs (bTJs) can be visualized and differentiated. We discovered 

that hyperosmolar condition (termed hyperosmolality here) leads to increased conductance at tTJs without 

significant alteration in conductance at bTJs. To quantify this effect, an automated computer vision 

algorithm was designed to extract and calculate conductance components at both tTJs and bTJs. 

Additionally, lowering Ca 2+ concentration in the bath facilitates tTJ disruption under hyperosmolality. 

Strengthening tTJ structure by overexpressing immunoglobulin -like domain -containing receptor 1

(ILDR1) protein abrogates the effect of hyperosmolality. We posit that osmotic stress physically disrupts 

tTJ structure, as evidenced by super -resolution microscopy. Findings from this study not only provide a 

high -resolution view of TJ structure and function, but also can inform current osmotherapy and drug 

delivery strateg ies for brain diseases. Applications of scanning electrochemical microscopy for high -

# resolution imaging and chemical sensing of corrosion reactions and 

# corrosion protection strategies 

Ricardo M. Souto 

University of La Laguna 

Department of Chemistry, P.O. Box 456, 38200 La Laguna (Tenerife), Canary Islands, Spain 

rsouto@ull.es 

Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) has become a very powerful tool for the investigation of 

solid -liquid interfaces in corrosion processes. Corrosion processes are initiated in micrometer and sub -

micrometer ranges, and they are usually very heterogeneously distributed on the surface of the reacting 

metals. In situ and real time monitoring thus requires the use of spatially resolved techniques such as 

scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM). The movement of an ultramicroelectrode (UME) in close 

proximity to the interface under study allows the application of various experimental procedures that can 

be classified into amperometric and potentiometric operations depending on either sensing farada ic 

currents or concentration distributions resulting from the corrosion process. Quantitative analysis can be 

performed using the UME signal thus revealing different sample properties and/or the influence of the 

environment and experimental variables that can be observed on different length scales. In this way, 

identification of the earlier stages for localized corrosion initiation, monitoring of water and specific ions 

uptake by intact polymeric coatings applied on metals for corrosion protection as well a s lixiviation, and 

detection of coating swelling -that constitutes the earlier stages of blistering -, have been successfully 

achieved. Prominent examples will be selected to illustrate the selection of operation modes and the 

problems encountered when work ing with practical samples. Figure 1 Various type of porphyrin -POM films.      

> Figure 2Top: 3D poly -Isoporphyrin -POM
> copolymer. Bottom: Electrospinn ing configuration
> used for deposition. of ITO nanofiber layers.

# Hybrid (iso) porphyrin – polyoxometalate copolymer for 

# photo(electro)chemical applications: from flat to mesoporous ITO 

# electrodes 

Laurent Ruhlmann ,* Yiming Liang, Zhaohui Huo, Antoine Bonnefont 

Institut de Chimie, UMR 7177, Université de Strasbourg 

4 rue Blaise Pascal, 67000 Strasbourg, France 

lruhlmann@unistra.fr 

The development of hybrid polymers incorporating POMs is a promising approach to elaborate new 

functional materials. To expand the practical 

applications, their association to a visible -

light photosensitizer is needed. In this 

context, we have developed a method of 

electropolymerization of POMs based on 

nucleophilic attack onto the electrogenerated 

porphyrin dications. 1-2 The formation of 

hybrid POM -porphyrin copolymeric films 

(Fig. 1, film I)  can be obtained by the 

electro -oxidation of porphyrin in the 

presence of the POM bearing two pyridyl 

groups (Py -POM -Py) 3. This process is 

feasible for various type of POMs such as 

Dawson , Lindqvist or Keggin type POMs 4-6.

Stable isoporphyrin 7 – POM copo lymers (Fig. 2) have 

been also develop recently showing interesting 

efficiency even upon the NIR illumination. A second 

methodology is also proposed to form hybrid  POM -

porphyrin films  (Fig. 1, films II or III): first the 

formation of cationic polyporphyrin electropolymer. 

Then, by metathesis reaction, the (partial) exchange onto 

the surface of the initial counter ions by the POM n- or by 

the nanoparticles stabilized with POM n- (POM n-@M, M 

= Ag, Au, Pt, etc.). 8 The photovoltaic performances of 

these hybrid ma terials have been investigated by 

photocurrent transient measurements  under visible -light 

illumination 9-11 given by now good efficiency. In order 

to increase the efficiency, mesoporous ITO electrodes 

(nanofiber formed by electrospun or porous ITO 

electrod e obtained using a colloidal co -assembly 

approach ) have been used and will be discussed (Fig. 2) .

1. L. Ruhlmann, A. Schulz, A. Giraudeau, J. -H. Fuhrhop, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1999 , 121, 6664. 2. Z. Huo, 

J. -P. Gisselbrecht, R. Farha, M. Goldmann, E. Saint -Am an, C. Bucher, L. Ruhlmann, Electrochimica 

Acta , 2014 , 122, 108. 3. D. Schaming, C. Allain, R. Farha, M. Goldmann, S. Lobstein, A. Giraudeau, B. 

Hasenknopf, L. Ruhlmann, Langmuir , 2010 , 26, 5101. 4. I. Azcarate, I. Ahmed, R. Farha, M. Goldmann, 

X. Wang, H. Xu, B. Hasenknopf, E. Lacôte, L. Ruhlmann, Dalton Trans. 2013 , 42, 12688. 5. Z. Huo , I. 

Azcarate , R. Farha , M. Goldmann , H. Xu , B. Hasenknopf , E. Lacôte , L. Ruhlmann, J. solid State 

Electrochemistry , 2015 , 19, 2611. 6. Z. Huo, D. Zang, S. Yang, R. Farha, M. Goldmann, B. Hasenknopf, 

H. Xu, L. Ruhlmann, Electrochimica Acta , 2015 , 179, 326. 7. M. Boudiaf, Y. Liang, R. Lamare, J. Weiss, 

H. Ibrahim, M. Goldmann, E. Bentouhami, V. Badets, S. Choua, N. Le Breton, A. Bonnefont, L. 

Ruhlmann, Electrochimica Acta , 20 19 , 309 , 432 -449. 8 . Z. Huo, A. Bonnefont, C. Bucher, L Ruhlmann, 

Electrochimica Acta , 2018 , 274, 177.  9. I. Ahmed, R. Farha, M. Goldmann, L. Ruhlmann, Chem. Comm. 

2013 , 49, 496. 10 . I. Ahmed, R. Farha, Z. Huo, C. Allain, X. Wang, H. Xu, M. Goldmann, B. 

Ha senknopf, L. Ruhlmann, Electrochimica Acta , 2013 , 110, 726. 1 1. I. Azcarate, Z. Huo, R. Farha, M. 

Goldmann, H. Xu, B. Hasenknopf, E. Lacôte, L. Ruhlmann, Chem. Eur. J. 2015 , 21, 8271. Magnetic Field -Driven Extraction of Peptides for Potentiometric 

# Biosens ing 

Jiawang Ding , Enguang Lv, Wei Qin 

Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research (YIC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS); 

Yantai, Shandong 264003 , P. R. China 

E-mail address : jwdin g@yic.ac.cn 

Potentiometric sensors based on polymeric membrane ion -selective electrode (ISE), with attractive 

advantages of portability, robustness, and resistance to interference from turbidity, have been well 

developed in the field of biosensors [1]. Peptides have simple and defined structure and exhibit specific 

and strong affinities to a variety of analytes. Moreover, in contrast to antibodies, peptides are intrinsically 

more stable in harsh environments [2]. In principle, peptides can be positively or negatively charged, 

which could induce a potentiometric response on the polymeric membrane ISEs. Inspired by the 

potentiometric responses of polyamino acids [3], we envision that a general and direct potentiometric 

sensing platform can be designed by us ing peptides for both molecular recognition and signal 

transduction. In this presentation, direct potentiometric assays based on magnetic field -driven extraction 

of peptides into polymeric membranes will be reported. 

[1] J. W. Ding; W . Qin , Recent adv ances in potentiometric biosensors, TrAC, Trends Analytical 

Chemistry, 2020, 124, 115803 

[2] E. G. Lv; J. W. Ding; W. Qin , Potentiometric detection of Listeria monocytogenes via a short 

antimicrobial peptide pair -based sandwich assay, Analytical Chemistry, 2018, 90, 6465 -6469. 

[3] I. S. Han, N. Ramamurthy, J. H. Yun, U. Schaller, M. E. Meyerhoff, V. C. Yang, Selective monitoring 

of peptidase activities with synthetic polypeptide substrates and polyion -sensitive membrane electrode 

detection , The FASEB Journ al 1996, 10, 1621 -1626. Development of Bioelectrochemical Sensor Based on Cytochrome bd 

# Oxidase 

Iryna Makarchuk 1, Alexander Theßeling 2, Hamid Nasiri 3, Andreas Speicher 4, Thorsten Friedrich 2, Petra 

Hellwig 1, Fr édéric Melin 1

> 1

Laboratoire de Bioélectrochimie et Spectroscopie, UMR 7140, Chimie de la Matière Complexe, 

Université de Strasbourg -CNRS, 67000 Strasbourg, France 

> 2

Institut f ür Biochemie, Albert -Ludwigs -Universität, Freiburg, Germany 

> 3

Institute of Microbiology , University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany 

> 4

Fachbereich 11 Organische Chemie, Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken, Germany 

makarchuk.iryna@etu.unistra.fr 

The cytochrome bd oxidases , family of unique prokaryotic enzyme s from the pathogenic respiratory chain ,

cataly ze the reduction of molecular oxygen in water and oxidation of quinols . It is also found that these 

proteins play the crucial role in bacterial adaptivity and resistance to oxidative stress which makes bd 

oxidases the promising target for future antibiotics [1] . Here, we developed the enzyme -based 

electrochemical sensor for the screening of a compound library in order to find effective in hibitors of bd 

oxidase  quinone -binding site . Th e application of the biosensor gives additional information on the catalytic 

behaviour of bd oxidase , immobilized on the 3D gold nanoparticles network which was previously modified 

by self -assembled monolayer of 6 -mercaptohexan -1-ol and hexanthiol. The stability of protein films was 

tuned by adding lipids, varying the protein concentration and different thiols bound to the surface, so the 

screening results were obtained with good reproducibility [2] .

The developed electrochemical sensor was successfully applied for the natural antibiotic Aurachin D and 

its synthetic derivatives screening, molecules that resemble the quinone scaffold . It was shown that the 

halogen substituent at 3 -position is not influential, however, the length -dependent isoprenoid chain in this 

position plays crucial role in activity of potent inhibitors. Additionally, the role of Ubiquinone as cofactor 

was investigated for better understanding of the bd oxidase catalytic mechanism. 

[1] S. Safarian , A. Hahn, D. J. Mills, et al, Active site rearrangement and structural divergence in 

prokaryotic respiratory oxidases , Science , 366 (2019) 100 -104 .

[2] E. Fournier , A. Nikolaev, H. Nasiri, et al , Creation of a gold nanoparticle based electrochemical assay 

for the detection of i nhibitors of bacterial cytochrome bd oxidases, Bioelectrochemistry, 111 (2016) 109 -

114. Selective Electrochemical Control of the Fluorescence of Biomolecules: 

# a Strategy to Monitor their Distribution Across Vesicular Lipid 

# Architectures 

Olivier Buriez , Ana Isabel Perez Jimenez, Lylian Challier, Raquel De Oliveira, Eric Aït -Yahiatène, 

Jérôme Delacotte, Eric Labbé 

PASTEUR, Département de chimie, École normale supérieure, PSL University, 

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 75005 Paris, France. 

olivier.buriez@ens.fr 

Transport of bioactive molecules across cell membranes is a central issue for living organisms 

since they encompass crucial processes including cell signaling and communication, cellular excretory 

activity and drug delivery. In this context, the development of instrumental methodologies possessing 

both high temporal and spatial resolution s to investigate transmembrane trafficking is still requested. The 

combination of amperometry and fluorescence is a representative example of the benefits brought by 

sensitive and time -resolved techniques in the exploration of vesicular exocytosis. 1 Based on this strategy, 

we recently explored the implementation of electrochemical commands to control fluorescence in order to 

study the passive transport of bioactive molecules across membranes. 2-4 Accordingly, we have shown that 

the fluorescence emitted by NB D-labelled biomolecules (NBD=7 -nitrobenz -2-oxa -1,3 -diazole) can be 

quenched electrochemically, a key property to study the trafficking of cell penetrating peptides (CPP). 

More specifically, we showed that such an electrochemical command is a powerful appro ach to 

discriminate internalized and non -internalized peptides incubated with purely lipidic nanometer -size 

vesicles. Interestingly, this strategy has also proved efficient to selectively switch off the fluorescence 

emitted by NBD -labelled phospholipids lo calized only on the outer leaflet of vesicles. + e 

# Or  

> Selective electro-bleaching of Cell Penetrating Peptides
> and phospholipids bearing NBD fluorescent probes
> CPP NBD

=NONNO 2NBD =NONNO 2

> NBD probe

References : 

(1) (a) Amatore, C.; Arbault, S.; Guille, M.; Lemaître, F.; Chem. Rev. 2008, 108 (7), 2585 -2621. (b) 

Meunier, A.; Jouannot, O.; Fulcrand, R.; Fanget, I.; Bretou, M.; Karatekin, E.; Arbault, S .; Guille, M.; 

Darchen, F.; Lemaître, F.; Amatore, C. Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 5081 –5084. (c) Liu, X.; Savy, 

A.; Maurin, S.; Grimaud, L.; Darchen, F.; Quinton, D.; Labbé, E.; Buriez, O.; Delacotte, J.; Lemaître, F.; 

Guille -Collignon, M. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 2366 –2370. (d) Pandard, J.; Pan, N.; Ebene, D.H.; 

Le Saux, T.; Ait -Yahiatène, E.; Liu, X.; Grimaud, L.; Buriez, O.; Labbé, E.; Lemaître, F.; Guille -

Collignon, M. ChemPlusChem. 2019, 84, 1578 -1586. 

(2) R. de Oliveira, M. Durand, L. Chall ier, P. Messina, J. M. Swiecicki, M. di Pisa, G. Chassaing, S. 

Lavielle, O. Buriez, E. Labbé. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2017, 788, 225. 

(3) Perez Jimenez, A.I.; Challier, L.; Di Pisa, M.; Guille -Collignon, M.; Lemaître, F.; Lavielle, S.; 

Mansuy, C.; Amatore, C .; Labbé, E.; Buriez, O. Electrochem. Commun. 2015, 54, 41. 

(4) Perez Jimenez, A.I.; Challier, L.; Aït -Yahiatène, E.; Delacotte, J.; Labbé, E.; Buriez. O. Chem. Eur. J. 

2017, 23, 6781. Coupling Electrochemistry and Photocatalytic Activity of Dissolved 

# Molecular Photosensitizers in Organic Medium 

Stanislav A. Trashin , Shahid U. Khan , Yuliya S. Korostei , Tatiana V. Dubinina , Larisa G. Tomilova ,

Sammy W. Verbruggen , Karolien De Wael 

AXES r esearch group, Department of Bioengineering , University of Antwerp 

Groenenborgerlaan 171 , 2020 Antwerp , Begium 

stanislav.trashin@uantwerpen.be 

Photosensitizers and p hotocatalytic reactions attract lots of attention due to a high demand for green 

technolog ies in organic synthesis, water and air purification, energy conversion. Moreover, new 

photosensitizers find applications in photodynamic therapy, artificial photosynthesis, bioche mical studies 

as ROS generators, and in newly emerging field s such as photoe lectrochemical sensing. Thus, 

discovering photosensitizers with advanced performances and evaluation of factors influencing their 

activities are crucial. 

Fig. 1. Sche matic illustration of the photo electrochemical cell and the redox cycling mechanism 

In the present ed study [1] , we developed a fast amperometric method to test the photocatalytic activity of 

type II photosensitizers dissolved in methanol making use of the redox cycling of hydroquinone (EC cat -

mechanism, Fig. 1 ). Within the suggested detecti on scheme, photocatalytic oxidation of hydroquinone is 

followed by amperometric reduction of the oxidized product (benzoquinone) at a graphite electrode 

giv ing rise to a photocurrent that can be linked to the rate and quantum yield (ΦΔ) of singlet oxygen ( 1O2)

generation . The method is suitable for measuring high 1O2 quantum yields (Φ Δ >0.5) as well as low yields 

(Φ Δ <0.05) in the same experimental conditions and time scale. Moreover, t he system does not require 

accumulation of a reac tion product since the amperometric signal develops near instantly when the light is 

on, which enables dynamic monitoring of a photosensitizers’ activity at varying conditions in a single 

exp eriment. 

Besides the demonstrated application in characterizati on of photosensitizing activity, this work also 

represents the first example of one‐pot coupling of electrochemical and photosensitized reactions in an 

organic medium. 

[1] S. U. Khan , S.A. Trashin, Y.S. Korostei, T.V. Dubinina, L.G. Tomilova, S.W. Verbruggen, K. De 

Wael . Photoelectrochemistry for Measuring the Photocatalytic Activity of Soluble Photosensitizers. 

ChemPhotoChem (2020) , 4, 300. doi:10.1002/cptc.201900275 Electrochemical Surface -enhanced Infrared Absorption Spectroscopy 

# of Nitric Oxide Reductas e Immo bilized on Gold Electrodes 

Ichizo Ya gi 1, Yuya Masuda 1, Narumi Yoshida 1, Shogo Nakagawa 1, Takehiko Tosha 2 and Masaru Kato 1

> 1

Hokkai do U niversity and 2RIKEN S Prin g-8 Center 

> 1

N10W5 Kita -ku, Sappo ro 060 -0810, Japan 

> 2

1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo -cho, Sayo -gun Hyogo 679 -5148, Japan 

iyagi@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 

Nitric oxide reductase s (NORs) are a trans membrane metalloenzyme and catalytically reduce NO to N 2O

in the microbial denitrif ication process. Th is enzymatic reaction occurs at a binuclear active center of the 

non -heme Fe B and the heme b3,[1] and t he reaction mechanism remains un clear even though it has bee n

intensively studied using physicochemical techniques including protein f ilm electrochemistry .[2] 

We have combined protein -film electroch emistry (PFE) and surface -enhanced in frared 

abs orption (SEIRA) spectro scopy of a cytochrome c-dependent NOR (cNOR) . The cNOR isolated from 

P. aeruginosa was immobilized on a SEIRA -active go ld film electrode on hemicylindrical Si pri sm via 

self -assembled monol ayer (SAM) of fu nctional group -terminated alky lthio ls and then the add ition of 

phospholipi ds prod uce d a protein -te thered lipid bilayer membrane (ptBLM), which was tracked by time -

resolve d SEIRA s pectroscopy. The formation processes of BL Ms were surely dependent on the ex istence 

of protein immobilized on SAM s. Pot ent ial -dependent SE IRA spectra at the cNOR -immobilize d Au 

electrode , where the e nzyme was almost exposed to the aqueous electrol yte solution , enab led us to ass ign 

the reduction poten tial of the binu clear active center , whic h revealed that heme b3 in volves the e nzymati c

NO reduction.[3] However, the effect of surrounding BLMs has not been included in the previous study. 

To gain furt her mechanist ic insights, potential -dependent SEIRA spectroscopy at the ptBLM -immo bilized 

Au electrode under NO i s underw ay. 

References 

[1] T. Hino , Y. Matsumoto, S. Nagano, H. Sugimoto, Y. Fukumori, T. Murata, S. Iwata, Y. Shiro ,

Science , 330 , 1666 (2010 ). 

[2] C. M. Cordas , A. G. Duarte, J. J. G. Moura, I. Moura , Biochim. Biophys. Acta , 1827 , 233 ( 2013) .

[3] M. Kato, S. Nakagawa, T. Tosha, Y. Shiro, Y. Masuda, K. Nakata, I. Yagi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. , 9,

5196 (2018). Perovskit es as electrocatalyst for glycerol oxidation: reaction pathway 

Patricia V. B. Santiago a,b ,c , Carlos C. Lima b,c , José L. Bott -Neto b,c , Pablo S. Fern ánde zb. c, Camilo A .

Angelucci a, Janaina Souza -Garcia a* 

> a

Federal University of ABC , Av. do s Estados 5001 , 09210 -580 , Sant o André SP, Brazil.  

> b

Chemistry Institute, State University of Campinas, PO Box 6154, 13083 -970, Campinas SP, Brazil.  

> c

Center for Innovation on New Energies, University of Campinas, CEP 13083 -841 Campinas, SP, Brazil. 

*Janaina .garcia @ufabc.edu .br 

Biodiesel , a biof uel, have faced a constan t increase on its production by attend ing the demand for 

sustainable fuel . The increase on its production have le d to an excess of gl ycerol , a co -product of 

biodiesel production, in global market in a way that i ts u se as fuel and/or precursor f or value -added 

chemicals can be consider at the same time that high pure hydrogen can be produce d in a electrolyzer .1

Noble me tal as Pt , Au, Pd and Ag ha ve demonstrate d its activity to oxidize glycerol 2 but the mate rials 

cos t turn s th eir use unviable 2. Thus, t o enable this type of device, it is ext remely important th e

developmen t of low cost electrocatalyst s.

Perovski te oxide materials can be considered as an option of electrocatalysts . This kind of ma terial has 

demo nst rate d being active as catalys t for glycerol reform in heterogen eous catalysis 3 and as 

electrocatalyst for glycerol a nd methanol oxidation for solid oxide fu el cell ( SOFC ).4,5 Thus , in this work ,

we present the fi rst fin di ngs of La NiO 3 and LaCoO 3 as electrocatalyst s for glycerol electro oxidation 

reaction (GEOR) sugges ting a re action pathway supported by in situ FTIR and sample collection on line 

coupled to HPLC.  

> Figure 1

(a 1 and a2 ) sh ows the voltammetric profile of GEOR on bo th materials . LaNiO 3 (a1) and LaCoO 3

(a2) are active for GEOR and LaCoO 3 does not s uffer with po isoning duri ng cycling. The obtained 

currents for LaNiO 3 ar e c.a. 250 times higher than those for Ni/C 6.

Figure 1(b1 and b2) shows the in situ FTIR results . Ba nds due to the formation of formic (15 80, 1380 and 

1350 cm -1) and glycolic (1580 and 1075 cm -1) acid s during GEOR ar e observe d for bo th electr ocatalysts. 

In the case of LaCoO 3 the presence of oxalic acid (1308 cm -1) can also be observed. Online HPLC 

experi ment s corrobo rates the in situ FTIR results demonstrating the formation of formic and glycolic 

acid , be ing formic acid forme d in higher amounts on LaCoO 3.

These results show that pero vskite oxides are active for GEOR , producing hi gh specific currents and the 

generation of formic and glycolic acids.                           

> Figure 1:Vol tammetric profile for GEOR on LaNiO 3(a1) and LaCoO 3(a2) (blank in da shed line) .FTIR
> spect ra of LaNiO 3(b1) and LaCoO 3(b2) collected in SNIFTIRS (reference 0.8V). F ormate and glycolate
> formation de tected b yon line HPLC for LaNiO 3(c1) and LaCoO 3(c2) .All results in a solution of 0.1molL -1
> glycerol in 0.1 molL -1NaOH .

1 C. Coutanceau and S. Baranton, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ. , 2016, 5, 388 –400. 

2 C. A. Angelucci, J. Souza -Garcia, P. S. Fern ández, P. V. B. Santiago and R. M. L. M. Sandrini, 

Ref. Modul. Chem. Mol. Sci. Chem. Eng. , 2017, 1 –8. 

3 G. Wu, S. Li, C. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Appl. Catal. B Environ. , 2014, 144 , 277 –285. 

4 M. Lo Faro, M. Minutoli, G. Monforte, V. Antonucci and A. S. Aric ò, Biomass and Bioenergy ,

2011, 35 , 1075 –1084. 

5 J. H. White, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 1993, 140 , 2167. 

6 V. L. Oliveira, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, G. Tremiliosi -Filho and K. B. Kokoh, J. 

Electroanal. Chem. , 2013, 703 , 56 –62. An enzyme -free H2O2 sensor based on 

# poly(2_aminophenylbenzimidazole)/gold nanoparticles coated pencil 

# graphite electrode 

Mine ŞEN TEKER a, Erhan KARACA a, Nuran ÖZÇİÇEK PEKMEZ a *, Uğur TAMER b, Kadir PEKMEZ a

a Hacettepe University, Department of Chemistry, 06800 Ankara, Turkey 

b Gazi University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry, 06330 Ankara, Turkey 

erhankaraca@hacettepe.edu.tr 

A poly(2 -aminophenylbenzimidazole)/ gold nanoparticles (P2AB/AuNPs) coated disposable pencil 

graphite elect rode (PGE) was fabricated as an enzyme -free sensor for the H2O2 determination. 

P2AB/AuNPs and P2AB were successfully synthesized electrochemically on PGE in acetonitrile for the 

first time. The coatings were characterized by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction 

spectroscopy, Energy -dispersive X -ray spectroscopy, Surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and UV -

Vis spectroscopy. AuNPs interacted with P2AB as carrier enhances the electrocatalytic activity towards 

reduction of H 2O2. The analytical perfor mance was evaluated in a 100 mM phosphate buffer solution at 

pH 6.5 by amperometry. The steady state current vs. H2O2 concentration is linear in the range of 0.06 

to100 mM (R = 0.992) with a limit of detection 3.67 × 10 −5 M at - 0.8 V vs . SCE and no interference is 

caused by ascorbic acid, dopamine, uric acid, and glucose. The examination for the sensitive 

determination of H 2O2 was conducted in commercially available hair oxidant solution. The results 

demonstrate that P2 AB/AuNPs/PGE has potential applications as a sensing material for quantitative 

determination of H 2O2.Elucidating reactions of individual nanoparticles by electrochemical dark -field microscopy 

## Albeit nanoparticles, especially silver and gold , are frequently used to date in medicine and 

## sportswear due to their antibacterial and anti -inflammatory properties, their physical properties, 

## chemical reactivit y and degradation are still poorly understood. Single noble metal nanoparticles 

## can be studied with dark -field microscopy based on their localized surface plasmon resonance 

## (LSPR). H, it is possible to observe their optical appearance (color) and scattering spectrum by 

## hyperspectral dark -field imaging. Hyperspectral imaging can be used to observe a change of the 

## LSPR operand o due an applied potential and a subsequent electrochemical reaction by monitoring 

## the scattering intensity and spectrum 

## With this new technique , further insights into reaction dynamic s and processes or structural 

## transformation s of nanoparticles during th eir electrochemical reaction can be obtained [1 -3] .

## Hence , this knowledge can be used to gain more information about the operando properties of 

## nanoparticles itself and the effect of the dielectric environment in the vicinity of the surface of the 

## particle s.             

> References:
> [1] K. Wonner, M. V. Evers, Kr. Tschulik, Journal of the American Chemical Society ,2018 , 40, 12658 .
> [2] K. Wonner, M. V. Evers, Kr. Tschulik, Electrochimica Acta ,2019 , 301, 458.
> [3] K. Wonner, C. Rurainsky, K. Tschu lik, Frontiers in Chemistry, 2019 ,7, 912 .

# Hierarchical “Core -Shell” Low -Loading Pt Oxygen Reduction 

# Reaction Electrocatalysts Based on a Graphene “Core” and a Carbon 

# Nitride “Shell” 

Vit o Di Noto a,b , Enrico Negro a,c , Angeloclaudio Nale a Keti Vezzù a,b Gioele Pagot a,c  

> a

Dept. of Industrial Engineering, University of Padova , via  Marzolo 9 , 35131 -Padova,  Italy  

> b

Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali , Italy 

> c

Centro Studi “Giorgio Levi Cases”, Via Marzolo 9, 35131 -Padova, Italy 

E-mail:  vito.dinoto@unipd.it 

Electrochemical energy conversion and storage (EECS) devices are expected to play a crucial role to wards 

the achievement of a sustainable energy system at the global level. Among EECS, a particularly high 

relevance will be enjoyed by proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). In these EECS, the 

electrooxidation of hydrogen by oxygen yields a direct current without the emission of greenhouse gases 

[1]. The pr ocess is highly efficient, but is bottlenecked by the sluggishness of the oxygen reduction reaction 

(ORR) [1].  To ensure that the PEMFC achieves a performance level compatible with the intended 

application, the ORR must be promoted by suitable electrocatal ysts (ECs) . Platinum is the most promising 

material for the active sites of such ECs . However, to place PE MFCs closer to market and to prevent supply 

bottlenecks the total amount of noble metal needs to be curtailed .

This work overviews the development of a new family of low -Pt ECs for the ORR, whose active sites are 

found on the surface of sub -nanometric clusters (SNCs) where Pt is alloyed with a first -row transition metal 

(e.g. , Ni, Cu) that operates as a “co -catalyst” and raises the intrin sic performance of each active site much 

above the Pt baseline [2]. 

The SNCs increase the utilization of Pt atoms included therein by up to ca. one order of magnitude with 

respect to the Pt nanoparticles (NPs) adopted in state -of -the -art ORR ECs, thus ra ising the specific power 

yielded by the PEMFC. Values as high as 14 kW/g Pt are achieved, that exceed the target set by the DoE for 

2020 ( i.e. , 8 kW/gPt). 

The support of the low -Pt ECs described herein exhibits a “core -shell” morphology, including a 

hierar chical graphene -based (H -GR) “core” that is covered by a carbon nitride (CN) “shell” . H -GR 

consists of highly defective graphene nanoplatelets and carbon black NPs [3], to facilitate mass and charge 

transport. The CN “shell” includes less than 5 wt% of N ( to prevent the introduction of ohmic drops) and 

though C - and N -based ligand s makes up “coordination nest s” that, together with defects of the graphene, 

stabilize the SNCs resulting in an outstanding durability of the ECs. 

This report takes into considera tion the various families of low -Pt ECs based on H -GR supports developed 

so far by our group, and compares the interplay between the preparation parameters (in particular the type 

of support) and the physicochemical properties with the electrochemical beha vior and the performance in 

a single PEMFC tested under operating conditions. 

References 

[1] B. Dunn, H. Kamath, J.M. Tarascon, Science , 334 (2011) 928 -935. 

[2 ] V. Di Noto, E. Negro, K. Vezzù, F. Bertasi, G. Nawn, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 24 ( 2015 ) 59 -64. 

[3] V. Di Noto, E. Negro, A. Bach Delpeuch, F. Bertasi, G. Pagot, K. Vezzù, Patent application 

PCT/EP2017/084801, 2017. Increasing Microbial Fuel Cell Power Densities Requires a Better 

# Understanding of Factors that Impact Electrode Performance 

Ruggero Rossi , Bruce Logan 

The Pennsylvania State University 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University Park, PA 16802, USA 

rxr57@psu.edu, blogan@psu.edu 

Improving power generation of microbial fuel cells (MFCs) requires that the system s are optimized to 

reduce resistances that limit system performance. Through quantification and analysis of these factors we 

wer e ab le to modify the cell design , and produce a maximum power density of 7.1 ± 0.4 W m –2 in 100 

mM phosphate buffer (PBS) , the highest power density ever generated for an MFC to our knowledge . The 

reactor was a flow -through cell with an anion exchange membra ne (AEM) separat in g a node and cathode 

(all 7 cm 2) in a membr ane electrode assembly (MEA) configuration . Through analysis of factors 

impactin g the electrode resistance, we minimi zed the total internal resistance by using a felt anode, AEM, 

and cathode tight ly packed together spe ci fically to enhance the hydroxide ions transport from cathode to 

anode and minimize pH imbalances and solution resistan ce (R Ω). Therefore, in 50 mM PBS the MFC 

produced one of the highest power density reco rded in such media, with 5. 7 ± 0.4 W m –2 (at 29 ± 1 A m –2,

internal resistance of 7.2 ± 0.6 mΩ m 2), and 25% high er in 100 m M PB S.

In contrast to other MFC s using a cation exchange membrane (CE M)

in MEA configuration s, an AEM facilitate hydroxide ion transport. 

The carbon fel t ano de and an air cathode (no catholyte) w ere pressed 

onto the AEM, ensuring a n electrode spacing si milar to the 

membrane thickness ( 106 ± 1 μm ) and facilitating transport of only 

the hydroxide ions produced at the cathode by the oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR ) while water diffuses through the membrane (Figure 

1). Cation trans port was severely limited by using a n AEM while 

hydroxide anion transport was enhanced by the localized 

concentration gradient and the electric field at high curren t densities .

Oxygen intr usion in the anolyte wa s limited by maintaining a low 

humidified air flowrate. To further minimize internal resistance the 

anoly te flow was directed throu gh the felt anode to improve overall 

performance. Maintain ing the anode and cathode close tog ether 

con tributed in minimizing RΩ to only 1.09 ± 0.02 m Ω m2, compared 

to RΩ > 14 mΩ m2 for a cubic MFC wi th brush anode and air -

cathode [1] . To maximize overall power production in MFCs, the 

protons produced at the anode and the hydroxide ions produced at 

the cathode need to be transported tow ards the other electrode , to 

effectively obtain a neutral pH and avoid acidification of the an od ic 

biofilm [2] .

Our MFC des ign using an AEM placed direct ly on the cathode 

minimized the total solution resistance, selectively transfer red hydroxide ions from the cathode to the 

anode , and thus better neutralize d protons produced at the anode lowering internal resis tan ce and 

substantially improving the reactor pe rformance .

References: 

[1] R. Rossi, B.P. Cario, C. Santoro, W. Yang, P.E. Saikaly, B.E. Logan, Evaluation of electrode and 

solution area -based resistances enables quantitative comparisons of factors impacti ng microbial 

fuel cell per formance, Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (2019) 3977 –398 6. doi:10.1021/acs.est.8b06004. 

[2] R. Rossi, D.M. Hall, X. Wang, J.M. Regan, B.E. Logan, Quantifying the factors limiting 

performance and rates in microbial fuel cells using the electrode potential slope analysis 

combined with electrical impedance spectro scopy, Electrochim. Acta. 348 (2 020) 136330. 

doi:10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136330. 

Fig. 1. Comparison of the ion 

transport in MFCs with a cloth 

separator, CEM , or AEM. Note 

that the cathode reaction is 

balanced by release of hydroxide 

ions and not consum ption of 

protons. Only the AEM can 

sel ectively enhance hydroxide ion 

transport from the cathode and 

thus control charge balance 

through OH – transport rather than 

H+ ion transport. On the thermodynamics of electroactive microorganisms 

Benjamin Korth 

Department of Environmental Microbiology, Helmholtz -Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ 

Permoser Str. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany 

benjamin.korth@ufz.de 

Electroactive microorganisms (EAM) are capable of performing extracellular electron transfer (EET). It 

represents a unique metabolic trait enabling the exchange of electrons via cytochromes across the cell 

membrane with solid electron conductors (e.g., ele ctrodes). Although EAM attracted considerable interests 

over the last decade, their thermodynamic characterization is still in its infancy. However, assessing the 

energy fluxes during EET is a prerequisite for deciphering their ecological role and for leve raging their 

biotechnological potential. Yet, a comprehensive thermodynamic analysis of EAM requires a profound 

understanding of their energy conversion. 

Therefore, the peculiarity of the electron -transport chain (ETC) and the energy harvest of EAM is discussed .

As metabolically received electrons are transferred across the cell membrane, a certain share of ETC 

components is located in the periplasm and at the outer membrane. Thus, they cannot contribute to the 

generation of proton motive force across th e inner membrane subsequently utilized for ATP synthesis. 

Consequently, the question arises, to which extent the anode potential influences the energy harvest of 

EAM. By applying a previous developed model for electroactive biofilms [1] , it is illustrated that the anode 

potential indeed influences the reaction conditions for substrate oxidation. However, this is solely a kinetic 

effect while the thermodynamic frame of EAM is not affected by the anode potential [2] . Therefore, energetic 

assessments require an adapted approach compared to classica l thermodynamic calculations. 

Furthermore, bioelectrocalorimetric studies with Geobacter anodireducens enrichment cultures are 

performed for measuring the heat dissipation during EET. By analyzing redox titration experiments, the so 

far unknown microbial electrochemical Peltier heat (mePh) was revealed. It represents an entropic effect at 

the cytochrome/solid electron acceptor interface for direct EET and amounts in the studied model system 

to a heat formation of −27±6 kJ per mole of transferred electrons [3] . The mePh constitutes a metabolic trade -

off as it de creases biomass yield but provides driving force for growth. To further assess this novel effect, 

alternative electron acceptors are analyzed. 

References 

[1] B. Korth, L. F. M. Rosa, F. Harnisch, C. Picioreanu , Bioelectrochemistry 2015 , 106 , 194 –206. 

[2] B. Korth, F. Harnisch, Front. Microbiol. 2019 , 10 , 1 –9. 

[3] B. Korth, T. Maskow, C. Picioreanu, F. Harnisch, Energy Environ. Sci. 2016 , 9, 2539 –2544. Bioelectrochemistry to improve biological gas desulfurization 

Annemiek ter Heijne, Rieks de Rink, Margo Elzinga, Dandan Liu, Jan Klok, Cees Buisman 

Environmental Technology, Wageningen University & Research 

Bornse Weilanden 9, P.O. Box 17, 6700 A A Wageni ngen, The Netherlands 

Annemiek.terHeijne@wur.nl 

The b iological gas desulfurization process under haloalkaliphilic conditions is widely applied in industry 

for removal and conversion of H 2S from sour gas streams , such as biogas and natural gas . his contin uous 

process consists of two steps: 1) Selective absorption of H 2S into a (bi)carbonate solution in an absorber 

column and 2) conversion of sulfide to elemental sulfur by sulfide oxidizing bacteria ( SOB ) in an aerated 

bioreactor. One of the challenges in t his process is to increase the selectivity for sulfur formation , by 

decreas ing the production side -products thiosulfate and sulfate, to reduce the requirements of NaOH to 

keep alkalinity . To increase th is selectivity, the continuous biological desulfurizat ion process was 

extended with a n anaerobic bioreactor , which was placed in between the absorber and aerated bioreactor .

It was hypothesized that both the biological formation of sulfate as the chemical formation of thiosulfate 

would reduce as a result of i ncubation of the SOB under the sulfidic conditions in the anaerobic reactor. 

With the anaerobi c bioreactor, a selectivity for sulfur formation of 97% was achieved, compared to 75 -

80% without anaerobic bioreactor. This lead to a reduction in NaOH consumpti on and bleed stream 

formation of 80 -90%. A surprising finding was the ability of SOB to remove part of the sulfide from 

solution in the anaerobic bioreactor. We hypothesized that SOB can shuttle electrons from sulfide from 

the anaerobic bioreactor to the a erobic bioreactor. 

To study the hypothesis of electron shuttling, we performed batch experiments to study two processes: 1) 

the removal of sulfide from solution and 2) the release of electrons from SOB at the anode in an 

electrochemical cell . We used bior eactor solution s from two biological desulfurization systems ; one from 

a full scale plant ) with absorber and aerated bioreactor, and one from a pilot plant ) with additional 

anaerobic bioreactor. We found that SOB removed all sulfide from solution when expo sed to 

concentrations up to 0 .2 mM 2. After SOB were transferred to an electrochemical cell, they released 

electrons to an anode in absence of free sulfide. Average current densities of 0.48 and 0.24 A/m 2 were 

measured for bio reactor solutions with two different types of SOB, at +0.1V vs Ag/AgCl. Current was 

negligible for reactor solutions without SOB. The recovered charge increased with more positive anode 

potentials. We hypothesize that SOB can oxidize sulfide to sulfur under anaerobic conditions and store 

electrons in e.g. the form of reduced quinones and cytochromes. 

Another challenge in the desulfurization of sour gas streams is the presence of organos ulfur compounds 

(thiols). These compounds inhibit SOB and as a result, gas streams with a high thiol concentration cannot 

be treated in an efficient way. We developed a bioelectrochemical process for the degradation of thiols to 

sulfide at the cathode . Met hanethiol, ethanethiol, propanethiol and dimethyl disulfide were supplied 

separately to the cathodes of bioelectrochemical systems. These systems were controlled at a constant 

current density of 2 A/m 2 and 4 A/m 2. We observed removal of thiols, and a consi derable part of the total 

sulfur added in the form of thiols was recovered as sulfide: 18% for methanethiol and ethanethiol, 17% 

for propanethiol and 22% for dimethyldisulfide. No sulfide was formed in electrochemical nor biological 

control experiments, de monstrating that both current and microorganisms are required for the conversion 

of organosulfur compounds. With further development of this process, the applicability of the 

biodesulfurization process can be extended to sour gas streams with high thiol co ntent. 

Th e combination of high pH and high salinity , the fact that bacteria can produce electricity in the absence 

of free sulfide , and the possibility to degrade thiols at biocathodes, offers new opportunities for design of 

biological desulfurization sy stems and bioelectrochemical reactors .Electrochemical Deposition of Composite and Hybrid Materials 

Ori Geuli and  Daniel Mandler 

Institute of Chemistry, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem 

Jerusalem 9190401, Israel 

Daniel.mandler@mail.huji.ac.il 

The formation of well -controlled composite and hybrid material layers is challenging. One would wish to 

control not only the thickness but also the organization on the nanometer and micrometer scale , and the 

composition of such coatings. Furthermore, for many applications the layer should be deposited on 

complex geometries, such as screws, springs, tubes, etc. Finally, the incorporation of organic materials, 

such as drugs, makes it even more challenging and avoids the application of high -temperature methods, 

such as CVD, high -temperature spraying and mo re. 

Electrochem istry is an ideal method for controlling the deposition of a wide variety of materials on 

conducting surfaces. Yet, typically electrochemical deposition is based on the oxidation or reduction of 

molecular species on the electrode surface and the formation of less soluble species that therefore, deposit 

instantaneously on the electrode. This does not allow good control on the formation of nanomaterials and 

even less composite and hybrid materials. 

We have developed during the last years a dif ferent approach that is based on the deposition of 

nanomaterials and macromolecules from their dispersion onto the electrode surface upon applying an 

electrochemical potential. 1-4 This approach, which we term from “ nano to nano” is based on destabilizing 

the dispersed nanomaterials in the solution causing them to precipitate because of applying an electrical 

potential. As the potential drives the deposition, it allows controlling the thickness and composition of the 

deposit, in case that co -deposition takes place. This enabled us to form graded layers , to co -deposit 

organic and inorganic materials, polymers and nanoparticles and much more. Moreover, deposition could 

be accomplished on a variety of surface topographies , and therefore , was applied for coating medical 

implants, grids and conductive patterns. 

The lecture will give an overview of this exciting field and discuss future perspectives. 

References: 

1. Rastogi, P. K.; Sarkar, S.; Mandler, D., Ionic strength induced electrodeposition of two -

dimensional layered MoS2 nanosheets. Applied Materials Today 2017, 8, 44 -53. 

2. Liu, L.; Layani, M.; Yellinek, S.; Kamyshny, A.; Ling, H.; Lee, P. S.; Magdassi, S.; Mandler, 

D., "Nano to nano" elec trodeposition of WO3 crystalline nanoparticles for electrochromic coatings. 

Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2014, 2 (38), 16224 -16229. 

3. Geuli, O.; Lewinstein, I.; Mandler, D., Composition -Tailoring of ZnO -Hydroxyapatite 

Nanocomposite as Bioactive and A ntibacterial Coating. Acs Applied Nano Materials 2019, 2 (5), 2946 -

2957. 

4. Geuli, O.; Hao, Q. L.; Mandler, D., One -step fabrication of NiOx -decorated carbon nanotubes -

NiCo2O4 as an advanced electroactive composite for supercapacitors. Electrochimica Act a 2019, 318 ,

51 -60. 

A graded deposition of hydroxyapatite and ZnO by controlling the applied potential (from ref. 3) Signal A mplified Sandwich -type Photoelectrochemical Assay B ased on 

# Polypyrrole/g -C3N4/WO 3 Inverse Opal Photonic Crystals Triple 

# Heterojunction 

Xueming Dang , Huimin Zhao *

Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (Ministry of Educa tion, China), 

School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology 

Dangxueming 1989 @126. com 

Photoelectrochemical (PEC) analysis , as a promising and fast -growing technology, has attracted 

widespread attention for biomedical mole cules and environmental pollutants detection due to its high 

sensitivity, low cost and low background noise [1] . In PEC sensors, t he photoactive materials are core 

component , which play a vital role in the conversion of excitation photoirradiation to respo nsive 

electrochemical signal [2]. In recent years, t ungsten oxide (W O3), known as a visible light response 

semiconductor, has been widely used in the field of PEC detection, owing to its chemical and thermal 

stability [3] . However, the detection sensitivit y of pure WO 3 photoelectrode is still limited by its relatively 

low photoelectric activity with the high photo -generated carriers recombination rate and low light 

absorption efficiency. Notably, to overcome above issue s, the construction of heterojunction can be an 

efficient strategy in the inhibit ion of photo -induced electron -hole pairs recombination [4] . Especially, the 

formation of inverse opal photonic crystals (IOPCs) in photoactive materials can enhance the optical 

response of PEC system, attributing to the light trapping structure with uniform and periodic pores 

surrounded by solid walls [5] . Therefore, a novel sandwich -type PEC sensing platform based on 

polypyrrole/ g-C3N4/WO 3 inverse opal photonic crystals (PPy/g -C3N4/WO 3 IOPCs) triple heterojunction 

was proposed in our studies [6]. The sandwich -type recognition system can not only enhance the 

sensitivity, but also favor the assembly the heterostructure. Benefiting from the appropriate cascade band -

edge levels , the heterojunction among PPy , g -C3N4 and WO 3 highly accelerate the separation of photo -

generated charges . Meanwhile, WO 3 IOPCs can greatly increase the light absorption of PEC detection 

electrode. With the simultaneous combination of these techniques , the developed PEC sensor possesses 

great pho toelectric property and exhibits high sensitivity with low limit of detection (LOD) as 0.004 nM 

(≈ 1.99 ng L -1) towards oxytetracycline (OTC) in water. The excellent selectivity and satisfactory 

detection results in real sample further revealed the potential of the signal amplification strategy 

integratin g the semiconductor IOPCs with its heterojunction structure assembled through sandwich -type 

detection model for PEC analytical application. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21976022 ). 

Ref erences 

1. J. Shu, D.P. Tang, Anal. Chem. , 2020, 92, 1 , 363 -377 .

2. Q. Zhou, D.P. Tang, Trac Trend. Anal. Chem., 2020, 124, 115814. 

3. J. Wang, Y.N. Pan, L.X. Jiang, M. Liu, F.Y. Liu, M. Jia, J. Li, Y.Q. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 

2019, 11, 37541 -37 549. 

4. R. Wick -Joliat , T. Musso , R.R. Prabhakar , J. Löckinger , S. Siol , W. Cui , L. Sévery , T. Moehl , J. Suh , J.

Hutter , M. Iannuzzi , S. D. Tilley , Energy. Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 19 01 -1909. 

5. Z.W. Wang, T.D. Nguyen, L.P. Yeo, C.K. Tan, L. Gan, A.L.Y. Tok, Small, 2020, 16 , 1905826. 

6. X.M. Dang, Z.L, Song, H.M. Zhao, Sensor. Actuat. B : Chem., 2020, 310, 127888. 1

# Electrochemical Detection of Metabolite Biomarkers Using 

# Nanomaterials Modified Carbon Electrode s

Hye Jin Lee a∗, Yunpei Si a, Jeong Won Park b, Sunhee Jung c,d , Geum -Sook Hwang c,e , Yae Eun Park f, Ji Eun 

Lee  f, Eunseo Goh a

> a

Department of Chemistry and Green -Nano Materials Research Center, Kyungpook National University, 

80 Daehakro, Buk -gu, Daegu -city, 41566, Republic of Korea 

> b

SW Contents Research Laboratory, Bio -Medical IT Convergence Research Division, Electronics and 

Telec ommunications Research Institute, 218 Gajeongno, Yuseong -gu, Daejeon, 34129, Republic of Korea 

> c

Integrated Metabolomics Research Group, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic Science Institute, 150, 

Bugahyeon -ro, Seodaemun -gu, Seoul, 03759, Republic of Korea. 

> d

Department of Chemistry, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu -ro, Jangan -gu, Suwon -si, Gyeonggi -

do, 16419, Republic of Korea. 

> e

Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae -gil, 

Seodaemun -gu, Seoul, 03760, Republic of Korea 

> f

Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 5. 

Hwarang -ro 14 -gil, Seongbuk -gu, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea 

e-mail address:  hyejinlee@knu.ac.kr 

The level s of metabolites generated in human metabolism are related to human health condition s can be 

used for disease diagnosis. Herein, we introduce our latest research works focusing on creating 

electrochemical sensing platforms for three metabolite molecules, which can be used as a disease biomarker 

individually , i.e., inosine (INO), hypoxa nthine (HX), and dopamine (DA). For the detection of cardiac 

ischemia biomarkers, INO and HX, a layer -by -layer (LbL) process involving a positively charged 

polyelectrolyte and negatively charged enzyme self -assembled on a screen printed carbon electrode (SPCE) 

was designed ; LbL assembled polysaccharide chitosan and enzyme purine n ucleoside phosphorylase [1] 

for INO, wh ereas poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium c hloride) coated carbon nanotube -graphene complexes 

and enzyme xanthine oxidase for HX [2] . In addition, a combined use of poly(L -methionine), car bon 

nanotube -graphene complexes, and Au nanoparticles [3] on SPCEs was developed for DA of which level 

is related to Parkinson’s disease and pheochromocytoma . Surfaces of three different electrode 

configurations were carefully characterized using various surface sensitive analytical tools including 

scanning electron microscope, atomic force microscopy , energy dispersive spectroscopy , and X-ray 

photoelectron sp ectroscopy. Under optimized conditions, each electrochemical sensors described above 

were applied separately to analyses of INO, H X, and DA in buffer and human biological fluid sample 

solutions using cyclic and differential pulse, and square wave voltammet ric techniques. The sample analy sis 

results were finally validated by comparing to those using liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry and/or 

commercial ly available assay kits .

References 

[1] Y. Si, J.W. Park, S. Jung, G. -S. Hwang, Y.E. Park, J.E. Lee, et al., Voltammetric layer -by -layer biosensor 

featuring purine nucleoside phosphorylase and chitosan for inosine in human serum solutions, Sens 

Actuators B Chem, 298(2019) 126840. 

[2] Y. Si, J.W. Park, S. Jung, G.S. Hwang, E. Go h, H.J. Lee, Layer -by -layer electrochemical biosensors 

configuring xanthine oxidase and carbon nanotubes/graphene complexes for hypoxanthine and uric acid in 

human serum solutions, Biosens Bioelectron, 121(2018) 265 -71. 

[3] Y. Si, Y.E. Park, J.E. Lee, H.J. Lee, Nanocomposites of poly(L -methionine), carbon nanotube -graphene 

complexes and Au nanoparticles on screen printed carbon electrodes for electrochemical analyses of 

dopamine and uric acid in human urine solutions, Analyst, 145(2020) 3656 -65. Lab -on -a-chip device for parallel optical and electrical detection of 

# antibiotics 

Sven Ingebrandt 1, Mohit Suranglikar 1, Parham Mohajerani 1, Xuan Thang Vu 1, Federico Polo 2, Vivek 

Pachauri 1

1. Institute of Materials in Electrical Engineering 1, RWTH Aachen Un iversity 

Sommerfeldstr. 24, 52074 Aachen 

2. Department of Molecular Sciences and Nanosystems, 

Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Via Torino 155, 30172, Venezia, Italy 

ingebrandt@iwe1.rwth -aachen.de 

Antibiotic drugs are widely used in our society and healthca re system. Unfortunately, the massive use of 

drugs causes anti -microbial resistance . The antibiotics Vancomycin hydrochloride (Van ) is a typical ‘last 

resort’ antibiotic s, which is used to treat a number of different bacterial infections. It is most effect ive 

against Gram -positive bacteria such as Methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which can 

cause very severe and sometimes fatal infections and is one of the major problems in clinical routines .

Administration of Van is recommended intravenou sly to treat serious infections by Gram -positive 

bacteria such as in complicated skin infections, bloodstream infections, endocarditis, bone and joint 

infections, and meningitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus. 

For the correct dosing of Van during therap y, companion tests of blood concentration levels are 

recommended , a technique called theranostics – therapy with combined diagnostics . Th eranostic 

monitoring is important to avoid possible side effects due to excessive overdosing such as nephrotoxicity 

or ototoxicity. Underdosing should be avoided as well , since Van as one of the last possible medication 

options should effectively kill bacteria in patients with severe health condition. Since monitoring of Van 

has to be done daily or even several times per day, this is a typical application for a theranostic device for 

point -of -care usage. A biosensor for Van at bedside could help to provide patients always with the right 

dose, thereby increasing the effectiveness and reducing the side effects of drug treatme nt. 

Here we realize d an ultralight analytical biosensor system that, (i)  provides an automated fluidic control 

on -chip, and (ii) combines optical and electrical detection mechanisms , for fast and accurate monitoring 

of Van in  point -of -care settings. Optic al detection of Van is carried out based on quenching of 

nanoparticles catalyzed chemiluminescence (CL ) in a concentration -dependent inhibition process . Going 

beyond enzyme based CL detection schemes such as enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA ), our 

method makes use of novel Van -specific silver nanoparticle (AgNP) assemblies , produced in a self -

assembly based bio -nano conjugation . CL -quenching assays for Van detection require very low sample 

volumes (20 μL) and show high reproducibility and sensor dyn amic ranges (10 -15 μg/mL) covering 

clinically relevant concentration ranges on Van dosing . In parallel, we integrate d a metal -microelectrode 

arrays ( MEA ) based electrochemical impedance spectroscopy sensor for electrical detection of Van. Here, 

Van -specifi c antibodies were immobilized within a fouling resistant polypyrrole matrix on gold 

micro electrodes using chronoamperometry. Van binding to the antibodies leads to a change in impedance 

signal , which can be measured in real -time using a miniaturized impeda nce analyzer and can be 

reaffirmed from the CL based optical detection .

With this novel Lab -on -a-chip device , we realized a generic opto -electronic biosensor platform, which 

could be easily adapted to other biosensor assays for point -of -care scenarios, w hen fast, accurate and 

automated biomolecule detection is needed. Nitrosyl -BODIPY dyes: spectroelectrochemical and computational 

# investigations 

M. O. F. Goulart (1*) A. K. A. de Almeida (1) , T. A. do Nascimento (1) , T. L. Silva (2) , A. P. A. Pereira (1) , S. 

M. G. Melo (3) , L. C. D. Rezende (3) , J. C. S. Da Silva (1) , F. S. Emery (3) 

> 1

Instituto de Química e Biotecnologia, UFAL, Maceió, Al; 2Departamento de Química, UFAL/Arapiraca, 

Al.; Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas, USP , Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brasil . mofg@qui.ufal.br 

BODIPY is an outstanding class of fluorescent dyes with wide applications in 

biological/analytical/environment research. In this work, the electrochemical properties o f new 

nitrosyl BODIPY dyes (1-3) were studied in degassed ACN + n-Bu 4NPF 6, along with 

computational studies. Compound 1 displayed the usual reduction behavior for unsubstituted 

BODIPY , while in the oxidation region it showed two irreversible waves ( Epa1 = 1.61 V; Epa2 

= 1.92 V) (Fig. 1A), probably due to the formation of radical cation and dication, respectively .

The addition of the acceptor nitroso group, in compound 2 (Fig. 1 B) and 3 (Fig. 1C), leads to a 

different profile. The reduction is much easier, ca 460 mV more positive for compou nd 3. The 

first to be reduced is the nitroso group, due to the proximity to the positively charged N ( EpIc 3 =

-0.281 V), and non -bonding interactions with the electronegative borondifluoride , differently 

from compound 2, with a β -nitroso group, where the reduction occurs in the BODIPY core ( EpIc 2

= -0.408 V). In the oxidation region, the irreversible peaks for compound 2 (Epa = 2.00 V) and 3

(Epa = 1.96 V) respectively, may be related to the formation of radical cations in the NO group. 

B97xD/cc -pVTZ results had shown that the HOMO orbital s are mainly formed by the π orbitals 

of nitroso group , with a small contribution of orbitals from atoms of the ionic form o f pyrrole ring 

of BODIPY moiety. A possible chemical interaction between the lone pair of flu orine of BODIPY 

core and π electrons of nitroso ligand for compound 3, can be the reason for the slightly higher 

oxidation susceptibility for it . C omparing the IP calculated by the Koopman’s theorem for values 

for compound 2 and 3 is possible to note that these values are approximately the same (~0.06 eV 

difference ). As shown by electrochemical /computational profile s, the location of the group (α or 

β) strongly affects the electronic structure, and consequently, their reactivities.      

> Fig 1A: CV of compound 1. Fig 1B: CV of compound 2. Fig 1C: CV of compound 3.

Acknowledgements: CNPq, CAPES/RENORBIO, FAPEAL, FAPE SP, INCT -Bioanalítica. Compacts of Synthetic Diamond as Electrodes: Platinum Additive Effect on 

# Their Electroactivity 

Yu . V. Pleskov 1*, M . D. Krotova 1, E . A. Ekimov 2,3 

> 1

Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 

> 2

Lebedev Physical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 

> 3

Vereshchagin Institute for High Pressure Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Troitsk, Moscow, Russia 

*e -mail: pleskov33@mail.ru 

Conducting diamond compact composition electrode materials are obtained by graphite transformation to 

diamond at high pressure and temperature in two - and three -component Pt –C and Pt –C–B growth systems; their 

physical and chemical properties are studied [1] . The diamond electrode ad ded with Pt in the two -component growth 

system Pt –C behaves in the chloride -ion anodic oxidation reaction like a purely platinum one, with due allowance for 

the platinum actual amount at the electrode surface. Results of voltammetric studies are in good ag reement with the 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data obtained in f -sweep and E -sweep modes. The boron doping of the 

diamond grown in the Pt –C–B system produced electrodes electroactive with respect to the chloride -ion anodic 

oxidation reaction; the electroactivity increased with the increasing of the platinum content at the electrode surface. 

The adding of platinum (a catalyst) was shown being more efficient (in the chlorine anodic evolution reaction) when 

the platinum was deposited right onto the e lectrode surface, rather when introduced to its bulk during the compact 

synthesis. 

1. Yu.V. Pleskov, M.D. Krotova, R.A. Khmelnitskiy, E A. Ekimov, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2020, vol. 56, no. 9, p. 1 .Knowledge -based A I for Smart Desi gn of Functional Nanoparti cles 

# in N on -vacuum Reactive Environment 

Byungchan H an , Hoje Chun, Hyunwook Jung, Choa Kwon 

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Enginee ring, Yonsei University 

50 Yonsei -Ro, Seodaemun -Gu, Seoul , 03722, Korea 

bchan@yonsei.ac.kr 

Nanomaterials have been played a key role in wide range of electrochemi ca l energy devices such as Li -air 

batteries, photovoltaic devices, and fuel cells. Innovative design for highly functional nano particle s has 

been, how ever, delayed . In molecular l eve l computational electrochemist ry new research paradigm has 

been establishe d, which substantially inco rporate s IT -based artifici al intelligenc e (AI) technology into 

machine lear ning algori sm. Using the new computational metho dology high -throughput screening of 

promising nanoparticle candidates has been attemp te d for various desired applications .

Whet her the frontier approach is successful or not is sign ificantly controlled by the reliability and 

accuracy of in put databas e. It is true that su bs tantial am ounts of the data are come by previous literatures 

and often ab -initio c alculations with idealized model systems. The conditions in which the data were 

generated may b e so different f rom the operando circumstance s of the target materials. To secure 

ext reme -level integrity of the database the in -situ measuremen t of nanoparticle structure s sh ould be 

carried out , from which the reliable correlation of the struc ture-performance -design princip le can be 

identified. 

We combined in -sit u TEM measurem ent of nanopar ti cle with ligan d in liquid and AI -based neural -

network approach to p recise ly establish three -dimensional (3D) structure database . The informa tion 

includes size s, lattice distortions, and defects with picometer resolution under non -vacuum c onditions .

From the 3D liquid -cell electron microscopy atomistic interaction potential and surface reactivity are 

anal yzed using density functional theory calculations and ma chine learning techniques . T he approach is 

in deed ‘knowledge -based ’ AI , which can b e expected to make ground breaking ways to ward the quantum 

nanoarchitecture .

Reference 

“Critical differences in 3D atomic structure of individual ligand -protected nanocrystals in solution ”,

Science 368, 60 –67 (2020) Investigating Solid -State Synthesis Reactions By In Situ S ynchrotron 

# X-Ray Diffraction And Ab Initio T hermodynamics 

M. Bianchini a,b ,c , J. Wang c,d , R. Clément e, B. Ouyang c, P. Hartmann b, T. Brezesinski a, J. Janek a, f,

W. Sun c, g and G. Ceder c,d  

> a

Battery a nd Electrochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of 

Technology (KIT), Hermann -von -Helmholtz -Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany  

> b

BASF SE, Carl -Bosch -Strasse 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany  

> c

Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.  

> d

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.  

> e

Materials Department, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.  

> f

Institute of Physical Chemistry & Center for Materials Science (ZfM/LaMa), Justus -Liebig -University 

Giessen, Heinrich -Buff -Ring 17, 35392 Giessen, Germany  

> g

De partment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of 

Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 

matte o.bianchini@kit.edu 

In the synthesis of inorganic materials, reactions often yield non -equilibrium kinetic byproducts instead of 

the thermodynamic equilibrium phase [1]. Why is that? And why, on the other hand, compounds 

predicted as thermodynamically stable often cannot be synthesized experimentally? Understanding the 

competition between thermodynamics and kinetics is fundamental for answering these question s and 

towards the rational synthesis of target materials [2]. In this presentation, we will high light the use of in 

situ synchrotron x -ray diffraction to yield insights on the real time behavior of powder precursors during 

synthesis. We investigate the multistage crystallization pathways of the important two -layer (P2) sodium 

oxides Na 0.67 MO 2 (M = Co , Mn) [3]. We find a series of fast non -equilibrium phase transformations 

through metastable three -layer O3, O3’ or P3 phases, before formation of the equilibrium two -layer P2 

polymorph. A theoretical framework to rationalize the observed phase progression will be presented, 

demonstrating that even though P2 is the equilibrium phase that we target, the first phase to form will be 

the one with the most negative compositionally -unconstrained reaction energy from the powder 

precursors. In other words, the firs t phase to form is guided by thermodynamics and it does not 

necessarily have the composition corresponding to the overall precursor composition in the reaction 

vessel. Afterwards, the first phase may develop according to kinetic or thermodynamic arguments, 

depending on the system of choice. Further examples will be presented for industrially -relevant LiNiO 2

and related compounds [4], where lithiation pathways can be instead more straightforward than sodiation 

ones; nonetheless, the high resolution of synchr otron XRD allows to observe detailed structural 

information revealing a complex behavior where metal vacancies play an important role. The insights we 

present constitutes a step forward towards unraveling the complex interplay between thermodynamics and 

kinetics during synthesis. Moreover, they can guide the choice of precursors and parameters towards the 

optimization of the solid -state synthesis of ceramic materials. 

References: 

[1] M.  Aykol et al., Science Advances , 2018, 4(4), 148. 

[2] Z. Jiang et al. , Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 2017 , 5(23), 5709 -5717. 

[3] M. Bianchini, J. Wang et al., Nature Materials . 2020 , https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563 -020 -0688 -6. 

[4] M. Bianchini et al., Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 2020 , 8(4), 1808 -1820. Novel Verdazyl Electrolyte for Symmetrical Non -aqueous Redox Flow 

# Batteries 

Isidora Cekic -Laskovic a, Aleksandr Korshunov b, Matthew James Milner c, Mariano Grünebaum a, Armido 

Studer c, Martin Winter a,b  

> a

Helmholtz Institute Münster, IEK -12, Forschungszentr um Jülich GmbH, 48149 Münster, Germany  

> b

MEET Battery Research Center, Institute of Physical Chemistry, Westfälische Wilhelms -Universität 

Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany  

> c

Organisch -Chemisches Institut, Westfälische Wilhelms -Universität, Corrensstraße 40, 48149 Münster, 

Germany 

i.cekic -laskovic@fz -juelich.de 

All -organic redox -flow batteries (RFBs) as an emerging branch of energy technology offer a modern and 

benign solution for buffering energy obtained from renewable but intrinsically intermittent so urces. The 

“heavy duty” nature of battery application dictates a persistent need for new battery chemistries where 

precisely tailored physicochemical properties of redox electrolytes are utmost preferred [1]. In light of 

this, verdazyl free radical compoun ds stand for promising candidates for symmetrical all -organic RFBs 

due to variety of synthetic ways to adjust their structure as well as unique bipolar feature, enabling a 

single redox molecule for both negolyte and posolyte. Concurrently, an irreversible exchange of 

electrolytes within a cell gets appropriately prevented [2]. 

The presented work comprises preliminary screening of verdazyl compounds library in respect of bulk 

diffusion coefficient and heterogeneous electron transfer rate constant as the key redox electrolyte 

parameters, by means of cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). In 

line with this , within a given set of symmetrical electrolytes, the best performing verdazyl -based radical 

was identified for RFB experi ments in order to compare an electrochemical behavior (CV) within an 

actual cell and prerequisite data and thereafter confirm a viability for energy storage (galvanostatic 

cycling experiments ) as well as to  characterize a redox electrolyte from different a ngles within a single 

cycle (“state of the charge” experiments) . Due to the fact that structure of the redox -flow cell significantly 

differs from the electrochemical one used throughout the preselection, a study of the present setup 

transition was conducte d as well. 

In the scope of long -term galvanostatic cycling experiments, symmetrical verdazyl electrolyte 

demonstrated good stability and high Coulombic (>97%) as well as energy efficiencies for more than 100 

charge/discharge cycles. On this account , obtai ned results highlight verdazyl -based electrolytes as 

promising and versatile energy material and implies a wide field for further synthetic development and 

optimization in the field of RFBs. 

References :

[1] Chen H. et al.  Journal of Energy Chemistry , 2018 27(5) 1304 -1325 

[2] Charlton G. D. et al. Journal of Energy Chemistry , 2019 34 52 -56 From Nanoel ectrochemistry to Real -Time Biosensors: 

# Analysis of Neurotransmitters Using Nanoporous Electrode 

## Kaiyu Fu 1,2 , Ji -Won Seo 1,2 , A mani A. Hariri 1, H. Tom Soh 1,2 

## 1Department of Electrical Engineering , Stanford University , Stanford , CA, 94305, USA 

## 2Department of Radiology, Stanford University , Stanford , CA, 94305, US A

## kaiyufu @stanford .edu 

## The emerging biosensing devices largely extend our capability to measure and monitor 

## the biomolecules in living organisms. Yet most commercially available detect ion 

## platforms are either simplified for a handful of abundant molecules in vivo, e.g. , glucose 

## and electrolytes, or designed with time -consuming sample pretreatment for low -

## abundance targets. There is an urgent quest to integrate the advancement of analyti cal 

## chemistry and nanotechnology to solve the long -existing problems for biodetection. In 

## this talk, I will first present a novel electrochemical detection platform that consists of 

## high -density nanoscale electrodes, viz. nanopore electrode arrays (NEAs), for single 

## entity detection by integrating into lab -chip device setting. I will describe a robu st 

## fabrication method to achieve nanopores with zero -dimensional structures and discuss 

## how permselectivity and ion migration are well -positioned to explore in s itu molecular 

## separation and detection. Next, I will present a real -time sensing technology to measure 

## neurotransmitters in the living brain using the nanoporous electrode. So far, the widely 

## used technique for in vivo brain measurement is through fast -sca n cyclic voltammetry, 

## which cannot measure non -redox active species, and requires frequent drift -correction 

## and complicated data analysis. The bio sensor developed in this work is capable of 

## continuously measuring the neurotransmitters from the cerebrospina l fluid of the animal 

## brain. This biosensor is designed on the flexible substrate with highly specific 

## bioaffinity recognition elements for chronic multisite brain recordings. Overall, this talk 

## will depict a general approach to access real -time chemical i nformation for a better 

## understanding of the brain functions. Engineering Redox Mediating Systems to Study Photoinhibition 

# Effects of Exogenous Mediators in Purple Bacteria 

Matteo Grattieri , Jeffrey Copeland , and Shelley D. Minteer 

Departments of Chemistry and Materials Science & Engineering , University of Utah 

315 S 1400 E Room 2020, Salt Lake City, (UT) 84112 USA 

matteo.grattieri@utah.edu 

Microbial (photo)electrochemical systems offer outstanding possibilities, span ning from sustainable 

(micro/low) power generation, biosensing of toxic compounds , bio electro synthes is of valuable chemicals ,

and bioremediation of contaminated environments . However, they also provide a unique platform for the 

study of the electrochemical processes at play between abiotic and biotic components. To date, a chieving 

a detailed u nderstandin g of the electron transfer process between intact bacteria cells and an exogenous 

electron acceptor remains one of the biggest challenges in microbial electrochemistry. 1, 2 For the specific 

case of photosynthetic microorganisms, an additional challenge for studying the electron transfer process 

is posed by the confinement of their photosynthetic app aratus in membranes located inside their cells ,

thus physically separated from the electrode surface . In recent years, multidisciplinary approaches have 

proven effective in gaining insights into these complex systems. Specifically, e lectrochemical studies 

have been coupled to computational methods (i.e., modeling, bioinformatics, and quantum mechanic 

calculations), 3, 4 fluorescence techniques, 5 as well as the engineering of both the biotic and/ or the abiotic 

components ,6 expanding our understanding of bio -photoelectrochemical systems. 

Herein, purple bacteria are utilized as model photosynthetic organisms based on their extremely versatile 

metabolism and c apability to adapt to environmental stresses, 7 which would enable their application for 

semi -artificial photosynthesis in the field. Various reports on the harvesting of photoexcited electrons 

from the photosynthetic apparatus of purple bacteria indicated t hat exogenous redox mediators are 

required to successfully establish a photocurrent, where both Os -based and quinone -based mediators were 

employed .8, 9 However, over long term experiments, the use of exogenous media tors can lead to 

photoinhibition, resulting in decreasing photocurrent generation. With the aim to study photoinhibition 

effects of exogenous quinone mediators, we explored t he use of an artificial, bio -inspired redox polymer 

and its corresponding monomeri c diffusible r edox moieties. The approach allowed unveiling d ifferent 

mediator -photosystem interaction s, and the effects of diffusion and electron transfer limitations on the 

resulting photoinhibition ,10 providing directions for the rational design of ar tificial redox mediating 

systems for enhancing both photoexcited electron harvesting and the stability of the system. 

References: 

1. G. Pankratova and L. Gorton, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. , 2017 , 5, 193 -202. 

2. Y. Liu and P. Atanassov, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. , 2020 , 19, 175 -183. 

3. E. M. Gaffney, M. Grattieri, Z. Rhodes and S. D. Minteer, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2020 , 167, 

065502. 

4. E. M. Gaffney, M. Grattieri, K. Beaver, J. Pham, C. McCartney and S. D. Minteer, Electrochim. 

Acta , 2020 , 3 37, 135731. 

5. L. Beauzamy, J. Delacotte, B. Bailleul, K. Tanaka, F. A. Wollman and F. Lemaitre, Anal. Chem. ,

2020 , DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b05808 .

6. N. Schuergers, C. Werlang, C. M. Ajo -Franklin and A. A. Boghossian, Energy Environ. Sci. ,

2017 , 10, 11 02 -1115. 

7. M. Grattieri, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. , 2020 , 19, 424 -435. 

8. K. Hasan, K. V. R. Reddy, V. Eßmann, K. Górecki, P. Ó. Conghaile, W. Schuhmann, D. Leech, 

C. Hägerhäll and L. Gorton, Electroanalysis , 2015 , 27, 118 -127. 

9. M. Grattieri, Z. Rhodes , D. P. Hickey, K. Beaver and S. D. Minteer, ACS Catal. , 2019 , 9, 867 -

873. 

10. M. Grattieri, S. Patterson, J. Copeland, K. Klunder and S. D. Minteer, ChemSusChem , 2020 , 13, 

230 -237. Structural and Electrochemical Characterization of Lithium and 

# Transition Metals Polyanionic Compounds 

A.V. Ivanishchev 1, A.V. Ushakov 1, I.A. Ivanishcheva 1, A.A. Korzhakov 1, K.S. Rybakov 1, S.V. Makhov 1,

A. Dixit 2 

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, Saratov State Un iversity, Saratov, Russia  

> 2

Department of Physics and Center for Solar Energy, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Radjastan, 

India 

ivanischevav@inbox.ru 

The importance of autonomous energy is currently gr owing due to the rapid development of portable 

electronic devices, electric vehicles and power supplies for distributed energy systems. Combinations of 

various energy storage devices such as a battery, a fuel cell and a supercapacitor can be used to expand 

the range of operating modes of energy sources in terms of power and energy intensity. Among the 

electrochemical systems used in batteries, a lithium -ion system (lithium -ion battery, LI B) stands out, 

which is significantly ahead of other systems both in t erms of characteristics and degree of development. 

At the same time, this system has significant potential for further development. The most numerous and 

diverse electrode materials are LI B’s cathode materials. Having achieved notable success with oxide 

co mpounds of lithium and transition metals, the researchers turned their attention to a much wider class of 

polyanionic compounds, promising comparable energy intensity and significantly higher chemical 

stability and safety at operation. The electrode potent ial of intercalation compounds increases in the series 

of polyanions: SiO 44-, BO 33-, PO 43-, SO 42-. At the same time, intercalation compounds with various 

polyanions have a significant scatter in the values of theoretical capacity and practical characterist ics 

depending on the composition as well as structural and morphological properties. For the targe ted 

improvement of the electrochemical characteristics of electrode materials, the accumulation and analysis 

of information on the relationship between the pr eparation features, structural , morphological and 

electrochemical properties is necessary (Fig. 1) [1]. 

Fig. 1 . Concentration dependences of the diffusion coefficient and the calculated diffusion map of lithium 

ions in the compound Li 2Fe(SO 4)2.

Acknowl edgments. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (projects No 

18 -53 -45004, 20 -03 -00381). 

References :

[1] A.V. Ivanishchev, N.A. Gridina, K.S. Rybakov, I.A. Ivanishcheva, A. Dixit // Journal of 

Electroanalytical Chemistry. – 2020. – V. 860 – P. 113894. Solid -state Architecture Batteries for Enhanced Rechargeability and 

# Safety (SABERS) 

Vadim F. Lvovich 1 *, Rocco P. Viggiano 1, Donald A. Dornbusch 1, John W . Connell 2, Yi Lin 2 

> 1

- NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland, OH 44135 

> 2

- NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681 

Vadim.F.Lvovich@nasa.gov 

All -electric vertical take -off and landing vehicles (eVTOL) for urban air mobility (UAM) concepts face 

numerous challenging technical barri ers before their introduction into the consumer marketplace. The 

most challenging of these technical barriers to overcome is developing an energy storage system capable 

of meeting the rigorous aerospace safety and performance criteria. The performance me trics for eVTOL 

craft , such as specific energy and cycle life, are at least 2 times greater than those of electric automobiles. 

Furthermore , safety is essential for operation of commercial electric aerovehicles. Preliminary s ystems 

level analysis studies have indicated that there are five key properties which must be optimized for 

successful implementation of battery system s. Those five key criteria are safety, energy density, power, 

packaging design and scalability. Current state -of -the -art (SOA) lithiu m-ion batteries meet or exceed the 

requirements for electric aviation in the areas of power and scalability, yet are insufficient in the key 

performance criteria of energy, safety and packaging design. 

The SABERS concept proposes a battery that meets all five key performance criteria through the 

development of a solid -state architecture cell design utilizing high energy density and power density 

sulfur -selenium cathode with a lithium metal anode. Data will be presented demonstrating high 

performing sulfu r - selenium cathode that offers a balanced energy to power density ratio, which can be 

tailored to the specific application by altering the stoichiometric ratios of sulfur to selenium. This cathode 

is being developed by implementing NASA patented holey g raphene technology as a highly conductive, 

ultra -lightweight electrode scaffold. Novel processing methods allow developing solid -state electrolyte 

that is a safe, non -flammable replacement to the highly flammable liquid organic electrolytes currently 

used in SOA lithium -ion batteries. The all solid -state lithium -sulfur -selenium cell design enables the 

implementation of a bipolar stack configuration, which has the advantages of reducing overall cell 

weight, reducing the amount of interfaced connections for the cell, and minimizing cooling requirements 

for the battery. In particular, the solid -state design allows for a serial stacking configuration to enable 

dense packaging of the cells within the bipolar stack. Lastly, optimization of battery components o ccur s

through a robust and rigorous combination of various computational modeling techniques covering 

multiple length scales. The expected result will be a solid -state battery with operational temperatures 

from 0 °C to 150 °C which provides the required e nergy density, discharge rate, and inherent safety to 

meet strict aerospace performance criteria. Electrolyte and Interface for Calcium B attery 

Alexandre Ponrouch 

Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB -CSIC) 

Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia (Spain) 

aponrouch@icmab.es 

Various metals hav e been used as battery anodes in electrochemical cells ever since the birth of the 

batteries with Volta’s pile and in the first commercialized primary (Zn/MnO2, Leclanché 1866) and 

secondary (Pb/acid, Planté 1859) batteries. Li -MoS2 cells, employing Li met al anodes, with specific 

energies two to three times higher than both Ni/Cd and Pb/acid cells, were withdrawn from the market 

due to safety issues related to dendrites growth. Instead, Ca are currently being considered as safer metal 

anode alternative. [ 1] Pioneering work by Aurbach et al. in the early 1990’s showed a surface -film 

controlled electrochemical behavior of Ca metal anodes in electrolytes with conventional organic 

solvents. [ 2,3] The lack of metal plating was attributed to the poor divalent cati on migration through the 

passivation layer. 

Nevertheless, recent demonstration of Ca plating and stripping in the presence of a passivation layer [4,5] 

has paved the way for assessment of new electrolyte formulations with high resilience towards oxidation .

However, several challenges remain to be tackled for the development of Ca based batteries.[1,6] Among 

these, the need for reliable electrochemical test protocols, mass transport limitations and high desolvation 

energies (due to strong cation -solvent and cation –anion interactions) are implied.[8 ,9 ] Her e, a systematic 

investigation of the electrolyte formulation impact on the cation solvation structure and transport is 

presented.[10] Fi nally, characterization of the passivation layer formed on to the Ca met al anode in 

various electrolyte formulations using complementary techniques will be presented allowing for the 

identification of the most suitable passivation layer components in terms of divalent cation mobility. 

References 

1) M. E. Arroyo -de Dompablo, A. Ponrouch, P. Johansson, M. R. Palacín, Chem. Rev. 

doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00339. 

2) D. Aurbach, R. Skaletsky, Y. Gofer, J. Electrochem. Soc.138 (1991) 3536 

3) Z. Lu, A. Schechter, M. Moshkovich, D. Aurbach, J. Electroanal. Chem. 466 (1999) 203 

4)  A. Ponrou ch, C. Frontera, F. Bardé, M.R. Palacín, Nat.  Mater., 15 (2016) 169 

5) D. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Jin, C. Kuss, P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater. 17 (2018) 16 

6) A. Ponrouch, M.R. Palacín, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 9 (2018) 1 

7) A. Ponrouch, J. Bitenc, R. Domink o, N. Lindahl, P. Johansson, M.R. Palacin, Energy Storage 

Materials 20 (2019) 253 

8) D. S. Tchitchekova, D. Monti, P. Johansson, F. Bardé, A. Randon -Vitanova, M. R. Palac ı́ n, A. 

Ponrouch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 164 (2017) A1384 

9) R. Dugas, J. D. Forero -Saboya, A. Ponrouch, Chem. Mater. 31 (2019) 8613 

10) J. D. Forero -Saboya, E. Marchante, R. B. Araujo, D. Monti, P. Johansson, A. Ponrouch, J. Phys. 

Chem. C 123 (2019) 29524 Understanding and Designing of Materials and Inter face 

# for High Energy Batteries 

## Yi Cui 

## Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University. 

## Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. 

## Email: yicui@stanford.edu 

## Abstract: The fast growth of portable power sources for transportation and grid -scale stationa ry 

## storage present s great opportunities for batter y development . How to increase energy density, 

## reduce cost, speed up charging, extend life, enhance safety and recycle are critical challenges. Here 

## I will present 15 year research in my lab to address some of challenges by understanding the 

## materials and interface s an d providing guiding principles for design. The topics to be discussed 

## includ e: 1) A breakthrough tool of cryogenic electron microscopy, leading to atomic scale 

## resolution of fragile battery materials and interfaces. 2 ) Materials design to enable high capac ity 

## materials: Si and Li metal anodes and S cathodes. 3) Interfacial design with polymer and inorganic 

## coating to enhance cycling efficiency of battery electrodes .

## References:                   

> 1) K. Yan, Z. Lu, H. -W. Lee, F. Xiong, P. -C. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Zhao, S. Chu, and Y. Cui, "Selective deposition and
> stable encapsulation of lithium through heterogeneous seeded growth", Nature Energy 1, 16010 (2016) .
> 2) D. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H. -W. Lee, J. Sun, H. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie, and Y. Cui, "Layered reduced graphene
> oxide with n anoscale interlayer gaps as a stable host for lithium metal anodes", Nature Nanotechnology 11,
> 626 (2016)
> 3) D. Lin, Y. Liu, and Y. Cui, "Reviving the lithium metal anode for high -energy batteries", Nature
> Nanotechnology 12, 194 (2017).
> 4) Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C. -L. Wu, L. -M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz,
> S. Chu, and Y. Cui, "Atomic structure of sensitive battery materials and interfaces revealed by cryo -electron
> microscopy", Science 358, 506 (2017 ).
> 5) Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, and Y. Cui, "Challenges and opportunities towards fast -charging battery materials" Nature
> Energy 4, 540 (2019).

## Proton -Coupled Electron Transfer in Electrochemistry 

## Sharon Hammes -Schiffer 

## Departm ent of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 

## e-mail: sharon.hammes -schiffer@yale.edu 

## Proton -coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions play a vital role in a wi de range of 

## electrochemical processes. This talk will focus on theoretical studies of molecular and 

## heterogeneous electrocatalysis , highlighting the interplay between theory and experiment .

## A general theory of PCET that includes the quantum mechanical effe cts of the electrons 

## and transferring proton s, as well as the motions of the proton donor -acceptor mode and 

## solvent environment , has been developed. This formulation enables the calculation of rate 

## constants , current densities, Tafel slopes, and kinetic is otope effects for comparison to 

## experiment. The application of this PCET theory to molecular electr ocatalysts designed 

## for water splitting illustrates the use of multi -proton relays to transport protons over 

## hydrogen -bonded networks , as well as the ability to tune the redox potentials through 

## substituents and other molecular design strategies. The application of this PCET theory to 

## proton discharge on a gold electrode in acetonitrile explains the experimentally observed 

## potential -dependent kinetic isotope e ffect in terms of contributions from excited electron -

## proton vibronic states that depend on both isotope and applied potential. This theory also 

## provides insight into the fundamental principles underlying p roton discharge to a gold 

## electrode in acidic and alkaline aqueous solution. These applications highlight the 

## importance of using a vibronically nonadiabatic theory that quantizes the transferring 

## proton and includes the effects of hydrogen tunneling and excited electron -proton 

## vibronic states. Recent per iodic density functional theory calculations of electric fields at 

## electrochemical interfaces and PCET at graphite -conjugated acids elucidate the impact of 

## the applied potential on the electronic structure and interfacial fields . The insights from 

## these th eoretical studies are useful for the design of both molecular and heterogeneous 

## electrocatalysts to control the movement and coupling of electrons and protons for energy 

## conversion processes.                                                                                  

> 1. Hammes -Schiffer , S. Proton -Coupled Electron Transfer: Moving Together and Charging
> Forward. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015 ,137 , 8860 -8871 .
> 2. Hammes -Schiffer , S. Controlling Electrons and Protons through Theory: Molecular
> Electrocatalysts to Nanoparticles. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018 ,51 , 1975 -1983 .
> 3. Goldsmith, Z. K.; Lam, Y. C.; Souda ckov, A.V.; Hammes -Schiffer , S. Proton Discharge on
> aGold Electrode from Triethylammonium in Acetonitrile: Theoretical Modeling of
> Potential -Dependent Kinetic Isotope E ffects .J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 ,141 , 1084 -1090 .
> 4. Lam, Y. -C.; Soudackov, A. V.; Goldsmith , Z. K.; Hammes -Schiffer , S. Theory of Proton
> Discharge on Metal Electrodes: Electronically Adiabatic Model. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019 ,
> 123 , 12335 -12345 .
> 5. Lam, Y. C.; Soudackov, A.V.; Hammes -Schiffer , S. Kinetics of Proton Discharge on Metal
> Electrodes: Effects of Vibrational N onadiabaticity and Solvent Dynamics. J. Phys. Chem.
> Lett. 2019 ,10 , 5312 -5217 .
> 6. Goldsmith, Z. K.; Secor, M.; Hammes -Schiffer , S. Inhomogeneity of Interfacial Electric
> Fields at Vibrationa lProbes on Electrode Surfaces. ACS Cent. Sci. 2020 ,6, 304 -311 .

%PDF -1.2 %âãÏÓ 

8 0 obj << /Linearized 1 /O 10 /H [ 597 179 ] /L 4284 /E 3064 /N 1 /T 4007 

>> endobj 

xref 8 10 0000000016 00000 n 0000000544 00000 n 0000000776 00000 n 

0000000945 0 0000 n 0000001018 00000 n 0000001288 00000 n 0000002549 00000 

n 0000002656 00000 n 0000000597 00000 n 0000000756 00000 n trailer << /Size 

18 /Info 7 0 R /Root 9 0 R /Prev 3998 

/ID[<070cf601e15bf973a553b41df35c3f18><070cf601e15bf973a553b41df35c3f1 8>] 

>> startxref 0%%EOF 9 0 obj << /Type /Catalog /Pages 6 0 R >> endobj 16 

0 obj << /S 36 /T 70 /Filter /FlateDecode /Length 17 0 R >> stream 

H‰c``à``` 

e ö% Ø ” b6(f`ðdàæa`H:åàÂp Ägd`àü ¡•D X ˜df`àŽ„ÐL *ï W endstream endobj 17 

0 obj 69 endobj 10 0 obj << /Type /Page /Parent 6 0 R /Resources 11 0 R 

/Contents 12 0 R /Thumb 1 0 R /MediaBox [ 0 0 699 861 ] /CropBox [ 21 24 

612 837 ] /Rotate 0 >> endobj 11 0 obj << /ProcSet [ /PDF ] /ExtGState << 

/GS2 15 0 R >> >> endobj 12 0 o bj << /Length 196 /Filter /FlateDecode >> 

stream 

H‰l •1N A EOà;ü 

àØÞ Û{ ¤ ª”ˆ. B ×£°³[ 73ÿ¿ùž/ Å öuú€°â *xÆË«àH»Çƒáí‡ ï

žC‘=8rÂ× Zç´Ä… $,ó \ äªìÝ7ôP .ÈÉ9ÕÊ -

sî} òJ÷° â“±×Ã•¹í»ý¸’ZpÆšs¿®)‹½d,þ_…)9{[+Ym¨ -ÿ6 ì"laÜç³ q¸Â3¸™¡‹±jàA³³KÃ÷ 

‰Ît ` ÃGL endstream endobj 13 0 obj << /FunctionType 0 /Domain [ -1 1 -1 1 ] 

/Range [ -1 1 ] /BitsPerSample 8 /Size [ 33 33 ] /Length 1098 /Filter 

/FlateDecode >> stream 

H‰LÍ[L’ 

àóØ›oõ”OÕKùÐekåZåV¹ –¹™ÖLgIÓ K 

Ó †þ˜ \ Äþ0$4ü½ Ä%¹„" qñ ! ( 

( ""¢¨ zžÎvÞ¿íû'ãìÅë9yO_TV×Ô£ hÂ êÞÁa% ¹·.Ÿ;}*#3ëæý‚Ò 

D ¦™@j§P)ä¶O8 U / •öèÎÕ 

gÎfeç ¾„×bp¤ ð+ó ‹ÅdÐ;ÉDlÃÛŠç •s®•¿x3· VÝÐÜJëbõ s¸ \Î ÔÛ ’ñ˜šªÒü»W®ß/„!P82 ÕÏá‹ÄR™T2*ä ±»;[ Úª’¼Û9 /«Qx*ƒÍ Hä “jF¥ —

ýä °@ ðþuñÃ¼Rx ŽÚ ŒÊ'μ† £Ñ8;S+¤‚¡ -Ô„|Uø´¢¶™Ì€x Åï)“Åj³ÛþÎ›gõ*¹h¸ç3 ]]ö 

i¥³G$ ºY‹Íát¹Ý®¥ ë Ÿ)μ \8Èìh©«¬¬ÃÑXœQ…Îh]tyÖüë~ŸweÙ>7þÅ‡ºH ˆj ©«_ ÿ=ku¬¬ 6Â››á ßã´› J1§‡ÖR[ÓÜÁâH&§,‹+¾P$ Û‰mo… ^§Í¤ @ôVt= ìãËμ&›k -

´ ÛM$ {ñhx}Õa™RŠ‡™d Mú: š0X ž@$¶· ˜L -$âÑ ŸËfÔÈFzi Û™ÃâÉ «sm#º»Ÿ<J ¥;‘Àê¢Y7Ægƒx€ò •#U m.•8 –8<J §Sûñ- Ç1§W ¡/ €ÊâÊ4F»{}s'‘L -

Ÿœ¤S »Ñ wÉbP ûéD€Ââ J5F›Û¿ K$ ŽOŽÿ :±‰ÌäHT³]¾ðöÞA*N %ÿ+Æ } 

ÓÆ UNÏ/yƒ[ñÄa*•J -ìm‡ýn»I+ÿñ½ ‡úD‡„ã:óÂŠ? •'ö ö÷b‘ wÙ:£’rYTl ®³ —'SÏZ —=pt'¾» ßŽ„|î ³^! d´aÞ äî¡Ÿ 

ý»Ó»¾ ÙŠF·ÂAßŠc~F -

ã±AB= E Ù<©jjÎî \õ ‚¡PÐïu;¬Fí¸h IÁ"a5Xr÷€@®ž6Û ®U×ëq//Ì u bn/HDÁKà øNÖ •H® 

6˜,¶EÇÒ’Ãn5Ïh'$¼¾®v 

+( ‹i {†…¿”Ú)£yÎb™3ÍèÕãb -Ä ´|¨*Î}VQ ÀžA¾xL©Ñé ½V¥ ‰¸} *-õ¦,ÿÖ£çUμ é3 â Ä²1…B1. —Šxƒ½] < QþäÞå; •K«Þ7 ;ºz á ¾P( üà ²™`{ 

+zpãÜÕœü’×Ht 

‰Fgö²¡~¨ï;‹ RˆÀ‡7åE¹Ù —N_¸v7¯øUu]cK+™ ~¡ÓÁNj ‹BV•=y •yêÌù+· –

U"jÑÀG< H$à°˜z$ VœïÆ¥ÌŒ ÐnÈ endstream endobj 14 0 obj << /Type /Halftone 

/HalftoneType 1 /Frequency 120 /Angle 45 /SpotFunction 13 0 R >> endobj 15 

0 obj << /Type /ExtGState /SA false /OP false /HT 14 0 R >> endobj 1 0 

obj << /Filter [ /ASCII85Decode /LZWDecode ] /Width 73 /Height 101 

/ColorSpace 5 0 R /BitsPerComponent 8 /Length 2 0 R >> stream 

J2Q7]3$]7K#D>EP:q1$o*=mro@So+ \<\5,H7Uo<*jE<[.O@Wn[3@'nb -

^757;Rp>H >q_R=AlC^cenm@9:1mM9jS"!dTMT<$3[GQ$8#0$s<4ZX!SPQ1`C/m<k<ioH)<bk^ 

Hj` \=EYZP^B4!g3;B=(iZ<kDqOh/Bf.DHAorf'R[o>[SZ~> endstream endobj 2 0 obj 178 

endobj 3 0 obj 481 endobj 4 0 obj << /Filter [ /ASCII85Decode /LZWDecode ] 

/Length 3 0 R >> stream 

J,g]g+e/h_!_gCtO=0f)$P%cIi8Zdfc5&3j_8$7g.@L`YKUJNGBP \poR=_;Dl'P(T 

(7Boo^^S:71(MN]ZQX/+Cbu.lK"p74pe1T%s.DY%& \1TdJhr54.M9au6>79n6`Q:4 

PbLSZTLEE(8E@'*1m g_*eTnN*;*'V3+gm -EEetX%;Bo$ur2ss*N`. -!.kG_q6GDD' 

dKoL!8Ka#EV,@V! \j8ZFbp6EE<9cn=N6j<M8Q?[#7"dq'1>0nf;(&;QU6bUD')c@ \

9-d\DA=cZ0Q>gIM$$;cd2O@&a;X,Nn_a<?V -PVE%?Sf]idH6WRZqHGq]Zm<uCi"]? 

Stg(<gV -H9NB<SA \T=sN)Il%(BDIak7/H&mV!kmDUo4X;8;]V>P(]I1aRc(K1^ue> 

gF/(+GaKo $qneLWDrQ#;5 \S( \$q'4Q,85` -8;S(=Z"WSBOV*FM)4,?B],R<gbPN=# 

OmIK<a: \o8+ioO -!W~> 

endstream 

endobj 

5 0 obj 

[

/Indexed /DeviceRGB 255 4 0 R 

]

endobj 

6 0 obj 

<< 

/Type /Pages 

/Kids [ 10 0 R ] 

/Count 1 

>> 

endobj 

7 0 obj 

<< 

/CreationDate (D:19560828043127) 

/Producer (Acrobat Distiller 3.01 for Power Macintosh) 

/Author () 

/Creator (Penta Systems International Inc.) 

/Title () 

/ModDate (D:19560828003808) 

>> 

endobj 

xref 

0 8

0000000000 65535 f 

0000002732 00000 n 

0000003064 00000 n 

0000003084 00000 n 

00000031 04 00000 n 

0000003678 00000 n 

0000003729 00000 n 

0000003794 00000 n 

trailer 

<< /Size 8 

/ID[<070cf601e15bf973a553b41df35c3f18><070cf601e15bf973a553b41df35c3f18>] 

>> 

startxref 

173 

%%EOF Ion -Transfer Stripping V oltammetry of Perfluorooctane Sulfonate 

Benjamín N. Viada, a,b,c L. Mabel Yudi, b,c Damien W. M. Arrigan a 

> a

Curtin Institute for Functional Molecules and Interfaces, School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin 

University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, Western Australia, 6845, Australia  

> b

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Departamento de Fisicoquímica, 

Córdoba, Argentina  

> c

Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas CONICET, Instituto de Investi gaciones en 

Fisicoquímica de Cór doba INFIQC, Córdoba, Argentina 

e-mail d.arrigan@curtin.edu.au 

Per - and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a category of persistent environmental contaminants that 

have been linked to health issues in humans. In this wor k, we investigate the detection of 

perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS -), one such PFAS, by ion -transfer voltammetry at an array of 

microinterfaces between two immiscible electrol yte solutions (μITIES). 1 Cyclic voltammetry, differential 

pulse voltammetry and differential pulse stripping voltammetry (DPSV) indicated the ion -transfer 

behaviour and detection of PFOS -, with the latter enabling detection at picomolar concentrations. Usi ng a 

5 min preconcentration time, during which PFOS - was preconcentrated into the organic phase of the 

μITIES array, a limit of detection (LOD) of 46 pM in aqueous electrolyte was achieved. This performance 

is attributed to the enhanced mass transport (rad ial diffusion) to the μITIES that occurs during 

preconcentration. To investigate the potentiality for applications of this analytical approach to 

environmental samples, measurements in a range of water matrices were investigated. Drinking water, 

laboratory tap water and seawater matrices were assessed by spiking with PFOS - over the 0.1 -1 nM range. 

A matrix effect was observed, with changes in sensitivity and LOD relative to those in pure aqueous 

electrolyte solutions. Such matrix effects need to be consider ed in designing applications of these PFOS -

measurements to environmental samples. The results presented here indicate that DPSV at a μITIES array 

can form the basis for a fast and sensitive screening method for PFOS - contamination that is suited to 

portable and on -site applications. 

1. B.N. Viada, L .M. Yudi, D.W.M. Arrigan, Detection of perfluorooctane sulfonate by ion -transfer 

stripping voltammetry at an array of microinterfaces between two immiscible electrolyte solutions. 

ChemRxiv , https ://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.12236240.v1 Catalytically Synthesized 

# Prussia n Blue Based Nanoz ymes Defeating Peroxidase :

# New Horizons for Electroanalysis 

Komkova M .A. , Zarochintsev A.A. , Galushin A.A. , Shavokshina V.A. , Karyakin A.A. 

Chemistry faculty of M.V. Lomonosov Moscow Sta te University, 119 991, Moscow, Russia 

e-mail : mkomkova@analyt.chem.msu.ru 

The term ‘nanozyme’ is attributed to nanoparticles with enzyme -like activity. Despite the 

attractive title , the enzymatic specificity, particularly in complex organic reactions , is ha rdly expectable 

for nanozymes . Nev ertheless, the nanocatalysts with broad spec ificity can act as the labels or transducers 

in biosensors. Undoubtedly higher stability of artificial enzymes compared to natural ones, as well as low 

cost of nanoparticles, exp lain vivid inter est towards nanozymes elaboration. Since peroxidase is probably 

the most widely used label , a variety of nanoparticles mimic king peroxidase -like activity have been 

studied .

Among the reported nanozymes , catalytically synthesized Prussian Bl ue (PB) based 

na noparticles are, probably, the only nanozymes suitable for analysis due to their genu ine enzymatic 

properties, including ultrahigh catalytic constant, an absence of oxidase -like activity and an ability to 

operate in physiological solutions [1]. Synthesi s in course of Fe III [Fe III (CN) 6] reduction by hydrogen 

peroxide, or by conducting polymer forming organic molecules occurs , upon the same reaction as in 

electrocatalysis . It results in PB structures with the highest catalytic activity , on the one hand, and al lows 

to functionalized nanoparticle surface at deposit ion step, on the other hand. Suc h nanoparticles display the 

size -dependent catalytic rate constants in H2O2 reduction, which are significantly impro ved compared to 

natural enzyme peroxid ase . So, for PB nanoparticles 200 nm in diameter, the turnover number is 300 

times higher .

Simple d rop -casting of the PB nanozymes suspension with subsequent drying provides improved 

analytical performance characteristics of the res ulting electrochemical ( bio)sensors . So, sensitivity of 

nanoparticles -based H 2O2 sensors is 30% higher (up to 0.85 A ∙M−1∙cm −2 ) compared to it for the sensors 

based on PB films [ 2]. Optimal sensitivity of the sensors is achieved in case of contin uative nanoparticles 

monolayer (est imated by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy [ 3]) on the electrode surface .

Similarly , the use of PB nanoparticles for elaboration of nanozyme -enzyme biosensors provides almost 

twice higher sensiti vity (> 0.2 A ∙M−1 ∙cm −2 ) [4]. The improved anal ytical performan ce characteristics of 

the PB nanoparticles -based (bio)sensors are most probably due to their inc reased roughness providing 

more efficient mass transfer compared to conventional PB films. 

Further improvement of the signal -to -background ratio peculiar to Pru ssian Blue is possible 

using the electrode supports characterized by ultra -low background current , such as boron -doped diamond 

(BDD) . In contrast to PB films depositi on using fully oxidized prec ursors , PB nanozymes immobilization 

is not det riment for the B DD surface and retains its termination. Compared to conventional graphite 

electrodes modified with P russian Blue nanoparticles, the use of BDD provided up to 20 times decreased 

oxygen reduction currents resulti ng in 4 times increased signal -to -background r atio [5] .

To validate PB based nanozymes as a nov el elect ro chemical label for RNA detectio n, azido -

groups functionalized nanoparticles were successfully conjugated with HULC (Highly U p-Regulated in 

Liver Cancer) gene sequence s. The possibil ity of nanozymes detection at subnano molar concent ra tions in 

chronoamperometric mode was shown. PB nanozymes conjugated probes are universal and can be used 

for diverse sensors elaboration. 

Financial support through Russian Science Foundation grant #19 -73 -00166 is acknowl edged .

References 

1. M.A. Komkova , E.E. Karyakina , A.A. Karyakin , Journal of t he American Chemical Society 140 

(2018 ) 11302 .

2. M.A. Komkova, A.A. Zarochintsev , E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin , Journal of Electroanalytical 

Chemistry (2020) 114048 .

3. M.A. Ko mkova , E.V. Karpova , G.A. Karyakin et al. , Electrochimica Acta 219 (2016) 588. 

4. D.V. Vokhmyanina , K.D. Andre eva , M.A. Komkova , E.E. Karyakina , A.A. Karyakin , Talanta 208 

(2020) 120393 .

5. M.A. Komkova , A.A. Karyakin et al. , Electrochimi ca Acta 339 (2020 ) 135924 .Coulometric Transduction for Solid -Contact Ion -Selective Electrodes 

Johan Bobacka , Tingting han, Zekra M ousavi, Ulriika Mattinen 

Åbo Akademi University, Johan Gadolin Process Chemistry Centre, 

Laboratory of Molecular Science and Engineering 

Biskopsgatan 8 , FI -20500, Turku/Åbo, Finland 

johan.bobacka@abo.fi 

A coulometric transduction method for solid -contact ion -selective electrodes (SCISEs) was introduced by 

our group in 2015 [1 ]. Since then, the coulometric metho d has been explored and optimized further by us 

[2 -5] and others [5, 6]. A key feature of this method is that the potential of the SCISE vs the reference 

electrode is kept constant . Therefore, any potential change at the ion -selective membrane (ISM) |sample 

interface, due to a change in ion activity in the solution, causes o xidation/reduction of the solid contact. 

The result is a transient current that is measured and integrated to obtain the charge that is proportional to 

the change in the logarithm of the ion activity in solution. A unique feature of this coulometric method is 

that the analytical signal, i.e. charge (for a given change in ion activity) is proportional to the redox 

capacitance of the solid contact, meaning that the signal can be amplified by increasing the thickness 

(loading) of the solid -contact layer. This is an advantage of the coulometric method compared to classical 

potentiometry. 

The coulometric method has been investigated using poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) ( PEDOT ) as solid 

contact in SCISEs for the detec tion of K+ [2 -4, 6 ], H+ (pH) [4] and Cl - [5 ]. The response time of the 

coulometric method was shortened by lowering the bulk resistance of the ion -selective membrane, either 

by increasing the geometrical surface area of the electrode [3] or by using spin -coated thin -layer I SMs [4, 

5]. A theoretical capacitive model based on a series RC circuit gave an excellent explanation of the 

coulometric response of a Cl --SCISE [5 ]. However, impedance measurements showed that the 

coulometric response for K +-SCISEs was limited by diffusio n even for thin -layer ISMs [4]. A n extended 

theoretical model for the amperometric and coulometric response of K +-SCISEs , which accounts for 

concentr ation polarization in the ISM was recently proposed [6 ]. Furthermore, coulometric SCISEs were 

evaluated for measurement of pH in seawater [4] and K + in serum [4, 6 ]. 

A further electrochemical study of the coulometric response and the corresponding charg e transfer 

processes of Pb 2+ -SCISEs and Ca 2+ -SCISEs strengthen ed our understanding of the coulom etric 

transdu ction mechanism. Electrochemical characterization of Pb 2+ -SCISEs with dif ferent thicknesses of 

PEDOT , as well differe nt thicknesses of ISMs, showed that the coulometric response of the Pb 2+ -SCISE 

wa s limited by charge (ion) tra nsport i n the PEDOT solid -con tact layer. This was explained by 

interactions between Pb 2+ and PEDOT doped with poly(styrene sulfonate) .

References 

[1] E.  Hup a, U. Vanamo, J. Bobacka, Novel Ion -to -Electron Transduction Principle for Solid -Contact 

ISEs, Electroanalysis 27 (2015) 591. 

[2 ] U. Vanamo , E. Hupa, V. Yrjänä , J. Bobacka, New Signal Readout Principle for Solid -Contact Ion -

Selective Electrodes, Anal. Chem. 88 (2016) 4369. 

[3] T. Han , U. Vanamo , J. Bobacka, Influence of Electrode Geometry on the Response of Solid -Contact 

Ion -Select ive Electrodes when Utilizing a New Co ulometric Signal Readout Method, ChemElectroChem. 

3 (2016) 2071. 

[4] T. Han , U. Mattinen , J. Bobacka, Improving the Sensitivity of Solid -Contact Ion -Selective Electrodes 

by Using Coulometric Sig na l Transduction, ACS Se nsors 4 (2019) 900. 

[5] Z. Jarolímová, T. Han, U. Mattinen, J. Bobacka, E. Bakker, Capacitive Model for Coulometric 

Readout of Ion -Sel ective Electrodes, Anal Chem . 90 (2018) 8700. 

[6] Y.O. Kondratyeva , E.G. Tolstopjatova , D.O. Kirsanov , K.N. Mikhelson, Chr onoamperometric and 

coulometric analysis with ionophore -based ion -selective electrodes: A modified theory and the potas sium 

ion assay in serum samples, Sens . Act uators B 310 (2020) 127894 .Enhancement of microbial fuel cell performance by introducing a 

# nano -composite cathode catalyst 

Mounika Kodali 

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Califor nia - Irvine 

Samueli School of Engineering 

916 Engineering Tower , 92697 Irvine, C alif ornia, USA 

mounikak@uci.ed u

Microbial fuel cell (MFC) is a promising bioelectrochemical device that converts chemical 

energy into electrical energy through the catalytic reaction of microorganisms in (circum) neutral media at 

room temperature . Inside the MFC, the el ectroactive bact eria at the anode oxides the organic s generat ing 

electrons and protons. Thus, generated protons transfer directly to cathode through the electrolyte while 

the electrons get transfer red through the external circuit generating elec tricity. El ectrons and prot ons get 

consumed at the cathode for reducing the oxygen. Unfortunately, the performance of MFCs are limited by 

several factors that hinder its large -scale applications such as high materials costs, the poor red -ox 

electrochemical performanc es and the relat ively low durability of the electrodes. For the large part of the 

scientific community, one of the greater bottlenecks is related to the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at 

the cathode. Despite several oxidant options investigated in MFCs, o xygen is the mos t preferred solution 

due to its natural availability in the atmosphere at no additional cost and its high electrochemical 

potential. However, ORR suffers from its sluggish kinetic s mainly due to the low operational temperature 

an d the neutr al pH. In order to maintain the biologica l activity at the anode neither the temperature nor the 

pH can be varied. 

To improve the sluggish kinetics of ORR and the electrochemical performance , catalysts need to 

be used. ORR catalysts can be main ly classifi ed into 3 catego ries i) platinum -based materials (PGM) , ii) 

carbonaceous materials , and iii) platinum group metal -free (PGM -free) materials. Platinum -based ORR 

catalysts (PGM) have been extensively in use in the past but their high cost and low durability have 

significant ly lowered their utilization. Various c arbonaceous materials have been in use in MFCs due to 

their characteristic properties such as low cost, high durability, high electrical conductivity and 

mechanical strength. However , the ir performance as catalysts is not high enough, and the ORR kinetics 

still remains low. PGM -free catalysts (M -N-C) based on transition metals (e.g. Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) are 

atomically dispersed on a carbon/nitrogen matrix. It was shown that PGM -free have super ior perform ance 

compared to AC and Fe -based material is the most performing catalyst [1] .

In this work, we investigated the electro catalytic activity of Fe -AAPyr (Fe -Aminoantipyrine) 

and 3D -graphene nanosheet (3D -GNS) separately and physically combined for ORR along with AC 

control . 3D -GNSs were synthesiz ed using a modified Hummers method technique and Sacrificial Support 

Method (SSM) while Fe -AAPyr was prepared using sacrificial support method with silica templat e and 

aminoantipyrine as an organic precurso r (C -N matr ix) . The ORR act ivity of these catalysts at different 

loadings was investigated by using rotating ring disk (RRDE) electrode setup in the neutral electrolyte 

and then the catalysts were investigated in MFC by integrat ing them into air -breathing cathode. Th e co -

presence of GNS (2 mgcm -2) and Fe -AAPyr (2 mgcm -2) catalyst within the air -breathing cathode resulted 

in the higher power generation in MFC of 235 ± 1 μWcm -2 while Fe -AAPyr catalyst itself showed high 

performance (217 ± 1 mWcm -2), higher compared to GNS (150 ± 5 μWcm -2) while AC generated power 

of roughly 104 μWcm -2 [2] .

References 

[1 ] M. Kodali, C. Santoro, A. Serov, S. Kabir, K. Artyushkova, I. Mat anovic, P. Atanassov. Air Breathing 

Cathodes for Microbial Fuel Cell using Mn -, Fe -, Co -and Ni -containing Platinum Group Metal -free 

Catalysts. Electrochim . Acta. 2017, 231, 115 -124. 

[2 ] M. Kodali, S. Herrera, S. Kabir, A. Serov, C. Santoro, I. Ieropoulos, P. Atanassov. Enhancement of 

Microbial Fuel Cell Performance by Introducing a Nano -composite Cathode Catalyst. Electrochimica 

Acta. 2018, 265, 56 -64. Coupled Mass Spectrometry Techniques in Research on 

# Stability of Electro - and Photo electrocatalysts 

S. Cherevko 1

> 1

Helmholtz -Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (IEK -11), Forschungszentrum 

Jülich GmbH, Erlangen, 91058, Germany 

s.cherevko@fz -juelich.de 

Long -term durability of electrochemical energy conversion devices such as fuel cells and water 

electrolysers can only be achieved through utilization of stable components. In particular, durable 

electrocatalysts are required. It is a common practice that on the way to their potential application in real 

devices, electrocatalysts are typically evaluated in various accelerated stress tests. Unfortunately, even 

positive results do not guarantee dura ble performance of the devices, as many degradation processes  go 

unnoticed  in such tests . Coupled mass spectrometry techniques were designed to address this issue [1] .

Tiny amounts of gasses or dissolved ionic /at omic species formed as a result of a degradation process can 

be detected using electrochemical gas mass spectrometry (gas MS) and on -line inductively coupled 

plasma mass spectrometry (on -line ICP -MS), respectively. 

Since such techniques are still relat ively rare in the electrocatalysis research, this talk will be started with 

a short introduction on basic operational principles of electrochemical MS in stability research . It will be 

shown that gas MS and on -line ICP -MS can be used in fundamental mechani stic studies. Moving to 

examples, dissolution processes in the state -of -the -art Pt/C and IrO x catalysts and how they have assisted 

in understanding of catalysts degradation will be describe d [2, 3] . In order to demo nstrate the versatility 

of the coupled mass spectrometry techniques in fundamental stability research, other representative 

examples will include: (a) light induced dissolution of Ir photoelectrocatalyst covered WO 3

photoabsorber s [4] ; oxidative leaching of sulfur from Pt single atom catalysts; Cu leaching at pHs of 

int erest for carbon dioxide reduction; degradation of non -noble metal fuel cell catalyst, etc. Moreover, 

novel approache s on application of on -line ICP -MS in more applied gas -diffusion -electrode (GDE) 

systems will be shown [5] .

[1] O. Kasi an, S. Geiger, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, S. Cherevko, Electrochemical On -line ICP -MS in 

Electrocatalysis Research, Chem Rec, 19 (2019) 2130 -2142. 

[2] S. Cherevko, N. Kulyk, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, Durability of platinum -based fuel cell electrocatalysts: 

Dissolution of bulk and nanoscale platinum, Nano Energy, 29 (2016) 275 -298. 

[3] S. Geiger, O. Kasian, M. Ledendecker, E. Pizzutilo, A.M. Mingers, W.T. Fu, O. Diaz -Morales, Z. Li, 

T. Oellers, L. Fruchter, A. Ludwig, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, M.T.M. Koper, S. Cherevko, The stabil ity 

number as a metric for electrocatalyst stability benchmarking, Nature Catalysis, 1 (2018) 508 -515. 

[4] J. Knöppel, S. Zhang, F.D. Speck, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, C. Scheu, S. Cherevko, Time -resolved analysis 

of dissolution phenomena in photoelectrochemistry – A case study of WO3 photocorrosion, 

Electrochem. Commun., 96 (2018) 53 -56. 

[5] K. Ehelebe, D. Seeberger, M.T.Y. Paul, S. Thiele, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, S. Cherevko, Evaluating 

Electrocatalysts at Relevant Currents in a Half -Cell: The Impact of Pt Loading on O xygen Reduction 

Reaction, J. Electrochem. Soc., 166 (2019) F1259 -F1268. Simultaneous Electrochemical Detection of Important Advanced 

# Glycation End Products Involved in Oral Pathology From Raw Saliva 

Mihaela Tertiș ,a Ana Teodora Ilea, a Aranka Ilea b and Cecilia Cristea a

> a

Analytical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Iu liu Hațieganu Unive rsity of Medicine and 

Pharmacy ; 4 Louis Pasteur Street, 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania  

> b

Department of Oral Rehabilitation, Oral Health and Dental Office Management, Faculty of Dentistry, 

Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

mihaela.tertis@umfcluj.ro 

The pathology of oral cavity is closely correlated with dietary intake. Advanced glycation end products 

(AGEs) are associated with the processed food and thus, can be ingested by consuming these types of 

foo d items. The majority of AGEs, such as methylglyoxal (MGL) and N -(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) 

are considered markers involved in oxidative stress by producing long -term damage to proteins in ageing, 

atherosclerotic plaques and diabetes. AGEs are usually det ected using ELISA, immunohistochemistry or 

HPLC, methods that require long time for analysis and implicit delayed diagnostic results 1,2. A novel 

approach for the sensitive electrochemical detection of MGL has been elaborated based on a lab -made 

printed pl atform using a flexible plastic foil as support, an Ag/AgCl conductive ink for the design of the 

reference electrode and the contacts, and a carbon ink for the working and counter electrodes. After 

drying, the surface of working electrode was decorated wit h a nanostructured platinum film that was 

generated electrochemicaly using cyclic voltammetry (CV) in the presence of hexachloroplatinic acid in 

hydrochloric acid. All the steps involved in the elaboration of the sensor were optimized based on the 

differen tial pulse voltammetry (DPV) signal of the target analyte. The optimized nanocomposite platform 

was then characterized using microscopic and electrochemical techniques. The selectivity tests performed 

for MGL have proved that the presence of CML in the sam e solution does not hinder the detection. 

Furthermore, the oxidation signal of CML was not influenced by the presence of MGL. The disposable 

sensor was successfully tested for direct electrochemical detection of MGL and CML using DPV. The 

employment of com posite electrodes exhibits electron -mediating effect, which leads to a well -defined 

reduction peak associated to the MGL and a well -defined oxidation peak associated to the CML. The 

developed assay was shown to be selective and sensitive for the simultaneo us analysis of salivary MGL 

and CML in healthy volunteers even when tested in vivo, being promising for the elaboration of point -of -

care devices for salivary analysis. 

Achnowledgements: 

This work was supported by two projects: COFUND -ERA -HDHL ERANET, Euro pean and International 

Cooperation - Subprogram 3.2 - Horizon 2020, PNCDI III Program - SALIVAGES; no 25/1.09.2017 and 

CCCDI -UEFISCDI, project number ERANET -RUS -PLUS -PLASMON -ELECTROLIGHT/46/2018, 

within PNCDI III. 

References 

(1) Maciejczyk, M.; Zalewska, A.; Ładny, J.R. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2019, Volume 2019, 

Article ID 4393460 

(2) Lettrichová, I.; Tóthová, L.; Hodosy, J.; Behuliak, M.; Celec, P. Redox Rep. 2016, 21(1), 24 -30. Scanning Gel Electrochemical Microscopy (SGECM) for Corrosion :

# Methodology, I nstrumentation and Prospects 

Liang Liu , Mariela Brites -Hel ú, Ning D an g

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et 

l’En vir onnement (LCPME), F -54000 Nancy, France 

liang. liu@uni v-lorraine.f r

Scanning electrochemical probe techniques , such as scanning electrochemical microscopy and scanning 

dro plet cell te chniques (including scanning electrochemical cell mi crosc opy) have been widely applied 

for studying localized corrosion processes. Rece ntly, we report ed the Scanning Gel Electrochemical 

Mic roscopy (SGECM) for meas uring the topography and corrosion activity of metallic samples placed in 

air 1,2 . The concept is based on a ge l pro be that scans over the sample surface in tapping mode. The gel 

probe is fa br icated by electrodeposition of chitosan on m icro -disk electrodes or sha rpen ed metal wires 

(Figure 1 ). It is approached to be in contact with the sample surface by either shear forc e or current 

feedback, which confines the electrochemical reactions in the contact area. So far, local amper ometry ,

potentiometr y, cyclic voltammetry a s well as patterning have been achieved on a home -built SGECM 

setup with so ftware written in VB.net (Figu re 2)1-3.

SGECM o ffers the following advantages for corrosion applica tions: (1) The sample is placed in air ,

making it suitable for studying atmospheric co rrosion ; (2) The electrolyte is immobilized so that it is 

applicable to samples of any complex shape ; (3) The non -destructive so ft c ontact between the gel and the 

sample protects the sample to a m aximum extent ; (4) T he instrumentation is auto mated and foreseen to be 

miniaturized for fiel d tests. With the recent dev elop ment , the lateral physical resol utio n of SGECM 

reaches ca. 1-2 μm, which is already close to the crystalline phases of alloy s. Moreover, by pressing or 

pulling the gel probe after touching the sam ple surface, the resolution is tun eable in the range of a few to 

tens of microns. Thes e advantag es make SGECM a promising tool for char act eriz ing localized corrosion ,

as well as f ixing c oatings or pits at mi croscale . In this p rese ntation, we wi ll introduce the methodology 

and instrumentation of SGECM, as well as disc uss about prospects and seek colla boration s in the 

corrosion electrochemistry community. Pt 

## Glass shield 

Figure 1. (A) Home -built SG ECM setup; Gel probes fabricated by electrodeposition of chitosan on 

micro -disk electrodes ( B) and sha rpe ned metal wires (C) .

Fig ure 2. Scheme of SGECM and topogra phy, current and potentiome tric (conducted at a different area) 

mapping of a copper tape on aluminum substrate .

References: 

(1) Liu , L.; Etienne, M .; Walcarius , A . Anal. Chem . 2018 , 90, 8889 –8895. 

(2) Dang, N .; Etienne, M. ; Walcarius , A. ; Liu , L. Electroc hem. Commun. 2018 , 97, 64 –67. 

(3) Dang, N .; Etienne, M. ; Walcarius , A. ; Liu , L. Anal. Chem . 2020 , acc epted.   

> (A) (B)(C)

# Prussian Blue based nanozymes “artificial peroxidase” in (bio)sensors 

Arkady A. Karyakin , Maria A. Komkova 

Chemistry faculty of M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University 

119991, Lenin Hills, 1/3, Moscow, Russia 

e-mail: aak@analyt.chem.msu.ru 

In modern biotechnology and analytical chemistry peroxidase is apparently the most widely used enzyme. 

On one hand, it is used as a label in immuno - and DNA -sensors. On the other hand, it is the key enzyme 

to detect hydrogen peroxid e including biosensing purposes. 

More than 25 years ago we discovered ferric hexacyanoferrate, as the most advantageous electrocatalyst 

for hydrogen peroxide reduction . In neutral aqueous media favorable for bioanalytical applications, the 

advantages of Pr ussian Blue modified electrodes over the conventionally used platinum are: (i) 3 orders 

of magnitude higher activity in H 2O2 reduction and oxidation in terms of the 1000 times higher 

electrochemical rate constants, obviously providing the similarly improve d sensitivity, and (ii) 3 orders of 

magnitude higher selectivity in hydrogen peroxide reduction allowing low -potential H 2O2 detection even 

in the presence of oxygen .

We’ve synthesized Prussian Blue nanoparticles through catalytic reaction involving hydroge n peroxide 

activation. Prussian Blue is known to be similarly a highly active electrocatalyst in H2O2 reduction and in 

its oxidation. Hence, synthesis of the highly active catalyst for one reaction ( H2O2 oxidation) would 

provide its improved catalytic acti vity also in H2O2 reduction. From this point of view, the best reductant 

for ferricianide−ferric ion mixture would be hydrogen peroxide. Indeed, since precipitation of Prussian 

Blue in this case requires oxidation of H2O2, the most catalytically active str uctures would have the 

highest growth rate and, thus, would grow predominantly. As a result, the most catalytically active 

structures, also in H2O2 reduction, would be synthesized [1]. 

The resulting nanoparticles display the size -dependent catalytic rate constants in H2O2 reduction, which 

are significantly improved compared to natural enzyme peroxidase: for PB nanoparticles 200 nm in 

diameter, the turnover number is 300 times higher; for 570 nm diameter nanoparticles, it is 4 orders of 

magnitude higher. Comparing to the known peroxidase -like nanozymes, the advantages of the reported 

PB nanoparticles are their true enzymatic properties: (i) the ultrahigh activity, which is up to 4 orders o f

magnitude higher as compared to the enzyme peroxidase, (ii) enzymatic specificity (an absence of 

oxidase -like activity) and (iii) an ability to operate in physiological solutions. These unique properties 

allow to denote the catalytically synthesized PB n anoparticles as nanozymes ‘artificial peroxidase’. 

Together with high stability and low cost, obviously peculiar to noble metal free inorganic materials, the 

mentioned properties would allow the substitution of natural and recombinant peroxidases in 

biotec hnology and analytical sciences [1]. 

Simple drop -casting of the catalytically synthesized Prussian Blue nanoparticles with subsequent 

annealing results in modified electrodes with high electrochemical and electrocatalytic activity. The 

electroactive fracti on of the deposited Prussian Blue being independent of the surface concentration, is 

decreased with an increase of the nanoparticles size reaching its lower saturation at approximately 25%. 

Sensitivity of the corresonding hydrogen peroxide sensor is increa sed linearly with the amount of 

Prussian Blue reaching its upper saturation together with formation of continuative film, indicating most 

probably, a nanoparticles monolayer [2]. 

In contrast to bienzyme biosensors, we propose the nanozyme -enzyme based ones substituting the 

enzyme peroxidase with the more active and stable nanoparticles “artificial peroxidase”. The resulting 

nanozyme -enzyme lactate biosensor displays twice higher sensitivity (> 0.2 AM −1 cm −2 ) compared to the 

Prussian Blue film based one [3]. 

References 

1. M.A. Komkova, E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin, J. Am. Chem. Soc . 140 (2018 ) 11302. 

2. M.A. Komkova, A. A.Zarochintsev , E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin, J. Electroanal. Chem. (2020) 

accepted. 

3. D.V. Vokhmyanina, K.D. Andreeva, M.A. Komkova, E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin, Talanta 208 

(2020) 120393. 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support through Russian Science Foundation grant #19 -13 -00131 is greatly acknowledged. Marcus -Hush Theory for Ultramicr oelectrodes Revealed by Electron 

# Tunnel ling through Hexagonal Boron Nitride 

Matěj Velický ,a,b,c * Kostya S. Novoselov ,b Héctor D. Abruña ,c Robert A. W. Dryfe a

> a

Department  of Chemistry, University of Manchester, Oxford  Rd, M anchester, M13 9PL, UK 

> b

Departme nt  of  Physics and Astronomy , University of Manchester, Oxford  Rd, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK 

> c

Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Cornell University , Ithaca, NY , 14853 -1301 , U SA 

*matej.velicky @manchester. ac.uk 

Althoug h several experimental confirmations of the Marcus -Hush theory of electron transfer have 

emerged since its introduction in the 1950s, some interesting pred ictions remain unverified. This includes 

implications of this theory for ultramicroelectrodes, put fo rward by Feldberg in 2010, who predicted that 

significant deviations from the commonly invoked but less generic Butler -Volmer behavio ur are to be 

observed u nder certain conditions [1] . However, a suitable experimental system, which would meet all of 

these conditions, including small electrode size, large overpotentials, slow electrode kinetics, and large 

reorganization energy, simu ltaneously, has not been found until a decade later. 

We discuss electron tunneling 

th rou gh insulating hexagonal boron nitride 

(hBN) , placed between a graphite 

electrode and an electrolyte solution of a 

redox mediator (Fig. 1 a) [2] . This system 

favorably meets all of the conditions posed 

by Feldberg’s analysis. The steady -state 

voltammograms of IrCl 6]3– oxidation and 

[Ru(NH 3)6]3+ reduction , their rate constant s

(Fig. 1b ), limiting current s, and transfer 

coefficient s all significant ly deviat e from 

the expected Butler -Volmer behavior , in 

an excellent qualitative agreement with 

Feldberg’s theoretical predictions. 

Beyond another independent confirmation of a fundam ental chemical theory, our findings also show 

that the electrochemical response of a conductive electrode can be effectively tuned by an insulating two -

dimensional material of varied thickness. Such tuneability could be exploited in future research on 

elec trode modification, electrochemical switching, or surface passivation [3] .

Re ferences: 

[1] S.W. Feldberg, Implications of Marcus−Hush Theory for Steady -State Heterogeneous E lectron 

Transfer at an Inlaid Disk Electrode, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010) 5176 -5183. 

[2] M. Velický, S. Hu, C.R. Woods, P .S. Tóth, V. Zólyomi, A.K. Geim, H.D. Abruña, K.S. Novoselov, 

R.A.W. Dryfe, Electron Tunneling through Boron Nitride Confirms Marcus –Hush Theory 

Predictions for Ultramicroelectrodes, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 993 -1002. 

[3] M. Velický, P.S. Toth, From Two -Dimensio nal Materials to Their Heterostructures: An 

Electrochemist's Perspective, Appl. Mater. Today 8 (2017) 68 -103. 

Fig ure 1: a, Schematic of electr on tunneling through hBN ,

between a graphite electrode and re dox levels in a liquid .

b, Deviation of the hete rogeneous electro n rate transf er rate 

constant fro m the ex ponential dependence on tunneling distance .Electrochemical Hydrogenation of Carbonyl Compounds: The 

# Interaction Between Secondary Functional Group and Electrode and 

# Its Influence on Catalytic Activity 

C. J. Bondue a, F. Calle -Vallejo b, M. T. M. Koper a 

> a

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden Univ ersity , P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.  

> b

Departament de Ciència de Materials i Química Fisica & Institut de Química Teòrica i Computacional 

(IQTCUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. 

c.j.bondu@lic.leide nuniv.nl 

Graphical Abstract: Pt(111) is inactive for the hydrogenation of acetone as the letter will not adsorb .

The phenyl ring of acetophenone forces the carbonyl function into a side -on geometry and activates it for 

the Pt(111) -catalyzed hydrogenation to the corresponding alcohol. 4 -Acetylpyridine adsorbs to Pt(111) in 

an upright position. This makes the carbonyl function inaccessible to the catalyst surface and no 

hydrogenation can commence. 

The heterogeneous hydrogen at ion of carbonyl compounds in chemical industry is highly relevant 

for the production of pharmaceuticals as well as fine chemicals . Its electrochemical counterpart has 

attracted interest , in view of effort s to electrify chemical industry, but also as a me an s to upgrade biomass 

derived bio -oils to fuels and platform chemicals. In this presentation we are going to discuss how the 

interactions between carbonyl compound and electrode surface affects the electrochemical reaction and 

how it depends on bot h the s ur face structure of the electrode and on the molecular structure of the 

substrate molecule. 

Short chained aliphatic carbonyl compounds can only interact with the electrode surface via the 

carbonyl functional group. In this presentation we are going to sho w for platinum single crystal electrodes 

that the coordination nu mber of an adsorption site determines the strength with which the carbonyl 

functional group adsorbs [1]. Both DFT calculations and experimental results show that acetone does not 

bind to surf ace sites featuring high coordination number such as Pt(111) and Pt (100) [1]. The absence of 

acetone adsorption results in the inactivity of these electrodes for acetone hydrogenation [1]. Adsorption 

and hydrogenation commences only at step and kink sites with low co ordination numbers, whereas the 

adsorption strength determines whether the hydrogenation yields selectively 2 -propanol (at Pt(110)) or in 

addition propane (at Pt(510)) [1].

Further more , we are going to show that adsorption through an inert sec ondary functiona l group 

present in the molecular structure of the carbonyl compound ( phenyl ring in acetophenone, pyridine rin g

in 4 -ace tylpyridine) can have a strong in fluence on the reactivity as well. Adsorption through the phenyl 

ring forces the carbon yl functional gr oup into a site -on geometry at Pt(111) . There fore , Pt(111) is able to 

catalyze the hydrogenation of acetophenone to the corresponding alcohol , which is not possible in the 

case of acetone [2]. Adsorption through the N-atom of th e pyridine r in g causes on all platinum surfaces a

vertical adsorption mode of 4-acetyl pyridine , which creates a phy sical distance between carbonyl 

functional gr oup and electrode surfaces , th us inhibiting the hydrogenat ion reaction [2]. This is even true 

fo r Pt(110) wh ich is the most activ e surface for acetone red uction. 

[1] C.J. Bond ue, F. Calle -Vallejo, M.C. Figueiredo, M.T.M. Kope r, Nature Catalysis , 2 (2019) 243 -250 .

[2] C.J. Bondue, M.T.M. Koper , Journal of the American Chemical Society , 141 , 12071 -10278, (2019) .A H– Superionic Conductor Ba 1.8 LiH 2.8 O0.9 

Genki Kobayashi 

Institute for Molecular Science, National Institute s of Natural Sciences 

38 Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki , Aichi 444 -8585, Japan .

gkobayashi@ims.ac.jp 

Hydride ion s (H –) can act as charge carrier as they exhibit several features suitable for fast ion 

conduction : monova lence , moderate ionic size comparable to O2– and F –, and high polarizability. 

Furthermore , hydride ion s exhibit strong reducing properties through the standard H –/H 2 redox potential 

(–2. 3 V vs. SHE ), whi ch can be expected to be applied to novel electrochemical devices . Following some 

investigation s on H– conduction in alkaline earth metal hydrides 1-4, we reported H– conduction in an 

oxide -based f ramework structure for the first time by finding a series of H– conductive oxyhydrides , La 2–

> x–y

Sr x+yLiH 1–x+yO3–y5. The discovery has triggered exploration of materials for H – conductors such as 

K2NiF 4-type Ln 2LiHO 3 (Ln = Pr, Nd) 6 and Ba 2ScHO 37 and fluorite -type La H3–2xOx8. However, a H –

conducto r exhibiting both high conductivity and low activation energy ha d not been developed yet . In the 

present study , we report a new H– conductive oxyhydride, Ba 1.8 LiH 2.8 O0.9 , containing a high amount 

of b arium and hydrogen vacancies and exhibiting long -range o rdering at room temperature .

Increasing the temperature above 315 ºC melts the ordered vacancies (Figure 1) , triggering 

superionic conduction with a high H – conductivity of over 0.01 S·cm –1 nearly independent of the 

temperature 8. This is the first report o f a H – superionic conductor , which might open up possibilities 

for new electrochemical devices. Ba 1.8 LiH 2.8 O0.9 (Pmn 21) 

> “AP-phase ”
> Ba 1.8 LiH 2.8 O0.9 (I4/ mmm )
> “HT-phase ”
> heating cooling
> acbacaabaa
> Ba Li HOXap 1Heq 1Heq 3Heq 2Heq 4Xap 4Xap 2Xap 3Ba1 Ba2 Ba4 Ba3

Figure 1. Crystal structures of K2NiF 4-type Ba 1. 8LiH 2.8 O0.9 . Left: low temperature phase , Right : high 

temperature phase (high conductivity phase) .

References 

[1] A. F. Andresen et al. , J. Solid State Chem. , 20 , 93 -101 (1977). 

[2] F. Altorfer et al. , Solid State Ion. , 70 -71, 272 -277 (1994). 

[3] M. C. Verbraeken, J. T. S. Irvine et al. , J. Mater. Chem. , 19 , 2 766 -2770 (2009). 

[4] M. C. Verbraeken, J. T. S. Irvine et al. , Nat . Mater. , 14 , 95 -100 (2015 ). 

[5] G. Kobayashi, R. Kan no et al. , Science , 351 , 1314 -1317 (2016). 

[6] Y. Iwasaki, G. Kobayashi , R. Kanno et al. , J. Mater. Chem. A , 6, 23457023463 (201 8). 

[7] F. Takeiri, G. Kobayashi et al. , Inorg. Chem. , 58 , 4431 -4436 (2019). 

[8] K. Fu kui, S. I imura, H. Hosono et al. , Nat. C ommun. , 10 . 2578 (2019). 

[9] F. Takeiri, A. Watanabe , G. Kobayashi et al ., (und er revision) Enantiodiscrimination at electrochemical interphases 

# through implementation of chiral and inherently chiral selectors: 

# novel insights and perspectives 

Patrizia Romana Mussini ,a Serena Arnaboldi, a Sara Grecchi, a Mirko Magni, a Mariangela Longhi, a

Francesco Orsini, a Giovanna Longhi, b Roberto Cirilli, c Fabiana Arduini, d Laura Micheli, d Claudio 

Fontanesi, e Marcus Korb, f Heinrich Lang, f Emanuela Licandro, a Silvia Cauteruccio, a Simona Rizzo, g

Lorenzo Guazzelli, h Andrea Mezzetta, h Tiziana Benincori i 

> a

Università d egli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy; bUniversità degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy; 

> c

Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy; dUniversità degli Studi di Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy; 

> e

Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy; fTechnische Univer sität Chemnitz, Germany; gCNR ISTM, 

Milano, Italy; hUniversità degli Studi di Pisa, Pisa, Italy iUniversità degli Studi dell'Insubria, Como, Italy 

Mail to: Patrizia R. Mussini, Università degli Studi di Milano, 

Dipartimento di Chimica, Via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano (Italia) 

patrizia.mussini@unimi.it 

To achieve enantioselectivity, electron transfer processes at the electrochemical interphase require the 

presence of a suitable enantiopure chiral selector, resulting in energetically different diastereoisomeric 

con di tions for the two probe enantiomers. 1 A groundbreaking strategy is based on the use of molecular 

selectors endowed with "inherent chirality", i.e. with chirality and key functional pro perties originating 

from the same structural element, which in o ur case identifies with the main mo le cular backbone, fea -

turing a tailored torsion with a racemization energy barrier too high to be overcome at room temperature. 

Large peak potential differences have been observed in voltammetry for the enan tiomers of even very 

different chiral probes either ( i) working in achiral media, on electrode surfaces modified with thin films 

of inherently chiral electroactive oligomers 1-4 or ( ii ) working on achiral electro des, implementing inherent 

chirality in the medium, par ticularly in ionic liquids ILs, either chiral them selves, or modified by a chiral 

additive, 1,5,6 exploiting the peculiar IL high order at the interphase with a charged electrode. 

Both strategies are being now extended and refined, particularly aiming to collect clues for the elucidation 

of the recognition mechanism, as well as to highlight attractive applications. 

In the film case, we are studying in detail morphology, growth, chemical composition as well as 

functional properties of inherently chiral elec troactive oligomer films, both as electrode surfaces and as 

self -standing membranes. 

In the media case, chiral or inherently chiral molecules are being studied as advanced media and/or media 

additives/components, with impressive results. 

Overall a wide pa lette of selectors (film or media) and/or probes are being compared, representing four 

classes of ste reogenic elements , i.e. stereogenic centres, axes, planes and helixes. 

The outstanding enantiodicrimination ability of the new selectors is also being co nsidered beyond 

molecular chiral probes, i.e. towards polarized light components (in terms of circular dichroism and 

circularly polarized luminescence) and electron spins (in magnetoelectrochemistry experiments). Not only 

impressive effects have been obser ved, but fascinating correlations and connections are emerging among 

the three areas, worthy to be explored in detail, possibly providing further interpretative clues, as well as 

for possible exploitation in photonics and spintronics.. 

Advice from Prof. F . Sannicolò as well as support from Regione Lombardia and Fondazione Cariplo 

(particularly Project 2016 -0923) and Università degli Studi di Milano is gratefully acknowledged. 

[1] S. Arnaboldi, M. Magni, P. R. Mussini, Curr. Opin. Electrochem ., 2018 , 8, 60 -72. 

[2] F. Sannicolò, S. Arna boldi, T. Benincori, V. Bonometti, R. Cirilli, L. Dunsch, W. Kutner, G. Longhi, 

P.R. Mussini, M. Panigati, M. Pierini, S. Rizzo, Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed. , 2014 , 53 , 2623 -2627. 

[3] S. Arnaboldi, T. Benincori, R. Cirilli, W. Kutner , M. Magni, P.R. Mussini, K. Noworyta, F. 

Sannicolò, Chem. Sci. 2015 , 6, 1706 -1711. 

[4] S. Arnaboldi, T. Benincori, A. Penoni, L. Vaghi, R. Cirilli, S.Abbate, G.Longhi, G.Mazzeo, S. 

Grecchi, M. Panigati, P. R. Mussini Chem. Sci ., 2019 , 10 , 2708 -2717. 

[5 ] S. Arnaboldi, D. Vigo, M. Longhi, F. Orsini, S. Riva, S. Grecchi, E. Giacovelli, V. Guglielmi, R. 

Cirilli, G. Longhi, G. Mazzeo, T. Benincori, P.R. Mussini , ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6 (16) 4204 -4214. 

[6]  S. Rizzo, S. Arnaboldi, V. Mihali, R. Cirilli, A. For ni, A. Gennaro, A.A. Isse, M. Pierini, P.R. 

Mussini, F. Sannicolò, Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed. , 2017 , 56 , 2079 -2082 .

[7] M. Longhi, S. Arnaboldi, E. Husanu, S. Grecchi, I. F. Buzzi, R. Cirilli, S. Rizzo, C. Chiappe, P. R. 

Mussini, L. Guazzelli, Electrochim. Acta 2019 , 298 , 194 -20. Technological advances in CO 2 Electrobiorefinery: 

# Linking Bioelectrochemical CO 2 reduction with Renewable Energy 

Deepak Pant* 

Separation and Conversion Technology, Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO),Boeretang 

200, Mol 2400, Belgium 

*deepak.pant@vito.be 

Carbon dioxide (CO 2) is considered to be the major cause of climate change by its accumulation in the 

atmosphere and its greenhouse properties. To counteract climate change, most research focuse d in the 

past on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Nowadays it is recognized that rather than just storing it, 

emitted CO 2 can be a valuable source of carbon for the production of commercially valuable products. 

This Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU) ap proach provides much needed additional capacity in the 

move towards a low carbon economy. 

This presentation focuses on the use of CO 2 as feedstock for the synthesis of chemicals using 

biotechnology as core process. The main approach to be discussed is mi crobial electrosynthesis (MES) 

being used for the production of chemicals using bacteria as electrocatalyst. Already the 

bioelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to acetate has been achieved as well as the reduction of 

CO 2 to methane and multi -carbon compounds. The key advantage foreseen here is the use of excess 

electricity that is often generated renewably such as from solar cells and wind mills, all of which cannot 

be utilized immediately and can be fed into a MES to produce chemical compounds. Res ults with specific 

bacteria towards bioelectrochemical conversion of CO 2 to organic compounds will be reported. 

Establishment of stable and robust biocathode for the bioelectrochemical CO 2 reduction at the graphite 

felt cathode succeeded repeatedly under l ong -term operation which led to the accumulation of higher titer 

to extractable amount (up to 8 -10 g L -1 of acetate). When higher titers are obtainable from the CO 2

reduction based MES, product downstream process would be feasible. This requires continuous 

availability of CO 2 and sufficiently low cathode potential to ensure the supply of reducing 

equivalents/hydrogen. The dissolution of CO 2 and mass -transfer of reducing equivalents/hydrogen are the 

main limitations. Improvement on the dissolution and mass t ransfer rate of CO 2 was explored using gas 

diffusion electrodes (GDEs). GDE at least doubled the CO 2 mass transfer and MES was able to utilize 

CO 2 from the diluted gas mixture (20% CO 2) to produce acetate at the rate of 240 mg L -1 d-1 when the 

cathode was polarized at -1.1 V/Ag/AgCl. 

Microbial electrosynthesis (MES) allow CO 2 capture and utilization for the electricity -driven 

bioproduction of organics such as acetic acid. Such systems can be coupled to any renewable electricity 

supply, especially those der ived from solar and wind energy. However, fluctuations or even absence of 

electricity may cause damages or changes in the microbial community, and/or affect the performance and 

robustness of MES. Therefore, the effect of electric supply interruptions on ME S performance was 

evaluated for the first time initially using bicarbonate as the substrate and later the transformation of 

gaseous CO 2 into organic products was assessed continuously during 120 days of operation. Time -

increasing power outages, from 4 h to 64 h, were applied in order to evaluate the effects of electric energy 

(current) absence on microbial community, organics formation, production rates and product 

accumulation. Acetic acid was the main product observed before and after the power outages. I n case of 

bicarbonate as substrate, interruptions affected the acetate production rate, causing a decrease of until 

77% after 64 h off. With CO 2 as substrate, a maximum titer and production rate of 6965 mg L -1 and 516.2 

mg L -1 d-1 (35.8 g m -2 d-1) of aceti c acid were observed, respectively. Pathways Towards Next Generation E nergy Storage T echnologies 

# Based on Redox Flow Batteries : Solid Boosters and Aqueous Organics 

Pekka Peljo 1, Mahsa Shahsavan 1, Mahdi Moghaddam 1, Rasmus Rönkä 1, Silver Sepp 1,Soléne Gentil 2,

Elena Zanzola 2, Hubert Girault 2

> 1

Research group of Physical Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Physics, Aalto University, 

PO Box 16100, FI -00076 Aalto, Finland 

> 2

Laboratoire d’Electro chimie Physique et Analytique, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 

Rue de l’Industre 17, CH -1951 S ION - Switzerland 

pekka.peljo@aalto.fi 

Redox flow batteries offer interesting options for electrochemical energy storage and even for heat -to -

power conversion. In the first part of the talk, we will discuss the possibilities offered by organic redox 

couple s in aqueous solutions ,1 report some recent examples from our lab , and describe our collaborative 

efforts for computational screening of organic redox couples within CompBat H2020 -project. 

In the second part of the talk, we shall introduce the concept of solid boosters for flow batteries. The 

advantage of such systems is that it allows relaxing  the requirement for high solubility of the redox 

couple, significantly increasing the number of redox couples available for flow batteries. Wang et al. first 

sugges ted this concept, where the electrolyte tank is filled with solid redox active mm -sized beads 

forming a backed -bed type system,  in 2013 .2 Firstly, the redox mediator is charged in the electrochemical 

cell and pumped back into the storage tank. The charge i s then transferred into the solid material in a 

chemical reaction with the mediator, similarly to “molecular wiring ” used, for example, in 

electrochemical enzymatic glucose sensors exploiting redox mediators to shuttle the electrons between 

the electrode a nd the enzyme. 3 The redox mediator can then be further charged in the electrochemical 

cell. We and others have shown that significant amount of the charge storage capacity of the solid 

materials can be used with a single mediator, if the redox potentials o f the solid and soluble materials 

match well enough. 4-7 Since charge storage density is much higher in solids, lower concentration of the 

mediators can be utilized as the capacity of the flow battery boosted with solids is mostly due to the solid 

only.  

> 1

Gentil S.; Reynard D.; Girault HH. Aqueous organic and redox -mediated redox flow batteries: a 

review. Curr Opinion Electrochem 2020 , 21 7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coelec.2019.12.006  

> 2

Huang, Q.; Li, H.; Grätzel, M.; Wang, Q. Reversible chemical delithiation/lithiation of LiFePO 4:

towards a redox flow lithium -ion battery, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013 , 15 1793. 

DOI :10.1039/C2CP44466F  

> 3

Heller, A.; Feldman, B. Electrochemical Glucose Sensors and Their Applications in Diabetes 

Management, Chem. Rev. 2008 , 108, 2482 -2505. DOI:  10.1021/cr068069y  

> 4

Zanzola, E.; Dennison, C. R.; Battistel, A.; Peljo, P.; Vrubel, H.; Amstutz, V.; Girault, H. H. Redox 

Solid Energy Boosters for Flow Batteries: Polyaniline as a Case Study. Electrochim. Acta 2017 , 235 ,

664 –671. DOI:  10.1016/j.electacta.2017.03.084  

> 5

Zanzola, E.; Gentil, S.; Gschwend, G.; Reynard, D.; Smirnov, E.; Dennison, C.R.; Girault, H.H.; 

Peljo, P ., Solid electrochemical energy storage material for aqueous redox flow batteries: the case of 

copper hexacyanoferrate, Electrochimica Acta , 2019 , 321 , 134704 . DOI: 

10.1016/j.electacta.2019 .134704  

> 6

Yu, J.; Fan, L.; Yan, R.; Zhou, M.; Wang, Q. Redox Targeting -Based Aqueous Redox Flow Lithium 

Battery. ACS Energy Lett. 2018 , 3 (10) , 2314 –2320. DOI: 

https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acsenergy lett.8b01420  

> 7

Ye, J.; Xia, L.; Wu, C.; Ding, M.; Jia, C.; Wang, Q. Redox Targeting -Based Flow Batteries. J. Phys. 

D. Appl. Phys. 2019 , 52 (44) , 443001. DOI:  https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1361 -6463/ab3251 Unveiling the Oxide -based Chemoresistor Sensing Mechanism :

# When the Theory Meets the Experiment 

E. Pargoletti ,a,b A. Tricoli, c M. I. Trioni, d F. Cargnoni ,d R. Soave ,d G. L. Chiarello a,b and G. Cappelletti a,b  

> a

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Milano, via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy 

(eleonora.pargoletti@unimi.it)  

> b

Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM), Via Giusti 

9, 50121, Firenze, Italy  

> c

Nanotechnology Research Laboratory, Research School of Engineering, Australian National University, 

Canberra 2601, Australia  

> d

CNR - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche ISTM - Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari c/o 

Dipartimento di Chimica, Universi tà degli Studi di Milano, Via Venezian, 21, 20133 Milano, Italy 

The development of high -performing sensing materials, able to detect ppb -trace concentrations of volatile 

organic compounds (VOCs) at low temperatures, is required for the development of next -generation 

miniaturized wireless sensors  [1 -3]. Here in , we present the engineering of highly sensitive chemical 

sensors, comprising of different Metal Oxide Semiconductors (MOS as ZnO, SnO 2 and WO 3) layouts [4,5] .

The chemical properties of these highly porous (> 90%) materials were systematically investigated in terms 

of composition and morphologies. Then, all the synthesized materials were tested towards different VOC 

species, namely ethanol (EtOH) , acetone and toluen e/ ethylbenzene (EtBz) , in order to eventually highlight 

the materials diverse selectivity. Optimized layouts demonstrate significant potential as chemoresistors 

operating at high temperatures (around 300 -350 °C) especially in terms of sensitivity , reaching ppb 

concentrations as the low detection limits (Figure 1 a). Furthermore, in order to elucidate the sensing 

mechanism, experimental in situ Modulated Excitation -XANES analys es (at the European Synchrotron 

Radiation Facilities in Grenoble) along with theore tical studies were carried out (Figures 1b and 1c) .

Theoretical outcomes reveal the pivotal role played by oxygen species adsorbed on the MOS surface. 

Hence, t he matching of experimental and theoretical results gave us the possibility to hypothesize the 

possible phenomena at the basis of the sensing behavior. 

Figure 1. (a) W O3 sensor response towards acetone ; acetone adsorption onto WO 3 nanomaterials on (b) 

the oretical and (c) experimental (XANES measurements ) points of view .

References 

[1] A. Tricoli, N. Nasiri, S. De, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1605271. 

[2] J. Chen, B. Yao, C. Li, G. Shi, Carbon 2013, 64, 225 –229. 

[3] A. Tricoli, M. Righettoni, A. Teleki, Angew.  Chem . Int. 2010, 49, 7632 – 7659. 

[4] E. Pargoletti, A. Tricoli, V. Pifferi, S. Orsini, M. Longhi, V. Guglielmi, G. Cerrato, L. Falciola, M. 

Derudi, G. Cappelletti, Applied Surface Science 2019 , 483, 1081 –1089 

[5] E. Pargoletti, U. H. Hossain, I. Di Bernardo, H. Chen, T. Tran -Phu, J. Lipton -Duffin, G . Cappelletti, 

A. Tricoli , Nanoscale 2019, 11, 22932 E – Ef (eV) E – Ef (eV) DOS DOS W total Wads Wfree        

> Wsat
> Wfree
> Wads
> Wsat
> DOS DOS E–Ef(eV) E–Ef(eV)

## a b cEnzymatic Reactions versus Electrochemical Transformation of 

# Naphthoyl Indole Derivative 

Michaela Obluková 1,3 , Romana Sokolová 1, Ilari a Degano 2, Radomír Čabala 3 

> 1

J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Dolejškova 3 , 182 23 

Prague 8, Czech Republic, e -mail: michaela.oblukova@jh -inst.cas.cz  

> 2

University of Pisa, Department of Chemistry and Industrial Chemistry, Via Moruzzi 13, 56124 Pisa, 

Italy  

> 3

Charles University, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Ka teřinská 1660/32, 12108 P rague 2 

1-pentyl -3-(1 -naphtoyl)indole (hereinafter referred to as “JWH -018”) is a compound belonging to a 

heterogenous group of synthetic cannabinoids, which has recently appeared in the drug market. This 

substance is abused for it s psychoactive effect an d serves as alternative to classical drugs (heroin, cocaine, 

ecstasy) due to its legal status. In human organism, JWH -018 is rapidly and completely metabolized and 

thus parent compounds are often undetectable. It is necessary to kno w its metabolism pathway to enable 

detection of this compound. 

In this research, the electrochemical methods were used to study drug oxidation and reduction. Since the 

electron transfer participates in metabolic pathways, electrochemical behaviour of JWH -018 was studied 

with pur pose to identify short living intermediates of redox reactions. Simultaneously, above mentioned 

compound was incubated with human liver subcellular fractions (microsomes) and cytochrome. The 

products obtained by electrochemical and biochemical methods were identified by advanced 

chromatographic techniques UPLC -MS/MS and serve to identify the potential metabolism of synthetic 

cannabinoid. NO

Figure 1: Chemical structure of JWH -018 

Acknowledgement 

Authors thank to the Czech Science Foundation (project no. 19 -03160S ). 

References 

1. Meyer MR. New psychoactive substances: an overview on recent publications on their 

toxicodynamics and toxicokinetics. Archives of Toxicology. 2016;90(10):2421 -44. 

2. Wintermeyer A, Möller I, Thevis M, Jübner M, Beike J, R othschild MA, et al. In vitro phase I 

metabolism of the synthetic cannabimimetic JWH -018. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry. 

2010;398(5):2141 -53. 

3. Grigoryev A, Melnik A, Savchuk S, Simonov A, R ozhanets V. Gas and liquid chromatography –mass 

spectrome try studies on the metabolism of the synthetic phenylacetylindole cannabimimetic JWH -

250, the psychoactive component of smoking mixtures. Journal of Chromatography B. 

2011;879(25):2519 -26. Deep Eutectic Solvents with Bio -Based Chiral Cations: 

# a New Electroanalytical Approach for the 

# En an tiomeric Excess Determination of Chiral Probes 

Serena Arnaboldi 1, Sara Grecchi 1, Elisa Emanuele 1, Lorenzo Guazzelli 2, Mariangela Longhi 1,

Fabiana Arduini 3, Laura Micheli 3, Patriz ia R. Mussini 1

> 1

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy 

> 2

Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Pisa, Via Bonanno 33 , 56126 Pisa, Italy 

> 3

Dipartimento di Scienze e T ecnologie Chimiche, Univ ersità degli Studi di Roma Tor Vergata, Via della 

Ricerca Scientifica, 000133 Roma, Italy 

serena.arnaboldi@unimi.it 

The concept of Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES) was introduced by Abbo tt in 2001. DES are considered as 

an interesting al ternative to molecular organic solvents and ionic liquids. They are constituted by at least 

two components that interact strongly to form an eutectic mixture. Deep eutectic solvents can be 

described by the general formula Cat+ -X− with Cat+ being ammonium, sulfonium, or phosphonium and 

X− a Lewis base, in general a halide. DES are usually divided into four types: type I (quaternary salt and 

metal halide), type II (quaternary salt and hydrated metal halide), type III (quaternary salt and hydrogen 

bond donor) and type IV (metal halide and hydrogen bond donor). They have different advantages with 

respect to the other media like: easy, scalable, low cost synthesis; low vapor pressure; non flammability 

and biodegr adability. There are very few works in literature concerning the electrochemistry or 

electroanalysis of and in DES media regarding the preparation of MIPs (Molecularly Imprinted 

Polymers), synthesis of nanomaterials, functionalization of carbon nanotubes a nd film electrodeposition 

[1]. From 2011 a new clas s of DES called NADES (NAtural Deep Eutectic Solvents) based on natural 

molecules was synthetized. In the class of NADES, Chiral Deep Eutectic Solvents (CDES) can be 

included. CDES were recently synthetize d and there are no detailed studies in literature o n their 

physicochemical properties, especially regarding the ones where chirality originates from the cation. The 

applications on CDES span from the field of catalysis to the one of enantioselective synthe sis. They differ 

from ionic liquids for the possibl e use on large scale (low cost, low impact on the environment), for the 

easy synthesis (mixtures of at least two components) and for their composition (adduct between a 

hydrogen bond donator and a hydrogen bond acceptor). In this work we would like to pres ent a new class 

of CDES in which the cation is both of natural origin and chiral. The hydrogen bond acceptor is a chiral 

organic salt of NOPOL -MIM/mesylate, because solid at room temperature and already st udied by our 

group as chiral additive in achiral co mmercial ionic liquid for the enantiorecognition of chiral probes; the 

hydrogen bond donators used are the common ones largely employed in literature: glycerol, levulinic acid 

and urea. Firstly, these CDES were characterized by differential scan calorimetr y (DSC) in order to study 

their physicochemical properties and to determine correctly the eutectic points. Then, we have performed 

enantioselectivity tests using these additives dissolved in a commercial a chiral ionic liquid on plastic and 

paper screen pri nted electrodes with different working electrodes (carbon black, graphite and gold), by 

means of differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). 

Recorded DPV signals shown a really huge separation between the enantiom ers of the chiral analyte in 

term of peak potential values. For these reason we h ave decided to test the chiral probes both in 

enantiopure and in racemic form. We have prepared different mixtures of the en antiomers of the analytes 

and determined the enan tiomeric excesses. Results are really promising, recalling signals obtained as 

output of a chiral HPLC. 

Fig. 1. Enantioselectivity tests on screen printe d ele ct rode using as addit ive the CDES with levul inic acid and as chiral probe a ferrocenylic one, as p ure enantiomer or as racemate 

[1] Christopher M.A. Brett, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2018, 10, 143 –148 New Families of Inherently Chiral Monomers with Different 

# Atropisomeric Cores for Applications as O ligomeric F ilms 

# in Chiral Electrochemistry 

Sara Grecchi 1, Serena Arnaboldi 1, Francesco Orsini 2, Tiziana Benincori 3 and Patrizia Romana Mussini 1

> 1

Universit à degli Studi di M ilano, Dipartimento di Chimica, Via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy. 

> 2

Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Fisica, Via Celoria 16, 20133, Milano, Italy. 

> 3

Università degli Studi dell’Insubria, Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tec nologia, Via Valle ggio 11, 

22100, Como, Italy. Addres s

sara. grecchi@unimi.it 

Enantioselective electroanalysi s is a very attractive target, potentially enabling to discriminate between 

the enantiomers of electroactive chiral probes without preliminary separ ation steps. Inherently chiral 

electroacti ve monomers based on atropisomeric biheteroaromatic cores and oligothiophene wings have 

recently proved excellent starting materials for the electrodeposition of electrode surfaces consisting of 

inherently chiral o ligomers, of outstanding enantiodiscrimina tion ability for chiral electroactive probes, in 

terms of large potential differences in voltammetry experiments [1 -2] . In this context, we would like to 

present new inherently chir al monomers that have different a tropisomeric properties and cores :

i) the new inherently chiral monomer Naph 2T4, based on a biaromatic atropisomeric core, an d

advantageously obtainable in enantiopure form without HPLC separation steps, by a 

synth etic route hinging on enantiopure 2,2’ -dibrom o-1,1’ -binaphthalenes ;

ii) an inherently chiral monomer based on a 2,2′ -biindole core (N -R) -Ind 2Ph 2T4, as the prototype 

of a new inherently chiral monomer family, whose properties could be modulable through 

functionalization of the pyrrolic N atoms (with alkyl chain s of different length s);

iii) an inherently chiral monomer based on a 2,2′ -biindole core with the N atom func tionalized with 

an alc oholic residue (N-OH) -Ind 2Ph 2T4

The monomers were electrochemically characterized by cyclic voltammety exper ime nts , the 

electrooligomerization conditions were then optimized to convert the monomers into oligomeric films. 

The films show good stability upon subsequent potential cycling in monomer -free solution, as required 

for use as an enantioselective electrode surf ace and subsequently their enantioselection capabilities were 

tested using the model chiral probe N,N -dimethyl -1-ferrocen ylethylamine , which can be regarded as a 

benchmark given that it displays an electrochemically and chemically reversible oxidation , but also 

pro bes of pharmaceutical interest (such as L- and D- DOPA and L- and D -Tryptophan) . We have verified 

the general validity of the inherently chiral concept, which does not depend on the chemical nature of the 

atrop isomeric scaffold, by testing the ele ctro -oligomerized chiral surfaces starting from monomers with 

different molecular design. In order to fully clarify the enantioselection capacity of all these 

heteroaromatic systems, we also propose a comparison of thes e new inherently chiral surfaces with the 

benchmark monomer BT 2T4.

References: 

[1] S. Arnaboldi, M. Magni, P. R. Mussini, Curr. Op. in El ectrochemistry 8 ( 2018 ) 60 -72. 

[2] S. Arnaboldi, S. Grecc hi, M. Magni, P.R. Mussini, Curr. Op. in Electrochemistry 7 (2018 ) 188 -199.  

> (R)-Naph 2T4(R)-(N -OH)-Ind 2Ph 2T4

# In situ Fluorescence Confocal M icroscopy: a New Insight in the 

# Reactivity of Enzymatic E lectrodes 

Anne de Poulpiquet 1 Hiu Mun Man, 1 Alice Dauphin, 2 Hugo Le Guenno, 3 Elisabeth Lojou, 1 Laurent 

Bouffier 2 

> 1

Aix -Marseille Univ., CNRS,  Bioenergetics and Protein Engineering, UMR 7281,  Marseille, France  

> 2

Institute of Molecular Sciences, UMR CNRS 5255, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, Talence, France  

> 3

Microscopy facility, FR 3479, Mediterranean Institute of Microbiology, CNRS, Marseille, France 

adepoulpiquet@imm.cnr s.fr 

Redox enzymes, which catalyze electron transfer reactions involved in several metabolism s, are key 

biomolecules in biotechnological and especially bioelectrochemical devices . Thanks to unique properties, 

such as huge specificity and affinity towards their substrate, high catalytic turnover, and low overvoltages 

with respect to their substrate, they are attractive receptors in biosensors or catalysts in biofuel cells. 

Electrochemistry provides key information about the thermodynamic and kinetic propert ies of the 

enzymes, as well as their physicochemical behavior upon immobiliza tion at the electrode inter face. It also 

enables characterizing the whole biodevices. However, several information are still miss ing in pure 

electrochemical studies . Among them , s patially -resolved information are lacking since the signal is 

collected and integrated over the whole electroactive surface where electron transfer reactions occur . No 

data about heterogeneities, or local enzyme environment during turnover, are provided . In this context, 

the interest in coupling electrochemical methods to microscopy techniques is increasing [1] . Indeed, it 

enables collecting simultaneously data at the global and local scales. Among these techniques, 

fluorescence confocal microscopy (FC M) is a method of choice for the study of bio -objects. Moreover, it 

enables rebuilding three dimensional images thanks to a non -invasive o ptical sectioning of volumes . FC M

was already implemented in situ during electrochemical experiment s in the abiotic context . It allowed 

notably elucidating reaction mechanisms through the determination of concentration profiles in the 

diffusion layer [2] . We show here that it also permits to characterize electro -enzymatic catalysis. We 

chose as a model enzymatic reaction the f our electron -four proton O 2 reduction in water by the multi -

copper enzyme bilirubin oxidase from Myrothecium verrucaria (Mv BOD). We demonstrate that the 

enzymatically generated local pH changes can be visualized using a pH -sensitive fluorophore, when 

Mv BOD is immobilized at a macro - or a micro -electrode. Reactivity at the electrode surface and in the 

electrolyte volume can thus be explored in a new way . We observe u nexpected features, especially the pH 

evolution of the enzyme environment, which is also indi cated by a characteristic concentration profile 

within the diffusion layer. Finally, we obtain a cartography of the reactivity at the enzymatic electrode, 

whic h could not be determin ed by pure electrochemical techniques [3] .

Illustration of the experime ntal strategy .

Mv BOD is immobilized at an electrode 

which provides the electrons for the 

enzymatic O2-reduction. Simultaneously, 

protons consumption changes the pH 

locally, thus modulat ing the fluorescence of 

fluorescein whose quantum yield ( ) is pH -

depen dent. The evolution of fluorescence 

intensity is record ed through the objective 

by FC M. Reproduced from [3]. 

[1] Zigah, D.; Lojou, E.; de Poulpiquet, A., Micro - and Nanoscopic Imaging of Enzymatic Electrodes: a 

Review. ChemElectroChem 2019, 6 (22), 5524 -5546. 

[2] d e Poulpiquet, A.; Goudeau, B.; Garrigue, P.; Sojic, N.; Arbault, S.; Doneux, T.; Bouffier, L., A 

snapshot of the electrochemical reaction layer by using 3 dimensionally resolved fluorescence mapping. 

Chem. Sci. 2018, 9 (32), 6622 -6628. 

[3] Tassy , B. ; Dauphin, A.; Man, H. M.; Le Guenno, H.; Lojou, E.; Bouffier, L.; de Poulpiquet, A.; In situ 

fluorescence tomography enables a 3D mapping of enzymatic O 2-reduction at the electrochemical 

interface , under revision at Analytical Chemistry .Reactive oxygen species formation at Pt nanoparticles revisited by 

# electron paramagnetic resonance and electrochemical analysis 

Stephan den Hartog , Mohammad Samanipour, H.Y. Vincent Ching, Sabine Van Doorslaer, Tom 

Breugelmans, Annick  Hubin  & Jon Ustarroz 

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Research Group Electrochemical and Surface Engineering (SURF) 

Pleinlaan 2, 1050, Brussels, Belgium 

stdenhar@vub.be 

In the search for clean energy conversion systems, PEM fuel cells have attracted a lot of attention ove r the 

last decades. Nanostructured electrocatalysts such as porous platinum nanoparticles (NPs) are considered 

one of the most promising advances to lower the cost of these fuel cells and make them more commercially 

attractive. The efficiency of these cata lysts is limited by their activity towards the oxygen reduction reaction 

(ORR), and most research is thus focused on understanding reaction mechanisms and improving the 

activity.  It has been shown indirectly 1,2 that radical intermediates formed during the reaction can desorb 

from the catalyst surface. More importantly, these free radicals are suspected to be responsible for the 

degradation of the carbon support, leading to the deactivation of the electrocatalyst NPs 3.

We propose  a combined electrochemical and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) procedure for the 

study of  ORR  intermediates generated at Pt  NPs . Using spin -trap EPR  spectroscopy  complemented by 

electrochemical analysis, we show that we can detect and identify the free radicals that are produc ed during 

the ORR and are otherwise difficult to detect . Custom -made glassy carbon RDE’s with a large geometrical 

surface area have been designed and were loaded with Pt nanoparticles via double pulse electrodeposition. 

The large surface area is necessary in order to produce sufficiently large amounts of free radicals to be 

detectable in the EPR spectrometer. 

Our experiments show that  only free •OH radicals are trapped by DMPO. Experiments with DEPMPO as 

spin trap confirm that no free •OOH radicals are present in solution. This is of great interest for on -going 

research to elucidate the ORR mechanism and to prevent degradation of the support and Pt electrocatalyst. 

We propose that our procedure can be use d for a more rigorous quantification of free radicals involved in 

electrochemical reactions. 

References 

[1] J. M. Noël, Y. Yu, and M. V. Mirkin, “Dissolution of Pt at moderately negative potentials during oxygen 

reduction in water and organic media”, Lang muir, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1346 –1350, 2013. 

[2] J. M. Noël, A. Latus, C. Lagrost, E. Volanschi, and P. Hapiot, “Evidence for OH radical production 

during electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction on pt surfaces: Consequences and application”, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc., vol. 134, no. 5, pp. 2835 –2841, 2012. 

[3] J. Ustarroz et al., “Mobility and Poisoning of Mass -Selected Platinum Nanoclusters during the Oxygen 

Reduction Reaction”, ACS Catal., 2018. Effect of Cation Solvat ion State of FS I-based Salt on Electr ic

# Double -layer Capacit ance Performance 

Masas hi Ishikawa 1, *, Sa ra Ohki 1, Satoshi Uchida 2 

> 1

Department of Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and 

Bioengineering , Kansai University , 3-3-35 Yamate -cho, Suita 564 -868 0, Japan 

> 2

Department of Energy and Environment, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 

Technology, 1 -8-31 Midorigaoka, Ikeda 563 -0026 , Japan 

*masaishi@kansai -u.ac.jp 

The electric doubl e layer capacitor (EDLC) is an electricity storage device that charges and discharges by 

electrostatically adsorbing and desorbing ions in an electrolytic solution. Since it has a long cycle life of 

10 5 times or more and high output power , it has been attra cting attention in recent years for memory 

backup of mobile devices, compensation of instantaneous voltage drop in an emergency, energy 

regeneration of hybrid vehicles, etc. A typical problem , however, is that the energy density is lower than 

that of li thi um-ion secondary batteries. Since the energy density of EDLC is proportional to the square of 

capacitance C and the operating voltage V, expanding V is the most effective method for increasing 

energy density. On the other hand, C is proportional to the ele ctrode surface area S, and the reciprocal of 

the thickness of the electric double layer , and so C can be enhance d mainly by increas ing surface area of 

active material, that is, activated carbon. It is thought that pore s tructure optimization may ha ve reached a

limit because of difficulty in how finely the pores enhancing C can be created ; hence the number of 

studies aiming at the expan sion of C is decreasing. 

Therefore, in this study, we tried to e nhance C from the viewpoint of reducing the double layer thickne ss 

d. Currently, ionic species with relatively large size and low charge density are generally used as charge 

carriers in non -aqueous EDLCs. This is because ions with small size and high charge density interact 

strongly with solvent s and behave as giant sol vated ions, increasing d. However, in our previous research, 

lithium bis (fluorosulfonyl )imide (LiFSI) was sufficiently dissoci ated even in a low dielectric constant 

solvent due to small interaction with ions, and lithium ion was easily de -solvated despite its high char ge 

density .1,2 In this study, we succeeded in utilizing weakly solvated alkali metal cations as charge carriers 

for EDLC by using a mixed solvent mainly composed of low dielectric constant solvent. In addition , we 

will report the detailed electrochemical results of the behavior of the electrode / electrolyte interface, and 

also report various studies conducted to imp ro ve the usability as a device. 

A composite electrode using activated carbon as th e active material, acetylene black (AB) as the 

conducti ve additive , carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) as the dispersant, and styrene -butadiene rubber 

(SBR) as the binder was prepa re d and used for evaluation. LiFSI or NaFSI were dissolved at a 

concentration of 1.0 mol dm -3 in a n electrolyt ic solut ion in which a high dielectric constant solvent PC 

and a low dielectric constant solvent DMC were mixed at a volume ratio of 1: 9 or 1: 1. A three -electrode 

cell was constr ucted using the above -mentioned activated carbon electrode for both the negative electrode 

and the positive electrode and metallic lithium for the reference electrode. In this study, we designed the 

cell so that the Li + adso rption / desorption behavior at the negative electrode side would be the dominant 

cell property. That is, the cell design was performed so that the weight of the activated carbon at the 

positive electrode was largely increased to reduce the influence of th e positive e lectrode. 

CV measurement s carried o ut for 1: 9 and 1: 1 systems using LiFSI (or KFSI afterwards) . In a typical 

electric double layer behavior, the CV curve shows a clean rectangle, but our studies show ed that the 

rectangle collapse d during Li + desorption in the 1: 1 sy stem, but hardly collapse d in the 1: 9 system . On 

the other hand, when the same CV was performed using KFSI, the response current for cation adsorption / 

desorption increased regardless of the solvent composition, Furthermore, no significant distortion was 

observed on the desorpti on side observed in the 1: 1 system when LiFSI was used . Raman spectroscopy 

show ed that when LiFSI is used, the solvation number of PC to Li + in 1: 1 is much higher than in the 1: 9 

system. On the other h an d, as for KFSI , the solvation number of PC wa s about the same as that of the 1: 9 

system even in the 1: 1 system. Therefore, it is considered that the difference in CV behavior is due to the 

difference in the solvation state between Li + and K + even in th e electrolyte solutions with the same 

solvent composition. These results demonstrate that the use of K +, which has a relatively low charge 

density, reduces the adverse effects of solvation as compared to the Li + system. 

References 

1.  S. Uchida and M. Ishik awa, J. Power Sources , 359 , 480 (2017). 

2. S. Uchida, T. Katada, and M. Ishikawa, Electrochem. Commun. , 114 , 106 705 (2020 ). Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy for the Characterization of 

# Conductive Polymer Films – The Non -stationary Case 

Gyözö G. Láng , Krisztina J. Szekeres, Mária Ujvári , Soma Vesztergom 

Eötvös Loránd University, Institute of Chemistry 

Pázmány Péter sétány 1/A, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary 

langgyg@chem.elte.h u

According to the usual interpretation of the concept of impedance, impedance is not defined as time -

depe ndent and, therefore, there should not exist an impedance out of stationary conditions. This means 

that if the requirement of stationarity in impedance spectroscopy is in conflict with the essential properties 

of the object, the measured data points are no t “impedances”, the obtained sets of experimental data are 

not “impedance spectra” and they cannot be used in any analysis based on traditional impedance models. 

When data recording occurs at low frequencies a complete measurement sequence can take considerab le 

time (at least several minutes). 

Many electrochemical systems , including polymer modified e lectrodes are intrinsically nonstationary and 

are affected by time -dependent phenomena. On the other hand, it is possible to show that under some 

suitable conditions time dependence can be conciliated into the concept of impedance [1 ,2 ]. The four -

dimension al analysis (FDA) metho d is based on the 

assumption of the continu um of the object’s state and 

parameters space. Every measured data at a given 

frequency should additionally contain the time of 

measurement (Fig. 1, a) . By t aking advan tage of the 

continuity of the evolution, interpolati on is performed 

resulting in instantaneous projections of the full 

impedance -time space (Fig. 1, b,c ) and “reconstructed” 

impedances related to a selected instant of the time 

(Fig. 1,d ). Each of these diagrams can be regarded as a 

stationary one, free of non -steady -state errors. 

Overoxidized poly (3,4 -ethylenedioxytiophene (PEDOT )

film on gold or glassy carbon in aqueous sul furic acid is 

a good example of a nonstationary conductive polymer 

system for which the 4-dimensional an alysis method 

can be effectively applied . A fter overoxidation , at both 

high and medium frequencies the complex -plane plot of 

the measured data is characterized by a “capacitive ” arc 

(or depressed semicircle), while the low frequency part 

indicates “capacit ive ” behavior . However, the complex 

plane plots clearly indicate that the system is 

nonstationary [2]. E.g. it can be inferred from the shapes 

of the sequentially recorded impedance spectra that the 

charge transfer resistance at the substrate/polymer film interface decreases continuously over several 

hours. The impedance analysis results show that the FDA method can not only be used for the correction 

of the existing (experimentally measured) impedance data, but it opens up the possibility of the estimation 

of the impedance spectra outside the time inte rval of the impedance measurements. 

In this study , t he advantages and limitations/drawbacks of the method and its relation to CNLS -fitting are 

discussed. 

References 

[1] Z. Stoynov, B. Savova -Stoynov, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 183 (1985) 133 -144. 

[2] D. Zalka, N. Kovács, K. Szekeres, M. Ujvári, S. Vesztergom, S. Eliseeva, V. Kondratiev, G.G. Láng ,

Electrochim ica Acta 247 (2017) 321 –332 .

Acknowledgement : Support from the National Research Developme nt and Innovation Office and the 

European Union (OTKA No. K129210 , VEKOP -232 -16 -2017 -00013) is gratefully acknowledged. Structural Dependence of Capacitive Performances of Multi -Metal 

# Oxides Composites of Ordered Support –Layer Microstructure 

Vladimir Pani ć

National Institute of Chemistry, Technology and Metallurgy, Department of Electrochemistry, University 

of Belgrade 

Nje goševa 12, Belgrade, Serbia 

panic@ihtm.bg.ac.rs 

An important aspect of the contemporary investigation of powdered metal oxides as electrochemical 

supecapacitors relates to fully precise tailoring of their synthesis to reach ordered structures of complete 

availability of capacitive performances . Ordered structure aims to minimize the amount of noble metal 

oxides, e.g ., RuO 2, or to improve their activity in multicomponent composite s of developed interactivity 

between layered noble metal oxide and poorly acti ve or inert support. The ordering is to be gained at 

micro - and nano -level , with structural uniformity of supporting matrices and a layer of active 

component(s), and consequently of composite support –layer ordered microstructural fragments. This 

requires i ntrinsic synthesis routes of an ex -situ or semi -ex -situ approach – separate synthesis of the 

components and subsequent impregnation, or alternatively in -situ , by time -programmed hydrolysis or 

hydrolysis within emulsified micro -reactors. 

Simple in -situ and ex -situ approaches for the synthesis of powdered RuO 2-based supercapacitive 

composites, with TiO 2 (Ru O2|TiO 2) [1] and perovskite -type LaSrCo 3 (Ru O2/LaSrCo 3) [2], respectively, as 

supports are presented and discussed. A synthesis procedure of ultrasonically induced combined 

hydrothermal/aerosol pyrolysis was found suitable to produce almost ideal microspheres with surface 

layer of uniformly dispersed active component. Capacitive performances, investigated by cyclic 

voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spec troscopy and galvanostatic charge/discharge experiments, 

are found sensitive to structure/composition of Ru O2|TiO 2, and indicated mutual improvement of the 

capacitive characteristics of Co 3O4 and RuO 2 in Ru O2/LaSrCo 3.

References 

[1] M. Ko sevi ć, N. Vukićević, S. Stopić, J. Stevanović, B. Friedrich, V. Panić, B. Nikolić, J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 165 (2018) J3363 –J3370 

[2] S. Eraković, M. M. Pavlović, S. Stopić , J. Stevanović, M. Mitrić , B. Friedrich, V. Panić , Electrochim. 

Acta 321 (2019) 134721 .Azulene Azotetrazoles Modi fied Electrodes for  Heavy Metal Ions 

# Detection 

Eleonora -Mihaela U ngureanu 1*, Veronica A nastasoaie 1,3, Laura -Bianca E nache 1,3 ,

Liviu B irzan 2, Marius E nac hescu 3

> 1

"Politehnica" University o f Bucharest, Gheorghe Polizu 1 -7, 011061, Sector 1, Bucharest, Romania, 

> 2

Institut of Organic Chemistry "C. D. Nenitzescu "of the Romanian Academy, Spl. Independentei 202B, 

PO Box 15 -258, 71141 -Bucharest, Romania 

> 3

Center for Surface Science and Nanotechnolo gy, "Politehnica" Uni versity of Bucharest , Splaiul 

Independentei 313 , 060042 Bucharest, Romania 

*eleonoramihaelaungureanu@gmail.com 

The paper relates the electrochemical characterization by cyclic voltammetry, pulse -differential 

voltamm etry and rotating disk electrode vol tammetry of new azulene azotetrazole monomers (Fig. 1). 

These monomers have been synthesized [1] and used to ob tain modif ied electrodes by electrochemical 

polymerization. The study led to the finding conditions for the a pplication of th ese complexing modified 

electrodes in re cognition of heavy metal ions. 

Fig.1. Investigated azulene azo tetrazole derivatives; R: H; 4,6,8 -Me3; 3,8 -Me2 -5-iPr 

The modified electrodes were characterized by cyclic voltammetry in ferrocene solutions, EIS, SEM, 

AFM. The complexing properties of thi s polyfunctional material were used for the recognition of heavy 

metal ions (Pb, Cd, Hg, Cu) by anodic pre -concentration technique [2]. The best results have been 

obtained for Pb detection. 

References 

[1] L. B îrzan, M. Cristea, C. C. Drăghici, V. Tecuceanu, M. Manganu, A. Hanganu, G. -L. Arnold, E. -M. 

Ungureanu, A.C. Răzuș , Tetrahedron, 72, 2316 -2326, 2016 .

[2] G. -L. Arnold, I. -G. Laza r, G. -O. Buica, E. -M. Ungurean u, L. Birzan, U.P.B. Sci. Bull . 79, (2017) 89 -

100. Electrochemical Reduction of Polya cylgermanes 

Alan Liska a,b , Philipp Fruhwirt b, Michael Haas c, Jiri Ludvik a, Georg Gescheidt -Demner b 

> a

Department of Molecular Electrochemistry and Catalysis, J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry 

of the CAS, Dolejsko va 3/215 5, 18223 Prague, Czech Republic  

> b

Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Technische Universität Graz, Stremayrgasse 9, 

A-8010 Graz, Austria  

> c

Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Technische Universität Graz, Stremayrgasse 9, A -8010 Graz, A ustria 

alan.liska@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Diacylgermanes such as Ivocerin ® are used for dental applications as serving as non -toxic 

photoinitiators for radical polymerization. The corresponding photo -induced reaction mechanisms are 

well established [ 1]. 

Irradi ation with light in the visible region leads to a homolytic C -Ge bond cleavage resulting in 

radical formation. The absorption spectra of the photoinitiators depend on the electron 

donating/withdrawing character of substituents at the aromatic moieties [2 -3]. 

Push -pull effects, however, also indicate a substantial effect on the redox properties of the acylgermanes 

monitored by means of electrochemical methods. The first electron reduction of the parent compounds 

yields an anion radical. 

In this context, w e present our results obtained by DC -polarography and cyclic voltammetry 

across a series of mono -, d i-, tri - and tetraacylgermanes, di - and tri -nuclear polyacylgermanes as well as 

analogical silanes and stannanes, respectively [4]. The observed trends in t heir first reduction potentials 

will be discussed connected with the substitution pattern at the central atom. 

Fig .: Structures of investigated compound classes (Ar=aryl, R=alkyl). 

References 

[1] T. Hirt, N. Moszner, P. Burtscher, K. Vogel, J. -C. Todd , S. Heintze, A. Peschke. Report – Aus der 

Forschung und Entwicklung der Ivoclar Vivadent AG, 9494 Schaan / Liechtenstein, 19 (2013), 2 -42. 

[2] M. Haas, J. Radebner, A. Eibel, G. Gescheidt, H. Stueger. Chemistry –A European Journal, 24(33) 

(2018), 8258. 

[3] J. Radebner, M. Leypold, A. Eibel, J. Maier, L. Schuh, A. Torvisco, R. Fischer, N. Moszner, G. 

Gescheidt, H. Stueger, M. Haas.  Organometallics, 36 (2017), 3624. 

[4] P. Fruhwirt, A. Liska, P. Wasdin, A. -M. Kelterer, M. Haas, J. Ludvik, G. Gescheidt. Organo metallics, 

(2020) - sent. 

Acknowledgement 

• GACR project No. 19 -22806S 

• NAWI Graz Enhanced Singlet Oxygen -based Photoelectrochemical Detection of 

# Rifampicin Based on its Interaction with the Supporting Material 

Adrian Blidar 1,2 , Stanislav A. Trashin 1, Sergiu M. Gorun 3, Cecilia Cristea 2, Karolien De Wael 1

> 1

AXES Research Group, Departmen t of Bio Engineering , University of Antwerp, 

Groenenborgerlaan 171, 20 20 Antwerp, Belgium 

> 2

”Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry, 

4 Pasteur St., 400 349, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 3

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Seton Hall University, 

South Orange, New Jersey 07079, United States 

blidar. adrian@umfcluj.ro ; adrian.blidar@uantwerpen.be 

Rifampicin (RIF) is an essential antibiotic for the short -course anti -tuberculosis treatment [1] . The 

intensive use of antibiotics including RIF results in the continuous release of the drugs into the 

environment, which lead s to the development of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and antibiotic 

resistant bacteria (ARB) making the treatment of some infections impos sible [2] . One of the main 

anthropogenic sources f or ARGs and ARB are suspected to be the effluents from urban wastewater 

treatment plants .

Therefore, there is a necessity to estimate RIF levels in biological, pharmaceutical and environmental 

samples. Accordingly, several analytical techniques based on chromatographic methods (liquid 

chromatography , thin -layer chromatography ), electrochemical methods and spectroph otometry have been 

reported for RIF d etection [1] .

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the analytical method .

Here, we propose a new robust and sensitive ph otoelectrochemical method for RIF detection based on 

a concept developed earlier [3] using a perfluorinated zinc phthal ocya nine (F 64 PcZn) as a type II 

photosensitizer . Deposited on an electrode, F64 PcZn generates reactive singlet oxygen ( 1O2) und er visible 

light illumination resulting in oxidation of phenolic analytes . This is fo llowed by electrochemical 

reduction of the produ ct and cor responding current rise [3] in the electrocatalytic cycle similar to 

enzymatic sensors .

F64 PcZn is depo sited on the electrode together with a support ing elemen t – TiO 2. The later can bring 

an analytical advantage due to enhanced interaction betwe en TiO 2 surface and vicinal phenols ( 1,2 -

dihydroxybenzene , 1,8 -dihydroxynaphthalene ) like in the structure of RIF [3 , 4] . The photosensitizer 

itself can also interact with RIF, both being highly hydroph obic molecules, further increasing the 

possibility for enhancing the overall sensitivity by pre -concentrating RIF on the sensing surface. 

Using this concept an d employing an in cubation step, a low limit of detection of 10 nM was ob tained .

Also, based on the characteristics of the interaction between RIF and the sensing material, the c apability 

of th e method to distinguish from RIF and certain other phenolic compounds was also dem onstrated, by 

testing other phenols and real samples, represented by effluents from urban wastewater treatment plants. 

This approach could be even further ext ended for other polyphenolic compound s, based on the 

promising results showed .

[1] N. Thapliyal et al. , Anal. Chim. Acta , vol. 27, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j. aca.2014.09.054. 

[2] L. Rizzo et al. , Sci. Total Environ ., vol. 447, pp. 345 –360,2013,doi:10. 1016/j.scitotenv .2013.01.032. 

[3] S. Trashin et al. , Nat.  Co mmun. , vol. 8, no. May, pp. 1 –10, 2017, doi: 10.1038/nc omms16108. 

[4] T. Rajh et al. , J. Phys . Chem. B , vol. 106, no. 41, pp. 10543 –105 52, 2002, doi: 10.1021/j p021235v. 

Acknowledgements: This work was support ed by ERA.Net RUS Plus Plasmon El ectrolight project 

(No. 18 -53 -76006 ERA) . The lab of S. Gorun is than ked for the F64 PcZn -TiO 2 powder. High -speed spectroelectrochemistry with quantum cascade las er 

# frequency comb spectroscopy 

Markus Mangold , Andreas Hugi, Urszula Sz cz epaniak , Raphael Horvath, Marku s Geiser 

IRsweep AG 

Laub is ruetistrasse 44, 8712 Staefa, Switzerland 

markus. mangold@irsweep.c om

Frequency comb sp ectroscopy is a promising dev elopment, allowing for higher resolutions, faster 

acquisitions, and higher throughput, especially when compared with non -laser based spectroscopic 

techniques. 1 We have developed a spectrometer based on quan tum cascade lasers, c ombining many 

advantages of d ual comb spectroscopy with the relative affordability and ease of use of semiconductor 

lasers. 

The method of dual -comb spectroscopy employs broadband lasers emitting hu ndre ds of wavelengths 

simultaneously , enabling studies of the time evolution of multiple molec ular absorption features. The 

recent advent of quantum cascade laser based mid -infrared frequency combs and the demonstration of 

their suitability for dual -comb spectroscopy led to the integration o f the technique into a spectrometer. 2,3 

This spectrometer is based on two quantum cascade laser frequency comb sources that are overlaid to 

produce a heterodyne beating signal. 

As the spectrometer contains no moving parts, a careful selection of the mode spacings allows for spectra 

to be acquired on a sub -micros econd timescale, and this can be done continuously for hundreds of 

milliseconds. The bright laser sources allow a combination of low noise (1 mOD at 100 μs) with high 

spectral resolution (< 0.0001 cm -1) to be achieved. Additionally, optically dense samples can be probed, 

for example affording measurements through highly absorbing water backgrounds. Validation of the 

method was done by comparing time -resolved dual comb spectroscopy measurements of a protein 

photocycle to an equivalent step -scan FTIR experime nt. 4 Closely matching spectral and kinetic behavior 

was found. Furthermore, the Stark tuning rate of fluorobenze ne was measured in a vibrational Stark 

spectroscopy experiment using the frequency comb spect rometer. 5 Most recently, the measurement of the 

potential dependent desorption of a monolayer of a pyrid ine derivative with time resolution as high as 

4 μs was ach ieved .6 In this presentation , we will detail the route towards in -situ spectroelectrochemical 

analysis with frequency comb sources and we will lay out the potential of studying microsecond 

dynamics in ele ctr ochem ical systems .

In conclusion, the development of a solid -state mid -infrared dual -comb spectrometer based on quantum 

cascade lasers is detailed. Reference experiments show good signal to noise r atios at short integration 

times and in single -shot measurements, allowing for new applications to be explored. 

Refe rences 

1) Keilmann, F.; Gohle, C.; Holzwarth, R. Opt.  Lett. 2004, 29, 1542 -1544. 

2) Hu gi, A.; Villa res, G.; Blaser, S.; Liu, H. C.; Faist, J. Nature 2012, 492, 229 -233. 

3) Villares, G.; Hugi, A.; Blaser, S.; Faist, J. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5192. 

4) Klocke , J.L. ; Mangold , M. ; Allmendinger , P; Hugi , A. ; Geiser , M. ; Jouy , P.; Faist , J.; Kottke , T. Anal. 

Ch em. 2018, 90, 17, 10494 -10500 

5) Szczepaniak , U .; Schneider , S.H.; Horvath , R.; Kozuch , J. , Geiser , M. ; Appl. Spect. 2019 ,

doi :10.1177/0003702819888503 

6) Lins, E., Read, S., Un ni, B. Rosendahl, S.M., Burgess, I.J. ; An al . Chem. 2020, 

doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c00260 Identification of lateral  water  diffusion in organic coatings using  time -

# resolved instantaneous  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy 

Benny Wouters a, Negin Madelat a, Raf Claessens a,b , Ehsan Jalilian b, Guy Van Assche b, Tom Hauffman a,

Herman Terry na, Anni ck Hubin a

> a

Research Group Electrochemical and Surface Engineering,  Department Materials and Chemistry 

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium 

> b

Research Group Physical Chemistry and Polymer Science, Department Materials and C hemistry 

Vrije U niversiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium 

benny.wouters@vub.be 

To protect metal constructions from corrosion, organic coatings are widely applied. However, these 

coatings can be prone to breakdown when exposed to aqueous environment s during prolonged periods of 

time. The initial step o f failure of a coating when it comes into contact with water is water uptake. This 

water uptake has been studied extensively in literature [1, 2] by Electrochemical Impedance Spectro scopy 

(EIS ) and/or gravimetry. With EIS, the coating capacitance is followed as a function of time, and the 

dielec tric constant of the coating over time is extracted. The water uptake can then be estimated by either 

using the Brasher -Kingsbury equation [2 ] or the linear rel ationship [3]. This method to determine water 

uptake from EIS results, take s as an assumption tha t water only diffuses perpendicular to the surface, 

while lateral diffusion could also occur from a theoretical standpoint. 

In this work, the validity of t his assumption is investigated, by not only measuring the capacitance change 

of the coating surf ace exposed to electrolyte , but also at surfaces that are not directly exposed . The 

capacita nce will be monitored through odd random phase elect rochemical impedance spectroscopy (ORP -

EIS). The test will be performed on model coatings, which are based on acrylic and/or methacrylic 

backbones. From initial research, it is found that the water uptake in these coatings has to be measured 

immediately af ter the immersion of the coating as it is a very fast process. This rapid water uptake in the 

co atings is monitored using the time -resolved instantaneous impedance calculation [4] from ORP -EIS 

measurement s. To identify the lateral diffusion, the impedance is measured simultan eously at the 

immersed surface and at a surface that is not in direct contact with the solution . This measurement is 

performed using a custom -made dual p otentiostat that shares the working electrode, which is the metal 

substrate underneath the coating. Res ults show that there is indeed a measurable capacitance inc rease in 

the measured surface outside of the immersed surface, indicating the lateral diffusio n of water. The lateral 

diffusion coefficient can be calculated an d compared to the perpendicular diffu sion coefficient. 

[1] Deflorian , F. et al, Electrochimica Acta 44 (1999) 4243 -4249 

[2] Brasher, D.M. and Kingsbury, A.H., Journal of Applied Chemistry 4 (1954) 62 -72 

[3] Nguyen, A.S. et al., Progress in Organic Coating s 112 (2017) 93 -100 

[4] Breugelmans, T. et al., Electrochimica Acta 76 (2012) 375 -382 Digital Twin of the Manufacturing Process of Rechargeable Batteries :

# the ARTISTIC Project 

Alejandro A. Franco ,1, 2,3,4, * 

> 1

Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (LRCS), CNRS UMR 7314, Université de Picardie Jules 

Verne, H ub de l’Energie, Rue Bau delocque, 80039 Amiens, France  

> 2

Réseau sur le Stockage Electrochimique de l'Energie (RS2E), Fédération de Recherche CNRS 3459, 

Hub de l’Energie, Rue Baudelocque, 80039 Amiens, France  

> 3

ALISTORE -European Research Institute, Fédération de Recherche CNRS 310 4, H ub de l’Energie, Rue 

Baudelocque, 80039 Amiens, France  

> 4

Institut Universitaire de France, 103 Boulevard Saint -Michel, 75005 Paris, France 

> *

alejandro.franco@u -picardie.fr 

In this lecture I report r ecent research progress achieved in our ERC -funded ARTISTIC project ,1 which 

aims at developing a digital twin of the manufacturing process of Lithium Ion Batteries (LIBs) to 

accelerate their optimization .2 Such digital twin is supported on a hybrid approac h encompassing a 

physics -based multiscale modeling workflow, Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) informatic algorithms and 

systematic experimental characterizations. Different steps along the battery cells manufacturing process 

are simulated, such as the electr ode slurry, coating, drying, 3-6 calendering 7 and electrolyte filling. The 

multiscale modeling workflow couples Coarse Grained Molecular Dynamics, Discrete Element Method 

and Lattice Boltzmann simulations and it allows predicting the impact of the process p arameters on the 

final electrode mesostructure . The predicted electrode mesostructures are injected in a 4D -resolved 

performance simulator capturing the influence of the pores networks and spatial location of carbon -binder 

within the electrodes on the elec trochemical response. 3,5 -8 Systematic experiments allow models 

validation. A.I. is used as a complementary tool to discover manufacturing parameters interdependencies 

directly from the experimental data, 9 to support the physical models’ parameterization 4 and as a guideline 

for reverse engineering . The predictive capabilities of this digital twin are illustrated with results for 

different NMC -based and graphite -based formulations. Finally, practical implications of ARTISTIC 

towards the acceleration of the ma nufacturing process optimization of advanced batteries are discussed. 

(1)  ERC Consolidator Project ARTISTIC ( Advanced and Reusable Theory for the In Silico -optimization 

of composite electrode fabrication processes for rechargeable battery Technologies with I nnovative 

Chemistries ), grant agreement #772873 (https://www.u -picardie.fr/erc -artistic/ ). 

(2) Franco, A. A., Rucci, A., Brandell, D., Frayret, C., Gaberscek, M., Jankowski, P., & Johansson, P. 

(2019). Bo osting rechargeable batteries R&D by multiscale modeling: myth or reality?. Chemical 

reviews , 119 (7), 4569 -4627. 

(3) Ngandjong, A.C., Rucci, A., Maiza M., Shukla, G., Vazquez -Arenas J., Franco, A.A., J. Phys. Chem. 

Lett. , 8 (23) (2017) 5966 .

(4) Lombardo, T., Hooc k, J. B., Primo, E., Ngandjong, A. C., Duquesnoy, M., & Franco, A. A. (2020). 

Accelerated Optimization Methods for Force‐Field Parametrization in Battery Electrode 

Manufacturing Modeling. Batteries & Supercaps . https://doi.org/10.1002/batt.202000049 

(5)  Rucci, A., Ngandjong, A. C., Primo, E. N., Maiza, M., & Franco, A. A. (2019).  Tracking variabilities 

in the simulation of Lithium Ion Battery electrode fabrication and its impact on electrochemical 

performan ce. Electrochimica Acta , 312 , 168 -178. 

(6)  Chouchane, M., Rucci, A., Lombardo, T., Ngandjong, A. C., & Franco, A. A. (2019).  Lithium ion 

battery electrodes predicted from manufacturing simulations: Assessing the impact of the carbon -

binder spatial location on the electrochemical performance. Journal of Power Sources , 444 , 227285. 

(7) Shodiev, A., Primo, E. N., Chouchane, M., Lombardo, T., Ngandjong, A. C., Rucci, A., & Franco, A. 

A. (2020). 4D -resolved physical model for Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy of Li (Ni 1-x-

> y

Mn xCo y)O 2-based cathodes in symmetric cells: Consequences in tortuosity calculations. Journal of 

Power Sources , 227871. 

(8)  Chouchane, M., Primo, E. N., & Franco, A. A. (2020).  Mesoscale Effects in the Extraction of Solid -

State Lithium Diffusion Coeff icient Value of Battery Active Materials: Physical Insights From 3D 

Modeling. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters . 11 , 7 , 2775 -2780 

(9)  Cunha, R. P., Lombardo, T., Primo, E. N., & Franco, A. A. (2020).  Artificial Intelligence 

Investigation of NMC Cathode Manufacturing Parameters Interdependencies. Batteries & Supercaps ,

3(1), 60 -67. Experimental Evidence of the Role of Short -Range Order on the 

# Electrochemical Activity of Iridium Oxide 

Marine Elmaalouf, 1 Mateusz Odziomek, 2 Marco Faustini, 2 Cédric Boissière, 2 Silvia Duran, 3 Cédric Tard, 3

Andrea Zitolo, 4 Jean -Yves Piquemal, 1 Marion Giraud, 1 Jennifer Peron, 1* 4 

> 1

Université de Paris, ITODYS, CNRS, UMR 7086, 15 rue J -A de Baïf, F -75013 Paris, France  

> 2

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Collège de France, UMR 7574, Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, F-

75005 Paris, France.  

> 3

LCM, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Université Paris -Saclay, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France.  

> 5

Synchrotron SOLEIL, L’orme des Merisiers, Saint -Aubin, 91192 Gif -sur -Yvette, France 

*jennifer.peron@u -paris.fr 

It is well known that amorphous iridium oxide materials (electrochemically synthesized or thermally obtained at 

low temperature) are more active than their well -crystalline counterparts, but usually it is at the expense of their 

stability. The presence of Ir hydroxo groups at the surface of highly active catalysts has been established. 1, 2

However, despite extensive studies, the reason of the higher activity of amorphous materials is also still the matter 

of a strong debate. We have recently extended the aerosol synthesis route to the preparation of highly porous noble -

metals and noble -me tal alloys 3 and noble -metal pure and mixed oxides. 4 In the case of pure iridium oxide, we have 

shown that the surface state, the crystallization and crystallite size and therefore the electrochemical properties can 

easily be tuned by changing the post -synthesis thermal treatment. 4 In this work, we are taking the ad vantage of the 

versatility of this green, cheap and scalable synthesis technique to prepare a large panel of iridium -non -noble metal 

mixed oxides. By introducing molybdenum along with iridium into the structure, we are able to delay the 

crystallization of the materials while the chemical transformation occurs in the same temperature range as for pure 

iridium. Measurements of the electrochemical activity towards the OER also show that, if the calcination 

temperature of the material is optimized, the activity of the catalyst is independent of the Mo content (Fig. 1). 

This uniqueness allows us to decouple the influence of the oxidation state from the structure of the material and 

provide unambiguous proof of the impact of the interatomic ordering onto the elec trochemical activity of iridium 

based materials towards the OER. These findings are supported by a large set of techniques including SEM, XRD, 

XRF and STEM -EDX (Fig. 1) as well as surface (XPS) and bulk (XAS) characterizations. Besides, to the best of 

our knowledge, we report for the first time the synthesis of true iridium -molybdenum mixed -oxides. Indeed, the 

preparation of the material by the aerosol technique permit the quenching of the initial precursor solution and 

therefore an intimate mixing of the t wo metals during the drying -step; after calcination mixed oxide Ir xMo 1-xO2

with 1≤x≤0.5 can be obtained.    

> Figure 1: from left to right, SEM images of Ir 0.7 Mo 0.3 O2calcined at 550 °C, STEM -EDX analysis of Ir 0.7 Mo 0.3 O2
> calcined at 550 °C and histogram of activity at 1.5 V for different composition of mixed oxide refer to IrO 2

1. Abbott, D. F.; Lebedev, D.; Waltar, K.; Povia, M.; Nachtegaal, M.; Fabbri, E.; Copéret, C.; Schmidt, 

T. J., Iridium Oxide for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction: Correlation between Particle Size, Morphology, and the 

Surface Hydroxo Layer from Operando XAS. Chemistry of Materials 2016, 28 (18), 6591 -6604. 

2. Reier, T.; Pawo lek, Z.; Cherevko, S.; Bruns, M.; Jones, T.; Teschner, D.; Selve, S.; Bergmann, A.; 

Nong, H. N.; Schlögl, R.; Mayrhofer, K. J. J.; Strasser, P., Molecular Insight in Structure and Activity of Highly 

Efficient, Low -Ir Ir –Ni Oxide Catalysts for Elec trochemical Water Splitting (OER). Journal of the American 

Chemical Society 2015, 137 (40), 13031 -13040. 

3. Odziomek, M.; Bahri, M.; Boissiere, C.; Sanchez, C.; Lassalle -Kaiser, B.; Zitolo, A.; Ersen, O.; 

Nowak, S.; Tard, C.; Giraud, M.; Faustini , M.; Peron, J., Aerosol synthesis of thermally stable porous noble 

metals and alloys by using bi -functional templates. Materials Horizons 2020, 7 (2), 541 -550. 

4. Faustini, M.; Giraud, M.; Jones, D.; Rozière, J.; Dupont, M.; Porter, T. R.; Nowak, S.; Bahri, M.; 

Ersen, O.; Sanchez, C.; Boissière, C.; Tard, C.; Peron, J., Hierarchically Structured Ultraporous Iridium -Based 

Materials: A Novel Catalyst Archit ecture for Proton Exchange Membrane Water Electrolyzers. Advanced Energy 

Materials 2019, 9 (4), 1802136. 1 mmElectrochemical Zinc Deposition onto Au(111) and Au(100) from 

# [MPPI][TFSI] 

Fabian M. Schuett , Jerome Mayer , Maren -Kathrin Heubach , Maximilian Ceblin , Ludwig A. Kibler ,

Timo Jacob 

Institute of Electrochemistry, Ulm University 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 47, D-89081 Ulm, Germany 

fabian.schuett@uni -ulm.de 

Zinc deposition and dissolution was thoroughly investigated in recent years for the improvement of 

rechargeable zinc/air batteries. [1,2] Mainly the influence of water , air and other additives on the structure of 

the Zn deposit and possible dendrite formation was studied .[3,4] However, the influence of the 

crystallographic orientation of the underlying substrate on the initial stages of Zn deposit ion and the 

structure of the Zn deposit was not focused on in detail, yet. 

In this work , the differences between the electrochemical deposition and dissolution of zinc on Au(111) 

and Au(100) model electrodes from the ionic liquid (IL) N-methyl -N-propyl -pip eridinium (MPPI) 

bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (TFSI) was investigated . The aim of our study was to evaluate the role 

of the electrode surface structure on a possible dendrite formation 

To better understand the fundamental processes which take place during the deposition and dissolution of 

zinc from this ionic liquid, a first characterization of th e system was conducted using cyclic voltammetry 

(CV) and in -situ scanning tunneling mi croscopy (STM) . The clearly different structures of deposits during 

the initial stages of zinc electro -crystallization on both gold electrodes reveal the strong influence of the 

crystallographic orientation on the metal deposition of zinc (Figure 1). The deposition of Zn leads to a 

positive shift in the cathodic decomposition potential of [MPPI][TFSI] , which limits the potential window 

for Zn electro -crystallization .

Figure 1: In -situ STM images of the early stages of the zinc bulk deposition on Au(111) (left) and 

Au(100) (right). 

Zn deposits fabricated by several potential cycles were examined by Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) 

and scanning electr on microscopy (SEM). While in -situ STM as well as AES sputter experiments indicate 

an alloy formation that takes place during the zinc deposition a complete plating of the Au electrode s upon 

continued potential cycling was found. Furthermore, under the studied conditions there were no signs of 

dendrite formation during Zn deposition on both Au single crystal electrodes. 

References: 

[1] T. J. Simons et al. , J. Phys. Chem. B 2014 , 118 , 48 95−4905 

[2] S. -D. Han et al ., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016 , 8, 3021 -3031 

[3] Z. Liu et al ., Dalton Trans 2016 , 45 , 8089 -8098 

[4] M. Xu et al ., J. Electrochem. Soc. 2014 , 161 , A128 -A136 Electrochemically Activated Stereoselective Functionalization of 

# Amino Acids in Ni(II) Coordination Environment 

Tatiana V. Magdesieva 

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Chemistry Dept., 

Leninskie Gory 1/3, Moscow 119991, Russia 

tvm@org.chem.msu.ru 

Elaboration of new stereoselective synthetic approaches is a topical problem nowadays since a

configuration of stereocenters is often determinant in practically important properties of a compound. 

Novel approach based on a c ombination of electrochemical activation with a stereoselective synthesis in a 

redox active metal coordination environment opens new horizons in stereoselective functionalization of 

amino acids in the form of the Ni -Schiff base complexes. The approa ch is compatible with the modern 

sustainable science requirements and allows reactivity and selectivity control on the substrates at the 

molecular level (due to cathodic or anodic activation) thus broadening a scope of available reaction routes 

(including processes which were not possible in common reaction conditions). 

Various types of electrochemical activation will be discussed in the presentation, including 

electrochemical in situ generation of the active species; deprotonation of the substrates using 

electrogenerated base, targeted regioselective activation of the different sites of the molecule, etc. 

Electrochemical formation of chiral nucleophilic equivalent of glycine which is in situ involved in various 

reactions, including multistep one -pot tran sformations (oxy - and thioalkylation, nucleophilic addition to 

activated C=C and C=O double bonds, radical reactions, etc.) allowed developing practical and highly 

efficient electrochemical routes to various types of enantiomerically pure α -amino acid der ivatives. 

Mechanistic insight into electrochemical processes helpful for understanding the manner of the 

stereocontrol of the reactions will be provided. 

Using the electrochemical approach , a number of unique amino acids in the form of Schiff base s were 

synthesized. Among them, novel fulleroamino acid derivatives with “double” chirality , in which amino 

acid is directly linked to the cage via the chiral α -amino acid carbon center providing noninherently chiral 

functionalization pattern; novel types of the α,α -cyclopropana ted amino acids and other interesting 

structures will be considered. 

Electrochemical functionalization made available the wide range of diastereomeric couples; each 

diasteromer was isolated in the individual form. This allowed performing a comparative voltammetric 

research o n the redox properties of a series new diastereomeric Ni -Schiff -base complexes . It revealed an 

in teresting phenomenon of the stereodependent redox activity inherent to the derivatives of various types 

of amino acids. The difference in the redox potential values for the diastereomeric complexes is rather 

significant, opening the route for the electroch emical discrimination of the stereoisomers. The origin of 

the phenomenon , clarified using voltammetry data and DFT calculations, will be also disc ussed in the 

presentation. 

Acknowledgement : this work was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Resear ch (Project number 

(19 -29 -08012). )

[1]. Levitskiy O., Aglamazova O., Magdesieva T. , Electrochimica Acta , 2019, 306, с. 568 -574 

[2]. Levitskiy Oleg A., Grishin Yuri K., Magdesieva Tatiana V. , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed . 2017, 56, 2704 

[3]. Levitskiy Oleg A., Grishin Yuri K., Magdesieva Tatiana V. European Journal of Organic Chemistr y, 

2019, № 20, p. 3174 -3182 

[4]. Levitskiy O., Aglamazova O., Magdesieva T., Chemistry -A European Journal, 2020, 

doi:10.1002/chem.201905708 Corrosion testing and electrochemical measurement under variable 

# pH: experimental setup and examples of application s

Michele Curioni , Meng Lyu, Fabio Scenini 

Department of Materials, School of Natural Sciences, University of 

Manchester, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, Manchester, UK. 

Michele.curioni@manchester.ac.uk 

A novel experimental setup to control the pH of a sodium chloride solution during corrosion testing and 

electrochemical measurements is presented. The setup comprises a purpose built electrochemical c ell that 

is separated in two compartments by a porous material which allows ions exchange. In each of the two 

compartment s a graphite electrode is placed and connected to a computer controlled, variable voltage, 

power supply. A pH electrode is immersed int o one of the two compartment (the test compartment) and 

connected to a controller which sends the pH value to the computer. In the same compartment where the 

pH electrode is placed , an independent counter electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a wor king 

electrode ( i.e. the material under study) are placed. An automatic controller connect the two graphite 

electrodes placed into the two half cells and applies a sufficient potential to develop hydrogen from one 

electrode and oxygen from the other. As a result, the pH in the half cell where hydrogen is developed 

increase s, whereas the pH in the half cell where oxygen develops decreases. By alternatively measuring 

the pH in the test cell and applying adequate potential to the graphite electrodes, it is pos sible to vary the 

test cell pH precisely and to perform pH sweep experiments. Further, the same controller enables to 

perform electrochemical measurements on the working electrode placed in the test cell. As a result, it is 

possible to obtain information o n the variation of electrochemical behavior as a function of pH with a 

single experiment. This paper presents the experimental setup and provides some example of applications, 

such as that illustrated in Figure 1 below. 

Figure 1: pH (a), corrosion poten tial (b) and polarization resistance (c) as a function of time for an 

AA2024T3 specimen immersed in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution. For the same experiment, the corrosion 

potential (d) and the polarization resistance (e) as a function of the solution pH. Influence of Micrometric Inter -electrode Distances and Water 

# Hardness on Mineral Scaling at the Electrode Surface during 

# Electrochemical Advanced Oxidation Process 

Faidzul Hakim ADNAN , Emmanuel MOUSSET, Marie -Noë lle PONS 

Laboratoire Réactions et Génie de s Procédés, Université de Lorraine, CNRS, LRGP, F -54000 Nancy, 

Fr ance 

emmanuel.mousset@univ -lorraine.fr 

In electrolytic water treatment, scaling or deposit is an inevitable challenge and it normally ends up in 

capital loss due to technical issues. When th e electrode is polarized at a sufficiently negative potential, 

dissolved oxygen and water are reduced to hydroxyl ions [1, 2] . These two phenomena result in an increase 

of local pH at the vicinity of electrode. In presence of Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ , hydroxide scale s can potentially be 

produced. On another side, this pH increment also shifts the thermodynamic ratio of 

carbonates/bicarbonates favoring the production of carbonate scales [3 -5] . Several authors have reported 

the formation of scaling in an electrochemical setup while working with different hard water coming from 

multiple sources: cooling water used in industries [9, 10], artificial underground water [11], artificial [4] 

and real seawater [12]. Due to abundant resources capable of restricting the applicatio n of electrolysis, 

meticulous study to comprehend and to avoid the formation of deposits seems primordial. 

The influence of reactor design on mineral scaling was investigated in this study by considering a 

microfluidic thin -layer cell in micrometric range compared to electrolyzer with inter -electrodes distance in 

centimeter range [6, 7] . Short distances have shown to enhance mass transfer within the cell and it 

overcomes the barrier of working with low ionic conductivity electrolyte [8] . Mg(OH) 2 and CaCO 3 deposits 

were selected in this work, as they are the main scales encountered in the field. The objective was to 

establish optimal operating conditions of microfluidic electrochemical cell in -which the scaling does not 

occur for all -type of hard waters. The results present here -in are the first to report on the scaling in 

microfluidic thin -layer cell. Its configuration is distinct as compared to that found i n the literature where 

rotating disk electrode was used as working electrode. In particular, its electrode surface area is 25 to 250 

times bigger relatively to the rotating disk electrodes (0.2 to 2 cm²). The electroch emical cell is hence more 

representative to reactors used on a larger scale. 

The appli cable current density range was larger with thin films in comparison to centimetric inter -electrode 

distances to prevent scaling formation , which could enlarge the applications of micro -reactors. Coupling 

the experimental results with voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy allowed depicting the mechanism 

of nucleation and scaling. Mathematical models were fitted to the experimental results to valid ate scientific 

approach notably on the effect of applied current density, inter -electrode distances and matrix of electrolyte. 

References :

[1] C. Barchiche, C. Deslouis, D. Festy, O. Gil, P. Refait, S. Touzain, B. Tribollet, Electrochimica Acta, 48 

(2003) 1645 -1654 .

[2] C. Barchiche, C. Deslouis, O. Gil, P. Refait, B. Tribollet, Electrochimica Acta, 49 (2004) 2833 -2839 .

[3] L. Beaunier, C. Gabrielli, G. Poindessous, G. Maurin, R. Rosset, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 

501 (2001) 41 -53 .

[4] C. Desl ouis, D. Festy, O. Gil, G. Rius, S. Touzain, B. Tribollet, Electrochimica Acta, 43 (1998) 1891 -

1901. 

[5] O. Devos, C. Gabrielli, B. Tribollet, Electrochimica Acta, 51 (2006) 1413 -1422 .

[6] O. Scialdone, E. Corrado, A. Galia, I. Sirés, Electrochimica Acta, 132 (2014) 15 -24 .

[7] J.F. Pérez, J. Llanos, C. Sáez, C. López, P. Cañizares, M.A. Rodrigo, Chemical Engineering Journal ,

351 (2018) 766 -772 .

[8] E. Mousset, M. Puce, M.N. Pons, ChemElectroChem, 6 (2019) 2908 -2916 .

[9] J. Marin -Cruz, R . Cabrera -Sierra, M. Pech -Canul, I. Gonzalez, Electrochimica Acta, 51 (2006) 1847 -

1854 .

[10] J. Mar in-Cruz, E. Garcıa -Figueroa, M. Miranda -Hern andez, I. Gonz alez, Water Research, 38 (2004) 

173 -183. 

[11] Y.B. Amor, L. Bousselmi, B. Tribollet, E. Triki, Elec trochimica Acta, 55 (2010) 4820 -4826 .

[12] C. Deslouis, P. Falaras, O. Gil, M. Jeannin, V. Maillot, B. Tribollet, Electrochimica Acta, 51 (2006) 

3173 -3180 .Recent Advances on Wearable Platforms for On -body Analysis Using 

# Membrane -Based Sensors 

Gaston A. Crespo 

KTH Royal Institute of Technology,  Department of Chemistry, Teknikringen 30, 100 44, Stockholm, 

Sweden 

gacp@kth.se 

Recent investigations of wearable electrochemical sensing have largely focused on development of flexible 

materials and electronics using traditional electrochemical sensing principles (i.e., potentiometry and 

amperometry) without genuine innovation of the chemical design, interrogation and readout parts. This has 

limited the true digital transformation of this fascinating concept because those devices do not meet the 

minimum requirements for healthcare purpose s, such as being calibration -free, having strict validation and 

correlation, robustness during on -body measurements, cytotoxicity assessment and analytical reliability, 

among others. 1 In this talk, recent advances that include the analytical development and evaluation of the 

sensing part of wearable electrochemical sensors for on -body monitoring of certain physiological 

parameters will be discussed. Importantly, the selected wearable devices exclusiv ely contain membrane -

based sensors and are classified in two types of platforms: (i) epidermal patches for the analysis of ions and 

biomolecules in sweat encompassing perspiration during sport practice; and (ii) (micro)needle -based 

platforms for the intrad ermal determination of ions and biomolecules with clinical purposes. 

The engineering of epidermal patches for real time characterization of sweat has required special attention 

in the design and fabrication of appropriate microfluidic system allowing for the creation of a safe path or 

the sweat coming from the eccrine glands towards the electrodes’ surfaces, with no contamination or 

evaporation risk while providing a passive sweat pump encompass ed to the sweat rate in the individual. 2

Having achieved that, the most crucial issue is to demonstrate the analytical reliability of on -body 

measurements through a meticulous and reliable validation strategy. This implies the accomplishment of a 

protocol based on sweat sam pling and its analysis using a standard analytical technique that has been 

recently suggested by our research group, for example ion chromatography for ions but also for glucose 

and lactate. Specifically , it has been demonstrated that on -body measurements in sweat involving enzyme -

based sensors require for pH and T correction towards more accurate outcomes. O n the other hand, o f

special interest is the case of lactate detection, since particular efforts are needed in the electrode design to 

reach the requir ed levels expected in sweat (ca. from 1 to 25 mM). Several strategies will be inspected in 

the talk. 

Intradermal analysis using membrane -based sensors has additional handicaps related to the 

biocompatibility of the tailored electrodes as well as physicoch emical resistance to skin penetration. The 

platform used per excellence to reach the desired level of penetration is (micro)needles that are adequately 

modified to sense different targets. Different sizes and designs would in principle allow for the availa bility 

of interstitial fluid, blood and intramuscular measurements. However, up to date, only in vitro tests have 

been presented in the literature. 3, 4 In our research group, we are working in one step further in terms of 

validation strategy, in vitro simulation of skin penetration and field experiments in mice based on po st 

mortem measurements. In particular, recent advances on the monitoring of scaffolds degradation my 

measuring pH and lactate by means of new (micro)needle -based devices will be presented.                    

> 1. Parrilla, M.; Cuartero, M.; Crespo, G. A., Trac -Trends in Analytical Chemistry 2019, 110 , 303 -320.
> 2. Parrilla, M.; Ortiz -Gomez, I.; Canovas, R.; Salinas -Castillo, A.; Cuartero, M.; Crespo, G. A., Anal Chem 2019,
> 91 (13), 8644 -8651.
> 3. Parrilla, M.; Cuartero, M.; Sanchez, S. P.; Rajabi, M.; Roxhed, N.; Niklaus, F.; Crespo, G. A., Anal Chem 2019,
> 91 (2), 1578 -1586.
> 4. Cuartero, M.; Parrilla, M.; Crespo, G. A., Sensors -Basel 2019, 19 (2) 363 .

# The Role of Poly(3 -octylthiophene) as Redox Mediator of Ion Fluxes 

# Across Voltammetric Thin Membranes 

María Cuartero , Yujie Liu and Gaston Crespo 

KTH Royal Institute of Technology,  Department of Chemistry, Teknikringen 30, 100 44, Stockholm, 

Sweden 

mariacb@kth.se 

Previous publications have demonstrated th e effective tuning of ion -transfer processes across ion -selective 

membranes formulated with a thickness in the nanometer order b y modulating the oxidation state of a film 

of poly (3 -octylthiophene) –POT – that is in backside contact. 1, 2 The beauty of the concept is based on the 

connection of the charge transfer (C T) process occurring in the POT lattice with any ion -transfer (IT) 

process at the sample –membrane interface, being framed by the application of a linear sweep potential 

rather than the typical measurements with ion -selective membranes at zero current (i.e. , traditional 

potentiometry). Several attempts on the theoretical description of this CT -IT system considered the Nernst 

equation for the description of the POT oxidation process, providing a sigmoid -shaped curve for the CT. 3,  

> 4

Besides some theoretical assumptions, to the best of our knowledge, there is no experimental evidences 

confirming this behavior of the CT whether this process comes coupled to IT process(es) of different nature. 

In this talk, a new strategy for the experimental characterization of the CT process in POT films i nvolved 

in different CT -IT systems is presented . For this purpose, w e take advantage of the absorbance change in 

the POT film while being oxidized to monitor the CT process linked to non -assisted and assisted IT at the 

sample –membrane interface. Thus, spec troelectrochemistry is used as the readout of ITO -based electrodes 

modified with a double layer design comprising POT and the ion -selective membrane. In particular, the 

concept is demonstrated for membranes containing one (potassium), two (lithium and pota ssium), and three 

(lithium, sodium and potassium) ionophores, thus promoting a change in the nature and number of the IT 

processes. 

The CT visualizes as independent sigmoid appearing at different potential ranges according to the assigned 

IT process. Adv antageously, it is here proposed an easy calculation of both CT (dynamic absorbance versus 

applied potential) and IT (coulovoltagram) based on the Sigmoidal –Boltzmann  model . Both experimental 

and theoretical definition of the role of POT as redox mediator of ion fluxes across voltammetric thin 

membranes open up new possibilities for the further design of sensors with superior analytical features, 

mainly in terms of improved selectivity because of the independency of CT according to different IT 

occurring in the electrode. In addition, the Sigmoidal –Boltzmann  model  may allow for the calculation of 

ion -ionophore binding constants in the membrane using an easy relationship between the peak potentials 

corresponding to non -assisted and assisted IT s.

In addition , the linear correlation found with the concentration of the cation(s) analyte(s) in the sample 

solution on the basis of the newly proposed spectroelectrochemical experiments deserves special attention 

towards further analytical purposes. A deep optimizatio n of membrane thickness, scan rate in the applied 

linear sweep potential as well as frequency acquisition (and resolution) of the optical measurements will 

contribute to a fine tuning of the obtained linearity. The tandem light -electrochemistry has demonst rated a 

series of unique fundamental but also analytical applications that are inaccessible with other techniques: 

mechanistic studies, analytical electrochromic devices, protein -related investigations and analytical sensors 

among others. In particular, th e electrodes herein developed based on nanometer -sized membranes in 

backside contact with POT present a high potential towards real -time extracellular measurements of 

different ions used to stimulate the cells in conjunction to light, undoubtedly offering new horizons in this 

field. 

1. Cuartero, M.; Acres, R. G.; De Marco, R.; Bakker, E.; Crespo, G. A., Anal Chem 2016, 88 (13), 6939 -

6946. 

2. Cuartero, M.; Crespo, G. A.; Bakker, E., Anal Chem 2016, 88 (3), 1654 -1660. 

3. Yuan, D. J.; Cuartero, M.; Crespo, G. A.; Bakker, E., Anal Chem 2017, 89 (1), 586 -594. 

4. Greenawalt, P. J.; Amemiya, S., Anal Chem 2016, 88 (11), 5827 -5834. Tuning the selectivity of CuAg core -shell nanoparticles towards CO through a 

## combination of high -end electrochemistry and electron microscopy 

Lien Pacquets a,b Nick Daems a,c , Sara Bals b and Tom Breugelmans a,c  

> a

ELCAT, faculty of applied engineering, University of Antwerp, 

Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium  

> b

EMAT, faculty of sience, University of Antwerp, 

Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerpen, Belgium  

> c

VITO, Separation & Conversion Technologies, 

Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium 

Due to the continuous combustion of fossil fuels into the atmosphere , an historical high po int was reached 

in 2015 when CO 2 emissions exceeded the threshold of 400ppm. It is broadly known that the excessive 

emission of CO 2 has a negative impact on the environment. It is therefore of utmost importance that the 

CO 2 concentration is inhibited by reducing the combustion of CO 2 into the atmosphere in order to mitigate 

the effect on global warming. In this context, CO 2, as a feedstock, represents a great alternative for the 

synthesis of fuels and valuable chemicals. Utilizing r enewable energy sources as the required energy 

supply to convert this CO 2 into value added products has the additional advantage that the process is CO 2

neutral . Since renewable energy displays the fastest growth of all this implies new challenges concerning 

production -consumption profile matchin g for which the electrochemical conversion of CO 2 offers a 

solution [1] . Electrochemical conversion of CO 2 is one of the most promising route s because of the ability 

to tune the product selectivity by adapting the operating potential and catalyst material [2] .

In this research , CuAg core -shell nanoparticles are used as electrocatalysts to convert CO 2 in CO. As 

broadly known, by combining metals with certain arrangements, energetic effects lead to the ability to 

tune the product selectivity. In case of CuAg core -shells nanoparticles , the product s electivity is tuned 

towards CO because of the change in adsorption of CO 2 on the catalyst surface. By reducing the size of the 

CuAg core -shells, more electrochemical active surface area (EASA) is obtained using significantly less 

material, making the total process less expensive. 

The gap in current research is the knowledge on ideal shell thickness to convert CO 2 into CO. Here, we 

gained novel insights into the influence of the shell thickness on the electrochemical reduction of CO 2.

The CuAg core -shell nanoparticles where synthesized through a colloidal method succeeded by galvanic 

displacement of Ag with Cu [3] . The shell th ickness was varied by using different Ag concentrations and 

displacement time s. The activity of these electrocatalysts was firstly studied in an in -house designed H -

type cell with an aqueous solution of KHCO 3 saturated with CO 2. The activity was screened with cyclic 

voltammetry to compare the onset potential of the different core -shells. Further information on the 

selectivity was gained by analyzing the materials in an in -house designed electrolyzer. Chrono -

amperometry experiment s were performed, gaseous products were analyzed with an in -line gas 

chromatograph (GC) and the liquid products with a HPCL. Finally the core -shell structures were 

investigated by TEM, to understand the link between the structure, the activity and the sele ctivity. 

[1] H. Kondziella, et al. , Renew. Sustain. 

Energy Rev. , vol. 53, pp. 10 –22, 2016. 

[2] Z. Yin, et al. , Trends Chem. , vol. 1, no. 8, 

pp. 739 –750, 2019. 

[3] W. T. Osowiecki, et al. , J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. , vol. 140, no. 27, pp. 8569 –8577, 

2018. Hydrogen Ge neration Derived from Water Dissociation (2 4)

Kenji SAKAMAKI and Ryusei OOTOMO 

Chemistry Course, Department of Applied Chemistry and Biochemistry, Fukushima College, 

National Institute of Technology, Fukushima 980 -8034, Japan 

sakenji@fukushim a-nct.ac.jp 

We created a two -compartment cell (2CC) separated by a bipolar membrane (BPM 1) sandwiched 

between a through -holed (TH) electrode assembly (BPMTHEA -2CC) with the distinguishing featur e of 

integrated functionality of dualities based on the Golde n Rule for sustainable water splitting derived from 

water dissociation (WD) with a dual chemical bias (CB). 2,3 A decisive advantage of this system is that all 

electrolytes used are sustainable becau se the reaction starts from WD. The opposite bidirectional charge 

separation of H+ and OH − ions derived from WD generates inner CB within BPM. Many anolyte –

catholyte combinations are possible in BPMTHEA -2CC, which induces outer CB (OCB). Therefore, dual 

CB reduces overall water electrolysis voltage. We pre sent here supporting pro of of our conc ept .

We have achieved hydrogen generation derived from WD with BPMTHEA -2CC using an oxygen 

evolving reaction active TH dimensionally stable anode  (De Nora Permelec Ltd) prepared on Pt gau ze .

Liberated  gas was analyzed using a ga s chromatograph (GC -390B, GL  Science s) equipped with a 

stainless -1/8”x 3m MS -5A 30/60  column and a  thermal conductive detector ( TCD ). We succeeded in 

detecting appropriate am ounts of mole cul ar hydroge n generated in the cathodic compartment of 

BPMTHEA-2CC, anolyte (water )|TH anode| BPM|TH cathode| catholyte (wa ter ), by imposing a voltage 

with less than the theoretical 1.23 V for wate r splitting at room temperature. 

1)  V. J. Frilette,  J. Phys. Chem.,  60 , 435 (1956). 

2)  K. Sak amaki et al.  AST201 9, June 2 -5, 2019, Awaji Yumebutai, Japan,  O-24  (2019). 

3)  K. Sakamaki et al. , J. Applied Electrochem . 49 , 949 -962 (2019) .

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10800 -019 -01337 -8Probing the activity of Fe -peroxo porphyrin intermediates in reaction 

# layer during electrochemical reductive activation of O 2

Jean -Marc Noel ,[a] Nikolaos Kostopoulos, [b] Célia Achaibou, [b] Claire Fave, [b] Elodie Anxolabéhère -

Mallart, [b] and Frédéric Kanou fi ,[a] 

[a] Interfaces, Traitements, Organisation et Dynamique des Syst �mes, Université de Paris, CNRS -UMR 

7086, 15 Rue J.A. Baif, 75013 Paris, France 

[b] Laboratoire d’Electrochimie Mol �culaire, Universit �de Paris, CNRS -UMR 7591,15 Rue J.A. Baif, 

75013 Paris, Fra nce 

jean -marc.noel@univ -paris -diderot.fr 

Oxidations are an important class of reactions in the chemical industry for the production of huge 

quantities of intermediate and final products. In the current economic and environmental context the ideal 

oxidant is O 2 as it is abundant and benign . The use o f Fe porphyrins (Figure 1A) is an interesting 

biomimetic approach for O 2 activation as Fe II can reproduce the metabolic transformation catalyzed by Fe 

enzymes such as CytP450 [1]. The o ptimization and control o f the O 2 activation process requires a 

complete understanding of the mechanism and the identification of intermediate s involved . Some of these 

intermediates being very reactive, their lifetime are very short making them difficult to detect 

experimentally . Thus th ere is a need to develop operando methodologies to probe the m at the earlier stage 

of their formation directly in reaction layer s.

The scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) is a perfect tool to capture, quantify and characterize 

short -lived in termediates, including in complex molecular homogeneous catalytic systems [2,3 ].

Herein we propose to use the SECM in generation -collection mode to quantitatively analyze O 2 reductive 

activation in organic media catalyzed by three different Fe porphyrins as illustrated in Figure 1 . We 

particularly focus on the first intermediate produced in non -acidic medium, the (peroxo) intermediate 

Fe III (OO 2-) adduct issued from the reduction of a (superoxo) Fe III (OO •-) formed from the binding between 

O2 and Fe II ). 

In o ne single SECM experiment new thermodynamic and kinetic parameters such as the redox potential 

of the intermediate , the association constant of Fe II with O 2 and the pKa of the Fe III (OOH -)/ Fe III (OO 2-)

couple can be obtained and related to earlier DFT calcu lations [4]. Such information, obtained in the 

absence of H +, are then related to the efficiency of these catalysts for O 2 reduction in the presence of H +.

The results obtained can contribute to a further understanding of the parameters controlling the cat alytic 

efficiency of the Fe porphyrin towards O 2 activation and reduction. 

[1] E. Anxolabéhère -Mallart, F. Banse, Curr. Op. Electrochem. 2019 , 15 , 118 -124. 

[2] T. Kai, M. Zhou, S. Johnson, H.S. Ahn, A.J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018 , 140 , 16178 -16183 .

[3] T.J. Stockmann, J.M. Noël, S. Ristori, C. Combellas, A. Abou -Hassan, F. Rossi, F. Kanoufi, Anal. 

Chem. 2015 , 87 , 9621 -30. 

[4] M.L. Pegis, B.A. McKeown, N. Kumar, K. Lang, D.J. Wasylenko, X.P. Zhang, S. Raugei, J.M. 

Mayer, ACS Cent. Sci. 2016 , 2, 850 -856. 

Figure 1: A ) structure of the porphyrins complex es used. B ) Principle of the SECM experiments In Situ Raman Study of Interfacial Water Structure at Pd Single -

# Crystal Surface 

Yao -Hui Wang, 1 Shi -Sheng Zheng, 2 Feng Pan, 2 Jian -Feng Li 1,* 

> 1

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, China  

> 2

School of Advanced Materials, Peking Un iversity, Shenzhen Graduate School, China 

Li@xmu.edu.cn 

Water molecules are essential component of the electrochemical double layer (EDL) during 

electrochemical reaction proces s. The discharge processes of water molecules or hydrated proton are the 

initi ation of the classical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) . Thus, the structure and composition of 

interfacial water molecules directly affect the HER process. Pd has excellent HER performance. The 

study of interfacial water molecules of Pd single -crystal su rface is of great significance for understanding 

the HER process. However, the perception of water molecules during the HER process at Pd single -

crystal surface has been still elusive due to the complex interfacial environment, such as various water 

orient ations, hydrated ions, and hydrogen bonds network in water molecules [1] .

Herein, using electrochemical in situ shell -isolated nanoparticle -enhance Raman spectroscopy 

(SHINERS) [2] and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), we systemically investigated the structure and 

composition of water molecules from interfacial solution phase and electrode phase during the HER 

process. It was found that the interfacial water is mainly composed of water of trihedrally and 

tetrahedrally coordinated water and Na + hydrated water (Na.H 2O) at Pd surface . The structure and 

composition of interfacial water dynamically changes and forms an ordered structure as HER progress .

Meanwhile, we studied interfacial solution phase (ion concentration and types) for the influence of 

interfa cial water and HER . We found that the population of Na.H 2O in high concentration electrolyte is 

the highest in interfacial water molecules , while the HER also shows a better performance in the same 

condition . Thus, according to the increase d population of Na.H 2O in high concentration electrolyte , the 

ordered Na.H 2O plays a key role during HER process. 

To understand the role of ordered Na.H 2O dur in g HER , we further investigated the electrode phase 

(crystallographic orientation and electronic structure) for the influence of interfacial water and HER, Pd 

(111) shows the best HER performance and the highest population of Na.H 2O in three low -index Pd (hkl) 

single -crystals . Therefore, we believe that Na.H 2O is more conducive to water dissociation during HER 

proce ss. The ordered interfacial water structure could accelerate the efficiency of electron transfer. 

Theoretical calculations also show that Na.H 2O is more susceptible to dissociate HO -H bond than 

trihedrally and tetrahedrally coordinated water at electrode s urface during HER process. We propose a 

new structure -relationship between the interfacial water and HER, which could help to understand the 

nature of electrocatalysis. 

Reference 

[1] J. J. Velasco -Velez, et al., “The structure of interfacial water on gol d electrodes studied by x -ray 

absorption spectroscopy,” Science, vol. 346, 2014 , no. 6211 , pp. 831 -834. 

[2] J. F. Li, et al., “Shell -isolated nanoparticle -enhanced Raman spectroscopy,” Nature, vol. 464, 2010, 

pp. 392 -395. Mapping Potential Gradient Distribution in Bipolar Systems using 

# Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence 

Elena Villani , Shins uke Inagi 

Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, School of Materials and Chemical Technology, 

Tokyo Institute of Technology 

42 59 Nagatsuta -cho, Midori -ku, Yokohama 226 -8502, Japan 

villani.e.aa@m.titech.ac.jp 

Bipolar electrochemistry has gained remarkable interest in r ecent years as a powerful technology for 

the modification of conductive objects and for the electrochemical synth esis of novel functional materials 

in a wireless mode [1],[2] . In fact , differently to c onventional electrochemistry, bipolar electrochemistry 

offers the extraordinary advantage to perform electr ochemical reactions at both extremities of a wireless 

electrod e, or bipolar electrode (BPE) , through the application of an external electric field generated in a 

low concentrati on of a supporting electrolyte. 

Bipolar system s, which are generally composed of an elec trochemical cell and a pair of driving 

elec trodes, ca n be designed with different geometries and configurations , in order to achieve the 

electrosynthesis of functional materials with desired morphologies and characteris ti cs . For example, 

bipolar electrolysis using a cylindrical insulator enabled the perpendi cular growth of a uniform 

conducting polymer array [3] , or the electrochemical fluorination of triphenylmethane was performed in a 

U-shaped electrochemical cell employing a split BPE system [4] . Nevertheless, the distribution of potential 

gradient in these bipolar systems is dynamic and gradually changing and its direct monitoring is 

hampered due to the wireless nature of the BPE. The possibility to obtain a direct indication of the 

potential distribution would have tremendous impact on the application and fu rther development of 

original bipolar systems. 

In the present contribution, we explore the use of Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence (ECL) to 

visualize the distribution of potential gradient at the level of a BPE in such bipolar systems. The ECL 

technolog y represents the ideal approach d ue to the electrochemi cal nature of light emission . In fact, ECL 

involves the generation of photons at the electrode surface triggered by an electrochemical stimulus and, 

nowadays, it is widely employed as a highly sensitiv e imaging technique [5] . Our method exploits the use 

of a mixture of different chromophores in solution that, in presence of a coreactant species and upon 

application of anodic potential s at the BPE, can be sim ultaneously electro -oxidized generating mixed 

ECL emission s at different wavelengths. Since every luminophore is characterized by a specific oxidation 

potential and a typical wavelength for ECL generation , the mixed ECL emission can be resolved and 

associated to the correspondent 

single emitting specie s and, hence, 

to the correspondent oxidation 

potential. This approach permits 

to map the distribution of potential 

gradient in a specific bipolar cell ,

and can be applied to any other 

bipolar system in general .     

> Figure 1 : ECL emission of Ru(bpy) 3(PF 6)20.0 5 mM / TPrA 10 mM system in acetonitrile solution at BPE in cylinder
> configuration with different polarities : a) cathodic area under the cylinder and b) anodic area under the cylinder.

References: 

[1] G. Loget, D. Zigah, L. Bouffier, N. Sojic, A. Kuhn, Ac c. Chem. Res. , 2013 , 46 , 2513 -2523 .

[2 ] N. Shida, Y. Zhou, S. Inagi, Acc. Chem. Res. , 2019 , 52 , 2598 -2608 .

[3] Y. Zhou, N. Shida, Y. Koizumi, T. Watanabe, H. Nishiyama, I. Tomita, S. Inagi, J. Mater.  Che m. C,

2019 , 7, 14745 -14751 .

[4] K. Miyamoto, H. Nishi yama, I. Tomita, S. Inagi, ChemElectroChem , 2019 , 6, 97 -100 .

[5] a) A. Zanut, A. Fiorani, S. Rebeccani, S. Kesarkar, G. Valenti, Anal.  Bioanal. Chem. , 2019 , 411, 

4375 -4382; b) J. Zhang, S. Arbault, N. Sojic, D. Jiang, Annu . Rev. Anal. Chem. , 2019 , 12, 275 -295. Thermal Stability of Electrodeposited Ni -Mo Alloys in the Light of 

# Detailed Structural S tudies 

László Péter 1, Garima Kapoor 2, János L. Lábár 3, György Radnóczi 3, Éva Fekete 1 and Jenő Gubicza 2

1: Wigner Research Centre for Physics . Konkoly -Thege út 29 -33 , Budapest H–1121 , Hungary 

2: Department of Materials Physics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary 

3: Institute for Technical Physics and Materials Science, Centre for Energy Research, Budapest, Hungary 

E-mail: peter.laszlo@wigner.hu 

Alloying Ni wit h another highly corrosion -resistant component leading to strengt hening is a field of 

interest in plating industry. Alloying Ni with oxoanion -forming metals such as Mo, W and Re is possible 

from citrate -type baths with the so -called induced codeposit ion me chanism. In this work, 

electrodeposit ion was performed from a solution of small citrate content (citrate/Ni 2+ ratio: 0.5) with no 

volatile component (like NH 3). The concentration of Na 2MoO 4 in the bath was the varying parameter . The 

highest deposition effi ciency ,

  0.94, was found for pH = 6.1, regardless of the current density applied. 

Both the increase in the molibdate concentration and the decrease in current density resulted in the 

increase of the Mo mol e fraction in the deposit. Saccharine as stress reliever was found to be beneficial 

for the deposition of crack -free samples. 

X-ray diffraction full line profile analysis was carried out to study the microstructural parameters such as 

the crystallite size, the dislocation density and the stacking fault probabi lity. The increase in the Mo 

content up to 5.3 at.% led to one order of magnitude enhancement of the dislocation density while the 

crystallite size reduction was less significant. In addition, the twin boundary formation activity during 

deposition increase d with increasing Mo concentration. The results obtained were compared with bulk 

nanocrystalline Ni -Mo materials with similar compositions but processed by severe plastic deformation. It 

was found that the microstructure in electrodeposited Ni layers is mo re sensitive to the Mo concentration 

than bulk ultrafine -grained Ni -Mo materials processed by severe plastic deformation. 

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were performed on the Ni films deposited with and 

without Mo to study the thermal stability of the deposits. It was revealed that the increase of the Mo mole 

fraction in the deposit significantly improved the thermal stability of the nanocrystalline microstructure in 

Ni layers, despite the much higher defect density and smaller grain s ize which act as thermodynamic 

driving force for recovery and recrystallization. The better thermal stability can be attributed to the 

pinning effect of Mo solute atoms on the lattice defects (e.g., dislocations and grain boundaries) during 

annealing. The comparison of thermal relaxation processes of the electrodeposited samples and those 

obtained with sever e plastic deformation (SPD) revealed that the annihilation of the structural faults takes 

place at the same rate as referred to the original defect dens ity of the specific samples, although the defect 

densities were distinctively different for samples obtained with the two procedures. 

The energy stored in the crystallographic defects in the nanocrystalline Ni -Mo alloy films was also 

determined from the DSC experiments. It was revealed that the majority of the heat released during DSC 

(~77%) was related to the grain boundaries. It was also found that the increase of Mo content from 0.4 to 

5.3 at.% yielded an enhancement of the stored energy with a factor of about two. In the SPD -processed 

samples , there was a considerable contribution of vacancies to stored energy while their effect in the 

electrodeposited layers was lower. 

The structural changes as a result to the increase in the Mo mole fraction to 5.3 at.% caused a fourfold 

increase in the yield strength for the latter sample. The Ni film with low (0.4 at.%) Mo concentration 

showed a normal strain hardening while the sampl e having high Mo content exhibited a continuous 

softening after a short hardening period. The strain softening was attributed to detwinning during 

deformation. 

References: 

1. G. Kapoor et al., Mater.  Charact. 145 (2018) 563 –572 .

2. G. Kapoor et al., J. Al loy. Compd. 796 (2019) 307 –313 .

3. J. Gubicza et al., Coatings 10 (2020 ) 205 (1 -14). Studying Water Reactivity at Electrochemical Interfaces by 

# Nanoconfinement Strategies 

Alexis Grimaud 

Chimie du Solide et de l’ Ener gie, Collège de France, UMR8260 

75213 Paris Cedex 05, France 

alexis.grimaud@college -de -france. fr 

Understanding and control ling water reactivity at electrochemical interfaces is pivotal for the 

development of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices such as water electrolyzer s or 

aqueous batteries, among other systems . However, it is a rather challenging task owin g to the ambivalent 

role played by water as both solvent and reactant, which often masks reactive water molecules at 

interfaces in their surroundings . Unfortunately, only few techniques can be used to determine the water 

structure (density, orientation etc .) in t he first molecular layers at electrochemical interfaces. Among 

them, operando spectroscopies were employed. While powerful, they are often limited by their spatial 

resolution and generally require the use of model electrodes. Similarly, computationa l chemistry 

approaches prove very powerful but suffer from the large computing cost of including explicit solvent 

molecules as well as taking into account charge transfer. 

Unlike for electrochemical systems, assessing the ability for water to interact wi th itself or its 

environment has always been pivotal to understand nature phenomena such as the folding of proteins, the 

winding of DNA or the complex organization of lipids into sheets. Strategies were thus developed to 

isolate water molecules in specific environments and study their behavior/reactivity. In this work, we 

demonstrate a strategy consisting in confining water molecules inside an organic liquid matrix in order to 

form aqueous nano -domains. Varying the concentration of water and/or supporting s alt, we further 

demonstrate that the size of the aqueous domains can be tuned and found that the reactivity of these 

domains at electrified interfaces depends on their size and chemical composition. In definitive, we show 

that complementary to the develop of spectroscopic tools capable of probing at the nanoscale active sites 

and their environment, another promising complementary approach relying on the control at nanoscale of 

the reactant itself, e.g. water, can be taken. Doing so, strength of short - and l ong -range interactions can be 

selectively studied, which can then be used to develop more efficient and selective electrocatalysts for 

water, CO 2, O 2 or N 2 reduction. Molecular -level Analysis of Catalytic Activities of Electrode Surface for 

# Electrochemical Deposition Reactions using Theoretical Calculations and Surface 

# Enhanced Raman Microscopy with Plasmonic Sensors 

Takayuki Homma 1,2 , Masahiro Kunimoto 1, Morten Bertz 2, Masahiro Yanagisawa 2 

> 1

Department of Applied Chemistry, Waseda Univ., Shinjuku, Tokyo 169 -8555, Japan  

> 2

Nano Technology Research Center, Waseda Univ., Shinjuku, Tokyo 162 -0041, Japan 

t.homma@waseda.jp 

Electrochemical deposition reactions have been wid ely utilized to prepare functional surfaces with 

controlled micro/nano structures featuring their precise controllability. In order to establish the 

methodology to achieve further higher performance and precise control, molecular -level understanding of 

th e reaction mechanisms is required. For this, we attempted to apply theoretical calculation such as 

density functional theory (DFT) as well as surface enhanced Raman microscopy equipped with plasmonic 

sensors. In this work, we will describe these approac hes with some of resent results. By using DFT 

calculations, we investigated the catalytic activity of the electrode surface s for the reaction of reductants 

for electroless deposition processes, including the behavior of their intermediate species, the int eraction 

with additive species, as well as solvation effects. While the DFT analysis provides quantitative insights 

for the origin of the catalytic activity of the electrode surfaces and the reaction mechanisms, obtaining 

these data from experimental appr oach is challenging. In order to overcome this, we applied surface 

enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) equipped with confocal microscopy and developed plasmonic sensors 

with controlled nanostructures to achieve very high signal enhancement. For the plasmon ic sensors, we 

developed “reflection” type and “transmission” type sensors, which could achieve very high sensitivity 

analysis [1] . Furthermore multi -confocal type SERS microscopy was employed for mapping and imaging 

analys es of the electrode surface as we ll as local pH distributions. By using these techniques, various 

systems have been investigated and modelling of their reaction processes has been carried out. 

This work was financially supported in part by “Development of Systems and Technology for Adva nced 

Measurement and Analysis,” Japan Science and Technology Agency, and Grant -in -Aid for Scientific 

Research, MEXT, Japan. 

[1] M. Yanagisawa, M. Saito, M. Kunimoto, T. Homma, Appl. Phys. Express, 9 , 122002 (2016). Surface Modification of Metal -Insulator -Semiconductor (MIS) 

# Photoanodes with Prussian Blue Analogs 

Ponart Aroonratsameruang 1,3 , Pichaya Pattanasattayavong 1,2, Gabriel Loget 3

> 1

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Molecular Science and Engineering, 

Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong, 21210, Thailand. 

> 2

Research Network of NANOTEC -VISTEC on Nanotechnology for Energy, Vidyasiri medhi Institute of 

Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong, 21210, Thailand .

> 3

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes) -UMR6226, F-35000 Rennes, 

France. 

e-mail : ponart.a_s16@vistec.ac.th 

Recently, r edox -active Prussian blue analog s (PB) ha ve gained attention to be promising water -oxidation 

electro catalysts in tegrated with semiconductor absorbers for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting ,

due to high catalytic activity , low cost and facile fabrication .[1 -3] Especially, Co Fe -Prussian blue analog 

(CoFePB) performs exceptional stability in acid media.[ 4] In p revious work from our group, Si photoanode s

based on the metal -insulator -semiconductor (MIS) junction were modified with Ni Fe -Prussian blue analog 

(NiFe PB ) by electrodissoluting homogeneous Si/SiO x/Ni photoanode . This modification transform ed 

homogene ous to inhomogen eous Si/SiO x/Ni MIS junctions, and led to considerable photovoltage ( Voc )

enhancement .[5] Furthermore , these modified Si photoanodes exhibited a pronounced electroactivity for 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and urea oxidation reaction (UOR) .

In this presentation , with the aim of extending the knowledge on the photoelectrochemical properties of 

these inorganic systems , we introduce the modification of CoFe PB and NiRu -Prussian blue analog 

(NiRu PB ) on homogeneous Si/SiO x/Co and Si/SiO x/Ni MIS electrodes , respectively. CoFePB was 

deposited by chemical ly etching Co layer , mean while NiRuPB was introduced by electro dissoluti on of the 

Ni layer in the presence of the metal cyanide salts . The electrochemical properties of two systems w ere 

studied, which unveiled clearly -defined and distinct electrochemical response s. Interestingly, the Voc of n-

Si/SiO x/Ni/NiRuPB were si gnificantly improved from ~200 to >350 mV with an increasing modification 

time. Conversely, n-Si/SiO x/Co/CoFePB ones were found to be independent on modification (~230 mV). 

We do think that these surprising distinct behavior s are indicative of a different morphology of the MIS 

junction , that was investigated by atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. 

Additionally, t he NiRuPB -modified Si photoanode with the optimal Voc was employed for solar -driven OER 

and UOR , exhibit ing a remarked photocurrent density of 8.3 and 17 .5 mA cm -2 at 1.23 V vs RHE ,

respectively . This finding demonstrates that our surface modification could b ring a new strategy to develop 

low -cost solar hydrogen technology .

[1] Moss, B.; Hegner , F. S.; Corby, S.; Selim, S.; Francàs, L.; López, N.; Giménez, S.; Galán -Mascarós, J. 

R.; Durrant, J. R. ACS Energy Lett. 2019 , 4 (1), 337 –342. 

[2] Tang, P. Y.; Han, L. J.; Hegner, F. S.; Paciok, P.; Biset -Peiró, M.; Du, H. C.; Wei, X. K.; Jin, L.; Xie, 

H. B.; Shi, Q.; et al. Adv. Energy Mater. 2019 , 9 (34), 1 –11. 

[3] Shaddad, M. N.; Arunachalam, P.; Labis, J.; Hezam, M.; Al -Mayouf, A. M. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 

2019 , 244 , 863 –870. 

[4] Han, L.; Tang, P.; Reyes -Carmona, Á.; Rodríguez -García, B.; Torréns, M. ; Morante, J. R.; Arbiol, J.; 

Galan -Mascaros, J. R. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016 , 138 (49), 16037 –16045. 

[5] Loget, G.; Mériadec, C.; Dorcet, V.; Fabre, B.; Vacher, A.; Fryars, S.; Ababou -Girard, S. Nat. Commun. 

2019 , 10 (1), 1 –11. Boron Nitride Nanosheet as Novel Electrocatalysts for Oxygen 

# Reduction Reaction and Hydrogen Evolution Reaction 

# - Combination with Inert Substrates and Metal Nanoparticles -

Kohei Uosaki 

National Institute for Materials Science 

Tsukuba, Japan 

Uosaki.ko hei@nims.go.jp 

Electrochem ical energy conversion play s central roles in the future sustainable society based on 

renewable energy. For example, hydrogen, one of the most important carriers, is produced by electrolysis 

of water and is converted back to elec tricity by hydrogen - oxygen fuel cell. Electrochemical hydrogen 

evolution reaction (HER)/oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen oxidation reaction 

(HOR)/oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are elemental processes in wa ter electrolysis and hydrogen -

oxy gen fuel cell, respectively. The rates of these reactions are strongly dependent on electrode materials, 

i.e., electrocatalyst [1], which are the key to improve the effic ien cies of electrochemical energy 

conversion pr ocesses .

Large overpotential for ORR is one of the most serious problems in the development of fuel cells. 

Although Pt grou p metals are the most efficient electrocatalysts, world -wide efforts have been made to 

find alternative catalysts because of their high cost, less abundance, poor stabilit y, and still sluggish 

kinetics. 

We proposed theoretically [2 -5] that boron nitride , which has similar geometr ic structure to that of 

graphite but is an insulator with a wide band gap (˜5.8eV) and, therefore, is not considered as an 

electrocatalytic materi al , may act as an efficient electrocatalyst for ORR when it has defects or is placed 

on inert metal gold substrate such as Ni. Electrocatalytic activity for ORR of BN placed on gold substrate ,

whi ch is inert for ORR with 2 -electron process and high overpot ential , is experimentally proved , although 

ORR still proceeds by 2 -electron process [5, 6]. Among various types of BN, BN nanosheet (BNNS) 

shows highest activity. By decorating BNNS by gold nanoparticles (AuNPs: 5 ~ 30 nm) , 4-electron ORR 

route to water is open, although only ca. 50% of oxygen is reduced to water [7]. Theoret ical free energy 

analysis shows that 4 -electron reduction becomes possible because small Au clusters drastically stabilize 

adsorbed O by 1.6 eV, making the dissociation of adsorbed OOH, which is an uphill process at BNNS/Au 

electrode, downhill. Considering the importance of BN/Au interface, one would expect further 

improvement of electrocatalytic activity for ORR by using smaller AuNPs for decoration. It is found that 

not only the overpo tential is reduced further by 100 -120 mV and is only 100 mV more than that at a Pt 

electrode but also more than 80% of oxygen is reduced to water at the Au electrode modified by BNNS 

decorated with AuNPs of small size (ca. 5 nm) with narrow size distributi on [8]. 

We also found that BNNS/Au is a good electrocatalyst for HER [9] . DFT calculation suggests that the 

origin of small overpotential is the existence of energetically favored sites at BN edge for adsorbed 

hydrogen, i.e., intermediate state , and furth er improvement of electrocatalytic activity for HER by 

increasing the fraction of atoms at the edges of BNNS on Au substrate , which can be achieved by 

decreasing the size of each BNNS at a given amount of BNNS on the surface. Actually, it is proved that 

th e smaller the BNNS size, the lower the HER overpotential [9]. AuNPs modification is effective for the 

reduction of HER overpotential [10] . Amounts of Au ca n be reduced by using nanoparticles of Au alloys 

by other metals such as Ni, Cu, and Co [10]. 

[1] J. O’M. Bockris and A. K. N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry , Plenum (1970). 

[2] A. Lyalin, K. Nakayama, K. Uosaki, and T. Taketsugu, J. Phys. Chem. C , 117 (2013) 21359. 

[3 ] A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki, an d T. Taketsugu, PCCP , 15 (2013) 2809. 

[4] A. Ly alin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki, and T. Taketsugu, Topics in Catalysis , 57 (2014) 1032 .

[5 ] K. Uosaki et al. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 136 (2014) 6542. 

[6 ] G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi, and K. Uosaki, PCCP , 16 (2014) 13755. 

[7 ] G. Elumalai et al. , Electrochem. Commun. , 66 (2016) 53. 

[8 ] G. Elumalai et al. , J. Electroanal. Chem. , 819 (2018) 107. 

[9] K. Uosaki et al. , Sci. Rep. , 6 (2016) 32217. 

[10] G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi, and K. Uosaki, J. Electroanal. Chem. , 84 8 (2019) 113312 .Novel Non -Liquid Electrolytes for EIS Characterization of S urface 

# Layers on Heritage and Art Objects 

Ivana Šoić, Sanja Martinez 

University of Zagreb, Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology 

Marulićev trg 19, HR -10000 Zagreb 

smartin @fkit.hr 

Electr ochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is being successfully applied by the conservation 

scientists [ 1] to rat e the efficiency of protection offered by thermoplastic resins, clear lacquers or thin 

layers of wax, to the surface of heritage and art objects. Passive layers on stainless steel, rust layers on 

Corten steel and iron as well as patinas on copper and bronze are being probed by EIS . For such objects, 

application of non -liquid electrolyte s was proven to be of special interest as it enables direct 

meas urements on flat or curved surfaces and easy transfer of EIS from the laboratory in to the field. 

Damaging of the metallic surface is the primary concern of any intervention on valuable metallic pieces, 

including the corrosion related measurements. Although EIS is known to be a non -destructive method, it 

st il l needs to meet high standards that tolerate no alteration of surface appearance at the place of EIS cell 

contact [ 2]. Additionally, EIS cell electrolyte should have a low enough conductivity not to inte rfere with 

the surface layer impedance that may approach that of the bare metal. The non -liquid electrolyte should 

also retain constant surface area during the EIS measurement, should follow the object surface pores [3 ]

and should be easily washed of leavi ng no traces . In the present study, we investigate EIS characteristics 

of various natural wax -based paste electrolytes and their performance in measuring impedances of 

protective layers on metallic substrates. Flexible conductive -polymer electrodes and the electrochemical 

setup that has been described in our recent paper [ 4], were used for performing EIS measurements. 

Impedance spectra were measured in a broad frequency range from 10 5 to 10 -2 Hz. Additionally, 

measurements on samples were repeated five time s at a single frequency of 0.1 Hz, and the arithmetic 

mean, that varied between k  cm -2 and 100 G  cm -2, was taken as indicative of the degree of protection 

[5]. Surface layers of high impedance have been successfully probed by all the investigated electrolytes. 

Interference of electrolyte spectra with the sample spectra was seen for s ome electrolyte formulations on 

low impedance samples. The interference was visible at low frequencies and manifested itself as an 

increase in impedance modulus and phase angle, due to the electrolyte. Some electrolytes, although being 

of low conductivity, were unable to follow the pores of the substrate yielding impedance overestimate of 

the few orders of magnitude. The results of the good electrolyte formulations were highly correlated to 

the measurements obtained in the solution, in a press -on cell. The investigation exemplifies the 

importance of the non -liquid electrolyte consistency and electrical characteristic s on the success of the 

surface layer impedance measurements that uses flexible conductive -polymer electrodes and is easily 

applicable in the la boratory and the field. 

[1] B. Ramírez Barat, E. Cano, In Situ Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy Measurements and their 

Interpretation for the Diagnostic of Metallic Cultural Heritage: A Review, ChemElectroChem, 5 (19) 

(2018) 2698 –2716 

[2] A. H. En gland, T. L. Clare, Synthesis and characterization of flexible hydrogel electrodes for 

electrochemical impedance measurements of protective coatings on metal sculptures, Electroanalysis 26 

(5) (2014) 1059 –1067 

[3] S. Corbellini, M. Parvis, S. Grassini, Dev elopment and characterization of flexible electrodes for 

protective painting monitoring, 2011 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology 

Conference (2011) 1 –6

[4] I. Šoić , S . Martinez, M . Dubravic , Gel -Electrolyte EIS Setup Used for Probing of IR Dried/Cured 

Industrial Coatings , Pro . Org . Coat ., 137 (2019) 105331 -1053 41

[5] B. J. Merten, M. T. Walsh, and J. D. Torrey, "Validation of Coated Infrastructure Examination by 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy," in Advances in Electrochemical Techniques for Corrosion 

Monitoring and Laboratory Corrosion Measurements, ed. S. Papavinasam, R. Rebak, L. Yang, and N. 

Berke (West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2019), 137 -159. 

Acknowledgment: This work has been fully supported by Croatian Science 

Foundation under the project IP -2019 -04 -5030. Ion -selective sensor based on modified electrospun nanofibers 

# – towards 2D sensing layers 

Agata Michalska 1, Anna Baranowska -Korczyc 1, Ewa Jaworska 1, Marcin Strawski 1, Bohdan Paterczyk 2,

Krzysztof Maksymiuk 1 

> 1

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, P asteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland  

> 2

Laboratory of Electron and Confocal Microscopy, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, 

Miecznikowa 1, 02 -096 Warsaw, Poland 

agatam@chem.uw.edu.pl 

A challenge in ion -selective sensors is to reduce the ion -selective me mbrane thickness down to a few 

nanometers. Thus obtained ion -selective layers can in principle offer significant advantages both in 

respect to analytical parameters and applicability for current driven sensors. 

We propose application of core -shell modifie d nanofibers mats as ultrathin ion -selective membranes for 

electrochemical and optical sensors 1. Nanofibers mats are used as inert support for liquid ion -selective 

membrane. Thus obtained systems offer significant advantages compared to classical membranes . Due to 

application of nanofibers, keeping the overall macroscopic size of the recognition element as for classical 

plasticized poly(vinyl chloride) membranes, herein proposed systems resulted in ultrathin (< 10 nm) 

receptor layers with total area nearly 1000 times larger. The surface area to volume ratio of the proposed 

system is close to 7.5 .10 7, making it first close to 2D potentiometric membrane. Formation of thin and 

continuous liquid film on nanofibers was confirmed by XPS studies. The nanofibers bas ed ion -selective 

receptors used offer slope and detection limit well comparable with those for classical plasticized 

poly(vinyl chloride) based membranes sensors. Despite nanometric thickness of ion -selective layer, the 

reproducibility of recorded potentia ls, studied for more than 30 days, was high. Using confocal 

microscopy it was shown that electrolyte transport through porous nanofibers mat phase is the rate 

limiting step in conditioning. Estimated electrolyte diffusion coefficients for nanofibers phase are close to 

10 -10 cm 2/s, thus are orders of magnitude lower compared values characterizing ion transport through 

classical poly(vinyl chloride) bases membranes. 

The truly nanostructural character of nanofibers based ion -selective receptors is visible in 

chronoamperometric experiments. It was shown that core -shell nanofibers mat behave as an array of 

nanoelectrodes – individual nanofibers. Thus, novel nanofibers based architecture of ion -selective 

receptor brings also new quality to current based electroch emistry of ion -selective sensors. 

1. Baranowska -Korczyc, A.; Maksymiuk, K.; Michalska, A. Electrospun nanofiber supported optodes: 

scaling down the receptor layer thickness to nanometers – towards 2D optodes, Analyst 2019, 144, 

4667 -4676. Teaching the Electrochemistry: Between Theory and Practice 

Branimir N. Grgur 

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade 

Karnegijeva 4, 11020 Belgrade Serbia 

BNGrgur@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

Electrochemistry is mainly experimental science with well -established theoretical background. 

Today many, usually younger, researchers presents and explained experimental results that are not 

theoretically correct. Some of the examples are mixing concentra tion and activity of the species in the 

solution, misunderstandings of the concept of the electrode potential and usage of different reference 

electrodes, reporting Tafel slope as high as 0.5 to 1 V dec -1, determination of exchange or corrosion current 

den sities by extrapolating slopes of the curve under mixed activation -diffusion to reversible or corrosion 

potentials, etc. To avoid such confusions strong connection of the electrochemical theory and experiments. 

At the Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade electrochemistry has a long 

history. Through generations, program of the Electrochemistry course has been changed, and today is 

teaching with following main subjects: Equilibrium and non -equilibrium in the electrolyte solutions, 

Ele ctrodics, Electrochemical kinetics and applied electrochemistry [1] . The concept of course is based on 

theoretical lectures followed by experimental work for each important subjects. 

In this lecture will be presented the short theoretical background and c orresponding laboratory 

exercises , under modest experimental conditions , of the main subject of the electrochemistry, like activity 

and activity coefficient, Faraday law, determination of the electrode potentials and their application, 

thermodynamics of th e electrochemical cells, kinetics of some electrode reactions under activation, mixed 

and diffusion control, preparative electrochemistry and specific energy consumption, corrosion and 

electrochemical power sources .

[1] Branimir Grgur, Elektrohemija (Elec trochemistry , on Serbian ), Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy ,

Belgrade, 2018. “Electrodeposition + Pulling” Gel Probes for Local Electrodeposition 

# by Scanning Gel Electrochemical Microscopy ( SGECM )

Mariela Brites Hel ú, Liang Liu 

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et 

l’En vironnement (LCPME), F -54000 Nancy, France 

mariela.brites -helu@univ -lorraine.fr 

Electrochemistry is a powerful tool for locally modifying conductive surfaces by electrodeposition of 

etching. This is achieved through scanning electrochemical probe techniq ues, notably scanning 

electrochemical microscopy and scanning droplet cell. A recent development is to attach gel on the 

electrode probe and to do local electrochemistry at the interface between such gel probe and the sample 

(denoted as scanning gel electr ochemical microscopy (SGECM) 1). To achieve high spatial resolution, 

one need to sharpen the gel, which is inherently difficult due to its soft nature. 

Inspired by cheese fondue, we take advantage of the thin meniscus formed while pulling a sharpened 

metal wire (for scanning tunneling microscopy) from a viscous chitosan precursor. At the same time, we 

apply cathodic potential on the metal wire to jellify chitosan based on well -known electrodeposition 

mechanism driven by pH modulation. This elegant “electrodeposition + pulling” approach, as illustrated 

in Figure 1a , combines electrodeposition with fluid mechanics offering sharp gel probes as shown in 

Figure 1b . The shape of the gel probes is rationally tuned by the electrodeposition and pulling parameters 

with good reproducibility , and the process is automated on a home -built setup as simple as pulling glass 

capillaries. 

The sharp gel probes fabricated by “electrodeposition + pulling” are used for local electrodeposition and 

etching on a SGECM setup (Figure 2a ). A model system is demonstrated, where Ag surface is oxidized 

to AgCl or etched by Cl - or NO 3- containing gel probes, respe ctively (Figure 2 b-c). With the sharp gel, 

the lateral spatial resolution of local electrodeposition reaches ca. 1 μm. Moreover, due to the elasticity of 

the gel, one may also press or stretch the gel after contacting the sample, like writing or painting w ith an 

ink brush. That is to say, the resolution of each gel probe can be tuned in a range from a few to tens of 

microns . Since the gel probe immobilizes the electrolyte, it is also used for local electrochemical 

patterning on 3D -printed complex -shaped str uctures ( Figure 2d), where the steps , steep planes and sharp 

edges are challenging for other techniques. Note that both the “electrodeposition + pulling” process and 

the local electrodeposition by SGECM are generic, with the possibility to play with the ch emistry of the 

gel in future .              

> Figure 1.a) Scheme of “electrodeposition + pulling”. b) Photos of gel probes.
> Figure 2. a) Scheme of SGECM for electrochemical patterning. b) Spots of AgCl on Ag plate. c) Etched holes on
> Ag -coated ITO. d) Dash l ine pat terned at curved -side edge of 3D -printed Eiffel tower model.

1 L. Liu, M. Etienne and A. Walcarius, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. , 2018, 90 , 8889 –8895. Diverting Electrons for Protecting Fragile Catalysts for Energy 

# Conversion 

Nicolas Plumeré 

Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ruhr University 

Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany. 

Email:  nicolas.plumere@rub.de 

Widespread implementation of energy conversion devices cannot proceed without solutions that mitigate 

the cost of rare metal catalysts and the intrinsic O 2-instability of bio -inspired repl acements. Recently, 

thick films of redox polymers were shown to prevent O 2 catalyst damage (1, 2), but also resulted in 

unnecessary catalyst load and mass transport limitations (3). Here, we apply novel methods for formation 

(4) and characterization (5) of homogeneous thin films that provide O 2-immunity while achieving highly 

efficient catalyst utilization (6 ). Resistance to O 2 inactivation can theoretically be obtained for non -

limiting periods of time even when using highly fragile catalysts such as hydrog enases. Experimentally, 

the lifetimes of hydrogenases under constant aerobic turnover can reach up to one week at the condition 

that protection also targets reactive oxygen species (7). Different protection mechanisms operate 

depending on matrix dimensions and intrinsic catalyst properties, and can be integrated together 

synergistically to achieve large and stable H 2 oxidation currents in the presence of O 2, potentially 

enabling a plethora of practical applications for bio -inspired catalysts in harsh oxidat ive conditions. 

References 

(1) Plumeré, Rüdiger, Alsheikh Oughli, Williams, Vivekananthan, Pöller, Schuhmann, Lubitz, Nature 

Chemistry , 2014 , 6, 822 –827. 

(2) Alsheikh Oughli, Conzuelo, Winkler, Happe, Lubitz, Schuhmann, Rüdiger, Plumeré, Angew. Chem. 

Int . Ed ., 2015 , 54, 12329 –12333. 

(3) Fourmond, Stapf, Li, Buesen, Birrell, Rüdiger, Lubitz, Schuhmann, Plumeré, Léger, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc ., 2015 , 137 , 5494 -5505. 

(4) Li, Buesen, Williams, Henig, Stapf, Mukherjee, Freier, Lubitz, Winkler, Happe, Plumeré, Chemic al 

Science , 2018 , 9, 7596 -7605. 

(5) Buesen, Li, Plumeré Chemical Science , 2020 , 11 , 937 – 946 

(6) Li, Buesen, Démentin, Léger, Fourmond, Plumeré J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 , 141 , 16734 -16742 

(7) Li, Münchberg, Alsheikh Oughli, Buesen, Lubitz, Freier, Plumeré Na ture Communications , 2020 , 11, 

920 

Funding 

Financial support by the Cluster of Excellence RESOLV (EXC 1069), by the ERC starting grant 715900 

and by the ANR -DFG project SHIELDS (PL 746/2 -1) is gratefully acknowledged. In sights into the ORR and OER in Ca 2+ containing DMSO: 

# A DEMS, RRDE , AFM and XPS study 

P. P. Bawol, I. Park, A. Koellisch, P. H. Reinsberg and H. Baltruschat 

Rheinische Friedrich -Wilhelms Universität Bonn 

Abteilung Elektrochemie, Roemerstrasse 164, 53117 Bonn, Germany 

* Baltruschat@uni -bonn.de 

Calcium, being the fifth most abundant metal on earth, combines high abundance with competitive 

volumetric capacity. As newer studies show promising results concerni ng electrochemical Ca 

plating/stripping (1 -5) , a combination with an oxygen cathode promise s impressive theoretical energy 

densities. In l iterature some pioneering work on the Ca –O2 system exists (6 -8) but deeper fundamental 

research is necessary to get insights into the reaction mechanism of oxygen reduction r eaction (ORR) and 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 

In this study we are investigating the ORR and OER in Ca 2+ containing system with various electrochemical 

and analytical methods. The product distribution of ORR products is investigated with differential 

electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) and rotating ring disc electrode (RRDE) using Pt and Au as 

electrocatalysts. The main products are Ca -peroxide and Ca - superoxide. Both products are soluble in 

DMSO. A complete blocking of the electrode surface , as it is known from Li -O2 literature, was not 

observed. Still the formation of s uperoxide in presence of the deposited film on the electrode is observed. 

Characterization of the ORR products was done via ex situ XPS measurements. There we could confirm 

calciu m peroxide and calcium superoxide as ORR products. Another oxygen containing product seems to 

be calcium oxide, which is located close to the electrode (shown by Ar + etching and XPS). In the 

electrochemical experiments the electrocatalysts can fully be reg enerated by applying higher electrode 

potentials as XPS studies showed . In addition the deposition of products on the electrode was investigated 

with EC -AFM. 

On basis of the new findings the reaction mechanism of the ORR in Ca 2+ containing DMSO will be 

dis cussed. 

1. A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Barde and M. R. Palacin, Nat.  Mater. , 15 , 169 (2016). 

2. D. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Jin, C. Kuss and P. G. Bruce, Nat.  Mater. , 17 , 16 (2017). 

3. Z. Li, O. Fuhr, M. Fichtner and Z. Zhao -Karger, Energy Environ. Sci. (2019). 

4. A. Shyamsunder, L. E. Blanc, A. Assoud and L. F. Nazar, ACS Energy Letters , 4, 2271 (2019). 

5. K. Ta, R. Zhang, M. Shin, R. T. Rooney, E. K. Neumann and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces , 11 , 21 536 (2019). 

6. P. Reinsberg, C. J. Bondue and H. Baltruschat, J. Phys. Chem. C , 120 , 22179 (2016). 

7. P. Reinsberg, A. A. Abd -El -Latif and H. Baltruschat, Electrochim. Acta , 273 , 424 (2018). 

8. T. Shiga, Y. Kato and Y. Hase, J. Mater. Chem. A , 5, 13212 (20 17). Does th e most active nanocatalyst evolve the largest nanobubble? 

Jean -François Lemineur, Paolo Ciocci, Jean -Marc Noël, Catherine Combellas, Frédéric Kanoufi 

ITODYS, Université de Paris, CNRS UMR 7086 

15 rue J.A. de Baïf, 75013 Paris, France 

frederic.kanou fi@univ -paris -diderot.fr 

The (photo)electrochemical generation/conversion of gases is drawing considerable interests as a

sustainable solution for energy storage or conversion. Among them, the evolution of dihydrogen gas, 

HER, during water splitting is on e of the most actively studied processes. While numerous efforts are 

produced towards the design of sustainable and efficient catalysts of HER, particularly employing 

nanoparticles, NPs, there is a need for the operando observation and quantification of th e gas 

nanobubbles (NBs) formation involved in this reaction 

Single -Entity Electro chemistry offers different toolboxes to reach the ultimate goal: a benchmarking 

study of the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of NP materials. However it is often limited to the study of 

single nanoobjects without considering the whole process such as the near neighbors effect and is 

technically difficult to implement. To have a wide -field overview of the NBs formation process, we 

coupled electrochemistry and interferometr ic optical microscopy. Indeed optical microscop ies can image 

various nano -objects operando , and under certain conditions, both individual catalytic NPs and gas NBs 

can be visualized. It allowed counting at high throughput the production of NBs and therefor e addressing 

the nucleation rate of NBs on various supports and during HER [1 -3]. However, very few examples have 

demonstrated a quantitative and dynamic sizing of these NBs [2]. We propose such quantification process 

for scattering -based, label free micr oscopy. It allows mapping at high throughput the local gas evolution 

rate (NB growth or dissolution) of an electrode. 

The Figure below shows example images obtained by interferometric microscopy, correlated with SEM, 

of the growth of individual NB at ind ividual 40nm Pt NPs. Besides analyzing the growth rate of 

individual NBs, the toolbox offered by super -localization and quantitative optical microscopy allows 

asking relevant questions for gas evolution catalysts: do the imaged Pt NPs where H 2 is evolving have the 

highest electrocatalytic activity? In other words, how to correlate a gas evolution rate map to a map of NP 

electrocatalytic activity? 

Figure: Optical monitoring of HER generation of NBs at Pt 40nm NPs. Nine single Pt NPs are imaged 

both by SE M and operando by interferometric optical microscopy before (OPT) or during (CAT) HER. 

The appearance of 4 bright features indicates that only 4 of the 9 NPs evolve single NBs. 

[1] Zhou, X. et al, JACS 2017, 139, 14277 

[2] Zhang, B. et al, PNAS 2018, 115, 5878 

[3] Wang, W. et al. PNAS 2019, 116, 12678 

Acknowledgments. This work was partly funded , through the SENTINEL ITN project, by the European 

Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska -Curie grant 

agreement n° 812398. Mining Nanopore Big Data to Reveal the Single Molecule 

# Heterogeneity 

Yi -Lun Ying , Xin -Yi Li, Hong -Yan Niu, Meng -Ying Li, Shao -Chuang Liu, Yi -Tao Long 

State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineeri ng, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, P. R. China 

E-mail: yilunying@nju.edu.cn 

The recent development of nanopore techniques pushes the envelope in precision and complexity to 

maximize the information content. Once a molecule is inside the nanopore, t he signal due to the 

interaction of the molecule with the nanopore sensing interface is observed. Hence, the signals from 

individual analytes lead to an abundance of stochastic fluctuations in the shape, structure, conformation, 

position, and orientation o f the molecule within the sensing interface. 1 These features permit single 

molecules to participate in unique noncovalent bonding interactions with the sensing interface of a 

nanopore, which in turn regulates the dynamic redistribution of ions along the se nsing interface. 

Therefore, each ionic current response contains small ionic fluctuations, which offer continuous snapshots 

of the confined single molecule. After statistical time -domain analyses of duration, current amplitude, and 

occurrence of characteri stic ionic current events as well as the frequency domain decomposition, 

differences in the features of single molecules, such as chemical properties, conformational changes, and 

charge distributions, could be detected. 2 The very beginning frequency analys is let us mine more 

information from the data, which could help to unravel different hierarchical pathways and enables to 

discovery the subpopulations and hidden kinetic during the dynamic motion of single molecules. 3-4

Together with the advanced data mini ng methods, we potentially show that nanopores are promising for 

identifying protein/peptide post -translational modification, and even decoding the sequential information. 

Figure 1. Nanopore -based single -biomolecule interface for single -molecule measure ments. (a) A

biological membrane protein molecule. (b) Information obtained from a single blockade event. 

References 

1. R. -J. Yu, Y. -L. Ying, R. Gao, Y. -T. Long, Angew. Chem. Inter. Ed. , 58, 3706 -3714 ( 2019 ). 

2. Y. -L. Ying, Y. -T. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 141., 15720 -15729 ( 2019 ). 

3. S. Liu, M. Li, M. Li, Y. Wang, Y. -L. Ying, Y. -J. Wan, Y. -T. Long, Faraday Discuss. , 210, 97 -99 

(2018 ). 

4. M. -Y. Li, Y. -L. Ying , X. -X. Fu, J. Yu, S. -C. Liu, Y. -Q. Wang, Y. -J. Wan, Y. -T. Long,  ChemRxiv. 

Preprint.  https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.7251683.v1  (2018 ). Compositional Control of Electrodeposited Ag -Fe Films 

## Yunkai Sun, Giovanni Zangari, 

## Department of Materials Science and Engineering and CESE, University of Virginia 

## 395 McCormick Rd, Charlottesville, VA, 22904, USA 

## gz3e@virginia.edu 

## Composition control in electrodeposit ed alloys is necessary to predict microstructure evolution ,

## phase transformation s and ultimately functionality . Some alloys however are intrinsicall y difficult 

## to be electrodeposited, mainly due to the large difference in equilibrium potentials and/or wide ly 

## differences in reduc tion kinetics of the alloy components ; the Ag -Fe system is one of those. In this 

## work, a novel alkaline citrate -dimethylhydantoin (DMH) Fe(II) -Ag(I) bath has been used to 

## synthesize Ag -Fe alloy films with several predetermined composition. 

## Here we demonstrate the procedure for designing a novel metastable alkaline DMH -citrate Ag -Fe 

## electrolyte , we compare the prediction of redox potentials from thermodynamic data with the 

## observed CV profiles, and we rationalize the composition control by exploiting limiting current 

## concepts. Stabilization of the deposition bath was achieved by utiliz ing the mixed potential theory 

## through addition of 1% of Fe 3+ to positively shift the redox potential of the redox couple Fe 3+ /Fe 2+ .

## Alloy composition s have be en predicted by imposing limiting current ratios . Little deviations from 

## th ese prediction s were found, probably caused b y the solution meta stability .

## Figure 1 : (a) Electrochemical equilibria c alculation s of the redox potentials related to the DMH -

## citrate complexed Ag -Fe electrolyte , based on the Nernst equation and thermodynamic data 

## available, with the redox pair that influences the solution stability marked with arrows in the plot ;

## (b) the stabilized bath exhibit s a well -behaved linear trend between solution concentration ratio 

## and film composition ratio. Design of Effective Pulse Deposition Process for Functional Cr 

# Coatings from Cr 3+ Electrolyte 

K. Ahmadi 1, T. Hall 2, E. J. Taylor 2, F. C. Robles 1, and S. R. Brankovic 1

> 1

Cullen College of Engineering, University of Houston, 

4726 Calhoun Rd. Houston Texas, 7 7204 

> 2

Faraday Technology, Inc. 

315 Huls Drive, Englewood, OH 45315 

SRBrankovic@uh.edu 

Our work investigates the pulse current deposition process for electrodeposition of functional Cr films 

from Cr3+ electrolytes. Results suggest that growth stress duri ng direct current (DC) Cr deposition is 

compressive with steady state values in the range below -100 MPa. The negative stress is associated with 

blistering in Cr films and accumulation of different defects on the surface which indicate significant 

amount o f dissolved hydrogen either as an interstitial impurity or as a part of chemically bonded H as Cr -

hydride. Our TEM data, stress, impedance and optical results undoubtedly suggest that weakened 

structure of the Cr films by oxidation process has a true origi n in Cr -hydride formation and subsequent 

oxidation of its degradation by -products (H and Cr). Therefore, the electrodeposition process that 

produces less Cr -hydride should be more desirable when the crack and defect free Cr films are the goal. 

The pulse c urrent function design is driven by the goal to achieve Cr -films with minimum amount of Cr -

hydride phase. The off time of the pulse current cycle is designed to allow break up and decomposition of 

hydride phase which has been formed in preceding pulse curr ent step of the pulse cycle. The details of the 

pulse current cycle designed are developed upon modeling our stress relaxation transients recorded during 

the pulse current stage. Our in situ stress data show that using such approach, it is possible to comp letely 

change the sing of the growth stress in Cr films from compressive to tensile. More importantly, we will 

show the first indications that pulse electrodeposited Cr films have similar micro -cracked structure as Cr 

films electrodeposited from Cr6+ solut ions. 

This work is supported by Gift Grant from NASF -AESF Research Foundation. These instructions are an 

example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper column and margin 

measurements are indicated. Effect of Small Amounts of Added W ater in Electrochemically -

# Mediated ATRP in Nonaqueous Solvents 

Abdirisak A. Isse ,1 Paola Pavan, 1 Francesco De Bon, 1,2 Francesca Lorandi, 3 Armando Gennaro 1

> 1

Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova , Via Marzol o 1, 35131 Padova, Italy 

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Rua Silvio Lima, Polo II, 3030 -790 

Coimbra, Portugal 

> 3

Department of Chemistry, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 

abdirisak.ahmedisse@unipd.it 

Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) is one of the most important and widely used methods of 

reversible deactivator radical polymerization [1] . It is mainly catalyzed by Cu complexes wi th N -based 

ligands . In electrochemically -mediated ATRP ( eATRP), polymerization is triggered and sustained by fast 

electrochemical (re)generation of Cu I from Cu II (Fig. 1a). eATRP allows modulation of reaction rate 

through easy control of the distribution o f Cu I and Cu II species in solution and the possibility of switching 

the process from active to dormant state and vice versa, by varying the electrochemical parameters 

applied to the system [2]. 

ATRP in water is quite challenging due to high activation rate constants ( kact ) and equilibrium 

constants ( KATRP ). It has been reported, however, that the presence of small amounts of H 2O ( 10 vol%) 

in organic solvents has beneficial effects on ATRP, enhancing the overall rate of polymerization without 

compromising c ontrol over molecular weight distribution [3 ,4 ]. The origin of this effect is not well 

understood although some hypothesis has been formulated mainly on intuitive basis. 

Fig. 1 . (a) General mechanism of eATRP and (b) effect of 10 vol% H 2O on kact and KATR P in pure solvents 

and solvent/monomer mixtures (50/50, v/v). 

We investigated the role of small amounts of water (up to 10 vol %) in eATRP of methyl acrylate 

using [Cu II TPMA] 2+ as catalyst. Experimentally, we observed an increase of the over all polymerizat ion 

rate , Rp, when the reactions were performed in mixtures of MeCN, DMSO, DMF and [BMIm][OTf] with 

H2O. The effect of H 2O on the redox potential of the catalyst, as well as on kact and KATRP for the 

activation of methyl 2 -bromopropionate by Cu I was examin ed in pure solvents and in 50 vol% 

solvent/methyl acrylate mixtures . While Eo of the Cu II /Cu I couple wa s not much affected by H 2O

addition , both kact and KATRP were enhanced by the presence of H 2O in both pure solvents and 

solvent/monomer mixtures (Fig. 1b ). Since Rp can be related to KATRP , the observed enhancement of 

KATRP may provide a plausible rationalization of the accelerating effect of H 2O in organic solvents. 

References 

[1] K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules 2012 , 45 , 4015 –4039 .

[2] P. Chmielarz, M . Fantin, S. Park, A. A. Isse, A. Gennaro, A. J. D. Magenau, A. Sobkowiak and K. 

Matyjaszewski, Prog. Polym. Sci. 2017 , 69 , 47 –78 .

[3] U. Chatterjee, S. K. Jewrajka and B. M. Mandal, Polymer 2005 , 46 , 1575 –1582. 

[4] J. P. Mendes, P. V. Mendonça, P. Maximi ano, C. M. R. Abreu, T. Guliashvili, A. C. Serra and J. F. J. 

Coelho, RSC Advances 2016 , 6, 9598 –9603. Understanding the Effects of Self -Assembled Monolayers and 

# Nanoporous Structure on Direct Electron Transfer of Fructose 

# Dehydrogenase 

Xiaomei Yan a, Su Ma b, Jing Tang a, David Ackland Tanner a, Jens Ulstrup a,c , Xinxin Xiao a,* , Jingdong 

Zhang a

> a

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark 

> b

Biocatalysis and Biosensing Laboratory, Department of Food Science and Technology, BOKU -

University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Muthgasse 18, 1190 Vienna, Austria 

> c

Kazan National Research Technological University, K. Marx Str., 68, 420015 Kazan, Republic of 

Tatarstan, Russian Federation 

E-ma il: xiyan@kemi.dtu.dk ; xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk .

Direct electron transfer (DET) between an electrode and redox/catalytic center(s) in oxido reductase s is a

core “elementary” process in enzym e bioelectrochemistry. [1,2 ] Favourable orientation and high enzyme 

loading on electrodes are paramount in DET -type bioelectrocatalysis to ascertain high catalytic activity 

and ET rate. [3] Fructose dehydroge nase (FDH) from Gluconbacter japonicas is a membrane -bound 

oxidoreductase with thre e subunits , subunit s I (67 kDa), II (51 kDa) and III (20 kDa). [4] Subunit I hold s a 

flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor as the active center of two -electron fructose oxidation to 5-

keto -D-fructose. Subunit II carries three heme c moieties , serving as ET relays between electron acceptors 

and FAD. Subunit III h as no redox center and possibly contributes to structural integrity of enzyme. 

We present here systematic inve stigation of the effects of both self -assembled molecular monolayers 

(SAMs ) and nanoporous (Au -)electrode structure on DET -type bioelectrocatalysis of FDH absorbed on 

SAM -modified Au(111) electrodes. Two different SAMs with varying functional terminal -grou ps and 

alkyl chain lengths were studied . FDH on a 2-mercaptoethanol (BME) SAM showed the best DET 

performance with a maximum current density ( jmax,det : 54.88 ± 3.03 

A cm -2) and DET -capable fraction 

derived from jmax,det over mediated jmax,m et (χdet : 13.33 %) due to the mo st favourable FDH orientation 

on the electrode surface . FDH on Au(111) functionalized with 3 -mercaptopropanoic acid (MPA) SAM 

exhibited the best mediated ET with  Δjmax of 640.76 ± 7.65 μA cm -2 using ferrocenemethanol as the 

medi ator . This can be explained by the negative ly charge d SAM surface efficiently adsorb ing FDH . Non -

linear fitting to the electrocatalytic profiles was performed. The FDH catalytic properties strongly depend 

on the alkyl chain length, showing significant decr ease with increasing SAM carbon chain length. 

Nanoporous gold supported FDH wa s also prepar ed. Porous gold structures not only improve d the 

catalytic performance by increas ed enzyme loading and χdet , but also increase d notably the operational 

stability. 

Acknowledgments 

The PhD project is kindly supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC ). 

References 

[1] Evans , R. M. ; Siritanaratkul, B.; Megarity, C. F. ; Pandey, K ., Esterle, T . F. ;Badiani S.; Armstrong , F.

A. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019 , 48 , 2039 -2052 .

[2] Xiao, X.; Xia, H. Q.; Wu, R.; Bai, L.; Yan, L.; Magner, E.; Cosnier, S.; Lojou, E.; Zhu, Z.; Liu, A. 

Chem. Rev. 2019 , 11 9, 9509 -9558. 

[3] Adachi, T.; Kaida, Y.; Kitazumi, Y.; Shirai, O.; Kano, K. Bi oelectrochemistry 2019 , 129 , 1 -9. 

[4] Kizling, M.; Bilewicz, R. ChemElectroChem 2018 , 5, 166 -174. Transparent cathode material for photobioel ectrochemical cell 

# development 

M. Riedel, S. Höfs, F. Lisdat 

Biosyste ms Technology, Institute of Life Sciences and Biomedical Technologies, 

Technical University Wildau ,

15745 Wildau, Germany 

flisdat@th -wil dau. de 

The combination of light -sensitive entities with electrodes has gained increasing interest in the last 

decade. Light can be used to switch electrochemical reactions which gives access to multiplexing by 

spatially resolved illumi nation of sensing surfa ces , but it can also be used to modulate the elec trochemical 

reactions [1] . This is interesting with respect to different aspects . One direction of research is de voted to 

systems which can improve the potential behavior for electrochemical signal chains. T his is rele vant 

particularly in bioenergetic applications. 

Thus , we have already demonstrated the deve lopment of a photobioanode which allows the collection of 

electrons from the sugar oxidation at extremely low potentials und er illumination . Here a combin ation of 

tw o sem iconducting materials (TiO 2 and PbS) with a biocatalytic reaction (FAD -GDH or PSII ) has been 

exploited [2,3] .

The present study is devoted to the investigation of a material which can be prepared as a thin layer by a 

simple spin coating pro cedure on FTO slides (fluor doped tin o xide) as cathode material . The material 

used here is BiFeO 3. It is characterized by a rather high positive onset potential for cathodic photocurrents 

(~0.6V vs A gAgCl) and a high open circuit potential. This is based on a proper position of valenc e and 

conduction band of the material. When hydrogen peroxides is added to the solution the cathodic signals 

ca n be si gnificantly enhanced - although there is no electrochemical H2O2 reduction in the dark at the 

electrode . The generated photocurrent provid es sufficient stability with millimolar hydrogen peroxide 

conc entrations and a defined dependence on the light intensity and H2O2 concentration. 

This provides the basis for the construction of a photobio cathode with a rather high potential by coupling 

an enzymatic reaction to th e photoactive electrode. 

These investigations ma y illustrate the potential of coupling suitable semiconductor structures with 

biocatalytic conversions on electrode surfaces for application in bioenergeti cs but also in bio sensing. 

Refere nces 

[1] Z. Yue, F. Lisdat, W. Par ak, S. Hickey, L. Tu, N. Sabir, D. Dorfs, N. Bigall, 

ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 5 (8) (2013) 2800 -2814 

[2] M. Riedel, W. Parak, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, F. Lisdat, 

ACS Catalysis , (2018 ), Vol. 8, 5212 -5220 

[3] M. Riedel, J. Wersig, A. Ruff, W. Schuhma nn, A. Zouni, F. Lisdat, 

Angewandte Chemie , (2019 ), International Edition, Vol. 58 (3), p. 801 -805 Spectroscopic study of the Na + insertion mechanism and SEI formation 

# in bio -waste derived hard carbon anode s for sodium -ion batteries 

Raul Garcia -Diez 1, Hyein Moon 2,3 , Ivana Hasa 2,3 , Kaiqi Nie 1, Johannes Frisch 1, 4, Roberto Felix 1, Claudia 

Hartmann 1, Rega n G. Wilks 1, 4, Stefano Passerini 2,3 , Marcus Bär 1, 4,5,6 

> 1

Interface Design, H elmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB) , Berlin, 

Germany  

> 2

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Ulm, Germany  

> 3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsru he, Germany  

> 4

Energy Materials In -Situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL), HZB, Berlin , Germany  

> 5

Helmhol tz Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (HI ERN), Berlin , Germany  

> 6

Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nü rnberg ,

Erlangen , Germany 

raul.garcia_diez@helmholtz -berlin.de 

In the continuously growing field of post lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) , sodium -ion batteries (SIBs) have 

emerged as a pr ominent cand idate and valid alternative solution to the Li -ion technology , especially in 

systems dedicated to large -scale stationary energy storage. The abundance and availability of sodium 

reserves , combined with the low use of critical raw materials ha ve sparked the investigation of high 

performance and efficient electrode materials for SIBs. 

Currently, hard carbon (HC) represents the anode of choice for SIBs. Bio -waste derived HC , in particular, 

is very attractive in terms of sustainability , cost and electrochemica l properties [1 ,2 ]. However, the 

processes governing the electrochemical performance of HC anodes are not completely understood , most 

likely stemming from the lack of a widely agreed -upon model of the HC structure , which hinder s a

comprehensive description of the processes occurring upon sodiation and its effects on the electronic and 

structural configuration of the materials. For example, the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase 

(SEI) layer and the sodium ion s’ uptake and release are two crucial p rocesses affecting the battery 

lifetime and performance . Several mechanisms have been proposed so far, however, a universally 

accepted mechanism governing these reactions is still largely discussed [3 ,4 ].

This study aims at using powerful chemically sensi tive synchrotron -based fluorescence and photoelectron 

spectroscopies to elucidate the composition and structure of complex materials. In order to gain insights 

into the SEI formation and the Na uptake in the underlying HC anode , a combined approach of X-ra y

spectroscopies with a tunable probing depth is used allow ing differentiation of the spectral contributions 

of the bulk electrode from those related to the SEI layer . HC -based electrode samples have been 

investigated at different stages of (dis)charge usi ng X-ray absorption (XAS), emission (XES) , and 

photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in the soft and tender X-ray regimes , revealing the formation and 

evolution of the SEI during the initial sodiation process and subsequent cycles . The chemical species 

observed in the SEI mainly originate from the decomposition of the salt and the carbonate -based 

electrolyte, as also shown with post mortem Fourier -transform infrared spectroscopy (FT -IR )

measurements. Additionally, res onant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) measu rements at the C K -edge 

provide supplementary information about the Na -insertion mechanism into the anode structure due to its 

excellen t atom -specificity and mapping of the C band structure at different (dis)charge stages . The study 

has been complemented w ith an in -depth investigation of the structural changes of the HC electrode upon 

(de)sodiation by in situ Raman spectroscopy. This comprehensive spectroscopic study provides new 

insights into the complex mechanism s governing the sodium insertion and the SE I formation in hard 

carbon anodes. 

[1] X. Dou et al. , Mater. Today 2019 , 23 , 87 

[2] D.A. Stevens & J.R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2000 , 147 (4), 1271 

[3] C. Bommier et al. , Nano Lett. 2015 , 15 , 5888 

[4] D.A. Stevens & J.R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001 , 148 , A803 Micro -sc ale capacitive -faradaic fu el cells for ions separat ion from 

# water           

> Your i Gendel *,Gidon Ami kam , Paz Nativ, Naama M anor -Korin
> Technion -Israel Institute of Technology. Facu lty of Civil and Environmental Engineering.
> Environmental Electroc hemistry Laboratory. Yitzhak Rabin Bld gr625, Technion City , Haifa 32000,
> Israel. E-Mail: ygendel@ tx. technion.ac.il

## A novel method for separation of ions from water and wastewater using micro -sc ale 

## (10 μm – 5 mm) fue l cells has bee n recently proposed 1. The fuel cell s comprise 

## activated carbon particles loaded with bifunctional catalyst for hydrogen oxidation and 

## oxygen reduction reactions. Wit hin the proposed process of ions removal , the particles 

## act as micro -scale capacitive -faradaic adsorbing fuel cells (MS -CF -AF C) which require 

## oxygen and hydrogen gas es for adsorption of ions during the water treatment step and 

## desorption of ions in brine production. The process was proved for removal of 

## perchlorate ion s from NaClO 4 sol utions in deioniz ed water and groundwate r us ing batch 

## and packed -bed reactors for two types of MS -CF -AFC s prepared from Lewatit AF5 

## microporous carbon and a powdered activated charcoal loaded with Pt (5wt%) catalyst. 

## Within the O 2-induced adsorption of ClO 4- ions , the reduction of oxygen on Pt ( fara daic 

## electrode of the MS -CF -AFC ) results in depletion of electrons from the carbonaceous 

## part (i.e. the capacitive electrode) of the micro -scale fuel cell , which leads to adsorption 

## of anions in the electric al double layer. The h ydrogen oxidation tha t occ urs during the 

## regeneration of the ClO 4-- loaded MS -CF -AFCs results in accumulation of electrons in 

## the capacitive electrode and in rep ulsio n of perchlorate ions into the regenerant solution. 

## This way the c he mical energy of H 2 and O 2 is conve rted b y the MS -CF -AFCs into the 

## electric al energy w hich is utilized for separation of ions . The technique was proved for 

## separat ion of cations as well in batch mode experim ents of Cu 2+ ions separation from 

## CuCl 2 solution s. In this case the MS -CF -AFCs were powered by H 2 gas during the Cu 2+ 

## adsorption step and by O 2 gas in brine production .    

> [1] Gendel, Y., Amikam, G., Nativ, P., 2 020. Separation of An ions and Cations from Water and
> Wastewater Using Micro -Scale Capacitive -Faradaic or Pseudocapacitive -Faradaic Adsorbing Fu el
> Cells .US Provisional Pate nt Application 62/983,689 .

# Accelerated discovery of next -generation battery materials and interfaces 

Tejs Vegge 

Technical Univ ersity of Denmark, DTU Energy , 2800 Kgs.  Lyngby , Denmark 

teve@dtu.dk 

Secondary batteries play a crucial role in the transition to a clean energy infrastructure, but until now, the 

development of novel, low -cost, high capacity and/or high voltage electrode materials, has been too slow. 

Understanding and controlling the complex and dy namic processes taking place in the electrode s, electrolyte s

and in particular at the battery interfaces /interphases hold s the key to develop more durable ultra -high 

performance batteries. Atomic -scale simulations have reached predictive accuracy in many c ritical areas of 

materials design and characterization, e.g. , the identification of rate - and potential limiting reaction steps. Here, 

we provide recent examples of how density functional theory (DFT) simulations supported by AI, machine 

learning and cluster expansion techniques [1] can been used to identify the limiting thermodynamic, ionic and 

electronic charge transfer mechanisms in next -generation electrode materials and interfaces [2 -3], and how 

interfacial dopants and additiv es can be used to improve the ir performance [ 4]. Finally, we will discuss the 

“Battery Interface Genome – Materials Acceleration Platform” (BIG -MAP) project in the large -scale European 

research initiative Battery 2030+, focusing on simultaneous utilization of data from multiple domains . BIG -

MAP aims to accelerat e the materials and interface discovery process for batteries , and here, we present our 

perspective on AI -orchestrated discovery of batteries using autonomous workflows [ 5] and generative deep 

learning models to control and ultimately (inverse) design better battery interfaces [6]. These models are trained 

on all sources of available data, i.e., large -scale multi -fi delity data sets, multi -scale computer simulations and 

databases, operando X-ray and neutron characterization from large -scale research facilities, high -throughput 

synthesis and laboratory testing .

[1] J. H. Chang, D. Kleiven, M. Melander, J. Akola, J. M. Garcia -Lastra, T. Vegge, CLEASE: A versatile and 

user -friendly implementation of Cluster Expansion method, J. Phys: CM 31, 325901 (2019) .

[2] C. Baur et al, Improved Cycling Stability in High -Capacity Li -rich Vanadium containing Disordered Rock 

Salt Oxyfluoride Cathodes, J Mater. Chem. A 7, 21244 -21253 (2019); J. Cha ble, C. Baur, J. H. Chang, S. 

Wenzel, J. M. García -Lastra, T. Vegge, From Trigonal to Cubic LiVO 2: A High -Energy Phase Transition 

Towards Disordered Rock Salt Materials, J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 3, 2229 -2237 (2020) 

[3] H. Park, N. Kumar, M. Melander, T. Vegge , J. M. Garcia Lastra, D. J. Siegel, Adiabatic and Nonadiabatic 

Charge Transport in Li -S Batteries, Chem. Mater. 30, 915 –928 (2018) ; N. R. Mathiesen, S. Yang, J. M. García -

Lastra, T. Vegge, D. J. Siegel, Charge Transport in Alkali -Metal Superoxides: A Syst ematic First -Principles 

Study, Chem. Mater. 31, 9156 -9167 (2019). 

[4] Y. S. Mekonnen, R. Christensen, J. M. Garcia -Lastra, T. Vegge, Thermodynamic and Kinetic Limitations 

for Peroxide and Superoxide Formation in Na−O 2 Batteries, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 4413 -4419 (2018) ; S. 

Lysgaard, M. K. Christensen, H. A. Hansen, J. M. Garcia -Lastra, P. Norby, T. Vegge, Combined DFT and 

DEMS investigation of the effect of dopants in secondary zinc‐air batteries , ChemSusChem 11, 1933 –1941 

(2018). 

[5] F. T. Bölle, N. R. Mathiesen, A. J. Nielsen, T. Vegge, J. M. García Lastra, I. E. Castelli, Autonomous 

Discovery of Materials for Intercalation Electrodes, Batteries and Supercaps, 10.1002/batt.201900152 (2020) ;

Z. Li, B. P. Vinayan, P. J ankowski, C. Njel, A. Roy, T. Vegge, J. Maibach, J. M. García Lastra, M. Fichtner, Z. 

Zhao -Karger , Multi -electron reactions enabled by anion -participated redox chemistry for high -energy 

multivalent rechargeable batteries , Angew.  Chemie , doi: 10.1002/anie.2 02002560 ( 2020) 

[6] A. Bhowmik, I. E. Castelli, J. M. Garcia -Lastra, P. B. Jørgensen, O. Winther, T. Vegge, A Perspective on 

Inverse Design of Battery Interphases using Multi -scale Modelling, Experiments and Generative Deep 

Learning , Energy Storage Materials 21, 446 -456 (2019). H2V3O8 as model system for ion insertion 

Jürgen Schoiber , Daniela Reiff, Michael Karl, Simone Pokrant 

University of Salzburg, Dept. of Chemistry and Physics of Materials 

Jakob -Haringer -Straße 2a 

juergen.schoiber@sbg.ac.at 

Since the elucidation of the Li thium -Ion shuttle mechanism many developments and investigations in the 

battery field were enabled. 1-4 The mechanism consists of the idea of shuttling a specific ion ( e.g. lithium 

ion) between two host materials with a sufficient electrochemical potential difference in order to 

electrochemically store energy. 5 This basic principle of energy storage was transferred to other cations, 

e.g. Na +, K +, Mg 2+ , Ca 2+ , Zn 2+ or Al 3+ aiming for novel/ other metal -ion battery (MiB) systems. 3, 4, 6 , 7

While very promising c andidates for each MiB system are under investigation, only few materials have 

been discovered which can intercalate more than one specific ion with substantial capacities. This is due 

to the different chemical properties and the electrochemical behavior o f the investigated ions. However, 

this is a very general statemen t and only little attention has been paid to the reason s why materials work 

exclusively for one specific insertion cation. 

A promising material to address the question , which paramete rs dominate the electroche mical storage 

behavior is H 2V3O8 (HVO), since Li +, Na +, K+, Mg 2+ or Zn 2+ can be inserted. 8-11 While each work proved 

exclusively that HVO is as promising host material for the investigated insertion ion, n either conclusions 

nor co mparisons were made with respect to the different ion storage behavior s, such as which 

crystallographic position will be occupied or why and how the crystallographic structure changes during 

the insertion process. Answering these questions , however, has th e potential to provide insight into the 

storage behavior . From there conclusions can be drawn why this material is so versatile in the up tak e of 

various insertion ions and wh ich parameters lead to this behavior. 

In this contribution, we present new insi ght in the H 2V3O8 structure and why this material is a promising 

candidate to investigate the needs which must be addressed as a function of the insertion ion . In 

particular, we will discuss the influence of structural modifications and, for the first time for this material, 

of the operating temperature on the storage behavior of various cations (i.e. Li +, Zn 2+ ). The obtained 

electrochemical and structural results will be discussed and compared with respect to the different 

insertion ions .

1. Li, C.; Zh ang, X.; He, W . J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 2018, 29, 14353 .

2. Lu, J.; Nishimura, S. -I.; Yamada, A . Chem . Mater . 2017, 29, 3597 .

3. Mao, M.; Gao, T.; Hou, S.; Wang, C . Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 8804 .

4. Yabuuchi, N.; Kubota, K.; Dahbi, M.; Komaba, S . Chem . Rev . 2014, 114, 11636 .

5. Winter, M.; Barnett, B.; Xu, K . Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 11433. 

6. Gummow, R. J.; Vamvounis, G.; Kannan, M. B.; He, Y . Adv . Mater . 2018, 30, e1801702. 

7. Rastgoo‐Deylami, M.; Heo, J. W.; Hong, S. T . ChemistrySelect 2019, 4, 11711 .

8. Zhu, K.; Yan, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Su, A.; Bie, X.; Zhang, D.; Du, F.; Wang, C.; Che n, G.; 

Wei, Y . Chempluschem 2014, 79, 447 .

9. Wang, D.; Wei, Q.; Sheng, J.; Hu, P.; Ya n, M.; Sun, R.; Xu, X.; An, Q.; Mai, L . Phys Chem 

Chem Phys 2016, 18, 12074 .

10 . He, P.; Quan, Y.; Xu, X.; Yan, M.; Yang, W.; An, Q.; He, L.; Mai, L . Small 2017, 13, 1702551. 

11 . Tang, H.; Xu, N.; Pei, C.; Xiong, F.; Tan, S.; Luo, W.; An, Q.; Mai, L . ACS A ppl Mater 

Interfaces 2017, 9, 28667 .Nanoscale visualization of cell surface under Epithelial -Mesenchymal 

# Transition by Scanning Ion Conductance Microscopy 

Noriko Taira a, Hiroki Ida a, b,c ,d, , Yuji Nashimoto b,e , Kos uke Ino e, Akichika Kumatani d,a Hitoshi Shiku e

> a

Graduate School of Environmenta l Studies, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

> b

Frontier Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

> c

PRESTO, JST, Saitama, Japan 

> d

WPI AIMR, Tohoku University, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan  

> e

Graduate School of Engine ering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

Addres s C10 -604, Aramaki -aza -aoba 6 -6-11, Aoba -ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan 

e-mail address noriko.taira.q7@dc.tohoku.ac.jp 

Background of this research 

Epithelial -mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process that epithelia l cells lose epithelial features 

and acquire mesenchymal characteristics . This phenomenon progresses for a few days with changing 

adhesion structures at nanoscale until losing cell -cell adhesion . As a result , EMT brings about cancer 

invasion and transition with morphological variations , and it is also known that there are only two states 

(Epithelial state to Mesenchymal state) under EMT. Recently, some researchers reported that there was 

some intermediate states with differences of gene expression between t wo states 1. However , continuous 

dynamics of cell surface is not comprehensively understood at nanoscale by conventional analytical 

techniques . T herefore , tracking nanoscale morphological changes are necessary throughout a few days to 

investigate the interm ediate states . In this study, we visualized topograph ical change s on cell membranes 

at nanoscale by scanning probe technique. 

Scanning Ion Conductance Microscope 

Scanning ion conductance microscopy (SICM) is one 

of scanning probe microscopies for visuali zing nanoscale 

topography of cell surface without invasion 2. Figure 1 shows a 

schematic illustration of SICM. A glass nanopipette (tip 

diameter: 100 nm) filled with medium and Ag/AgCl wire is used 

as a probe . When a voltage is applied between the nanopipet te 

and the medium , ionic current due to ionic flow through the 

probe is measured. Th e ionic current is used as a feedback signal 

to control the distance between the probe and a sample surface 2.

Nanoscale images can therefore visualize without physical 

cont act and fluorescence labelling .

Experiments, results and future works 

A549 cells (Human alveolar adenocarcinoma cell line) w ere used as a model of epithelial cells. 

Before EMT process , multiple microvilli were observed on A549 cell surface by SICM . Afte r treatment 

with 10 ng/mL TGF -βin the culture medium , microvilli decreased within 6 days. From immunostaining 

results , A549 lost E-cadherin within 5 days . The process of losing cell -cell adhesion can be observed by 

SICM. These results indicated that the EM T was progressed by treatment of TGF -β, and the membrane 

remodeling was visualized at EMT transition states by SICM . Currently , we have develop ed a combined 

SICM system with an incubator that can achieve long -term measurement to understand intermediate 

sta te s in EMT . We expect that this technique will be useful for understanding the mechanism of EMT. 

References 

1. M. A. Nieto et al. , Cell , 166 , 21 -45, 2016 

2. PK Hansma et al., Science , 243 , 641 -643, 1989 

Figure 1: Schematic illustration 

of SICM Photosystem I Monolayers with Controlled Orientation for the 

# Fabrication of Energy Conversion Devices 

Felipe Conzuelo ,1 Panpan Wang ,1 Fangyuan Zhao, 1 Anna Frank ,2 Anna Lielpetere ,1 Sónia Zacarias, 3

Marc M. Nowaczyk, 2 Inês. A. C. Pereira ,3 Adrian Ruff, 1 Ma tthias Rögner, 2

Wolfgang Schuhmann 1 

> 1

Analytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, D -44780 Bochum, Germany.  

> 2

Plant Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology a nd Biotechnology, R uhr University Bochum, D -44780 Bochum, 

Germany.  

> 3

Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras 

2780 -157, Portugal. 

felipe.conzuelo@rub.de 

Photosystem I (PSI) is one of the key protein complexes driving oxygenic photosynthesis, a highly 

developed process by Nature through billions of years of evolution for the efficient conversion of sunlight 

into chemical energy. Resembling a photodiode, PSI is able to perform charge -separation upon absorption 

of visible light, with a considerably high quantum efficiency for the photon -to -electron conversion pro -

cess. After subsequent internal electron transfer, a final state is obtained at PSI, consisting of two redox 

centers of opposite charge wit h a potential differenc e of about 1 .0 V. In addition, PSI is a robust and 

widely abundant biomolecule . A s a result, PSI is considered an attractive building block for the fabrica -

tion of semi -artificial energy conversion devices. However, a consequence of the large voltage diffe rence 

between the terminal redox sites at PSI is that it translates directly into a substantial driving force for 

recombination and short -circuiting processes, as a result canceling out at least part of the generated 

photocurrents in conventionally impleme nted devices [1,2]. Therefore, one of the major challenges in the 

development of PS I-based photobioelectrodes constitutes the fabrication of well -defined structures able to 

provide a unidirectional electron flow. 

Taking advantage of the amphiphilic nature of PSI , the molecule can be used for the preparation of dense 

Langmuir monolayers . After spreading isolated PSI protein complexes onto a water -air interface, the 

hydrophilic ends adopt a specific orientation either being solubilized in water or facing air, while the 

hydrophobic regions stack together after compression of the movable barriers at a Langmuir trough . Since 

the terminal redox centers at PSI are located at opposite sides of the biomolecule within the hydrophilic 

ends , a den sely packed and stable monolayer presenting a preferential orientation is obtained. This mole -

cular structure can be transferred to the electrode surface for the fabrication of PSI -based biophotoelec -

trodes presenting an anisotropic electron flow [3]. On t his basis, novel archit ectures for the fabrication of 

PSI -based photobioelectrodes are presented, enabling the development of more efficient solar -to -chemical 

energy conversion devices as a result of the de creased charge recombination and short circuiting pro -

cesses .

Reference s: 

[1] F. Zhao, N. Plumeré, M.M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, F. Conzuelo, Small , 2017 , 13, 

1604093. 

[2] N. Plumeré, M. M. Nowaczyk, Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. , 2016 , 158, 111 -136. 

[3] F. Zhao, P. Wang, A. Ru ff , V. Hartmann, S. Zacarias, I .A. C. Perei ra, M .M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, F. 

Conzuelo, W. Schuhmann, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2019 , 12, 3133 -3143 .   

> Acknowledgements :
> This work is supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of the Cluster of Excellence
> RESO LV (EXC 2033 –project number 390677874) as well as the Deutsch -Israelische Projektkooperation (DIP)
> “Nanoengineered Optobioelectronics with Biomaterials and Bioinspired Assemblies”.

# How Theory Can Help Us with Engineering Graphene -Based 

# Materials for Electrochemical Application s?

Igor A. Pa šti 1*, Ana S. Dobrota 1, Aleksandar Jovanović 1, Sanjin J. G utić 2, Slavko V. Mentus 1,3 

> 1

University of Belgrade - Faculty of Physical Chemistry , Stud entski trg 12 -16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 33 -35, 71000 

Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 

> 3

Serbian Academ y o f Sciences and Arts, K nez Mihajlova 35, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia 

*e-mail address:  igor @ffh.bg.ac.rs 

Since its discov ery, graphene attracts immense attention of the scientific community and it is frequently 

claimed to be the perfect material for numerous applications. It is no t s urp rising that graphene quickly 

found its place in electroc hemical laboratories . This is natural because electrochemis ts have been using 

carbon materials for decades, and graphene ind eed possesses some properties which are attractive to 

electroc hemists. Hi gh conduc tivity and large specific s urface are some of them. However, perfect 

(pristine ) graphene is chemically in ert and reacts poorly with basicall y any atom in the Periodic Table of 

Elements [1]. Luckily, it turns out that for electrochemis ts prist ine graphene i s not so interesting. Much 

more can be obtained by the introd uction of defects and functional groups o n graphene bas al plane and 

edg e sites , pawing a way to new battery materials, ma terials for electrochemical capacitors or 

electrocat alysts. Howev er, to fully expl oi t the potential of graphene -based materials an atomic level of

understanding is a must , and theoretical methods can h elp us along this path. We shall present some of the 

recent results of our group on the modelling of graph ene -based mate rials for energy conversion 

appl ications. First, we shall address some general features of functionalized graphene surfaces with 

heteroatoms and oxygen functional gro ups [ 2] and d emonstrate such functionalization can be employed in 

me tal -ion bat teries [3]. Then we shall address the tailoring of graphene -oxide for the applications in 

electrochemical capacitors [4]. Finally, we shall describe how different levels of theory can be used to 

guide the development of novel graphene -base d plat inum -free el ectrocatal ysts for hydrogen evolution [ 5]. 

We intend to present a realistic situa tion in the field, demonstrating possibilities , but also limitation s of 

the use of graphene -based materials in electrochemistr y. 

Acknowledgemen t: This work was suppo rted by the Se rb ian Ministr y of Education, Science and 

Technologi cal Developments. We a cknowledge the financial support provid ed b y the Scien ce Fund of the 

Rep ublic of Serbia through the project R atioCAT (ID 606224 ). This work was spo nsored in part by the 

NATO Science for Peace and Security Programme under grant G5729. 

References :

[1] I. A. Pašti, A . Jovanović, A . S. Dobrota, S . V. Mentus, B . Johansson, N . V. Skorodumova , Appl . Surf .

Sci . 436 (2018 ) 433 .

[2] A. S. Dobrota, I . A. Pašti , S . V. Mentus, N . V. Skor odumova , Phy s. Chem . Chem . Phys . 19 (2017 )

8530 .

[3] N. P. Diklić, A . S. Dobrota, I . A. Pašti, S . V. Mentus, B . Johansson, N . V. Skorodumova , Electrochim .

Acta 297 (2019 ) 523 .

[4] D. Karačić, S . Kora ć, A . S. Dobrota, I . A. Pašti, N. V. Skorodumova, S . J. Gutić , Electr oc him . Acta 

297 (2019 ) 112 .

[5] S. J. Gutić, A . S. Dobrota, M . Leetmaa, N . V. Skorodumova , S . V. Mentus, I . A. Pašti , Phys . Chem .

Chem . Phys . 19 (20 17 ) 13281 .Spectroelectrochemical study of water oxidation on nickel -based 

# electrocatalysts in alkaline solution 

Reshma R Rao 1, Sacha Corby 1, Alberto Bucci 2, Miguel García -Tecedor 3, Sixto Gimenez 3, Julio Lloret -

Fillol 2, James R. Durrant 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Im perial College London, White City Campus, London W12 0BZ, UK 

> 2

Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 

Avinguda Països Catalans, 16, 43007 Tarragona, Spain 

> 3

Institute of Advanced Materials (INAM ), Universitat Jaume I, 12006 Castelló, Spain 

reshma.rao@imperial.ac.uk 

Efficient (photo)electrochemical oxidation of water is pivotal to the production of energy carriers such as 

hydrogen, ammonia, synthetic carbon -neutral fuels by CO 2 reduction and the production of metals from 

metal oxides 1. Nickel -based oxides have been widely employed as water oxidation catalysts in alkaline 

electrolyte owing to their high intrinsic activity and stability 2,3. In order to understand and further improve 

the activity of catalytically active centers, it is imperative to understand the reaction mechanism and 

atomic scale processes occurring during water oxidation. Specifically, nickel -base d oxides form an 

oxyhydroxide structure under oxidizing conditions relevant to water oxidation 4, which have layered 

structures, with varying degrees of long -range order. Water and electrolyte ions can intercalate within the 

resultant three -dimensional structure to access redox states within the bulk, beyond the surface and sub -

surface layers 5. Thus, both, the intrinsic activi ty for water oxidation and the density of accessible active 

sites need to be increased in order to design the most active catalysts. 

In this study, we use operando spectroelectrochemical methods 6 to assay the concentration of oxidized 

species for a series of metal -doped NiO films (M 0.1 Ni 0.9 O, M = Fe 3+ , Co 2+ , Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ ) synthesized 

from the respective chloride salts. We first demonstrate how the dopant atoms can be used to rationally 

tune the binding energetics of the Ni site for water oxidation. The density of oxidized species 

accumulated under reaction conditions at potentials between 1.5 V RHE and 1.8 V RHE decreases in the order 

Mn 0.1 Ni 0.9 O > Co 0.1 Ni 0.9 O > Fe 0.1 Ni 0.9 O > NiO > Zn 0.1 Ni 0.9 O, which correlates with the onset of the 

Ni 2+ /Ni 3+ redox peak position, i.e. the accumulation of redox species is greatest for chemistries that are 

easiest to oxidize. On the other hand, we find that the kinetics of water oxidation, defined as the turn over 

frequency per active oxidized species, increases from Mn 0.1 Ni 0.9 O to Co 0.1 Ni 0.9 O and Fe 0.1 Ni 0.9 O but 

decrease for NiO and Zn 0.1 Ni 0.9 O, demonstrating a volcano relation where the ideal Ni site binds oxygen 

neither too weakly nor too strongly. In the next part of this study, we use different precursor salts 

(chloride, nitrate, sulfate, triflate) to synthesi ze the metal oxides, which results in a change in the local 

structural environment around the active site. Differences in local structure are manifested as changes in 

the rates of generation of oxidized species as a function of potential, suggesting that t he accessibility of 

active sites is influenced strongly by the local structure around the active site. Thus, based on the use of 

combined optical and electrochemical techniques, we highlight possible strategies to enhance the activity 

of Ni -based oxides by tuning both the intrinsic activity per active site by modifying the electronic 

structure as well as the accessibility and utilization of these sites. 

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

progr amme under grant agreement 732840 -A-LEAF. 

References 

1 C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. L. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao ‐Horn, Adv. 

Mater. , 2019, 31 , 1806296. 

2 D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 1987, 134 , 377. 

3 C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2013, 135 , 16977 –

16987. 

4 M. E. G. Lyons and M. P. Brandon, Int J Electrochem S ci , 2008, 3, 39. 

5 B. M. Hunter, W. Hieringer, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2016, 9,

1734 –1743. 

6 L. Francàs, S. Corby, S. Selim, D. Lee, C. A. Mesa, R. Godin, E. Pastor, I. E. L. Stephens, K. -S. Choi 

and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Commun. , , DOI:10.1038/s41467 -019 -13061 -0. Detection of cancer -related glycosylation changes in prostate specific 

# antigen using electrochemical label -free aptasensor s

Ana Díaz -Fernánde z1,2 ,* , Rebeca Miranda -Castro 1,2 ,Pedro Estrela 3, N oemí de -los -Santos -Álvarez 1,2 , María 

Jesús Lobo -Castañón 1,2 

1 De partamento de Química -Física y Analítica. Universidad de Oviedo, Julián Clavería, 8, 33006 ,

Oviedo , Spai n.

2 Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias, Avenida de Roma, 33011, Oviedo ,

Spai n.

3 Centre for Biosensors, Bioel ectronics and Biodevices (C3Bio) and Department of Electronic & 

Electrical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7 AY, United Kingdom 

*anadfdez@gmail.com 

Cancer is associated with aberrant glycosylation and each type of malignant issue is characterize d by a 

distin ct change in the glycan structure. Therefore, analysis of tumor -linked glycan alterations is proposed 

as a valuable tool for diagnost ic and prognostic purposes. The glycosylation profile of tumors is currently 

characterized by long and complic ated protocol s, based on final MS detection or with the use of lectins. 

However, these procedures cannot be applied for routine analysis in early detection of cancer. In 

consequence, to translate these biomarkers from discovery to clinical diagnostics ther e is a clear need for 

extremely selective methods, able to differentiate the glycan profile characteristic of disease conditions. 

Aptamers can be tailored to specifically detect aberrant glycosylation at each protein or even at each 

glycosylation site, and the use of a ptamers as synthetic receptors appears to be a promising approach to 

replace the current methods [1]. In the case of the prostate can cer, it has been recently described that there 

is a variation in the fucose and the sialic acid in the glycan structure of the Prostate Specific Antigen 

(PSA), the only biomarker approved for clinical use in this type of cancer. This aberrant glycosylation is a 

better marker of the aggressiveness of prostate cancer. [2] 

In this work we present a strategy to direct the selectio n of aptamers toward the glycosylation site of the 

protein PSA, both glycan and surrounding peptide moieties. The SELEX procedure is based on counter -

selection steps against the recombinant PSA (unglycosylated) and two different strategies usi ng lectins. 

The aptamers in the last cycle are cloned, sequenced and classified into families using bioinformatics 

tools. The most abundant aptame rs are characterized by electrochemical binding assays. The best aptamer 

is able to recognize specifically the glycans of t he protein PSA due to the interaction with aminoacids of 

the protein but does not recognize other glycoproteins. 

We employed the as -selected aptamer or an aptamer previously described for PSA, which only recognizes 

the peptidic part [3], for the developme nt of an impedimetric label -free aptamer -based sensor, onto home -

made gold electrodes modified with gold nanoparticles as support of the sensing phase. With both 

aptamers we obtained two different calibration curves for the analysis of the tot al PSA and gl ycosylated 

PSA. The sensor responds to different levels of total PSA in human serum reaching levels well -below the 

4 ng/mL cut -off. These instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should 

look like. Proper column and margin me asurements a re indicated. 

References 

[1] A. Díaz -Fernández, R. Miranda -Castro, N. de -los -Santos -Álvarez, M. J. Lobo -Castañón, Anal. 

Bioanal. Chem. 2018 410(8), 2059 -2065. 

[2] S. Gilgunn, P. J. Conroy, R. Saldova, P. M. Rudd, R. J. O’Kennedy, Nat. Rev. Ur ol. 2013, 10, 99. 

[3] N. Savory, K. Abe, K. Sode, K. Ikebukuro, Biosens. and Bioelctrons. 2010, 26 -4, 1386 -1391. 

Acknowledgments 

Ana Díaz -Fernández thanks Junta Provincial de Asturias de la Asociación Esp añola Contra el Cáncer 

(AECC) for th e award of a predoctoral grant, and the Banco Santander grant in the framework of the 

economic mobility grants of excellence for teachers and researchers of the University of Oviedo. The 

work has been financially support ed by Spanish Government (project RT I-2018 -095756 -B-I00) and the 

Principado de Asturias government (Project IDI/2018/000217, co -financed by FEDER funds). Material Screening Revisited: Challenging the Paradigm of a 

# Thermoneutral Electrocatalyst as Apex of a Volcano Plot 

Kai S. Exner 

University of Duisburg -Essen, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Theoretical Chemistry 

Universitätsstra ße 5, 45141 Essen, Ger many 

kai.exner@alumni.uni -ulm.de 

On the way toward a sustainable energy scenario, environmentally friendly and efficient electrocatalysts 

need to be developed. Material screening is a promising strategy to recognize potential electrode and 

electrolyte compositions. Most researchers apply the volcano approach, as introduced by Nørskov, 

Rossmeisl, and co -workers , which connects Sabatier’s principle and the Brønsted -Evans -Polanyi relation 

to the analysis of simple binding energies , while neglecting the applied overpotential and kinetics in the 

analysis [1] . This methodology purports that an optimum electrocatalyst stabilizes all reaction 

intermediates thermoneutral at zero overpotential (ΔGRI = 0 eV at η = 0 V ). 

Recently , the author derived material -screening approaches that pay proper attention to the applied 

overpotential and kinetics: while the concept of kinetic scaling relations enable s resolving the rate -

determining reaction step wi thin a homologous series of materials at overpotentials corresponding to 

typical reaction conditions [2,3 ], overpotential -dependent volcano curve s enclose the applied 

overpotential in to the determination of the volcano’s apex [4-6]. These advanced methods have been 

connected to Nørskov ’s theory by establishing a unifying material -screening approach [7,8 ], which has 

shown to excel the conventional volcano scheme with respect to thorough sorting of electrode materials 

into active and inactive catalysts [9].

Most notably, the inclusion of the applied overpotential and kinetics into the volcano concept indicates 

that optimum electro catalysis requires thermoneutral bonding of the crucial reaction intermediate at target 

overpotential ( ΔGRI = 0 eV at η > 0 V ), tha t is , endergonic bonding at η = 0 V . This result was 

corroborated by microkinetic modeling [10 ], giving rise to reappraise the traditional understanding of the 

volcano approach for electrocatalytic processes : electrocatalysts that bind the decisive reactio n

intermediate endergonically at η = 0 V are not necessarily catalytically inactive, whereas the opposite 

case hold s true, that is, exergonic bonding of reaction intermediates at η = 0 V result s in a poor catalytic 

activity. Consequently , electrocatalysts with ΔGRI > 0 eV at η = 0 V should not be discarded when 

conducting volcano analyses (cf. Figure 1 ).

Figure 1: The apex of the volcano curve for a simple two -electron process shifts toward weak bonding 

when the applied overpotential and kinetics are inc luded in the analysis. 

[1] I. C. Man , J. Rossmeisl et al. , ChemCatChem 2011 , 3, 1159 –1165. 

[2] K.S. Exner, H. Over, ACS Catal. 2019 , 9, 6755 -6765 .

[3] K.S. Exner, Electrochim. Acta 2020 , 334 , 135555 .

[4] K.S. Exner, ACS Catal. 2019 , 9, 5320 -5329. 

[5] K.S. Exner, J. Phys. Chem. C 2019 , 123 , 16921 -16928 .

[6] K.S. Exner, ChemElectroChem 20 20 , 7, 1448 -1455 .

[7] K.S. Exner, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2019 , 2, 7991 -8001 .

[8] K.S. Exner, ChemCatChem 20 20 , 12 , DOI: 10.1002/cctc.201902363 .

[9] K.S. Exner, J. Phys. Chem. C 2020 , 12 4, 822 -828 .

[10 ] K.S. Exner, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2020 , 59 , DOI: 10.1002/anie.202003688 .The Influence of Protic and Aprotic Ionic Liquids on the 

# Electrochemical Behavior of Organic Radical Polymers 

Patrick Gerlach , Rene Burges, Ulrich S. Schubert, Alexandra Lex -Balducci, Andrea Balducci 

Friedrich Schiller University Jena 

Institute for Technical Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry 

Center for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena) 

Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena 

patrick.gerlach@uni.jena.de 

Organic radical polymers (ORPs) have received a growing interest over the last decades , as they combine 

fast kinetics with typical characteristics of organic redox active materials like flexibility, sustainability and 

versatility [1] . Today one of the most investigated ORPs is poly(2,2,6,6 -tetramethylpiperidinyl -N-

oxymethacrylate) (PTMA) , which was first introduced by Nakahara et al. in 2002 [2] . PTMA bears a 

2,2,6,6 -tetramethylpiperidinyloxy -group (TEMP O) in the repeating unit and th us provides a theoretic 

capacity of 111 mAh g -1 and a high rate capability as well as high cycling stability [3] . Most of the work 

dedicated to PTMA -based electrodes has been done utilizing typical lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) 

electrolytes e.g. 1M lithium hexafluorophosphate in ethylen e carbonate / dimethyl carbonate (1M LiPF 6 in 

EC/DMC) . Little effort ha s been directed toward s the use of ionic liquids (ILs) , although these electrolytes 

- which could be used neat, in mixtures with organic solvent s or in gel polymer electrolytes - could be 

interesting for the development of advanced polymer -based energy storage devices. [4],[5] . In one of our 

previous studie s, we were able to show that the use of neat 1-butyl -1-methylpyrrolidinium 

bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Pyr 14 TFSI) has a positive effect on the cycling stability as well as the 

self -discharge behavior of PTMA in a metal -free setup [6] .

In this work, we perform ed a systematic 

analysis of the electrochemical behavior of 

PTMA -based electrodes in c ombination with 

two aprotic and two protic ILs. Namely 

Pyr 14 TFSI, 1-butyl -1-methylpyrrolidinium 

bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide ( Pyr 14 FSI ) (aprotic), 

1-butyl -pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethane -

sulfonyl)imide (Pyr H4TFSI ) (protic) and 1-

butyl -pyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide 

(Pyr H4FSI ) (protic) . By doing so, we were able 

to show that the nature of the cation and the 

anion of the ILs has a strong impact on the 

performance of PTMA . Furthermore, we 

demonstrate that when neat Pyr 14 FS I is used 

as electrolyte , PTMA -based electrodes 

display outstanding stability for 2.5 months 

during float experiment s carried out at a

potential of 1.1 V vs. Ag (corresponding to 4.1 

V vs. Li/Li +) (Figure 1) .

References 

[1] S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Haupler, T. Janoschka, U.S. Schubert, Chemical reviews 116 (2016) 

9438 –9484. 

[2] K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, M. Satoh, Y. Morioka, J. Iriyama, M. Suguro, E. Hasegawa, Chemical Physics 

Letters 359 (2002) 35 1–354. 

[3] K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh, E.J. Cairns, Journal of Power Sources 165 

(2007) 870 –873. 

[4] Y. -Y. Cheng, C. -C. Li, J. -T. Lee, Electrochimica Acta 66 (2012) 332 –339. 

[5] J. -K. Kim, A. Matic, J. -H. Ahn, P. Jacobsson, RSC Adv. 2 (2012) 9795. 

[6] P. Gerlach, R. Burges, A. Lex -Balducci, U.S. Schubert, A. Balducci, Journal of Power Sources 405 

(2018) 142 –149.       

> Figure 1: Capacity retention of PTMA based electrodes in Pyr 14 TFSI
> Pyr 14FSI after 70 days of floating at 1.1V vs. Ag (corresponding to 4.1 V
> vs. Li/Li +)

# Nanostructured Pt xM/C (M = Cu, Co, Ni, Ir, Y) Alloy Electrocatalysts 

# Synthesized via a Novel Top -Down Route Towards the Enhancement of the 

# ORR Activity 

Theophilus Kobina Sarpey a, Johannes Fichtner a, Sebastian Watzele a, Batyr Garleyyev a, Jan M. Macak b,

Aliaksandr S. Bandarenka a,* 

a. Physics of Energy Conversion and Storage , Technical University of Munich, James -Franck -Straße 1, 85748 

Garching, Germany 

b. Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology, Purkynova 123, 612 00, Brno 

Czech Republic 

Addressing the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) which occurs on the cathodic end of the 

fuel cell is of peculiar interest for future sustainable energy conversion and storage in the automotive industry to 

be specific. Continuous search for an optimum catalyst to address this challenge has led to the discovery of Pt -

based nanostructured alloys as prominent candidates. As such, alloying nanostructured Pt with 3d transition metals 

and/or rare -earth elements is an auspicious approach to tune the electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR. Usually, 

bulk Pt -alloys are used in the synthesis of nanostructured Pt -alloys. With the exception of Pt xIr nanoparticle s (NP s)

tha t were synthesized from their bulk metal alloy s, all the other NPs investigated in this study were synthesized 

using a different strategy or method. For the fi rst time herein, this study presents the direct dissolu tion and/or 

deposition of 3d transition metal /rare -earth element precursor salts into the 1.0 M KOH electrolyte to pro duce NPs 

from bulk Pt. By so doing, nanostructured Pt xM/C (M = Cu, Co, Ni, Y) alloys were synthesized using a novel top -

down nanostructuring technique which is the electrochemical erosion of bulk metal and /or metal alloys. The 

nanoparticles were characteri zed using transmission electron microscopy, energy -dispersive x -ray spectroscopy, 

x-ray diffraction and spectroscopy. The electrocatalytic oxygen reduction activity for the various nanocatalysts 

were also measured. 

All the synthesized samples apart from th e leached Pt xY/C -15V exhibited specific activities (SAs) higher than the 

reference Pt/C TKK catalyst. In terms of mass activities (MAs) , aside Pt xNi/C -10V and Pt xY/C -15V that displayed 

lower MA compared to the reference Pt/C TKK catalyst, all the other inv estigated nanostructured electrocatalysts 

outperformed the reference Pt/C TKK catalyst. In particular, Pt xCu/C -15V showed a 4 fold enhancement (0.64 

A/mg Pt at 0.9V vs RHE) in terms of mass activity and ~ 5.5 fold higher specific activity (2.27 mA/cm 2 at 0.9V vs 

RHE) when compared to the reference Pt/C TKK catalyst. 

Reference 

[1 ] Shao, M.; Peles, A.; Shoemaker, K., “Electrocatalysis on Platinum Nanoparticles: Particle size Effect on 

Oxygen Reduction Reaction Activity”, Nano. Lett ., 11, 2011 , p. 3714 – 3719 

[2] Chattot, R.; Asset, T.; Bordet, P.; Drnec, J.; Dubau, L.; Maillard, F., “Beyond Strain and Ligand Effects: 

Microstrain -Induced Enhancement of the Oxygen Reduction Reaction Kinetics on various PtNi/C Nanostructures”, 

ACS Catalysis , 7, 2017 , p. 398 – 408. 

[3 ] Yanson, A. I.; Antonova, P.V.; Yanson, Y. I.; Koper, M.T.M., “ Controlling the size of platinum 

nanoparticles prepared by cathodic corrosion”, Electrochim. Acta , Vol. 110, 1. Nov. 2013 , p. 796 – 800. In -situ ele ctrolytes fo r high performance electrical do uble layer 

# capacitors 

Lars H. Heß a, Lars Borchardt b and Andrea Balducci a   

> Friedrich -Schiller -University Jena, Institute for Technical Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry, Center for
> Energy and Envir onmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena), Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany
> Ruhr -University Bochum, Faculty for Chemistry and Biochemist ry, Universitätsstraße 150 ,44780 Bochum , Germany
> andrea. balducci @uni -jena.de

Electri cal dou ble layer capaci tors (EDLC s) di splay high power , high cycle life and high safety and, due 

these favo rable features, the y are nowadays consider ed one of the most interesting energy storage sys te ms 

> [1-2]

. The prope rties displayed by EDLCs are ori ginated by the storage mech ani sm ta kin g place in th ese 

devices, which is relying on the formation of an electrical double la yer at the interface between electrodes 

and electrolyte . The state -of -the -art EDLC s consist of comp osite electrode s containing highly porous 

activ ated carbon s (AC) as act ive materials and electrolyte s base d on a s alt dissolved , i n most of the cases ,

in an organic sol vent .

Nowadays, the AC utilize d in EDLCs are typically realized through the  chemical activation of 

carbonaceous precursors . Th is process is allowing the reali zation of desi gned AC, able to display high 

capacitance. H owever, the overall process  is resource consuming and it require s several washing steps to 

separate carbon and activation reagents [3]. Fo r th is reason, its optimization would significantly improve 

the overall susta inability of EDLCs. 

In th is work we present a holistic concept , indicated as “in -situ electrolyte ” in which by -product salts, 

which are formed during the synthesis of AC are not considered as waste products but rather upcycled to 

an orga nic electrolyte for EDLC application [3-4]. Thereby, the waste production during the EDLC 

preparation is minimized greatly (with an increase of t he mass productivity of 15 -fold ) and only the use of 

a solvent is required for the realization of EDLCs . We sho wed that EDLCs rea lized utilizi ng the “in -situ 

electrolyte ” approach display h igh capacitan ce at high current dens ity (30 F g-1 at 10 A g -1) and high 

cyclin g stability .

Figure 1. Schematic represen tation o f the in -si tu electrolyte appro ach 

Refere nces 

[1] Z. Lin, E Goikolea, A. Balducci , K. Naoi, P.L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin, P. Simon, Materials 

Today , 21 (4), 419 -436 (2018) 

[2] C. Schütter, S.Pohlmann, A. Balducci , , Advanced Energy Materials DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201900334 ,

1900334 (2019 )

[3] Leiste nschneider, D., Schneidermann, C., Hippauf, F., Grätz, S., & Borchardt, L.  Advanced 

Sustainable Systems ,(2018), 2(12), 1800087. 

[4] D.  Leistenschneider , L.H. Heß,  A. Balducci , L . Borchardt , accepted for publication in  Sustainable 

Energy & Fuel Quick Determination of Electroactive Surface Area o f Some Oxide 

# Electrocatalysts 

S. Watzele 1, P. Hauenstein 1, Y. Liang 1, S. Xue 1, J. Fichtner 1, B. Garlyyev 1, D. Scieszka 1,

F. Claudel 2, F. Maillard 2, A.S. Bandarenka 1

1- Department of Physics, Technical U niversity of Munich 

James -Franck -Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany 

bandarenka@ph.tum.de 

2- University Grenoble Alpes, University Savoie Mon t Blanc, CNRS 

Grenoble INP, LEPMI, 38000 Grenoble, France 

Metal oxid es are important functional materials with a wide range of applications, especially in the field 

of electrocatalysis. However, quick and accurate assessment of their real electroactive surface area 

(ECSA), which is of paramount importance for the evaluatio n of their specific activity , remains a 

challenging task. In the presentation, I will present a relatively simple strategy for an accurate in situ 

determination of the ECSA of commonly used metal oxide catalysts, namely: Ni -, Co -, Fe -, Pt - and Ir -

based oxi des. Similar to the well -established practice in electrocatalysis, the method is based on the 

phenomenon of specific adsorption. It uses the fact that , at the electrode potentials close to the onset of 

the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), specifically adso rbed reaction intermediates manifest themselves 

through so -called adsorption capacitance, which is unambiguously detectable using electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy.[1,2] With simple impedance measurements, experimentalists can acquire the 

adsorption c apacitance values and accurately estimate the real electroactive surface area of the above -

mentioned oxide materials, including nanostructured electrocatalysts. Additionally, as illustrative 

examples, I will demonstrate an application of the method for the determination of the ECSA of oxide 

catalyst nanoparticles. 

References 

[1] Watzele, S.; Hauenstein, P.; Liang, Y.; Xue, S.; Fichtner, J.; Garlyyev, B.; Scieszka, D.; Claudel, F.; 

Maillard, F.; Bandarenka, A.S. ACS Catalysis 2019, 9, 9222 -9230. 

[2] Watzele, S.; Bandarenka, A.S. Electroanalysis 2016, 28, 2394 -2399. Vesicular Neurotransmitter Release is Altered by Zinc Cations as 

# Evidenced by Amperometry and Kinetic Modelling 

Lin Ren 1, Alexander Oleinick 2, Irina Svir 2, Christian Amatore 2,3 , Andrew G. Ewing 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology University o f Gothenburg, 

Kemivägen 10, 41296 Gothenburg , Sweden  

> 2

PASTEUR, Département de chimie, École normale supérieure, PSL University, 

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 24 rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France  

> 3

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, College of Chemistry and 

Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005 Xiamen, China 

christian.amatore@ens.fr; andrew.ewing@chem.gu.se 

Zinc is an important nutrient playing important role in metabolic processes (cell growth, DNA 

transcription etc.). A t the same time, there is a mounting evidence of zinc being involved in potentiat ing 

learning and memory , although the mechanism of zinc action on the latter processes is not clearly 

identified and understood. 

In this work, the effect s of Zn 2+ cations on the exocy tosis in PC12 cells was studied. Zn 2+ cations were 

shown to influence exocytotic release and storage in neurotransmitter -containing vesicles. In order to 

characterize and quantify different aspect of this complex process a combination of several t echniques 

was used.  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed for structural analysis and size 

measurements of the vesicular dense core and halo (less compacted zone), while single -cell amperometry 

allowed investigating the vesicle fusion pore si ze changes induced after zinc treatment . The amperometric 

traces before and after Zn 2+ treatment were analyzed and compare d to theoretical predictions based on the 

concept of partial release as opposed to full quantal release and incorporating structural i nformation 

obtained from TEM. 

This powerful combined analytical approach allowed establishing the existence of an unsuspected strong 

link between vesicle structure and exocytotic dynamics. These results allowed delineating possible 

mechanism of regulation of synaptic plasticity by Zn 2+ through modulation of kinetics and amount of 

neurotransmitter release [1].

References: 

[1] L. Ren, A. Oleinick , I. Svir, C. Amatore, A.G. Ewing, Angew. Chemie , 59 (2020) 3083 -3087 .Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy with nanoporous structures 

# composed of nonconductive polystyrene nanoparticles 

Jakub Sopoušek 1,2 , Karel Lacina 2 

> 1

Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenic e 5, Brno, Czec hia  

> 2

Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, Brno, Czech ia 

jakubsopousek@gmail.com 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a suitable method for in -depth studies of interfacial 

processes . As its output signal is a function of applied potential modulated in frequency domain (instead of 

time) , lots of information can be gathered from a single measurement.  Using EIS, we investigate d solid -

state nanoporous interfaces formed by assembling nonconductive polystyrene nanoparticles in densely 

packed layers on the electrode (Figure A) . Due to the dense hexagonal packing, the interstitial space among 

three neighboring nanoparticles can be con sidered as a nanopore of specific diameter . Monolayers 

composed of carboxylated polystyrene nanoparticles different in size were tested. These monolayers were 

further modified with protein (human serum albumin) with the intention to reduce the dimensions o f the 

nanopores and to monitor the corresponding electrochemical impedance behavior . Moreover , ordered 

multilayer structures of nanoparticles, built layer -by -layer , were investigated through out the same 

experiments . Unexpected and i nteresting outcomes were acquired. The absolute impedance of the 

monolayers corresponded to the level of carboxylation of the particular nanoparticles apart from the 

influence of reduced nanopores (Figure B, C; Sopoušek et al., ACS Appl. Mater . Interfaces, 2020 , in press ).

The impedance spectra of m ulti -layered structures exhibited additional resistance component (Figure D).

All impedimetric data were fitted with theoretical equivalent circuit s and the interfacial effects in such 

matrices were d iscussed .

Figure: A: Visualization of the nanoporous structures composed of 80 nm nanoparticles using AFM 

(including heights in cross -section) . B: Charge transfer resistance (R ct ) of un/modified monolayers of 

nanoparticles containing nanopores of different diameter . Th e strange behavior corresponds to the level of 

carboxylation of individual nanoparticles in C. D: Impedance spectra of multilayers indicate additional 

resistance componen t.

Acknowledgements 

This research has been financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech 

Republic under the project CEITEC 2020 (LQ1601) and by the Czech Science Foundation, grant nr. 19 -

16273Y . Jakub Sopoušek is gratef ul for the Brno Ph.D. Talent 2018 award, funded by the Brno City 

Municipality, JCMM, z.s.p.o. The importance of double layer charging and electrolyte composition 

# in electrochemical CO 2 reduction 

> Karen Chan
> Technical University of Denmark
> Department of Physics, Fysikvej, Kongens Lyngby Denmark 2800
> kchan@fysik.dtu.dk

# Electrochemical CO 2 reduction is a particularly challenging process from 

# both modelling and experimental perspectives. The challenge arises from 

# the complexity of its reaction network and the sensitivity of its activity and 

# selectivity to the electrolyte composition and the associate d interfacial field 

# effects. In this talk, I will first discuss developments in methods to model 

# the electrochemical interface - the accuracy of widely applied continuum 

# approximations of the electrolyte, as well as a new unified approach to 

# obtain electro chemical barriers from both explicit and implicit solvent 

# simulation approaches. In particular I emphasize that the surface charge 

# gives the most appropriate proxy of the local potential (vs. the traditionally 

# considered work function). Then, I will disc uss the impact of the 

# electrolyte composition - pH and ions - on electrochemical CO 2R activity 

# of both transition metals as well as supported single atom catalysts. 

# Finally, I discuss the implications of our findings for electrocatalyst design 

# and electro lyte engineering. Reaction Confinement Enables High -Capacity and Stable Anodes 

# for Alkali -Ion Batteries 

Laifa Shen , XiaogangZhang 

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Electrochemical Energy Storage Technologies, 

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 

Nanjing, 210016, P.R . China 

Email: lfshen@nuaa.edu.cn 

Current insertion anode chemistries are approaching their capacity limits; thus, battery technologies have 

to move toward the employment of electrode materials based on “multi -electron redox reactions”. 

Materi als based on alloying reactions offer this characteristic, enabling the storage of a few alkali ions 

and electrons per host atom. In particular, silicon and germanium are considered as potential alternatives 

for the currently employed graphite because of t heir very high theoretical lithium storage capacity (3578 

mAh g −1 for Li 15 Si 4 and 1623 mAh g −1 for Li 4.4 Ge). However, their performance is far from being 

satisfactory because of the large volume change and severe capacity decay that occurs upon lithium 

all oying and dealloying processes. To address these problems, we p ropose and demonstrate a versatile 

strategy that makes use of the electronic reaction confinement via the synthesis of ultrasmall Ge 

nanoparticles (10 nm) uniformly confined in a matrix of larg er spherical carbon particles (Ge ⊂C spheres). 

This architecture provides free pathways for electron transport and Li + diffusion, allowing for the alloying 

reaction of the Ge nanoparticles. The thickness change of electrodes containing such a material, 

moni tored byan in situ electrochemical dilatometer, is rather limit ed and reversible, confirming the 

excellent mechanical integrity of the confined electrode. As a result, these electrodes exhibit high 

reversible capacity (1310 mAh g −1, 0.1C) and very impressi ve cycling ability (92% after 1000 cycles at 

2C). A prototype device employing such an alloying electrode material in combination with 

LiNi 0.8 Mn 0.1 Co 0.1 O2 offers a high energy density of 250 Wh kg −1.

REFERENCES 

1. S. Fang, L. Shen* , S . Li, G . T. Kim, D . Bresser, H . Zhang, X . Zhang*, J . Maier, S . Passerini*. ACS 

Nano , 2019, 13, 9511 –9519. 

2. L. Shen , Y. Wang, F. Wu, I. Moudrakovski, P. van Aken, J. Maier, Y. Yu. Angewandte Chemie -

International Edition , 2019, 58, 7238 –7243. New Lithium Recycling Technique of Used Li -ion Batteries 

# using Li Separation Method by Ionic Conductor: LiSMIC 

Tsuyoshi Hoshino 

Breeding Functional Materials Development Group, Department of Blanket Systems Research, Rokkasho 

Fusion Institute, Fusion Energy Directorate, 

National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology (QST) 

2-166, Obuchi, Omotedate, Rokkasho -mura, Kamikita -gun, Aomori, 039 -3212, Japan 

hoshino.tsuyoshi@qst.go.jp, hoshino.tsuyoshi@qst -go.jp 

The world is increasingly turning to the use of Li -ion batteries in electric vehicles; therefore, there is 

a growing need for lithium (Li). I propose new me thod for recovering Li from used Li -ion batteries by 

using Li separation method by ionic conductor; LiSMIC [1] . Li ionic conductor is functioned as a Li 

separation membrane. This innovative LiSMIC involves the use of an Li separation membrane whereby 

only Li ions in a solution of used Li -ion batteries permeate from the positive electrode side to the negative 

electrode side during electrodialysis; the other ions, including Co, Al, and F, do not permeate the 

membrane. 

Li 0.29 La 0.5 7TiO 3 was selected as the Li separation membrane. The positive side of the dialysis cell 

was filled with used Li -ion battery solution, and then the negative side was filled with distilled water. In 

this study, the platinum (Pt) electrodes are bonded to the right and left faces (the tw o main faces) of the 

LISM, respectively. The applied dialysis voltage was 5 V, and the electrode area was 16 cm 2 and 4 cm 2 as 

new Li separation membrane. The Li recovery ratio increased with electrodialysis time. Furthermore, Li 

permeation speed was not de pended on the electrode area, and I succeeded in the development of new Li 

separation membrane with small area electrode. 

After electrodialysis, the Li recovery water was bubbled by CO 2 gas to produce lithium carbonate 

(Li 2CO 3) as a raw material for Li -io n batteries. The high purity Li 2CO 3 powder was easily generated 

under CO 2 gas bubbling method. Also, the Li recovery water was dried to produce lithium hydroxide 

(LiOH) as a raw material for Li -ion batteries. The high purity LiOH powder was easily generate d under 

vacuum drying atmosphere. 

Thus, LiSMIC is most suitable for the Li recycling of used Li -ion batteries (Fig.1) .Recycling 1mm 

Li 2CO 3

（ raw material of battery) 

Recovery Solution 

Li recovery ＋－      

> Li Li
> Li Li
> Co
> Co Al
> F
> Co
> Recovery Solution
> （Distilled Water ）
> Solution of
> Used Li -ion Battery
> Electrode
> e-
> Electron e-
> Electrode
> Electron Lithium Ionic Conductor
> （Li ions can permeate through the membrane ）
> Potentiostat －
> Electrical
> Generation
> ＋
> Li Li
> Li Li
> Co
> Co F
> Al
> Co
> Electrode
> Lithium Ionic Ccnductor
> （Li ions can permeate through the membrane ）
> e-
> Electron e-
> Electron
> Electrode
> Li only
> permeate
> Recovery Solution
> （Distilled Water ）
> Solution of
> Used Li -ion Battery

By -product hydrogen 

Fig. 1 This schematic draw is Li recovery Technology from used Li -ion battery solution using Li 

separation method by ionic Conductor; LiSMIC. Lithium carbonate (Li 2CO 3) as a raw material for Li -ion 

batteries is produced from Li recovery solution. And then, H 2 gas is generated as a by -product on the Li 

recovery side. 

Reference 

[1] T. Hoshino, Desalination, 359, 59 -63 (2015). Bioelectrocatalysis for Electrosynthesis 

Shelley D. Minteer 

Uni versity of Utah 

315 S 1400 E Rm 2020 

Salt Lake City , UT 84112 

minteer@chem.utah.edu 

Electrosynthesis of commodity and fine chemicals is an em erging area . Bioelectrocatalysis ha s only 

recently been considered for this application. This talk will discuss the advantages of bioelectro catalysis 

for electrosynthesis with examples ranging from ammonia production to pharmaceutical pr oduct s and 

intermediates. In the last 5 years, there have been extens ive studies and new materials designed for 

catalytic reduction of nitrogen to ammonia. This is a challenging reductive transformation for traditional 

electrocatalysts and photocatalysts, but nature can provide a n inspiration. Nitrogenase is the only enzyme 

known to reduce nitrogen to ammonia. This talk will discuss electroanalytical techniques for studying 

nitrogenase electrochemistry , includ ing both mediated bioelectrocatalysis and direct bioelectrocatalysis. 

Then, this talk will discuss electrode material s innovation for interfacing these complex proteins with 

electrode surfaces as well as using them for electrosynthesis of ammonia as well a s other value -added 

products (i.e. chiral amines, chiral amino acids, etc.). Finally, this talk will discuss the use of enzyme 

cascades for enzymatic bioelectro synthesis and synthetic biology for microbial bioelectrosynthesis of 

ammonia and other value -added products. Electrochemical systems for the treatment of contaminated water: 

# limitations, challenges and prospective 

Jelena Radjenovic 1,2 , Natalia Sergienko 1,3 , Nick Duinslaeger 1,3 , Gianni s Florjan -Norra 1,3 , Luis Baptista -

Pires 1,3 

> 1

Catalan Institute of Water Researc h, c/Emil i Grahit 101, Girona, Spain 

> 2

Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 

Barcelona, Spain 

> 3

University of Girona, Girona, Spain 

To minimize the effects of water pollution and alleviate water scar city, urb an water infrastructure will 

have to be re -invented through implementation of innovative low -cost, energy efficient decentralized 

water and wastewater treatment systems, and use of alternative water resources. Distributed treatment 

systems need to be compa ct, highly efficient, cost -effective, sustainable, robust and autonomous. Among 

the available technologies, electrochemical systems have the most potential to be used for decentral ized 

treatment of (waste)water. Electrochemical systems do not use chemical reagents, do not form a residual 

waste stream, operate at ambient temperature and pressure, are robust, versatile and have a small 

footprint. Yet, to advance from laboratory experi ments to practical implementation, there are two key, 

long -standing challeng es that need to be addressed: 1) high energy consumption and cost; given that most 

contaminants are present at low concentrations, their electrochemical reactivity in the conventio nal flow -

by two -dimensional (2D) electrochemical reactors is subjec t to pron ounced mass transfer limitations, and 

2) formation of toxic halogenated byproducts in the presence of halides. Three -dimensional (3D) reactor 

design is characterized by the high electrode surface area to reactor volume ratio and significantly 

impr oved reac tor efficiency, with a larger effective surface area available for electrolytic degradation of 

contaminants and reduced mass transfer limitations. Yet, low electrocatalytic effic iency and stability, and 

high cost of electrode materials are hamperi ng the im plementation of 3D electrochemical systems. 

In the scope of the ERC Starting Grant ELECTRON 4WATER, we are develo ping 3D el ectrode materials 

based on low -cost synthesis process, which are tailored for different water treatment application s (e.g, 

removal o f sulfide from wastewater, removal of perfluorinated compounds from groundwater, removal of 

persistent organic contamina nts from wastewater) . For example, Mn -oxide based electrodes were 

developed for selective and reversible oxidation of sulfide f rom waste water to sulfur (Sergienko et al, 

20 20 , Appl . Cat. B Environ. ). Although M n oxide -coated electrodes have been extensively investigated 

and applied in batteries, this study is the first one to employ Mn -based nanostructured material for 

electrochem ical wast ewater treatment. We have also developed graphene -based sponge materials for their 

use as both cathodes and anodes in small, one -pass, flo w-through electrochemical filter units that can treat 

even low conductivity water (e.g., drinkin g water) (Pir es et al, ACS Nano, submitted) . One major 

advantage of the developed graphene sponges is that they do not produce chlorine, chlorate or 

perchlorate, while oxidizing the persistent contaminants present at trace concentrations in the water. Thus, 

th is materi al overco mes one major limitation of electrochemical systems – product ion of toxic chlorinated 

byproducts in the presence of chloride , and th us has the potential to strong ly influence future research on 

novel electrode materials for electrochemical water t reatment. 

While nanostructure d carbon - and meta -based electrode materials have been the primary research interest 

across many fields of material science, such as supercapacitors, batteries, solar cells, and sensors , they 

haven´t been explored as much for environme ntal ap plications. In the ELECTRON4WATER project , we 

are conducting interdisciplinary research and using the findings achieved in other fields of science to 

contribut e towards further development of e lectrochemical water treatment systems and thei r applica tion 

in a wider scale. 

References :

Sergienko, N., Radjenovic, J. 2020.  Manganes e oxide -based porous electrodes for rapid and selective 

(electro)catalytic removal and recovery of sulfide from wastewater, Appl. Catal. B. Environ , 267, 118608 .

Pir es, L.B., Radjenovic, J.2020.  Novel graphene sponge for electrochemical r emoval of persistent organic contaminants from low -conductivity water. ACS Nano, submitted. Designing Quinone -based Conducting Redox Polymers specifically for 

# Aqueous Proton Batteries and for Lithium Ion Battery Cathodes 

Martin Sjödin , Rikard Emanuelsson , Christian Strietzel, Huan Wang, Mia Sterby and Maria Strømme 

Uppsala University, Dep t. of Materials Science and Engineering , Div. of Nanotechnology and Functional 

Materials 

Box 534, SE -751 21 Uppsala, Sweden 

martin.sjodin@angstrom.uu.se 

Conducting redox polymers (CRPs) are conducting 

polymer s that have been decorated with redox 

active functi onal group s and they provide an 

attractive alternative as organic matter based 

electrical energy storage materials. The purpose of 

the polymer backbone is two -fold, 1) i t prevents 

dissolution of the redox group and , 2) it renders the 

material conductive . The redox active pend ant 

groups, on the other hand, provide the material with 

a well -defined redox reaction as well as a high 

charge storage capacity. CRPs thus provide a

solution to two of the most significant obstacles in 

achieving powerful and stable bat tery materials 

from organic compounds , i.e. material s dissolution 

and limited electronic conductivity while 

simultaneously providing a high charge storage capacity . For battery applications it is thus essential that 

the individual properties of the conduct ing polymer backbone and the redox group can be preserved and 

that they operate in synergy in the CRP. One prerequisite for synergetic polymer -pendant combinations is 

redox matching. As conducting polymers are only conducting in their charged state success ful 

combinations rely on that the pendant group has a redox potential within the conducting region of the 

polymer backbone. In addition, the CRP must allow mass transport of ions, not only related to the cycling 

chemistry of the pend ant group but also ions related to the doping of the polymer backbone. These 

requirements put significantly different demands on the polymer design for the development of aqueous 

proton batteries and for CRPs for lithium cycling cathodes. In this presentation specific CRP design -

solutions will be presented that allow for the development of all -organic proton batteries 1,2 and for 

lithium ion CRP -battery cathode s 3.

In addition , a solution -processing 

method , termed Post Deposition 

Polymerization (PDP), for CRP -

materials and the underlying 

principles and requirement s for 

PDP will be presented. 

Importantly, in PDP the 

processing step occurs prior to 

polymerization. After depositing and drying of the repeat -unit precursor onto a substrate polymerization 

is achieved by oxidative polymerization of the precursor. The PDP -method opens up for a scalab le 

method for the coating of CRP materials onto any substrate and can, for instance, be used to make 

nanostructured CRP materials. 

1 Emanuelsson, R., Sterby, M., Str ømme, M. & Sj ödin, M. An All -Organic Proton Battery. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc . 139 , 4828 -4834, doi:10.1021/jacs.7b00159 (2017). 

2 Strietzel, C. et al. Accepted in Angewandte Chemie doi:10.1002/anie.202001191 (2020). 

3 Wang, H. et al. Redox -State -Dependent Interplay between Pendant Group and Conducting 

Polymer Backbone in Quinone -Ba sed Conducting Redox Polymers for Lithium Ion Batteries. 

ACS Applied Energy Materials 2, 7162 -7170, doi:10.1021/acsaem.9b01130 (2019). Elimination of Fluorination: The Influence of Fluorine -Free 

# Electrolytes on the Performance of Si -based Li -ion Batteries 

Guiomar Hernández , Andrew J. Naylor, Yu -Chuan Chien, Daniel Brandell, Jonas Mindemark, Kristina 

Edström 

Department of chemistry – Ångs tröm Laboratory, Uppsala University 

Box 538, SE 751 21, Uppsala, Sweden 

Guiomar. Hernandez@kemi.uu.se 

Eliminating fluorinated electrolytes , susceptible to release toxic and corrosive compounds such as HF, is 

one step t owards more environmentally friendly a nd safer batteries . Yet, fluorine -containing electrolytes 

are often considered necessary for enhanced battery performance. 1 Alternatively, replacing the state -of -

the -art LiPF 6 with fluorine -free salt would reduce cost, increase safety and decrease toxicity , both in the 

manufacturing and recycling processes. 2 Furthermore, additives in the electrolyte needed to form a stable 

solid -electrolyte interphase (SEI) are another common source of fluorine, for example fluoroethylene 

carbonate (FEC), which is particula rly important for silicon -based electrodes as they suffer high volume 

changes upon cycling. 3

Herein, we investigate the effects of electrolyte fluorination for full cells combining silicon -graphite 

composite electrodes with LiNi xMn yCo zO2 cathodes, by mean s of electrochemical testing and post -

mortem analysis. The fluorine -free electrolyte is based on lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB) salt and 

vinylene carbonate (VC) as SEI -forming additive, while the fluorinated electrolyte is based on the 

conventional LiP F6 salt with FEC and VC additives. Our results show that although the SEI composition 

on the anode is very different, both electrolyte formulations are able to stabilise silicon -based electrodes 

and support stable cycling in full cells (Figure 1) . Therefor e, fluorine -free alternatives are good 

candidates for high -energy -density full cells opening new possibilities towards safer, more sustainable 

and less toxic batteries. 

Figure 1. (Left ) Discharge capacity of full cells containing different electrolyt es: LiPF 6 (black rhombi), 

LiPF 6 with FEC and VC additives (blue square), LiPF 6 and LiBOB with FEC and VC additives (teal 

circles), and LiBOB with VC additive (green triangles); and ( right ) s chematic representation of cell 

constituents and SEI composition.  

> 1

von Aspern, N.; Röschenthaler, G. -V.; Winter, M.; Cekic -Laskovic, I. Fluorine and Lithium: Ideal 

Partners for High -Performance Rechargeable Battery Electrolytes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 

15978 -16000.  

> 2

Xu, K. Nonaqueous Liquid Electrolytes for Lithium -Based Rechargeable Batteries. Chem. Rev. 2004, 

104, 4303 -4418.  

> 3

Etacheri, V.; Haik, O.; Goffer, Y.; Roberts, G. A.; Stefan, I. C.; Fasching, R.; Aurbach, D.  Effect of 

Fluoroethylene Carbonate (FEC) on the Performance and Surface Chemistry of Si -Nanowire Li -Ion 

Battery Anodes. Langmuir 2012, 28, 965 -976. Application of Ionic Rectification for Water Purification: Desalination 

# with a Nafion Cationic Diode 

## Budi Riza Putra 1,2 , Frank Marken 1* 

> 1

## Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK  

> 2

## Department of Chemistry, Faculty o f Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Bogor 

## Agricultural University, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia 

## brpp2 0@bath.ac.uk / budiriza@gmail.com 

## Abstract 

## Cationic diodes based on Nafion ionomer coated microhole array substrates are 

## combined with an anion conducting membrane to give an AC -electricity driven 

## desalination or salination system. The combination of cationic diode with anionic 

## resistor allows a 3D -printed four -chamber sys tem to be configured with two internal 

## chambers to extract and/or accumulate salt. Thre e configurations are demonstrated 

## combining desalination and salination for an aqueous 250 mM NaCl solution. For a 

## proof -of -concept device, 50% desalination/salination is demonstrated. The charge 

## efficiency is estimated to be only 12%, limited mainly due t o (i) resistivity lowering 

## rectification, (ii) rectification ratio limitations for the array of microholes, (iii) 

## insufficient stability of ionomer membranes under AC -pu lse -driven operation. 

## Perspectives for improvements and for future desalination/salinat ion applications are 

## given. Reconstitution of Escherichia coli ATP -Synthase on G old Electrodes 

# for Potentiometric Detection of ATP 

Antonio L. De Lacey ,a G. García -Molina, a Paolo Natale, b,c Laura Valenzuela. a,d Julia Alvarez -Malmagro, a

Cristina Gutiérrez -Sánchez, a Ana Iglesias -Juez, a Iván López -Montero, b,c Marisela Vélez, a Marcos Pita a

> a

Instituto de Catálisis y Petroleoquímica, CSIC, c/Marie Curie 2, 28049 Madrid, Spain 

> b

Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain 

> c

Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital Doce de Octubre ( imas12), Madrid, Spain 

> d

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Spain 

alopez@icp.csic.e 

Modification of electrode surfaces with floating phospholipid bilayers as biomimetic membranes allows 

reconstitution of membrane -bound enzymes on a controlled way for electrochemical applications. In this 

way, the catalytic activity of the enzymes associated to transport processes across the biomimetic 

membrane is combined with the sensitivity of electrochemical detection [1 -3] .

We r eport a potentiometric biosensor based on ATP -synthase from Escherichia coli reconstituted in a 

floating phospholipid bilayer over gold electrodes modified with a 4 -aminothiophenol self -assembled 

monolayer. The use of a pH -dependent redox probe on the elec trode surface allows a simple, specific and 

reliable on site determination of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration from 1 μM to 1 mM . ATP is 

a key molecule as energy vector for living organisms, therefore its detection reveals the presence of 

microbi al colonies. Environments where the existence of microbial pathogens suppose a health hazard 

can benefit from real time monitoring of such molecule. The broad range ATP biosensor can offer an 

alternative way of measuring in a few minutes the presence of mi crobial contamination [4] .

[1] O. Gutiérrez -Sanz, D. Olea, M. Pita, A.P. Batista, A. Alonso, M. M. Pereira, M. Vélez, A.L De Lacey. 

Langmuir 30 (2014) 9007 -9015. 

[2 ] Gutierrez -Sanz, O., Natale, P., Marquez, I., Marques, M. C., Zacarias, S., Pita, M., Lóp ez -Montero, 

De Lacey, A. L., Velez, M. Angew.  Chem . Int . Ed . 55 (2016) 6216 -6220. 

[3] O. Gutiérrez -Sanz, C. Tapia, M.C. Marques, S. Zacarías, M. Vélez, I.A.C. Pereira, A.L. De Lacey. 

Induction of a proton gradient across a gold -supported biomimetic membra ne by electroenzymatic H 2

oxidation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 54 (2015) 2684 -2687 .

[4] G. García -Molina, Paolo Natale, Laura Valenzuela. Julia Alvarez -Malmagro, Cristina Gutiérrez -

Sánchez, Ana Iglesias -Juez, Iván López -Montero, Marisela Vélez, Marcos Pita , A. L. De Lacey. 

Bioelectrochemistry 133 (2020) 107490. Lubricin, an A ntifouling Coating for Electroactive S urfaces 

Pauline E. Desroches , Anita F. Quigley, Robert M. I. Kapsa, Simon E. Moulton , Saimon M. Silva, 

George W. Greene 

Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Burwood Campus, 221 Burwood Hi ghway, Burwood, 

Victoria 3125, Australia 

BioFab3D@AMCD, St Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 3065, Australia 

pdesroches@deakin.edu.au 

Electroactive surfaces are a significant component in nu merous biomedical applications, such as 

biosensors and implantable devices used as bionic neural interfaces or controlled drug release platforms. 

The performance and charge transfer efficiency of electrode surfaces , however, can be significantly 

affected b y the fouling caused by non -specific adsor ption of proteins at the surface . These adsorbed 

proteins act both as a passivation layer and an anchoring point for the further attach ment of cells. 

Likewise, the grafting of traditional anti -adhesive coatings to electrode surfaces, typically charge -neutral 

polymers such as polyethylene glycol or dextran, often lead to the same electrical pa ssivation effects as 

the protei ns they are protecting against [1] .

Conductive polymers (CPs) are an attractive material for sensors and neural interface 

applications due to their high impedance, ionic and electric conductivity, mechanical softness , and 

actuation response to applied voltages enabling controlled drug release [2] . Unfo rtunately, CP surfaces are 

particularly prone to protein fouling when exposed to biolog ical fluids (e.g. blood, perilymph, saliva) 

leading to compromised performance and shortened working lifespans [3] .

In this work , the issue of fouling is addressed by usi ng lubricin (LUB) . LUB , a self -assembling 

glycoprotein and major biolubricant molecules [4] present s promising propertie s for use as an anti -fouling 

agent on bionic electrodes . This includes inherent biocompatibility, protein and cell adhesion resistance. 

LUB coatings have recently been shown to prevent fouling of platinum, gold, and carbon e lectrodes with 

minimal impact on electrode electrochemica l activity (i.e. passivation) [5,6] . Notab ly, t his work explores the 

application of LUB with electrochemically grown polypyrrole (PPy) electrodes and investigates several 

fabrication methods for incorporating LUB into the po lymer structure. The PPy /LUB film structures were 

characterized along with its electrochemical and fouling resistance properties to assess its ability to 

protect electrode surfaces against the detrimental effects of biofouling in highly concentrates soluti ons of 

proteins an d bodily fluids such as blood. Electrochemical characterization using K3[Fe(CN) 6] as redox 

reporter (Figure 1) suggested that the optimized LUB -coated conductive films exhibited anti -adhesive 

properties in fouling solutions. These results reveal the potential application of PPy/LUB film for bionic 

implant application. -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0      

> -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0
> Potential, E/V vs. Ag│AgCl
> B. Au/PPy(pTS)/LUB
> Potential, E/V vs. Ag│AgCl Current Density, J/mA.cm -2
> A. Au

Figure 1: Cyclic voltammograms measured using a scan rate of 100 mV/s and coated gold WE of the oxidation -

reduction of a 3.6×10 −3 mM solution of K 3[Fe(CN) 6] prepared in a nonfouling PBS solution before (black line) and 

after 2 hours (red line) incubation of BSA protein (5 mg/mL) for a bare gold electrode and a PPy(pTS) and LUB -

coated gold electrode. The cycle is the last of 25 cyc les 

[1] G. G. Wallace, S. E. Moulton, G. M. Clark, Science 2009 , 324 , 185. 

[2] R. A. Green, N. H. Lovell, G. G. Wallace, L. A. Poole -Warren, Biomaterials 2008 , 29 , 3393. 

[3] E. M . Stewart, M. Fabretto, M. Mueller, P. J. Molino, H. J. Griesser, R. D. Short, G. G. Wallace, 

Biomater Sci 2013 , 1, 368. 

[4] B. Zappone, M. Ruths, G. W. Greene, G. D. Jay, J. N. Israelachvili, Biophys. J. 2007 , 92 , 1693. 

[5] S. M. Silva, A. F. Quigley, R. M. I. Kapsa, G. W. Greene, S. E. Moulton, ChemElectroChem 2019 ,

6, 1939. 

[6] M. J. Russo, M. Han, A. F. Quigley, R. M. I. Kapsa, S. E. Moulton, E. Doeven, R. Guijt, S. M. Silva, 

G. W. Greene, Electrochimica Acta 2020 , 333 , 135574. Electrochemical S ensors Compatible with the Point -of -Care Enabled 

# by Lubricin Antifouling Coatings 

Saimon M. Silva , Matthew J. Russo , Anita F. Quigley, Robert M. I. Kapsa, George W. Greene, Simon E. 

Moulton 

ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Sci ence , Faculty of Science, Engineering & Technology, 

Swinburne University of Technology , Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia - smoraessilva@swin.edu.au 

Glucose meters are medical devices that demonstrate s the eno rmous potentiality of electrochemical 

sensors to operate in whole blood and other biological fluids. Nonetheless , the success of these medical 

devices has not yet been extended for many other biomarkers. [1] The main impediment to this technology 

is the n onspecific adsorption of biomolecules such as proteins or even whole cells , which leads to surface 

biofouling. Biof ouling , in the case of electrochemical sensors, may cause a reduction in senso r selectivity 

by interfering with the interaction of target species with the electrodes surface, or may result in variations 

in sensor sensitivity by hindering electrode transfer pathway of redox active species. [2] This ultimately 

lead s to sensors failure. In the case of glucose sensing, this issue could be resolved by using semi -

permeable membranes that are permeable for glucose (as it is a small molecule) but halt proteins from 

reaching the sensor surface .[1] Nevertheless , a large number of clinically appropriate biomarkers are t he 

same as the fouling species (i.e. proteins ), hence semi -permeable membranes cannot be applied. 

Additionally, semi -permeabl e membranes are also themselves prone to fouling, reducing hence their 

transport properties. Therefore, a major issue to electrochemical sensing platforms that needs to function 

in biological fluids remains the bi ofouling of electrode surface. This highlig hts the need for development 

of sensor surfaces that can function in complex biological fluids for the analytical detection of 

biomarkers. 

Here, we report t he use of lubricin (LUB) in re sponse to the biofouling issue. LUB is a cytoprotective 

glycoprotein present in synovial fluids and coating cartilage surfaces in articular joints. [3] LUB displays a

distinguishing chemistry, conformational and molecular structure, and also the ability of self -assembling 

in a well -organized manner on substrate s from different na ture. [4] When attached to a conductive surface, 

LUB presents the capability of p revent ing biofouling and at the same time allows good electrochemistry 

with the advantage of a simple and one -step coating preparation .[5] This makes LUB an interesting surface 

coating for electrochemical biosensing . In this work, the detection of electroactive species ,

benzodiazepines , is reported . The prepared electrodes showed a good analytical response in biological 

fluids such as saliva and whole blood, being able to detect very low concentrations (as low as picomolar) 

of the investigated analytes. Square wave voltammetry was used as excitation technique for the 

quantification. In these sensor s, LUB works as both, antifouling agent as well as an active component for 

the analyte detection . Aiming the compatibility with the point -of -care, reduced graphene screen -printed 

electrodes was used as a substrate to the LUB functionalization (Figure 1) .

Figure 1 – Schematic represe ntation 

of the sensing platform. LUB is self -

assembled on a reduced graphene 

oxide to allow the detection of 

electroactive species in biological 

fluids. The excitation technique 

used for measurements is square 

wave voltammetry .

[1] J. J. Gooding, Nat Nanotechnol 2019 , 14 , 1089 -1090. 

[2] M. Parviz, N. Darwish, M. T. Alam, S. G. Parker, S. Ciampi, J. J. Gooding, Electroanal 2014 , 26 ,

1471 -1480. 

[3] S. M. Silva, A. F. Quigley, R. M. I. Kapsa, G. W. Greene, S. E. Moulton, Chemelectrochem 2019 , 6,

1939 -1943. 

[4] M. Y. Han, S. M. Silva, W. W. Lei, A. Quigley, R. M. I. Kapsa, S. E. Moulton, G. W. Greene, 

Langmuir 2019 , 35 , 15834 -15848. 

[5] M. J. Russo, M. Y. Han, A. F. Quigley, R. M. I. Kapsa, S. E. Moulton, E. Doeven, R. Guijt, S. M. 

Silva, G. W. Greene, Electrochim Acta 2020 , 333 .Toward the definition of new hybrid proton exchange 

# membranes for PEMFC: from  NMR  molecular dynamic 

# studies to electrochemical performances 

Isabella Nicotera , Cataldo Simari, Er nestino Lufrano 

University of Calabria 

Department of Chemistry and Chemical Te chnology, Via P. Bucci , 87036 Rende (CS), Italy 

isabella.nicotera@unical.it 

Highly hydrophilic nanostructures, most of them layered -type (s mectite clays , l ayered doubled hydroxide -

LDH , g raphene oxide -GO ), have been properly synthesized and organo -function alized to interact with a

ionomer in order to prepare advanced nanocomposite membranes for PEMFC applications . As nanofillers 

in Nafion® polymer, they can modulate the nature of water confined in the nanosized ionic channels with 

the result that the hybrid membranes show high proton mobility in dehydrating state . Additionally, many 

efforts are devoted in the development of alternative ionomers to commercial Nafion, based on non -

fluorinated macromolecules with adequate mechanical strength , high proton conduc tivity and stability in 

the aggressive environment of a working fuel cell. Studies on hybrid membranes based on sulfonated 

Polyethersulphone (PES) and Polysulfone (PSU) will be presented .1,2

The 2D nanofillers of interest are those with a layer -like morpho logy characterized by a high aspect ratio 

(large lateral dimensions and small thickness), and hydrophilic functional groups on the surface in order 

to provide more sites for the coordination of water molecules and to build long -range proton transfer 

pathwa ys inside the membrane .

LDHs and smectite clays are anionic and cationic minerals, respectively, with a unique combination of 

swelling, intercalation and ion exchange properties. Appropriate organo -functionalizations by using 

simple chemical methods with o rganic/inorganic guest molecules have been operated. Noteworthy is a 

hybrid material obtained by rooting CNTs (decorated with RSO3H groups) on smectite plates, providing 

an outstanding effect on the protons transport in the nanocomposite membrane due to th e formation of an 

appropriate network which favors the Ghrotthus -type mechanism .3

Graphene Oxide (GO) is characterized by the presence of oxygen –containing moieties, mostly hydroxyl, 

epoxy and carboxyl groups on the carbon sheets. Organo -modified GO was sy nthetized and tested as 

nanofiller for the creation of novel hybrid nanocomposites with enhanced proton transport. 4

The barrier property of such 2D -materials was also valuated to reduce the methanol crossover (critical 

issue in the DMFCs). The exfoliation and dispersion of the layers throughout the continuous polymeric 

matrix can significantly increase the tortuosity of the methanol’s diffusion path.  Moreover, a higher 

order's degree in the arrangement of the filler's platelets, e.g. aligned parallel to the membrane surface, 

may further reduce the detrimental effect of the methanol permeation as a consequence of the greater 

obstruction and increased tortuosity of the fuel diffusion path. 

With this aim , a mechanical alignment of GO and LDH lamellae within the polymer matrix has been 

attempted and anevidence of lamellae’s alignment at the nanoscale  was obtained through the Magnetic 

Resonance Imaging combined with Rheology (Rheo -MRI) technique , an effective and elegant method, as 

well as original for such invest igations, to study the organization of nano -lamellae dispersed in a 

polymeric solution under the shearing. 5,6

NMR was widely used to investigate molecular dynamics through direct measurements of self -diffusion 

coefficients (Pulse Field Gradient –PFG techniq ue), relaxation times (T 1 and T 2) and spectral analysis,  in 

order to achieve a systematic understanding at a fundamental level of the effects of dimensionality and 

organization of these nanofillers on the physico -chemical, mechanical and electrochemical pr operties of 

the membrane electrolytes .          

> 1J . Applied Polymer Science 2019, 136 (34), pag. 47884.
> 2Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020, in press.
> 3J . Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120 (5), pp. 2574 -2584.
> 4Electrochimica Acta 2019, Vol. 297, pag. 240 -249.
> 5J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 24357−24368
> 6Journal of Membrane Science 2020, 599, pag. 117858.

# Local Electrochemical Measurement 

# with 3D Printed Solution Flow -type Microd roplet Cell 

Kei Sakata , Bilal Muhammad, Masatoshi Sakairi 

Graduate School of Engineering, Hokkaido University 

Kita -13, Nishi -8, Kita -ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan 

njuakeikei_429@eis.hokudai.ac.jp 

Metal materials are widely used and have advanced propert ies , such as high strength, high corrosion 

resistance and flatness . Non-uniformity of m aterial s play an important role in these properties . In order to 

investigate the non -uniformity, it is necessary to perform a higher resolution analysis. Therefore, 

electrochemical technology in a small area is required. One of the techniq ues is a electrochemical micro -

cell. The electrochemical micro -cell has been attracting attention as a measurement method on a small 

surface area. The Electrochemical micro -cells are classified into two types, a meniscus type and a gasket 

type, due to the difference in the structure of the capillary tip and the sample electrode 1) , 2) . These two types 

of electrochemical micro -cells have enabled us to investigate small surface area. However, in these two 

types, when intense electrode reaction occurs, the change in the solution concentration near the sample 

surface becomes remarkable. In this case, a concentration gradient is generated in the solution inside the 

capillary, so appropriate measurement and chemical reaction cannot be performed. To solve this p roblem, 

Lohrengel et al. developed a gasket -type electrochemical micro -cell with a θ -shaped glass capillary 3) .

Solution supply and ejection could be performed using two channels. Fushimi et al. developed a dual 

capillary solution flow -type microdroplet cel l (Sf -MDC) 4) . It has a coaxial double tube structure in which 

two capillaries with different diameters are combined, the solution is supplied from the inner capilla ry, and 

the solution is collected by the outer capillary. Using Sf -MDC, Sakairi et al. controlled the area and 

thickness of porous -type aluminum anodic oxide 5), 6) . Hashizume et. al. investigated SCC mechanism near 

fusion line by Sf -MDC 7) . This Sf -MDC is very useful for 

various area selective electrochemistry applications .

However, th e structures of previous Sf -MDC are very 

complex and difficult to fabricate . Therefore, in this study, 

3D print ing was applied to fabricate Sf -MDC and local 

electrochemical measurements were carried out by fabricated 

Sf -MDC .

Sf -MDC was designed using computer -aided design 

software and fabricated by 3D printer . A platinum wire and 

an Ag / AgCl wire were insert ed inside the cell as counter and 

reference electrode s. The cell equipped with the electrodes 

was attached to a microscope (Fig. 1 ). Using this setup, it was 

possible to control precisely the measuring position and carry 

out the area selective electrochemistr y. 

The surface state before and after the electrochemical 

measurement s was observed , and the immersion potential 

measurement s and the electrokinetic polarization 

measurement s were performed on materials using 10 mM 

NaCl. The immersion potential and the polarization curve s of 

aluminum alloys were observed . The obtained curves showed 

fluctuation s, depending on the material location. 

References 

1) M. M. Lohrengel, C. Rosenkranz, I. Klüppel, A. Moehring, B. Van den Bossche, J. Deconinck; 

Electroch im. Acta , 49, 2863 (2004). 

2) H. B öhni, T.Suter , and A. Schreyer; Electrohim. Acta, 10, 1361 (1995) .

3) M. M. Lohrengel, I. Kl üppel, C. Rosenkranz, H. Bettermann , and J. W. Schultze; Electroch im. Acta, 

48, 3203 (2003). 

4) K. Fushimi, S. Yamamoto, R. Ozaki and H. Habasaki; Electroch em. Acta, 53, 2529 (2008). 

5) M. Sakairi, T. Yamaguchi, T. Murata and K. Fushimi; ECS Transactions, 50 , 255 (2013). 

6) M. Sakairi, F. Nishino and R. Itzinger; Surf. Interface Anal., 48, 921 (2015). 

7) S. Hashizume, T . Nakayama, M. Sakairi and K. Fushimi; Zairyo -to -Kankyo, 60, 196 (2011) .

Fig. 1 Sf -MDC  fabricated  by  3D printer 

attached to optical microscope .Sample Sf-MDC Microscope DNA/carbon -based s uper lattice electro active hierarchical self -assembled 

# nano networke for biomedical detection and bio sensing  

> Aboulfazl Mirzapoor 1
> 1Department of Nanobiotechnology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, P.O. Box 14115 -
> 175, Tehran, Iran
> a.mirzapour@modares.ac.ir

## In this study, a new effective and DNA and DNA like polymer based self -assembled and 

## hierarchical nanostructures was designed that can be used for bio sensing applications. SWNT -

## DNA hybrid Nano structure fabricates by region selective covalent combined bet ween DNA and 

## SWNT Nano particles These hybrid Nano structures have different electrochemical properties 

## compare of alone SWNT and DNA single strand. Electrochemical behavior of SWNT -DNA 

## hybrid Nano structures are studied by cyclic voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy 

## technique. Due to wire shape SWNT -DNA hybrid Nano structures have favorable electrical 

## properties could be used in fabrication of genomic biosensor which was detected mismatch and 

## abnormality in ds -DNA. In other attempt, a three -dimensional ( 3D) hierarchical architecture for 

## aerographite bio electrodes was fabricated by template -directed self -assembly. The superlight 

## aerographite was functionalised with guanine (G) rich polymer loaded with glucose oxidase 

## (GOx) thorough π -π interactions of ele ctron pairs of the guanine ring and the electron cloud of 

## aerographite. These superlight and hierarchical graphene based nanostructure detected glucose 

## in solution with satisfy sensitivity. 

## References 

## [1] Y.Weizmann, D.M.Chenoweth , and T.M. Swager, J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2010, 132, 14009 –

## 14011. 

## [2] Ch. Zhao, K.Qu, C. Xu, J.Ren and X.Qu, Nucleic Acids Research, 2011,39,9, 3939 –3948. Sensing possibilities of diferrocenylborinic acid 

# immobiliz ed in 2D -titanate nano sheet host 

Martin Konhefr *, 1,2,3 , Karel Lacina 3, Petr Skládal 2,3 , Budi R. Putra 1, 4 and Frank Marken 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK ; 2 Department of 

Biochemistry, F aculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlářská 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech ia; 

> 3

Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech ia ; 

> 4

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Bo gor Agri cultural 

University, Bogor, West Java, Indonesia 

*martin.konhefr @ceitec .muni.cz 

The d iferrocenylborinic acid (Fc 2BOH) contains two interconnected and communicating redox 

centres . The boron bridge be tween two ferrocen yls is able to interact with other an alytes as nucleophi les, 

diols etc. [1] The ma in aim of our work was to describe the fundamental electrochemical behaviour of 

such system with two redox centres in relation to model analytes as fluoride . We also wanted to widen 

knowledge about intramolecula r communication between joint red ox centres. 

Fc 2BOH has been synthesized in good yield via an improved synthetic path. Its physicochemical 

characterisation was carried out us ing NMR, HRMS, FTIR, X-ray crystallogra phy, and then by 

electrochemical methods . These revealed the desired two one -electron oxidation processes for the two 

electronically coupled ferrocenyl moieties. The redox properties of Fc 2BOH in homogenous phase 

(organic media ) was contrasted to th ose in heterogeneous phase. For this purpose, a ne w concept of 

modification of electrode recently developed by Marken’s group [2] has been utilized – Fc 2BOH was 

incorporat ed into a lamellar film of 2D titanate nanosheets on a glassy carbon electrode . Data from cyclic 

voltammetry and from square wave volta mmetry confirmed that the bridging boron can bind to 

nucleophiles (hydroxide, fluoride ) upon oxidation of the ferrocenyl groups. 

An immobilization in 2D -titanate nanosheet film has proven as a good modifi cation technique as 

these were successfully emplo yed to host Fc 2BOH on a glassy carbon electrode . In the presence of 

disodium sul ph ate in aqueous electrolyte , a stable reversible voltammetric response was o bserved. In the 

presence of sodium fluoride, “bound” and “unbound” states of Fc 2BOH were observed at h igher scan 

rates (above 0.1 Vs -1). Mechanism of inter action has been proposed and discussed and sensing 

applications suggested. 

Figure : Redox properties of Fc 2BOH (A) in homogenous (B – in acetonitrile, C – in di chloromethane )

and heterogeneous phase (D – immobilized in 2D -titanate nanosheets ).

[1] Konhefr et al. Dalton Tran sactions ( 2019 ) 48:11200 –11207 

[2] Wahyuni et al. Electroanalysis ( 2017 ) 30:1303 –1310 Modified Hydrocyclone as Electrochemical Reactor: Modelling, 

# Characterization and A pplications 

## A. N. Colli , J. P. Fornés, O. González Pérez, J. M. Bisang 

## Universidad Nacional del Litoral, CONICET 

## Programa de Electroquímica Aplicada e Ingeniería Electroquí mica (PRELINE) 

## Facultad de Ingeniería Química, Santiago del Estero 2829, S3000AOM Santa Fe, 

## Argentina 

## e-mail address: ancolli@gmail.com 

Many electrochemical industrial processes  take  place under a mixed  kinetic  control,  such as :

electrochemical wastewater  treatment or inorganic -organic electrosynt hesis.  These  situations demand  for 

extensive research  effort s in order to develop electrochemical reactors with good mass -tr ansfer 

conditions.  Thus, it is pretended to maximis e the space time yield of the reactor  and to become more 

uniform  its  potential distribution  with the aim of  to avoid , as much as possible , the presence of s econdary 

reactions or electrode  degradation. 

Hydrocyclones are often used in the chemical industry when differ ent phases need to be 

separa ted. These devices are characterised by their constructive easy, without moving  parts , and simple 

operation . The double helical flo w existing in the interior of a  hydrocyclone  suggests  improved mass -

transfer conditions. Thus, it has been proposed  as  an  ele ctro chemical reactor ,1 being the cylindrical -

conical casing  operated as working electrode  whereas the  counter electrode  is placed at  the overflow.  The 

proposal  has two additional aspects : (i) if a solid is produced at the working electrod e, d epending on 

particle  size, it c an be separated from the spigot and  (i i) the hydrocyclone shows a low -pressure  region in 

its  central part,  known as  air  core, which becomes appropriate for the introduction of a gas phase. 

Therefore, it  can be considered  as  an alternative reactor for a  two -phase  operation. 

In this work, a mathematical model to calculate tertiary current distributions in electrochemical 

reactors is presented taking into account the potential and concentration fields together with the 

hydro dynamics under laminar or turbulent conditions. Multiple reactions with different kinetic controls 

are considered at both electrodes. The computational algorithm solving the mod el was implemented in 

OpenFOAM. 

The model was validated by using some test 

reac tions from dilute solutions employ ing a

supporting electrolyte ,2 but also without it  in order to 

study the effect of ionic migration.  The experiments 

were carried out in a modified hydrocyclone with a 

segmented cathode, 12 segments.  A close agreement 

between experimental and predicted curr ent 

distributions was obtained as it can be conclud ed 

from the figure on the left -hand side, which compares 

theoretical , dashed lines,  and experimental , points, 

current distribution s for different values of  both 

volumetric flow rate and applied cathodic potential .

In the  figure,  the  test reaction  was  ferri cyanide 

reduction. 

The modified hydrocyclone was  also 

examined as an alternative reactor for the 

electrochemical processing of two -phase systems. 

Experimental measurements demonstrate an appropriate hydrodynamics of the equipment. Mass -transfer 

measurement s corroborate the good performance of the cylindrical body of the hydrocyclone.  Copper 

electrodeposition 3 and s ulphur dioxide re duction to colloidal sulphur 4 were used to check  the  behaviour  of 

the reactor, being it promising for these tasks. 

1. N. Dhamo and R. Kammel,  Metall,  46  (9), 912 -916 (1992). 

2. A. N. Colli and J. M. Bisang,  J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  167  (1), 13513  (2020). 

3. L. C. Resio, O. González Pérez, and J. M. Bisang,  J. Electrochem. Soc.,  164  (14), E529 -E535 (2017). 

4. A. N. Colli, J. P. Fornés, O. González Pérez, and J. M. Bisang,  Electrochim. Acta,  309  219 -227 (2019). 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18          

> 025 50 75 100 125 150
> 0246810 12 14 16 18
> 050 100 150 200 250
> j (A/m 2)

y (cm)                     

> Q= 5.2 dm 3/min
> 123456
> Segment number
> 78910 11 12
> Q= 8.7 dm 3/min
> ESCE =-0.5 V
> ESCE =-0.7 V
> ESCE =-0.9 V
> ESCE =-1.1 V
> j (A/m 2)

y (cm) New tools for the r ational development of metal -sulfur batteries 

Rinaldo Raccichini, Liam Furness, James W. Dibden , Nina Meddings , He Li, John Lampkin, John R. 

Owen, and Nuria Garcia -Araez 

University of Southampton 

Highfield Campus, SO17 1BJ, Southampton, United Kingdom 

n.garcia -araez@soton.ac.uk 

Metal -sulfur batteries have an outstanding theoretical specific energy, but their development is hampered 

by the ir complicated and not fully understood reaction mechanism s, in which a variety of polysulfide 

speci es are formed in the pathway of the reduction of sulfur to metal sulfide. Performance improvement s

can be obtained by tuning the electrolyte properties , e.g., in terms of polysulfide solubility /speciation .

Consequently, in order to guide a rational method for electrolyte optimization, we have developed a 

reliable analytical method that enable s the determination of the total solubility of polysulfide species and 

the average chain length of polysulfide species in the polysulfide solutions, which are key prope rties that 

critically affect battery performance and, in particular, the role of polysulfide species as intermediate 

species [1]. 

However, the performance of metal -sulfur batteries is also critically affected by the interplay between 

electrolyte formulati on and electrode composition. To study such effects, we have recently demonstrated 

the use of a simple impedance -based method of analysis of porous electrodes, using a transmission line 

model with only two fitting parameters, to quantify the rate of ion tr ansport within the porous electrode, 

which we have shown is a key property determining the electrode performance [2,3]. Fig ure 1 illustrates 

the physical meaning of the model, with electrons travelling through the carbon conductive additive (in 

black ) and ions (e.g. , Li +) travelling through the electrolyte filling the pores (in blue ). Interestingly, we 

found that the electrode/electrolyte combinations that resulted in faster ion transport were also the ones 

leading to optimal battery performance , thus provi ding the bases for the rational design of high -

performance batteries. 

For the direct detection of polysulfide species formed during the operation of metal -sulfur cells, we have 

also developed a novel cell design incorporating a reliable and highly sensiti ve electrochemical sensor .

With the use of a glassy carbon sensor material, the detection of polysulfides is achieved with 

unprecedented sensitivity [4,5] .

Figure 1. Illustration of the meaning of 

the transmission line model used to 

characterize sulfur -carbon composites 

for Li -S battery applications and 

Nyquist plot of the as sociated 

impedance spectrum .

References: 

1. J. W. Dibden, J. W. Smith, N. Zhou , N. Garcia -Araez and J.R. Owen . Chem . Commun., 2016,52, 

12885 -12888. 

2. R. Raccichini, L. Furn ess, J. W. Dibden, J. R. Owen, N. Garcia -Araez. J Electrochem Soc. 2018, 165, 

A2741. 

3. R. Raccichini, J. W. Dibden, A. Brew, J. R. Owen, and N. Garcia -Araez. J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 

267. 

4. N. Meddings, J.R. Owen and N. Garcia -Araez. J. Power Sources , 2017, 364, 148 -155 .

5. N. Meddings, J. R. Owen, N. Garcia -Araez, ChemElectroChem , 2019 , 6, 1678. Two steps synthesis of D -glucaric acid by electrocatalytic oxidation of 

# D-glucose on a gold electrode: influence of operational parameters 

Giulia Moggia 1,2 , Jonathan Schalck 1, Nick Daems 1,2 , Tom Breugelmans 1,2  

> 1

Research group Applied Electrochemistry & C atalysis, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 

2610 Wilrijk, Belgium.  

> 2

Separation & Conversion Technologies, VITO, Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium. 

Giulia.Moggia@uantwerpen.be 

The ambition to convert our fossil -fuel economy into a decarbonized e conomy will inevitably pass 

through the use of renewable energy platforms, such as wind, water, sun and nuclear fission. Similarly, 

also the production of chemicals is meant to reduce its dependence on a petroleum based feedstock, 

promoting instead the use of bio -waste (up to 138 million tons per year in the European Union [1] ), which 

seemly fits in the concept of circular economy. The selective oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid, and its 

subsequent oxidation to glucaric acid are potentially key steps in the biomass -to -chemicals value chain 

for the numerous application of glucaric acid, for example, in the production of metal complexation 

agents, biodegradable polymers and detergents [2] . Nowadays the major challenge for the bio -based 

chemical production of glucaric acid is the lack of a suitable conversion technology [3] . Especially when 

compared to the already settled  petrochemical  technologies based on  fossil  resources, the conversion of 

renewable carbon to chemicals is the most undeveloped and complicated of all biorefineries [3] . The most 

promising technique up -to -date is the e lectrochemical oxidation, which involv es the transfer of electrons 

in the reactions, eliminat ing the use of high O 2 partial pressure or of hazardous oxidants . Addi tionally, it 

can be operated under mild conditions and allows control over the selectivity by tuning the electrode 

potential. In our recent work we demonstrated the correlation between the oxidation potential and the 

reactivity of the functional groups of glucose for three selected metal electrodes [4] . The best selectivity 

to the products of interest was obtained on gold where a low oxidation potential (0.55 V RHE ) leads to the 

selective production of D -gluconic acid, while a more positive potential (1.3 0 VRHE ) promotes the further 

oxidation to D -glucaric acid [4] .

Here , we investigate d the impact of the operational parameters (pH, substrate concentration, cell voltage ,

temperature and reaction time) on the two oxidation steps separately (respectively starting from glucose 

and gluconic acid) with as final aim to identify th ose conditions that ensure an optimal sele ctivity to 

glucaric acid . Our results show that while the selectivity of the first oxidation step is highly depen dent on 

the pH and temperature of the electrolysis , the second step is mainly affected by the applied potential 

during the electrolysis experiment . The best selectivity that could be obtained in the first oxidati on step to 

gluconic acid wa s 97.6%, at 0. 55 VRHE , 5°C and pH=11.3; and in the further oxidation to glucaric acid 

wa s 89.5% at 1.1 0 VRHE , 20°C and pH=12.5. 

Figure 1: (Top) Reaction scheme , (bottom) change in selectivity as function of pH for first oxidat ion 

[1] https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020 -section/bioeconomy (accessed October 

30, 2019). 

[2] M. Khawaji, et al. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 256 (2019). 

[3] J.J. Bozell, et al. , Green Chem. (201 0). 

[4] G. Moggia, et al. , ChemElectroChem, (2019) 1 –11. DNAzyme Based Sensor for the Detection of Metal Ions in Solutions 

# Using R esistive Pu lse Se nsing 

Imoge n Heaton , Mark Platt 

Loughborough University 

Department of C hemistry, Epinal Way, Loughborough LE11 3TU 

i.heat on@lboro.ac. uk 

Based on the Coulter counter principle, resistive pulse sensing (RPS) measures particles on a particle by 

particle basis as they traverse a nanopore providing information on particle size, concentration and 

charge. RPS has been used to mea sure a large variety of analytes such as proteins, DNA, a nd metal ions. 

The use of DNAzymes for the detection of metal ions has been demonstrated for multiple targets .

Currently most strategies rely on the use of fluorescence to measure the cleavage of D NA upon target 

metal binding. RPS offers a label free sensi ng method as it can resolve the changes from ssDNA to 

dsDNA. Here we develop the use of DNAzymes with RPS technologies for the detection of calcium ions 

in solution. 

We present the initial testi ng which indicates the ability to measure calcium ions binding with our 

DNAzyme before the DNA undergoes re arrangement as demonstrated through changes in the particle 

speed, figure 1b. We demonstrate the change in speed to be proportional to the amount of Ca2+ present, 

figure 1d, and our assays selectivity over a mi xture of other metal ions. The work allows for future 

development of the assay for environmental testing and the ability to multiplex it previously designed 

metal ion aptamers. 

Figure 1. (a) Ex ample of a baseline current and blockade events caused by the carriers translocating the 

pore, inset showing 25 – 30 s. (b) Schematic of the DNAzyme binding with Ca2+ ions before rearranging. 

(c). Schematic of a particle traversing the RPs device and the s ignal produced. Bloc kade magnitude Δip, 

and full width half -maximum are shown. (d) Relative particle speeds normalised to blank DNAzyme 

functionalised particles vs. varying amounts of Ca2+ ions from 1 – 9 μM. Natural Methylxanthines : Multifacet Starting Material s in 

# Electroorganic Synthesis 

Marta Feroci 

Dept. Scienze di Base e Applicate per l'Ingegneria (SBAI), Sapienza University of Rome, 

Via del Castro Laurenziano, 7, 00161, Rome, Italy 

marta.feroci@uniroma1 .it 

Natural methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline, theobromine) are abundant natural compounds present i n

more than 60 plants, cocoa, t ea and coffee among the most famous. They can be thus considered 

renewable bio -based reagents. 

Their stucture (ur acil and imidazole fused rings) can, in principle, be transformed into many different 

derivatives, not only by functionalization of the nitrogen atoms, but also by opening of one of the two 

rings. Nonetheless, methylxanthines are molecules particularly res istant to ring chemical transformations, 

needing very harsh conditions to open one of the two rings. 

In this context, electrochemistry can play an important role as it allows the methylxanthines structure 

transformation under quite mild conditions. 

Althoug h the anodic oxidation of these natural compounds is by far the prevalent electrochemical reaction 

reported in the literature (and widely used in electrochemical sensors), also their reduction is possible, 

both in the absence and in the presence of the imi dazole nitrogen alkylation prior to the cathodic 

reduction. 

This presentation will deal with the various possibilities to transform theophylline and caffeine by 

electrochemical means, by both anodic and cathodic reactions, evidencing analogies and differen ces with 

the reactivity of the same species carried out by classical chemical reactions. 

References 

F. Pandolfi, L. Mattiello, D. Zane, M. Feroci, Electrochemical behaviour of 9 -methylcaffeinium iodide 

and in situ electrochemical synthesis of hymenia cidin, Electrochim. Acta 2018 , 280 , 71 -76. 

R. Petrucci, G. Zollo, A. Curulli, G. Marrosu, A new insight into the oxidative mechanism of caffeine and 

related methylxanthines in aprotic medium: may caffeine be really considered as an antioxidant? BBA, 

Gen. Subjects 2018 , 1862 , 1781 -1789. 

F. Pandolfi, I . Chiarotto, L . Mattiello, D . Rocco, M . Feroci , Cathodic reduction of caffeine: amino -

functionalized imidazole from a bio -based reagent , Synlett 2019 , 30 , 1215 -1218. 

I. Chiarotto, L . Mattiello, F . Pandolfi, D. Rocco, M . Feroci, R . Petrucci , Electrochemical oxidation of 

theophylline in organic solvents: HPLC -PDA -ESI -MS/MS ana lysis of the oxidation products, 

ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6, 4511 -4521. 

M. Feroci, M . Bortolami, I . Chiarotto, P . Di Matteo, L . Mattiello, F. Pandolfi, D . Rocco, R . Petrucci , An 

insight on the reactivity of the  electrogenerated  radical cation of caffeine , Electrochem 2020 , accepted .Monitoring of Vancomycin and Gentamicin Treatment Using 

# Electrochemical Sensors 

Bogdan Feier , Adrian Blidar, Cecilia Cristea 

”Iuliu Hațieganu ” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry 

No. 4, Pasteur str., 4000349, Cluj -Napoc a, Romania 

feier.george@umfcluj.ro 

Vancomycin (VAN) is a glycopeptide antibiotic, with bactericidal action towards Gram -positive bacteria, 

in particular enterococci, streptococci and st aphylococci. V AN is indicated parenterally for the treatment 

of severe infections caused by bacteria resistant to other antibiotics and for the prophylaxis of 

postoperative infections [1]. Gentamicin (GEN) is an aminoglycoside antibiotic, widely used as 

prophylaxis and treatment in many clinical situations, like severe infec tions with a wide range of Gram -

negative bacilli, against staphylo cocci and certain mycobacteria [2 ]. The treatments with VAN or GEN 

can lead to ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity and bacterial resistance to antibiotics, needing a therapeutic 

monitoring of these antibiotics that maximizes efficacy, reduces toxicity and the spread of the antibiotic 

resistance. 

The purpose of thi s study was the development of fast and sensitive methods for the electrochemical 

analysis of VAN and GEN from biological samples (human se rum and urine). 

Two strategies were used for the electrochemical detection of VAN . First, involving a battery of tests, t he 

complex electrochemical fingerprint (CEF) of VAN was achieved, incorporating the electrochemical 

behavior of VAN at different commer cially available screen printed electrodes, at several electrolytes, at 

successive analyses, after simple pretreatment, using both the anodic and cathodic peaks. 

The s econd method was based on the interaction between VAN and gold. Thus, a hybrid graphene -gold 

nanostructures electrode was employed for the direct VAN detection by anodic oxidation and for the 

indirect VAN detection, using the electro -active gold nanostructures as probe to monitor the changes in 

their cathodic signal due to the interaction bet ween gold nanostructures and VAN .

In order to explain the electrochemical behavior of vancomycin, the mechanism of the VAN anodic 

oxidation was elucidated by high performance liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry 

analyses of the products obt ained after small scale electrolysis and a two -step electrochemical -chemical 

mechanism was proposed .

The electrochemical behavior of GEN was studied using different electrochemical techniques, different 

electrolyte solutions and several screen printed ele ctrodes (SPE): carbon -based (C -SPE), graphene -based 

(G -SPE), platinum -based (Pt -SPE), gold -based (Au -SPE) and carbon -based modified with gold 

nanoparticles (AuNP -SPE). A sensitive and selective electrochemical method was developed using the 

GEN anodic oxid ation in alkaline medium at the C -SPE. 

To facilitate a fast and simple electrochemical detection of VAN and GEN from human serum and urine ,

different treatments of the biological samples were tested. The human serum and urine containing Van or 

GEN were tre ated with different protein precipitation agents, liquid -liquid extraction and different solid 

phase extraction procedures and the influence of each treatment on the electrochemical signal of VAN or 

GEN and of the interferents was tested. Also , the electro chemical analysis of VAN and GEN from human 

serum and urine was optimized in terms of electrode material, electrolyte and electrochemical technique 

in order to eliminate/diminish the electrochemical signal of the interferents from these complex matrices. 

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Research and Innovation, CNCS 

- UEFISCDI, project number PN -III -P1 -1.1 -PD -2016 -1132, within PNCDI III. 

References 

[1] FR Bruniera, F.R. et al.  The use of vancomycin with its therapeutic a nd adverse effects: a review. 

European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences 2015 19:694 -700. 

[2] C. Chen, Y. Chen, P. Wu, B. Chen, Update on new medicinal applications of gentamicin: Evidence -

based review. Journal of the Formosan Medical Associa tion 2014, 113.72 -82 Effect of inten tiona l convection on passivation of Fe -6Cr surface in 

# acidic Na2SO 4 solution 

Ko ji Fushimi 1, Tomomi Kanazawa 2, Akihiro Fujimura 2, Yuichi Kitagawa 1, Yasuchika Hasegawa 1,

Takashi Doi 3

> 1

Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University 

> 2

Graduate Sch ool of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Hokkaido University 

Kita -13 Jo, Nishi -8 Chome , Kita -ku, Sappor o, Hokkaido 060 -8628, Japan 

kfushimi@eng.hokudai.ac.jp 

> 3

GResearch & Development, Niopp on Steel Corp oration 

Fusocyo -1, Amagasaki, Hyogo 660 -0891, Japan 

The anodic oxidation behavior of Fe -6Cr during potentio -dynamic polarization in pH 4.5 Na 2SO 4 solution 

was inv estigated by electrochemical el lipso -microscopy . Active, passive , and trans -passive sta tes of the 

Fe -6Cr surface showed heter ogeneous oxida tion be haviors depend ing on the substrate micro -structure ,

electrode potential and solution convect ion . Enhancem ent of mass -transport by solution injection in the 

la tter half of the active state resulted in acc elerat ion o f passiv ation of the Fe -6Cr surface. The p assivity -

current density of t he surface passivated by intentional convection was reduced to almost half of the 

current density of the surface that had been in the passive state in a stag nant solution , an d the surface 

passivated by intentional convection sh owed better resistance against pitting in a chloride -containing 

solu tion . The improvement of passivity of the surface wa s attribut ed to the formation of a Cr-enri che d

passive film by a de creas e in the th ickness of the diffusion layer in the lat ter half of the active state .Electrochemical imaging of E.coli biofilms using Soft -Probe -Scanning 

# Electrochemical Microscopy 

Sorour Darvishi , a Horst Pick, b Emad Oveisi, c Andreas Lesch, d and Hubert H. Girault, a 

> a

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Valais Wallis, Labo ratory of Physical and 

Analytical Electrochemistry, Rue de l'Industrie 17, 1950 Sion, Switzerland.  

> b

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Laboratory of Protein and Cell Engineering, EPFL 

Station 15, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.  

> c

Interdisciplina ry Center for Electron Microscopy, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 

CH -1015 Lausanne, Switzerland  

> d

University of Bologna, Department of Industrial Chemistry "Toso Montanari", Viale del Risorgimento 

4, 40136 Bologna, Italy. 

Presenting autho r’s email:  Sorour.darvishi@epfl.ch 

Biofilms are slimy layers composed of attached microbial cells , which are embedded in a matrix of 

extracellular polymeric substances providing protective functions. Biofi lms secreted by the microbes play 

a major role in the manifestation of severe infectious diseases . It has been estimated that about 80% of 

chronic microbial infections in the human bo dy are due to bacterial biofilm formation . Biofilms are of 

serious univer sal concern because they provide increased protection against antibiotics, which can be 10 -

1000 times higher than observed in free -floating cells. They represent also a host defense system against 

competing microbes and external physical and chemical facto rs .1 Biofilms are usually analyzed by using 

fluorescence imaging , which has limitation s because it does not allow long -term observations of different 

biofilm developmental stages . Here we demonstrate that e lectrochemical detection is a suitable method to 

overcome this limitation. 

We present electrochemical imaging of E. coli biofilm development and long -term monitoring of 

biofilm metabolic activities using soft -probe scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM). Soft probes 

are made of thin flexible insu lating plastic films with embedded carbon microelectrode. They are brushed 

in a gentle contact mode over the biofilm surface guaranteeing a constant working distance while the 

biofilm remains intact. Biofilms were grown for up to ten days on various substr ates including glass, 

plastics and metals. The oxidized form of redox -active species was reduced by the metabolic activity of 

the biofilm. This allowed SECM feedback mode imaging (Fig. 1). Finally, the advantages and 

perspectives of using soft probes towar ds the potential mapping of metabolic communication molecules 

in biofilm communities will be discussed. Finally we aim at develop ing methodologies for using 

electrochemical methods for the disinfection of bacterial biofilms.             

> Figure 1.a) Schematic representation of SECM feedback mode imaging of a biofilm using FcMeOH as redox mediator. b)
> Feedback mode Soft -Probe -SECM image. c) Mean currents ± standard deviation values over the E.coli biofilm and bare glass.
> Experimental details : working potential ET= 0.4 V, probe translation speed = 25 μm/s, step size = 10 μm, 2.5 mM FcMeOH in 100
> mM PBS (pH = 7.4).

## References 

[1]  Sharma, D., et al , 2019. Antimicrobial Resistance & Infection Control , 8(1), p.76. Multifunction Nanostructured Coatings for Corrosion Protection. 

# Contribution to a Sustainable Technology 

Mário G. S. Ferreira , João Tedim 

mgferreira@ua.pt 

Department of Materials and Ceramic Engineering, and CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials, 

University of Aveiro, 3810 -193 Aveiro, Portugal 

The active corrosion protection of metallic substrates can be achieved by addition of corrosion inhibitors 

to protective coatings. However, direct mixing of an inhibitor with coating formulations can lead to 

important drawbacks decreasing barrier properties of the coating and diminishing activity of the inhibitor. 

Also, soluble inhibitors can cause phenomena like osmotic blistering or be leached out spontaneously to 

the environment, which limits lo ng -term performance and is environmentally pernicious. To overcome this 

problem and have controlled release of inhibitor different strategies of inhibitors storage in nanocontainers 

have been developed in order to produce smart self -healing coatings. Succe ssful use of this technology 

could allow the replacement of Cr VI traditionally used in coatings and other surface treatments, as this is 

a hazardous health and environmental product. 

In this work novel protective nanostructured coatings with self -healing ability are presented. This effect is 

obtained on the basis of nanocontainers that release entrapped corrosion inhibitors in response to local pH 

changes or presence of corrosive species. The development of new nanocontainers for organic and 

inorganic gree n corrosion inhibitors is described, especially the most promising from industrial point of 

view, based on Layered Double Hydroxides (LDH). The combination of different of these nanocontainers 

in the same coating system has proved to be effective to accomp lish further functions as antifouling and 

sensing. Potential use of materials that exist in nature will also be reviewed. Electrochemical Plasmonic Optical Fiber Probe for Real -time Insight 

# into Coreactant Electrochemiluminescence 

Jingxian Yu ,1 Peipei Jia, 1 Shengping Wang, 2 Heike Ebendorff -Heidepriem, 1 and Andrew D. Abell 1 

> 1

ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonic s (CNBP), Institute of Photonics and Advanced 

Sensing (IPAS), School of Physical Scienc es, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia  

> 2

Faculty of Materials Science and Chemistry, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China 

E-mail address : jin gxian.yu@adelaide.edu.au 

Electrochemical surface plasmon resonance (ESPR) is a powerful technique for defining dynamic 

changes in chemical composition and morphology of functional interfaces by correlating spectral 

information with voltametric characteris tics of the electrode processes. 1, 2 However, conventional 

Kretschmann prism -based surface plasmon resonance (SPR) configurations require sophisticated 

apparatus and complex optics. Here, we present a versatile flow injection ESPR device that incorporates a 

plasmonic and conductive fiber optic probe, for which a gold nanohole array film is integrated onto the 

endface of a conventional optical fiber via template transfer. The coreactant -based Ru(bpy) 32+ /

tripropylami ne (TPrA) electrochemiluminescence (ECL) system, is chosen to unravel electrochemically -

induced real -time interfacial information, since such an approach is increasingly employed for clinical 

assay analysis and the associated ECL mechanism is an active are a of investigation. The ESPR 

observations provide novel experimental evidence to support the proposition that ECL reactions undergo 

an oxidative -reduction pathway. Moreover, the ESPR peak shift exhibits a broader linear detection range 

of TPrA concentratio n (0 - 20 mmol L -1), compared to the ECL and SPR techniques. This study clearly 

demonstrates that the novel fiber optic ESPR device presents as a reliable and multimodal 

spectroelectrochemical platform to gain mechanistic insights into complicated chemical processes and 

provide sensing capabilities, while offering great simplicity, portability and miniaturization. 

Figure 1. (Top -left) SEM image of the gold hexagonal 

nanohole array film and o ptical fiber tip after a gold 

nanohole film transferred . (Centr e) Fiber optic ESPR 

device , and o xidative -reduction pathway for the 

coreactant ECL system. (Bottom -right) Multiple mode s

for signal detection. 

Figure 2.  SPR transmission intensities at 

900 nm in 1.0 mmol L -1 Ru(bpy) 3Cl 2 and 

0.1 mol L -1 PBS (pH = 7.4) so lutions 

containing a varied concentration of TPrA 

at a scan rate of 50 mV s -1.

1. Chieng, A.; Chiang, M.; Triloges, K.; Chang, M.; Wang, Y. X., Recent progress in the studies 

of electrochemical interfaces by surface plasmon reson ance spectroscopy and microscopy. Current 

Opinion in Electrochemistry 2019, 13 , 94 -99. 

2. Singh, P., SPR Biosensors: Historical Perspectives and Current Challenges. Sensors and 

Actuators B -Chemical 2016, 229 , 110 -130. Teaching electrochemistry without Fake News 

Hubert H. Girault ,

Laboratoire d ’Electroch imie Physique et Analytique 

Ecole Polytechnique Fédéra le de Lausanne, CH -1951, Sion, Switzerland 

Hubert .girault@epfl.ch 

As the teaching support of electrochemical sc ience has moved from textbo oks, to slides and on -line 

information providers, many conc epts of electroc hemistry have become simplified to the point of

becoming tot ally wrong. 

Indeed, a textbook usually took many yea rs of preparation and was thoroughly revie wed. The information 

was refl ecting the knowledge of the time but c ould generally be trusted. Nowadays, fewer textbooks are 

published and many teacher s gather th eir teaching material from on -line sources. 

Here, we shall review some FAKE NEWS that propagat e through the literature and unfor tunate ly to 

lecture notes. 

The most damaging fake news is th at of the HO MO -LUMO semantic to express the redox stability of a n

electrolyte in a battery. It started in a publication from well -kn own scienti st s and propagated virally .

Another fake news is again a HOMO -LUMO semantic to express the solvent re -organisation ener gy in 

electron transfer the ory. 

A less damaging fake news consists of sayin g that the current reaches a maximum in linear sweep 

voltammetry because the rea ctant concentration drops to ze ro at the electrode. This is not the case …

Other fake news are based on an obsolete vocabulary. A classic ex ample is the use of N HE to refer to 

SHE ; indeed , very few are still familiar to the concept of n ormality in solution chemistry. 

Many students find electrochemistr y to be a difficult subject in their curricula. Indeed, electrochemical 

rea ctions take place at a surface and a basic knowledge in sol id state physics and of electrolyte solution 

chemistry is required to unders tand interf acia l reactions with the difficult conc ept of elec tric potentials (so 

many of them: inner, outer, surface, redox, electrode , Nernst, Donnan, G alvani , Zeta, ..) 

In man y cursi , electrochemistry is not taught an y more by physical chemists to physi cal chemists, but to a 

much lar ger audience with a much more disperse background. This requires a rewri ting of old c oncepts in 

a unified approach. The presenter still wanders where he is on the Dunning -Kruger curve be low 

(Courtesy of Wikipedia) , but noneth eless will advocate for the teaching of the Fermi level of the electrons 

in soluti on to present elec trochemical science in a unified framework. Development of a European Master Program me Curricul um in Fuel 

# Cell and Hydrogen Science and Engineering 

K. Bouzek , M. Paidar, R. Steinberger -Wilckens 

University of Chemistry and Technology Prague 

Technicka 5, Prague 6 166 28, Czech Republic 

bouzekk@vscht.cz ;

University of Birmingham, School of Chemical Engineering, Centre for FC & Hydrogen Research 

Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , UK 

r.steinbergerwilckens@bham.ac. uk 

Hydrogen related technologies, like e.g. fuel cells and water electrolysis, are currently rapidly progressing 

to reach full market application. This fact is indicated by an exponentially growing number and size of 

demonstration activities , as well as by growing interest on side of the industry. Motivation for this trend 

clearly follows from the policy of reduction of CO 2 emissions, as well as dependence on the politically 

instable regions exporting fossil fuels . It is, however, necessary to keep in mi nd the important aspect that 

hydrogen technologies, as a typical representative of novel hi -tech processes, depend s very significantly 

on the availability of correspondingly trained operators, not mentioning development, production and 

installation teams. For the moment, preparation of respective staff is not secured in a sufficient quantity 

and very often also quality, in sense of required broadness of knowledge. T he t arget of the described 

activity is to overcome this obstacle .

The progress to the final target consists of several steps requiring the cooperation of a spectrum of 

institutions able to cover the relevant topic s in required broadness. The m ethodology used in the present 

case may be described as follows: 

- Identification of the outline structure of the program me proposed ,

- Identification of the suitable partners having expertise in the related fields ,

- Setting up the detailed study program me curricul um broken down to the individual lectures ,

- Produc ing content for the program me developed ,

- Piloting th e program me proposed at the selected universit ies, 

- Collecting feedback from the students as well as from the teachers involved in piloting ,

- Pr oduc ing a final version of the program me content ,

- Applying for program me accreditation .

As the most relevant degre e of study, a M aster program me was selected for this project . This is because a

Master s degree allows more substantial specialisation on hydrogen technologies based on engineering 

fundamentals obtained during the Bachelor degree study. A s econd initiative is oriented towards 

continuous professional development (CPD). Both these activities allow to train a significant number of 

specialists needed for the transition to the hydrogen economy implementation quite rapidly .

The course content elaborated is prepar ed in the way to be available in a repository and organised such as 

to allow high quality distan ce learning. A l imitation is represent ed by at least 20 % of the course content 

to be delivered at the participating University locally in face -to -face fashion . Participation of partners 

from various European countries ensures translation of the materials produced to a number of languages 

in order to make them more attractive for the students as well as for the Universities. Project core partners 

will provide the necessary support to wards the realisation of the study program me s and in keeping the 

content up to date .

This project has received funding from the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking under grant 

agreement No 779730 . This Joint Undertaking receiv es support from the European Union’s Horizon 

2020 research and innovation programme, Hydrogen Europe and Hydrogen Europe research .Boosting Aqueous Zinc Batteries by Intercalation Chemistries at High -

# Voltage 

Huang Zhang ,1,2,3 Xu Liu ,2,3 Bingsheng Qin, 2,3 Stefano Passerini 2,3  

> 1

Institute of Flexible Electronics (IFE), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU), 127 West Youyi 

Road, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, China  

> 2

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> 3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany 

Email:  iamhzhang@nwpu.edu. cn  (H.Z.);  stefano.passerini@kit.edu  (S.P.) 

Aqueous batteries are highly desirable for large -scale energy storage . However, the energy density and 

cycling stability are major issue s for their applications . Rechargeable aqueous zinc batteries have a direct 

advantage as they can employ Zn metal as negative electrode .1 However, their development is plagued by 

the reversibility of Zn anode and a limited choice of positive electrodes, which often show inadequate 

cycl ing life and low energy density. Recently, the concept of highly concentrated electrolyte enables the 

wide electrochemical stability window of aqueous solution, providing the basis for the development of 

high voltage aqueous batteries. 2,3

Here we demo nstrate the intercalation reaction s in optimal aqueous electrolyte s for high -voltage aqueous 

zinc batter ies . The designed aqueous concentrated electrolyte s can manifest superior Zn stripping/plating 

reversibility, combined with a promising electrochemical stability window . Firstly, we investigated the 

reversible anion intercalation reaction in graphite positive electrode for aqueous zinc battery , as a concept 

of dual -ion battery . This cell offers a high operating voltage and unprecedented cycling stability with 

comparable Coulombic efficiency. Further , we report the high -voltage intercalation reaction of V2O5

positive electrode using a concentrated gel polymer aqueous electrolyte for zinc batteries. Quasi -solid -

state Zn/V 2O5 batteries employing such an elect rolyte, reach a high operating voltage of 2.2 V, resulting 

in a specific energy of 326 Wh kg -1 at 20 mA g -1 based on cathode mass, and a capacity retention of 93% 

over 600 cycles at 500 mA g -1. Moreover, the cell well performs in the 0 -40 °C temperature ra nge without 

significant energy loss. These results may open up the development of high -voltage aqueous Zn batteries 

employing intercalation -based positive electrodes leading to potentially high energy, high reversibility 

and high safety. 

[1] H. Zhang, B. Qin, J. Han, S. Passerini. ACS Energy Letters 3 (2018) 1769 -1770. 

[2] C. Yang, J. Chen, T.P. Pol lard, X. Lü, C.J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. 

Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu, C. Wang. Nature 569 (2019) 245 -250. 

[3] D. Kundu, B.D. Adams, V. Du ffort, S.H. Vajargah, L.F. Nazar, Nature Energy, 1 (2016) 16119. Data -Driven Design of Micros tructure in All -Solid -State Batteries 

Masaki Adachi 1,2 , Ignas Budvytis 1, Caterina Ducati 2 and Robe rto Cip olla 1

> 1

Department of Engineering , University of Cam bri dge , CB2 1PZ , United K ingdom 

> 2

Department of Materials Science & Met allurgy, University of Cambridge , CB 3 0FS , United 

Kingdom 

e-mail address : ma 921@cam.ac.uk , 52stringguitar@gmail.com 

Since the discovery of practical sulfide superionic conductors in 2016 [1], all -solid -state batteries 

(ASSBs) have been considered as one of the most promising candidates for next -generation batteries. 

ASSBs are not only high -power ed but also electrochemically stable. These properties enable a wide 

selection of high -capacity active materials, some of which are incompatible to liquid -state batt er ies . In 

co ntrast, ASSBs ha ve a difficulty in making contact interfaces between solid particles, even though this is 

a negligible problem for liquid -state batterie s. Repeated charge / discharge cycles cause disconnects in 

inter -particle interfaces, res ult in g in shor tening batter y li fe . This degradation phenomenon is derived from 

a crack propagation phenomenon in a heterogeneous powder mixture, and accurate pr ediction is 

extremely difficult to deal with existing simulation methods. Solving the problem o f in te rfacia l contact 

and preventing degradation are one of the most important issues toward the practical application of 

ASSBs. 

Recently, battery degradation research by data -driven approach was succe ssful in accurate ly 

predict ing batter y li fe in variou s char ge / dis charge patterns [2]. This indicates that the data -driven 

approach is more effective than a simulation -based approach in predicting batter y li fe . However , the input 

data in this study was acquired from mass -produced and identical batterie s with extr emely low variance 

of properties that meets the product standard. In other words, this study provides optimal control methods 

for suppressing degradation of the identical batteries, but does not provide a better battery design to 

extend its life. 

There fore , we studied a n ew data -driven method to explore a better electrode design . As 

experimental insights, ASSBs ’ li ves differ in different manufacturing process es , even though the design 

value s and materials composition of the sa mples are completel y same. On e of t he cause s is c onsidered to 

depend on a microstructure insi de a batter y, partic ula rly sp atial distr ibu tion and rel ative positions of each 

mater ials [3 ]. Therefore, we acquired 17,700 scannin g microscope (SEM ) images from 177 various 

design of batt eries in order to investigate the relation ship between the microstructure s and the batteries 

lives. In this presentation , we discuss the result s of recognized degradation patterns through image 

generative model using t wo pair s of images from fresh and degrade d b att eries. 

References 

[1] Y. Ka to, S. Hori , T. Saito, et al. , High -power all -solid -state batter ies using sulfide superionic 

conductors, Nat. Energy 1, 16030 (2016) 

[2] K. A. Severson, P. M. Attia, N. Jin, et al. , Data -driven prediction of battery c ycle lif e before capacity 

degradation, Nat . Energy 4, 383 -391 (2019) 

[3 ] X. Wu, J. Billaud, I. Jerjen, et al ., Operando visualization of morphological dynamics in all -solid -state 

batteries, Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1901517 (2019 )Tripodal Anchoring Groups for Molecular Electronic Elements. 

Magdal éna  Hromadová 1, Viliam Kolivo ška 1, Jakub Šeber a1, Táňa Sebechlebská 1,2 , Jind řich  Gasior 1,

Štěpánka Nováková Lachmanová 1, Gábor Mészáros 3, Marcin Lindner 4, Marcel Mayor 4, Michal Valášek 4 

> 1

J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Dolejškova 3, 182 23 

Prague, Czech Republic  

> 2

Department of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University 

in Bratislava, Mlynská dolina, Ilkovičova 6, 842 15 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 

> 3

Research Centre for Natural Sciences, HAS, Magyar Tudósok krt. 2, H -1117, Budapest, Hungary 

> 4

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Nanotechnology, P. O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

E-mail: magdalena.hromadova@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Knowledge of the conductance properties of individual molecules is indispensable for the development of 

future molecular electronic devices. We have studied a series of molecules based on oligophenylene 

molecular wires containing tripodal anchoring groups which differ in the position of thiols ( meta versus 

para ) on the aromatic rings of the tetraphenylmethane tripod (see structures below). The conductance of 

individual molecules was obtained by the scanning tunneling 

mic roscopy break junction method . Density functional theory 

co mbined with the non -equilibrium Green’s function formalism 

was used to understand charge transport properties and provide 

most probable metal -molecule -metal junction geom etries. It was 

shown that i n the molecules studied in this work  the most 

probable molecular junction geometry is the following: three 

thiolates of the tripod are anchored to one electrode and a single 

thiolate of the oligophenylene wire to another one. The junction 

formation probabi lity for meta functionalization was  68 % and 

that for para  55 %, respectively. Nevertheless, the conductance -

distance histograms  for both molecules show two peaks, where 

a high conductance peak G H represents the conductance through 

a tripodal platform, whe reas the low conductance peak G L

represents conductance along the molecule through the tripod -

linked molecular wire as described above. Single molecule 

conductance for meta  functionalized wire is  logG H/G0 (meta) = ‒3.7 ± 0.6 and logG L/G0 (meta) = ‒5.8 ± 

0.5 and that for par a functionalized wire  is logG H/G0 (para) = ‒3. 9 ± 0.6 and logG L/G0 (para) = ‒5. 6 ±

0.5 , respectively. These results indicate that meta substitution leads to a more stable junction compared to 

para molecules, whereas para functionalized tripodal anchoring group has better conducting properties. 

Experimental and theoretical results will be further discussed in terms  of the suitability of these types of 

molecules as support ing conductors for additiona l molecular electronic elements important for the future 

molecular electronics design. 1‒4

Financial support by the Czech Science Foundation (18 -04682S) and the Czech Academy of Sciences 

(RVO: 61388955) is gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

1. V. Kolivoška, J. Šebera, T. Sebechlebská, M. Lindner, J. Gasior, G. Mészáros, M. Mayor, M. 

Valášek, M . Hromadová, Chem. Commun.  55 (2019) 3351. 

2. J. Šebera, V. Kolivoška, M. Valášek, J. Gasior, R. Sokolová, G. Mészáros, W. Hong, M. Mayor, M. 

Hromadová, J. Phys. Chem. C 121 (2017) 12885. 

3.  M. Lindner, M. Val ášek,  J. Homberg, K. Edelmann, L. Gerhard, W. Wulfhek el, O. Fuhr, T. Wächter, 

M. Zharnikov, V. Kolivoška, L. Pospíšil, G. Mészáros, M. Hromadová, M. Mayor, Chem. Eur. J. 22 

(2016) 13218. 

4.  T. Sebechlebská, J. Šebera, V. Kolivoška, M. Lindner, J. Gasior, G. Mészáros, M. Valášek, M. 

Mayor, M. Hromadová, Electro chim. Acta 258 (2017) 1191. SH HS SH SH SH HS HS SH  

> meta para

# Electrochemical Processing f or Small -Scale Robot ics 

Prof. Salvador Pan é

Materials for Robotics, Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, ETH Z ürich 

Tannenstrasse 3, CLA H9, 8092, Z ürich, Swi tzerland 

vidal p@ethz.ch 

We live in a world increasingly su rrounded by robots such as robotic surg ical systems, flying drones, 

autonomous planetary rovers, and robotic appliances. An emerging family of robotic systems are 

untethered micro - and nanorobots . These tiny vehicles can move either by harvesting chemical fuels 

present in their swimming environ ments or by means of external energy sources. One of the ultimate 

goals of small -scale robotics is to develop machines that can deliver drugs, or realize other medical 

missions in confined spaces of the human body. O ther applications include water remedia tion or “on -the -

fly” chemistry. The recent rapid developments in small -scale robotics is undeniably related to advances in 

material science and manufacturing. However, while many applications have been demonstrated, a spects 

such as complex locomotion, mult ifunctionality, biocompatibility and biodegradability need to be further 

investigated for the successful translation of these devices to real applications. To this end, new material -

based concepts and novel fabricatio n schemes are urgently required. 

Electrochemical processing techniques have played a significant role in the development of m aterials for 

small -sca le robotics. Electroless, electroforming, electrodeposi tion and anodization – to name a few –

have been wid ely used a s batch manufacturing approaches for the fabrication of micro - and nanorobots. 

In this talk, I will introduce  some of our  latest developments in small -scale robotics  using electrochemical 

processing techniques . Particularly , I will show how 3D pr inted microtemplates can be exploited to 

produce complex robotic microstructures made of  electr odeposited  rigid metals, soft polymers and 

combinat ions of these. As a result, topologically complex metal -organic structures can be realized with 

sub -micrometri c resolution. I will also demonstrate that metal -organic interlocked micromachines can 

solve several practical challenges in small -scale robotics. We  will  show that high magnetic 

responsiveness, drug loading capabilities, biocompatibility, on -demand shape transformation, and multi -

locomotion modes can be embedded in a single microrobotic machine. Mixed -Valence CoMn Layered Double Hydoxides Nanoparticles as 

# Efficient Electrocalalysts for Hydrogen Peroxide Sensing 

Hani Farhat a, Christine Taviot -Gueho a, Guillaume Monier b, Claude Forano a, Christine Mousty a

> a

Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, SIGMA C lermont, Institut de Chimie de Clermont -Ferrand, F -

63000 Clermont –Ferrand, France. 

> b

Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, SIGMA Clermont, Institut Pascal, F -63000 Clermont –Ferrand, 

France. 

Chr istine.Mousty@UCA.fr 

Among the nanomaterials reported in the lite rature for electroanalytical applications, hybrid and 

biohybrid materials or nanocomposites based on layered double hydroxides (LDH) have been used as 

electrode modifiers for sensing environmental pollutants or small biomarkers, such as glucose or 

hydrogen peroxide 1,2 . LDH are lamellar materials made by the stacking of positively charged brucite -like 

layers separated by intercalated charge -compensating anions and water molecules. They are represented 

by the general f ormula [M 2+ 1−x M3+ x(OH) 2][X m− x/m ,nH 2O] with M 2+ and M 3+ being divalent and trivalent 

metal cations, respectively and X m- the anionic species. Interestingly, the LDH have a unique inorganic 

structure that can combine mixed -valence transition metal cations ( i.e. NiFe, NiCo, CoMn, CoFe, etc.) in 

its framework. These LDH containing transition metals are, since very recently, under great investigation, 

in particular for their electrocatalytic behavior for water splitting, as well for electroanalytical 

applicatio ns 2,3 .

A series of Co RMn -LDH (1 ≤R ≤ 5) was synthesized by the coprecipitation method. The  formation of 

LDH phases is confirmed by powder X -ray diffraction (XRD) and infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The 

energy dispersive X -ray analysis (EDX) confirms the total coprecipitation of Co and Mn a nd the  X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) gives evidence of the joint presence of Co(II), Co(III), Mn(II), Mn(III) 

in the LDH structure. The Rietveld refinement of the structure using the XRD data reveals that the sample 

with a Co:Mn ratio 3:1 displays a pure LDH phase having an unusual trivalent metal composition, with a 

M(II):M(III) near 1:2 and a high content of CO 32-/OH - charge compensating anions in the interlayer. 

When compared with the other Co RMn -LDH, the Co 3Mn -LDH displays the best redox prope rties in an 

alkaline medium (0.1 M NaOH) and in a neutral pH ( 0.1 M Tris buffer at pH 7). An in -depth study of the 

Co 3Mn -LDH obtained after electrochemical oxidation was performed and its electrocatalytic behaviour 

for H 2O2 oxidation at neutral pH was eval uated using cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry . The 

Co 3Mn -CO 3 modified electrode exhibits good electrocatalytic performance in terms of sensitivity 30 mA 

M-1 cm -2 and a detection limit of 86 μM . These values can be compared to those reported for 

electrochemical sensors based on other LDH or mixed spinel oxides , showing the interest of bifunctional 

CoMn -LDH in sensing H 2O2 in neutral pH under oxidation condition. Finally, Co 3Mn -LDH was used as 

immobilization matrix for glucose oxidase (GOx) to buil d bioelectrode s which have been tested for the 

electrochemical detection of glucose. H2O2 2H + + O2 + 2e - 

> Co 3Mn -LDH
> Carbon Electrode
> Co II Co III Mn II Mn III

[1] Mousty, C.; Prevot, V. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2013 , 405 , 3513 -3523. 

[2] Asif, M.; Aziz, A.; Azeem, M.; Wang, Z.; Ashraf, G.; Xiao, F.; Chen, X.; L iu, H. Adv. Colloid 

Interface Sci. 2018 , 262 , 21 -38. 

[3] Vialat, P.; Leroux, F.; Mousty, C. J. Solid State Electrochem. 2015 , 19 , 1975 -1983. Charge Transport T uning in Electrolyte -Gated F ield Effect 

# Transistors by Electrochemical Approach: Inkjet -Printed Graphene 

# Oxide E lectronics and Applications 

Sandra Vasilijevi ć, Giorgio Mattana, Guillaume A nquetin, Nicolas Battaglini *, Benoît Piro 

ITODYS, Université de Paris 

15 rue Jean Antoine de Baïf , Paris, France 

*nicolas. battaglini @u -paris.fr 

Graphene and its derivatives have been extensively studied and 

used for a wide range of applications thanks to their outstanding 

characteristics: hig h value s of charge mobilities , high electronic 

sensitivity toward outside interactions and excellent conductivity. [1] 

Used as the active layer in electrolyte -gated graphene field -effect 

transistors (EG -GFET ; Fig. 1 ), its charge carriers density can be 

modulated with an appropriate gate voltage. [2] In this work, the 

inkjet -printing technique is employed for the deposition of the 

graphene active layer in the GFET structure , usin g our own 

formulation of graphene oxide (GO) printable ink. This allows us 

to obtain an EG -GFET i n a timely, effective manner and at low 

cost. The a s-printed GO layer is then electrochemically reduced 

(rGO) , using an in -situ approach that we developed on the bottom -

contact configuration of GFET s[3,4] . Morpho logy of the printed laye r as well as its electrical properties are 

studied (Fig. 2a ). Reduction degree is observed to significantly affect the charge transport in rGO , leading 

both to the control of charge carriers ’ mobility as well as its doping level. In terms of application s, we 

stud y this EG -GFET for the life cycle monitoring of photosynthetic organisms (Fig. 2b) . During the 

photosynthesis (under illumination of the cyanobacteria Anabaena flos -aquae here studied) oxygen is 

released in the solution and reduced at the gate, whic h permits its detection in terms of increase of the 

device output current. On the contrary, during the respiration process ( occurring in the absence of light) 

there is a decrease of oxygen concentrations due to its consumption by cyanobacteria, resul ting i n a 

decrease of the device current. Furthermore, we study and present the effects of water pollutants on the 

metabolism of cyanobacteria .

Figure 2. (a) Electrical characterization of rGO for different reduction times (arrows showing the 

corresponding current axes of each transfer curve ). (b) Chronoampe rometric study of cyanobacteria ’s

metabolism in the presence (current increase) and abse nce of light (current decrease) in rGO -EG -FET 

configuration. 

[1] B. Zhan, C. Li, J. Yang, G. Jenkins, W. Huang, X. Dong, Small 2014 , 10, 4042 .

[2] I. Meric, M. Y. Han, A. F. Young, B. Ozyilmaz, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard, Nature Nanotech 2008 , 3,654. 

[3] R. Furlan de Oliveira, P. A. Livio, V. Montes‐García, S. Ippolito, M. Eredia, P. Fanjul‐Bolado, M. B. 

González García, S. Casalini, P. Samorì, Adv. Func t. Mater. 2019 , 29 , 1905375. 

[4] S. Pei, H. -M. Cheng, Carbon 2012 , 50 , 3210. 

(a) 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 

> 1,37x10 -3
> 1,38x10 -3
> 1,39x10 -3
> 1,40x10 -3
> 1,40x10 -3
> Time (s) Drain current (A)
> 4,0x10 -10
> 6,0x10 -10
> 8,0x10 -10
> 1,0x10 -9
> 1,2x10 -9
> Gate current (A)

Figure 1. EG -GFET configuration 

scheme with inkjet -printed rGO as 

the active layer. 

(b)-0,4 0,0 0,4 0,8 1,2 1,6 2,0  

> 0,100 0,104 0,108 0,112 0,116 0,120
> Gate voltage (V) Drain current (mA) tred =1s tred =10s
> 0,6 0,7 0,8 0,9 1,0 Drain current (mA)

# Electron Transfer Kinetics in a Deep Eutectic Solvent .

Fangchen Zhen, Lucie Percevault, Ludovic Paquin, Emmanuelle Limanton, 

Corinne Lagrost, Philippe Hapiot 

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISCR – UMR 6226, F -35000 Rennes, France Addres s

Philippe.hapiot@univ -rennes1. fr 

Sin ce their initial proposition, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES) are receiving an increasing interest as new 

class of solvent for numerous applications ranging from synthesis, elect rochemistry to extraction, etc. 1

Common DES are often composed of a salt and a hydrogen bond donor. They are now considered as 

possible electrolytic media because of their inherent ionic conductivity associated to excellent 

solubilizing properties. Moreover, they are easy to prepare, low cost and p ossibly environmental friendly. 

Electron transfers (ET) rate in these media is a key parameter for many proposed electrochemical 

applications. In this work , Electron T ransfer (ET) kinetic s in Ethaline that is one of the most common 

DES (1:2 Choline Chloride + Ethylene Glycol) have been investigated with the example of two common 

redox couples (ferrocene/ferrocenium and ferrocyanide/ferricyanide) . Accurate analysis of a fast electron 

transfer in suc h media is a challenging task because of a lower viscosity and conductivity that required a

careful treatment of the residual ohmic drop. 

Rate constants are discussed in the framework of the Marcus -Hush theory and compared with values in 

molecular solvents or common ionic liquids. 2 They were found to be close to the values reported in 

organic solvent for ferrocene oxidation or in water for ferrocyanide oxidation. In that sense, Ethaline 

appears to be more similar to a molecular solvent than to an ionic liquid. 3,4 We could connect this 

observation with another observation concerning the small va riations of the diffusion coefficients with the 

charge of the solute as observed previously in Ethaline and in Reline. 5 This behavior is in sharp contrast 

to the observations in ionic liquids where diffusion coefficients vary with the charge carried by the solute 

because of specific interactions between the molecules and the ions of the ionic liquids. 

When considering DES for electrochemical applications, the fast electron transfer is a strong advantage of 

these media for example in energy storage systems or electrochemical sensors where the current density 

or time response is a key parameter. 

Variations of ks for the ferrocyanide/ferricyanide couple versus 1/ 

L

1 - Smith, E. L.; Abbott, A. P.; Ryder, K. S. Chem. Rev. 2014 , 114 , 11060 .

2 - Fawcett, R. W; Gaál, A.; Misicak; D. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2011 , 660 , 230 .

3 - Hapiot, P.; Lagrost, C. Chem. Rev. 2008 , 108 , 2238 -2264. 

4 - Zhen, F.; Percevault, L.; Paquin , L. Limantoon, E.; Lagrost, C.; Hapiot, P. J. Phys. Chem. B 2020 ,

124 , 1025. 

5 - Fryars, S.; Limanton, E.; Gauffre, F.; Paquin, L.; Lagrost, C.; Hapiot, P. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2018 ,

819 , 214. Energy Conversion and Storage: 

# Novel Materials and Operando Methods 

Héctor D. Abru ña 

Cornell University 

Dept. of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Baker Lab. 

Ithaca, New York 14853 -1301 

hda1 @cornel l.edu 

This presentation will deal with the development of ne w materials and operando methods for energy 

conversion and storage with emphasis on fuel cells and battery materials and technologies. The 

presentation will begin with a brief overview of the methods employed. Particular emphasis will be 

placed on the use of X -ray diffraction (XRD), X -ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) X -ray microscopy 

and to mography and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) under active potential control. The utility 

of these methods will be illustrated by selected examples including elec trocatalysts for the oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR), hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and spectroscopic studies of Li/S and 

Li/Se batteries and Li metal deposition and dendritic growth. The presentation will conclude with an 

assessment of future directio ns. Enabling multivalent batteries by organic cathodes 

Robert Dominko , Klemen Pirnat, Alen Vižintin, Anja Kopač Lautar, Rekha Narayan, Jan Bitenc 

> 1

National institute of chemistry, Hajdrihova 19, Ljubljana, Slovenia 

> 2

FKKT, University of Ljubljana, Večna pot 113 , Ljubljana Slovenia 

> 3

ALISTORE -ERI, Amiens, France 

Robert.Dominko@ki.si 

Classical insertion chemistry in multivalent batteries has only limited success due to different difficulties 

connected with a diffusion of highly polarizable multi valent cation, with a charge transfer reaction due to 

strong solvation, and electrolyte components that are not compatible with high voltage cathode materials 

based on oxide framework. Much better and stable electrochemical activity can be obtained by use of 

redox active or ganic polymers. Although o rganic materials possess low volumetric energy density, in the 

combination with high volumetric energy density metal anodes (magnesium, calcium or aluminum), still 

can offer highly interesting battery system with practical applica tion. Moreover, multivalent organic 

batteries are attractive due to sustainability, safety and environmental aspect connected with decreased 

CO 2 release . As in the case of insertion cathode materials, multivalent organic batteries have only limited 

choice of electrolytes, since they need to have non -nucleophilic character, excellent ability for stripping 

and deposition and suitable electrochemical stability. 

In this presentation, overview of recent achievements in our group on the field of organic multival ent 

batteries will be discussed with a focus on the proper selection of battery components in order to achieve 

electrochemical properties attractive for the commercialization. 

1) J. Bitenc, K. Pirnat, T. Bančič, M. Gaberšček, B. Genorio, A. Randon -Vitan ova and R. 

Dominko, Anthraquinone -Based Polymer as Cathode in Rechargeable Magnesium Batteries, 

ChemSusChem, 8 (2015) 4128 –4132. 

2) A. Vizintin, J. Bitenc, A. Kopač Lautar, K. Pirnat, J. Grdadolnik, J. Stare, A. Radon -Vitanova 

and R. Dominko, Probing elect rochemical reactions in organic cathode materials via in operando infrared 

spectroscopy, Nat. Commun., 9 (2018) 661. 

3) J. Bitenc, K. Pirnat, G. Mali, B. Novosel, A. Randon Vitanova and R. Dominko, 

Poly(hydroquinoyl -benzoquinonyl sulfide) as an active mate rial in Mg and Li organic batteries, 

Electrochem. commun. 69 (2016) 1 –5. 

4) T. Bančič, J. Bitenc, K. Pirnat, A. Kopač Lautar, J. Grdadolnik, A. Randon Vitanova and R. 

Dominko, Electrochemical performance and redox mechanism of naphthalene -hydrazine diimide polymer 

as a cathode in magnesium battery, J. Power Sources 395 (2018) 25 –30. 

5) J. Bitenc, A. Vizintin, J. Grdadolnik, R. Dominko, Tracking electrochemical reactions inside 

organic electrodes by operando IR spectroscopy, Energy Storage Materials 21 (2019 ) 347 –353. 

6) A. Kopač Lautar, J. Bitenc, T. Rejec, R. Dominko, J. -S. Filhol, M. -L. Doublet, Electrolyte 

Reactivity in the Double Layer in Mg Batteries: An Interface Potential -Dependent DFT Study , J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. Accepted ( 2020 ), https://doi.org/10.1021/ jacs.9b12474 

7) J. Bitenc, N. Lindahl, A. Vizintin, M. E. Abdelhamid, R. Dominko, P. Johansson, Concept and 

electrochemical mechanism of an Al metal anode ‒ organic cathode battery , Energy Storage Materials 24

(2020) 379 -383 .Water -in -salt electrolyte: from hype to practical reality in Li -ion 

battery 

Léa Droguet a,c , Alexis Grimaud a,c , Olivier Fontaine b,c , Jean -Marie Tarascon a,c  

> a

Chimie du Solide et de l’Energie, Colle ge de Fran ce, UMR 8260, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France  

> b

Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier Universit e Montpellier, UMR 5253 Place Eug ene Bataillon, 

34095 Montpellier, France  

> c

Reseau sur le Stockage Electrochimique de l’Energie (RS2E), CNRS FR3459, 33 rue Saint Leu, 80039 

Amiens Cedex, France 

E-mai l:  lea.droguet@college -de -france.fr 

Sustainability of battery components is becoming nowadays an overriding parameter for storing renewable 

energy at large scale. Towards that ambitious goal, severa l strategies are currently being explored. One of 

them is the use of aqueous electrolyte s that are theoretically cheaper, safer and less toxic than their organic 

counterparts. However, the major limitation towards the development of aqueous electrolytes is the narrow 

thermodynamic electrochemical stability window (ESW) of water (1.23V). Although, it can be kinetically 

extended to 1.5V when using salts in diluted solution, it remains not competitive when compared to organic 

solvent. Owing to this limitation that translates into poor energy density, Li -ion  aqueous systems , as 

introduced in 1994 by Dahn , and coworkers could never be marketed [1] .

To alleviate this issue , Suo et al. [2] proposed in 2015 an aqueous electrolyte made with a high salt 

concentration (21mol/kg), denoted Water -in -salt (WiSE), which they claim to enlarge the operating 

potential window to 3V and possesses a conductivity close  to  that of  classical organic electrolyte (ar. 

10m S/cm). Following this initial discovery, Yamada et al. [3] then showed that Water -in -bisalt enables to 

build batteries with a potential up to 3.1V. Both studies have renewed interest for studying aqueous systems. 

Nevertheless, a few question dealing with practicality o f such findings remain ed . Herein, we  carried out a 

systematic  study to assess the  practical  viability of 20m ol/kg  LiTFSI Water -in -salt electrolyte. To do so, 

two couple of electrodes were chosen to decouple  the  influence of WiSE on cell performances  :

Mo 6S8/WiSE /LFP was chosen on the cathodic side and LiTi 2(PO 4)3/WiSE /NMC 622 on the anodic side to 

study how the competing water reduction (HER) and oxidation (OER) affects the system performance. 

Electrochemical tests were performed to estimate cell per formances  as a function of  concentration, 

temperature  and cycling rate . The in fluence of p arasitic reaction s on battery performances was studied by 

online electrochemical mass spectrometry (OEMS) , while  cyclic voltammetry and self -discharge 

experiments enabl ed the assessment of  SEI stability. 

Thus, we found that water reactivity i t not suppressed by the used of WiSEs with continuous generation of 

gas upon charge. Indeed, continuous SEI dissolution is monitored, which lead s to drastic self -discharge and 

poor efficiency at low C -rate . This systematic study therefore leads us to conclude that Wate r-in -salt 

electrolyte cannot be used for practical application in Li -ion battery. 

Reference s:

[1] W. Li, J. R. Dahn, and D. S. Wainwright, Science , vol. 264, no . 5162, pp. 1115 –1118, May 1994 .

[2] L. Suo et al. , Science , vol. 350, no. 6263, pp. 938 –943, Nov. 2015 .

[3] Y. Yamada, K. Usui, K. Sodeyama, S. Ko, Y. Tateyama, and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy , vol. 1, no. 

10, Oct. 2016 .             

> Style Definition: Authors
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt, Italic
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Left
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt
> Formatted: Font: 10 pt

# Water -Gated Organic Field Effect Transistor for Monitoring of

# Photosynthetic Organisms 

Beno ît Piro , Jérémy L e Gall , Roberta B rayner , Giorgio M attana , Vincent N oël

ITODYS, UMR CNRS 7086, Universit é de Paris 

15 rue Jean -Antoine de Baïf, 75013 Paris, France .

piro@u -paris. fr 

Organic Electrochemical Transistors ( OECTs ) are frequently reported for cell monitoring 1. In contrast, 

Electrolyte Gated Organic Field Effect Transi stors (EGOFETs) ha ve never been described for that kind of 

application . However, water -gated OFETs seem perfectl y adapted for this because they can operate 

directly in a cellular culture medium, thanks to the conventional dielectric layer being replaced here by 

water 2. They are po ssibly more sensitive tha n OECTs due to thei r much high er on/off ratio (several 

thousand s instead of several tens). 

In this work, we first demonstrate that not only the gate potential can trigger the source -drain current ,

which is the generally accepted mode of operation, but that the current flowin g at the gate can also be 

used , providing that the gate/electrolyte capacitance stays significantly lower than that of the 

electrolyte/semiconductor interface. 

As an example of application of this new mode of operat ion, we aim to demo ns trate here that monitoring 

microalgae photosynthesis is possible through the direct measurement of photosynthet ic O2 production 

thanks to its electroreduction on the EGOFET ’s gate . Microalgae (Anabaena flos aquae ) are tapped 

within a n alginate hydroge l3,4 gr afted on the platinum gate . While do ing photosynthesis, microalgae 

produce O2 that is electroreduced on the gate ; the resulting current significantly decreases the 

gate /electrolyte potential drop and symmetrically increases that of the electrolyte /semiconductor i nt erfa ce ,

leading to an increase of drain current .

EGOFET structure under negative polarization and strategy of gat e modification 

Beyond this proof of concept, a possible applicati on is the environmental monitoring of pollutan ts 

cocktails through their deleter ious influence on the metabolism of photosynthetic organisms such as 

microalgae or cyanobacteria . This also paves the way for novel applications of EGOFETs in the field of 

amplification of redox reactions in general. 

Refe rences               

> 1. Strakosas, X., Bongo, M. & O wens, R. M . The organic electrochemical transistor for bi ological applications.
> J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 132 , 1 –14 (2015).
> 2. Torsi, L., Magliulo, M., Manoli, K. & Palazzo, G. Orga nic field -effect transistor sensors: A tutoria l review.
> Chem. Soc. Rev. 42 , 8612 –8628 (2013).
> 3. Ionescu, R. E. et al. Amperometric algal Chlorella vulgaris cell biosensors based on alginate and
> polypyrrole -alginate gels. Electroan alysis 18 , 1041 –1046 (200 6).
> 4. Dumitru, L. M. et al. A h ydrogel capsul e as gate dielectric in flexible organic field -effect transistors. APL
> Mater. 3, (2015).

# Biotic/Abiotic Photo -Bioelectrochemical Cells for the Generation of 

# Electrical Power 

Omer Yehezkeli 

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 

Haifa, Israel 

y.omer@technion.ac.il 

The photosynthesis process converts light energy into useful fuels (hydrocar bons) by coupling light and 

dark cycles. This Fund amental process enable s the earth 's energy dem an ds in the last 3.5 billion years. 

The light cycle coined “Z -scheme”, facilitate efficient light -induced charge separation process es, which 

lead to the generat ion of chemical fuels. While photosystem II coupled to electrodes can oxidize water to 

evolve oxygen and generate photocurrent, photosystem I can be utilized in both direction s to generated 

anodic or cathodic photocurrents . The direction can be controlled by an applied bias, utilization of redox 

mediators or the use of electron donor (or electron acceptor ). In the last few decades, numerous attempts 

to mimic the photosynthetic process have been realized using different scientific approaches drawn from 

diffe rent disciplines , but the quest for a sustainable world is still in it s course .

Here we present the development of biotic /abiotic based photoelectrochemical cells, which 

facilitate photoinduced electrical power generation. The developed cathodes which ar e based on 

Photosystem I or Bilirubin Oxidase facilitate efficient oxygen reduction reaction s. By coupling those 

developed cathodes to BiVO4 based photoanodes, bias -free, donor free photo(bio)electrochemical cells 

that generate electrical power can be obta ined .

Two major configuration s will be discussed and presented: 

a. A donor -free photobioelectrochemical cells for the generation of light -triggered electrical will be 

presented. The developed oxygen reduction biocathodes are based on bilirubin oxidase (BOD) 

originates from Myrothecium verrucaria (MvBOD) and a thermophilic Bacillus pumilus (BpBOD). 

Methods to entrap the bilirubin oxidase with ABTS redox molecules in a polydopamine layer will be 

presented and a pH -independent, positively charged pyrene -betaine linker Both developed 

polydopamine/ABTS/MvBOD and the pyrene -betaine/BpBOD biocathodes were further coupled 

with BiVO4/cobalt -phosphate water oxidation photoanodes to construct biotic/abiotic 

photobioelectrochemical cells, generating power outputs of 0.74 mW/cm 2 and 0.85 mW/cm 2,

respectively. 

b. We further show the development of a layer -by -layer photocathode configuration, which utilizes a 

thermophilic photosystem I for the generation of electrical power. T wo redox -active polymers were 

used, polymethylene bl ue (pMB) which acts as an electron donor and poly -butyl -viologen, (PBV) 

which acts as an electron acceptor and as a catalyst for oxygen reduction . The redox -active polymers 

enable improved stability, improved PSI trimers integration on the electrodes and facilitates efficient 

charge separation processes. The developed photocathode s were further coupled to BiVO4 for the 

construction of donor free, bias -free photo(bio)electrochemical cell s.

References 

1. D. Mukha , Y. Cohen, O. Yehezkeli Biotic/abiotic Photobi oelectrochemical Cells for Unbiased Light -  

> Triggered Electrical Power Generation, ChemSusChem ,2020

2. N. Herzallh R. Nechushtai O. Yehezkeli. Photosynthesis Z -scheme biomimicry: Photosystem I/BiVO4   

> Photo -bioelectrochemical cell for donor -free bias -free elect rical power generation .in preparation

# Bottom -up electro synthesis of BiTePd nanofilm using electrochemical 

# atomic layer deposition technique for ethanol oxidation 

A.C Mkhohlakali 1, 2 , X. Fuku 1, R.M . Modibedi 1*, L .E Khotseng 2, M. Mathe 1

> a

Energy Centre, Smart Places, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Pretoria, South Africa 

0012 

> b

Department of Chemistry, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, Cape Town, South Africa 

Corresponding author Email: amkh ohlakali@yahoo .co.za 

Abstract 

Nanofilms have increased a considerable interest in fuel cell due to their high electrocatalytic performance. 

Electrochemical atomic layer deposition (E -ALD)  is low temperature and a low -cost electrodeposition technique 

which sequentially produces nanofilm materials [1]. In this work, E -ALD cycles were used to electro -synthesize 

rarely BiTePd nanofilm on Au substrate via alternated surface limited replacement (SLRR) of copper 

underpotential deposition (Cu -UPD ) and repetitive ex ecution of oxidative Te -UPD and reductive Bi -UPD . In order to 

set optimal potentials for E -ALD cycles, the electrochemistry profile of Au and Pd surface in Te 4+ and Bi 3+ 

solutions was investigated using cyclic voltammetry (CV). It appeared that the atomic layers of Bi, Te may form 

via UPD and overpotential deposition (OPD) respectively. The resulted deposits consist of unitary (Te, Pd), binary 

(BiPd, TePd) and ternary (Bi TePd) nanofilms. All the deposits exhibit the typical Pd signatures, with the varied 

current response and potential shift of Pd -O oxide around -0.2 to -0.16 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The detailed studies of 

structure -composition were obtained using XRD, SEM -EDS, an d AFM. TePd and BiTePd exhibit nanodendritic 

structure with alloy and elemental phases textured epitaxial along Pd -Au (111) orientation.  EDX evidenced the 

presence of all deposited elements.  Moreover, ternary and binary nanofilms  showed higher electrocatal ytic 

activity and stability towards EOR than unitary Pd confirmed by the following trend (peak current and onset 

potential): BiTePd ( 1.26 mA, -0.55 V)> TePd ( 0.527 mA, -0.535V)> BiPd ( 0.24 mA, -0.39 V)> Pd ( 0.135 mA, -

0.35 V) obtained from CV and Chronoamp erometry (CA). The incorporation of Bi and Te on Pd surface improved 

interfacial charge transfer during EOR using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).  These results 

encourage the use of ternary BiTePd nanofilm electrocatalyst for application in al kaline direct ethanol fuel cells 

(DEFCs). 

REFERENCES 

[1]  M.K. Mathe, S.M. Cox, H.B. Flowers, R. Vaidyanathan, L. Pham , N. Srisook, U.H. Nattapong, and J. 

Stickney; Crystal. Growth, 2004 , 271, 55 -64 .Sust ainable Electrochemical Metal Extra ction from Waste Strea ms: 

# From Removal to Recovery 

Wei Jin 1,2 

> 1

Institute of Process E ng ineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1 st Ber -er -tiao, Beijing 100190, Pe ople`s 

Republic of China 

> 2

Sch ool of Chemical and Mater ial Engineering, Jiangnan University, No. 1800 Lihu Avenue, Wuxi 

214122, People`s Repu blic of China 

Addres s

Emai l: wjin@ipe.ac.cn 

Abstract : Due to the wide spread developme nt of chemical, electronic, metallurgy and energy, 

con siderable hazardous heavy met als -bearing wastewater and solid waste are directly or indirectly 

discharged into the environmental. In order to overcome the dr awbacks of long process -flow and large 

chemicals requirements in conventional treatment technologi es, novel electrochemical meta l extraction 

techni ques are devel oped in this study including alkaline electrochemical oxidation processes (A -EAOPs) 

and cyclone electrowinning ( emew ® cell ). Efficient and selective metal extraction is achieved from 

refractory spent SCR catalysts and vanad iu m slag vi a in -situ generated reactive oxygen s pecies (ROS), 

while contro llable Cu, Te, Se powde ry products are obtained from dil ute multi -comp onent wastewater. 

Besides, the electrochemical recovery mechanism and behavior are reveal ed using in -situ dynami c X-ray 

synchrotron imaging and flu id flow calculation techniques, p ar ticularly in the complicated HCl effluents. 

Based upon the systema tic investigations of reactors, mass transfer , phase transition and electrochemical 

reactions, the process -mechanism -pro ducts (PMP) rational design of electrochemical metal recove ry is 

proposed rather than simply metal removal. 

Keywords : Metal recovery , Re active oxygen species, Mass transfer, in -situ dynamic X-ray imaging, 

Process -mechanism -products (PMP) 

References: 

1. W. J in, J. Chen, B. Liu, J. Hu, Z. Wu, W. Cai, G. Fu , Small , 2019, 15, 1904210 

2. G. Maduraiveeran, M. Sasidharan, W. Jin, Prog. Mater. Sci. , 2019, 106, 1005 74 

3. W. Jin, M. Hu, J. Hu, ACS Sust ain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 13378 -13384 

4. M. Hu, Z. Sun, J. Hu, H. Lei, W. Ji n, Ind. Eng. Chem. R es ., 2019, 58, 12642 -12649 

5. Y. Xue, Y. Zhang, Y. Zha ng, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, Chem. Eng. J. , 2017, 325, 544 -553 

6. W. Jin, H. Du, S. Z heng, Y. Zhang, Electrochimi. Acta , 2016, 191, 1044 -1055 

7. W. Ji n, R. Tolba, J. Wen, K. Li, A. Chen, Electrochimi. Acta , 2013, 107, 611 -618 

8. W. Jin, M. S. Moats, S. Zheng, H. Du, Y. Zhang, J. D. Miller, Electrochim. Acta , 2011, 56, 8311 -

8318 

Fig. 1 : The p rocess -mechanism -products (PMP) during electrochemical metal recovery Phase diagrams under scrutiny – In -situ electrochemical X -ray 

# diffraction unravels layered β-Fe 1+x Se as superconductor for all x

Bertold Rasche , Simon J Clarke, Richard G Compton 

Institut e of Inorgani c Chemi stry, Universit y Cologne 

Greinstr. 6, 50939 Colo gne, Ger many 

bertoldrasche@web.de 

Systematic investigations of phase systems and transitions are the foundation of understanding complex 

physical phenomena such as superconductivity . One example in which the lack of such a systematic 

knowledge has led to contradictory results is β-Fe 1+x Se . The superconductivity of this “simple” two -

dimensio na l, layered structure has been reported to be heavily dependent on the composition and closely 

related structural transitions , defects and various superstructures with overall very inconsistent results. [1 –6] 

The difficulties arise from the narrow phase width of β-Fe 1+x Se (0.01 < x < 0.04), a sm all deviation from 

the 1:1 ratio and its manifold of neighbouring phases .[7] 

We report the precise post -synthetic control of the composition of β-Fe 1+x Se by electrochemistry with 

simultaneous tracking of the associa ted structural changes via in -situ synchrotron X -ray diffraction 

(Figure 1) .[8]  Via an externally applied potential , electrochemistry allows us to systematically explore t he 

phase system , while a ffordi ng the high precis ion needed in this case . We confirm the phase width of 0.01 

< x < 0.04 and identify the superconducting state below 8 K, which in contrast to ea rlier reports is 

independent of the composition. However, in a seco nd set of in situ X -ray dif fraction experiments, we 

demonstrate that β-Fe 1+x Se forms a new phase in the presence of oxygen above a 100 °C , which has the 

same anti -PbO type structure but is not superconducting down to 1.8 K. The latter process can be reverse d

electrochemically to reinstate the superconducting state. 

This ele ctrochemical approach takes experime nts for two -dimensional materials beyond intercalation 

re actions ,[9,10]  and exploit s the exquisite control provided by electrochemistry .

Figure 1: The composition of β-Fe 1+x Se (left) is electrochemicall y varied within its phase width (cent er :

red) . Simultaneously , the st ructural changes are monitored via X-ray diffraction (center : black ).

Independent of the composition , the superconducting transi tion temperature remains unchanged (right). 

[1] T. M. McQueen et al., Phys. Rev. B 2009 , 79 , 014522. 

[2] S. Margadonna et al., Chem.  Commun. 2008 , 0, 5607 –5609. 

[3] T. M. McQueen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009 , 103 , 057002. 

[4] F. Nitsche et al., Inorg.  Ch em. 2012 , 51 , 7370 –7376. 

[5] U. Pachmayr et al., Chem. Commun.  2015 , 52 , 194 –197. 

[6] A. E. Böhmer et al., Phys.  Rev. B 2016 , 94 , 024526. 

[7] H. Okamoto, J. Phase Equilibria 1991 , 12 , 383 –389. 

[8] B. Rasche et al., Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed. 2019 , 58 , 15401 –154 06 ,

Angew.  Chem. 2019 , 131 , 15547 –15552. 

[9] S. -J. Shen et al., Ch in. Phys. B 2015 , 24 , 117406. 

[10] A. M. Alekseeva et al., Sci.  Rep. 2016 , 6, 25624. PQQ -Glucose Dehydrogenase -Calmodulin Chimera Enzyme: Different 

# Triggered Activation for Multipurpose Biosensors 

Paolo Bollella a, Artem Melman a, Zhong Guo b, Selvakumar Edwardraja b, Wayne Johnson b, Kirill A. 

Alexandrov b, Evgeny Katz a 

> a

Department of Chemist ry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699 –5810, 

United States  

> b

CSIRO -QUT Synthetic Biology Alliance, Queensland University of Technology 

2 George st, Brisbane, 4001,QLD,Australia 

pboll ell@clarkson.edu 

In the last decade , the rise of synthetic biology has driven the efforts to construct artificial allosteric 

protein switches in order to detected and quantif y natural and artificial chemistries in vitro and in vivo. 

Typically, this inv olves construction of chimeric enzymes via i nsertion of a regulatory receptor domain 

into the biocatalytic reporter domain. Construction of such chimeric enzymes utilizes the recombinant 

DNA technology that is a core technology of protein engineering [1] .

Herein, we report on the bioelectrocataly tic properties of pyrroloquinoline quinone -dependent glucose 

dehydrogenase fusion with calmodulin (PQQ -GDH -CaM) . This protein is catalytically inactive in its 

ground form but can be activated by the addition of calmodulin binding peptide that induces its 

conformational transition and activation , as shown in Figure 1 . The PQQ -GDH -CaM was immobilized 

onto highly porous gold (hPG) produced electrochemically [2] by using a b ifunctional linker, namely 4-

mercaptobenzoi c acid further activated through 1-ethyl -3-(3 -dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide and N -

hydroxysuccinimide (EDC/NHS) coupling to covalent bind the PQQ -GDH -CaM chimeric enzyme [3]. 

At first, we characterized the switchable features of PQQ -GDH -CaM by simply exp osing it to the 

activating peptide . Subsequently we devised an approach to use proteolytic activation of a caged -peptide 

to generate activating peptide for PQQ -GDH -CaM . Furthermore, the system was utilized to study 

different pathways for PQQ -GDH -CaM trigg ered activation according to differe nt logic gates in order to 

realize multipurpose biosensors (e.g., glucose detection, peptide detection etc.) [4] .

Figure 1. Activation mechanism of PQQ -GDH -CaM by the addition of calmodulin binding peptide 

Referen ces 

[1] Gamella, M., Guo, Z., Alexandrov, K., Katz, E. (2019). ChemElectroChem, 6(3), 638 -645. 

[2] Bollella, P., Hibino, Y., Kano, K., Gorto n, L., Antiochia, R. (2018). Analytical chemistry, 

90(20), 12131 -12136. 

[3] Koushanpour, A., Gamella, M., Guo, Z., Honarvarfard , E., Poghossian, A., Sch �ning, M. J., 

Alexandrov, K., Katz, E. (2017). The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 121(51), 11465 -11471. 

[4] Bollella, P., Katz, E. (2019). International Journal of Unconventional Computing, 14(3 -4), 181 -

198. How Ionophore -Valinomycin Enters and Transports K + Across a 

# Model Bilayer Lipid Membrane 

Jacek Lipkowski a, Zhangfei Su a, Slawomir Sek a,b , Adrian Schwan a

Presenting author , Co -Authors 

a. Department of Chemistry, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada 

b.  Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, �wirki i 

Wigury 101, 02 -089 Warsaw, Poland 

jlipkows@uoguelph.ca 

Valinomycin, a cyclic peptide, was incorporated into a biomimetic lipid membranes either tethered 

(tBLM) to or floa ting at the surface of a gold (111) electrode. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy 

(EIS) was used to study the ionophore properties of the peptide and polarization modulation infrared 

reflection absorption spectroscopy (PM -IRRAS) was employed to determi ne the conformation and 

orientation of valinomycin in the membrane. The combination of these two techniques provided unique 

information about the ionophore mechanism where valinomycin transports ions across the membrane by 

creating a complex with potassium ions and forming an ion pair with a counter anion. The ion pair resides 

within the hydrophobic fragment of the membrane and adopts a small angle of ~22 o with respect to the 

surface normal. This study provides new insights explaining the valinomycin ion tr ansport mechanism in 

model biological membranes. 

Su, ZhangFei; Ran, Xueqin; Leitch, J. Jay; Schwan, Adrian; Faragher, Robert; Lipkowski, Jacek, "How 

ionophore -valinomycin enters and transports K+ across a model bilayer lipid membrane", Langmuir, 

2019 , 35, 16935 -16943 Nano -Crystalline G raph ene Electrodes for Anthracene Sensing 

Antonio Radoi 1, Octavian Gabriel Simionescu 1, Camelia Albu 2, Carmen Ciobanu 1, Cristina Pachiu 1,

Cosmin Romanitan 1, Sandra A. V. Eremia 2, Mihaela Kusko 1 

> 1

National Institute for Research and Deve lopment in Microtechnology – IMT Bucharest, 126A Erou 

Iancu Nicolae Street, 077190, Voluntari, Romania  

> 2

Centre of Bioanalysis, National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences -

Bucharest, 296 Splaiul Independentei, Bucharest, 060031 , Romania 

antonio.radoi@imt.ro 

The nano -crystalline graphene (NCG) shares electrical characteristics matching few -layered graphene in 

terms of sheet resistance, meanwhile the electrochemical features , reflected by the heterogeneous electron 

transfer rate constant , are closer to the highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG - basal plane ). Therefore 

enhanceme nt of redox transfer at NCG electrodes is promoted through an increase of the availability of 

edge s, obtaine d under a pre -activation step , thus obtaining redox features comparable with the glassy 

carbon electrode (GC) . The advantages related to the use NCG as electrode material are ascribed to its 

reproducible PECVD synthesis achievable on large surfaces (wafers of several inches), its peculiar 

characteristics being suitable to compete with robust electrodes made of carbon fabric. 

Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a class of organic compounds made of hydrogen and carbon 

atoms accommodated in two or more fused aromatic rings, the most common known PAHs being 

naphthalene , fluoranthene , pyrene, phenanthrene and anthracene. Their occurrence in oils, coals, tar 

deposits and persistence as by -products of fuel burning made PAHs one of the most important groups of 

pol lutants, being identified to be teratogenic, carcinogenic, and mutagenic [ 1]. For such a reason, 

anthracene is one of the 16 PAHs which are monitored routinely for regulatory purposes [ 2]. 

Graphene based nanomaterials are expected to possess properties th at make them very efficient tools for 

the development of electrochemical sensors due to the excellent mobility of electrons in honeycomb sp2 -

hybridized carbons, being well known that electro -catalysis readily occurs on graphene [ 3]. 

Plasma -enhanced chemic al vapour deposition (PECVD) allowed growth of graphene and N -doped 

graphene domains on SiO 2, consisting of densely packed nano -sized islands 4. The Raman spectrum of the 

nano -crystalline graphite film, made of graphene domains, showed peaks at 1357 cm -1 (D band), 1600 cm - 

> 1

(G -band), 2695 cm -1 (2 D band) and 2944 cm -1 (D + D’ bands), suggesting crystalline arrangement of 

graphene domains, and a certain degree of disorder. 

Preliminary electrochemical investigations of NCG and N -doped NCG electrodes revealed the ability to 

sense anthracene and behave similar to GC electrode in terms of linear working range and applied 

working potential. 

Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge financial support offered by  PN -III -P1 -1.2 -PCCDI2017 -

0619 -“Materiale nanostructurate pe baza de carbon pentru dezvoltarea de senzori pentru monitorizarea 

unor gaze si hidrocarburi aromatice policiclice” - Project no. 3. 

[1] Fetzer, J. C., 2000, The Chemistry and Analysis of the Large Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, 

Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds (New York: Wiley) 27 (2), p.143. 

[2] Liu, S., Wei, M., Zheng, X., Xu, S., Xia, F., Zhou, C., Alizarin red S functionalized mes oporous silica 

modified glassy carbon electrode for electrochemical determination of anthracene (2015) Electrochimica 

Acta, 160, pp. 108 -113. 

[3] Radoi, A., Obreja, A.C., Eremia, S.A.V., Bragaru, A., Dinescu, A., Radu, G. -L., L -Lactic acid 

biosensor based on multi -layered graphene (2013) Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 43 (10), pp. 985 -

994. 

[4] Albu C, Eremia SAV, Veca ML, Avram A, Popa RC, Pachiu C, et al. Nano -crystalline graphite film 

on SiO2 : Electrochemistry and electro -analytical application (20 19) Electrochim Acta, 303 , pp. 284 -292. Segmented Battery Cells for Monitoring Current Density Distribution 

# and locally -resolved Impedance Spectroscopy Analysis 

Dennis Kopljar , Christopher Heim, Norbert Wagner, K. Andreas Friedrich 

Deutsches Zentrum für Luft - und Raumfahrt (DLR), 

Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, 

Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 

dennis.kopljar@dlr.de 

Motivation: 

As a broad market penetration of lithium -ion -batteries becomes reality in a multitude of applications, 

safety and reliability are major issues that have to be ensured. In recent years, especially driven by the 

demands and rapid growth in the field of electro -mobility, the trend in the development of Li -ion batteries 

goes towards the manufacturing of large -format cells to increase system energy de nsity. In such large -

format cells, thermal gradients and an inhomogeneous state -of -charge (SOC) and current distribution over 

the cell -stack become more significant . This can present a severe challenge regarding cycle stability and 

safety, which can lead t o a more pronounced aging behavior as function of location in the electrode stack .

In turn, it can induce performance losses, compromise lifetime and constitutes a safety issue as local hot -

spots can develop at positions with higher impedance or local curr ent density , encompassing an increase 

in temperature and the risk of triggering thermal degradation. 

Obtaining information on how material properties, cell engineering and charge/discharge 

parameters influence such gradients is critical to maintain inside a safe operating window, to 

optimize performance and to facilitate longer lifetime. 

Methodology :

To gain better insight in the above phenomena, a combination of modelling and experimental 

investigation, complemented by post -mortem analysis of aged cells is mandatory [1] . At the core of this 

work is the development of a segmented current collector which is coated by the active material and 

inserted into the pouch -cell as part of the electrode stack. This proprietary development [2] facilitates the 

real -ti me monitoring of local current density as function of operating conditions and facilitates 

performing local impedance spectroscopy on each segment distributed over the electrode. An exemplary 

image of this is presented in figure 1. The so -obtained knowledg e is of considerable value for scientists, 

cell manufacturers and users, as it allows insights into locally resolved aging and the development of 

critical positions on the electrode surface. The experimental results further serve as validation for 

impedanc e-based cell modelling for which locally -resolved impedance data serves as input for simulation 

of t he dynamic behavior of the cell, current density , SOC and SO H distribution during operation. This 

contribution will present how this combination can help in understanding the inhomogeneities in the cell 

and how they affect operation, longevity and performance loss of the cell. 

Figure 1. Proof -of -concept of segmented cell technology. Impedance spectra (left) and resulting current 

density distribution (right) during cycling on eight segments of the current collector. 

[1] Kosch et al. (2018) Journal of The Electrochemical Society 165, A2374 -A2388 

[2] N. Wagner, A. Dreizler, D. Schneider, DE102017109233A1, 2017 ISE 71 st Annual Meeting online, Belgrade Online .

# Multi -Physics Modeling and Empirical Investigation of Active Polymer 

# Binder for Thick Cathode of Li -Ion Battery 

Tanmay Dev *, 1, Behrooz Karami 1 , Luigi Cabras 2 , Jennifer Schaefer 3 , and Alberto Salvadori 2 

> 1

DICATAM , Via Branze 43 , University of Brescia, Brescia, 25123, Italy;  

> 2

DIMI , Via Branze 38 , University of Brescia, Brescia, 25123, Italy ; 

> 3

Dept. of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA 

## *Email:  t.dev@unibs.it 

Li -ion batteries hold great importance in the process of transitioning to renewable energy. Advancement of 

battery technology to provide higher energy density and higher rate capability is thought to be necessary to 

achieve this transition. The objective o f the current research work is to investigate of the effects of ionomer -

based active polymer binder, in lieu of traditional binder, in the porous cathode of the Li -ion battery. 

Li + transport within porous electrodes is limited by porosity and tortuosity. The lower effective diffusivity of 

Li +, compared with the counter -anion, causes high concentration and potential gradients across the thickness of 

the cathode, especially at high charge -discharge rates. The depletion of the Li + cation from the reaction sur face 

of active material limits the thickness of the active material that is effectively utilized at a given rates, and thus 

limits practical rates. Here, covalently tethered anionic ligands titrated with Li + are investigated to mitigate this 

Li + depletion. Ion transport properties (transference number, diffusivity, conductivity) have been characterized 

and used in the simulation of the multiphysics system. 

For making active polymer binder functionalized nanoparticles and Poly(STFSI) were mixed with the cathode 

slurry . Experimental charge -discharge cycling result of the modified composite electrode (active polymer 

binder based) at different C -rate and thickness has been investigated and compared with the control electrode 

of similar thickn ess and porosity . The effect of active polymer on increased capacity of modified cathode is 

evident, after comparison. 

A predictive microscale multiphysics model of the investigated system has been put in place. The governing 

PDEs, constitutive laws and t he interface conditions (Butler -Volmer and Donnan equilibrium) that describe the 

electro -chemo -mechanical system have been solved numerically. A purposely written Matlab Package script 

has been developed and Matlab PCT has been used for parallel computing , to implement the numerical method .

The discharge voltage profile and distribution of ion concentration and electric potential across the battery have 

been simulated. Comparison of discharge voltage profile s between the mathematical model and experimental 

results validate the mathematical model. The Kinetics Study of Hydrogen Peroxide Electroreduction onto 

# Graphene/Palladium Modified Glassy Carbon Electrode 

Jelena Čović 1, Marjan Ranđelović 1, Aleksandra Zarubica 1, Aleksandar Bojić 1, Valentin Mirceski 2

> 1

University of Niš, Faculty of Sciences and Mathematics, Department of Chemistry 

Višegradska St., 18000 Niš, Serbia 

> 2

Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, “Ss Cyril and Methodius” 

University, Skopje, R. Macedonia 

covic.jelena91@gmail.com 

In present work, we report the s ynthesis of graphene (G) which is subsequently decorated with palladium 

(Pd) nanoparticles as a efficient electrocatalyst for electrochemical reduction of hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2). 

The structure of obtained nanohybrid material (G -Pd) was examined by XRD technique. The 

graphene/palladium composite material was immobilized on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) 

for the electroreduction of hydrog en peroxide (H 2O2). 

The electroreduction of H 2O2 was studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and square wave voltammetry 

(SWV), at a potential range of −0.6 to +0.2 V in order to study electrocatalytic behaviour of G -Pd .

Voltammetric data are analyzed in the l ight of the theory for simple irreversible electrode reaction. 

The presen ce of palladium nanoparticles as well as Fe retained during graphene synthesis have a major role 

in the electroreduction of H 2O2. The graphene/palladium composite showed pronounced el ectrocatalytic 

activity toward the reduction of H 2O2 in alkaline medium. 

Figure 1 . The CV responses of G -Pd GCE in 5 

mM H 2O2, 0.1 M KOH at scan rates 0.01, 0.02, 

0.05, 0.08 and 0.1 V s -1

Figure 2. The SW responses of G -Pd GCE in 5 mM 

H2O2, 0.1 M KOH at amplitude values 0.01 V, 0.02 

V, 0.03 V, 0.04 V and 0.05 V 

References 

[1] W. Chen, S. Cai, Q. -Q. Ren, W. Wen, Y. -D. Zhao , Recent advances in electrochemical sensing for 

hydrogen peroxide: a review, Analyst 137 (2012) 49 .

[2] R. Ayranci, G. Başkaya, M. Güzel, S. Bozkurt, F. Şen, M. Ak, Carbon based nanomaterials for high 

performance optoelectrochemical systems, ChemistrySele ct, 2 (4) (2017) 1548 -1555 .

measurement of chromium, Materials Science for Energy Technologies, 2 (2019) 676 -686 .

[3] M. Censabella, V. Torrisi, S. Boninelli, C. Bongiorno, M.G. Grimaldi, F. Ruffino, Laser ablation 

synthesis of mono - and bimetallic Pt and Pd nanoparticles and fabrication of Pt -Pd/Graphene 

nanocomposites, Applied Surface Science, 475 (2019) 494 -503 .

[4] M. Guler, V. Turkoglu, A. Kivrak, F. Karahan, A novel nonenzymatic hydrogen peroxide amperometric 

sensor based on Pd@CeO 2-NH 2 nanocomposites modified glassy carbon electrode, Materials Science 

& Engineering C, 90 (2018) 454 -460 .Carbon - free Ceramic Gas -Diffusion Electrodes for Secondary Zn -air 

# Batteries 

E. Mladenova, M. Slavova, B. Burdin, E. Mihaylova -Dimitrova, D. Bojchev, D. Vladikova  Institute of 

Electrochemistryand Energy Systems“Academician Evgeni Budevski”, Acad. Georgi Bonchev 10 Str., 

1113 Sofia, Bulgaria e-mail:  e_mladenova@iees.bas.bg 

Abstract: 

In recent years, secondary Zinc -air cells have received considerable attention as promising approach for 

energy storage of rene wable energy. One of their durability problems is  the oxidation of the conventional 

carbon gas -diffusion electrodes [1]. Replacement of the carbon -based material with ceramic one is a 

possible solution for overcoming this problem  which is the aim of this w ork . An innovative approach 

which applies solid state “monolithic” gas -diffusion electrode  proposed by standard ceramic technology is 

proposed. The appeared ceramic materials with perovskite structure 

(LSM and LSCF) provide good mechanical and chemical sta bility 

[2 -4]. The solid state “monolithic” electrode is produced with 40% 

porosity  which guarantees  the  necessary gas permeability.  A special 

impregnation procedure ensures the needed hydrophobicity [5]. 

The testing of the new electrodes in a 1cm 2 half -ce ll configuration 

with reference hydrogen electrode. The cell was carried out 

subjected to cycling at charge/discharge current ± 10  mA /cm 2. The 

results from the electrochemical tests demonstrate behavior similar 

to that of the carbon -based etalon GDE. The s amples are stable for 

more than 1000 cycles.  These preliminary results demonstrate the 

applicability of carbon free solid state “monolithic” gas -diffusion 

electrodes in Zinc -air rechargeable batteries .

Acknowledgements: 

This work was supported by the Bul garian Ministry of Education 

and Science under the National  Roadmap for Research 

Infrastructure (2017 -2023) project: Research Infrastructure Energy Storage  and Hydrogen Energetics NI 

SEVE, GA D01 -160/28.08.18 and National Science Found Project:  Innovative Rechargeable Carbon -free 

Zinc -Air Cells (INOVI), GA KP -06 -N27/15 

References: 

1. T. Danner, S. Eswara, V. P. Schulz, A. Latz, Characterization of gas diffusion  electrodes for metal -air 

batteries, J. Power Sources , 2016, 646 – 656. 

2. D.K. Lim, H.N. Im, B. Singh, C.J. Park, S.J. Song, Electrochemical hydrogen charge and discharge 

properties of La 0.1 Sr 0.9 Co 1−yFe yO3−δ (y  = 0, 0.2, 1) electrodes in alkaline electrolyte solution, J. 

Electrochim . Acta , 2013, 393 -399. 

3. H.W. Park, D.U. Lee, P. Zamani, M.H. Seo, L.F. Nazar, Electrospun porous nanorod perovskite 

oxide/nitrogen -doped graphene composite as a bi -function al catalyst for metal air batteries, J. Nano 

Energy , 2014, 192 -200. 

4. R. Mohamed, X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, P.Levecque, R. Kötz, O. Conrad, and T. J. Schmidt, Electrocatalysis 

of Perovskites: The Influence of Carbon on the Oxygen Evolution Activity, J. Electroche m. Soc. , 2015 ,

F579 -F586. 

5.  Utility model  № 2978/12.07.2018 D. Vladikova, M. Slavova, B. Abrashev, B. Burdin, E. Mladenova: 

Carbon -free planar gas -diffusion electrodes for secondary metal -air batteries and methods for their 

production 

Comparison of volt -ampere 

characteristics during discharge 

(ORR)  and charge  (OER) 

measured on classical GDE (EE) 

and monolithic  monolithic GDEs 

(LSM) Non -mercury -based Electrochemical Reference E lectrodes 

Ji an -Jun Sun * and Fei -Long Fan 

Ministry  of  Education  Key  Laboratory  for  Analytical  Science  of  Food  Safety  and  Biology,  Fujian  Provi 

ncial  Key  Laboratory  of  Analysis  and  Detection  Technology  for  Food  Safety,  College  of  Chemistry, 

Fuzhou  University,  Fuzho u,  Fujian  350108,  China. 

jjsun@fz u.edu.cn .

As an indispensable electrode in electrochemistry, the reference electrode plays a very important 

role in the basic research and application, which forms an electronic circuit with working electrode to 

achieve potential measurement and control. Currently, the reference electrodes used for 

electrochemical me asurement in aqueous solution are generally Hg/Hg 2Cl 2, Hg/Hg 2SO 4 and Hg/HgO 

electrode s. The mercury -based reference electrode has the advantages of stable potential and good 

reproducib ility. However, the electrode material contains mercury, which inevitably produces mercury 

pollution during the preparation, use, and recycling processes, to harm the environment and human 

health. In addition, mercury -based reference electrode also h as the disadvantages of large temperature 

coefficient, severe temperature hysteresis, and inabi lity to use at high temperature . Here we introduce 

Ag/A g2SO 4 and Ag/A g2O reference electrodes, to be expected to replace Hg/Hg 2SO 4 and Hg/HgO ones, 

with excellent potential stability , r eproducibility , and lower temperature coefficient as well. Towards Practical Li -S Battery with Dense and Flexible Electrode 

# Containing Lean Electrolyte 

Jiahang Chen, a Huiming Zhang ,a Jiulin Wang ab *

a. Department of Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 

b. College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Henan 450001, China 

Email:  wangjiulin@sjtu.edu.cn 

Lithium -Sulfur (Li -S) batteries attracted intensive attention as potential candidates owing to its high 

theoretical energy density (2600 Wh kg -1) and huge natural sulfur resources. 1 The electrochemical 

behavior of Li -S batteries has been improved through many comprehensive strategies in recent years. 

Nonetheless, more realistic conditions need careful consideration towards practical Li -S ba ttery, such as 

areal capacity, flexibility, electrode density, cathode porosity and electrolyte amount. The improvements 

favor to design real high -energy density Li -S batteries. Higher cathode loading is feasible to increase 

areal capacity whereas many new issues arise compared with thin -film electrodes , such as fragile cathode 

structure , increased electrode thickness and decrease d ionic /electronic conductivity . Pressure treatment 

could effectively decrease electrode thickness corresponding to high electrod e density and low porosity. 

Additionally, flexible electrode design potentially extends the application towards flexible energy storage 

devices. 

Recently, S@pPAN has received extensive attention due to its excellent electrochemical performance. 

Compared wi th solid -liquid dissolving -deposition mechanism of common S@C composite , S@pPAN 

reveals unique solid -solid conversion mechanism , which enables high sulfur utilization even at low 

electrode porosity and lean electrolyte uptake. 2 Herein, we creatively design ed a rigid -flexible coupling 

binder via interaction between guar gum and a novel long -chain binder carboxylic styrene butadiene 

rubber .3 With sulfurized pyrolyzed poly(acrylonitrile) (S@pPAN) composite cathode, high areal -capacity 

cathode was fabricated wi th enhanced areal capacity of 5.55 mAh cm -2 after long cycles . Moreover, the 

electrode exhibited benign flexibility with a capacity retention near 90% even after 400 times’ folding. In 

addition, remarkable electrode density up to 1.54 g cm -3 corresponding to cathode porosity of 13.3% and 

low electrolyte amount to 1.00 ml g -1composite were proven feasible for a practical Li -S battery. 

Figure .1 (a) Cycle performance of flexible cathodes ; (b) Schematic illustration of bending test; (c) 

Electrochemical performance of flexible cathodes in different density; 

Acknowledgements 

This work was financially supported by the National Natural Scienc e Foundation of China (U1705255 )

and  Key -Area Research and Development Program of Gua ngdong Prov ince (2019B090908001) .

Reference 

[1] J. Wang, Y. He, J. Yang, Adv. Mater. , 2015 , 27, 569 -575. 

[2] H. Yang, J. Chen, J. Yang, J. Wang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 2020 , 132, 2-15. 

[3] J. Chen, H. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Lei, A. Naveed, J. Yang, Y. Nuli, J. Wang, Ener gy Storage Mater. ,

2020 , 27, 307 -315. High molecular weight polyacrylonitrile precursor for S@pPAN 

# cathode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries 

Jingyu Lei, a Jiahang Chen, a Jiulin Wang ab *

a. Department of Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 

b. College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Henan 450001, China 

Email: wangjiulin@sjtu.edu.cn 

The Lithium -Sulfur (Li -S) battery has been considered as the most promising next generation energy 

storage system because of advantages such as high theoretical sp ecific capacities , abundant sulfur 

resources, low cost and environmentally friendly 1. For a typical Li -S battery with ele mental sulfur 

cathode which we call as mobile sulfur , there are a number of shortcomings , such as polysulfide dissolves 

in the electrolyte and renders the “shuttle” effect, which leads to the loss of active materials, poor 

electrochemical performances, low sulfur utilization and low Coulombic efficiency. However, there is 

another sulfur cathode, we call it stationary sulfur, sulfurized pyrolyzed poly(acrylonitrile) (S@pPAN) 

which was firstly synthesized via heating the mixture of sulfur and PAN under inert atmosphere 2, 3 . The 

S@pPAN delivered excellent compatibility with carbonate electrolyte, high utilizat ion of active material, 

and long cycle life. It is due to the fact that the material does not dissolve and has no shuttle effect of 

polysulfide during cycling. 

Herein, we adjusted PAN precursor with high molecular weight to prepare S@pPAN with high 

sulfur content. For the PAN with high molecular weight, the longer main chain can form a larger 

conductive network and offer additional space to accommodate more sulfur molecular in the process of 

heating cyclization. The cathode S@pPAN, which was prepared by hig h molecular weight PAN precursor 

up to 555000 (555k), accommodated amorphous S ca. 55 wt%. It delivered reversible specific capacity of 

901 mAh g -1 which was calculated based on whole composite at 0.1 C under 50 ℃ with sulfur utilization 

over 98%, along with stable cycling and good high rate capability. Therefore, synthesizing PAN with 

high molecular weight as precursor is a promising strategy to effectively enhance the amorphous sulfur 

content in S@pPAN, which wi ll lead to high specific capacity, stable cycling, and finally high energy 

density for Li -S full batteries. 

Figure .1 Cycling performance at 0.2C and Schematic of S@pPAN synthesized by PAN precursors with 

different molecular we ights (where the number following PAN indicates its molecular weight )

Acknowledgements 

This work was financially supported by the National Natural Scienc e Foundation of China (U1705255 )

and  Key -Area Research and Development Program of Gua ngdong Province (2 019B090908001) .

Reference 

1. A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. -H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. -S. Su, Chemical reviews , 2014, 114 , 11751 -

11787. 

2. J. Wang, J. Yang, J. Xie and N. Xu, Advanced materials , 2002, 14 , 963 -965. 

3. J. Wang, Y. S. He and J. Yang, Advanced materials , 2015, 27 , 569 -575. Enhanced cell performance by optimal water -uptake and electrode 

# thickness in direct hydrazine fuel cells 

## Hongsun Hwang a,b , Sujik Hong a, Jaeyoung Lee a,b ,*  

> a

Electrochemical Reaction and Technology Laboratory (ERTL), School of Earth Sciences and 

Environment al Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, 

Republic of Korea  

> b

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 

Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea 

*e-mail address : ja eyoung@gist.ac.kr (J . Lee) .

Fuel cell electric ve hicles (FCEVs) have received substantial attention for its high energy 

efficiency and zero emission as a future alternative vehicle type to replace the conventional combustion 

engine -based vehicles. Direct hydrazine fuel ce lls (DHFCs) are the promising fuel cell type applied in 

FCEVs because the carbon -free hydrazine fuel does not produce any carbon dioxide and air pollutant , and 

its theoretical cell potential (1.56 V) , energy density (5.4 kWh L-1), and ener gy efficiency are higher than 

that of hydrogen gas in fuel cell system [1 -2] . Further, the high catalytic activity of Ni , as an anode 

catalyst, toward hydrazine than precious metal Pt makes DHFCs more at tractive power sources in 

FCEVs. Despite these strong merits, the optimal membrane -electrode assemblies (MEAs) in DHFCs 

operating alkaline media have not been established well, which leads to insufficient cell performance. In 

this research, t o pursue high cell performance of DHFCs , we prepared the less oxidi zed Ni/C catalysts 

depending on the Ni contents on the carbon supports , and used the Ni/C with moderate metal contents 

observed for hydrazine oxidation reaction in DHFCs.  We examined  the effect on DHFCs performance 

resulting from the water -uptake in cathod e and the electrode thickness in anode based on the cell 

evaluation . The MEAs with the appropriate hydrophobic gas diffusion layer of cathode and catalyst 

loading of anode showed the enhanced cell power density of 547.8  mW cm -2 employing the Ni/C and 

ultra -low  amou nts  Pt in DHFCs  [3] .

References 

[1] K. Asazawa, K. Yamada, H. Tanaka, A. Oka, M. Taniguchi, T. Kobayashi , An gew. Chem. Int. 

Ed. 46 (2007) 8024 –8027 

[2] A. Serov, M. Padilla, A.J. Roy, P. Atanassov, T. Sakamoto, K. Asazawa, H. Tanaka , Angew. Che m. 

Int. Ed. 53 (2014) 10336 –10339 

[3] H. Hwang, S. Hong, D. -H. Kim, M. -S. Kang, J. -S. Park, S. Uhm , J, Lee, J. Energy Chem 51 (2020) 

175 –181 Bismuth electrodeposition in choline chloride -urea deep eutectic 

# solvent 

Youcef Karar a, b, Salem Boudinar b, Aziz Kadri b, Jean -Claude Lepretre a, Nassima Benbrahim b, Eric 

Chaînet a 

> a

Univ.  Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, Grenoble INP, L EPMI, 38000 Grenoble, 

France.  

> b

Laboratoire de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux (LPCM), Université Mouloud Mammeri de Tizi -

Ouzou, RP 15000 , Algeria. 

1130 rue de la piscine, Saint Martin d’Hères 38402, France 

Youcef.karar@lepmi.grenoble -inp.fr 

Effect of am monium chloride on b ismuth electrodeposition from choline chloride -urea deep eutectic 

solvent (DES) using BiCl 3 as source of Bi(III) was investigated. Spectroscopic and thermal studies were 

performed on the DES in order to understand whether the addition o f ammonium chlori de affects its 

behavior; the results of the thermal study do not indicate any significant change except a modification of a 

cold crystallization peaks at low scan rate. The effect of temperature and NH 4Cl content on 

electrochemical behavio r of bismuth was studied by cyclic voltammetry. Chronoamperometry was used 

to study b ismuth electrocrystallization which indicated that the bismuth electrodeposition in studied 

conditions evolves with a three -dimensional progressive nucleation. SEM images show that grain size of 

bismuth deposits decreases while adopting a well -defined geometry as ammonium salt concentration 

increases. EDS analysis confirms that pure bismuth thin films were obtained and X -Ray diffraction 

indicates that the bismuth growth fol lows a preferential orientation along the (012) reticular plane. 

Keywords 

Bismuth, ammonium chloride, deep eutectic solvent, electrodeposition, nucleation. A Facile Synthesis o f Iron -Cobalt -Nitrogen -doped CNTs as High 

# Electroactivity Catalysts of Oxygen Reduction Reaction 

A Ling Chen 1, Qing Feng Yi1,2 

1: School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology 

Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China 

2: Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Advanced Materials for New Energy Storage and Conversion, 

Xiangtan 411201, China 

yqfyy2001@hnust.edu.cn 

Efficient dispersion of M -N-C molecular macrocycles on carbon nanomaterials supp ort is an 

attractive strategy to noble metal -free Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) elect rocatalyst . In recent years, 

Co phthalocyanine( CoPc ) derivatives have been studied as metal complex catalysts for oxygen 

electroreduction. In particular , CoPc compounds supported with multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) 

have attracted great a ttention . CoPc is a transition metal macrocycle, and exhibits a n unique ORR 

capability for al ternative cathode catalysts, due to its large conjugated molecular structure with strong π-

π interactions between aromatic rings. 

Compared to most of the studies reported , the synthes is of Fe/Co doped C -N nanotubes in this work 

is different . Preparation of the catalysts does not involve complex and harsh equipment, and more 

importantly, it does not need adding pristine carbon nanotubes to raw materials . ,Carbon nanotubes were 

in situ form ed via high temperature pyrolysis of a mixture of CoPc , ferrocene and dicyandiamide. Th e

ORR behavior of Co -Fe -N-doped CNT catalysts is evaluated by employing the rotating disk electrode 

(RDE) method. Under alkaline conditions, it show s an onset potential of 0.01 V close to that of 

commercial Pt/C -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1  

> 01

(a)           

> j/mA cm -2
> CoPc-FER-DCD
> E/V VS Ag/AgCl
> 0rpm 400rpm 800rpm 1200rpm 1600rpm 2000rpm -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
> 01
> (b)
> j/mA cm -2
> E/V VS Ag/AgCl
> CoPc-DCD-FER Pt/C

.

Fig .(a ) LSV s of Fe 3Co 1-N@MWCNTs in O 2-satur ated 0.1 mol L -1KOH at 5 mV s -1;(b) LSV s of the 

catalysts in O 2-saturated 0.1 mol L -1KOH at 1600 rpm at 5 mV s -1;(c) SEM images of Fe 3Co 1-

N@MWCNTs .

Acknowledgements :This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 

China (21875062) and Development Planning Projects in Key Areas of Hunan Province 

(No.2019GK2034) 

## Reference: 

[1] Morozan A, St éphane Campidelli, Filoramo Aetal. Carbon , 2011, 49(14):4839 -4847. 

[2] Cui L , Lv G, He X. . J . Power Sources, 2015, 282:9 -18. 

[3] A. Sánche z-Calvo, A. Costa -García, M.C. Blanco -López.. Analyst, 2020, 145. A M etal -free N -P Doped Graphene Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction 

A Ling Chen 1, Qing Feng Y i1,2 

1: School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology 

Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China 

2: Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Advanced Materials for New Energy Storage and Conversion, 

Xiangtan 411201, China 

yqfyy2001@hnust.edu.cn 

The oxygen reduction reaction ( ORR) is traditionally carried out wi th noble metals (such as Pt) or 

non -noble metals as catalysts. However, these metal -based catalysts often suffer from multiple 

disadvantages, including high cost, low selectivity, poor stability and detrimental environmental effects. 

Here , we prepare d a non -metallic oxygen reduction catalyst doped with nitroge n and phosphorus via 

direct heat treatment of a mixture o f starch and dicyandiamide, followed by a further heat treatment with 

the addition of triphenyl phosphorus to get  graphene  co -doped with nitrogen and phosphorus . Graphene, 

one -atom -thick layers of sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms packed in a honeycomb lattice, is now renowned 

for its fascinating electronic properties . Since phosphorus has a lower electronegativity than carbon, i.e., 

higher electron -donating ability, it is of great signifi cance to explore the unique properties o f phosphorus -

doped graphene , which is of great significance in electrocatalyst development .

Th e ORR behavior of the prepared N-P-doped grapheme catalysts is evaluated employing the rotating 

disk electrode (RDE) method. Under alkaline conditions, it show s an onset potential of -0.04 V which is 

higher than many catalysts doped with metals and is clos e to that of the commercial Pt/C .-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 

> 01

(a)        

> j/mA cm -2
> E/V vs Ag/AgCl
> N-P-Graphene
> 0rpm 400rpm 800rpm 1200rpm 1600rpm 2000rpm -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
> 01(b) STA-DCD-TPP-300 Pt/C
> j/mA cm -2
> E/V vs Ag/AgCl

Fig .(a ) LSV s of N -P-Gr aphene in O 2-satur ated 0.1 mol L -1KOH at 5 mV s -1;(b) LSV s of N-P-Graphene 

and Pt/C in O 2-saturated 0.1 mol L -1KOH at 1600 rpm at 5 mV s -1;(c) SEM image of N-P-Graphene .

Acknowledgements : This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 

China (21875062) and Development Planning Projects in Key Areas of Hunan Province 

(No.2019GK2034) 

## Reference: 

[1] Zhang J, Zhao Z , Xia Z , et al. A metal -free bifunctional electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and 

oxygen evolution reactions[J]. Nature Nanotechnology, 2015, 10(5):444 -452. 

[2] Chen S, Zhao L , Ma J , et al. Edge -doping modulation of N, P -co -doped porous carbon spheres for 

high -performance rechargeable Zn -air batteries[J]. Nano Energy, 2019. 

[3] Xiong -Xiong, Xue, Li -Ming, et al . Bifunctional mechanism of N, P co -doped graphene for catalyzing 

oxygen reduction and evolution reactions.[J]. Journal of Chemical Physics, 2019 ，

(C) Yttrium Ruthenate Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Evolution Reaction in 

# Acidic Media 

## Chen wang a, Junjie Ge a   

> aLaboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry
> 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun 130022, PR China
> Email: chenw 92926 @ciac .ac.cn
> Email: gejj @ciac.ac.cn
> Abstract

With the growing demand for energy and the increasing concerns about environment 

pollution from fossil fuels, research interest in energy conversion from sustainable energy 

sources is stimulating and sustaining . Ele ctrochemical reaction can be used to store electrical 

energy efficiently via chemical bonds. For example, energy can be stored by electrochemically 

splitting water to form hydrogen and oxygen, whose subsequent recombination can provide 

clean electrical ene rgy with the only by -product of water . However, the efficiency of hydrogen 

fuel generation from water splitting is severely limited by the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen 

evolution . Therefore, an efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is 

needed to afford high current at low overpotential and improve the energy conversion 

efficiency. Although Iridium oxide (IrO 2) and ruthenium oxide (RuO 2) are widely recognized as 

the most active electrocatalyst for OER, th e scarcity nature as well as high cost have limited 

their widely application seriously. Therefore, it is urgent to develop low -cost alternatives as 

highly efficient electrocatalysts for OER process. 

Here, we have prepared a novel kind of pyrochlore Y 2Ru 2O7−δ electrocatalyst with high 

activity and stability toward OER in strong acidic media. Y 2Ru 2O7−δ electrocatalyst shows an 

ultralow onset overpotential of less than 240 mV in 0.1 M H 2SO 4 solution and stable 

chronopotentiometric performance under constant c urrent density. This study provides an 

effective choice for the design of high performance electrocatalyst for water electrolysis.  

> References
> 1. Kim, J. , Shih, P. C. , Ts ao, K. C. , Pan, Y. T. , Yin, X. , & Sun, C. J. , et al. (2017). High -
> performance pyrochlore -type yttrium ruthenate electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction in
> acidic media. Journal of the American Chemical Society, jacs.7b06808.

Fig.1 LSV curves of Y 2Ru 2O6

Fig.2 Chronopotentiometry performance u nder 

constant current density at 1 mA/cm 2

.Preparation and electrochemical properties of porous NiCo -MOF 

# from urea dopping 

Wang Ting 1,Yi Qingfeng *1,2 

1: School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology 

Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China 

2: Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Advanced Materials for New Energy Storage and Conversion, 

Xiangtan 411201, China 

yqfyy2001@hnust.edu.cn 

With the growing of environmental problems , t he development of fuel cells and metal -air batteries 

is becoming more and more important . Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is an important and key 

process for energy conversion and storage systems. Noble metal -based materials, such as Pt and Pd, are 

still the most efficient catalysts for O RR. Nevertheless, their large -scale applications were hindered by 

their rarity, high cost and low tolerance to fuel crossover. Therefore, developing highly active and 

cost -effective catalysts as alternatives for ORR is significant for both practical applic ations and 

academic researches. 

In this paper, we firstly prepared a bimetallic doped metal -organic frameworks, and then 

hydrothermally mixed it with urea to obtain the porous product by pyrolysis. The SEM images of the 

CoNi -MOF are presented in Fig.1.(a,b ) and the SEM image of the corresponding CoNi -MOF@Urea is 

presented in Fig.1(c). Fig.1(d) show s that the CoNi -MOF and CoNi -MOF@Urea had superior catalytic 

activity for oxygen reduction in alkaline condition. Catalytic activity of CoNi -MOF@Urea for oxygen 

reduction is close to that of commercial Pt/C. 

Fig.1. (a,b,c)The SEM images of all preparede catalyst ,(d) The ORRLSV curves for CoNi -MOF ,

CoNi -MOF@Urea and commercial Pt/C (20 wt %) at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. 

Acknowledgements: This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 

China (21875062) and the Research and Development Planning Projects in Key Areas of Hunan 

Province (No.2019GK2034) -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 

> 01
> j/mA cm -2
> EV vs Ag/AgCl
> Pt/C
> CoNi-MOFs
> CoNi-MOFs@Urea
> （d）

Reference: 

[1]Y . Zhuang, Zhanga, Q . Chen, S . Li, H . Cao, Y . Huang. Co 3O4/CuO hollow nanocage hybrids with 

high oxidase -like activity for biosensing of dopamine. Mater . Sci . .. Eng ., 2019,C(94):858 -866. 

[2]S .-L. Jian, L.-Y. Hsiao, M.-H. Yeh and K .-C. Ho. Designing a carbon nanotubes -interconnected 

ZIF -derived cobal t sulfifide hybrid nanocage for supercapacitors. J . Mater . Chem . A ,2018,7(4):33. 

[3] R. Vinodha, R. Suresh Babub, C.V.V M. Gopia, C. Deviprasatha, R. Atchudanc, L. M.Samynb, A. F. 

de Barrosb, H. -Je Kima, M. Yia, Influence of Annealing Temperature in Nitr ogen Doped Porous 

Carbon Balls Derived from Hypercross -Linked Polymer of Anthracene for Supercapacitor Applications. 

J. Energy Storage 28 (2020) 101196 Co, Fe Codoped Yolk -Shell Hollow Carbon Sphere as an Effective 

# Electrocatalyst for ORR in Alkaline Solution 

Hou Lifeng 1, Yi Qingfeng *1, 2

1: School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hun an University of Science and Technology 

，

Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China 

2: Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Advanced Material for New Energy Storage and Conversion, 

Xiangtan 411201, Hunan, China 

yqfyy2001@hnust.edu.cn 

Anthropogenic climate change and environmental pollution probl em, caused by the booming 

depletion of fossil fuels, make it urgent to develop renewable energy storage and conversion technologies. 

Among diverse technologies, metal -air batteries play a significant role for the conversion from chemical 

energy to electric energy due to their high theoretical power density and environmental friendliness . T he 

cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in metal -air batteries is so sluggish in nature that we usually 

need Pt -based electrocatalysts to accelerate the ORR kinetics f or their commercial application, even the 

metal Pt is extremely precious and scarce. Therefore, exploring electrocatalysts with excellent ORR 

catalytic activity and stability to replace the Pt -based catalyst is extremely urgent .

Herein, we use the one -pot synthesis method to synthesize a bimetal (Fe and Co) doped yolk -shell 

hollow carbon sphere using dopamine, cobalt chloride hexahydrat e and ferric chloride as carbo n, cobalt 

and ferric source respectively . Results show that the catalyst has an excellent ele ctrocatalyti c activity for 

oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in 0.1 M KOH solution. The synthesis procedure is shown in Fig. 1a, 

and the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves in 0.1M KOH with a scan rate of 5 mV/s are presented in 

Fig. 1b. -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 

> 0
> j/mA cm 2
> E/V vs Ag/AgCl FeCo-YSNC Pt/C Co-YSNC (b)

Fig .1 . Synthe sis procedure of FeCo -YSNC (a) and LSV s of FeCo -YSNC, Co -YSNC and Pt/C at 1600 

rpm in 0.1M KOH (b) .

Acknowledgements: 

This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875062) and 

the Research and Development Planni ng Projects in Key Areas of Hunan Province (No.2019GK2034) 

Reference: 

[1] Yongzheng Zhang, Kai Sun, Liang Zhan, Yanli Wang, Licheng Ling. N -doped yolk - shell hollow 

carbon sphere w rapped with graphene as sulfur host for high -performance lithium -sulfur batt eries. 

App lied Surface Science. 427 (2018): 823 –829 

[2] Dan Zhou, Liping Yang, Linghui Yu, Junhua Kong, Xiayin Yao, Wanshuang Liu, Zhichuan Xu, and 

Xuehong Lu. Fe/N/C hollow nanospheres by Fe(III) -dopamine complexation -assisted one -pot doping as 

nonprecious metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction . Nanoscale . 00 (2014 ) 1-8.

[3] Aijuan Han, Wenxing Chen, Shaolong Zhang, Maolin Zhang, Yunhu Han, Jian Zhang, Shufang Ji, 

Lirong Zheng, Yu Wang, Lin Gu, Chen C hen, Qing Peng, Dingsheng Wang, and Yadong Li. A Polymer 

Encapsulatio n Strategy to Synthesize Porous Nitrogen -Doped Ca rbon -Nanosphere -Supported Metal 

Isolated -Single -Atomic -Site Catalysts . Adv anced Mater ials . 1706508 (2018 ). Excellent Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalyst Assembled from Hollow 

# Carbon Spheres and Bamboo -like Carbon Nanot ubes 

Kuang Sheng 1, QingFeng Yi *1,2 

1: School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology 

Xiangtan 411201, Hun an, China 

2:Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Advanced Materials for New Energy Storage and Conversion, 

Xiangtan 411201, China 

yqfyy2001@hnust.edu.cn 

Economic development and technological advancement are accompanied by increasingly 

prominent problems of environmental pollution and energy crisis, which has accelerated the 

inevitable transformation of the energy structure from traditional fossil energy to renewable energy. 

Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) plays a key ro le in renewable energy conservation and storage 

technologies. P latinum  (Pt)  and platinum  (Pt) -based catalysts  are widely  considered to be the most 

effective  catalysts  for ORR. However, limited by high cost, rare source and declining activity  made 

it in gre at demand to  develop  an  alternative catalyst  to precious metal platinum. 

Under this background, we have developed an effective ORR electrocatalyst as shown in 

Fig.1 a and b , which is composed of non -noble metals nickel and cobalt as active materials, 

assem bled from carbon hollow spheres and carbon hollow nanotubes.  First, the nickel and cobalt 

co -doped  hollow  carbon sphere  was prepared by using silica ball s as hard template, dopamine 

hydrochloride as carbon source and nitrogen source. Subsequently, using ni ckel and cobalt as 

growth sites, composite s from  hollow carbon spheres and hollow carbon tubes were prepared.  The 

rotating disk electrode (RDE) measurement was performed to assess the electrocatalytic activities 

regarding ORR of the prepared catalyst by co mparison with commercial platinum carbon. -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1      

> 0
> c) 0.1M KOH
> j/mA cm -2
> E/V vs Ag/AgCl
> 0 rpm 400 rpm 800 rpm 1200 rpm 1600 rpm 2000 rpm -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
> 0
> 1600 rpm 0.1M KOH
> j/mA cm -2
> E/V vs Ag/AgCl
> catalyst Pt/C
> d)

Fig. 1. SEM image of catalyst (a); TEM image of catalyst (b); RDE polarization curves of the 

prepared catalyst in O 2-saturated 0.1 mol ·L-1 KOH at different speeds (c) and comparison of 

prepared catalyst with P t/C at 1600 rpm  (d) .

Acknowledgements : This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (21875062)  and the Research and Development Planning Projects in Key 

Areas of Hunan Province (No.2019GK2034) 

References 

[1]  Clark S ,  R. Mainar A , Iruin E , et al. Towards Rechargeable Zinc -Air Batteries with Aqueous 

Chloride Electrolytes[J]. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2019. 

[2]  Kumar G G , Chung S H , Kumar T R , et al. Three -Dimensional Graphene –Carbon Nanotube 

–Ni Hierarchical Arch itecture as a Polysulfide Trap for Lithium –Sulfur Batteries[J]. Acs Applied 

Materials & Interfaces, 2018, 10(24):20627 -20634. In  situ  Observation of  Metallic Dissolution and Corrosion 

# Characterization of Ternary CoCrMo L ibraries  in Simulated Human 

# Body Fluid Environment 

Shaukat Ali Lone 1, Cezarina Cela Mardare 1, J an Philip p Kollender 1, A chim Walter Hassel 1

Institute of Chemical Technology of Inorganic Materials  (TIM ), Johannes Kepler University Linz ,

Altenberg er S tr . 4040, Linz, Austria 

achimwalter.hassel@jku.at 

The most important material use in implants for total hip replacement is a  cobalt -chromium -molybdenum 

alloy ( known as CoCrMo) . The important property which makes this material suitable for implants are: 

biocompatibility and appropriate strength , stiffness, hardness, and wear resistance, together with high 

elastic modulus [1]. The composition of this alloys lays in the range of 26 -30 at.% Cr, 2.9 -4.1 at.% Mo 

together with other minor alloying elements (C, Si, Ni, Mn) and Co. 

In or der to investigate a broader compositional range around the composition of bulk CoCrMo, in this 

work a ternary compositional range from the cobalt , chromium and molybdenum metal lic system was 

obtained by mean s of co -sputter deposition . Energy -dispersive X-ray spectroscopy revealed a

compositional ma trix containing Mo (3 -10 at.%), Cr (17 -48 at.%) and Co (46 -79 at.%). The 

microstructure analysis of respective alloy compositions was undertaken with the help of high resoluti on 

scanning e lectron microscope. A sharp change from spike or conical to a refine d grain and compact 

microstructure was achieved with the increase in Cr content . Higher Mo conten t was responsible to 

induce further grain refinement. Crystal structure investigation via X -ray diffraction exhibited weak and 

broad peaks matching the rt HCP and ht FCC structure of Co at all compositions . Addition of Mo and Cr 

was responsible by a slight shift in the respective peaks. Electrochemical experiments e. g. open circuit 

potential (OCP) , Tafel extrapolation, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) were utilized to examine the corrosion properties of various alloy compositions in 

Ringer`s solution at 37 oC. A special flow type scanning droplet cell microscope (FT -SDCM) containing 

three electrodes setup was utilized to perform the experiments. Furthermore, to study the role of 

chromium and molybdenum during passive and transpassive dissolution (CV experiments) an d ICP -OES 

was directly coupled with FT -SDCM. To investigate the enrichment or d issolution of a specific metal ,

the instantaneous dissolution rate of each metal was converted into the normalized dissolution w ith 

respect to Co . No considerable passivation was observed at the higher Co content (above 70 at.%) 

regard less of Cr and Mo concentrations . Active to passive dissolution significantly drops as the Cr 

content becomes higher whereas, on the other hand incre ase in Mo content improved the transpassive 

dissolution above 0.6 -0.7 V vs SHE. Alloys in the rang e of (7 -10) at.% Mo (40 -48) at.% Cr 

(complementary Co) show improved corrosion resistance and dissolution which make them suitable for 

further testing and bio medical application .

[1] J. A. Disegi , Cobalt -Base Alloys for Biomedical Applications , ASTM international, USA, 

1999 Two Routes for Extracellular Electron Transfer in Enterococcus 

# faecalis 

Lo Gorton , Galina Pan kratova, L ars Heders tedt 

Lund University 

P.O.Box 124, SE -22100, Lund, Sweden 

Lo.Gorton@biochemis try.lu.se 

Bacterial electrochemistry is currently a much expandin g research field with many fundamental as wel l as 

practical implic ations in e.g., biotechnology and analytical chemistry [1-4]. Most commonly Gram 

negative bacteria have been investigated , however, also Gram positive bacteria have during the last few 

year s been at focus [4 ,5 ]. We have previously shown that the Gram positiv e lactic acid bacterium E. 

faecalis is a we ak electricigen [6] and that both monomeric redox mediators and redox polymers , when 

added to the system , can largely increase the rate of extrac ellular electron transfer f rom the bacterial cells 

to electrodes [7 -10]. 

In th is presentation it will be demonstrate d that electrons generated in glycolysis can be transferred to 

electrodes via two dif ferent pathways [11] . The finding is of interest and va lue to those active in seve ral 

fields of microbiolo gy, such as environmental, applied, and medical microbiology. Our research results, 

which are based on molecular genetic s, biochemical and electrochemical studies, also contribute to basic 

knowledge in mic robiology and physiology. 

[1] S. A. Patil, C. Hägerhäll, L. Gorton, Bioanalytical Reviews, 4 (2012) 159 -192 .

[2] A. Kumar , L . H.-H. Hsu , P . Kavanagh , F . Barrièr e, P . N. L. Lens , L . Lapinsonnière , J . H. Lienhard V ,

U. Schröder , X . Jian g, D. Leech , Nature R ev ie ws, Chemistry , 1 (201 7) 0024. 

[3] G. Pankratova, L. Gorton, Curr ent Opi nio n in Electrochem istry , 5 (2017) 193 –202 .

[4] B. G. Lusk, Frontiers in Microbiology, 10 (2019) 818 

[5] G. Pankratova, L. Hederstedt, L . Gorton, Ana lytica  Chim ica Acta ,1076 (2019) 32 -47 .

[6] L. E. Doyle , E . Marsili , Bioresource Technology 258 (2018) 354 –364 .

[7] G. Pankratova, K. Hasan, D. Leech.  L. Hederstedt, L. Gorton, El ectroche mistry Commun ications , 75 

(2017) 56 –59 .

[8] G. Pankratova, D. Leech, L. Gorton, L. Hederstedt, Biochem is try , 57 ( 2018) 4597−4603 .

[9] G. Pankratova, E. Szypulska, D. Pankratov, D. Leech, L. Gorton, ChemElectroChem 6 (2019) 110 –

113. 

[10] G. Pankratova, D. Pankratov, R.D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, L. Gorton, Ad vance d Energy Ma terials ,

(2019) 1900215 .

[11] L. He derste dt, L . Gorton, G. Pankratova, Journal of Bacterio logy , 202(7) (2020 ) e00725 -19 .Sustainable electrochemical production of tartaric acid 

Amanda C. Garcia 1, * , Carlos Sánchez -Martínez 1, Ivan Bakker 1, Earl Goetheer 1,2 .

> 1

Department of Sustainable Process and Energy Systems, TNO, Leeghwaterstraat 44, 2628 CA Delft, 

The Netherlands 

> 2

Process and Energy, Delft University of Technology,  Leeghwaterstraat 39, 2628 CB Delft, The 

Netherlands 

amanda.garcia@tno.nl 

The development of green industrial processes has been attracting more attention in the last years and it 

requir es renewable energy sources. Large -scale electrification of the energy and chemistry sectors is a 

crucial condition for the transition from a society based on fossil resources to a sustainable society based 

on renewable building blocks.  Transformation of C O2 into chemicals has been intensively studied over the 

past decades because this molecule can be used as C 1 feedstock in electro -organic synthesis due to its 

abundant, cheap, renewable and non -toxic nature 3–5. Of particular interest of this molecule is the synthesis 

of two - to four -carbon atom products (C 2-C4). Concerning the synthesis of C 2-C4 products, tartaric acid 

(TTA) attracts attention because it is an important product used in the tex tile printing, dyeing, 

pharmaceutical and food industries 11 . In the past years, the price of TTA and its salts has varied as much as 

50 %, as might be expected when the source of the raw material is a by -product of another industry .

Herein we describe a study of the electrochemical reduction of oxalic and glyoxylic acids towards a feasible 

green and sustainable production of tartaric acid in aqueous and/or acetonitrile solvent using silver and lead 

electrodes. 

Our results show that  on the silver electrode, for both oxalic acid and glyoxylic acid, the reduction reaction 

is more favorable towards the dimerization step, leading to tarta ric acid, due to the increase in the local pH, 

while on the lead electrode the step involving the protonation of the intermediate is more favorable, leading 

to the formation of glycolate.         

> Figure 1. Calculated yield and conversion of OxA and the main liquid products detected by HPLC on Ag (A) and Pb ( B) electrodes
> in ACN solution + 0.1 M TEACl + 0.1 M OxA.
> Figure 2 .OPEX, CAPEX and Total Production Costs for TTA
> for Case 1 (from GLYA) and Case 2 (from OxA), and Market
> Price for TTA from vendors.

Techno -Economic Analysis shows that tartaric 

acid production from glyoxylic acid and from 

oxalic acid via electrochemical synthesis can be a 

potential process at industrial scale. In the present 

case, the oxygen evolution reaction was chosen as 

the reacti on at the other electrode for practical 

reasons, but oxygen is a low -value product. 

Another anodic reaction with a more valuable 

oxidation product can be selected to increase the 

profitability of the overall electrochemical 

process, and thereby decrease th e total production 

costs of tartaric acid .

References 

[1] Matthessen, R.; Fransaer, J.; Binnemans, K.; De Vos, D. E. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2014 , 10 , 2484 –

2500. 

[2] Thangavelu, S. Bull. Electrochem. 1985 , 1 (6), 553 –554. 

> B

# Amorphous Nanocluster PtNiP supported on Defective Graphene as an 

# Efficient Electrocatalyst for Methanol Oxidation Reaction 

Long Yang ab , Zhao Jin a, Shuai Hou a, Liang Liang a, Chenyang Li a, Guiling Wang* b, Junjie Ge* a,

Changpeng Liu a and Wei Xing* a

a State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, 

Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Renmin Street No.5625, 

Changchun 130022, PR China 

b Key Laboratory of Superlight Materials and Surfa ce Technology of Ministry of Education, College of 

Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, PR China 

Corresponding author: Wei Xing, E -mail:  xingwei@ciac.ac.cn 

Guiling Wang, E -mail:  wangguiling@hrbeu.edu.cn 

Junjie Ge, E -mail:  gejj@ciac.ac.cn 

Pt based mater ial s with high specific surface area have attracted increasing attention as a result of their 

high activity and durability for electrocatalys is , because of their high surface area, more active sites and 

high electrical conductivity .[1, 2] Herein, amorphous PtNiP/graphene nanoclusters were successfully 

prepared by a simple process that hypophosphite -assisted co -reduction method to electrocatalyze 

methanol oxidation. The diameter of PtNiP/graphene nanoclusters was abou t 0.92 nm. The morphology 

and structure of PtNiP/graphene nanoclusters were characterized by transmission electronic microscopy 

and x -ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Benefiting from the size -confined growth mechanism and the 

doping of P, PtNiP nanocluster was anchored uniformly with controllable size on the surface of graphene. 

Meanwhile, P was used to form PtNiP alloy and adjust the electronic structure of Pt. The as -prepared 

PtNiP/graphene catalyst exhibits excellent mass activity as high as 826.1 mA•mg-1Pt , which is 2.58 times 

higher than commercial Pt/C and excellent durability after 1000 cycles CV test. 

Fig.1. (a) TEM image of PtNiP/graphene. (b) MOR curves recorded at room temperature in a 0.5 M 

H2SO 4+1 M CH 3OH aqueous solution at the scan rate of 5 0 mVs -1

Acknowledgments 

This paper is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( U1601211, 21733004, 

21673221), the Jilin Province Science and Technology Development Program (20170203003SF) .

References 

[1] J. Gao, F. Sahli, C. Liu, D. Ren, X. Guo, J. Werner, Q. Jeangros, S.M. Zakeeruddin, C. Ballif, M. 

Gratzel, J. Luo, Solar Water Splitting with Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Cell and TiC -Supported Pt 

Nanocluster Electrocatalyst, Joule, 3 (2019) 2930 -2941. 

[2] J. Han, X. Me ng, L. Lu, Z.L. Wang, C. Sun, Triboelectric nanogenerators powered electrodepositing 

tri -functional electrocatalysts for water splitting and rechargeable zinc -air battery: A case of Pt 

nanoclusters on NiFe -LDH nanosheets, Nano Energy, 72 (2020). Highly active and stable nanoporous RuO 2 catalyst to oxygen 

# evolution reaction in acidic media by advancing micro/mesoporous 

# structure 

## Jiadong Jiang a, Shuai Hou a, Junjie Ge a*,Wei Xing a*

a State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Jilin Province Key Laboratory of Low 

Carbon Chemical Power, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of 

Sciences. 

Email:  gejj@ciac.ac.cn ; xingwei @ciac.ac.cn 

Nanoporous RuO 2 is very promising to achieve the activity and stability of electrocatalyst for 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in acidic medium, but it is still challenging [1] . This article reports a 

nanoporous RuO 2 catalyst with high catalytic performance in acid OER. The RuO 2 catalyst is prepared 

by a simple and effective ammonia -induced pore formation method, which has a large number of 

micropores/mesopores. As a self -supporting electrocatalyst, the n anoporous RuO 2 has excellent acid 

OER activity. The overpotential at 10 mA c m-2 is 215 mV. More importantly, the overpotential 

difference of the OER of this catalyst before and after accelerated stability testing was only 35 mV, and 

it did not show significant deactivation or decomposition. Therefore, the catalyst can be used as a n

efficient OER electrocatalyst in acidic media. 

Acknowledgements 

The work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No 2018YFB1502400), the 

Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of  Sciences (No. XDA21090400), the 

Jilin Province Science and Technology Development Program (20190201300JC, 20180101030JC) 

[1] G. Li, S. Li, M. Xiao, J. Ge, C. Liu, W. Xing, Nanoporous IrO2 catalyst with enhanced activity and 

durability for water oxidation owing to its micro/mesoporous structure, Nanoscale, 9 (2017) 

9291 -9298. 20 30 40 50 60 70 80             

> Relative Intensity(a.u.) 2()
> RuO-350 °C
> RuO-400 °C
> RuO-450 °C
> PDF#43-1027 RuO2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 050 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600
> RuOx 350°C
> RuOx 400°C
> RuOx 450°C
> Volume/cc g -1
> Relative Pressure/(p/p 0)0510 15 20 25 30 35
> 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16
> dV(d)/cc nm -1  g-1
> Pore Diameter/nm
> RuOx 350°C
> RuOx 400°C
> RuOx 450°C

Fig. 1 0 2 4 6 8 10 12                    

> 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
> E - IR (V vs.RHE) Time (h)
> RuO x-350°C
> RuO 2(CM) 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 020 40 60 80
> Current density
> (mA cm -2 )
> Potential (V versus RHE)
> RuOx 350°C
> RuOx 400°C
> RuOx 450°C
> RuO 2(CM) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> RuOx 350°C
> RuOx 400°C
> RuOx 450°C
> Zim /ohms cm 2
> Zre /ohms cm 20.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> RuOx 350°C
> RuOx 400°C
> RuOx 450°C
> Zim /ohms cm 2
> Zre /ohms cm 2

Fig. 2 Advanced Filter Membrane Separator for Aqueous Zinc -Ion Batteries 

Yao Qin, Yougen Tang, Haiyan Wang* 

Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sources, College of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineering, Central South University 

Changsha, China 

E-mail: wanghy419@csu.edu.cn 

Aqueous zinc -ion batteries with low cost and inherent safety are considered to be the next -generation 

energy storage device. However, it is suffering from poor cycling stability and low Coulombic efficiency 

caused by the serious zin c dendrites during the cycling. In this work, a porous water -based filter 

membrane is firstly proposed as separator due to its good toughness and uniform pore distribution. 

Compared with conventional cells with glass fiber separator or filter paper, the ce lls with filter membrane 

show a longer cycle life. The results demonstrate that the symmetrical cell using a filter membrane can 

cycle over 2600 hours with a low voltage hysteresis of 47 mV. Moreover, aqueous Zn//NaV 3O8·1.5H 2O

cell based on the filter memb rane is constructed, which demonstrates a high capacity retention of 83.8 % 

after 5000 cycles at 5 A g ‒1. The mechanism research results reveal that the excellent dendrites inhibiting 

the ability of the filter membrane should be attributed to its uniform p ore distribution rather than its 

composition. This work proposes a filter membrane separator and reveals the great influence of separator 

on the zinc stripping/plating process, which will shed light on the development of high -performance 

aqueous zinc -ion b atteries. 

Figure. The cycling performance of cells with different separators. (a) Zn//Zn symmetrical cells at the 

current density of 1 mA cm ‒2 with areal capacity of 1 mAh cm ‒2. (b) Zn//NaV 3O8·1.5H 2O full cells at 5 A 

g‒1.

This research was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China 

(No.21975289), Hunan Provincial Research and Development Plan in Key Areas (2019G K2033) and 

Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project of China (No. 2017TP 1001 and No. 

2018RS3009) .

Refere nces 

[1] Q. Zhang, J. Luan, L. Fu, S. Wu, Y. Tang, X. Ji, H. Wang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019 , 58, 15841 .

[2] F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu, J. Chen, Nat. Commun. 2018 , 9, 1656 .Ti 3C2Tx modified graphene foam as a lightweight interlayer for 

# improved lithium -sulfur battery 

Ruowei Yi , Chenguang Liu, Yinchao Zhao, Li Yang *, Cezhou Zhao 

Department of Chemistry, Xi'an Jiaotong -Liverpool University 

Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China 

Li .Yang @xjtlu.edu.cn 

Lithium -sulfur (Li -S) batteries ha ve high specific capacity and energy density overweigh the 

commercial lithium ion batter ies [1] . Besides, the elemental sulfur also surpasses other cat hode materials 

for its low -cost, natural abundance and environmental benignity [2] . Nevertheless , Li -S batteries still have 

several crucial drawbacks: the poor electrical and ionic conductivi tie s of sulfur species seriously retard 

the redox reaction. In addition, the so called “shuttle effect” brought by the dissolution of polysul fides can 

degrad e the capacity and stability performance [3] . To overcome these obstacles, one special strategy is to 

build a functional interlayer between the cathode and the separator [4] . Here, the highly con ductive 

lightweight graphene foam (GF) was modified by the Ti 3C2Tx (MXene) colloid and the resulted GFMX 

inte rlayer inherited their merits as lightweight and polysulfide -attractive. With this GFMX interlayer , the 

cell presen ted 867 mAh g-1 after 120 cycles with 88.8 % retention, which exceeds the pristine one’s 

capacity by 32.8 %. 

[1] Ji, X. and L.F. Nazar, Advances in Li –S batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2010, 20 (44 ): 

p. 9821 -9826. 

[2] Zhao, H., N. Deng, J. Yan, W. Kang, J. Ju, Y. Ruan, X. Wang, X. Zhuang, Q. Li, and B. Cheng, 

A Review on Anode for Li thium -sulfur Batteries: Progress and Prospects. Chemical Engineering 

Journal, 2018, 347 p. 343 -365. 

[3] Zhang, J., H . H uang, J. Bae, S. -H. Chung, W. Zhang, A. Manthiram, and G. Yu, Nanostructured 

Host Materials for Trapping Sulfur in Rechargeable Li -S Batte ries: Structure Design and 

Interfacial Chemistry. Small Methods, 2018, 2 (1): p. 1700279 -1700310. 

[4] Zhao, Q., Q. Z hu, Y. An, R. Chen, N. Sun, F. Wu, and B. Xu, A 3D Conductive Carbon 

Interlayer with Ultrahigh Adsorption Capability for Lithium -sulfur Batte ries. Applied Surface 

Science, 2018, 440 p. 770 -777. Stabilized Pt Cluster Based Catalysts Used as Low -loading Cathode in 

# PEMFC 

Siyuan Zhu ,ab Xian Wang, ab Ergui Luo, ab Liqin Gao, a Liang Liang ,a Chenyang Li, a Shuai Hou, a Chen 

Wang, a Shiwei Liu, a Zhao Jin, *a Changpeng Liu, ab Junjie Ge *ab and Wei Xing *ab 

a: St ate Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, 

Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China 

b: School of Applied Chemistry and Engineering, University of Science an d Technology of China, USTC, 

Hefei 230026, China 

zjin@ciac.ac.cn ; gejj@ciac.ac.cn ; xingwei@ciac.ac.cn 

Lowering the Pt catalyst loading in fuel cell cathode without sacrificing the cell performance 

remains topical for fuel cell development, which will large ly reduce the capital cost of the technology. 

This, in the meantime, is also highly challenging, since lowering the Pt loading not only reduces the 

overall kinetics of oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), but also causes serious mass transfer issue in high 

cur rent density domain (HCD). Herein we overcome this difficulty by obtaining a highly active and stable 

Pt cluster based catalyst, where the catalyst loading reduction is completely compensated by the 

extraordinarily high electrochemical specific area  (358.6 m2 gPt -1) and the high dispers ion of the platinum 

clusters. The Pt clusters, with average size of 1.3 ± 0.4 nm and atomic ultization rate up to 32.81%, are 

highly stabilized due to the strong anchoring effect of the N, P doped carbon nanosheets. As a resu lt, the 

final Pt -9.3@NPC catalyst not only outcompetes the commercial Pt/C catalysts in terms of activity, but is 

also more stabilized during potential cycling. Even further, the cell assembled using Pt -9.3@NPC as 

cathode catalyst (0.1 mg Pt cm -2) conveys m uch higher fuel cell performance ( 837 mW cm -2) in H2/Air 

mode than the counterpart commerical catalysts (472 mW cm -2), clearly evidencing the success in 

surmounting the mass transfer problem .

Ackno wledgements: 

The National Key R&D Progra m of China (No 20 17YFB0102900) ; The National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (21633008, 21875243, 21733004) Ecological and economical s tationary energy storage system 

# based on aqueous zinc -ion batteries 

W. Peters , M. Kronsbein, J. -F. Drillet ,

DECHEMA -Forschungsins titut 

Theodor -Heuss -Allee 25, 60486 Frankfurt, Germany 

willi. peters @dechema.de 

The replacement of fossil energy sources by wind and solar power is dependent on ecological and 

economical large scale energy storage solutions such as pumped -storage, hydrogen and batteries. Besides 

established systems such as lead -acid, Ni -MH and Lithium -based systems, additional emergent 

electrochemical systems are needed to satisfy increasing demand. 

In the conventional zinc -ion battery ( ZIB ), an ener gy -dense metallic zinc anode (820 A h/ kg; 5854 Ah/ l) is 

combined with an aqueous electrolyte (ZnS O4) and preferably with a δ-MnO 2 cathode (308 Ah/kg) to 

form a n environmentally benign, non -toxic, non -flammable and low cost battery (<50 €/kWh). Most 

battery components are readily available as raw materials as well as high quality commercial products. 

Recyclin g processes for zinc and partially for MnO 2 are established. All ecological concerns are 

addressed within th is battery chemistry. Thus, remaining economical and technical challenge s are cycling 

stability of the ZIB and its scale -up to commercially a vailable battery formats . The increasing amount of 

ZIB publications indicates the potential of this highly promising battery chemistry. Multiple studies were 

able to achieve a high electrochemical stability by demonstration of 1000 -8000 charge/discharge cy cles. 

[1,2] However, these results have bee n achieved in coin cell design containing low amount of active 

material and have not been demonstrated in larger battery formats yet .

This work aims at developing a prismatic ZIB cell and electrode manufactur ing based on aqueous inks 

excluding the t oxic and expensive NMP solvent. After establishing a homogeneous and stable ink 

composition , the electrodes were coated and tested first in coin cell design. Hereby, MnO 2 capacity of 

300 mAh /g at a loading of 5 mg/cm² and current density of 60 mA/g (C5) was achieved that is close to 

theoretical value. Furthermore, we studied influence of the electrolyte composition on corrosion of the 

zinc anode (H 2 evolution), MnO 2 dissolution/deposition as well as battery component stability. Corrosion 

experiments in 1 M ZnSO 4 at 80°C for 8 weeks have been performed for commercially available passive 

and active cell components, such as binders, separators, current collectors , cell casings and gaskets. 

Conven tional current collectors such as alumi num and copper underwent complete decomposition or 

severe corrosion. Stainless steel components (1.4404, 1.4310), titanium and others demonstrate d very 

high corrosion stability. 

References 

[1] C. Xu, Angew. C hemi. Int. Ed. 51 (2012) 933 

[2 ] B. Jiang, Electrochimica Acta 229 (2017) 422 

[3 ] G. Kasiri, Electrochimica Acta 222 (2016) 74 

[4 ] M. Eckert, Materials 11 (12) (2018) 2399 Eco -friendly Chitosan: Anticorrosion Film on aluminum alloy 6061 Via 

# a Facile Method of Pyrolysis 

Yanwei Zeng , Zihao He , Linghui Yang , Qunjie Xu *

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Materials Protection and Advanced Materials in Electric Power, Shanghai 

University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, China 

e-mail : xuqunjie@shiep.edu.cn 

As an environmentally friendly multi -carbohydrate material, chitosan contains a great amount of 

amino and hydroxy functional groups in the molecular structure. A highly corrosion -resistant carbon film 

doped nitrogen was successfully prepared on the surface of aluminum alloy 6061 (AA 6061) by pyrolysis. 

Corrosion behavior of the as -prepared film was studied via EIS, Ta fel polarization curve and equivalent 

circuit in 0.5 M H 2SO 4 and 2 pp m HF. The corrosion current density of carbon film on AA 6061compared 

that of bare AA 6061 was down dramatically from 8.356 ×10 -5 A·cm -2 to  7.461×10 -8 A·cm -2,which  reveal 

good corrosion resistance . The surface morphology and composition were characterized by field emission 

scanning electron microscopy (FE -SEM) and its affiliated energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), atomic 

force microscope (AFM), X-ray diffracti on (XRD), Raman spectrum, fourier transform infrared 

spectroscopy (FT -IR) and X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), respectively. The results  illustrat e

that the as -prepared film on AA 6061 was a nitrogen -doped graphitized carbon film and exhibited a ver y

high protection inhibition of 99.91%.   

> Fig .1

The schematic diagram of the experimental process 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  financially  supported  by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.  21673135) and Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No.17020500700). 

[1] Qin Z. L, Zeng Y. W. , Hua Q. H. et al. Synergistic effect of hydroxylated boron nitride and silane on 

corrosion resistance of aluminum alloy 5052[J] Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical 

Engineer s,2019,100:285 -294 

[2] Wan Y., Chen M. J. , Liu W., et al. The research on preparation of superhydrophobic surfaces of pure 

copper by hydrothermal method and its corrosion resistance[J] Electrochimica Acta,2018,270:310 -318 Strategy to provide hydrogen by formic acid decomposition 

Qinglei Meng ab , Liang Liang bc , Chenyang Li bc , Junjie Ge bc *, Changpeng Liu bc * Wei Xing ab * 

> a

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, 130022, PR China. E -mail:  rpma@ciac.ac.cn ;

xingwei@ciac.ac.cn  

> b

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, PR China.  

> c

Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy 

of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, 130022, P R China. E -mail:gejj@ciac.ac.cn 

The dehydrogenat e split ting of f ormic acid (FA) offers an ideal solution to H 2 storage and on demand 

releasing in a mobile fuel cell, where catalysis is at the heart of efficient hydrogen delivery. Lack in 

fundamental knowledge on catalytic interfac e has bottleneck ed the design and development of effective 

catalysts with both high conversion efficiency and selectivity . In our recent work , w e present our effort 

to understand the nature of active sites for the Pd catalysts ,1 based on which the relationship between the 

concentration of the substrate and the performance has been discussed . Here we propose that the saturated 

formate solution with few formic acid could keep the catalyst stay in the best performance, which could 

make the hydroge n produced longer and faster if the formic acid could be supplied in the same rate. 

Fig.1 Relationship between the activity and the substrate , (a) HCOOH -Pd/C , (b) HCOONa -Pd/C ,

(c) linear relationship in (b), and (d) performance in the saturated formate solution with few HCOOH .

Acknowledgements 

Thanks the National Key R&D Program of China (No 2017YFB0102900), the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (21633008, 21875243, 21733004) 

References 1. Lv, Q.; Meng, Q.; Liu, W.; Sun, N.; Jiang, K.; Ma, L.; Peng, Z.; Cai, W.; Liu, C.; Ge, J.; Liu, L.; Xing, W. (2017), 

Pd –PdO Interface as Active Site for HCOOH Selective Dehydrogenation at Ambient Condition. The Journal of 

Physical Chemistry C. Synergistic engineering of MoS 2 via dual -metal doping strategy 

# towards hydrogen evolution reaction 

Dongchen Han , Zhaoyan Luo , Yang Li , Nanxing Gao,Weixing *, Changpeng Liu *, Junjie Ge *

State Key La boratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institut e of Applied Chemistry, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China 

No. 5625, Renmin Street, Changchun City, Jilin Province 

liuchp@cia c.ac.cn, gejj@ciac.ac.cn,  xingwei@ciac.ac.cn 

Hydrogen is an ideal en ergy carrier to replace the conventional energy based on fossil fuels, where its 

high efficiency production constitutes the cornerstone of the sustainable hydrogen economy. (1, 2 )

Currently, the cathode reaction, i.e ., the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) process relies heavily on 

platinum -based materials, thus impeding the water electrolysis from wide spread application, due to the 

scarce and high price of Pt. (3) Molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2) is reckoned as one of the most positive low -

cost HER catalysts to replace platinum -based precious metals in acid media. (4) Unfortunately, some 

issues preclude MoS 2 from being truly applicable including limited active sites, poor conductivity and 

lack o f intrinsic activity. (5) Herein, we report a Cu, Pd co -doped MoS 2 nanomaterial as an efficient and 

stable HER electrocata lysts, which partially resolve the above -mentione d problems and leads to high 

overall performance. Specifically, we improve the electric conductivity of the MoS 2 by Cu dopant and 

realize the phase transition of MoS 2 from pristine 2H phase to stable 1T phas e by Pd dopant. More 

importantly, we increase act ive site density to facilitate fast electrocatalytic Faradaic process via 

synergistic effects of Cu and Pd doping, and tune electronic energy states of MoS 2 to improve HER 

intrinsic activity. In acidic media , the performance of Cu -Pd -MoS 2 catalyst in terms of a low 

overpotential ( -93 mV) at 10 mA cm −2, a small Tafel slope of 77 mV dec -1, and an excellent stability is 

better than that of single -doped catalysts. 

1. Y. Shi et al. , Energy Level Engineering of MoS2 by Tr ansition -Metal Doping for Accelerating 

Hydrogen Evolution Reactio n. J Am Chem Soc 139 , 15479 -15485 (2017). 

2. Y. Wang et al. , Catalysis with Two -Dimensional Materials Confining Single Atoms: Concept, Design, 

and Applications. Chem Rev 119 , 1806 -1854 (2019) .

3. P. Yu et al. , Earth abundant materials beyond transition metal dichalcogenides: A focus on 

electrocatalyzing hydrogen evolution reaction. Nano Energy 58 , 244 -276 (2019). 

4. T. F. Jaramillo et al. , Identification of active edge sites for electrochemica l H2 evolution from MoS2 

nanocatalysts. Science 317 , 100 -102 (2007). 

5. H. Jin et al. , Emerging Two -Dimensional Nanomaterials for Electrocatalysis. Chem Rev 118 , 6337 -

6408 (2018). Unexpected High Activity of Nanostructured Rh -Pt Catalysts for 

# Ethanol Electro oxidation 

V. Del Colle ,a N. A. Galiote ,b G. Tremiliosi -Filho b

> a

Departamento de Físico -Química, Instituto de Química de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paul o, Av. 

Trab. São -carle nse 400, 13560 -970, São Carlos, SP, Brazil .

> b

Universidade Federal de Alagoas – Campus Arapiraca , Av. Manoel Severino Barbosa, s/n, 57309 -005, 

Arapiraca -Al, Brazil .

delcolle@i qsc .usp.br 

Ethanol electro oxidation reaction (EOR) proceeds via a multistep proce ss. Platinum is a good 

elect rocatalyst for the first electro -oxidation step, in ac id medium, the adsorption of et hanol is followed 

by platinum catalyzed dehydrogenation. Howev er, platinum is poor electrocatalyst for ethanol C –C bond 

break. The last step is the adsorbed CO electro -oxidation to CO 2. Hence, the strategy to enhance the rate 

of the last elementary oxidation step is to combine platinum with a second metal, specially an oxophilic 

metal. While Pt 1Rh 1 alloy nanodendrit es exhibit superactivity for EO R [1], rhodium alone is a non -active 

catalyst. Nonetheless, sub -monolayers of Pt (up to 5 %) onto Rh single crystal surface, showed an 

unexpected enhancement in the activity and the stability of the EOR [2]. Inspired in the excellent 

perf ormanc e of rhodium /platinum , bimetallic nanostructured catalysts were synthe sized on carbon -

dispersed (Black Pearls 2000 ®-Cabot Corp.) using chemical reduction from metal precursors achieving 

low Pt content (in mass) compared to Rh (Rh 27% Pt 4% C69% , Rh 27% Pt 6%C67% , and Rh 27% Pt 9.5% C63.5% ), and 

dispersed pure Pt (Pt 5% C and Pt 50% C) . TGA/DSC scans in air atmosphere from 30 to 1000 °C confirmed 

the Rh and Pt percentages in the nanoparticles. The XRD results indicated the formation of alloyed 

polycrystalline Rh and Pt nanoparticles [1 ]. Also, from the Debye -Scherrer equation [1], for the (111) 

XRD peak, crystallites of ca. 3.8 nm size were calculated for all samples. From HR -TEM images were 

observed well -dispersed ≈ 5 nm (sphere -like) nanoparticles. Cyclic voltammetry wa s performed in 0.5 M 

H2SO 4, in th e presence and absence of ethanol, in a potential range of 0.05 – 1.10 V (RHE), at 50 mV s -1,

the 50 th cycle was recorded for all electrodes. The main processes observed in the absence of ethanol were 

hydrogen adsorption/desorptio n and formation/reduction of metal oxides. In presence of ethanol (0.5 M) ,

it was possible to observe that small amounts of Pt (Rh 27% Pt 9.5% C63.5% ) presented an onset potential, in the 

first cycle, of 0.39 V and 0.50 V for RhPt and Pt/C, respectively. A high non -normalized activity, 1.93 

mA (RhPt) and 1.01 mA (Pt/C) at 0.6 V (RHE), were observed. During the subsequent scans, the RhPt 

electrodes demonstrated a progressive increase in the anodic and cathodic oxidation current densities 

whereas the Pt/C remains the same or diminish es in the case of Pt 5% C. This fact is so interesting, once the 

low Pt load embedded in Rh was capable to promote an unexpected and superior EOR result, even if the 

major component (Rh) is inactive. Thus, the low amount of Pt facilitated the ethanol electrooxida tion 

reaction probably by a bifunctional surface during cycling, achieving the best active site configuration 

without any performance decreasing of these electrodes cycle to cycle [2]. Additionally, f rom the distance 

det ermination between crystallographic planes by HR -TEM, it is possible to suggest that the lattice strain 

effect associated with the bifunctional surface effect are responsible for the unexpected high catalytic 

performance of the RhPt nanoparticles .

Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the FAPEAL, FAPESP, CNPq for the financial support. 

References 

[1] J. Bai, X. Xiao, Y. Xue, et al.  ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 10 (2018) 19755 -19763. 

[2] V. Del Colle, V. Grozovski, E. Herrero, J. M. Feliu. ChemCatChem , 5 (2013) 1350 -1353 .Ti -Doped RuO 2 as Highly A ctive Acidic Oxygen Evol ution Reaction 

# Catalyst 

Zhaoping Shi , Xian Wang, Shuai Hou , Junjie Ge*, Changpeng Liu*, Wei Xing* 

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry Chinese 

Academ y of Scinece 

Renmin Avenue , 5625, Changchun, China 

*e-mail address : gejj@ciac.ac.cn (JJ. Ge), liuchp@ciac.ac.cn (CP Liu), xingwei@ciac.jl.cn (W. Xing). 

Though solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) water electrolysis hold the promise in the field of clean 

energy conversion and utilization, the sluggish anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the bottleneck 

for its large overpotential [1] . Herein, we present a Ti doped RuO 2 catalyst with a highly active Ru -O-Ti 

structure. Attribute to the electron withdraw effect of Ti, Ru in the Ru -O-Ti possess a higher charge 

density compared with the Ru -O-Ru structure in the undoped one, which can significantly promote the 

potential determine step of OER on RuO 2 according to the traditional adsorption evolution mechanism 

(AEM) [2]. Thanks to this unique structure, our best catalyst needs only a low overpotential as 159 mV to 

reach a current density of 10 mA cm -2 in 0.5 M H 2SO 4 electrolyte. Besides, the stable Ti species 

introduced can work for a long time with only a small amount of dissolves (2.42 % dissolution of Ti after 

30 h chronopotentiometry tests at 10 mA cm -2). Full water splitting test imply that a voltage as low as 

1.42 V is required to deliver 10.0 mA cm −2 for the electrolysis assemble, which is significantly superior to 

the full cell with bare IrO 2 as anode. We argue that the Ru -O-Ti structure unit introduced by trace Ti 

doping are responsible for the exhibited superior OER activity. 

Figure 1. TEM cha racterization of Ti -doped 

RuO 2.

Figure 2. XRD, XPS and electrochemical test 

results of the Ti -doped RuO 2.

Acknowledgements 

Thank the National Key R&D Program of China (No 2018YFB1502400), the Strategic Priority Research 

Program of the Chi nese Academy of Sciences (No. XDA21090400), the Jilin Province Science and 

Technology Development Program (20190201300JC, 20180101030JC) 

References 

[1] B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Earth -abundant heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts, 

Chem. Rev. , 2016, 116 , 14120 -14136. 

[2] I. C. Man, H. -Y. Su, F. Calle -Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. 

Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, Universality in oxygen evolution electrocatalysis on oxide 

surfaces, ChemCatChem , 2011, 3, 1159 -1165. Atomically dispersed Plat inum on phosphomolybdic acid and oxidized 

# graphene interface towards HER 

Yang Li ab , Zhaoyan Luo ab , Xian Wang ab , Zhao Jin ab Junjie Ge ab* , Changpeng Liu ab * Wei Xing ab*  

> a

State Key Lab oratory of Electro analytic Chemistry, Ji li n Province Key Laboratory of L ow Carbon 

Chemical Power, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sc iences. 

Changchun, J ilin, 130022 ( P. R. China ) 

> b

School of Applied Chemistry and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of Ch ina. 

Hefei, Anhui, 230026 ( P. R. China )

gejj@ciac.ac.cn ; liuchp@ciac.ac.cn ; xingwei@ciac.ac.cn. 

Hydrogen energy technology with hydrogen as an energy carrier is gaining more and more attention 

due to its ad vantages such as non -pollution and high energy de nsity (1). Among them, hydrogen evolution 

react ion is one of the cleanest and most sustainable hydrogen production technologies , as a necessary 

prerequis ite for the future economic development of hydrogen energy (2). However , its development is 

subject to the expensive price of precious metals. One of the ideas is to reduce the lo ading and increase 

the atomic utilization rate. Single -atom catalyst is the limit that can be reached at presen t-the theoretical 

atom utilization rate 100% -so th at each metal site can adsorb H atom a nd produce hydrogen (3). Here , we 

use phosphomolybdic acid with varying valence effect as a soft r educ ing agent to redu ce P t(Ⅳ) to 

monodisperse P t atoms. With the increase of the strong reducing agent NaBH 4, the low -valence Mo 

increase, so there is a greater proba bi li ty of reducing Pt(Ⅳ). Through high -resolution transmission 

electron microscopy and map ping , it can be determined that Pt exists in monodisperse form. PMA and 

GO construct an int erface that is easy to load with Pt, which great ly improves the stability of the catalyst .

Although the overpotential is still not as good as JM -Pt/C -20%, its mass s pecific activity is dozens of 

times. 

Fig .1 XPS of Mo Fig.2 Mapping of Pt Fig.3 Electrochemistry performance Fig.4 Mass activity 

Acknowledgements 

The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (216330 08, 21875243, 

21 673220, U16 01211), National Science and Technology Major Project (2017YFB0102900), Jilin 

Province Science and Technology Development Program (20190201270JC, 20180101030JC). Part of the 

computational time is supported by the High -Performance Computing Cente r of Jilin University and Jilin 

Province, as well as Network and Computing Center of Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. Prof. 

Wei Xing thanks Gusu talent program for the financial support. 

References 

1. C. G. Mo rales -Guio, L. A. Stern, X. Hu, Nanostructured hydrotreating catalysts for 

electrochemical hydrogen evolution. Ch em. Soc. Rev. 43 , 6555 -6569 (2014). 

2. X. Zou, Y. Zhang, Noble metal -free hydrogen evolution catalysts for water splitting. Chem. Soc. 

Rev. 44 , 5148 -5180 (2015). 

3. Z. Z hang et al. , The simplest construction of single -site catalysts by the synergism of mic ropore 

trapping and nitrogen anchoring. Nat Commun 10 , 1657 (2019). Defects Control in a Novel Gadolinium Doped Iridium Oxide Catalyst 

# for Acidic Oxygen Evolution Reaction 

Wang Yibo, ab Hou Shuai, a Jin zhao, a Liang Liang, a Li Chenyang, a Liu Shiwei, a Liu Changpeng, ab *

Ge Junjie, ab * Xing Wei abc* 

(a Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy 

of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, 130022, PR China.  

> b

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, PR China.  

> c

State Key Laboratory of Ele ctroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chan gchun, Jilin, 130022, PR China 

*Corresponding author Email : liuchp@ciac.ac.cn ; gejj@ciac.ac.cn ; xingwei@ciac.ac.cn .) 

Doping the second metal into iridium oxide offers great opportunities for an efficacious regulation of 

electrocatalytic activity and stability for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 1, 2 Here, a novel kind of 

Gadolinium -doped IrO 2 catalyst with high specific surface area and lots of defects is synthesized by a

simple template -free ammonia complex -based method . For 5% -Gd -pIrO 2, the overpotential to achieve 10 

mA cm -2 is only 287 mV and this catalyst exhibits excellent stability under operating conditions. The 

exceptional performance is derived from its decreased remarkably crystallinity , abundance electronic 

defects of iridium and oxygen vacancies controlled by two ch arge compensating mechanism , boosting the 

kinetics of oxgen evoluction reaction . We believe this strategy can be extended to multifarious material 

systems for creating defects in nanoparticles. 

Fig.1 The structure characteriz ation of doped and 

undoped samples. 

Fig.2 The electrochemical catalytic properties of 

doped and undoped samples in 0.5 M H 2SO 4.

Acknowledgements 

Thanks the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFB1502400), the Strategic Priority Research 

Program of CAS (No. XDA21090400) and Jilin Province Science and Technology Development Program 

(No. 20190201300JC) for financial support. 

References 

1.  J. Gao, C. Q. Xu, S. F. Hung, W. Liu, W. Cai, Z. Zeng, C. Jia, H. M. Chen, H. Xiao, J. Li, Y. Huang 

and B. Liu, J Am Chem Soc , 2019, 141 , 3014 -3023. 

2.  H. Chen, L. Shi, X. Liang, L. Wang, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Angew Chem Int Ed Engl , 2020, DOI: 

10.1002/anie .202006756. Diagnose the contamination effect at the cathode of the PEMFC using 

# Impedance Spectroscopy 

Xian Wang ab , Junjie Ge *ab , Wei Xing ,ab Yunfeng Zhai c and Jean St -Pierre c

a. Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Jilin Province Key Laboratory of Low Carbon Chemical 

Power Sour ces, Chan gchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 

Changchun, Jilin, 130022, PR China. E-mail : gejj@ciac.ac.cn ;

b. University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, PR China 

c. Hawaii Natural Energy Institute , Universi ty of Hawaii –Manoa, Ho nolulu, Ha waii 96822, USA. 

In order to improve proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) performance and to increase the cell’s 

lifetime, it is necessary to examine t he operati on of a PEMFC fo r analyzing performance loss es especially 

the contaminant effect in the different processe s inside the fuel cell with suitable techniques. The AC 

impedance technique, also known as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), is a powerful 

nondestructive technique utilizing in PEMFC studies. In this study, propene at a concentration of 100 

ppm as the contaminants were used in the cathode to study the contamination effect in PEMFC. 

Disregarding the current direction, the redox reac tions of p ropene only acco unt for at most 0. 2 % of the 

total current at the cathode. Using an EES, we illustrated the contamination effect in terms of influence at 

both R ct and R c. This work has the great effect on helping use EIS to examine the PEMFC s. 1-2

Fi gure 1. The con tamination behavior of Propene at the Pt electrode. 

Acknowledgements 

Thanks the National Science and Technology Major Project (2017YFB0102900) and the Hundred Talents 

Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial s upport. 

Ref erences 

1. Zhai, Y.; Bethune, K.; Bender, G.; Rocheleau, R. J. Electrochem. Soc. , 159, B524 (2012 ).

2. J. Ge, J. St -Pierre, Y. Zhai, Int . J. Hydrogen Energy , 39, 18351 (2014 ).Effect of micropores and chloride ions on Ru / C catalyst for 

# hydrogen evolution reaction 

Rongpeng Ma ab , Liang Liang bc , Chenyang Li bc , Junjie Ge bc *, Wei Xing ab * 

> a

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, 130022, PR China. E -mail:  rpma@ciac.ac.cn ;

xingwei@ciac.ac.cn  

> b

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026, PR China.  

> c

Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy 

of Sciences, Chang chun, Jilin, 130022, P R China. E -mail:gejj@ciac.ac.cn 

The hydrogen -energy society demands a cheap and stable production of hydrogen in which highly -

efficient electrocatalysts are of paramount importance. The Ru is cheaper while generally displays 

inferior performances compared to state -of -the -art Pt for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER ). Herein, we 

discover controlling content of Cl - can decrease toxic effe ct on Ru/ C catalyst and the ration 

micro/ mesopores can avoid the agglomeration of Ru, which is beneficial to increase performance for 

HER. We prepared Ru/ C catalyst with ruthenium chloride and acetylacetonate, and found that ruthenium 

acetylacetonate has better performance. The catalyst prepared with ruthenium trichloride washed with 

ammonia water has 18 mV performance improv ement. The refore, it is concluded that Cl - does have toxic 

effect on Ru/ C catalyst, and it can be eliminated by high temperature or ammonia water washing; the 

appropriate proportion of the micro mesopores can avoid the aggregation of Ru, be beneficial to the 

performance improvement for HER. 

Fig.1 HER polarization curves of Ru/C, (a) different metal sources, (b) Ru/C of after ammonia water 

washing , (c) and (d) different carbon carriers from the same metal source. 

Acknowledgements 

Thanks  the National Key R&D Program of China (No 2018YFB1502400), the Strategic Priority 

Research Program of the Chinese Academy of  Sciences (No. XDA21090400), the Jilin Provin ce Science 

and Technology Development Program (20190201300JC, 20180101030JC)  support. 

References     

> 1. J, Mahmood and J, B Baek, Nature Nanotechnolog. 12 ,441 -447 (2017)

# Hybrid high -concentration electrolyte significantly strengthens the 

# practicability of alkaline aluminum -air battery 

Shengan Wu , Shouyao Hu, Qi Zhang, Dan Sun*, Pengfei Wu, Yougen Tang* and Haiyan Wang* 

Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sou rces, College of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineering, Central South University 

Changsha, 410083, P.R. China 

E-mail:  wanghy419@csu.edu.cn (H. Wang) , sundan4330@csu.edu.cn (D. Sun), ygtang@csu.edu.cn (Y. 

Tang). 

Alkaline aluminum -air batteries show great pote ntial for energy storage applications because of their high 

theoretical energy density and low cost. However, they are suffering from severe anodic self -corrosion 

and the gelation of electrolyte which greatly reduce the practical energy density and shelf l ife. Herein, we 

firstly construct an efficient high -energy alkaline Al -air battery based on high -concentration potassium 

acetate -potassium hydroxide electrolyte and prototype optimization. The self -corrosion of Al anode is 

greatly suppressed owing to the s pecial hydrate structure in such electrolyte. The Al -air battery with 

optimum electrolyte demonstrates remarkable increased discharge capacity of 2324 mAh g −1, and the 

constructed miniaturized Al -air battery enables an outstanding system energy density of 436.1 Wh kg −1

(compared with 85.8 Wh kg −1 of normal electrolyte) after integrating a discharge product removing 

system. This work opens up a new direction for the practical realization of high - energy, low -cost, and 

high -efficiency alkaline Al -air battery and other aqueous metal -air batteries. [1 -4] 

Figure 1. (a)  Schematic illustration of the difference of water reduction reaction from 4 M KOH 

electrolyte to 16 M HCPA -KOH electrolyte. (b) Schematic application diagram of the Al -air battery 

integrated sys tem. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curves of Al -air full batteries with different electrolytes at 

a current density of 25 mA cm −2.

This work was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 21975289, 

No. 21905306 and No. U19 A2019), Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project, China (No. 

2017TP1001, and No. 2018RS3009), Key Areas Research and Development Plan of Hunan Province 

(No.2019GK2033), Key -Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province 

(2020B09091 9001). 

Reference s

[1] J. Ryu, M. Park, J. Cho, Advanced technologies for high -energy aluminum -air batteries, Adv. Mater. 

31 (2019) 1804784. 

[2] L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang, K. Xu, “Water -in -salt” 

electrolyte enabl es high -voltage aqueous lithium -ion chemistries, Science. 350 (2015) 938. 

[3] L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, 

S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu, C. Wang, Advanced high -voltage aqueo us lithium -ion 

battery enabled by “Water -in -Bisalt” electrolyte, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55 (2016) 7136 -7141. 

[4] M. R. Lukatskaya, J. I. Feldblyum, D. G. Mackanic, F. Lissel, D. L. Michels, Y. Cui, Z. Bao, 

Concentrated mixed cation acetate “water -in -salt” s olutions as green and low -cost high voltage 

electrolytes for aqueous batteries, Energy Environ. Sci. 11 (2018) 2876 -2883. Revisiting Electrocatalysis of Acetaldehyde Oxidation Reaction with 

# Wide Frequency ATR Surface enhanced IR Spectroscopy 

Xian -Yin Ma, Sai Duan, Wen -Bin Ca i

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative Materials, Collaborative Innovation 

Ce nter of Chemistry for Energy Materials, Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai 

200433, China 

E-mail: wbcai@fudan.edu.cn 

The adsorption and reaction of acetaldehyde on Pt electrode is of considerable interest in surface 

chemistry and electro catalysis, since acetaldehyde is either an intermediate or a reaction product of 

ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) or the anode reaction in direct ethanol fuel cells. The in -depth 

mechanistic understanding of acetaldehyde adsorption and oxidation on Pt elec trode is essential for 

further revealing the mechanism of more complicated EOR and developing relevant efficient catalysts. 

[1] 

For decades, owing to the application of in situ IR spectroscopy with either external (IRAS) or internal 

(ATR) reflection mode, it has been suggested that two pathways may be involved in the acetaldehyde 

oxidation reaction (AOR) on Pt surface in acidic media, that is, the minor C1 pathway leading to the 

production of CO2 and the dominant C2 pathway to acetic acid. The C1 pathway i nvolves the C –C bond 

cleavage to form COads and CHx surface species at low potentials, followed by their further oxidation to 

CO2 at high potentials. The C2 pathway may proceed via the oxidation of surface C1 intermediates 

before forming acetic acid. Despi te the above general consensus, details regarding AOR on Pt electrode 

yet remains controversial, in terms of chemical identity and configuration of surface C2 intermediates. 

Recently, thin and micromachined Si wafers, designed as internal reflection elem ents (IREs) for 

attenuated total reflectance infrared spectroscopy, were adapted to serve as su bstrates for electrochemical 

ATR -SEIRAS by Burgess’ group.[2] The 500 μm thick wafer IREs with groove angles of 35° are 

significantly more transparent at long mid -IR wavelengths as compared to conventional large Si 

hemisphere IREs. In this work,[3] in situ ATR -SEIRAS technique incorporating a micro -structured Si 

wafer window, p -polarized infrared radiation and isotope labelling is extended to revisit acetaldehyde 

electro -oxidation on Pt electrode in acid media. New spectral features in the fingerprint regio n are 

detected, including the γ(C -H) at 1078 cm -1 and the νas(C -C-O) at 913 cm -1 for adsorbed acetaldehyde 

and the δ(O -C-O) at 689 cm -1for adsorbed acetate, besides the other enhanced and clearly discriminated 

spectral signals at higher frequencies. The ATR -SEIRAS measurements together with new DFT 

calculations incorporating the coadsorption of CO and C2 species enable to clarify the structures and roles 

of the C2 intermediates ((η1(C) -acetyl and η1(H) -acetaldehyde) during acetaldehyde electro -oxidation. 

Re ferences 

[1] Y. Wang, S.Z. Zou, W.B. Cai, “Recent Advances on Electro -Oxidation of Ethanol on Pt - and Pd -

Based Catalysts: From Reaction Mechanisms to Catalytic Materials ” Catalysts, 2015, 5(3):1507 -1534. 

[2] T.A. Morhart, B. Unni, M.J. Lardner, I.J. Burges s, “Electrochemical ATR -SEIRAS Using Low -Cost, 

Micromachined Si Wafers” Analytical Chemistry, 2017, 89(21),11818 -11824 

[3] X.Y. Ma, W.B. Cai, “Revisit Acetaldehyde Oxidation on Pt Electrode in Acid Media by High Quality 

and Wide Frequency ATR -SEIRAS”, in p reparation. Microelectrode Arrays for B iosensing in a 3Dimensional Cell Culture 

# Scaffold 

Karthika Kappalakandy Valapil , Wojciech Mazurkiewicz , Emilia Witkowska Nery 

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw 

ul. Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -224 Warsaw, Poland 

E-mail: karthikakv@ichf.edu.pl 

Microelectrode Array s (MEAs ) were introduced in the 1950s 1,2 and from that moment they a re used as a basic 

tool in electrophysiology , yet their applications for analysis of other types o f cell activities is till now rather 

unexplored. When incorporated in a 3D cell culture scaffold, MEAs provide an adaptable platform for sensing 

and bio sensing of normal cell metabolism; they can also be a convenient tool for recording and simultaneously 

stimulating electrical activities of a neur al network. 

Our objective is to develop a novel device that incorporates MEAs in a 3D cell cu lture scaffold. The device will 

allow visualizing the gradients and cellular functions inside the cell culture during its growth with the help of 

MEAs that act as a cell -electrode interface. MEAs will be em ployed in a cell culture for viability test s through 

analysis of glucose and oxygen consumption. They will also be used for the investigation of neurotransmission 

through recording of dopamine an d glutamate levels in various points of a neural culture .

The current focus is the fabrication of microel ectrode arrays using insulated platinum wires of 15 and 25μm 

diameters . Stable and reproducible performances are achieved from most of the electrodes tested so far (Fig.1). 

After optimization of the preparation process of the single electrodes they are connected in meshes of 4, which 

will be later used for analysis in 3D cell cultures. 

Simultaneously, we are also working on the development of glucose biosensor s as they can be easily modified 

to sense other species such as glutamate by mere exchange of the enzyme, yet glucose oxidase is much less 

expensive and easier to work with than other enzymes from the oxidase family . Apart from glucose oxidase the 

sensor is covered with a layer of a mediator . We are inv estigating both Prussian B lue (Fig.2) and a 

metallopolymer that contains poly(vinylimidazole) (PVI) complexed with [osmium -(4,4’ - dimethoxy -2,2’ -

bypyridine)Cl] (Os -dmo -bpy) .3 As the neural cells will be growing directly on the electrodes, we are not 

neglecting the possibility of accidental stimulations as the neural culture is electrically active and the potential in 

standard electrochemi cal measureme nts is swept till 1.0 V or higher. Although hydrogen peroxide produced 

through the reaction with oxidase enzyme can be sensed directly on a platinum electrode, we apply a layer of a 

mediator to reduce the working potential o f the electrode and diminish the chance of accidental stimulation of 

the cul ture .0,00 0,02 0,04 0,06 0,08 0,10 -0,4 -0,3 -0,2 -0,1 0,0               

> I (μA) c (mol/dm 3)
> R2=0,9426
> Fig.1 Stable and reproducible performances of five 15 μm Fig.2 Calibration curve for hydrogen peroxide in
> platinum microelectrodes in 1mM 1, 1’ -Ferrocenedimethanol PBS Buffer (pH 7.4) measured using Prussian Blue
> and 0.1M KCl modified glassy carbon electrode vs Ag/AgCl 1M KCl
> Authors acknowledge financial support of the National Centre for Research and Development under the grant LIDER/38/01381/L -9/17/NCBR/2018, and EWN
> would like to also thank the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP), from which she was supported through START programme and National Science Centre
> Poland for the MINIATURA grant NCN 2017/01/X/ST4/00463.

References       

> 1. Ghane -motlagh, B. & Sawan, M. Design and Implementation Challenges of Microelectrode Arrays : A Review. 2013 , 483 –495
> (2013).
> 2. Thomas, C. A., Loeb, G. E. & Okunj, L. M. A Miniature Microelectrode Array To Mo nitor The Bioelectric Activity Of Cultured
> Cells. 74 , 0 –5 (1972).
> 3. Films, C. P., Ohara, T. J., Rajagopalan, R. & Heller, A. Glucose Electrodes Based on Cross -Linked [ Os(bpy)2CI] +/2+
> Complexed Poly( 1 -vinylimidazole) Films. 5970 –5975 (1993).

# Multilayered DDM -modified Nickel foam anodes for alkaline water 

# electrolysis 

Elitsa Petkucheva , Galin Borisov, Elefteria Lefterova Evelina Slavcheva, 

Acad. E. Budevski Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy System - Bulgarian Academy of Sciences ,

Acad . G. Bonchev Str.10, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria, 

e.petkucheva@iees.bas.bg 

Water electrolysis provides a direct pathway for conversion of electrical energy to chemically energy in 

the form of high -purity hydrogen. 

Currently, commercial approach for low temper ature water 

electrolysis is the alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) . The 

alkaline water electrolyzers typically operated in aqueous 

KOH solutions (c= 25 –30 wt% (5.5 –6.9 M KOH) and T= 

65 °C and 100 °C ) where cathode and anode compartments 

are separated by a porous diaphragm, allowing the 

conduction of hydroxide ions while separating the product 

gases. 

The AWE offers the distinct advantage of employing 

relatively inexpensive non -noble electrocatalysts (n ickel -

based catalysts are most commonly used ), which prov ide 

for relatively low oxygen evolution reaction (OER) 

overpotentials and good stability in alkaline media .

Fig. 1. AWE setup with immersed porous NF 

electrodes in zero -gap assembly 

In the present work, a concept for alkaline water elect rolyzer with a ‘’Dip and Drying’’modified (DDM) 

nickel foam (NF) electrodes as anode, a pure NF cathode and a state -of -the -art Zirfon™ separator is 

presented. The geometric surface of the electrodes was 7 cm 2.

The DDM -NF anode consist 1 mm thick Nickel foam substrate covered with thick micro -pores catalytic 

layer build from DDM -Nickel powder and PT FE emulsion. 

The morphology and the chemical composition of the developed materials/electrodes were analyzed by 

scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X -ray difraction (XRD), respectively. 

The electrocatalytic activities of the electrodes for the hydrogen (HER) and oxygen (OER) evolution 

reactions in 1M KOH are investigated by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), cyclic voltammetry (CV), 

and chronopotentiometry (CP). Then, the electrodes were fixed in a laboratory made electrolysis test cell 

and separated by a 0.5 mm thick ceramic diaphragm Zifron Perl 500 (Fig.1) . The doping of the diaphragm 

was performed directly in the cell by circulating 25% KOH solution for 24h at room temperature. 

The single cell unit operated in dynamic regime at room and elevated tempe ratures without any sign of 

degradation. The current density reached value of 0.150 A.cm -2 at 80 0C and 2V cell voltage. 

Acknowledgements : The research has been supported by the National Research Program '' Young 

Scientists and Postdoctoral Fellows '' -2020 , Bulgarian Mi nistry of Education and Science. 

Part of the experiments were performed on equipment of Research Infrastructure “Energy Storage and 

Hydrogen Energetics” (ESHER), included in the National Roadmap for Research Infrastructure 2017 -

2023”, gr anted by the Ministry of Education and Science of Republic Bulgaria, grant agreement DО1 -

160/28.08.18. 

References: 

[1] F. Song, M.M. Busch, B. Lassalle -Kai ser, C. -S. Hsu, E. Petkucheva, Micha �L Bensimon, Hao, 

M. Chen, C. Corminboeuf, X. Hu, An Unconventional Iron Nickel Catalyst for the Ox ygen 

Evolution Reaction, ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 558−568; ttps://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.9b00053. 

[2] E. Petkucheva, G. Borisov, E. Lefterova, E. Slavcheva, Application of the "Dip and Drying" 

method (DDM) for the synthesis of electro -catalysts with ap plication in industrial alkaline 

electrolysis, In: Proc. of XVI National Youth Scientific -practical C onference , 7 -8 Nov. 2019, 

Sofia, Bulgaria, pp. 17 -22. Understanding the Effect of Interfacial Interaction on Metal/ Metal 

# Oxides Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution and Hydrogen 

# Oxidation Reactions on the Basis of First -principle Calculations 

Xingqun Zheng , Li Li, Mingming Den g , Jing Li, Wei Ding , and Zidong Wei 

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University 

No.174 Shazhengjie, Shapingba, Chongqing, 400044, China 

zxingqun@cqu.edu.cn 

Abstract : Understanding the interfacial interaction between metal (M) and transition metal oxides 

(TMO) support is essential for the material design of high performance electrocatalysts. In this study, we 

constructed Pt/TiO 2 composite models with interfacial Pt -Ti a nd Pt -O bonds respectively, to clarify the 

interface effect on electronic structures, spe cies ad -desorption and migration properties, HER and HOR 

mechanism through first -principles calculations. Interfacial Pt -Ti metallic interaction causes more 

delocalize d electron on Pt cluster, which strengthens H and OH adsorption, facilitates *H migration and 

H2O dissociation. While interfacial Pt -O covalent interaction affects the localized electronic structure of 

Pt with deficient electron, which results in an optimu m H ad -desorption and complicated *H migration 

processes. The interface sites and non -int erface sites jointly provide an efficient H migration channel and 

reaction pathway. For HER, Pt -O interaction benefits the Tafel step, and Pt -Ti interaction is favorab le for 

the Volmer step. For HOR, Pt -O interaction contributes to a higher HOR activity an d an anti -oxidation 

ability than Pt -Ti. These results can serve as a theoretical guidance for constructing high performance 

M/TMO electrocatalysts for HER/HOR by regul ating interfacial bond type and proportion. 

Figure 1 Interfacial Pt -O and Pt -Ti intera ctions of Pt/Ti contribute two distinct tune effects on 

HER/HOR. 

References 

1 X. Tian, P. Zhao, W. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31 , e1808066. 

2 N. Ramaswamy, S. Mukerjee, Chemical reviews, 2019, 119 , 11945. 

3 J. Park, S. Lee, H. E. Kim, A. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Ye , J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang, J. Lee, Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 2019, 58 , 16038. 

4 T. Bhowmik, M. K. Kundu, S. Barman, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1929. 

5 L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. L. Zhao, Q. H. Zhang, L. B. Huang, L. Gu, G. Lu, J. S. Hu, L. J. Wan, Natl. Sci. 

Rev., 2020, 7, 27. The Influence of Flow Field Design on the Performance of a 

# Zinc -Iodide Flow Battery 

Fatemeh ShakeriHosseinabad a, Edward PL Roberts b

> a

PhD Candidate, Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering 

> b

Professor, Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering  

> a & b

University of Calgary, Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, 2500 University Drive 

NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canad a

Fatemeh.shakerihosse@ucalgar y.ca 

A very high energy density has been reported for the zinc -iodide flow battery [1]. An optimized flow field 

design for uniform distribution of the electrolyte is desirable for the redox flow battery systems. In order 

to enhance the performance of a zinc -iodide flow battery, the impact of a new flow field design on the 

performance of the battery was investigated. 

The flow cell used graphite felt electrodes, a Nafion membrane, and had an active area of 5 cm 2.

Electro analytical methods, inclu ding cyclic voltammetry (CV), and rotat ing disk electrode (RDE) , were 

performed to evaluate redox potential, diffusion coefficient and electrochemical reversibi lity of the 

electrolyte system. 

Charge -discharge characteristics were carried out to investigate cy clability and efficiency of the zinc -

iodide battery with and without the presence of flow -through flow field design . The battery cell was 

tested under constant current density over 40 cycles and test analysis indicated that the efficiency and 

discharge ene rgy density of the battery improved. Using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and optical 

profilometry shows that the presence of flow -through flow field design enhanced the morphology of zinc 

deposition from a thick and rough deposition to a thinner and s oft deposition in the new flow field design. 

It was also found that due to inhibition of dendrite formation with the presence of flow -through 

arrangement, a higher range of current density is applicable for the zinc -iodide flow battery. 

[1] - Li, B., Nie, Z., Vijayakumar, M., Li, G., Liu, J., Sprenkle, V., & Wang, W. (2015). Ambipolar zinc -

polyiodide electrolyte for a high -energy density aqueous redox flow battery. Nature communications, 6, 

6303. Electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide to oxalate and oxalic acid 

Suji Jang , Yoonjung Kim, Ji hye Seo, Woonsup Shin* 

Department of Chemistry, Sogang University , Seoul, Korea 

shinws@sogang.ac.kr 

The electrochemical CO 2 conversion technology has merits of the operation at room temperature and 

atmospher ic pressure, and the flexible capability in the scale by stacking and attracts a lot of attention from the 

industries to capture and convert the CO 2 to useful compounds . Oxalic acid is a reduced dimer of CO 2, and it 

uses only one -electron per CO 2 for the conversion. It can be one of the most economic al and energy -efficient 

CCU (carbon capture and utilization) process es. We succeeded in producing 0.1 kg/day of the oxalate salt at 

the current efficiency of 86% in the one -pot cell using a sacrificial anode . Subsequently, the oxalate could be 

converted to oxal ic acid with an eff iciency of 75 %, by the membrane electrolysis using a three -compartment 

cell .Nickel Phosphide Coated with Ultra -Thin Nitrogen Doped Carbon Shell as a 

## Highly Durable and Active Catalyst for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction 

Shuai Hou b, Wei Xing a,b , Junjie Ge a,b 

> a

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130012, PR China 

> b

Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Changchun 

130012, PR China 

E-mail address : houshuai @ciac.ac.cn 

With the aggravating environment pollution and depletion of conventional fossil fuel, the development of clean 

and sustainable energy, such as solar and wind power, has become a worldwide research hotspot [1] . However, the 

development of wind and solar energy still face the feasibility problem due to their intermittent nature [2] .

Fortunately, water splitting offers an ideal route. Water can be used to store solar and electrical energy to produce 

hydrogen. This can be realized by electroch emical reactions, which is an efficient method to store electrical energy 

at scale . Therefore, water electrolysis process plays an important part in the construction of the energy conversion 

system. 

The greatest challenge is the design and fabrication of e fficient catalysts for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution 

reactions of water electrolysis . Although Pt and Pt -based materials are the most effective catalysts for hydrogen 

evolution reaction (HER) at present, the high cost and low abundance hamper their wid er uses. High abundance non -

precious catalysts based on transition metals including Ni, Co, Mo, and W are more intensively studied and regarded 

promising in replacing Pt based materials. Among the varied transition metal based catalysts, transition -metal 

phosphides, especially nickel and cobalt phosphides, has long been considered as the most effective non -precious 

electrocatalysts for HER .

To solve the problems mentioned above, herein, highly durable and active Ni 2P nanoparticles with ultrathin N -

doped car bon shell are fabricated. With the aim of improving the stability of Ni 2P nanoparticles without affecting 

their electrocatalytic activity, the number of N -doped carbon layers is controlled. By controlling the thickness, the 

protective shells are ultrathin (as low as 4 layers) and permeable for the reactant molecules, which avoid catalytic 

active sites being blocked. In addition, the effect of N dopant on the catalytic activity of the hybrid material is also 

discussed. As recently published, the sulfur incor poration into transition metal phosphides leads to more optimal 

ΔG H* (0.096eV), and achieves the balance of hydrogen adsorption and detachment on Ni sites. Inspired by the 

similar electronegativities of N and S, herein, N is doped into the carbon matrix to optimize the ΔG H* of Ni 2P

towards better HER activity. 

Acknowledgments 

The work is supported by the Strategic Priority Research Program of CAS (XDA09030104), Jilin Province 

Science and Technology Development Program (20160622037JC), Hundred Talents Progra m of Chinese Academy 

of Sciences and the Recruitment Program of Foreign Experts (WQ20122200077). 

References 

[1] Ambec S, Crampes C. Electricity provision with intermittent sources of energy. Resource and Energy 

Economics. 2012;34(3):319 -36. 

[2] Ambec S, Crampes C. Electricity provision with intermittent sources of energy. Resource and Energy 

Economics. 2012;34(3):319 -36. Numerical Modelling of Silicon Electrodeposition by in High 

Temperature Molten Salt Electrolysis 

Aditya Moudgal a, Mohammad Asadikiya a, Adam Powell a *, Uday Pal b, Yu Zhong a 

> a

Materials Science and Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical Engineer ing, Worcester 

Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA.  

> c

Division of Materials Science and Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA  

> a

100 Institute Rd., Worcester, 01609, MA; b15 Saint Mary’s St., Boston, 02215 

amou dgal@wpi.edu ; masadikiya@wpi.edu ; acpowell@wpi.edu *; upal@bu.edu ; yzhong@wpi.edu 

Current m anufact uring of silicon for solar energy applications via the Siemens process is expensive ,

energy intensive, unsafe, and environmentally harmful . It involves due to many unit operations, 

including carbothermic reduction, chlorination, distillation, and vapor ph ase reactions. Many r energy 

intensive with inefficient carbothermic reduction and has various safety problems . Researchers have 

considered direct electrolysis of silica employing looked at alternative methods and t he electrodeposition 

of silicon using molt en salts is a promising process 1. This process is analogous to aluminum smelting in 

the Hall -Heroult cell. Toward s this goal, a novel molten salt bath comprising of MgF 2-CaF 2-YF3-Ca O-

SiO 2 was formulated . It has to have low volatility <0.1 μg/cm 2*s, low v iscosity of <5 mPa*s, high ionic 

conductivity of >4 S/cm and adequate SiO 2 solubility >5wt% 2. One of t The scientific challenges 

obstacles that remain s are to be answered is the salt entrapment and the non -planar and non -uniform 

growth of the silicon depos it the characteristics of the deposition . To address these challenges an 

understanding of the deposition process is necessary. The current density distribution on the electrodes ,

and the characteristics of the bath gives us an idea of the growth pattern of silicon on the cathode and the 

losses that can occur in the electrochemical cell. This presentation provides a model of the silicon 

deposition process looks at answering these questions throug through h a macroscopic finite element model 

by numerically solvi ng the Butler -Volmer equation describing charge transfer overpotential vs. current 

density , Navier -Stokes equations for fluid flow , energy and species diffusion equations with 

electromigration 3, and Maxwell’s equations describing to understand the magneto hydrodynamics of the 

bath. It presents quantifiable characteristics of the bath behavior which can be used in design and scal e-up 

ing of the cell. The finite element model is solved using COMSOL multiphysics. 

References  

> 1

Toshiyuki Nohira, “Silicon Production by Molten Salt Electrolysis,” in Encyclopedia of Applied 

Electrochemistry , ed. Gerhard Kreysa, Ken -ichiro Ota, and Robert F. Savinell (New York, NY: Springer 

New York, 2014), 1963 –66, https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4419 -6996 -5_457.  

> 2

Jicheng Guo et al., “Effect of Optical Basicity on the Stability of Yttria -Stabilized Zirconia in Contact 

with Molten Oxy -Fluoride Flux,” Journal of the American Ce ramic Society 101, no. 8 (August 2018): 

3605 –16, https://doi.org/10.1111/jace.15496.  

> 3

Adam Powell and Soobhankar Pati, “Multi -Physics Modeling of Molten Salt Transport in Solid Oxide 

Membrane (SOM) Electrolysis and Recycling of Magnesium,” in CFD Modeling and Simulation in 

Materials Processing , ed. Laurentiu Nastac et al. (Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012), 

57 –64, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118364697.ch7.  

> Formatted: Font: 10 pt

# Enhancing Electrode Dur ability, Process Intensification, and Co -

# Conversion for Efficient Electro reduction of CO 2

Paul J.A. Kenis 

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign 

600 South Mathews Avenue, Urba na IL, 61822 

kenis@illinois.edu 

Today fossil fuels serve as the major feedstock for the production of intermediates, chemicals, and fuels. 

This approach will not be sustainable for many generations: Accessible fo ssil fuel reserves are dwindling 

and the energy -intense thermal / catalytic processes typically employed for chemical production are 

responsible for a significant fraction of the anthropogenic CO 2 emissions. The use of electrochemical 

reduction of CO 2 to p roducts such as CO, formic acid, ethylene, and ethanol may be a process that will be 

key to achieving a more sustainable chemical industry. While techno -economic (TEA) and life -cycle 

(LCA) analyses of these processes indicates their promise, these also hi ghlight the challenge to compete 

in terms of cost with present day chemical conversion processes operated at scale [1]. 

This contribution will elaborate on three approaches to bring electrochemical reduction of CO2 closer to a 

process that can be implemen ted at scale, while being economically feasible and (close to) carbon neutral. 

First, w hile active and selective catalysts have been developed for products such as CO, formic acid, 

ethanol, and ethylene, the electrodes that are needed in scalable electroly sis configuration do not exhibit 

the 1000s of hours of lifetime needed to achieve economic feasibility. This presentation will summarize 

the range of encountered electrode degradation mechanisms [2], before elaborating on recent work 

towards (accelerated) durability CO 2 electrolysis testing methods, as well as ways to mitigate electrode 

degradation .

Second, l ike many electrocatalytic processes, the electroreduction of CO 2 is highly dependent on the 

exact operation conditions of the electrolysis process. This presentation will summarize a set of system 

design rules to enhance CO 2 electrolysis performance ( Faradaic efficiency, energy efficiency, conversion 

efficiency ) through fine -tuning of a combination of factors: (i) electrolyte composition and pH; (ii) 

electrolyte flowrate; (iii) CO 2 feed flowrate; and (iv) catalyst loading.[3] More recently, we have found 

that the use of mixed electrolytes can be remarkable useful for further process intensification. 

Third, upon realizing that 90+% of the total energ y required to operate a CO 2 electrolysis cell is 

consumed at the anode by the energy demanding oxygen evolution reaction, we explored alternative, less 

energy -demanding options for the anode reaction. We found, for example, that co -conversion of CO 2

(redu ction at cathode) with organic waste molecules (oxidation at anode) reduced the overall energy 

consumption by 40 -50%.[4] This presentation will show how this co -conversion process concept can be 

the starting point for a new generation of chemical manufact uring technology that is significantly more 

efficient and sustainable (sustainable feedstocks, less greenhouse gas emissions) than the traditional 

thermochemical processes. 

(1) P.J.A. Kenis, A. Dibenedetto, T.R. Zhang, ChemSusChem , 2017 , 18 (22), 3091 -309 3. 

(2) U.O. Nwabara, E.R. Cofell , S. Verma, E. Negro, P.J.A. Kenis, ChemSusChem , 2020 , 13 (5), 855 -875. 

(3) S.S. Bhargava, F. Proietto, D. Azmoodeh, E.R. Cofell, D.A. Henckel, S. Verma, C.J. Brooks, A.A. 

Gewirth, P.J.A. Kenis, ChemElectroChem , 2020 , 7, 2001 – 2011 

(4) S. Verma, S. Lu, P.J.A. Kenis, Nature Energy , 2019 , 4, 466 –474. Development of a tyrosinase biosensor based on a boron -doped 

# diamond electrode for phenol detection in wines .

Presenting author : Patric Bosch 

Co -Authors ; Supervisor: Professor Priscilla Baker 

Co -supervisor: Miss Dhielnawaaz Abrahams 

Affiliation : The Unive rsity of the Western Cape 

Addres s; University of The Western Cape 

Robert Sobukwe road 

Bellville ,7535 

Republic of South Africa 

e-mail address :3343791@myuwc.ac.za 

Polyphenols are a large group of organic compounds, that can be characteri zed by the presence of one or 

more hydroxylated benzene rings in their structure. In wines two main forms of polyphenols are found; 

Flavonoids (e.g. quercetin) and Phenolic acids (e.g. gallic and caffeic acid). Because of their useful 

properties (e.g., ant ioxidant, anti -mutagenic, anti -carcinogenic etc.) some polyphenols such as curcumin 

or tannic acid are considered useful reagents , in the treatment of cancer and diabetes. However, other 

polyphenols such as chlorinated (e.g. 2 -chlorophenol) and oestroge nic polyphenols (e.g. Bisphenol) 

present toxicity and bioaccumulation issues even at low concentrations, thus highlighting the need for 

simple , selective and highly sensitive electrochemical determination of these for wine analysis, effluent 

remediation and o ther purposes. 

The aim of this project is the development of an electrochemical biosensor, based on a boron -doped 

diamond electrode (BDDE) for the determination of tannic acid in aqueous media. The tyrosinase (Tyr -

ase) modified electrode was investigated , with special emphasis on the determination of tannic acid. 

Immobilization of the enzyme onto the electrode active surface confirmed that the enzyme retained its 

bio -electrocatalytic activity for tannic acid oxidation, which was investigated by means of v oltammetric 

techniques. Tannic acid stock solutions of 5ml were prepared daily, and characterized by attenuated total 

reflection (ATR) and ultra -violet (UV -Vis) spectroscopy to confirm the functional groups and chemical 

structure of tannic acid .

A 1.03 x 10 -8 M enzyme solution was prepared from a 3.71 x 10 -5 M stock solution. Electrode cleaning 

was done using alumina slurries with particles sizes of 0.05um and 0.3um, with polishing pads. 

Electrodes were also sonicated in ethanol and water for 5 minutes ea ch, before electro -activation in 1.0M 

H2SO4 for 15 cycles at 50mV/s and in ultra -pure (Milli -Q) water for 10 c ycles at 100mV/s respectively. 

The Tyr -ase/BDDE biosensor was applied for the detection of tannic acid, and the overall activity of the 

en zyme wa s investigated with cyclic and square wave voltammetry. These voltammetric techniques 

yielded a limit of detection of 0.484mg/L and a limit of quantification of 1.466mg/L with concentrations 

ranging from 0 -6.5mg/L for tannic acid. The biosensor system yiel ded reasonably high sensitivity and 

stability for the determination of tannic acid with a standard deviation of 3.25 x 10 -3. 

References 

• Midgley, D. (1984). Limits of detection. Limits of detection of ion -selective electrodes. 

Analytical Proceedings, 21(8 ), p.284. 

• Mangombo, Z., Baker, P., Iwuoah, E., et al, 2010. “Tyrosinase biosensor based on a boron -

doped diamond electrode modified with a polyaniline -poly ( vinyl sulfonate) composite film ”. 

Microchim Act a (2010) 170; 267 -273. 

• Notsu, H., Tatsuma, T. and Fujishima, A. (2002). Tyrosinase -modified boron -doped diamond 

electrodes for the determination of phenol derivatives. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 

523(1 -2), pp.86 -92. 

• Goulding, R. (1996). Book Reviews: Phenol - Environmental Health Criteria 161 by World 

Health Organisation. Published by International Programme on Chemical Safety, 1994. Sw Fr 

27. Paperback. ISBN 92 4 157161 6. Journal of the Royal Society of Health, 116(5), pp.341 -341. Probing Interphase Reactions on Lithium with Operando Gas 

# Chromatography 

Gustavo M. Hobold , Betar M. Gallant *

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

Addres s

Cambridge, MA 02139, United States 

*Corresponding author: bgallant@mit.edu 

Li battery chemistries exploit reactions that occur under very reducing conditions (~ 0 V vs. Li/Li +) at 

negative electrodes, which are held below the electrochemical stability window of known carbonate -based 

electr olyte systems (0.5 -1 V vs. Li/Li +), 1 resulting in solve nt decomposition at the surface and leading to 

the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). When formed on Li, however, this interphase is unable 

to fully protect the electrode, resulting in an SEI composition that changes over time. 2 Due to this dynamic 

nature, its chemistry is challenging to characterize using conventional ex -situ su rface analysis ( e.g. , Fourier 

transform infrared spectroscopy, FTIR; X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS). 3, 4 Consequently, 

identifying the chemical mechanisms through which candidate systems for improving Li SEI stability 

operate – such as the use of highly fluorinated and/or concentrated electrolytes 5 – remains difficult. 

Fortunately, interphase reactions are known to release gases that are easily detected by gas chromatography 

(GC) and mass spectrometry (MS), 6 using which we are able to construct a ti me -resolved picture of the SEI 

chemistry. Here we show that these experiments can provide valuable insight into the dynamic chemical 

reaction pathways on Li, yielding an updated picture of factors that contribute to a good SEI. 

Our experimental approach c onsists of a custom -designed electrochemical cell coupled to a GC instrument, 

which, by sampling the cell headspace periodically, enables operando quantification of CO 2, CO, H 2 and 

C1-2 products evolved at Li electrodes. By comparing gas evolution between rest and polarization regimes, 

we identified a significant increase in the rate of formation of all observed gases when the electrodes are 

polarized. Using electrodes that we identified to be gas -inert, such as LiFePO 4, we identified that the 

deposition re action, i.e. , Li + reduction, accounts for nearly all of the gas -releasing interphase reactions, 

implying that the SEI is only formed electrochemically when Li is plated. We next explored the nature of 

these reactions by quantifying how the evolution rate o f each gas scales with current density, which enabled 

the distinction between gases that were formed in chemically -limiting reactions and gases that were formed 

from electrochemically -limiting steps. Because our experiments are able to quantify the abundan ce of each 

gas product, we also identified and quantified the branching of specific interphase reactions that occur on 

Li with conventional carbonate -based electrolyte systems. Then, by rationally tuning the electrolyte ( i.e., 

changing the salt species and /or introducing fluorinated solvents), we discovered and quantified how each 

component drives specific interphase reactions, and how the ensuing SEI chemistry affects the Faradaic 

efficiency of the Li electrode over time. In particular, we observed that pa thways that promote 

decarbonylation and/or decarboxylation ( i.e. , release of CO/CO 2) of the solvent upon reduction correlate 

with higher Faradaic efficiencies. By varying salt concentration, we further explored how interphase 

formation pathways are affecte d by the solvation structure of the electrolyte in the contact -ion and solvent -

separated regimes. Thus, our experiments provide a mechanistic picture of how organic solvent -derived 

products affect SEI chemistry and stability, which can be as important as k nown ionic phases like LiF. 5

1. Gauthier, M.; Carney, T. J.; Grimaud, A.; Giordano, L.; Pour, N.; Chang, H. -H.; Fenning, D. 

P.; Lux, S. F.; Paschos, O.; Bauer, C.; Maglia, F.; Lupart, S.; Lamp, P.; Shao -Horn, Y., The Journal of 

Physical Chemistry Letters 2015, 6 (22), 465 3-4672. 

2. Lin, D.; Liu, Y.; Cui, Y., Nature Nanotechnology 2017, 12 (3), 194. 

3. Aurbach, D.; Markovsky, B.; Shechter, A.; Ein‐Eli, Y.; Cohen, H., Journal of The 

Electrochemical Society 1996, 143 (12), 3809 -3820. 

4. Dedryvère, R.; Gireaud, L.; Gruge on, S.; Laruelle, S.; Tarascon, J. M.; Gonbeau, D., The Journal 

of Physical Chemistry B 2005, 109 (33), 15868 -15875. 

5. Suo, L.; Xue, W.; Gobet, M.; Greenbaum, S. G.; Wang, C.; Chen, Y.; Yang, W.; Li, Y.; Li, 

J., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2018, 115 (6), 1156 -1161. 

6. Xu, K., Chemical Reviews 2014, 114 (23), 11503 -11618. Ferrocene Oxidation Study in Water -in -Biodiesel Microemulsions 

Yara Patrícia da Silva a, Andrea Anilda Hoffmann da Rocha c, Carla R. B. Mendonça b, Clarisse Maria 

Sartori P iatnicki c 

> a

Oxyara Quality, Rua Deodoro Homerich, 644, CEP 99.052 -329, Passo Fundo -RS , Bra zil. Email: 

yapasi78@gmail.com 

> b

Centro de Ciências Químicas Farmacêuticas e de Alimentos – Universidade Federal de Pelotas, 

Campus Universitário, Cx. Postal, 354, CEP 96010 -900, Pelotas -RS, Bra zil. E -mail: 

carlaufpel@hotmail.com  

> c

Institute of Chemist ry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre / RS, 15003, 

Brazil. deiaahoffmann@gmail.com ,clarisse.piatnicki@ufrgs.br ,

New electroanalytical methodologies in low conductivity medi a such as fa tty acids alkyl esters , also 

known as biodiesel, have been of great interest in analytical chemistry . Self -oxidation of pure biodiesel 

(B100) gives rise to secondary oxidation products so that B100 oxidati ve stability is a quality criterion 

that requires r egular monitoring. Therefore, rapid and direct quantification of species present in biodiesel 

is important to allow adjustments and ensure product quality even in production line. A study on 

oxidation of ferrocene (Fc) i n aqueous media by Bond et al (1 ) sh owed poor adsorption on the electrode 

surface so that, even so, the Fc +/Fc redox pair can be used as a reference system in this medium. In the 

present study, B100 samples prepared in water in oil microemulsio n (w/o ME) , containing ferrocene (Fc) 

as a probe were analyzed using differential pulse voltammetry (DPV ) at a Pt ultramicroelectrode ( ume ), 

to evaluat e oxygen influence in th is medium . A μAUTOLAB TYPE III potentiostat/galvanostat provided 

with a general -purpose electrochemical system (GPES) software ha s been used in voltammetr ic 

measurements conducted in a three -electrode configuration cell. The working electrode was a 10 μm 

radius Pt disk ume , while a Pt ribbon and a Pt wire were, respectively, the auxiliary and quasi reference 

electrodes. Successive a dditions of Fc in w/o ME were made in concentrations ranging from , respectively ,

1.2 x 10 -3 mol L -1 to 2.1 x 10 -3 mol L -1. Experimental conditions were: 10 mV amplitude; 50 ms pulse 

width and 5 mV s -1 potential scan rate. All voltammetr ic measurements were carried out at room 

temperature without stirring. Influence of oxygen was evaluated de -aerating the system through bubbling 

nitrogen for 5 minutes. The B100 sample was used within specifications set by the Brazilian National 

Agency of Petroleum, Natural G as and Biofuels (ANP). The ME was prepared in % mass/mass with 

water (9%), B100 (28%) and sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS):n -pentanol (1:4) (63%). Microemulsion 

components were mixed sequentially and mechanically stirred until obtaining a clear and homogeneou s

system. It was observed that a current peak, i p, which doubles in value with increasing concentration of Fc 

appears at a potential , Ep, around 0.100 V . In the same scan, around 1 .400 V there is a second current 

peak which also increases with Fc concentra tion. However, when the system is de -aerated, the first peak 

remains unchanged whereas the second one practically disappears. This behavior may be indicating that 

there is a chemical reaction between oxygen and Fc or Fc and some ME component. The first pea k could 

also correspond to oxidation of Fc dissolved in the continuous medium, which requires less positive 

potentials, while the second one would correspond to ferrocene dissolved in to the water droplets. In this 

hypothesis, the droplets surfactant -cosurf actant envelope would require a more positive potential for its 

rupture to release dissolved Fc. The results obtained for the redox re action of the Fc +/Fc pair in the 

studied system show a good relationship between Fc concentration and the measured current , as well as 

influence of oxygen in the medium, as already described for po lar organic solvents (2 ). Thus, it has been 

demonstrated that preparation of B100 samples as w/o microemulsion enable analysis by differential 

pulse voltammetry, de -aeration of the medium being recommended. 

1. Bond, A.M.; McLennan, E. A.; Stojanovic, R.S.; Thomas, F.G.; Anal. Chem ., Assessment of conditions 

under which the oxidation of ferrocene can be used as a standard voltammetric reference process in 

aqueous media, 1987 , 59 , n° 24, 2853 -2860. 

2. Hurvois, J.P.; Moinet, C., Reactivity of ferrocenium cations with molecular oxygen in polar organic 

solvents: Decomposition, redox reactions and stabilization, . J. Organomet.Chem. , 2005 , 690 , 1829 –1839. Simulation of an Interdigitated Mo nopolar plate for a Cati on 

# Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell 

Jonathan Valentín a, José L . Nava a, Tzayam P ére zb, Tatiana Romero c

> a

Uni ver sidad de Gua najuato , D epartamento de Ingeniería Geomática e Hidr áulica 

Av. Juárez 77, Zona Centro , C.P. 360 00, Guanajuato, Guanajuato, M éxico 

> a

Uni ver sidad de Gua najuato , D epartamento de Ingeniería Qu ímica 

Noria Alta S/N , C.P. 36 050 , Guanajuato, Guanajuato, M éxico 

> a

Insitituto N acional de Energías limpias , Gerencia de Energía s Renovables 

Reforma 113, Palmira, 62490 Cuernavaca, Mor elos, M éxico 

jlmn@ ugto.mx ; t.perez segura@ ugto .mx ; jonat han.valentinry@ uanl.edu.mx ; tro mer o@ineel.mx 

The increasing energy demand, finite nature of fossil fuel resources and global environmental challenges 

have promote d the development of alternative energies and green technologies . Proton exchang e

memb rane fuel cells (PEMF Cs) are promising alternatives because they convert chemical energy from 

hydrogen and oxygen (or air) into electricity with high efficiency, high power density, and low or zero 

pollutant emissions 1. Several studies have been done to improve the overall effi ciency of PEM cell stacks 

including the de velopment and s election of an ade quate catalyst lay er, proton excha nge membr ane , gas 

diffusion layers and flow channels config urations. Bipolar plates (BP) are one of the most important 

components in cell stacks because they perform several functions like supply the reactant gases through 

the flow channels, provide structural support and facilitate water and heat management 2. Inadequate 

design of BP leads to bumpy reactant gases distribution, localized hot spots, u neven current density and 

flooding of the device caused by poor water management 3. Numerous studies have been done to

improve the bipolar plate design , in this context, interdigitated flow fields rise to prevent water flooding 

phenomenon and promote a better mass transfer through porous media 4. Biomimetic flow fields , in spired

on nature, have been designed to reduc e the pressure drop and current distribution, and water removal . In 

the present work, computational flui d dynamics (CFD) si mulations of an i nterdigitated flow field based 

on leaf veins was carry out to be tested on a cath odic compartment in PEM FC .

Model development for CFD simulations is ba sed on the Navier -Stokes equations co upled to continuity 

equation for a free flow t hro ug h channels and Brinkman equations on porous media; governing equations 

for mass transfer are desc ribe d by the Mix ture -averaged trans po rt model with the Bruggema n´s 

correction for porous media and the electroch em ical kinetic is represented by the Butler -Vol mer equation .

The tran sport equations were solved numerically in 3D by finite element method usi ng the software 

COMSOL Multiphysics . CFD simulations were carried out in order to analyze the effect of different 

operation variables on cell performance. Finally, simulation results were validated using experiment al. A

computer numerical control (CNC) mac hine with one -way trajectory was used to prod uce the 

interdigitated monopolar plate to carry out cathodic experim ents with the aim of validat ing the CDF 

simulations .                         

> Refer ences :
> 1. Gulcin, D., Sezgin, B., Devrim, Y. &Eroglu, I. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 ,10834 –10841 (2018) ;
> 2. Li, X. & Sabir, I. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 30 , 359 –371 (2005) ;3. Wilberforce, T. et al. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
> 111 , 236 –260 (2019 );4. Wood, D. L., Yi, J. S. & Nguyen, T. V. .El ectrochim. Acta 43 , 3795 –3809 (1998).

# Fabrication of the Electrochemical Cilostazol Chemosensor 

# with Molecularly Impri nted Polymer Nanoparticle s

# as the Recognition Unit 

Jyoti ,1* Carlo Gonzato ,2 Fran ck Merlier, 2 Kar sten Haupt, 2 Pawel Borowicz, 1

Włodzimierz Kutner, 1,3 Krzysztof Noworyta 1 

> 1

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences (IPC PAS), 

Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -224, Warsaw, Poland,  

> 2

Génie Enzymatique et Cellulaire (GEC ) – UMR -6022, 

Université de Technologie de Compiègne, 

Rue Personne de Roberval, 60200, Compiègne, France,  

> 3

Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, School of Sciences, 

Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University, Woycickiego 1/3, 01 -815 Warsaw, Poland 

* jyoti@ichf.edu.pl 

In the presented paper , fabrication, and tests of a n electrochemical chemosensor for selective determination and 

quantification of cilostazol is described. Cilostazol, 6 -[4 -(1 -cyclohexyl -1H -tetrazol -5-yl)butoxy] -3,4 -dihydro -2(1H) -

quinolinone, is an antiplatel et agent and a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor. It is used for the treatment of intermittent 

claudication (IC), a preliminary symptom of peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD is most commonly caused by 

atherosclerosis. It affects millions of patients worl dwide and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. [1]

Fast, simple and reliable method of this drug determination along with its principal active metabolites is important from 

the point of view of personalized drug dosage.  In order to  devise  selective  chemosensor for determination of  cilostazol 

in biological matrices, molecularly imprinted polymer nanoparticles (nanoMIPs) were prepared by precipitation 

polymerization of the selected acrylate derivatives  and were characterized .[2] Furthermore, density functional theory 

(DFT) calculations were performed for better understanding of interactions between the acylate monomers and the 

target analyte, and also with its principal metabolites. The result indicated pre -polymerization complex formation 

mainly through H -bonding .

In the next step the nanoMIPs were immobilized on the gold electrode. Then, the obtained electrodes were characterized 

electrochemically and spectrally. Moreover , morphology of the obtained electrodes was studied by AFM microscopy. 

Finally, the analytical tests of the devised chemosensor were performed. 

Funding:  Polish National Science Center (grant No. 2015/19/B/ST4/03743) .

Acknowledgements : Authors are grateful for the cilostazol synthesis to E. Gilant, P. Rudzki and A. Kutner from 

Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland. 

References :

[1] Chi  Y, Lavie . C ; J, Milani . V. R ; White . J. C . Vasc. Health Risk Manag, 2008 , 4, 1197 -1203. 

[2] Bui T. S. B; Merlier F ; Haupt  K, Anal. Chem ., 2010 , 82 , 4420 -4427. Mn2O3-based catalysts for regenerative fuel cell applications 

Dušan Mladenović a,* , Diogo M.F. Santos b, Gamze Bozkurt c, Gulin S.P. Soylu d, Ayse B. Yurtcan e, Šćepan 

Miljanić a, Biljana Šljukić a,b,* 

> a

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 12 –16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia 

> b

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de 

Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal 

> c

Project Coordination Implementation and Research Center, Erzurum Technical University, Erzurum, 

Turkey 

> d

Faculty of Engineering, Chemical Engineering Department, Istanbul University -Cerrahpasa, 34320, 

Avcilar, Istanbul, Turkey 

> e

Department of Chemical Engineering, Atatürk University, Erzurum, Turkey 

corre sponding author:  dusan.mladenovic@ffh.bg.ac.rs ; biljka@ffh.bg.ac.rs 

Rising global warming by CO 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and increasing energy demands have 

led researchers all over the world to focus on developing technologies for clean energy production. Fuel 

cells and batteries are in the focus of many research groups and have great potential to replace fossil fuel -

based technologies for numerous applications . In order for fuel cells to produce high currents, high 

performing metal -based catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR ), oxygen evolution reaction (OER ),

hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR ), and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER ) are of great importance. In 

this work, we synthesized manganese oxide -based catalysts as cathode materials for regenerative fuel cell 

applications. Three catalysts based on Mn 2O3 were synthe sized : Mn 2O3 in pure form, Mn 2O3 with anchored 

Pt nanoparticles (NPs) , and Mn 2O3 with Pt and Ni NPs. Ni and Pt NPs were anchored via microwave 

irradiation method .1

Linear scan voltammetry (LSV) experiments in 0.1 M KOH in ORR potential region clear ly show that 

attaching NPs on pure Mn 2O3 has a positive effect on limiting current density and onset potential values. 

For Mn 2O3 we found limiting current density of -2.3 1 mA cm -2, while the Pt/Mn 2O3 sample ha s shown 

limiting diffusion current density of -4.00 mA cm -2. PtNi/Mn 2O3 sample showed a slightly reduced value 

of limiting current density ( -3.17 mA cm -2), but this sample contain ed only 10 wt.% of Pt and 10 wt.% of 

Ni NPs, comparing to Pt/Mn 2O3, which ha d 20 wt. % of Pt NPs . Pt is well known for its electrocatalytic 

performance , but also for its high price. 2 LSV experiments performed in the potential region corresponding 

to OER revealed that all samples exhibit similar behavior in terms of the onset potential of the investigated 

reaction. After performing IR correction all three LSVs overlapp ed almost perfect ly . The d ifference c ould 

only be observed in maximum current densities that have been reached in each experiment. The highest 

one is reached with the pure Mn 2O3 sample , followed by PtNi/Mn 2O3 sample. The l owes t value was show n

by the sample containing only Pt NPs. Tested samples showed promising results for both investigated 

reactions. Having in mind the cost of Pt and comparing its performance with the sample that also contains 

Ni NPs, we must emphasize the potential of PtNi/Mn 2O3 ca talyst for regenerative fuel cell application. 

Further analysis should be performed to get better insights in to the kinetics of both reactions on these 

catalysts. Also, one of the main aim s of future investigation is testing the stability and their perform ance s

in a real regenerative fuel cell. 

Acknowledgments 

Th e authors would like to thank the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of 

Republic of Serbia. ( Contract number: 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200146) , as well as Fundação para a Ciência e

a Tecnologia (FCT, Portugal) (contract no. IF/01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 under IF2014 Programme 

(D.M.F. Santos) and contract no. IST -ID/156 -2018 (B. Šljukić) ).

References 

1. Şayin, E. S., Bayrakçeken, A. & Eroǧlu, I. Durability of PEM fuel cell electrocatalysts prepared by 

microwave irradiation technique. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 37 , 16663 –16672 (2012). 

2. Markovi ć, N. M., Schmidt, T. J., Stamenković, V. & Ross, P. N. Oxygen Reduction Reaction on Pt 

and Pt Bimetallic Surfaces: A Selective Review. Fuel Cells 1, 105 –116 (2001). Enhanced Photoelectrocatalytic Degradation of Organic Pollutant by 

# Self -organized Nanotube s Grown on Ti1 4wt.% Nb Substrate Under 

# Different Preparation Methods 

Daniely Reis Santos [1 ,2 ], Beatriz Zimerman [1] , Christiane de Ar ruda Rodrigues [1,2] 

Federal Uni vers ity of São Paulo (UNIFESP) 

Rua São Nicolau, 210, Centro – Diadema, São Paulo. 

daniely_reis95@hotmail.com 

Titanium -based materials have been extensively studied in a variety of different applications. Among 

them are studies aimed at the photodegradation of pol lutants present in water and wastewater, such as 

dyes. About 10 -15 % of the amount of dye produced in the world is released from the process into the 

environment, which is an alarming issue from an environmental point of view [1] . Thus, different st udie s

have been carried out in order to promote the total mineralization of pollutants into innocuous 

compounds, such as CO 2 and H 2O. Due to the limitations of the TiO 2 semiconductor (high recombination 

rate of photogenerated charges; band gap energy 3.2 e V, a nat ase phase), modifications by decoration or 

doping with metals or metal oxides have been evaluated as an alternative to improve this semiconductor 

> [2]

. Considering that Brazil has the largest reserve of Nb in the world, holding 98 % of the world's res erv es 

of ore, and its low cost, combined with the advantages related to the structural modification by doping 

and surface modification, this study proposes the production of photocatalytic oxides nanoscale in 

Ti14Nb alloy . In the niobium -oxygen system the pha ses NbO, NbO 2 and Nb 2O5 are the main ones 

observed [3]. In general, materials which are modified with Nb show s Nb 2O5 in the composition of the 

nanotubes (NT), as well as absorption in the visible region due to doping in the oxide matrix. In this 

conte xt, t his work presents the formation of nanot ubular oxide layer (NOL) grown on Ti14wt.% Nb 

substrate under different preparation methods , cast (BF) and quenching (CT). The influence of substrate 

type, the temperature on the crystallization of oxides and on the p erfor mance of the semiconductor 

photocatalytic activity used in the degradation of Reactive Blue 4 (RB4) dye was evaluated. The 

nanotubes were grown on Ti14 wt.% Nb substr ate by anodization process, using HF solution (0.3%, v/v) 

under a constant potential of 20 V , reached after a voltage ramp of 2 V min -1. Then, the samples were heat 

treated at different temperatures from 450 to 650 ° C, in order to optimize the conversion temperature of 

the amorphous structures, resulting from the anodization process, into highly ordered crystalline 

structures. The oxide layer grown on Ti14wt.%Nb substrate was characterized by SEM, EDX and XRD. 

Photoactivity studies were carried out and com pared among different heat treatment temperatures using 

the linear voltammetry techniqu e in 0.1 M Na 2SO 4 solution, pH 3, with potential range from -0,025 to 1,5 

V vs . Ag/AgCl/Cl - (3 mol L -1). The evaluation of the performance of the alloy in color removal and 

degradation of the Reactive Blue 4 (RB4) dye by photocatalytic and photoelectrocata lytic processes under 

UV/visible and visible light was carried out and compared with the TiO 2 semiconductor. The results 

demonstrated that the addition of Nb in the oxid e layer leads to an increase in the anatase -rutile transition 

temperature. The presence of N b2O5 was confirmed by XRD and EDX analyzes, which give the material 

a hybrid behavior (partially doped with Nb), even in small quantities . The sample NT/Ti14wt.%Nb -Q

showed better photoactivity compared to the sample NT/Ti14wt.%Nb -C and NT/TiO 2. The b est c ondition 

obtained for the NT/Ti14wt.%Nb -Q sample was under heat treatment at 650 °C, which presented a 

current intensity of 1.08 and 0.71 mA cm -2 under UV/visible a nd visible light, respectively . Comparing 

the electrodes studied, in photoelectrocataly sis ( PEC) under UV/visible light, NT/ Ti14wt.% Nb -Q was 

more efficient in the degradation of Reactive Blue 4 (RB4), reaching 66 % reduction of the initial carbon 

concentra tion [Co] over 1.5 hours , total discoloration after 20 min and total mineralization aft er 2 ho urs ;

while the sample of NT/Ti14wt.% Nb -C reduced 88 % of [Co] in 3 hours and total discoloration after 3 0

min. The decolorization data for PEC under UV/visible light were adjusted in the pseudo -fir st order and a 

constant rate (k) of 0.17 and 0.19 m in – 1 was found for the NT/Ti14wt .%Nb -C and NT/Ti14wt .%Nb -Q, 

respectively, whose value is almost double the value of the obtained for NT/TiO 2 electrode under the 

same conditions. The better performance of the NT/Ti14wt .%Nb electrode in photoelectrocatalysi s was 

attributed to the doping of TiO 2 with Nb. 

References: 

[1] Gita S, Hussan A, Choudhury TG (2017) Impact of Textile Dyes Waste on Aquatic Environments and 

its Treatment. Environ Ecol 35:2349 –2353. 

[2] Bleckenwegner P, Mardare CC, Cobet C, et al (2017) Compo sitionally Dependent Nonlinear Optical 

Bandgap Behavior of Mixed Anodic Oxides in Niobium -Titanium System. ACS Comb Sci 19:121 –129. 

[3] Nico C, Monteiro T, Graça MPF (2016) Niobium oxides and niobates physical properties: Review and 

prospects. Prog. M ater. Sci. 80:1 –37 Electrochemical Technologies for Detecting and Degrading 

# Paracetamol 

João . M. M. Henrique 1, Mayra . K. S. Monteiro 1, Carlos A . Martínez -Huitle 1, Elisama V. dos Santos 1

> 1

Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 59078 -970 Natal, Brazil 

elisama_quimica@yahoo.com.br 

In this work, the detection and quantification of paracetamol was performed by differential pulse 

voltammetry (DPV) with a cork -modified graphite electrode . The calibration curve and the limits of 

detectio n and quantification for paracetamol were estimated. DPV was compared to high‐performance 

liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, leading to a satisfactory result in terms of stability and sensitive 

response. As a novel aim, a combined electroche mical metho d for environmental application has be en 

developed to oxidize and detect paracetamol using diamond films and cork -modified graphite electrode s. 

A set of galvanostatic electrochemical oxidation experiments with 1 L of Paracetamol solution were 

acc omplished i n order to understand the effect of current density, the concentration of the pollutant an d

the concentration of electrolyte . Applying DPV in an acidic medium with the cork -modified graphite 

electrode , it was possible determine the concentration s of PAR (r anging from 0 to 1000 μM), with limits 

of detection of 8.36 μM . The optimal operating conditions were achieved at 60 mA cm −2 , 100 mg L−1 of 

Paracetamol with 50 mM Na2SO4. Additionally, the evolution of short‐chain carboxylic acids of that test 

was followed over time in order to suggest a possible degradation route. The results were described and 

discussed in the light o f the existing literature. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from National Council for Scientific and 

Technological Development (CNPq – 430121/2016 -4, CNPq - 306323/20 18 -4 and 465571/2014 -0); 

L'ORÉAL - ABC – UNESC O; Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - FAPESP (Proc. 

FAPESP 2014/50945 -4) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – CAPES 

(Proc.  CAPES 88887136426/2017/00) are gratef ully acknowledged. The authors also thank to D r. Vítor 

J.P. Vilar from University of Porto (Portugal) for supplying the cork samples used in this study. One -step preparation of the Co2V2O7: synthesis and use to peroxide 

# electrogeneration 

Murilo Fernando Gromboni .a, Paulo Jorge Marques Cordeiro -Junior a, Lucia Helena Mascaro b,

Marcos Roberto de Vasconcelos Lanza a

> a

São Carlos Institute of Chem istry, Universit y of São Paulo, São Carlos, SP, 13566 -590, Brazil 

> b

Department of Chemistry, Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, 13565 -905, Brazil 

mgromboni@usp.br 

Gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) produced with carbon matrices have been applied in the hydrogen 

peroxide electrogeneration and used in electro -Fenton process . In GDE, an increase of peroxide 

electrogeneration can be achieved by improving the carbon matrix (CM) or by incorporating 

electrocatalysts in CM . Different CM has been studied, among them, Pri ntex 6L Carbon (P6LC) has a 

good cost and efficiency ratio, as it has a high surface area and a selectivity for the oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR) via 2 electrons. Regarding the new electrocatalysts studied, bimetallic oxides are being 

appli ed as electro catalysts to ORR, d ue to the synergism between metals as catalysts for ORR. In this 

study , a new one -step route to obtain Co 2V2O7 is described, as well as the incorporation in P6L C that is 

used in the electrochemical study of ORR, and the application of th e modified matrix in the GDE. The 

Co 2V2O7 was obtained by co -precipitation from the neutralization of solutions containing the precursors. 

For this, two solutions were prepared (20 mL) : A) 0.1 M HNO 3 + 0.2 M Co(NO 3)2 and B) 0.1 M NH 4OH 

+ 0.2 M NH 4VO 3. Both solutions were heated to 80º C. Then , solution A was transferred drop by drop to 

solution B , under agitation. After all, the material was filtered, washed with deionized water, and dried at 

120º C. The material was characterized by XRD. Diffractogram anal ysis indicates the presence of the 

monoclinic phase associated with Co 2V2O7 (ICSD 2357 ). Any s econdary phases were not observed , and 

thermal treatment was not necessary, unlike the syntheses reported in the literature. The Co 2V2O7 oxide 

was added to P6L C by physical adsorption in the proportions of 2.5 , 5.0 , 10.0 , and 15.0 % (w/w). For 

this, both catalytic mass es were mixed with isopropyl alcohol under magnetic stirring for 40 min , dried 

for 3 h (2 h at 60 ºC and 1h at 100 ºC ). Electrochemical measurements (electrochemical impedance and 

analysis of the ORR efficiency studies) were performed using the porous microlayer technique applied on 

the glassy carbon disc. The study of ORR was carried out using linear scanning voltammetry coupled to a 

rotating ring dis k electrode (RRDE) system , with a rotation speed of 100 to 2500 rpm. The PL6C 

presented a maximum current value of 135 μA. The 15% Co 2V2O7/PL6C had the highest recorded value, 

160 μA, followed by the 2.5% Co 2V2O7/PL6C with 147 μA, a value close to the 5% C o2V2O7/PL6C (143 

μA). Th e modification with Co 2V2O7 tends to improve CM’s selectivity, leading to a higher 

electro generation of H2O2. Also, the ORR onset is the same for all catalysts, having a value close to -0.15 

V vs . Ag/AgCl, which suggests that the mo dification does not alter the start of the reaction , only increases 

its selectivity . However, at low potentials of -0.3 V, a displacement of the current recorded on the disk to 

more negative values are observed. This shift towards that more negative potent ials results in greater 

consumption of electrical energy from the ORR for the H 2O2 electrogeneration. The PL6C had shown a 

value of H 2O2 selectivity (%) equal to 85.0 %. In the modifi ed matric es the values was: 92.0; 91.0; 90.9 

and 86.8% to 2.5; 5; 10 and 15%, respectively. With these results and EIS anal ysis , the modified matrix 

with 2.5% Co 2V2O7 was chosen for the production of GDE . The GDE containing 40% PTFE w as 

prepared by mixing the catalytic mass with the PTFE , in 400 ml of ultrapure water under cons tant 

agitation for 60 min. The suspension was filtered , and 2 g of the new mixture was placed between two 

metal plates under 7.5 ton s, 290 ºC for 2 h. Then, t he study of H2O2 electrogeneration was carried out by 

electrolysis at constant current density (25 , 50, 75 , and 100 mA cm -2), using GDE (unmodified, only 

PL6C) and GDEm ( PL6C modified with 2.5% Co 2V2O7). The maximum concentration of H2O2 obtained 

for the GDE was 132 mg L -1, after 90 min at a current density of -100 mA cm -2. For GDEm , an increase 

of 33. 3% in H 2O2 electrogeneration was observed (176 mg L -1), for the same current density . A nalyzing 

the energy consumption (EC) for GDEm, th e value was 86.2 kWh kg -1 to j = -100 mA cm -2, lower than 

observed for GDE (116.3 kWh kg -1). However , the density that showed the best ratio between EC and 

H2O2 electrogeneration was -75 mA cm -2, wh ich produced 147 mg L -1 of H 2O2, and EC was 59.4 kWh kg -

> 1

. In conclusion, the proposed new one -route was a simple method to produce a new selective material to 

H2O2 electrogenera tion. This material can be adsorbed onto CM to increase the performance of GDE s and 

to decrease the energetic consumption of these electrodes. On the electrolysis of liquefied lignocellulosic biomass 

Ana P. R.A . Ferreira a,b , Raisa C.P. Oliveira a,b , Tiago A.R. Silva a,b , Maria M. Mateus b, Diogo M.F. Santos a,*  

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA), Instituto Superior T écnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal 

diogosantos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

This work aims at producing electrolytic H2 and explore the possibility of captur ing CO 2 through the 

electrolysis of liquefied biomass. Lignocellulosic biomass is constituted by three main polymers: 

cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin [1] . Biomass is globally used for different ene rgy needs including, 

electricity generation, heat for domestic and industrial use , and transportation fuels . However, biomass is 

mostly used through direct combustion [2] . The major obstacle for the utilization of lignocellulosic 

biomass is the cost -benefi t relation of used technologies to process this kind of material and produce fuels 

and high -added value chemical compounds [1] . The electrolysis process of liquefied biomass powered by 

renewable energy and, consequently, without CO 2 emissions , has the pote ntial for H 2 production 

(chemical energy st orage) scale -up. Furthermore, the electroreduction of CO 2 is a promising approach for 

the reduction of CO 2 emissions that is receiving increasing interest from the scientific community, policy 

makers and the gener al public [3] .

For this purpose, voltammetric, chronoamperometric , rotating disk electrode (RDE) , and rotating ring 

disk electrode (RRDE) studies are employed for the electrochemical characterization of an emulsion 

constituted by a 1:1 mix of liquefied bi omass and a 2 M KOH aqueous solution (for the ionic conductivity 

enhancement). A small -scale laboratory liquefied biomass electrolyzer is assembled and used to analyze 

the electrolysis optimal working conditions . Temperature, voltage , and different anode m aterials (Ni and 

Ti O2-RuO 2) are studied . In all experiments , gas generation is observed at the Ni cathode side. The results 

show that when Ni electrodes are used for both cathode and anode the generated current is four times 

higher than employing a Ti O2-Ru O2 anode. Additionally, the use of higher temperatures (55 ºC) gene rates 

two times higher currents than those obtained at room temperature . As, expected, currents were also 

improved when increasing the potential up to 2.4 V. Additional experiments involved CO 2 continuous 

bubbling in the solution during the electrolysis. The results show that the CO 2 bubbling is able to hold 

stable the liquefied biomass emulsion ’s ionic conductivity for significantly longer times than in the 

experiments without CO 2 addition .

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for 

contract no. IF/01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos) and for PhD 

grant SFRH/BD/137470/2018 (R.C.P. Oliveira). This work was carried out under the Project Clean4G –

“Conversion of CO 2 from cement production process into a clean gaseous fuel for use in the same 

process - circularity in t he process of cement emissions” (POCI -01 -0247 -FEDER -038323), funded by the 

Portuguese Ministry of Eco nomy in the frame of “Program Portugal 2020” .

[1] A. Brandt, J. Gräsvik, J. P. Hallett, T. Welton, Deconstruction of lignocellulosic biomass with 

ionic liquids, Green Chem . 15 (2013) 550 –583. 

[2] W. Nabgan , T.A.T. Abdullah, R. Mat, B. Nabga n, Y. Gambo, M. Ibrahim , A. Ahmad , A. A. Jalil ,

S. Triwahyono , I. Saeh, Renewable hydrogen production from bio -oil derivative via catalytic 

steam reforming: An overview, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 79 (2017) 347 –357 .

[3] Y. Zhang, S.X. Guo, X. Zhang, A. M. Bond, J. Zhang, Mechanistic understanding of the 

electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction – New developments based on advanced instrumental 

techniques, Nano Today 31 (2020) 100835. Computational Core Level Electron Spectroscopy of Ionic Liquids 

# in Bulk and at Interfaces 

Vladislav Ivaništšev ,a Heigo Ers, a Meeri Lembinen, b Enn Lust. a 

> a

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia  

> b

Institute of Physi cs, University of Tartu, Ostwaldi str. 1, Tartu 50411, Estonia 

e-mail address: vladislav.ivanistsev@ut.ee 

On the example of 40 ion pairs (5 cations times 8 anions), this study demonstrates how the core -level 

binding energy values can be calculated and use d to plot theoretical spectra at low computational cost 

using density functional theory methods [1]. Three approaches for obtaining the binding energy values are 

based on delta Kohn –Sham (ΔKS) calculations, 1s KS orbital energies, and atomic charges. The Δ KS 

results show reasonable agreement with the available experimental X -ray photoelectron data [2 –6]. The 

1s KS orbital energies correlate well with the ΔKS results. Atomic charge correlation with ΔKS is 

improved by accounting for the charges of neighboring atoms. The choice between the methods implies a 

compromise between computational cost and accuracy. For instance, differently from the other methods, 

the order of ΔKS binding energies is in agreement with the difference spectroscopy used to resolve the 

or der of peaks in pyridinium - and imidazolium -based ILs by comparing the XPS of functionalized and 

non -functionalized cations [7]. Besides being more accurate, the ΔKS method is also more resource -

demanding and less accessible than the other two methods. Thu s, the use of the 1s KS orbital energies and 

atomic charges is justified when qualitative aspects of X -ray photoelectron spectra are of higher interest 

than the absolute BE values, or when the available computational power is limited. For example, t he 

expe rimental data taken from [2 –4] measured in connection to the electrochemical application in the 

supercapacitors. On example of graphene –ionic liquid interface, we show that 1s KS orbital energies and 

atomic charges can be obtained in molecular -level simula tions of a supercapacitor model at a relatively 

low cost. 

References[ 1] M. Lembinen et al. , Int. J. Quantum Chem. 120 (2020) 

e26247. 

[2] J. Kruusma, et al. , Electrochim. Acta 206 (2016) 419 –426. 

[3] J. Kruusma, et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc. 164 (2017) A 3393 –A3402. 

[4] A. Tõnisoo, et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc. 160 (2013) A1084 –A1093. 

[5] A. Foelske -Schmitz, D. Weingarth, R. Kötz, Surf. Sci. 605 (2011) 1979. 

[6] I.J. Villar -Garcia et al. , Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13 (2011) 2797 –2808. 

[7] C. J. Clarke et al. , Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 21 (2019 ) 114. 3D topographical SVET prototype for localized corrosion study. 

Silvar Kallip 1*, Erik Levoll, Tõnis O ppe, Olavi Opper, K alle Tiisma, Toomas Vinter, Enn Lust 

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia 

> 2

Tehnolabor OÜ, Täh etorni 21, 11625 Tallinn, Estonia. 

> *

silvar. kallip@ut.ee 

The Scanning Vibrating Electrode Technique has been applied to corrosion research for few decades and 

proved its relevance especially in specific localized corrosion research on carefully designed m odel -

electr ode situations. However, due to the technical restrictions several limitations to the sample conditions 

have to be taken into account, especially the sample size and topography, as the ionic currents under 

observation are rapidly dependent on th e probe to surface distance. 

New technical approach of combining the scanning confocal microscopy and 3D resolved SVET will be 

presented. Several topographically complicated and demanding model electrode systems were explored 

and the approach of localized electroche mical technics will be discussed and evaluated. 

The Different Al alloys (such as aeronautically relevant AA2024 and modern Al -Li alloy AA2198) are 

given as studied examples for estimation of corrosion localization and it’s influence. Also, the different 

te chnologically relevant galvanic situations like CFRP + Al alloys or Ti + Al are considered in respect of 

design of dedicated corrosion inhibiting systems and its relevance of application of new approaches of 

SVET technique. 

Figure 1. Photograph and 3 D SVET map of AA2024 sample wit h two embedded Ti rivets immersed in 

0.05M NaCl for 6h. Locali zed distribution of galvanic corrosion activities are exposed. 

The support by projects PIAPP -GA -2013 -612415 (PROAIR) by EU FP7, PUT1033 by ETAg and 

RUS_ST2017 -477 “ACTICOAT” by ERA.NET /Mobera13 are gratefully acknowledged. Smart Electrochromic Devices based on Luminescent 

# Ionosilica/Poly(methyl methacrylate) Electrolytes 

V. de Zea Bermudez ,a,b M. A. Cardoso, b,c H. M. R. Gonçalves ,b, d S.F.H . Correia, c L.D. Carlos, c P.S. 

André, e R.A.S. Ferreira c

a) Department of Chemistry, Univer sity of Trás -os -Montes e Alto Douro, 5000 -801 Vila Real, 

Portugal 

b) CQ -VR, University of Trás -os -Montes e Alto Douro, 5000 -801 Vila Real, Portugal 

c)  Department of Physics and CICECO 

− Aveiro Institute of Materials, University of Aveiro, 3810 –

193 Aveiro, Portug al. 

d) REQUIMTE, Instituto Superior de Engenharia do Porto, 4200 -072 Porto, Portugal 

e) Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Instituto de Telecomunicações, Instituto 

Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal. 

vbermude@ut ad.pt 

The pressing energy challenges for the coming years call for new materials and new technologies. In the 

building sector, the need to increase the buildings energy -efficiency must be urgently addressed. The use 

of low -carbon technologies and renewabl e sources is essential to implement zero -energy buildings 

(ZEBs) . For instance, efforts to considerably improve the performance of the current photovoltaic (PV) 

cells and to integrate them into buildings must be made . L uminescent down -shift ing (LDS) layers and 

luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) are valuable options to tackle this issue. LDS layers are coatings 

directly applied on the PV cell surface, which absorb the incident radiation complementary to that of the 

PV cell , and subsequently re -emit it at a specific wavelength that is refracted towards the PV cell. LSCs 

can be embedded in façades or windows, allowing them to be transformed i nto energy harvesting units, 

operating similarly under direct a nd diffuse sunlight conditions. Another attractive way of increasing 

energy efficiency in buildings is to incorporate smart electrochromic devices (ECDs) able to modulate 

sunlight transmittance (visible radiation) and solar heat gain (near -infrared (NIR) radiation) and thus 

reduce the buildings energy use, in crease indoors thermal/visual comfort, and improve outdoors view. 

Triv alent lanthanide (Ln 3+ )-based complexes exhibit attractive photoluminescence features, but display 

poor mechanical proper ties and low thermal stability. To circumvent these disadvantages these 

compounds may be added as complex anions of ionic liquids (ILs) whose cation s are covalently bonded 

to the surface of silica to yield luminescent ionosilicas (I Ss) [1] . In the light of this approach, we 

produced optically ac tive coatings for LSCs co mposed of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and 

imidazolium -based ISs containing Eu 3+ - and Tb 3+ -based complex counter anions [2] . Recently IS -PMMA 

LDS layers were coated on the surface of commercial Si -based PV cells. By controlling the down -shifting 

layer thickness , the layer s also acted as LSC s enabling the collection of the guided radiation by flexible 

PV cells applied on the borders of the d own -shifting layer leading to a marked enhancem ent of the PV 

energy conversion. Herein, the electro -optical perform ance of luminescent ECDs incorporating 

electrolytes composed of a mixture of Eu 3+ -doped IS -PMMA and an IL , was tested. 

Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by National Funds by FCT - Foundation for Science and Technology 

(PTDC/CTM -NAN/0956/2014), FEDER funds through the POCI - COMPETE 2020 - Operational 

Programme Competitiveness and Internationalization in Axis I - Strengthening research, technological 

development and innovation (POCI -01 -0145 -FEDER -007491 and Pest -OE/QUI/UI0616/2014, POCI -01 -

0145 -FEDER -016884 and PTDC/CTM -NAN/0956/2014), CICECO - In stituto de M aterials de Aveiro 

(UIDB/50011/2020 & UIDP/50011/2020), Instituto de Telecomunicações (UID/EEA/50008/2020), 

financed by national funds through the FCT/MEC and when appropriate co -financed by FEDER under 

the PT20 20 Partnership Agreement. M. A. Cardoso thanks FCT for grant SFRH/BD/118466/2016. 

References 

[1] P. H esemann, L. Viau and A. Vioux, I n The Sol -Gel Handbook, Wiley -VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 

KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2015, vol. 2, pp. 487 –518. 

[2] A. R. Frias, M. A. Cardoso, A. R. N. Bastos, S. F. H. Correia, P. S. André, L. D. Carlos, V. de Zea 

Bermudez, R. A. S. Ferreira, Energies, 12(3) (2019) 451 

[3 ] M. A. Cardoso, S. F. H. Correia, A. R. Frias, H. M. R. Gonçalves, R. F. P. Pereira, S. C. Nunes, M. 

Armand, P. S. André, V. de Zea Bermudez, R.A.S. Ferreira, Journal of Rare Earths, 38 (2020) 531 -538 Ro tating disk electrode studies on the oxidation of kraft black liquor 

Raisa C.P. Oliveira a,b , Maria M. Mateus b, Paula C.R. Pinto c, João C.M. Bordado b, Diogo M.F. Santos a,*  

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA ), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> c

RAIZ - Instituto de Investigação d a Floresta e Papel, Quinta de S. Francisco, Apartado 15, 3801 -501 

Eixo, Portugal 

> *

diogosantos @tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

The mechanism of the electrochemical oxidation of kraft black liquor (BL) is extremely complex and, to 

further understand it, a combination of different techniques is required . Simple voltammetric studies, 

chronoamperometry , and chronopotentiometry have been employed in the electrochemical characterization 

of BL [1 -4], but the results do not provide enough information to elaborate a n oxidation mechanism . To 

collect more data about this process and help in the construction of a logic al mechanism, further studies 

employing rotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) are required .

This study deals with the analysis of the effect of the convection (rotation) in the BL oxidation employing 

commercial bulk Pt, Au, and Ag RDEs. The effect of temperature under convection is also analyzed and 

compared with the same effect in diffusion -limit ed conditions. The n umber of exchange d electrons is 

calculated by applying the Koutec ky-Levich method and compared with the results obtained by Randles –

Sevcik equation (in the absence of convection) . The electrochemical behavior of black liquor at the thre e

different electrodes is compared to understand how the electrode material affects the mechanism of the BL 

oxidation . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first black liquor RDE study to be reported .

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for PhD 

grant SFRH/BD/137470/2018 (R.C.P. Oliveira) and for contract no. IF /01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 

under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos). This work was carried out under the Project Inpactus –

innovative products and technologies from eucalyptus, Project N.º 21874 funded by Portugal 2020 through 

European Regional Development F und (ERDF) in the frame of COMPETE 2020 nº246/AXIS II/2017. 

[1] R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, On the oxidation of kraft black liquor for lignin 

recovery: a voltammetric study , J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) E546 –E553. 

[2] R.C.P. Oliveira , M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, Chronoamperometric and chronopotentiometric 

investigation of kraft black liquor, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (2018) 16817 –16823. 

[3] H.R. Ghatak, Electrolysis of black liquor for hydrogen production: Some initial findings , Int. J .

Hydrogen Energy 31 (20 06 ) 934 –938 .

[4] H.R. Ghatak, S. Kumar, P.P. Kundu, Electrode processes in black liquor electrolysis and their 

significance for hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 33 (2008) 2904 –2911. Voltammetric and degradation studies of raw and anaerobically 

# digested swine wastewater 

G. Lourinho a,b ,* , P.S.D. Brito a, Diogo M.F. Santos b

> a

VALORIZA - Research Center for Endogenous Resource Valorization, Campus Politécnico, 10, 7300 -

555, Portalegre, Portugal  

> b

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal 

> *

goncaloclourinho @tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Swine wastewater (SW ) is a complex wastewater composed of organic and inorganic contaminants. These 

substances mainly include polysaccharides, proteins, lignin, and short -chain fatty acids , but also pathogens, 

antibiotics, trace metals (e.g., Zn, Cu) , and salts (e.g., Na Cl, K Cl ) [1] . Electrochemical methods have been 

widely used for the mineralization of a wide range of environmental pollutants from wastewaters containing 

varying amounts of inorganic ions and organic compo unds with a growing interest in SW as a target solution 

[2] .

However, little is known about the fundamental mechanisms that rule the oxidation of pollutants in these 

wastewaters. In fact, fundamental electrochemical studies dedicated to understanding the electrochemical 

behavior of these wastewaters as a background electroly te are very limited . This knowledge is important 

because low -grade electrolytes can be used in alternative strategies for hydrogen produ ction from water by 

replac ing the challenging oxygen evolution reaction with thermodynamically more favorable organic 

ox idation reactions that occur at a lower redox potential [3 ,4] .

Based on th ese premises , this work aims to present voltammetric studies to obtain a better knowledge of 

the anodic processes (organics oxidation) occurring during the electrolysis of swine -derived solutions. In 

particular, cyclic voltammetry using a Pt electrode was used to get a preliminary portrait of the 

electrochemical behavior of two swine solutions: raw wastewater (RW), as collected from a pig farm, and 

digested wastewater (DW), as the effluent from the anaerobic digestion of the same wastewater. 

Subsequently, to analyze possible oxidation processes , voltammograms were recorded at different scan 

rates ( 5 - 1000 mV s -1) and conclusions were drawn about the nature of the electrochemical process . The 

electrochemical degradation of raw and anaerobically digested SW samples was also investigated over 

graphite and nickel electrodes in potentiostatic conditions. The obtained results suggest the development of 

the concept of a SW electrolyzer that can be installed in future pig farms. 

The firs t author (G . Lourinho) gratefully acknowledges FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia - for 

financial support within the scope of the grant SFRH/BDE/111878/2015 . D.M.F. Santos thanks FCT for 

contract no. IF/01084/2014/CP1214 /CT0003 under IF2014 Programme .

[1] C. A. Villamar, T. Cañuta, M. Belmonte, and G. Vidal, “Characterization of Swine Wastewater 

by Toxicity Identification Evaluation Methodology (TIE),” Water, Air, Soil Pollu t. , vol. 223, no. 

1, pp. 363 –369, 2012. 

[2] G. Lourinho and P. S. D. Brito, “Electrolytic Treatment of Swine Wastewater: Recent Progress 

and Challenges,” Waste and Biomass Valorization , 2020. 

[3] B. You and Y. Sun, “Innovative Strategies for Electrocatalytic Water Splitting,” Acc. Chem. Res. ,

vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1571 –1580, 2018. 

[4] C. R. Lhermitte and K. Sivula, “Alternative Oxidation Reactions for Solar -Driven Fuel 

Production,” ACS Catal. , vol. 9 , no. 3, pp. 2007 –2017, 2019. Kinetic Study of the Oxygen Reduction Reaction on Conductive 

# Polymer Electrodes Decorated with ZIF -8 as an O 2 Pre -concentrator 

F. C. D. Lopez 1* , M. Rafti 1, W. A Marmiso llé 1, O. Az zaroni 1, K. Kern 2,3 , D. Grumelli 1

> 1

Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas, 

CONICET - 1900 La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

> 2

Max Planck for State Solid Research - 7056 9 Stuttgart, Baden -Wurtemberg, Germany.  

> 3

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 

*f.lopez@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is one of the most studied in electrochemistry due to its participation 

in energy conversion devices. Its slow kinetics leads to the inevitable use of catalysts. Within this context, 

conside rable attention was dedicated to electrocatalysis at conducting polymers (CPs) electrodes, its high 

conductivity and chemical stability makes them very suitable for electrocatalysis purposes [1]. An example 

of them is CP poly(3 -aminobenzylamine -co -aniline) (PABA), copolymer of aniline (ANI), an ORR 

catalyst, and 3 -aminobenzylamine (ABA), which allows the catalysis to occur at neutral pH. One way for 

increasing the efficiency of these catalysts is the pre -concentration of the O 2 reagent on the surface of the 

electrode. To achieve that, organometallic networks (MOF) are used as a novel three -dimensional 

microporous architecture. In particular, the MOF ZIF -8 (Zeolitic Imidazolate Frame), obtained via the 

polymeric reaction between Zn(NO 3).6H 2O and 2 -methyl -imid azole, is widely employed as an O 2

preconcentrator at the electrocatalytic interface. 

On the other hand, aniline polymer (PANI) is known to reduce O 2 through the formation of H 2O2 in a two -

electron process [2] but nothing is specifically known about the O 2 reduction mechanism in PABA. 

Meanwhile, the path of the O 2 molecule through the pores of the ZIF -8 is more turbulent than in solution, 

being able to modify the kinetics of the conductive polymer. 

In this work we will present the development of an electro de composed of the PABA film decorated with 

ZIF -8 crystals and results from rotating disk electrode (RDE) experiments, performed in order to model the 

kinetics of the system. 

First of all, we will show the electropolymerization of the catalytic copolymer PABA. The obtained 

nanofilm has been characterized electrochemically and studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM), making 

possible the elucidation of the surface topography and the determination of its thick ness. We will also 

present the characterization of the ZIF -8 crystals grown onto the PABA -coated electrode, which consist of 

scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and AFM studies, with the purpose of obtaining details of its 

microstructure, and X -ray diffract ion (XRD) to describe its crystalline nature. Additionally, we will show 

an ORR linear scan voltammetry (LCV) of the system carried out to demonstrate the effective improvement 

provided by the ZIF -8 crystals in the catalytic activity of the PABA copolymer for the ORR. Finally, we 

will provide RDE results that will make possible to establish the kinetic mechanism of the ORR catalysis 

by PABA and whether or not such mechanism is altered by the presence of the ZIF -8 crystals. 

REFERENCES 

1. M. Rafti, W. Marmisoll e, O. Azzaroni; Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2016, Vol 05, 1600047. 

2. L. Doubova, G. mengoli, M. M. Musiani, S. Valcher; J. Electrochem. acta 1989, 34, 337 Electrochemical investigation of heat treated PtRu nanoparticles prepared 

# by modified polyol method at varying pH for direct methanol fuel cell 

# application. 

Adebare Nurudeen Adewunmi, Sabejeje Akindeji Jerome 

Chemical Sciences Department, University of the Western Cape, Bellville 7535, South Africa. 

3875793@myuwc.ac.za 

This study investigate d the b inary PtRu electrocatalyst prepar ed by modified polyol method for methanol 

oxidation reaction (MOR)in acidic medium for the synthesized Platinum - Ruthenium metal alloys supported on 

multi -walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) . HR -TEM and XRD techniques were used to determine the particle 

size and crystalline size of the electrocatalysts, respectively while EDS was used to determine elemental 

composition. XRD crystalline sizes are from 7.6 to 10.6 nm while from HR -TEM particle sizes are in the range 

of 9.3 and 11.3 nm. The electroactivity towards the kinetics and stability of the electrocatalysts towards methanol 

in acidic medium was studied using electrochemical impedance spectrometry (EIS) and chronoamperometry (CA) 

respectively, w hile the cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to determine the electroactive surface area (ECSA) of 

the electrocatalysts. PtRu electrocatalysts produced by the modified polyol method at  pH  11 were the most 

electrochemically active with value of 11 .2X10 5g/m 2 compared with a value of 3.2X10 5g/m 2 at pH of 3 

Electrocatalysts produced at 450 0C showed better activity towards methanol oxidation reaction(MOR)as 

compared to PtRu nanoparticles produced at 350 OC and 250 OC evident from the highest current density produc ed. 

PtRu nanoparticles produced at 350 0C also gave a remarkable kinetics from the electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy but at 450 oC the electrocatalyst showed best kinetics for the methanol oxidation reaction. 

Keywords: Methanol oxidation reaction , electrocatalysts , multi -walled carbon nanotubes , metal alloys Electrocatalysis Assisted by Unique Atoms Deposited on 

# Single Crystal <001> Magnetite Surfaces 

F. C. D. López 1, K. Kern 23, D. Grumelli 1* 

> 1

Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas, 

CONICET - 1900 La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

> 2

Max Planck for State Solid Research - 7056 9 Stuttgart, Baden -Wurtemberg, Germany.  

> 3

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 

*doris@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is of great importance in electrochemistry due to its participation in 

clean energy generation technologies. The main problem with this reaction is its slow kinetics, which leads 

to the inevit able use of catalysts. The preferred catalysts for this reaction are noble metals, such as Pt or 

Ag, which have a high cost in the market that is transferred to the technological applications. However, 

latest efforts are progressively reducing the economic gap with respect to conventional energies, with the 

single atom catalysis (SAC) as the final limit in minimizing the amount of atoms required to prepare 

catalysts [1]. Single metal atoms are the best known electrocatalysts for the OER. Nevertheless, their 

excellent catalytic properties come along with a very high reactivity, making them prone to agglomeration 

into larger structures with less catalytic power, which in turn impedes the generation of homogeneous 

coating of individual atoms. To prevent this is sue, we propose the use of single crystal surfaces of magnetite 

(Fe 3O4) with <001> orientation to act as templates for individual metal atoms. These single crystal <001> 

Fe 3O4 surfaces, prepared in ultra high vacuum (UHV) conditions, present a surface reco nstruction with 

nanometric cavities that can act as location sites for individual metal atoms [2]. Recent experiments in our 

laboratory demonstrated the electrochemical stability of this reconstruction in the range of potentials where 

the OER occurs [3]. 

In this work, the adequate preparation of <001> Fe 3O4 surfaces (under UHV conditions) will be presented, 

along with first results in the immobilization of individual Pt and Ag atoms; characterization results from 

scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques will also 

be available. Furthermore, we will present the electrochemical response of the system to show the catalytic 

improvement of the OER. 

REFERENCES 

1. G. S. Parkinson “Single -Atom Catalysis: How Structure Influences Catalytic Performance”; 

Catalysis Letters 149, pp. 1137 –1146. (2019) 

2. R. Bliem, G. S. Parkinson, et al . “Adsorption and incorporation of transition metals at the 

magnetite Fe 3O4(001) surface”; Physical Review B 92 (7), 075440. (2015) 

3. D. Grumelli, G. S. Parkinson, U. Diebold, K. Kern, O. M. Magnussen, et al. “Electrochemical 

Stability of Fe 3O4(001) Surfaces”. Submitted. (2020) Effect of the organic solvent on redox rate constant studied by 

# electrochem ical impedance spectroscopy 

Pavel Chulkin a, Gr egory Sinenko b

> a

Silesian University of Technology , Faculty of Chemistry 

Strzody 9 str. 44 -100, Gliwice, Poland 

> b

Moscow State Universi ty , Faculty of Chemistry 

Leninskiye Gory 1 / 3 str. , 119 -234, Moscow , Ru ssia 

pavel. chulkin@polsl.pl 

The presented work is dedicated to study of the solvent influence on kinetics of electrochemical reactions. 

A great impact within the area was made by W.R. Fawcett et al. [1 -2] . A theor y relating solvent di electric 

properties , longi ntudinal relaxation time and charge transfer rate constant was successfully used by them 

to predict electrochemical rate consta nt based on solvent physical proper ties. The existen t theory, though 

seemed to be advanc ed for the time, ha d revealed numerous li mitation s that subsequently suspended its 

wide application. One of the gravest limitations is concerned with the case when electrolyte specifically 

adsorbs on electrode surface. 

Chloranil ( tetrachloro -1,4 -benzoquinone ) reversible one -electron reduction was ch osen as a test react ion 

to study effect of the so lvent. The electrochemical process was investigated in s even solvents , including 

dichloromethane, acetonitrile, toluene, N,N -di methyl formamide, propylene -carbonate, dimethyl 

sulfoxide, tetr ahydrofurane an d N-methyl -2-pyrrolidon e. The experiment was carried out using plati num 

work ing electrode and Bu 4NBF 4 as an electrolyte . A set of impedance spectra were obtained and analyzed 

by d eriving an equivalent electrical circuit and determination of its parameter s. Charge tra nsfer resistance, 

double lay er capacitance and other parameters were calculated and represented as a function of potential. 

Combined analysis of charge transfer resista nce and diffusion impedance values allowed estimation of the 

rate constant for chloranil reduction on Pt electrode. The direct application of the known theor etical 

approach [1 -2] was not poss ible, probably due to inaccuracies in work -term corrections . The challenges 

and the proposed solutions are to be discussed. 

References 

[1] W.R. Fawcett, C.A. Foss Jr.  Electrochimica Acta , 1991, Vol. 36, No. 11/1 2, p p. 1797 -1774. 

[2] W.R. Fawcett, C.A. Fos s Jr. J. Electroanal. Chem. , 1991, Vol. 306, pp. 71 -85. Study of Microstructure and Corrosion Properties of Electro -

# Codeposited Ni -SiO 2 Nanocomposite Coatings from Deep Eutectic 

# Solvent (DES) Electrolyte 

M. Fattah, B. Candelma, and S. Morin 

York University 

4700 Keele Street Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3, Canada 

mefattah@gmail.com , romeo25@my.Yorku.ca , smorin@Yorku.ca 

Abstract: 

Metal matrix composites containing metal and semiconductor or insulator nanoparticles have been 

fabricated through different methods , and mechanical and electrochemical behavior studied [1 -8]. 

Electro -codeposition is a metal matrix nanocomposite coating fabrication met hod that is used widely due 

to its superior advantages such as homogeneous coatings, low cost, easy set -up and fast deposition rate 

[9,10]. Several examples of metal matrix composites are reported in the literature. In the case of nickel -

based composites, many of the pure, ceramics and oxides nano/micro -sized particles such as Ti [1], TiO 2

[2,3], SiC [4,5], SiO 2 [6,7], and Al 2O3 [8] are added as the second phase. In this paper, the fabrication of 

Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coatings and the influence of the addition of SiO 2 nanoparticles on composition, 

microstructure and corrosion properties of electrodeposited Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coatings are 

discussed. A pulse electro -codeposition method was employed to prepare Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coating 

on the surfac e of AISI 1045 medium carbon steel from a choline chloride (ChCl)/ethylene glycol (EG) -

based deep eutectic solvent (DES) with a ChCl to EG molar ratio of 1/2. Nickel chloride [NiCl 2.6H 2O] 

and 15 g/L silicon dioxide (SiO 2) nanopowder, 10 -20 nm particle size and 99.5% purity, were then added 

to the electrolyte. The electro -codeposition process, for pure Ni and Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coatings, was 

carried out at the same conditions of temperature, current density and frequency that were set to 70 °C, 8 

mA/cm 2 and 1000 Hz, respectively. Disc -shaped medium carbon steel substrates were mechanically 

polished and degreased followed by activation before electrocodeposition. Scanning electron microscopy 

(SEM), Energy -dispersive X -ray spectroscopy (EDS) and X -ray diffra ction (XRD), were used to study 

microstructure, surface morphology, composition, and phase analysis of the Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite and 

pure Ni coatings. Corrosion properties of the coatings were evaluated by means of potentiodynamic 

polarization test in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution at room temperature. SEM images revealed that the addition 

of silicon dioxide nanoparticles to the nickel film affects the grain size, microstructure and morphology of 

the coating surface. The microstructure of the nanocomposite coating is a combination of nano and micro -

sized structures on the surface. A granular -like microstructure with a quasi -uniform dispersion of SiO 2

nanoparticles in the coating was observed. Our characterization results confirm the incorporation of SiO 2

nanoparticl es into the Ni film. Potentiodynamic polarization results showed that the incorporation of SiO 2

nanoparticles into the Ni film significantly improved the corrosion properties of the coatings compared to 

the pure nickel. Corrosion potential of Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coating increased to a more positive value, 

and the corrosion current density decreased compared to that of pure Ni. Enhanced corrosion resistance in 

nanocomposite coating with respect to the pure Ni is explained by the effect of the additio n of SiO 2

nanoparticles on both microstructure and composition of the nanocomposite coating. Thus, the 

electrodeposition method using choline chloride/ethylene glycol -based DES solution can be used to 

produce Ni -SiO 2 nanocomposite coating with uniformly di spersed SiO 2 nanoparticles in the Ni film that 

exhibits clearly better corrosion resistance compared to pure Ni coating and suggesting its potential 

application in industry with the goal of surface corrosion protection. 

Keywords: corrosion, nanocomposite, coating, nickel, silicon dioxide, deep eutectic solvent 

References :

[1] Lekka, M.; Offoiach, R.; Revelant, F.; Fedrizzi, L. Trans. IMF 2019, 97, 73 -81. 

[2] Mohajeri, S.; Dolati, A.; Ghorbani, M. J. Ultrafine Grained Nanostruct. Mater. 2016, 49, 51 -63. 

[3] Danilov, F. I. et al . Surf. Eng. Appl. Electrochem. 2019, 55, 138 –149. 

[4] Lanzutti, A. et al . Tribol. Int. 2019, 132, 50 -61. 

[5] Zhou, Y.; Xie, F. Q.; Wu, X. Q.; Zhao, W. D.; Chen, X. J. Alloys Compd. 2017, 699, 366 -377. 

[6] Li, R.; Hou, Y.; Liu, B.; Wang , D.; Liang, J. Electrochim. Acta 2016, 222, 1272 –1280. 

[7] Ratajski, T. et al . Mater. Charact. 2018, 142, 478 -491. 

[8] Jiang, S. W. et al . Surf. Coat. Technol. 2016, 286, 197 -205. 

[9] Chen, W. W.; Gao, W.; He, Y. D. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2010, 204, 2493 -24 98. 

[10] Tu, W. Y. et al . J. Mater. Sci. 2008, 43, 1102 -1108. Step Towards Highly -Effic ient Oxygen Evolution Reaction using 

# nanostructured β-Ni(OH) 2

Biljana Šljuki ća, Kush K. Upadhya b, Aldona Bal čiūnaitė c, Diogo M.F. S antos a, M.F. Montemor b

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials, Instituto Superi or Técnico, Universidade de 

Lisboa, 1049 -001, Lisbon, Portugal 

> b

Centro de Química Estrutural -CQE, Departamento de Engenharia Química, Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001, Lisboa, Portugal 

> c

Department of Catalysis, Center for Physic al Sciences and Technology, Saulėtekio ave. 3, Vilnius LT -

10257, Lithuania 

biljana .paunkovic@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Oxygen evolutio n reaction (OE R) plays a crucial role in e lectrochemical energy storage and co nversion 

devices , such as metal -air batteries or unitized regenerative fuel cells, as well as in water electrolyzers [1].

Sluggish reaction kinetics imposes the use of suitable electrocatalysts am ong which platinum -group metal 

(PGM) oxides, IrO 2 and R uO 2, have been reported to have the highest activity. Namel y, sl uggish reaction 

kinetic s results in high overpotential of OER which furthe r results in high energy consumption for water 

molecule splitting and the ov erall high price of the process . PGM -based elec trocatalysts have high 

efficiency towards O ER , but they also have high price impeding their application in large scale industrial 

water electroly zers . Search for lower cost, but hi ghly effi cient electro catalys ts for O ER is an ongoing 

quest [2] . N ickel -base d electrocatalyst s have demonstrated to offer high intrinsic activity a long with high 

stability in alkaline electrolyte s [3] .

Herein , β-Ni(OH) 2 was prepared by hydrothermal metho d and systematically studied for oxygen 

evol ution reaction in al kaline media (1 M KOH). Material showed activity for O ER with low onset 

potential of ca. 0. 55 V and low Tafel slope . Polarization curves were record ed at temperatures up to 85 °C

as current industrial electrolyzers commonly ope rate at temperatures between 65 and 90 °C. Expected 

reaction kinetics improvement as evidenced by decrease of overpotential and increase of current density 

reached could be obse rved for up to 75 °C, while very intense bubbling was observed at 85 °C.

Additionally , initial stability test run for 2 h  reve aled  oxidation current density somewhat increas ing with 

time. 

Collected results suggest hydrothermally prepared Ni(OH) 2 as a goo d electrocatalyst for OER for 

applicati on in water electrolyzers and unitized regenerative fuel cells .

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT, Portugal) ( project 

UID/QUI /00100/2019 , contract no. IF/010 84/20 14/CP1214/CT0003 under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. 

Santos) and contract no. IST -ID/156 -2018 (B. Šljukić)) as well as the Ministry of Education, Science and 

Technological Development of Republic of Serbia  (Contract number: 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200146) .

Reference s

[1] Muhammad Tahi r, Lun Pan , Faryal Idrees , Xiangwen Zhang , Li Wang , Ji -Jun Zou , Zhong Lin Wang ,

Electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction for energy conversion and storage: A comprehensive review ,

Nano Energy 37 (2017) 136 –157 .

[2] Yan -Jie Wang , Hongbo Fan , Anna Ignaszak , Lei Zhang , Siqin Shao , David P. Wilkinson , Jiujun 

Zhang , Compositing doped -carbon with metals, non -metals, metal oxides, metal nitrides and other 

materials to form bifunctional electrocatalysts to enhance metal -air battery oxygen reduc tion and 

evolution reactions , Chemical Engineerin g Journal 348 (2018) 416 –437 .

[3] Lucas -Alexandre Stern , Xile Hu , Enhanced oxygen evolution activity by NiO x and Ni(OH) 2

nanoparticles , Faraday D iscussion s 176 (2014) 363 -379 .Standardless Determination of Nanometric Thicknesses in Stratified 

# Si/C anodes for Lithium -Ion Batteries by Electron Probe 

# Microanalysis 

Gastón Pereyra a, Manuel Otero a, Ezequiel P.M.Leiva b ,Nicolas Budini c, Pablo Daniel 

Pérez, Jorge Trincavelli a, Fabiana O liva b

> a

Instituto de Física Enrique Gaviola (IFEG -CONICET), Facultad de Matemática, 

Astronomía, Física y Computación (FAMAF), 

> b

Instituto de Investigaciones en Físico -Química de Córdoba (INFIQC -CONICET), 

Facultad de Ciencias Químicas 

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina 

> c

Instituto de Física del Litoral 

Santa Fe, Argentina 

> e

Departamento de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad de La Frontera 

Temuco, Chile 

ezequiel.leiva@unc.edu.ar 

The present work reports on the development of a standardless met hod for the determination of 

nanometric thicknesses for the morphological characterization of anodes of lithium -ion batteries, in 

particular for those based on binder -free Si/C binary composites generated by sputtering deposition . The 

procedure was develop ed based on the detection of characteristic x rays under electron impact , and 

although it was specifically designed for nano -stratified samples consisting of a Si film deposited onto a 

C layer (which in turn is deposited on a Cu substrate), it is also easi ly applicable to other configurations. 

Since it is necessary to know the thickness of the surface layer to obtain the thickness of the deepe st layer, 

the calculations involve the application of an iterative strategy based on Monte Carlo simulations. The 

validation of the method was done on a set of samples whose thicknesses were also determined by 

Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) , and the method was applied to another set of anodes, 

which gave results that coincided with the expected values. Th e thickness es of the Si and C layers of the 

binder -free composite anode obtained by the proposed method were used to calculate the specific 

capacity. Galvanostatic charge -discharge curves up to 100 cycles were analyzed for three different C/Si 

ratio anodes , and the experimental results were compared with the theoretical capacity for each binary 

system. 

In Figure 1 a particular application example of the developed method is presented . The analyzed sample s

wer e prepared by sputtering deposition of three diffe rent thicknesses of C onto Cu foil s followed by a 

deposition of a silicon film. T he implementation of the method allowed a thickness estimation of 25 nm 

for Si , and 92, 156 and 190 nm for C. These values were used to obtain the mass ratio of the anode and a

corresponding theoretical specific capacity. Afterward, the anode s were mounted as working electrode s in 

an electrochemical cell with lithium as a counter electrode and cycled 100 times at a constant current of 

20 A. In Figure 2 it is shown , as an examp le, the cycling response for the electrode Si25/C 92 and the 

corresponding theoretical capacity , 1098 mAhg -1, calculated as a reference . The electrochemical test 

shows that the experimental specific capacity of the particular anode is 1200 mAhg -1, in good a greement 

with the estimation made by the present method . The nano -stratified Si/C anodes prepared by sputtering 

deposition showed good cycling performance and great stability regarding the silicon volume expansion 

during the charge -discharge process. 

Figure 1 Figure 2 Colorous porous anodic titanium oxide prepared in ethanol -based 

# electrolyte 

Marta Michalska -Domańska , Piotr Ny ga, Mateusz Czerwiński 

Institute of Optoelectronics, Military University of Technology 

Ul. Kaliskiego 2, 00 -908 Warsaw, Poland 

Marta.michalska@w at.edu.pl 

Colorous anodic titanium oxide was produced in ethanol -based electrolyte, which contained 0.3 

M ammonium fluoride and 2, 3.5, 5 or 10 wt% of deionized water. The new type of electrolyte was 

describe elsewhere [1]. The applied anodizing voltage was varied between 20 and 60 V and the 

anodization temperature was kept constant at 20 oC. 

Morphological characterization of oxide layer was made using SEM (Fig 1) . The optical 

characterization of fabricated samples was done by measuring diffusion reflect ance and calculation of 

theoretical colors. It was found that depending of anodizing conditions the color of fabricated oxides are 

significantly changed. Moreover, depending of anodization temperature the fabricated anodic titanium 

oxide have nanotubular o r slightly porous morphology. The thickness of oxide is affected mostly by 

anodizing voltage not temperature. The colors of anodic oxide could be controlled by changing anodizing 

conditions. 

Fig .1. Example of morphology anodic titani um oxide made in ethanol -based electrolyte (a), and 

theoretical colors of samples made in electrolyte with 3.5 w t% of water (b). The bar is 500 μm in real 

distance. 

Reference: 

[1] M. Michalska -Domańska, P. Nyga, M.  Czerwiński, Ethanol -based electrolyte for nanotubular 

anodic TiO 2 formation, Corrosion Science 134 (2018) 99 – 102 

Acknowledgments :

The research was financed by the National Science Centre, Poland, under SONATA grant (no UMO -

2015/17/D/ST8/02432) and by the National Centre for Research and De velopment (Poland) under 

program LIDER IX ( No LIDER/50/0199/L -9/17/NCBR/2018 ). Dr M. Michalska -Domańska cordially 

acknowledges financial support from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education (Scholarship 

for Young, Outstanding Researchers 2016 –2019, agreement no. 1013/E -410/STYP/11/2016. 

a)  b) Electrochemica l pH sensor using tape and paper for oral preventative 

# care 

Oreoluwa Cherebin , Armel le Met ang mo and Frédérique Deiss, 

Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Indiana -University Purdue University Indianapolis 

(IUPUI), IN, USA 

402 N Blackf ord Street, Indianapolis, IN, USA 

ochereb@iu.ed u

Low oral pH (<5.5) has been shown to play an important role in dental erosion. The measurement of oral 

pH can be useful in preventative care, particularly in aiding the dental caregiver in determining the 

likeliness of future dental cavities. The measurement of oral pH has becom e a more pop ular are a of 

research in an effort to develop a more quantitative method for the dia gnosis of dental caries. We are 

developing an elec trochemical tape -and -paper -based analytical device for pH measurements. These 

devices are low -cost, easy to fabricate, disposable and portable. These devic es rely on the pH -dependent, 

redox active species , using intrinsic defects of the material that gener ate oxog rou ps on the p ainted 

graphite electrode. We have optimized a method to car ry out these pH measurements using cyclic 

volt ammetry wi th the us e of an ionic adjuster . B y measuring the shift in potentials displayed by these 

species, we can determine the pH of a sample. We have tested the devices in different buffer solutions as 

well as commercial pH standards. The electrochemical response of the devices has show n good linear 

correlation in the tested solutions as well as across multiple devices and diffe rent users. The devices show 

promise for pH measurement in artificial saliva a nd other oral samples. Obtaining high -added value products from the technical cashew -nut 

# shell liquid using electrochemical oxidation with BDD anodes 

Mateus C. Medeiros a, Elisama V. dos Santos b, Ana S. Fajardo a, Djalma R. da Silva a,

Suely S. L. Castro c, Carlos A. Martínez -Huitle a,d ,

> a

Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, P59078 -970 Natal, RN, Brazil 

> b

School of Science and Technology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Campus Universitário, 

P59078 -970 Natal, RN, Brazil 

> c

Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, State University of Rio Grande do Norte, Campus Central, 

Mossoró P59625 -620, Rio Grande do Nor te, Brazil 

> d

National Institute for Alternative Technologies of Detection, Toxicological Evaluation and Removal of 

Micropollutants and Radioactives (INCT -DATREM), Institute of Chemistry, UNESP, P.O. Box 355, 

14800 -900 Araraquara, SP, Brazil 

carlosmh@quimic a.ufrn.br 

The electro -organic synthesis is currently experiencing a renaissance due to the tremendous contributions 

of various electrocatalytic materials as well as the use of electric current as an inexpensive and suitable 

reagent to drive the electrosy nthetic transformations, avoiding conventional chemical oxidizers or 

reducing agents [1] . Consequently, electrosynthesis has a significant technical impact due to its 

advantages such as versatility, environmental compatibility (possibility of recovering an d recycling non -

converted substrates), automation (switching on or off electric current), inherent safety and potential cost 

effectiveness among others [1] . Although many novel electrode materials have been developed and 

established in electro -organic synt hesis, diamond films (as boron doped diamond (BDD) electrodes) [2] 

emerge as a novel and sustainable solution in selective electrochemical transformations for value -added 

organic products. For this reason, in this work, the use of BDD to treat technical ca shew -nut shell liquid 

(t -CNSL) [3] was proposed to favor its conversion on high -added value products such as carboxylic acids 

[4] . The evolution of five carboxylic acids was followed over time for the experiments of the three 

different current densities us ing 0.1% of t -CNSL in 1.00 mol L -1 NaOH. At 40 mA cm -2, the most 

notorious increase in the organic acids concentrations took place during the two last hours achieving 

electrochemical conversions about of 144, 120, and 75 mg L -1 for the acetic, formic and o xalic acids, 

respectively. The results are discussed in light of the existing lite rature .

Reference 

[1] S. Möhle, M. Zirbes, E. Rodrigo, T. Gieshoff, A. Wiebe, S.R. Waldvogel, Modern Electrochemical Aspects for 

the Synthesis of Value -Added Organic Pro ducts, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 57 (2018) 6018 –6041. 

doi:10.1002/anie.201712732. 

[2] C.A. Martínez -Huitle, M. Panizza , Electrochemical oxidation of organic pollutants for wastewater treatment, 

Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 11 (2018) 62 –71. doi:10.1016/j.coelec.2018.07.010. 

[3] P.R.F. da Costa, E.C.TA. Costa, S.S.L. Castro, C.A. Martínez -Huitle, A.S. Fajardo, Cashew -nut efflue nt: An 

anodic oxidation treatment using a batch recirculation reactor with BDD anode. J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 (13) (2018) 

E659 –E664. doi: 10.1149/2.0121813jes. 

[4] D. Di Marino, T. Jestel, C. Marks, J. Viell, M. Blindert, S.M.A. Kriescher, A.C. Spiess, M. Wessling, Carboxylic 

acids production via electrochemical depolymerization of lignin. ChemElectroChem 10.1002/celc.201801676 

Acknowledgements      

> Financial supports from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (Brazil) are gratefully acknowledged
> (CNPq –439344/2018 -2), as well as the support from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (Brazil) with the
> FAPESP project 2014/50945 -4. Mate us C. Medeiros and Ana S. Fajardo gratefully acknowledge Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
> de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Brazil) for the financial support under the Master and PNPD postdoctoral grants awarded. Carlos A.
> Martínez -Huitle acknowledges the fundin g provided by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Germany) and Coordenação de
> Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Brazil) as a Humboldt fellowship for Experienced Researcher (88881.136108/2017 -
> 01) at the Johannes Gutenberg -Universität Mainz, G ermany. The authors thank the Núcleo de Processamento Primário e Reúso de
> Água Produzida e Resíduos (NUPPRAR) for providing HPLC analyses.

# Photoelectrochemical reduction of CO 2 over Ti -Cu al loy s: Effect of 

# phases towards multicarbon products 

Juliana de Almeida , Rica rdo Alexandre Galdino da Silva, Christiane d e Arruda Rodrigues 

Department of Chemi cal Engineer – Fede ral University of São Paulo - UNIFESP 

210 São Nicolau Stree t – Diadema , S ão Paulo - Brazil 

e-mail: juliana .almeida17@unifesp .br 

Copper species ex hi bit favorable positions in the conduction band and high potential for reducing 

compounds adsorbed on its surface [1], being widely stu died in the conversion of CO 2 in mul ticarbon 

products. However, when applied in photoelectrocatalytic processes, these are easily oxidized and their 

stability is a challenge. Copper species can be coupled with other materials, suc h as TiO 2, a n -type 

semico nductor with excellent charge transf er properties and chemical stability. These oxides in 

nanostructured si ze have properties improved and, consequently, obtain better efficiency of photocatalytic 

activity [2]. Therefore, the present work evaluate d the inf luence of different species and stru ctures of Cu 

in Ti -Cu system alloys for converting CO 2 in multi carbon products . The electrodes were manufactured to 

act as photocathodes from Ti -10at .% Cu alloys . These electrodes were prepared using an arc melting and 

then, annealed at 900 ° C under argo n atmosphere during 120 h . After the heat treatment , the alloy was 

cooled with controlled temperature at 1 ° C min -1. The identification of the phases present s in the 

substrate w as carried out by optical microscopy, diff raction a nd X -ray dispersion . The Ti – O – Cu 

nanostructured films were grown by anodic process using a solution of 0.1 M HF in ethylene glycol + 

2.5% ( v/v) H 2O and heat treat ed in different temperature within 350 - 550 ° C. The morphological and 

compositio nal pr operties were investigated by scanning electron microscopy and X -ray diffraction. The 

quantifications of the phases present in each temperature composition were carried out by the Rietveld 

method. The photo electrochemical characterization was examine d by linear swee p voltammetry in N 2

bubbled 0.1 mol L -1 Na 2SO 4 aqueous solutions (pH 6.6 ) under irradiation of chopped UV and visible light 

(a 150 W Hg lamp) , with a potential range of onset potential to -1.0 V vs. Ag /AgCl /Cl (3M) . The 

phot oelectro catalyti c reduction experime nts were carried out bubb ling CO 2 in to 0.1 mol L -1 of NaHCO 3

aqueous s olution and a potential at -0.5 V was app lied . The electrode was illuminated for 3 h and then, 

the samples were taken each 0.5 h to evaluate the produ ct formation at different times. The determination 

and quantification of compounds, such as methanol, ethanol, and acetone were conducted by gas 

chromatography by flame ionization. On the substrate, the analyses showed Ti 2Cu and TiCu 3 intermetallic 

phases in its com positi on. The presence of a significative quantity of Ti 2Cu precursor was essential to 

defined film composition and its photocatalytic behavior. The Rietveld quantification method for these 

electrodes revealed binary and ternary oxides on the fil m nanostru ctured in different co mpositions for 

each temperature. The presence of ternary oxide derives from Ti 2Cu precursor which can provide other 

properties to the electrode, as more stability and high redox potential. Some characteristic that can be 

att ributed to the T i2CuO is oxygen sharing between Ti and Cu species, that did not allow the copper 

dissolution and change its oxidation state, consequently, it gave new properties for this material that 

prov ide d significant concentrations of methanol and eth anol as final pr oducts. 

Refer ence 

[1] K. Rajeshwar, M.K. Hossain, R.T. Macaluso, C. Janáky, A. Varga, and P.J. Kulesza, J. Electrochem. 

Soc. 165, H3192 (2018). 

[2] H. Yoo, K. Oh, G. Lee, and J. Choi, J. Electrochem. Soc. 164, H104 (2017). Hybrid Static/Flowable Electrodes 

Eyal Shalem 1, Elad B. Halfon 1, Matthew E. Suss 1 

> 1

Faculty of Mechanical Engineerin g, Technion−Israel Institute of Technology 

Haifa , 3200003, Israel 

Shaleme@campus.technion.ac.il 

In contemporary redox flow batteries, either static or flowable electrodes are conventionally used. Although 

the conductivity in static electrodes is several orders of magnitude higher than that of a flowable electrode, 

the latter offer distinct operational advantages, such as dendr ite -less metal deposition. 

We here report on a new method utilizing a flowable electrode that can operate in both static and flowable 

modes, with the user deciding the mode during cell operation. The latter technique utilizes gravitational 

forces acting on particles to form either a flowable fluidized bed electrode or packed electrode. 

We show that such an electrode can repeatedly cycle between modes by adjusting electrode flow velocity, 

allowing for over four orders of magnitude variation in electric condu ctivity as seen in  Figure 1 .

We further demonstrate the discovery of a novel operational regime, at intermediate velocities where large -

scale particle motion through vortex formation occurs, which enables exceptionally high electric 

conductivity in the flowable state. 

We expect this new approach could enable the creation of a more versatile electrodes which can form the 

basis of future electrochemical systems for energy storage, conversion or water desalination. 

Conductivity measurements 

Figure 1 - Electrode Conductivity Vs. Superficial velocity. The electrode changes its state from flowable 

to static and back exhibiting a change of over 4 orders of magnitude in its conductivity 

References: 

1. E. B. Halfon and M. E. Suss, “Measurements of the electric conductivity of an electrode as it 

transitions between static and flowable modes,” Electrochem. commun., vol. 99, pp. 61 –64, Feb. 

2019 

2.  G. J. Doo rnbusch, J. E. Dykstra, P. M. Biesheuvel, and M. E. Suss, “Fluidized bed electrodes with 

high carbon loading for water desalination by capacitive deionization,” J. Mater. Chem. A, vol. 4, 

no. 10, pp. 3642 –3647, 2016. Development of Anaerobic Biocathodes with Polymer -modified Gas 

# Diffusion Electrodes for Converting CO 2 to Organic Compounds via 

# Microbial Electrosynthesis 

Jean -Marie Fontmorin 1, Paniz Izadi 1, Da Li 1, Shehna Farooq 2, Salma Bilal 2, Eileen Yu 1, 3*

1 School of Engineering, Newcastle University 

2 National centre of excellence in Physcial chemistry, University of Peshawar 

3 De partment of Chemical Engineering, Loughborough University 

Email:  jeanmarie.fontmorin@gm ail.com , e.yu @lboro.ac.uk 

In the last few years, bioelectrochemica l systems (BES) have shown great potential for the conversion of 

CO2 into C2 -C6 volatile fatty acids (VFAs) and alcohols. Despite their versatility, BES present 

limitations such as the lon g time associated with the development of biocathodes and the start of 

bioproduction, even in presence of a pre -enriched inoculum. In this work, we studied the conversion of 

CO2 via microbial electrosynthesis in BES equipped with carbon based gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) 

modified with hydrophilic and conductive polyanil ine (PANI) polymer. Reactors were inoculated with a 

pre -enriched inoculum and operated at -1000 mv vs Ag/AgCl. The utilisation of PANI -modified GDEs 

significantly reduced the start -up tim e of bioproduction to only 6 days with an acetate concentration of 

1.29 ± 0.36 g L -1 after 17 days of operation, and of 4.01 ± 0.5 g L -1 after 24 days with apparition of 

butyrate. On the other hand, BES reactors equipped with non -modified GDEs showed much slower start -

up (17 days) reaching 0.33 ± 0.12 g L -1 after 24 days a nd 1.19 ± 0.73 g L -1 after 31 days. Reactors were 

operated during 60 days and PANI -GDEs led to an acetate concentration of 6.85 ± 0.9 g L -1 and 0.20 ± 

0.05 g L -1 butyrate. Electrochemical and physico -chemical analysis revealed that the PANI polymer 

enhanc es the interaction between the biofilm and the electrode, thus contributing to the fast start -up and 

higher bio -production compared to non -modified carbon cloth GDEs. On the electrochemical behavior of kraft black liquor using BDD 

# electrodes 

Raisa C .P. Oliveira a,b , Josephus G. Buijnster c, Andre F. Sartori c, Tiago A.R. Silva a, b ,* , Maria M. Mateus b,

Paula C.R. Pinto d, João C.M. Bordado b, Diogo M.F. Santos a 

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> c

Department of Precision and Microsystems Engineering, Faculty 3mE, Delft University of Technology ,

Mekelweg 2, 2628, CD, Delft, T he Netherlands  

> d

Forest and Paper Research Institute - RAIZ, Portugal 

> *

tiago.a.silva @tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Black liquor (BL) is a complex solution ge nerated as a by -product of the k raft pulping process and is mainly 

composed of inorganic salts, such as NaOH, NaCO 3, and Na 2SO 4, and lignin [1] . In the last few years , there 

has been a growing effort of the scientific community to understand the electrochemical behavior of the BL 

[2 –4] . As the electrolysis of BL is being more explored it is being pointed out as a promising process to the 

treatment and valori zation of th is by -product . In fact , u nderstanding this electrochemical behavior can bring 

an important development for the wastewater/environmental processes of pulp and paper industries [5 –7] .

Therefore , this work aims at analy zing by voltammetric (cyclic voltammetr y, CV) , amperometric 

(chronoamperometry, CA) , and potentiometric (chronopotentiometry, CP) techniques the behavior of kraft 

BL solutions utilizing boron -doped diamond (BDD ) electrodes . CVs are recorded at several scan rates and 

the peaks are analy zed using the Randles -Sevcik equation . Then CA and CP techniques are run, and the 

results analy zed in order to better understand the electrochemical oxidation of lignin in the BL. The obtained 

results are critically discussed and compared with previous litera ture studies to comprehend the catalytic 

effect of BDD electrodes in the electrooxidation process of the lignin present in the kraft BL. 

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for contract 

no. IF/01084/ 2014/CP1214/CT0003 under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos). This work was carried 

out under the Project Inpactus – innovative products and technologies from eucalyptus, Project N.º 21874 

funded by Portugal 2020 through European Regional Development Fund (ER DF) in the frame of 

COMPETE 2020 nº246/AXIS II/2017. 

[1] N.S. Kevlich, M.L. Shofner, S. Nair, Membranes for Kraft black liquor concentration and 

chemical recovery: Current progress, challenges, and opportunities, Sep. Sci. Technol. 52 (2017) 

1070 –1094. 

[2] R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, On the oxidation of kraft black liquor for lignin 

recovery: a voltammetric stud y, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) E546 –E553. 

[3] R.C.P. Oliveira, M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, Chronoamperometric and chronopotent iometric 

investigation of Kraft black liquor, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (2018) 16817 –16823. 

[4] H.R. Ghatak, S. Kumar, P.P. Kundu, Electrode processes in black liquor electrolysis and their 

significance for hydrogen prod uction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 33 (2008) 2904 –2911. 

[5] J.N. Cloutier, O. Savadogo, J. Paris, M. Perrier, R. Labrecque, N. Kandev, P. Champagne, Effect 

of the basic electrochemical cell operating parameters on the performance of the electrolysis of 

kraft pulping black liquor, ECS Trans. 80 (2017) 871 –891. 

[6] I.C. Belo, R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, J.C.M. Bordado, P.C.R. Pinto, D.M.F. Santos, 

Development of a black liquor electrolyzer for lignin extraction, ECS Trans. 86 (2018) 3 –9. 

[7] M. Haddad, L. Bazinet, O. Savad ogo, J. Paris, Electrochemical acidification of Kraft black liquor: 

Impacts of pulsed electric field application on bipolar membrane colloidal fouling and process 

intensification, J. Memb. Sci. 524 (2017) 482 –492. Synthesis and spectroelectrochemical analysis of P3HT/PCBM and 

# CP3(HT -OT)/PCBM blends .

Thiago Nogueira Marques Cervantes 1, Guy Louarn 2, Henrique de Santana 3

Universidade Federal do Paraná, CP 19061, 86051 -990, Curitiba , PR, Brazil 1. Institut des Matériaux Jean      

> Rouxel, Université de Nantes –CNRS, 44322 Nantes, France 2.Universidade Estadual de Londrina, CP 6001, 86051 -
> 990 Londrina -PR, Brasil 3

tnmcervantes@gmail.com 

Poly(3 -alkylthiophenes) (P3AT ´s) , due to th eir double conjugate bonds, are part of the group of 

conducting polymers, which are of great interest for applications such as battery electrodes, organic light 

emitting diode (OLED) electronic devices, organic solar cells, low -cost integrated circuits and organic 

field effect transistors, owing to their good stability, high conductivity and flexibility of preparation 1.

After electrochemical synthesis, these polymers can change from insulators to conductors due to 

reversible oxidation processes in the p conjugate system, resulting in chains with positive charges, 

polarons and bipolarons , which are balanced by the incorporation of counterions (anions), referred to as 

p-type doping. Films obtained in this way exhibit properties that make them efficient electron donors at 

heterojunctions with n -type materials , such as fullerenes and its derivatives, used in organic solar cells. 

To study the electrochemical properties of modified polymeric films, the electrochemical 

impedance (EIS) could be combined with vibrational spectroscopy in order to understand how the 

positive segments in polymer matrix affect the process of electronic transport in th ose materials , such as 

double layer capacitance, charger transfer velocity, charge transfer process 2.

Therefore, in this work, first, a poli(3 -hexylthiophene) , P3HT, and a blend obtained from two 3 -

alkylthiophenes monomers, 3-hexylthiophen and 3-octylthiophene, named as CP3(HT -OT), were 

synthesized by chronoamperometry (in non -aqueous media) 1. After this, under both films, were 

deposited, by dropping coating method, a fulle rene derivative, [6,6] -phenyl -C61 -butyric acid methyl ester 

(PCBM ). Thus, t he blends formed between the P3AT’s and PCBM, named as P3HT/PCBM and CP3(HT -

OT)/PCBM, were characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV), EIS , XPS (X -ray Photoelectron 

Spectroscopy), pho toluminescence (PL) and in situ and ex situ Raman spectroscopy. 

The presence of P CBM in P3HT and CP3(HT -OT) blends were confirmed by XPS , which 

demonstrated a small difference of the fullerene derivative between them. PL spectra showed a quenching 

because of a successful heterojunction formation, being more effective in P3HT/PCBM (indicating that ,

in this blend , the charge transfer process were more effective) . The presence of PCBM did not 

significantly alter the band gap of the blends but was able to chan ge the relative quantity of positive 

segments, evaluate by in situ Raman spectroscopy, in polymer matrix. The addition of PCBM increased 

the bipolaron segments in P3HT , while in CP3(HT -OT) stabilized the polaron segments, considering the 

submission of the blends to anodic potential (from 0 to +1,4 V) . In addition, EIS showed that, despite the 

reduction in charge resistance transfer (R CT ), 9% and 47% for P3HT/PCBM and CP3(HT -OT)/PCBM, 

respectively, due to the stabilization of positive segments, the non -homog enous phase separation of 

P3AT’s and PCBM prevented this reduction from being even greater. 

References 

[1] C ervantes , T. N. M.; Bento, D. C.; Maia, E. C. R.; Fernandes, R. V.; Laureto, E.; Moore, G. J.; 

Louarn, G.; de Santana.  The influence of influ ence of different electrolytes on the electrical and optical 

properties of polymer films electrochemically synthesized from 3 -alkylthiophenes . Journal of Material 

Science : Materials in Electronics, v. 25, p. 1703 -1715, 2014. 

[2] Bento, D. C.; Barbosa, C . G.; Roncaselli, L. K. M.; Renzi, W.; Duarte, J. L.; Olivati, C. A.; Péres, L. 

O.; de Santana, H. Thin films of poly[(9,9 -dioctylfluorene) -co -thiophene] deposited on ITO by the 

Langmuir –Schaefer and Langmuir –Blodgett techniques . Journal of Material Scienc e: Materials in 

Electronics, v. 38, p. 3875 -3883, 2017. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would thanks to Spectroscopy Laboratory ( LABSPEC ) at PROPPG/UEL Multiuser Center, Institut des  

> Matériaux (Université de Nantes); CAPES (project no. 124/2012) and CNPq for their financial support.

# Study of Methanol electrooxidation on Thin Nickel Films by Sampled 

# Current Voltammetry 

María Paula Salinas ,† D. Alfonso Crespo -Yapur, † Oliver Rodríguez, †, ‡ Guy Denuault ‡ and Marcelo Videa † 

> †

School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey , Monterrey, NL 64849, Mexico  

> ‡

School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 

mvidea@itesm.mx 

Because its application o n direct methanol fuel cells [1], several works have focused on the synthesis of 

materials with electrocatalytic activities comparable to that of platinum. Salinas et al. [2] showed that Ni 

films deposited on Au under galvanostatic control had high electrocatalytic activity. In this work, Ni films 

were deposited by the galvanostatic method on gold electrodes. The ir electrocatalytic activity for methanol 

electrooxidation was evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and sampled current voltammetry (SCV) . The 

sampled volta mmograms were constructed from individual chronoamperometric measurements so that 

each measurement was made with a renewed surface, eliminating the effects of the electrode history present 

in voltage sweep methods [3]. 

Electrodeposition result s of two pr ocesses, nucle ation and growth, occur ring at two different time scales. 

Nucleation proceeds at the millisecond timescale, and the diffusion field follows the microscopic features 

of the electrode's surface. The growth of the nuclei takes place at longer ti mescales when the diffusion field 

has extended , so the geometric area controls it. Therefore, the applied current relative to the electroactive 

area dictates nucleation conditions, but leads to different growth kinetics , resulting in variability on the Ni 

deposits, determining the predominan ce of Ni(OH) 2 polymorph. Fig ure 1a shows the Ni deposits after 

cycl ing in 1 M KOH. The position of the NiOOH peak (Iaf) changed depending on the total applied current. 

For simplicity, two types of Ni films were identified: Type A with the NiOOH formation peak located 

below 0.39 V vs. Ag|AgCl, and Type B, which has the NiOOH formation peak above that threshold value. 

The solid lines in Fig. 1b and 1c represent the CVs for Ni films obtained in the pre sence of 0.5 M methanol. 

The anodic peaks, IIaf and IIab, correspond to methanol oxidation during the forward and backward scans. 

The sum of the current peaks , called Electrocatalytic Intensity , EI , can be used to evaluate Ni films' activity .

According ly , Type B deposits show higher activity for methanol electrooxidation compared to Type A .

However, the superimposed SCVs (dotted lines) suggest that although Type B films are suitable catalysts 

for me thanol oxidation, they also exhibit high activity for oxygen evolution, as evidenced by the current 

increase beyond 0.5 V vs. Ag|AgCl. Conversely, the Type A deposit shows high activity for methanol 

oxidation without oxygen evolution interference , making i t a suitable material for direct alcohol fuel cells. 

These results demonstrate that SCV is a valuable technique to gain insight into the catalytic behavior of 

electrocatalytic materials. 

a) Cyclic voltammogram of Type A (long -dash curves), and Type B Ni films (short -dash curves). Scan 

rate: 50mV s −1 , 1 M KOH . (b) Cyclic voltammograms (solid lines) and (b) sampled current 

voltammograms (dotted lines) of Type A and Type B films in 1 M KOH + 0.5 M methanol 

References 

[1] K. I. Ozoemena, RSC Adv. , 6, 89523 (2016). 

[2] M. P. Salinas‐Quezada, D. A. Crespo‐Yapur, A. Cano‐Marquez, M. Videa, Fuel Cells , 19, 587 (2019). 

[3] S. C. Perry, L . Al.  Shandoudi, and G . Denuaul t, Analytical Chemistry , 86 , 9917 (2014). Dye Doped Silica Nanoparticles for Efficent Electrochemiluminescence 

# Imaging 

Alessandra Zanut ,a Francesco Palomba ,a Sara Rebeccani, b Matilde Rossi Scota, b Massimo 

Marcaccio, a Giovanni Valenti, a Francesco Prodi, b Francesco Paolucci a 

> a

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New York 

University, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.  

> b

Dipartimento di Chimica ‘‘G. Ciamician’’, University of Bologna, Via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy 

az2218@nyu.edu 

Electroch emiluminescence (ECL) is a leading technique in bioanalysis. 1 Since the excited species are 

produced with an electrochemical stimulus rather than with a light excitation source, ECL displays 

improved signal -to -noise ratio compared to photoluminescence, wit h minimized effects due to light 

scattering and luminescence background. 2

Chasing ever -increas ing sensitivities, ECL can ideally be coupled to nanotechnology and supramolecular 

chemistry to develop new systems and strategies for analyte determination also in very complex matrices. 3,4 

In particular, dye -doped silica nanoparticles (DDSNs) present many advantages: they can be obtained with 

accessible synthetic schemes, are intrinsically hydrophilic, and, thanks to silica chemistry, are prone to 

bioconjugation . With this approach we were able to achieve extremely bright systems and DDSNs assume 

the photophysical properties of the dye accumulated within the nanoparticle. 5 In DDSNs, light emission is 

influenced by the combination of several factors that make DDSN s complex multichromophoric structures. 

However, w hen ECL comes into play, the scenario is 

even more complicated due to the coreactant−NP 

interactions effect .5 Such complex scenario was 

approached at the theoretical level by developing 

suitable mechanistic models for ECL generation 6

while, at the same time, the influence of doping level 

on ECL efficiency was evaluated. Our results showed 

that the ECL intensity of a nanosized system cannot be 

merely incremented acting on doping, since other 

parame ters come into play. These studies provide 

valuable indications for the design of more efficient 

ECL nano - and micro -sized labels for ultrasensitive 

bioanalysis. 

References 

[1] Z. Liu,  W. Qia, G. Xu  Chem. Soc.  Rev. 44 (2015) 3117. 

[2] M. Hesari,  et al.  J. Electrochem. Soc. 163 (2016) H3116 

[3] E. Rampazzo, S. Bonacchi, D. Genovese, R. Juris, M. Marcaccio, M. Montalti , F. Paolucci, M. Sgarzi, 

G. Valenti, N. Zaccheroni, L. Prodi.  Coord. Chem. Rev. 256 (2012) 1664. 

[4] H. Qi,  et al.  J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 1947; H.  Li,  et al.  Chem. - Eur. J. 22 (2016) 12702 

[5] G. Valenti, E. Rampazzo, S. Bonacchi, T. Khajvand, R. Juris, M. Montalti, M. Marcaccio, F. Paolucci, 

L. Prodi, Chem. Commun. 48 (2012) 4187; S. Kesarkar , E. Rampazzo, G. Valenti, M. Marcaccio, A. Bossi, 

L. Prodi, F. Paolucci ChemElectroChem 4 (2017) 1690 

[5] G.  Valenti, E. Rampazzo, S. Bonacchi, L. Petrizza, M. Marcaccio, M. Montalti, L. Prodi, F. Paolucci 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 15935. 

[6] E.  Daviddi,  A. Oleinick, I. Svir, G. Valenti, F. Paolucci, C. Amatore  ChemElectroChem 4 (2017) 1719. The hydroxylation of o -quinone as a kinetic model to the formation of 6 -

# hydroxy -dopamine. 

Raphael S. Nakaya , Raphael P. Bacil, Silvia H. P. Serrano 

> a

Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo - Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 748 - Butantã - São Paulo – SP, 

Brazil.  CEP: 05508 -000 

Nowadays, mental disease diagnosis increases significantly in society in general. 1 The causes of diseases 

such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's, schizophrenia and depression remain to be unveiled in detail. In this 

particular scenario, dopamine (DA), is involved in some pathways which are related to synapsis and signalling 

functions. Most of DA’s functions are related to its redox reactivity, which can be electrochemically simulated in 

an EECEE mechanism. 2 Following -up to the oxidation of DA’s catechol moiety to o -quinone, a chemical step 

occurs as the molecule undergoes an intramolecular Michael addition, a cyclization. 2 On the other hand, the 

follow -up cyclizat ion reaction competes with the intermolecular Michael addition which would generate the 6 -

hydroxy -dopamine (6 -OHDA). This secondary product (6 -OHDA) is used in animal models to generate 

Parkinson's disease in the subjects. 3 Since DA also presents the cyclization reaction, catechol (CAT) was used as 

a model to observe the exten sion of the Michael addition at physiological pH, therefore simulating the in vivo DA 

behaviour in an in vitro situation. Cyclic voltammetry was used to obtain the kinetic rate constant (kf) of the 

chemical step which follows -up the CAT oxidation at physiological pH and other pH values using the number of 

effective electrons 4 to better comprehend the inte rmolecular addition mechanism. The Tafel plots were obtained 

to observe the mechanism as a function of the scan rate, since the charge transfer coefficients (β) values are 

sensitive to the mechanism change, as already demonstrated. 2 The scan rate values were then restricted in an 

appropriate window and the kf values to the addition were then obtained. In sequence, to observe the extension of 

this reaction, th e kf values obtained were compared to a recent study of our group in which the cyclization rate 

constant of DA in pH = 7.4 was obtained. The results show that CAT intermolecular addition occurs with a kf = 

0.28 s -1, which is 0.04 s -1 superior to the 0.24 s -1 previously reported for DA’s cyclization. In addition, the chemical 

step for CAT presented a parabolic behaviour, with a peak at approximately 7.4, which allows two conclusions. 

Firstly, that the reaction occurs at its optimized situation in physiologic al media., Secondly, that after CAT 

oxidation, the further nucleophilic addition occurs in a similar mechanism to a S NAr, which could also be the case 

for the 6 -OHDA formation. 5

1 D. Durstewitz, Q. J. M. Huys and G. Koppe, Psychiatric Illnesses as Disorders of Network Dynamics, 

Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging , 2020, 1 –12. 

2 R. P. Bacil, L. Chen, S. H. P. Serrano and R. G. Compton, Dopamine oxidation at gold electrodes: 

mechanism and kinetics near neutral pH, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , , DOI:10.1039/C9CP05527D. 

3 M. S. Antunes, L. Cattelan Souza, F. V. L. Ladd, A. A. B. L. Ladd, A. L. Moreira, V. C. Bortolotto, M. 

R. P. Silva, S. M. Araújo, M. Prigol, C. W. Nogueira and S. P. Boeira, Hesperidin Ameliorates Anxiety -

Depressive -Like Behavior in 6 -OHDA Model of Parkinson’s Disease by Regulating Striatal Cytokine 

and Neurotrophic Factors Levels and Dopaminergic Innervation Loss in the Striatum of Mice, Mol. 

Neurobiol. , , DOI:10. 1007/s12035 -020 -01940 -3. 

4 A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, N. York, C. @bullet, W. Brisbane and S. E. Toronto, 

ELECTROCHEMICAL METHODS Fundamentals and Applications, Electrochem. I. Faulkner, Larry 

R, 1944, 3 –7. 

5 M. B. Smith and J. March, March’s Advanced Org anic Chemistry , 2006. Electrochemical and magnetic properties of green synthesized Fe 2O3

# maghemite nanoparticles 

> 1*

Nokwanda P. Ngema , 1Emmanuel I. Iwuoha , 1Fanelwa . Ajayi 

SensorLab, Chemistry Department, Chemical Sciences Building, University of the Western Cape, Robert 

Sobukw e Road, Bellville, 7535 

> 2*

3778941@myuwc.ac.za 

Green synthesis of iron nanoparticles has accumulated an ultimate interest over the last few years due to their 

di stinctive properties and applicability in various fields of science and technology. The use of biological 

products such as microorganisms, plant extracts or plant biomass is proving to be a better alternative to chemical 

and physical methods for the engineering of meta l oxide nanoparticles through environmentally benign route s.

In the present study, the synthesis of iron nanoparticles (Fe 2O3) was achieved using coffee extracts. The 

synthesized material s were studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD), UV -visible spectroscopy (UV -vis), Fourier 

Transform Infrared (FTIR) S pectroscopy, Vibrating Sample Magnet ometer (VSM), High Resolution Scanning 

Electron Microscopy ( HR SE M), High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy ( HR TEM) and Cyclic 

voltammetry (CV). The average diameter of the Fe 2O3 nanopart icles was observed to be a pproximately 35 nm 

while HR TEM con firmed the cubic nature of the nanoparticles. The FTIR spectrum of the nanoparticles 

revealed the role of the biomolecules present in the extra ct in capping the nanoparticles with prominent bands at 

3381 cm -1, 1384 cm -1 and 691 cm -1. UV -vis studies reveale d an absorption band in the ultraviolet region of 289 

nm indicating confirming the successful development of the prepared nanoparticles as also indicated by the 

optical energy band gap determined using Tauc plot . The VSM studies show ed the ferromagnetic na ture o f the 

synthesized nanoparticles and CV illustrated t he e lectrochemical behaviour of the Fe 2O3 nanoparticles on glassy 

carbon electrodes. The modified electrode with showed good electron conductivity when compared to the bare 

electrode an indication o f the potential use of the nanoparticle s in the development of sensors or biosensors. Sensitive and Selective Detection of Low -Level Ammonia Gas Sensor 

# by Reduced -Graphene -Based Nanocomposie 

Shih -Han Wang *, Wei -Jie Syu , Bo -Rong Chen 

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, National Yunlin University of Science and 

Technology 

123 U niversity Road, Section 3,Douliou, Yunlin 64002, Taiwan 

E-mail: wangsh@yuntech.edu.tw 

Ammonia is an important indicator for the environment quality and agriculture safety applications. It also 

has been identified as an import ant biomarker of breathing ga s, and the elevated ammonia levels in 

exhaled breath could be the results of liver or kidney -related desieases . The exhaled ammonia gas 

concentration for healthy human is down to 0.02 -2 ppm  [1] , and for the environmental quality evaluation 

should be lower to 50 ppb. Due to the low concentration and the complicate sample gases, it is important 

to develop a highly sensitive and selective ammonia sensor. Several materials such as metal oxide, 

conducting polymer and carbon nanomaterials have been extensively used for ammonia gas sensing. 

Among those materials, carbon -baed nanosomposite holds great promise for low -concentration ammonia 

sensing. 

We demonstrated a highly sensitive and selective ammonia sensor based on reduced -graphene 

nanocomposite for detectio n of ammonia down to the ppb -level at room temperature. T ungsten oxide and 

polyaniline was incorporated into easily functionalized reduced graphene in supercritical fluid to form a 

nanocomposite. Metallic nanocatalyst was doped to enhance the sensitivity and selectivity. Ammonia 

adsorbed on the sensing membrane and then be oxidized at room -temperature. Therefore, the resistance of 

sensing membrane increased with ammonia concentration. The sensor could detect the ammonia 

concentration in the range from 0 to 100 ppm at room temperature. The sensitivity was enhanced 4 times 

by the nanocatalyst, and the lower detection limit was 50 ppb. The effect of interference gases, including 

nitric oxide (NO), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO 2), sulfur dioxide (SO 2) has been evaluated 

as well, and all the cross -talk was less than 10%. 

Furthermore, ammonia gas is highly water soluble, the sensing resistance was shift significantly by 

humidity, especially in higher humid atmosphere. In order to solve the problem, t he electrode surface was 

more hydrophobic. After surface modification, the humidity effect decreased. The sensing mechanism of 

electrode and effect of humidity was also investigated. The experimental result suggested that the catalyst 

doped nanocomposite had high sensitivity, stability and selectivity for low concentration ammonia 

sensing at room temperature, the influence of humidity has been overcome by the surface modification. 

A room temperature operated low -level ammonia sensor could be potential app lied for exhaled gas or 

environmental quality monitoring. 

Reference s: 

[1]  S. Abdulla, J. Dhakshinamoorthy, V. Mohan, D. V. Po nnuvelu, V. K. Kallidaikuruchi, L. M. 

Thalakkotil, B. Pullithadathil , J. Breath Res. 13 (2019) 046005 .Ag doped black TiO 2 nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalyst abilities 

# for organic pollution degradation under visible light 

## Ting Zhang , Wei Gao ,*

## Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, the University of Auckland, Private Bag 

## 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand 

The development of noble metal doped on semiconductor materials has attracted significant attention [1, 2] .

Herein, the degradation of Methylene blue over Ag doped black TiO 2 nanocomposite, synthe sized using a simple 

electrochemical doping method, was reported. The Ag nanoparticles doped on black TiO 2 nanotubes exhibits a 

superior degradation efficiency of methylene blue aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. The efficiency 

is up to 75%, and around 4 times higher than that of pure TiO 2 nanotube arrays. The enhanced photodegradation 

performan ce is attribute to the formation of surface plasmon resonance ca used by Ag nanoparticles, as well as the 

conductivity enhancement caused by Ti 3+ and Ag doping. This nanocomposite can effectively increase 

photocurrent under irradiation of visible light and improve the photocatalyst efficiency of TiO 2 nanotube [3] .

Reference 

Figure1 Photocatalytic degradation of MB using different catalyst 

[1] X. Yue, W. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Liu, Q. Zhang, J.J.E.A. Jia, A facile method to prepare Pt/C/TiO2 

nanotubes electrode for electro -oxidation of methanol, 174 (2015) 667 -671. 

[2] Y. Zhang, J. Nie, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y.J.A.S.S. Cong, Synthesis of Co3O4/Ag/TiO2 nanotubes 

arrays via photo -deposition of Ag and modification of Co3O4 (311) for enhancement of visible -light 

photoelectrochemical performance, 427 (2018) 1009 -1018. 

[3] J. Yu, J. Xiong, B. Cheng, S.J.A.C.B.E. Liu, Fabrication and characterization of Ag –TiO2 multiphase 

nanocomp osite thin films with enhanced photocatalytic activity, 60 (2005) 211 -221. Neuronal Tau Protein Film Stability on Gold Surface: Electrochemical 

# Impedance Spectroscopy and Cyclic Voltammetry Studies 

William Wallace , Sanela Martic 

Department of Environmental and Life Sciences, Trent University 

1600 West Bank Drive, Peterborough, O ntario , Canada , K9K0G2 

wwallace@trentu.ca , sanelamartic@trentu.ca 

Tau is a neuronal protein responsible for microtubule formation [1] . It is also the pathological 

protein active in the Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) pathway. When Tau begins to aggregate as a result of 

misfolding, the neuronal cells die due to t he lack of microtubule formation and can take on prion -like 

properties [2] . Therefore, detection of aggregated Tau can serve as a powerful tool in the early diagnosis 

of AD and dementia related diseases . As has been previously demonstrated, Tau 441 can be detected with 

an electrochemical immuno assay based on the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) by using 

gold electrode [3] . The EIS was also used to monitor interactions between Tau protein and Heparin [4]. 

Due to the sensitive nature of protein mo lecules, buffers of physiological pH need to be employed to 

maintain native protein structure. However, not all buffer solutions are appropriately suited for surface 

studies. Herein, we describe use of EIS and cyclic voltammetry (CV) to monitor and detect surface 

stability of Tau protein films on gold electrode in two common buffers: MES buffer and Phosphate Buffer 

(PB) . After modifying the surface of the electrode with activated lipoic acid and Tau, a s eries of further 

incubation step s were performed to test surface stability under various conditions . The EIS and CV were 

measured as a function of Tau or Heparin concentrations, and incubation time and temperature. The 

control experiments included, Tau -fre e surface , Heparin -free solution , and buffer solutio ns in order to 

minimize non -specific interactions . The stability of the surface s was measured as a signal change in EIS 

and CV after incubation s and it was discovered that certain buffered solution induce d large changes in tau 

protein films on surfaces .

References 

[1] M.D. Weingarten, A.H. Lockwood, S. Hwo, M.W. Kirschner, A Protein Factor Essential for 

Microtubule Assembly, Natl. Acad Sci. 72 ( 1975) 1858 –1862. 

[2] F. Clavaguera, J. Hench, M. Goedert, M. Tolnay, Prion -like transmission and spreading of tau 

pathology, Neuropathol. Ap pl. Neurobiol. 41 (2015) 47 –58. 

[3] N. Carlin, S. Martic -Milne, Anti -tau antibodies based electrochemical sensor for detection of tau 

protein biomarkers, J. Electrochem. Soc . 165 (2018) G3018 –G3025. 

[4] H. Trzeciakiewicz, J. Esteves -Villanueva, R. Soudy, K. Kaur, S. Martic -Milne, Electroche mical 

characterization of protein adsorption onto YNGRT -Au and VLGXE -Au surfaces, Sensors 

(Switzerland). 15 (2015) 19429 –19442. Operando Surface Structure Determination of Pt(111) under Realistic 

# Oxygen Reduction Conditions using High -Energy Surface X -Ray 

# Diffraction  

> L Jacobse ,R Schuster, T Weber, V Vonk, A Stierle
> DESY NanoLab, Deutsches Elektronensynchrotron DESY
> Notkestrasse 8 5, D -22607 Hamburg, Germany
> leon .jacobse@desy.de

## Platinum is the most widely used electrocatalyst driving water -splitting and (the 

## reverse) hydrogen oxidation reactions, which are the processes occ urring in 

## electrolysers and fuel cells, respectively. Due to the material costs, it is of 

## crucial importance to maximize the electrode stability. Experiments under static, 

## oxygen -free conditions have provided a detailed description of the degradation 

## of the Pt(111) electrode surface by applying highly oxidizing p otentials . In our 

## High -Energy Surface X-Ray Diffraction (HE -SXRD) experiments we have 

## shown that the Pt(111) surfaces change significantly at potentials above 1.1 V 

## vs RHE. The se changes depend on the potential, its scan rate and for how long 

## it is applied . Despite extensive oxidation of the electrode, w e did not observe 

## any features indication the formation of an ordered (surface) oxide. 

## However, it is unclear how this degrada tion changes in case of a high oxygen 

## chemical potential as during the oxygen re duction reaction. We have developed 

## a Rotating Disk Electrode (RDE) setup that can be mounted on the beamline 

## diffractometer, enabling us to perform operando HE -SXRD experiment s. This 

## setup has been used to determine the structure of a Pt(111) while a larg e

## current density for oxygen reduction is applied. The results are compared to 

## measurements performed under static and oxygen -free conditions .Reduction of Methane Emissions by Living Electric Cables 

Vincent V. Scholz 1, Rainer U. Meckenstock 2, Lars Peter Nielsen 1, Ian P.G. Marshall 1, Nils Risgaard -

Petersen 1

> 1

Center for Electromicrobiology, Aarhus University, DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark 

> 2

Environme ntal Microbiology an d Biotechnology, University Duisburg -Essen, 45141 Essen, Germany 

vincent .sch olz@bios.au.dk 

Cable bacteria are living electrochemical devices using internal wires to direct electrons fr om anaerobic 

decompo sition of organic matter to oxygen reduction via a sulfur shunt  in sediments . The sulfur shunt 

invo lves a continuous cycling between electrogenic sulfide oxidation by cable bacteria und sulfate 

red uc ing bacteria , leading to an overall a ccumulation of sulfa te in the porewater .

He re we show that the exclusion of  cable bact eria  le d to the direction of  the electron flow to 

methanogenesis resulting in a more than tenfold higher methane emission  from rice -vegetated soil pots  to 

the atmosphere . We also found that cable bacteria do naturally occur in rice fields - al though thriv ing well 

in some fields, they appear to be absent in others. Moreover, t he cable bacteria -induced effects potentially 

include the protection of rice pla nts against toxi c s ulfide . Taken togeth er, w e suggest that unrav eling the 

factors contr ollin g cable ba cteria blooms in rice fields would allow to tailor mi tigation str ategies to red uce 

methane emissions and sulfide toxicity in rice fie lds .Ion Exchange Involving Graphene Oxide and Metallic Cations as a 

# Tool for the Electrosynthesis of Advanced Materials 

Ferreira, Caroline ; Ramos, Maria Karolina; Zarbin, Aldo J. G. 

Materials Chemistry Group (GQM), Department of Chemistry, Universidade Feder al do Paraná (UFPR) 

Centro Politecnico, CP 19081, CEP 81531980 - Curitiba – PR - Brazil 

carolinemarianof@gmail.com 

Prussian blue is a  hexacyanometallate  mixed -valence complex co nstituted by iron metallic centers in 

oxidation states two and three, connect ed by bridges of cyanide ligands . Iron centers can be replaced by 

other transition metals, generating a class of compounds with the same structure of Prussian blue,  the so -

called Prussian blue analogues (PBA) , with the formula  AxMy[M ’(CN) 6]z·nH 2O, wherein  M and M ’ are 

transition metals and A is a metal cation. These complexes  present  unique electrochemical properties. At 

the same time, the y show low elec trochemical stability, which can be improve d through the preparation of 

composites with carbon nanostruct ur es like graphene or carbon nanotubes . 1,2 This work presents a novel ,

simple and efficient route to prepare thin films of PBA/graphene nanocomposites, based on ion -exchange 

reactions . Thin films of graphene oxide (GO) were prepared through the liquid -liq uid interfacial route 

developed in our research group. 3 The GO films were deposited over Fluor -doped tin oxide covered glass 

(F TO /glass) and immersed in 0.1 mmol L -1 aqueous solutions of Fe 3+ or Cu 2+ ions for different time 

intervals, aiming ion -exchange r eaction between acidic hy drogens of GO surface and the metallic ions in 

solution . Further, the films were washed several times with water and reacted with aqueous solution of 

NaBH 4. The reduction process converts graphene oxide into reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and cationi c

species into their metallic forms . In the following, these films have been used as precursor for both 

Cupper hexacyanometallates (CuHCF) or iron hexacyanometallates (FeHCF) composites , through 

heterogeneous electrochemical reactions with [Fe(CN 6)] 3- aque ous solution , in a three -electrode 

electrochemical cell in which the ion -exchanged rGO films act as work electrodes. The cyclic 

voltam mograms of the films during the deposition reactions show redox process es in the region of 0.7 V

for Cu 2+ and 0.8 V for Fe 3+ , in which the current intensities increase according the number o f cycles, 

indicating the Prussian blue and PBA formation. The occurrence of FeHCF and CuHCF was confirmed 

by Raman and FT -IR spectroscopy. The morphology of the films visu alized by scanning electron 

microscopy shows the formation of cubes  homogeneously distributed over the entire rGO film  after 

electrodeposition, w hich indicates the formation of hexacyanometallates . The results demonstrate the 

viability of the electrodeposi tion processes and represents a new route to prepare PB - and PBA -based 

composites thin films, opening several possibilities for application in di fferent fields. 

[1] LOPES, L. C.;  HUSSMAN, S.; ZARBIN, A. J. G. ; Electrochimica Acta 345 , 13 6199 (20 20 )

[2] HUSSMAN, S.; ZARBIN, A. J. G. ; Electrochimica Acta 283 , 1339 -1350 (2018) 

[3] SALVATIERRA, R. V.; OLIVEIRA, M.M.; ZARBIN, A. J. G. Chem.  Mat er. 22., 5222 -52 34 (2010) Electron microscopy of lignin from electrooxidation of kraft black liquor 

Tiago A.R. Silva a, b,* , Raisa C.P. Oliveira a, b, Maria M. Mateus b, Paula C.R. Pinto c, João C.M. Bordado b,

Diogo M.F. Santos a 

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> c

Forest and Paper Research Institute - RAIZ, Portugal 

> *

tiago.a.silva@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Black liquor (BL) is a complex solu tion generated as a by -product of the kraft pulping process and is mainly 

composed of inorganic salts (such as NaOH, NaCO 3, and Na 2SO 4), and lignin [1] . In the last few years ,

there has been a growing effort in the scientific community to understand the electrochemical behavior of 

the BL [2 -4] . Currently , there are some well -known processes for the recovery of the lignin, such as the 

noteworthy LignoBoost and LignoForce commerc ial processes, a sequence of acidification steps used for 

the precipitation of the lignin present in the black liquor [5,6] . However, the method used for lignin 

extraction has a direct impact on the properties of the lignin obtained . A s such, it is importa nt to select the 

appropriate method for the lignin intended applications. As the electrolysis of BL has been more explored 

in the last few years and can be a promising process to the treatment of this by -product, u nderstanding the 

properties of the obtaine d lignin by electrolysis poses an important challenge for its commercial valori zation 

[7 ].

This work aims to analy ze by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy 

(TEM) techniques the lignin obtained by electrolysis of kraft B L sample s utilizing nickel electrodes . To the 

best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first time that differences between lignin samples are assessed 

by electronic microscopy. SEM images , coupled with energy dispersive X -ray analysis, are obtaine d for 

several samples of lignin collected from kraft BL by different extraction processes. The morphology of 

each different sample is critically analy zed. TEM analysis is also performed in the same samples to assess 

the particle size distributi on and understand possible differences in the structure of each lignin sample . The 

results obtained for the electrodeposited lignin are discussed and compared with those of commercial lignin 

samples. This will allow us to better comprehend the characterist ics of the lignin obtained during the kraft 

BL electrolysis process. 

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for contract 

no. IF/01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos) and for Ph D grant 

SFRH/BD/137470/2018 (R.C.P. Oliveira) . This work was carried out under the Project Inpactus –

innovative products and technologies from eucalyptus, Project N.º 21874 funded by Portugal 2020 through 

the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) in the frame of COMPETE 2020 nº246/AXIS II/2017. 

[1] N.S. Kevlich, M.L. Shofner, S. Nair, Membranes f or Kraft black liquor concentration and 

chemical recovery: Current progress, challenges, and opportunities, Sep. Sci. Technol. 52 (2017) 

1070 –1094. 

[2] R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, On the oxidation of kraft black liquor for lignin 

recovery: a voltammetric stu dy, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) E546 –E553. 

[3] R.C.P. Oliveira, M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, Chronoamperometric and chronopotentiometric 

investigation of Kraft black liquor, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (2018) 16817 –16823. 

[4] H.R. Ghatak, S. Kumar, P.P. Kundu, Electrode processes in black liquor electrolysis and their 

significance for hydrogen prod uction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 33 (2008) 2904 –2911. 

[5] P. Tomani , The Lignoboost Process , Cellulose Chem. Technol. 44 (2010) 53 –.58 

[6 ] L. Kouisni , P. Holt -Hindle, K. Maki, M. Paleologou , The Lignoforce System TM : A new process 

for the production of high -quality lignin from black liquor , J-FOR. 2 (2012) 6 –10 .

[7] V.G. Gupta, M. Tuohy, C.P Kubicek, J. Saddler, F. Xu, ch18. Industrial Lign ins: Analysis, 

Prope rties and Applications, Bioenergy Research: Advances and Applications , Elsevier , 2014 

315 -333. Preparation and characteristics of a glassy carbon electrode 

# modified with multi -walled carbon nanotubes and palladium 

Andrzej Leniart , Barbara Burnat, Mariola Brycht, Sławomira Skrzypek 

Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemis try, University of Lodz 

Tamka 12, 91 -403 Lodz, Poland 

andrzej.leniart@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

Glassy carbon due to its unique properties such as high electrical and thermal conductivity, hardness, 

resistance to high temperatures, chemicals and stability in a w ide range of polarization potentials is a

widely used electrode material in electrochemistry. In order to improve or obtain new properties of the 

electrodes surfaces, inter alia, the glassy carbon electrode is subjected to various modifications. Surface 

mo difications can be carried out, for example, as a result of electrochemical processes (electrodeposition 

of polymer s or metallic layers ) as well as by applying new materials to the surface (e.g. carbon nanotubes, 

graphene). 

Carbon nanotubes are one -dimensi onal structures characterized by high electrical conductivity, high 

chemical stability, high electrical conductivity, high surface area -volume ratio, high adsorption capacity 

resulting in increased sensitivity of sensors . They are used as a material for mo dification of electrodes 

surfaces which are at the same time a substra te for metallic catalysts. 

Palladium due to its catalytic properties and hydrogen sorption capacity is used to build fuel cells 

operating on the basis of oxidation of small organic compo unds, such as methanol or formaldehyde. 

The type of electrode, surface development and microstructure as well as the size and dispersion of the 

catalyst on the electrode surface strongly affect s the work of such a cell and its efficiency. The 

combination of the above -mentioned materials, namely: glassy carbon, carbon nanotubes and palladium, 

results in obtaining an electrode with new properties. 

The aim of presenting work was to obtain glassy carbon electrodes (GCE) modified with multi -walled 

carbon nanotu be s (MWCNTs) and palladium (GCE/ MWCNTs -Pd), to characterize them in terms of 

surface morphology and to study their electrochemical properties. 

The preparation of GCE/ MWCNTs -Pd electrodes consisted of applying multi -walled carbon nanotubes to 

the prepared glassy carbon electrode surface and electrochemical generation of palladium nanoparticles 

with programmed charges ( -0.005, -0.020, -0.050 and -0.100 C). GC E/MWCNTs -Pd electrodes with 

different content of palladium nanoparticles were characterized in terms o f surface morphology using 

atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X -ray 

spectrometry (SEM -EDS). However, the evaluation of electrochemical properties was carried out with 

use of cyclic voltammetry (CV) and ele ctrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) in the environment of 

per chloric acid .

As a result of electrochemical Pd catalyst generation, palladium nanoparticles were obtained in four size 

ranges: 10 -30, 20 -40, 50 -60 and 70 -90 nm. Based on the obtained measu rement results, it was observed 

that the quantity and size of the obtained nanoparticles of deposited palladium on the electrode depends 

on the charge used during the electrodeposition . The resistance of GCE/MWCNTs -Pd electrodes 

decreases with increasing amount of palladium .

Acknowledgement 

The authors would like to thank the financial support obtained from the University of Lodz, Poland Unveiling the origin of carbon dilatometric changes with the 

# application of novel SPECS technique 

Jakub Menzel 1, Przemysław Galek 1, Paulina Bujewska 1, Scott Donne 2, Krzysztof Fic 1

1. Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry, Poznan University of Technology 

Berdychowo 4, 60 -965 Poznan, Poland 

2. Discipline of Chemical Engineering, University of Newcastle, 

Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia 

jakub.menzel@put.poznan.pl 

Many researchers ha ve been studying the ions migration in the activated carbon porous structure to date .

One direction of these studies focuses on the examination of dilatometric changes in polarized electrodes .

It was found that depending on the current direction , the respons e of the electrode is different and 

cathodic polarization causes more pronounced changes. Our recent findings , with application of the 

electrochemical contact angle measurement , allowed us to observe the direct electrolyte adsorption on the 

polarized elect rode surface. Collected data followed the established trend , where a cathodic polariz ation 

induces better wettability and faster absorption .

Now , to further understand the nature of the ion migration in the porous structure of carbon electrode, we 

applied the dilatometric measurement combined with novel Step Potential Electrochemical Spectroscopy 

(SPECS). By merging th ese two techniques , we were able to analyze and identify the current derivatives 

resulting in specific electrode behavior. Thus, the overall current response has been deconvoluted to 

individual components. 

For this research , two commercial carbons, i.e., Kuraray YP -50F with “closed” and Cabot BP2000 with 

“open” porosity was chosen. [EMI m] +[TFSI ]- ionic liquid (IL) was selected as the electrolytic solution .

The application of this IL was intentional , as the size of cation and anion are similar . Moreover, the 

selection of IL electrolyte limit s the possibility of parasitic redox processes that may contribute to the 

final result. 

Briefly, it seems that the dilatometric changes depend on the type of the porosity rather than the size of 

the ions. Moreover, it is assumed that the volume of ions is less important than their mass and mobility 

during polarization. However, the current de convolution suggests a non -linear dependence between the 

‘diffusion’ and ‘geometric’ components. 

Finally, t he presented results will elucidate the reasons that stay behind the differences in ion diffusion 

into the carbon porous structure. 

Figure: The S PECS current deconvolution and recorded corresponding dilatometric changes 

CT – Total, C P – Porous, C G – Geometric, C D – Diffusion, C R – Residual 

Acknowledgment : This work was financially supported by European Research 

Council within the Starting Grant project (GA 759603) under European Unions’ 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme. Maleic acid from furfural via a cascade approach combining 

# photochemistry and electro - or biochemistry 

Roel Bisselink , Shanmugam Thiyagarajan, David Franciolus, Tom Ewing, Carmen Boeriu and 

Jacco van Haveren 

Wageningen Food & Biobased Research 

Bornse Weilanden 9, 6708 WG Wageningen , The Netherlands 

roel.bisselink@wur.nl 

Maleic acid is an important raw material that finds multiple applications in the chemical industry such as 

in manufacturing of unsaturated polyester resins, lubricant additives, surf ace coatings, textile, 

photographical chemicals, plasticizers, pharmaceutical products and in agricultural chemicals. In our on -

going research, M aleic acid is widely being used to synthesize chemicals for different applications, 

biobased aromatic (bulk) ch emicals in particular. 1

The current industrial process of maleic acid involves hydrolysis of maleic anhydride which in turn is 

obtained from the vapor phase oxidation of fossil -based benzene or n -butane . Lately, renewable resources 

have been investigated to circumvent the use of fossil derived feed -stocks. In particular, biomass -derived 

platform chemicals like butanol, levulinic acid, 5 -hydroxymethylfurfural and furfural were investigated 

as starting materials for the synthesis of maleic acid. 2 Among thes e platform chemicals, furfural is an 

interesting substrate since the commercial production is already established starting from carbohydrates. 3

In the present study, we investigate the two -step synthesis of maleic acid under very mild conditions. In 

the f irst step, 5 -hydroxy -2(5H) -furanone is synthesized via photochemical oxidation and proposed as an 

stable intermediate. Subsequent oxidation in the second step, either by an electrochemical or enzymatic 

process, to produce maleic acid in high yield and sel ectivity. 

1 a. Thiyagarajan S., Genuino, H.C. et al., ChemSusChem 2015, 8, 3052 -3056; b. Thiyagarajan S. ,

Genuino H. C. et al., Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2016, 55, 1368 -1371. 

2 a. Wang K.F., Liu C.l. et al., ChemBioChem 2018, 19, 654 -659 ; b. Wojcieszak R.,  Santarelli F. et al., 

Sustainable Chemical Processes 2015, 3, 9; c. Centi G., Trifiro F. et al., Chemical Reviews 1988, 88, 55 -

80; d. Frontmatter. In Industrial Organic Chemistry, pp I -XVII, 1997; e. Yang M., Liu B.t., et al., Chinese 

Journal of Polymer Science 2010, 28, 951 -959; f. Front Matter. In Plastic Packaging, pp I -XVIII, 2008. 

3 a. Maleic and Fumaric Acids. In Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2000, b.  Luo Y., Li 

Z. et al., Catalysis Today 2019, 319, 14 -24. Zn 1-xCo xO vs Ag -ZnO Photoanodes Design Via Combustion: 

# Characterization and Application in Photoelectrocatalysis 

Adriana C. Lucilha 1, Luan P. Camargo 1, Vanessa R. Liberatti 1, Eduardo C. M. Barbosa 1,

Luiz H. Dall’Antonia 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, State University of Londrina – UEL, Londrina -PR, Brazil 

luizh@uel.br 

In this work different synthetic conditions were analyzed for the preparation of modified ZnO 

photoelectrodes, in order to prevent the reco mbination of their photogenerated charge carriers and allow 

the continuous formation of electrons and holes on photoelectrocatalytic reactions [1,2] . This study aims to 

prepare in a simple and proficient way photoelectrodes of the ZnO chemically modified w ith cobalt, 

Zn 1-xCo xO and superficially with silver Ag -ZnO, both produced from combustion synthesis process and 

deposited on the indium tin oxide conductive surface by casting method . The influence of different 

percentages of the metal nitrate precursors (either Co or Ag – 2.0% mol L -1) and thermic treatment ( either 

500 or 600 ºC) on the photoelectrochemical response of the prepared electrodes were analyzed. The 

photoelectrodes were used in a photoelectrochemical discoloration reaction of methylene blue (M B) dye. 

X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis confirmed chemical modification of ZnO with cobalt and superficial 

modification with silver for all samples (Fig. 1-a) . Scanning electron microscopy indicated that the sample 

with 2.0% metallic modifying agent and treated at 600 °C produced smaller -sized particles for both 

materials. Therefore, the electrodes prepared by this condition were the ones that provided better 

photoelectrochemical and photoelectrocatalytic responses for the MB discoloration , Zn 1-xCo xO

(132 μA cm -2 and 9.05×10 -3 min -1) and Ag -ZnO (162 μA cm -2 and 15.0×10 -3 min -1) (Fig. 1 -b,c ). The surface 

area related to the particle size and their morphology wer e determinant factors for the photoelectrodes 

efficacy . The significant increases in current density, jN, and photoelectrocatalytic , kobs , efficiencies for Ag -

ZnO electrodes are attributed to the synergism between the ability to remove and store electrons by Ag with 

the applied potential, thus significantly hampering the recombination of ZnO charge carriers under UV 

light. The superficial modification of ZnO with silver is more efficient for the inhibition of ZnO 

photogenerated exciton recombination, when c ompared to the chemical modification with cobalt. 

Fig. 1 – (a) X-ray diffraction for Zn 1-xCo xO and Ag -ZnO samples , (b) current density and (c), 

photoelectrocatalytic responses for the MB discoloration reaction , for ZnO, Zn 1-xCo xO and Ag -ZnO 

photo electrodes (E app = +1.0 V , UV light ). Electrolyte: 0.1 mol L -1 Na 2SO 4 solution. 

References 

[1] S. Garcia -Segura, E. Brillas, J. Photochem. Photobiol. C . 201 7, 31 , 1-35 .

[2] M. Borysiewicz, Crystals . 20 19, 9, 1-29 .20 30 40 50 60 20 30 40 50 60 70 80  

> 2q / º
> Intensity / a.u.
> 4%, 600 ºC 4%, 500 ºC 2%, 600 ºC
> 2%, 500 ºC

## (a)         

> 2q / º
> ****
> 4%, 600 ºC 4%, 500 ºC 2%, 600 ºC
> 2%, 500 ºC 020 40 60 80 100 120
> -1.8 -1.5 -1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0
> 030 60 90 120 150 180

## (b) jN / mA cm -2 

Photoelectrodes 

> Ag-ZnO Zn 1-x Co xOZnO
> ln ( A/Ao)

t / min 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 

> -1.8 -1.5 -1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0
> 030 60 90 120 150 180

# (c) 

> Ag-ZnO
> Zn 1-x Co xO
> ZnO
> ln ( A/Ao)

t / min Highly stable bifunction HOR catalysts for membraneless Alkaline 

# Fuel Cell 

Huong Doan , 1 Thiago Morais, 2 Nino Borchtchoukova , 3 Yair Wijsboom , 3 Gennadi Finkelshtain 3 and 

Marian Chatenet 1, ∗ 

> 1

University Grenoble Alpes, LEPMI, F -38000 Grenoble, France  

> 2

University of São Paulo , Institute of Chemistry, São Carlos , State of São Paulo, Brazil  

> 3

GenCell Energy, Petach Tikva , Israel 

thi -thanh -huong.doan@grenoble -inp.fr 

Fuel cells are one of the mo st mature technology for green energy, specifically the proton exchanged 

membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) that depends mostly on the use of expensive platinum group metals (PGMs) 

[1 ]. Recently, alkaline exchanged membrane fuel cell (AEMFC) have been received a major attention for 

advanced and low -cost catalysts . Although there are efficient non -PGM catalyst s for alkaline -oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) , Pt/C still has the highest performance for alkaline -hydrogen oxidation reaction 

(HOR ) [2]. Beside their cost, the biggest disadvantage of Pt/C and other monometallic PGMs is the ir 

drastic degradation in electrochemical surface are a and performance at high pH . Several works of 

Chatenet et al. on accelerate d stress test (AST) combine d with identical location transm ission electron 

microscopy (IL -TEM) showed that Pt assist s the local carbon corrosion , leading to CO 2/carbonates 

formation, and particles detachment [3]. In contrast, b imetallic or bifunction catalysts showed better 

durability compare d to monometallic ones , such as Pd -Pt [4] and Pd -Ni [5] alloy nanoparticle s. Bifunction 

catalyst can also enhance the sluggish kinetic of monometallic PGM in alkaline -HOR, according to the 

metal -metal oxide theory of Markovic et al. [6]. Following this insight, GenCell Energy , Israel patented 

two composition s of Pd -Pt and Pd -Ni on high surface activated carbon to be used in caustic solution (up 

to 6.6M KOH in a membraneless alkaline fuel cell set up ). In this work, the stable performance of those 

catalysts was evaluated in 0.1M KOH before and after Ar -AST (150 cycles and 1000 cycles , 0.1 VRHE -

1.2 VRHE , 100 mV/s scan rate ). Their physical and chemical properties before and after AST were 

evaluated by IL -TEM, XRD, XPS and Raman spectroscopy. As expected, both Pd -Pt and Pd -Ni show ed 

better stability com pare d to monometallic Pt/C and Pd/C (ETEK). Figure 1 present s very little loss of 

nanoparticles and reasonable agglomeration of Pd -Ni and Pd -Pt cataly sts after Ar -AST 150 cycles .

Figure 1: IL -TEM of pre an d post Ar -AST 150 cycles (0.1 VRHE -1.2 VRHE , 100 mV/s scan rate). 

References 

1. Vielstich, W.; Gasteiger, H. A.; H. Yokokawa Eds. Handbook of Fuel Cells: Advances in 

Electrocatalysis, Material, Diagnostics and Durability ; Wiley, 2009 .

2. Dekel, D. R. Review of Cell Performance in Anio n Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells. J. Power 

Sources 2018 , 375 , 158 –169. 

3. Zadick, A., Dubau, L., Sergent, N., Berthome, G., Chatenet, M. Huge instability of Pt/C catalysts 

in alkaline medium. ACS Catalysis , 2015 , 5(8), 4819 -4824. 

4. Kiros, Y.; Schwartz, S. Long -Term Hydrogen Oxidation Catalysts in Alkaline Fue l Cells. J. 

Power Sources 2000 , 87 (1), 101 –105. 

5. Sankar, S.; Anilkumar, G. M.; Tamaki, T .; Yamaguchi, T. Binary Pd−Ni Nanoalloy Particles 

over Carbon Support with Supe rior Alkaline Formate Fuel Electrooxidation Performance. 

Chem .Cat .Chem . 2019 , 11 (19), 4731 –4737. 

6. Danilovic, N., Subbaraman, R., Strmcnik, D., Chang, K. C., Paulikas, A. P., St amenkovic, V. R., 

Markovic, N. M. Enhancing the Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution Reaction Activity through the 

Bifunctionality of Ni(O H) 2/Metal Catalysts. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 2012 , 51 (50), 12495 –

12498. Electroactivity of Selected Rare Earth Elements in Dicyanamide -Based 

# Room Temperature Ionic L iquids 

R. Ortega -Borges (1 *), M. Razo -Negrete (1 ), V. A. Zinovyeva (2) , C. Cannes (2) , C. Le Naour (2) , G. Trejo -

C�rdova (1) , Y. Meas (1)  

> (1)

CIDETEQ, Parque Tecnol �gico Qro -Sanfadila, Mexico  

> (2)

IJCLAb, CNRS -IN2P3, Université Paris -Saclay, Orsay, France 

*E -mail : rortega@cideteq.mx 

In this work the electrochemical behavior of some selected rare earth (RRE) was evaluated by cyclic 

voltammetry (VC) in dicyanamide - based room temperature ionic liquid [1].

The studied elements (yttrium, lanthanum, neodymium and samarium) show an electrochemical response 

that is dependent both on their reduction electrochemical process (in a single step or in a two consecutive 

steps) and on their associated oxidation process. 

From these results and in account of the voltammetric behavior, it is possible to conclude that the studied 

REE are reduced and oxidized at very similar processes as in aqueous media, molecular solvents and hig h

temperature molten salts [1-9].

The obtained results of the comparison of the electrochemical behavior of the studied REE allow us to 

propose the possibility of selectively identifying the studied REE in the context of their differing 

electrochemical re sponses. 

[1] M. Razo -Negrete, R. Ortega -Borges, V. Zinovyeva , C. Cannes, C. Le Naour , G. Trejo -C�rdova, Y. 

Meas , Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 14 ( 2019 ) 10431 .

[2] M. Gali �ski, A. Lewandowski and I. Stepniak, Electrochim. Acta, 51 (2006) 5567. 

[3] Y. Pan and C. L. Hussey, Inorg. Chem., 52 (2013) 3241. 

[4] L. M. Glukhov, A. A. Greish and L. M. Kustov, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 84 (2010) 104. 

[5] M. C. Buzzeo, C. Hardacre and R. G. Compton, ChemPhysChem, 7 (2006) 176. 

[6] P. Bonh �te, A. -P. Dias, N. Papageorgiou, K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gr �tzel, Inorg. Chem., 35 

(1996) 1168. 

[7] P. Hapiot an d C. Lagrost, Chem. Rev., 108 (2008) 2238. 

[8] S. P. Ong, O. Andreussi, Y. Wu, N. Marzari and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 23 (2011) 2979. 

[9] L. H. Chou and C. L. Hussey, Inorg. Chem., 53 (2014) 5750. SILAR Process Deposition: An Interesting Methodology to Obtain 

# Fe 2V4O13 Film With Good Photoelectrochemical Properties 

Luan Pereira Camargo 1, Marcelo Rodrigues da Silva Pelissari 2, Paulo Rogério Catarini da Silva 3, Luiz 

Henrique Dall’Antonia 1

> 1

UEL – State University of Londrina, Department of Chemistry, Londrina, PR, Brazil 

> 2

UNESP – São Paulo State University, Engineering College, CTI, Bauru, SP, Brazil 

> 3

UEL – State University of Londrina, Department of Physics, Londrina, PR, Brazil 

luan pcamargo @gmail .com 

The research and development of new materials with catalytic properties is essential due to the growing 

industrial development, energy crisis and environmental problems. Vanadates represent a very important 

class a mong the commonly used catalytic and photocatalytic materials. For instance , iron vanadates receive 

attention due to their distinguished properties. The Fe 2V4O13 (n-type) semiconductor stands out due to its 

low band gap energy, high chemical stability, low cost and ecologically friendly, which makes it promise 

for use in electrochemical sensors [1] , cathode in batteries [2] and photoelectrochemical water oxidation [3] . In 

this context, the research to materials with better photoelectrocatalytic performances ac hieves in the SILAR 

process a way to improve the properties of the Fe 2V4O13 . The present work aims to evaluate the 

electrochemical properties of Fe 2V4O13 film obtained by the SILAR process with 5 layers. The 

physicochemical film characterization was performed through X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman 

spectroscopy, diffuse reflectance and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques, as well as 

electrochemical characterization through linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves, chronoampe rometry and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques in to the dark and using visible light irradiation 

(Blue Laser (FA02 )). From the XRD and Raman techniques, it was possible to verify the formation of the 

Fe 2V4O13 monoclinic crystalline st ructure. By diffuse reflectance spectroscopy results it was observed 1.71 

eV band gap energy. The SEM images show that the average particle size was close to 0.08 μm forming a 

layer of approximately 4.5 μm on the glass substrate (SnO2:F). Regarding the ele ctrochemical 

characterization the film presented a high current density under the incidence of light (Fig.1). During the 

anodic scan under the chopped light condition the behavior of n -type semiconductor film was verified. The 

transient time was also deter mined using chronoamperometry (+1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The observed low 

transient time, 10.3 seconds, can be associated with the favorable electrochemical properties of the 

semiconductor, making it difficult to recombine the photo -generated charge carriers ( e-/h +). The Mott –

Schottky plots leads us to estimate the semiconductor flat band potential approximately +1.06 V vs. RHE 

(Fig. 2). This result agrees with the onset potential observed in the LSV curves under irradiation. This work 

was possible to determine electrochemical properties for Fe 2V4O13 and based on the results it becomes 

possible to use this material in future i n advanced oxidative processes. 

Fig. 1 – Linear sweep voltammetry for 

FTO/Fe 2V4O13 electrode in 0.1 mo l L -1 Na 2SO 4

solution, v = 10.0 mV s -1.

Fig. 2 – Mott –Schottky plots for Fe 2V4O13 

collected at a frequency of 1, 0.5 and 0.25 kHz in 

0.1 mol L -1 Na 2SO 4 solution. 

References 

[1] P. S. Adarakatti , M. Mahanthappa, E. H, A. Siddaramanna, Electroanalysis, 30, 1971 -1982, 2018. 

[2] S. Lakkepally, Y. Kalegowda, N. Ganganagappa, A. Siddaramanna, J. Alloys Compd., 737, 665 -671, 2018 .

[3] D. Tang, A. Rettie, O. Mabayoje, B. Wygant, Y. Lai, Y. Liub, C. Mull ins , J. Mater. Chem. A, 4, 3034 -3042, 2016. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5                              

> 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
> Potential / V vs. Ag/AgCl
> j / mA cm -2
> Dark Blue Laser CHOPPED Potential / V vs. RHE -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.00E+000 1.50E+008 3.00E+008 4.50E+008
> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
> 1/C 2 / (1/F) 2
> 1kHZ 500 Hz 250 Hz
> Potential / V vs. Ag/AgCl
> +1.06 V vs. RHE
> + 0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl
> Potential / V vs. RHE

# The birth of an electrochemical garden 

Dimitra Spanoudaki 1, Eleni Pavlidou 2, Dimitra Sazou 3

1. Nonlinear Physical Chemistry Unit, Department of Chemistry, Univer sité libre de Bruxelles 

Boulevard du Triophe, 1050, CP231, Bruxelles, Belgium 

Dimitra.Spanoudaki@ulb.ac.be 

2. Solid State Physics Unit, Department of Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 

54124, Thessaloniki, Greece 

3. Physical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 

54124 , Thessaloniki , Greece 

The far -from -equilibrium precipitation reaction of chemical gardens can lead to the formation of 

biomimetic and complex structures providing a new route for the rational architectural design of 

functional materia ls 1.

Inspired by recent developments in the field of chemical gardens 2, we put forward a new scientific 

question: "Is it possible to create an electrochemical garden?". By implementing state -of -the -art 

electrochemical techniques and using an otherwise dest ructive phenomenon, that of metal corrosion, we 

sculpture self -organized structures on a zinc disc -electrode surface by a mechanism similar to that of 

chemical gardens. A deeper search in the formation mechanism reveals that ion -selective membranes are 

the driving force for the growth of an electrochemical garden. At last, electrochemical instabilities, 

introduced under proper conditions, result in the emergence of current oscillations in the region where 

electrochemical gardens were discovered. Current osc illations sculpture the electrode surface with a 

variety of self -organized precipitation structures 3.

1. E. Nakouzi, O. Steinbock, “Self -organization in precipitation reactions far -from -the -equilibrium”, 

Sci. Adv , 2, e1601144 (2016). 

2. L. M. Barge et al., “F rom Chemical Gardens to Chemobrionics”, Chem. Rev. , 115, 8652 (2015) .

3. D. Spanoudaki, A. Kaimi, L. Kouzi, D. Sazou, “Analysis of the temporal self - organizational 

phenomena observed during the electrodissolution of Zn in sulfuric acid solutions”, Mat. Toda y: 

Proc ., 5, 27626 (2018). Electrochemical i mped ance spectroscopy detection of norfloxacin at a 

# polyamic a cid modified screen printed carbon electrode .

Clementine Juliat Louw, Prof PGL Baker 

University of the Western Cape 

SensorLab , Chemistry department, University of the Western Cape, Ro bert Sobukwe Rd, Bellville 7530, 

South Africa 

3136359@myuwc.ac.za 

Electrochemical sensors have been used in a number of fields such as industry, medicine and agriculture 

due to their robustness as a sensitive, cost effective and rapid form of molecular detection (Jacobs M, et al., 

2013) . Electrochemical sensors are devices that change electrochemical information into an an alytically 

signal that is useful. They offer advantages of low detection limits, a wide linear response range as well as 

good stability and reproducibility. Detection of environmental contaminants using electrochemical methods 

have advantages of being reli able, fast, portable that can be used for in field analysis to detect environmental 

pollutants including antibiotic residues ( Munteanu FD, et al 2018; Faridbod F, et al., 2011). Norfloxacin 

is a n antibiotic that is usually used to treat complicated urinar y tract infe ction. It has been reported that this 

antibiotic has been detected in various sources such as surface w ater, sea water, groundwater and drinking 

water (Chen, M and Chu, W. 2012) . There has been wor k reported on the detection of n orfloxacin (NOR) 

using electrochemical techniques such as square wave voltammetry (SWV) , cyclic voltammetry (CV) and 

differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) . T his work reports on the detection of NOR by electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy (EIS) in aqueous systems as there is not a lot of work reported on the detection of 

norfloxacin by EIS. EIS can be used as an analytical tool to measure changes in the electrical properties of 

the sensor under various analyte concentrations. This electrochemical technique has been extensively 

utilised for detection of a number of chemical and biological targets in terms of electrochemical change of 

the electrodes surface (Muñoz J, et al., 2017) EIS have unique advantages compared to CV, SWV and 

DPV such as ease of signal quantification, ability to separate the surface binding events from the solution 

and it is also more sensitive compared to the other electrochemical techniques (Chen Z, et al., 2011 ). This 

work reports on two different electrochemical detection methods , square wave voltammetry and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy that can be used for d etection of n orfloxacin in aqueous systems .

In this work NOR will be detected by square wave voltammetry and electrochemical impedance at a screen 

print electrode mo dified with polyamic acid in 0.1 M pH 7.4 PBS .

Jacobs, M., Nagaraj, V.J., Mertz, T., Selvam, A.P., Ngo, T. and Prasad, S., 2013. An electrochemical sensor 

for the detection of antibiotic contaminants in water. Analytical Methods, 5(17), pp.4325‐4329. 

Chen, M. and Chu, W., 2012. Degradation of antibiotic norfloxacin in aqueous solution by visible‐light‐ 

mediated C‐TiO2 photocatalysis. Journal of hazardous materials, 219, pp.183189 

Muntteanu, F.D., Titoiu,A., Marty, J.L. and Vasilescu, A., 2018. Detection of antibiotics and evaluation of 

antibacterial activity with screen printed electrodes. Sensors, 18(3), p.901 

Faridbod, F., Gupta, V.K. and Zamani, H.A., 2011. Electrochemical sensors and biosensors. International 

Journal of electrochemistry, 2011. 

Muñoz, J., Montes, R. and Baeza, M., 2017. Trends in electrochemical impedence spectroscopy involving 

nanocomposite transducers: Characterization, architecture surface and bio -sensing. TrAC Trends in 

Analytical Chemistry, 97, pp.201 -215 

Chen, Z., Li L, Zhao H, G uo L, Mu X. 2011 . Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy detection of 

lysozyme based on electrodeposited gold nanoparticles . Talenta, 83(5), pp. 1501 -1506. Photoelectrochemical Properties of ITO /MOF 235 Electrode 

Luan P. Camargo 1, Paulo R. C. da Silva 2, Luiz H. Dall’Antonia 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, State University of Londrina – UEL, Londrina -PR, Brazil 

> 2

Department of Physics , State University of Londrina – UEL, Londrina -PR, Brazil 

luizh@uel.br 

The Metal -Organic Frameworks (MOF) is a new class of materials that has had the attention of researchers 

in the last years . They are structurally based on the presence of a metal ion or clusters linked by an organic 

ligand in a highly ordered structure, giving rise to materials with pronounced properties [1]. Its main 

characteristics are its versatility and in its excellent p hysical -chemical properties, such as a high adsorption 

capacity, gas storage and catalytic activity and semiconductor behavior [1,2] . MOF 235 stands out among the 

thousands of different types of MOFs since orange crystals are formed in an octahedral structu re and each 

trivalent iron atom is organized in a network by the organic terephthalic acid ligand [2] . In this study, MOF 

235 was easily obtained by the solvothermal method, and its photoelectrochemical properties were 

investigated by obtaining photoelectrodes by the drop -casting method on conductive ITO glass using 

different amount of layers (5, 10 and 15) . The solid sample was characterized by X -ray diffractometry 

(XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and diffuse reflectance. Re garding electrochemical 

characterization cyclic voltammetry (CV ), chronoamperometry and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) techniques were perform ed. The DRX and FTIR results reveal the formation of MOF 

235 by the peaks and bands characteristic o f its structure [2] . Based on the diffuse reflectance results the band 

gap energy was determined 2.0 eV, (Fig. 1 -a) . The results of CV and chronoamperometry (Fig. 1-b), 

indicated excellent photoelectrochemical performance with a high current density under irradiation of blue 

laser . The influence of layers was evaluated by chronoamperometry (Fig. 1 -c) . The best performance (10.5 

μA cm -2) was obtained with 15 -layers and its probably related to a large amount o f semiconductor 

deposited . However , impedance measu rements demonstrated the lowest charge transference resistance for 

5-layers films (246 Ω) (Fig. 1 -d) . Thi s work demonstrate s that a simple and fast route can be used to obtain 

MOF 235 with excellent photoelectrochemical properties. 

Fig. 1 – (a) – Diffuse reflectance spectra to MOF 235 obtained by solvothermal method , (b) CV for 

ITO /MOF 235 (5 -layers) electrode , (c) chronoampe rogram at +1.1 V vs . Ag/AgCl with chopped blue laser, 

and (d) EIS plots for ITO /MOF 235 electrod es. Electrolyte: 0.1 mol L -1 Na 2SO 4 solution. 

References 

[1] Y. Li, G. Hou, J. Yang, J. Xie, X. Yuan, H. Yang, M. Wang, RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 16395 -16403. 

[2] J -Y. Lee, O. Farha, J. Roberts, K. Scheidt, S -B. Nguyen, J. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2009, 38, 1450 -1459. 0 200 400 600 800     

> 040 80 120
> 1.8 2.1 2.4 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
> Reflectance / %
> l/ nm
> (ahn)1/2  (eV cm -1 )1/2
> Eg/ eV

Eg = 2.00 eV 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 020 40 60       

> j / mA cm -2
> Potential / V vs. Ag/AgCl ITO - Dark ITO - Blue Laser ITO/MOF-235 - Dark ITO/MOF-235 - Blue Laser 040 80 120 160
> 0510 15

(c)            

> 10.5 mA cm -2
> 9.0 mA cm -2
> j / mA cm -2
> t/ s
> 5-layers 10-layers 15-layers 8.5 mA cm -2 0100 200 300 400
> 0100 200 300 400
> 310 W
> 369 W
> -Z'' /  W
> Z' / W
> 5-layers 10-layers 15-layers

Eapp = +1.40 V  

> 246 W

(d) 

(a)  (b) Tailored Bipolar Membranes Ba sed on Reduced Graphene 

# Oxide/Mo S2 Hybrid Interfaces for Reduced Crossover in CO 2

# Reduction Cells 

Ramato Ashu Tufa , Qingfeng Li, David Aili 

Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Buildin g 310, 2800 

Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark ; emails: rastu@dtu.dk, larda@dtu.dk 

The electrochemical CO 2 reduction (CO 2R) using renewable energy is a promising strategy for the 

conversion of CO 2 into storable fuels and chemicals while keeping a carbon -neutral energy cycle. 

Recently, the use of bipolar membranes (BPMs) in CO 2 electrolyzer s has emerged as a promising solution 

to achieve the practical ambitions due to its unique advantage in maintaining a constant pH gradient over 

the membrane and reducing crossover of ionic and molecular specieces 1,2 . Therefore, elucidation of the 

crossover dependence on membrane structure, among others, is crucial for advancing the selectivity and 

efficiency of the process 3. Herein, a series of BPMs are prepared based on a hybrid inter face composed of 

Reduced Graphene Oxide/MoS 2 catalysts for enhanced water sp litting. The cation exchange layer, formed 

from sulfonated poly(ethe r

ether ketone) (SPEEK) 

based polymer, is tuned in 

terms of fixed charge 

density and water uptake, 

which is suit ably combined 

with Polybenzimidazole 

(PBI ) based membrane s as 

anion exchange layer. The 

interface layer is optimized 

by assessing the impact of 

the composition and 

loading of the hybrid 

catalyst on the electrochemical potential difference over the BPMs . Th e crossover of anionic products 

(e.g., formate) through the BPMs - evaluated in terms of the ionic flux, permeability or transport number -

is investigated at varying electrolyte concentration (pH) and current density. The ultimate goal is to shed 

light on the interface structure -property -crossover relationships of BPMs under CO 2 reduction conditions .

Acknowledgment 

The financial support of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the 

Marie Sklodowska -Curie grant agreement no. 713683 (COFUND fellows DTU) is gratefully 

acknowledged. This work was also supported by ECOEthylene project from the Innovation Fund 

Denmark (g rant# 8057 -00018B) and by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

pro gram under the grant ag reement no. 761093, project LOTER.CO2M. 

Reference 

1. M. Ma, E. L. Clark, K. T. Therkildsen, S. Dalsgaard, I. Chorkendorff, B. Seger, Energy & 

Environmental Science 2020, 13, 977 -985. 

2. D. A. Vermaas, S. Wiegman, T. Nagaki, W. A. Smith, Sustainable Energy & Fu els 2018, 2, 2006 -

2015. 

3. Y. C. Li, Z. Yan, J. Hitt, R. Wycisk, P. N. Pintauro, T. E. Mallouk, Advanced Sustainable Systems 

2018, 2, 1700187. H2O

> Interfacial
> layer

AEM CEM 

Anode Cathode 

KOH (aq) 

O2 HCOO - (aq )

CO 2 (KHCO 3) (aq)  

> OH -H+
> H2O
> RGO/MoS 2
> H2O

Minimized electromigration/flux 

HCOO - (aq )

HCO 3- (aq) Photoelectrochemical Properties of FTO/BiOCl E lectrode 

Luan P ereira Camargo 1, Marcelo R odrigues da Silva Pelissari 2, Luiz H enrique Dall’Antonia 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, State University of Londrina – UEL, Londrina -PR, Brazil 

> 2

Engineering College, CTI, São Paulo State University – UNESP, Bauru -SP, Brazil 

luanpcamargo@gmail.com 

Bismuth oxychloride (BiOCl) is a p -type semiconductor material with a band gap energy of 3.4 eV. This 

material has been investigated in recent years due to its unique properties, being the packaging layers of -

[Cl -Bi -O-Bi -Cl] - which provides the formation of an internal static electric field that facilitates the 

separation of photogenerated charge carriers, minimizing the recombination processes of the electron/hole 

pairs. This inherent property leads this material to be applied as electrode materials in pho toelectrochemical 

systems [1,2 ]. In this work, the FTO/BiOCl electro de was constructed by simple, fast, low cost and efficient 

SILAR deposition process. The experimental procedure was carried out by immersion of FTO substrate as 

follows to form one layer: 1) into Bi 3+ solution (Bi (NO 3)3(aq) 0.1 mol L -1 + acetic acid) for 2 0 s econds ; 2) 

into deionized water for 20 seconds ; 3) into Cl - solution (KCl (aq) 0.1 mol L -1) and finally , 4) into deionized 

water for 20 seconds . After ten deposited layers, the electrode was dried at 100 °C for 4 hours. The 

characterization of the BiOCl sample and the FTO/BiOCl electrode was carried out by x -ray diffraction 

(XRD ). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and surface area analysis (BET method) , were also used . In 

Fig. 1-a, it is possible to observe the diffractograms of powder sample and FTO/ BiOCl film . All the 

diffracted peaks are in agreeing to the tetragonal structure (P4/nmm and a=b=0.389 nm, c=0.737 nm) 

(JCPDS 06 -0249 standard ). The FTO diffracted peaks (SnO 2:F) are also observed. SEM topographic image 

of the FTO/BiOCl electrode shows a homogeneous micro -aggregate distribution (Fig. 1 -b). Besides, the 

micro -aggregate with the spherical shape is formed up of small particles with an elongated format. The N 2

physisorption analysis indicates a large specific area of 1 2.5 m 2 g-1. The electrochemical characterization 

carried out by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and chronoamperometry techniques, showed the 

photoelectrochemical properties of FTO/BiOCl electrode. LSV curves (Fig. 1c) shows the increase in 

photocurrent density from the scanning potential of +1.0 V to 0 V vs . Ag/AgCl under continuous UV light 

irradiation. This behavior in the j vs . E curve is typical of p -type semiconductor material. In the potential 

scan with the light chopped condition (light on -light off, 5 seconds ), the reproducibility of photocurrent is 

observed. When the light is off the current back to the current value of the dark condition (black line – Fig. 

1-c) and when the light is on the current reaches the value of continuous UV light condition (red line – Fig. 

1-c) . Chronoamperometric measurements, j vs . t curves (inset in Fig. 1c), was carried out by applied 

potential of 0 V vs . Ag/AgCl, obtaining a photocurrent density of -18 μA cm −2 . Besides, under the light on 

condition, it is observed the photocurrent s tability, wherein in this case , the recombination of charge carriers 

process may be being suppressed . Then, from the results obtained in this work, the FTO/BiOC l electrode 

emerges as an interesting material to be applied as a cathode in photoelectrochemica l cells. 

Fig. 1 – (a) X-ray diffractograms of powder and film of BiOCl semiconductor , (b) SEM topographic image 

of FTO/BiOCl , 12,000× magnification , and (c) , LSV of FTO/BiOCl electrode in 0.1 mol L−1 KCl solution. 

Insertion in (c): chronoamperogram under 0 V vs . Ag/AgCl in 0.1 mol KCl solution with chopped UV light. 

References 

[1] L. Ye, Y. Su, X. Jin, H. Xie, C. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Nano, 1, 90 –112, 2014 

[2] S. Cao, C. Guo, Y. Lv, Y. Guo, Q. Liu, Nanotechnology, 20, 275702, 2009. 10 20 30 40 50 60   

> Film Powder (212) (104)  (211) (202) (113) (201) (003) (111) (103) (112) (102) (110) (101) (002) (001)
> *
> **
> Intensity / a. u. 2q/ °
> *
> FTO

(a) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -30 -15 0     

> j / mA cm -2
> E / V vs. Ag/AgCl (3.0 mol L -1 )
> Dark UV Light UV Light chopped
> (c)
> light off light on -18 mA10 s light off

# Phase -Field Modeling of Galvanic Corrosion in Magnesium -Aluminum 

# Joints 

Kübra Karayağız , Adam Powell, Qingli Ding, Brajendra Mishra 

Worcester Polytechnic Institute 

Worcester, MA , USA 

kkarayagiz@wpi.edu 

The future design of light -weight vehicles requires a multi -material design approach in which dissimilar 

alloys are joined together to form a single structure. Alum inum and magnesium alloys are shown to be 

amongst the best candidate materials for light -weighting purposes due to their superior properties. 

However, the joining of Al and Mg is challenging due to galvanic corrosion, a common issue in 

dissimilar metal joi nts. A phase -field model to study the galvanic corrosion in Al -Mg joints is presented 

in this work. The model accounts for the transport of i on s in the electrolyte, the electrochemical reactions 

at the metal -electrolyte interface, and the formation of hydr oxide phases on the metal surface (e.g., 

Mg(OH) 2). Two -dimensional simulations are performed to predict the corrosion microstructure, corrosi on 

rate, and galvanic current density in diffusion bonded Al -Mg couples immersed in an electrolyte solution. 

Galvan ic corrosion experiments are conducted for validation. The predictions obtained from the model 

are compared with those estimated from the ex pe riments. Overall, good agreement is achieved. The 

corrosion model formulation presented here is intended for later use with microgalvanic corrosion 

between pure metal and intermetallic phases in complex friction stir welded magnesium -aluminum joint 

micro st ructures .Localized surface modification with SECCM 

E. Oswald , J. Kund, C. Kranz 

Institut e of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , Ulm University 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 11, 89081 Ulm 

eva -1.oswald@uni -ulm. de 

During the recent years , scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) has mainly been used for 

studies measuring and mapping local e lectrochemical processes of electrochemically active materials [1] ,[2] .

For example , SECCM has been used to investigate the heterogeneous electron transfer activity of 

graphene [3] . Besides, mapping SECCM is also highly suitable for surface patterning [4 ] and generating 

nanostructures [5 ]. Some of the advantages in comparison to the scanning electrochemical microscopy 

(SECM), are the stable response an d the easy fabrication of the SECCM probe. Typically , SECCM 

experiments are performed with double -barreled nano pipette s with a quasi -reference counter -electrode 

(QRCE) in both channels , where a thin meniscus droplet at the end of the tip constitutes an ele ctrochemical 

cell. Since the contact area between the meniscus and the sample surface depends on the tip size, structures 

possible with na nometer – to micrometer dimensions can be generated. 

With this contribution, we present the local modification of carbon -based materials such as graphene or 

other carbon -based nanomaterials with ruthenium - and cobalt -catalysts. Such catalysts are interesting in 

molecular -driven photocatalysis. The generated nanostructures are characterized by atomic force 

microscopy in respect to their structure and size in dependence of the experimental parameter. In addition, 

TEM analysis will be used. Further investigations will be targeted towards correlated degradation studies 

for molecular photocatalytic systems. 

[1] N. Ebejer, A. G. Güell, S. C. S. Lai, K. McKelvey, M. E. Snowden, P. R. Unwin, Annu. Rev. Anal. 

Chem., 2013 , 6, 329 –51. 

[2] C. L. Bentley, M. Kung, P. R. Unwin, J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 2017 , 139 , 16813. 

[3] A. G. Güe ll, N. Ebejer, M. E. Snowd en, J. V. Macpherson, P. R. Unwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012 , 134 ,

7258 -7261. 

[4 ] E. E. Oseland, Z. J. Ayres, A. Basile, D. M. Haddleton, P. Wilson, P. R. Unwin, Chem. Commun., 2016 ,

52 , 9929 -9932. 

[5] K. McKelvey, M. A. O’Connell, P. R. Unwin, Chem. Commun., 2013 , 49 , 2986 -2988. Comparative Study of SnS 2 Nanosheets on Micro/Macroscopic Scale 

Gábor Szabó, a Péter S. Tóth, a,b and Csaba Janáky a 

> a

University of Szeged, Department of Physical Chemistry and Materials Science  

> b

MTA Premium Postdoctoral Research Program 

Aradi Sq. 1, 6720 Szeged, Hungary 

szabogabor97@gmail.com 

The two -dimensional semiconductor crystals, such as nanosheets of transitional -metal di chalcogenides 

(TMDCs) are promising candidates for applications in energy storage/conversion and sensing, due to their 

tunable structural, electronic and optical propert ies. However, over these materials, chalcogenides of post -

transition metals also show photoactivity in the spectrum of UV -Visible light, such as tin -disulfide (SnS 2). 1

Due t o these characteristics, this formerly neglected layered material could also be a great alternative for 

applications in light -driven catalysis. 

It is crucial to understand the photoelectrochemical  (PEC)  behavior of these crystals to be able to 

apply them i n energy harvesting applications. The reactivity of TMDCs may change extremely with their 

surface structure (e.g. , basal planes and edges, number of layers and defect density). 2 Si nce SnS 2 nanosheets 

have not been studied thoroughly in terms of structure -dependent reactivity, the goal of our group was to 

determine the effects of different surface domains on microscopic scale and compare th ose to the 

performance of macroscopic electr odes , in order to enhance its PEC performance .

The micro -scale electrodes were prepared by micromechanical exfoliation from SnS 2 single 

crystals and were studied with our custom -designed PEC micro -setup. This setup allows us to deposit and 

maintain microdr oplets on the desired part of a nanosheet, with a micro -injection and manipulator system 

thus to create a ‘microelectrochemical cell’. The deposition happens with the help of a microcapillary giving 

place to the counter - and reference electrodes . The working electrode is the area of the nanosheet, on which 

the droplet had been deposited. For the macroscopic measurements, bulk SnS 2 crystals were hydrothermally 

synthesized and exfoliated in formamide .3 The resultant dispersion was centrifuged at different speeds to 

obtain two mono disperse fractions in terms of flake thickness and lateral size . Th e SnS 2 nanosheets 

prepared by both mechanical and liquid phase exfoliation were characterized with Raman spectroscopy and 

microscopy techniques (AFM, TEM, SEM ). The as -prepared suspensions were used to fabricate the 

macroscopic electrodes on ITO -coated gla ss slides. The (photo)electrochemical activity of the nanosheets 

will be presented with the help of cyclic voltammetry, photovoltammetry and transient measurements 

(photocurrent transient analysis), focusing the role of the edges and other structural domai ns. 

As a conclusion, th e microscopic measurements allow us to better understand how the surface 

structure affects the (photo)electrochemical behavior of nanosheets, as well as the behavior of macroscopic 

electrodes fabricated from them. With the help of t his approach we will show that the edges of the 

nanoflakes do not have such a strong negative effect on the photoactivity in case of SnS 2, compared to other 

TMDCs like MoS2, or MoSe 2.4 Due to this weaker effect , the photoactivity of SnS 2 electrodes could be 

enhanced more effectively than that of other TMDC electrodes. 5

(1) Huang, Y.; et al. Tin Disulfide -an Emerging Layered Metal Dichalcogenide Semiconductor: 

Mater ials Properties and Device Characteristics. ACS Nano 2014 , 8, 10743 –10755. 

(2) Velický, M.; et al. . Photoelectrochemistry of Pristine Mono - and Few -Layer MoS2. Nano Lett. 

2016 , 16 , 2023 –2032. 

(3) Sun, Y.; et al. Freestanding Tin Disulfide Single -Layers Realizing Efficient Visible -Light Water 

Splitting. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 2012 , 51 , 8727 –8731. 

(4) Todt, M. A.; et al. Single -Nanoflake Photo -Electrochemistry Reveals Champion and Spectator 

Flakes in Exfoliated MoSe2 Films. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018 , 122 , 6539 –6545. 

(5) Zuo, Y.; et al. Solution -Processed Ultrathin SnS 2 -Pt Nanoplates for Photoelectrochemical Water 

Oxidatio n. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019 , 11 , 6918 –6926.         

> SUPPORTED BY THE ÚNKP -19 -2NEW NATIONAL EXCELLENCE PROGRAM OF THE MINISTRY FOR INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY .

# Square wave cathodic adsorptive stripping voltammetry of nanomolar 

# levels o f selenium: Application in foodstuffs 

Fernanda C. O. L. Martins 1, Lavínia M Andrino 2 and D jenaine De Souza 2

USP and UFU  

> 1

Green Analytical Chemistry Group (GEQAV), College of Agric ulture “Luiz de Queiroz”, University of 

São Paulo, PO Box 9, Piracicaba, SP 13418 -970, Brazi l.  

> 2

Laboratory of Electroanalytical Applied to Biotechnology and Food Engineering (LEABE), 

Multidisciplinary Group of Research, Science and Technology (RMPCT), Ch emistry Institute, Uberlândia 

Federal University, Major Jerônimo street, 566, Patos de Minas - MG, 38700 -002, Brazil. 

fernandacolm@hotmail.com , laviniandrino@hotmail.com  and  djenaine@gmail.com 

The main goal of this work was the development of a methodology to quantify selenium (Se) in 

the foodstuffs employing silver solid amalgam electrode modified by a thin and stable mercury film (f -

AgSAE) coupled to square -wa ve cathodic adsorptive stripping voltammetry (SWCASV). Preliminary 

experiments were realized to verify the suitable analytical signal from SWV experiments using AgSAE in 

acid (0.1 mol L -1 HCl ) and basic medium (0.1 mol L -1 NaOH plus 0.1 mol L -1 KCl) , where was observed 

that the signal analytical (I p) was strongly influenced by pH of the medium. Besides this, the peak 

potential (E p) was dislocated to more cathodic values and half -peak width (ΔE p1/2 ) have value large with 

the increase of the pH. After experiments of SWV observed a considerable block of the electrode surface 

by adsorbed products from redox reaction , providing low repeatability and poor reproducibility. 

Posterior ly, SWCASV experiments were made using AgSAE and f-AgSAE in 0.10 mol L -1 HCl solution 

preconcentration steps ( -0.2 V by 30 s), where was observe d the presence of a well -defined voltammetric 

peak under AgSAE and f-AgSAE at -0.64 V and -0.50 V, respectively. Bes ides, the f-AgSAE show ed 

high er sensibility and selectivity , due to values of the I p and ΔE p1/2 present values more favorable than 

AgSAE. 

The preconcentration parameters were evaluated using preconcentration potential from +0.10 to 

-0.50 V vs. Ag/AgCl 3.0 mol L -1 in accumulation times from 15 to 90 s econds, and was observed that 

ap plying 0.0 V during 90 seconds the Ip presented values around fifty times higher than observed to 

potential preconcentration more cathodic, and without alteration in the E p and ΔE p1/2 values . Analytical 

signals are related to a reaction of irreversible reduction of t he Se producing HgSe . Voltammetric 

parameters were individually evaluated, the pulse amplitude ( a) was varied in 5 at 50 mV, thus, it 

observed an increase linear of the I p up until 50 mV, dislodgment in E p to less cathodic potential 

direction, but provoked widening in the voltammetric peak baseline, due to 25 mV was selected. Already, 

the variation of the pulse potential frequency ( f ) was realized from 10 to 300 s -1 observing increase linear 

of I p with f square root, that is typical reaction was controlle d by the diffusion rate. Besides this, the 

Lovric’s Equation enabled the calculation of the number of electrons of the reaction of the surface, 

according to the rel ationship between the f and E p, theses reactions that were 4 ele ctrons , and it made 

possible the verification of the mechanism reduction of selenium . Thus, 90 s -1 was chosen to further 

experiments, and sca n potential increment (ΔEs) was chosen value of -2 mV , due to loss of the peak 

profile .

So, analytical c urves were built using sta ndar addition method in a linear 

range from 0.10 to 8.0 μmol L -1, and the analytical parameters were 

cal culated and are show n in Table 1. The correlation coefficient (r )

de monstrated excellent linearity. The detection and quantification limits (DL 

and QL) presente d values like obtained using other electrodic surfaces and 

spectroscopic techniques . The methodology precision was evaluated by 

repeatability and reproducibility an d i ndicated suitable values that were 

below 5.0%. While the accuracy was measured according to recovery curves 

obtained 101.0%. The coconut water , soy juice, soy milk, apple, orange, 

potato, spinach, and tomato were previously digested using nitric, 

perchl oric, hy drochloric acid , and after this was made reco very curves and 

obtained recovery values va riated from 101.78 to 170.76 %. 

The use of the f-AgSAE with SWCASV decreased the waste generation and allowed sensitive, 

selective, reproductive, and yet quick analysis , is a suitable methodology to the determination of Se in 

foodstuffs samples .                      

> Parameter This work
> LR (μmol L -1)0.10 -8.0
> r0.9989
> DL (mol L -1)1.0071x10 -9
> 80.53 ng L -1
> QL (mol L -1)3.3570x10 -9
> 268.4 ng L -1
> Recovery (%) 101.00
> Reproduci bility (%) 4.90
> Repeatability (%) 1.64
> Table 1:Analytical parameters for the
> determination of Se in pure electrolyte on f-
> AgSAE, where LR is the linearity range, r is
> the correlation coefficient, DL and QL are
> detection and quant ification limit, respectively.

# Comparative Corrosion Studies of TiO 2 Coatings Doped with Metal 

# Ions of Biomedical Importance 

Barbara Burnat , Andrzej Leniart, Sławomira Skrzypek 

Faculty of Chemistry , University of Lodz 

12 Tamka St., 91 -403 Lodz, Poland 

barbara.burnat@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

Biomaterials as materials implanted into a living system must fulfill stringent requirements. Nowadays, 

studies on biomaterials are focused on enhancing their bioactivity and giving them new properties, e.g. 

antibacterial properties. One of the methods us ed for preparation of biomaterials with desirable properties 

is coating their surfaces with functionalized coatings. For example bioactivity may be enhanced by ion 

doping procedure – the coating is doped with metal ions e.g. calcium and strontium ions. The antibacterial 

properties may be also achieved by doping procedure – for that purpose silver, copper, zinc or gallium 

ions are used as antibacterial agent. Unfortunately, every performed functionalization may cause 

deterioration of other features of biomat erials. Therefore, it is important to control the impact of carried 

out modifications on other material features, especially corrosion resistance. 

The main goal of this study was to apply the s ol -gel method for the preparation of protective ceramic 

coatin gs of titanium dioxide and their modification by doping of silver , copper , zinc, and gallium ions ,

that are of antibacterial importance [ 1-2].

In this study , TiO 2 sol -gel coatings doped with different metal ions were produced on the surface of 

M30NW biome dical alloy substrates. The titanium tetrabutoxide was used as a precursor of titanium 

dioxide. In the doping procedure, the nitrates of silver, copper, zinc, and gallium were used as precursors 

of particular ions. The content of individual ions in the coa ting was the same and amounted to 5% . The 

TiO 2-based coatings were calcined at a temperature of 450 C to obtain anatase structure. The effect of 

each dopant on microstructural and anticorrosion properties of TiO 2-based coatings was investigated. 

The morpho logy, topography and roughness of TiO 2-based coatings were investigated using scanning 

electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The corrosion measurements were 

carried out in Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) solution using electrochemica l methods : linear 

polarization resistance (LPR), potentiodynamic polarization, and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy. Anticorrosion properties of TiO 2-based coatings were specified on the basis of the results of 

electrochemical tests. 

The sol -gel pro cedure and annealing temperature of 450 C applied in this study allowed the synthesis of 

crystalline TiO 2 coating with a thickness of ca. 70 nm. Using the sol -gel procedure the TiO 2 coating was 

successfully functionalized by doping of silver, copper, zinc, and gallium ions. Depending on doped ion 

the surface morphology of the coating was different. It was found that the addition of copper and gallium 

ions does not affect surface roughness, while doping with silver and zinc ions increases surface 

development . The results of corrosion tests in PBS solution confirmed the anticorrosion properties of all 

TiO 2-based coatings. However, t he anti corrosive nature of titanium dioxide coatings doped with ions of 

antibacterial activity can be ranked as follows: Cu_TiO 2 < TiO 2 < Ag_TiO 2 < Zn_TiO 2 < Ga_TiO 2.

References 

[1] Mittapally S, Taranum R, Parveen S, Metal ions as antibacterial agents, Journal of Drug Delivery and 

Therapeutics , 2018 , 8(6 -s):411 -419 . doi: 10.22270/jddt.v8i6 -s.2063 

[2] Turner R.J., Metal -based ant imicrobial strategies , Microbial Biotechnology, 2017, 10: 1062 –1065. 

doi:10.1111/1751 -7915.12785 Figure 2: Melting point dependence on anionic 

molar fraction of mixture (cation is choline) .

# Predicting Properties of Biocompatible Ionic Liquids and 

# Their Mixtures with Molecular Dynamics 

Vladislav Ivaništšev ,a Karl Karu, a Fred Elhi, b Kaija Põhako -Esko b 

> a

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia  

> b

Ins titute of Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, 50411, Tartu Estonia 

e-mail address: vladislav.ivanistsev@ut.ee 

Ionic liquids (IL) are well -known as candidates for energy storage -and -transformation applications [1]. 

Herewith, conventional ILs are to xic and harmful to the environment. Biocompatible ILs yield when 

choline cation is combined with carboxylate anions. Yet, the primary drawback of such ILs is a higher 

melting point and poor charge transport properties [2]. One way to lower the melting poin t is to create 

eutectic mixtures of ILs [3]. The current work demonstrates that molecular dynamics (MD) is a suitable 

method for predicting properties of possible combinations and compositions of ILs and their mixtures. 

The solid phases can be obtained by applying Coulombic potential wells to a system of randomly packed 

ions. Then, the melting points can be determined from a change of slope in the diffusion coefficient vs. 

inverse temperature (Figure 1) during simulated annealing [4]. The presented MD -based method was 

tested on 13 choline based ILs in work 4 and lately on binary mixtures of ILs for which phase diagrams 

were predicted (Figure 2). 

Biocompatible ILs are possible electrolytes for biomimetic and biomedical applications in smart and soft 

electroa ctive polymer actuators. Our recent MD study [5] showed that among other simulated properties, 

the cation –cation correlation serves as a good predictor of strain difference in such actuators. 

References1. M.V. Fedorov, A.A. Kornyshev, 2014, Chem. Rev., 114, 

2978. 

2. M. Petkovic et al., 2010, Green Chem., 12, 643 –649. 

3. H. Niedermeyer et al. , 2012, Chem. Soc. Rev., 41, 7780 –7802. 

4. K. Karu et al. , 2019, Applied Sciences, 9, 5367. 

5. F. Elhi et al., 2020, Actuators, 9, 40. 

Figure 1: Diffusion coefficient – inverse temperature 

dependence during simulated annealing. 

Figure 1: Diffusion coefficient – inverse temperature 

depende nce during simulated annealing. Transient and Impedance Response of a Rotating Disk Electrode in a Weak 

# Acid 

Samuel Jacobs, Chen You , Mark E. Orazem 

Department of Chemical Engineering 

University of Florida, Gainesville 32611 FL USA 

meo@che.ufl.edu 

Electrochemical current may be influenced by homogeneous reactions adjacent to the electrode . For example, 

dissociation o f a weak acid may enhance the cathodic current through homogeneous supplementation of hydrogen 

ions. Enhancement is influenced by dissociation rate, diffusion of the weak acid to the electrode , and applied 

potential . The objective of this work was to model the impedance response and the transient response under a step 

in potential. The c haracteristic time constants of the current r esponse are influenced by the homogeneous 

dissociation of the weak acid. 

In previous work ,1 we modeled impedance of a rotating disk electrode adjacent to a nonlinear homogeneous 

reaction. Numerical results were fit to a modified Gerischer impedance whic h included the influence of the 

convection -diffusion and first -order homogeneous kinetics. Recently, Potoskaya and Gicahn 2 derived an analytic 

expression for the Gerischer impedance when diffusion coefficients are unequal. Their results show that unequal 

diffusion coefficients influence the Gerischer impedance at low frequency, but the Warburg response for the 

diffusion of the electroactive species remains unchanged at high frequencies . The o bserved influence of the 

homogeneous reaction disappear ed for a sufficiently small rate constant. 

The objective of the present work was to develop an impedance model and a transient model to investigate the 

current response of hydrogen reduction on a rotating disk electrode in a weak acid syste m. Due to the nonlinea r

homogeneous kinetics of acid dissociation, a numerical finite -difference method was employed to calculate the 

response for varied acid dissociation rate constants and applied potential. The relationship between the impedance 

response to oscillating pote ntial and transient response to step potential was investigated. Time constants extracted 

from the two methods were found to be in good agreement. 

Acknowledgement 

The support of Medtronic Diabetes (Northridge, CA) is gratefully acknowledged. 

Reference s 

> 1

Harding, M. S., Tribollet, B., Vivier, V., & Orazem, M. E. , The Influence of Homogeneous Reactions on the 

Impedance Response of a Rotating Disk Electrode. Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 164 (2017) , E3418 -

E3428.  

> 2

Pototskaya, V., & Gichan, O. , The Gerischer Finite Length Impedance: A Case of Unequal D iffusion 

Coefficients. Journal of Electroanlytical Chemistry , 852 (2019) , 113511. The Effect of the Counter Electrode Material on the Evaluation of 

# Electrocatalysts 

Matthew Bird , Sean Goodwin, Darren Walsh 

Nottingham Applied Materials and Interfaces Group 

GSK Carbon Neutral Laboratory for Sustainable Chemistry 

Jubilee Campus , Universit y of Nottingham 

Nottingham , NG7 2TU 

United Kingdom 

Making accurate measurements of electrocatalytic activity is of paramount importance for the 

development of new earth -abundant electrocataly sts. In a typical three -electrode setup Pt or Au is often 

used a s the counter electrode material. These metals can dissolve during testing and subsequently deposit 

on the test electrocatalyst surface, artificially increasing the measured activity. A Nafion membrane is 

sometimes used to separate the counter electrode fr om the test electrocatalyst to minimise this, though no 

work has conclusively proved this to be effective. The work presented here uses X -ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy, energy -dispersive X -ra y analysis, mass spectrometry, and voltammetry to demonstrate th e

issues with using metallic counter electrodes and the ineffectiveness of Nafion to mitigate this during 

constant -current testing of electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction. It i s further shown that a 

carbon counter electrode can deactivate e lectrocatalyst surfaces, and that a glass frit should be used to 

separate the test surface from the counter electrode in these cases. 

Figure 1: XP spectra of a GC  surface after 24 h of HER at  –10 mA cm –2 in cells containing  (A) Pt and (B) 

Au counter ele ctrode s, with a Nafion membrane separat ing the counter/reference electrode s from the GC .

(C) Voltammograms recorded be fore (d ashed line ) and after (solid line s) 24 h of HER at 

–10 mA cm –2 at GC in cell s containing  a Pt counter electrode s and a Nafion -memb rane (black solid line) 

and glass -frit separator (gray solid line) , respectively. (D) Voltammograms recorded before (dashed line) 

and after (solid line) 24 h of HER at  –10 mA cm –2 at GC in a cell containing  an Au counter electrode and 

Nafion -membrane separ ator .

1. Bird, M. A., Goodwin, S. E. & Walsh, D. A. Best Practice for Evaluating Electrocatalysts for 

Hydrogen Economy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces (2020). doi:10.1021/acsami.0c03307 Photoelectrocatalytic Evaluation of BiVO 4/GO nanofibers for 

# application in the photovoltaic cells 

Diego N. David -Parra , Camila F. Pereira, Bruno H. S. Góis, Marcos F. S. Teixeira and Deuber L. S. 

Agosti ni 

Faculty of Science and Technology, São Paulo State University (FCT/UNESP), Pres. Prudente -SP, Brazil 

School of Sciences and Technology – Dep of Chemistry and Biochemistry 

Rua Roberto Simonsen, 305 – Santa Helena –19060 -900 

e-mail: david.parra@unesp.br 

Ab stract: The development of materials to monitor and minimize negative impacts on the environment and 

human health has been widely studied. In this sense, the aim of this work was the development of a high 

performance device for the , built by electrospinni ng the BiVO 4/GO, obtaining through the technique, 

nanofibers with high surface area when compared with other techniques of deposition. The BiVO4 band 

gap value (2.4 eV) and its absorption in the visible region (520 nm), together with the high conductivity of 

the GO, a p -n heterojunction was formed, thus increasing the efficiency of the device, provided optimum 

results [1]. Optical and Scanning Electron Microscopes (SEM) were able to morphologically confirm the 

efficiency of the electrospinning technique in the preparation of the BiVO4/GO nanofibers, showing 

excellent fiber uniformity, no coalescence and obtaining fibers with diameters between 60 and 96 nm. The 

photoelectrovoltaics measurements showed a significant improvement in the photogenerated current, using 

the nanofibers, confirmed by the increase of the peak current and the decrease in the value of the peak 

potential when compared to other methods of preparation already described in literature [2]. In this way, 

the data corroborate that the union of the photoelectrocatalytic effect of BiVO 4/GO and electro -spinning 

process have a high potential for applications in the field of renewable energy generation. 

Acknowledgement: 

CDMF (CEPID/FAPESP) 2013/07296 -2, CNPq 159615/2018 -6. 

References: 

[1] LIU, M. , SUZUKI, Y., Current Nanoscience 11 (2015) 499 -503 

[2] SILVA, M. R., et. al., J Solid State Electrochem 16 (2012) 3267 –3274 Mathematical Model and Regression Analysis for Electrochemical 

# Impedance Spectroscopy of Continuous Glucose Sensors 

Ming Gao ,1 Rui Kong, 2 Mark E. Orazem 1

> 1

Department of Chemical En gineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 

> 2

Medtronic Inc., Di abetes , 18000 Devonshire St. , Northridge, CA 91325 

meo@che.ufl.edu 

The Continuous Glucose Monitor (CGM) is a device to help patients with diabetes mellitus monitor the 

blood sugar level in real time and manage hype rglycemia. It includes an enzyme -based glucose sensor 

implanted under the skin measuring the glucose level in the subcutaneous fluid. 

An advanced one -dimensional mathematical model accounting the physics and chemistry of the 

continuous glucose monitor ha s been developed. 2,3 The mechanistic model includes the enzymatic 

reactions, the anomerization equilibrium of -D-glucose and -D-glucose, the pH -dependent enzyme 

activities and the biological buffers. The coupling between the homogeneous reactions and heterogeneous 

reactions has been described specifically. The physical properties of the sensor and the transport process 

are also considered . The mathematical model was solved numerically by using the finite -difference 

method and Newman’s BAND algorithm. 4 A systematic parameter investigation has been explored 

regarding the steady -state profiles and impedance response . The results showed that oxygen and hydrogen 

peroxide play a key role in the transport -reaction process. Therefore, the electrochemical impedance 

response is useful for differentiating fault reading caused by oxygen deficiency and enzyme deactivation. 

It facilitates the understanding of the transport -reaction process and interpretation of the impedance 

response of sensor under various working conditions, failure mechanism and different sensor designs. 

The approach of analyzing the experimental impedance d ata is shown in the presented work. The process 

model that accounts for the reactions and physics has been proposed . Regression analysis for the 

impedance measurement of continuous glucose sensors has been performed based on the measurement 

model 5,6 and a proposed process model. The m easurement model has been used to confirm the 

consistency of impedance data with the Kramers -Kronig relations. The data flawed by non stationary 

behavior and instrument defects is eliminated. The regression of impedance data can extrapolate fitting 

parameters that have physical meaning and can be correlated with glucose concentration. The study 

suggests that more information can be extrapolated from impedance response with measurements taken at 

lower frequencies and lower applied potentials. 

Reference 

1. M. E. Orazem and B. Tribollet, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (John Wiley & Sons, 

Hoboken, NJ, 2017), 2nd edition, p. 279 -293. 

2. M. Gao, M. S. Hazelbaker, R. Kong, and M. E. Orazem, “Mathematical Model for the 

Electrochemical Impedance Response of a Continuous Glucose Monitor” , Electrochimica Acta, 

275 (2018), 119 -132 .

3. M. Gao and M. E. Orazem, “The Development of Advanced Mathematical Model for 

Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGM)” , in preparation. 

4. J. S. Newman and K. E. Thomas -Al yea, Electrochemical Systems (John Wiley & Sons, 

Hoboken, NJ, 2004), 3rd edition. 

5. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Measurement Models for Electrochemical 

Impedance Spectroscopy: 1. Demonstration of Applicability,” Journal of the Electroch emical 

Society 139 (1992), 1917 -1927. 

6. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Application of Measurement Models to 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy: 3. Evaluation of Consistency with the Kramers -

Kronig Relations,” Jour nal of The Electrochemical Society , 142 (1995), 4159 -4168. 

Acknowledgement 

The support of Medtronic Diabetes (Northridge, CA) is gratefully acknowledged. Electrochemical Behavior of Several Metals from Waste Printed 

# Circuit Boards in Aci dic Brominated Lixiviant s

Gianina Damian 1, Simona Varvara 1, Sorin Aurel Dorneanu 2, Maria Popa 1, Roxana Bostan 1, Liana 

Muresan 2, Petru Ilea 2 

> 1

Department of Cadaster , Civil and Environment al Engineering, “1 Decembrie 1918” University of Alba 

Iulia, 15 -17 Unirii Street, 510 009 Alba Iulia, Romania 

2 Department of Chemical Engineering, “Babes -Bolyai” University, 11 Arany Janos Street, 400 028 

Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

gianina. damian @uab.ro 

Waste p rinted circuit boards ( WPCBs) are the most valuable components of the electrical and electronic 

equipment wastes , which contain different metals with var ious ranges of concentrations, including 

hazardous elements (Pb, As, Cd, Hg), base (C u, Sn, Zn, Ni, Fe) and precious (Au, Ag, Pd) metals [1] .

Recovery of metals from WPCBs is of great importance for both environmental protect ion and resource 

re -utilization. The traditional hydrometallurgical approaches for metal s recovery from WPCBs use 

le aching systems that cannot always meet the requirements in the env ironmental , economic and technic 

aspects . There fore, m uch attention should be paid on developing novel leaching methods that use 

environmental -friendly and easily recycled lixiviant and oxid ant [1] .

In the present paper, the dissolution and deposition behaviour of base (Zn, Fe, Ni ) and metals precious 

(Au, Ag ) was investigated in an acidic bromine -containing electrolyte that could be used as lixiviant in 

hydrometallurgical route of metals rec overy. The experiments were performed in synthetic electrolytes 

containing known concentrations of metallic ions and in real solutions resulted from WPCBs leaching 

from which the more noble metals i.e. Au, Ag, Cu, Sn and Pb were removed by electroextr actio n.

Cyclic voltammetry and polarization measurements were performed in order to characterize the metals 

dissolution and electrodeposition processes . The influence of metals concentrations and /or solution pH on 

the electrodeposition was al so investigated to determine the optimum working conditions. 

The present s tudy is part of a complex research project aiming to elaborate an innovative and pollutants -

free hydrometallurgical technology for metals recovery from WPCBs. 

Fig . 1. Cyclic voltammograms recorded on a glassy carbon electrode from 2 M KBr+0.5 M HBr 

solution s containing different metal bromides (MBr 2); scan rate 20 mV/s 

Reference s

[1] H. Li , J . Eksteen , E . Oraby , Hydrometallurgical recovery of metals from waste printed circuit boards 

(WPCBs): Curre nt status and perspectives – A review , Resources, Conservation & Recycling 139 (2018) 

122 –139 .

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by a grant of the Romanian Ministry of Research and 

Innovation, CCCDI -UEFISCDI, project number PN -III -P1 -1.2 -PCCDI -2017 -0652 / 84PCCDI ⁄ 2018, 

within PNCDI III .Gold Electrodeposition in Choline Chloride -Oxalic Acid and 

# Choline Chloride -Urea Deep Eutectic Solvents 

F. Soma a, b * , M. Bougouma b, C. Buess -Herman a, Th.  Doneux a

> a

Chemistry of Surfaces, Interfaces and Nanomaterials, Faculté des Sciences, Université libre de Bruxelles 

(ULB), Boulevard du Triomphe 2, CP 255, B -1050 Bruxelles, Belgium  

> b

Laboratoire de Chimie des Matériaux et de l'Environnement (LCME), UFR/Sciences et Technologies 

(ST), Avenue Maurice Yaméogo, Université Norbert ZONGO, BP 376 Koudougou, Burki na Faso 

Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) , formed from a quaternary ammonium salt and a hydrogen bond 

donor , have emerged as alternative media to toxic/corrosive aqueous or organic solvents for 

electrodeposition processes. These solvents are usually ecolog ically friendly and conductive enough to be 

used with no further addition of an electrolyte salt . Speciation is an important factor in metal 

electrodeposition and owing to the large variety of available DES, the deposit characteristics of a given 

metal can be extremely different between DES .

The present study concerns the electrodeposition of gold from two differents salts (AuCl and 

AuCl 3) dissolved in two different DES, namely choline chloride - oxalic acid (1: 1) (ChCl -Ox) and the 

choline chloride – ur ea (1 : 2) (ChCl -U). 

On glassy carbon, the voltammetric features associated with the Au(III)/Au(I) and Au(I)/Au(0) 

couples are clearly identified. Both are associated with slow kinetics, more particularly in the ChCl -U

medium where a very large overpotent ial is required for Au electrodeposition. By contrast , on platinum, 

the kinetics of the Au(I)/Au(0) couple is much faster, so that only one cathod ic wave associated with a 3 

e− reduction is observed while two anodic peaks corresponding to the 1 e − oxidatio n to Au(I) followed by 

the 2 e − oxidation to Au(III) are obtained in the ChCl -Ox medium. 

The electrochemical data are completed by spectrophotometric measurements and a discussion on the 

speciation of Au is conducted to rationalise the obtained results. A Preliminary Investigation into the Microscopic P assivation of new 

# Bio High Entropy Alloys 

Julia C.Mirza Rosca, Nestor Florido Suarez, Ionelia Voiculescu, Victor Geanta 

University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria , Mech.Eng.Dept. 

Campus Universitario Tafira EIIC – 35017 

julia.mirza@ulpgc.es 

In recent years, due to the great advance of scientific and technological research, new alloys are being 

explored with a different metallurgical concept: at least three basic components and these allo ys are called 

High Entropy Alloys (HEA). In this way it was created the groundwork for a new concept in alloy design 

by looking after combinations of metals to work “in team” for an advanced material with unique properties. 

At the end of the last century, the progress of science led to the rapid development of biomedical materials 

and the recent development of high entropy alloys (HEA) provides a new perspective for a new generation 

of biomaterials. 

Two new experimental alloys (with the composition presente d in Table 1) were obtained by Vacuum Arc 

Remelting from high purity chemical elements (99.5%) that exhibit extremely low bio -toxicity for the 

human body (for this reason we named them BioHEA) .

Table 1. Chemical comp osition of the analyzed BioHEA. 

The alloys were microstructurally characterized (dendritic morphology, Fig.1 and Fig.2) and microhardness 

measurements were performed. Both the compositional analysis performed using the dispersive energy 

probe and the structural characterization by X -ray diffraction revealed the dendritic separation of 

compounds in the fine dendritic matrix. 

Fig.1. BioHEA 1 microstructure Fig.2. BioHEA 2 microstructure 

In order to analyze the passivation process, the electrochem ical impedance spectroscopy technique at 

different potentials was used and the experimental results were compared with those obtained by 

potentiostatic and potentiodynamic techniques. 

The low corrosion rates, low corrosion currents and high polarization r esistance attest the good stability of 

these BioHEA in simulated biological environments .

Wt.% 

Mo  Ta  Ti  Zr  Nb  Fe 

BioHEA 1  20.45  32.45  12.67  18.97  15.46 

BioHEA 2  17.32  38.95  13.21  17.45  13.07 Influence of the Electrode Substrate (Au, GC , Pt) on the Palladium 

# Electrodeposition in the Ch oline Chloride -Urea Deep Eutectic Solvent 

F. Soma a, b *, Q. Rayée a, M. Bougouma b, C. Buess -Herman a, Th. Doneux a 

> a

Chemistry of Surfaces, Interfaces and Nan omaterials, Faculté des Sciences, Université libre de 

Bruxelles (ULB), Boulevard du Triomphe 2, CP 255, B -1050 Bruxelles, Belgium  

> b

Laboratoire de Chimie des Matériaux et de l'Environnement (LCME), UFR/Sciences et Technologies 

(ST), Avenue Maurice Yaméogo, Université Norbert ZONGO, BP 376 Koudougou, Burkina Faso 

Palladium electrodeposition in aqueous media requires potentials close to the decomposition of water, 

leading to low faradaic yields and embrittlement of electrodeposited palladium. This justifies searching 

for an alternative electrolyte and the DESs formed from a quaternary ammonium salt and a hydrogen 

bond donor, have emerged as a judicious choice . These solvents provide relatively large electrochemical 

potential windows and temperature ranges .

This work reports on the electrodeposition of palladium  in the Ch oline Chloride – Urea (1:2) (ChCl -U) 

deep eutectic solvent  and focuses on the influence of the substrate on the  electrochemical behavior of 

Pd(II) .

Curves obtained at a platinum and glassy carbon electrode show two cathodic peaks and two reverse 

anodic peaks. The first cathodic and anodic response s are linked to the redox reaction of the Pd(II)/Pd(0) 

couple , while t he second cathodic and corresponding anodic waves were attributed to the incor poration 

and desorption of hydrogen into the deposited palladium .

The overvoltage required for palladium electro deposit ion is much higher on glassy carbon than on 

platinum and associated with a nucleation process .

The gold disc electrode stands out with a different electrochemical behavior signed by the presence of a 

third cathodic peak which appears long before the two cathodic responses observed on the two previous 

substrates . No significant overvoltage is required for the depositi on of palladium on gol d. The most 

probable explanation of this third response is an under -potential deposit ion phenomenon of palladium, as 

observed in an aqueous medium [1] . Rotating disc electrode measurements were performed to obtain 

more information on these cathodic peaks. Bas ed on these results, the electrochemical behavior of Pd(II) 

could be separated into four distinct potential zones . In the zone of the most positive potentials the RDE 

measurements reveal that the intensity corresponding to the first cathodic peak is ind ependent of the 

rotation rate of the electrode (ω), which indicates a reaction limited by a surface process and confirms our 

hypothesis of a n underpotential deposition in this region. 

[1] J. Tang, M. Petri, L. A. Kibler, et D. M. Kolb, « Pd deposition on to Au(111) electrodes from sulphuric 

acid solution », Electrochim.  Acta , vol. 51, no 1, p. 125 -132, 2005, doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2005.04.009 A portable electroanalytical procedure with unmodified screen -printed 

# carbon electrode to determine paracetamol in urine and struvite used 

# as organic fertilizers 

Rafael de Q. Ferreira , Luiz R. G. Silva, Maria de L. S. Vasconcellos 

Chemistry Department, Un iversidade Federal do Espírito Santo, 29075 -910, Vitória, ES, Brazil 

E-mail address:  rafael.q.ferreira@ufes.br 

Among organic fertilizers, bovine and human urine are natural su bs tance that can re place chemical 

fertilizers, since they are rich in potassium and nitrogen, and they ha ve compounds that improve plant 

resistance in terms of health, pests and diseases 1. The utilization of urine in agriculture can be made both 

in liquid or solid form, thro ug h the precipitation of struvite 2. Struvite precipitation has been gaining 

recognition in the agriculture and industrial sector for being an ecological and economical technique that 

enables the recovery of macronutrients 3, 4. However , some toxic substances present in the urine can 

contaminate the soil, such as drugs ( e.g. paracetamol), once urine is a direct excretion route. Paracetamol 

in high dosage and continuous indirect consumption can cause gastrointestinal bleeding, exogenous 

intoxicatio n, hepatitis and liver ne crosis, which can lead to death 5. The present work developed a fast, 

sensitive, inexpensive and portable procedure for the determination of paracetamol in urine and struvite 

used as organic fertilizers. In this study , unmodified screen -printed carbon elec trodes (SPCE) were used 

in conjunction with the square wave voltammetry (SWV) technique, employing a drop of solution (40 

μL) for analysis. 

Initially, the voltammetric profile of paracetamol was obtained by cyclic 

voltammetry (CV) , to identify th e redox potentia ls and possible coupled 

chemical reactions. Fig. 1 represents the cyclic voltammogram of 100 μmol 

L−1 paracetamol in 0.1 mol L −1 HCl (pH 1 .0). 

The response obtained for the supporting 

electrolyte (0.1 mol L −1 HCl ) indicates that there 

are no significant background currents, 

interfering processes or any adjacent reactions in 

the applied potential rang e. The pH effect on the 

voltammetric response of paracetamol was evaluated by CV , in the pH range 

of 1.0 to 1 2.0, using HCl, KCl and BR buffe rs in the presence of 100 μmol L −1

of the analyte (Fig. 2). The res ults demonstrate that 0.1 mol L −1 HCl (pH 1.0) 

was the best support electrolyte .

The operational parameters of the SWV were optimized by univariate experiments. The optimal values 

found were: 10 mV (step po tential ); 40 mV (modulation amplitude ) and 15 Hz (frequency ). In addition, a 

SPEC stabil ity study was carried out by application of 50 suc cessive SWV scans . The results indicated 

that after 25 scans , the SPCE loses the ability to generate reliable responses due to erosio n from 

continuous use of the electrode. 

The analytical curve was constructed in a linear range of 0.19 to 100 .0 μmol 

L−1 (Fig . 3). The procedure presented a limit of detection (LOD ) and 

quantification of 0.046 and 0.156 μmol L −1 , respectively , and R2 of 0.998 .

The determination of paracetamol in struvite and urine samples indicated that 

the concentration of the drug is be low of LOD in both . The recovery tests in 

different matrices showed values between 92 and 106%, indicating that there 

is no matri x effect. Based on all of these results , the proposed procedure 

proved to be effective, sim ple, fast and a sustainab le altern ative to promote 

green chemistry in the determina tion of paracetamol in urine and struvite. 

Acknowledgement : FAPES/SEAG (nº 721/2016) and CAPES (financial code 001) 

References 

1. Pesag ro -Rio , Second ed. Coordenadoria de Difusão de Tecnologia, Niterói , 200 2.

2. Lind, B., Ban, Z., Bydén, S., Ecol. Eng. V. 16, p. 562 -566 , 2001 .

3. Guadie et al ., J. Environ. Sci. v. 26, p. 765 –774 , 2014 .

4. Ye et al ., J. Environ. Sci. v. 26, p. 991 –1000 , 2014 .

5. Prescott, L.F ., Drugs , v. 25, p. 290 –314 , 1 983 .A systematic micro -solvation method to estimate solvent effects on adsorption 

# energies 

Alejandra Rendón -Calle a, Santiago Builes a, Federico Calle -Vallejo b 

> a

Departamento de Ingeniería de Procesos, Universidad EAFIT, Carrera 49 No 7 sur 50, 050022, Medellín, 

Colombia.  

> b

Departament de Ciència de Materials i Química Física & Institut de Química Teòrica i Computacional (IQTCUB), 

Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. 

jrendon8@eafit.edu.co 

Electrochemical processes are a promising alternative to convert electricity into chemical energy, thereby contributing 

to the development of an econom y propelled by sustainable energy. The rational improvement of such processes 

requires in -depth , atomic -scale understanding of the reaction mechanisms and the factors influenc ing the reaction 

performance [1] , which can be obtained with the help of DFT studies. However, countless electrocatalytic reactions 

occur in aqueous media where adsorbates and water molecules interact through hydrogen bonds, which are not fully 

captured by calculations in vacuum. E xplicit inclusion of the solvent , in terms of accur acy, is probably the best way 

to incorporate solvation effects, but its high computational cost makes it unsuitable for mechanistic studies of complex 

reactions [1, 2] . Conversely, i mplicit solvation models are practical , and generally inexpensive, however their 

description of hydrogen bonding is still insufficient in general [3] . Therefore, an alternative approximation is the 

addition of ad hoc solvation corrections, computed as the difference between the adsorption energies with and without 

the solvent. I n previous DFT -based studies, ad hoc corrections were reported for R -OH adsorbates, either on Cu(111) 

or Pt(111), with magnitudes from −0.1 to −0.6 eV [4, 5] . Nevertheless , recent works have shown that these corrections 

may significantly change from one ma terial to the next, introducing errors in the predictions of adsorption energies, 

reaction pathways, and overpotentials obtained from simulations in vacuu m [6] .

Here we will introduce a simple and affordable micro -solvation method to estimate the solvation contributions to the 

adsorption energies [2] . Within this method, an adsorbate -water hydrogen bond occurs when it leads to a more stable 

energetic state , so that water -adsorbate and water -water interactions are weighed . The method determine s the number 

of water molecules in the first solvation shell of each adsorbate, and the energetic stabilization granted by adsorbate -

water hydrogen bonds . The CO 2RR on Cu in aqueous media was used to develop and test the m ethod, and the analysis 

was extended to Ag, Au and Zn electrodes . Applying the calculated solvation corrections, we find good agreement 

with experiments in the calculated pathways and onset potentials, with an average error of only 0.07 V. The results 

obta ined on (111) surfaces can be used as ad hoc corrections on other facets of the same metal. 

# References 

[1] A. Rendón -Calle, S. Builes, F. Calle -Vallejo, A brief review of the computational modeling of CO2 

electroreduction on Cu electrodes, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry , 9 (2018) 158 -165. 

[2] A. Rendón -Calle, S. Builes, F. Calle -Vallejo, Substantial improvement of electrocatalytic predictions by 

systematic assessment of solvent effects on adsorption energies, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental , 276 (2020) 

119147. 

[3] Y. Basdogan, A.M. Maldonado, J.A. Keith, Advances and challenges in modeling solvated reaction mechanisms 

for renewable fuels and chemicals, WIREs Computational Molecular Science , 10 (2020) e1446. 

[4] F. Calle -Vallejo, M.T.M. Koper, Theoretical Considerations on the Electroreduction of CO to C2 Species on 

Cu(100) Electrodes, Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 52 (2013) 7282 -7285. 

[5] A.A. Peterson, F. Abild -Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, J.K. Nørskov, How copper catalyzes th e electroreduction 

of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbon fuels, Energy & Environmental Science , 3 (2010) 1311 -1315. 

[6] L.P. Granda -Marulanda, S. Builes, M.T.M. Koper, F. Calle -Vallejo, Influence of Van der Waals Interactions on 

the Solvation Energies of Adso rbates at Pt -Based Electrocatalysts, ChemPhysChem , 20 (2019) 2968 -2972. Formation of Singlet Oxygen in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction in 

# LiTFSI -DMSO in Lithium Oxygen Battery Cathodes 

D. Córdoba, H.B. Rodríguez, E.J. Calvo 

INQUIMAE. Universidad de Buenos Aires, Pabellón 2, Ciudad Universitaria, 

Bueos Aires, Argentina 

calvo@qi. fcen.uba.ar 

The formation of singlet oxygen, 1O2, during the O 2 electroreduction reaction on carbon electrodes in 

lithium bis -(trifluorometilsulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) in dimetilsulfoxide (DMSO) has been detected “in -

operando” by 9,10 -dimetil anthracene, (DMA) fluorescence quenching. 

The formation of 1O2 during the oxygen electroreduction (ORR) requires Li + ions while in the presence of 

sodium azide, a specific physical quencher of 1O2, the flurescence quenching of DMA is negligible. The 

addition of Li + ions to a superoxide solution in DMSO stabilized by tetrabutylammonium bis -(tri -

fluorometilsulfonyl) imide increases the fluorescence decay of DMA, which is a proof of 1O2 formation 

during superoxide radical anion bimolecular disproportionation: 1

The di scharge and charge of Li -O2 batteries under long term operation to deep discharge in repetitive 

cycles, in the presence of sodium azide in the electrolyte resulted in full charge recovery below 4.3 V vs. 

Li +(DMSO) and increased capacity , unlike batteries c ycled under similar conditions but in the absence of 

azide in the electrolyte, where the charge is not recovered . Note that 4.3 V is the stability anodic limit of 

the solvent DMSO ..2

Figure 1. Cell voltage vs. capacity, with azid e (black) and without azide (red) 

1. D. Córdoba, H.B. Rodríguez, E.J. Calvo, ChemistrySelect 2019, 4, 12304 – 12307. 

2. N. Mozhuzhukina, L. Mendez De Leo, E.J. Calvo, J. Phys. Ch em. C., 117 (36), 18375 -

18380, (2013). 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 

## 0.0 0.6 1.3 1.9 2.5 3.2 3.8 4.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 

Capacity / mAh cm -2 

> Cell voltage / V vs. Li / Li +

Capacity / mAh g -1 

4.3V cutoff 

Discharge Charge Voltammetric analysis of kraft black liquor artificial solutions 

Raisa C.P. Oliveira a,b ,*, Tiago A.R. Silva a,b , Maria M. Mateus b, Paula C.R. Pinto c, João C.M. Bordado b,

Diogo M.F. Santos a 

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials ( CeFEMA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> c

RAIZ - Instituto de Investig ação da Floresta e Papel, Quinta de S. Francisco, Apartado 15, 3801 -501 

Eixo, Portugal 

> *

raisa.oliveira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Kraft b lack liquor (BL) is a complex solution mainly composed by inorganic salts used in the pulp cooking 

process (e.g., NaOH, NaCO 3, Na 2SO 4, Na 2S), sugars, hemicellulose, and lignin [1] . Due to its complexity, 

BL electrochemical behavior i s still misunderstood despite the efforts of the scientific community [2 –4] .

Understanding BL electrochemical processes can be an important advance in the topic of industrial 

wastewater/ environmental electrochemistry. As a result, t he electrolysis of this by -product has been 

significantly explored in the last 5 years and is becoming a promising alternative to process the excess of 

produced BL [5 –7] .

Considering that, this work aims to analyze by voltammetric techniques ( i.e., by cyclic voltammetry, CV, 

and linear scan voltammetry, LSV) the behavior of artificial solutions containing the main components of 

the BL. The initial solution is composed exclus ively by KOH + NaOH, being the other inorganic salts 

gradually added according to the following order: Na 2CO 3 + K 2CO 3, K 2SO 4 + Na 2SO 4, Na 2S. After each 

addition, CVs and LSVs of this BL artificial solution are recorded using a commercial Pt electrode . Then ,

lignin is finally added (considering its original concentration in real BL) to the final solution containing all 

the inorganic salts and the electrochemical behavior of this artificial BL is analyzed . The study is done 

using acid precipitated lignin and LignoBoost lignin, in order to identify electrochemical differences 

between them . Finally, the effect of lignin concentration in the voltammetric behavior of the artificial BL 

is analyzed . All results are critically discussed an d compared with the literature to clarify the most important 

BL electrochemical processes. 

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for PhD 

grant SFRH/BD/137470/2018 (R.C.P. Oliveira) and for contract n o. IF/01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 

under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos). This work was carried out under the Project Inpactus –

innovative products and technologies from eucalyptus, Project N.º 21874 funded by Portugal 2020 through 

European Regional Developm ent Fund (ERDF) in the frame of COMPETE 2020 nº246/AXIS II/2017. 

[1] N.S. Kevlich, M.L. Shofner, S. Nair, Membranes for Kraft black liquor concentration and 

chemical recovery: Current progress, challenges, and opportunities, Sep. Sci. Technol. 52 (2017) 

1070 –1094. 

[2] R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, On the oxidation of kraft black liquor for lignin 

recovery: a voltammetric st udy, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) E546 –E553. 

[3] R.C.P. Oliveira, M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, Chronoamperometric and chronopotentiometric 

investigation of Kraft black liquor, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (2018) 16817 –16823. 

[4] H.R. Ghatak, S. Kumar, P.P. Kundu, Electrode processes in black liquor electrolysis and their 

significance for hydrogen prod uction, Int. J. Hydroge n Energy 33 (2008) 2904 –2911. 

[5] J.N. Cloutier, O. Savadogo, J. Paris, M. Perrier, R. Labrecque, N. Kandev, P. Champagne, Effect 

of the basic electrochemical cell operating parameters on the performance of the electrolysis of 

kraft pulping black liquor, ECS Trans. 80 (2017) 871 –891. 

[6] I.C. Belo, R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, J.C.M. Bordado, P.C.R. Pinto, D.M.F. Santos, 

Development of a black liquor electrolyzer for lignin extraction, ECS Trans. 86 (2018) 3 –9. 

[7] M. Haddad, L. Bazinet, O. Savadogo, J. Paris, Electrochemical acidification of Kraft black liquor: 

Impacts of pulsed electric field application on bipolar membrane colloidal fouling and process 

intensification, J. Memb. Sci. 524 (2017) 482 –492. The use of dental amalgam electrode in the folic acid analytical 

# determination: control of the quality breads 

Fernanda C. O. L. Martins 1, Regina G. Silva 2, Fernanda M. Vanin 3 and Djenaine De Souza 2 

> 1

Green Analytical Chemistry Group (GEQAV), College of Agriculture “Luiz de Queiroz”, University of 

São Paulo, PO Box 9, Piracicaba, SP 13418 -970, Brazil.  

> 2

Laboratory of Electroanalytical Applied to Biotechnology and Food Engineering (LEABE), Campus of 

Patos de Minas, Federal Uberlândia University, Getúlio V argas street, 230, Patos de Minas - MG, 38700 

- 126, Brazil . 

> 3

University of São Paulo, Faculty of Animal Science and Food Engineering, Av. Duque de Caxias Norte, 

225, CEP 13635 -900, Pirassununga, SP, Brazil 

fernandacolm@hotmail.com, fernanda.vanin@usp.br and djenaine@gmail.com 

The main goal of this work was the development of an electroanalytical procedure for the 

determ ination of folic acid in bread samples using dental amalgam electrode (DAE ) and square wave 

voltammetric ( SWV ) technique . Preliminary , e lectronegativity tests were performed in Britton -Robinson 

(BR) with pH values around to ionization con stant s of folic acid ( pK a), pH 2.5 0 and 8.0 0, w hich indicated 

that in the acid medium the redox reaction is more favo urable . So, BR and oxalic acid/oxalat e buffer in 

pH 2.50 were individually evaluated and voltammetric responses indicated that in oxalic acid/oxalate 

buffer the peak potential (E p) and current intensity (I p) presented more favourable values , and for this, the 

pH values of acid/oxalate buffer were changed to 2.00 from 5.00 . The voltammetric responses indicated 

that Ip increase d up until the pH 3.00 without los s in voltammetric profile and Ep presented none 

rela tionship with the pH , indicating that the protonation is not the step determinant in reaction kinetic s.

This way, the pH 3.00 were chosen , presenting two well -defined voltammetric peak s, in -0. 50 V and -

0.84 V vs Ag/AgCl 3.0 mol L -1.

SWV parameters were evaluat ed using pulse amplitude ( a) from 5 to 50 mV, pulse potential 

frequency ( f ) fr om 10 to 250 s -1 and scan potential increment (ΔE s) from 2 to 10 mV. Voltammetric 

responses indicated that best voltammetric signals were observed using a = 50 mV, f = 250 s -1 and ΔE s =

2 mV. Besides, analysis of E p and I p using different f values indicate d that the electrons transfer occur 

quickly and following a redox reaction controlled by diffusion rate . Thus, the relationship s between E p

and logarithm of f values, called as Lovric’s Equation , enabled the calcul ous of electrons number and 

offers a possi ble redox mechanism that probably involves the reduction of the group C=N in the main 

heterocyclic ring , that was previously protonated, following a fast electron transfer with coupled reactions 

involving a n intermediary chemical specie. 

Analytical parame ters (linear range, linearity coefficient, detection and quantification limits, 

precision, accuracy and robustness) were evaluated using analytical and recovery curves built using 70 

and 250 s-1 as f parameter, as shown in Table 1. The linearity coefficien t (r) value demonstrated good 

linearity, detection and quantification limits (DL and QL, respectively) were lower than the concentration 

expected in the bread samples . The precision of methodology was evaluated by repeatability and 

reproducibility and indi cated suitable values , coupled to an adequate recovery efficiency values, 

indicating that the proposed methodology using DAE and SWV is proper for folic acid determination. All 

analytical parameters were compared to similar data obtained using the high -per formance liquid 

chr omatography with diode array detection (HPLC -DAD ), using a precolumn and a column C18, a 

mobile phase constituted by 0.1 mol L -1 of the acetic acid solution and acetonitrile that had a flow rate of 

0.6 mL/minute at a temperature of 40°C and an elution gradient with organic phase changing from of the 

10 to 24%. 

The proposed methodology using DAE and 

SWV was applied in 27 bread samples, which 

were previously pretreated accord ing to 

literature reports. The voltammetric data 

permitted the folic acid quantification in bread 

samples prepared using different baking 

temperature and various steam during the 

process of bread production, permitting the 

evaluation of the availability of folic acid in commercial bread . So, the proposed methodology presented 

as an alternative environmentally friendly to the folic acid determination .                                       

> Parameters f= 70 s -1f= 250 s -1HPLC -DAD
> LR (μmol L -1)0.1000 –10.00 0.01000 –5.000 0.5000 –5.000
> r0.9955 0.9965 0.9978
> DL(mol L -1)1.202x10 -06 1.726x10 -08 20.299x10 -6
> QL(mol L -1)3.641x10 -06 5.2291x10 -08 61.512x10 -6
> Repeatability (%) 4.73 4.49 -
> Reproducibility (%) 5.96 5.07 -
> Recovery (%) 93 103 -
> Table 1 : Analytical parameters for the determination of folic acid in pure electrolyte on
> DAE, where LR is the linearity range, r is the correlation coefficient, DL and QL are
> detection and quantification limit, respectively.

# Electrodeposition of Germanium Antimony Telluride Microarrays 

# from a Weakly Coordinating, Non -aqueous Electrolyte 

L. Meng 1, Y. J. Noori 2, G. P. Kissling 1, R Huang 2, W. Zhang 1, C.H. (Kees) de Groot 2, G. Reid 1, A. 

Hector 1, D. Smith 3, P.N. Bartlett 1

> 1

Chemistr y, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ , UK 

> 2

Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 

> 3

Physics, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK 

L.meng@s oton.ac.uk 

Electrodeposition provides a bottom -up technique compared to conventional coating methods, such as 

physical vapor deposition (PVD). It is of advantage in the efficient use of the starting material and can be 

used to plate curved surfaces and e ven inside of to pologically demanding surfaces. 

Aqueous electryolytes are commonly used solvent in electrochemical deposition, however, it suffers from 

narrow deposition potential window which makes water reduction a competing process vs high potential 

metal reduction/deposition , adding major complexit ies to experiments. Here we employ an electrolyte 

system based on tetrabutylammonium chlorometallate metal sources with compatible tetraalkyl halide 

supporting electrolytes in non -aqueous, weakly coordinatin g solvents, which provides the ability to 

deposit alloys with des ired structures and properties at high potentials [1, 2]. 

In this work we report the deposition of germanium antimony telluride (GST) into microstructured TiN 

arrays from dichloromethane. We present how adjusting the concentrations of the chlorometallates allows 

control over the composition and also the morphology of the deposits (Figure 1). We also highlight the 

composition variation of GST deposits in the microarray structures and the desig n of experiment to 

minimize the convection effect causing the composition variation. 

This work is conducted as part of the ADEPT project funded by EPSRC (EP/N035437/1). 

Figure 1: (a) Cyclic voltammetry of 2.5 mM [NBu n4][GeCl 5], 1 mM [NBu n4][ SbCl 4] and a range of 

[NBu n4]2[TeCl 6] conventrations (black: 2 mM, red: 5 mM and blue: 10 mM) in 0.1 M [NBu n4]Cl in 

CH 2Cl 2 measured at a scan rate of 50 mV s −1 . (b) Change in the composition of electrodeposited GST 

microarrays as a function of the precursor concentrat ion in the plating bath represented as composition 

triangles. 

References 

1. P. N. Bartlett, S. L. Benjamin, C. H. de Groot, A. L. Hector, R. M. Huang, A. Jolleys, G. P. 

Kissling, W. Levason, S. J. Pearce, G. Reid and Y. D. Wang, Materials Horizons, 2, 420 (2 015). 

2. Kissling, G.P., Huang, R., Jolleys, A., Benjamin, S.L., Hector, A.L., Reid, G., Levason, W., de 

Groot, C.K. and Bartlett, P.N., 2018. Elect rodeposition of a Functional Solid State Memory 

Material: Germanium Antimony Telluride from a Non -Aqueous Plating Bath. Journal of The 

Electrochemical Society, 165(11), p.D557. Further insights on the kraft black liquor oxidation using r otat ing ring 

# disk electrode studies 

Raisa C.P. Oliveira a,b ,*, Maria M. Mateus b, Paula C.R. Pinto c, João C.M. Bordado b, Diogo M.F. Santos a 

> a

Center of Physics and Engineering of Advanced Materials (CeFEMA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> b

Center for Natural Resources and the Environment (CERENA), Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Universidade de Lisboa, 1049 -001 Lisbon, Portugal  

> c

RAIZ - Instituto de Investigação da Floresta e Papel, Quinta de S. Francisco, Apartado 15, 3801 -501 

Eixo, Portugal 

> *

raisa.oliveira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 

Understanding the complex mechanism of the electrochemical oxidation of kraft black liquor (BL) is 

something that requires the combination of different techniques. Conventional electrochemical techniques, 

such as voltammetry , chronoamperometry , and chronopotentiometry have been already employed in the 

electrochemical characterization of BL [1 -4]. These results allowed the collection of relevant kinetic 

parameters but do not provide enough information to elaborate a more detailed oxidation mechanism . In 

order to get additional data on the BL oxidation mechanism , this work involves rotating ring disk electrode 

(RRDE) studies in real industrial weak BL samples .

The employed RRDE system (Pt ring/Pt disk and Pt ring/Au disk) was used to identify the presence of 

intermediates and to verify the reversibility of the electrochemical reaction. F or that, the Pt ring electrode 

was mai ntained at a fixed potential (ranging from 200 mV below OCP to 500 mV above the OCP) while 

linear scan voltammetry (LSV) was run at the disk. A potential scan rate of 10 mV s -1 and rotation of 1200 

rpm were applied for all the experiments. The effect of th e temperature (25 – 65 ºC) in the electrochemical 

response was also analyzed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first black liquor RRDE study that 

has been reported so far .

The authors would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) for PhD 

grant SFRH/BD/137470/2018 (R.C.P. Oliveira) and for contract no. IF/01084/2014/CP1214/CT0003 

under IF2014 Programme (D.M.F. Santos). This work was carried out under the Project Inpactus –

innovative products and technologies from eucalyptus, Project N.º 21874 funded by Portugal 2020 through 

the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) in the frame of COMPETE 2020 nº246/AXIS II/2017. 

[1] R.C.P. Oliveira, M.M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, On the oxidation of kraft black liquor for lignin 

recovery: a voltammetric stu dy, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (2019) E546 –E553. 

[2] R.C.P. Oliveira, M. Mateus, D.M.F. Santos, Chronoamperometric and chronop otentiometric 

investigation of k raft black liquor, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (2018) 16817 –16823. 

[3] H.R. Ghatak, Electrolysis of black liquor for hydrogen production: Some initial findings , Int. J. 

Hydrogen Energy 31 (20 06 ) 934 –938 .

[4] H.R. Ghatak, S. Kumar, P.P. Kundu, Electrode processes in black liquor el ectrolysis and their 

significance for hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 33 (2008) 2904 –2911. New Pulsed Charge Protocol for Lithium ion Batteries 

Lautaro Acosta 1, Guillermo G araventta 2, Victoria Flexer 1

1-Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo de Materiales Avanzados y Almacenamiento de Energía de Jujuy, 

CIDMEJu (CONICET, Universidad Nacional de Ju juy) 

Centro de Desarrollo Tecnológico General Savio 

Avenida Martijena s/n 4612, Palpala, Jujuy, Argentina 

2-Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas, INIFTA (Facultad de Ciencias 

Exactas, UNLP -CONICET) 

e-mail:  lacosta@cidmeju.unju.edu.ar 

Lithium ion -batteries (LIBs) are a widely employed option in the energy storage field for mobile devices 

(cellphone s, electric vehicles, etc.) due to their capacity and power characteristics , and a bove all their 

stable cycling . Apart from all the kno wled ge in the cathode and anode material and electrolyte 

composition, other important aspect for an optimal operation is the charging protocol. A broad list of 

charging techniques has been reported 1, but the standard one is a Constant Current -Constant Voltage (CC -

CV) protocol. 

In this work a new charging methodology is presented. This consist on two step s, first ly a pulsed curren t

period , followed by a pulsed voltage period. Pulsed parameters have the advantage that allows the system 

to change the diffusional stress in the interface 2. As innovation, the proposed method applies current and 

voltage values that oscillate according to a square pulse around a central value without reach ing null 

values .

Figure 1: Current (left) and voltage (ri ght) response of a 18650 LIB under voltage pulsed and 

current pulsed respectively. 

The experiments were carried on 18650 LIBs and the protocol was repeated several time s to exhibi t its 

impact on the cell capacity over its cycling. The pulse amplitude an d frequency of both section was varied 

to see its impact on the learning curves. 

References 

(1) Vo, T. T.; Shen, W.; Kapoor, A. Experimental Comparison of Charging Algorithms for a Lithium -Ion 

Battery. In 10t h International Power and Energy Conference, IPEC 2012 ; 2012; pp 207 –212. 

(2) Purushothaman, B. K.; Landau, U. Rapid Charging of Lithium -Ion Batteries Using Pulsed Currents. J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 2006 , 153 .Graphene quantum dots@Benzoquinone@ β-cyclodextrin sys tems 

# for a dual mode sensing 

Wafa Aidli a,b , Abdelmone im Mars b,c , Valentina Pifferi a, Ma riangela Longhi a,

Amedea Manfredi a, Ahmed Hichem Hamzaoui b, Luigi Falciola a 

> a

Dipartimento di Chimica, Uni versità degli Studi di Milano, via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy  

> b

Valorization Laboratory of Useful Materials (LVMU) ,

National Center of Material Science Research (CNRSM), Techno -park Borj Cedria , 8027 Solima , Tunisia  

> c

Laboratory of Natural Water Treatm ent (LABTEN ),

Water Researches and Technologies Center, Techno -park Borj Cedria , 8027 Soliman , Tunisia 

wafa.aidli@ unimi.it 

Host -Guest inclusion systems have aroused widespread interest , since they play importa nt roles in 

molecular recognition , particu lar ly in sensor devices . A class of host molecules that has often been used 

in sens ing applications is that of the cyclodextrins, cyclic oligosaccharides that consist of six (α -

cyclodextrin), seven (β -cyclodextrin, β-CD ), or eight (γ -cyclodextrin) glucose moi eties [1 ]. Depending on 

the cavity size, cyclodextrin s have shown a selective affinity to a wide variety of molecules. For instance, 

in a previous work , we succeeded to demonstrate the affinity of cyclodextrin s for o-toluidine , a toxic 

water pollutant [2]. 

Various functional composites based on β -CD have been developed in the Literature . Particularly, 

Organic -Metal oxides nanocomposites have emerged as an outstanding surface modifier for sensors 

construction. Howe ver, the composite concept can even go be yond this approach by combining 

electroactive and fluorescent nano materials for the creation of a dual -mode sensing device. 

Based on this, a novel system based on Graphene Quantum Dots GQDs @Benzoquinone@β -

cyclodextr in as a host guest capturing probe was pr opose d. In this approach , EDC/NHS chemistry was 

used to covalently immobilize benzoquinone, the electroactive probe, via a cysteamine spacer on 

graphene quantum dots . Finally, β -cyclodextrin was added via a reductive amination. The optical 

properties of th e syn thesized GQDs were studied using UV -vis and PL spectroscopy. Structural and 

morphological characterizations were examined by t he Transmission Electron Microscop y and Fourier -

Transform Infra Red spectroscopy . Cyclic voltammetry, differential pulse volta mmetr y and 

electr ochemi cal impedance spectroscopy were performed to investigate the surface modification at each 

step. 

The system was firstly immobilized directly on glas sy carbon electrode, then on fluorine tin oxide 

glass , bare or covered with a thin lay er of Titania film, to test the possibility of a dual mode sensing. In 

fact, the capturing of the target molecule will be accompanied by a simultaneous substantial variat ion in 

the benzoquinone electrochemical signal and an evident fluorescence quenching o f GQD s. 

[1] Niu, X., Mo, Z., Yang, X., Sun, M., Zhao, P., Li, Z., Ouyang, M., Liu, Z., Gao, H., Guo, R. and Liu, 

N., Microchim . Acta , 2018, 185 , 328. 

[2] Pifferi, V., Ca ppelletti, G., Di Bari, C., Meroni, D., Spadavecchia, F., & Falciola, L. , Electrochim .

Act a, 2014, 146 , 403 -410. Role of the metal center in metal -nitrogen -doped carbons for the 

# electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide in a continuous flow 

# reactor 

Miguel Duarte 1, Jonas Hereijgers 1, Nick Daems 1, 2 , Tom Breugelmans 1, 2  

> 1

ELCAT, University of Antwerp , Universiteitspl ein 1, 2610 Wilrijk Belgium  

> 2

Separation & Conversion Technologies, VITO, Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium 

Miguel.Duarte@uantwerpen.be 

We report the synthesis and operation of various metal -nitrogen -doped carbons for the 

electrochemical reduction of carbo n dioxide to carbon monoxide and /or formic acid as part of a 

mitigation and adaptation approach to increasing CO 2 atmospheric concentrations. For the first 

time different transition metals (i.e. Sn, Co, Fe, Mn and Ni) were embedded in nitrogen -doped 

carbon s through an easily up -scalable and tunable method and its performance characterized in 

a continuous flow reactor at industrially relevant current densities up to 200 mA cm -2. Moreover, 

changing the embedded transition metal allowed tuning the selectivity towards the desired 

product. A complete potential -productivity profile was established for CO and/or formic acid 

yielding better insights into the overall performance of all electrocatalysts. Mn -N-C and Fe -N-C

performance was compromised by its high CO* bi nding energy, while Co -N-C gave way mostly 

to HER. Ni -N-C and Sn -N-C revealed to be competitive electrocatalysts, being the latter for the 

first time tested in a flow reactor at high current densities. A productivity of 589 L CO m -2h-1 at -

1.39 V vs RHE wi th Ni -N-C and 456 L HCOOH m -2h-1 at -1.47 V vs RHE with Sn -N-C was 

achieved and no signs of degradation were detected after 24 hours of operation at industrially 

relevant current densities (100 mA cm -2). Stable operation at 200 mA cm -2 led to turnover 

freq uencies for the production of carbon products up to 5176 h -1. Th is unprecedented analysis 

constitutes an essential step towards the scalability and ultimately towards the economical 

valorization of CO 2 electrolyzers using metal -containing nitrogen -doped ca talysts. Dental amalgam electrode as a voltammetric tool for triazine -based 

# pesticides determination: application in natural water samples 

Fernanda C . O. L.Martins 1 and Djenaine De Souza 2 

> 1

Green Analytical Chemistry Group (GEQAV), College of Agriculture “Luiz de Queiroz”, University of 

São Paulo, PO Box 9, Piracicaba, SP 13418 -970, Brazil.  

> 2

Laboratory of Electroanalytical Applied to Biotechnology and Food Engineering (LEABE), 

Multidisciplinary Group of Research, Science and Technology (RMPCT), Chemistry Institut e, Uberlândia 

Federal University, Major Jerônimo street, 566, Patos de Minas - MG, 38700 -002, Brazil. 

fernandacolm@hotmail.com and djenaine@gmail.com 

The main goal of this work was the use of the dental amal gam electrode (DAE) allied to square 

wave voltam metry (SWV) in the analytical determination of the ametrine, atrazine and simazine in 

natural water. The experimental and voltammetric parameters were optimized in Brinton -Robinson buffer 

at pH 2.5, with a pulse amplitude of 50 mV , pulse frequency of 100 s -1, and scan increment of -2 mV, and 

consequently, it was presented irreversible w ell -defined voltammetric peaks at -1.05 V, -0.97 V and -0.99 

V vs Ag/AgCl 3.0 mol L -1 for ametrine, atrazine, and simazine respectively . Additionally, the SWV 

parameters eval uation indicated the redox reaction of the ametrine and simazine were controlled by 

diffusion rate , while, the atrazine was controlled by adsorption kinetic. Furthermore, Lovric’s Equation 

enabled the calculation of the number of electrons of these reactio ns that were 2 electrons , and it made 

possible the verification of the mechanism of the three triazines, being that the ametrine was the reduction 

of bond carbon -SCH 3, a lready, the atrazine reduction of the bond carbon -chloride and the simazine was 

suppose d that occurred atrazine like a mechanism, reducing of the bond of the carbon -chloride bond in 

the pyridinic ring .

Analytical curves were built for each triazine separately using the standard addition method in a

linear range from 0.7500 to 10.00 μmol L -1. All analytical parameters (linear range, determination 

coefficient, detection and quantification limits, precision and accuracy) were calculations, and are shown 

in Table 1 . The data indicated a suitable linearity and adequate d etection and quantificatio n limits , which 

presented values lower than the maximum limits of residues permitted in natural water by Brazili an 

Environmental Agency, 100 μ g L -1 (100 ppb) and near values obtaine d using the chromatographic 

techniques and other electrodic surfaces. The m ethodology precision was evaluated by repeatability and 

reproducibility experiments producing adequate values , while the accuracy was measured using recovery 

curves producing recovery values of 100.5 , 100.2 , 99.6 % to ametrine, atrazine and simazine, 

respe ctively. 

Th e proposed methodology was 

applied in the natural water from Paranaíba 

River , considering samples characterized 

by biochemical oxygen demand analysis, 

that indicated the presence of the 10.8 mg 

L-1, 11.6 mg L -1 and 15.4 mg L -1 of total 

organic compounds considering the sample 

1, sample 2 and sample 3, respectively, 

which are directly related to different levels 

of organic matter, including wastes from 

agricultural, industrial and urban activities. 

1.0 mL of each sample was mi xture 

with 9.0 mL of BR buffer pH 2.5 in an 

electrochemical cell and analytical curves and recovery curves were obtained by SWV experiments on the 

DAE. The inclination of the curves was influenced according to the organic composition, so, the increase 

of BOD values provided a proportional increase in the slope of the analytical curves, indicating that 

components interact wit h the triazines promoting an improvement in the analytical signals. The recovery 

curves also evaluate the interference of organic and inorganic compounds in the natural water sample, 

which presented values around to ones obtained in pure electrolyte showin g that the sample did not 

interfere in the voltammetric signals. The methodology proposed was applied in the natural water sample 

without sample preparation step , showing its robustness. Furthermore, the DAE presented an alternative 

environmentally friendl y to determination of triazines based pesticides .                            

> Parameter Ametr ine Atrazine Simazine
> LR (μmol L -1)0.7500 –
> 10.00
> 0.7500 –
> 10.00
> 0.7500 –
> 10.00
> r0.9989 0.9952 0.9963
> DL (mol L -1)1.200x10 -7
> (27.28 μg L -1)
> 1.241x10 -7
> (26.77 μg L -1)
> 1.624x10 -7
> (32.75 μg L -1)
> QL (mol L -1)3.636 x10 -7
> (82.66 μ g L -1)
> 3.759 x10 -7
> (81.07 μg L -1)
> 4.921 x10 -7
> (99.24 μg L -1)
> Repeatability (%) 2.13 4.25 4.75
> Reproducibility (%) 2.58 3.56 2.62
> Recovery (%) 100.5 100.2 99.6
> Table 1:Analytical parameters for the determination of triazines in pure
> electrolyte on DAE, where LR is the linearity range, r is the correlation
> coefficient, S bis the blank standard from reduction pote ntial values of triazines,
> DL and QL are detection and quantification limit, respectively.

# Correlation between the electrochemical behavior and mechanical 

# properties of Ti -20Zr as a candidate for orthopedic material 

Nestor R. Florido Suarez , Pedro P. Socorro Perdomo, Amparo Verdú Vazquez, Julia C. Mirza Rosca 

Processing Eng ineering Dep artment, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria 

Campus Universitario de Tafira, E IIC, 35017 

nestor.florido@ulpgc.es 

A combination of titanium with zirconium was evaluated because it has been suggested as a candidate for 

human body implant material and was primarily developed in response to concerns of potential cytotoxicity 

and adverse tissue reactions caused by vanadium and aluminum in the actually used biomaterial Ti6Al4V. 

From all the metallic alloys used in prosthesis, probably the most used one is Ti -6Al -4V alloy. Titanium 

has poor mechanical strength [1] and when aluminium or vanadium are added to titanium in small 

quantities, the strength of the alloy is much increased over that of titanium [ 2]. Therefore, the Ti -6Al -4V 

alloy achieves considerably higher tensile properties than of pure titanium and this alloy is used in high 

stress -bearing situations. But Ti -6Al -4V has a potential cytotoxicity and adverse tissue reaction s caused by 

vanadium [ 3]. 

Further studies have shown the release of both V and Al ions from the alloy might cause long -term health 

problems, such as peripheral neuropathy, osteomalacia and Alzheimer diseases. 

The microstructure and microhardness were det erminate; the tensile strength and electrochemical behavior 

were evaluated. Titanium is an allotropic element and this mean that exists in more than one 

crystallographic form. At room temperature has a hexagonal close -packed (hcp) crystal structure, which is 

referred to as 'alpha' phase. At 883ºC (1621 ºF) this structure transforms to a body -centred cubic (bcc) called 

'beta' phase. 

The Ti -20Zr alloy, composed of 80% Titanium and 20% Zirconium, (from R&D CS Bucharest, Romania 

– Research &Development Consult ing and Services) was obtained by vacuum melting. 

From metallographical images can be observed that the sampl e has an alpha -beta structure. The 

microhardness measurements concluded that the alloy formed a hard layer on its surface which greatly 

improves the wear resistance. The obtained tensile strength can be considered good in relation with other 

similar implant materials. 

The impedance spectra were fitted with two time constants equivalent circuit and the fitting parameters 

indicate long -term stabilit y of the passive layers in surgical implant conditions. 

The results were confirmed by mechanical approach, in terms of two -layer model of the oxide film, 

consisting of a thin barrier type inner layer and a porous outer layer. The pronounced porous outer layer is 

expected to facilitate the incorporation of mineral ions and to improve the resistance to electrochemical 

corrosion over the potential of relevance for human body conditions. 

The hardness of Ti -20Zr alloy is 20% higher than that of commercially p ure Ti, confirming the alloy's 

superior mechanical strength .

REFERENCES 

[1] T. Kokubo, H -M Kim, M. Kawashita, T. Nakamura, Bioactive metals: Preparation and properties, J. 

Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 15(2) (2004) 99 -107. 

[2] T.Kokubo, F.Miyaji, H -M.Kim, Spontaneous formation of bonelike apatite layer on chemically treated 

titanium metals, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 79(4) (1996) 1127 -1129. 

[3] S.Fujibayashi, T.Nakamura, S.Nishiguchi, J.Tamura, M.Uchida, H-M.Kim, T.Kokubo, Bioactive 

titanium: Effect of sodium remova l on the bone -bonding ability of bioactive titanium prepared by alkali 

and heat treatment J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 56(4) (2001) 562 -570. Cation Transport in Nickel Hexacyanoferrate Structures: Effect of the 

# Hydrogen Bond Network on the Ionic Mobilities 

Alena I. Komayko a, Sergey V. Rya zantsev b, Eduard E. Levin a,c , Victoria A. Nikitina b

> a

M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1/3, Moscow, 119991 Russia 

> b

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel str.3, Moscow, 121205 Russia 

> c

FSRC "Crystallography and Photonics" RAS, Leninskiy Prospekt 59, Moscow, 119333 Russia 

kai2796@mail.ru 

Post -lithium metal -ion battery technologies based on Na +, K +, Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ − ions are attracting more and 

more attention from the battery community . Recently, the possibility of employing proton -interc alating materials for 

energy storage applications has been investigated due to the low cost of the materials, environmental friendliness of 

aqueous solutions and exceedingly high transport rates of protons. [1] Prussian Blue Analogues (PBAs) have been 

ackno wledged as prospective electrode materials for both sodium -ion and potassium -ion batteries due to high 

diffusivities of Na + and K + cations, which are achieved due to the presence of large 3d -channels in PBA structures. [2] 

PBAs can also be considered as sui table materials for proton -intercalation batteries due to the hydrogen bond networks 

in the structures of hydrated PBAs, which could provide exceptionally high proton transport rates via Grotthuss -type 

mechanisms . Yet, PBAs exhibit different structures and different phase -transformation patterns [3] depending on the 

amount of water and intercalated alkali ions in the as -synthesized materials, which calls for the investigation of the 

effect of the PBA structure type and hydration level on the mobilities of ch arge -compensating species. 

In this work, we focus on comparing potassium -ion and hydroxonium diffusivities in nickel hexacyanoferrate 

structures. The electrochemical behavior of the PBA cathode materials with the compositions Ni 1.5 [Fe(CN) 6]· 6.9 H2O

and K 2Ni[Fe(CN) 6]·1.6H 2O was investigated with respect to their charge storage properties in aqueous solutions 

containing K + and H 3O+ as charge compensating cations. The diffusion coefficients and charge transfer resistances 

were estimated based on chronoamperom etry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data. Complementary 

information on the mechanism of redox transformations of PBA materials in aqueous solutions was obtained based 

on IR spectroscopy and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance measuremen ts . Our results indicate that the rates 

of diffusional transport of cations in nickel hexacyanoferrate structure s are strongly dependent on the PBA water 

content. The presence of a hydrogen bond network in the PBA structure leads to an increase in the prot on transport 

rates and slows down the transport of potassium cations. 

References 

[1] X. Wu, J. J. Hong, W. Shin, L. Ma, T. Liu, X. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Qi, T. W. Surta, W. Huang, J. Neuefeind, T. Wu, 

P. A. Greaney, J. Lu, X. Ji, Nat. Energ. 2019 , 4, 123. 

[2] K. Hurlbutt, S. Wheeler, I. Capone, M. Pasta, Joule 2018 , 2, 1950. 

[3] E. E. Levin, A. A. Kokin, D. E. Presnov, A. G. Borzenko, S. Y. Vassiliev, V. A. Nikitina, K. J. Stevenson, 

ChemElectroChem 2020 , 7, 761. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was s upported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant # 20 -33 -70092 ). Iron Porphyrin Monolayers Supported on Gold Electrodes: Influence 

# of its Orientation on Electrocatalytic Activity of Oxygen Reduction 

# Reaction 

G. Ocampo 1,2 *, P. Alexa 3, J. Giusi 1, G. Benitez 1, R. Gutzler 3, A. Boh 4, B. Habermeyer 4, K. Kern 3,5, D. 

Grumelli 1

> 1

INIFTA - UNLP - CONICET, La Plata, Argentina. 

> 2

CIDMEJu – UNJu - CONICET, Jujuy, Argentina. 

> 3

Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Stuttgart, Germany 

> 4

PorphyChem SAS, Dijon, France 

> 5

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 

*gerardoocampo@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

Iron porphyrins FeP are of high interest in electrocatalysts developing for the oxygen reduction reaction 

(ORR) in replacement to Pt, which is the best catalyst for ORR but too expensive and ambiently scarce 1,2 .

The technological applications require immobilizing FeP on the surface . Many alternatives have been 

explored to bring FeP to substrate surfaces resulting in different orientations 2,3,4, interaction with the 

substrate ( Van der Walls or covalent bounding), and chemical nature, etc. All these final structures of the 

FeP on a sub strate would affect the ORR performance and this should be taken into account 5.

In this work, we will present the influence on the ORR of the final orientation of 5,10,15,20 -Tetrakis(4 -

phenyl) iron(III) porphyrin ( FeTPP ) on Au surfaces achieved by immob ilization of Fe TPP to the surface 

by two different preparation method s. One method uses physical vapor deposition of FeTPP on ultra -high 

vacuum (UHV) condition s which creates self -assembly monolayers of Fe TPP lying flat on the surface 

(Figure 1.a) . A second method consist s in electrografting of the diazoni um salt of the Fe TPP in presence 

of an excess of the radical scavenger, 2,2 -diphenyl -1-picrylhydrazil (DPPP) in order to favor monolayer 

grown , followed by metalation in solution . This second method creates monolayers of FeTPP orientated 

quasi perpendicular to the surfaces (figure 1.b) . Both parallel and perpendicular configurations have been 

characterize d by atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning tunnel mic roscopy (STM) , X-ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy (XPS) and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM). Finally, the influence of the 

orientation and chemical nature of the FeTPP monolayer on the ORR performance has been evaluated by 

lineal scan volt ammetry (LSV) in alkaline solution .

Figure 1. Monolayers of FeTPP obtained on gold surfaces by (a) physical vapor deposition on ultra -high 

vacuum and ( b) electrografting via radical scavenger technique followed by metallization in solution. 

References 

1. Buchner F, et al. J Phys Chem C . 2008;112(39):15458 -15465. 

2. Wurster B, et al. J Am Chem Soc . 2016;138(11):3623 -3626. 

3. Lu. X, et al. ChemPhysChem 2006, 7(4): 854 -862. 

4. Gross A. J., et al.  Electrochem. Commun.2011; 13 (11): 1236 -1239. 

5. Marianov AN, et al. ACS Sustain Chem Eng . 2019;7(4):3838 -3848. Au 

FeP  

> Electrografting self -assembly
> (ultra -high vacuum )

# Modeling Self -Si milar Periodic Islands in the Oscillatory 

# Electrodissolution of Nickel 

C. da S. Rodrigues 1, C. G. P. dos Santos 1, R. C. C. de Miranda 1, E. Parma 1, Raphael Nagao 1,2 ,*

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, University of Campinas, CEP 13083 -970 Campinas, SP, Brazil 

> 2

Center for Innovation on New Energies, University of Campinas, CEP 13083 -841 Campinas, SP, Brazil 

*nagao@unicamp. br 

The oscillatory electrodissolution of nickel is one among several reactions utilized as a model -system to 

study the emergence o f oscillations and pattern formation in electrochemical interfaces, in addition to 

frequently providing experimental proofs for t heoretical predictions in synchronization engineering. The 

reaction was modeled in 1992 by Haim and co -workers 1 and since then the model has been used with 

great success. Although some numerical studies have been done in thi s regard, there is still no detailed 

investigation of the effect of control parameters on the complex dynamics of nickel dissolution. Here, we 

provide a well -detailed and rigorous analysis of the effect of the external resistance and applied potential 

by s imulating high -resolution phase diagrams based on the calculation of Lyapunov exponents and 

morphological periods (also known as isospikes 2) of the time -series . Our findings clearly indicate a strong 

dependence of the self -similar periodic islands, the so -called “shrimps” ,3 with the control parameters. 

Overall, we observed a low shrimp density in the phase diagrams being completely suppressed in large 

values of resistance and potential. The shrimp -like structures become gradually elongated with an 

increase of the control parameters to the point where only diagonally aligned periodic bands intertwined 

with chaotic domains are present. Interestingly, period -doublin g cascades were observed not only on the 

shrimps but also on the periodic bands. Some of these part icularities found in the oscillatory 

electrodissolution of nickel may be attributed to the exponential dependence of Butler -Volmer kinetics on 

differential e quations. 

Figure 1 – Lyapunov diagram in the (r, v) control space indic ating chaotic and periodic regions for three 

different range s of resistance and poten tial : (a ) low , (b) intermediate and (c) high values . Chaos is marked 

by yellow -cyan scale and per iodicity is denoted by white -black one. 

Acknowle dgements 

FAPESP, CAPES, CNPq and SHELL 

** A manuscript cont aining the results described here has been submi tted .

Referen ce s

1 – D. Haim, O. Lev, L. M. Pismen, M. Sheintuch, J. Phys. Chem. 1992 96, 2676. 

2 – J.G. Freire, J. A. C. Gallas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 12191 .

3 – M. A. Nascimento, J.A.C. Gallas, H. Varela, Phys.  Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 441. Probing Speciation and its Applicability to Concentrated Electrolyte 

# Transport Mode lling     

> Andrew A. Wang , Charles W. Monroe
> Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
> Oxford, United Kingdom
> andrew.wang@eng.ox.ac.uk

## Speciation in concentrated electrolytes has been demonstrated to occur due to 

## coordination between solvents, cations, and anions [1] . Interactions between species 

## such as ion pairs impact the transport laws governing diffusion, migration, and 

## convection . To model how composition and potential gradients develop across a 

## concentrated electrolyte, one may need to account for the equilibria between different 

## molecular structures. 

## The dynamics of ion -pair formation and salt association /dissociation kinetics both can 

## impact the availability of charge -carrying species in an electrolyte. Experimentally, 

## transport and thermodynamic measurements present indicators for ion -pairing, while 

## spectroscopic techniques can further quantify extent of dissociation . Transport 

## phenomena relating to solute and solvent structure , such as Faradaic convection and the 

## excluded -volume effect , can also become domina nt in the super -concentrat ed regime 

## [2]. In very concentrated electrolytes c onvection can be important because when the salt 

## occupies a large volume fraction of the solution, salt flux across the boundary of a 

## solution drives a bulk solution velocity through overall mass continuity . Faradaic 

## convection can be quantified by combining densitometry w ith electrochemical 

## measurements. 

## Newman’s application of Onsager –Stefan –Maxwell theory to electrochemical transport 

## considers solute/solute interactions neglected in Nernst –Planck dilute solution theory 

## [3]. The distinction between higher -order species i n models may be necessitated by the 

## timescales relevant to bulk transport and ion -pairing dynamics. We will discuss how 

## solute -volume effects and ion -association equilibria influence apparent flux -explicit 

## transport properties such as conductivity, diffusi vity and transference number [4].              

> [1] G. Richardson et al., The effect of ionic aggregates on the transport of charged species in lithium
> electrolyte solutions, J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 (2018)
> [2] Liu, J. & Monroe, C. W. Solute -volume effects in electr olyte transport. Electrochim. Acta 135, 447 –
> 460 (2014).
> [3] Monroe, C. W. & Delacourt, C. Continuum transport laws for locally non -neutral concentrated
> electrolytes. Electrochim. Acta 114 , 649 –657 (2013).
> [4] Hou, T. & Monroe, C. W. Composition -dependent thermodynamic and mass -transport
> characterization of lithium hexafluorophosphate in propylene carbonate. Electrochim. Acta (2019).

# Nanostructurated bioactive surface of Ti -Ta alloys for medical devices 

Nestor R. Florido Suarez 1, Pedro P. Socorro Perdomo 2 , Tomas Gil López 3, Julia C. Mirza Rosca 2

> 1

Processing Eng.Dept ., University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,35017,  nestor.florido@ulpgc.es 

> 2

Mechanical Eng.Dept., University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,35017,  julia.mirza@ulpgc.e s

> 3

Madrid Polytechnic University, Department of Building Technology, Madrid 28040,  tomas.gill@upm.es 

The most commonly used titanium alloy is Ti 6Al 4V but further studies have shown that the release of both 

V and Al ions might cause long -term health problems [1,2]. In response to these health problems, new Ti 

alloys have been developed and among them, titanium -tantalum alloys are expected to become promising 

candidates for medical applications due firstly to tantalum which is a non -toxic element and secondly due 

to their better compatibility with bone tissue compared with Ti and Ti 6Al 4V [3]. 

The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of tantalum concentration on the behaviour of different 

bioactive Ti -Ta alloys as biomaterials for medical applications. Three kinds of binary Ti -Ta alloys with 

5%,15% and 25% mass tantalum with a surfa ce modification treatment consisting of immersing the samples 

in hot concentrated NaOH followed by washing with distilled water and dried at 40ºC during 24 hours. 

The microstructure of the Ti -Ta alloys was observed by metallographic technique and by scann ing 

tunnelling microscopy (STM). 

Were analysed using various roughness parameters such as: arithmetic mean roughness (Ra), maximum 

height (Ry) and 10 -point mean roughness (Rz). 

Ti25Ta alloy with lower surface roughness experienced less corrosion when com pared to the specimens 

with higher surface roughness values. 

The differences in the hardness and depth of passive layer concerned mostly with bioactive treatment and 

the concentration of tantalum in the alloy. 

Analysis of the impedance spectra was done b y fitting these data to the equivalent circuit proposed in Fig.1. 

The components of the circuit take into account the electrolytic resistance, the resistance and the 

capacitance of the passive layer, the double layer capacitance and the charge transfer res istance (the model 

of the surface is presented in Fig.2).      

> Fig. 1.Equivalent circuit used for fitting the experimental data of EIS
> Fig. 2.The model proposed for passive layer formed on the surface of bioactive alloys .

Among studied Ti -Ta alloys, the Ti -25Ta exhibits after chemical treatment, superior properties of the 

passive film and corrosion behaviour , therefore it appears to be a promising candidate for novel 

biomaterials. Further experiments are needed to quantify the influence of tantalum content on 

biocompatibility and cell growth on nanostructurated bioactive Ti -Ta alloys. Porous passive layer 

Metal Nanostructurated bioactive surface of Ti -Ta alloys for medical devices 

Nestor R. Florido Suarez , Pedro P. Socorro Perdomo , Tomas Gil López, Julia C. Mirza Rosca 

Processing Eng ineering Dep artment, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria 

Campus Universitario de Tafira, EIIC, 35017 

nestor.florido@ulpgc.es 

The most commonly used titanium alloy is Ti 6Al 4V but further studies have shown that the release of both 

V and Al ions might cause long -term health problems [1,2]. In response to these health problems, new Ti 

alloys have been developed and among them, tita nium -tantalum alloys are expected to become promising 

candidates for medical applications due firstly to tantalum which is a non -toxic element and secondly due 

to their better compatibility with bone tissue compared with Ti and Ti 6Al 4V [3]. 

The aim of thi s study is to investigate the influence of tantalum concentration on the behaviour of different 

bioactive Ti -Ta alloys as biomaterials for medical applications. Three kinds of binary Ti -Ta alloys with 

5%,15% and 25% mass tantalum with a surface modificatio n treatment consisting of immersing the samples 

in hot concentrated NaOH followed by washing with distilled water and dried at 40ºC during 24 hours. 

The microstructure of the Ti -Ta alloys were observed by metallographic technique and by scanning 

tunnellin g microscopy (STM). 

Were analysed using various roughness parameters such as: arithmetic mean roughness (Ra), maximum 

height (Ry) and 10 -point mean roughness (Rz). 

Ti25Ta alloy with lower surface roughness experienced less corrosion when compared to the specimens 

with higher surface roughness values. 

The differences in the hardness and depth of passive layer concerned mostly with bioactive treatment and 

the concentration of tantalum in the alloy. 

Analysis of the impedance spectra was done by fitting these data to the equivalent circuit proposed in Fig.1. 

The components of the circuit take into account the electrolytic resistance, the resistance and the 

capacitance of the passive layer, the double l ayer capacitance and the charge transfer resistance (the model 

of the surface is presented in Fig.2).      

> Fig. 3.Equivalent circuit used for fitting the experimental data of EIS
> Fig. 4.The model proposed for passive layer formed on the surface of bioactive alloys .

Among studied Ti -Ta alloys, the Ti -25Ta exhibits after chemical treatment, superior properties of the 

passive film and corrosion behaviour , therefore it appears to be a promising candida te for novel 

biomaterials. Further experiments are needed to quantify the influence of tantalum content on 

biocompatibility and cell growth on nanostructurated bioactive Ti -Ta alloys. Porous passive layer 

Metal Increasing the Osseoinduction of Ti6Al7Nb Tibia I mplant by Surface 

# Treatment and “in vivo” Application 

Julia C. Mirza Rosca 1, Nestor R. Florido Suarez 2, Pedro P. Socorro Perdomo 1 , Tomas Gil López 3

> 1

Mechanical Eng.Dept., University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 3501 7, SPAIN 

julia.mirza@ulpgc.es 

Animals such as rats, guinea pigs, rabbits, dogs, sheep, goats, pigs and others with a relatively long life 

expectancy are suitable for long -term testing of subcutaneous tissues, bones and muscles. Pigs are one of 

the preferred species as they have organs and osseointegration times similar to humans and this is one of 

the main reasons why the minipig has been chosen as an experimental anim al in our study, mainly focused 

on analyzing the behavior "in vivo" of a titanium alloy plate Ti6Al7Nb with nanostructured surface, from 

the point of view of its osseointegration and its toxicity. 

A micro -nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite coating on the bioa ctivated surface has been deposited in two steps: 

immersion in NaOH solution plus heat treatment and immersion in SBF solution with additional 

biovitroceramic PAW1 content 

.

The importance of the mechanical stability of the implant is evaluated by analyzin g the quality of the 

osseointegration at the bone -implant interface through the analysis of the amount of neoformed bone in 

direct contact with the implant, able to mechanically fix the implant and the type of bone tissue that is 

formed. 

In this study, th e implant was designed so that implantation is simple and as minimally invasive as possible, 

in the tibia (Fig.1), ensuring optimal bone -implant contact as well as load transmission (bone growth 

induction). 

Fig.1. Radiography of the implant Fig.2. Metal -implant interface analysis 

The implantation period has been 6 months and during the healing period the contact between the bone and 

the implant of each operated pig has been guaranteed, no signs of inflammation have been observed . The 

to xicity of the implanted metal plate was evaluated by determining the concentration of aluminium by 

atomic absorption in the different organs of the experimental animals. 

Analysis by scanning electron microscope and EDX analyzer of the bone -implant interfa ce of the samples 

indicates that there is no presence of potentially toxic elements (aluminum) belonging to the implant, results 

confirmed by electrochemical tests obtained in vitro before implantation. 

The study of the bone -implant interface (Fig.2) of the samples from the experimental animals shows that 

elements belonging to the mineral part of the bone tissue (calcium, phosphorus) have been found. The 

average of the results obtained from the Ca/P ratio that have been analyzed for each animal allow us t o

confirm that there is bone growth. 

Studies using the atomic absorption spectropy technique indicate that the proportion of aluminium that can 

affect humans due to the diffusion of this element when wearing an implant is insignificant and cannot be 

consi dered harmful compared to daily consumption through food intake or other factors. Bioenergy generation from glycerol in an MFC using a mixed culture 

# of microorganisms 

Gisele Giovanna Halfeld a, Erica Janaina Rodrigues de Almeida a, Valeria Reginatto Spiller a, Adalgisa 

Rodrigues de Andrade a,b  

> a

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Philosoph y Sciences and Letters at Ribeirão Preto, University of 

São Paulo, 14040 -901 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.  

> b

Unesp, Nati onal Institute for Alternative Technologies of Detection, Toxicological Evaluation and 

Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives (INCT -DATREM), Institute of Chemistry, P.O. Box 355, 

14800 -900, Araraquara, SP, Brazil 

gihalfeld@usp.br 

The use of microorganisms immobilized onto the surface of electrodes in MFC devises can be employed 

to generate effi cient electric al energy . In addition, the low environmental im pact and variety of fuels and 

oxidants must be considerate . Recently, we have concentrated our goal to the develop anaerobic 

degradation of glycerol to produce energy. This may be important to a lternative glycerol treatment plus 

prod uct valorization to ov ercome the surplus of this fuel. We will report the energy generation of energy 

employing pure gl ycerol in an air -breathing MFC with an anaerobic anode compartment (30 mL) . The 

anode (carbon fibe r brush - Re search Laboratory Sh op/China) with 3 x 2 cm was connected with cathode 

((HT1400W, ELAT ® GDL –BASF) across the externa l resistance of 1 K U. A mixture culture o f

microorganisms from a lagoon of Mina Gerais state/Brazil was Inoculated (10 days ) in a proper medium 

[1]. In order to obtain a s table microorganism’s fi lm s continuous acclimation of glycerol was done by 

rep lace ment gradually acetate f rom glycerol (fractions of 20% w/w). We star ted initially wit h1.0 g L -1 of 

acetate until the total replacem ent of the carbon source for glycerol (1.0 g/L) . As can be seen in the figure 

replace ment of acetate for glycerol increase s more than 2 times ( 144 h ) the operational cycle of the MFC 

plus furnishing an in crease in the power output (440 mV ± 0. 1 or 12.57 mA m-2). These results are higher 

compared with the ones found in the literature. A good stability of glycerol MFC was obtained in the 

different feeding cycles investigated. The maximum power density obtained for MFC was 7.7 mW m -2

and the maximum current wa s 25.8 mA m -2. HPLC da ta s how ed that the fuel is fast metabolized b y the 

mic roorganism a nd the main product at the end of the feeding cycle is propanediol. 

Our results showed that glycerol is a suitable and 

promising substrate for power generation, using a

simple two -chamber MFC even at high glycerol 

concentrations. SEM images showed the formation of 

the biofilm, predominantly with the rod -shaped. The 

formation of nanowires was also detected in a large 

extend. 

1. Lovley , D.R ., Phillips, E.J.P., 1988 . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54 (6), 1472 –1480.  

> Acknowledge: FAPESP (grants # 2017/20431 -7 and 2014/50945 -4), CNPq (grant (465571/2014 -0) and CAPES 001.

# Polysulfide reduc tio n in Lith ium-Sulfur batteries th rough the 

# bio catalytic effect of tris(2 -carbox yethyl)p hosph ine hydr och loride 

# (TCEP): A First-Principle st udy

Ma. del Carm en Roja s1* , Mar tin Zolof f Mic ho f 2, Patricio Vel ez2, Vict or ia Bracamo nte1, Da niel Barr aco1,

Ez equ iel Lei va2 ; Guiller mina Luqu e2 

> 1

IFEG, Facult ad de Matem ática Astrono mí a, Fí sica y Computaci ón , Univer sida d Naci onal de

Córdoba , CONICET, Ciuda d Univer sit aria, X5000 , Córdo ba, Argenti na 

> 2

INFIQC, De partame nto de Química Te óric a y Compu taci ona l, Facult ad de Cie nci as Químic as,

Univer sida d Naci ona l de Córdoba , CONICET, Ciuda d Univers it aria, X5000 , Córdo ba,Argenti na

> *

mroj as@ famaf. un c.edu .ar

Lit hium-sulf ur batte ries are con sidered as the op timal secon d-generati on c omm ercial batte ry due to their 

high t heor etic al energy density of 2600 Wh kg −1 and a hi gh specific a high theor etic al specific cap acity of

167 5 mAh g −1, the natural abundance of sulfur its nat ur al abu ndance, it’s low cost and

env ironm ental fr iend li ness [1] . However, Li-S batte ries suff er fro m diff erent pr oble ms, such as the

insulati ng nat ur e of sulf ur , the chang e of volume of the acti ve mate rial and the loss of acti ve sulf ur

mate rial dur ing repeated charge/ discharg e cycling . Upon lithiati on of sulfur, high er-ord er lithi um

polysulf ides (Li2 Sx (x =4, 6, and 8)) are generat ed that are high ly solub le in the li qu id ele ctr olytes and

shu ttle acro ss the separat or causing low charg e/discharg e e ff icie ncy and c orro sion of the lithi um ano de. 

This eff ect produ ces l ow util izati on of the acti ve mate rial and cap acity fades. Anot her fact that makes Li-

S batte ries no n- comm ercia ble until tod ay is the un con trolla ble ele ctr od epo sition of insulati ng Li2S2 /Li 2S

that blocks ion /e lectr on dif fu sion and decreases the util izati on of sulfur [2] . To ov ercom e these iss ues, 

there are diff erentare appro aches different approaches , such , as such as , incor por ati on,

incorporation of c ondu cti ve mat rices and adso rb ent agents in the cathode, optimizati on of new 

ele ctrolytes, mod ificati on of the separat or to redu ce the shu ttle e ff ect, protecti on of lithi um a node with 

po lym ers, amon g others. ButHowever, de spite the ob tai ned advances in inh ibiting the sh uttle effect, it’s it 

is wor th no ti ng that the nu cle ation a nd gro wth of Li2S2/Li 2S is still un con trolled dur ing the discharg e

pro cess , which lea ds to la rg e insolub le Li2S2 /Li 2S aggr egates. Considering this fact , catal yzi ng the

redu cti on of long-chain polysulfi des to Li2S2 /Li 2S and enh anci ng the reacti on kineti cs have prov en to be

valid wa ys to solve the shu ttle eff ect an d improv e the rate perfo rmance of Li-S batte ries. Recentl y, a series 

of fun cti onal com posite inte rla yers have been syste matic ally i nv est igated to identify the key paramete rs

that determine t heir role in improving the performance of Li/S batteries . It is well kno wn that 

trial ky l pho sph ines have the prop erty of selectively redu cing e disulfi de bond s. Recently experimental 

work s use the commercially a vaila ble organoph os phoru s tri s(2- carbo xyet hy l)pho sph ine hydrochlor ide

(TCEP) takin g advanta ge of its eff ect in disrup ti ng disulfi de bond s in variou s pro tei ns [3] to c atal yze 

the cle av age of –S–S– in po lysu lfi des. In the pr ese nt wor k, we perfor m density fun cti on al calculati on s

using SI ESTA [4 ] with the aim of und ersta nd ingto understand the specific work ing pr inciple of TCEP 

in lithi um-sulfur batte ries. In this regard, we have perform ed studies of the inte racti on of lon g- chain 

po lysulfi des with T CEP and stud ied the TCEP-as sisted po lysulfi de redu cti on reacti on by Nudged elastic 

band calc ulati on s [5] . The reaction ste ps fo r TCEP to redu ce the po lysulfi de c hai ns, incl ud ing the

inte rmediate pro duct of each redu cti on step (i. e. cle av age site of po lysulfi des) are elucidated in this work. 

Bib liog raphy

[1 ] A. Man thira m, Y. Fu, S. Chung , C. Zu, and Y. Su, “Rec harg eab le Lit hium − S ulf ur Batte ries,” Chem. 

Re v. , vo l. 11 4, pp. 1175 1–87, 201 4.

[2 ] Y. Huang, X. Sun , R. Li, G. Lia ng, C. Wei, and H. Hu, “P ro moti ng Redo x Redu cti on of Lit hium -

Sulf ur Batte ry by Tris(2-carboxy l) pho sph ine Shearing S-S Bond ,” J. Electr ochem. So c., vo l. 166, 201 9.

[3 ] T. Ya ng et al., “U nif or m gro wth of Li 2S pr omo ted by an org anop hospho rus-based mediat or fo r high

rate Li -S batte ries,” Chem. Eng. J., vol. 381 , no . Ju ne 2019 , p. 1226 85, 2020 .

[4 ] J. M. Soler et al., “The SIESTA met ho d for ab initio order-N mate rials simu lati on ,” J. Phys. Cond ens.

Matte r, vo l. 14 , no . 11 , pp . 2745–2779 , 2002.

[5 ] G. He nkel man and H. Jón sson , “Im prov ed ta ng ent estimate in the nudg ed elastic band met ho d fo r

find ing minimu m energy pat hs and sadd le po ints,” J. Chem.  Phys ., vo l. 11 3, no. 22, pp. 9978–9985 , 2000 .Nano -graphitic templates and hierarchical nanostructures in multi -

# functional electrocatalysts for CO 2 conversion 

Miriam Moro (a), Giovanni Valenti (a) , Tiziano Montini (b) , Alessandro Boni (a) , Lucia Nasi (c) , Michele 

Melchionna (b) , Silvia Voci (a) , Giovanni Bertoni (c) , Marcella Bonchio (d) , Paolo Fornasiero (b) , Francesco 

Paolucci (a) and Maurizio Prato (b) 

a) Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, Alma Mater Studiorum - University of 

Bologna, Via Selmi, 2 - 40126 Bologna, Italy. 

b) University of Trieste, Dep. of Chemical Science, Center of Excellence of Nanostructured 

Material (CENMAT), Trieste, Italy .

c) CNR -IMEM Institute, Parco area delle Scienze 37/A, 43124 Parma, Italy 

d) University of Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy 

E-mail : miriam.moro2@unibo.it 

The electrocatalytic reduction of CO 2 is a captivating strategy for the conversion of CO 2 into fuels , to realize 

a close loop for carbon footprinting . The research has focused on the development of new materials and 

technology capable of capturing and converting CO 2 into useful products. 1 Among all reduction products, 

formic acid is particularly attractive for its high volumetric hydrogen density, low toxicity and liquid state, 

that make it a valuable hydrogen storag e vector. 

The design of new electrocatalysts that reduce CO 2 in a selective and efficient fashion is a key step for 

future exploitation of this technology .

Here we present how the combination of different building blocks in a single nanostructure might be a good 

strategy to achieve a good selectivity in the CO 2 reduction process. 

Combining the unique physico -chemical properties of functionalized nanomaterials (such as carbon 

nanotubes and carbon nanohorns) and nanocrystalline cerium dioxide (CeO 2) we revealed faradaic 

efficiency for formic acid production as high as 55% at an overpotential as low as 0.02V in acid solutions. 

These performances have been possible by the formation of partially reduced ceria ( Ce 4+/3+ O2-x) responsible 

of a n increased CO 2 adsorption and a more efficient electron transfer at the surface. 2 In the nanocomposite, 

the carbon nanostructures don’t just act as a support, 

but they counteract the insulating effect of oxide 

nanoparticles and promote the generation of C e3+ 

sites. Their elevated surface area and high electrical 

conductivity guarantee a greater process efficiency .3

In particular, the nanohorns have a unique conical 

geometric, where the nano -tips terminals act as 

“electron collector”, increasing the charge 

mobility. 4

The interconnection of the various components has 

been shown to be fundamental for the efficient CO 2

reduction to formic acid with this new metal -free 

nanocomposite and opens new possibilities in the 

design of optimized electrocatalytic materials. 

## Reference s

[1] B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White, J. M. Spurgeon, Catalysis 

Today 2016, 270 , 19 -30 

[2] T. Montini, M. Melchionna, M. Monai, P. Fornasiero, Chem. Rev. 2016, 116 , 5987 –6041 

[3] G. Valenti, A. Boni, M. Melchionna, M. Cargnello, L. Nasi, G. Bertoni, R. J. Gorte, M. Marcaccio, S. 

Rapino, M. Bonchio, et al., Nat. Commun . 2016, 7, 13549 

[4] M. Melchionna, M. V. Bracamonte, A. Giuliani , L. Nasi, T. Montini, C. Tavagnacco, M. Bonchio, P. 

Fo rnasiero and M. Prato , Energy Environ. Sci ., 2018,11, 1571 -1580 .e-

Figure 1. Schematic CO 2 reduction into formic 

acid on MWCNT@CeO 2Reduced Graphene Oxide Fibre Electrodes for Drug Sensing 

Sutthima Sriprasertsuk , John Varcoe and Carol Crean 

Department of Chemistry, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK. 

s.sriprasertsuk@s urrey.ac.uk 

Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) functionalized carbon fibre electrodes and their ability to sense 

paracetamol (as model drug) in addition to interferents such as ascorbic acid and dopamine were studied. 

rGO was electrodeposited onto carbon fibre via 2 techniques: potentiostatic deposition and cyclic 

voltammetry (CV). In CV, the number of CV scans (3 to 20) was varied to study the effect on sensing. 

rGO -coated on carbon fibres could sense paracetamol at an oxidation peak at 0.62 V (vs Ag/AgCl). Th e

limit of detection for paracetamol , using a carbon fibre coated with rGO using 3 CV cycles, was 10.8 μM 

(S/N = 3) with a linear range of 0 – 100 μM of paracetamol (R 2 = 0.9904). The performance of this sensor 

with respect to interferents such as ascorbic acid and dopamine, commonly found in blood, was also 

tested. Increasing the number of CV scans for rGO deposition improved the sensing ability due to an 

increased electrochemical surface area. The morphology of rGO fibre electrodes was characterised by 

sc anning electron microscopy (SEM) and the presence of rGO on the carbon fibre surface was confirmed 

by Raman spectroscopic analysis. Further work is underway to sense a range of drug molecules. 

Figure 1. Images and sensing da ta from a carbon fibre coated with rGO using 3 CV cycles : (a) Scanning 

electron microscop e image ; (b) Energy -dispersive X -ray spectroscopy (EDS) - mapping images showing 

chemical composition of Carbon and Oxygen (table gives values for areas not coated (ar ea 1) and coated 

with rGO (area 2) , (c) Cyclic voltammograms (50 mVs -1) with various concentrations of paracetamol (0 –

500 μM) in aqueous 0.1 M PBS solution .Advanced hybrid electrodes based on polyoxometalate –activated carbon for 

# electrochemical energy storage in Li -ion batteries 

## Georg -Maximilian Bosch 1,2 , Patrick Treffehn 2 and Sonia Dsoke 1,2     

> 1Helmholtz -Institute Ulm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), P.O. Box 3640, Karlsruhe, Germany
> 2Institute for Applied Materials (IAM), Karlsruhe I nstitute of Technology (KIT), 76344 Eggenstein -
> Leopoldshafen, Germany
> georg.bosch@kit.edu

For fast charging and speeding up an elect ric vehicle , the high power of supercapacitors is needed. 

Driving a long distance can be realized by the high capacity of a battery. A combination of the 

advantages o f supercapacitors and batteries in one material can bring novel possibilities for electric 

mobility in the future. Therefore, hybrid materials have attracted much attention in recent years, since 

they can simultaneously deliver hig h power and high energy density [1] . Polyoxometalates (POMs), for 

example , the α -Kegging type: y H +·[XM 12 O40 ]-y, are well known as very stable t owards oxidation and 

reduction. These materials show fast and reversible mult i-electron transfer reactions [2] , and can ,

therefore , be considered as a promising candidate . In previous experiments, t he properties of the POM 

were optimized for the use in an organic electrolyte by temperature treatment , and the cycling stability 

of the material improved by 20 -times [3] .

In this work, activated carbon (AC) was used to prepare POM @AC hybrid material. Due to the 

absorption properties of the activated carbon, the maximum POM amount was 45 %-wt . The high -

temperature optimization of the POM was achieved in one step toge ther with th e activated carbon . The 

combination and optimization of the two materials enables increased cycling stability, as well as a higher 

capacity with respect to the two single materials (Fig.1) . SEM revealed a smaller POM particle size. 

Therefore the increased capacity can be related to a higher surface of the active material. Further, the 

hybrid material was characterized by XRD, TGA -DSC, and electrochemically. 

Future experiments will focus on increasing the amount of POM on the activated carbon. A higher 

percentage of POM in the hybrid material, as well as a better distribution of the particles on the surface, 

can lead to an increase in capacity. 

> Acknowledgment

This work contributes to the research performed at CELEST (Center for Electrochemical Energy Storage 

Ulm -Karlsruhe ). 

[1] M. Genovese, K. Lian, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 19 (2015) 126 –137. 

[2] M. Sadakane, E. Steckhan, Chem. Rev. 98 (1998) 219 –237. 

[3] G. -M. Bosch, S. Dsoke, Paper in progress, (2020).         

> Figure 1: Comparison of (a) specific capacity and (b) capacity retention of the POM with and without
> optimized properties , the carbon material , and the carbon -POM -hybrid material .
> (Measurement was done in LP30 in the potential range 1.4 -3.5 V vs. Li/Li +.)

## (b) (a) Developing Machine Learning Algorithms Able To Identify The Tool -

# Electrode Dipping Depth During Glass Micro -Machining By Spark 

# Assisted Chemical Engraving 

Soheila Kabirghadim  a, Rolf Wuthrich a,b  

> a

Department of Mechanical, Industrial, and Aerospace Engine ering, Concordia University, Montreal, 

Quebec, H3G 1M8, Canada  

> a,b

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 

1M8, Canada 

s_abirgh @encs. concordia.ca 

Rolf. wuthrich@concordia.ca 

Spark Assisted Chemical Engraving ( SACE ) is a method for micro -machining glass which utilizes glow 

discharge electrolysis in alkaline solutions such as s odium or potassium hydroxide [1]. A micro -sized 

cathode is used as tool -electro de in a two electrode setup . Under high enough cell terminal voltages 

(typically 25-35V, depending the size of the tool -electrode) glow discharge electrolysis phenomena 

happens . The  electrical discharges happening between the tool and electrolyte trough a gas film 

surrounding the tool -electrode increase the local temperature to 500 -600 oC. Brin ging the tool -electrode 

near the workpiece controlled machining by etching of the glass happens .

Controlling of t his process requires adequate electrical signals (ty pically pulses which altering glow 

discharge electrolysis with regular electrolysis in order to gain a better control over the local temperature) 

and appropriate tool -electrode motion (combining rotation and relative positioning of the tool to the 

workpiec e). Recently SACE process was commercialized and industrial machines are now available [ 2]. 

Even if very high precision micro -parts can be manufactured by SACE (typical surface roughness are 

well below 1 m and geometrical accuracy is below typically 5 m) research is ongoing to enhance 

further the precision of SACE micro -machining. A major challenge that limits machining precision is the 

uncontrolled surface S that the tool -electrode is in contact with the surrounding electrolyte during the 

process. This difficulty results from the turbulent nature of glow discharge electrolysis and the motion of 

the tool -electrode during machining process. A solution would be to adjust the machining parameters 

(potential and tool motion) in function of the actual surface S. This requires a way to measure the dipping 

depth of the tool -electrode in -line while machining is proceeding. This measurement must be fast as the 

typical time scale of glow discharge phenomena is a hundred few milliseconds. 

In this communication we pr esent the development of m achine learning algorithms which are able to 

identify the dipping depth of the tool during machining within a few milliseconds. The algorithms, based 

on logistic regression with regularisation using the current signal as input fe atures , are trained on data 

where the tool electrode is dipped with a known depth into the electrolyte. The algorithms are not only 

able to identify the dipping depth but can potentially as well give valuable information on the local 

temperature surroundin g the electrode. 

References: 

1.  Wuthrich, R., Abou Ziki , J.D., 2015.  Micromachining Using Electrochemical Discharge 

Phenomenon: Fundamentals and Application of Spark Assisted Chemical Engraving .

2. https://www.posalux.com/applications -sace/ Array Microcell Method (AMCM) for Serial Electroanalysis 

Sasha E. Alden , Natasha P. Siepser, Jacqueline A. Patterson, Gargi S. Jagdale, My unghoon Choi, and 

Lane A. Baker 

Indiana University 

800 E Kirkwood Ave, Bloomington IN 

sealden@iu.edu 

Here we describe a method for electrochemical measurement and synthesis based on the combination of a 

mobile micropipette and a microelectrode array, which we term the Array MicroCell Method (AMCM) as 

illustrated by Figure 1 . AMCM has the ability to addre ss single electrodes within a microelectrode array 

(MEA) and provides a simple, low cost format to enable versatile electrochemical measurements. In 

AMCM a droplet at the tip of a movable micropipette (inner diameter of 50 μm) functions as an 

electrochemic al cell in which the electrode area is defined by a microelectrode of the array . We also 

report carbon MEAs that are well suited for AMCM and are fabricated from pyrolyzed photoresist films 

(PPFs). PPF -MEAs with nominal electrode di ameters of 5.5 μm are ch aracterized by AMCM, standard 

macroscale electrochemical methods and finite element modeling . The versatility of AMCM is 

demonstrated by shape -controlled metal particle electrodepositions, single particle measurements and 

molecule detection within single c ells.    

> Figure 1. (a) Scheme of pyrolyzed photoresist film -microelectrode array (PPF -MEA) fabrication. (b) AMCM
> electrochemical measurement setup. (c) Optical image of AMCM, where bright spots are microelectodes 150 μm apart.
> The inset shows an electron micrograph of a typical pipette used .

# Ionic fluxes within porous carbon electrodes operating in aqueous 

# lithium sulphate solution at different pH 

Paulina Bujewska , Krzysztof Fic 

Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry, Poznan University of Technology 

Berdychowo 4, 60 -965 Poznan, Poland 

Paulina.Bujewska@put.poznan.pl 

Electrochemical capacitors (ECs) are devices for energy storage and conversion. During EC operation, 

charge is accumulated at an electrode surface when it is polarized and an electrical double -layer is 

formed [1] . Because of solely physical interactions be tween ions and the electrode, ECs are able to 

deliver energy in a very short time. Processes occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface seem to be 

simple – an electrode polarized negatively attracts cations, while an electrode polarized positively at tracts 

anions causing volumetric changes of the electrode [2 -4] . To date , ionic fluxes have not been described in 

detail and it is still an open question how the ions move near the electrode surface, how many of the m are 

attracted to the surface and how the io n exchange procee ds during charge and discharge of the ECs. 

In this work, we report on the volumetric changes of microporous carbon electrodes caused by ions 

adsorption/desorption in aqueous electrolyte – 1 mol L-1 Li 2SO 4, measured during in -situ electrochemical 

dilatometry experiments at different pH values. The result s of the preliminary studies are presented in 

Fig. 1. 

(a)  (b) 

Fig. 1. Cyclic voltammograms (a) and dilatometry curves (b) recorded for the cell operating in 1 mol L -1

Li 2SO 4 electrolyte at microporous carbon material (Kuraray YP -80 F) at room temperature 

Furthermore, i n the case of aqueous electrolytes, pH is a very important parameter because it influences 

hydrogen and oxygen evolution rea ction potentials and, consequently, has an impact on the operating 

voltage of EC and possible reduction/oxidation reactions of sulphate anion. Moreover, pH may change 

the hydration energy of ions, thus simplify or hinder a desolvation process. In this cont ext, the paper will 

bring the insights into composition of the electrolyte at various pH and its impact on the dilatometric 

response of the polarized electrode. 

Acknowledgment: European Research Council is acknowledged for financial support within the St arting 

Grant project (GA 759603) under European Unions’ Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme. 

References 

[1] C. Choi, D.S. Ashby, D.M. Butts, R.H. Deblock, Q. Wei, J. Lau, B. Dunn, Nature Reviews Materials, 

5 (2020) 5 -19. 

[2] F. Béguin, E. Frąckowiak, CRC Press, (2009) 329 -373. 

[3] M.M. Hantel, D. Weingarth, R. Kötz, Carbon, 69 (2014) 275 -286. 

[4] K. Fic, A. Płatek, J. Piwek, J. Menzel, A. Ślesiński, P. Bujewska, P. Galek, E. Frąckowiak, Energy 

Storage Materials, 22 (2019) 1 -14. Influence of e lectrolyte CO 2 saturation on aqueous electrochemical 

# capacitor characteristics and l ong -term performance 

Adam Slesinski , Justyna Piwek, Elzbieta Frackowiak , Krzysztof Fic 

Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry, Poznan Universi ty of Technology 

Berdychowo 4, 60 -965 Poznan, Poland 

adam.slesinski@put.poznan.pl 

Electrochemical double -layer capacitors (EDLC) operate owing to the physical interactions of electrolyte 

ions present in the liquid medium with the electrodes. To obtain sat isfactory energy output, it is necessary 

to apply high cell voltage. In the case of exceeding the stability voltage of the electrolyte, the 

decomposition of the electrolytic medium occurs and the side products are released. In the simplest case 

of aqueous electrolyte , it is hydrogen at the negative electrode and oxygen at the positive one , as depicted 

by Pourbaix diagram. At the positive electrode, which is considered to be the limiting one in the system, 

the material itself can undergo oxidation. It leads to the formation of carbon oxides (most often carbon 

dioxide). Taking the advantage of Le Chatelier’s principle, the foregoing electrolyte saturation with 

carbon dioxide shifts the equilibrium, thus restrains the destructive electrode oxidation. 

carbon po sitive electrode: 2 H 2O + C  CO2 + 4H + + 4e -

The current research focuses on the validation of the above concept. For that purpose , we select the 

neutral aqueous electrolyte 1 mol L-1 LiNO 3 and binder -free carbon cloth Kynol 507 -20. The electrodes 

and so aked separator (Whatman Glass fiber A) are placed in a tight electrochemical vessel of ca. 0.5 mL

dead volume . Three setups are used: 

1. a cell containing the atmospheric air (percentage of CO 2 being 0.4 mbar) ;

2. a cell with the air being displaced by CO 2 (pe rcentage of CO 2 being 1 bar) ;

3. a pressurized cell with 3.5 bar CO 2.

The above setup s are tested at 1.5 V and 1.8 V to elaborate the CO 2 influence at the sub -boundary 

conditions and at overexposed voltage , respectively . The electrochemical experimental matr ix includes 

the basic testing and long -term floating. Moreover, the carbon electrodes are physicochemically tested in 

post -mortem mode, for the assessment of the ir elemental composition, with the special attention to the 

oxygen content before and after the ageing process (floating experiment) . Moreover, the reaction 

mechanisms will be proposed and discussed. 

The initial floating data shows that the CO 2 addition does influence the cell potentials during the test at 

1.5 V, what confirms that the reaction equ ilibria are shifted. The E 0 potentials of the electrodes (i.e. at the 

discharged state) are presented in Figure 1. 

Figure 1. Rest (E 0) potentials of the electrodes during floating experiment at 1.5 V 

Acknowledgment : This work was financially supported by the European Research 

Council within the Starting Grant project (GA 759603) under European Unions’ 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme. Development of electrodes an d ion exchange membranes for effective 

# Microbial Desalination Cells 

Martí Aliaguilla *, Pau Bosch -Jimenez *, Daniele Molo gnoni *, Laura Huidobro Rodríguez *, Diego 

Morillo *, Sonia Matencio *, Sandra Martínez *, Ruediger Schweiss ** , A lmut Schwenke ** , Maarten 

Meijlink *** , Abdulsalam Alhadidi *** , Eduard Borràs *

* LEITAT Technologi cal Center  C/ de la Innova ció 2, 08225 T errassa, S pain 

** Technology & Innovation, SGLCarbon GmbH, Werner -von -Siemens -Strasse 18, Meitingen, Germany 

*** Fujifi lm Manufacturing Europe B.V. P.O. Box 90156, 5000 LJ Tilburg, The Netherlands 

maliaguilla @leitat.org 

Fresh water scarcity will arise as one of the m ajor environmental issues in the coming years. Low -ene rgy 

desalination technologies such as Microbial Desa lination Cell (MDC) are needed . Briefly, a n MDC 

consists in a three -chamber electrochemical reactor: an anode and a cathode chambers separate d by ionic 

exchange membranes from a middle chamber (contain in g saltwater ). At the anode, organic matter is 

oxidize d by electroactive bacteria, while at the cathode, reduction processes take place . The redox 

reaction becomes the driving force for ions removal from the saline chamber by charges compensation . In 

MIDES project, MDC key components have been studied to incr ease overall desalination performance. 

Carbonous material s (>20) , including uni /bidirectional carbon fibers and carbon felts, have been 

employed as anode materials . Be st results, in terms of biofilm formation time ( <7days) and current 

density (> 0.3mA/cm 2), were achieved with carbon felt. Besides, electroactive biofilm population differs 

depending on anode material despite using identical inoculum .

Air -cathodes, based on carbon nanofibers (CNFs) doped with metal nanoparticles (Fe and Co) , were 

developed us ing electrospinning technique as an alternative to costly and non -regenerative catalysts. 

Electrochemical tests were performed to evaluate the Oxyg en Reduction Reaction (ORR) catalytic 

activity. CNFs demonstrate d suitable ORR performance. CNFs incorporatin g Fe further enhanced ORR 

kinetics .

Anionic exchange membranes with low electrical resistance, high permselectivity and anti(bio)fouling 

properties coating s were developed for MDC application . Their performance was benchmarked with 

standard membranes , in terms of membrane properties and desalination capacity . Also, their performance 

over time under MDC operation was studied. 

Best performing materials we re assembled in MDC for assessing the performance in sea water and 

brackish water scenarios. Best desali nation rates were reached in brackish water, accounting for 2.2 

gNaCl/m 2·h, with a 60% salt removal in 72 hours. 

Results regarding materials development in MIDES project are likely to be transferrable to other 

bioelectrochemical systems. Research leading to these results has received funding from EU -Horizon 

2020 programme , GA Nº685793 (MIDES project). On the Development of a Computationally Efficient Model to Predict 

# the Performance of Porous Carbons as Electrode Materials for 

# Electrochemical Capacitors 

Anouar Belhboub 1,2 , El Hassane Lahrar 1,2 , Patrice Simon 1,2 , Céline Merlet 1,2  

> 1

CIRIMAT, Univer sité de Toulouse, CNRS, Université Toulouse 3 – Paul Sabatier, 118 route de 

Narbonne, 31 062 Toulouse cedex 9, France  

> 2

Réseau sur le Stockage Électrochimique de l’Énergie (RS2E), Fédération de Recherche CNRS 3459, 

Hub de l’Énergie, rue Baudelocque, 80 039 Amiens, France 

merlet@chimie.ups -tlse.fr 

Progress in the development of novel energy storage systems is hampered by our lack of understanding of 

the microscopic mechanisms that determine their performance. The key issue is that phenomena on the 

atomistic scale have consequences on macroscopic length and timescales. In particular, the effects of 

ionic confinement and diffusion are crucial for device performance, yet experiments that probe p roperties 

related to local structure and diffusion are challenging and difficult to interpret without a parallel 

modelling approach. In this talk, I will focus on carbon -carbon supercapacitors in which the energy is 

stored by ion adsorption at the electrod e surface. In order to understand fundamentally the macroscopic 

properties of such systems, it is essential to characterise finely the porous materials used and the structural 

and dynamic properties of the fluid adsorbed. But, in order to screen materials for energy storage 

applications, it is necessary to develop computationally efficient methods. 

Molecular Dynamics simulations is a very useful tool in the context of energy storage systems as it allows 

one to get a microscopic picture of the phenomena at play. Here, we focus on concentrated electrolytes in 

contact with various porous carbons (ordered and disordered) and use molecular dynamics simulations to 

investigate the structural and dynamic properties of the adsorbed liquid. The concentrated electrol yte is 

represented using a simple coarse -grained model which allows us to tune its characteristics (e.g. ion size, 

ion charge) and analyse the effect of such variations on the properties of the system [1]. We then report 

on the development of a lattice mod el, to predict quantities of adsorbed ions and capacitances 10,000 

times faster than with Molecular Dynamics simulations. While the lattice model is still in a primitive 

form, it shows some promising results as it is able to reproduce the effects of solvat ion and pore size 

observed experimentally [2]. 

References 

[1] E. H. Lahrar, A. Belhboub, P. Simon and C. Merlet, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter. , 2020, 12 , 1789. 

[2] A. Belhboub, E. H. Lahrar, P. Simon and C. Merlet, Electrochim. Acta , 2019, 327 , 135022. Characterizing Electrochemical Ligand Removal Au Nanocubes 

Myunghoon Choi a, Soojin Jeong a, Yi Wang a, Sang -joon Cho b, Xingchen Ye a*, and Lane A. Baker a*

> a

Department of Chemistry, Indiana University 

800 E. Kirkw ood Avenue, Bloomington, Indiana 474 05 Affili ation 

*xingye@indiana.edu , *lanbaker@indiana.edu 

> b

Par k Syste ms, 109 Gwanggyo -ro, Woncheon -dong, 

Yeongtong -gu, Suwon -si, Gyeonggi -do, South Korea 

Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is a common organic surfactants employed in seed -

mediat ed synthesis of nanomaterials .1 Au nanocrystals grown by seed -mediated growth provide an 

inte resting model system to understand nanoscale nucleation and growth , and are also promising 

technological materials, having found utility as catalyst s for energy conver sion .2,3 In some cases, notably 

catalysis , CTAB ligand s adsorbed to the Au surface can pr ove deleterious to catalytic activity or 

selectivity. 4 In a recent report from our groups , we found that the residual CTAB on Au NCs complicated 

quantitation by electrochemical imaging .5

Methods to remove adsorbed CTAB via chemical treatments have been rep or ted. In particular, thiol s

containing carboxylic acids, 6 have been explored, with CTAB removal efficiency evaluated by optical 

spectroscop y such as FT -IR or UV -Vis spectroscopy . Bulk spectroscopic characterization of ligands on 

three dimensional nanomat erials can prove challenging, however, as monolayer or sub -monolayer 

quantities can be difficult to detect reliably . Here we demonstrate characterization of CTAB ligands 

adsor ption on Au nanocubes (Au NCs) with a combination of in situ atomic force microsc opy and 

electron microscopy . Highly disperse Au nanocube s (NC s) were utilized as a model system, enabling 

quantitative comparison of height and width measurement . Force -distance (FD) curves and c orrelative i n

situ AFM topography of CTAB adsorbed at Au NC s, compared to SEM measurements provides 

compelling evidence of the effects of surface cleaning on CTA B adsorbed on the Au NCs .

1. Nikoobakht, B.; El -Sayed, M. A., Preparation and Growth Mechanism of Gold Nanorods (NRs) Using 

Seed -Mediated Growth Meth od. Chem. Mater. 2003, 15 , 1957 -1962. 

2. Huang, J.; Buonsanti, R., Colloidal Nanocrystals as Heterogeneous Catalysts for Electrochemical CO2 

Conversion. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31 , 13 -25. 

3. Chiu, C. -Y.; Chung, P. -J.; Lao, K. -U.; Liao, C. -W.; Huang, M. H., Face t-Dependent Catalytic Activity 

of Gold Nanocubes, Octahedra, and Rhombic Dodecahedra toward 4 -Nitroaniline Reduction. J. Phys. 

Chem. 2012, 116 , 23757 -23763. 

4. Lu, L.; Zou, S.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, J.; Li, R.; Xu, Z.; Xiao, L.; Fan, J., Ligand -regulated ORR acti vity of 

Au nanoparticles in alkaline medium: the importance of surface coverage of ligands. Catalysis Science & 

Technology 2018, 8, 746 -754. 

5. Choi, M.; Siepser, N. P.; Jeong, S.; Wang, Y.; Jagdale, G.; Ye, X.; Baker, L. A., Probing Single -

Particle E lectrocatalytic Activity at Facet -Controlled Gold Nanocrystals. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 , 1233 -1239. 

6. Garabagiu, S.; Bratu, I., Thiol containing carboxylic acids remove the CTAB su rfactant onto the 

surface of gold nanorods: An FTIR spectroscopic study. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2013, 284 , 780 -783. Layered and 2D Transition Metal Oxide Materials for Energy 

# Conversion Applications 

Michelle P. Browne , Sonia Jaśkaniec and Valeria Nicolosi 

Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices  (CRANN) , Advanced Materials and 

BioEngineering Resea rch (AMBER) Centre and School of Chemistry 

Trinity College Dublin 

Brownem6@tcd.ie 

Currently, the state -of -the -art materials for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction ( OER ) and the Oxygen 

Reduction Rection (ORR ), the energy intensive reactions in water electroly sis and fuel cell s respectively ,

stem from the expensive and rare Platinum Group Metals (PGMs). However, major problems remain 

when using these PGMs for these reactions. For the OER and ORR , most state -of -the -art PGM catalysts 

exhibit large overpotentia ls and this value needs to be signifi cantly decreased for electrolysis and fuel cell 

technologies to become economical. 

In general, few layer and 2D -mater ials exhibit higher surface area and are more cond uctive than their bulk 

counterparts therefore hold gr eat promise as next generation materials for the OER and ORR .1 Hence, as 

Transition Metal Oxide (TMO ) based material s are currently the best performing catalysts for the OER 

and ORR , it is logical that few layer and 2D TMO materials are likely candidates to emerge as alternative 

low cost and ac ti ve catalysts for these electrochemical energy conv ersion application s. 2 In this work we 

explore layered a nd 2D TMO based materials as potential catalysts for these technologies, as we try to 

create materials with increased active sites , surface area s and conductivity compared to bulk TMO 

materials .3

1. J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, 

S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. -Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. 

Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. 

Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. 

Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science , 2011, 331 , 568 -571. 

2. M. P. Browne, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Energy & Environmental Science , 2019, 12 , 41 -58. 

3. S. Jaśkaniec, C. Hobbs, A. Seral -Ascaso, J. Coelho, M. P. Browne, D. Tyndall, T. Sasaki and V. 

Nicolosi, Scientific Reports , 2018, 8, 4179. Electrocatalytic CO 2 Reduction on CuZnAl -based Oxide Catalysts: 

# Tuning of the H 2/CO Ratio 

Hilmar Guzmán a,b , Daniela Roldán a, Adriano Sacco b, Micaela Castellino a, Marco Fontana b, Nunzio 

Russo a, Simelys Hernández a,b , 

> a

CREST group, Department of applied sci ence and technology (DISAT), Politecnic o di Torino , C.s o

Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 1 0129, Turin, Italy . 

> b

Center for Sust ainable Future Technologies, IIT@Polito, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Livorno, 

60, 10144, T urin, Italy. 

e-mail: hilmar.guzman@po lito.it 

Electrochemical Reduction of CO 2 (ER-CO 2) is a ver y attractive alternative to tackle Global Warming1.

Cu -based materials have show n increased yields of hydrocarbon and oxygenate products, while its 

selectivity towards CO is low 2. Inspired by the thermocatalytic process, a traditional co -precipitation 

method was employed to synthesize CuZnAl -based oxide catalyst s with a mesoporous structure. This 

CuZnAl catal yst was tested for the first time for the ER-CO 2 under am bient conditions . The chemical -

physical properties of the catalyst s were studied by several characterization techniques (e.g. XRD , XPS ,

BET , SEM , TEM ) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at di fferent applied -potentials  to 

understan d the role of the modification o f the catalyst c ompo nents during operation in the final selectivity 

and activity . Results revea led that by  adding amphoteric metal oxides like ZnO and Al 2O3 to the CuO -

based cataly st contribute d to promote CO formation over H2. XPS measurements on the fresh samples 

revealed that  the ternary  CuZnAl  catalyst present ed a lower percentage (5%) of Cu 0 + Cu 1+ mixture on the 

surface than the other catalysts , being mainly constituted by Cu +2. This m aterial reached a Faradai c

efficiency towards syngas of almost 95% at -0.89 V vs RHE. Nevertheless, the highest production rate of 

syngas was obtained at the most negative applied potential (⁓ 17 μmol h -1 cm -2 at -1.14 V vs RHE ).). A

tunable H 2/CO ratio w as ach ie ved by applying different potentials , reaching lower values by increasing 

applied negative potential (CO current density increase d). In fact , a syngas with a H 2/CO ratio of ⁓ 2 was 

obtained at -0.89 V vs RHE , which is a suitable raw materia l for further methanol synthesis 3. The 

enhanced performance for syngas production of the d eveloped  CuZnAl  catalyst is demonstrated to be 

attributed to its surface properties (i.e. alka linity and the oxid ation state on the surface , its lowest 

diffusional mass tr ansfer resistance, its highest total pore volume and the low est Cu crystal s size among 

the prepared catalysts .

Reference 

1 H. Guzm án, M. A. Farkhonde hfal, K. Rodulfo Tolod, N. Russo and S. Hern ández, in Solar 

Hydrogen Production Processes, Systems and Technologies , Else vier Inc., 2019, p. 560. 

2 J. J. Velasco -Vélez, T. Jones, D. Gao, E. Carbonio, R. Arrigo, C. J. Hsu, Y. C. Huang, C. L. 

Dong, J. M. Chen, J. F. Lee, P. Strasser, B. Roldan Cuenya, R. Schl ögl, A. Knop -Gericke and C. 

H. Chuang, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. , 2019, 7, 1485 –1492. 

3 S. Hern ández, M. A. Farkho ndehfal, S. Francesc, M. Makkee, G. Saracco and N. Russo, Green 

Chem. , 2017, 19 , 2326 –2346. Analysis of Lithium Insertion and Deinsertion in Photo -charging 

# Battery System 

Nur Chamidah , Yuki Orikasa 

Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University 

Noji -higashi 1 -1-1, Kusatsu, Shiga Prefecture, Japan 

Email : gr0399hi@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 

The energy conversion of light energy into electricity is one of the most interesting studies to be 

explored. Light energy as an alternative energy source is utilized for energy conversion devices such as 

solar cell s. Solar ce ll s convert light energy in to electrical energy . However, both of the light and electrical 

energies cannot be stored in their form; thus, it requires the energy conversion from the electrical to the 

chemical energy using rechargeable batteries. Two steps of energy conversion in the basic solar cell drive 

the low efficiency of energy converted during device -to -device transfer. The efficient establishment of 

solar cell technology on a global scale requires an efficient improvement concerning materials and 

dev ices to increase the power conversion efficiency. The integration of light -harvesting solar energy with 

the battery system was expected to drastically improve the energy efficiency. 

The photo -electrochemical reaction of lithium -ion insertion and deinsertio n has been reported by 

employing dye -sensitized battery material driven by light irradiation [1]. The light energy generated 

electron -hole pairs with the holes aiding to the chemical conversion. Nevertheless, energy efficiency and 

reaction kinetics should be improved by investigating the appropriate anode material for the system. By 

utilizing the photo -intercalation and photo -deintercalation concept that has been proposed by H. Tributsch 

in 1983 [2], the light energy can induce the transfer of ions between the electrode and electrolyte when 

there is a difference of fermi level energy between electrolyte and electrodes in semiconductor materials. 

Hence, to investigate the basic fundamental studies of the photo -intercalation reaction, active battery 

materials and semiconductors were utilized in the photochemical cell. A photo -sensitized LiFePO 4 has 

been prepared to be applied as the working electrode, while a silicon p -type semiconductor has a role as 

the counter electrode in three electrodes battery system. Th e electrochemical transparent cell was utilized 

in order to observe the electrical current response from the energy produced by the reaction that takes 

place under the light irradiation. 

The experiment of photo -lithiation was conducted by observing the cu rrent s response of the 

LiFePO 4/Si and the potential changes of LiFePO 4 vs. Li +/Li full cell system under light irradiation. There 

was no electrochemical activation involved in the system. When there was no light irradiation, there was 

no current s response observed. Meanwhile, there was a distinct current change from 0 mA to ±0.6 mA 

once the light irradiat es the photochemical cell. In order to further analy ze the chemical state changes of 

the electrode materials in the photo -electrochemical system , an experi ment was conducted by using X -ray 

absorption spectroscopy measurement . The experiment was established after the irradiation of light 

towards the material s. The intense absorption in the near -edge area broadened, and the edge energy was 

shifted towards lowe r energy. This trend corresponds with the spectrum change during the 

electrochemical lithium insertion of the silicon electrode [ 3]. By this result, we acquired the possibility of 

advancing the design principles for photo -assisted rechargeable batteries .

Reference s :

[1] A. Paolella, et al, Nature Communication, 8 , 14643 (2017). 

[2] H. Tributsch, Solid State Ionics , 9-10 , 41 (1983). 

[3] A. Suzuki, Memoirs of The SR Center Ritsumeikan University, 20 , 17 (2018). System identification of PEMFCs through EIS and cFRA: a 

# comparative study 

A. Sorrentino 1*, K. Sundmacher 1,2 , T. Vidakovic -Koch 1

> 1

Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, 

Sandtorstraße 1, D -39106 Magdeburg, Germany 

> 2

Otto -von -Gue ricke University Magdeburg, Process Systems Engineering, Universitätsplatz 2, D -39106 

Magdeburg, Germany 

Due to its capability to s eparate power losses related to different mass transport and kinetic phenomena, 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EI S) is commonly applied as fault identification tool for 

polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEMFCs). However, this is not always the case especially in the lower 

frequency region of the EIS spectra (< 1 Hz), where the contribu tions of the gas transport of oxyg en and 

liquid water, water sorption in the Nafion membrane, and adsorption/desorption kinetic steps of the HOR 

and ORR overlap, becom ing practically indistinguishable. In this frequent scenario, the efficacy of EIS as 

PEMFCs diagnosis tool and its capabili ties to estimate key parameters related to the fuel cell performance 

are inadequate. 

Recently, our group has developed a novel freque ncy response methodology based on the use of periodic 

concentration as input which aims to overcome the limitations of the EIS at low frequencies [1,2]. The 

new technique, named concentration -alternating frequency re sponse analysis (cFRA), applies per iodic 

input of oxygen or water at the cathode side of PEMFCs and detects electric responses under 

galvanostatic or voltastatic c onditions, cell po tential and current respectively. 

In this contribution, an experimental facility capable to produce an input flow with periodic concentration 

of oxygen or water at different frequencies is presented, and a procedure to measure cFRA spectr a is 

described. Then, by the support of a mathematic al model of a PEMFC, the capability of the cFRA to 

separate the dynamics of gas transport and water sorp tion in Nafion membrane depending on the kind of 

concentration input and output is demon strated (ple ase see the figure below). Finally, the identifiab ility 

and estimation of some key PEMFC performance parameters using EIS and cFRA transfer functions have 

been compared by considering sensitivity and collinearity of the different parameters. Criteria to ch oose a 

most appropriate technique to identify a sp ecific parameter are discussed. 

Left : cFRA transfer function obtained by periodic oxygen concentration change under galvanostatic conditions .

Onl y dynamics of gas transport in the channel is d etected. Right : cFRA transfer function obtained by periodic 

water concentration change under galvanostatic conditions . Only dynamics of water sorption in Nafion is 

detected. 

Keywords : Polymer electrolyte fuel cell, system identification, impedance, frequency res ponse analysis .

1. Sorrentino et.al., Electrochimica Acta  243 (2017) , 2345 -2356 

2. Sorrentino et.al., Journal of Power Sources 412 (2019) , 1119 -1130. Effect of Oxygen Functionalization of Graphene on the Signal 

# Sensitivity of Dopamine Detection 

Md. Mahbubur Rahman 1, Jongdeok Par k2, Kicheon Yoo 2, Myung Jong Ju 3, Jong -Beom Baek 3,

Jae -Joon Lee 2,*

> 1

Department of Energy & Materials Engineering, Konkuk Uni versity, Chungju 27478 , Republ ic of Kore 

> 2

Department of Energy & Materials Eng ineering, Research Center for Photoenergy Harvesting & Conversion 

Technology (phct), Dongguk University, 100 -715, Seoul, Republic of Korea 

> 3

School of Energy and Chemical Engine ering/Center for Dimension -Controllable Covalent Organic 

Frameworks, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50, UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, 

Republic of Kore 

*e-mail address : jjlee@dongguk.edu 

We examined the effect of the carboxyl group ( −CO OH) functionalization at the ed ges of graphene 

nanoplatelets (GNPs) for the electrochemical sensing of dopamine (DA) in the presence of ascorbic acid 

(AA) and uric acid (UA). The −COOH functionaliz ed GNP at the edges (ECG) was prepared by a ball 

mill metho d with a high percentage of fun ctional groups (26.40%). For comparison, GNPs with a low 

percentage of –COOH (2.35%) functionalization was also prepared by the heat treatment of ECG 

(HECG) . Both ECG and HECG dispersions  in 2 -propanol  were used to modify the fluorine -doped tin -

oxide elect rode s (FTO) by the e-spray method.  The ECG/FTO sensor displayed high catalytic activity and 

sensitivity with the signal separation of DA, AA, and UA , while the HECG /FTO sensor completely 

suppress es the oxidation signals of AA and UA with a low sensiti vity of DA oxidation . This can be 

ascribed to the varying interaction mechanism of AA -, DA +, and UA - at pH 7.0 with the −COOH groups 

of ECG and H ECG. The differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) signals for the oxidation of DA reveale d

the  detection limits (S/N = 3 ) of 0.26 and 1 .0 μM, respectively, at the ECG/FTO and H -ECG/FTO sensor 

with the sensitivity of  2.11 and 0.55 μA/cm 2/μM, respectively. Modeling temperature effects on a graphite Li -ion anode by Kinetic 

# Monte Carlo simulations 

Ezequiel Leiva 1,2, Maximiliano Gavilán -Arriazu 2,4 , Alexis Paz 1,2 , Oscar Oviedo 1,2 , Oscar Pinto 5, Beatriz 

López de Mishima 5, Manuel Otero 3,4 , Daniel Barraco 3,4 

> 1

Facu ltad de Ciencias Químicas - Universidad Nacional de Córdoba - Argentina, 

> 2

Instituto de Investigaciones en Físico -Química de Córdoba, CONICET -UNC -Argen tina, 

> 3

Facultad de Matemática Astronomía y Física - Universidad Nacional de Córdoba -Argentina 

> 4

Institut o de Física Enrique Gaviola ,CONICET -UNC -Argentina 

> 5

Instituto de Bionanotecnología del NOA (INBIONATEC -CONICET), Universidad Nacional de Santiago 

de Estero -Argentina 

eze_leiva@yahoo.com.ar 

The Li -ion battery is one of the most important devices involved i n the change towards a new energetic 

paradigm, being graphite the most used material as anode due to its high specific capacity, low cost, and 

low volume expansion, to name a few properties. Li -ion (de)intercalation (from)into graphite involves a 

series of stable compounds denoted as stages. 

Understanding how external variables, such as pressure or temperature, affect batteries is important to 

improve their operation since they have demonstrated to play a role in several processes, such as changes 

in the interphase resistance. Several studies have tackled temperature effects on Li -ion intercalation into 

graphite but, until now, none has addressed a detailed atomistic study. 

In this presentation, we introduce our most recent results regarding the kinetics of Li -ion (de)intercalation 

(from)into graphite from a theoretical -computational perspective, using the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) 

method. We have extended our previous work 1 to cover a complete set of properties at different 

temperatures , which can be cont rasted with experimental results. In this respect, we have simulated cyclic 

voltammograms and potentiostatic steps, and calculated diffusion coefficients and exchange current 

densities for different states of charge at different temperatures. Some of these results are shown below. 

Figure: a) kMC chronoamperometric simulation results for a potentiostatic step from a potential where 

stage I is stable (50 mV), up to a potential where stage II is formed (95 mV) for three different 

temperatures. The princip al events are indicated in the Figure form (i) to (v) for T=333 K. b) Snapshots 

showing some of the features labeled in Figure a. 

REFERENCE  

> 1

“Kinetic Monte Carlo applied to the electrochemical study of the Li -ion graphite system”, E.M.Gav ilán -

Arriazua, O.A.Pinto, B.A.López de Mishima, D.E.Barraco, O.A.Oviedo, E.P.M.Leiva, Electrochimica 

Acta 331 (2020 ) 135439 Towards Increasing the Operating Potential Window of Aqueous 

# Supercapacitors through the Passivation of Carbon -based Electrodes 

# by Electrodeposition of Poly(phenylene oxide) 

Baptista, J. M. *(1,2) , Gaspar, G. (1) , Santos, D. R. (1,3) , Sagu, J.S. (2) , Correia , J. P. (3) , Wijayantha, U. K.G .(2) ,

Lobato, K. (1) . 

> (1)

Instituto Dom Lu iz, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande 1749 -016 

Lisboa, Portugal;  

> (2 )

Energy Research Laboratory (ERL), Department of Chemistry, Loughborough University, 

Loughborough, Leicester LE11 3TU, UK  

> (3)

Centro de Química Estrutural, Faculdade de Ciê ncias, Universidade de Lisboa, Ca mpo Gran de 

1749 016 Lisboa, Portugal; 

*jpbaptista@fc.ul.pt 

The main drawback of supercapacitors is their low energy density, which is mostly limited by the 

br eakdown voltage of the electrolyte. Commercial devices typically use organic solvents, which can 

withstand up to 2.7 V, but are toxic and expensive 1. Aqueous electrolytes would be a cheaper and 

environmentally friendly alternativ e if their electrochemicall y stable potential window (ΔV≈1V) could be 

extended. 

A conceivable way to achieve this is by electrodepositing an insulating mater ial on the surface of the 

carbon -based electrode. Poly(phenylene oxide) was identified as a suitab le candidate 2. For a succes sful 

passiva tion , the deposited material must be thick enough to prevent electron transfer between the 

electrode and the el ectrolyte (>2 nm) 3 whil st simultaneously thin enough (<30 nm) to preserve the 

electrode’s high surface a re a, indispensable for a high capacitance. 

Preliminary results suggest a trade -off between capacitance and degree of passivation: a decrease in both 

oxidation and reduction leakage currents ( measured at constant potentials and respectively associated to 

the oxygen and hydroge n evolut ion reactions) comes at the expense of a capacitance loss. This work will 

present results comparing differing polymer electrodeposition conditions and how these cor relate both to 

the passivation of the electrode and to its perfor mance metrics.  

> 1

A. Gonzá lez et al., Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 58 (2016) 1189 –1206  

> 2

S. Deheryan et al., Carbon 88 (2015) 42 –50  

> 3

S. Fletcher et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (2016) 8014−8022 

Acknowledgement s: The authors acknowledg e the financial support given by Fundação para a Ciência e a 

Tecnologia (FCT ): project s UIDB/50019/2020 – IDL - Instituto Dom Luiz and UIDB/00100/2020 – CQE 

– Centro de Química Estrutural and by PhD  grant s PD/BD/128169/2016 and SFRH/BD/148805/2019 .Polymeric matrices as cathodes for Sodium -ion batteries -

# Electrochemical and pseudocationic doping behaviour characterization 

Daniel R. Santos a, Carlos F erreira a, Upul Wijayantha KG b, Killian Lobato c, Jorge P. Correia a

> a

Centro de Química E strutural, Facu ldade de Ciênci as da Universidade de Lisboa, 1749 -016 Campo 

Grande, Portugal 

> b

Energy Research Laboratory (ERL), Department of Chemistry, Loughborough University, 

Loughborough, Leicester LE11 3TU, UK 

> c

Instituto Dom Luiz (IDL), Faculdade de Ciências da Unive rsidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande C8, 1749 -

016 Lisboa, Portugal 

drcsantos@fc.ul.pt 

Sodium -ion batteries appear as an alternative more abundant , in te rms of resource, and less 

expensive than the conventional Lithium -ion batteries, being used for applica tions where the weight and 

the specific energy are less determinant [1]. Their delay in commercialization is related to the delayed 

development of cathodes with capacities and performance similar to those achieved by commonly used 

materials in Lithium -ion batte ri es, since they must be designed for a larger size ion e xchange [2]. The 

cathodic structure must be sufficiently flexible and stable , and extremely light [3] to compensa te the total 

mass of the storage unit. An electro nically conducting poly mer with pseud ocationic doping may fulfil th is 

requirement. Here cations are exchanged during the polym er redox conversion .

Poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) doped wit h poly(styrene -4-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is a

stable mat erial that exhibits , in some extent , pse udo catio nic d oping character , making it an attractive 

choice for cathodes in Sodium -ion ba tte ries. Other doping polyanions such as Poly(2 -acr ylami do -2-

methyl -1-propan esulfonic acid) (PAMPSA) and Sodium do decyl sul ph ate (SDS) , may also impart ,

theoretically, a pseu docationic behaviour to the polymeric matrix. 

Electrochemical techniques c an prov ide information about the thermodynamic s and kinetic s of

electroactive systems, but they do not resolv e the str uctur al and chemical mod ifications imparted by the 

mass tran sfer proces ses . So, the coupling of electrochemical methods with techniques sensitive to the 

structural and chemical changes caused by charge transfer phenomena on the electrode surface, will gran t

more i nformation about th e nature o f the mass flo w. 

In this work PEDOT:PSS, PEDOT: PAMPSA, PEDOT:SDS, films were potentiostatically ,

galvanosta tically and poten tiodynamically synthesize d onto platinum electrodes from aqueous solutions 

containing the mono mer and the polyanion. The ele ctroactivity and redox r eversibi lity of th ese films was 

characterized by cyclic voltammetry in acetonitrile medium containing NaClO 4. Wettabili ty was 

monitored by contact angle goniometry . The ma ss transfer phenomena takin g place during the redox 

co nversion of PEDOT:PSS fil ms deposited with different thicknesses and at different temperatures , we re 

investigated by coupling electrochemic al methods with microgravimetry (EQCM) and Probe Beam 

Deflectio n (PBD) . These te chniques are well suited for measuring the mass flow, since they transdu ce 

both the ionic fl ow (probed by EQCM and PBD) , and s olvent m olecules associated to the mechanical 

changes that occu r during the redo x conversion on the polymeric matrices (only probed by EQCM). By 

cooperatively u sing PBD and EQCM data , the ioni c and the solv ent mass flo ws were separ atel y

dis tinguish ed .

References :

[1] J.Y. Hwang, S.T. Myung e Y.K . Sun; Chem. Soc. Rev. 46 (2017) 3529 -3614. 

[2] H. Kim, H. Kim, Z. Ding, M. H. Lee, K. Lim, G. Yoon e K. Kang; Adv. En ergy. Mater. 6 (2016) 

1600943. 

[3] Q. Zha o, Y. Lu e J. Che n; Ad v. Energy. Mater. 7 (2017) 1601 792. 

Acknowledgments: This work is supported by FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) through 

the programmes UIDB/00100/2020 – CQE – Ce ntro de Química Estrutural and UIDB/5001 9/2020 – IDL 

- In stituto Dom Luiz . D.R. Santos i s also supported by the FCT PhD grant SFRH/BD/148805/2019 .Towards Active and stable NiCo 2O4 catalysts for O 2 evolution and 

# reduction 

Ricardo Paz Moldes Duarte a),b) , Ifan E.L. Stephens a) , Mary P. Ryan a) Alejandro Martinez Bonastre b) , Jonathan 

Sharman b) 

a) Department of Materials, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, SW7 2AZ, London, United Kingdom ;

b) Johnson Matthey Technology Centre, Blount’s Court road, RG4 9NH, Reading, United Kingdom 

e-mail of corresponding author: ricardo.pazmoldesduarte@matthey.com 

It is particularly challenging to find a bifunctional catalyst capable of accelerating both O2 evolution and reduction 

in aqueous solutions . The discovery of such a material would bring reversible fuel cells and metal air batteries 

much closer to technological fruition. Researchers have shown that both doped carbon and oxides show 

appreciable activity in short term tests , lasting hours . However, in a real device, such a catalyst will need to retain 

its activity over several years. Even t he best bifunctional catalysts reported , thus far , would need to withstand a n

enormous potential window of at least 1 V. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, little is known about the 

factors controlling the stability of bifunctional catalysts. 

In the current contribution, we investigate NiCo 2O4 and Co 3O4 under both oxygen evolution and reduction 

conditions in 0.1 M KOH . When these materials undergo accelerated degradation test in a rotating disk electrode 

(RDE) configuration, rapid deactivation of the oxygen reduction is observed, as shown in figure 1. At the same 

time, this is accompanied by a significant increase in oxygen evolution activity and a shift in pre -catalytic redox 

peak . Herein, we employ a range of post -mortem techniques including inductively coupled plasma mass 

spectrometry (ICP -MS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and x -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 

to understand the causes of the deactivation of NiCo 2O4. Additionally, oxygen -electrode prototypes were 

manufactured and characterized in a half -cell configuration.             

> Figure 1Cyclic voltammogram of NiCo 2O4in O 2saturated 0.1 M KOH recorded at 10 mV/s, 1600 RPM and 25 μg catalyst /cm 2. Blue line
> corresponds to the third scan and gre en line corresponds to the scan after cycling for 4 hours between 0.6 V RHE and 1.7 V RHE under the
> aforementioned conditions. Figure ins et corresponds to a magnification of the cyclic voltammogram.

Acknowledgements: This work is supported by the project ‘’FLOWCAMP’’ under the European union’s 

innovation tra ining network (grant agreement 765289) 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 

# -5 

# 0510 15 20 25 

1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 

> jgeo  (mA/cm 2disk )

# URHE (V) 

## 4 h cycling Initial 

> jgeo  (mA/cm 2disk )

URHE (V) Unid irectional P hotosynthetic Complex Functionalization f or Tunnel 

# Current Distance Decay Spect roscopy 

Manuel López -Or tiz , Ricardo Zam ora -Brito, Marina Inés Giannotti, Nuria Camarero , Chen Hu, Roberta 

Croce , Pau Gorostiza 

Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC) , Barcelona I nstitu te for Science and Technology (BIST) 

Baldiri Reixac 15 -21, E -08028 Barcelona, Spain 

mlopezo@ibecbarcelona.eu 

Interprotein electron trans port (ET) is a key process for living organism s, playing a fundamental role in 

res piration and photosynthesis. ET processes between photosynthetic complex es and electron carrier 

partner proteins have been widely studied with bulk spectroscopic techniques 1, however the 

characterization of ET at the level of single molecules is limited . This is due in part to the lack of a well -

defined experimental setup for protein orientation and current measurement. In this work, a peptide 2 that 

binds selectively to plant Photosynthetic Complex I (PSI) in is used to functionalize atomically flat gold 

mo nocrystal electrodes and to evaluate photocurrents by bulk photo -electrochemical exper iments and ET 

by scanning probe techniques, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electrochemical scanning tunneling 

microscopy (ECSTM). ECSTM -based spectroscopic measurement s allow investigat ing the current decay 

distance 3 (β [nm -1]) of PSI functionalized electrodes under electrochemical control. Mapping β over 

sample and probe potentials reveals enhanced charge exchange distance as probe potential is aligned with 

PSI’s electron acceptor cofactor redox potential. 

Left: Carto on representa tion of peptide -PSI molecules absorbed on Au substrates in ECSTM experiment. 

Energy diagram displaying probe fermi level (green bar aligned, blue bars misaligned) and PSI ET 

cofactor redox potential (black bar) . Righ t botto m: Semilogarithmic plot of t unnel current vs probe 

distance for aligned (green) , misaligned (b lue) probe potentia ls in peptide -PSI functionalized electrodes 

and bare Au control (yel low). Righ t Top: Histogram displaying current decay distance (β [nm -1])

distribution for curves shown bellow. 

1. Electron transfers amongst cytochrome f, plastocyanin and photosystem I : kinetics and mechanisms. 

Hope, A. B. 1, 2000, Biochimica et Biophisica acta, Vol. 1456, pp. 5 -26. 

2. Orientation and Incorporat ion of Photosystem I in Bioelectronics Devices Enabled by Phage Display. 

Gordiichuk P., Pesce D., Castañeda Ocampo O. E., Marcozzi A.,. 2017, Advanced Science, p. 1600393. 

3. Direct measurement of electron transfer distance decay constants of single redox proteins by 

electrochemical tunneling spectroscopy.  Art és J. M., Díez Pérez I., Sanz F., Gorostiza P. 3, 2011, ACS 

Nano, Vol. 5, pp. 2060 -2066 Tetraglyme - Ca(TFSI) 2, a non -monotonic liquid electrolyte 

Tanguy Gogny Picard , Nicolas Sergent, Cristina Iojoiu , Fannie Alloin 

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LEPMI, 38000 

Grenoble, France 

tanguy.picard@grenoble -inp.fr 

Ca -ion batteries are considered among the most suitable candidate for post -lithium batteries as 

they present similar charge density and a large theoretical energy density 2.06 Ah/cm 3 [1] . Ca lcium ,

considering its reactivity and metal properties, is a safer element than lithium as it is less prone to burst 

in f lame in contact with air and Ca platting -stripping reported so far did not show any dendrites growth 

demonstrating the safety of such technology to a moderate cost on electrolyte resistance [2] . In addition, 

Ca is the 5 th most available element and evenly distributed on Earth compared to Li, 25 th , making it a 

very promising alternative to Li [3].

Polymer electrolytes as compared to liquid electrolytes are easier to handle and shape on an 

industrial scale and tackle dendri te growth issues. Here we propose to pave the way to safe and efficient 

Ca -Poly mer batteries avoiding the usage of organic based electrolyte . We investigated the most 

commonly reported polymer in the literature , PEO. A tetraglyme electrolyte coupled to a calcium salt 

(Ca(TFSI) 2) is used as preliminary study . This approach helps us to investigate the interaction between 

PEO polymer with calcium salt by means of ionic conductivity measurement carried out by 

Electrochemical Imped ance Spectroscopy (EIS) and complementary techniques based on Raman and 

FT -IR spectroscop ies . As can be seen in Figure 1, the conductivity response with respect to temperature 

is non -monotonic as normally expected from the Vögel -Tammann –Fulcher model. Several parameters 

could influen ce this behaviour among them, the viscosity of the electrolyte, the salt dissociation process, 

the crystallinity of the polymer etc. Such behaviour deserves a proper investigation to elucidate the 

process behind. We employed here operando Raman spectroscop y technique at specific temperatures to 

get insights into molecular structure of the species in solution (aggregates, solvated -Ca...). This method 

allows us quantify ing the amount of Ca -diffusing species in the electrolyte and to correct Vögel -

Tammann –Fulc her model , proposing then a new model better featuring the obtained conductivity 

measurements .

Reference: 

1.  M. E. Arroyo -de Dompablo*, A. Ponrouch, P. Johansson, and M. R. Palacín, Achievements, Challenges,                        

> and Prospects of Calcium Batteries ,Rev. 2020
> 2. J.Wang, F .S. Genier, H .Li, S .Biria, I .D. Hosein ,A Solid Polymer Electrolyte from Cross -Linked
> Polytetrahydrofuran for Calcium Ion Conduction ,ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2019 , 1, 1837−1844
> 3. Haynes, W.M. Abundance Of Elements In The Earth’s Crust And In The Sea. In CRC Handbook of
> Chemistry and Physics , 97th ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2016 ;pp. 14 –17
> Figure 11: EIS measured conductivity of Ca(TFSI) 2tetraglyme. Figure 22: Raman spectra of Ca(TFSI) 2tetraglyme electrolytes

# Soft X-Ray Microscopy o f Manganese Hexa cyanoferrate Cathode 

# Materials for Lithium a nd Sodium Batteries 

M. Li 1, M .Maisuradze 1, A.Khan 1, A.Mull aliu 2, A. Sorrentino 3, S. Passerini 2, M. Giorgetti 1, and D. Tonti 4

(1) Dep. of Industrial Chemistry Toso Montanari U niv. of Bologna, Viale del Risorgimento 4, 

40136 Bologna (Italy) 

(2) Helmholtz Inst. Ulm (HIU), Electrochemistry I Helmholtzstraße 11, 89081 Ulm, and 

Karlsruhe Inst. of Technology (KIT) PO Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe (Germany) 

(3 ) ALBA Synchrotron Light So urce, Carrer de la Llum 2 -26, 08290 Cerdanyola del Vallés, (Spain) 

(4) Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 

(ICMAB -CSIC), Campus UAB Bellaterra, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès (Spain) 

dino.t@csic.es 

A very interesting, durable and cheap class of active intercalation cathode materials is represented by 

open -framework structures such as Prussian blue analogues (PBAs). Manganese hexacyanoferrate 

(MnHCF)  with nominal formula Na 2Mn[Fe(CN) 6]•zH 2O, only incl udes abundant elements and is safely 

and easily synthesized. The material features high specific capacities at high potentials when compared to 

other PBAs [1] . A combined XAS and XRD study has demonstrated that both Fe and Mn sites are 

involved in the elec trochemical process but a capacity fading is observed during the charge and discharge 

steps, due to a Jahn -Teller (J -T) effect [2].

Using energy -dependent soft x -ray microscopy [3,4] in this study we reveal and visualize the spatial 

distribution of the ox idation state of Mn , Fe and N at different electrode composition and after 50 cycles 

in a Li and in a Na battery . The high -resolution access to the metal L edge provided complementary 

details on the metal -ligand characteristic to the one already available by hard x -ray absorption , while the 

images demonstrate particle s at different state of charge, likely caused by J -T-related passivations , in 

particular in the cycled lithiated samples. This confirms the superior stability to sodiation and provides a n

impor tant support for strategies aimed to the suppression of fading .

An example of data extracted from energy -dependent 

images at the Fe -L edge of a fully charged MnHCF 

electrode material in a Li battery after 50 charge -

discharge cycles: maps of ratio betwe en main 

spectral components highlighting distribution of 

different prevalent Fe oxidation states. 

Acknowledgements 

This work has been partially financed by the Spanish Government, through the “Severo Ochoa” Programme for 

Centers of Excellence in R&D ( SEV - 2015 -0496), the project MAT2017 -91404 -EXP and CSIC platform FLOWBAT 

2021 . The HIU authors kindly acknowledge the basic funding of the Helmholtz Association. 

References 

[1] L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. Lu, M. Xu, J. Cheng, D. Zhang, J.B. Goodenough, Angew. Ch em., 125 (2013) 2018. 

[2 ] A. Mullaliu, J. Asenbauer, G. Aquilanti, S. Passerini, M. Giorgetti, Small Methods, 4 (2020) 1900529 

[3] A. Sorrentino et al., J. Synchrotron Rad. 22, (2015) 1112. 

[4] D. Tonti, et al. in "X -ray Characterization of Nanostructured Energy Materials by Synchrotron Radiation" (Eds.: 

M. Khodaei andL. Petaccia), InTech, 2017. .Highly Corrosion Resistant Nb Coatings on Copper Bipolar Plates for 

# Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolyzers 

Andrea Kellenberger a, Nicolae Vaszilcsin a, Delia Duca a, Mircea Laurentiu Dan a, Narcis Duteanu a

Svenja Stiber b, Tobias Morawietz b, Indro Biswas b, Paw el Gazdzicki b, Aldo S. Gago b, K. Andreas 

Friedrich b

> a

Politehnica University Timisoara, Faculty of Industrial Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, 

Piata Victoriei No. 2, 300006 Timisoara, Romania,  andrea. kellenberger@upt.ro 

> b

Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, German Aerospace Center, Pfaffenwaldring 30 -40, Stuttgart, 

70569, Germany,  Aldo.Gago@dlr.de 

Proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysis of water is a green procedure for hydrogen production, 

but to become competitive the cost of stack components, in particular bipolar plates (BPP) need to be 

reduced. This can be achieved by using coated low -cost materials as alternative to titanium. In this work, 

we rep ort on the development of a highly corrosion -resistant coating deposited by vacuum plasma 

spraying (VPS) of niobium powder on copper substrate. Copper substrate has been used as a cost -

effective replacement of titanium, commonly used to manufacture BPPs. T he influence of the Nb coating 

thickness, given by the number of deposited layers (32, 16 and respectively 8 layers of Nb coating) , on 

the corrosion resistance properties is investigated by electrochemical methods . Corrosion parameters of 

Nb coated samples have been determined from the Tafel plots shown in Fig. 1 and compar ed to those of 

pure metallic Nb, both before and after an accelerated stress test (AST) consisting in polarization at 2 V

for 6 hours . Appropriate conditions for the corrosion and stress tests have been chosen to simulate the 

anode side environment of PEM electrolyzer under operating conditions and the degradation of the proton 

exchange membrane by fluoride release. 

Figure 1. Potentiodynamic polarization curves ( v = 1 mV s -1) of meta llic Nb and VPS Nb -coatings on 

copper in 0.05 M H 2SO 4 + 0.1 ppm F - (pH = 1.4) (a) before and (b) after polarization at 2 V for 6 h, 

measured in O 2 saturated solution at 90°C .

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is used to estimate the polarizati on resistance and 

thickness of Nb coatings. Interfacial contact resistance at different compaction forces is evaluated both 

before and after the AST . Post -test analytic is carried out by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) 

and atomic force microscopy (A FM) measurements .

The results showed that even with a reduction of coating thickness from 130 to 30 μm, the highly 

corrosion resistance properties of Nb coatings are preserved, as proven by corrosion currents bellow 0.1 

μA cm -2. The AST at 2 V induces the formation of a passive oxide layer. Both EIS and XPS analysis gave 

a similar estimate of the protective oxide layer thickness of about 10 nm. The chemical composition 

determined by XPS shows the predominance of Nb 2O5 in the outermost layer. These results d emonstrate 

the possibility to reduce production cost of BPPs in PEM water electrolyzers by using alternative low -cost 

materials such as copper and substituting precious metals coatings with highly corrosion resistant coatings 

based on niobium. 

Acknowledg ment 

This work is part of PRETZEL project and has received funding from the Fuel Cell and Hydrogen 2 Joint 

Undertaking under the European Union´s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant 

agreement No 779478. An Electrochemical Alternative to Reduce t he E nvironmental Impact 

# of Evaporitic Lithium Extraction f rom Brines. Stage I : Removal of

# Calcium and Magnesium 

Noelia A. Palacios a, César H. Díaz Nieto a, Korneel Rabaey b, Victoria Flexer a 

> a

Centro de Investigac ión y Desarrollo en Materiales Avanzados y Almacenamiento de Energía de Jujuy 

(CONICET - Universidad Nacional de Jujuy) 

Av. Martijena S/N, Palpalá, 4612, Argentina  

> b

Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET), Faculty of Bioscienc e Engineering, Ghen t

University 

Coupure Links 653, Ghent, 9000, Belgium 

npalacios@cidmeju.unju.edu.ar 

In a context in which it is urgent to change the energy matrix dependent on fossil fuels for a more 

sustainable one, the reference to energy accumulation, electromob ility and lithium is undeniable .

Continental brines as present in a small region in South America (the Lithium Triangle), are the most 

abundant and the easiest to exploit with an evaporitic method [1]. Current practice is highly water and 

chemical intensive, and delivers besides lith ium only waste to be landfilled [2,3]. Concerns about 

processing practices are growing, particularly with the local native population. As an alternative to the 

current extraction process, it is proposed an integrated membrane electro lysi s process with three stage s,

each based on a water electrolyser with a side crystallizer. Lithium is present in diluted concentrations 

together with different ions, and it is imperative to fully remove both magnesium and calcium before 

lithium carbona te can be precipitated. In the stage I of this approach, hydroxyl groups are generated in 

situ in a two chamber electrochemical cell with a side crystallizer, omitting the need for chemical addition 

and not leading to substantial loss of lithium rich brine . The native brine is introduced into the cathodic 

compartment of a 2 -chamber electrolyzer (AEM) like the one show in the figure . As the pH increases, 

Mg(OH) 2 and Ca(OH) 2 will quantitatively precipitate. The objective is to obtain these two salts with 

com mercial value, avoiding that they remain as waste in the salar and minimize the amount of brine 

adsorbed on solids. Batch electrolysis expe riments were performed and showed that for a native south 

american brine containing 3090 mg L -1 of Mg 2+ and 685 mg L -1 of Ca 2+ , 62 kWh m -3 are needed for the 

full removal of both cations when a current density of 223 A m -2. It is necessary to remark that the Li +

concentration in the brine is not affected. The first stage of this alternative process to the evaporitic 

meth od, not only performs the necessary removal of the divalent cations from the brine, but also allows 

obtaining magnesium and calcium compounds simultaneously, minimizing the production of waste. 

Figure: Scheme of the electrochemical cell of S tage I 

REFERENCES 

1.Border, S. and L. Sawyer, Evaporites and brines – geological, hydrological and chemical aspects of 

resource estimation. Transactions of the Institutions of Mining and Metallurgy, Section B: Applied Earth 

Science, 2014. 123(2): p. 95 -10 6. 

2.Garrett, D.E., Part 1 - Lithium, in Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium Chloride, D.E. Garrett, 

Editor. 2004, Academic Press: Oxford. p. 1 -235. 

3 Flexer, V. et al , Lithium recovery from brines: A vital raw material for green energies with a potent ial 

environmental impact in its mining and processing. Sci Total Environ, 2018. 639: p. 1188 -1204. 

> Ca(OH) 2
> Mg(OH) 2

# The Importance of the Electrolyte in Energy -Related Electrocataly tic 

# Reactions : the Case o f Bicarbona te 

Giulia Marcandalli , Marc T. M . Koper 

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University 

P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Le iden , Th e Net herlands 

g.marcandalli@lic .leidenuniv.nl 

The nature of the electrolyte (pH, identity of bu ff er  and its concentration ) has proven to crucially  aff ect 

electrocatalytic  behaviour in a way that goes beyond simple water related equilibria. Herein, we  expand 

the understanding of the e ff ect of the widely employed bicarbonate electrolytes  on  hydrog en evolution 

reaction (HER),  CO 2 electrochemical reduction (CO2RR) to CO and, vic eversa, CO  electroxidation to 

CO 2 (COOR) .

We perfo rmed voltammetry measuremen ts under w ell -defined mass transport conditions using a gold 

rot ating disk el ectr ode and rotating -rin g disk electrode assembly changing the concentration of the 

bicarbonate electrolyt e. Importantly, this systematic investigation reveal s that carbonic acid and 

bicarbonate are viable proton do nor s for HER and CO2RR and that carbonate is  an oxygen donor  for 

CO OR .

Additionally,  probing the cataly tic surface by  in situ  IR  spectroscopy , we gain insights into the 

mechanism regulating the partici pation of bicarbonate -related species in the mech anism of HER , CO2RR 

and COOR. Preparation of Co Single -Atom Nanozyme Based on Graphyne and Its 

# Efficient  Detection of H 2O2

Li hua Shen 1, Yuan X u1, Cong Chen 1, Daixin Ye1,*, H on gbin Zhao 1,*

> 1

Department of Chemistry , College of Sciences, Shanghai University , 200444 

99 Shangda Road, Baosh an District, Shang hai, China 

E-mail: hongbinzhao@shu.edu.cn,  daixinye@shu.edu.cn 

Single -Atom Nanozyme (SAN) inherits the advantages of heterogeneous catalysts and homogeneous 

catalysts, not only has excellent activity and selectivity, but also achieves t he maximum utilization 

efficiency of atoms [1] . Meanwhile, n anozymes with oxidoreductase -like activity, such as peroxidase, 

oxidase and catalase, have been extensively applied in biosensors, immunoassay, and therap y. Graphyne 

as a novel and unique two -dime nsional planar carbon nanomaterial has excellent properties such as high 

electrical conductivity, high specific surface area, and stable structure, and can be used as an ideal 

biosensing platform [2] . Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide (O 2·− ) hydroxyl radical ( ·OH) 

as well as H 2O2 are present in numerous biological processes. How ever, the excessive generation of ROS 

would cause tissue injury and associated inflammation. Therefore, it is necessary to develop an ultra -

sensitive and selective method to detect H 2O2 in living cells. 

In this work, graphyne was prepared by the mechanical milling method . First, the mixture composed o f

benzene and CaC2 was put it into the ball milling chamber and ball milled for a certain period of time 

under c ertai n ball milling conditions. Then, the product was calcined at 260°C and N 2 for 2 hours, and 

further washed by acid and dried to obtain graphyne. Next , Co -MOF @graphyne precursor solution was 

prepared by mixing Zn(NO 3)2·6H 2O, Co(NO 3)2·6H 2O, 2-methylimidazole and methanol . The mixture 

solution mildly stir red at room temperature for 24 hours , then the solution was transferred into a Teflon -

lined stainless -steel autoclave, sealed, and heated to 120 ℃ for 6 h. The Co -MOF @graphyne was 

obt ain ed by centrifugation, wa sh ed and dried in a vacuum oven at 60 ℃ overnight eventually . Scanning 

electron microscopy, transmissi on electron microscopy, and X -ray diffraction can be used to prove that 

the folded sheets of the catalyst are stacked. At last , Co SAN was successf ully sy nthesized by high -

tem perature pyrolysis of Co -MOF@ graphyne . After calcined at 900 °C for 2h , Co single -atom nanozyme 

was obtain ed. At the same time, electrochemical tests also showed th at the catalyst has oxygen reduction 

catalytic activity. For further res earch , the catalyst was tested for peroxidase -like enzymes to optimize 

pH, temperature, and incubation time for TMB substrate catalysis conditions. The microbial corrosion of metals induced by sulfate reducing bacteria 

Guan fang 1,2 , Zhai xiaofan 1,2 , Duan Jizhou 1,2 *, Hou Baorong 1,2 

1. Key Laboratory of marine Environmental Corrosion and Bio -fouling, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese 

Academy of Scienc es, No. 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao 266071, China 

2. Open Studio for Marine Corrosion and Protection, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science 

and Technology, Qingdao, 266237, China. 

e-mail address duanjz@qdio.ac.cn 

Microbiologically influenced corrosion (MIC) is one of the main reasons for the failure of engineering 

materials immersed in seawater. Sulfate -reducing bacteria (SRB) could induce corrosion on almost all 

metals, causing severe corrosion in almost all metals immersing in sea water. The corrosio n of metal is 

closely related to the metabolic activity of SRB [1]. 

T. Gu [2] divided SRB induced metal corrosion into two forms: metabolite MIC (M -MIC) and 

extracellular electron transfer MIC (EET -MIC). M -MIC refers to the process in which the organic ac ids 

and other metabolites produced by SRB attack metals indirectly and accelerate corrosion by chemical 

reaction. Whereas EET -MIC refers to the process of direct corrosion of the metal by the SRB with the 

ability of extracellular electron transfer to obtai n electrons directly from the metal surface and accelerate 

the corrosion of the metal. It is proved that the biocorrosion mechanism of metal is related to metal 

composition, environmental and bacteria. The corrosion mechanism of the same SRB strain is diff erent 

for different metals. The corrosion of carbon steel caused by Desulfovibrio vulgaris strain SRB is mainly 

EET -MIC [3], while for copper alloy, the corrosion of Desulfovibrio vulgaris on copper alloy is mainly 

M-MIC [4]. 

To verify the MIC difference o f 5052 and Al -Zn -In -Cd aluminum alloy s by SRB strain Desulfovibrio 

caledoniensis , and t he interaction between the aluminum alloys and D. caledoniensis metabolic activity. 

SRB growth curve and sulfate variation with and without aluminum were performed to fi nd the effect of 

two aluminum alloys on SRB metabolic activity. Corrosion of 5052 aluminum alloy and Al -Zn -In -Cd 

aluminum alloy with and without SRB were performed. The results showed that both the presence of 

5052 and Al -Zn -In -Cd aluminum alloy promoted S RB metabolic activity, with more significant effect 

was found on the 5052 aluminum alloy. The electrochemical results suggested that the corrosion of the 

Al -Zn -In -Cd aluminum alloy was accelerated substantially by SRB. EET -MIC is the most possible 

corrosio n mechanism of Al -Zn -In -Cd aluminum alloy in SRB was EET -MIC, while M -MIC for 5052 

aluminum alloy. 

> Fig.1 Schematic of the corrosion mechanism for the Al -Zn -In -Cd aluminum in SRB medium.

Acknowledgement 

This work was supported financially by the Nation al Natural Science Fou ndation of China (No. 

41806090) .

References 

1. K.E. Anderson, The Sulfate -Reducing Bacteria (Book). American Scientist, 1980. 

2. T. Gu, R. Jia, T. Unsal, D. Xu . Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 2018 , 35 : 631 –636 .

3. Xu, D. and T. Gu, International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 2014. 91: 74 -81. 

4. W. Dou, R. Jia, P. Jin, J. Liu, S. Chen, T. Gu , . Corrosion Science, 2018. 144: 237 -248. Investigation of graphene and 1 -ethyl -3-methylimidazolium 

# tetrafluoroborate interfacial structure and capacitance temperature 

# dependence 

Heigo Ers , Maksim Mišin, Vladislav B. Ivaništšev 

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, Tartu 50411, Estonia 

E-mail: heigoers@ut.ee 

Supercapacitors are electrochemical energy storage devices, where energy is accumulated at the double 

layer . To achieve better energy and power density, t he electrolyte used in supercapacitors should have 

high electrochemic al stability and ion conductivity. Room -temperature ionic liquids (RTIL) are novel 

compounds, which are considered as possible electrolytes due to their stability and low vapor pressure. As 

RTILs consist only of ions, the electrode -RTIL interfacial structu re differs noticeably from other 

electrode -electrolyte interfaces. To study RTILs structure, molecular dynamic s (MD) simulations are 

indispensable, as they allow modeling and investigatin g the interface on the atomic -scale without any 

undesirable impuritie s, which could alter the RTIL structure. 

In this study, MD simulations have been used to evaluate the capacitance of an interface between model 

graphene electrode and 1 -ethyl -3-methylimidazoliu m tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid and to investigate its 

structu ral response to changes in temperature and potential. The aim of this study is to relate trends in 

interfacial capacitance dependencies to changes in ionic liquid’s interfacial structure. This work shows 

that near the potential of zero charge, the increase in temperature decreases the capacitance due to 

increased thermal motion, which hinders the ordered packing of ions. Furthermore, characteristic saddle 

points in the capacitanc e-potential curve were related to the restructuring of the ionic liquid. 

Fig ure 1. Capacitance -potential dependenc ies of studied temperatures in the range from −5 to 5 V. The 

potential axis (U) is shifted by the potential of zero charge of each temperature. 

Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the Estonian Research Council (grants IUT20 -13, 

PSG249, and PUT1107), the EU through the European Regional De velopment Fund (TK141 “Advanced 

materials and high -technology dev ices for energy recuperation systems”), and the Estonian –French 

cooperation program Parrot, funded by the Estonian Research Council and Campus France. Photodegradation of 4 -chlorophenol using composites g-

# C3N4/Zn O/carbon xerogel and Zn O/carbon xerogel as catalyst 

Dan iel C. Sperandio , Juliana G. M. de Sousa , Nicolas P . de Moraes , Leandro C. Trevelin, Rica rdo B. 

Valim, Liana A. Rodrig ues, Robson S. Rocha *

Es cola de Enge nharia de Lorena – Universidade de São Paulo 

Estrada do Campinho , sn , C EP 12602 -810 , Lorena , SP, Brasil 

*robson.r ocha @usp.br 

In the photocatalytic process for persistent organic pollutant degradation , the main aim is the increasing 

of the q uantum efficiency dimi nishing charge recombination . Th e present study evaluates the effect of 

hybrids g -C3N4/ZnO /carbon xerogel and ZnO /carbon xerogel on heterogeneous photocatalysi s in the 

degradation of 4 -Chlorophenol . For th e synthesis , 4.5 g of ZnCl 2 and 0.0689 g of g -C3N4 were solubilized 

in ethyl alcohol . Then, 1.5 ml of formaldehyde and 1.5 g of tannin were added and mixed with a nother 

solution with 4 g of KOH and the same solvent . The product was washed , dried in an oven ( 24 ho urs at 

100 ºC), ground and sieved (325 mesh ). The materials were calcined at 300 ºC for 30 min , under N2

atmosphere . The XC/ZnO synthesis followed the same procedure . However, the g -C3N4 mass was not 

added . Electrochemical experiments were performed with linear linear volta mmet ry from -0.1 to 1.0 V on 

porous microlayers prepared with each material , deposited on a rotating ring electrode glass car bon . The 

electrochemical measurements we re obtained with electrolyte K2SO 4 0. 05 mol L -1 (pH 2) using a 

potentiostat PGSTAT -bi -204 N (Aut olab/Metrohm ) and RRDE (Pine Research). -0,2 0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 -8 -6 -4 -2           

> 0246810
> I (nA) E (V) XC - ZnO (off) XC-ZnO-g-C3N4 (off) XC - ZnO (on) XC-ZnO-g-C3N4 (on) 0200 400 600 800
> 0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0
> Current (nA) Time (s) XC - ZnO - g-C3N4 XC - ZnO 050 100 150 200 250 300
> 010 20
> ZnO/XC g-C 3N4/ZnO/XC
> Time (min)
> % Degradation

Figur e 1: Linear voltammetry comparing under visible light and dark (on /off) 

Fig ure 2: Photocurrent generation under pulsed irradia tion for the materials pre pared. 

Figure 3: Degradation under visible radiation 

Acco rding to Fig ure 1, the g-C3N4/ZnO /XC ma terial show s hi gher current under visible light, imp lying in 

better charge separation and higher photocatalytic activity . Lower recombi nation rate s result in higher 

photocurrent generation s, and the g-C3N4/ZnO /XC shows superior photocurrent generation and high 

sensibility to light irradiat ion (Fig ure 2), which agrees with the photocatalytic efficiency sh own in Figure 

3, that exhibits 17% of photo degradation of 4-Chlorophenol . Therefore, this test proves the improvement 

of the efficiency of the catalyst under visible radiation with the presence of carbon xerogel and g-C3N4.

Acknowledg ments 

FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES for financial support. A Metal lic Copper Based Catalyst For The CO 2 Reduction To Formic 

# And Acetic Acid 

Martina Serafini (a) , Federica Mariani (a) , Andrea Fasolini (a) , Francesco Basile (a) , Erika Scavetta (a) ,

Domenica Tonelli (a) 

> (a)

Department of Industrial Chemistry “Toso Montanar i”, University of Bologna 

Viale del Risorgimento , 4 Bologna (Italy) 

martina.serafini6@unibo.it 

Starting from the industrial revolution, the majority of the human activities have been tied to the use of 

fossil fuels . Electricity and heat production, intensive agricultur e, industries and transportation are the 

main causes for the increase of gaseous CO 2 in the enviro nment . With the so -called Paris Agreement, 

world leaders officially recognized the strong im pact of anthropological activities on climate change and 

since then a great effort has been demanded to all fields of human sciences in order to guarantee a 

sustainable future for our society . In this framework, the concept of “artificial photosynthesis” 1 has 

gained momentum in view of a smart use of the atmospheric 

CO 2.

Inspired by the natural photosynthesis , carbon dioxide is 

converted back to chemicals and fuels by exploiting an 

electrochemical process 2. This contribut ion describes the 

preparation of an easily synthesized catalyst made of 

metal lic copper for the heterogeneous CO 2 reduction 

reaction (CO 2RR) in liquid phase in order to produce formic 

and acetic acid. The metal lic copper -based catalyst was 

electrochemically synthesised on a gas diffusion la yer 

(GDL) support made of carbon fiber s as shown in Figure 1. 

Electrosynthesis allows the one step formation and 

deposition of the Cu film directly on the carbon paper 

substrate. Adapting an already reported procedure 3, the 

carbon paper electrode was pre -treated in 1M H2SO 4

followed by soaking in pure EtOH. The role of the pre -

treatment time on the surface properties of the support was 

thoroughly evaluated. In particular, the ratio between 

crystalline and amorphous carbon phase s was optimised 

after investig ation by Raman analysis on the single carbon 

fibers. Afterwards, electrodeposition of the Cu film on the 

carbon fibers support was achieved starting from a n aqueous 

solution containing Cu( NO 3)2 at room temperature and 

atmospheric pressure. The optimized ca talyst was employed 

to carry out the CO 2RR in a typical H -Cell, in which a 

Nafion membrane divide d the catho de side , containing the 

working electrode , from the anod e side where a platinum 

gauze and Ag/AgCl electrode were used as counter and 

reference elect rode s, respectively. The reaction was 

performed for one hour in NaHCO 3 aqueous solution . All 

the liquid products we re collected in the catholyte and analysed by q uantitative 

H1-NMR , while the gas products were first collected in a gas sampling flask 

and an aly sed by Gas Chromatography. As first preliminary tests, several 

reactions were carried out both in continuous and discontinuous CO 2 flux at 

-1. 1 V and -0.7 V vs RHE in which a CO faradaic efficiency (FE) up to 4,36% 

was obtained with a FE for H2 evol ution of 63,80% for the gaseous product. 

As for the liquid products, formic acid (up to FE = 4.46%) and acetic acid (up 

to FE = 6.69%) were obtained .

References 

1. Bensaid S. et al. ChemSusChem 5 (2012) 500 – 521 

2. Genovese C. et al. J. Ener gy Chem . 22 (2013) 202 –213 

3. Xuli Ma et al., Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41(2016) 14553 -14561 

Figure 1 - Morphology 

of the metal lic copper 

film on carbon GDL 

support (upper zone 

(A); middle zone ( B)

and lower zone ( C)Electrochemic al instabilities in lithium -oxygen batteries : The role of 

# the redox mediator 

Gabriel F. Costa ,1 Edu ardo Machado, 1,2 Thayane Carpanedo, 2,3 Chaye ne Anchieta, 2,3 Gustavo Do ubek, 2,3 

Raphael Naga o. 1,2  

> 1

In stitute of Chemistry, U niversity of Campi nas , CEP 13083 -970, Campinas, SP, Brazil  

> 2

Center for Innovation o n New Energies, University of Campinas , CEP 13083 -841, Campinas, SP, Brazil  

> 3

School of Chemical Engineering, University of Campinas, CEP 13083 -852 Campinas, SP, Brazil 

Corresponding Author: nagao@unicam p.b r

The increasing use of mobile devices and electric vehicles has brought as one of the greatest challenges of 

contemporary civilization the need for batteries that supplies this energy demand. Recently, spontaneous 

potential oscillations h ave been identified during the process of discharging lithium -oxygen batteries. 

Nonlinear dynamics in these systems are known to occur under conditions far from thermodynamic 

equilibrium as a result of the interaction between kinetic instabilities and mass transport properties. 

Understanding, therefore, the reaction mechanism can provide important clues to the birth and evolution 

of this temporal complexity, thereby enabling pre cise control and prevention of battery efficiency 

collapse. It was used lithium halides salts acting as redox mediator in the electrolyte composition, since 

during the oxidation of Li, the X - of LiX is oxidized to X 3- providing a decreasing in the charge 

overpotential. Besides that, the halides presence can act as a diffusional compon ent that could help the 

emergence of electrochemical instabilities. Thus, it was assembled Li -O2 batteries cells with and without 

LiBr which was submitted to different galvanos tatic charge/discharge conditions in to comprise the effect 

of this species in t he electrolyte. It was observed that the presence of bromide reduced the charge 

overpotential and improved the cyclability. Besides that, the role of applied current was evaluated and 

higher it was, less completed cycles were obtained. After determining an interval of current operation, 

galvanodynamic experiments will be conducted to obtain conditions under which spontaneous potential 

oscillations emerges. Thereby, it will be designed appropriated cells in which in operando experiments 

will be conducted to monitor spontaneous emergence of patterns with temporal resolution. Then, it is 

hoped to understand how experimental parameter can impact the nonlinear dynamics observed during the 

battery operation. Figure 1 present s the results ob tained in cyclability Li -O2 batteri es tests with and 

without LiB r as redox mediator and using different galv anostatic condi tions.              

> Figure 1:(a) Cyclability Li -O2batteries tests with different electrolytes: with and without LiBr in its composition.
> (b )1st and 5 th cycles for cyclability Li -O2batteries tests with different elec trolytes: with and without LiBr in its
> composition. (c) Evolution of Li -O2battery capacity with and without LiBr in the electrolyte composition . (d)
> Cyclability Li -O2batteries tests in different galvanostatic conditions with LiBr in the electolyt e.

# Use of FeMnO 3 as a C atalyst in the Water Splitting R eaction 

Milena Dojcinovic 1, Zorka Z. Vasiljevic 2, Vesna Ribic 1, Zeljko Mravik 3, Ivana Stojkovic -Stamatovic 4,

Maria Vesna Nikolic 1

> 1

Institute for Multidisciplinary Research, University of Belgrade, Kneza Viseslava 1,Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Institute of Techn ic al Sciences of SASA, Knez Mihailova 35, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences , University of Belgrade, Mike Petrovica 12 -14, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physical C hemistry, Studentski trg 12 -16, Belgrade, Serbia 

milena.dojcinovic@imsi.rs 

Conversions between O 2 and H 2O are an important part of many renewable energy production 

technologies. Alkaline water splitting electrolysis (Oxygen Evolution Reaction -OER) is con si dered 

as an effective and environmentaly acceptable route for the production of hydrogen and oxygen gas 

required as resources for energy production via fuel cells. Also, with the approaching 

commercialization of  PEM  fuel  cell  technology, search for active, inexpensive non -precious metal 

ORR  catalyst  materials to replace currently used Pt -based  catalysts  is necessary in order to reduce 

the system cost. 

These renewable energy solutions require active, stable and low -cost electrocatalysts. In this work, 

we presen t our results on iron manganite synthesized by a relatively new synthesis method as a

catalyst material for both OER and ORR reaction s.

FeMnO 3 was synthesized via a sol -gel combustion synthesis process using glycine as fuel and nitrate ions 

as oxidizing agents and iron nitrate nona hydrate and manganese nitrate hydrate as precursors. Afte r

vivacious combustion a black ash -like powder was obtained. The a morphous powder was then sintered at 

800 oC for 6 hours and structurally, morphologically and texturally characterized [1] . XRD showed phase 

content of a pure bixbyite cubic structure. The structure recorded with TEM and FESEM can be described 

as a plate -like, net -like formation, with particles ranging from 0.2 to 1 μm. About 10 -20% o f the particles' 

surface area was interconnected, as estimated from TEM images. With Kubelka -Munk function ext racted 

from the light absorption spectrum the band gap of the synthesized powder was determined to be 1.69 eV, 

slightly lower than reported in literature. 

FeMnO 3 was tested as a catalyst a node for both oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR) via linear voltammetry (LV) with Nafion as the carr ier polymer agent, carbon black and 

graphene oxide . In OER FeMnO 3 with nafion as a carrier polymer agent exhibited 4.4 A g -1 mass activity 

and 3.3 A cm -2 surface activity, while in ORR activi ty was 2.4 A g -1 and 1.2 A cm -2. Charge transfer 

resistance wa s measured by electric impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and mathematically fitted and was 

found to be relatively low (OER: RCT =27 Ω at E= 1.15 V, ORR: RCT =230 Ω at E= -0.5 V). Electrode 

stability was tested with chronoamperometry (CA) measurements during 1 hour and the material 

maintained 57% of the initial current jump at the end of the trial period at the potential of E= 1.15 V. 

1. Vasiljevic Z. Z., Dojcinovic M. P, Krstic J. B., Ribic V., Tadic N. B., Ognjanovic M., Auger S. 

Vidic J., Nikolic M. V. (2020) Synthesis and antibacterial activity of iron manganite (FeMnO 3)

particles against the environmental bacterium Bacillus subtilis , RSC Adv., 10 : 13879 -13888, DOI 

10.1039/d0ra0809k Atom -scale dispersed palladium in a conductive Pd 0.1 TaS 2 lattice with 

# a unique electronic structure for efficient hydrogen evolution 

Xin Wang, b Dong Wang, a Yue Lu, c Changsheng Song, a Jie Pan, a Chilin Li, a Manling Sui, *c Wei Zhao *a 

and Fuqiang Huang *ab  

> a

State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Super fi ne Microstructures, Shanghai Institute 

of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1295 Dingxi Road, Shanghai 200050, P.R. China.  

> b

State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Che mistry and Applications, National Laboratory, 

College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, No. 5 Yiheyuan Road Haidian 

District, Beijing 100871, P.R. China  

> c

Institute of Microstructure and Properties of Advanced Materials, Beijing University of Technology, No. 

100, Pingleyuan, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100124, P.R. China. 

zhaowei220@mail.sic.ac.cn; huangfq@mail.sic.ac.cn ; mlsui@bjut.edu.cn ; wangxin0620@zzu.edu.cn 

ABSTRACT: No ble metal catalysts have extraordinary catalytic activity but suffer from high cost; 

therefore single atom catalysis attracts tremendous attention. Here, we propose atom -scale dispersed 

palladium (Pd) in a layered TaS 2 lattice to form new compounds of Pd xTaS 2, whose crystal structure was 

resolved by powder X -ray diffraction. The electrical conductivity of metallic Pd 0.1 TaS 2 (1.36 × 10 4 S m −1)

is twice as large as that of TaS 2 (6.18 × 10 3 S m −1). This compound applied as a new electrocatalyst for the 

hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) exhibits excellent catalytic performance with an onset overpotential of 

77 mV, superior to those of other catalysts such as TaS 2 (295 mV) and Pd -loaded TaS 2 (114 mV). Density 

functional theory calculations reveal that the interaction of Pd -4d and Ta -5d orbitals results in the upshift 

of the Fermi level (TaS 2 versus Pd 0.1 TaS 2) to decrease the barrier height for the HER. Furthermore, the 

hybridization of Pd -4d and S -3p orbitals builds up pathways along the c axis to improve t he conductivity 

and promote HER performance. It is noted that the amount of Pd used in Pd 0.1 TaS 2 is only 4 wt. %, compared 

with 20 wt. % in commercial Pd/C catalysts, which is beneficial for its practical application .Carbon Nanomaterial -modified Inkjet Printed Silver Nanoparticle 

# Paper Electrodes for Adsorptive Stripping Voltammetry of Ni(II) -

# chelate complexes 

Keagan Pokpas †, Nazeem Jahed †, Earl McDonaldº, Petrone Bezuidenhout ‡, Suzanne Smith ‡, Kevin Land ‡,

and Emmanu el Iwuoha † 

> †

SensorLab, Department of Chemistry, University of the Western Cape, Robert Sobukwe Road, Bellville, 

7530, South Africa, 

º Electron Microscope Unit, Physics Building, University of the Western Cape, Robert Sobukwe Road, 

Bellville, 7530, South A frica,  

> ‡

Materials Science and Manufacturing, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Meiring 

Naude Road, Brummeria, Pretoria 0001, 

South Africa. 

kpokpas@uwc.ac.za 

The development of low -cost, disposable electrode materials has been at the forefront of sensor 

technology in recent decades. Paper, offers possibilities for multi -functional, disposable and economically 

friendly sensing capabilities and has proved to be a suitable reagent storage and substrate material in 

paper -based analytical devices (PADs). In this work, we report a simple inkjet printing procedure on 

photographic paper for the fabrication of single analyte electrochemical sensors. A three -electrode 

systems, consisting of a 3 mm diameter working electrode (WE), a counter elect rode (CE) and a reference 

electrode (RE) were prepared by inkjet printing of silver conductive inks. In a second step, modification 

of the working electrode surface with (a) an electrochemically reduced graphene oxide, gold nanoparticle 

(ERGO -AuNP) film, t o improve electrode sensitivity and (b) a nafion dimethylglyoxime carbon black (N -

DMG -CB) ink, as an environmentally friendly, metal -free approach was employed. Electrical and 

topographical characterization of the printed layers was performed in the fabric ation process. Printing of 

Ag -NP ink showed good resistivity (1.8 – 6.3 Ω) on photographic paper. The prepared printed paper -

based electrodes (PPE) offer a quantitative analysis of Ni(II), based on the accumulation of Ni(dmgH) 2

complexes at the modified electrode surfaces by square -wave adsorptive cathodic stripping voltammet ry 

(SW -AdCSV). Instrumental parameters including deposition potential and deposition time were 

optimized for both electrochemical sensors. Improved sensitivities were achieved at the modified 

integrated electrodes with limits of detection (LOD) of 32.19 an d 48.01  μg L -1 for the ERGO -AuNP -CC -

Ag -PPE and N -CB -DMG -Ag -PPE respectively. This is well below the EPA and WHO standards of  0.1 

mg L -1 or 0.1 ppm for Ni 2+ in drinking water. Exploring the Interfacial Behavior of Al uminum Electrode s in Ionic 

# Liquids : an Impedance Stud y

Jinfeng Zhao, Ove Oll, Georg Gorbatovski and Enn Lust 

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu 

Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia 

jinf eng, zha o@ut.ee 

The expan sion of renewable energy production and the growing number of energy storage devices 

demand improved and low -cost electrochemical energy storage tech nologies . To meet the future needs of 

energy storage, novel material s with high ener gy densities, readily a vailable raw materials and safety are 

required [1] . Aluminum as the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust attract s the electrochemists ’

attention , esp ecia lly as the established recycling technolog y and price make alumin um very cost efficient .

How ever , fo r aluminum as an anode in secon dary battery some cha lleng es remain . Pristine aluminum is 

intrinsically protected by a passiv e Al 2O3 layer . This layer has t wo effects: making redox potential more 

positive and limit ing the expos ure of the active surface [2] . Further more, when aluminum has been used 

as the current collector in supercapacito r, the contact resistance increase s over time .

Room temperature ionic liquid (IL ) electrolytes present new possibilities for nonaqueous alumi num ion 

batter y owing to their tunable phys icochemical properties. One of main advantages is the high 

electrochemical stability [3]. However, several dis advantages of using ILs as electrolytes for aluminum 

batter ies remain . One is the decomposition and dissolution of the cathode materia ls in 

chloroaluminate -based ILs . Another is the possib ilit y of side reac tions in chloroaluminate -based ILs .

Worse, the chloroaluminate -based ILs are highly corrosive , hygroscopic and viscous , all of which 

aggravate their limitation as an efficient battery electrolyte [2] . There fore, it is of importance to explore 

suitable non chlor oaluminate -based IL s toward to aluminum battery electrodes .

Con sidered the above statements , it is of importance to address the covering layer when establishing an 

electrochemica lly active interface between the Al anode and the IL electrolytes. After all, electrochemical 

reacti ons at the interface reflect the fundamental understanding of the interfacial processes governed by 

double layer formation at electrode |IL interfaces. To ov ercome those obstacles, the interfacial behavior of 

Al and Al(111 ) electrodes in ILs is studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) methods . Three different IL anions have been chosen for th is study with the same 

cat ion 1-ethyl -3-methylimidazolium (EMIm) , namely, bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (TFSI) ,

tetrafl uor oborate (BF 4) and p erchlorate (C lO 4). From the EIS results , relatively low capacitance values for 

capacitance vs. potential curves in the three studied ILs have been observed . The average capacitance 

value in this study are much lower tha n what ha ve been shown in literature [ 4]. This implies that the fully 

metallic Al surface can not be obtained fro m the ILs under this study. Intere sting ly , with in the negati ve 

polariz ation r ange , the avera ge capacitance values in t hree ILs can be clearly disting uish ed fro m the 

diffe rent anions . That is , it sho ws the lo west average capacitance values for the larg e TFSI anion s. It

suggests that , with regard to the IL s themselves, the interaction of IL and aluminum surface can for m a n

anomalous layer structure which limits the exposure of the single crystal Al electrode . The stability of this 

surface layer has been explored. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Esto nian Ministry of Education and Research (projects no. IUT 20 -13, 

PUT1033, PUT1107 and PSG249) and Estonian Centres of Excellence project TK141. 

Reference 

[1]  T. Leisegang , F . Meutzner , M. Zschornak , W . Münchgesang , R . Schmid , T . Nestler , R . A. Er emin , A .

A. Kabanov , V . A. Blatov  an d D. C. Meyer , The  aluminum -ion  battery:  a sustainable and  seminal  concept ,

Frontiers i n Chemistry , 7 (2019 ) 268. 

[2] Y. Zhang, S . Liu, Y . Ji, J. Ma and H. Yu , Emerging nonaqueous aluminum -ion batteries: challenges, 

sta tus, and perspectives , Adv. Mater. 30 (2018 ) 170631 0. 

[3] O. Oll, M. Väärtnõu , G. Gorbatovski , J. Zhao, C. Siimenson, L. Siinor , K. Lust, T. Romann , P. Pikma 

and E. Lust, Adsorption of anions on bismuth and cadmium single crystal plane electrodes from var ious 

sol vents and ionic liquid mixtures, Electrochimica Acta. 319 (201 9) 895 -90 8.

[4] V. A. Safonov , M. A. C hoba and M. S. Dolov , Specific features of the interaction of the surface of 

mechanically renewable aluminum electrode with molecules of aprotic solvents , Journal of 

Electroanalytical Chemistry , 851 (2019) 113456 .New sodium orthoferrite s ynthesis route for green sodium -ion batteries 

Maria Gabriella Detone Guaita 1, Otávio José de Oliveira, Paulo Rogério Catarini da Silva 1, Luiz Henrique 

Dall’Antonia 1, Alexandre Urbano 1

> 1

State University of Londrina 

Londrina, Paran á, Brazil 

gabriellaguaita@hotmail.com 

The growing demand for lithium -ion batteries may, in the future, limit the available lithium resources, 

significantly influencing the cost and the own survival of technology. Therefore, new materials are 

investigated to replace the non -abundant and expensive raw materials that constitute the available cathode 

active material on lithium -ion batteries.[1] Among the emerging technologies, the one that uses sodium 

ion and iron stands out. Sodium orthoferrite, NaFeO 2, shows polymorphism with the α -phase stable up to 

770 ºC and the β -phase stable at higher temperatures. The phase α -NaFeO 2 presents a lamellar structure 

that allows the diffusion of sodium ions in two dimensions, enabling its use as a cathode of Na + based 

batter ies.[2] The investigation of this material is essential for the commercial application of these 

batteries. Thus, the aimed of this study was to synthesize α -NaFeO 2 via sol -gel route, not yet described in 

the literature, and to verify its crystallographic, morphological and electrochemical properties. The effect 

of the concentration of chelating agent (citric acid), of the calcination temperature and time, on the 

synthesis, were studied. X -ray diffraction shows the tendency to the formation of the α -phase in the ratio 

of 1: 2 of citric acid and metals. By Rietveld ’s refinement of the calcined sample at 600 ºC for 4 days it 

was verified that the on ly phase containing the iron was α -NaFeO 2 with contamination with Na 2CO 3 of 

less than 5% . Spherical grains of the o rder of 200 nm were observed by scanning electron microscopy .

Using the BET method, it was observed that the α -NaFeO2 phase synthesized by the sol -gel route had a 

surface area 4 times greater than that described in the literature for solid state synthesis. Electrochemical 

performance measurements revealed a charge capacity for the first cycle of about 113 mA h g -1 in the 

potential range of 1.00 to 4.00 V vs. Na +/Na. Even higher discharge capacity values, as well as superior 

electrochemical performance can b e achieved by improving the synthetic parameters of the new route are 

in progress. 

References: 

[1] VAALMA, C.; BUCHHOLZ, D.; WEIL, M.; PASSERINI, S. Nature Reviews Materials , v. 3, p. 

18013, 2018. 

[2] KATAOKA, R. et al. Electrochimica Acta , v. 182, p. 8 71 -877, 2015. Molecular simulation of lithium metal deposition 

S. Alexis Paz †‡ , Paula V. Saravia †, Andrea C. Calderón †π 

> †

Dpto. de Química Teórica y Computacional. Fac. de Ciencias Químicas. Univ. Nacional de Córdoba. 

> ‡

Instituto de Fisicoquímica de Córdoba (INFIQC). CONICET -UNC. 

> π

Instituto de Física Enrique Gaviola (IFEG). CONICET -UNC. 

> †

Laboratorio de Energías Sustentables ( LaES). IFEG. 

Córdoba (X5000HUA), Argentina. 

apaz@unc.edu.ar 

Lithium metal is considered the ultimate 

anode for energy -storage systems for its 

extremely high theoretical specific capacity 

(3860 mAh g−1), the lowest redox potential 

(−3.040 V vs the standard hydrogen electrode) 

and a low gravimetric density (0.534 g cm−3) 

[1]. However, the main issue associated with 

this electrode is the growth of metal 

dendrites, also known as high surface area 

lithium (HSAL), during charge/discharge 

cycles. Therefore, there is a great interest in 

the study of the mechanism of HSAL formation 

and the effect of the different variables 

involved. The final goal is the possibility to 

tune these variables to control the formation 

of HSAL. Such control remains elusive 

probably because it requires an important 

feedback between theory and experiments. 

Molecular simulations could help to improve 

this feedback, although the construction of an ad hoc model that connects the simulations 

pa rameters with the experimental measures is required. We have developed a computer model based on 

that of Mayers et. al. [2] to simulate the HSAL growth. One side of the simulation box, say the bottom, is 

considered an ideal electrode where lithium ions can be reduced and deposited. On the opposite side, the 

simulation box is connected to a constant density reservoir of lithium ions that maintain the system at a 

constant chemical potential. The motion of lithium ions is integrated using the Langevin equation that, 

together with the reservoir, set the system in the μVT thermodynamic ensemble. The deposition is a random 

event with probability P that may occur when a lithium ion approaches the implicit electrode or a previously 

deposited metal atom. This probabi lity P can be connected to the experimental cell current. In this work we 

present the effects that different P values have in the resulting HSAL morphologies. The study of other 

processes like dissolution or surface diffusion within this model, and further extensions, are discussed. 

[1] Yang, H., Guo, C., Naveed, A., Lei, J., Yang, J., Nuli, Y., & Wang, J. (2018). Recent progress and 

perspective on lithium metal anode protection. Energy Storage Materials, 14(January), 199 –221. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2018.03.001 

[2] Mayers, M. Z., Kaminski, J. W., & Miller, T. F. (2012). Suppression of Dendrite Formation via Pulse 

Charging in Rechargeable Lithium Metal Batteries. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116(50), 26214 –

26221.  https://doi.org/10.1021/jp309321w Electrochemical Flow Reactor for the Sustainable E xtraction 

# of LiCl from Natural Brines 

## Valeria Romero 21 , Daniela Putrino 2, Victoria Flexer 1,

## Mario Tagliazucchi 2 . Ern esto J. Calvo 2 

> 2

## INQUIMAE Universidad de Buenos Aires, CABA , Pabellón 2, 

## Ciudad Univ ersitaria,Buenos Aires, Argentina  

> 1

## CIDMEJu, Palpala Jujuy, Argentina 

calvo@qi.fcen.uba.ar 

We consider an electrochemical flow reactor with two compartments separated by an anion (chloride) 

selective membrane. The electrochemical reactor is comprised of two 3D compact porous bed electrodes 

with conducting petroleoum coke particles covered by the spinel oxide LiMn 2O4. The cathode is a lithium 

deficient Li 1-xMn 2O4, and the anode is LiMn 2O4, which exchange lithium ions. The ar chitecture of this 

flow electro chemical reactor is similar to a vanadium flow battery and operates by a rocking chair lithium 

intercalation mechanism of lithium ion batteries 

The reactions in each electrode are the following: 

In the negative electrode, 

in the positi ve electrode: 

## (0  x  1, and y  x ) 

We will present digital simulation (COMSOL® 5.2a) results of the interfacial intercalation, ion diffusion 

in the LiMn 2O4 particles, ion transport by diffusion and migration under tertiary current distrib ution and 

liquid electrolyte circulation under constant current applied to the reactor. We analyze the experimental 

and digital simulation results with plots of cell voltage vs. time (or charge) under constant current and 

lithium concentration with a poten tiometric ion selective electrode. 

From the simulation results we obtain plots of concentration distribution in the electrolyte and electric 

potential in the electrodes. We have also studied the effect of Li + concentration, flow velocity, current 

density, etc. 

We will present results of LiCl extraction in two steps, from natural brines of Olaroz and Hombre Muerto 

(Argentina), Uyuni (Bolivia) and Atacama (Chile) which demonstrate the method works with different 

natural brine compositions .Method for the Accurate Prediction of pK a and Electron Transfer 

# Potentials from ab -initio Calculations 

Michael Busch 1* , Elisabet Ahlberg 2, Kari La asonen 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland  

> 2

Department of Che mistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden 

Michael.Busch@aalto.fi 

The ability to efficiently and accurately predict acid dissociation constants (pK a) and electron transfer 

(ET) potentials is critical for the success of comp utational methods in electrochemistry. Proton coupled 

electron transfer reactions are typically modeled using the computational hydrogen electrode A

comparable simple and efficient procedure is, however, still missing for pure electron transfer reactions. 

Here, typically the absolute potential is used to compute the redox potential. While this method is 

computationally efficient it interferes with the inherent cancellation of errors from density functional 

theory (DFT) and implicit solvation models. The alt ernative use of a well studied and computationally 

undemanding electrochemical reference reaction such as the oxidation of a simple organic molecule, 

which would allow for this cancellation of errors, is limited by the almost complete absence of reliable 

electrochemical measurements for suitable compounds. This is opposed to the dissociation constants of 

acids which can be obtained experimentally with high accuracy for almost any material. 

In this contribution we will show a thermochemical cycle which con nects the pK a with electron transfer 

and proton coupled electron transfer reactions. This allows us to determine an effective absolute potential 

Geff (e -) and an effective proton solvation energy G eff (H +) for any ab -initio or DFT method using the 

experiment ally well defined pK a of an arbitrary acid as reference reaction. G eff (e -) can be used to predict 

the ET potential. A comparison of high level coupled cluster CCSD(T) calculations with experimentally 

well characterized ET reactions on small organic molecu les shows that our method is, due to the superior 

cancellation of errors, able to predict energetics of ET reactions with high accuracy (Figure 1a). In a 

subsequent benchmark with respect to CCSD(T) results the best performing DFT functionals were 

extracte d. 

In addition to computing ET potentials our method also allows for the prediction of pK a values using the 

effective proton solvation energy G eff (H +). The accuracy of the method can be increased further by 

including corrections for the differences in chem ical similarity between the functional group considered 

in the reference reaction and those of the molecule of interest. The accuracy of the effective proton 

solvation method was tested for a set of 73 organic molecules with varying complexity. Our computa tions 

indicate that pK a values can be predicted with chemical accuracy (Figure 1b). 

Figure 1: : a) Comparison of ET potentials computed using coupled cluster 

CCSD(T)/Def2 -TZVPP with experiment. b) Comparison between computed acid 

dissociation constant s (PBE0/6 -311++G**/SMD) using the effective proton 

solvation energy Geff (H +) after correction for chemical similarity and 

experiment. Synthesis of activated carbon using sugar cane bagasse 

Thaynara M. Costa , Dan iel C. Sperandio, Nicolas P. Mor aes, Leandro C. Trevelin, Rica rdo B. Valim, 

Liana A. Rodrig ues, Robson S. Rocha *

Es cola de Enge nharia de Lorena – Universidade de São Paulo 

Estrada do Campinho , sn , C EP 12602 -810 , Lorena , SP, Brasil 

*robson.r ocha @usp.br 

In the process of electrochemical synthesis of hydrogen peroxide, the main area is the development of the 

electrodic material modifier for oxygen reaction reduction (ORR) with the fo rmation of H 2O2. Th e

present study evaluates the viability of using activated carbon from sugarcane bagasse (SCB) as organic 

carbon source , for the H2O2 electrochemical generation .

The sugarcane bagasse was crushed, washed and impregnated with H 3PO 4 soluti on (0%, 5%, 10%, 20 %, 

30%, 40% and 50%) for 3 days. Then, these materials were dried in an oven (3 hours at 150 ° C) and 

calcined at 700 ° C for 1 hour ( heating rate 5 ºC min -1). At the end of the process, the calcined material 

was ground to obtain a fine po wder. For electroch emical tests, porous microlayers wer e prepared with 

each material following the literature 1. Electrochemical experiments were performed with linear sweep 

voltammetry on micro layers of different materia ls deposited on an electrode rotatin g ring (Pt) -disk (GC ).

The electrochemical measurements we re obtained with electrolyte K2SO 4 0. 05 mol L -1 (pH 2) using a 

potentiostat PGSTAT -bi -204 N (Autolab/Metrohm) and RRDE (Pine Research). -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 -600 -400 -200 0

> Disc
> I /  mA
> E vs Ag/AgCl / V
> 025 50 75 100
> Printex using 0% H 3PO 4
> using 5% H 3PO 4
> using 10% H 3PO 4
> using 20% H 3PO 4
> using 30% H 3PO 4
> using 40% H 3PO 4
> Ring
> I /  mA

Figure 1 : LSV catalyst (ORR) of SCB impregnated with H 3PO 4 and calcined at 700 ° C for 1 h under 

uncontrolled atmosphere 

The initiation reaction occurs from the potential of -0.15 V and the current diffusion limit starts from -0. 3

V and -0.4 V for material with 10% and 20% of H 3PO 4, respec tively . The analysi s of the graph was based 

on the values abo ve -0.2V, becaus e it is possible to notice that with smaller values , the potential tends to 

zero volts, forming less hydrogen peroxide. By comparing the carbon values of SCB with acid to that 

wit hout acid and Print ex, it is already possible to see f rom the current values the effectiveness of the 

application of the acid. Note two important information in Figure 1, first is the maximum current reached 

in the ring, which the material with 20% acid re ached approximately 110  mA compared to the Printex 

with 75  mA. Another important poin t is the potential at which these currents were observed, the SCB with 

20% H 3PO 4 reached the maximum current at -0.4 V while the Printex reached the maximum current at -

1. 0 V. 

Reference 

> 1

Applied Catalysis A: General, v. 411 -412, p. 1-6, 2012 

Acknowledg ments 

FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES for financial support. Lignin -derived carbons for supercapacitors and microbial fuel cells 

Ncholu Manyala 1, Bridget K. Mutuma 1, Ndeye F. Sylla 1, Amanda Bubu 1, Ndeye M. Ndiaye 1,

Federico Poli 2, Alessandro Brilloni 2, Tommaso Polci 2, Carlo Santoro 3, Francesca Soavi 2

1Department of Physics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa 

> 2

Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, Alma Mater Studiorum – Universita’ di Bologna, 

Italy 

> 3

Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Science, University of Manchester, United 

Kingdom 

ncholu.manyala@up.ac.za 

Porous carbons are key electrode components of many electrochemical energy storage/conversion 

systems. With the aim of exploiting wasted derived by biomass plants, h ere, lignin was v alorized as raw 

material for the production of carbons with tailored porous texture for a use in electrical double layer 

capacitors (EDLCs) and microbial fuel cells (MFCs) . The lignin -derived activated carbon (LAC) was 

generate d by a one -step carbonizatio n route using KHCO 3 as mild activating agent. Different lignin -to -

KHCO 3 ratio s were explored. The performance of the LAC car bon electrode was investigated in 

supercapacitors and for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at neutral pH . LACs obtained at 

biomass/KH CO 3 mass ratios of 1:0.5 and 1:2 (LAC -0.5 and LAC -2) comprised of mesopores and 

micropores and displayed BETs of 1558 m 2g-1 and 1879 m 2g-1, respectively. LAC -2 exhibited a superior 

specific capacitance and ORR electrocatalytic activity. A symmetric superca pacitor with LAC -2

electrodes and 2.5 M KNO 3 electrolyte displayed a specific capacitance of 28.5 F g -1, corresponding to an 

electrode specific capacitance of 114 F g -1, a specific energy of 10 Wh kg −1 and a specific power of 

397 W kg −1 . A capacitance rete ntion of 84.5% after 15,000 charge -discharge cycles was demonstrated .

The ORR kinetics at LAC samples were studied using a rotating disk electrode (RDE) in a neutral 

medium. LAC -2 showed the highe st electrocatalytic activity. The better performa nce of LAC -2 vs LAC -1

can be explained with a better interconnected porous network and high er surface area that ma ke that the 

former lignin -derived porous carbons suitable electrode materials for dual applications , EDLCs and 

MFCs. .

Acknowledgments 

This research was carried out under the Italy -South Africa joint Research Programme (ISARP) 2018 -2020 

(Italian Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of the Environment). The South African Research Chairs 

Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Re search Foundation of South 

Africa (Grant No. 61056) is also acknowledged. 

References 

[1] Sylla N, Ndiaye N, Ngom B, Momodu D, Madito M, Mutuma B, Manyala Sci Rep 9 ( 2019 ) 1-15. 

[2] D. Momodu, C . Okafor, N . Manyala, A . Bello, M .G. Zebaze Kana, E . Ntsoenz ok , Waste and Biomass 

Valorization 10 ( 2019 ), 1741 -1753 

[3] D. Momodu, N.F. Sylla, B. Mutuma, A. Bello, T. Masikhwa, S. Lindberg, A. Matic, N. Manyala, J. 

Electroanal. Chem. 838 (2019) 119 -128. 

[4] F.Poli, D. Momodu, G. E Spina, A. Terella, B. K. Mutuma, M. L. Focarete, N. Manyala, F. Soavi, 

Electrochim. Acta 338 (2020) 135872 Electrodeposition and Electrochemical Characteris ation 

# of Thin Nickel Overlayers on Au(111) 

Markus Wittmann a, Stefan M. Schorer a, Ludwig A. Kibler a, Timo Jacob a,b  

> a

In stitute of Electrochemistry (Ulm University), b Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) 

Ulm University , Institute of Electrochemistry , Albert‐Einstein‐Allee 47, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

markus.wittmann@uni -ulm.de 

Nickel is widely used in energy storage and conversion , e.g. nickel -iron, nickel -cadmium , and nickel -

metal hydride batteries. The behavior of nickel electrodes has been investigate d extensively. However, a 

detailed understanding of surface processes on the atomic level is still missing. [1 ,2 ] In particular, there 

have been only a few fundamental studies of nickel single crystal electrodes rela ted to their 

electrochemical oxidation. [3 ] The initial stages of the electrochemical deposition of nickel have been 

studied on Au(111) .[4] The electrochemical fabrication of thin n ickel overlayers on Au(111) and their 

electrochemical characterization have been investigated in detail. 

The nickel overlayers have been electrochemically deposited onto Au(111) from a 0.01 M NiSO 4 solution 

and subsequently characterized by cyclic voltammetry in a 0.1 M KOH solution. Metallic nickel is highly 

sensitive to oxidation by ambient air , which requires very c aref ul handling of the electrodes. [2,3] The 

transfer of the electrode from one electrochemical cell to the other has been done under inert gas 

atmosphere to guarantee stability and electrochemical performance of the nickel electrode surfaces. 

Figure 1 show s the current density -potential curve of a n ickel overlayer on an Au(111) single crystal in 

comparison with the behavior of Au(111) and Ni(111) in 0.1 M KOH. The study of nickel monolayers on 

Au(111) helps to identify surface and bulk contributions of Ni e lectrooxidation. In addition, relations 

between structure of the Ni electrodeposit and its electrochemical behavior are addressed. 

Figure 1: Cyclic voltammogram of a nickel overlayer electrodeposited on to an Au(111) single crystal in 

0.1 M KOH in comparison with Ni(111) and Au(111) . Scanrate: 10 mV s -1.

[1] D. S. Hall, C. Bock, B. R. MacDougall, J. Electrochem. Soc. 160 (2003) 235 –243. 

[2] L. F. Huang, M. J. Hutchison, R. J. Santucci, J. R. Scully, J. M. Rondinelli, J. Phys. Chem. C 121 

(2017) 9782 –9789. 

[3] J. Scherer, B. M. Ocko, O. M. Magnussen, Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 1169 –1191. 

[4] P. Allongue, L. Cagnon, C. Gomes, A. Gündel, V. Costa, Surf. Sci. 557 (2004) 41 –56. Electrospun nickel manganite ( NiMn 2O4) nanofibers for temperature 

# and humidity sensing application s

M. V. Nikolic 1, M. P. Dojcinovic 1, Z. Z. Vasiljevic 2, J. B. Krstic 3, N. B. Tadic 4, S. Markovic 2

> 1

Institute for Multidisciplinary Research, University of B elgrade, Kneza Viseslava 1, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Institute of Technical Sciences of SASA, Knez Mihailova 35, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

Institute of Chemistry, Technology and Metallurgy, Department of Catalysis and Chemical Engineering, 

University of Belgrade, Student ski trg 14 -16, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 4

University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physics, Studentski trg 12, Belgrade, Serbia 

mariavesna@imsi.rs 

Monitoring temperature and humidity/moisture is widely present in many domestic, industrial and 

medical applications. Nicke l manganite , a transition metal oxide cubic spinel oxide , has been previously 

applied a s a Negative Temperature C oefficient (NTC) ceramic material for temperature sensing due to its 

stable characteristics, low room temperature resistivity and moderate temp erature sensitivity. 

Electrospinning is a method used to o btain nanofibers from a solution using electric force generated by 

high voltage . Nickel manganite ( NiMn 2O4) nanofibers were obtained by electrospinning and subsequent 

calcination at 400 oC. TG/DTA o f t he as -spun fibers was performed . X-ray diffraction analysis confirmed 

the formation of a cub ic spinel structure. The fiber surface area and pore size distribution was estimated 

using nitrogen porosimetry. The morphology of as -spun and calcined nanocryst alline nickel manganite 

nanofibers was analyzed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Initial investigation of the material 

constant (B) of the nickel manganite nanofibers applied as paste on test interdigitated electrodes on 

alumina substrate, dried at 1 00 oC was determined as 4379 K in the temperature range 20 -50 oC and 

temperature sensitivity of -4.95%/K at room temperature (25 oC) and is comparable with commercial 

devices using spinel based NTC ceramics, confirm ing the potential for application in flex ible temperature 

sensors . Complex impedance monitored at room temperature (25 oC) in a climatic chamber in the relative 

humidity range 40 -90% decreased noticeably with increase in humidity showing that this material can 

also be applied as a humidity sensor .Electrochemistry and thermoelectrochemistry of ‘super -concentrated ’

# ferricyanide/ferrocyanide systems 

Kristine Laws , M. A. Buckingham, L. Aldous 

King’s College London 

Britannia House, 7 Trinity Street, London SE1 1DB 

kristine.laws@kcl.ac.uk 

International ly , most energy is produced from heat source s, such as fossil fuels or nuclear , where the vast 

ma jority of thi s is lost as low -grade waste heat . [1] However , wast e thermal e nergy can be converted 

directly into ele ctricity using electrochemistry . This can be achieved by an entropically driven 

thermoelectrochemica l process , which uses a dissolved redox couple san dwiched between two electrodes 

held at different temperatures , as part of a thermo electrochemical cell (or thermocell). [2] The [Fe(CN) 6]3- 

> /4 -

redox couple is arguably the mo st investigated redox couple in thermocells ; this is due to the high 

Seebeck coefficient , and fast -revers ible electrode kinetics, resulting in high power output s. [3] The power 

density of [Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - thermocells is known to scal e proportionally with concentration [3], where the 

saturation limit at ambient temperature in aqueous solvent of the typically employed K3/4 [Fe(CN) 6] redox 

couple is ca. 0.2 M of both K3[Fe(CN) 6] and K4[Fe(CN) 6]. A combinati on of alkali metal cations in th e

[Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - thermocell is known to have a synergistic effect on both the thermodynamics (Se 

coefficient) and kinetics (electrocatalysis) of the system. 

Therefore , we investigate ‘super concentrated ’ [Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - thermocells u sing a combination of the 

K3[Fe(CN) 6] and Na 4[Fe(CN) 6].[4] Whereas K3/K4 have a combined solubility of 0.4 m (molal) when 

K3/Na 4 are combin ed they have a combined solubility of 1.6 m, effective ly 4-fold higher. Ultimately , the 

higher concentration increased the current and the power produced by the thermocell si gnificantly ,

however , at very h igh concentratio ns, a plateau was also observed meaning that a 4 -fold increase in 

conce ntration only resulted in a n ca. 1.5 x increase in the power produced. In order to investigate this 

phen omena, conductivity , viscosity, cyc lic volt ammetry simulation and rotating dis k electr ode (RDE) 

voltammetry were conducted and the results will be discussed in this poster. 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 0

# [Fe(CN) 6] / m 

> Pmax

# a) 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 

0.0 

# [Fe(CN) 6] / m 

> Pmax , jlim , 

# b) 

a) Graph showing maxi mum power changes with concentration of [Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - (K 3/K 4 Gree n, K 3/Na 4

Purple) b) Graph showing power (blue), limiting current (green) and conductivity (red) 

[1] M. Rah imi, A. P. Straub , F. Zhang, X. Zhu, M. Elimelech, C. A. Gorski, B. E. Logan, En ergy and 

Environ me ntal Science , 2018, 11 , 276 -285 

[2] M. A. Buckingham, F. Marke n, L. Aldous, Sustainable Energy and Fuels , 201 8, 2, 2717 -27 26 

[3] M. A. Buckingham, S. Hammoud, L. Huanxin, C. J. Beale, J. T. Sengel and L. Aldous, Sustainable 

Energy and Fu els, 2020, Advance article , DOI: 10.1039/d0s e00440e 

[4] Buckingham, M. A., Li, H., Laws, K., Aldous, L., Submitted Two -step modification of p lanar Au SPE’s towards amperometric 

# Lactate detection 

Julia Madden , Sofia Teixeira & Paul Galvin 

Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork 

Lee Maltings, Dyke Parade, Cork, Ireland. T12 R5CP 

Julia.madden@tyndall.ie 

Gra phical Abstract 

Abstract: 

Blood lactate levels are used as an indicator of physical fitness as well as being of interest in the clinical 

diagnosis of a number of conditions . An increase in l act ate levels has been linked wi th hypoxia [1] ,

endotoxic shock [2] , sepsis [3] , diabetes [4] in addition to cancer diagnosis [5] . Blood lactate levels of a 

healthy human at rest have been reported at 0.5 mM - 2 mM [4] . Here we report a two -step modification 

with Platinum and a Chitosan/Lactat e oxidase mixture to the gold planar screen printed disc electrode 

(Au/Pt/CHT -LOx) for electrochemical enzymatic lactate detection . This Au/Pt/CHT -LOx electrode was 

examined using chronoamperometry at 0.3 V vs. Ag SPE . The modified electrode respo nds linea rly from 

0 to 3 mM of lactate . The relative standard deviation (RSD) towards detection of a 1mM lactate 

concentration was determined to be 6.52% (n=4) demonstrating a good level of reproducibility. The 

sensor was challenged against the following interfer in g species : 5 mM g lucose, 0.05 mM L-ascorbi c acid, 

0.2 mM Uric acid and 10 μM acetaminophen. A 2.5 mM lactate response increased by 2 % in the 

presence of interfering species (n=4). The operational stability was assessed by carrying out 10 successive 

measure ments in 1 mM lactate on three electrode surfaces. The RSD of each respective electrode was 

calculated to be 8 %, 4.7 % and 5 % indicating excellent re -usability. 

Key Words: Electrochemical, Enzymatic, Lactate , Lactate Oxidase 

References :

1. Rimachi, R., et al., Lactate/Pyruvate Ratio as a Marker of Tissue Hypoxia in Circulatory and 

Septic Shock. Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 2012. 40 : p. 427 - 432. 

2. Levy, B., et al., Myocardial lactate deprivation is associated with decreased ca rdiovascular 

performance, decreased myocardial energetics, and early death in endotoxic shock. Intensive 

Care Medicine, 2007. 33 (3): p. 495 -502. 

3. Lee, S.M. and W.S. An, New clinical criteria for septic shock: serum lactate level as new 

emerging vital sig n. Journal of thoracic disease, 2016. 8(7): p. 1388 -1390. 

4. Goodwin, M.L., et al., Blood Lactate Measurements and Analysis during Exercise: A Guide for 

Clinicians. Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 2007. 1(4): p. 558 -569. 

5. Hirschhaeuser, F., U .G. Sattler, and W. Mueller -Klieser, Lactate: a metabolic key player in 

cancer. Cancer Res, 2011. 71 (22): p. 6921 -5. Potentiometric investi gation of steel -assisted synthesis for 

# gold nanoparticles prod uction 

Margherita Izzi 1, M aria Chiara Sportelli 1, Ángela I. López Lorente 2, Gerardo Palazzo 1, Rosaria Anna 

Picca 1, N icola Cio ffi 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, University of Bari “Al do Moro”, Via Orabona, 4, 70126 Bari, Italy;  

> 2

Departamento de Química Analítica, Universidad de Córdoba, E -14071 Córdoba, Spain; 

margherita. izzi@uniba.it 

Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are the most ancient metal nanophase ever used and they are amo ng the mo st 

common metal nanomaterial s employed even today [1 ]. Among the methods for metal nanoparticles 

preparation, the chemical reduction of metal ion species is widely applied, based on the use of precursor 

and reducing/stabilizing agents. Recently, f ew research groups have proposed steel corrosion to assist the 

synthesis of metal nanoparticles starting from a precursor salt, typically HAuCl 4 [2, 3]. In this approach, 

stainless s teel can be used as removable solid reduc tant in the aqueous preparation of gold nanocolloids. 

This innov ative method is very easy, quick , cost -effective and scalable allowing the synthesis of highly 

stable nanoparticles without additional capping agents. However, the me chanisms behind this reaction are 

not yet fully understood. To date, two distinct reaction pathways have been proposed. According to the 

first hypothesis, Cl - penetration through the passivating oxide layer on steel is invoked, thus assisting steel 

surface corrosion [2]. The second one considers that hydrogen, whic h is forme d as a consequence of the 

reduction of protons mediated by the steel substrate, reduces AuCl 4- ions yielding AuNPs [3]. In order to 

support the system investigation , we carried out the syntheses recording the open circuit potential (OCP) 

to poten tiometrically explore the electrochemical behavior of steel and track the solution potential [4].

The operando OCP monitoring has never been examined and it is useful to assess the role of steel 

corrosion in the synthesis mechanism . In particular, the expe rimental setup for AuNPs syntheses and 

simultaneous recording of OCP values consisted of a two -electrode cell, including th e stainless steel 

working electrode mounted on a rotating bar and an Ag/AgCl (KCl sat.) reference electrod e. The recorded 

potentials during OCP measure ments are a combination of reduction potential of AuCl 4- ions in solution 

and corrosion potential of stainless steel . In addition, different experimental setting s that may influence 

the synthesis process and final nanoparticle properties were evaluated . Partic ularly, the role of Cl -

conc entration, pH of the precursor solut io n, as well as steel composition are described. In general ,

different in itia l potential valu es and OCP trend s were found , depending on experimental settings . The 

OCP dec rement to wards more negative values report ed in some cases suggested a higher trend to 

oxidation and a progressive dissolution process of steel metals such as iron, chromium and nickel . This 

phenomenon promote s the reduction of Au 3+ to Au 0, thus lea ding to AuNPs synthesis . Hence, the 

di fferent corrosion behavior s were examined and the best conditions for the AuNP synthesis were 

established . These findings were supported by a deep spectroscopic and morpholog ical characterization 

carried out to c orrel ate the synthesis parameters with the AuNPs characteristi cs . will be discussed . In thi s

com munication, results of OCP experiments together with the complete analytical characterization will be 

presented demonstrating the validity of this approach .

[1] Nano -Anti microbials: Progress and Prospects; Cioffi, N., Rai, M., Eds.; Springer -Verlag: Berlin 

Heidelberg, 2012; ISBN 978 -3-642 -24427 -8. 

[2] T.H. Han, M.M. Khan, S. Kala thil, J. Lee, M.H. Cho, J Nanosci Nanotechnol, 2013, 13, 6 140 -6144. 

[3] A.I. López -Lorente, B.M . Simonet, M. Valcárcel, S. Eppler, R. Schindl, C. Kranz, B. Mizaikoff, 

Talanta, 20 14, 118, 321 -327. 

[4] M. Izzi , M . C. Sportell i, L . Turselli no , G . Palazzo , R. A. Picca , N . Cioffi , Á. I. López Lorent e, 

Nanomaterials 20 20, 10, 622 .Highly active Ag/C nanoparticles containing ultra -low quantities of 

# sub -surface Pt for the electrooxidation of glycerol in alkaline media 

Carlos C. Lima a, Marta V. F. Rodrigues a, Antonio F. M. Neto a, Cinthia. R. Zanata b, Cléo T. G. V. M. T. 

Pires a, Luelc Souza a, José Solla -Gullón c, Pablo S. Fernández a,d . 

> a

Institute of Chemistry, States University of Campinas (UNICAMP) , Campinas -SP, 13083 -970, Brazil.  

> b

Institute of Chemistry , Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul (UFM S), Campo Grande -MS, 79074 -

460, Brazil  

> c

Institute of Electrochemistry, University of Alicante, Apdo. 99, E -03080 Alicante, Spain  

> d

Center for Innovation on New Energies (CINE), Campinas -SP , 13083 -841, Brazil 

carlosufma@hotmail.com 

Abstract 

In this work we synthesized carbon supported Ag 20% (w/w) nanoparticles (NPs), and then we successfully 

decorated them with ultra -small (0.8%) quantities of Pt. The resulting electrocatalyst was tested for the 

electrooxidation of glycerol. XRD, ICP, XPS, TEM and e lectrochemical characterization strongly support 

that the Pt atoms are located at the sub -surface of the Pt(0.8%)Ag/C and that the electrochemical excursion 

until the Ag 2O formation induces the Pt atoms segregation activating the material for the hydrogen 

evolution reaction, hydrogen Oxidation reaction and electrooxidation of glycerol (figure 1a). We showed 

that the Pt atoms of our catalyst are one order of magnitude more active (in terms of mass activity) than 

Pt/C commercial catalyst (Figure 1b). 

Figure 1. Cyclic voltammograms obtained in 0.5 mol.L -1 NaOH and 1.0 M GlOH solution at scan rate 10 

mVs -1 for Pt(0.8%)Ag/C activation and no activation ( a) and Pt(0.8%)Ag/C and Pt/C Normalizing the data 

by the Pt mass ( b). 

By performing in situ FTIR measurement s, electrolysis experiments and HPLC analysis, we showed that 

both catalysts form mainly glycerate and lactate 1, but Pt/C is more prone to poisoning and to break the C -

C bond of the molecule to form carbonate 2. We suggest that this different behavior is attributed to the high 

dispersion of the Pt atoms on Ag NPs. The lower probability of finding neighboring Pt atoms (compared to 

Pt/C) diminishes the formation of multiple bonded intermediates, which are precursors for the formation of 

carbonate and some poisoning intermediates 2.

References 

1. Dai, C. et al. Electrochemical production of lactic acid from glycerol oxidation catalyzed by AuPt 

nanoparticles. J. Catal. 356 , 14 –21 (2017). 

2. De Souza, M. B. C. et al. Pb - And Bi -Modified Pt Electrodes toward Glycerol Electrooxidation in 

Alkaline Media. Activity, Selectivity, and the Importance of the Pt Atoms Arrangement. ACS 

Catal. 2131 –2137 (2020). doi:10.1021/acscatal.9b04805 Effect of Cerium Nitrate on Corrosion Inhibition of Mild Steel in Different 

# Components of Brine Solution    

> Minakshi Koundal 1, Chhaya Sharma 2*
> 1Department of applied science and engineering 2*Department of pulp and paper technology IIT Roorkee,
> Saharanpur Campus (U.P.)
> 2*Corresponding Author Email ID: Chhaya1964@rediffmail.com
> Presenting Author Email ID koundal.minakshi@gmail.com

## Enhance d oil recovery (EOR) technology is getting more attention, in which water flooding is one 

## of the most common, economical , and efficient methods for secondary oil recovery. Generally, 

## produced water or formation water from the oil well used for this purpose. This water consists of 

## an aggressive ion such as chloride, sul fate, and bicarbonate ion that cause the failure of oil well 

## pipelines. There are many techniques used to mitigate the corrosion inside the pipes. Meanwhile, 

## cerium nitrate inhibitors are consi dered as an efficient inhibitor to use for different metals and 

## alloy due to its low cost, abundance, and eco -friendly. Owing to this, cerium nitrate is investigated 

## as an inhibitor for various solution s such as Sodium chloride, sodium sul fate , and sodium 

## bicarbonate solution. 

## Further, immersion test, electrochemical polarization test, and electrochemical impedance 

## spectroscopy are employed to study the corrosion inhibition. Consequently, the morphology and 

## composition of inhibitor film formed on the metal surface are determined by SEM, XRD, and 

## FTIR and discussed in detail. Based on all the results, cerium nitrate inhibitor found to be an 

## efficient inhibitor in the case of bicarbonate and sul fate ion -containing solution with higher 

## inhibition efficiency as compared to the chlorine ion -containing solution. The results proved that 

## cerium nitrate inhibitor could be utilized as promising corrosion inhibitors for various industrial 

## applications .The Wet Etching Approach for Decreasing the Thickness of 

Mesoporous Silica Films Generated by Electrochemically Assisted Self -

Assembly 

Taisiia Sikolenko , Christelle Despas, Neus Vil à, Alain Walcarius 

Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and Microbiology for t he Environment 

UMR 7564, CNRS / Université de Lorraine 

Taisiia.sikolenko@univ -lorraine.fr 

The de sign of new electrochemical sensors and the ir nanometre nanometre scale modification is a lways a

challenge fo r scientific community . Electrode coatings based on organized mesoporous silica films 

(MSFs) is one of the branches which develops rapidly with respect to all demands 1es 1,2. Combining 

electrochemistry and sol -gel process (electrochemically assisted self -assembly, EASA 23), the thin 

(thickness around 100 nm 34) organized films with hexagonal mesostructure and pores , perpendicularly 

oriented to the electrode support cylindrical pores (2 -3 nm in diameter) , they can be obtained . The 

thickness of deposited film is important , since its decrease may help to facilitate mass tran sport through to 

non -inert silica pores Tdecrease 56, to lower the unwanted accumulation of analysed probe and, hence, to 

gain in electrochemical response. 

Under the operated conditions (100 mM TEOS, 32 mM of CTAB, 10 s of deposition at -1.3 V potential 

applied to ITO electrode ), the generation of defectle ss and homogeneous MSFs gives a rise to a minimum 

thickness equal to 79±10 nm. With the aim of o btaining the thinner film, p ost -treatment by ammonium 

fluoride solution 7 (also known as wet etching procedure ) was applied to deposits 4. It was shown , that the 

evolution of the film thickness measured by p rofilometry ,with 8time with etchant in side is the function of 

contact time between the etchant and silica sample. The presence of covalently bonded to MSF surface 

ferrocene species did not interfere the silica dissolution . Instead, the reduction of its electrochemical 

response while etching appeared to be another way to follow the film thic kness decrease 5. Transmittance 

electron microscopy characterization demonstrated that the vertically oriented hexagonal structure is still 

preserved after 1 hour reaction with 0.05M NH 4F while t After treatment, t t9.he thickness becomes a third 

less relatively to the initial value. 

The practical application of wet etching approach will be checked on sensor for glyphosate (GLYP) 

detection . The potential hazard of GLYP and the presence of the secondary amine in its structure makes it 

a perfect candidate to be anal yzed by the electrochemiluminescence (ECL) reaction with tr is (2,2’ -

bipyridine )ruthenium(II) (Ru(bpy) 3)6, grafted on MSF surface. Typically, the best yields of the ECL 

reaction between GLYP and Ru(bpy) 3 are observed at pH 7 -10 7, but deprotonation of pesticide in these 

conditions lead s to negative ly charge d analyte , what complicate s its mass transport through negatively 

charged silica film channels . Therefore, the effect of film thickness will be taken into the account and its 

decrease by wet etching is expected to improve the performance of ECL sensor. with 

1 B. J. Melde, B. J. Johnson and P. T. Charles, Sensors , 2008, 8, 5202 –5228. 

2 A. Walcarius, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. , 2018, 10 , 88 –97. 

3 A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, Nat. Mater. , 2007, 6, 602 –608. 

4 A. Go ux, M. Etienne, E. Aubert, C. Lecomte, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater. , 2009, 

21 , 731 –741. 

5 M. B. Serrano, C. Despas, G. Herzog and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. commun. , 2015, 52 , 34 –36. 

6 A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater. , 2001, 13 , 3351 –3372. 

7 M. Kob ayashi, K. Susuki, T. Otani, S. Enomoto, H. Otsuji, Y. Kuroda, H. Wada, A. Shimojima, 

T. Homma and K. Kuroda, Nanoscale , 2017, 9, 8321 –8329. 

8 N. Vilà, J. Ghanbaja, E. Aubert and A. Walcarius, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. , 2014, 53 , 2945 –

2950. 

9 T. Sikolenko, C. Despas, N. Vilà and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. commun. , 2019, 100 , 11 –15.                

> Formatted: Strikethrough
> Formatted: French (France), Strikethrough, Highlight
> Commented [DC1]: Are you sure this is t he labo?
> Formatted: Space After: 8 pt
> Commented [DC2]: I don’t understand what you want to
> say. At which properties do you think?
> Commented [ТС3R2]: I meant that with mesoporous silica
> coatings it is possible to change the pore size, thicknesses,
> grafted functional groups so that the material becomes
> suitable for use for different types of analytes. And with
> respect to all demands caused by various possible probes, it is
> easy to be modified, therefore the development is fast.
> Commented [DC4]: NO It is not true : the silica wall
> presents at its surface silan olate groups. I think that these
> groups are not completely inert!!!
> Commented [ТС5R4]: Actually, it is written there. ‘Non -’
> is added to show the opposite meaning, so non -inert =
> reactive
> Commented [DC6]: NO you don’t use unmodified silica
> but Ru modified film that lead to a global positive charge in
> the pore
> Commented [DC7]: Refer ence : Highlighted text to be
> completed , corrected

Wet Etching Approach to Tune the T hickness of Electrochemically 

Assisted Self -Assembly Mesoporous Silica Films 

Taisiia Sikolenko , Christelle Despas, Neus Vil à, Alain Walcariu s

Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et l’Environnement 

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, LCPME, F -54000 Nancy, France 

Taisiia.sikolenko@univ -lorraine.fr 

The design of new electrochemical sensors and the continuous improvement at the nanometre scale stays 

a challenge for scientific community. Electrode coatings based on organized mesoporous silica films 

(MSFs) is one of the approach es 1,2. By combining electrochemistry and sol -gel process (electrochemically 

assis ted self -assembly, EASA 3), the obtained thin (thickness 80 -100 nm 4) organized films with hexagonal 

mesostructure and pores , perpendicularly oriented to the electrode support (cylindrical shape with 2 -3 nm 

diameter), they represent an interesting new class of nanomaterials. The thickness of deposited film is an 

important parameter influencing the mass transport to through the electrode surface specifically because 

silica is a reactive material (silanol groups). The thickness decrease of silica film should reduce the 

diffusion constraint through the film while keeping the advantage of the coating (molecular sieve 5,

preconcentrat ion 6) and, hence, gain in electrochemical response. 

The electrogeneration of defect less and uniform MSFs onto ITO electrode (100 mM TEOS, 32 mM of 

CTAB) requests a minimum deposition time equal to 10 s at -1.3 V. The resultant thickness is 79±10 nm. 

Post -treatment of the silica film is needed to decrease its thickness. The selected appro ach is the drop wet 

etching with ammonium fluoride solution 7. Profilometry measurements and electrochemi stry monitoring 

(with neutral or ionic probes , or with onto ferrocene grafted MSF 8) report the decrease of the thickness in 

function of contact time with etchant and its concentra tion. The influence of the presence of CTA + kept 

inside the silica pores is demonstrated and discussed. Transmittance electron microscopy proved that the 

well oriented pores and regular mesostructure of the film is still preserved after 1 hour reaction wit h

0.05M NH 4F. After treatment, t he coating is three times thinner than originally 9.

In view of possible application, the detection of glyphosate by electrochemiluminescence ( ECL) with 

functionalized mesoporous silica films is also evaluated. Tris(2,2’ -bipyridine)ruthenium(II) complex is 

grafted onto silica pores by click reaction to limit the mass transport to the pesticide diffusion through the 

film. The resulting ECL signal is discussed in function of the MSF thickness. 

1 B. J. Melde, B. J. Johnson and P. T. Charles, Sensors , 2008, 8, 5202 –5228. 

2 A. Walcarius, Curr ent . Opin ion in . Electrochem istry ., 2018, 10 , 88 –97. 

3 A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, Nat. Mater. , 2007, 6, 602 –608. 

4 A. Goux, M. Etienne, E. Aubert, C. Lecomte, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater. , 2009, 

21 , 731 –741. 

5 M. B. Serrano, C. Despas, G. Herzog and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. commun. , 2015, 52 , 34 –36. 

6 A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater. , 2001, 13 , 3351 –3372. 

7 M. Kobayashi, K. Susuki, T. Otani, S. Enomoto, H. Otsuji, Y. Kuroda, H. Wada, A. Shimojima, 

T. Homma and K. Kuroda, Nanoscale , 2017, 9, 8321 –8329. 

8 N. Vilà, J. Ghanbaja, E. Aubert and A. Walcarius, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. , 2014, 53 , 2945 –

2950. 

9 T. Sikolenko, C. Despas, N. Vilà and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. commun. , 2019, 100 , 11 –15. 

> Field Code Changed

# Synthesis o f GONR /Pt nano composite s for visible light -enhanced 

# methanol oxidation reaction in an alkaline solution 

Yu -Chih Chen 1, Cheng -Hsuan Lin 1, Hung -Yu Chen 1, Chia -Wei Huang 1 and Chia -Liang Sun 1,2* 

1 Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Chang Gung University, Guishan, Taoyuan 

33302, 

Taiwan 

2 Department of Neurosurgery, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Guishan, Taoyuan 33305, 

Taiwan 

e-mail address:  sunchialiang@gmail.com 

We have studied gr aphene oxide nanoribbon s (GONR s) for a variety of applications since 2011 . [1 -14 ] In 

this study, Pt nanoparticles with the average diameter of ar ound 4.3 nm were adsorb ed on GONR s

prepared with different microwave powers to form GONR/Pt nanocomposites . The GONR/Pt 

nanocomposites were then characterized by transmission electron microscopy, x -ray diffraction, Raman, 

x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and photoluminescence. For electrochemical measurements, the 

nanocomposites were drop casted on screen -printed carbon electrodes for methanol oxidation reaction 

(MOR) in an alkaline solution (1.0 M CH 3OH + 1.0 M KOH) with or without the illumination of a blue 

light . It was found that our Pt/GONR (200 W) exhibit s the remarkable photo -enhanced MOR current 

density in c yclic voltammograms and the number is even higher than that of Pt/g -C3N4. [15 ] The 

photoeletrochemical activity of Pt/GONR nanocomposite s could be due to the semiconducting nature of 

GONRs that may change along their processing para meters . More details of GONR /Pt electro catalysts for 

photoeletrochemical MOR will be presented and discussed in this conference. The se investigations on 

novel nanomaterials may benefit the further development of direct alkaline methanol fuel cells. 

References 

[1] C. L. Sun et a l. ACS Nano 5 (2011) 7788 .

[2] L. Y. Lin et al. J. Mater. Chem. A 1 (2013), 11237. 

[3] Y. J. Lu et al. Carbon 74 (2014), 83. 

[4] M. H. Yeh et al. J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (30) (2014), 16626. 

[5] C. L. Sun et al. Biosens. Bioelectron. 67 (2015), 327. 

[6] X. Lu et al. J. Mater. Chem. A 3 (201 5), 13371. 

[7] R. Zhang et al. Anal. Chem. 87 (201 5), 12262. 

[8] Y. W. Lan et al. Nano Energy 27 (2016), 114. 

[9] H. Y. Chen et al. Adv. Mater. Interfaces (2016) , 1600357. 

[10] C. H. Su et al. ACS Omega 2(8), (2017 ), 4245. 

[11 ] T. E. Lin et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56 (2017), 16498. 

[12 ] R. Zhang et al. Carbon 126 (2018), 328. 

[13 ] C. H. Su et al. J. Taiwan. Inst. Chem. Eng. 95 (2019), 48. 

[14 ] H. Y. Chou et al. ACS Omega 5(12 ), (20 20 ), 6588 .

[15 ] M. S. Zhu et al. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental (2017) 112 .-0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -300 0300 600 900 

> Current  (A)

# Potential (V vs. Ag/AgCl) 

GONR 

Graphene 

MWCNT 100 nm 

MWCNT 200 nm 

500 nm 

GONR 

Fig. 1. Microwave -assisted synthesis of core -shell MWCNT/GONR heterostructure for electrochemical detection of ascorbic acid, dopamine, and uric acid . [ 1] Studies C oncerning the Electrochemical Corrosion and 

# Electrochemical C utting of Iron Silicon Alloy s

Mirabela Nicoleta Foran 1, Sorin -Aurel Dorneanu 1,2 , Ioan Marius Purcar 3, Petru Ilea 1,2 

> 1

Babeş -Bolyai University, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Department of Chemical 

Engineering, 11 Arany Janos Street, Cluj Napoca, RO -400028, Romania, 

> 2

Babeş -Bolyai University, Interdisciplinary Research Institute on Bio -Nano -Sciences, 42 Treboniu 

Laurian Street RO -400271, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 3

Technical University of Cluj -Napoca, Electrotechnics and Measurements Department, 400027 Cluj -

Napoca, Romania 

Email:  foran_nicol etta@yahoo.com 

Sheet metal cutting is widely used in the tailoring of metal parts. The mechanical cutting, techniques, 

milling sawing, gu illotine, punching, etc., are widely used but they often lead to localized material 

structure modifications (accumulation of unwanted residual stress) within the cutting area. Nor new 

techniques (Water Jet Machining, Abrasive Jet Machining, or Laser Beam Machining) cannot eliminate 

th e disadvantages of the mechanical cutting [1]. Electrochemical Cutting (E C) can remove the 

disadvantages of the mechanical methods and ensure a high precision. E C is based on the controlled 

anodic dissolution of metals ( Cu, Ni, Fe, Ti etc. ) and their alloy s [2]. In this research , the electrochemical 

corrosion and cutting of iron silicon alloy s (ISA) were investigated. 

The demand of soft materials like ISA in various applications like electrotechnical industry/ electric power 

distribution systems , has greatly increased. Such materials have augmented magnetic properties due to 

grain size, crystallography of the material, the level of impurities (silicon concentration - up to 6.5% Si) 

but they lack in electrical conductivity [3, 4, 5]. 

The purpose of this research is to investigate the corrosion behavior during the EC of ISA in different 

types of electrolytes like sodium nitrate , sodium sulfate and sulfuric acid (in small concentration) , in 

mono -component solutions and in mixture s, in order to setup an efficient (short time and small current 

demand) EC cutting process. 

Optimal potential range, current densities, and electrolyte composition for the EC process of three types 

of ISA were established based on cyclic voltammetry and polarization curves. 

References: 

1. Y. Nukman, A. Farooqi, O. Al -Sultan, Procedia Engineering , 2017, 184, 370 – 380 

2. Z. Xu, Y. Wang, Chinese Journal of Aeronautics , 2019, in press, 

https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.cja.2019.09.016 

3. T. Ros -Yaňeza, Y. Houbaert, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 2003, 141, 132 –137 

4. Y. Oda, M . Kohno, Journal of Magnetism an d Magnetic Materials 2008, 320 , 2430 – 2435 

5. K. Senda, M . Uesaka, World Electric Vehicle Journal 2019, 10, 31 Improvement of Analytical Characteristics of Lactate Biosensors Using 

# Prussian Blue Nanoparticles and Siloxane -Perfluorosulfonated 

# Ionomer Membranes 

Darya V. Vokhmyanina , Elena E. Karyakina , Arkady A. Karyakin 

Chemistry Department of M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University 

Leninskiye Gory 1-3, GSP -1, Moscow , Russia 

vokhmyanina@gmail.com 

Prussian Blue is recognized as the most advantageous low -potential transducer for hydrogen peroxide [1]. 

Due to high catalytic activity and selectivity which were comparat ive with enzyme biocatalysis, we even 

denoted Prussian Blue as ‘artificial peroxidase’.  Recently we reported Prussian Blue based nanozymes [2] 

defeat ing natural peroxidase in term of their catalytic activity . Nanozymes we re characterized by true 

enzymatic properties: (i) enzymatic specificity (an absence of oxidase -like activity) and (ii) an ability to 

operate in physiological solutions. 

In contrast to bi -enzyme biosensors we propose the nanozyme -enzyme based ones substituting the 

enzyme peroxidase with th e more active and stable Prussian Blue nanoparticles. 

The procedure of sensor development involve s the s imple drop -casting of the nanozyme suspension onto 

the electrode surface with subsequent drying . The result ed modified electrodes characterized with eve n

higher sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide as compared to conventional Prussian Blue sensors .

For immobilization of lactate oxidase the improved protocol with enzyme exposing to water -organic 

mixtures with the high content of organic solvent proposed earli er has been used [ 3]. Since lactate oxidase 

is among the less stable enzymes, further stabilization of the enzyme containing membranes is required 

for multiused commercial biosensors. 

For this aim we've investigated the stabilization of the lactate oxidas e containing siloxane membranes [ 4]

with Nafion analogue – perfluorosulfonated ionomer (PFSI). The perfluorosulfonated ionomer induce the 

decrease of sensitivity of the resulting biosensors caused by  negatively charged substituent able to shield 

the enzyme active site . However, it is possible to observe an absolute maximum of sensitivity.  At the 

same point the apparent Michaelis constant of the corresponding biosensors displays the minimum for 

non -zero PFSI content in the membranes illustrating the highest affinity of the immobilized enzyme to 

lactate. 

Operation stability of lactate biosensors has been evaluated as the number of lactate injections ( 0. 2 mM) 

in flow -injection mode remaining the response at the level of 95% from its initial value. The highest 

operational stability has been registered for biosensors made from the mixture of 1.5 % γ-

aminopropyltriethoxysilane and 0.2 % Nafion, which corresponds to the extremes in sensitivity and 

Michaelis constant . Operational stability of the corresponding biose nsor in terms of the number of lactate 

injections remaining 95% activity (81 ± 4 injections) is almost 3 times higher as compared to the 

biosensor made without perfluorosulfonated ionomer (28 ± 3 injections). At the same time the decrease in 

sensitivity co mpared to the biosensors made without PFSI is only 35%. 

Hence, an addition of 0.2% of PFSI to the membrane -forming mixture provides the significantly 

improved stability of the resulting siloxane based enzyme containing membranes. Thus improved 

protocol fo r lactate oxidase immobilization has been used for elaboration of the nanozyme -enzyme 

biosensor. 

The resulting nanozyme -enzyme lactate biosensor displays twice higher sensitivity (> 0.2 A∙M −1 ∙cm −2 )

compared to the Prussian Blue film based one [ 5]. Nanozyme s “artificial peroxidase” are expected to find 

wide use in elaboration of oxidase based biosensors. 

References :

[1]  A.A. Karyakin, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 2017 , 5, 92. 

[2] M. A. Komkova, E. E. Karyakina, A. A. Karyakin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018 , 140 , 11302 .

[3] A.A. Karyakin, E.E. Karyakina et al., Anal. Chem. 1996 , 68, 4335. 

[4] E.I. Yashina, A.V. Borisova, E.E. Karyakina et al., Anal. Chem. 2010 , 82(5), 1601. 

[5] D.V. Vokhmyanina, K.D. Andreeva et al., Talanta . 2020 , 208, 120393. 

Acknowledgements :

Financial support through Russian Science Foundation grant # 19 -13 -00131 is greatly acknowledged. Bi -metal lic IrSn catalyst s supported on Montmorillonite - efficiency 

# towards OER in PEMEC 

Iveta Boshnakova, Elefteria Lefterova, Denis Paskalev , Evelina Slavcheva 

Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy Systems -Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. Georgi Bonchev 

str., 10bl. Sofia, Bulgaria 

boshnakova .iveta @iees.bas.bg 

Global environmen tal concerns and increasing energy demands are the main drive to move from fossil 

fuels to renewable energy (such as wi nd or solar). The world has strong need for reliable, cost -effective, 

and renewable clean energy sources. Hydrogen shows a great potentia l as a fuel for a sustainable energy 

future. The electrolysis of water is the most attractive technology to produce car bon -free energy when 

coupled with electricity produced from renewable sources. However, a major challenge remains the high 

overpotential at the oxygen electrode and the use of expensive noble metals (e.g., Ir or Pt). 

In this work bimetallic nanosized IrSn powders were synthesized and studied as anode electrocatalysts 

using non -carbon catalytic support (one cheap natural phyllosilicate mine ral montmorillonite (MMT)) and 

reducing the expensive noble metal Ir by cheaper one (Sn). IrSn/MMT catalysts with diffe rent Ir:Sn ratio 

were obtained by sol -gel technique. Thus, prepared catalysts were characterized in terms of structural 

(XRD) and morpholo gical (TEM) features. Their electrochemical behavior and catalytic activity towards 

the oxygen evolution reaction were investigated by cyclic voltammetry, steady state polarization curves 

and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in a laboratory polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis 

cell (PEMEC) at elevated temperatures 20oC – 80oC using. The efficiency of most activ e catalyst 

Ir Sn /MMT was compared with that of a previously investigated Ir/MMT catalyst [1]. It was found that 

Bi -metallic IrSn catalyst supported on Montmorillonite has a larger developed surface area (fig.1) and 

higher catalytic activity concerning OER. Due to synergetic effects between iridium and the used 

interactive oxide support, the loading of the noble metal can be reduced essentially without sacrifice of 

efficiency thus, decreasing the cost of catalysis. 

Figure 1: Cyclic voltammogra ms of the c atalysts Ir/MMT and Ir18Sn12/MMT under study in PEMEC 

at 20 oC; potential scan rate 100 mV s -1.

References: 

(1) Boshnakova I, Lefterova E, Slavcheva E., Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018, 43, 16 897 -904. 

This work was supported by the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science under the National 

Research Programme E+: Low Carbon Energy for the Transport and Households, g rant agreement D01 -

214/2018 -0,2 0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 -1,0 -0,5 0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 

> 20 oC
> j/mA cm -2
> E/V vs RHE
> Ir/MMT IrSn/MMT

# Exploring High -activity Copper Doping Zirconia Catalysts for 

# Methane Electrochemical Conversion at Room Temperature 

Nengne ng Xu a,b , Xiao -Dong Zhou a,b *, Yuyu Liu c, Jinli Qiao d*

> a

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Laf ayette, LA 70504 

> b

Institute for Materials Research and Innovation, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA 

70504 

> c

College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Donghua Universtiy, 2999 Ren’min North Road, 

Shanghai 201620, China 

> c

Institute f or Sustainable Energy, College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. 

*xiao -dong.zhou@louisiana.edu and qiaojl@dhu.edu.cn 

Recently, a lot of research has been done on the conversion of CH 4.1 Compared to photo -catalysis and 

thermos -catalysis with precious metal catalysts and high reaction temperatures, the electro -catalysis path 

which are always performed at room temperature demonstrates more potential. In this regard, the 

electrochemical oxidation and conversion of CH 4 to commodity chemicals, such as wide -application 

liquid alcohols, shows obvious ec onomic benefit and high energy/ conve rsion -efficient. Zirconia (ZrO 2)

has rich Lewis acid active sites and hu ge electron acceptability, showing a remarkable adsorption capacity 

of CO 32-.2,3 Thereby, zirconia -based hybrids have attracted a lot of attention and have made some 

breakthroughs. Transition metal oxide doping ZrO 2 forming TMO/ZrO 2 compound demonstrates the 

potential of methane oxidation with CO 32- at room temperature. Compared to NiO and Co 3O4, copper -

based (Cu) catalysts have a high activity and a long -term durability on forming liquid and gas organics of 

C1 catal ysis reaction system (CO 2 reduction reaction) at room temperature. 4 Hence, we present a facile 

strategy of using Cu ions doping ZrO 2 to activate the hybrid activity by manipulating its crystal and 

electronic structu re. As except, the unique cylindrical ZrO 2:CuOx catalyst shows remarkable CH 4

oxidation performance with large current density differences (13.35 mA cm -2) and long -term 

electrochemical stability (negligible attenuation (10 %) after 48 hours). According to theoretical and 

experimental observations of the CH 4 oxidation on ZrO 2: CuOx hybrid, the high activity and durability of 

the hybrid should be attributed to i) strong synergistic -coupling effect; 2) the unique doping structure 

forming favorable electronic a nd crystal structure; 3) fast oxidation reaction mechanism by shortening the 

reaction path. The mechanism could be described as that ZrO 2 facilitating CO 32- adsorption, then CO 32- as 

the oxidizing agent source rapidly oxidizes CH 4 adsorbed on the surface o f Cu in zirconia. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors appreciate supports from  the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF -1747603) ,

the“International Academic Cooperation and Exchange Program of Shanghai Science and Technology 

Committee (18160723600) , and  the “Sci entific and Technical Innovation Action Plan” Basic Research 

Field of Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (19JC1410500) .

References 

1. Y. Amenomiya, V. I. Birss, M. Goledzinowski, J. Galuszka and A. R. Sanger, Catalysis Reviews ,

1990, 32 , 163 -227. 

2. B. Samaranch, P. Ramírez de la Piscina, G. Clet, M. Houalla, P. Gélin and N. Homs, Chem. Mater. ,

2007, 19 , 1445 -1451. 

3. N. Spinner and W. E. Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2013, 160 , F1275 -F1281. 

4. C. T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibri a, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, A. 

Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero -Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton 

and E. H. Sargent, Science , 2018, 360 , 783 -787. Needle -type organic electrochemical transistor for spatially resolved 

# detection of dopamine 

Federica Mariani 1, Thomas Quast 2, Corina Andronescu 3, Isacco Gualandi 1, Beatrice Fraboni 4,

Domenica Tonelli 1, Erika Scavetta 1, Wolfgang Schuhmann 2 

> 1

Dipartimento di Chimica Industriale “TosoMontanari”, Università di Bologna, Viale del Risorgimento 

4, 40136 Bologna, Italy  

> 2

Analytical Chemistry -Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany  

> 3

Chemical Technology III, Faculty of Chemistry and Center for Nanointegration (CENIDE), University 

Duisburg E ssen, Carl -Benz -Str.  201, D -47057 Duisburg, Germany  

> 4

Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, Viale Berti Pichat 6/2, 40127 Bologna, 

Italy 

federica.mariani8@unibo.it 

Detection of complex biological events at the single cell level, suc h as release and reuptake cycles of a 

neurotransmitter at a synaptic contact, holds great potential for biomedical research. However, the 

combination of ultra -low analyte concentration and highly spatially confined and temporally resolved 

biochemical dynam ics remains an unaddressed challenge for conventional analytical approaches. In this 

view, the development of miniaturized bioelectronic systems is of particular interest. 

Here, we report the design of a novel electrochemical tool combining the unmatched temporal and spatial 

resolution of carbon nanoelectrodes (CNEs) with the amplified transducing capability of an organic 

electrochemical transistor (OECT) for biochemical detection at the single cell level. 

The device was obtained from single and double b arrel CNEs, whose fabrication was optimised to reach 

adequate control on the desired size and shape of the electrodes. Therefore, a thin film of organic 

semiconductor was electrochemically deposited on top of them, in order to create submicrometric, 

nanodi sk -shaped gate and channel elements. The fully assembled device was characterized and show ed 

the typical transistor behaviour upon gating . Overall, this is the first example of a needle -type OECT with 

cell -compatible dimensions, and we provide its proof -of -principle application for dopamine detection in 

biologically relevant concentration [1] .

Figure 1 . (A) Configuration of the needle -type OECT. (B) Current vs time curve recorded during 

increasing additions of Dopamine in the picomolar range ( Vg = − 900 mV; V d = − 300 mV). 

[1] F. Mariani, T . Quast, C . Andronescu, I . Gualandi, B . Fraboni, D . Tonelli, E . Scavetta , W. Schuhmann .

Microchim. Acta 187 (2020) 378 .Carbon free membrane electrode assemblies with non – noble catalyst 

# for AEMEC 

Galin Borisov, Nevelin Borisov, Denis Paskalev, Evelina Slavcheva 

Acad. E. Budevski Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy System - Bulgarian Academy of Sciences ,

Acad. G. B onchev Str.10, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria, 

gal.rusev@iees.bas.bg 

The AEM water electrolysis based on alkali -doped polymer electrolyte membrane is an efficient method 

to produce hydrogen with higher purity which offe rs several advantages over the traditional technologies: 

higher current density, low ohmic resistance, possibility to operate at higher working pressure, as well as 

usage of platinum free electro catalysts . The technology still has some problems such as no n-sufficient 

stability of the polymer electrolyte at elevated temperature, low conductivity of the commercially 

available membranes, and intensive corrosion on the bipolar plates of the cell. This work presents a 

research on development of highly efficient membrane electrode assembly (MEA) with carbon free 

electrodes containing non -noble metal catalysts (Co and Ni supported on Magnelli phase titania), and 

commercially available AB -PBI anion exchange membrane. It is found that the optimal amount of the 

catal ysts for hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions is 1.0 mg.cm -2 and 0.5 mg.cm -2, respectively. The 

electrochemical performance of the prepared MEA shows low over potentials concerning both partial 

reactions and stable behavior at elevated temperature of 80 oC with current density of 0.6A.cm -2 at cell 

voltage of 2.0 V. The enhanced efficiency of the electrolysis is explained with the observed homogeneous 

distribution of the nano -sized catalyst crystallites on the non -carbon carrier, reduced ohmic resistance of 

the electrode, and high anion conductivity of the used polymer electrolyte membrane. 

Acknowledgements : This work was supported by the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science under 

the National Research Programme E+: Low Carbon Energy for the Transp ort and Households, grant 

agreement D01 -214/2018 . Part of the experiments were performed on equipment of Research 

Infrastructure “Energy Storage and Hydrogen Energetics” (ESHER), included in the National Roadmap 

for Research Infrastructure 2017 -2023”, gran ted by the Ministry of Education and Science of Republic 

Bulgari a, grant agreement № DО1 -160/ Voltammetric Investigation of Th 4-xUx(PO 4)4P2O7 Solid Solutions. 

# Characterization and Effectiveness of the Uranium (IV) Entrapment 

Michel Perdicakis , Hugues Aubriet 

LCPME, UMR 7564, CNRS - Université de Lorraine 

405 rue de Vandœuvre, 54602 Villers -lès -Nan cy Cedex, France 

michel.perdicakis@univ -lorraine.fr 

The spent nuclear fuel consists essentially of UO 2 that is highly insoluble in reducing media, but its 

apparent solubility increases dramatically under oxidizing conditions (from 4 to 10 orders of magnit ude) 

because U(IV) is transformed into soluble U(VI). Thorium phosphate -diphosphate Th 4(PO 4)4P2O7 (TPD) 

was envisaged by the ‘Institut de Physique Nucléaire’ (IPN) of Paris -Sud Universit y for the 

immobilization of actinides (Ac) [1.2]. The TPD structure al lows the replacement of large amounts of 

Th 4+ by U 4+, Np 4+ or Pu 4+ with formation of solid solutions Th 4-x Ac x(PO 4)4P2O7. S everal successful 

leaching tests have been performed with Th 4-xUx(PO 4)4P2O7 (TUPD) in very corrosive media y [3] .

In this work we e xamine the decrease of the electro -oxidizability two of TUPD samples, TUPD10 and 

TUPD50, where 10% and 50%, respectively, of the Th 4+ ions in the TPD structure were replaced by U 4+

ions. 

The electrochemical experiments were performed using the Voltammetry of MicroParticles technique 

(VMP) [ 4] where TUPD microparticles were immobilized on the cross -section of graphite electrodes. The 

surfaces of these electrodes were characterized by XPS and μRaman spectroscopy before and after 

electrooxidation. The voltamm ograms of Fig. 1A show that TPD is not electroactive and TUPD 

compounds are more difficult to oxidize than UO 2.

Fig. 1. (A) Voltammetric characterization of TPD, TUPD10, TUPD50 and UO 2 microparticles in 0.5 M 

NaClO 4 using VMP (scan rate 2 mV/s). (B) Raman spectra of TPD, TUPD50 and TUPD50 ox (oxidized 

TUPD50). 

The insertion of U 4+ ions in the TPD structure results in a significant decrease of the Raman signal (the 

more the U 4+ content the less intense the signal). The electrooxidation of TUPD compo unds leads to the 

release of about 12% of the uranium content in the case of TUPD10 and 20% in the case of TUPD50. The 

electrooxidized TUPD compounds are no longer electroactive and their Raman spectra become closer to 

that of TPD as it is shown in Fig. 1B for TUPD50. 

References 

[1] N. Dacheux, R. Podor, B. Cassigneux, V. Brandel, M. Genet, J. Alloys Compd. 271 -273 (1998) 236. 

[2] Y. Brandel, N. Dacheux, M. Genet, Radiochemistry 43 (2001) 16. 

[3] A.C. Thomas, N. Dacheux, P. Le Coustumer, V. Brandel, M. Genet, J. Nu cl. Mater. 2 95 (2001 ) 249 

[4] F. Scholz, B. Meyer, Voltammetry of Solid Microparticles immobilized on electrode surfaces, in: A.J. 

Bard, I. Rubinstein (Eds.), Electroanalytical Chemistry A Series of Advances, vol. 20, M. Dekker, 

New York, 1998. Application of Copolymer from Folic Acid and Riboflavin for 

# Determination of Pesticides 

Emilija Katinaitė , Aneta Radzevič, Rasa Pauliukaite 

Na noengineering Department , Center for P hysical Sciences and Technology (FTMC) 

Savanoriu Ave. 231, LT -02300 Vilnius , Lithuania 

rasa. pauliukaite@ftmc.lt 

Nowadays , natural comp ounds in sensors are desirable . They are preferable to contribute in diminish ing 

of climate changes and in line with the European Green Deal announced by the European Commission. 

Natural polymers are already used in sens or development , while polymers from natural monomers , e. g. 

amino acids , some vitamins or dopamine is a rather recent topic in sens ing and especially biosensing [1] .

Pesticides are important for a successful plant growth but they are harmful to human and a nimal 

organism s, t herefore, i t is important to monitor their concentration in plant products. Atra zine is a triazine 

class herbicide , res idues of which can stay in crops or other cult ivated plants. 

Polymeri zed folic acid (PFA) or rib oflavi n (PRf) were already employed for detection of some 

comp ounds like glutamate, glucose and ascorbic acid [2,3] . Th ese vitamins can be polymeri zed 

electrochemicall y under certain conditions [4,5] . Electrochemi stry is a g reen synthesis method and 

obtain ed polymers from natural monomers can be used in sensors for medicine or food quality control or 

other biological samples .

PFA and PRf copolymer was synthesized on glassy ca rbon electrode in order to detect atrazine. The 

opti mi zation of the copol ymer compo sition and its electrocatalytical activity towards atrazine will be 

presented and discussed. 

References 

1. R. Pauliukaite , Application of Natural Polymers for Electrochemical Sensing , In: Biophysics for 

Biomedical and Envi ronmental Sciences, ed. M. Florescu, Transilvania University of Brasov Press, 

Brasov, 2016, 187 -212. 

2. T. Venckus, R. Celiešiūtė, A. Radzevič, T. Rakickas, Š. Vaitekonis, Ž. Ruželė, R. Pauliukaite ,

Application of Polyfolates in the Development of Electroc hemical Glucose Biosensors ,

Electroanal ysis, 26 (2014) 2273 -2282. 

3. R. Celiešiūtė, A. Radzevič, A. Žukauskas, Š. Vaitekonis, R. Pauliukaite , A Strategy to Employ 

Polymerised Riboflavin in the Development of Electrochemical Biosensors , Electroanalysis, 29 ( 2017) 

2071 -2082. 

4. R. Celiešiūtė, T. Venckus, Š. Vaitekonis, R. Pau li ukaite , Electrosynthesis and Characterisation of 

Poly(Folic Acid) Films , Electrochim. Acta, 138 (2014) 62 -68. 

5. A. Radzevič, G. Niaura, I. Ignatjev, Tomas Rakickas, R. Celiešiūtė, R. Pauliukaite , Electrosynth esis of 

Conducting Polymer Films From a Natural Monomer – Riboflavin , Electrochim. Acta, 222 (2016) 

1818 –1830. How to Minimize Problems with Electrode Passivation 

# in Electroanalytical Chemistry 

J. Barek a, J. Fischer a, V. Vyskocil a, P. Dvo řák a

Korotkova E.K b, Khristunova E b

> a

Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Analytical Chemistry, UNESCO Laborat ory of 

Environmental Electrochemistry, Prague, Czech Republic 

Albertov 6, CZ 128 43 Prague 2, Czech Republic 

> b

National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University, Lenin Avenue 30, 634050 Tomsk, Russia 

e-mail  Barek@natur .cuni.cz 

The possibilities of modern electroanalytical methods in environmental analysis or organic compounds 

are well recognized (low investment and running costs, reasonable and in many cases “fit for the purpose” 

sensitivity and selectivity, easy aut omatization, easy miniaturization resulting in portability of 

corresponding instrumentation, user friendliness and environmental friendliness (“green electroanalytical 

chemistry”). Nevertheless, the big problem connected with the use of modern electrochemi cal techniques 

in environmental analysis is the passivation of working electrodes by products/intermediates of 

electrochemical reactions or by components of an environmental sample which can adsorb on the 

electrode surface thus fouling the electrode and co mplicating the determination or even making it 

impossible. It is obvious that surface chemistry plays a deceive role in this process. 

The following new approaches eliminating problems with electrode passivation in environmental 

monitoring of organic pollu tants will be discussed and demonstrated on practical examples : 

i) preparation, surface characterization and testing of new electrode materials resistant towards 

passivation (e.g. boron doped diamond, nitrogen -incorporated tetrahedral amorphous carbon, hydr ophilic 

carbon prepared by pyrolysis of acetylene and hydrogenation, carbon films, nanostructured metals 

deposited on various substrates, bismuth and antimony films ,

ii) elimination of passivation by electrochemical polishing/cleaning/pre -treatment of elect rode surface 

between successive measurements ,

iii) elimination of electrode passivation by measurements in flowing systems (liquid chromatography, 

flow injection analysis and batch injection analysis with electrochemical detection) 

iv) prevention of passivatin g molecules from matrix to access the electrode surface by their preliminary 

separation via membrane filtration ,

v) application of electrodes with easily renewable surface (dropping mercury electrode, hanging mercury 

drop electrode, static mercury drop ele ctrode) and/or disposable electrodes for a single use (screen printed 

electrodes) ,

These approaches will be demonstrated on selected example s of passivating pollutants (phenols, 

nitrophenols, aromatic amines and nitrocompounds, dyes, drugs, etc.). 

Acknowledgement 

This research was supported by the Czech Science Foundation (project GACR 20 -01417J and by the 

Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project RFBR 19 -53 -26001 )Spectroelectrochemical properties of electrodeposited polypyrrole 

# complexes with sulfonated polyelectrolytes 

V.A. Kabanova , O.L. Gribkova, O.D. Iakobson, A.A. Nekrasov, 

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry RAS, 

Leni nskii pr ospect 31, Moscow, 119071, Russia 

kabanovavar @gmail.com 

Polypyrrole (PPy) films were synthesized in galvanostatic mode in the presence of salt and acid 

forms of water -soluble sulfonated polyelectrolytes: flexible -chain poly(styrene -4-sulfonic acid) (PSSA) 

and poly -2-acrylamido -2-methyl -1-propanesulfonic acid (PAMPSA), semi -rigid -chain poly( 4,4’ -(2,2’ -

disulfonic acid) -diphenylene -iso -phthalamide) (i -PASA), rigid -chain poly( 4,4’ -(2,2’ -disulfonic acid) -

diphenylene -tere -phthalamide) (t -PASA). 

The electronic a nd chemical structure of the PPy films obtained was studied by UV -Vis -NIR and 

Raman spectroelectrochemistry. UV -Vis -NIR spectroelectr ochemi cal and cyclic voltammetr ic 

comparative studies were performed in water and organic (propylene carbonate) medium. It was shown 

that the structure of PPy depends strictly on the structure of polyelectrolyte and the nature of its cation. 

In the presence of acid forms of flexible -chain polyelectrolytes PPy films are formed in 

protonated, more oxidized form with higher conce ntration of free charge carriers . PPy films 

electrodeposited i n the presence of salt form s of all polyelectrolyte s are less protonated , however they 

characterized by high absorption in the NIR spectral region . Their spectroelectrochemical properties are 

si milar to those of PPy films obtained in inorganic electrolytes (Fig.1a) . Contrarily, PPy complexes with 

rigid -chain polyacids exhibit lower doping degree, lower absorption in NIR region, which is indicative of 

lower concentration o f free charge carriers (F ig.1b) . At the same time, n umerous cycling in propylene 

carbonate with 0.5M NaClO4 showed that films of PPy complexes with rigid -chain polyacids are more 

electrochemically stable. 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8       

> 330 430 530 630 730 830 930
> Wavelength, nm
> D
> -0.6V
> 0.7V

## a) 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6        

> 330 430 530 630 730 830 930
> Wavelength, nm
> D
> 0.7V
> -0.6V

## b) 

Fig.1 UV -Vis -NIR absorption spectra of the PPy -PSSA ( а) and PPy -i-PASA (b) films at 

different fixed potentials in 0.1 М NaClO4 aqueous solution. 

The differences are discussed considering peculiarities of pyrrole distribution in the synthesis 

solution depending on the hydrophobicity, conformational state and spatial distribution of sulfonic groups 

in polyelectrolyte coils. 

This study was financially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant No. 

19 -29 -08048_mk .Self -organized Electrodeposi tion of Cu/Cu 2O towar ds Novel Materials 

Maria R . Pinto 1, Bianca Kitagaki, 1 Adriana C. Queir oz, 1,2 Guilherme B . Per eira ,1 Raphael Nagao 1,2  

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, University of Campinas, 13083 -970, Campinas, SP, Brazil  

> 2

Cent er for Innovation on New Energies, University of Campinas, 13083 -841, Campinas, SP, Brazil 

Corresponding Author: nagao@unicamp. br 

Self -organization is a powerful to ol that may be explored as a methodology for th e synthesis of new 

materials wi th intricate structures . Oscillatory electrodeposition and electrod issolution reactions can 

enable the formation of nanostructured materials under micro and nanoscale through bottom -up 

processes. [1] The electrodeposition in a n alkaline media containing cop per su lfa te and lactate yield 

periodic oscillations by only appl ying a constant current . The oscillations under galvanostatic regime 

oc cur in a broad range of different pH and current densiti es values , that directly affect th e period and 

amplitude of the oscillations (Figure 1a) .[2] Although direct relatio nships between experimental 

parameters, such as pH, current density and temperature can be obtained , multivariate statistical an aly sis 

re vealed a more complex dependence on th e frequency including quadratic terms (Fig ure 1b). The 

periodic oscillations related to alternate deposition of Cu and Cu/ Cu 2O are recorded in the form of an 

ordered architecture in the electrodeposit ed film , the so -called multilayers. The period and amplitud e of 

the oscillations is directly relat ed to the thickness and composition of the layers of the electrodeposited 

film . Under high frequencies the thin thickness an d the inhomogeneous deposition encumber the well -

defined layer formation (F igure 1c) , despite this, the formation of two distinct ph ases are clearly 

observed , consisting of copper oxide grains (in white ) identified in Transmission Kikuchi Diffraction 

phase maps surrounded by a metallic copper matrix , in gray .[3] Cu |Cu 2O interface s are emplo yed in many 

fields , inclu ding electrocatalysis , in the CO 2 electroreduction , in sensors, as glucose detect or s, as 

nanowires in lithium -ion batteries , all of them who can benefit greatly from the use of new materials bui lt 

through self -organized system s. 

Fig ure 1: (a) Oscillations samples extracted from galvanostatic electrodeposition time -series with different pH values 

and current densities . (b) Response surface plot of the model for the C u/Cu 2O oscillatory deposition at T = 35.0 oC, in 

the pH range of 9 .0 to 9.5 and current densit ies of 2.0 to 4.0 mA cm -². (c) High -Angle Annular Dark Field image of 

the cross -section lame lla pr epared th rough Focused Ion Bean ( FIB ) from the Cu/Cu 2O oscillato ry filmed deposit ed 

over FTO substr ate .

References: 

[1] Pinto, M. R.; Costa, G. F.; Machado, E. G.; Nagao, R . ChemElectroChe m 2020 , 7, 1 .

[2] Pinto, M. R.; Pereira, G. B.; Queiroz, A. C.; Nagao, R. J.Phys . Chem . C 2020 , 12 4, 2 3, 12559 –1256 8.

[3] Ki tagaki, B. T.; Pin to, M. R.; Queiroz, A. C.; Bre itkreitz, M. C.; Rossi, F.; Nagao, R. PCCP 2019 , 21, 16423. Sodium Adsorption Ratio Reduction via Monovalent Selectivity in 

# Capacitive Deionization with Functionalized Electrodes 

Eric N. Guyes 1, Amit N. Shocron 1, Yinke Chen 2, Charles E. Diesendruck 2,3 , Matthew E. Suss 1,2 

> 1

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering , Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel 

> 2

Grand Technion Energy Program , Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel 

> 3

Schulich Faculty of Chemistry , Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200 0, Israel 

eguyes@campus.technion.ac.il 

Ion -ion selectivity, the preferential removal of particular charged species in a competitive ionic 

environment, is an active and growing research topic in capacitive deionization (CDI) with potential water 

treatment applications such as heavy metal removal and agricultural water remediation 1. We here study 

monovalent selectivity, the preferential removal of a monovalent ion in the presence of a divalent ion, with 

the aim of reducing the sodium adsorption ratio (SAR) of a test feed stream. SAR is an important 

agricultural water parameter , and excessive values can adversely affect plant health and reduce crop yields 2.

Using a flow -through electrodes ( FTE ) CDI device, we evaluate the performance of a cell with a cathode 

functionalized with sulfonic groups (S -P cell ) for a feed water containing Na + and Ca 2+ ions with initial 

SAR = 19.8 and conductivity к = 1.75 mS/ cm for a range of cycle times ( 6 – 30 min , equally divided into 

charge and discharge steps ) and applied constant voltage s. At cycle times of 15 and 30 min , SAR is 

increased above the feed value due to preferential Ca 2+ removal . However, at a cycle time of 6 min, the S-

P cell reduces SAR at voltages above 0.8 V, improving the water quality relative to the feed value (see 

Figure 1a), an effect due to greater relative removal of Na +. Furthermore, we show that SAR reduction and 

high coulombic efficiency (>96%) are retained over a 1000 -cycle experiment at 1.2 V and 6 min cycle time 

(Figure 1b), indicating the promise of functionalized electrode materials for applications involving 

monovalent selectivity. We discuss tradeoffs for conditions that achieve net reductions of SAR and 

conductivity, such as acidification of the desalinated water to pH < 6 and energy consumption of ~1 kWh/m 3

product water , the latter vs. ~0.01 kWh/m 3 for conditions that result in high Ca 2+ selectivity. 

Figure 1: CDI performance in the S -P cell. a) The effect of charging voltage and cycle time on output 

water SAR and conductivity . Feedwater conditions are shown at the intersection of the dashed lines. b) 

Output water SAR and coulombic efficiency over a 1000 -cycle experiment at 1.2 V and 6 min cycle time. 

Reference s:

(1) Zha ng, X.; Zuo, K.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, C.; Liang, P. Selective Ion Separation by Capacitive 

Deionization (CDI) Based Technologies: A State -of -the -Art Review. Environ. Sci. Water Res. 

Technol. 2020 .

(2) Singh, R. B.; Minhas, P. S.; Chauhan, C. P. S.; Gupta, R. K. Effect of High Salinity and SAR 

Waters on Salinization, Sodication and Yields of Pearl -Millet and Wheat. Agric. Water Manag. 

1992 , 21 (1), 93 –105. Electrochemical reduction of CO 2/CO to C2+ products assisted by Cu -

# Ag bimetallic catalysts 

Floriane A. Rollier, Marta C. Costa Figue iredo , Emiel J.M. Hensen 

Inorganic Materials and Catalysis, Chemica l Engineering and Chemistry faculty , Ein dho ven Un iversi ty

of Techn ology 

Building Helix, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven 

f.a.rollier@tue.nl 

Witnessing both fossil resources s carcity and global warmi ng consequences, it is crucial to 

develop sustainab le an swe rs to the r is ing demand in energy and chemicals. An innovative way of 

producing added value products for industry is to electrochemicall y convert carbon dioxide using 

electricity originating from sustainable energy sources (solar, wind, …). [ 1] Mo re than mitig ating 

greenhous e gas emission in the atmosphere, the process would allow the storage of surplus electrons 

produced during sunny or windy days into chemi cal bon ds, mak ing energy available for later use. The 

focus on producing lo ng -chain compounds (C2+) , ha ving a higher energy density than one -car bon 

products , is a key point for further progress in CO 2/CO electroreduction (CO 2RR and CORR) .

After decades of investigations, cop per based electrocatalysts have prove n to be active in CO 2RR 

towa rds C2+ products . [2] Howe ver, the selectivity and further improvement of the activity constitute the 

main challenges to overcome before any industrial applications. Despite a not fully understood reaction 

mechanism , c arbon m ono xide was shown to be the main reaction intermediate leading to C2+ products .

[3] COR R focused studies have indeed been published this past decade in or der to increase the selectivity 

towards high energy density product s. [4] Knowing that CO like intermediates induc e C-C coupling ,

some research group s [5][ 6] have recently investigated bimet allic system alloying copper with a CO -

produ cing metal ( e.g. Ag or Au ) in order to provide localized CO product ion and spill over on copper 

domain s where CO would react further . This appr oach enhan ces the CO coverage on copper and leads to 

increase in C -C coupling , further pulling up selectivity for C2+ compoun ds . Gewirth et al. [6] synthesized 

CuAg nanowir es demonstrating a noteworthy near 100% fa radaic efficiency (FE) for CO 2RR , with a 60% 

FE to Ethylene as well as a 25% FE for Ethanol at relatively low overpotential ( -0.7V vs RHE ). The y also 

determined that half of the current density devoted to CO 2RR is directed towards Ethylene production ,

and one third towards E thanol and CO formation .

These promising results constitute key knowled ge for further optimization . In this work w e

pr esent the study of Cu Ag base d bimetallic systems for CO 2RR and CORR . Differe nt e lectrodeposited 

CuA g catalysts will b e presented (pu re Cu, CuAg (1%at), CuAg (6%at) and Cu Ag (9 %at)) as well as their 

performance in CO 2RR and CORR . Moreover, in this study we op timiz ed the synthesis of the bim etallic 

catalysts by using different li gands (i mi dazole and triazole based ) influencing the shape of th e catalysts .

The shape will impact the product distribution during reaction and ligands are investigated f or this 

pu rp ose. 

References: 

1.  S. Nitopi et al. – Chem. Rev. (2019), 119, 7610 -7672 

2. Y. Hori – Modern aspects of electrochemistr y n°42  (20 08 )

3.  Y. Y. Birdja et al. – NATURE Energy, 4 (2019 ) 732 -745 

4.  L. Wang et al. - ACS Catal. (2018 ), 8, 8, 7445 -7454 

5.  L. Hou et al. – Inorg. Chem. Front., (2020 ), 7, 2097 

6. T. T. H. Hoang et al. - J. Am. Chem. Soc. (2018 ), 140, 5791−5797 Electrocoagulation using aluminum electrodes for boron removal 

Douglas M. L. da Silva, Maria Tereza W. D. Carneiro , Josimar Ribeiro 

Laboratório de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento em Eletroquímica, Departamento de Química do Centro de 

Ciências Exatas da Univer sidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Av.: Fernando Ferrari, 514, Goiabeiras, 

Vitória, Espírito Santo, CEP.: 29075 -910, Brazil 

josimar.ribeiro@ufes.br 

The efficiency of the electrocoagulation method in the removal of boron from synthetic effluent and 

mining effluent was investigated in this study. Different parameters such as pH, current density, 

electrocoagulation time and supporting electrolyte concentration were tested for both types of effluents 

[1]. The synthetic effluent was prepared from boric acid so lution and the mining effluent was collected 

from an important brazilian mining company located in Vitória city. The results showed a percentage of 

boron removal higher than 60% for the synthetic effluent and close to 70% for the mining effluent, using 

alu minum electrodes, pH 7.5, a current density of 14.82 mA cm -2 and electrolyte support 0.200 mol L -1.

The methods of electrocoagulation and chemical coagulation were also compared in this study, where a 

percentage of 56.30% higher was obtained by electrocoag ulation for the mining effluent. Thus, 

electrocoagulation was more efficient at removing boron, especially when appropriate parameters were 

applied. Thus, electrocoagulation proved to be an important technique for the removal of residues in 

industrial effl uents and, consequently, a reduction of the environmental impacts caused by them [1]. 

Figure 1 . Percentage of boron removal at the current densities of 4.81 and 14.42 mA cm -2, with a time of 

EC of 30 minutes and supporting electrolyte of 0.200 mol L -1.

Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico 

(CNPq), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and Fundação de 

Amparo à Pesquisa e Inovação do Espirito Sant o (FAPES) for providing financial support. 

References 

[1] Silva, D. M. L.; Carneiro, M. T. W. D.; Ribeiro, J. The Scientific World Journal , 2019 , 1 -7, 2019. Preparation and properties of a versatile ge l p olymer electrolyte for 

# safer high voltage lithium batteries 

Ruggero Poiana 1, Akiko Tsurumaki 1, Ernestino Lufrano 2, Cataldo Simari 2, Isabella Nicotera 2, Maria 

Assunta Navarra 1

> 1

Dep artment of Chemistry, U nivers it y of Rom e Sap ienza, P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rom e, It aly 

> 2

Department of Chemistry and Chemical Technologies, University of Calabria, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy 

ruggero. poiana@uniroma1.it 

The introduction of a polymeric electrol yte component in lithium bat teries has dramatically in creased 

safety of these energy storage device s, thus en hancing their employment in many commercial 

applic ations . In this c onte xt the electrical cond uction is one of the most importa nt feature s for the choice 

of a suitable polymer , together with good mechanical strength and ch emical stability . Hence , polymeric 

electrolytes can be divided in t wo major classes depending on their features: dry solid polymer 

electrolytes (SPE) , where the polymeric matrix acts a s solid so lvent, and gel polymer electrolytes (GPE) ,

compose d of organic solvents mixed together with an appropriate polymer [1] . In both c ases polymer 

cha ins t ake part to lithium cation diffusion through the electrolyte , improving safety but slightly reducing 

its ion conduction re spect to liquid system s. 

This work is focused on the development of a versatile GPE for high voltage lithium batteries [2],

enha ncing safety of the devic e without undermining its electrochemical performances . Poly(vinylide ne 

fluoride -co -hexafluoropropylene ) (PVdF -HFP ) copoly mer is used as polymeri c co mponent, dis solved in a

mixture of alkyl carbonate solvents with a n easy room atmosphere pr ocedure for the accomplishment of a

dried se parator with controlled thick ness . The rma l characterization of the polymeri c separat or is carried 

out with thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential scannin g calorimetry (DSC) . The membrane is 

then stored und er i nert atmosphere, ready to be swollen in liquid electrolyte solutions to form a suitable 

GPE . The adaptability of t he sepa rator to ele ctrolyte solutions of different nature is demo nst rated with a

liquid commercial electrolyte and innovative solutions obtained with the addition of the ionic liquid N -n-

butyl -N-methylpyrrolid inium hexafluorophosphate (Py 14 PF 6) [3]. Pul sed field gradient NMR 

measurements are performed to investigate GPEs lithium diffusion coefficients and relaxation 

phen omena , useful for the co mprehension of the ion -conduction mechanisms [4]. GPEs are also 

characterized by rheological and electrochem ical me asurements , adopting a nickel -substituted manganese 

spinel LiNi 0.5 Mn 1.5 O4 as high voltage cathode in lithium metal batteries . Enhanced safet y of the polym eric 

matrix is demonstr ated with f lame tests on both GPEs and their li quid counterpart s.

[1] Manuel Ste phan A., Review on gel polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries . European Polymer 

Journal 42 , 21 -42 (2006). 

[2] Fasciani, C., Panero, S., Hassoun, J. , Scrosati, B. , Novel configuration of 

poly(vinylidenedifluoride) -based gel polymer electrol yte for a ppli cation in lithium -ion batteries. J. Power 

Sources 294 , 180 –186 (2015). 

[3] Tsurumaki, A., Navarra, M. A., Panero, S., Scrosati, B. , Ohno, H. , N-n-Butyl -N-

methylpyrrolidinium hexafluorophosphate -added electrolyte solutions and membranes for li thium -

seco ndar y batteries. J. Power Sources 233 , 104 –109 (2013). 

[4] Simari, C., Lufrano, E., Coppola, L. , Nicotera, I. , Composite gel polymer electrolytes based on 

organo -modified nanocl ays: Investigation on lithium -ion transport and mechanical properties. 

Membrane s. 8, (2018). Graphene –ionic liquid interfacial potential drop from DFT -MD 

# simulations 

Heigo Ers 1, Meeri Lembinen 2, Maksim Mišin 1, Ari P Seitsonen 3, Maxim V. Fedorov 4, Vladislav B. 

Ivaništšev 1

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, Tartu 50411, Eston ia 

> 2

Institute of Physics, University of Tartu, Ostwaldi 1, 50411 Tartu, Estonia 

> 3

Département de Chimie , École Normale Supérieure , 24 rue Lhomond , F-75005 Paris , France 

> 4

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo Innovation Center, Moscow 143026 , Russia 

E-mail: heigoers@ut.ee 

Ionic liquids (IL) are organic salts with remarkable stability and high charge density. These properties 

make them promising electrolytes for electrochemical applications such as supercapacitors. As the 

microscopic processe s taking place at the interface affect the macroscopic characteristics of 

supercapacitors, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are essential to study the elec trode –IL interface 

structure and dynamics. 

In this work, we have used density functional theory -based molecular dynamics (DFT -MD) simulations 

to explore the interface between graphene electrode and 1 -ethyl -3-methyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate 

ionic liqu id at different graphene surface charges. DFT -MD level of theory allowed us to examine the 

charge di stribution and polarization on the graphene. The results indicate that overscreening is preserved 

upon the inclusion of quantum effects. Furthermore, we hav e divided the electrical double layer potential 

drop into two components to narrow the gap between classical and DFT -based MD simulations. The first 

involves atomic charges and arises due to the reorganization of the ionic liquid. The second quantifies the 

redistribution of the graphene electron density using atomic dipoles that correlate with the atom ic charges. 

The latter term we have related to the concepts of Thomas –Fermi screening length, effective surface 

charge plane and quantum capacitance. 

Figu re 1. Interfacial potential drop disassembled into two main components ar isi ng from atomic charges 

and dipoles. 

Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the Estonian Research Council (grants IUT20 -13, 

PSG249, and PUT1107), the EU through the European Regional Development Fund (TK141 “Advanced 

materials and high -technolo gy devices for energy recuperation systems”), and the Estonian –French 

cooperation program Parrot, funded by the Estonian Research Council and Campus France. [1] D. Molognoni , P . Bosch -Jimenez , R . Rodríguez -Alegre , A . Marí -Esp inosa , E . Licon , J . Gallego , S . Lladó , E .    

> Borràs , M .Della Pirr iera .How operational parameters affect electromethanogenesis in a bioelectrochemical power -
> to -gas pro totype .Manuscript currently u nder revi ew.

# Long -term demonstration of a bioelectrochemical power -to -gas 

# prototype, run in different operation conditions 

Daniele Molo gnoni, Pau Bosch -Jimenez , Laura Huidobro Rodríguez , Rub én Rodrig ue z-Alegre, Adrián 

Mari -Es pinosa, Ed xo n Licon, Julia Gallego, Sal vado r Ll adó, Eduard Borràs, Moni ca Della Pirriera 

LEITAT Technologi cal Center 

C/ de la Innova ció 2, 08225 T errassa, S pain 

lhuidobro@leitat.org 

Bioelect rochemical power -to -gas represents a novel solution for electrical energy storage. It allows 

converting elec trical energy to methane (CH 4), therefore connecting the electricity and natural gas grids 

for a high -capacity and flexible energy storage. The tech nology can be coupled with membrane contactors 

for CO 2 capture, dissolving the CO 2 in wastewater before its feeding to the bioelectrochemical system. 

This way, the integrated system can achieve also carbon capture, in the scenario of a wastewater 

treatment plant application. In this study, such technology was developed in a medium -scale prototype of 

32 L (Figure 1), operated for 400 days in different conditions of temperature, voltage and CO 2 capture [1] 

Figure 1 – Photo of developed 

prototype. Left side: CO 2

capture system. Right side: 

EMG -BES stack. 

The prototype achieved the 

highest CH4 production rate 

(147 ±33 L m-3 d-1) at the 

lowest specific energy 

consumption (1,0±0,3 kWh m -3

CH 4) when operated at 25 ºC 

and applying a voltage of 0,7 V, 

while capturing and converting 

22 L m -3 d -1 of CO 2 (Figure 2). 

Traces of H 2 in the biogas, detectable during the period s of closed electrical circuit operation, indicated 

that hydrogenotrophic electromethanogenesis was taking place at the cathode. On the other hand, a 

relevant CH 4 production during periods of open electrical circuit operation confirmed the presence of 

acet oclastic methanogenic microorganisms in the microbial community, which was dominated by the 

archaeal genus Methanothrix (Euryarcheota). Different OTUs (operational taxonomic units) belonging to 

the bacterial Synergistes phylum were found at the anode and t he cathode, having a potential role in 

organic matter degradation and H2 production, respectively. 

Figure 2 – Trend in time of CH 4

production rate, wit h and without 

CO 2 capture. 

In the panorama of methanation 

technologies currently available 

for power -to-gas, performance of 

this EMG -BES prototype is not 

yet competitive, especially in 

terms of volumetric CH 4

production rate and power 

density demand. Howe ver, the 

possibility to obtain a high -

quality biogas (almost respecting 

the quality standards of biomet hane) at a minimal energy consumption represents a potentially favorable 

business scenario for this technology. This work has been financially supported by the Spanish Ministry 

of Economy and Competitiveness under t he project Power2Biomethane (RTC -2016 -5024 -3, 2016). Her Activity of Nickel Coated Graphite Electrodes Doped with CoW 

# Nanoparticles 

> 1*

Yakubu Sawadogo Adam, 1Gurbet Yerlikaya, 1Gülfeza Kardaş , 2Murat Farsak 

> 1

Cukurova University, Faculty of Art and Science, Chemistry Department, 01130, Adana, Turkey 

> 2

Osmaniye Korkut Ata University, Applied Science School of Kadirli, Department of Food Technology, 80000, 

Osmaniye, Turkey 

*Corresponding author e -mail: gulfeza@cu.edu.tr 

ABSTRACT 

Hydrogen is a renewable secondary energy source. Due to its high energy density and zero emissions, it has been 

accepted as a suitable alternative for conventional fossil fuels [1] . Environmentally friendly energy sources for 

sustainable renewable resources are of interest due to the rise in global pollution. Hydrogen, seen as the energy 

source of the future, can be obtained in different ways. However, the most suitable method is to obtain hydrogen 

by electrolysis. The electrical energy used in this method increases the unit price of H 2. In addition, it increases 

the unit price even more because it requires additional energy in over -potential consisting of electrodes and 

electrolytes. In order to overcome these problems, suitable electrode, working environment and catalyst are 

investigated [2, 3] .

In this study, the hydrogen evol ution reaction (HER) effect of CoW nanoparticles deposited on the Ni plated 

graphite eletrodes (CoWNi@C) were studied. The HER activity of the prepared electrodes were investigated by 

electrochemical techniques. Electrochemical analyses were carried out by the potentiodynamic polarization 

techniques and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Surface morphology and chemical composition of 

synthesized nanoparticles were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy dispersive X -ray 

spectroscopy (EDX) techniques. The ca thodic polarization curves of Ni @C and CoWNi@C in 1 M KOH solutions 

are given in Fig. 1. The addition of a small amount of CoW to the coatings in order to increase the catalytic activity 

led to significant differences in current densities. When current de nsity values are compared as an expression of 

catalytic activity, it is seen that the CoWNi@C catalyst has higher activity than the Ni@C catalyst. It showed that 

HER efficacy of CoWNi@C catalyst in 1.0 M KOH solution was higher than Ni@C catalyst and showe d lower 

potential. 

Fig. 1 The cathodic polarization curves for C, Ni@C and CoWNi@C catalysts in 1 M KOH .

Acknowledgement 

We are greatly thankful to Scientific Research Project of Cukurova University (Project No: FYL -2019 -12494) and 

CUMERLAB. 

References 

[1] Ren Z, Han Y, Cong N, Jin L, Tan L, Chen H, et al. Hydrothermal synthesis of spherical Ru with high efficiency 

hydrogen evolution activity. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. 2019;848. 

[2] Ananth M, Parthasaradhy N. Hydrogen evolution characteristics of electrodeposited Ni -Zn -Fe coatings in 

alkaline solutions. International journal of hydrogen energy. 1997;22:747 -51. 

[3] Badawy W, Nady H, Negem M. Cathodic hydrogen evolution in acidic solutions using electrodeposited nano -

crystalline Ni –Co cathodes. international journal of hydrogen energy. 2014;39:10824 -32. Electrochemical Surface -Enhanced Raman Spectroscopic Study of p-

# Bromide Nitrobenzene on AgNPs@Ag Electrode 

Jia -Liu, Zhuan -Yun Cai, Wei -Xin Sun, Jia -Zheng Wang, De -Yin Wu 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, College of Chemistry an d Chemical 

Engineering, Collabora -tive Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM), Xiamen 

University, 

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Fujian Province , China. Zipcode 

：

361005 

dywu@xmu.edu.cn 

Identification of the intermediates on the electrode -molecule surface is significant for understanding 

electrochemical reaction mechanism s. Surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) i s a powerful in 

situ technique to get the molecul ar fingerprint information of interface reaction s.1 During the 

electroreduction of p-brom onitrobenzene (pBNB) under NaClO 4 aqueous ele ctrolyte, structural 

transf ormations of sur face molecule s have been investigated by in -situ electrochemical SERS in this 

work. 

Figure 1a shows the c yclic voltammetry of pBNB from 0.1 to -1.22 V vs. Ag|AgCl. Two cathodic 

waves for the nitro group reduction are observed both on the f irst and second cycles (red and blue curves, 

respectively). A pair small redox wave s can be observed at -0.21 V and -0.23 V in the second CV cycle. 

This is similar to nitrobenzene reduction, which is identified as the redox of hydroxylamine and nitroso 

int ermediates .2 However, there is lack of evidence of the m olecul ar transformation. Figure 1b presents the 

potenital -dependent SERS spectra in the 600 -1800 cm -1 region. The initial spectrum of pBNB observe d at 

0.1 V has the typical band at 1350 cm -1, which is from the nitro group. When sweeping the potential to 

negative potential , this result s significant change in SERS. New peaks at 1168, 1339, 1386 cm -1 appeared 

in -0.4 V correspond to the reduction intermediate nitroso derivative. These b ands disappear at -1 V and 

the SERS bands at 819 and 993 appear to prove the reduction to amino derivatives. Finally, the SERS 

band s at 987, 1061, 1134, and 1224 cm -1 can be identified as the intermediate product hydroxylamine 

derivative when the potenital was applied in the reversed sweep to -0.2 V. -1.2 -0.8 -0.4 0.0 0.4 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 

> 024
> Current (uA)
> Potential (V vs. Ag/AgCl)
> blank pBNB 2mM 1 cyl pBNB 2mM 2 cyl
> -0.46 -0.49 -0.97 -0.23 -0.21

a) 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800   

> 1347 1619 1350 1168 1020 993 819
> -0.02 V -0.2 V -1 V -0.4 V 0.1 V
> Normalized Intensity (a.u.)
> Raman Shift (cm^-1)
> 0.020 V -0.18 V -1.03 V -0.38 V 0.1 V
> 1134 1224 1061 987 1142 1347 1418 1597 1539
> Potential (V vs. Ag|AgCl)

b) 

> 1410
> pBNB 2 mM 1386 1339

Figure 1 (a) Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) of 2 mM pBNB recorded at a scan rate of 0.1 V/s on Ag electrode. 

Dashed line is the first scan circle, and solid line(red) is the second circle, blank is shown in black dash 

line. (b) Sequenc e of EC -SERS at representative potential s for the reduction of pBNB obtained during 

CV at scan rate of 0.05 mV/s, at Ag NPs@Ag electrode. SERS spectra conditions: The integration time is 

1 s. the laser wavelength 532 nm, and laser power is 150 W, the 10 ×, N A=0.3. All experiment s were 

recorded in 2 mM pBNB under 0.1 M NaClO 4 solution . The reference electrode is Ag|AgCl, the counter 

electrode is Pt. 

(1) Wu, D. Y., Li, J. F., Ren, B. and Tian, Z. Q., Electrochemical surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy 

of nanostructures. Chem Soc Rev . 2008, 37, 1025 -1041. 

(2) Gao, P., Gosztola, D. and Weaver, M. J., Surface -enhanced raman spectroscopy as a probe of 

electroorganic reaction pathways. 1. Processes involving adsorbed nitrobenzene, azobenzene, 

and related species. The Journal of Physical Chemistry . 1988, 92, 7122 -7130. Determination of Alumin um stripping & plating kinetics parameters 

# in EMimCl/AlCl 3 by pulsed voltammetry for Al -ion battery 

M. Eckert , B. Rana, S. Suthar, J .-F. Drillet, 

DECHEMA Forschungsinstitut 

60486 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

drillet @dechema.de 

The development of alternative battery systems that rely on cheap, non toxic, easy to recycle and 

worldwide available materials is of great importance for supplying huge energy storage market. One very 

pr omising candidate is the Alumin um -ion battery (AIB) that uses Graphite as intercalation material for 

positive electrode and an Alumin um foil or foam as negative electrode 1. To overcome aluminium 

passivation and H 2 evolution, most common AIB chemistry relies of water -free ionic liquid electrolyte 

such as EMimCl/AlCl 3 mixture. During charging, large AlCl 4- anions intercalate in graphene sheets and 

Al i s plated on the anode according to following reactions :

## 𝐶 𝑛 + 𝐴𝑙 𝐶 𝑙 4 

> −

## → [𝐶 𝑛 𝐴𝑙𝐶 𝑙 4] + 𝑒 −

## 4 𝐴 𝑙 2𝐶 𝑙 7 

> −

## + 3− → 𝐴 𝑙 0 + 7 𝐴𝑙𝐶 𝑙 4

> −

During discharging step, Al stripping occurs while AlCl 4- ions de -intercalate from graphite matrix. One 

crucial issue is related to graphite volume change during cycling. While a few articles report on kinetics 

of Al dissolution step 2,3 , not information about Al deposition kinetics in ionic liquid was published yet. 

Herein kinetics parameter of both Al stripping & plating from/on an Aluminum foil in different 

EMimCl/AlCl 3 concentrations were evaluated by using cyclic voltammetry an d high -resolution pulsed 

chrono potentiometry. The Tafel slop es of Al -stripping & p lating were found to be in the ran ge of 120 –

150 mV dec -1 while corresponding exchange current densities account ed for about 3 – 5 mA cm -2.

Experiments on determination of activation energy will be presented as well. 

References 

1. M.C. Lin . et al. ; Nature 520 (2015) 324 

2. P.K. Lai & M. Skyllas -Kazacos; Electrochim. Acta 32 (1987) 1443 

3. C. Wang , A. Creuziger, G. Stafford . & C. L. Hussey; J. Electrochem. Soc. 163 (2016) H1186 Mesosc opic Effects in Ele ctrocatalysis : from Concept to Catalyst 

# Synthesi s and Performance Evaluation 

Matthias Arenz 

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Bern 

Freie strasse 3, 3012 Bern, Switzerland 

matthias. arenz @dcb.unibe.ch 

In the la st decade t he interest in electrocatalyst design has been boosted by the increasing availability of 

regenerative energy in the form of electricity . The intermittent nature of energy sources such as 

photovoltaic power and wind energy requires suita ble energ y storage technology to be able to align the 

“production” with the “dem and” of energy . While battery technology for mobile applications shows 

continuous progress, the storage and re -conversion of electricity in the form of energy carriers such as 

hydrogen gas still faces significant challenges. Complementing strategies to utilize renewable energy for 

the produc tion of gas es , liquids or chemicals of interest , summarized under the “Power to value ” or 

“Power2X” label , are even more in their technologi cal infan cy . However , for an efficient regenerativ e

energy management on a global scale such technologies are indispensable. 

For all these technologies a fundamental understanding and rational design of (electro -)catalysts , on 

which many surface reactions of inter est take place, play an essent ial role. I n state -of -the -art academic 

electrocatalyst design, the focus is on optimi zing the surface structure of the catalyst on a nanometer 

scale. This design principle , however, only takes kinetic factors into account – which are important, but 

not sufficient for catalytic applications . Furthermore, the electro catalyst performance is determined at 

significant lower reaction rates than re quired for applications. 

I will present our research concept that focuses on a differe nt, complementary design approach for 

sup ported electrocatalysts in order to optimize their properties . In supporte d electrocatalysts, the active 

phase consists of metal or alloy nanoparticles distributed over a conducting support, mostly carbon based. 

Our aim is to elucidate the role of mesoscop ic propert ies – such as the interparticle distance on the 

support – fo r th eir performance in a comprehensive and systematic manner by combining electrochemical 

measurements with ( ex -situ and in operando) spectroscop y and microscopy . Mesoscopic properties h ave 

so far received only little attention in academic electrocataly st desi gn , yet some few studies demonstrate 

that they bear significant potential for improving the electrocatalyst performance. A proof o f concept h as 

been our pioneering work on the partic le proximity effect on size -selected Pt clusters 1. Different colloidal 

cata lyst synthesis strategies 2, 3 developed allow the investigat ion of mesoscopic effects with a

significantl y broader perspective. 

1. Nesselberger, M.; Roefzaad, M.; Hamou, R. F.; Biedermann, P. U.; Schweinberger, F. F.; 

Kunz, S.; Schloegl, K.; Wiberg, G. K. H.; Ashton, S.; Heiz, U.; Mayrhofer, K. J. J.; Arenz, M., The 

effect of p article proximity on the oxygen reduction rate of size -selected platinum clusters. Nat Mater 

2013, 12 (10), 919 -924. 

2. Quinson, J.; Kacenauskaite, L.; Bucher, J.; Simonsen, S. B.; Kuhn, L. T.; Oezaslan, M.; 

Kunz, S.; Arenz, M., Contro lled Synthesis of Surfactant -Free Water -Dispersible Colloidal Platinum 

Nanoparticles by the Co4Cat Process. Chemsuschem 2019, 12 (6), 1229 -1239. 

3. Quinson, J.; Neumann, S.; Wannmacher, T.; Kacenauskaite, L.; Inaba, M.; Bucher, J.; 

Bizzotto, F.; Sim onsen, S. B.; Kuhn, L. T.; Bujak, D.; Zana, A.; Arenz, M.; Kunz, S., Colloids for 

Catalysts: A Concept for the Preparation of Superior Catalysts of Industrial Relevance. Angew Chem Int 

Edit 2018, 57 (38), 12338 -12341. Electrochromic performance of V 2O5 thin films grown by spray pyrolysis 

## Kyriakos Mouratis 1,2,3 , Dimitra Vernardou 1,2 , Cosmin Romanitan 4, Iuliana Mihalache 4,

## Mirela Suchea 2,4 , Valentin Tudose 2, Emmanuel Koudoumas 1,2 , Stelios Couris 3,5 

> 1

## Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, School of Engineering, Hellenic 

## Mediterranean University, 710 04 Heraklion, Crete, Greece, email kmuratis @hmu.gr 

> 2

## Center of Materials Technology and Photonics, Hellenic Mediterranean University, 

## 710 04 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 

> 3

## Department of Physics , University of Patras , University Campus, 265 04, Rio Achaia ,

## Greece 

> 4

## National Institute for Research and Development in Mi crotechnologies (IMT -

## Bucharest) 

> 5

## Institute of Chemical Engineering and High Temperatu re Chemical Processes 

## (ICEHT), Foundation for Research and Technology -Hellas (FORTH), Patras 26504, 

## Greece 

## Experimental results are presented related to the electrochromic behavior of vanadium 

## pentoxide (V 2O5) thin films deposited with a custom -made spray pyrolysis system using 

## ammonium metavanadate as precursor. The effect of precursor concentration, 

## deposition time and annealing on the basic characteristics of the films and their 

## functionality was investigated in details. The films were found t o exhibit quite good 

## electrochromic behavior with four main color changes (light brown, light blue, light 

## green and yellow) . Annealed films were more stable exhibit ing faster response time and 

## larger change in the transmission between the colored and the b leached phase . These 

## results concern a preliminary study, aiming in the development of efficient 

## electrochromic layers using low cost and simple materials, low cost and easily adapted 

## to a production line deposition technique, offering the possibility of developing large 

## scale windows. 

## Acknowledgements: This doctoral dissertation was implemented with a scholarship 

## from the State Scholarships Fou ndation (IKY), which was funded on the basis of 

## “ENHANCEMENT OF HUMAN RESEARCH RESOURCES THROUGH THE 

## IMPLEMENTATION OF DISSERATATION RESEARCH” funded by the EP 

## “Development of Human Resources, Education and Lifelong Learning”, 2014 -2020. Tailored electrocatalytic properties of Pt nanocrystals on N -

# functionalized carbon surface 

Ji Mun Yoo 1,2 , Jongmin Lee 1,2 , Chi -Yeong Ahn 1,2 , and Yung -Eun Sung 1,2 *

> 1

Center for Nanoparticle Research, Institute for Basic Science), Seoul 08826, South Korea 

> 2

School of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea 

Seoul 08826, South Korea 

*E -mail: ysung@snu.ac.kr 

ABSTRACT 

Pt -based nanocrystals have been largely studied due to their high activity and stability as 

electrocatalysts in fuel cell and water electrolyzer. For optimal electrocatalytic performance, adsorption 

properties of the Pt surface should be tailored toward the sweet spot where the turn over frequency is 

maximized while surface coverage of spectator i ons is minimized. Traditionally, various approaches have 

been suggested with nano -architecture of Pt -based nanocrystals, including control over size, alloy 

composition, morphology, and surface dopants. However, there have been limited studies on the impact 

of carbon support surface on the adsorption properties of Pt nanocrystals. In this study, we report an 

unexpected change in adsorption behaviors of Pt surface when supported on the N -functionalized carbon 

surface. Affinity toward both protons and oxygen s pecies are highly modulated, resulting in tailored 

electrocatalytic properties in acidic and alkaline electrolytes. This study will suggest the importance of 

carbon surface as another factor toward tailoring the performance of nano -particulate electrocatal ysts. Carbon nanofibers doped with metals for air -cathodes . Oxygen 

# reduction reaction characterization and application in microbial 

# desalination cells 

P. Bosch -Jimenez, 1 Laura Huidobro, 1 S. Matencio, 2 M. Canal Rodriguez, 2 M. Aliaguilla, 1 D. Morillo, 2 S. 

Martine z, 2 E. Borràs 1 

> 1

LEITAT Technological Center, C/ de la Innovació, 2, 08225 Terrassa, Spain  

> 2

LEITAT Technological Center, C/ Pallars, 179 -185, 08005 Barcelona, Spain 

Bioelectrochemical Systems (BES) are novel technologies using microorganisms to catalyse different 

electrochemical processes. Among BES applications, Microbial Desalination Cell (MDC) (Figure 1) 

constitutes an emerging energy efficient desalination technol ogy. The main advantage of MDC is lower 

energy required to drive desalination process (po tentially 0.5 kWhm -3) compared to reverse osmosis (3

kWhm -3).  MDC performance depends on the performance of key components (anode, cathode and 

membranes) . In the prese nt study, a ir -cathodes, based on carbon nanofibers (CNFs) doped with metal 

nanoparticles (Fe and Co), were developed using electrospinning. Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 

kinetics were assessed by chronopotentiometry, cyclic voltammetry and OCV .1 CNFs dem onstrate 

suitable ORR performance which is essential for use as air -cathode -MDC electrode s. CNFs incorporating 

Fe nanoparticles further enhanced ORR. Finally, an air -cathode -MDC reactor was constructed with 

optimized electrode s, observing high relationship between material ORR performance and desalination 

rate. Developed cathodes are an altern ative to Pt -based cathodes and are suitable to be used in others BES 

and electrochemical technologies . Research leading to these results has received funding from EU -

Horizon 2020 programme. GA Nº685793 (MIDES project). 

Figure 1 : Structure of a Microbial Desalination Cell (MDC).   

> 1Bosch -Jimenez, Pau, et al. Non -precious metal doped carbon nanofiber air -cathode for Microbial Fuel Cells application: Oxygen
> reduction reaction characterization and long -term validation. Electrochimica Acta 228 (2017): 380 -388 .

# Molybdenum selenide /sulfide with carbon nanotubes as attractive 

# electrode material s for electrochemical capacitors 

Maciej Tobis , Elżbieta Frąckowiak 

Poznan University of Technology 

60 – 965, Poznań, Berdychowo 4, Pol and 

maciej.p.tobis @doctorate.put.poznan .pl 

Electr ochemical capacitors (ECs) are considered to be the most promising high -power energy storage 

devices for various application including portable electronics, hybrid vehicles or communication s due to 

their stable long -life cycle and high specific capacitance. Carbon materials such as activated carbon s,

carbon nanotubes or carbon fibre s are the most common electrode components used in ECs . Although, 

while constructed in ECs cells in comparison to other materials, they offer relatively small specific 

capacitance due to limite d specific surface area or non -uniform distribution of pores .

Among various electrode material s, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides ( 2D -TMDs) are interesting 

choice due to their two dimensionality, large specific surface area an d large diversity of compounds. 

TMDs are layered material with a formula of MX 2, where M is the metal atom , e.g. , Mo, V, Re etc. and X 

is the chalcogen atom , e.g. , S, Se or Te . Atoms are bonded with each other by strong covalent bond and 

layers are stacked together with weak van der Waals force s. While assembled in ECs , 2D -TMDs can store 

charge through adso rption of ions at the electrolyte/electrode interface and also through faradaic reactions 

occurring on the surface of the electrode. Their structure can be tailored to obtain high specific surface 

area which will ensure the space for adsorption of ions an d active sites for faradaic reactions [1].

MoSe 2 as a representative of 2D -TMDs is a semiconductor which gained significant attention due to a

high theor etical capacity and a low cost. It possesses slightly higher intrinsic electrical conductivity than 

MoS 2 mainly due to the metallic nature of the Se . Additionally, unsaturated Se edges possess stable 

structure and can occur in multiple electrochemically ac tive sites which is a beneficial f or the faradaic 

capacit y and decrease the internal resistance. MoS e2 as a mainly pseudocapacitive material suffers from 

poor electrical conductivity which in total decrease s the overa ll electrochemical performance [2].

It was already proven that multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) show superior electrical 

conducti vity and could serve as a good percolator of various electrode materials in ECs . Combination of 

highly conductive MWCNTs with faradaic MoSe 2 resulted in obtaini ng stable , highly capacitive 

composite wit h improved conductivity . Moreover, the addition of MWNCTs increased the overall 

lifespan as they prevent the MoSe 2 from volume expansion during char ge/discharge which has its origin 

in more metallic nature of Se . Several MoSe 2/MWCNTs composites with various composition w ere 

prepared by simple hydrothermal method. For comparison MoS 2/MWNTs composites have also been 

prepared. The o btained composites were characterized with various textural/ structural methods , e.g. ,

sc anning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy. The electrochemical 

performance of the prepared ECs cells were studied by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic 

charge/discharge and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Two - and three -el ectrode cells were 

tested. Neutral aqueous solutions (sulfates) have been selected as electrolytes to extend operational 

voltage of EC. 

Acknowledgements: The authors would like to acknowledge the National Science Centre, Poland, for the 

financial support in the framework of the project 2018/31/B/ST4/01852. 

References 

[1] Wonbong Choi, Nitin Choudhary, Gang Hee Han, Juhong Park, Deji Akinwande and Young Hee Lee, 

Materials Today, 2017, 20, 117 

[2] Suresh Kannan Balasingam, Jae Sung Leec and Yongseok Jun, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45 , 9646 PElectrogenerated Chemiluminescence and Photophysical Properties 

# of Oxazaborines Molecules 

Pavlos Nikolaou [a] , Tomáš Mikysek [b] , Mirjeta Kafexholli [c] , Petr Šimůnek [c] , Jiří Váňa [c] , Aneta 

Marková [d] , Martin Vala [d] , and Giovanni Valenti [a] 

[a] Department of Chemistry ‘’G. Ciamician’’, University of Bologna 

Via Selmi 2, 40126, Bologna , Italy 

[b] Department of Analytical Chemistry 

Faculty of Chemical Technology, University of Paradubice 

Studentská 573, CZ -53210 Pardubice, Czech Republic 

[c] Institute of Organic Chemistry and Technology 

Faculty of Chemical Technology, University of Pardubic 

Studentská 573, CZ -53210, Pardubice, Czech Republic 

[d] Brno University of Technology, Faculty of Chemistry 

Materials Research Centre 

Purkyňova 118, 612 00 Brno, Czech Republic 

Email:  pavlos.nikolaou2@unibo.it 

An importan t and novel group of fluorophores that are tetra -coordinated six -membered boron compounds 

with O - B- N moiety, are called Oxazaborines ( Figure 1b). These molecules have ignited great interest 

to be investigated due to their aggregation -included emission and for obtaining the forming donor -

acceptor (D -A) chromophores.[1] The investigation of Oxazaborines ’ properties yield a high 

photoluminescence (PL) of 70 -75% which is relative to their first redox behavior. The use of the 

electrochemiluminescence (ECL) meth od dem onstrates the high ECL intensity which has a value four 

times higher than the standard dyes, therefore opening novel applications within the ECL luminophores 

fiel d (Figure 1a).[2][3] Finally, all of these novel compounds were analyzed under the same conditions, 

in order to make it possible to create a comparison between them. Thus, the ECL analysis of the above 

compounds was carried out in an aprotic solvent.[4] 

Figure 1: (a) ECL intensity vs potential for 5.10 -4 M OxaBo3 (current in black and ECL in red) in 

CH 3CN/Bu 4NPF 6 (0.1 M). Working electrode: Pt disk (2 mm diameter) vs SCE electrode with scan rate 

1 Vs 1. PMT bias of 750 V; voltage scan between +1.3 and -1.7. (b) The st ructures of Oxazaborines 

[1] H. Doušová, N. Almonasy, T. Mikysek, J. Váňa, M. Nepraš, B. Frumarová, M. Dvořák, Z. 

Růžičková and P. Šimůnek, Monatsh. Chem. 2018, 149, 1795 –1811 .

[2] S. Kesarkar, E. Rampazzo, G. Valenti, M. Marcaccio, A. Bossi, L. Prodi and F. Paolucci, 

ChemElectroChem 2017, 4, 1690 –1696. 

[3] S. Kesarkar, S. Valente, A. Zanut, F. Palomba, A. Fiorani, M. Marcaccio, E. Rampazzo, G. Valenti, 

F. Paolucciand L. Prodi, J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 5686 –5691. 

[4] T. Mikysek, P. Nikolaou, M. Kafexholli, P. Šimůnek, J. Váňa, A. Marková, M. Vala, and G. 

Valenti, ChemElectroChem. 2020, 7, 1550 –1557 .Cysteine detection at mesoporous Silica Films functionalized with Ferrocene 

Himanshu Maheshwari *, Gr égoire Herzog, Neus Vilà, Alain Walcarius 

Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et l’Environnement 

UMR 7564 405, rue de Vandoeuvre 54600 Villers -lès -Nancy, France 

* himanshu.maheshwari@univ -lorraine.fr 

Cysteine is a thiol containing semi -essential amino acid which plays an important role in cellular 

functionality to counter oxidative stress in living cell s [1] . It also has a role in certain cell signaling pathways 

[2]  and regulatory functions  [3] . Since, the cysteine amino acid is a part of glutathione tripept ide , selective 

detection of cysteine over glutathione always remains a challenge .

Herein, we report a novel strategy for the selective detection of micromolar concentrations of cysteine over 

glutathione, taking advantage of the electrocatalytic properties of ferrocene in the electrochemical oxidation 

of cysteine [4] . Ferrocene functionalized mesoporous silica films have been used for this purpose (Figure 

1) .

The films were prepared by electrochemically assisted self -assembly (EASA) method followed by copper -

catalysed azide -alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition reaction [5] . Vertically aligned mesoporo us silica films 

display good selectivity [6]  and sensitivity  [7] . The pores of the films are ~2 nm in diameter and offer a 

highly selective surface for small molecul es.  These ferrocene functionalized films were characterized by 

cyclic voltammetry and show good electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of cysteine [8] . Further, we 

also discuss the electron transfer kinetics for such an electrocatalytic reaction and the effect of diffusion of 

molecules in the 1D mesochannels of mesoporous films . In order to improve the detection sensitivity, flow 

injection amperometry has been performed and is used for selective detection of cysteine in the 

concentration range from 3 to 100 μM in buffer solution. 

REFERENCES 

[1] M. Ramen T, Med. Chem. , 2015 , 05 , 37. 

[2] S. T. Wood, D. L. Long, J. A. Reisz, R. R. Yammani, E. A. Burke, C. Klomsiri, L. B. Poole, C. M. Furdui, 

and R. F. Loeser, Arthritis Rheumatol. , 2016 , 68 , 117. 

[3] D. Long, H. Wu, A. W. Tsang, L. B. Poole, B. K. Yoza, X. Wang, V. Vachharajani, C. M. Furdui, and C. E. 

McCall, Sci. Rep. , 2017 , 7, 11005. 

[4] J. E. Taylor, J. F. Yan, and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1966 , 88 , 1663. 

[5] N. Vilà, J. Ghanbaja, E. Aubert, and A. Walcarius, Angew.  Chemie Int. Ed. , 2014 , 53 , 2945. 

[6] N. Vilà, E. André, R. Ciganda, J. Ruiz, D. Astruc, and A. Walcarius, Chem.  Mater. , 2016 , 28 , 2511. 

[7] T. Nasir, G. Herzog, M. Hébrant, C. Despas, L. Liu, and A. Walcarius, ACS Sensors , 2018 , 3, 484. 

[8] H. Maheshwari, N. Vilà, G. Herzog, and A. Walcarius, ChemElectroChem , 2020 , 7, 2095. 

Figure 1: Selective o xidation of cysteine over glutathione and electron hopping effect in the 

ferrocene functionalized silica film Si NN N

Cys (reduced) 

Glutathione 

(reduced) 

X

ELECTRODE Friction at electrode surface: Effect of adsorbates and potential 

Inhee Park and Helmut Baltruschat* 

Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry University of Bonn 

Roemerstr . 164, D-53117 Germany 

Baltruschat @uni -bonn.de 

Friction between sliding AFM tip and the surface of electrode in contact help us to understand interfacial 

and tribological behavio r on nanoscale. The measurement of friction in an electrochemical cell allows 

controlling the interfacial interactions in situ easily. Our interest has be en focused on the adsorption of 

foreign metals, ranging from (sub)monolayer (underpotential deposition(UPD)) to multilayer (bulk 

deposition) and the adsorption of organic adsorbate depending on a potential on single crystal electrodes 

in aqueous electrolyt e[1-3]. In addition to studie s made in aqueous electrolyte, ionic liquids have been 

introduced for friction study to investigate their structures depending on a pote ntial. [4, 5].

In this study, we investigate the interfa cial proper ties on Au(111) in aqueous electrolyte. The structure of 

Ag UPD layers is extremely sensitive to co -adsorbed anions such as ClO 4-, I- and SO 42-. In perchlorate 

electrolyte, Ag UPD layers show different structure depending on the existence or nonexistence of the 

iodine adlyer on Au(111) [6,7]. We found that the iodine adlayer on Au (111) forms a (˅3× ˅3) R30° 

structure using the results of atomic stick -slip. It changes to a p(3×3) and (˅3×˅3)R30° structure after 1 st 

Ag UPD and 3 rd Ag UPD, respectiv ely. The results of the friction on potential shows that the incomplete 

Ag UPD layer on Au(111) leads to relatively high friction . It is in good agreement that for low and 

moderate coverages, the tip drags the adsorbates along the surface resulting in high friction, whereas for 

higher coverages the tip slides above the adsorbates resulting in low friction [6]. The results of the friction 

on load on I -modified Au(111) shows three apparent regimes . Under the low normal load (F N<30nN) , the 

friction force is independent on Ag UPD, meaning that the tip is interacting with iodine layer. Under 

critical norm al load, the friction shows a rapid increase, which indicates that the tip penetrates into the 

iodine layer. Under the high normal load (F N>100), the friction shows moderate increase, which 

represent s that the tip is interacting with Ag UPD layer. 

[1] S. Iqbal, S. Wezisla, N. Podgaynyy, H. Baltruschat, Electrochimica Acta 186 (2015) 427 -435. 

[2] M. Nielinger, H. Baltruschat, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 9 (2007) 3965 -3969. 

[3] N. Podgaynyy, S. Iqbal, H. Baltruschat, Surface Sci ence 631 (2015) 67 -72. 

[4] H. Li, M.W. Rutland, M. Watanabe, R. Atkin, Faraday discussions 199 (2017) 311 -322. 

[5] J. Sweeney, F. Hausen, R. Hayes, G.B. Webber, F. Endres, M.W. Rutland, R. Bennewitz, R. 

Atkin, Physical review letters 109 (2012) 155502. 

[6] W. Ouyang, A.S. de Wijn, M. Urbakh, Nanoscale 10 (2018) 6375 -6381. Re vealing the mechanism of the performance discrepancy between Li 

# and Na metal anodes 

Shuai Tang 

Center of Green Catalysis, and College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University 

College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China 

stang@zz u.edu.cn 

Lithium and sodium metal anodes are pr omising candidates for next -generation energy storage systems 

because of the high theoretical capacity and low working potentials. It is reported that the high affinity 

between Li/Na metals and the electrodes can help suppress the dendrite growth and thus improve the 

reversibility of Li/Na plating/stripping cycles. [1 -3] However, we find that the average Coulombic 

efficiency and lifespan for Na is superior to that of Li in literatures ( Figure 1a ). Therefore, we 

systematically investigate the fundamental electrochemical behaviors and interphase chemistry of Li and 

Na metal anodes. We uncover that the reversibility difference is correlated with the plating geometry, 

which o riginates from the concentration polarization at the interphase between Li/Na metal and the 

electrolytes (Figure 1b, c) .[4] More importantly, we propose ways to ameliorate the reversibility of Li 

metal anodes. We believe the work can shed ligh t on the researchers for the understanding of Li and Na 

metal anodes and further design ing high -performance Li and Na metal battery. (a) (b) 

> (c)

Figure 1. (a). Summary of coulombic efficiencies and cycling time of the Li and Na plating/stripping 

cycles reported in the literature. The scheme of the cycling process of (b) Li and (c) Na metal anode. 

Reference 

[1] K. Yan, Z. Lu, H. -W. Lee, F. Xiong, P. -C. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Zhao, S. Chu, Y. Cui, Nat . Energy 2016 , 1,

16010. 

[2] S. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang , X. G. Zhang, J. T. Li, X. Y. Wang, J. W. Yan, D. Y. Wu, M. S. Zheng, Q. F. 

Dong, B. W. Mao, Adv . Mater . 2019 , 31 , e1807495. 

[3] S. Tang, Z. Qiu, X. Y. Wang, Y. Gu, X. G. Zhang, W. W. Wang, J. W. Yan, M. S. Zheng, Q. F. Dong, 

B. W. Mao, Nano Energy 2018 , 48 , 10 1.

[4] S. Tang, X. -G. Zhang, X. -Y. Cui, H. -Y. Xu, D. -Y. Wu, J. -W. Yan, M. -S. Zheng, Q. -F. Dong, B. -W. 

Mao, J. Mater . Chem . A 2019 , 7, 23216. Fabrication and Characterization of Electrodeposited N ickel -Graphene 

# Oxide C omposit e Coating on Mild Steel for Corrosion P rotection 

Usha Pandey 1, Chhaya Sharma 2,* 

> 1

Department of A pplied Science and Engineering 

> 2, *

Department of Pulp and Paper Technology, IIT Roorkee Saharanpur Campus, Saharanpur (U.P.), 247001, 

India 

> *

Corresponding author E - mail:chhaya1964@rediffmail.com 

> 1

Presenting author E -mail: usha.pandey9019@gmail.com 

Nickel -based composite coatings have been used widely in various industries due to its good corrosion protection 

ability and g raphene -oxide have attracted enormous interest due to its wide range of properties, such as excellent 

mechanical properties, impe rmeability, chemical stability and therma l stability . In t he present work , we have 

fabricated nickel -graphene oxide (Ni -GO) composite coating on mild steel substrate by facile and cost -effective 

electrodeposition techniques, and characterized by XRD, FE -SEM, and EDX. XRD analysis shows that the growth 

of Ni -GO coating is along the 111 and 200 planes. FE -SEM image indicates the enhanceme nt in the compactness 

of the coating and EDX confirmed the successful incorporation of the carbon content in the Ni -GO coating. 

Further, electrochemical polarization test and electro chemical imp edance spectroscopy are carried out to study 

the corrosion res istance of the coating in 3.5% NaCl solution. The effect of various current densities (10, 20, 30, 

40, 50 mA/cm 2) on the morphology and corrosion protection properties on the coating is also investigated and 

discussed in detail. The corrosion rate is found to be lowest at the current density of 40 mA/ cm 2 due to its better 

compactness of Ni -GO coating. Moreover, i mmersion test is also performed for three days where the corrosion 

rate of composite coating is reduced as compared to bare steel. This work finds a new way to fabricate GO -based 

composite coating on mild steel for effective corrosion protection. Catalytically Active Re -Ni and Ni -Re -P Coatings as Electrocatalytic 

# Materials for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction 

V.V. Zhulikov 1, Yu.D. Gamburg 1, V.V. Kuznetsov 1,2 , V.M. Krutskikh 1, E.A. Filatova 2

> 1

A. N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electroche mistry , Russian Academy of Science 

11907 1 Leninsky ave. 31/4, Moscow , Russia 

> 2

D. I. Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia 

125047 Miusskaya sq. 9, Moscow, Russia 

e-mail: vladimirzh91@gmail.com 

Electro plating and electroless chemical deposit ion are used for formation of catalytically active Re –Ni 

coatings. Re –Ni de posits prepared by electrodeposition contain 55 –88 at. % of rhenium. It is found that 

these coatings have an amorphous structure and contain metallic nickel and both metallic and ox ides 

forms of rhenium. The oxidized forms of rhenium are obviously oxides c ontaining rhenium in the 

intermediate oxidation states. Re –Ni cathodes demonstrate high catalytic activity in 1.0 M sodium 

hydroxide solution . The logarithm of exchange current dens ity of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) 

for the most catalytically act ive Re –Ni alloys containing 80 at.% of rhenium is –3.4. The obtained 

materials are stable in alkali solutions under electrolysis conditions , but they are un stable in acidic media. 

On the contrary , Ni –Re –P coatings obtained by electroless deposition using s odium hypophosphite as a 

reducing agent are promising candidates for HER electrocatalysis in acidic solutions. The deposits are 

also X -ray amorphous and contain metallic rhenium, me tallic and oxidized forms of nickel , and some 

phosphorus. 

Therefore, Re –Ni coatings prepared by electrodeposition are promising for electrocatalysis of HER in 

alkaline solution s, whereas Ni –Re –P deposits obtained by electroless deposition are attractive ca ndidates 

for hydrogen evolution in acidic solutions. 

Acknowle dgment This work was supported by Russian Foundatio n for Basic Research , pro ject 18 -03 -

00826 Self -supported NiFeP layer coated nickel phosphide rods as 

# bifunctional water splitting electrocatalyst in alkaline solution 

Fangyuan Diao 1, Xinxin Xiao 1, Jingdong Zhang 1, Christian Engelbrekt 1* 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, DK -2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 

Email address:  fandia @kemi.dtu.dk , xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk , cheng@kemi.dtu.dk 

De veloping nonprecious metal, efficient and stable electrocatal ysts is still a big challenge for industrial 

water electrolysis to produce hydrogen and oxygen gas . Elemental d oping to modulate electronic 

structure , and morpholog y engineering have proven to be effective for enhanc ing materials’ catalytic 

activity. In th is work, we report a facile and practical method to fabricate self -supported NiFeP coated 

nickel phosphide rods on Ni foam (NiFeP @NiP @NF) by phosphorizing NiFe Prussian blue analogues 

(PBA s) coated on nickel phosphate hydrate rods grown on Ni foam. The NiF eP @NiP @NF electrocatalyst 

shows efficient oxygen evolution activity , exhibit ing low overpotentials of 225 and 252 mV at current 

densities of 10 and 100 mA cm -2, respectively, in 1.0 M KOH. NiFeP @NiP @NF can also work as an 

active electrocatalyst for hydroge n evolution reaction with a low overpotential of 99 mV at a current 

density of 10 mA cm -2 in the same solution. Thus, the catalyst can act as both anode and cathode in an 

electrolyzer, requiring a cell voltage of 1.5 6 V to afford a 10 mA cm -2 current densi ty. Furthermore , the 

composite material exhibits outstanding stability for continuous water electrolysis over 120 h. The high 

catalytic activity and excellent durability of this material are attributed to the synergistic effect of nickel 

and iron phosphide , and the core -she ll rods structure. This method could be applied to prepare other 

bimetallic phosphide electrocatalysts with similar structure in the future. 

Figure 1. a. Scheme of water splitting (left). b. Polarization curves of NiFeP @NiP @Ni foam (+, -) and Ni 

foam (+, -) for overall water splitting in a two -electrode electrolyzer (right); Inset: SEM image of 

NiFeP @NiP @NF .Thin films of molybdenum -based 2D or amorphous materials for the 

# hydrogen evolution reaction 

Ariane Schmidt and Aldo J. G. Zarbin 

Chemistry Departament, Federal University of Paraná (UFPR) 

Centro Politécn ico, CP 19081, 81531 -990, Curitiba , PR, Brazil 

aria neschmidt@ufpr.br; aldozarbin@ufpr.br 

Hydrogen has been considered a promise for clean and sustainable energy resource to replace the finite 

and traditionally fossil fuels. The water can be split into hydrogen and oxygen with the aid of electricity 

or sol ar radiation, which is a renewable and sustainable technology for hydrogen generation . A limiting 

factor for water splitting is the shortage of low -cost and high -efficiency catalysts. At the date, Pt provides 

the best hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) cat alysis, but it is too expensive and scarce. Molybdenum -

based materials, such as 2D -MoS 2 and amorphous Mo X (X= S or O), is point ed out as favorable 

alternative to the Pt HER catalysts . In this work, we have investigated the performance of molyb denum -

based tw o-dimensional (2D) and amorphous thin films as catalyst for HER. Samples have been prepared 

according a methodology developed by us [1] based on a reaction between ammonium molybdate and 

ammonium sulfide in acidic me dia, directly in one phase reaction or in a liquid/liquid (L/L) interfacial 

system . The samples were c haracterized by Raman spectroscopy, X ray diffraction, scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) and linear sweep voltammetry. The synthesis carried out in one phase system leads to 

an amorphous powder composed by molybdenum sulfide and oxide that can be easily converted to a 

mixture of crystalline MoS 2/MoO 3 with a proper annealing at inert atmosphere. Otherwise, the synthesis 

at the L/L system gives rise to a thin film of amorphous Mo X directly at the L /L interface. Also, with 

liquid phase exfoliation in acetonitrile of the mixture between MoS 2/MoO 3 these two materials were 

separated, yielding a homogeneous and stable dispersion of 2D -MoS 2, which is separated from the 

undispersed MoO 3 by centrifugation. The dispersion was used to prepare thin films of 2D -MoS 2 based on 

the L/L interfacial method. [2] The deposition of the Mo X and 2D -MoS 2 can be made in any kind of 

substrate . In order to analyze the potential of the materials for HER, the films wer e deposite d over ITO or 

glassy carbon . The linear sweep voltammetry was made in H 2SO 4 0.5 mol L -1 as electrolyte . It w as 

observed that the electrode plays a crucial role in the performance of HER. Both materials showed 

currents below 2.5 mA cm -2 when deposited over ITO, however a totally differently behavior was 

observed when the materials were deposited in glassy carbon instead, in which Mo X and 2D -MoS 2

showed an overpotential of 255 mV cm -2 and 344 mV cm -2 at 10 mA cm -2, respectively. The dif ference in 

the overpote ntials could be addressed to the wrinkly morphology and composition of the amorphous film, 

which provides vacancies along the sample , that improve the catalytic behavior for HER comparable to 

the 2D -MoS 2, which have the active sites only in the edges. An o verview of the work is presented in 

Figure 1. Overall, this works presented a simple, original and versatile route to prepare different 

molybdenum -based materials thin films and showed the potential of the materials as catalyst for hydrogen 

generation by w ater splitting. 

Figure 1. Summary of the materials obtained and the performance in HER. 

[1] Schmidt, A. and Zarbin, A . J. G ., J. Colloid Interf. Sci. , 2019, 554 , 80 -90. 

[2] Salvatierra, R. V. , Oliveira, M. M, Zarbin, A. J. G., Chem. Mater. , 2010, 22 , 5 222 -5234. Biomimetic electrochemical sensor for the highly selective detection of 

# azithromycin in biological samples 

Ioan – Adrian Stoian 1, Bogdan -Cezar Iacob 1, Cosmina -Larisa Dudaș 1, Lucian Barbu -Tudoran 2,3 , Diana 

Bogdan 3, Iuliu Ovidiu Marian 4, Ede Bodoki 1*, Radu Oprean 1

> 1

Analytical Chemistry Department, “Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 4, Louis 

Pasteur St., 400349, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 2

Faculty of Biology and Geology, Electron Microscopy Center, “Babes -Bolyai” University, 5 -7 Clinici lor 

St., 400006, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 3

National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular Technologies, 67 -103 Donat 

St., 400293, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 4

Research Center in Electrochemistry and Non -conventional Materials, Faculty of Ch emistry and 

Chemical Engineering, Babes -Bolyai University Addres s

*Correspondence:  bodokie@umfcluj.ro 

Antibiotic resistance has a significant impact on health and therapeutic efficacy, the World 

Health Organization (WHO) recommending a careful monitoring of the use and disposal of this class of 

drugs. Therefore, there is a rising demand for highly sensitive sensors able to selectively detect low 

concentrations of antibiotics from different matrices in a fast and dec entralized manner. 

The purpose of this study was to develop an electrochemical sensor for the detection of 

azithromycin from various conventional (urine, plasma) and nonconventional (tears) biological fluids , by 

combining the convenient synthesis and analy tical robustness with the tailored selectivity offered by 

molecular imprinting. 

For molecular recognition an d signal transduction a thin (~75 nm) imprinted polymeric film, 

using 3-thienyl boronic acid as functional monomer and 2,2΄ -bithiophene as crosslink er, was 

electropolymerized on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode. The resulting polymeric layer, both by 

covalent interactions (cyclic ester formation with the cis -diol moieties) and steric/functional 

complementarity of the imprinted cavities, is ren dered highly selective towards the template molecule 

(azithromycin). 

The surface morphology and the analytical performances of the developed sensor were assessed 

by scanning electron and atomic force microscopy, electroc hemical impedance spectroscopy and c yclic 

voltammetry. By employing an indirect electrochemical detection using cyclic voltammetry in the 

presence of 10mM ferro/ferricyanide as redox probe, the sensor exhibited a very wide dynamic range 

(13.33 nM to 66.67 μM), with an estimated detection limit in the subnanomolar range (0.85 nM 

azithromycin). Under the optimized conditions t he simple t o construct sensor could be reused multiple 

times (>5) without significant loss in the signal intensity, has a good shelf -life (>1 month ) and exhibits 

remarkable selectivity over a wide number of structurally related and non -related antibiotics, commonly 

associated drugs and endogenous compounds . The fabricated sensor was successfully applied for the 

quantitation of azithromycin from different biological samples (urine, plasma, tears). 

Acknowledgement: This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Res earch and Innovation, CNCS -

UEFISCDI, project number PN -III -P1 -1.1 -TE -2016 -0628, within PNCDI III and by European Social 

Found, Human Capital Operational Programme 2014 -2020, project no. POCU/380/6/13/125171 .A D esalination Fuel Cell 

> 3

Matthew E. Suss ,2

Imri Atlas ,1

Shada Abu Khalla 

1 The Nancy and Stephen Grand Technion Energy Program (GTEP) ,2 Russell Berrie Nanotechnology 

Institute , 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Technion, Haifa, Israel 

Shadak@c ampus. technion.ac.il 

Desalination has evolved into a viable alternative to fresh water supply, increasing water 

availability and decreasing scarcity. Reverse osmosis (RO) is the most -widely used technology today for 

desalination, and requires significant e lectr ical energy investment, about 4 kWh /m3 of treated water, when 

desalinating sea water. In contrast to such conventional desalinat ion systems which utilize energy, we 

here intro duce the desalination fuel cell , which takes chemical energy as input, in the for m of hydrogen 

and oxygen gas, and produces both desalted water and e lectricity simultaneously. Thus, water can b e

desalinated without any externa l electrical supply required . The desalination fuel cell is based on 

continuous energy conversion from chemic al to electrical, and thus is not cyclic as with capacitive 

deionization .

As with an ED cell, our cell consists of one anion and one cation exchange membrane which 

sandwich a desalination channel fed with feedwater. Unlike an ED cell, on the opposite side o f the anion 

exchange membrane is a hydrogen anode and anolyte, while a n oxygen cathode and catholyte are placed 

opposite to the CEM. During operatio n, the reductant present in the anolyt e (hyd rogen ) and oxidant 

present in the catholyte ( oxygen ) react spont aneously at the anode and cathode surfaces, respectively, 

providing an electric current between the anode and cathode which can be delivered to a load. The half -

reactions also give rise to a s pontaneous ionic current through the cell, which drives ion remo val from the 

desalination channel 1.

The cell was characterized experimentally in single -pass mode for various catholytes and 

anolytes, including using feedwater as anolyte and catholyte (fee dwater was 0.5 M NaCl) . W hen using a 

slightly acidic catholyte (pH = 1) and basic anolyte (pH = 13) , the cell demonstrated significantly higher 

voltages and electricity production during desalination . The results of the latter experiments are shown in 

Fig. 1 for varying feedwater flowrates . Fig. 1a shows p olarization c urve measurements that were 

performed . A h igh open circuit voltage (OCV) of ~1.6 V was reached, while the flowrate affected voltage 

at higher currents (~ 5 mA/ cm 2). Fig. 1b shows the effluent concentration at the downstream end of the 

desalination compartm ent . We can see that at lowe r flowrate (0.1 ml/min) , the cell performed near -

complete desalination at a single pass . Furthermore, we calculated the desalination efficiency and 

recovery efficiency and compared it to a dedicated thermodynamic model that w e developed for chemical 

energy driven desalination systems .

Fig. 1 : Experimental results from our desalination fuel cell prototype device . a) Polarization curve 

measurements . b) concentration of the desalted effluent leaving the cell after a single pass .

References: 

1. S. Abu Khalla , & Suss, M. E. (2019). Desalination , 467 , 257 -262. 

a bDevelopment of Oxygen -Deficient Ca Fe 2O4 Nanostructures as H igh -

# Performance Electrode M aterial for P seudocapacitors 

Sandeep Kumar Sundriyal , Yogesh Sharma *

Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 

Roorkee, India 247667 

> *

Corresponding author E -mail:  yogeshfph@iitr.ac.in 

Presenting author E -mail: sundriyalphysics@gmail.com 

The poor electronic/ionic conductivity and low cyclic performance of iron -based oxides hinder their practical 

application as electrode materials for high -performance pseudocapacitors . Owing to this, introduction of defects 

such as oxygen vacancies in iron -based oxides could alter the ir electronic/ ionic conductivity and thereby , improve 

the energy storage performance . Herein, we have fabricated nanoparticle and nanofibers of CaFe 2O4 (CFO) by 

combustion and electrospinning technique, respectively , and characterized by XRD, FE -SEM, TGA, TEM , and 

BET. EPR and XPS reveal the presence of higher concentration of oxygen vacancies in nanofibers of CFO than 

their nanoparticles . The energy storage performance of CFO is further investigated by CV, GCD , and EIS . The 

specific capacitance of CFO nanofibers is found to be 380 (±10) F g -1 at 1 A g -1 in 3M KOH , which is higher than 

their nanoparticles (225 (±10) F g -1). The improved performance of nanofibers of CFO is attributed to the 

alignment, high aspect ratio , and void/gaps pr esent in the nanofibric architecture. These voids/ gaps are beneficial 

to facilitate smoother percolation of electrolyte to the interior of active electrode materials and enable high and 

stable capacitance. In addition to morphological features , the presence of higher concentration of oxygen 

vacancies in nanofibers leads to better electronic/ionic movement. This work opens a new strategy to develop Fe -

based oxides as high -performance electrode materials for pseudocapacitive applications. Comparison of In -situ 57 Fe Mössbauer Spectroscopic Data for 

# Differently Prepared Fe -N-C Catalysts 

L.Ni; C.Gallenkamp; M. Kübler, S. Paul; V. Krewald, U.I. Kramm 

Department of Materials - and Earth Sciences & Chemistry 

Otto Berndt -Str. 3, 64287 Darmstadt 

Lingmei.ni@ese.tu -darmstadt.de 

Electrochemical energy conversion in proton exchange fuel cells (PEFCs) is very promising for world -

wide energy demand, especially in the transportation sector [1]. Currently, the application is hindered by 

the high costs of platinum -based catalysts. For the oxygen reduction reaction, Fe -N-Cs are promising to 

replace Pt based catalysts. 

> 57

Fe Mössbauer Spectroscopy is powerful in obtaining detailed information of iron sites, with respect to 

structural composition , electronic states as well as magnetic environment [2 -3]. The active site structures 

have been debates for a long time and different geometric structures have been proposed for differently 

prepared catalysts by multi -characterization methods, which indicate there migh t be indeed different 

active site structures from different preparation routes [4 -5]. 

In this work, in -situ Mössbauer spectroscopy coupled with electrochemistry is used to get more insights 

on similarities and differences between differently prepared cata lysts. The in -situ data are  compared  and 

similar trends on the active sites will be summarized for the three different catalysts. Based on this, 

further insights on the active site structure in Fe -N-C catalysts can be gained. 

Literature: 

[1] Debe, M. K. Nature, 486 (2012), 43−51. 

[2] Kramm, U.I. Dodelet, J. P. et al J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136 (2014), 978 -985. 

[3] Kramm, U. I. et al., Phys.  Chem.Chem.Phys. 14 (2012), 11673 -11688. 

[4] Zitolo, Andrea, et al. Nature materials 14.9 (2015), 937. 

[5] Wagner, Stepha n, et al. Angewandte Chemie International Edition (2019). Ion -transfer Voltammetry as a Powerful Tool in Electrochemical 

# Investigation of Biogenic Amines 

Konrad Rudnicki , Łukasz Półtorak, Paulina Borgul, Sławomira Skrzypek 

Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Lodz, Tamka 12, 91 -403 Lod z, Poland 

konrad.rudnicki@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

Electrochemistry at the liquid – liquid interface, or the interface between two immiscible 

electrolyte solutions (ITIES) gains more and more interest among scientists due to its wide range of 

applications inclu ding electrochemical sensing. Detection at ITIES is not dependent on oxidation or 

reduction processes (common in electroanalysis) and can ensue from a simple interfacial ion transfer 

reaction – truly unique property [1]. Biogenic amines (BA) are biological ly active compounds supplied to 

the human body together with food we consume. It was recognized that at elevated concentration (e.g. in 

some cases, 5 -10 mg of histamine can lead to human poisoning) th ese compounds are directly related to 

the health risks, from light to heavy intoxication or disorder of many metabolic processes. Their increased 

content in food products results from microbial decarboxylation of amino acids during fermentation, 

processing and storage of raw materials or endogenous enzymes acti vity contained in raw materials. 

Furthermore, the presence of increased concentrations of BA can be directly related to the food spoiling. 

Consequently, simple and cheap methodologies have to be develop to monitor these species at different 

stages of food storage and processing. 

Within this paper, the electrochemical behavior of selected BA at the ITIES has been studied 

using ion –transfer voltammetry (ITV). Voltammetric experiments were performed in the conventional 

four electrode macroscopic cell (macro -ITIES , see Fig. 1 ) using 10 mM HCl as a n aqueous phase while 

the organic phase was the solution of hydrophobic salt dissolved in 1 ,2-dichloroethane. The effect of 

concentration of the investigated BA on the analytical signal was studied. Based on obtained r esults 

analytical parameters such as: linear dynamic ranges (LDRs), limit of detections (LODs) and sensitivit ies 

were established . Furthermore, the effect of pH on the analytical signal was tested and the results are 

plotted in a form of ion partition diag rams. The precision and repeatability of the method were also 

checked. The obtained results showed that the elaborated procedure can be successfully apply for 

screening purposes. 

Fig. 1. Traditional macroscopic ITIES cell. 

Acknowledgments: K.R. acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Center (NCN) in 

Cracow, Poland (Grant no. UMO –2018/29/N/ST4/01054). 

[1] F. Reymond, D. Fermín, H. Jin Lee, H. H. Girault, Electrochemistry at liquid/liquid interfaces: 

methodology and potentia l applications , Electrochim. Acta 45 (2000) 2647 –2662. Development of a Sandwich Molecularly Imprinted Polymer Based 

# Sensor for Adenosine Detection 

Laura -Elena Gliga , Bogdan -Cezar Iacob, Ede Bodoki *, Radu Oprean 

“Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Analytical Chemistry Department, Louis 

Pasteur 4 street, 400349, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

*e-mail: bodokie @umfcluj.ro 

Abnormal concentrations of aden os ine , an endogenous purine with vital roles in all cells of the human 

system, represents a diagnostics marker of several metabolic disorders and diseases . The purpose of this 

study was to develop an innovative sandwich MIP -based electrochemical sensor for fast and reliable 

detection of adenosine in biological samples. 

A novel electropolymerized sandwich molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) was designed . The MIP film 

relies on the formation of covalent -imprinted biomimetic recognition sites generated by the overlapping of 

two polymeric layers . The first one is a boronate‐affinity bithiophene layer (consisti ng of 2,2΄ -bithiophene 

and a boronic acid functional monomer ) and an overlaying poly(3 -indolacetic acid) intended to extend the 

selectivity towards adenosine . The selective binding of adenosine is occurring by a double recognition 

mechanism (IF ~ 4.5) , both through functional (covalent and noncovalent) and spatial complementarity .

Indirect electrochemical detection is performed in the presence of ferro/ferricyanide as redox probe. 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry was employed for sensor 

characterization , whereas differential pulse voltammetry served for the quantitative determination of 

adenosine. The MIP based sensor can be used multiple times without significant loss in the signal intensity, 

exhibiting a linear response in t he range of 37.4 nM – 37.4 μM, with a LLOD of 21 nM in pH 7. 4 phosphate 

buffer solution. The selectivity of the MIP sensor towards adenosine against other nucleosides and other 

relevant structurally -related interferents was also demonstrated . The developed sensor was applied for the 

fast and quantitative assessment of adenosine in spiked urine samples with good recoveries (102.98% -

106.34%). 

This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Research and Innovation, CNCS - UEFISCDI, project 

number PN -III -P1 -1.1 -TE -2016 -0628, within PNCDI III and by European Social Found, Human Capital 

Operational Programme 2014 -2020, project no. POCU/380/6/13/125171. Electrochemical and computational study of the chiral interactions of 

# propranolol enantiomers at the surface of L -cystein e modified gold 

# nanoparticles 

Stoian Ioan – Adrian 1, Iacob Bogdan -Cezar 1, João P. Prates Ramalho 2, Iuliu O. Marian 3, Vasile Chiș 4,

Bodo ki Ede 1*, Oprean Radu 1 

> 1

Analytical Chemistry Department, “Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 4, Louis 

Pasteur St., 400349, Cluj -Napoca, Romania  

> 2

Departamento de Química, Centro de Química de Évora e Laboratório Hercules, Escola de Ciên cias e 

Tecnologia, Universidade de Évora, Portugal  

> 3

Research Center in Electrochemistry and Non -conventional Materials, Faculty of chemistry and 

chemical engineering, Babes -Bolyai University  

> 4

Department of Biomolecular Physics, Faculty of Physics, Babes -Bolyai University, 1, Kogalniceanu 

Street, 400084, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

*Correspondence:  bodokie@umfcluj.ro 

Gold nanoparticles are important components for biomedical application, offering unique 

optoelectronic an d catalytic properties. As such, they continue to attract considerable interest in 

electrocatalysis and in the design of chemo - and biosensors. Cysteine can be used to control the size and 

shape of chemically or electrochemically obtained gold nanoparticle s. By adding L -cysteine to the 

HAuCl 4 solution used fo r gold electro deposition , the number of nucleation sites and overall process 

kinetics are improve s without major changes in the purity of deposits. 

The present study aimed to investigate the enantiosel ective interaction of a model chiral drug 

molecule, propranolol at the surface of L-cys teine functionalized gold nanoparticles using 

electrochemical techniques ( differential pulse voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spec troscopy )

and computational mo de ling (molecular dynamics simulations) .

L-cysteine modified gold nanoparticles were potentiostatically ( -0.4V vs. Ag/AgCl, 3M KCl) 

electrodeposited on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode, followed by the spontaneous adsorption of 

propranolol’s enanti omers on the gold surface. The d ifferences in the differential pulse voltammetric 

behavior of the two physisorbed enantiomers was investigated in pH 7.0 phosphate buffer .

Computational modeling served for the identification of the main attractive force s responsible of 

the chiral molecular interaction s between the covalently bound L -amino acid and the enantiomer 

adsorbates . It was shown that t he R(+) antipode is involved in a significantly higher number of hydrogen 

bonding th an the S( -) antipode , being resp onsible of the recorded enantiospecific electrochemical signal .

Correlati ng electrochemical data with computational modeling allows a deeper understanding of 

fundamental molecular interactions occurring at the electroactive surface and may enable a more ra tional 

design of future chiral electrochemical sensing platforms. 

Acknowledgement: This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Research and Innovation, CNCS -

UEFISCDI, project number PN -III -P1 -1.1 -TE -2016 -0628, within PNCDI III and by European Social 

Found, Human Capital Operational Programme 2014 -2020, project no . POCU/380/6/13/125171. Development of alginate based hydrogel for supercapacitors 

# electrolytes 

Rafael José da Silva , Marcio Vidotti 

Universidade Federal do Parana 

Av. Cel. Francisco H. dos Santos, 100 - Jardim das Américas, Curitiba 

rafaelsilva@ufpr.br , mvidotti@ufpr.br 

The electric power generation industry increasingly seeks to replace energy matrices based on fossil fuels 

with more sustainable sources. The need to develop high performance devices, capable of storing the 

electricity generated by these alternative sources, arises in this context. An example of devices that can 

perform this function are supercapacitors, which combine the high energy density of batteries with the high 

power den sity of conventional capacitors [1] . Supercapacitors have attracted the attention of researchers 

mainly for their versatility, once their architecture can be diversified in distinct ways, which allows their 

use in different applications. An application that is growing in the energy storage field is flexible and 

wearable electronic devices. For the development of a supercapacitor, it is necessary to have an electrode 

and an electrolyte. The literature is rich in studies on materials and morphologies for elect rodes, however 

there are few studies on electrolytes, mostly on those capable of acting as electrolyte for solid devices [2] .

Thus, it is interesting to develop a material that can act as an electrolyte and also present adequate viscosity, 

allowing its use in solid and flexible devices. In this work, a hydrogel -type electrolyte was developed from 

sodium alginate, a natural polysaccharide with low toxicity and low environmental impact [3] . The 

hydrogels were prepared from different proportions of sodium algina te, nitric acid and calcium chloride, 

and were characterized by cyclic voltammetry. Later, they were applied to the assembly of a supercapacitor 

device that combined the gel electrolyte with electrodes modified by polyaniline. The device was subjected 

to g alvanostatic charge and discharge tests, for the evaluation of the device's specific capacitance. It was 

possible to establish proportions between the aforementioned reagents which allowed the charge to be 

transported, even with the expected diffusion limi tations for an electrolyte of this type. In addition, it was 

possible to build a supercapacitor device in the sandwich architecture. Hereafter it is expected to test this 

supercapacitor device in other architectures and use this electrolyte with others con ducting polymers 

electrodes. 

The ciclic voltammetry (a) of polyaniline electrodes in H 2SO 4 1 mol L -1 electrolyte in blue and hydrogel 

electrolyte in green and a picture (b) of the supercapacitor device. 

[1] Chem. Eng. J. 374, 1153 –1179 (2019) 

[2]  J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 25282 –25292 (2017). 

[3]  Biomaterials 111, 40 –54 (2016). Figure 1. H2/O 2 Fuel cells test with ETFE -AEM 

irradiated over dry ice. 

# Effect s of synthesis parameters on ETFE -based anion exchange 

# membranes and ionomers properties 

Ana Laura Gonçalves Biancolli , Andrey da Silva Barbosa, Bruno Pereira Lima, Elisabete Inácio Santiago 

Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Center at Nuclear and Energy Resear ch Institute – IPEN 

Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2242 - Butantã, São Paulo - SP, 05508 -000 - Brazil 

anabiancolli@hotmail.com 

To overcome several limitations of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells (PEMFCs), anion -exchange 

membranes (AEM) have been developed for application in anion -exchange membrane fuel cells 

(AEMFC)¹. This type of fuel cell can potentially reduce CO poisoning and allow for the possibility of 

using non -noble metal catalysts. Recent studies demonstrated very high performance for fuel cells 

co ntaining AEMs based on the radiation -grafting of vinylbenzyl chloride onto ETFE (ethylene -

tetrafluoroethylene) with a subsequent functionalization using either trimethylamine (TMA) or n-

methylpiperidine (MPRD)². In this work, anion exchange membranes (AEMs ) based on ETFE films were 

synthetized under different conditions. The films were irradiated by using an electron beam source at 

room temperature (RT) under air or N 2 atmospheres, and also over dry ice (air atmosphere). This study 

evaluated the effect of d ose rate and dose conditions on the grafting by vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) and 

subsequently amination step. The anion exchange ionomers (AEI) responsible for conducting ions in the 

catalyst layer in the fuel cell are also a very important component in AEMF Cs. These ETFE -AEIs, in 

powder form, as well as the membranes, were irradiated, grafted and functionalized by TMA. The 

literature presents two types of synthesis for ETFE -based AEIs: in isopropanol and in aqueous media. In 

the first³, the IEC of the AEI is around 1.2 mmol g -1, while in the second method² the IEC is around 2.0 

mmol g -1. However, despite this difference in IEC values, the fuel cell results are essentially the same. 

This is due probably to the fact that the synthesis 

in isopropanol provides sm aller powder particles 

(and larger surface area in the triple phase 

boundary) than in the case of synthesis based on 

aqueous media. A major disadvantage of 

isopropanol synthesis is that four times more 

VBC is needed than in water synthesis, and this 

reacta nt is extremely toxic. Thus, besides 

analyzing the irradiation parameters effects on 

AEMs, this work also investigated the ETFE -

AEIs synthesis, varying the medium, duration of 

the reaction and the irradiated dose. The aim was 

to combine smaller particle si zes with high IEC, 

low quantities of VBC and high final power 

density. AEMs synthesis results revealed that 

higher degree of grafting (DoG), as well as 

higher ion exchange capacities (IEC) , are obtained at higher irradiation doses. It is important to menti on 

that water absorption capacity follows exactly the same trend. Besides that, the switch from air to N 2

atmosphere during the irradiation process allowed higher DoGs for the same doses. For example, a 

membrane irradiated with 40 kGy under air normally re aches 60% of DoG after 16h of reaction, while the 

membrane irradiated at the same dose but under N 2 presented 82% of DoG after 16h and 63% after only 

4h of reaction. The membranes irradiated on the dry ice have also shown an improvement on the DoG 

compared to the traditional ones irradiated at RT . At 100 kGy dose, membranes prepared over dry ice 

have presented 142% of DoG while membrane obtained under air results in approximately 90% of DoG. 

This unprecedented improvement i n the way of irradiating ETFE film s will allow the synthesis of 

membranes with the same ion exchange capacity and conductivities with lower dose rates , resulting in 

mech anically more stable membranes. H2/O 2 single fuel cells tests with improved AEM and AEI showed 

a power density of the ord er of 1.13 W cm -2 (Fig. 1) , which corresponds to a similar performance to the 

corresponding state -of -the -art PEMFCs obtained under similar conditions. 

¹ Varcoe, J. R. et al . Energy and Environmental Science , 7, 3135 -3191 (2014); 

² Gonçalves Biancolli, A . L. et al . J. Mater. Chem. A , 6, 24330 –24341 (2018). 

³ Poynton, S. D. et al. J. Mater. Chem . A, 2, 5124 –5130 (2014). 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0     

> Current Density (A cm -2 )
> Fuel Cell potential (V)
> 0100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200
> ETFE-40-ICE-TMA
> Power Density (mW cm -2 )
> 1133 mW/cm 2
> Tcell = 60°C Tanode and cathode = 55°C Flows = 1 L min -1
> Anode: Pt-Ru/C, 0.5 mg Pt cm -2
> Cathode: Pt/C, 0.5 mg Pt cm -2

# High detection resolution of gas and liquid products using capillary 

# inlet DEMS setup for the CO2 reduction reaction    

> J. Ferreira de Araújo ,S. Renfrew , X. Wang, W. Ju, P. Strasser,
> Technische Universität Berlin, Str. des 17. Juni 124,10623 Berlin , German y
> jor ge. ferreira @tu -berlin.d e

# Rapid analytical assessment on the electrochemical CO 2 reduction reaction 

# (CO2RR) is fundamental for the understanding of reaction mechanism and 

# intermediates. A spe cial attention is given to the complexity of multiple gas 

# an d liquid products evolving during CO2RR. The current analytical 

# techniques are limited in terms of spatially resolved product sampling, 

# which hinders the detection of product intermediates as well as the 

# identification of reaction processes .

# In the current work, we present the assessment of products using a liquid 

# electrochemical cell coupled through a liquid loop interface with a high -

# resolution mass spectrometer (DEMS technique). 

# Up to now, DEMS measurement are done with the specific cell design that 

# res tricts the ideal reactions conditions . Moreover, there are only few reports 

# on kinetics onset potentials during CO2RR for Cu metal with ethylene 

# around −0.74 V RHE and methane around −0.9 VRHE and a lack of analytical 

# identification of intermediate products .

# The goals of this work are to discuss the merits of combining mass 

# spectrometer analysis with optimized electrochemistry operating 

# conditions, to describe the methodology for di rect cell DEMS measurement 

# and thus to stimulate further development on CO2RR . Also, we will 

# present, for the first time with DEMS, C3 oxygenates (propionaldehyde 

# and propanol) evolution accompanied with C3 hydrocarbons, such as 

# propane (m/z = 39,41,42), which are essential for the synthesis of cyclic 

# and economic fuel production. In this work, we examine the products of 

# CO2RR on copper metal catalysts and compare them for different pre -

# treatment conditions. For further validation of the catalys t activity 

# assessment, we present our methodology using isotope -labeling .

# The capillary inlet DEMS setup is a patented technology that will soon be 

# commercially available at LiquidLoop, a TU Berlin Spinoff. A Statistical Design Approach for Impedance Spectroscopy of Li -ion 

# Battery 

Salim Erol 1,2 and Ugur Morali 2

> 1

College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle East, Kuwait 

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering, Eskisehir Osmangazi Unive rsity, Turkey 

Salim.Erol@aum.edu.kw 

Energy storage systems face challenges regarding safety and performance since they can operate under 

different conditions. In this sense, m ultiple factors can affect the perf ormance of Li -ion batterie s. Cell 

potential and t emperature are considered major factors among them . Robust development of energy 

storage device s requires a deep understanding of the relationship between the operation conditions and 

electrochemical feature s. The influences of cell potential and temperature on battery parameters of 

commercially available LiNiMnCoO 2/graphite coin cells were statistically investigated and discussed by 

using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy combined with the Taguchi metho d. The experimental 

design provides a combination of measurements that enables fast and reliable results and detailed 

analyses. The experiment s based on the experimental design minimize the adverse and unavoidable 

effects that can be defined as noises in t he design terminology and increases confidence level for the 

results. 

The Taguchi design of experiment was applied to interpret the influence of factors on the regressed 

elements of the developed equivalent circuit model. The synergistic effects of the b attery potential and 

temperatu re on the response variables were monitored based on the statistical analysis. The factor 

dependency of the fitting parameters obtained from impedance response of the battery is presented in 

detail by a variance analysis as we ll as the response table. 

The results showed that the sustainable Li -ion battery can be optimized in terms of battery dynamics by 

selecting the optimum temperature and potential obtained in this study . Temperature was determined to 

more significant factor compared to cell potential , suggesting that this factor should be select ed carefully 

when the battery dynamics is desired to be optimized. This approach is suggested to be applied for 

different types chemistry and geometry of batteries. The results of the Taguchi design method combined 

with the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy would pave an effective way for the researchers 

improving the battery management systems in real applications. Lithium –matrix Composite Anode Protected by a Solid Electrolyte 

# Layer for Stable Lithium Metal Batteries 

Xin Shen 1, Xin -Bing Cheng 1, Peng Shi 1, Jia -Qi Huang 2,*, Xue -Qiang Zhang 1, Chong Yan 2, Tao Li 1, and 

Qiang Zhang 1, *

> 1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Ch emical Reaction Engineering and Technology Department of 

Chemica l Eng ineering Tsinghua University Beijing 100 084, China 

> 2

Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 10 0 

081, China 

jqhuang@bit.edu.cn 

zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Lithium (Li) metal with an ultrahigh specific theoretical capacity and the lowest reduction potential is 

strongly considered a promising anode for high -energy -density batter ies. However, uncontrolled lithium 

dendrites and infinite volume change during repeated plating/striping cycles hinder its practical 

applications immensely. Herein, a house -like Li anode (housed Li) was designed to circumvent the above 

issues (Figure 1)1. The house ma trix was composed of carbon fiber mat rix and affords a stable structure to 

relieve the volume change. An artificial solid electrolyte layer was formed on composite Li metal, just 

like the roof of a house, which facilitates uniform Li ions diffusion and ser ves as a physical barrier against 

ele ctrolyte corrosion. With the combination of solid electrolyte layer and matrix in the composite Li metal 

anode, both dendrite growth and volume expansion are remarkably inhibited. The housed Li | LiFePO4 

batteries exhib ited over 95% capacity retention afte r 500 cycles at 1.0 C in coin cell and 85% capacity 

retention after 80 cycles at 0.5 C in pouch cell. The rationally combination of solid electrolyte layer 

protection and housed framework in one Li metal anode sheds fre sh insights on the design principle o f a 

safe and long -lifespan Li metal anode for Li metal batteries. 

Figure 1. Schematics of morphology evolution on (a) bare Li and (b) housed Li during stripping/platin g

cycles. 

Reference 

1. Shen, X.; Cheng, X. B.; Shi, P.; Hu ang, J. Q.; Zhang, X. Q.; Yan, C.; Li, T.; Zhang, Q. J Energy Chem 

2019, 37, 29 -34. Effect of Process Parameters on Energy Consumption in 

# Electrochemical Treatment of Textile Dyeing Wastewate r Containing 

# Reactive Violet 5 using Pt/Ir Electrodes 

Bahad ir K. K örbahti , K. Meltem Özdemir 

Mersin University 

Faculty of Engineering, Chemical Engi neering Dept., Çiftlikköy 33343 Mersin, Turkey 

korbahti@mersin.edu.tr, korbahti@gma il.com 

The effect of process parameters was investigated on electrochemical treatment of textile dyeing 

wastewater containing Reactive Violet 5 (RV5 ) using Pt/ Ir electrodes in the presence of 

75%NaCl+25%Na 2CO 3 (w/w) supporting electrolyte mixt ure in a batch electrochemical reactor. Ef fect of 

process parameters were operated in the range o f 300 -1500 mg/L textile dye concentration, 4-20 g/L 

electrolyte concentr ation, 5-15 mA/c m2 current density, and 2 0-60 C reaction temperature in 12 0 min 

electrolysis time . Decolorization yield was analyzed using UNICO 4802 model UV/Vis double beam 

spectrophotometer at 520 nm wavelength . Merck Spectroquant COD cell tests used fo r the COD analys is. 

Energy consumption for dye decolorization was obtained as much lower than COD removal due to the 

degradation of azo bo nd is the first step of the electrochemical degradation of the textile dyes . The e nergy 

consumption decreased with increasing textile dye concentration , electrolyte c oncentration and reaction 

temperature , while decreasing the current density. In the study, energy consumption values were 

evaluated for textile dye dec olorization (t=15 min) and COD removal (t=120 min) as 3.8-23. 5 kWh/kg 

dye decolor ization and 64 .7-321 .1 kWh/ kg COD removal , respectively. 

Table 1. Effect of process parameters on energy consumption in electrochemical treatment of textile 

dyeing wastewate r containing Reactive Violet 5 (RV5) using Pt/ Ir electrodes 

Paramet er  Pr ocess Conditions  ED (kWh/kg dye 

decolor ization )

(t = 15 min) 

ECOD (kWh/kg COD 

remov al )

(t = 120 min) 

Textile dye concentration  300 -1500 mg/L 

(J=10 mA/cm 2, T=40 °C,

electrolyte=12 g/L )

7. 4 - 22.2  100.6 - 314.7 

Electrolyte concentration  4-20 g/ L

(J=10 mA /cm 2, T=40 °C,

RV5 =900 mg/L )

6. 4 - 20. 4 111. 4 - 321. 1

Current density  5-15 mA/cm 2

(RV5 =900 mg/L, T=40 °C,

electrolyte=12 g/L )

3. 8 - 15. 1 64.7 - 275. 6

Reaction tempera ture  20 -60 °C

(J=10 mA/cm 2, RV 5=900 

mg/L, electrolyte=12 g/L 

6. 8 - 10. 1 134.1 - 139.6 

Acknowledgement : This project was supported by Mersin University Scientifi c Research Projects Center 

(MEÜ BAP) with Grant No. 2015 -TP2 -1037 .Interactions of plasmid DNA with new prospective antibacterial drugs: 

# Comparison with anticancer drug s

Hanna Elzanowska 1, Dominika Janiszek 1, Monika M. Karpinska 2, Andrzej Niewiadomy 2 Agnieszka 

Girstun 3, Magdalena Maj -Zurawska 1, Pawel J. Kulesza 1

> 1

Unive rsity of Warsaw, Faculty of Chemistry, Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland 

> 2

Institute Łukasiewicz Research Network: Institute of Industrial Organic Chemistry, 

Annopol 6, 03 -236 Warsaw, Poland 

> 3

University of Warsaw, Faculty of Biology, Miecznikowa 1, 02 -096 Warsaw, Poland 

e-mail: helzan @chem.uw.edu.pl 

Anticancer drugs such as da unorubicin and doxorubici n, except for their interactions with DNA [1, 2], are 

known to possess antibacterial properties. Moreover, some other antibacterial substances like levofloxacin 

[3], or nitrofurantoin [4 ], also interact with DNA. Question is therefore whether th e electrochemical 

properties of new prospective antibacterial drugs might interact with DNA in a similar, or maybe in a 

different way than th e anticancer drugs ?

We have earlier studied the electrochemical properties of a new prospective anticancer drug 4-chlo ro -6-

(1 H-imidazo[4,5 -b]phenasine -2-yl)benzene -1,3 -diol (Cl -IPBD ) in terms of its interactions with DNA [5, 

6], using DP voltammetry to show the redox properties and ACV method to detect accumulation of the 

Cl -IPBD on the Glassy Carbon electrode (GCE) in terms of redox properties as well as 

capacitative/resistive properties. Similar strategy we are using now to study the properties of two, new 

prospective antibacterial drugs : 6-tert -butyl -2-(2,4 -dihydroksyfenylo) -4H -tieno[3,2 -d][1,3]tiazyn -4-on 

(TDTT), 5-(2,4 -dihydroksyfenylo) -1-metylo -3-propylopirazolo[4,3 -d][1,3]tiazyno -7(1H) -on (DMPT) .

The difference in the conditions of the current experiments is however in the pH used. For the anticancer 

drug s, we have used pH 4.7, the pH often regarded as more sui tabl e for the study of their cancer 

properties. This time, to obtain proper solubility of the prospective antibacterial substances, we used pH 7 

to study the antibacterial drugs. For the sake of comparison, we have also tested the prospective 

anticancer dr ug Cl-IPBD at pH 7. 

References: 

1. A. H. J. Wang, G. Ughetto, G. J. Quigley, A. Rich, Interactions between an Anthracycline 

Antibiotic and DNA: Molecular Structure of Daunomycin Complexed to d( CpGpTpApCpG) at 

1.2 -Å Resolution, Biochemistry 26 (1987) 1152 -1163. 

2. A. Palinska‐Saadi, M. Lukasiewicz, J. Oszczapowicz, M. Lukawska, I. Oszczapowicz, E. 

Zwierkowska, S. Achmatowicz, M. Maj‐Zurawska, Voltammetric and Spectrophotometric 

Studies on DNA Interacting with Daunorubicin and its Amidino Derivatives , Electroanalysis 2 9

(2016) 172 -181. 

3. A. Radi, M. A. El Ries, S. Kandil, Electrochemical study of the interaction of levofloxacin with 

DNA, Analytica Chimica Acta 495 (2003) 61 –67 

4. M.L. Yola , N. Özaltın , Electrochemical studies on the interaction of an antibacterial drug 

nitr of urantoin with DNA , Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 653 (2011) 56 -60. 

5. D. Janiszek, M. Karpinska, A. Niewiadomy, A. Girstun, H. Elzanowska, M. Maj -Zurawska, P. 

Kulesza, Nucleic Acid -Drug Interactions: An Electrochemical Approach, in: Extended 

Abstra ct s, 3rd International Work -Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, 

2015, Granada, Spain, April 15 -17, Editorial Copicentro S.L., pp.77 -82. 

6. D. Janiszek, M. Karpinska, A. Niewiadomy, A. Girstun, H. Elzanowska, M. Maj -Zurawska, P.J. 

Kulesza, Phase Transition Detection in Accumulation of a Potential Anticancer Drug Cl -IPBD 

with DNA: Supercoiled and Linear pUC19 Plasmids, Electrochimica Acta 210 (2016) 422 -434. Comparison of Electrochemical Degradation Kinetics of Imidacloprid 

# and Abamectin Pesticides in Aqueous Med ium using Boron -Doped 

# Diamond Electrodes 

Bahad ir K. K örbahti , M. Ceyhun Erdem 

Mersin University 

Faculty of Engineering, Chemical Engineering Dept. , Ç iftlikköy 33343 Mersin, Turkey 

korbahti@mersin.edu.tr, korbahti@gma il.com 

Electrochemical degradation of imidacloprid (IMD ) and abamectin (ABA) pestici des were investigated 

using boron -doped diamond (BDD) electrodes in a batch electrochemical reactor. Rea ction conditions 

were operated a t 40-200 mg/L initial IMD concentration (COD IMD, o=140 -385 mg/L ), 2-10 mg/L initial 

ABA concentration (COD ABA,o =125 -865 mg/L ), 2-10 g/L suppor ting electrolyte (Na 2SO 4), 4-20 mA/cm 2

current density, and 2 0-60 C re action temper ature at 120 min reaction time . Merck Spectroquant COD 

cell tests used for the COD analysis . Process optimization was accomplished with response surface 

methodology in CCD designed experiments using Design -Exp ert 12 software in order to determ ine the 

effec t of independent factors on COD reduction along with the experimental conditions. The o ptim um 

operating conditions under specified constraints were obtained for the highest desi rability as outlined in 

Table 1. 

Table 1. Optim um operating conditions for ele ctrochem ical degradation of imidacloprid and abamectin 

pesticides in aqueous medium using BDD anode 

Parameter  Imidacloprid  Abamectin 

In itial concentration  100 mg/L  5 mg/L 

Na 2SO 4 concentration  4.4 g/L  6.4 g/L 

Current de nsity  8.6 mA/cm 2 11 .8 mA/cm 2

Reac tion temperatur e 60 C 60 C

In a batch electrochemical reactor, the overall electrochemic al conversion rate of pollutants was 

expressed based on COD conc entration . Reaction kinetics w ere determined by the method of initial rates, 

and specific reaction rat e constant s (k) were obtained using Arrhenius equation. The reaction kinetic 

parameters for electrochemical degradation of imidacloprid and abamectin pestici des in aqueous medium 

using boron -doped diamond anode were evaluated under response surface optimiz ed co nditions and given 

in Table 2. The reaction order of the electrochemical degradation of both pestici des were determined as 1 .

The activation energy (Ea) depends on the natu re of the reaction, and fast reactions genera lly have small 

Ea values. It is kn own that the activation energy for a diffusion -controlled homogeneous reaction is <40 

kJ/mol .

Table 2. Reaction kinetic parameters for electrochemical degradation of imidacloprid and abamectin 

pestici des in aqueous med ium usi ng BDD anode 

Parameter  Imidac loprid  Abamectin 

Reaction orde r ( n) 1 1

Activation energy ( Ea) 5.29 kJ/mol  9.28 kJ/mol 

Reaction rate constant ( k) 0.0105 min -1 0.010 0 min -1

Frequency factor ( ko) 0.089 min -1 0.624 min -1

Acknowledgement : This project was supported by Me rsin University Scientific Researc h Projects Center 

(MEÜ BAP) with Grant No. 2016 -1-TP2 -1393 .Photocatalytic Activity of Electrochemically Prepared Orthorhombic 

# MoO 3

Nena Velinov , Milica Petrović, Slobodan Najdanović , Miloš Kostić, Miljana Radović Vučić , Danijela 

Bojić, Aleksandar Bojić 

University of Niš, Faculty of Sciences and Mathematics, Depar tment of Chemistry 

Višegradska 33, 18000 Niš, Serbia 

nena.velinov @yahoo .com 

UV -photodegradation process can remove many organics that can not be removed from wate r by 

conventional treatments due to their chemical stability. Removal is based on oxidation via hydroxyl 

radical, •OH, strong oxidant produced by UV radiation. There are many attempts to catalyze the 

oxidation , commonly using certain oxides [1 ]. MoO 3 has many important applications, like in 

electrochromic devices and Li -ion batteries [4, 7] , but it was also used as catalyst in some reactions [2, 3] ;

its crystal structure, activity and other properties depend on the synthesis conditions, thus several 

synthetic procedures are used, mostly hydrothermal [2, 3]. Electrochemical procedure was also appli ed 

due to its numerous advantages [4, 5]. In this work, MoO 3 is synthesized by galvanostatic 

electrodeposition, f ollowed by thermal treatment, and used as a catalyst in UV -degradat ion of a dye 

Reactive Orange 16 (RO 16). 

Electrodeposition was done in 0.05 M solution of (NH 4)6Mo 7O24 ·4H 2O at pH 6.0 in two -electrode cell on 

Ti substrate (cathode) at a current density of 10 mA cm -2 during 90 minutes. Deposited material was 

peeled off, dried, and thermally treated in air at 600°C for 90 minutes. Cyclic voltammog ram of Ti 

substrate in deposition solution was recorded in three -electrode cell using SCE as a reference electrode. 

The same electrode setup was used for cyclic voltammetric determination of the material band gap. The 

obtained material was examined by  SEM, EDX, XRD and FTIR.  Dye degradation was performed using 

the obtained material (500 mg dm -3) in UV chamber at 254 nm and  1950 μW cm –2.

Cyclic voltammogram contains broad cathodic peak which originates from irreversible molybdate 

reduction. SEM revealed mic ro -crystalline, mostly rod -like morphology. EDX showed the Mo:O atomic 

ratio % of 19.9: 80.1, which is close to the elements ration in MoO 3 with little higher O -content. XRD 

revealed well crystalline α -MoO 3 (orthorhombic space group 62:Pnma, parameters a =13.84, b = 3.69 0

and c = 3.96 ; angles α = β = γ = 90 .0° and V = 202.33 Å3). FTIR spectra contain bands between 490 and 

990 cm -1, typical for α-MoO 3, but there is evidence of the traces of some other MoO 3 phase, most likely 

h-MoO 3 [6 ]. The calculated band gap is 3.23 eV. 

RO 16 is stable to UV radiation under the applied conditions, and it is not adsorbed by synthesized MoO 3.

When exposed to UV radiation in the presence of MoO 3 catalyst, a series of RO 16 solution s ranging 

from 10 to 50 mg dm -3 was complet ely decolorized . Reaction takes place via •OH radicals, generated at 

the catalyst surface excitated UV radiation. Decolorization time increased with the increase of initial dye 

concentration, being about 120 minutes for the highest one. Decolorization reactions follow the pseudo -

first order kinetics. Catalyst activity was 95% of its initial after 5 consecutive uses. 

Acknowledgement 

The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Education, Scienc e and 

Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Agreement No 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200124) 

References 

(1) Šima, J; Hasal, P.  Chem. Eng. Trans . 2013 , 32, 79 -84. 

(2) Tang, B; Du, J; Feng, Q, Zhang, J; Wu, D; Jiang, X; Dai, Y; Zou, J. J. Colloid Inter face Sci . 2018 ,

517, 28 –39. 

(3) Xi, Q; Liu, J; Wu, Z; Bi, H; Li, Z; Zhu, K; Zhuang, J; Chen, J; Lu, S; Huang, Y; Qian , G. Appl. Surf. 

Sci . 2019 , 480, 427 –437. 

(4) McEvoy, T.M; Stevenson, K.J. Langmuir , 2003 , 19, 4316 -4326 

(5) Zhao, G; Zhang, N; Sun , K. J. Mater. Chem . 2013 , 2, 221 – 224 

(6 ) Wongkrua, P; Thongtem, T; Thongtem , S. J. Nanomater . 2013 , 79 -86. One Step Electrochemical Synthesis, Characterization and Plasma 

# Catalytic Activity of Molybdenum Zinc Oxide 

Milica Petrović , Slobodan Najdanović, Nena Velinov, Jelena Motrović, Miljana Radović Vučić , Danijela 

Bojić , Aleksandar Bojić 

University of Niš, Fa culty of Sciences and Mathematics, Department of Chemistry 

Višegradska 33, 18000 Niš, Serbia 

milicabor84@gmail.com 

Zinc molybdates have some important applications, like supercapacitor, electronic, optical devices 

technology and catalysis , so several syn thesis procedures have been developed, including coprecipitation, 

various types of hydrothermal procedures or electrochemistry – assisted laser ablation , which affects their 

chemical composition, crystal structure and activity [1 -5]. Advanced oxidation pro cesses, including 

plasma, are developed in order to degrade organic compounds which are difficult to remove by 

conventional procedures. Organics are successfully degraded b y plasma, however, there are recent 

attempts to enhance this process by application of catalysts [6]. In this paper, molybdenum zinc oxide was 

synthesized by electrochemical procedure, and applied as a catalyst in plasma degradation of a dye 

reactive Orange 4 for the first time, to the best of our knowledge. 

Synthesis was done in two -com partment electrochemical cell by electrodeposition at Ti cathode in the 

solution containing 0.01 M (NH 4)6Mo 7O24 and 0.1M ZnSO 4 at constant current density of 10mA cm -1

during 120 minutes. Cyclic voltammetry was performed in the same solution in three compa rtment cell 

using SCE as reference electrode. Material was peeled off the cathode and characterized by SEM . EDX 

and XRD . Plasma dye degradation was performed by the self -made atmospheric pressure non -thermal 

plasma open reactor system, based on positive pu lsating corona electrical discharge . The multipoint 

anode was placed above the liquid surface, which acted as a cathode. The corona discharge was created in 

the gas phase between them . All experiments were done at 40 kHz and current density of 9.15 μA/cm 2

[7]. Catalyst concentration was 50 mg dm -3.Cyclic voltammogram showed broad cathodic peak which 

originates from co -deposition of Zn (II) and molybdate ions. SEM analysis showed flaky morphology, 

with particles of undefined shapes and size varying from 1 to more than 20 μm. EDX showed the 

presence of Zn, Mo and O with non - uniform distribution and average atomic ratio: 16.77: 8.91: 74.32%, 

respectively , w hich close their ratio in Zn 5Mo 2O11 5H 2O. XRD revealed that the synthesized material is 

composed of mostly rhombohedral Zn 5Mo 2O11 5H 2O, which was obtained at the cathode by co -deposition 

of Zn (II) species and molybdate. Some minor presence of metallic Zn, as well as some amorphous phase, 

most likely amorphous Zn 5Mo 2O11 5H 2O was also detected. Dye was complete ly degraded by plasma 

treatment. Total decolorization time was lower by about 50% in the presence of catalyst in the dye initial 

concentration range from 5 to 40 mg dm -3. Decolorization proceeds via hydroxyl radical, •OH, which is 

generated by decompositi on of plasma -generated H 2O2 [7 ].The catalyst enhances generation of •OH from 

H2O2. Degradation reactions follow the pseudo -first order kinetics. After five consecutive uses, the 

catalyst kept about 94% of its initial activity. 

Acknowledgement 

The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Education, Science and 

Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Agreement No 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200124) 

References 

(1) Reddi, B; Vickraman, P; Justin, SA. Bull.Mater. Sci , 2019 , 4 2-52 

(2) Keereeta, Y; Thongtem, T; Thongtem, S. Superlattice Microst , 2014 , 69, 253 -264. 

(3) Jiang, Y; Lee, WW; Chen, K; Wang, M; Chang, K; Chen, C. J.Taiwan. Inst. Chem. Eng , 2014 , 45, 

207 -218 

(4) Rajakumaran, R; Abinaya, M; Chen, S; Balamurugan, K; Muthu raj, V. Ultrason. Sonochem , 2020 , 61, 

104823 

(5) Liang, Y: Liu, P; Li,H .B; Yang, G.W. Cryst. Growth Des , 2012 , 12, 4487−4493 

(6 ) M.R. Ghezzar, MR; Abdelmalek, F; Belhadj, M; Benderdouche , N; Addou, A. J. Hazard. 

Mater . 2009 , 164, 1266 –1274 

(7 ) Rančev, S; Petrović, M; Radivojević, D; Bojić, A; Maluckov , Č; Radović , M. Plasma  Sci . Technol .

2019 , 21 , 125501 .Structural stability of K and Nb co -doping Li 1.167 Mn 0.583 Ni 0.25 O2

# cathode material on enhanced rate and cycling performance 

Gang Yang , Cong Liu, Yuhong Li, Hongmei Ji, 

Jiangsu Lab of Advanced Functional Material, School of Materials Engineering, Changshu Institute of 

Technology, Changshu, 215500, P. R. China 

gyang@cslg.edu.cn 

The Li 1.167 -xKxMn 0.583 -yNi 0.25 -yNb 2y O2 (x = 0, 0.05 and 2y = 0, 0.01) samples are successfully prepared 

through ball mill and high -temperature treatment. The impact of K + and/or Nb 5+ doping on the crystal 

structure, particle morphology and electrochemical properties of samples are investigated . The XRD 

patterns demonstrate that K+ and/or Nb 5+ doping does not significantly change the structure of 

Li 1.167 Mn 0.583 Ni 0.25 O2. Tiny changes in the lattice parameters of all samples indicate that K + and/or Nb 5+ 

are successfully doped into the sample. The K + doping can expand the Li + diffusion channel and inhibit 

the transition of the layered structure to the spinel structure, and thus improve the cycleability and rate 

performance. The Nb 5+ doping significantly improve the discharge specific capacity of the materials, but 

the single Nb 5+ doping is not conducive to the cycling stability of the material. At 2C rate in a half cell, 

the bare LMN sample delivers capacity of 123.9 and 32.1 mAh g -1 at the 1 st and 300 th cycle, but the K+

and/or Nb 5+ doping significant the capacities, 141.9 and 110.2 mAh g -1 for LMN -K, 161.1 and 110.1 mAh 

g-1 for LMN -Nb, 162.5 and 140.6 mAh g -1 for LMN -K/Nb. In the full cell , the LMN -K/Nb sample also 

delivers the highest discharge capacities than the bare LMN and the single elemental doping samples. In 

addition, the XRD, SEM and XPS analysis of the positive and negative electrodes taken out from the full 

cell after cycling sh ow that the crystal structure is effectively stabilized by the K + and Nb 5+ co -doping, 

and the side reactions of the electrode and electrolyte are suppressed during the long cycle. These results 

demonstrated that the K + and Nb 5+ co -doping are feasible strat egies to enhance the performance of Li -rich 

layered cathode materials. 

References: 

[1] R.N. Ramesha, C.P. Laisa, K. Ramesha, Electrochim. Acta 249 (2017) 377 -386 .

[2] H.F. Zheng, Z.Y. Hu, P.F. Liu, et al. Energy Storage Mater. 25 (2020) 76 -85. 

Fig. 3 The 1st charge/discharge curves (a), the 

cycling performances of samples at 0.1 C (b), 2 C 

(c), 5 C ( d) and 10 C (e) rates. 

Fig. 2 The d Q/d V profiles of LMN (a), LMN -K (b), 

LMN -Nb (c) and LMN -K/Nb samples (d) at 0.1 C. 

Fig. 1 XPS spectra K 2p (a) and Nb 3d (b) observed in 

the LMN, LMN -K, LMN -Nb and LMN -K/Nb samples. 1-Hydroxyethylidene -1,1 -diphosphonic acid as a corrosion inhibitor of 

# AISI 304 stainless steel 

Juliana Panceri Franco, Josimar Ribeiro 

Laboratório de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento em Eletroquímica, Departamento de Química do Centro de 

Ciências Exatas da Uni versidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Av.: Fernando Ferrari, 514, Goiabeiras, 

Vitória, Espírito Santo, CEP.: 29075 -910, Brazil 

josimar.ribeiro@ufes.br 

The novelty of this work is the analysis in a medium containing sulfide ion due to the generation of thi s

ion in petroleum industries, in the refining stage (the sulfide ion is also present on the produced water)[1]. 

The performance of 1 -hydroxyethylidene -1,1 -diphosphonic acid inhibitor (HEDP) was investigated by 

potentiodynamic polarization, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and weight loss measurements in 

a dissolution of AISI 304 stainless steel immersed in a solution containing chloride and sulfide ions. The 

protection of the stainless was increased with the addition of divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Zn 2+ , and Mg 2+ ). 

Potentiodynamic polarization studies have shown that the inhibitor alone has anodic protection, but the 

addition of Ca 2+ (10 mg L -1) favors the cathodic protection, and the addition of Zn 2+ (20 mg L -1) and Mg 2+ 

(10 mg L -1) mixed -type is observe d. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was performed at three 

distinct potentials: -0.3 [V vs. SCE], Ecorr [V vs. SCE], and 0.1 [V vs. SCE] (see Fig. 1 ). This revealed 

that calcium is responsible for favoring the formation of the film and the other elem ents (zinc and 

magnesium) favor the stabilization of the protective film. Scanning electron microscopy analysis revealed 

that the addition of cations provided the adsorption of HEDP on the metal surface. Weight loss results 

showed that the presence of zinc in a solution containing HEDP favored greater inhibitor efficiency (Zn 2+ 

ηm = 85.2% and for Mg 2+ ηm = 70.4%) [2]. 

Figure 1. SEM image, EDS analysis, EIS data, and potentiodynamic polarization studies. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowle dge Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico 

(CNPq), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and Fundação de 

Amparo à Pesquisa e Inovação do Espirito Santo (FAPES) for providing financial support. 

Referenc es 

[1] Fakhru'l -Razi, A., Pendashteh, A., Abdullah, L. C., Biak, D. R., Madaeni, S. S., and Abidin, Z. Z. 

(2009) Journal of hazardous materials, 170, 530 –551. 

[2] Franco, J. P., Ribeiro, J. (2020) Advances in Chemical Eng. Science, in press .Selective electroextraction of copper from aqueous leaching solutions 

# obtained during the recycling of waste printed circuit boards using the 

# KBr + HBr system 

Marian Iosif Frîncu 1, Sorin Aurel Dorneanu 1,2 , Simona Varvara 3, Petru Ilea 1,2 

> 1

Babeş -Bolyai University, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Department of Chemical 

Engineering, 11 Arany Janos Street, Cluj Napoca, RO -400028, Romania 

> 2

Babeş -Bolyai University, Interdisciplinary Research Institute on Bio Nano Sciences, 42 Treboniu 

Laurian Street, Cluj Napoca, RO -400271, Romania 

> 3

”1 December 1918” University, Faculty of Exact Sciences and Engineering, Department of 

Environmental Engineering, 5 Gabriel Bethlen, Alba -Iulia, RO -510009, Romania 

frincu.marian23@gmail.com 

The rapid development of technology and the short life of electrical and electronic equipment has resulted 

in the production of a large amount of waste electrical and electronic equi pment (WEEE), with a production 

rate of two to three times higher than other urban waste [1] . The recycling process of WEEE also plays a 

vital role in the management of the cumulative waste from the electronics industry [2]. For all the electronic 

devices, the printed circuit boards are the most valuable items [3]. The ir recycling can be fulfilled by using 

electrochemical processes which have high environmental compatibility, high energy efficiency and can be 

performed with minimal involvement of auxiliary materials. As a result, the recovery of metals from waste 

printed circuit boards (WPCB) by using electrochemical methods can reduce the rea gent consumption and 

allows to recuperate the valuable metals without or with less loss [ 4]. 

For the selective electroextraction of copper from the leaching solutions obtained during the recycling of 

WPCB, in this work , cyclic voltammetry (CV ) and selective electrodeposition of Cu in galvanostatic mode 

were performed . The cathodic support material was stainless steel 316 .

For the beginning, measurements were performed on synthetic electrolyte solutions (SES ) similar to the 

real samples (RS ). SES contain KBr + HBr as supporting electrolyt e background and different 

concentrations of CuBr 2 and / or SnBr 2 and PbBr 2, respectively. CV tests demonstrated the possibility of 

selective electroextraction of Cu if the electrode polarisation is more positive than the electrodeposition 

potential of Sn and Pb. 

Selective electroextraction of copper from RS occurs if the Cu concentration in solut ion at least as 12 g/L 

is maintained. Selective electrodeposition of Cu is possible in a wide range of current densities, between 

200 and 600 A/m 2. Under these conditions, the purity of Cu obtained deposits can exceed 99.6%. 

References 

[1] Akbari S., Ahmad A. , Chemical Engineering & Processing: Process Intensification , 2019 , 142 , 1-8.

[2] Ghosh S., Thin Solid Films, 2019 , 669 , 641 –658. 

[3] El -Nasr R. S., Abdelbasir S.M., Kamel A. H., Hassan S.S.M. , Separation and Purification Technology, 

2020 , 230 , 1-11 .

[4] Dorneanu S.A., Avram A.A., Marincaş A. H., Cotolan N., Frenţiu T., Ilea P. , Studia University 

“Babeş -Bolyai”, Seria Chimia , 2018 , LXIII, 4, 147 -158 .Study of electrodeposition parameters on the synthesis and 

# photovoltaic response of kesterite solar cells 

G. Perelstein a, Y. Sánchez b, F. Oliva b, V. Izquierdo b, A. Perez b,c , E. Saucedo b and M. Valdés a

> a

Electroquímica Aplicada, Instituto de Investigacio nes en Ciencia y Tecnología de Materiales (INTEMA), 

CONICET -Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Av. Colón 10850, B7606BWV Mar del Plata, 

Argentina.  

> b

L’Institut de Recerca en Energia de Catalunya (IREC), Jardins de les Dones de Negre 1, 08930 Sant 

Adrià del Besòs -Barcelona, Spain.  

> c

IN2UB , Universitat de Barcelona, C.Martí i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

mvaldes@fi.mdp.edu.ar 

Electrodeposition is one of the most attractive techniques for the synthesis of thin films chalcogenides for 

photovoltaic applications, in particular for earth abundant kesterite. In this work, the influence of core 

parameters of this technique, such as the applied potential and deposition time, on the chemical 

composition of co -depo sited Cu -Zn -Sn precursors is studied. Indeed, how the precursor composition 

affects the final composition of Cu 2ZnSnSe 4 after reactive annealing in Se atmosphere is also 

investigated, not only at the film level but also in solar cell devices. X -ray based t echniques (XRF and 

XRD) reveal that the chemical and phase composition of electrodeposited precursors is highly sensitive to 

small modifications (25 mV) of the applied potential during electrodeposition. Only when the applied 

potential is -1.2 V (vs. Ag /A gCl) the precursor composition matches to what is required for operating 

devices. Multi -wavelength Raman spectroscopy of selenized precursors confirms that lower potential than 

-1.2 V favor the formation of Sn -rich secondary and ternary compounds after sel enization, while a higher 

overpotential led to the formation of ZnSe in the film. On the other hand, the use of longer deposition 

times enhance the incorporation of zinc in the film, modifies the morphology of the precursor and 

promotes the formation ZnSe after selenization. Photovoltaic devices were only obtained at an 

electrodeposition potential of -1.2 V, and reaching a maximum efficiency close to 5% for a 10 minute 

electrodeposited CZT precursor. Ternary PtCuSn Catalyst for Oxy gen Reduction Reaction in Proton 

# Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells 

Dae Jong You *, Yun Sik kang, Eunyoung You 

Fuel cell engineering Team, Hyundai Mobis co. LTD. 

Yongin 16891, Republic of Korea 

daejong73@m obis.co.kr *

In fuel cell s, Platinum (Pt) and its alloys have been widely used as the best electro -catalysts for the 

oxygen reduction reaction ( ORR ) owing to its intrinsic catalytic activity and stability, but its high price 

and scarcity limit among many major technical barriers o f proton exchange membrane fuel cells 

(PEMFC s) still need s to be overcome in the development of electro chemical catalysts for widespread 

commercialization of PEMFC s [1]. In response to these issues , many researchers have been exploring 

novel catalyst with superior ORR activity that can effectively lessen the dependence on noble metal Pt in 

order to reduce the cost of fuel cell s [2]. 

In this study, Platinum –Copper -Tin (PtCuSn ) catalysts supported on carbon ( XC -72R, cabot ) were 

investigated as a cathode catal yst for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in proton exchange membrane 

fuel cell s ( PEMFCs). The PtCuSn catalyst was synthesized via a modified polyol process in teflon -sealed 

reactor by microwave -heating. From X -ray diffraction and transmission electron micro scopic analysis, the 

PtCuSn catalyst exhibits a face -centered cubic structure , similar to platinum (Pt ), which is attributed to 

form a good solid solution of Cu atoms and Sn atoms in the Pt lattice. The PtCuSn nanopartic les with 

average diameter of 3.5 nm were uniformly distributed on the carbon support . The electrochemical 

surface area (ECSA) and ORR activity of PtCu , PtSn and PtCuSn catalysts were measured using a 

rotating disk electrode technique with cyclic voltammetry and the linear sweep method. The PtCuSn 

catalysts showed the highest performances for ECSA and ORR, which might be attributed both to 

formation of small nanoparticle by tin atom and to change in lattice constant of P t by copper atom. 

Furthermore, The PEMFCs single cell performance employin g PtCuSn catalyst exhibit ed an enhanced 

cell performance compared to a single cell using the PtCu and P tSn catalyst s. This result indicates the 

importance of electric and geometric control of P t alloy nanoparticles that can improve the catalytic 

activity. This synergistic combination of copper and Tin with P t could provide the direction of 

development of Pt catalyst for fuel cell system .

[1] Pak C, Kang S, Choi YS, Chang H. Nanomaterials and structures for the fourth innovation of polymer 

electrolyte fuel cell. J . Materials Res. 2010;25 (1-20 ): 2063 -71. 

[2] Feng Y, He T, Alonso -Vante N. In situ Free -Surfactant Synthesis and ORR - Electrochemistry of 

Carbon -Supported Co3S4 and CoSe2 Nanoparticles. Chem Mater. 2008;20 (1): 26 –28. Discharge Morphology and Mechanism of Magnesium -air batter ies 

Fanglei Tong , Xize Chen, Shanghai Wei , Wei Gao 

Department of Chemical & Materials Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, the University of Auckland 

5-7 Graf ton Road, Auckland 1142, New Zealand 

s.w ei@auckland.ac.nz 

Abstract: 

Metal -air batter ies have attracted much attentions due to their high capacity and low cos t. Magnes ium -air 

batter y is one type of the m with high theoretical voltage (3.1 V) and theore tical energy density (6.8 

kW hkg -1). However, magnesium (Mg) metal anode shows low anodic efficiency due to its high self -

corrosion rate and discharge product accumulation on the surface. Much effort has been attempted to 

enhance Mg -air battery performanc e, but rare research has focus ed on the discha rge mechanism of pure 

Mg anode in Mg -air battery. In this work, morpholog y of Mg anode before and after remove discharge 

product have been studied. Pure Mg was discharged at differe nt current densities rang e fr om 50 μA cm -2

to 5 mA cm -2. A la rge amount of lamellar structure formed on Mg anode surface at low current densi ties, 

while anode surface is more uniform with pitting morphology at high current densit ies . Fur thermore, 

discharge morphology of Mg metal anode shows schistose with preferred orientation. Grain boundary 

plays a critical role in prevent ing Mg self -corrosion diffusion .

Keywords: Mg -air battery, Discharge mechanism , Morphology characteri zation , Metal -air battery Li -S batteries: improving polysulfide retention by cathode coating with 

# a nanostructured carbon 

Francisco J. Garcia -Soriano , German Lener, Guillermina L. Luque, Daniel Barraco, Ezequiel P. M. Leiva 

IFEG, Facultad de Matemática Astronomía, Física y Comput ación, Universidad Nacional de 

Córdoba, CONICET, Ciudad Universitaria, X5000, Córdoba, Argentina 

INFIQC, Departamento de Química Teórica y Computacional, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, CONICET, Ciudad Universitaria, X5000, Córdoba, 

Argentina 

fran.garcia@unc.edu.ar 

High power high -density lithium rechargeable batteries are necessary to meet the energy demand of 

electric vehicles and high -power stationary grids. Li -S batteries represent a potential solution to obtain 

high -per formance electrochemical energy storage devices. This is so because of their high theoretical 

specific capacity 1672 mAh g -1 and high energy density 2600 Wh kg -1.[1] However, there are many 

difficulties to be solved before a practical application. Sulfur h as high electronic resistivity (10 24 Ωcm) [2] ,

and the reactions with lithium lead to an increase in volume (80%) that may result in the rupture of 

contact with the current collector [3] . Another important issue is the formation of long -chain polysulfides 

(L i2Sn, n ≥ 4) during sulfur lithiation. Polysulfides are soluble in the commonly used ether -based 

electrolytes and therefore can migrate to the anode where they undergo further reduction, which 

ultimately leads to the passivation of the lithium anode. [4] Th is process is known as the shuttle effect, 

which also causes the loss of active material by conversion to non -reversible structures during cycling. 

In this work we use a combination of carbon structures on the cathodic side of the cell to achieve 

electro nic and ionic conductivity, and, at the same time, the mitigation of the shuttle effect. Thus , a 

conductive matrix of activated carbon was just mixed with sulfur to contain the volume -change during the 

charge and discharge processes and to increase the con ductivity of the electrode. Also, to retain the 

polysulfides in the cathode and prevent their migration to the anodic part of the cell a nanostructured 

carbon (NC), obtained from natural raw clay, was used to directly coat the sulfur cathode. XPS 

measureme nts were made on both NC -coated and uncoated cathodes, the S2 p spectrum showed that the 

sulfur in the cathode interacts with the NC promoting the formation of COSO 2-/SO 32- species before 

cycling. These species can help to immobilize sulfur atoms and theref ore serve as mediators to retain and 

confine polysulfides in the cathode. Electrochemical studies of cyclability, rate capability, cyclic 

voltammetry, and electrochemical impedance studies (EIS) were carried out for both the pristine and NC 

coated cathodes . The cyclability study showed that the NC -coated cathode had excellent stability with 

more than 200 cycles, capacities of 75% relative to the theoretical capacity of sulfur, and coulombic 

efficiencies of 99.7%. The C -rate proved that this system could rea ch reversible capacities up to 950 mAh 

g-1 at rates as high as 1C. EIS and cyclic voltammetry showed that there is a significant increase in the 

electrical and ionic conductivity of the NC -coated cathode. In this manner, through a simple modification, 

the electrochemical performance of the system was substantially improved using simple and economic 

methodology.    

> [1] Hagen, M. Hanselmann, D. Ahlbrecht K. Maça, R. Gerber, D. Tübke J. (2015). Lithium –Sulfur Cells: The Gap
> between the State of the Art and the Requirements for High Energy Battery Cells. Advanced Energy Materials,
> Volume 5, issue 16, 1401986.
> [2] Sun, Z. Zhang, J. Yin, L. Hu, G. Fang, R. Cheng, H.M. Li, F. Conductive porous vanadium nitride/graphene
> composite as chemical anchor of polysulfides for lithium -sulfur batteries. Nat. Commun. 8 , 1 –8.
> [3] Josef, E. Yan, Y. Stan, M. C. Wellmann, J. Vizintin, A. Winter, M. Johansson, P. Dominko, R. and Guterman, R.
> (2019). Ionic Liquids and Their Polymers in Lithium Sulfur Batteries. Isr. J. Chem, Volum e 59.
> [4] Gao, J. Lowe, M.A. Kiya, Y. Abruña, H.D. (2011). Effects of liquid electrolytes on the charge -discharge
> performance of rechargeable lithium/sulfur batteries: Electrochemical and in -situ X -ray absorption spectroscopic
> studies, J. Phys. Chem. C. 1 15, 25132 –25137.

# Increasing POM Loading s into POM@ZIF -67 Nanocomp osites to 

# Drastically Boost their Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER) Activity 

Víctor K. Abdelkader -Fernández , Diana M. Fernandes, Salete. S. Balula, Luís Cunha -Silva and 

Cristina Freire 

REQUIMTE/LAQV, Depar tamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências da 

Universidade de Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169 -007 Porto, Portugal 

victor.fernandez@f c.up.pt 

The eff icient electrocatalysis of the Oxygen Evolutio n Reaction (OER) is a key factor regarding the re al 

implement ation of fuel cell/electrol yzer sy stems in industry an d transport . For this reason, the 

development of low -cost and robu st catalysts with better perfo rmances than those of the benchmark 

materials ( RuO 2 and IrO 2) is mandatory. In this context , polyoxometalates (POM s) and me tal -organic 

frameworks (MOFs) as well as the ir s mart integration into electrocatalytically active nanocomposites play 

a protagonist role .[1] In our previou s work ,[2] we took advantage of the complete size complementarity 

bet wee n zeolitic imidazole frameworks (ZIFs) cavi ties and Keggin -type POM units an d prepared two 

POM(guest )@ZI F(ho st) materials involving individually encapsulated SiW 9Co 3 POM units inside the ZIF 

cages . By using two isostructural ZIF fra meworks —ZIF -8 and ZI F-67, including Zn and Co nodes ,

respectively — we demonstrated the necessity of the existence of Co nodes in the ZIF frameworks to 

generate a POM ↔ ZIF -67 bi directional synergy leading to a signi ficant OER activi ty. Now, we have 

extended this phenomenon to another more easily synthetized cob alt -containing POM , SiW 11 Co, and 

successfully increased the POM loading s. [3] Interestingly , the resulting high POM loading 

nanocomposites (labelled as SiW 11 Co[h] @ZIF -67 and SiW 9Co 3[h]@ZIF -67) present extremely modi fied 

fram eworks f ar away from the can onical ZIF struc tures , being th ese drasti c structural changes —along 

with the POM loading increments themselves — th e origin of their bo osted OER activit ies. A thorough 

compositional /structural characterization (via ICP -OES, XPS, ATR -IR, PXRD , N 2-adsorption, SEM, 

TEM and EDS analysis) revealed the coexistence of two structurally/ morpholog ically differentiated 

phases in these complex electrocatalysts , both o f them incl uding homogeneously dispersed POM clusters .

In ad dition, CV , LSV and chronoamperometric tests allo wed the estimatio n of the ECSAs and OER 

activit ies developed by these samples in alkaline electrolyte and the ir long -term stability as we ll. These 

test s have shown up a remarkable OER perform ance of the POM@ZIF -67 nanocomposites , mu ch higher 

than that exhibited by the pristine ZIF -67 (Table 1 ), and a n intrin sic activity comparable —and , in some 

cases , even higher — to the exp ensive commercial RuO 2 and IrO 2 powders (Figure 1 ).

Table 1. OER activity parameters of pristine ZIF -67 and 

POM@ZIF -67 nanocomposites. 

(ref) sample 

OER parameter 

E10 (V 

vs. 

RHE )

η10 

(V) 

j1.75 

(mA 

cm -2)

Tafel Slope 

(mV dec -1)

(1) ZIF -67  1. 81  0.58  7.2  144.3 

(2) SiW 11 Co@ZIF -67  1.69  0.46  15.0  141.6 

(3) SiW 11 Co[h]@ZIF -67  1.66  0.43  23.0  95.3 

(4) SiW 9Co 3@ZIF -67  1.70  0.47  14.2  113.6 

(5) SiW 9Co 3[h]@ZIF -67  1.65  0.42  28.9  93.9 

Figure 1. OER LSV curves of 

pristine ZIF -67, POM@ZIF -67 

nanocomposit es and refer ence 

materials. 

[1] C. Fre ire et a l., POM & MOF‐based Electrocatalysts for Energy‐related Reactions . ChemCatChem 

201 8, 10 (8) , 1703 –1730 . DOI: 10.1002/cctc.201701926 

[2] V. K. Abdelkader -Fernández e t al., Oxygen Evolution Reaction Electrocatalytic Improvement in 

POM@ZIF Nanocomposites: A Bidir ectional Synergistic Effect . ACS Appl. Energy Mater . 2020 , 3 (3),

2925 –2934 . DOI: 10.1021/acsaem.0c00009 

[3] V. K. Abdelkader -Fernández et al., Advanced Framework -Modified POM@ZIF -67 Nanocomposites 

as Enhanced Oxygen Evolution Reaction Electrocatalysts . J. Mater. Chem. A . (Under revision )Using Ionic Liquids to Increase Selectivity and Sensitivity in Heavy 

# Metal Ion Detection 

Fabian Schmitt , Tizian Venter, Markus Biesalski, Gui -Rong Zhang, Bastian J.M. Etzold 

Technische Universität Darmstadt, Ernst -Berl -Institut für Technische und Makromolekulare Chemie, 

Alarich -Weiss -Strasse 8, Darmstadt, Germany. 

f.schmitt@tu -darmstadt.de 

Electrochemical sensing of heavy metal traces, such as Pb, Cd and Hg is known to be a user -friendly, 

mobile point -of -care solution. High sensitivity can be ob tained by electrochemical methods, such as 

square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (SWASV) in presence of surface modifiers (e.g. Hg or Bi), as 

reflected by impressive limits of detection far below WHO suggestions. Nevertheless, unsatisfying 

selectivity a s also low stability hinders vast commer ciali zation of electrochemical detection in this field. 

Liu -Liu et al. demonstrated that modifier free sensors using technical grade graphite foil can exhibit high 

stability and also satisfying sensitivity [1]. The c urrent work aims to use ionic liquids (IL s) to further 

improve the selectivity and sensitivity based on the modifier free concept. ILs are capable of selectively 

extracting and preconcentrating heavy metals from aqueous solutions due to their high solubili ties in ILs, 

which provides the basis for this study . As a suitable IL protonated betaine 

bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide [ HBet][NTf 2] was chosen as it combines two crucial properties: 1) It 

extracts metal ions from aqueous phase with different distributi on coefficients, enabling discriminating 

preconcentration [2] and 2) it is reported for the direct electrochemical detection of metal oxides in the 

sub -ppb range [3]. Furthermore, for the first step of extraction this IL allows for facile and intensive 

mix ing as also phase separation , as above the upper critical solution temperature of 55 °C a homogeneous 

mixture occurs and below phase separation is induced. As a conceptual study the extraction of Pb -ions 

from aqueous phase, temperature induced phase separa tion and subsequent ion detection via SWASV was 

investigated using only technical grade graphite foil as working and counter electrod es (Fig. 1 A). A 

reproducible extraction and detection of Pb 2+ for concentrations of 2 ppm in the aqueous phase can be 

realized and SWASV -peaks of several 100 μA resulted (Fig. 1 B). Future work can build on this concept, 

which is especially promising for improving selectivity. 

A B

Fig. 1 A: schematic procedure of the Pb 2+ extraction (step 1) from the aqueous to the IL phase 

(V IL /V aq =1) via single -phase -generation and the electrochemical detection (step 2) by SWASV. 

B: SWASV response signal for a starting concentration of 2 ppm Pb in the aqueous phase (parameter: 

deposition: 10 min @ -1 V vs . Ag -qRE, stripping: f=100 Hz, EP=100 mV, ES=20 mV). 

References :

[1] L -L. Shen, G -R. Zhang, W. Li, M. Biesalski, B. Etzold, ACS Omega 2017 , 2, 4593. 

[2] T. V. Hoogerstraete, B. Onghena, K. Binnemans, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013 , 4, 1659. 

[3] D. Lu, N. Shomali, A. Shen, Electrochemistry Communications 2010 , 12 , 1214. The design of a new electrochemical cell for studying highly active 

# metallo enzymes 

Asmaa Hadj Ahmed a,b , Jean -Vincent Daurelle b, Jérome Vicente b, Vincent Fourmond a 

> a

Laboratoire de Bioénergétique et Ingénierie des Protéines, Institut de Microbiologie de la 

Méditerranée, UMR 7281 Aix Marseille Université/CNRS, 31 Chemin J. Aiguier, 13402 Marseille Cedex 

20, France.  

> b

Laboratoire IUSTI, UMR 7343 Aix Marseille Université/ CNRS, Polytech Marseille, Dpt Mécanique 

Energétique (ME), Technopôle de Chateau Gombert, 5 rue Enrico Fermi 13453 Marseille Cedex 13, 

France. 

## asmaa.HADJ -AHMED@etu.univ -amu.fr 

Protein Film Electrochemistry is a technique consisting in immobilizing enzymes on a rotating disc 

electrode in a configuration where the electron transfer is direct, and the enzymatic activity is monitored 

as an electri cal current [ Fig ure 1]. This technique has proved extremely useful to study various aspects of 

the activity of metalloenzymes [1] . Generally , the consumption of the substrate at the surface of the 

electrode is compensated by a flow of a fresh buffer imposed by the rotation of the electrode . However, 

this was not the case for CO dehydrogenase (CODH), which is an enzyme that catalyzes the reversible 

reduction of CO 2 into CO following this equation: CO 2 + 2e - + 2H +  CO + H 2O

This enzyme is so fast that the catalysis is mostly limited by the transport of the substrate (CO) towards 

the electrode, and not by the catalyzed chemical reaction , even at a high rotation rate. This limitation 

hides information about the catalysis in the electrochemical response [2] [Figure 2]. As this problem 

couldn’t be overc ame by the rotating disc electrode, we chose to design a completely different type of 

electrochemical cells ( based on jet flow cell ) in which the buffer is pumped towards a static electrode [3] .

We screened different jet flow cell geometries by means of numerical simulation. Then, we selected and 

built one with promising transport properties (a high and homogenous mass transport coefficient, and a 

low shear stress at the surface of the electrode) [4] . In this work, we optimize the current design by 

simulation, and we further test the performance of the new setup experimentally by using simple redox 

couples such as Fe (CN 6)3/ Fe (CN 6)3- or by detecting the catalytic current given by an adsorbed enzyme, 

the nitrite reductase which catalyzes the reduction of nitrite to ammonium. This new cell should provide 

enhanced transport but also a much greater flexibility for changing the concentration of the species that 

the enzyme is ex posed to. Therefore, it will be useful for studying other metalloenzymes that do not even 

require high mass transport. 

References 

1. C. Léger, P. Bertrand, Chem. Rev. 2008,108,7,2379 -2438. 

2. M. Merrouch , J. Hadj -Saïd, C. Léger, S. Dementin, V. Fourmond. Electrochimica Acta, 2017, 245, 

1059 -1064 .

3. M. Fadel, J -V. Daurelle, V. Fourmond, J. Vicente, 23ème Congrès Français de Mécanique, 2017. 

4. M. Fadel, J-V. Daurelle, V. Fourmond, J. Vicente . Phys.Chem.Chem.Phy, 2019, 21, 12360 .

Fig ure 1. schematic representation 

of protein film electrochemistry 

Fig ure 2. experiment in which the CODH 

is exposed to a transient injection of CO Redox -Driven Deformation an d Electrode Reaction of Viologen -

# Incorporated Polymer Hydrogel 

Bo Wang , Hironobu Tahara , and Takamasa Sagara 

Graduate School of Engineering, Nagasaki University 

Bunkyo 1 -14, Nagasaki 852 -8521, Japan 

bb52 316205@ms.nagasaki -u.ac. jp 

Stimuli -sensitive hydrogel s ha ve a wide variety of flexibility and mobility. They can be us ed as a 

material of an actuator in an assembl ed molecular robot. We focused on a redox driven hydrogel , because 

redox reaction in the gel can quickly and dras tically change the propert ies of the gel, resu lting in fas t and 

large -scale motion of the gel . With an aim at developing redox driven hy drogel , we use redox reac tion of 

viologen (Figur e 1a ) as the engine of fast and la rge amplitude deformation . We desig ned a hydrogel 

shown in Figure 1b . Viologens were covalently attached v ia amide linkage to poly -peptide, -poly -L-

lysine (P LL). The n, g lutaraldehyde was used for cross -linking of free -ami ne gro up s to give a hydrogel ,

PLLV gel . The hydrogel with a 25% vio logen pendant rate contracted 93% -volume within 100 s upon 

reduction of viologens by dithi onite , whereas it exhibited slow re -expan sion u pon reoxidation by 

dissolved O 2 [1]. One -electr on reduction of a vio logen (V 2+) to radical cation V•+ induces the stack ing of 

V•+ units a nd desol vation of the viologen site s. The former process draws the polymer chains to be 

entangle d and to acce lerate inte r-site elec tron transfer , while the latte r process drain s water from the gel 

(Figur e 1c). A d ecrease of positive cha rges on violog ens result s in the change of osmotic pressure to 

egress of water from the gel . All these cha nge s upon reduction contribute d to the contradiction of the 

hydroge l.

Electrochemical and s pectro -

electrochemical characteriza tion 

of the PLLV gel was made by 

sandwi ching a piece of gel 

between a Au disk electrode and 

the inner wall of an optical 

window of the ce ll . We obser ved 

cyclic volt ammetric response of 

app arent diffusio n in the ra nge 

of sweep rate between 2 and 200 

mV s -1. The feature of obta ined 

elec tro re flec tance spectra was of 

th e enriched V•+ dimers. 

We exami ned the effect of 

the viologen pe nda nt rate as well 

as the introduction of a con -

ductive filler and poly mer 

electrol yte cou nter anion . The 

25% penda nt rate gel showed 

contraction faster and larg er 

amplitude than the others . We 

added conductive fillers in the gel for accelerating electron transpor ta tion and re -expansion . The fillers 

include d Au nano particle , gr aphene n ano -platelet , and carbon nano tu be . The initial contr action of th e gel 

with fillers was faster than the gel without fille rs. However, re -oxidati ve swelling was still slow. The 

contraction and re -swelling largely rely on egress and ingress of water. To boost the penetration of water 

an d accelerate re -oxidati ve swelling , the anionic polymer , polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) , was incorporated 

into the gel . The incorporation made the re -oxidative swelli ng faster and the swe lling amount greater . PSS 

accelerate d water ingress into the ge l and ma de the re -oxidation swelling faster a nd the extent larger ,

while it diminished the contraction amplitude .

These results pave a new way to a hydrogel craw ling on an electro de by redo x control.    

> [1] B. Wang, H. Tahara, T. Sagara, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces ,2018 ,10 , 36415.

Figure 1. Chemical structure and redox process of viologen (a), 

chemical structure of PLLV gel (b), and mech anism of target 

hydrogel deformation (c) .TiO2/SnO2 nano composite s for lithium -ion batteries 

## Xize Chen , Yuguang Pu, Shanghai Wei, Peng Cao ,

De partment of Chemical & Material Engineering , University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 

Lithium -ion batteries(LIBs) have been widely used as electrical energy storage (EES) devices for port able 

electronic devices, such as laptops and smart phones. LIBs are also being considering as EES system for 

electric vehicles and grid scale energy storage. These applications require batteries have higher energy 

density and lower cost. 1. In present study, TiO2/SnO2 nano composite s have been synthesized as anode 

materials for lithium ion batteries. Firstly, Tin(II) oxide hydroxide was synthesized with sol -gel method, and 

then coated with TiO2 by using wet chemistry method. The tin(II) oxide hydroxide s are pyramid -shape 

nano particles. TiO2 coated pyramid -shape nanoparticles were heated at 600 °C to form TiO2/SnO2 hollow 

nanocomposites (TSHNP ). These nanocomposites show a unique hollow structure with particle size about 200 

nm , and original pyramid structure was destroyed during the oxidation process in the heat treatment . The 

TiO2/SnO2 nanocomposites have been tested as an anode for lithium ion batteries in half -cell. Compared to 

SnO2, TSHNP shows longer cycle life with maintaining 200 mhA/g in 50 cycles , which is due to the special 

hollow structure 2. In addition , TiO2 and Li2O matrix act as a mechanical support system for SnO 2 volume 

expansion during the d e/ lithiation process . However, C-rate performance are not ideal because of the 

polarization and relatively low electron conductivity , which are the challenges of transition metal -oxide s.

## References 

## 1 Julien, C., Mauger, A., Vijh, A. & Zaghib, K. in Lithium Batteries 29 -68 (Springer, 2016). 

## 2 Lou, X. W., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Lee, J. Y. & Archer, L. A. J. A. M. Template‐free synthesis of 

## SnO2 hollow nanostructures with high lithium storage capacity. 18 , 2325 -2329 (2006). Coupling Micro -Hydropower with electrolyzing, case study 

Maël Le Marre 1,2 Philippe Mandin 1,2 Praveen Thap pily 1, 2

Jean -Louis Lanoisellé 1 Thierry Sauvage 2 

> 1

Université de Bretagne Sud, IRDL, UMR CNRS 6027, Lorient (France)  

> 2

GIP Campus Esprit Industries, Redon (France) 

mael.le -marre@univ -ubs.fr  philippe.mandin@univ -ubs.fr 

The energy used to pump and treat water for residents and industry represents between 2 and 3% of the 

world’s energy consumption { 1}. The consumption can be reduced by 25% t hrough solutions like micro -

hydropower (MHP). Pressure reducing valve s (PRV) are installed in the water distribution network 

(WDN) to reduce the leakage losses, which is directly related to th e pressure in pipe {2}. The reducing of 

pressure in PRVs lead to hydraulic losses into thermal losses, replace PRV with MHP system is a good 

solution to recover a part of those losses. On the other hand, the transport area, with a thermal motor, is 

one of the main issue s for slowing global warming. Replace thermal motor with electrical motor suppl ied 

by fuel cell s is a good solution. One of the biggest water tanks in Rennes (France) called “Les Gallets” is 

an interesting site to implement MHP installation, the huge site area allows to implement a electrolyze 

installation to supply hydrogen cars. Coupling the production of hydrogen with MHP system is a solution 

to get a green energy production. The scheme of the installation is presented in figure 1. 

The site “Les Gallets” is composed of two water tanks, one is called “Les Gallets Haut”, the other one is 

called “Les Gallets Bas”. Two MHP system s can be installed, one upstream the first water tank, and one 

between both water tan ks. Conventional turbines are not massively available on the market, hence they 

are expensive and lead to strong payback period s for MHP, to face this problem, the use of pumps in 

reverse mode (pumps as turbines) is a solution {3}. Indeed, those pumps have good efficiencies (between 

50 to 85%) and can be divided by 10 times the payback period of an installation compare d to 

conventional turbine s installation s. For this study, an average efficiency of 65% for Pumps as turbines 

installations is considered. 

Flo w conditions of both installation s are detailed in table 1.                       

> Site Flow rate (l/s) Head (m) Load factor (h/year) Elost (MWh/year) Producible (MWh/year) H2Producible (kg H2/ye ar)
> Gallets Haut 208 11 7366 165,7 107,705 1795
> Gallets Bas 100 19 6647 137,6 89 ,44 1490
> Table 1: Flow conditions of Gallets sites

The total electricity production in “Les Gallets” will reach about 197MWh per year. Considering that the 

electroly zer absorb 60 kWh of electricity to create 1kg of Hydrogen. The electroly zer will be able to 

produce about 3285kg of H 2 per year. Considering a conventional Hydrogen car, with an autonomy of 

500km , and a Hydrogen’s consumption of 1kg of H 2/100 km, it will be possible to load the car’s fu el cell 

625 times per year. 

Ackn owledgements to Eurepean InteReg EERES4WATER and Brittany region.   

> References:
> 1}: De Marchis et al., 2014, Procedia Engineering : “Energy recovery in water distribution networks. Implementation
> of pumps as turbine in a dynamic numerical mode”

{2}:  Colombo et al., 2002, Water Resour. Plan. Manag, 128, 441 -450 : “ Energy and c osts of leaky pipes: Toward    

> Comprehensive Picture “
> {3}: Chappallaz et al., 1992, “Manual on pumps used as turbines”
> Figure 1: Installation's scheme

# Nitrogen -rich covalent organic frameworks for high -performance 

# sodium batteries 

Yixin Li , Ruijuan Shi, Jun Chen *

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College of Chem istry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China 

* Corresponding author: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn 

Covalent organic frameworks (COF s) have attracted increasing attention as idea cathode materials duo to 

the designable periodic skeletons and ordered nanopores . However, the reported COF s based cathode 

materials are plagued by limited capacity and unsatisfying rate performance. Herein, we design ed a

honeycomb -like nitrogen -rich COF (TQBQ -COF) with good intrinsic electronic conductivity and studied 

the electrochemi cal performance in sodium battery . The sodium storage ability of pyrazines and 

carbonyls and the up -to twelve sodium -ion redox chemistry mechanism for each repetitive unit have been 

demonstrated by in/ex -situ Fourier transform infrared spectra and density functional theory calculations. 

The TQBQ -COF cathode exhibits high capacity of 452 mA h/g (0.02A/g) , excellent cycling stability (96% 

capacity retention after 1000 cycles), and high rate performance (134.3 mAh /g at 10 A/g ). A pouch -type 

battery ( energy dens ity of 101.1 Wh /kg ) is assembled to prove practical applications of conjugated 

polymers in rechargeable sodium batteries . This work will promote the function -oriented design and 

application of COFs -based materials for high -performance sodium storage device s. 

Figure 1. (a)The chemical structure and possible electrochemical redox mechanism of TQBQ -COF with 

a theoretical capacity of 515 mAh/g. (b) Top and side views of the schematic AB stacking model of 

TQBQ -COF layers with a pack ing distance of 3.07 Å. (c) Long cycling stability of TQBQ -COF 

electrodes at different current densities (0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 A g −1). The capacities are all calculated based on 

the mass of TQBQ -COF. (d) The selected charge/discharge curves of pouch -type Na//TQBQ -COF 

batteries at a current of 50 mA. The capacity is calculated based on the mass of the full cell. 

References :

[1] R. Sh i, L Liu, Y. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Li, L. Li, Z. Yan, J. Chen. Nat. Commun ., 2020 , 11 (178) , 1 -10. Photovoltaic activity of simple photosystem I /conducting glass 

# electrode 

Krzysztof Gibasiewicz ,* Sebastian Szewczyk, Rafał Białek, Gotard Burdziński 

Faculty of Physics, Adam Mickiewicz University, ul. Uniwersytetu Poznańskiego 2 , 61 -614 Poznań, 

Poland 

*e-mail : krzyszgi@amu.edu.pl 

We demonstrate photovoltaic activity of electrodes composed of fluorine -doped tin oxide (FTO) 

conducting glass and a multilayer of trimeric photosystem I (PSI) from cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. 

PCC 6803 yielding, at open ci rcuit potential (OCP) of + 100 mV (vs. SHE), internal quantum efficiency 

of (0.37 ± 0.11)% and photocurrent density of up to (0.5 ± 0.1) μA/cm 2.1 The photocurrent measured for 

OCP is of cathodic nature meaning that preferentially the electrons are injected from the conducting layer 

of the FTO glass to the photooxidized PSI primary electron donor, P700 +, and further transferred from the 

phot oreduced final electron acceptor of PSI, F b−, via ascorbate electrolyte to the counter electrode. This 

observation is consistent with preferential donor -side orientation of PSI on FTO imposed by applied 

electrodeposition. However, by applying high -positive bias (+ 620 mV) to the PSI -FTO electrode, 

exceeding redox midpoint potential of P700 (+ 450 mV), the photocurrent reverses its orientation and 

becomes anodic. This is explained by “switching off” the natural photoactivity of PSI particles (by the 

electroc hemical oxidation of P700 to P700 +) and “switching on” the anodic photocurrent from PSI 

antenna Chls prone to photooxidation at high potentials. The efficient control of the P700 redox state 

(P700 or P700 +) by external bias applied to the PSI -FTO electrodes was evidenced by ultrafast transient 

absorption spectroscopy. The advantage of the presented system is its structural simplicity together with 

in situ -proven high intactness of the PSI particles.  

> 1

Sebastian Szewczyk, Rafał Białek, Gotard Burdziński, Krzysztof Gibasiewicz “Photovoltaic activity of 

electrodes based on intact photosystem I electrodeposited on bare conducting glass” Photosynthesis 

Research (2020) 144:1 –12, doi:10.1007/s11120 -020 -00722 -1Magnesium and Calcium Insertion/De -insertion into the Sb Modified Au 

# Electrode and determination of the diffusions coefficients 

D. Xing, and H. Baltruschat* 

Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, University of Bonn 

Roemerstr.164, D-53117, Germany 

baltruschat@uni -bonn.de 

Antimony has been suggested as an insertion material for a magnesium secondary battery [1, 2] , because 

magnesium can form an intermetallic binary phase Mg 3Sb 2. The stable alloy reaction shows high 

magnesium storage performance and high cycling stability. 

The diffusion coefficient of Mg -insertion in Sb - multi -layers has been estimated by using va rious 

electrochemical techniques. We stud ied the diffusion of Mg in a thin, bulk (massive) layer of Sb by 

using PITT, CV and potential step experiments. Such diffusion coefficients, albeit still somewhat 

“apparent”, are much related to true diffusion coeff icient in the metal or alloy. The diffusion coefficient 

of Mg into the Sb layers are in the range of 10 -13 -10 -15 cm 2s-1. The D Mg values was calculated by CV at 

about 1.28 − 1.78 × 10 −14 𝑐𝑚 2/𝑠 into a novel Bi -based anode (Bismuth oxyfluoride, BiOF) [3] and as 

1.97 × 10 −14 𝑐𝑚 2/𝑠 into a CuS cathode by GITT -Method . [4] 

Recently calcium stripping and plating using a Ca(BH 4)2 electrolyte was reporte d at room temperature 

with a Coulombic efficiency (CE) of 95% on a n Au substrate. [5] In this work the insertion/de -insertion 

of Ca 2+ -ion into antimony with Ca(BH 4)2/THF electrolyte was investigated. The cyclic voltammogram 

for Ca insertion/de -insertion into Sb -modified elect rode shows a positive shift ( ~1 V) of the onset 

potential of Ca deposition compared to that at bare Au electrode. The ratio of moles of Ca to Sb agrees 

with the stoichiometry of Ca 2Sb alloy.  The diffusion coefficient of Ca into the Sb layers are calculated 

to be  4.25 − 6.11 × 10 −15 𝑐𝑚 2/𝑠  cm 2s-1.

[1] T. S. Arthur, N. Singh, and M. Matsui, Electrochemistry Communications 16 :103 (2012). 

[2] L. Zan, D. Xing, A. Abd -El -Latif, and H. Baltruschat, Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 10 :2541 

(2019). 

[3] W. Wang, L. Liu, P. -F. Wang, T. -T. Zuo, Y. -X. Yin, N. Wu, J. -M. Zhou, Y. Wei, and Y. -G. Guo, 

Chemical communications 54 :1714 (2018). 

[4] M. Mao, T. Gao, S. Hou, F. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Wei, X. Fan, X. Ji, J. Ma, and C. Wang, Nano letters 

19 :6665 (2019). 

[5] D. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Jin, C. Kuss, and P. G. Bruce, Nature Materials 17 :16 (2017). Investigation of diffusion c oefficients of the hydroxide ions of various 

# systems using a rotating electrode setup 

Praveen Thappily 1,2 , Philippe Mandin 1, Thierry Sauvage 2

> 1

IRDL, UMR CNRS 6027, Université de Bretagne Sud, Lorient, 56321, France  

> 2

GIP Campus ESPRIT Industries, Redon, 35600, France 

dr.praveen.official@gmail.com , philippe.mandin@univ -ubs.fr 

Hydrogen [1,2] is one of the most promising energy carriers for domestic and industrial energy systems. 

Water electrolysis is considered as the safe st and non -polluting means of producing the hydrogen. 

Rotating disk electrode is a hydrodynamic electrode te chnique that utilizes convection as the mode of 

mass transport. In order to determine the diffusion coefficient of hydroxide ions, Levich's theory [3] can 

be used. This theory makes it possible to calculate the diffusion limit current of a sample placed on a 

rotating disc electrode. 162 13 2

## 0.62 lim J nFD C

##  −

## = 

With the help of the above equation value of D can be extracted. Here, t he experimental set -up is a three -

electrode arrangement as shown in Figure 1.A. T he rotating disc electrode is placed in the cent re of the 

beaker to avoid boundary problems and to have forced convection due to the invariant electrode by 

rotating it around the electrode. The counter electrode and the reference electrode are placed about two 

centimet res from the working electrode. NaOH and KOH solutions with different concentration are used 

as th e electrolyte. Voltage and current data are recorded using the Nova control software and the 

electrochemical technique used is linear scanning voltage (LSV) voltammetry, with the potential being 

reset to 0 between two experiments using a second LSV. We als o extracted the value of the diffusion 

coefficient with different temperatures as shown in Figure 1.B. It is observed that the diffusion 

coefficients tend to increase with temperature .20 22 24 26 28 30 32 

> 2.0x10 -10
> 4.0x10 -10
> 6.0x10 -10
> 8.0x10 -10
> 1.0x10 -9
> 1.2x10 -9
> Diffusion coefficient (m 2/s) Temperature ( oC)
> KOH pH 10 KOH pH 10.5 KOH pH 11 NaOH pH 10 NaOH pH 10.5 NaOH pH 11

A B

FIGURE 1: (A) EXPERIMENTAL SETUP (B) THE SENSITIVITY OF THE DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT 

> WITH RESPECT TO THE TEMPERATURE

References 

[1] A. Contreras, R. Guirado, T.N. Veziroglu, Design and simulation of the power control s ystem of 

a plant for the generation of hydrogen via electrolysis, using photovoltaic solar energy, Int. J. 

Hydrogen Energy. 32 (2007) 4635 –4640. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2007.07.006. 

[2] S. Nanda, K. Li, N. Abatzoglou, A.K. Dalai, J.A. Kozinski, Advancement s and confinements in 

hydrogen production technologies, 2017. doi:10.1016/B978 -0-08 -101031 -0.00011 -9. 

[3] G.K.H. Wiberg, M. Arenz, On the influence of hydronium and hydroxide ion diffusion on the 

hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions in aqueous media, E lectrochim. Acta. 158 (2015) 13 –

17. doi:10.1016/j.electacta.2015.01.109. Novel Experimental Approach for the Direct Assessment of Nucleation Rate 

# Constants from Cyclic Vo ltammetry and Chronoamperometry Data for Phase 

# Transforming Intercalation Electrodes 

Aleksandr A. Kokin, a Stanislav S. Fedotov, b Victoria A. Nikitina b

> a

M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1/3, Moscow, 119991, Russia 

> b

Center for Energy Science and Technology, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 

Nobel str.3, Moscow, 121205, Russia 

v.nikitina@skoltech.ru 

Phase -transforming electr ode materials with a wide miscibility gap have been extensively studied for both 

Li -ion (LiFePO 4, Li 4Ti 5O12 ) and Na -ion (Na 3V2(PO 4)3) batteries. In particular, LiFePO 4 material has become a model 

system for the investigation of intercalation induced phase transformation mechanisms. [1,2] Most of the state -of -the -

art research on the phase -separating intercalation materials focuses on the elucidation of phase transformatio n

mechanisms as well as on the theoretical assessment of the nucleation barrier heights based on the evidence from 

structural investigation and microscopic single particle -level experiments. [3] In particular, recent reports have led to 

the establishment of a concept of competing mechanisms of phase boundary propagation, which can be bulk diffusion 

limited or surface reaction limited. [4] Yet, phase -field modeling usually used to rationalize the experimental findings 

rarely relies on the experimental values o f nucleation and charge transfer activation barriers, deduced directly from 

the experimental data, which compromises the reliability of the obtained results. 

Recently developed electroanalytical methods [5,6] provide the possibility to estimate the characte ristic rates 

of nucleation, charge transfer and diffusion from the experimental electrochemical data. The proposed novel 

approaches enable direct comparison of phase transformation rates in various intercalation -based electrodes (LiFePO 4,

V2O5, cation -rich Prussian blue analogues, Na 3V2(PO 4)3) as well as the elucidation of the rate -determining step nature. 

In this work, we show that the new phase nucleation appears to be a characteristic rate -determining step for a wide 

range of intercalation materials. We demonstrate that the nucleation rates (probabilities of critical nucleus formation) 

can be straightforwardly determined from the electrochemical experimental data. A simple experimental approach is 

proposed toward interpreting electrochemical cyclic voltam metry and chronoamperometry data for phase -

transforming electrodes. [7,8] The new methodology provides for a facile assessment of the influence of various 

experimental factors (particle size, defect concentration, solvent nature, and surface coating) on the nucleation -

controlled phase -transformation rates in intercalation materials. Experimental data analysis illustrates the validity of 

the applied approaches, which allows developing diagnostic criteria for distinguishing slow nucleation rate control 

from ot her possible rate -determining steps as well as obtaining quantitative estimates of the nucleation rate constants. 

References 

[1] Y. Li, F. El Gabaly, T. R. Ferguson, R. B. Smith, N. C. Bartelt, J. D. Sugar, K. R. Fenton, D. A. Cogswell, A. L. Kilcoyne, T .

Tyliszczak, M. Z. Bazant, W. C. Chueh, Nat. Mater. 2014 , 13 , 1149. 

[2] Y. Li, H. Chen, K. Lim, H. D. Deng, J. Lim, D. Fraggedakis, P. M. Attia, S. C. Lee, N. Jin, J. Moskon, Z. Guan, W. E. Gent, J .

Hong, Y. S. Yu, M. Gaberscek, M. S. Islam, M. Z. Bazant, W. C. Chueh, Nat. Mater. 2018 , 17 , 915. 

[3] L. Wu, V. De Andrade, X. Xiao, J. Zhang, J. Electrochem. En. Conv. Stor. 2019 , 16 , 041006. 

[4] L. Hong, L. Li, Y. K. Chen -Wiegart, J. Wang, K. Xiang, L. Gan, W. Li, F. Meng, F. Wang, J. Wang, Y. M. Chiang, S. Jin, M. 

Tang, Nat. Commun. 2017 , 8, 1194. 

[5] S. Y. Vassiliev, E. E. Levin, D. E. Presnov, V. A. Nikitina, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2019 , 166 , A82 9. 

[6] V. A. Nikitina, S. Y. Vassiliev, K. J. Stevenson, Adv. Energy Mater. 2020 , 1903933. 

[7] E. E. Levin, A. A. Kokin, D. E. Presnov, A. G. Borzenko, S. Y. Vassiliev, V. A. Nikitina, K. J. Stevenson, ChemElectroChem 

2020 , 7, 761. 

[8] A. R. Iarchuk, V. A. Nikitina, E. A. Karpushkin, V. G. Sergeyev, E. V. Antipov, K. J. Stevenson, A. M. Abakumov, 

ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6, 5090. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was s upported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant # 18 -29 -12097 mk). Iron Sulfide -Carbon Nanospindles as Sulfur Host for Li-S Batteries 

Dongjiu Xie , Shilin Mei, Zdravko Kochovski and Yan Lu 

Department of Electrochemical Energy Storage (EM -AEES ), Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien 

und Energie (HZB) , Hahn -Meitner -Pl atz 1,14069, Berlin, Germany. 

dongjiu.xie@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Recently, a lot of efforts are devoted into lithium -sulfur battery system due to its high theoretical capacity 

(1675 mAh g -1) and low cost , which could be a competitive candidate for energy storage in the future. 

However, it suffers from a poor cycling stability during charging -discharging, which is blamed to the 

notorious “shuttle effects” caused by lithium polysulfides (Li 2Sx, 4≤x≤8) [1 -2] . In our study, functional 

metal oxide/sulfide nanoparticles prepared by a colloidal route have been used as cathode host materials 

for lithium -sulfur batteries. Firstly, β -FeOOH nanospindles with a length of 250 -300 nm and a diameter 

of 60 nm were success fully synthesized through the hydrolysis of FeCl 3 in cetyltrimethylammonium 

bromide (CTAB) solution in a large batch [3]. After coating with polydopamine and followed with 

annealing at high temperature, iron oxide/sulfide was designed to be encapsulated i nto hollow cabon 

nanospindle with formation of a york -shell structure(shown in Fig.1) to suppress the “shuttle effect”. An 

improved performance has been obtained via the combination of physical adsorption of the hollow carbon 

nanospindle and chemical adsor ption of iron sulfide. Moreover, it is revealed that the replacement of iron 

oxide with sulfide inside the hollow carbon spindle can improve the specific capacity and rate capability 

of the lithium -sulfur batteries. 

Fig. 1: TEM and SEM images of polydop amine coated FeOOH nanospindles (a), Fe 3O4-carbon yolk -shell 

nanospindles (b) after etching 2 h with HCl solution (2 M) and FeS -carbon yolk -shell nanospindles (c). 

References: 

[1] Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar. “ Advances in lithium –sulfur batteries based on 

multifunctional cathodes and electrolytes”, Nature Energy, 2016,1.9, 16132. 

[2] M. Wild, L. O. Neil, T. Zhang, R. Purkayastha, G. Minton, M. Marinescu and G . J. Offer "Lithium 

sulfur batteries, a mechanistic re view." Energy & Environmental Science, 2015, 8, 3477 -3494. 

[3] X. Wang, X. Chen, L. Gao, H. Zheng, M. Ji, C. Tang, T. Shen and Z. Zhang, “ Synthesis of β -FeOOH 

and α -Fe 2O3 nanorods and electrochemical properties of β -FeOOH”, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 

2004, 14, 905 -907. Electrochemical Readout of Molecularly Imprinted Polymers: 

# Potentials and Challenges 

Aysu Yarman 1, Goksu Ozcelikay 2, Sevinc Kurbanoglu 2, Lei Peng 1, Cagla Kosak Soz 3, Sibel A. Ozkan 2,

Ulla Wollenberger 1 and Frieder W. Scheller 1

> 1

Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Karl -Liebknecht -Strasse 2 4-25, Potsdam 

14476, Germany 

> 2

Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Ankara University, Tandogan, Ankara 

06560, Turkey 

> 3

Faculty of Science, Material Science and Technologies, Tu rkish -German University, Sahinkaya Cad. No. 

86, Beykoz, Istanbul 34820, Turkey 

aysu.yarman@yahoo.de 

Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) are one of the most frequently studied alternative recognition 

elements in chromatography and sensorics. They are pre pared by polymerizing the target analyte (so -

called template) and functional monomers (in the presence or absence of cross -linkers). Subsequent 

removal of the template from the polymer network results in the formation of cavities with a molecular 

memory, w hich is complementary in size, shape and functionality to the template [1] .

Depending on the analyte of interest, three main approaches have been presented in literature for the 

electrochemical readout of MIP sensors [1]. Herein we present examples for eac h approach. 

i) Electroactive analytes: For both low - and high -molecular weight targets, faradaic current is measured, 

which is based on the direct redox transformation of the analyte a t the electrode. The analytical 

performance of MIPs for the anticancer d rug tamoxifen and the enzyme hexameric tyrosine -coordinated 

heme protein will be demonstrated [2,3]. 

ii) Catalytically active analytes: In the second approach redox active product s of enzymes, catalytically 

act ive MIPs or enzyme -labelled tracers can be di rectly m easured. In this regard, MIPs for the Alzheimer´s 

disease biomarker butrylcholinesterase and the melanoma biomarker tyrosinase will be illustrated here 

[4 ,5].

iii) Redox -inactive analytes: The m ost f requently studied method relies on the modulation of diffusional 

per meability of the polymer MIP -layer by target binding of a redox marker . MIPs for the peptide drug 

daptomycin and the anticancer drug tamoxifen w ill be presented [3 ,6]. 

In this presentation the potential and challenges of electrochemical readout of MIP se nsors will be 

summarized: Electrochemical methods are straightforward for the preparation of MIPs and analyte 

determination. However , up to now there has been no commercial example yet. 

References 

[1] Yarman, A.; Scheller, F.W. How Relia ble Is the Electro chemical Readout of MIP Sensors? Sensors 

2020, 20, 2677 .

[2] Yarman, A.; Scheller, F.W. The First Electrochemical MIP Sensor for Tamoxifen. Sen sors 2014, 14, 

7647 -7654. 

[3] Peng, L.; Yarman, A.; Jetzschmann, K.J.; Jeoung, J. -H.; Schad, D .; Dobbek, H.; Wol lenberger, U.; 

Scheller, F.W. Molecularly Imprinted Electropolymer for a Hexameric Heme Protein with Direct Electron 

Transfer and Peroxide Elec trocatalysis. Sensors 2016, 16, 272. 

[4] Ozcelikay, G.; Kurbanoglu, S.; Zhang, X.; Kosak Soz, C .; Wollenberger, U .; Ozkan, S.A.; Yarman, 

A.; Scheller, F.W. Electrochemical MIP Sensor for Butyrylcholinesterase. Polymers 2019, 11, 1970. 

[5]Yarman, A. Develop ment of a molecularly imprinted polymer -based electrochemical sensor for 

tyrosinase. Turkish Jo urnal of Chemistry 2018 , 42 , 346 -354. 

[6] Ozcelikay, G.; Kurbanoglu, S.; Yarman A., Scheller F.W., Ozkan, S.A. Au -Pt nanoparticles based 

molecularly imprinted na nosensor for electrochemical detection of the lipopeptide antibiotic drug 

Daptomycin. Sensors a nd Actuators B: Ch emical 20 20 , 320 , 1 28285.   

> Acknowledgment
> This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under
> Germany´s Excellence Strategy –EXC 2008/1 (UniSysCat) .

# Electroosmotic pump for implantable drug delivery system 

Taejwa Park , Junyeong Kang, Enh ua Zhu, Woonsup Shin* 

Department of Chemistry, BioMedical Engineering, Sogang University , Korea 

* shinws@sogang.ac.kr 

An i mplantable infusion pump is surgically imp lanted in the abdomen to deliver a drug to a target area 

through a catheter . It is beneficial for severe chronic and cancer pain patients. For the acute pain, 

morphine delivers directly to the intrathecal space , where the main neuro signals pass by. The am ount of 

1/100th or 1/300 th amount of the drug has the same efficacy of the delivery through intravenous or oral. 

The programmed intrathecal delivery significantly increases the patient’s quality of life by reducing the 

side effects of the medication since the drug does not circulate through the whole body . The 

electroosmotic pump (EOP) consists of two electrodes separated by a porous membrane, having no 

magnetic component, and ideal for the implantable device. We could demonstrate that the device is MRI 

co mpatible even during the run. The sub μL/min flow rate, low -power consumption , and long -term 

stability confirm the pump is suitable for the implantable drug delivery .Electro oxidation of Hydrogen Peroxide on a Pt -Metallized 

# 4-Mercaptopyridine Self -Assembled Monolayer on Au(111) 

Mathias Piescheck , Areeg Abdelrahman, Johannes M. Hermann, 

Heiko Müller, Timo Jacob, Ludwig A. Kibler 

Institut für Elektrochemie, Universität Ulm 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 47, 89069 Ulm, Germany 

mathias.piescheck@uni -ulm.de 

A systematic investigation of the hydrogen peroxide oxidation reaction (HPOR) on an Au(111) single 

crystal modified with a Pt metallized 4,4’ -dithiodipyridine self -assembled monolayer (SAM) in phosphate 

buffer (pH = 7.3) has been conducted. While the volta mmetric behavior of bare Au shows considerable 

electrocatalytic activity towards the HPOR, the inhibition of the oxidation reaction after modification with 

the SAM implies that adsorbed 4 -mercaptopyridine molecules do not catalyze the HPOR. However, SAM -

mo dified Au(111) shows a catalytic activity for the HPOR after a single metallization step fabricating Pt 

islands on -top. Hydrogen peroxide (HP) may then either react at the Pt nano islands similar to metal 

nanoparticles deposited on insulating SAMs [1] [2] or on the reactivated Au sites, made accessible by 

disordered structural changes of the SAM induced by the metallization [3] (Figure 1). The shape of the 

voltammetric profiles for the HPOR on repeatedly metallized SAMs suggests that the contribution of Au 

to the total current density gradually diminishes with increasing Pt coverage while the contribution of the 

Pt nano islands increases. The electrochemical behavior is dominated by Pt already at a coverage of 0.5 ML. 

Figure 1: HPOR on a Pt island (grey circles represent Pt atoms) and on the uncovered Au(111) surface .

Black bars represent the SAM of 4-mercaptopyridine molecules .

References 

[1] D. Bethell, M. Brust, D. J. Schiffrin, C. Kiely, J. . Electroanal . Chem . 409 (1996) 137. 

[2] P. Cea, S. Martín, A. González -Orive, H. M. Osorio, P. Quintín, L. Herrer, J. Chem.  Educ. 93 (2016) 

1441. 

[3] a) T. Baunach, V. Ivanova, D. M. Kolb, H. -G. Boyen, P. Ziemann, M. Büttner, P. Oelhafen, Adv. 

Mater. 2004 , 16, 2024; b) V. Ivanova, M. Manolova, D. M. Kolb, SSP 121 -123 (2007) 363. Composites Based on Three -dimensional Graphene and Transition 

# Metal Dichalcogenides as the Electrode Materials in Supercapacitors 

Masoud Foroutan , Elż bieta F rąckowiak 

Poznan University of Technology, Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry, 

60 -965, Poznan, Berdychowo 4, Polan d

masoud.foroutankoudahi@doctorate.put.poznan.pl 

Supercapacitors are capable of delivering high power density but moder ate energy density at the same 

time . In light of this fact, researchers are endeavoring to intensify the energy density of supercapacitors 

without deteriorating their power capabilities through designing components with more sophisticated 

structures . Among various adopted approaches for improving supercapacitors’ energy density, integrating 

high conductivity components such as carbonaceous materials, with faradaic materials, e.g., metal 

oxides/hydroxides/ sulfides , is of paramount importance . Considering di fferent carbonaceous structures, 

three -dimensional porous architecture based on graphene (3DG) is promising due to various physical and 

electrochemical features such as structural interconnectivities, lightweight, high active surface area, and 

unique poros ity . Due to excellent mechanical stability, 3DG can serve as a promising substrate for 

depositing other materials. Among redox -active metallic materials, transition metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDs) have attracted widespread attention since most of them have a low c ost and a high theoretical 

capacitance. Utilizing both 3DG and TMDs can improve the electrochemical performance of 

supercapacitors . Here, we demonstrate that combining 3DG with different spinel -type TMDs will give 

electrode materials that can deliver better electrochemical parameters compared to each single 

component . 3DG contains a wide range of pores with different diameters from n anometer to micrometer. 

Therefore, the redox -active material can be easily embedded inside the pores of the substrate. In this state, 

we may increase the energy density of the electrode material but at the sacrifice of losing its power 

density. Owing to this fact, electrode material based on 3DG and Co 3S4 was constructed with different 

ratio s to evaluate the proper proportio n of substrate and the redox -active material . In the same line and in 

separate procedures, the electrode materials based on 3DG , as the substrate , as well as Ni 3S4 and MnS 2

were synthesized . The prepared electrode materials were characterized by the variou s textural/structural 

methods: scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X -ray diffraction (XRD) , and Raman spectroscopy. For 

electrochemical characterization, electrode materials with 1 cm diameter and fairly 1 mm thickness were 

cut and symmetrically served as both positive and negative electrodes inside a Swagelok cell without 

adding any binder or conductive additive. Whatman paper was cut in a diameter of 1 2 mm and used as the 

separator. Before running the electrochemical experiments, the electrode material an d the separator were 

immersed in aqueous electrolyte (6 M KOH) for 24 hr to exchange the water in the pores with KOH. 

Cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge -discharge , and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 

experiments were carried out on a Biologic potentiostat/ galvanostat instrument. The electrochemical tests 

were performed in the applied potential range of 0 - 1 V. 

Figure 1. Optical photo of 3DG (a) , SEM images of bare 3DG ( b) and 3DG/Co 3S4 (c). 

Acknowledgements: The authors would like to ackn owledge the National Science Centre, Poland, for the 

financial support in the framework of the project 2018/31/B/ST4/01852. Investigation on the L ong -term Stability of Photosystem 1/R edox 

# Polymer Based B io -photoelectrode s

Fangyuan Zhao [a] , Felipe Conzuelo [a] , Volker Hartmann [b] , Adrian Ruff [a],

Marc M. Nowaczyk [b] , Matthias Rögner [b] , Wolfgang Schuhmann [a]  

> a

Analytical Chemi stry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES) , Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, 

D-44780 Bochum, Germany  

> b

Plant Biochemistry , Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitäts str. 

150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

fangyuan.zhao@rub.de 

Inspired by natural photosynthesis, great effort has been directed to the design and fabrication of semi -

artificial bio -photoelectrochemical devices able to harvest solar energy. Photosystem 1 (PS1 ), one o f the 

key enzymes that drive photosynthesis, has been increasingly investigated for this aim due to its strong 

reductive force upon light -induced charge separation processes. 

In our previous work, the use of an Os -complex modified redox polymer to wi re PS1 with the electrode 

surface has enabled efficient generation of photo currents [1]. While O 2 was used as terminal electron ac -

ceptor to scavenge the photo -generated electrons, superoxide radicals were formed leading to the genera -

tion of partially red uced reactive oxy gen species in the surroundings of the immobilized protein com -

plexes, resulting in the inactivation of PS1 . In consequence, only a limited long -term stability was 

observed for the bioelectrode under illumination. 

An in -depth evaluation o f the PS1/redox polymer -based biocathode was performed by means of scanning 

photoelectrochemical microscopy , revealing pathways for the g eneration of oxygen radicals [2]. Thus, in 

order to prevent the deleterious effects of generated reactive oxygen specie s, the operation of biophotoca -

thodes under anaerobic conditions is indispensable. The careful selection of an electron scavenger capable 

of efficient electron extraction even in the absence of O 2 made the operation of the PS1 -based 

photoelectrode with an extens ively improved long -term stability possible [3] .

References: 

[1] T. Kothe, S. Pöller, F. Zhao, P. Fortgang, M. Rögner, W. Schuhmann, N. Plumeré, Chem. Eur. J. 

2014 , 20 , 11029 –11034. 

[2] F. Zhao, S. Hardt, V. Hartmann, H. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rö gner, N. Plumeré, W. 

Schuhmann, F. Conzuelo, Nat.  Commun. 2018 , 9, 1973 

[3] F. Zhao, A. Ruff, M. Rögner, W. Schuhmann, F. Conzuelo , J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 , 141 , 5102 Nonaqueous Zinc -organic Battery with Ultra -long life and Wide 

# Operating Temperature 

Nan Wang , Yonggang Wang *

Department of Chemistry , Fudan University 

Shanghai 200433, P. R. China 

ygwang@fudan.edu.cn 

Zinc (Zn) metal is an attractive anode material for nex t generation batteries due to their high 

theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capacities, abundance, nontoxicity, and cost -effectiveness. [1 -3]

Rechargeable Zn metal batteries using a mild aqueous electrolyte, which showing promising 

electrochemical perf ormance, are extracting extensive attention of researchers. [4, 5 ] This directly drove the 

recent renaissance of rechargeable Zn battery development, such as Zn//MnO 2, [6, 7 ] Zn//V 2O5, [8, 9 ]

Zn//hexacyanoferrate. [10, 11 ] Unfortunately, the inescapable H 2 evolution and dendrite formation on Zn 

anode join hands with the structure collapse of host materials in cathode setting an intrinsic limit on the 

cycle life and the practical of the Zn metal rechargeable batteries. 

Herein, we have successfully demonstra ted a promising nonaqueous Zn -organic battery , in which the 

phenanthrenequinone macrocyclic trimer (PQ -MCT) and Zn foil serve as cathode and anode, 

respectively, while N, N -dimethylformamide (DMF) solution containing ZnTFMS (ZnTFMS/DMF) 

serves as electroly te. Its operation depends on the reversible coordination reaction (C=O/C -O-0.5Zn 

conversion) in cathode and the Zn plating/striping in anode, in parallel with Zn 2+ transfer in between, 

showing a rock -chair mechanism. It is found that the formation of Zn 2+ -DMF complex enable Zn 2+ 

uniformly transported to the surface of Zn electrode, facilitating dendrite -free Zn platting. In addition, the 

aprotic nature of the electrolyte eliminate s the issue of undesired H 2 evolution on Zn surface, increasing 

the reversibil ity of platting/stripping. Therefore, Zinc anode shows high cycle stability in such electrolyte. 

Furthermore, owing the insolubility in DMF solution and the high reversibility of coordination reaction, 

PQ -MCT can serve as a robust cathode with fast kinetic s. As a result, such Zn//PQ -MCT full battery 

exhibits super -long life (20000 cycles) and high power/energy densities. Finally, benefiting from the low 

freezing point and high boiling point, this full battery even can be operated in wide temperature range o f

220 ℃ (from -70 ℃ to 150 ℃). 

References: 

[1] J. Zheng, Q Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y Deng, L. Wang, D. C. 

Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok, L. A. Archer, Science 

2019 , 366, 645 -648. 

[2] K. E. K. Sun, T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu, P. Chen, Chem. Eur. J . 2018 , 24, 1667 -1673. 

[3] D. Kundu, S. H. Vajargah, L. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast, L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci. 

2018 ,11, 881 -892. 

[4] Z. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Dong, J. Huang, Y . Wang, Y. Xia,  Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 130, 11911 -

11915. 

[5] W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T Gao, F. Han, R. Hu, M. Zhu, C. Wang, J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139, 9775 -9778. 

[6] N. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Long, X. Liu, F. L i, J. Chen, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 405. 

[7] C. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Pan, X. Liu, G. Wang, D. Cao, Electrochimica Acta. 2014, 116, 404 -412. 

[8] H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou, G. Cui, Nat. Commun. 

2019 , 10, 1 -12. 

[9] P. Senguttuvan, S. D. Han, S. Kim, A. L. Lipson, S. Tepavcevic, T. T. Fister, I. D. Bloom, A. K. 

Burrell, C. S. Johnson, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6, 1600826. 

[10] L. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Zhou, Z. Liu,  Adv. Energy Mater. 2015 , 5, 1400930. 

[11] M. Pasta, C. D. Wessells, N. Liu, J. Nelson, M. T. McDowell, R. A. Huggins, M. F. Toney, Y. Cui, 

Nat. commun. 2014 , 5, 3007. Identification of active sites in ultralow -loading PtFe composite ORR 

# catalysts with high utilization 

LiyuanGong ab , ErguiLuo ab , Changpeng Liu ab* , Junjie Ge ab* and Wei Xing ab*  

> a

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytica l Chemistry, Jilin Province Key , Laboratory of Low Carbon ,

Chemica l Power, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemist ry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

Changchun, Jilin, 130022 (P. R. China)  

> b

School of Applied Chemistry and Eng ineering, University of Science and Technology of China 

Hefei, Anhui, 230026 (P. R. China) 

gejj@ciac.ac.cn ; liuchp@ciac.ac.cn ; xingwei@ciac.ac.cn 

Cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR ) governs overall proton exchange membrane fuel cell 

(PEMFC) performance . Among all the catalysts available, the Pt -based catalyst is well deserved the best 

oxygen reduction catalyst , which makes them practically irreplaceable at present . However, a vast amount 

of platinum (Pt) is require d due to the sluggish ORR kinetics, especially in harsh acidic me dia , which 

casts a blight on their economic competitiveness and sustainable development. Th is constraints are 

pressing incentives for exploring catalysts with high Pt utilization . The most mature alternatives is Pt 

alloy nanoparticle s with substantial enha ncement in activity and significant reduction in Pt loading [1] . The 

electronic structure of surface Pt atoms can be tailored by the s o-ca lled geometric effect and ligand effect ,

which are mainly originating from the latt ice mismatch and heterometallic interaction . Here, we 

synthesized a hollow structured Pt Fe composite catalysts by acid leaching. T he usage of Pt could be 

reduced without com promising the ORR activity comparing to pure Pt catalysts . Based on a series of 

control experiments analysis, h igh -resolution electron microscope image, and CO stripping data [2] , we can 

identify the tr ue active site of this complex catalysts, which possess non -uniform particles after high 

temperature calcination and acid leaching. The largest contribution to catalytic activity is from the small -

sized hollow particles, where the improved ORR activity was due to the weakened oxygen -binding 

strength induced by the electronic structure of the segregated Pt -skin surface. 

Acknowledgements 

The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21633008, 21875243, 

21 673220, U1601211), National Science and Technology Major Project (2017YFB0102900), Jilin 

Province Science and Technology Development Program (20190201270JC, 20180101030JC). Part of the 

computational time is supported by the High -Performance Computing Cente r of Jilin University and Jilin 

Province, as well as Network and Computing Center of Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. Prof. 

Wei Xing thanks Gusu talent program for the financial support. 

References 

[1]  Z. Zhao, C. Chen, Z. Liu , J. Huang, M. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Huang,  Adv Mater  2019 , 31 ,

e1808115. 

[2]  Y. Chen, J. Shi, S. Chen,  The Journal of Physical Chemistry C  2015 , 119 , 7138 -7145. 

Fig.1 HRTEM of PtFe /C  Fig. 2 XRD of P tFe /C and reference 

samples 

Fig.3 LSV of P tFe /C and reference 

samples Reliable Differential Capacitance from Computer Simulation of Ionic 

# Liquid Confined Between Charged Electrodes 

I.V. Voroshylova 1, H. Ers 2, V. Ivaništšev 2, C.M. Pereira 3, M.N.D.S. Cordeiro 1

> 1

LAQV@REQUIMTE, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Depa rtamento de Química e 

Bioquímica, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169 -007 Porto, Portugal 

> 2

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, Tartu 50411, Estonia 

> 3

CIQUP – Physical Analytical Chemistry and Electrochemistry group, Faculdade de Ciências, 

Univers idade do Porto, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169 -007 Porto, 

Portugal 

voroshylova.iuliia@fc.up.pt 

The electric double layer (EDL) is a region occurring at the interface between two phases, most 

commonly an electrode and an e lectrolyte. Differential capacitance has central role in the theories of 

EDL. First of all, it is one of the few observables that can be directly compared to experimental 

measurements. Additionally, it describes the magnitude of electrolyte response to the change in applied 

potential. Finally, the differential capacitance is in the heart of modern technologies such as 

supercapacitors and batteries [1]. While the basic theory behind the interface between dilute electrolytes 

and electrodes has been establishe d, the EDL occurring between metal surfaces and concentrated 

electrolytes, such as ionic liquids, represents a challenge for theory [2,3]. Using a computational 

approach, the capacitance -potential curve, C(U), for such systems can be derived from molecular 

dynamics (MD) simulations. Although a differential capacitance for various ionic liquids accessed via 

MD simulations has been reported in the literature [4,5], retrieving a C(U) curve from the MD trajectories 

is not trivial. Usually, it implies a differen tiation of the charge -potential curve. Independently on MD 

methodology implemented (i.e., simulation with a constant charge or constant potential applied), the 

curve fitting is a crucial step, as the resulting differential capacitance strongly depends on t he fitting 

method used and must be manipulated with care. 

The present work focuses on the MD simulation data treatment in the process of C(U) curve fitting, 

however, always taking into account the position of surface charge plane [6]. We consider various 

simulations techniques and approaches for the treatment of simulation data. We demonstrate that the 

shape of the capacitance curve is largely determined by the electronic structure, which agrees with 

previous experimental results [7]. A more detailed analy sis provides insights towards potentially useful 

combinations of electrode and electrolyte, capable of yielding significantly higher capacitances that are 

required for advanced electrochemical devices .

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Projects UID/QUI/50006/2020 (LAQV@REQUIMTE) 

and UID/QUI/00081/2020 (CIQUP) with funding from FCT/MCTES through national funds . The study 

was also supported by  the Estonian Research Council (grants IUT20 -13, PSG249, and PUT1107) and the 

European Regional Developmen t Fund (grant TK141). 

[1] G. Chatel and D.R. Macfarlane, Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 8132 (2014). 

[2] A.A. Kornyshev and R. Qiao, J. Phys. Chem. C .118, 18285 (2014). 

[3] M.V. Fedorov and A.A.Kornyshev, Chem. Rev. 114, 2978 (2014). 

[4] D. Bedrov, J. Vatamanu, Z. Hu, J. Non -Cryst. Solids. 407, 339 (2015). 

[5] M. Sha, Q. Dou, F. Luo, G. Zhu, G. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 6, 12556 (2014) 

[6] I.V. Voroshylova, M. Lembinen, H. Ers, M. Mišin, V.A. Koverga, C.M. Pereira, V.B. Ivaništšev, 

M.N.D.S. Cordeiro, Electro chim.  Acta, 317, 76 (2019) 

[7] R. Costa, C.M. Pereira and A.F. Silva, Electrochim. Acta, 167, 421 (2015). Glucose Sensing Electrode Fabrication using Unnatural Amino Acid 

# Incorporated and Ferrocene Conjugated GDH 

Quan Yuzhong 1, Woonsup Shin 2

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 121 -742, Korea. 

> 1

qyz0524 @sogang.ac.kr; 2shinws@sogang.ac.kr 

Electrochemical enzymatic glucose sensors measure glucose concentration through a current generated 

by an enzyme specifically oxidizing glucose. However, the cofactor in which this reaction occurs is 

buried inside the macromolecule of the enzyme, the efficiency of electrons transferred to the electrode 

surface is very low. Therefore, the method of coating the electrode surface using various linkers to 

crosslink ing the glucose oxidizing enzyme and the redox polymer that assists electron transfer is 

frequently applied. In this study, we use the modified enz yme to fabricate the glucose sensor which is 

possible to direct electron transfer, without using a separate mediator and cross -lin king process. An azide 

group was introduced on the surface of glucose dehydrogenase through the genetic incorporation of an 

un natural amino acid, then a small molecule of ferrocene containing alkyne combines on the surface of 

GDH through the “click” reaction. The electrode was simply prepared by drop -coating the modified 

enzyme on the screen printed carbon electrode, dried in roo m temperature. We measured the glucose in 

a range of 0.1~1.0 mM in PBS solution, used the electrode prepared above as working electrode, Pt wire 

as counter, Ag/AgCl as reference . The results proved that the direct electron transfer efficiency was 

clearly i mproved compared to the electrode using an enzyme of a natural structure with no modification .

Enzyme activity in each process was also observed and compared to that of natural structures. Elucidating the Mechanism of Li Insertion into Fe 1-xS/Carbon via in 

# Operando Synchrotron Studies 

C. Li †, A. Sarapulova, † K. Pfeifer, † G. Melinte, ⊥ X. Luo, †, ‡ Q. Fu, † N. Casati, # E. Welter, ‖ and S . Dsoke * †, §  

> †

Institute for Applied Materials (IAM),  ⊥ Institute of Nanotechnology (INT), and ‡ Karlsruhe Nano Micro 

Facility (KNMF), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann -von -Helmholtz -Platz 1, Eggenstein -

Leopoldshafen, 76344, Germany 

> §

Helmholtz Institute U lm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), Helmholtzstraße 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> #

Paul Scherrer Institute Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 

> ‖

Deutsches Elektronen -Synchrotron DESY -A Research Centre of the Helmholtz Association, Notk estraße 85, D -

22607 Hamburg, Germany 

E-mail: li.chengping@partner.kit.edu 

The detailed understanding of kinetic and phase dynamics occurring in lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) is 

crucial for their further improvement. We previously r eported that Fe 1-xS/C nanocomposite shows a 

promising performance as anode material for LIBs. However, the underlying lithium storage mechanism 

was not entirely understood during the 1 st cycle. In this work, we apply in operando nondestructive 

synchrotron X -ray diffraction (SRD) and X -ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) to directly track the 

complex electrochemical reaction mechanisms during the 1 st (de)lithiation processes in the Fe 1-xS/C 

nanocomposite. The combination of in opera ndo techniques enables the uncovering of the pronounced 

electronic changes and structural alterations on different length -scales. Additionally, the investigation of 

kinetics processes, morphological changes and internal resistance dynamics are discussed. T hese results 

reveal that the phase transition of Fe 1-xS→Li 2Fe 1-xS2→Fe 0+Li 2S occurs during the 1 st lithiation process. The 

redox reaction of Fe 2+ →Fe 0 is confirmed by in operando XAS. During the 1 st (de) -lithiation process, Fe 0

and Li 2S convert to Li 2-yFe 1-xS2 and Li + is extracted from the Li 2S to Li 2-yS phase. The phase transition from 

Li 2S to Li 2-yS is not detected in previous findings. After the 1 st de -lithiation process, amorphous Fe 1-xS

nanoparticles are embedded within the remaining Li 2S matrix [1 -3].     

> Fig. 1 In operando XRD and XAS of

Fe 1-xS/C during the 1st lithiation and de -lithiation process es .

Acknowledgments: 

C. Li received financial support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC) during pursuit PhD degree in 

the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. This work contributes to the research performed at CELEST (Center 

for Electrochemical Energy Storage Ulm -Karlsruhe ). This work has also benefited from the synchrotron: 

the Paul Scherrer Ins titute (PSI), Swiss Light Source (SLS ) and P65 Applied X -ray Absorption 

Spectroscopy (PETRA  Ⅲ, DESY). 

References :

[1] C. Li, et al., Chem. Mater . 2019 , 31, 5633 –5645. 

[2] C. Li et al., ChemSusChem 2020 , 13, 986 –995 .

[3] Y. Zhang, et al. , Adv. Funct. Mater . 2015 , 25, 481 –489. Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Ionic Liquid at Electrified 

# Interface: Impact of Electrode Surface Crystallography 

I.V. Voroshylova 1, M. Lembinen 2, H. Ers 3, V. Ivaništšev 3, C.M. Pereira 4, M.N.D.S. Cordeiro 1

> 1

LAQV@REQUIMTE, Faculdade de Ciências, Univers idade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169 -007 

Porto, Portugal 

> 2

Institute of Physics, University of Tartu, Ostwaldi 1, Tartu 50411, Estonia 

> 3

Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, Tartu 50411, Estonia 

> 4

CIQUP – Physical Analytical Chemistry and Electrochemistry group, Faculdade de Ciências, 

Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169 -007 Porto, Portugal 

voroshylova.iuliia@fc.up.pt 

Recent progress in the application of ionic liquids (ILs) as electrolytes in supercapacitors, Li -ion batt eries, 

and actuators  [1]  has stimulated studies of the electrical double layer (EDL) in this media [2] , as the EDL 

structure affects the performance of all listed electrochemical devices. Due to a strong anion –cation 

interaction in ILs , the ionic layering near the surface is induced [ 3], resulting in an alternatively charged 

ionic structure (see Figure 1).  To calculate the capacitance -potential dependence, C(U), in such complex 

systems , advanced theoretical models are being developed along with numerous com puter simulations 

[4,5 ]. In general, with the focus on the electrolyte side of the EDL, different models give two types of 

C(U) curves: with one (bell -shaped) or two (camel -shaped) maxima near the potential of zero charge 

[5,6 ]. In this molecular dynamics (MD) study, we show the correlation between the electrode surface 

corrugation in conjunction with the electrolyte atoms sizes and the shape of the C(U) curve. For this 

reason, we chose well -studied 1 -butyl -3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMImPF 6) IL and 

three charged gold surfaces, namely, Au(111), Au(110), and Au(100). Special attention is paid to the 

effect of surface crystallography on the calculated C(U) dependence in reference to the experimental data. 

Figure 1: Ion number density contour pl ots on the electrode’s surface. The cation (red) – anion (blue) 

layering structure is visible, especially at high electrode charges (in the top and bottom of green lines). 

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Projects UID/QUI/50006/2020 (LAQV@REQ UIMTE) 

and UID/QUI/00081/2020 ( CIQUP) with funding from FCT/MCTES through national funds . The study 

was also supported by  the Estonian Research Council (grants IUT20 -13, PSG249, and PUT1107) and the 

European Regional Development Fund (grant TK141). 

[1] G. Chatel and D.R. Macfarlane, Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 8132 (2014). 

[2] I.V. Voroshylova, M. Lembinen, H. Ers, M. Mišin, V.A. Koverga, C.M. Pereira, V.B. Ivaništšev, 

M.N.D.S. Cordeiro, Electrochim. Acta, 317, 76 (2019) 

[3] M.Z. Bazant, B.D. Storey, A.A. Kornyshe v, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 046102 (2011). 

[4] M. Salanne, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17, 14270 (2015). 

[5] Z.A.H. Goodwin, G. Feng, A.A. Kornyshev, Electrochim.  Acta. 225, 190 (2017). 

[6] M. Girotto, R.M. Malossi, A.P. dos Santos, Y. Levin, J. Chem.  Phys. 14 8, 193829 (2018). Cyclic Voltammetry is invasive on a Bioelectrochemical System s

Sanne M. de Smit , Cees J.N. Buisman, Johannes H. Bitter, David P.B.T.B. Strik 

Wageningen University and Research 

Axis -Z, Bornse Weilanden 9, 6708 WG Wageningen, The Netherlands 

sanne.desmit@wur.nl 

In general electrochemical characterization techniques such as cyclic voltammetry (CV) and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are regarded as non -invasive techniques. Here we show that non -

invasiveness does not simply account for the application of cyclic voltammetry (CV) on a

bioelectrochemical system . This finding requires a rethinking on the usefulness of CV on 

bioelectrochemistry. CV is widely used in bioelectrochem stry to measure biocat holytic activity, electrode 

composition or reaction kinetics. Although CV is considered to be an innocent technique, a recent study 

from Jourdin, et al. [1] showed that the cathodic current of a bioelectrochemical CO 2 reduction system 

increased after a CV scan was performed on the system. This finding led to the objective of our study, to 

study the effect of CV on microbial electrosynthesis. A bioe lectrochemical system was developed with a 

mixed culture biofilm in which CO 2 was elongated to acetate. The effects of CV on both reactor 

performance and biocathode composition were studied. CV repetitively enhanced current density for up to 

20 days. Addi tionally, a different oxidation peak was observed during the first cycle of the CV scan 

compared to the subsequent two cycles. This indicated that a different oxidation reaction occurred during 

the first cycle compared to the subsequent two cycles. To furt her investigate this change, the metal 

composition of the biocathode was studied. The concentrations of Fe, Co, Al, Ba, Mn, Mo and biomass 

increased in the biotic catholyte predominantly during the oxidation peak of the first CV cycle, indicating 

these com pounds were released from the cathode . The biocatholyte concentrations of the released metals 

were still increased at the end of the CV, they decreased rapidly within four hours after the CV at the 

cathodic operation potential of -0.85 V vs SHE. 

The resul ts from this study show that CV is not simply an analysis technique, but causes changes at the 

biocathode. Invasiveness of CV on other bioelectrochemical systems should be investigated to understand 

the potential impact of this technique. Present findings are potential applicable to modify or provide in -situ 

maintenance on biocathodes. Moreover, our findings form a starting point for follow up studies 

inve stigating the mechanisms behind the possible catalytic effects of the performed analysis method. 

[1] L. Jourdin, S. M. T. Raes, C. J. N. Buisman, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, Frontiers in Energy Research 

2018 , 6.NIR -Emitting Organic -Inorganic Ureasil -based Hybrid Electrolytes 

# for Electrochromic Devices 

M. Fernandes a, H. M. R. Gonçalves b, , S. C. Barros c, S. Pereira d, R . A. S. Ferreira e, L. D. Carlos e, M. M. 

Silva c, E. Fortunato d, V. de Zea Bermudez a

a) Departme nt of Chemistry and CQ -VR University of Trás -os -Montes e Alto Douro, 5000 -801 Vila Real 

b) REQUIMTE, Instituto Superior de Engenharia do Porto, 4200 -072 Porto, Portuga 

c) Department of Chemistry, University of Minho, Gualtar, 4710 -057 Braga, Portugal 

d) D epartment of Materials Science/CENIMAT, Faculty of Sciences and Technology of the New 

University of Lisbon, Campus of Caparica, 2829 -516 Caparica, Portugal 

e) Department of Physics and CICECO Aveiro Institute of Materials, University of Aveiro, 3810 -193 

Av eiro, Portugal; 

mspf@utad.pt ; vbermude@utad.pt 

Energy consumption in residential and commer cial/ office buildings has a significant impact on the 

environment, contributing signifi cantly to greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. Not 

surprisingly, energy efficiency has become a priority target for the ene rgy policies in many countries. The 

em erging concepts of zero and nearly -zero energy buildings call for new materials and new technologies. 

In this context, t he interest in the development of smart electrochromic windows (ECWs) , enabling the 

fine control of the incident solar spectrum (heat ( near -infra red (NIR) region) and sunlight (visible region) )

has grown significantly in t he last few years [1]. Such w indows re ly on electrochromic devices (ECDs). 

ECDs undergo a r eversible color change upon application of a small voltage (1 -3 V) . Their arc hetypal 

configuration comprises a multilayer structure: an EC film of the cathodically coloring tungsten trioxide 

(WO 3), an electro lyte film , an EC film of the anodically coloring nickel oxide ( NiO ), an d two outermost 

transparent conductive oxide (TCO) lay ers , such as visible -transparent -indium tin oxide (ITO) [1], or 

visible - and NIR -transp arent amorphous indium zinc oxide (a -IZO) [2 (a) ]. 

Aiming the production of NIR -emitting smart ECWs providing additional indoors human comfort in 

buildings , electrolytes doped with erbium salts and/or complexes [ 2 (a -b)] were reported. Herein we used 

the s ol -gel method [2(b) ] to prepare transparent and thin films resulting from the co -condensation of two 

urea cross -linked poly(oxyethylene)/siloxane matrices: a di -ureasil d-U(Y) [3] and a tri -ureasil t-U(Y’) 

[4], where Y=600, 900, 2000 and Y’=400, 3000 and 5 000 represent the average molecula r weight of the 

polymers chains . The t -U(Y’) materials were doped with a commercial ionic liquid , and the d -U(Y) 

matrices were do ped wi th e rbium complexes. For comparison purposes non -doped matrices were also 

prepared. ECD s incorporating optimized electrolytes were assembled and the ir electro -optical 

performance was evaluated .

Acknowledgements: This work was funded by Foundation for Scie nce and Technology (FCT) and 

FEDER through the POCI - COMPETE 2020 - Operational Progra mme Competitiveness and In -

ternationalisation in Axis I - Strengthen ing research, technological development and innovation 

(UniRCell (SAICTPAC/0032/2015 and POCI -01 -0145 -FEDER - 016422), UIDB/00616/2020 and 

UIDP/00616/2020) . M. Fernandes and S. Barros a ckno wledge FCT -UTAD and FCT -UM for the 

contracts in the scope of Decreto -Lei 57/2016 – Lei 57/2017 , respectively , and H.M.R. Gonçalves 

acknowledge s project POCI -01 -0145 -FEDE R-030858.  This work was developed within the scope of the 

project CICECO -Aveiro Institu te of Materials (UIDB/50011/2020 & UIDP/50011/2020) .

References: 

1. Granqvist, C.G.; Arvizu, M.A.; Pehlivan, I.B.; Qu, H. -Y.; Wen, R. -T.; Niklasson, G.A. Electrochim. 

Acta , 2018, 259, 1170. 

2. a) Nunes, S.C. ; Saraiva, S.M. ; Pereira, R.F.P. ; Pereira, S. ; Silva, M.M. ; Carlos, L.D. ; Fortunato, E. ;

Ferreira, R.A.S. ; Rego, R. ; Zea Bermudez, V. de ACS Appl . Ener . Mater ., 2019 . b) Fernandes, M.; de Zea 

Bermudez, V. “Sol -gel ma terials for smart electrochromic devices”, In Chemical Solution Synthesis for 

Materials Design and Thin Film Device Applicatio ns , Soumen Das and Sandip Dhara Eds., Elsevier Inc. 

Cambridge, USA, 2020 .

3. de Zea Bermudez, V.; Carlos, L.D.; Alcácer, L. Chem. Mater. 1999, 11, 569. 

4. Freitas, V. T. ; Lima, P. P. ; Ferreira ; R. A. S. ; Pecoraro, E. ; Fer nandes , M. ; de Zea Bermudez, V. , Carlos, 

L. D, J .Sol -Gel Sci .Tec h.65 , 2013 , 83 .Spectroelectrochemistry of Nonunity Stoichiometry 

# Electrode Reactions: A Theoretical Study 

José María Gómez -Gil , Angela Molina, Eduardo Laborda, Juan García -Martínez 

Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Química, Regional Campus of International 

Exc ellence“Campus Mare Nostrum”,Universidad de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain 

jm.gomezgil@um.es 

Key electrochemical processes are reported to follow non -unity stoichiometries in a variety of 

scientific and technological fields [1] : energy storage and conversion ( eg ., halides in dye -sensitized solar 

cells, hydrogen production), environmental monitoring and assessment ( eg ., mercury complexes) and 

electrosynthesis ( eg ., dimerization of the electrode product), among others (s ee Scheme I). 

Scheme I. Schematic and examples of electrochemical reactions with nonunity stoichiometry. 

The full characterization of this kind of processes can be challenging considering the number of 

parameters to be determined, at least: the stoichio metric and diffusion coefficients of the redox species, 

the number of electrons transferred, and the formal potential of the couple O/R. Hence, as in other 

contexts [2,3] , the joint analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and spectroscopic measurements ca n be 

advantageous for comprehensive and sound studies. 

Attending to the above, a general theoretical treatment is developed in this work to model the 

spectroelectrochemical response at macroelectrodes of reversible electrode reactions with complex 

stoichi ometry a:b (see Scheme I). The theory is applicable to any voltammetric perturbation and whatever 

the diffusion coefficient and bulk concentration of the redox species. Simple equations are derived for the 

current -potential response, surface concentrations and concentration profiles of the most common 2:1, 

1:2, 3:1 and 1:3 cases. From the theoretical solutions obtained, the value of spectroelectrochemistry is 

assessed in the elucidation and quantitative characterization of the reaction stoichiometry. Thus, the 

voltabsortometric and chronoabsortometric responses are investigated both in normal and parallel modes, 

establishing suitable experimental approaches, diagnosis criteria and protocols for data analysis. 

Acknowledgements 

Fundación Séneca - Agencia de Ci encia y Tecnología Región de Murcia (19887/GERM/15). 

References 

[1] Gómez -Gil, J. M.; Laborda, E.; Molina, Anal.  Chem. 2020 , 92 , 3728 and references therein. 

[2] Kaim, W.; Fiedler, J., Chem. Soc.  Rev. 2009 , 38 , 3373. 

[3] Molina, A.; Laborda, E.; Gómez -Gil, J. M.; Martínez -Ortiz, F.; Compton, R. G., J. Electroanal. Chem. 

2018 , 819 , 202 .Chemically Modified Electrodes Based on Methylene Blue and SBA -15 

# composites 

Nicoleta Cotolan 1, Liana Maria M uresan 2, Graziella Liana Turdean 3, Diana Bogdan 4, Andrea Salis 5

> 1,2,3

“Babeș -Bolyai” University , Department of Chemical Engineering, 11, Arany Jan os St, 40028 

Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 4

National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular Technologies, 67 -103 

Donat h, 400293 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 5

Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Geologiche, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, CSGI, and CNBS, 

Cittadella Universitaria SS 554 bivio Sestu, Monserrato, 09042 Cagliari, Italy 

E-mail:  ncotolan@chem.ubbcluj.ro 

The aim of the presen t work is to assess and develop chemically modified electrodes based on a 

composite formed by Methylene blue (MB) and a mesoporous ordered structured ( SBA -15 ) [1 ,2 ].

Methylene blue could be a mediator, which act s as electrocatalyst in certain redox reaction s (e.g. 

detection of cancer marker s). In addition, Methylene blue is a disinfectant and an antioxidant. It also is an 

an tidote in case of intoxications by nitrates (NO 3-), nitrites (NO 2-) or chlorates (ClO 3-) [3].

The preparation of the modified electrode was realized by drop -casting method, followed by evaporation 

of the solve nt after deposition of a solution containing MB and SBA -15 on a glassy carbon surface. The 

obtained composite layer was protected by a Nafion film. 

The GC/SBA -15 -MB/Nafion modified electrode will be characterized by electrochemical methods of 

investigation (cyclic voltammetry and square wave voltammetry) in order to obtain the electrochemical 

parameters ( ΔE, Eo’, Ipa/Ipc, FWHM (full width at half maximum)) . The influence of the experimental 

conditions (scan rate and pH) on the electrochemical behavior and the stability of the GC/SBA -15 -

MB/Nafion modified electrode will be investigated. Also, t he morpho -str uctural characterization will be 

evaluated by Atomic force microscopy, AFM; Energy -dispersive X -ray spectroscopy, EDX and Scanning 

Electron Microscopy, SEM .

The GC/SBA -15 -MB/Nafion modified electrode will be tested for H2O2 detection. 

[1] Salis A., Parsons D. F., Bostr �m M., Medda L., Barse B., Ninham B. W., Monduzzi M., (2010 ), Ion 

specific surface charge density of SBA -15 mesoporous silica , Langmuir, 26, 2484 –2490 .

[2] Cotolan, N., Mureşan, L. M., Salis, A ., Barbu -Tudoran L., Turdean G. L., (2020 ) Electrochemical 

Detection of L ead Ions with Ordered Mesoporous Silica –Modified Glassy Carbon Electrodes. Water Air 

& Soil Pollut ion , 231, 217 -22 4.

[3] Levin R. L., Degrange M. A., Bruno G. F., Del Mazo, C. D., Taborda, D . J., Griotti, J. J., & B oullon, 

F. J. (2004 ) Methylene blue reduces mortality and morbidity in vasoplegic patients after cardiac surgery. 

The Annals of Thoracic Surgery , 77, 496 -499 .

Acknowledgements 

The research for this work was funded by the Ministry of Education and Research , through the project 

32 PFE/19 .10.2018 .Scale -up Effect on Performance of Reversible Chlor -Alkali Electro -

# Absortion Cells 

M. Carvela, J. Lobato, M .A. Rodrigo 

Chemical Engineering Department , University of Castilla -La Mancha .

Av. Camilo Jose Cela n 12, Enrique Costa Novella Building, Ciudad Real (13071) Spain 

mireya.carvela@uclm.es 

Nowadays, because of global warming, use of renewable energies has become of a paramount importanc e. 

Europe and other countries all around the world are putting a great effort on the introduction of the 

renewable energies (e.g. solar and wind energies) in the electricity grid but there are still some 

inconveniences that limit their implementation such as the capital costs and their intermittent nature. To 

overcome the last one, a storage medium or energy carrier is needed. It is in this scenario where the 

hydrogen technology plays a very important role as it can be stored and produced from primary energ y

sources [1]. Flow batteries based on hydrogen -halogen compounds have generated interest to different 

researchers as renewable energy storage systems [2]. Because of relatively facile chlorine redox kinetics, 

H2 -Cl2 cells are capable of operation with low er activation loss associated to the chlorine electrode 

compared with the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction of the H 2-O2 based fuel cells. 

The fuel cell and the electrolyzer operation modes can be carried out in the same electrochemical cell and 

with the same electrodes. Thus, a reversible electrochemical cell can be operated as electrolyzer or fuel cell 

depending on the reagents that are fed into the electrodic compartments. It allows the use of a single 

equipment for the storage of energy as chemicals. Thus, in a reversible cell, the same electrodes are used 

in both operation modes, so they must show good performance when acting as anodes or cathodes, because 

they are going to perform in both roles. For hydrogen oxidation, platinum is known to be a very good 

electrode. For chloride oxidation, Mixed Metal Oxides (MMO) based on RuO 2 are the most widely used 

electrodes [ 3]. It is interesting to assess the performance of both typ es of electrodes when they are used in 

the reduction of chlorine and protons to produce hydrogen. 

In this work , the performance of a reversible electrochemical cell for the storage of energy using the 

chloralkaline process was investigated. In a first sta ge , we checked that the anode composition (Ru/Pt ratio) 

influences in the performance of the reversible cell . It was found that a molar ratio Ru:Pt within the range 

3-4 was good enough to obtain a good performance in both operation modes [4]. In the second stage ,

different models or configuration of cells are tested . Results demonstrate that design of the cell has a superb 

significance on the performances obtained [5]. Based on these results, we used a cell larger than the first 

cell we designed, in order t o check the performance of the reversible cell at different scales . We observed 

that the results in both cells were similar, and in the scaled -up fuel cell, the influence of applied (from 25 

to 80 ºC) temperature is more relevant. 

These results demonstrate that work ing with larger cells while maintaining the efficiency of the process is 

possible 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness and European 

Union through project CTQ2017 -91190 -EXP (AEI/FE DER, UE) is gratefully acknowledged. 

1. Yilanci A, Dincer I and Ozturk HK. 2009. A review on solar -hydrogen/fuel cell hybrid energy systems 

for stationary applications. Progress in energy and combustion Science 35:231 -244. 

2. Thomassen M, Sandnes E, Borresen B and Tunold R. 2006. Evaluation of concepts for hydrogen –

chlorine fuel cells. Journal of Applied Electrochemistry. 36: 813 –819. 

3.  Tran Le L, Kim J, Yoon J.2015.  Physicochemical properties of RuO2 and IrO2 electrodes affecting 

chlorine evolutions. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry. 21: 400 -404. 

4.  Carvela M, Conti J, L obato J, Scialdone O and Rodrigo MA.  Effect of the anode composition on the 

performance of reversible chlor -alkali electro -absorption cells. Separation and Purification 

Technology . 248. 

5. Carvela M, Lobato J and Rodrigo MA Storage of energy using a gas -liquid H 2/Cl 2 fuel cell: A first 

approach to electrochemically -assisted absorbers . Chemosphere . 254. In Search of the Best Operation Conditions for the SO 2 Electrolysis at 

# High Temperature ( Above 100 °C)

* Sergio Díaz -Abad, Manuel A. Rodrigo, Justo Lobato 

University of Castilla -La Mancha, Chemical Engineering Department.  Av. Camilo Jose Cela n 12, 

Enri que Costa Novella Building, Ciudad Real (13071) Spain 

*Corresponding author e -mail:  sergio.diazabad@uclm.es 

The Hybrid Sulphur Cycle has been identified as a highly efficient method for large -scale hydroge n

production. Based on this cycle, this work is related to the step where SO 2 is electrochemically oxidized 

in the anode to form sulphuric acid, protons, and electrons (E 0 = 0.17 V vs SHE). The protons are 

conducted across the electrolyte separator to the cathode where they recombine with the electrons to form 

H2 according to equations 1 and 2. 

SO 2 (aq) + 2 H 2O → H 2SO 4 (aq) + 2H + + 2 e - (1) 

2H + + 2 e - → H 2(g) (2) 

For high cycle efficiencies, operating at temperatures higher than 100°C in the electrolyzer is 

recommended. However, SO 2 depolarized electrolysis is currently mostly studied using Nafion 

me mbranes which limits the operating temperature to around 80°C because of the need of hydration of 

these membranes. That is the reason for the need of developing new materials for this application. PBI 

based membranes are a promising alternative for working at high temperatures due to they do not need to 

be humidified for its operation at high temperature, also the degradation temperature of this polymer (ca. 

500°C) makes it suitable for this application. 

A commercial PBI membrane supplied by Danish Power S ystems USA was used for the experiments. 

The membranes were doped with 85 wt% phosphoric acid. As reactants for the electrolysis, MiliQ water 

and SO 2 were used. A platinum loading of 0.7 mg Pt/cm 2 was employed on both electrodes (anode and 

cathode) using 4 0% Pt/Vulcan carbon XC72 as catalyst by spraying a catalytic ink on the electrode 

surface. For the electrochemical measurements, a potentiostat /galvanostat (AUTOLAB, Netherland) 

equipped with Frequency Response Analysis (FRA module) was used. 

The tests wer e performed in a 25 cm 2 SO 2 depolarized electrolysis cell based on PEMFC technology, 

working with SO 2 in gas phase and generating steam which will be mixed with the SO 2 flow. The 

performance was studied in a range of temperatures from 120°C to 150°C. Polar ization curves were 

obtained by scanning the applied potential from 0.00 to 1.00 V (vs RHE) at a scan rate of 10 mV s -1.

Impedance spectroscopy was measured potentiostatically, at 0.15 and 0.55 V, with a perturbation signal of 

10% with a frequency range of 10 kHz to 100 mHz 

Results showed that increasing temperature has not always a beneficial effect on the performance of the 

electrolyzer as result of enhancement of parasitic reactions. On the other hand, when an inert gas is 

introduced to the cathode of t he cell it results in some advantageous effects as they can remove the possible 

SO 2 which has crossed the membrane . R egarding this aspect , nitrogen and a mixture of nitrogen and steam 

where studied as feed for the cathode. Finally, the effect of the flows of water and sulfur dioxide in the 

anode where also studied in order to evaluate the optimum stoichiometry of the system .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT S

Financial support from the Junta de Comunidades de Castilla -La Mancha and the FEDER –EU Program, 

Project ASEPHAM. G rant number “SBPLY/17/180501/000330” is gratefully acknowledged. Development of a Sensitive Electrochemical Paracetamol Sensor based 

# on Nano -composite Fe 2O3/TiO 2 Electrodes 

Emmanuel Topoglidis , Christina So fia Leva, Pavlos Nikolaou, Ioanni s Koutselas 

Department of Materials Sciece, School of Natural Sciences, Universit y of Patras 

Rio 26504, Greece 

e-mail: etop@upatras.gr 

Paracetamol’s usage, a widely used analgesic and antipyretic drug, suffers from overdoses and chronic 

usage problems and its concomitant use with alcoho l or other drugs causes toxic metabolite accumula tion, 

hepatic toxicity and disorders, nephrotoxicity, pancreas inflammation and skin rashes. Therefore, accurate 

determination of paracetamol is necessary during quality control in pharmaceutical formulation s and 

biological fluids. 

Paracetamol is an electr ochemically active structure which is oxidized on various electrodes, while on 

bare electrode this occurs at high overpotentials. Chemically modified electrodes have been used 

successfully in order to lower the oxidation overpotential and increase the curr ent sensitivity without 

affecting the drug concentration determination. 1

In this work,  nanocomposite electrodes of hematite ( α-Fe 2O3) deposited on mesoporous TiO 2 film 

electrodes on ITO glass were found to be simple, low cost, sensitive, electrochemical pa racetamol 

sensors, with improved conductivity compared to bare TiO 2 films. 2-4 The electrodes’ excellent 

electrochemical behavior was examined by cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry, while their 

structure was invest igated by FESEM, EDS and X -ray diffr action. Under optimized conditions these 

electrodes demonstrated excellent electrocatalytic activity towards paracetamol oxidation in the linear 

response concentration range from 2 to 40  μM (correlation coefficient 0.98 7) with a  1.07  μM detection 

limit. These sensors demonstrated good repeatability, reproducibility and stability, applicable for 

pharmaceutical paracetamol determination. 

References: 

1.  X. Kang , J. Wang , Η. Wu , J . Liu , I .A. Aks ay , Y . Lin , Talanta 81 (2010) 754 -759. 

2.  E. Topoglidis, P.A. Koloz off, C. Tiflidis, J. Papavasil iou E. Sakelli s, Colloid Polym. Sci. 296 

(20 18) 1353 -136 4

3.  P. Nikolaou, A. Vassilakopoulou, D. Papadato s, E. Topoglid is, I. Koutselas, Mater. Chem. 

Front. 2 (2018) 730 -740. 

4.  C.S. Leva, P. Nikolaou, I. Koutselas, E. Topogidis, Nanomaterials (submitted ). Electroactive sulfate reducing microorganisms and their relevance in 

# accelerated iron corrosion 

Krishnaveni Venkidusamy a*, Hari Ananda Rao a and Laura Machuca Suarez a

> a

Curtin Corrosion Centre (CCC), Western Australia School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical 

Engineering , Curtin University, Bentley, WA, 6102, Australia 

*E-mail address : krishna.venkidusamy@curtin.edu.au 

Sulfate -reducing microorganisms (SRM) are major metabolic groups of microorga nisms causing 

microbially influenced corrosion (MIC) and known for their corrosivity through the formation of biogenic 

hydrogen sulfide (H 2S), iron sulfide (FeS), and hydrogenotrophic metabolism (1,2). Among these distinct 

corrosion mechanisms of MIC, elec tromicrobiologically influenced corrosion (EMIC) is currently 

recognized as being involved in the acceleration of the iron corrosion (3). Recent research has shown the 

importance of electroactive SRM (ESRM) and their role in possible ennoblement and accele rated 

corrosion of iron structures due to their special adaptations of extracellular electron uptake mechanisms 

through iron oxidation (4, 5). Such studies indicate that ESRM influences the cathodic reaction of iron 

corrosion. In the present study, we revi ew such abilities in known corrosive bacterial genera of the 

families, Desulfovibrionaceae and Desulfobulbaceae to use iron structures as a sole source of electron 

and explore its electron uptake mechanisms in relevance to EMIC. These specialized bacterial species 

employ different strategies including cell -associated direct electron uptake through outer -membrane 

vesicles (6,7), formation, and accumulation of electrically -conductive mineral crusts (FeS) through 

dissim ilatory sulfate reduction (2,8 ) and redox mediators’ generation from bacterial cells (9). 

Nevertheless, the new electromicrobiological routes of such corrosive behavior have yet to be studied. 

Since the microorganisms are adapted to acquire energy from various environments, further exploring the 

research on extracellular electron uptake mechanisms will provide novel insights into microbial evolution 

and energy conversion besides its technical relevance. 

References: 

1. Enning, Dennis, and Julia Garrelfs. "Corrosion of iron by sulfate -reducing bacter ia: new views 

of an old problem." Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80.4 (2014): 1226 -1236. 

2. Enning, Dennis, Hendrik Venzlaff, Julia Garrelfs, Hang T. Dinh, Volker Meyer, Karl Mayrhofer, 

Achim W. Hassel, Martin Stratmann, and Friedrich Widdel. "Marine sulfate‐reducing bacteria 

cause serious corrosion of iron under electroconductive biogenic mineral crust." Environmental 

microbiology 14, no. 7 (2012): 1772 -1787. 

3. Venkidusamy , Krishnaveni, an d Laura Machuca Suarez . "Electrical microbial influenced 

corrosion: perspectives on metal respiring microorganisms and their role in pipeline corrosion." 

Australian corrosion association: Corrosion and Protection, November 27 -December 2, 2019. 

4. Trigodet, F lorian, Nicolas Larché, Hilary G. Morrison, Mohamed Jebbar, Dominique Thierry, 

and Lois Maignien. "Electroactive bacteria associated with stainless steel ennoblement in 

seawater." Frontiers in microbiology 10 (2019): 170. 

5. Yu, Lin, Jizhou Duan, Xiangqian Du , Yanliang Huang, and Baorong Hou. "Accelerated 

anaerobic corrosion of electroactive sulfate -reducing bacteria by electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy and chronoamperometry." Electrochemistry communications 26 (2013): 101 -104. 

6. Beese -Vasbender, Pascal F., Simantini Nayak, Andreas Erbe, Martin Stratmann, and Karl JJ 

Mayrhofer. "Electrochemical characterization of direct electron uptake in electrical microbially 

influenced corrosion of iron by the lithoautotrophic SRB Desulfopila corrodens strain IS4." 

Elect rochimica Acta 167 (2015): 321 -329. 

7. Li, Cheng, Keaton Larson Lesnik, and Hong Liu. "Stay connected: electrical conductivity of 

microbial aggregates." Biotechnology advances 35, no. 6 (2017): 669 -680. 

8. Venzlaff, Hendrik, Dennis Enning, Jayendran Srinivasan, Karl JJ Mayrhofer, Achim Walter 

Hassel, Friedrich Widdel, and Martin Stratmann. "Accelerated cathodic reaction in microbial 

corrosion of iron due to direct electron uptake by sulfate -reducing bacteria." Corrosion Science 

66 (2013): 88 -96. 

9. Zhang, Peiyu, Dake Xu, Yingchao Li, Ke Yang, and Tingyue Gu. "Electron mediators accelerate 

the microbiologically influenced corrosion of 304 stainless steel by the Desulfovibrio vulgaris 

biofilm." Bioelectrochemistry 101 (2015): 14 -21. How to Measure Sustainable El ectrical Power Produced by 

# Thermogalvanic Cells using Waste Heat 

Leigh Aldous , M. A. Buckingham 

King’s College London 

Department of Chemistry, Britannia House, 7 Trinity Street, London SE1 1DB , UK 

leigh.aldous @kcl.ac.uk 

Therm ogalvanic cells can exploit a temperature gradient ( e.g. from waste heat) to generate electrical 

power. This is driven by the entropy difference between two redox states (commonly observed in 

electrochemistry as the temperature coefficient of the reduction potential ). [1] This is exemplified in the 

cartoon below, for water containing 0.2 M of K 3[Fe(CN) 6] and 0.2 M of K 4[Fe(CN) 6]. W ith two 

el ectrodes sharing an electrolyte containing both redox states, redox processes and mass transfer ensure a 

continual flow of electricity (as long as the te mperature difference persists).[2] 

Numerous thermogalvanic devices (or thermocells) using novel cell designs, [3] electrolytes, [4] redox 

couples, [5] etc. are now being published, and invariably compared. But are the compar isons – and even 

the initial measurement and characterisation – valid? 

This poster will summarise recently published work [6] where a ‘round robin’ type approach was made to 

comparing 5 common methods reported in the literature for characterising the elect rical power produced 

by thermogalvanic cells. As summarised in the Figure below, some methods were accurate and some 

significantly overestimated the power capable of being sustainably produced. Normalisation of power 

values are also increasingly common , gi ven the wide range of temperatures different groups apply, 

culminating in the popular adoption of “temperature -insensitive figure of merit for areal power density” .

This method of normalisation was explored, and found to be significantly temperature -sensit ive ; an 

alternative method of normalisation was also demonstrated. FeCN 63- FeCN 64-

## Less hot electrode 

# e-

# e-

# e-

# ??? 

## Hot electrode 

## Thermocells: How to measure the electrical power produced? 

## A number of common methods tested 

> Constant Voltage
> Constant Current
> Constant Resistance
> 2 Electrode Chrono
> 1 mV s-1LSV
> 5 mV s-1LSV
> 10 mV s-1LSV
> 50 mV s-1LSV
> 100 mV s-1LSV
> 3 Electrode Chrono
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> Pmax / mW m-2
> Accurate methods
> Methods over-estimate power

[1] M. A. Buckingham, F. Marken and L. Aldous, Sustain. Energy Fuels , 2018 , 2, 2717 –2726. 

[2] M. Al Maimani, J. J. Black and L. Aldous, Electrochem. Commun. , 2016 , 72 , 181 –185. 

[3] H. A. H. Alzahrani, M. A. Buckingham, F. Marken and L. Aldous, Electrochem. Commun. , 2019 , 102 ,

41 –45. 

[4] J. Wu, J. J. Black and L. Aldous, Electrochim. Acta , 2017 , 225 , 482 –492. 

[5] E. H. B. Anari, M. Romano, W. X. Teh, J. J. Black, E. Jiang, J. Chen, T. Q . To, J. Panchompoo and L. 

Aldous, Chem. Commun. , 2016 , 52 , 745 –748. 

[6] M. A. Buckingham and L. Aldous, J. Electroanal C hem ., 2020 , acce pted, DOI: 

10.1016/j.jelechem.2020.114280 Controlling proton -electron transfer in CO reduction electrocatalysts 

Prof. Marcel Schreier 

University of Wisconsin -Madison 

1415 Engineering Drive , EH 3016 

Madison, WI 53706 

mschreier2@wisc.edu 

CO 2-derive d fuels , synthesized using renewable energy, prese nt an attractive way towards a sustainable 

energy system. Impressive progress has been achieved in the production of CO and formic acid from 

CO 2. The selective electrosynthesis of higher order products such as ethylene and methane remains 

challenging, howe ver. This can be attributed to an insufficient understanding of the complex reaction 

networks involved in transferring multiple protons and electrons to surface -bound intermediates. 

To shed light into this fascinating maze, I will present investigations in to the electrochemical reduction of 

CO in nonaqueous model systems, allowing the independent interrogation of the role of proton donor 

pKa, solvent, cation nature and molecular struc ture and the interaction of conjugate base anions with the 

electrode surfa ce. 

Our experiments explain the kinetic bifurcation between methane and ethylene production and provide an 

integrated mechanistic picture that explains why these pathways are either affected or not by the nature of 

electrolyte cations. I will show, how the se results can be exploited to modulate the catalytic selectivity 

between methane, ethylene and parasitic hydrogen. Ammonia Modified Graphene Oxide – Gold Nanoparticles C omposite 

# as a Sensing P latform 

Mateusz Kasztelan 1,2 , Grażyna Zofia Żukowska 2, Włady sław Wieczorek 2, Barbara Pałys 1,3 ,

> 1

Department of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, Warsaw, 02 -093, Poland 

> 2

Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University of Technology, Noakowskiego 3, Warsaw, 00 -664, Poland 

> 3

Chemical and Biological Research Center, Universi ty of Warsaw, Zwirki i Wigury 101, Warsaw, 02 -089, 

Poland 

mkasztelan@chem.uw.edu.pl 

Graphene oxide (GO) is a novel material which is an important member of graphene family. The 

popularity of GO originates from the combination of pristine graphene features such as exceptional 

mechanic, electronic and thermal prop erties and advantages of oxygen surface groups. GO contains many 

oxygen groups in its structure, including epoxide, hydroxyl and carbonyl moieties, which help to 

overcome some limitations of pure graphene, such as high hydrophobicity, poor solubility in aq ueous 

solvents and difficulties in surface functionalization [1]. Due to mentioned facts GO is commonly used as 

a component in many fields, for example in designing electrochemical [2 ,3 ] and SERS [ 4] sensors, 

catalysis [ 5], and many more. 

GO is a versatile and easy processing material, which can be easily modified by chemical 

reactions. Presence of various oxygen groups facilitates numerous modifications of GO surface. 

Increasing attention is devoted to fabrication hybrid nanocomposites, which include graph ene oxide and 

metal nanoparticles [6]. Thanks to imperfect carbon plane of GO and presence of oxygen moieties it is 

relatively easy to promote efficient adsorption of nanoparticles on its surface. Moreover, presence of 

graphene oxide is additionally advant ageous as it protects nanoparticles from ambient environment and 

thus prevents from their degradation [7,8]. 

In this work we have performed a modification of graphene oxide with ammonia solution. 

Obtained product was thoroughly examined using spectroscopic (Raman, XPS, FTIR, UV -VIS) and 

microscopic techniques and used as a component of hybrid composite with gold nanoparticles (AuNPs). 

Hybrid composites consisting AuNPs and as -prepared or modified GO were used as platforms towards 

electrochemical detection o f H 2O2 and SERS platforms towards optical detection of aromatic dye, 

rhodamine 6G. 

[1] Pei, S., Cheng, H -M., Carbon , 50, 3210, 2012 .

[2] Rowley -Nale, S.J., Randviir, E.P ., Abo Dena, A.S., Banks, C.E., Appl.  Mater.  Today , 10, 218, 2018. 

[3] Berbeć, S., Żołądek, S., Jabłońska, A., Pałys, B., Sens. Actuat.  B Chem., 258, 745, 2018. 

[4] Jabłońska, A., Jaworska, A., Kasztelan, M., Berbeć, S., Pałys, B., Curr. Med. Chem., 26, 6878, 2019. 

[5] Se ngupta, D., Ghosh, S., Basu, B., Curr. Org. Chem., 21, 834, 2017. 

[6] Mondal, A., Jana, N.R., Rev. Nanosci. Nanotechnol , 3, 177, 2014. 

[7] Tan, C., Huang, X., Zhang, H., Mater. Today , 16, 29, 2013. 

[8] Li, Y. -F., Dong, F. -X., Chen, Y., Zhang, X. -L., Wang, L., Bi, Y. -G., Tian, Z. -N., Liu, Y. -F., Feng, J., 

Sun, H. -B., Sci. Rep. , 6, 37190, 2016. 

Project implemented under the Operational Program Knowledge Education Development 2014 -2020 co -

financed by the European Social Fund. Development of Lithium -rich Li 2Mn 1/2 Ti 1/2 O2F as cathode material for 

# Li -ion batteries 

Nureli Abdukirem 1, Mario Branchi 2, Barbara Mecheri 1, Maria Assunta Navarra 2, Alessandra 

D’Epifanio 1 *

> 1

: University of Rome Tor Vergat a, Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1 , 00133 Rome Italy 

> 2

: Dipartimento di Chimica, Università di Roma "La Sapienza", P. le Aldo Moro, Roma, 00185, Ital y

e-mail address : nureli.abdukirem@uniroma2.it 

As being the bottleneck in the design of a dvanced Li -ion Batteries, the development of cathode materials 

remains as a hottest research topic . Low cost and low toxicity make Manganese and Titanium particularly 

desirable material s for cathode . In this work lithium -rich cathode with the partial subst itution of fluorine 

for oxygen and based on Lithium , Manganese and Ti ta nium was prepared an d characterized. 

Li 2Mn 1/2 Ti 1/2 O2F (LMTF) has been sy nthesized using two different approaches : 1) One pot ball mill 

synthesis starti ng from the mixtures of all precur sor salt s according to the stoichi ometr ic ratio (LMTF1) 

[1] ; 2) Combination of a sol -gel first step to synthesize the mid -product LiMn 1/ 2Ti 1/2 Ox (LMT) , then a ball 

mill step of LMT prepared by sol -gel step and LiF as precursor s [2] to obtain LMTF2 . The two methods 

have been optimized changing the ball mill time and speed . LiMn 1/2 Ti 1/2 O2 was also synthesized using the 

ball mill approach as control .

All the samples have been characterized by X-ray diffract ion (XRD ), Thermal Analysis (TGA, DTA) , and 

Scanning Electron M icroscopy (SEM ). In fig.1 XRD diffraction pattern s of th e samp le s obtain ed with the 

different procedure s are reported together with the theoretical pattern , as reference. In both case s a

disordered -rocksalt structure was obtain ed indica ting the success of the both procedure s in the 

preparation of Li 2Mn 1/2 Ti 1/2 O2F [1] .

Furthermore the electrode preparation has be en optimize d in terms of binder ( Polyvinylidene difluo ride 

(PVdF) and Polytetrafluoro ethylene (PTFE) ) and ratio of components ( active material:carbon:binder ).

Electroche mical characterization was carried out in Li -ion half cells using Cyclic Voltammetry (CV ), and 

Galvanost atic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL) techniques , pointing at the possible applicability 

of the prepared LMTF in lithium batteries. 30 40 50 60 70 80 

> Intensity (a. c. unit) Angle (2  )LMTF 1 LMTF 2 theoretical LMTF

Figure 1. XRD patterns of Li 2Mn 1/2 Ti 1/2 O2F from different ap proaches 

Refences: 

[1] J. Lee et al. , "R eversible Mn 2+/Mn 4+ double redox in lithium -excess cathode materials," 

Nature, vol. 556, no. 7700, pp. 185 -190, 2018. 

[2] N. Takeda et al. , "Reversible Li storage for nanosize cation/anion -disordered rocksalt -type 

oxyfluorides: LiMoO2 –x LiF (0≤ x≤ 2) bin ary system," Journal of Power Sources, vol. 367, pp. 

122 -129, 2017. Electrochemistry of the Calcium Channel Blocker Lercanidipine 

# at a Carbon Black Modified Glassy Carbon Electrode 

Ana -Maria Chiorcea -Paquim , Isabel Garrido Fernandes and Ana Maria Oliveira -Brett 

University of Coimbra, CEMMPRE, Department of Chemistry, 30 04 -535 Coimbra, Portugal 

anachior@ipn.pt 

Hypertension is one of the main risk factors of cardiovascular diseases, and occurs mainly at the aging 

population, causing a high number of premature deaths. The use of antihypertensive drugs is important to 

av oid cardiovascular illness and mortality, and the most important drugs, such as diuretics, calcium 

antagonists, β -blockers and others, are efficient in the blood pressure control . Lercanidipine is a third 

generation calcium channel blocker belonging to the dihydropyridine group of compounds, and is used to 

treat mild to moderate hypertension, chronic stable angina pectoris and Raynaud’s syndrome. 

The need for rapid, easy and low cost detection, and quantification of pharmaceutical compounds in 

pharmacolog ical compositions, combined with the necessity of reducing the utilization of organic 

solvents due ecological considerations, are causing an increasing interest on voltammetric methods that 

are highly sensitive . The carbon black (CB) nanomaterial was used in many electrochemical studies, due 

to its interesting properties, that include high conductivity, chemical stability, large surface area, and very 

low cost. 

The lercanidipine electrochemical behaviour at different carbon electrode materials, in a wide pH range, 

was studied using cyclic, square -wave and differential pulse voltammetry [1] . A comparison was made 

between unmodified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) and boron doped diamond electrode (BDDE), and 

GCE and BDDE modified with a CB nanoparticles embed ded within a dihexadecylphosphate (DHP) 

nanostructured film (CB –DHP/GCE and CB –DHP/BDDE). The lercanidipine oxidation, for 

3.4 < pH < 9.5, was pH -dependent, diffusion -controlled, irreversible, and took place at the N1 and C4 

positions from the 1,4 -dihydro pyridine ring. Two consecutive steps were observed, each involving the 

transfer of one electron and one proton . For pH > 9.5, both oxidation processes were pH -independent ,

and a pKa = 9.40 was determined. The lercanidipine reduction was irreversible, and the lercanidipine 

reduction products were also electroactive, following a reversible electron transfer reaction .

Based on the lercanidipine oxidation , and with no need for N2 purging, the lercanidipine electroanalytical 

determination at a nanostructured G CE modified with a CB –DHP film (CB –DHP/GCE) was achieved, 

showing a detection limit of 0.058 μM (3.58 × 10 -5 g L -1) and a quantification limit of 0.176 μM (1.08 × 

10 -4 g L -1), more than ten times lower than previous described .

References 

[1] I. G. Fernandes, A .-M. Chiorcea -Paquim , A. M. Oliveira -Brett , Calcium channel blocker lercanidipine 

electrochemistry using a carbon black –modified glassy carbon electrode. Anal Bioanal Chem (2020). 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216 -020 -02591 -yNi/Co -layered Double Hydroxide Anchored on TiO 2 Nanorod Arrays 

# with Enhanced Water Photo -oxidation Performances 

Sheng -Mu You 1,2 *, W.M.A. El Rouby 1, Ruey -An Doong 2,3 , Pierre Millet 1*

1. Paris -Sud University, ICMMO -Eriée, UMR CNRS 8182, 91405 Orsay, France. 

2. National Chiao Tung University, Institute of Environmental Engineering, 30010, Taiwan. 

3. Materials Science and Nanotechnology Department, Faculty of Postgraduate Studies for Advanced 

Science (PSAS), Beni -Suef University, 62511 Beni -Suef, Egypt. 

4. Nat ional Tsing Hua University, Dpt Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sci ., 30013, Taiwan .

* e -mail s: -sheng -mu. you@u -psud.fr , pierre.millet@u -psud.fr 

Water splitting photoanodes made of Ni/Co -layered double hydroxide (LDH) anchored at the surface o f

TiO 2 nanorods array (TNRA) were successfully fabricated by using a two step hydrothermal method , in 

order to enhance the performance s during water photo -oxidation . Ni and Co were selected because of 

their known activity towards the oxygen evolution react ion (OER) . Several experimental parameters have 

been tuned to maximize the OER efficiency of these NC -LDH@TNRA photoanodes: the ni ckel -to -cobalt 

ratio , the thickness and porosity of the coating , and the structure of the interface between TiO2 nanotubes 

and the active LDH phase . The LDH coatings ha ve galleries containing Co and Ni cations that have been 

partly oxidized to higher valence states. A current density of 0.45 mA/cm 2 was measured at 1.75V (v.s 

RHE) in 0.1M Na 2SO 4 neutral electrolyte using a NC -LDH@ TNRA photo anode with a 2:1 (Ni : Co) 

ratio. The OER activity was significantly increased compared to bare TNRA. Based on these results, it is 

expected that these nanostructure d NC -LDH@TNRA photoanodes can provide a new pathway for the 

fabrication of effici ent water photo anode materials and the development of water photo -dissociation 

devices .

Reference 

[1] R. Patel, J. T. Park, M. Patel, J. K. Dash, E. B. Gowd, R. Karpoormath, A, Mishra, J. Kwak and J. H. 

Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A , 2018, 6, 1, 12 -29 .

[2] F. Ning, M. Shao, S.Xu, Y. Fu, R. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans , X. Duan, J. Name ., 2013, 00 , 1 -3.

[3] Y. Zhang, B. Cui, C. Zhao, H. Lin, and J. Lia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys ., 2013, 15 , 7363 -7369 .Electroplating of 3D Printed Electrodes for Selective Electrochemical 

# Reduction of CO 2

Eva Vaněčková a,b , Viliam Kolivoška b, Ji ří Rathouský b 

> a

University of Chemistry and Technology Prague , Faculty of Chemical Engineering, Department of Physical 

Chemistry, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic 

> b

J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Dolej škova 3, 18223 Prague, 

Czech Republic 

eva.vaneckova@jh -inst.c as.cz 

With the rapid development of novel advanced materials for 3D printing, the applicability of these technique s has 

extended into various specialized fields. In electrochemistry, there is a growing interest in developing printable 

conductive composite filaments 1,2,3 to be used as electrode materials as an alternative to conventional carbon or 

metal electrodes . In this work, we chose a commercial  polylactic acid/carbon nanotube (PLA/CNT) filament  to 

manufacture electrode s emp loying fused deposition modeling (FDM ) 3D printing process (Fig. 1A) with the goal 

of developing customized catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of CO 2. In addition, we employed FDM to 

fabricate an insulating electrode casing from unmodified PLA to ensure a defi ned area of the electrode/ electrolyte 

interface (Fig . 1A). It is known from the literature that different metals lead to various products of the CO 2

electrochemical reduction .4 Therefore , we additionally designed and manufactured a PLA cell dedicated for 

functionalization of electrode s by metallic electroplating (Fig. 1A ) to control the product selectivity of CO 2

reduction by selecting a suitable metal ion solution (Cu 2+, Sn 2+ Sn 4+ , Zn 2+ , Ag +). Our recent work 3 has demonstrated 

that metallic electroplating additionally leads to a drop of the kinetic intrinsic barrier for the interfacial electron 

transfer. Electron transfer properties were investigated by c yclic voltammetry employing [Ru(NH 3)6]3+/2+ couple 

as the electroactive probe (Fi g. 1C ). For PLA/CNT electrodes functionalized by potentiostatic electroplating 

performed in 0 .1 M Cu(NO 3)2 for 32 minutes at 6 V,  the separation of faradaic maxima decrease d and the faradaic 

peak current distinctly increas ed. This observation confirms that the Cu layer reduces the kinetic barrier to electron 

transfer and also increases the total area of surface active sites available for this process . Such an improvement in 

electrical properties offers great potential for practical use of 3D printed ele ctrodes modified by electroplating such 

as the production of hydrocarbon chemicals and fuels .

Fig. 1 (A) CAD d esign of 3D print ed electrode s in insulating casing , (B) setup for electro plating of electrodes with 

controlled applied voltage and recorded resulting current , (C) cyclovoltammetric response of unmodified 

PLA /CNT electrode ( black ) and the same electrode subjected to copper electroplating for 32 min at 6 V (red ).  

> 1

E. Vanečková, M. Bouša, Š. Novaková Lachmanová, J. Rathouský, M. Gál, T. Sebechlebská, V. Kolivoška, 3D 

printed polylactic acid/carbon black electrodes with nearly ideal electrochemical behavior , J. Electroanal. Chem. 

857 (2020) 113745.  

> 2

E. Vanečková, M. Bouša, F. Vivaldi, M. Gál, J. Rathouský, V. Kolivoš ka, T. Sebechlebská, UV -VIS 

spectroelectrochemistry with 3D printed electrodes , J. Electroanal. Chem. 857 (2020) 113760.  

> 3

E. Vanečková, M. Bouša, R. Sokolová, P. Moreno -Garcia, P. Broekman n, V. Shestivska, J. Rathouský, M. Gál, 

T. Sebechlebská, V. Kolivoš ka, Copper electroplating of 3D printed composite electrodes , J. Electroanal. Chem. 

858 (2020) 113763.  

> 4

Hori, Y. Electrochemical CO2 Reduction on Metal Electrodes. In Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, Vayenas, 

C. G.; White, R. E.; Gamboa -Aldeco, M. E., Eds.; Springer, 42 ( 2008 ) 89 -189 .Eviden ce of Blocking Fluorophosphate and Met al Fluoride Layer s

# Fo rmed During Lit hiation To wards Li 2Mn 2O4 in the 3V Range 

Louis De Taeye , Philippe Vereec ken 

Imec, 

Kapeldreef 75, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 

KU L euven , cMACS , M2S

Celestijnenlaan 200F , 300 1 Leuven , Belgium 

Louis.DeTaeye@imec.be 

Next ge neration battery materials sh ould be c heap and envi ronmentally benign, while retaining both a 

high energy and power den si ty. LMO is a n i nteresting materi al as i t contains only abundant materials ,

however, the energy density of LM O is generally limited by the relatively low capacity of 630 mAh/ cm 3

and the average potential around 4V vs. Li +/Li . The applicabili ty and perfo rman ce of LM O can be 

enhanced by utilizing the 3V potential range in LMO , effectively lithiati ng the material up to Li 2Mn 2O4.

Operating the material using both the 4V and 3V potential ranges , boosts the c apacity to 12 60 mAh /cm 3

with 630 mAh /cm 3 at 4 .1 V vs. Li +/Li and an ad ditional 630 mAh/cm 3 at 2.9V vs. Li +/Li , leading to a n et 

increase of 65% in ene rgy density . This incr ease in energy density places the material on par with many 

st ate -of -the -art materials , such as NMC and LMNO. 

There are some drawbacks . Lithiation of LixMn 2O4 beyo nd x =1 , leads to poor cycl abili ty due to Jahn -

Teller distortion and Mn diss olution. Improvements in the cycl ab ility we re ach ieved in thin film s by 

scaling these films down to sub 1 00 n m thicknes s [1]. This w as linke d to suppression of the mechanical 

damage inflicted by Jahn -Teller distortion .

A second issue s tems from ele ct ro lyte instability at the upper limit of the e lectrochemical win dow . This 

can be minimized by the cho ice of electrolyte. LiPF 6 in EC:DMC is a comm only used electrol yte solution 

due to the wide elec trochemica l stability window . When this electrolyte solut ion is used during deep 

discharge of LMO a pecul iar decomposition reaction was observed , leading to poor cycling and r ate 

performance. The dec ompo si tion for the given potential wind ow (2.5V vs. Li +/Li up to 4.25V vs. Li +/Li) 

is unexpected , as the electroly te solution is not expected to cathodically de co mpos e above 1V vs. Li +/Li .

[2] 

A comp arative study of the performance of LM O utilizing both the 3V and 4V regions is conducted using 

differe nt electrol yte solutions , to determine wh ether the reaction stems f rom the so lve nt (EC:DMC or PC )

or the salt (LiClO 4 or LiPF 6) used during cycling. Ba sed on the results , t he decomposition reaction is 

linked to the use of the LiPF 6 salt and appears to be independent of the solvent used .

A reaction mechanism for this dec omposition is postulated ba sed on the formation of a blocking 

flu orop hosphate and metal fluoride surface layer . The reacti on requires the formation of a s urface lay er of 

Li 2Mn 2O4 in the 3V regi on . XPS and ERD are com bined to confirm the hyp othe sized mechan ism .

[1]  B. Put , P.M. Vereecken , N. Labyedh , A. Sepulveda , C. Huyghebaert , I.P. Radu , A. Stesmans , ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 40, 22413 –22420 

[2] D. Aurbach, M. Daroux, P. Faguy, E. Yeager, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry and Interfacial 

Electrochemistry, Vol ume 297, I ssue 1, 1991, Pages 225 -244, Assessment of electrochemically driven technologies applied to the 

# treatment of endocrine disruptor s in different aqueous matrices 

Alexsandro J. dos Santos , Matheus S. Kronka and Marcos R. V. Lanza 

Institute of Chemistry of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, Avenida Tra balhador São -Carlense 400, 

São Carlos, SP 13566 -590, Brazil 

e-mail address : alexsandrojhones@ usp.br 

Every day different organic pollutants are being discharged in to water streams and even at low 

concentrations can cause considerable harm to environment an d human health. Currently , it is estimated 

that more than 87,000 compounds from natural or synthetic origin can directly affect human endocrine 

system [1] . These compounds are known as endocrine disruptors (EDs). The c onventional physical -

chemical treatmen ts applied to treat them demonstrated low efficiencies and require long depollution 

times of operation . The electrochemical advanced oxidation process es (EAOPs) appeared as efficient, 

clean and low -cost technologies . EAOPs ha ve been succe ssfully used due to their simplicity combined to 

high performance . Little information in literature has been provided about their performance with 

complexes aqueous mediums. Therefore, t he aim of this work is to evaluate the influence of different 

aqueous mediums like sulfate (SO 42−), persulfate (S 2O82−) and chloride (Cl −) in the treatment of Bisphenol 

A, a typical EDs . A simulated matrix that mimicked a real wastewater and tap water were also tested in 

order to show EAOPs viability in complexes matrices. The depurations were based on anodic oxidation 

with H 2O2 eletrogerated (AO -H2O2) using boron -doped diamond/ O2-diffusion electrochemical cell at a

current density (j) of 33.3 mA cm -2. The AO -H2O2 process consists of in situ electrogeneration of 

physically adsorbed hydroxyl radicals ( ●OH) (Eº( ●OH/H 2O) = 2.80 V/SHE) from water oxidation 

(reaction 1), where the hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) is yielded by the O2 reduction on the cathode (reaction 

2). 

The results highlight that EDs de gradation is considerably affected by the type of water matri x.

This behavior can be related to the formation of different oxidant s in the medium . The kinetic constant 

(k1) and dissolved organic carbon removal values increased in the following order : tap water ( 6.67 x10 -5 s- 

> 1

– R2=0.99 3, 42 .2%) < sulfa te (1.53 x10 -4 s-1 R2=0.9 92 , 52 .1%) < persulfate (2.78x10 -4s-1 – R2=0.99 6,

63 .7%) < chloride (5.12 x10 -4s-1 – R2=0.9 97 , 77 .2%) < simulated wastewater (1.48 x10 -3 s-1 – R2=0.9 83, 

72 .8%) . In the sulfate medium , the greatest contribution to EDs removal was reaction 1, where ●OH 

reacts with the contaminant leading to its overall degradation to CO 2, H 2O or partial conversion .

Regarding the persulfate medium , there is the formation of sulfate radical ion (SO 4•−) through reaction 3

with the H2O2 electrogenerated . Sulfate radical ion has high oxidation potential (Eº(SO 4•−/SO 42−) = 2.5 -3.1 

V/SHE)) and longer half -life (30~40 μs) than ●OH [2]. Active chlorine species (Cl 2, HClO and ClO −),

obtained from Cl − oxidation, accelerat es the degradation process [3], as revealed by the acquire d results .

BDD + H 2O → BDD( ●OH) + H + + e − (1) 

O2(g) + 2H + + 2e − → H 2O2 (2) 

S2O82−+H 2O2→2SO 4•−+ 2 ●OH (3) 

The presence of inorganic ions acted as scavengers of oxidants in the tap water, justifying the 

poor degradation of EDs in this me dium . Thus, before applying any type of treatment to water, the 

medium must be widely characterized with the aim of verify ing what can influence the removal of the 

target pollutant .

Acknowledgments 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from São Paulo Research Foundation 

(FAPESP) grant #2019/20634 -0, #2017/23464 -3 and #2017/10118 -0.

References 

[1] R.B. Vidal , G.A. Ibanes , G.M. Escandar , Talanta 159 (2016) 336 

[2] H. Song, L. Yan, J. Jiang, J. Ma, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, T. Yang, Water Research 128 (2018) 393 

[3] A. J. dos Santos , S. Garcia -Segura , S. Dosta , I. G. Cano, C.A. Ma rtinez -Huitle, E Brillas, Separation 

and Purification Technology 228 (2019) 115747 Research on in -situ Preparation and Characterization of 

# Transition Metal -based Oxygen Evolution Catalysis 

Bingliang Wang , Yonggang Wang , Yongyao Xia  *

Department of Chemistry , Fudan University 

Shanghai 200433, P. R. China 

yyxia @fudan.edu.cn 

Water splitting reaction involving oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction 

(HE R) represents the core of renewable energy conversion and storage technologies . OER is generally 

considered to be the rate -lim iting reaction due to the four -electron transfer, sluggish kinetics, and high 

overpotential. In the conventional mechanism of OER , the reaction includes multiple adsorbed 

intermediates (i.e., O –O bond formation, the rate determine d step), leading to a larg e overpotential, while 

a new identified direct O 2 evolution mechanism (DOEM), which involves direct O –O coupling, has been 

proved to break through the limitation . Designing catalyst s based on DOEM could boost the kinetics by 

enhanc ing the formation rate of O-O bonds. 

Among the recently reported catalysts, transition -metal -based alloy, metal oxides and perovskite oxides 

show great potential. During the OER process, those ele ctrocatalysts would go through a surface 

reconstruction process at high potential, e specially the transition -metal -based alloy. Transition -metal 

based alloy is the most potential oxygen evolution catalyst due to its oxyhydroxides surface fabricated by 

elec trochemical oxidation induced surface evolution and multi -metallic synergistic effec ts . Structural 

evolution could be achieved by electrochemically -induced continuous oxidation . It c ould provide more 

reaction sites, more active species and better water oxi dation performance. 

Here in , we report a homogeneous multi -metal -site oxyhyd roxide e lectrocatalyst (consisting of Fe 

doped NiOOH and Cu doped NiOOH) by in -situ electrochemical dealloying of multi -metal -site alloy 

(consisting of FeNi 3 and NiCu alloy). The in -situ structural evolution process manipulates intermediate 

and enhances th e perfor mance of water oxidation. After dealloying, the electrochemical dealloyed 

catalyst exhibits a small overpotential at large current density (250 mV at 100 mA cm -2), low Tafel slope 

(34 mV dec -1), remarkably increased ECSA (8 -fold larger than before) , and su perior durability for 200 h 

at 100 mA cm -2. Such electrocatalyst represents one of the best performances among all reported 

transition -metal based electrocatalysts, even superior to benchmark RuO 2. Operando ATR FT -IR reveals 

that the electrochemica l deallo yed electrocatalyst could manipulate the reaction path based on direct O 2

evolution mechanism (DOEM) and facilitate the formation rate of O -O bonds. The fundamental 

understanding would contribute to the identification and design of the active struc ture of oxygen 

evolution electrocatalysts. 

Refere nce s:

1 B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich , M. García -Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu, L. 

Zheng, F. P. García de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, M. Yuan, E. Yassitepe, N. Chen, T. Regier, P. Liu, Y. 

Li, P. de Luna, A. Janmohamed, H. L. Xin, H. Yang, A. Vojvodic and E. H. Sargent,  Science , 2016, 

352 , 33 3–337. 

2 Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo,  Science ,

2017,  355 , eaad4998 .

3 T. Wu, S. Sun, J. So ng, S. Xi, Y. Du, B. Chen, W. A. Sasangka, H. Liao, C. L. Gan, G. G. Scherer, L. 

Zeng, H. Wang, H. Li,  A. Grimaud and Z. J. Xu,  Nat . Catal ., 2019,  2, 763 –772. 

4 J. S. Yoo, X. Rong, Y. Liu and A. M. Kolpak,  ACS Catal. , 2018,  8, 4628 –4636. 

5 C. N. Brodsky, R . G. Hadt, D. Hayes, B. J. Reinhart, N. Li, L. X. Chen and D. G. Nocera,  PNAS ,

2017,  114 , 3855 –3860. 

6 Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, Z. -G. Chen, W. Zhou, A. C. Komarek, Q. Lin, H. -J. Lin, C. -T. Chen, Y. 

Zhong, M. T. Fernández -Díaz, S. C. Smith, H. Wang, M.  Liu and Z. Shao,  Adv. Mater. , 2019,  32 ,

1905025. 

7 A. Grimaud, O. Diaz -Morales, B. Han, W . T. Hong, Y. -L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. 

M. Koper and Y. Shao -Horn,  Nat . Chem ., 2017,  9, 457 –465. Research on Promot ed Polysulfide Redox Kinetics by Graphene -

# Supported Carbon -Coat ed Ni Nanoparticles 

Zhuo Yu , Bingliang Wang, Yonggang Wang *

Department of Chemistry , Fudan University 

Shanghai 200433, P. R. China 

yg wang@fudan.edu.cn 

Although n umerous effor ts have been made to explore sulfur -enca psulated host materials and 

separator modification components (e.g. , porous carbonaceous materials [1 -3], metal oxides [4] , and two -

dimensional nanomaterials [5,6] ) to physica lly/chemically trap sulfur species within ca thodic side , they fail 

to facilitate intrinsically sluggish reaction kinetics of accumulated polysulfides in lithium -sulfur (Li -S) 

batteries . Aiming at above issue, introducing electrocatalytically active materia ls to cathodes or separators 

is reg arded as an effective method to boost surfac e conversion kinetics of polysulfides . Nevertheless, 

mechanical insights of electrocatalysis are in sufficient , owing to the complexity of intermediate products 

of the redox reac tions [7] . Moreover, it should be no ted that the enhanced battery performances with the 

introduc tion of electrocatalytic materials are still achieved at low sulfur mass loading (1~2 mg cm -2) and 

excess electrolyte (≥ 10 μL mg -1), which is adverse to overall energy density [8-11] . Especially, it is very 

difficult to promote low -temperat ure behaviors of Li -S batteries by these reported electrocatalysts. 

Herein, graphene -supported carbon -coated Ni Nanoparticles (denoted as Ni@C/graphene ) was 

prepared by directl y carbonizing the metal -organic fra mework/graphene oxide precursor, which was then 

dispersed on a comm ercial glass fiber membrane to form a separator with electrocataly tic activity for 

polysulfide conversion. In -situ analysis and electrochemical investigat ion demonstrate that the modified 

separator can effectively suppress shuttle ef fect and regulate the c atalytic conversion of intercepted 

polysulfides, which is also confirmed by density functional theory calculation. As a result, the 

corresponding lithium -sulfur battery shows a high cycle s tability (88% capacity retention over 100 cy cles) 

even with a high sulfur mass loading of 8 mg cm -2 and lean electrolyte (6.25 μL mg -1). Surprisingly, 

benefitting from the improved kinetics, the batt ery can work well at -50 oC, which is rarely achieved by 

conventional Li -S batteries. 

Refer ences :

[1] C. Zhang, H. Wu, C. Yuan, Z. Guo, X. (David). Lou, Ang ew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012 , 51 , 9592. 

[2] Y. Pang, J. Wei, Y. Wang , Y. Xia, Adv . Energy Mater . 2018 , 8, 1702288. 

[3] P. Han , A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources 2017 , 369 , 87. 

[4] S. Bai, X. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Wu , H. Zhou, Nat . Energy 2016 , 1, 16094 .

[5] S. Yao, J. C ui, J. -Q. Huang, Z. Lu, Y. Deng, W. G. Chong, J. Wu, M. Ihsan Ul Haq, F. Ciucci ,

J. -K. Kim, Adv . Energy Mater . 2018 , 8, 1800710. 

[6] Y. Yang , J. Zhang, Adv . Energy Mater . 2018 , 8, 1801778. 

[7] W. G. Lim, S. Kim, C. Jo , J. Lee, Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 2019 , 58 , 18746. 

[8] G. Babu, N. Masurkar, H. Al Salem , L. M. Arava, J. Am . Chem . Soc . 2017 , 139 , 171. 

[9] G. Zhou, S. Zhao, T. Wang, S. Z. Yang, B. Johannessen, H. Chen, C. Liu, Y. Ye, Y. Wu, Y. 

Peng, C. Liu, S. P. Jiang, Q. Zhang , Y. Cui, Nano Lett . 2020 , 20 , 1252. 

[10 ] J. Wang, L. Jia, J. Zhong, Q. Xiao, C. Wang, K. Zang, H. Liu, H. Zheng, J. Luo, J. Yang, H. Fan, 

W. Duan, Y. Wu, H. Lin , Y. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater . 2019 , 18 , 246. 

[11 ] N. Wang, B. Chen, K. Qin, E. Liu, C. Shi, C. He , N. Zhao, Nano Energy 20 19 , 60 , 332. CO2 electro reduction – challenges for different products 

Marta C. Figueire do 

Chemical Eng ineering and Chemistry D epartment, Eindhoven University of Technology 

> P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

m.c.costa.figueiredo@tue.nl 

The electroc hemical routes are within the most promising techn ologies for the use of carbon 

dioxide (CO 2) to produce chemicals . Electrochemical CO 2 reduction not only allows for direct 

utilization of renewable energy but also enables the production of chemicals with neutral or even 

negative carbon e missions [1].

A wide range of valuable fuels and chemicals can be produced via the CO 2 reduction reaction 

(CO2RR) [2] from hydro carbons [3] , oxygenates [4] , carbonates [5] to syngas (CO + H 2). The 

production of C1 products is possible with high selectivity and reaction rate, however more 

complicated compounds are requiring more electrons, are lacking high selectivity and they are 

facing the difficulty of the C -C bond formation. Significant work still needs to be done before 

CO 2RR is a vailable as a techn ologi cal solution a t industr ial level. Moreover, each some of the 

possi ble products have different properties a nd are at different stages of research what makes the 

challenges different for each o f them. For f ormic acid format e) synthesis from CO 2 for example ,

high faradaic efficiencies can be found in the literature , however stability of the catalysts in 

prolonged electrolysis is still unsatisfying . By the other hand, the main challenge in hydrocarbo ns 

production is selectivit y

In this presentation , I will focus on the differen t challenges for CO2RR to different products and 

our recent results and st rategies to tackle these challenges .

[1] S. Nitopi, et al ., Chemical Reviews 2019 119 (12), 7610 -7672 

[2] Y. Y. Birdja , et al ., Nat.  Energy , 2019, 4, 732 –745. 

[3] D. Anastasiadou, et al. , ChemElectroChem , 2019, 6, 3928 –3932. 

[4] Y. Zheng, et al, JACS 2019 141 (19), 7646 -7659 

[5] M. C. Figueiredo, et al , ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. , 2019, 7, 10716 –10723. Mesoporous Carbon Nitride based Catalyst for E fficient Water 

# Oxidation 

Devesh Kumar Singh and Vellaichamy Ganesan* 

Department of Chemistry, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi -221005, 

UP, India 

e-mail:  velganesh@yahoo.com  and  velgan@bhu.ac.in 

Harvesting energy from sustainable sources is of immense importance to solve the current 

situation of the world’s energy crisis . Electrochemical water oxidation is one of those 

sustainable ways to produce clean fuels like hydrogen. Anodic oxidation involved in the water 

splitting is relatively complex and its sluggish reaction pathway requires high activation. IrO 2

and RuO 2 are treated as benchmark catalysts for the water oxidation at different conditions 

however, their instability and high -cost limit their consistency. In this work, w e repor t an

efficient catalyst , CoS xO2-x supported on a conducting sulfur -incorporated mesoporous carbon 

nitride (represented as Co SxO2-x-S-MCN) synthesized by a simple and cost -effective route. For 

the synthesis of CoS xO2-x-S-MCN , a unique strategy is followed in which MCM -41 mesoporous 

silica is used as a template to create porosity and to introduce oxygen into the material. The 

eff iciency of the CoS xO2-x-S-MCN towards the water oxidation is analyzed and compared with 

other reported catalysts (including IrO 2 and RuO 2) in terms of overpotential and Tafel slope 

values. The careful analyses/comparison s reveal that the CoS xO2-x-S-MCN exh ibits ~ 2.5 times 

high er activity than the RuO 2 towards the electrochemical water oxidation and thus this material 

could be a pro mising alternative to replace the IrO 2 and RuO 2 based catalysts. 

Figure: Left: Schematic representation of the higher (~ 2.5 times) water oxidation activity of CoS xO2-x-

S-MCN than the RuO 2 Right: Linear sweep voltammetry response of RuO 2 and CoS xO2-x-S-MCN 

modified glassy carbon electrodes in 1.0 M KOH (s can rate : 5 mVs -1 and rotation rate: 1600 rpm ).

Acknowledgm ents: DST -ASEAN program (IMRC/AISTDF/R&D/P -16/2018) , India is 

acknowledged for funding. DKS acknowledges CSIR for the award of the senior research fellowship. 

References :

1. D. K. Singh, V. Ganesan, D. K. Yadav, M. Yadav, Cryst. Growth Des., (2020) revise d manuscript is 

submitted 

2.  L. Gong, X. Yu, E. Chng , Y. Du, S. Xi, B. S. Yeo , ACS Catal ., 8 ( 2018 ) 807−814. 

3. X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, J. R. J. Simke , J. Schmidt , A. Thomas , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. ,57 (2018) 

8921 –8926. 1.4 1.6 1.8 -20 020 40 60 80   

> E / V vs. RHE
> j / mA cm -2
> RuO 2
> CoS xO2-x -S-MCN

# Selectiv ity on electrocatalytic hydrogenation usi ng well -defined Pd ML 

# electrodes : C= O versus C =C saturation. 

M. A. Villalba, M. T. M. Koper 

Leiden Institute of Chem istry, Leiden University 

P. O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 

m.a.villalba@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

Selective hydrogenatio n is a key reaction in organic chemistry since the reducing agents available are 

scarce and their reaction is only potential -driven. Electrocatalytic Hydrogenation (E CH) reaction on the 

other hand, offers the advantages of a) being a clean procedure through electr ogenerated species 

(electrons are the reducing agent generated in situ), b) tunable product distribution as function of the 

potential and c) adsorption geomet ry and energy can be modified by choosing the electrocatalyst .

Particularly , aliphatic ketone s are readily reduced on Pt while on Pd the adsorption and reaction is largely 

hinder ed . However , the last one possesses the ability to easily hydrogenate unsatur ated hydrocarbons and 

carbonyl groups in aromatic ketones too .

We will show the selectivity of the ECH in model molecules containing C=C and C=O groups using 

electrodeposited palladium monolayer on well -defined platinum sur face s. Suppor ting information wa s

taken from similar electrochemical experiments employing molecules containing on ly one of the 

mentioned moieties . Comparatively, t wo low -index facets which showed the hi gher electroactivit y were 

studied to investigate adsorption strength/ orientation effe cts . Product distribution as function of the 

applied potential was monitored by in situ Online HPLC through a fraction collect or .

However further research is needed to fully di sclose the origin of the selectivity , the prese nt result 

constitutes the fundam ental knowledge for future scaling up in industries as important as p harmace utical 

and fertilizers. -3 -2 -1 

01

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 -6 -4 -2 

0 B) A) 

## PdMLPt(110) 

> j / mA.cm -2

# E / V vs RHE 

## PdMLPt(111) 

Figure 1 : Cyc le voltammetry of 1mM benzalcetone ( red ) and 10mM methyl v inyl ketone ( yellow) in 

0.1M sulfuric acid solution usi ng a) Pd ML Pt(111) and b) PdMLPt(110 ) (bl ank CV in grey) at 50m V.s -1.Probing the Effect of Titanium Substitution on the Sodium Storage in 

# Na 3Ni 2BiO 6 Honeycomb -type Structure. 

Eugen Zemlyanushin 1, Kristina Pfeifer 2, Angelina Sarapulova 1, Martin Etter 3, Helmut Ehrenberg 1,2 and 

Sonia Dsoke 1,2, * 

> 1

Institute for Applied M aterials (IAM) Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Herm ann -von -

Helmholtz Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany.  

> 2

Helmholtz -Institute for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, 

Germany.  

> 3

Deutsches Elektronen -Synchrotron (DESY), Notkestraße 85, D -22607 Hamburg, Germany .

* Correspondence: sonia.dsoke @kit.edu ; Tel.: +49 721 608 41915 

Na 3Ni 2BiO 6 with Honeycomb structure suffers from poor cycle stability when used as cathode material 

for sodium -ion batteries. Our strategy to improve the stability is to substitute Ni and Bi with the inactive 

Ti. Monoclinic Na 3Ni 2-xBi 1-yTi x+y O6 powders with different Ti content were successfully synthesized via 

sol -gel method and, 0.3 mol of Ti was determined as a maximum concentrati on to obtain a phase -pure 

compound. A solid -solution system of O3 -NaNi 0.5 Ti 0.5 O2 and O3 -Na 3Ni 2BiO 6 is obtained when this 

critical concentration is not exceeded. The capacity of the first desodiation process at 0.1 C of 

Na 3Ni 2BiO 6 (~ 93 mAh g-1) decreases a t higher Ti concentr ation to ~ 77 mAh g-1 for Na 3Ni 2Bi 0.9 Ti 0.1 O6

and ~ 78 mAh g-1 for Na 3Ni 0.9 Bi 0.8 Ti 0.3 O6, respectively. After 100 cycles, a better capacity retention is 

obtained for the Ti -containing structures. At 1.0 C, the stabilization effect of Ti i s even more 

pronounc ed. Furthermore, a change in the multiple phase transformation was found. The O`3 phase, 

which forms in the first discharge process no longer exists after substitution with Ti. This leads to an 

improvement in the kinetics, which results in more stable cycl ing performance. 

Keywords: Sodium -Ion -Batteries, Honeycomb -Layer, Solid -Solution, Cathode Mater ial. Activating Mn(OH) 2 as Oxygen Evolution Reaction catalyst by 

# Electrically Interconnecting between MnO x and Conductive Carbon 

Kahyun Ham a, Jaeyoung Lee a,b,*  

> a

School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology 

(GIST), 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South Korea  

> b

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, GIST, 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South 

Korea 

*C orresponding author e -mail address: jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr 

Hydrogen is one of the promising en ergy carriers, which can be also utilized in the various industrial 

field. Among some hydrogen production technologies, water electrolysis based on anion exchange 

membrane is getting attention due to the availability of usage of transition metal (Co, Ni, F e, Mn) as the 

catalysts. Oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which is a counterpart of hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), 

has a higher overpotential than HER, and it causes an increasing oxidation state of metal catalysts from 

+2 to +3/+4. However, the active oxidation state toward OER is limited. In the case of Mn, only Mn 3+ is 

known as the active site for OER due to unstable bonding between oxygen and Mn atom. To increase the 

OER activity, it is important to design the MnOx with dominant Mn 3+ by oxidizing Mn 2+ species such as 

Mn(OH) 2 and MnO. 

In this study, we investigate the role of conductive carbon of catalyst layer in maximizing active site, 

Mn 3+ , in OER operating potential. We observed that Mn(OH) 2 oxidation peak was activated by adding 

conductive carbon in cyclic voltammogram, and the peak potential was dependent on the amount of 

conductive carbon. The relationship between the amount of carbon and activated Mn(OH) 2 was 

confirmed in terms of OER overpotential and electro -conductivity estimated by band -gap . However, 

carbon is generally known as undergoing corrosion in the harsh OER potential. To distinguish the carbon 

corrosion peak from OER oxidation peak, we conducted a rotating -ring disk electrode technique and 

stability test. Electro analytical Detection of Trace Arsenic(III) in Aqueous Media 

# Using AgMnO 2 Electrode 

Kristina Radinović 1, Jadranka Milikić 1, Nikola Cvjeti ćanin 1, Tanj a Barudžij a2, Biljana Šljukić 1,*  

> 1

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 12 -16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia.  

> 2

Vinča Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of the Republic of Serbia, University of 

Belgrade, P.O. Box 522, 11351 Belgrade, Serbia .

(kristina.radinovic@ffh.bg.ac.rs ; biljka @ffh .bg .ac. rs )

Arsenic is a heavy metal that exists in the Earth ’s crust and groundwater s. It occurs in organic and inorganic 

forms , with inorganic forms being more toxic than organics ones. Furthermore, inorganic As 3+ is reported 

to be ca. 60−70 times more toxic than As 5+ [1] . Prolonged exposure to arsenic in drinking water has a 

dam aging effect on the human nervous system, respiratory system, skin, cardiovascular system , also 

increasing the risk of cancer . Consequently , the World Health Organization has limited the maximum level 

of arsenic in drinking water to 10 μg L -1 [2] . Various analytical methods, such as atomic fluorescence 

spectroscopy [3] and inductively coupled plasma -mass spectrometry [4] , have been employed for the 

detection of trace arsenic. However, these methods require expensive an d robust instrumentation, and , as 

such, can only be used in a laboratory. Due to the mentioned shortcomings, replacement of these analytical 

methods by electrochemical ones, as portable, faster and cheaper , has been suggested [5] .

Herein, Ag xMnO 2 (x ~0.2 ) of the hollandite -type structure was  prepared by mixing equimola r aqueous 

solutions of MnSO 4 x H 2O and (NH 4)2S2O8 with Ag wire added in the final solution. After 3 days of 

standing in the dark, the obtained powdery material was washed with absolute ethanol and distilled water 

several times, respectively, dried in a vacuum and finally heated for 4 h at 450 ºC. 

This material was tested for As sensing in acidic media ( 1 M HCl ) by anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) 

Det ermination of As 3+ on the AgMnO 2 electrode by ASV method proceeds in two steps: reduction of As 3+ 

from the solution to As 0 and deposition of As 0 on the electrode, after which, due to the change in potential, 

As 0 is oxidized to As 3+ and passes into solution .

Cyclic voltam mogram (CV) of AgMnO 2 electrode illustrate d its activity for detection of As 3+ in 1 mM 

NaAsO 2 solution. Namely, CV of AgMnO 2 showed a well -defined peak at -0.6 V vs SCE corresponding to 

the electrooxidation of As. The possibility of using this electrode for detection of As 3+ was tested in real 

samples using a sample of water from the river Drina spiked with As 3+ . The response of AgMnO 2 electrode 

in the river sample (without any pre -treatment) was well defined with a ppearance of a clear peak 

corresponding to As 3+ oxidation .

In this work, the AgMnO 2 electrode showed good activity for the detection of arsenic in acidic media and 

in the real sample indicating that this electrode can be a potentially good sensor for arsenic detection in 

aqueous media. 

Acknowledgment s

This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological 

Development of Republic of Serbia (Contract number: 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200146 ).

REFERENCES                                   

> [1] N. Babar, K.S. Joya, M.A. Tayyab, M.N. Ashiq, M. Sohail, Highly Sensitive and Selective Detection of Arsenic Using
> Electrogenerated Nanotextured Gold Assemblage, ACS Omega. 4(2019) 13645 –13657.
> https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b00807.
> [2] K. Mao, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Cao, K. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Yang, Nanomaterial -based aptamer sensors for arsenic detection,
> Biosens. Bioelectron. (2019) 111785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2019.111785.
> [3] M. Liu, T. Liu, X. Mao, J. Liu, X. Na, L. Ding, Y. Qian, A novel gas liquid separator for direct sampling analysis of ultratrace
> arsenic in blood sample by hydride generation in -situ dielectric barrier discharge atomic fluorescence spectrometry, Talanta.
> 202 (2019) 178 –185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2019.04.041.
> [4] P.C. G upta, A. Elanchezhiyan, S.C. Shukla, A.S. Sengar, A. Saha, R. Surendran, N.P. Awasthi, K.P. Prasanth, S. Jacob,
> S.K. Saxena, Development, validation, and accreditation of a method for the determination of 75 As, 111 Cd, 201 Hg, and 208 Pb
> in Cephalopods using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP -MS), SN Appl. Sci. 1(2019) 1–7.
> https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452 -019 -0294 -x.
> [5] L. Bu, Q. Xie, H. Ming, Simultaneous sensitive analysis of Cd(II), Pb(II) and As(III) using a dual -channel anodic stripping
> vo ltammetry approach, New J. Chem. 44 (2020) 5739 –5745. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0nj00545b.

# Influence of Meta l-Organic Framework on the M ultifunctional 

# Catalys is of Gold Nanoparticles 

Vellaichamy Ganesan and Dharmendra Kumar Yadav 

Department of Chemistry, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi -221 005, 

UP, Indi a.   

> e-mail: velganesh@yahoo.com and velgan@bhu.ac.in

The development of multifunctional catalysts becomes essential to satisfy the needs of the 

present world in the fields of renewable ener gy and sensing applications. Accordingly, 

researchers are very much focused on crystal engineering to develop new materials and 

reasonably utilize them through electrochemical technology . In this work, gold nanoparticles 

are wrapped by a zinc -based metal -organic formwork using a simple synthetic route. The 

crystalline nature of the resulting material , Au NPs -Zn-MOF is verified by powder X -ray 

diffraction patterns. X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy reveals the presence of Au 0 nanoparticles 

and their intera cti on with the zinc -based metal -organic formwork. Further, the AuNPs -Zn -MOF 

is employed for the electrochemical water splitting, electrocatalytic reduction of oxygen, and 

electrocatalytic oxidation of tyrosine . The electrocatalytic reduction of oxygen and the reductive 

water splitting processes are competitive to each other and these reactions were carefully 

analyzed based on the Tafel slope value s. Reduction of oxygen proceeds through a two -electron 

process to produce hydrogen peroxide as the end product and the reductive water splitting 

follow s the Volmer mechanism. Electrochemical oxidation of tyrosine is also catalyzed by the 

AuNPs -Zn -MOF. This phenomenon is advantageously used for the construction of an 

electrochemical sensor for the sensitive determinatio n of tyrosine . The limit of detection and 

sensitivity of the fabricated sensor are found to be 3.03 μM and 0.12 μAμM -1cm -2, respectively. 

Th us , the AuNPs -Zn -MOF acts as a multifunctional catalyst that can be exploited further in the 

electrochemical energy conversion & storage and electrochemical sensing .

Figure: Schematic synthetic route and multifunctional catalytic activity of AuNPs -Zn -MOF .                   

> Acknowledgments: DST -ASEAN program (IMRC/AISTDF/R&D/P -16/2018) for financial support and
> Prof. Bip lob Koch ,Department of Zoology, Institute of Science, BHU for cell culture media.
> Reference:
> 1. D.K. Yadav, R. Gupta, V. Ganesan, P. K. Sonkar ,M. Yadav, ChemElectroChem 5 ( 2018 )
> 2612 -2619 .
> 2. D. K. Yadav, V. Ganesan, M. Yadav, R. Gupta, P. K. Sonkar ,D. K . Singh ,Indian J. Chem. A,
> (2020) m anuscript in preparation .
> 3. K. J. Lee, S. Choi, S. Park, H. R. Moon, Chem. Mater. 28 (2016) 4403 -4408.

# Self -assembled Sulfur -benzonitrile Supramolecule for Lithium Sulfur 

# Battery 

Kangfei Liu a, Muhammad Arif Khan a, Rida Javed a, Xu yuan a, Chen Cong a, Daixen Ye a, Yipeng Que b,

Hongbin Zhao a*, jiujun Zhang a

a College of Sciences & Institute for Sustainable Energy, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, P. R. 

China 

b Research institute of Chilwee Group, Changxing, Zhejiang 313100, P . R. China 

E-mail:  hongbinzhao@shu.edu.cn 

S8 is environmentally friendly, cheap and abundant. Its theoretical specific capacity is as high as 

1675mAh g-1, discharge voltage platform is 1.8V relative to Li +/Li, and theoretical specific energy can be 

as high as 2600Wh kg -1. S 8 is regarded as one of t he ideal choice for the next generation of high energy 

density battery systems.According to the simulation results, the size of sulfur beam is determined, and the 

pore structure is reversely designed to inhibit the dissolution of polysulfide ions, and by t he form of 

organic -inorganic compound sulfur, slow down the formation of polysulfide ions, improve the cycling 

performance of materials.In order to make benzonitriles with different shapes self -assemble according to 

a certain rule and form regular pore str ucture, we controlled the kinds and proportion of benzonitriles with 

different shapes reasonably by adjusting stirring speed, melting temperature and time; By adjusting the 

proportion of sulfur and benzonitrile, melting temperature and cooling rate, the in -situ SNAr and effective 

anchoring of sulfur and halogen are realized .

Keywords : self -assemble, Benzonitriles 

References 

[1] Y. Li, J. Fan, M. Zheng, Q. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2016, 9, 1998 -2004 

[2] Y. Choi, K. Kim, H. Ahn, J. Ahn, Alloys Compounds, 2008, 449, 313 -316 

[3] G. Zhou, S. Pei, L. Li, D. Wang, S. Wang, K. Huang, L. Yin, F. Li, H. Cheng. Adv. Mater., 2014, 

26, 625 -631 

Acknowledgment 

The authors appreciate the financial support from t he Key R&D project of Zhejiang Province, PR China 

(2019C01072). In -situ Probing of the Electrode Roughness Change during 

# Electrodeposition in Ionic Liquid s Using 

# Electrochemical Surface Plasmon Resonance 

Naoya Nishi , Kenta Ezawa, Tetsuo Sakka 

Department of Energy and Hydrocarbon Chemistry, Graduate Sch ool of Engineer ing, 

Kyoto University , Kyoto 615 -8510, Japan 

nishi.naoya.7e@kyoto -u.ac.jp 

Ionic liquids (ILs) are promising materials for electrodeposition, because of their attractive 

properties such as wide electrochemical window and wide liquid temperature range. To maximize the 

performance of ILs for electrodeposition, studies on the interfacial structure during the electrodeposition 

reactions at the IL interfaces are of crucial importance. In the present study, the electrodeposition 

reactions at the IL|Au interfac e have been studied using electrochemical surface plasmon resonance 

(ESPR). 

ESPR has shown that it can be an in -situ probe for the change in the refractive index near the 

IL|Au interface: both the IL side and the metal side. For the former, ESPR has bee n used to sensitively 

probe the electric double layer (EDL) structure [1 ,2 ]. ESPR revealed that the EDL structure at the IL|Au 

interface shows extraordinarily slow relaxation, on the order of minutes, against the potential perturbation 

[1 ,2 ]. This specifi c slow dynamics is likely to result from ionic multilayers [ 3-10 ], a well -ordered 

structure, spontaneously formed in the EDL of ILs. The diffusion layer of redox species at the IL|Au 

interface can also be probed using ESPR [ 11 ]. 

As for the electrodeposit ion, ESPR can sensitively probe the metal side of the IL|Au interface, 

especially the surface roughness change during the deposition/re -dissolution processes. In the present 

paper, we will introduce the electrodeposition of Cu and underpotential depositio n (UPD) of Li on the 

IL|Au interface as examples [12 ]. For both the cases, ESPR can sensitively probe the roughness change 

during the multi potential cycles within which the deposition/re -dissolution of the metals repeatedly 

occurs. The ESPR results show the element dependence; t he Cu electrodeposition and Li UPD make the 

Au surface flat and rough, respectively. The latter is likely caused by alloying/de -alloying of Li with Au. 

References 

[1] N. Nishi, Y. Hirano, T. Motokawa, T. Kakiuchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , 15 (2013) 11615. 

[2] S. Zhang, N. Nishi, T. Sakka, in revision .

[3] N. Nishi, Y. Yasui, T. Uruga, H. Tanida, T. Yamada, S. Nakayama, H. Matsuoka, T. Kakiuchi, J. 

Chem. Phys. , 132 (2010) 164705. 

[4] N. Nishi, T. Uruga, H. Tanida, T. Kakiuchi, Langmuir , 27 (2011) 7531. 

[5] N. Nishi, T. Uruga, H. Tanida, J. Electroanal. Chem. , 759 (2015) 129. 

[6] S. Katakura, K. Amano, T. Sakka, W. Bu, B. Lin, M. Schlossman, N. Nishi, submitted .

[7] N. Nishi, J. Uchiyashiki, Y. Ikeda, S. Katakura, T. Oda, M. Hino, N.L. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem. C,

123 (2019) 9223. 

[8] S. Katakura, N. Nishi, K. Kobayashi, K. Amano, T. Sakka, J. Phys. Chem. C , 123 (2019) 7246. 

[9] S. Katakura, N. Nishi, K. Kobayashi, K. Amano, T. Sakka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , 22 (2020) 

5198. 

[10] S. Katakura, N. Nishi, K. Kobayashi, K. Amano, T. Sakka, J. Phys. Chem. C , 124 (2020) 7873. 

[11] N. Nishi, Y . Ikeda, T . Sakka, J. Electroanal. Chem. , 817 (2018) 210 .

[12] K. Ezawa, N. Nishi , T. Sakka, submitted .Polar Conformer Formation Determining Ionic Conductivities of 

# Linear Carbonate Electrolytes 

Hochun Lee *, Hyejin Lee , Sunwook Hwang 

Department of Energy Science and Engineering, DGIST 

Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea 

dukelee@dgist.ac.kr 

The underlying nature of the ion conduction in concentrated battery electrolytes still remains elusive. An 

archetypal example is a long -standing puzzle why a dimethyl carbonate (DMC) solution exhibit higher 

ionic conductivity than other linear carbonate (LC) solutions de spite the similar physicochemical 

properties of the LC solvents. To address this, we investigate the correlation between the conformational 

isomer formation and salt dissociation behavior in 0.1 M –3.0 M LiPF 6 DMC, ethyl methyl carbonate, and 

diethyl carbon ate solutions using Raman spectroscopy, dielectric relaxation spectroscopy, and PFG -

NMR. Importantly, we corroborate that compared to the other two LCs, DMC more readily dissociates 

Li -salt into free, conducting ions. The higher salt -dissociation ability o f DMC was attributed to the 

extensive formation of polar cis -trans conformer participating in Li -ion solvation compared to non -polar 

cis -cis conformer, which is supported by the theoretical calculation. This study unveils the critical role of 

the solvent i somerism in the ion -solvation chemistry, suggesting an avenue to achieve highly conductive 

electrolytes for rechargeable batteries. Active water electrolysis catalysts with Rational design 

# of hydrogen evolution interface 

Wei Xing *a,b , Changpeng Liu b, Junjie Ge b

> a

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130012, PR China 

> b

Laboratory of Advanced Power Sources, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Changchun 130012, 

PR China 

*C orresponding Author: Wei Xing, E -mail:  xingwei@ciac.ac.cn , Tel: 0431 -85262223 

Hydrogen is an ideal energy carrier with an energy density of 140 MJ kg -1 and water as its final 

product, which is considered as an ideal candidate for the replacement of fossil fuels. 1 To date, most 

H2 is produced today through nickel -catalyzed conversion of CH 4 to H 2 and CO followed by a water 

gas shift reaction to yield H 2 and CO 2. However, this approach is based on unsustainable fossil 

energy and discharges greenhouse gas. Water is an ideal source for H 2 production as it is carbon -free, 

plentiful and almost costless. Water electrolysis, with only H 2 and O 2 as the final produ ct, is a highly 

promising route in environmental benign H 2 generation. 1-2 Although the ultimate goal is to couple 

hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) to an integrated efficient 

device for whole water electrolysis, one of t he most crucial issues that must be solved is the 

development of highly efficient and durable catalysts for water oxidation and reduction. 

Here, we build a hydrogen evolution di -anionic surface on MoS 2 material to control its catalytic 

activity. Specificall y, sulfur anions are electronically activated by heteroatom metal doping (Pd and 

Ru) to acquire optimized hydrogen adsorption energy. Meanwhile,  –OH anions molecularly replace 

S sites at the interface in a controllable manner can create a reactant benign i nterface. The merits of 

the di -anion interface with  –OH anion doping are: first,  –OH functional groups attracts hydronium 

ions and water molecules closer to the inner Helmholtz plane (IHP) through hydrogen bonding, thus 

contributing to a reactant friendly i nterface; second,  –OH sites work in conjunction with adjacent 

metal sites (M –OH) to split water in alkaline medium, thus enormously boosts the HER catalytic 

behavior. We show that the HER activity of the final catalyst exhibits highest kinetic performance 

exceeding the existed MoS 2 based material in both acidic and alkaline environments. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21433003 ，21 63300 8), 

the Strategic priority research program of CAS (Grant No. XDA09030104), the Jilin Province 

Science and Technology Development Program (Grant No. 20130206068GX, 20140203012SF, 

20160622037JC) and the Recruitment Program of Foreign Experts (Grant No. WQ20122200077). 

References 

1. Karunadasa, H. I. et al. A molecular MoS 2 edge site mimic for catalytic hydrogen generation. 

Science 335, 698 –702 (2012). 

2. M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, E. A. S. Qixi Mi and N. S. Lewis, 

Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 –6473. A smart transparent microscope slide for rare cell capture, single cell 

# sensing and isolation 

Jiaxin Lian 123 , Wenxian Tang 123 , Ying Yang 123 , Stephen G. Parker 123 , Vinicius R. Gonçales 1, Richard D. 

Tilley 124 , J. Justin Gooding 123 

> 1

School of Chemistry, 2Australia Centre for NanoMedicine, 

> 3

ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio -Nano Science and Technology,  

> 4

Electron Microscopy Unit 

The University of New Sale Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia 

Jiaxin.lian@unsw.edu.au; justin.g ooding@unsw.edu.au 

The recognition of the diverse cellular behaviors, such as the different metastatic potentials of the 

circulating tumor cells, has triggered the need to develop single cell isolation and analysis techniques, so 

the information for each single cell, rather than the whole population was obtained, which could help to 

better understand some biological behaviors. While microelectrode array and scanning electrochemical 

microscopy were the common approaches to electrochemically sense a single c ell of interest in a cell 

population, ‘light activated electrochemistry’, a concept developed by Gooding group, offered another 

potential option. Light activated electrochemistry means on an unstructured semiconducting surface, a 

light defined where the e lectroactive area is. Based on this concept, a platform has been built on 

crystalline silicon for single cell electrochemical sensing and even single cell isolation, by simply using a 

laser pointer to shine to where the target cell located. Another advanta ge of this platform was it was 

compatible to work with other rare cells enrichment techniques, so it can be applied to sense and isolate 

rare single cells. While it is a highly interrogated system, there are opportunities to make it more 

accessible for the biologist for routine applications. Inspired by the previous work, here is presented a 

new single cell sensing and isolation platform which builds on a transparent glass slide. It shares the same 

advantages as the old system but it is much more robust, si mpler to fabricate and more user friendly. The 

first step to build this improved platform was to develop a transparent semiconducting electrode that 

became conducting upon exposure to visible light and were compatible with high resolution fluorescence 

micr oscopy. Subsequently, surface modification of this electrode to anchor the target cells such that they 

could be electrochemically sensed or release individually, has been developed. The fabrication and 

performance of this new single cell study platform wi ll be illustrated in the presentation. 

Figure 1 Cell capture, single electrochemical analysis and isolation on the smart transparent slide. 

References 

1. Carlo, D. D.; Lee, L. P., Dynamic Single -Cell Analysis for Quantitative Biology. Analytical 

Chemistry 2006, 78 , 7918. 

2. Parker, S. G.; Yang, Y.; Ciampi, S.; Gupta, B.; Kimpton, K.; Mansfeld, F. M.; Kavallaris, M.; 

Gaus, K.; Gooding, J. J., A photoelectroc hemical platform for the capture and release of rare single cells. 

Nature Communications 2018, 9, 2288. 

3. Lian, J. X.; Yang, Y.; Wang, W. Q.; Parker, S. G.; Gonçales, V. R.; Tilley, R. D.; Gooding, J. J.; 

Amorphous silicon on indium tin oxide: a transpar ent electrode for simultaneous light activated 

electrochemistry and optical microscopy, Chemical Communications  2019 , 55, 123. Nitrite reduction catalyzed by silver foam: 

# a differential electrochemical mass spectrometry study 

Sun Jing , Yulin Zhou, Antoine Bonnefont, Laurent Ruhlmann, Vasilica Badets 

Université de Strasbourg, Institut de Chimie, UMR CNRS 7177, Laboratoire d’Electrochimie et de 

Chimie Physique du Corps Solide 

4 Rue Blaise Pascal, CS 90032, 67081, Strasbourg Cedex, France 

badets@unistra.fr 

Metallic nanofoams are recently presenting an i nterest in electrocatalysis and electrochemical sensing. 

Application to carbon dioxide reduction [1] and glucose detection [2] have been described for silver, 

copper, gold and platinum foams. These materials are obtained using the dynamic hydrogen template 

electrodeposition. Their enhanced electrocatalytic activity is explained by the large surface, the porosity 

at different length scales and the existence of nanometric features such as dendrites and needles. 

In this presentation, we described the use of s ilver foams for nitrite reduction. Although nitrite is 

used as food preservative, its presence in high concentrations both in human body and in the environment 

is dangerous. Therefore, the detection and eventually the conversion of nitrite into harmless co mpounds is 

desired. Amongst other metals, polycrystalline silver has been well characterized as catalyst for nitrite 

conversion [3] . It has been shown that, on the silver surface, nitrous acid (HNO 2) is converted to nitr ic 

oxide (NO) which is subsequently converted to nitrous oxide (N2O). For the first time, silver foam is used 

here as electrode material for catalyzing this reaction. We have employed differential electrochemical 

mass spectrometry as analytical technique for the on -line detection of reaction products (Figure 1) . Our 

main finding is that the silver foam favors the reduction of solution -phase NO (issued from the 

decomposition of HNO 2 at acidic pH). In the low potential range (between 0.2 to -0.1 V vs RHE ) the 

product is N 2O. As the potential is decreasing below -0.1 V vs RHE, a change in the reaction mechanism 

is observed. The concentration of the solution phase NO is stable while the one of N 2O is decreasing. This 

is interpreted as the apparition of the reducti on of HNO 2 to NO that is now subsequently converted to 

hydrogenated species such as NH 4+ or NH 3OH + that are not detectable by DEMS. 

Figure 1. DEMS analysis of nitrite reduction catalyzed by silver foam . Black curve is the forward 

scan of cyclic voltammetry, dot line is the signal of m/z = 16, dash line is the signal of m/z = 46 (10 

mM NaNO 2 containing isotope 15 N was used). 

References: 

[1] A. Dutta et al., ACS Catal. , 2018 , 8, 8537 -8368 

[2] V. Coyle et al., J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2016 , 163 , 689 -695 

[3] M. Duca et al., Electrochimica Acta ., 2012 , 68 , 32 -43-0,2 -0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 4,0x10 -12 

> 2,0x10 -12
> 0,0 -2,0x10 -12
> -4,0x10 -12
> -6,0x10 -12
> -8,0x10 -12
> -1,0x10 -11
> -1,2x10 -11
> -1,4x10 -11
> -1,6x10 -11

E (V vs. RHE) Partial pressure 

NO N2O

> -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10
> I ( A)

# Ionic C harge Transfer th rough the Polymer/Ceramic Electrolyte 

# Interface determined by Electrochemical Impedance S pectroscopy 

James A. Isaac, Léa R. Mangani, Didier Devaux, Renaud Bouchet* 

Laboratoire électrochimie et physicochimie des matériaux et des in terfaces 

1130 Rue de la Piscine, 38402, Grenoble, France 

Renaud.Bouchet@lepmi.grenoble -inp.fr 

James.is aac@grenoble -inp.fr 

With our increasing demand for carbon free renewable energy, the developm ent of high energy 

density and safe batteries is key. Lithium (Li) metal has been identified as the ultimate negative electrode 

due to its particularly high gravimetric capacity (3.86 A.h.g -1)(1) and very low potential ( -3.04 V vs. SHE, 

Standard H ydrogen Electrode) which are the two levers to increase the energy density in a battery .

However, Li is known to form dendrites during cycling which eventually short -circ uit the device and lead 

to a hazard issue (fire, explosion). One strategy aims then at developing all -solid -state Li batteries, which 

would prevent dendrite form ation using solid electrolyte and increase both battery safety and cycle life. 

Solid -state electrolytes fall into two major classes; polymers and inorganic ceramics. Solid 

polymer electrolytes (SPEs) have advantages in terms of their mechanical properties, however poor ionic 

conductivity (typically 10 -5 S.cm -1 at room temper ature , RT ) hinders their application .(2) Conversely, 

ceramic electrolytes (CE) have greater thermo -stability and ionic conductivity (around 10 -4 to 10 -3 S.cm -1

at RT for NaSICON/garnet structur es), (3) but suffer from mechanical issues (brittleness ).

Composite electrolytes have therefore co me to light as a possible solution comprising the 

mechanical properties of SPEs and the high ionic conductivity of ceramics. The addition of highly Li +

conducting CE ( e.g. NASICON, garnet…) to a polymer should reach conductivit ies higher than the neat 

poly mer electrolyte . However, results are varied , including some groups that observe a decrease in the 

overall conductivity upon dispersion of a CE in a SPE matrix. (4) In vestigation are thus needed to 

understand the reason hindering the development of composite electrolyte. A possibilit y for the decrease 

in conductivity of the composite electrolyte could be due to the high Li + charge -transfer resistance at the 

SPE/CE interface. (5)

We propose a deep characterization of the interfacial SPE/CE processes by electrochemic al 

impedance spectroscopy. Different model layered systems based on symmetrical cells made using 

reversible Li (Li/SPE/Li or Li/SPE/CE/SPE/Li) or blocking stainless steel (SS) (SS/SPE/SS, SS/ 

SPE/CE/SPE /SS , see Figure 1 ) electrodes are reported to probe specifically the ionic charge transfer 

resistance , R ict , and capacitance at the CE/SPE interface , Ci, and its impact on the effective transport 

properties .

1. M. Armand, J. M. Tarascon, Nature . 414 , 359 –367 (2001). 

2. D. Zhou, D. Shanmukaraj, A. Tkacheva, M. Armand, G. Wang, Chem . 5, 2326 –2352 (2019). 

3. A. Varzi, R. Raccichini, B. Scrosati, J. Mater. Chem. A M ater. energy Sustain. 4, 17251 –17259 

(2016). 

4. M. Keller, A. Varzi, S. Passerini, J. Power Sources . 392 , 206 –225 (2018). 

5. M. Weiss et al. , Electrochem. Energy Rev. (2020), doi:10.1007/s41918 -020 -00062 -7. 

Figure 1: Experimental approach to study SPE /CE interfacial charge transfer .Controlled Anchoring of M etal Precursors to Prepare Fe -N/C ORR 

# Catalyst with High -density and Highly Dispersed Active Sites 

Jie L iu , Yuyi Chu, Zhao Jin, Junjie Ge*, Changpeng Liu* & Wei Xing* 

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry Chinese 

Academy , Changchun, China 

5625 Renmin Street, Changchun 130022, P. R. China 

jliu@c iac.ac.cn 

Abstract 

Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is an important reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cell 

technology (PEMFC). Because of its excellent ORR performance, platinum is widely used in fuel cell 

oxygen reduc tion catalysis. However, platinum's high cost and insufficient resources limit its application 

in fuel cells. It is important to design a low -cost, high -efficiency catalyst to replace platinum. Using the 

cyano -modified mesoporous silica hard template (CN -SBA -15), through the anchoring of the cyano -

group, a highly active, active site dispersed Fe -N/C ORR catalyst was prepared. Experimental results 

show that the use of cyano -functionalized templates with different loadings can improve the performance 

of the c atalyst, which is mainly due to the high dispersion of the active sites of the prepared catalyst. 

Under acidic conditions, the onset potential of the catalyst with the best performance was 0.88 V vs. 

RHE, and the half -wave potential (E 1/2 ) was 0. 70 V vs. RHE. At the same time, after 10,000 stability 

tests, only a half -wave potential attenuation of 20mV was observed, which indicates that it has excellent 

stability .

Figure 1. (a) Synthesi s of CN -SBA -15 and correspondin g Fe -N/C catalyst . (b) Characterizatio ns for CN -

SBA -15 .

Figure 2. Characterizations for  correspondin g Fe -N/C catalyst .Spinel/Lithium -Rich Manganese Oxide Hybrid Nanofibers 

# as Cathode Materials for Rechargeable Lithium -Ion Batteries 

Junxiang Liu , Jiaqi Wang, Youxuan Ni, Fangyi Cheng, Jun Chen *

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China 

* Corresponding author: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn 

Lithium -rich layered oxides are promising cathode candidates to build 500 Wh kg −1 Li -ion batteries 

(LIBs) yet suffer from low initial Coulombic efficiency , rapid capacity fade , and poor rate capability. To 

address these obstacles , heterostructured spinel/ layered oxide (Li 1.15 Ni 0.20 Mn 0.87 O2) nanofibers were 

synthesized . The synergist ic effect of nanofiber morphology and spinel/layer heterostructure enhances 

structure/surface stability as well as lithium diffusivity coefficient , leading to improved initial Coulombic 

efficiency ( ≈100%), cyclability (258 mAh g −1 after 70 cycles) , and rat e performance (150 mAh g −1 at 

5C) . In -situ techniques combined with first -principle calculations reveal that the spinel can stabilize the 

layered structure via suppressing layered structural variation as well as oxygen overoxidation and 

maintaining oxygen vacancy . The results would pave ways for the design of 1D heterostructure composite 

cathodes to develop high energy/power density LIBs. 

Fig.1 SEM and HAADF image s of 1D spinel/layered heterostructured LLRO and illustration o f stability 

during cycling. 

References 

[1] J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ni, Y. Zhang, J. Luo, F. Cheng, J. Chen, Small Methods 2019, 3, 1900350. Electrochemical and DFT Study of Carbon - and Heteroatom -bridged 

# Diarylnitroxides : a Possi bility to Tune Redox -properties 

Dmitry Dulov , Oleg Levitskiy, Tatiana Magdesieva 

Lomonosov Moscow Sta te University, Chemistry Dept., 

Leninskie Gory 1/3, Moscow 11999 1, Russia 

dulov.dmitry@gmail.com 

Poor ecologic situation and restricted mineral resources dictate a necessity for gradual replacement of 

inorganic metal -containing materials for biodegradable and recycl able organic compounds . Stable organic 

radicals are p erspective systems to investigate since they can form several redox -states and exhibit fast 

electrode kinetics . Importantly, organic molecules provide wide possibilities for targeted structural 

modification, to obtain the properties required. In this conte xt, diarylnitroxides seem perspective 

candidates. Recently we demonstrated that “twisted” donor -acceptor diarylnitroxides are smart tunable 

molecules capable to stabilize three redox states .1 Herein, the opposite structural “instrument” of the 

molecular design is applied, i.e., partial planarization of the nitrox ide molecule via insertion of carbon or 

heteroatomic linker connecting two phenyl rings. Prior to synth esis, the influence of such structural 

modification on the redox potential values was estimated, to choose the most promising structures and 

save material and time resources .

Quantum -chemical estimation of the oxidation potential values of novel nitroxides was performed using a

combination of the “Priroda” program package at the PBE/L2 level of theory with continuum solvation 

model (in the form of the two -step procedure) which provides a low -cost and reliable methodology for 

calculation of the standard redo x potentials for nitro xides in acetonitrile solution .2 It was shown, that the 

introduction of a carbon -bridge (containing 1 -3 methylene units between various positions of the rings) 

has only minor influence on the oxi dation potential values (E Ox are varied in the range of 

0.6 – 0.75 V vs Ag/AgCl/KCl) whereas the synthetic procedure becomes more time -consuming. In 

contrast, insertion of the SO 2-linker between the rings gives the promising st ructure with the DFT -

estimated oxidation potential value much more anodic than that previously measured for other nitroxides, 

both of aryl and alkyl type ( EOx = 1.24 V vs. Ag/AgCl/KCl). 

The SO 2-bridged nitroxide was synthesized and investigated using cycl ic voltammetry. It was shown, that 

the radical is stable in solution and exhibits completely reversible oxidation at 1.33 V (vs. Ag/AgCl/KCl). 

This is the maximal anodic potential value achieved for reversibly oxidized nitroxides to date. One can 

expect th at new compound might be of interest as cathodic redox material providing much higher 

potential gap as compared to the previously reported compound s. 

Acknowledgement: This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation (Project number 19 -13 -

00094). 

1. O. A. Levitskiy, V. V. Sentyurin, and T. V. Magdesieva, Electrochim. Acta , 260 , 459 –467 (2018). 

2. O. A. Levitskiy and T. V. Magdesieva, Mendeleev Commun. , 28 , 187 –189 (2018). Performance of Ag -Ni -Porous Coordination P olymer as a High -quality 

# Electrocatalyst Supporter Toward Palladium N ano particles 

Reza Khakpour 1, Mohammad Soleimani L ashkenari 2

> 1

School of Chemical Engineering, Kavosh Institute of Higher Education, Mahmood Aba d, Iran 

> 2

Fuel Cell Electrochemistry and Advanced Material Research Lab oratory, Faculty of Engineering 

Modern Technologies, Amol University of Special Modern Technologies, Amol, 4616849767, Iran 

e-mail address : reza.khakpour73@gmail.com 

The average temper ature of the earth is being rapidly increased which can endanger human survival. It is 

occurred d ue to the high demand for fossil fuel s to supply energy for citizens . One of the suggested 

method s to efficiently convert fuels into energy is fuel cells . The low performance and durability of 

available electro catalysts toward direct ethanol fuel cell (DE FC) provide a challenging research area to 

either modify previous catalysts or discover new catalysts. Our recent Excremental evidence indicated 

that Ag -Ni poro us coordination polymer (ANP) has a high -level capability to support platinum 

nanoparticles [1] . In the present research, the ANP was synthesized by the hydrothermal method, 

afterward , the palladium nanoparticles were deposited on the surface of th e ANP (Pd -ANP) . As a 

characterization test, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE -SEM ) has been taken to evaluate 

the morphology of the structure. To discover the performance and durability of synthesized 

electrocatalyst for the oxidation of etha nol , the cyclic voltammetry (CV) technique was exerted. 

Moreover, the Pd -ANP electrode was compared with the electrode contain palladium nanoparticles 

supported by carbon past electrode (Pd electrode). Additionally, a CV test was performed on the Pd -ANP 

el ectrode along 50 cycles to investigate the stability of the electrocatalyst. Electrochemical cyclic 

voltammetry demonstrated that forward peaks current density of Pd -ANP electrode and Pd electrode 

(without ANP supporter) are 5.178 mA cm -2 (-0.246 E / V vs A g/AgCl ) and 1.782 mA cm -2 (0.0836 E / V 

vs Ag/AgCl ) respectively. It resulted that ANP supporter bo lstered the activity of p alladium nanoparticles 

toward electrooxidation of ethanol by almost 290%. Besides, the onset potential was decreased from the 

Pd elec trode ( -0.225 V V vs Ag/AgCl) in comparison with the Pd -ANP electrode ( -0.594 V vs Ag/AgCl). 

The result indicates that ANP promisingly affects the kinetics of ethanol electrooxidation reactions. 

[1] Khakpour R, Peyravi M, Jahanshahi M, Lashkenari MS. A new durable and high performance 

platinum supported on Ag –Ni -porous coordination polymer as an anodic DMFC nano -electrocatalyst: 

DFT and experimental investigation. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. 2019;44:26530 -44. Influence of the carbon support in the electrochemical reduction of 

# carbon dioxide using copper -based catalysts 

Fabiola Martínez , Carlos Jiménez, María Isabel Cerrillo, Rafael Camarillo, Isaac Asencio and Jesusa 

Rincón 

Universidad de Castilla -La Mancha, F aculty of Environmental Sciences and Biochemistry, Department of 

Chemical Engineering 

Avenida Carlos III, s/n, 45071 Toledo, SPAIN 

fabiola.martinez@uclm.es 

Carbon dioxide anthropogenic emissions are nowadays one of the most important concerns of our society 

to try to mitigate the Climate Change. Electrochemical catalytic reduction appears as a promising 

technology for recycling CO 2 to fuels or other valuable products. One of the most important challenges of 

this technology is the development of catalysts that can obtain high efficiencies in the reduction of carbon 

dioxide. In this sense, copper nanoparticles deposited on some type of carbon support are frequent ly used 

as electrocatalysts as they have demonstra ted high reduction efficiencies. In this work, copper 

nanoparticles have been deposited using supercritical fluid deposition (SFD) technique (Figure 1) on three 

different carbon supports: carbon black (CB), carbon nanotubes (CNT) and reduced graphene oxi de 

(rGO). SFD is an environmentally friendly technology that has demonstrated good results in the synthesis 

of nanomaterials [1,2 ].

Figure 1. Scheme of the SFD technique for the deposition of copper nanoparticles 

Different tec hn iques have been analyzed to characterize the catalysts synthesized to try to understand the 

influence of the carbon support in the results obtained: TEM, DRX, XPS, ICP , FTIR and BET. Results 

show that SFD technique allows obtaining catalysts with a homogen eous copper nanoparticles 

distribution in the different carbon supports with deposition yields close to 90% in every case. 

Furthermore, most of the copper nanoparticles crystallite size is between 10 and 20 nm. 

Finally, the activity of these catal ysts (Cu/ CB, Cu/CNT and Cu/rGO) has been determined for the 

electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide in gas phase in a PEM type electrochemical cell ( 25 cm 2

geometric area) . Every assay has been carried out in continuous mode at 0.05 SL CO 2/min of carbo n

dioxide circulating through the cathodic compartment of the cell. The anolyte used was a KHCO 3 0.1 M 

aqueous solution . Temperature was fixed at 60 ºC and current density applied was 16 mA/cm 2 with four 

replicates for each catalyst studied .

The highest CO 2 conv er sion rate was obtained for the Cu/CNT catalyst. Nevertheless, products 

distribution was very similar in every case with CO, formic acid and methane as the main products 

obtained. Nevertheless, Cu/CNT and Cu/CB catalysts promote the formation of CO, whereas formic acid 

is the main reaction product with Cu/rGO. These results point out that the interaction between the copper 

nanoparticles and the carbon support plays an important role in the CO 2 electrocatalytic reduction 

process. 

References 

(1 ) Jiménez, C.; García, J.; Martínez, F.; Camarillo, R.; Rincón, J. Electrochim. Acta 2020, 337, 135663. 

(2) Barim, S.B.; Uzunlar, E.; Bozbag, S.E.; Erkey, C. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 167, 054510. 

Acknowledgment 

The authors gratefully acknowledge to Mini sterio de Econo mía y Competitividad of the Spanish 

government, for the financial support to this work through project CTM2016 -79098 -R. Influence of Carbon Felt Surface Oxidation on Vanadium Redox Flow 

# Battery Behavior 

Justyna Piwek , Elzbieta Frackowiak 

Poznan Univer sity of Technology 

Pl. M. Sklodowskiej -Curie 5 , 60 -965, Poznan, Poland 

justyna.piwek@put.poznan.pl 

Carbon fiber s are commo nly used as materials for the flow -through electrode coupled with vanadium 

redox pairs because of their relatively low cost, broad potential window, porosity and resistance in 

supporting electrolyte, i.e., acid ic solution [1 ]. Their role is very important especially when vanadium 

redox flow batteries (VRFB) are considered. The key recognition of VRFB systems is the possibility to 

separate the energy and power values and to tailor VRFB for specific application. The energy is 

dependent on the size of the elec trolyte storage tanks, while the power capability is determined by the size 

of electrochemical cells stack. This feature gives VRFB a brilliant future in energy storage systems for 

grid application [2]. 

Beside many advantages of RFB system , some side rea ctions (carbon corrosion and oxygen evolution on 

the positive side and hydrogen evolution on the negative) still lead to the significant RFB performance 

losses over time . Therefore, there is still a particular need to develop a material with good electrica l

conductivity and proper activity to improve overall RFB properties [3]. 

The research objective relates to broadly -defined comparison of the cost -effective carbon material 

treatments coupled with insightful post -mortem and in -situ physico -chemical analy sis . For these studies, 

Rayon based graphitized carbon Sigracell® GFD 4.6 EA from SGL Carbon (Germany) was used. 

In order to address the growing need of environmental friendliness using mild approaches, a new 

oxidation method will be adapted using neutral alkali salts such as potassium nitrate (KNO 3).  Herein, a 

simple molten salt method is studied to prepare carbon felt electrode with novel properties. Various 

reaction conditions have been investigated and correlation of the activation time and temperature on 

VRFB behaviour will be presented. 

All the electrodes were tested in three electrode cells and redox flow battery system. Moreover,  physico -

chemical properties such as: surface functionality, wettability and surface texture/structure have been 

monitore d using X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy , elemental analysis and 

contact angle measurements .

It seems that a pplication of molten salts as an activation agent can be the new route for carbon felt 

treatment necessary for efficient vanadium redox reactions. 

Acknowledgements: Justyna Piwek would like to acknowledge the N ational Science Centre, Poland 

(project no. 2018/29/N/ST4/01055) for the financial support of the research .

[1]  B.Sun , M.Skyllas -Kazacos  Modification of graphite electrode materials for vanadium redox flow 

battery app lication —I. Thermal treatment , Electrochimica Acta 7, 1992, 1253 -1260 

[2] A. Parasuraman , T. M. Lim , C. Menictas , M. Skyllas -Kazacos  Review of material research and 

development for vanadium redox flow battery application ,s Electrochimica Acta , 101, 2013, 27 -40 

[3]  L.Eifert , Z.Jusys , R.J.Behm , R. Zeis  Side reactions and stability of pre -treated carbon felt electrodes 

for vanadium redox flow batteries: A DEMS study , Carbon 158, 2020, 580 -587 Enhancing the Activity of Alkaline Hydrogen Evolution Reaction by 

# Lateral Electrode Structuring 

Thomas L. Maier 1, Matthias Golibrzuch 2, S imon Mendisch 2, Tina Angerer 1, Werner Schindler 1,

Markus Becherer 2, Katharina Krischer 1

> 1

Nonequilibrium Chemical Phy sics, Department of Physics, 

Technical University of Munich , 8574 8 Garching, Germany 

> 2

Chair of Nanoelectronics, Department o f Electrical and Computer Engineering, 

Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany 

thomas.maier@ ph.tum.de 

The productio n of solar fuels with devices based on metal -semiconductor junctions is a promising future 

technology of the renewable energy economy. The semiconductor part of these hybrid devices can 

provide an eff icient absorption of solar light while the metal facilit ates fast reaction kinetics. However, to 

fulfil l these two functionalities the device requires a laterally patterned surface .

We show that lateral structuring of silicon -based electrodes with well -defined gold arrays in addition 

exhibits cooperative effe cts, i.e. strongly altered catalytic activities compared to bare gold surfaces [1] .

We demonstrate this with the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) . In particular , we show that the alkaline 

HER rate scales with the int erfacial area between the gold catalys t and the silicon oxide support [2] . A

rate e nhance ment of an order of magnitude for the largest interfacial area is observed. We present 

evidence that the lateral structuring changes locally the electric field , thus g iving rise to a bifunctional 

mechanism . The local field enhancement increases the reaction rate of alkaline HER at the interface 

compared to the rate at the metal bulk. The enhancement is not restricted to go ld /silicon oxide boundaries. 

Rather, structured electrodes based on platinum catalysts exhibit also higher reaction rat es than bulk Pt 

films . Such laterally structured silicon photoelectrodes can exhibit reaction rates for alkaline HER that are 

similar to the HER activity in acidic medi a [2] .

Referenc es :

[1] S. Filser et al., Electrochim ica Acta 268, 546 -553 (2018) 

[2] T.L. Maier et al., J. Chem. Phys. 152, 154705 (2020) Design and Fabrication of Economic and Scalable all Electrodeposited 

# NiCo 2S4//Iron oxide based Asymmetric Supercapacitor 

Samhita Pappu, a,b Tata N Rao, a Surendra K Martha, b Sarada V Bulusu a* 

> a

International Advanced Research Center for Powder Metallurgy an d New Materials (ARCI), Balapur, 

Hyderabad -500005, Telangana, India 

> b

Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Kandi, Sangareddy -502285, Telangana, India 

samhitapappu.11@gmail.com 

Supercapacitors are primarily employed as energy sources for hybrid electr ic vehicles, back up systems, 

etc. ow ing to their high power density and life span 1. However, meeting the energy deman ds require high 

energy densitie s, which can be achieved by improving the specific capacitance or widening the potential 

window. Besides , the quest for new anode and cathode materials have always been quintessential to 

improve the supercapacitor properties. In comparison to most commonly employed carbonaceous 

materials, metal oxides/sulfides are superior in their electrochemical performance due to the additional 

faradaic reactions. In this regard, the present work aims at the synthesis of NiCo 2S4 as positive and iron 

oxide as negative electrode with nanoflower -like morphology by facile, scalable and highly economical 

electrodeposition route. Both the electrodes have been studied for their morphological (Fig. 1a and b), 

electrochemical (Fig. 1c) and structural properties. The appropriateness of NiCo 2S4 2 and iron oxide 3 as 

electrode materials is realized by their corresponding cyclic voltammetry (CV) and charge -discharge 

analys es , also exhibiting excellen t cyclic stability. Thereafter, an all -electrodeposited NiCo 2S4//Iron oxide 

asymmetric supercapacitor is fabricated with 3M KOH as the electrolyte (F ig. 1d). Thus fabricated device 

exhibited good energy and power density values while yielding excellent stabil ity performance (to be 

discussed later). The present study shows that the electrodes synthesized by th e economic 

electrodeposition method are highly efficient and are suitable for next -generation supercapacitor devices. 

Figure 1. FESEM i mages of (a) NiCo 2S4, (b) Iron oxide, (c) CV of NiCo 2S4 and iron oxide at 20 mV s -1

scan rate and (d) schematic of the asymmetric supercapacitor 

References: 

1. B. Li, Z. Tian, H. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Wang and X. Wang, Electrochimica Acta , 2019, 314 , 32 -39. 

2. S. Sahoo, K. Kumar Naik and C. Sekhar Rout, Materials Today: Proceedings , 2018, 5, 23083 -

23088. 

3. X. -F. Lu, X. -Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. -X. Tong and G. -R. Li, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces ,

2015, 7, 14843 -14850. Beyond energy storage limitations – long -term operation of sulfate -

# based electrochemical capacitors 

Anetta Platek -Mielczarek , Justyna Piwek , Elzbieta Frackowiak , Krzysztof Fic 

Poznan Univer sity of Technology 

Pl. M. Sklodowskiej -Curie 5 , 60 -965, Poznan, P oland 

anetta .g.platek @doctorate. put.poznan.pl 

Lithium sulfate aqueous solution find s its application as electrolyte in electrochemical capacitors (ECs) 

mostly by its versatile advantages [1 -2], such as: 

• neutral pH, 

• good electrical conductivity (for 1 mo l L -1 Li 2SO 4 - 72 mS cm -1), 

• suitable ion size matching to carbon porous structure, 

• reversible and satisfactory capacitive performance (95% of coulombic efficiency and 65% of 

energetic one when charge d/discharge d with in the voltage range of 0-1.6 V at 0.1 A g -1),

• ability to operate at high voltage (up to 1.6 V) and good long -term stability (120,000 cycles recorded 

during 2 50 days of constant operation to obtain 20% capacitance fade). 

We do believe that besides many advantages, sulfate -based ECs might be f urther improved. Our research 

is focused on expanding sulfate -based ECs properties, by studying the influence of various cation s (Li +,

Na +, K +, Rb + and Cs +) on the overall electrochemical performance and ageing phenomena. 

After applying constant voltage h old (floating ) test on EC with 1 mol L -1 sulfate -based electrolyte ,

deterioration of both electrodes (namely specific surface area (SSA) ) has been observed contrary to 

nitrate -based ECs [ 3]. Thus, it suggest s that both electrodes participate in the ageing process. Moreover, 

pH tends to be a crucial factor for a long -term stability of the device. In addition, considering binding 

energy of cations to aromatic ring, the higher binding energy (Li +>>Cs +), the lower SSA change. 

Apparently, the i on size itself doe s not affect textural changes of electrode after ageing test remarkably .

When ions penetrate the electrode porosity, local dehydration process might occur; however, it cannot be 

discussed based on a full device studies and post mortem analysis of electrode texture , as each cation is 

characterized by different hydration enthalpy . Hence, three -electrode investigations are required . Large 

cations (Rb + and Cs +) favorabl y lose their solvation shell, as it might be done with a low energetic cost. 

Small cations (L i+ and Na +) exhibit strong interaction with surrounding water molecules. Counter 

electrodes SSA fade trend resembles the following order of cations in the electrolytic solution 

Li +<Na +<Rb +=Cs +. It suggests that ECs based on 1 mol L -1 Rb 2SO 4 and Cs 2SO 4 get age d similarly. Thus, 

binding energy does not play such an important role considering change of SSA of electrodes, contrary to 

the ions ’ size. It is assumed that Rb + and Cs + are too big to penetrate porosity reversibly and pore 

clogging effect might occur, while these cations are trapped inside micro por e structure. In order to 

enhance system with rubidium or c aesium sulfate, one need to use carbon with wider micropores (1 -2 nm 

range) or even more developed mesoporosity . Additionally, ECs lifetime has been c ompared (up to 

C/C 0=80%) among all studied electrolytes. These results indicate that proposing a novel sulfate -based 

electrolyte composition, extension of operational time can be achieved (up to 650h of floating test) .

We do correlate th ese findings with pH influence on SO 42- anion stability. Furthermore, time of operation 

of ECs with Me2SO 4 electrolyte (where M e=Na +, K +, Rb +, Cs +) seems to be in a linear trend with cation 

properties , e.g., binding energy, cation diameter, hydration enthalpy . Interestingly , Li 2SO 4 does not 

follow this tendency at all. 

Insight s into sulfate -based ECs have been, herein, presented. Cation influence on the overall electrolyte 

performance has been described and advancement of the system has been proposed .

Acknowledgements: AP M would like to acknowledge the National Science Centre, Poland, for the 

scholarship 2019/32/T/ST4/00276. 

The authors acknowledge the European Commission and the European Research Council for financial 

support by the Starting Grant project (GA 759603) unde r the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research 

and Innovation Programme. 

[1] K. Fic, G. Lota, M. Meller, E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5842 -5850 

[2] K. Fic, A. Platek, J. Piwek, J Menzel, A. Slesinski, P. Bujewska, P. Galek, E. Frackowiak, Energy 

Storage Materials , 2019, 22, 1 -14 

[3] J. Piwek, A. Platek, E. Frackowiak, K. Fic, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227029 Novel Approach for Lifespan Extension of Electrochemical Capacitors 

Justyna Piwek , Anetta Platek -Mielczarek , Elzbieta Frackowiak, Krzysztof Fic 

Poznan Univers ity of Technology 

Pl. M. Sklodowskiej -Curie 5 , 60 -965, Poznan, Poland 

justyna.piwek@put.poznan.pl 

Water -based electrochemical capacitors (ECs) are nowadays intensively studied mainly due to their 

environmental benign and cost -effective technology . Nevertheless, their cycle -life at the higher voltages 

is limited because of thermodynamic water decompos ition at U>1.23 . Therefore, there is a particular 

necessity to develop long -lasting ECs operating in aqueous medium at high voltages [ 1].

Our previous studies allowed the capacitors failure reasons to be fully recognized in capacitive (LiNO 3-

based) and re dox (KI -based) systems . It has been proven that the oxidati on of the positive electrode is one 

of the main problems which causes capacitance fade of aqueous medium carbon/carbon ECs . Moreover, 

solid -state deposit (namely Li 2CO 3) has been found for both ele ctrodes after the ageing test [2]. 

Currently, o ur scientific scope concerns the study of capacitors with nitrate -based electrolytes operating 

with activated carbon electrodes.  This research reports on the successful attempts of symmetric aqueous 

electroch emical capacitor life -span extension. 

Various electrolyte concentrations were selected in order to observe its influence on capacitor operation. 

Long -term performance has been simulated using a constant voltage -holding test . The carbon -based 

electrodes af ter the ageing tests have been analysed and compared with pristine materials using various 

physicochemical techniques, such as: N 2 adsorption/desorption at 77K, XPS and elemental analysis . A

modified electrochemical protocol was adapted in order to extend capacitor life -time operation. This 

approach allowed  the properties of the negative electrode to be used.  It has been proven that ECs cycle 

life strongly depends on the electrolyte concentration . All the systems were aged to the same relative 

capacitance l evel, i.e., C/C 0=80 %. On this basis, it has been estimated that  maximally +83% of capacitor 

operation time extension is achieved for 0.2 mol L-1 LiNO 3.

Fig. 1 Specific energy as a function of floating time for capacitors with LiNO 3 electrolyte at diffe rent 

concentration  (0.2 mol L-1 and 5.0 mol L-1)

Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge the European Commission and the European Research 

Council for financial support by the Starting Grant project (GA 759603) under the European Union’s 

Horizon 2020 Re search and Innovation Programme. 

[1 ] R. Koetz, M. Carlen  Principles and applications of electrochemical capacitors , Electrochimica Acta 45 

(2000) 2483 -2498 

[2] J. Piwek, A. Platek, E. Frackowiak, K. Fic Mechanisms of the performance fading of carbon -base d

electrochemical capacitors operating in a LiNO 3 electrolyte, Journal of Power Sources 438 (2019) 227029 Performance and s tability of LSFMn+NiSDC anode in dry methane 

Leonardo Duranti *a , Igor Luisetto b, Silvia Licoccia a, Costantino Del Gaudio c, and Elisabetta Di 

Bartolomeo a 

> a

Dept. of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome Tor Vergata, V ia della Ricerca 

Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy  

> b

Department of Energy Technologies, ENEA C.R. Casaccia DTE -PCU -IPSE, S.P. 081 Via 

Anguillarese 301, 00123 S.M. di Galeria, Rome, Italy  

> c

E. Amaldi Foundation, Via del Politecnico snc, 00133 Rome, Italy 

Anod e deactivation over prolonged SOFC operation represents a major issue towards stable and reliable 

energy production from hydrocarbon -containing fuels [1][2] . In this respect, Ni -YSZ replacement with 

oxide -based anodes, less prone to coking, is commonly rega rded as a viable solution [3]. Nevertheless, 

most studied oxides cannot compete with Ni -based state -of -the -art anodes in terms of conductivity and 

catalytic activity. A novel MIEC anodic composite based on La 0.6 Sr 0.4 Fe 0.8 Mn 0.2 O3-δ (LSFMn) perovskite 

and Ce 0.85 Sm 0.15 O2-δ containing 5 wt.% of Ni (NiSDC) was tested in methane fuel . In reducing conditions, 

LSFMn undergoes phase transformation to Ruddlesden -Popper structure, exsolving Fe 0 nanoparticles and 

retaining proper conductivity [4] . The small amount of Ni, well -dispersed on the SDC matrix, forms a Fe -

Ni alloy with the exsolved iron from the perovskite Fig.(1) . While Fe -Ni alloy activates CH 4, SDC 

provides enough O 2- ions to electrochemically oxidize any cracking products. LSGM -ba sed electrolyte 

supported cells were tested in wet, dry methane and methane -based gas mixtures. Endurance cell test s at 

850 °C in dry CH 4 were performed. A remarkable cell stability for over 40h was registered both in open 

circuit voltage and in operando Fig.(2) . SEM and Raman Spectroscopy analyses carried out after 

endurance tests do not reveal any anode fouling. 

Fig. 1 – XRD patterns of reduced anodic components. From LSFMn and NiSDC co -reduction FeNi alloy 

formation is visible. 

Fig. 2 – Endurance test in dry methane at 850 °C, current density versus time at 0.5 V. IN the inset I -V

curve and power densities before and after the test are reported. 

[1] M. Mogensen, K. Kammer, Conversio n of hydrocarbons in solid oxide fuel cells, Annual Review of 

Materials Research , 33 (2003) 321 -331. 

[2] T.M. Gür, Comprehensive review of methane conversion in solid oxide fuel cells: prospects for 

efficient electricity generation from natural gas, Progre ss in Energy and Combustion Science , 54 (2016) 

1-64. 

[3] J. Irvine, A. Sauvet, Improved oxidation of hydrocarbons with new electrodes in high temperature fuel 

cells, Fuel Cells , 1 (2001) 205 -210. 

[4] Duranti, L., Sora, I. N., Zurlo, F., Luisetto, I., Licoccia, S., & Di Bartolomeo, E. (2020).  The role of 

manganese substitution on the redox behavior of La 0.6 Sr 0.4 Fe 0.8 Mn 0.2 O3-δ. Journal of the European 

Ceramic Society .Bio -insp ired Supercapacitor an ecofriendly device for green 

# supercapacitor 

Pietro Forcellese , Federico Poli, Mohammad Said El Halimi , Francesca Soavi 

Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 40132 Bologna, Italy 

francesca.soavi@unibo.it 

The huge and continuously growing demand for electrochemical energy storage systems is forcing the 

scientific community to think about their impact on the environment. Technologies that should enable a 

transition to a sustainable society feature pollutant s components and require a tremendous amount of 

energy for the ir production process . Su percapacitor s represent a niche of the total energy storage market 

but are not exempt from th is criticism [ 1,2 ]. Indeed, the main components of modern carbon -based 

Electrical Double L ayer Capacitor ( EDLC ), such as the electrolyte solvent Acetonitrile , are known to be 

flammable , t oxic to human health and dangerous to the environment. The binder is not immune from this 

kind of judgment , indeed, Polyvinylidene difluoride (P VDF) belong s to the large r family of the Per - and 

polyfluoroalkyl substances , also known as PFAS . It is arising the concern about their impact on the health 

and their capability to bio -accumulate [ 3,4]. The solvent needed for the processing of the electrodes, N-

Methyl -2-Pyrrolidone (NMP) is also known to be toxic and irritant . The usage of th is solvent represents a

further drawback in terms of the device cost . Moreover, its processing requires a tremendou s amount of 

energy for being dried [5-8].  Water processable binder and non -toxic electrolyte represent a solution to 

the majority of th ese problem s [9-12 ]. A further step through green and sustainable supercapacitor s is the 

ex plo itation of a living syst em to enhance the performance of EDLC devices. 

Here we report the syste matic study of an EDLC based on anthrac ite that exploit s the activity of a biofilm 

to enhance its performance . A water processable Alginate based binder has been u sed and cation 

exchange (Sodium with Calcium) has been performed to enable its use in aqueous electrolytes [13 ].

Waste water was used as electrolyte. Different combination s of active carbon, binder , and electrolyte have 

been tested . The most perfo rming one has been selected to build an EDLC . The growth of the biofilm has 

been monitored and the eff ect of its presence on the performance of the EDLC measured. This work 

high light s that sustainable and green device s have performance comparable with classical fluorinated 

polymer and organic electrolyte based EDLC. Furthermore. Our findings aim at paving the way towards a 

novel concept of “Bio -Supercapacitor ” that exploits bacteria as active components for energy stor age. 

## Acknowledgments 

The present research reports the results obtained under the Italy -South Africa joint Research Programme 

2018e2020 (Ita lian Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of the Environment) .

References 

[1] C. Curry, Lithium -ion battery costs a nd market. Bloomberg New Energy Finance, (2017) 5. 

[2] P. Harro p, F. Gonzales, J. Amstrong, K. Kathryn . Supercapacitor/ultracapacitor strategie s and emerging 

applications 2013 –2025. IDTechEx Ltd, (2013). 

[3] S. Byrne, S. Seguinot -Medina, P. Miller, V. Wag hiyi, F. A. von Hippel, C.L. Buck, D. O. Carpenter, 

Environmental Pollution 231 (2017) 387 –395. 

[4] A. B. Lindstrom, M. J. Strynar, A. D. Delins ky, S. F. Nakayama, L. McMillan, E.L. Libelo, L. Neill, L. Thomas, 

Environmental Science & Technology 45 (2011) 8015 –8021. 

[5] K. P. Lee, N. C. Chromey, R. Culik, J. R. Barnes, P. W. Schneider, Fundamental and Applied Toxicology 9

(1987) 222 -235. 

[6] A. E. Ahmed, J.-P. Loh, B. Ghanayem, G. I. Hussein, Pharmacology & To xicology 70 (1992) 322 .

[7] S. Ahmed, P.l A. Nelson, K. G. Gallagher, D. W. Dees, J. Power Sources 322 (2016) 169 

[8] H. Dura, J. Perry, T. Lecacou, F. Markoulidis, C. Lei, S. Khalil, M. Deck er, M. Weil, 2013 International 

Conference on Clean Electrical Power (ICCEP) (2013). 

[9] B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, M. Helon, M.R. Lukatskaya, M. Beidaghi, Y. Gogotsi, Development of a green 

supercapacitor composed entirely of environmentally friendly materia ls , Che mSusChem , 6.12 (2013): 2269 -2280. 

[10] D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, A. Moretti, A. Varzi, S. Passerini, Energy Environ. Sci. 11 (2018) 3096. 

[11] F.Poli, D. Momodu, G. E Spina, A. Terella, B. K. Mutuma, M . L. Focarete, N . Manyala, F . Soavi , Electrochim. 

Acta 338 (2020) 135872 

[12] G. E. Spina, F. Poli, A. Brilloni, D. Marchese , F. Soavi , Energies, (2020) accepted 

[13] M. Borgogna, G. Skjåk -Bræk, S. Paoletti, I. Donati, J. Phys . Chem . B (2013), 117 (24), 7277 .Novel water processable binder for high potential Li -ion battery 

# cathodes 

Alessandro Brilloni , Federico Poli, G iovanni Emanuele Spina, Francesca Soavi 

Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, Alma Mater Studiorum Universita’ di Bologna, 

Via Selmi 2 -40126 Bologna, Italy 

alessandro.brilloni2@unibo.it 

The growing energy demand in all the world is requiring for more sustainable energy production metho ds 

while the environmental and economic sustainability of th ese methods are of tremendous importance. 

Electrochemical energy s torage systems are a key element for the implementation of sustainable energy 

systems and the transition from an economy based on fossil fuels to a low environmental impact society. 

Li thium -ion batterie s (LIBs) are the most well establis hed battery technology with an exponentially 

growing market. However , LIBs require further improvement . In order to achieve higher energy density, 

the most effective strategy is to use high potential cathodes like Li xNi 0.76 Mn 0.14 Co 0.10 O2 (NMC ). 

Nonetheless , the environmental impact of battery production method s is of extreme importance. Today 

LIBs are fabricated with F -based polymers as binders, such as poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVdF) which 

need N -methyl -2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as solvent/dispersant, both very toxic for humans and environment. 

This process also requires expensive atmosphere -controlled environment. 

Here w e present a novel water processable binder based on the biodegradable biopolymer Pullulan (Pu). 

Pu is used to process high potential NMC cathode s in ambient atmosphere. The electrochemical results of 

Pu/NMC cathodes are here reported and discussed and comp ared with those achieved with PVdF/NMC 

electrodes. 

Acknowledgments 

“Piano Triennale di Realizzazione 2019 -2021, Accordo di Programma Ministero dello Sviluppo 

Economico” – ENEA and the Italy -South Africa joint Research Programme 2018 -2020 (Italian Minist ers 

of Foreign Affairs and of the Environments) are acknowledged for financial support .

References 

[1] D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, A. Moretti, A. Varzi, S. Passerini, Energy Environ. Sci. 11 (2018) 3096. 

[2] F.Poli, D. Momodu, G. E Spina, A. Terella, B. K. Mutuma, M. L. Focarete, N. Manyala, F. Soavi, Electrochim. 

Acta 338 (2020) 135872 

[3] G. E. Spina, F. Poli, A. Brilloni, D. Marchese, F. Soavi, Energies, (2020) accepted Organic/ inorganic hybrid electrode materials for lithium batteries 

Yong Lu , Licheng Miao, Jun Chen *

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center , College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China 

* Corresponding author: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn 

Organic carbonyl compounds have attracted much attention in recent years because of t heir low cost, high 

abundance, flexible structural designability and environmental friendl iness. However, pure small organic 

carbonyl materials are easily dissolved in ap rotic electrolyte, leading to inferior cycling stability, low 

Coulombic efficiency and undesired shutting problems. We here report a dissolution -recrystallization 

method to pre pare flexible , binder -free and free -standing hybrid film of sodium 1,4 -dioxonaphthalene -2-

sulfonate and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (NQS/MWNTs) as high -performance cathode for lithium 

batt eries . The hybrid films exhibit a high initial reduc tion potential at 2.97 V, a high material utilization 

of 75%, a high capacity retention of 96% after 50 cycles at 0.2 C and good rate performance (capacity 

retention of 64% at 2.0 C compared with that at 0.2 C), which result from the high polarity and smal l size 

of NQS, electron withdrawing property of −SO 3Na group, and three -dimensional intertwined conductive 

network formed by MWNTs. Moreover, the reversible redox mechanism of NQS/MWNTs during 

discharge/charge processes was revealed by in situ infrared spe ctroscopy, whic h indicates that the C=O 

groups are active sites. This stud y paves the way to develop well -designed organic/inorganic hybrid 

materials with high electrochemical performance for practical lit hium battery applications in the future. 

Fig. 1 (a) Structural f ormula and reversible electrochemical redox mechanism of NQS/Li 2NQS. (b) The 

lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of NQS molecule, the highest occupied molecular orbital of NQS 2− ,

and optimized structure of Li 2NQS. (c ) Schematic process for preparing NQS/MWNTs hybrid film . (d) 

Optical photographs of NQS/MWN Ts hybrid film. 

References 

[1] Y. Lu , J. Chen. Nature Rev. C hem. 2020, 4, 127 –142 .

[2] Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu, J. C hen.  Chem 2018, 4, 2786 –2813. 

[3] Y. Lu, Q. Zhao, L. Miao, Z. Tao, Z. Niu, J. Chen. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 14498 –14506. Toward F irst -Principles Modelling of Charged Oxide -Electrolyte 

# Interfaces 

Chao Zhang 

Department of Chemistry – Ångström  Laboratory , Uppsala University 

Lägerhyddsvägen 1 , 75121 Uppsala, Sweden 

e-mail address : chao.zhang@kemi.uu.se 

Oxide -electrolyte inte rfaces are universally present in energy storage device, nanofluidic chemical 

processor, drug delivery nanoparticles and containments treatment in ground water. The surface charge of 

all these interfaces is controlled by the pH of the electrolyte solution and this leads to the formation of the 

electric double layer (EDL) by deprotonation of adsorbed water molecules or protonation of the oxide 

surfaces. Despite of the rapid development of experimental techniques, the missing of microscopic 

understanding impo ses a knowledge gap. In this regard, modelling and simulation of EDL can provide 

complementary information of the structure, dynamics and energetics of charged interfaces. Here, I will 

report our recent methodological progress on the atomistic modelling of dielectric properties of charged 

oxide -electrolyte interfaces. 

[1] Chao Zhang*, Thomas Sayer, Jürg Hutter, Michiel Sprik, “Modelling electrochemical systems with 

finite field molecular dynamics”, J. Phys.: Energy, 2020 , Accepted (Topical Review) 

[2] Chao Zhang*, Jürg Hutter, Michiel Sprik, “Coupling of surface chemistry and electric double layer at 

TiO 2 electrochemical interfaces”, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019 , 10: 3871 Reduc tion of faradaic contributions in carbon/carbon cells  using a

# “water -in -salt” electrolyte 

Emmanuel Pameté Yambou * and François Béguin 

Institute of Chemistry and Technical Electrochemistry, Poznan University of Technology, 

Berdychowo4, 60 -965 Poznan, Poland 

*emmanuel.yambou@doctorate.put.poznan.pl 

Environmentally friendly aqueous alkali sulfate electrolytes with pH close to neutrality have been recently 

proposed for carbon/carbon supercapacitors (SCs) demonstrating enhanced voltages up to U = 1.6 V [1]. The 

enhanced voltages in SCs using neutral aqueous electrolytes exceeding the electrochemical stability window of 

water (1.23 V) is due to the increased local pH inside the porosity of negative carbon electrode due to the 

electrochemical reduction water producing OH - anions and causing important di -hydrogen evolution over -

potential [2]. However, it has now been established that carbon/carbon cell in 1 mol L -1 Li 2SO 4 keeps good state -

of -health under potentiostatic floating only up to 1.5 V, beyond this voltage oxidation of positive carbon electrode 

occurs owing to the generation of oxygenated functionalities demonstrated by the CO and CO 2 evolution as side 

products [3 ]. Besides, reduction of water at the negative electrode generating hydrogen gas presents another 

challenge at high voltages contributing to pressure increase inside the cell and consequently resulting deterioration 

of SC performance during long -term aging /cycling [4]. 

In this work, we implement LiTFSI in water at t wo different concentrations (1 mol kg -1 and 21 mol kg -1, pH = 6.1) 

in carbon/carbon supercapacitors to demonstrate the influence of electrolyte concentration on the electrochemical 

performance of the cell. Three -electrode cell investigations show that the hydrogen adsorption under negative 

polarization of carbon electrode in 21 mol kg -1 aqueous LiTFSI is dramatically reduced in comparison to 1 mol 

kg -1 LiTFSI. Two electrode cell data demonstrates nearly rectangular CV characteristics similar to an electrical 

double -layer capacitor for carbon/carbon cell in 21 mol kg -1 LiTFSI. Thanks to the reduced faradaic contribution 

at the concentration of 21 mol kg -1 LiTFSI owing to the negligible hydrogen adso rption and desorption at the 

negative carbon electrode, the cell demonstrates low self -discharge of ΔU = 0.17 8 V. Further analyses of self -

discharge data suggest the shift of activation controlled mechanisms to diffusion controlled mechanisms with the 

incr ease of concentration from 1 mol kg -1 LiTFSI to 21 mol kg -1 LiTFSI. Thermo -programmed desorption 

performed on the carbon electrodes in 21 mol kg -1 LiTFSI suggest a sudden mass loss at around 450 °C owing to 

the decomposition of LiTFSI trapped inside the el ectrode porosity. 

## Reference s:

[1] Demarconnay L., Raymundo -Piñero E., Béguin F., Electrochem.  Comm., 12 (2010) 1275. 

[2] Gao Q., Demarconnay L., Raymundo -Piñero E., Béguin F., Energy & Environ. Sci., 5 (2012) 9611. 

[3] Ratajczak P., Jurewicz K., Skowron P., Abbas Q., Béguin F., Electrochimica Acta, 130 (2014) 344. 

[4] He M., Fic K., Frackowiak E., Novak P., Berg E. J., Energy Environ. Sci., 9 (2016) 623. 

[5] Suo L., Borodin O., Gao T., Olguin M., Ho J., Fan X., Luo C., Wang C., Xu K., Science, 350 (2015) 938. 

## Acknowledgements :

The Polish National Science Center (NCN) is acknowledged for supporting the MAESTRO project UMO -

2016/22/A/ST4/00092 Effects of Oxygen Contamination on the Electrochemical Carbon 

# Dioxide Reduction R eaction Catalyzed by Cu Nanoparticles 

Kaito Nagita 1, Takashi Harada 2, Kazuhide Ka miya 1,2 , Shuji Nakanishi 1,2  

> 1

Graduate School of Engineering Science , Osaka University, 

> 2

Research Center for Solar Energy Chemistry, Osaka University  

> 1-2

1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560 -8531, Japan 

E-mail: kamiya@chem.es.osaka -u.ac.jp 

The electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CRR) in aqueous media is a promising approa ch 

to closing the carbon cycle. After Hori et al. reported that Cu metal electrodes selectively reduced CO 2 to 

various organics [CO, CH 4, C2H4, EtOH, Pr nOH ]1, numerous studies have described Cu -based 

electrocatalysts for CRR. The electrocatalytic activity of Cu -based catalysts has been generally evaluated 

using synt hetic pure CO 2 gas (> 99.9 9%). However, low -purity CO 2 emitted from factories will become the 

substrate in the real application of CRR, and thus, a certain amount of imp urities are inevitably 

contaminated . Among various contaminations , oxygen contamination in CO 2 gas would become a 

significant problem because oxygen is more easily reduced than CO 2. However, there is no systematic study 

on the effect of contaminant oxygen on the CRR catalyzed by Cu -based catalysts .

Herein, we investigate d the effect of oxygen contamination on CRR on a gas diffusion electrode carrying 

copper nano pa rticles (Fig.1). The CO 2 gas es contai ning oxygen ( 0% , 1%, 2%, 3%, 4% and 5 % ) were used 

as the model substrate. CRR activity was evaluated under a potenti ostatic condition ( -3.0 V vs . Ag/AgCl 

without IR collection ). In the absence of oxygen (i.e. , pure CO 2 gas) , the total faradaic e fficiencies(FEs) of 

hydro carbons (methane and e thylene) reached up to 24 %. Then , the total FE of hydrocarbons decreased to 

3.6 % by the addition of 1 vol % oxygen in pure CO 2 gas. Interestingly, the production of hydrocarbon s was 

more largely suppressed than CO or HCOOH production in the presence of oxygen contamination. In the 

poster presentation, we will discuss the detailed mechanism for the suppression of the evolution of 

hydrocarbon s in the presence of oxygen. 

References 

1) Y.Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi, J. Chem. S oc ., Faraday Trans ., 1989, 85 , 2309 .

Fig.  1 (left) The e lectr ochemical cell  for gas diffusion electrode s. (right) Schematic illustration of 

experimental setup. Pullulan as green components for supercapacitors 

Giovanni Emanuele Spina , Federico Poli, A lessandro Brilloni, D aniele Marchese, F rancesca Soavi. 

Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 40132 Bologna, Italy 

francesca.soavi@unibo.it 

The increas ing mark et of storage systems such as supercapacitors and batteries is leading the research 

towards new sustainable materials, to reduce the ir environmental and economic impact [1] . The 

utilization of water -processable, biodegradable electrodes and separators is a viable approach to develop 

green and easy -to -dispose devices. Natural polymers processed by aqueous solutions are a very promising 

alternative to fluorinated polymers like polyvinylidene difluoride that also requires the use of the toxic N -

Methyl -2-pyrrol idone solvent [2,3]. Electrospinning is an emerging technology for the preparation of 

non -woven free -standing fiber mats to be used as electrode materials and separators in supercapacitors. 

Enabling the utilization of novel bio -derived polymer as pri mer g iving also the possibility to use 

environmentally friendly solvents. 

Here, we report about a systematic study on electrospun no -woven separators for high voltage carbon -

based electrical double layer supercapacitors (EDLC s). Two natural polymer -based elect rospun separator s

have been tested in three different organic electrolytes. In particular , for all the combination s of 

separator/electrolyte , it has been studied the stability and the resistive contribution .at different operating 

temperature trough El ectro chemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS ). Natura l polymer -based water 

processable binder s have been studied too . Out study demonstrate s for the first time th at pullulan can be 

used to produce high mass loading electrodes (> 10 mg cm -2) at low binder cont ent ( 10%) for ionic -liquid 

based EDLCs. 3.2 V - Pul lulan -ionic liquid EDLCs featured specific energy and power of 7.2 Wh kg -1 and 

3.7 kW kg -1 along with good cycling stability over 5000 cycles. 

Ack nowled gments 

The Italy -South Africa joint Research Programme 2 018 -2020 (Italian Ministers of Foreign Af fairs and of 

the Environments) and “Piano Triennale di Realizzazione 2019 -2021, Accordo di Programma Ministero 

dello Sviluppo Economico” – ENEA, are acknowledged for financial support. Professor Maria Letizia 

Focare te (University of Bologna) and her resear ch group are acknowledged for their precious contribution 

and support on electrospinning of natural polymers. 

References 

[1] F.Poli, D. Momodu, G. E Spina, A. Terella, B. K. Mutuma, M. L. Focarete, N. Manyala, F. Soavi, 

Electrochim.  Acta 338 (2020) 1358 72 

[2] G. E. Spina, F. Poli, A. Brilloni, D. Marchese, F. Soavi, Energies, (2020) accepted for pulbication Operando Identification of the Defect Structural Reconsitution during 

# Oxygen Evolution Reaction 

Zhao -Hui Xiao ,*,1 Yu -Cheng Huang, 2 Chung -Li Dong, 2 and Shuang -yin Wang *,1 

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Chem/Bio -Sensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, 410082, P. R. China ;

> 2

Department of Physics, Tamkang University, New Taipei City , 25137, Taiwan ;

Email:  xqhdy@qq.com ; shuangyinwang@hnu.edu.cn 

The exact role of defect structure on transition -metal compound for electro catalytic oxygen evolution 

reaction (OER ) is a very dynamic process and unclear. Despite of the poor intrinsic activity of pure Co 3O4,

various modifica tion strategies have been developed to enhance the OER activity, such as defect 

engineering with introduction of oxygen vacancy (V O). However, the role of defect in catalyst materials 

ha s not yet been fully identified. VO-rich Co 3O4 has been widely reporte d as advanced OER 

electrocatalysts, the mechanism of which was preliminarily attributed to the enhanced electronic 

conductivity and more low -valence Co (Co 2+ ) formed. In addition, the chemical environment of defective 

Co 3O4 is more dynamically changeable d uring electrocatalysis with applied potential. Studying the 

structure -activity relationship of defective electrocatalysts under operando conditions is crucial for 

understanding their intrinsic reaction mechanism and dynamic behavior of defect sites . Co 3O4 with rich 

VO has been reported to efficiently catalyze OER. We construct ed pure spinel Co 3O4 (as m odel catalyst )

and V O-rich Co 3O4 to study the defect mechanism and investigate the dynamic behavior of defect sites 

during the electrocatalytic OER process by various operando characterization s. Operando EIS and CV 

implied that t he VO could facilitate the pre -oxidation of the low -valence Co (Co 2+ , part of which was 

induced by the V O to balance the charge) at relatively low er applied potential . This observation confirmed 

that the VO could initialize the surface reconstruction of V O-Co 3O4 prior to march during OER process .

The quasi -operando XPS and operando XAFS results further demonstrated the oxygen vacanc ies were 

filled with OH * firstly for VO-Co 3O4 and facili tate d pre -oxidation of low -valence Co, and promote d

reconstruction /deprotonation of intermedia te Co -O-OH . This result provides insight into the defect 

mechanism in Co 3O4 for OER in a dynamic way by observing the surface dynamic evolution process of 

defecti ve electrocatalysts and identifying the real active sites during the electrocatalysis process. The 

current finding would motivate the community to focus more on the dynamic behavior of defect 

electrocatalysts. 

References :

1. Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 2016, 55, 5277. 

2. Energy & Environmental Science, 2017,10, 2563 ;

3. Nature Chemistry , 2018, 10, 149 ;

4. Journal of Energy Chemistry, 2021, 53, 208. FeCo 2O4/CNF Prepared by Electrospinning as Bifunctional Oxygen 

# Electrode for Alkaline Metal -Air Battery Applications 

V. Baglio a, C. Busacca a, A. Di Blasi a, O. Di Blasi a, E. Modica a, M. Girolamo a, M. Bottari a, A.S. Aricò a,

V. Antonucci a, C. Alegre b

> a

CNR -Istituto di Tecnologie Avanzate per l’Energia “Nicola Giordano” (ITAE), Messina, Italy. 

> b

CSIC -Instituto de Carboquímica (ICB), Zaragoza, Spain. 

baglio@itae.cnr.it 

A new way to produce and store electrical energy is necessary to address future energy dem ands and 

reduce polluting emissions. Rechargeable alkaline metal –air batteries are envisaged as commercially 

viable energy storage devices due to their high theoretical energy densities respect to lithium -ion 

batteries . However, they do not still offer ade quate practical energy density and life cycle due to critical 

problems aris ing from the positive electrode, such as slow kinetics of the oxygen reduction (ORR) and 

oxygen evolution (OER) reactions . In the last few years, research was focused on the develop ment of 

highly efficient oxygen reduction/evolution catalysts based on transition metals, such as Co, Fe, Mn, La, 

etc, in the form of mixed oxides (perovskites, spinels, etc.), or advanced carbon materials. Co -based 

catalysts have been thoroughly investiga ted for the ORR/OER, and, usually, Co 3O4 is the most employed 

formulation. However, the electrical conductivity of bare Co 3O4 is not appropriate for the application in 

most of these devices. Other transition metals (Ni, Fe, Mn, etc.) can partially replace Co atoms in the 

Co 3O4 spinel structure, improving its electronic conductivity while promoting oxygen evolution. Another 

approach is to combine these oxides with carbon nanostructures, in particular graphitic ones, in order to 

maintain suitable stability u nder cycling operation. Recently, carbon nanofibers (CNF) synthesized by 

electrospinning, modified with a spinel Co 3O4 [1] or a combination of cobalt oxide and metallic cobalt 

(CoO -Co/CNF) [2] or loaded with Nic kel -cobaltite [3], were investigated in our laboratories as 

bifunctional air electrodes showing good reversibility and stability. In this work , Fe partially replace s Co 

atoms in the Co 3O4 spinel structure, leading to a FeCo 2O4/CNF, by using the same electrospinning 

preparation procedure previously re ported . The FeCo 2O4/CNF catalyst is physico -chemically studied in 

terms of structure, morphology and surface properties; these features are correlated to the electrochemical 

behavior for the oxygen reduction (ORR) and oxygen evolution (OER) reactions in co mparison with 

previously developed Co 3O4/CNF [1] and state -of -the -art materials. An outstanding onset potential 

towards the OER of 1.40 V vs. RHE is observed, which is 140 and 250 mV lower compared to the pure 

spinel (Co 3O4/CNF) and Pt/Vulcan, respectively . A remarkable reversibility ( E = E OER – EORR ) value of 

495 mV is obtained, due to a good activity also for the ORR. To assess the stability of the catalysts for 

rechargeable alkaline metal -air batteries, cycling operation and chronopotentiometric experim ents are 

carried out, showing promising results. 

References 

[1] C. Alegre, C. Busacca, A. Di Blasi, O. Di Blasi, A.S. Aricò, V. Antonucci, E. Modica, V. Baglio ,

Journal of Energy Storage 23 (2019) 269 –277 .

[2] C. Alegre, C. Busacca, O. Di Blasi, V. Anto nucci, A.S. Arico, A. Di Blasi, V. Baglio, Journal of 

Power Sources 364 (2017 ) 101 -109. 

[3] C. Alegre, C. Busacca, A. Di Blasi, et al., ChemElectroChem 7 (2020 ) 124 –130. 

Acknowledgements: The research leading to these results has received funding from t he “Accordo di 

Programma CNR -MiSE, RdS PTR 2019 -2021 - "Progetto 1.2 Sistemi di accumulo, compresi 

elettrochimico e power to gas, e relative interfacce con le reti” .Aqueous E lectrochemical Reduction of Dinitrogen to A mmonia 

# by Metal -doped Covalent Triazine F rameworks 

Keitar o Ohashi 1, Rino Sugimoto 1, Takashi Harada 2, Kazuhide Kamiya 1-2, Shuji Nakanishi 1-2 

> 1

Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, 

> 2

Re search Center for Solar Energy Chemistry , Osaka University  

> 1-2

1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560 -8531, Japan 

E-mail: kamiya @chem.es.osaka -u.ac.jp 

Ammonia is an important raw material of various chemical products, including resins and fertilizers. 

The present industrial technology for ammonia synthesis, Haber -bosch process, needs a grand scale 

because it requires high pressures and temperature . Recently, an aq ueous electrochemical reduction of 

dinitrogen to ammonia has attracted much attention as an on -demand technology for ammonia synthesis 

because it can operate under ambient condition s. An active  electrocatalyst to split the stable N -N bonds in 

dinitrogen is required for efficient electrochemical devices.  Choi et al. theoretically predicted that s ingle 

early -transition -metal (ETM) atoms (such as Mo, V , and Ti) doped into sp2 carbons serve as the active 

catalytic sites for dinitrogen reduction reaction due to the efficient π back -donation to N -N bond s. 1) 

Howev er, single ETM atoms easily aggregate to oxides or hydroxides in aqueous solutions. Recently, our 

group has demonstrated that covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) could support a wide variety of metals 

via coordination bonds. Interestingly, the metal -doped CTFs (M -CTFs) exhibited electrocatalytic 

functions depending on the metal species 2) -4) . Therefore, we expect that the CTFs can stably immobilize 

single ETMs and catalyze dinitrogen re duc tion reaction. 

In the present work, we attempt to synthesize efficient electrocatalysts composed of M -CTFs fo r the 

dinitrogen reduction reaction. First, we selected effective metal active centers using density functional 

calculations (DFT) . Then, we evaluated the dinitrogen reduction activity of the synthesized M -CTFs 

using gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) , as sho wn in Figure 1 . In the poster, we will present the detail ed 

results of DFT and electrochemical dinitrogen reduction activity of M -CTFs. 

Fig.1 Schematic illust ratio n of the electrochemical setup for the GDE carrying M-CTF s.

References 

1) C. Choi , S. Back , N. Kim, J. Lim, Y. Kim, Y . Jung , ACS Catal ., 2018 , 8, 7517 -7525. 

2) K. Iwase, T. Yoshioka, S . Nakanishi, K . Hashimoto, K . Kamiya , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 2015 ,

54 ,11068 –11072 .

3)  K. Kamiya,  R. Kamai, K. Hashimoto, S.  Nakanishi , Nat. Commun ., 2014,  5, 5040. 

4)  K. Kamiya,  T. Tatebe, S. Yamamura, K. Kazuyuki, T. Harada, S. Nakanishi , ACS Catal. , 2018,  8,

2693 −2698 .Pyrrolidinium -based polymer electrolytes for supercapacitor 

# applications 

Stoyanova a, S. Veleva a, Ch. Novakov b, Ivaylo Dimitrov b 

> a

Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy Systems, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, 1113, 

Bulgaria  

> b

Institute of Polyme rs, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, 1113, Bulgaria 

e-mail: antonia.stoyanova@iees.bas.bg 

Supercapacitors are electrochemical energy storage devices that achieve high power density and fast 

charge -discharge rates. In a traditional supercapacitor, an ion -permeable and electrically insulating 

separator film is sandwiched between two electrodes flooded with a liquid electrolyte. Since liquid 

electrolyte leakage is a severe issue, especially when the material is environmentally hazardous, efforts 

are focu sed on replace the liquid electrolytes with solid electrolytes. The polymer electrolytes are ideal 

candidates for next generation solid supercapacitors, which are not only safer, but also offer high 

performance, light weight, and flexible forms [1]. 

A met hod of polymerization and chemical modification was applied for synthesis of a series of novel 

pyrrolidinium - containing homo - or copolymers and their turning into polymeric ionic electrolyte. The 

polymer electrolyte was impregnated the active layer of th e activated carbon supercapacitor electrodes 

and the resulting thin polymer electrolyte layers on both electrode surfaces are integrated into a single 

thin layer minimizing interfacial resistance. The electrochemical characteristic of the assembled 

superca pacitor cells and also of systems consisting of carbon electrode and mixtures of ionic liquid and 

PIL (with varying composition) were evaluated using galvanostatic charge/discharge tests and cycling 

voltammetry. The effect of polymer composition and operat ion temperature on the supercapacitor 

performances was also studied. 

It has been found that the use of PIL in supercapacitors leads to stabilization of its capacity, as well as to 

increased efficiency of the charge -discharge process. Further studies are n eeded to improve their 

electrochemical characteristics. 

Acknowledgments: This work was financially supported by the Bulgarian National Science Fund through 

KP -06 -OPR 04/5 project and partially by the National Roadmap for Research Infrastructure 2017 -2023 

“Energy storage and hydrogen energetics (ESHER)”, approved by DCM # 354/29.08.2017 and granted 

by the Ministry of Education and Science of Republic Bulgaria. 

Keywords : polymer electrolyte, supercapacitor, electrochemical tests, biogenic activated carbon 

References: 

1. H. Gao, K. Lian, RSC Adv. 4, 33091 (2014) Influence of Ionomer Content on Oxygen Transport Resistance and 

# Performance in PEMFC 

Xinye Sun , Hongmei Yu, Li Zhou, Xueqiang Gao, Zhigang Shao 

Fuel Cell System and Engineering Laboratory, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physic s, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences 

457 Zhong shan Road , Dalian, China 

sunxinye@dicp.ac.cn 

Proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is considered to be an ideal clean energy technology .

However, its commercial application is still limited by cost and performance under high current densiti es .

Previous research has shown that the performance loss of the MEA with low Pt loading mainly comes 

from the oxygen transport resistance at the cathode reaction site. Despite the ionomer content in catalyst 

layer has been accepted as one of the impact fa ctors , few research focused on the in -situ measurements of 

oxygen transport resistance and further analysis . In this study, different ionomer content cathode catalyst 

layers with I/C varying from 0.3 to 0.9 were made. Oxygen transport resistance was charac terized through 

limiting current density, the total oxygen transport resistance, Fick diffusion resistance, and local oxygen 

transport resistance were all calculated. Results show that ionomer content has strong influence on both 

Fick diffusion resistance and local transport resistance. Reasons of the influence can be attributed to the 

change of pore structure and the increas e in thickness of ultra -thin ionomer film at the surface of platinum 

particles . Based on the results, ionomer content in low Pt loadin g catalyst layers should be minimized to 

reduce oxygen transport resistance and improve the performance at high current densities.                           

> (a) (b) (c) (d)
> Figure 1. Polarization curves and power density curves of CCMs with cathode Pt loading as (a) 0.4 mg cm -2, (b) 0.3 mg cm -2, (c) 0.2
> mg cm -2, (d) 0.1 mg cm -2, with ionomer content as 0.3 ,0.5, 0.7, 0.9, at 65 ℃, 100% RH, H 2/Air with constant flow rates as 150/1500
> ml min -1.
> (a) (b) (c) (d)
> Figure 2. Plot of Rtotal vs. Pressure of CCMs with various ionomer content and Pt loading. The slope was obtained from a linear fit
> giving the value of RF.
> (a) (b) (c) (d)
> Figure 3. Plot of Rtotal vs. 1/ f Pt of CCMs with various Pt loading and pressure under different ionomer content (a) I/C=0.3, (b)
> I/C=0.5, (c) I/C=0.5, (d) I/C=0.7. The slope was obtained from a linear fit givi ng the value of RPt
> ,O2 .

References: [ 1] Chao Wang, et al., Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 201 9, 166 , F239 -F245. 

[2] H. Yu, et al. , Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 2018, 165, J3318 -J3334. 

[3] J. P. Owejan, et al. , Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 2013, 160, F824 -F833. Influence of DNA surface density on a sensitivity of tetracycline 

# measurements 

Marcin Jaskółowski and Agnieszka Więckowska 

University of Warsaw, Faculty of Chemistry 

1 Pasteur Street, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland 

m.jaskolowski2@uw.edu.pl 

Biosensors are small devices employing biochemical molecular recognition properties as the 

basis for a selective analysis . Such devices consist of a biological recognition element with a physical 

transducer [1]. In recent years, biosensors became popular in monitoring biologi cal and synthetic 

processes in the field of food analysis and in the area of human monitoring and diagnostics [2]. DNA 

biosensors are based on nucleic acid recognition layers which can be easily synthetize and unlike enzyme 

or antibodies biosensors, DNA bi osensors can be regenerated for multiple uses [3] .

In this project we present a study on detection limit of tetracycline, widely used in animal 

breedin g [ 4], using a DNA biosensor with different surface densities of DNA probe. In order to attach to 

the gol d surface , DNA chain ha s to be modified with a short thiol. Thiolated DNA is capable of forming 

self -assembled monolayers onto gold transducers by covalent linkage to the surface via functional 

alkanethiol -based monolayers [5]. We used electrochemical tech niques including impedance 

spectroscopy to characterize layer of biological probe on the electrode surface. During the interaction 

between DNA aptamer on the surface and tetracycline, the charge transfer resistance between the solution 

and the electrode su rface changes , which allows to determin e tetracycline concertation in solution. 

Surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy was used for real time observation of antibiotics interactions and 

determination of layers thickness. 

References :

1. J. Wang , Perspectives in Bioanalysis , 200 5, 1, 175 .

2. V. Kavita, J Bioengineer & Biomedical Sci ., 7, 2017, 222 .

3. N. Prabhakar, K. Arora, S.P. Singh, H. Singh, B.D. Malhotra, Anal . Biochem ., 2007, 366, 71 .

4. D. C hen, D. Yao, C. Xie, D. Liu, Food control , 2014, 42, 109. 

5. H.C.M. Yau , H.L. Chan , M. Yang , Biosens. Bioelectron. , 2003, 18, 873 .Dynamic behavior analysis of ion transport through a bilayer 

# lipid membrane by an electrochemical method combined with 

# fluorometry 

Terumasa Omatsu , Kisho Hori, Naoto Ishida, Kohji Maeda , Yumi Yoshida 

Faculty of Molecular Chemistry and Eng ineering, Kyoto Institute of Technology 

Hashigami -cho, Matsugasaki, Sakyo -ku, Kyoto, JAPAN 

d9871001@edu.kit.ac.jp 

Analyzing ion transport through an artificial bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs) is essential for 

understanding biomembrane phenomena (such as n eurotransmission and respiration) and delivery 

of ionic drugs into a cell .

The mechanism of ion transport through a biomembrane was 

conventionally studied by electrochemical methods such as the 

patch clamp method 1 and voltammetry 2,3, which provide a dyna mic 

and highly sensitive analysis of ion transport through membranes. In 

the electrochemical methods, it is not easy to identify the 

transported ion from the transmembrane current. For example, a 

cation transfer s through a membrane from an aqueous phas e with 

more positiv e potential to another aqueous phase with less positive 

potential, yielding a positive current in the electrochemical 

measurement. However, the transport of an anion through the 

membrane in the opposite direction also gives a similar pos itive 

current. Besi des, electrochemical methods cannot detect the coupled 

transports of cations and anions or the anti -transports of two ionic 

species with the same charge as electric current. 

The combination of the electrochemical method with fluorom etry 

solves the dis advantage of the electrochemical method, e.g. 

difficulty in characterization of the ion transported through a BLM 

in the presence of other ions. In the present work, the ion transport 

through a BLM caused by both a fluorescent cation (rh odamine 

6G +, R6G +) and a relatively hydrophobic anion (BF 4–) was 

examined by utilizing the electrochemical method combined with 

fluorometry, in which the transmembrane current and fluorescent 

intensity in the local area close to the planar BLM were 

simulta neously measured as a function of the applied membrane 

potential 4.

Fig. 2 indicates I and f, which were recorded simultaneously during 

scanning E between −100 mV and 100 mV. In the presence of R6G +, the 

amplitude of f appeared synchronously with E, and the amplitude of I als o

increased. To compare I to f more precisely, we converted I to the total 

charge of the transport ed ions, Q, by integrating I. The positive Q

increased for positive E of W1 as compared with W2. The results mean 

either R6G + transport fro m W1 to W2 or BF 4− transport in the opposite 

direction. f increased with the increase in positive Q, and then we characterized the increases in Q and f as 

the R6G + transport from W1 to W2 through the BLM. 

Using this method, the influence of a coexisting anion on R6G + tran sp ort through a BLM was 

examined and i t was found that the R6G + transport was facilitated by the addition of hydrophilic 

anions such as BF 4–.

[References ]

1. E. Neher and B. Sakmann, Nature , 1976, 260 , 799 –802. 

2. O. Shirai, S. Kihara, Y. Yoshida and M. M at sui, J. Electroanal. Chem. , 1995, 389 , 61 –70. 

3. O. Shirai, Y. Yoshida, M. Matsui, K. Maeda and S. Kihara, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. , 1996, 69 , 3151 –

3162. 

4. T. Omatsu, K. Hori, Y. Naka, M. Shimazaki, K. Sakai, K. Murakami, K. Maeda, M. Fukuyama and Y.          

> Fig. 2 T ransmembrane current, I,
> Transmembrane charge, Q, and
> fluorescent intensity, f,recorded
> synchronously with membrane
> potential, E.
> E: the applied potential
> I: the transmembrane current
> f: fluorescent intensity
> Fig. 1 Schematic of the
> experimental set -up.

Yoshid a, Analyst , 2020, 145 , 3839 –3845. Three -Dimensional Networks of S -Doped Fe/N/C with Hierarchical 

# Porosity for E ffi cient Oxygen Reduction 

Muhammad Arif Khan a, Rida Javed a, Yanmei Gong a, Xu yuan a, Chen Cong a, Daixen Ye a, Yipeng Que b,

Hongbin Zhao a*

a College of Sciences & Institute for Sustainable Energy, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, P. R. 

China 

b Research institute of Chilwee Group, Changxing, Zhejiang 313100, PR China 

(Email:  hongbinzhao@shu.edu.cn )

Reasonable design and synthesis of Fe/N/C based catalysts is one of the most promising way for 

developing precious metal -free oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalysts. Here, nitrogen and sulfur doped 

catalyst were synthesized (Fe -N-C-S) using ferric chloride hexahydrate as Fe source, Potassium thio cynate 

as Sulfur source and Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as Carbon and nitrogen source. The obtained catalyst 

shows three dimensional macroporous structure. This method has the advantage of using Potassium 

thiocynate as Sulfur source during the synthesis pro cess , which resulted in high doping of sulfur (about 5.4 

%). The optimal catalyst shows high ORR activity with a half wave potential of 0.880 V, vs RHE and 

limiting current density of 6.5 mA cm -2. The synthesized Fe -N-C-S catalyst showed stability in both acidic 

and basic media. 

Keywords:  oxygen reduction reaction , three dimensional macroporous structure,  zinc -air batteries 

Figure 1. (a) SEM for Fe -N-C-S (b) LSV at different rpm for Fe -N-C-S

References 

1. Y. C. Wang et.al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 9907 -9910 

2. J. Zou et.al. Nano Convergence. 2019, 6. 

3. M. Xiao et.al. ACS. Cat. 2018, 8, 2824 -2832 

Acknowledgment 

The authors appreciate the financial support from the Key R&D project of Zhejiang Province, PR China 

(2019C01072). Facile Electrochemical Synthesis of Copper -Cobalt Oxide 

# Nano structures for Efficient Water S plitting 

Narayan Chandra Deb Nath 1, Hyunwoong Park 2,, and Jae -Joon Lee 1,*

> 1

Department of Energy and Materials Engineering, Research Center for Photoenergy Harvesti ng 

and Conversion Technology, Dongguk University, Seoul 100 -715, Republic of Korea  

> 2

School of Energy Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea 

> *

Email:  jjlee@dongguk.edu*  Tel : 82 -2-2260 -4979, Fax: +82 -2-2268 -8550 

Copper -cobalt oxides, CuCo 2O4 have attracted a great deal of research interests in a wide range of 

applications such as oxygen evolution reaction, oxygen reduction reaction, hydrogen evolution reaction, 

alcohols oxidation , H 2O2 decomposition, urea oxidation, and energy storage. T hese a re cost -effective and 

low -toxic and their controllable composition, electronic structure, valence states or redox characteristics, 

morphology, and high catalytic property have made them suita ble as universal catalysts. However, their 

low intrinsic electrical conductivity still overshadows their practical application to some degree. In 

addition, th e conventional preparation procedures of copper -cobalt oxide result in relatively low catalytic 

ac tivity or large OER overpotential for catalytic reactions. In the present report, nanostructured copper –

cobalt oxide (Cu xCo 3−xO4, CCO) electrodes are grown directly on conducting substrates via 

electrochemical deposition; then, various factors (e.g., oxyge n vacancies, electrochemically active surface 

area, and electrical conductivity) affecting their electrocatalytic activity for overall water splitting are 

studied. The observed oxygen evolution reactions (OERs) performance decreases when increasing the 

ann ealing temperature due to the nanostructure deformation and agglomeration and the decreased number 

of oxygen vacancies, electrochemically active surface area, and electrical conductivity. The configuration and electrochemical performance of Li -Na hybrid 

# batteries 

Qiu Zhang , Yong Lu, Licheng Miao, Jun Chen *

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College o f Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China 

* Corresponding author: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn 

Due to the low cost, wide distribution, low electrochemical potential ( -2.73 V vs. standard hydrogen 

electrode) and high theoretical specific capacity (116 6 mA h g -1), Na metal anode attract s attentions in the 

applications of high -energy and low -cost energy storage systems. However, Na has high reactivity with 

the electrolyte, leading to the formation of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer between Na a nd 

electrolyte. During the repeated Na plating/stripping, Na metal anode shows uneven deposition and a 

huge volume change, rendering the breaking and re -forming of SEI. The consumed Na metal anode and 

electrolyte lead to low coulombic efficiency (CE) and b attery failure. Meanwhile, uneven Na plating 

results in the growth of dendritic Na, leading to internal short circuit and safety concerns. Thus, i t is 

importan t to restric t the dendritic growth and improve the CE of Na metal anode. 

The electrochemical perf ormance and mechanism of Li and Na metal anode in ether -based electrolyte 

were investigated . Due to its lower reduction potential, Li + cannot be reduced and forms Li + electrostatic 

shield layer to guide Na plating. We also observed the dynamic plating proc ess via in -situ optical 

microscope that proves the unique Na plating pattern. In addition, Na metal anode shows higher 

reversibility with an average CE of 99.2% and faster plating kinetics than Li metal anode. We utilized 

density functional theory calculat ion to understand the solvation/desolvation of metal -ions, and proved 

the fast desolvation kinetics of Na +. Moreover, LiFePO 4 cathode was used to construct an advantage -

complementary Li -Na hybrid battery system (LNHB) . During the discharge/charge processes , Li + and 

Na + play roles in insertion/extraction into/from the cathode and stripping/plating of the anode ,

respectively . The LNHB with the high reversibility, stability and fast kinetics of Na metal anode shows 

low voltage hysteresis and long -term cycling. 

Fig. 1 (a) In situ optical observations of Li /Na plating . (b) The  simulated electric field intensity 

distribution and schematic illustration of Li/Na plating patterns.  Voltage profiles of  (c)  Li/Na -Cu batteries 

and (d) Li/Na symmetric batteries . ( e) Fre e energy profiles of Li +/Na + solvation process . (f)  The 

configuration of LNHB . (g) Rate performance and (h) cycling performance of LNHB .

References: 

[1] Q. Zhang, Y. Lu, L. Miao, Q. Zhao, K. Xia, J. Liang, S. -L. Chou, J. Chen, Angew . Chem . Int . Ed .,

2018, 57(45): 14796 -14800. Biowaste derived M-N-C/S catalyst use as an active electro catalyst for 

# Zn -air battery 

Rida Javed a, Muhammad Arif Khan a , Daixin Ye a , Hongbing Zhao a *, Jiujun Zhang a , Yipeng Que b

a College of Sciences & Institute for Sustainable Energy, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, P. R. 

China 

b Research institute of Chilwee Group, Changxing, Zhejiang 313100, PR China 

(Email:  hongbinzhao@shu.edu.cn )

In this work, we design a n improved strategy to create an ORR catalyst by using sustainable bio waste 

materials ( peanut shells ) as source of carbon , nitrogen and sulphur . This method is proceeded by; chemical 

activation with KOH, intrinsically doped with nitrogen as well as sulphur , while extrinsically doped with 

iron in order to get a catalyst with enhanced ORR catalytic performance. The SEM images revealed 3D 

hierarchically graphitic micro and mesoporous structure with high surface area of about 102 0.3597 m²/g. 

The EDX, mapping and XP S confirms the formation of Fe -N-C/S catalyst . The synthesized Fe -N-C /S 

displays excellent ORR activity with a half wave potential of (0.8 7 V versus RH E), limiting current density 

5.3 1 mA cm -2 and onset potential of 1.1 3 V in 0.1 M KOH solution. This work will be surely helpful for 

the design and synthesis of biomass resource as facile route to change renewable bio waste materials to a 

valuable electro catalyst for Zn -air batteries. 

Key words : biowaste, peanut shells , oxygen r eduction reaction and Sulphur .

Figure 1.  (a) SEM images and (b) xrd pattern for Fe -N-C/S 

Figure 2. LSV at different rpm for Fe -N-C/S

References: 

[1] Wu, Y. Chen et al. J. Mater. Chem A. 2018, 25 , 12018 -12028. 

[2 ] Yang, L. Zeng et al. Energy Storage Mater. 2018, 12 , 277 -283 .

[3] Tao, L., Qiao, et al.  Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  2019, 58 (4), 1019 -1024. 

Acknowledgment 

The authors appreciate the financi al support from the Key R&D project of Zhejiang Province, PR China 

(2019C01072). Highly dispersed PtZn intermetallic for efficient oxygen reduction 

catalysts 

Tuo Zhao ,Ergui Luo ,Junjie Ge* ,Wei Xing* 

Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry , Changchun, Jilin, 130022 (P. R. China) 

School of Applied Chemistry and Engineering , University o f Science and Technology of China Hefei, 

Anhui, 230026 (P. R. China) 

tonyzhao@ciac.ac.cn 

Abstract ：This work develops a Zn -based MOF as catalyst support and provides a facile strategy to 

prepare atomically dispersed intermetallic alloys with highly activit y and durability. 

Figure 1. structure and composition of PtZn/C MOF . Figure 2. electrochemical performance of 

PtZn/C MOF and Pt/C. 

Figure 1: 

(a,b): lattice fr in ges of 0.221nm and 0.345nm are smaller than those (0.226nm, 0.351nm) of PtZn (111) and (22 0) 

face t, indicating the presence of lattice compression. 

(c): XRD pattern of PtZn /C MOF agrees well with the intermetallic L10-PtZn PDF card (PDF#06 -0604) without any 

impurity peak, indicating that the ordered L10-PtZn intermetallic alloy has been successfu lly formed. Slight peak 

position shifts to positive angle compared with standard pattern further demonstrate that the e xistence of compression 

strain makes lattice spacings smaller. 

(d): Pt core levels(71.7eV of Pt4f) shows a 0.2eV negative shift to lower binding energies compared with 

Pt/C (71.9eV of Pt 4f). 

Figure 2: 

(a): The ECS A values for PtZn /C MOF and Pt/C are 81.9 and 60.1 m 2/gPt respectively , demonstrating the higher ECSA 

and more active ORR potency for PtZn /C MOF .

(b): The half wave potential E½ of PtZn /C MOF (0.922V) is 42mV higher than commercial Pt/C (0.880V) observed 

from the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in a O 2-saturated 0.1 M HClO 4 solution .

(c): Tafel plot of PtZn /C MOF (67mV/dec) derived from LSV exhibit s smaller slope than Pt/C (75mV/dec) , man ifest ing 

the enhanced kinetics for OR R. 

(d): PtZn /C MOF delivers higher mass (0.926A/mg Pt ) and specific activities (1.13mA/cm 2) of Pt at 0.9 V versus RHE, 

which are respectively 5.4 and 4.0 times higher than those (0.172 A/mg Pt and 0.28 mA/cm 2) of the Pt/C ref erence. 

Conclusion ：

we adopt a facile one -step heat -treatment approach to obtain a series of highly dispersed PtZn intermetallic ORR 

catalysts based on a porous Zn -rich MOF. Small PtZn particles (mean size:3.95nm) enable large electrochemically 

active sur face area(81.9 m 2/g Pt ) and high atomic utilization. The ligand effects and compressive strain optimize the Pt 

electron structure and binding strength between Pt and oxygen intermediates. These advantages result in better ORR 

performance (0.926 A/mg Pt of m ass activity and 1.13mA/cm 2 of specific activity), which are respectively 5.4 and 4.0 

times higher than those of commercial Pt/C(0.172 A/mg Pt and 0.28 mA/cm 2). 

Commented [1]: ？？？ Electronic conductivity modification of Na 3V2(PO 4)3 cathode material 

# using graphitic carbon shell for enhanced electrochemical performance 

Ambesh Dixit 1, Prince Babbar 1, Ajay Tiwari 1, Aleksander V Ivanischev 2

> 1

Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Te chnology Jodhpur, 342037, India 

> 2

Institute of Chemistry, Saratove State University, named after N.G. Chernyshevsky, 83 Astrakhanskaya 

str., Saratov 410012, Russian Federation 

*ambesh@iitj.ac.in 

NASICON structured sodium vanadium phosphate Na3V2(PO4)3 is a promising cathode material for 

rechargeable sodium ion batteries. The high specific capacity ~176.44mAhg -1 [1] and structural stability 

of Na3V2(PO4)3 are important characteristics for its application in sodium i onbatteries. We optimized 

nanostructured Na3V2(PO4)3 synthesis process and pristine and carbon coated Na3V2(PO4)3 material 

are prepared. Carbon coated Na3V2(PO4)3 was synthesized by varying carbon source molar fraction 

during sol -gel synthesis process. The refinement of X-ray diffraction measurements suggests the 

rhombohedral NASICON structure with R -3c space group. The measured lattice parameters are in 

agreement with the reported values [2]. The carbon presence has been confirmed using Fourier Transform 

Infrared (FTIR), Raman spectroscopic and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements. We will 

discuss the impact of electronic conductivity as a function of carbon fraction and its graphitic content in 

shell geometries with Na3V2(PO4)3 core, as explained in Fig. 1, on charge/discharge characteristics in 

hybrid coin cell structures, where lithium ‘Li' metal has been used as anode material. .

Figure 1. Schematic representation of graphitic carbon shell with Na 3V2(PO 4)3 core stru cture. 

References: 

1. W. Song, X. Ji, Y. Yao, H. Zhu, Q. Chen, Q. Sun., C. E. Banks, Chem. Chem. Phys.,, 16, 3055 (2014). 

2. I. V. Zatovsky,Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E: Struct. Rep. Online,, 66, i12 (2010) Synchrotron X -Ray Analysis of Surface Modification s on β-Gallium 

# Oxide to Control the Surface Conductivity and Chemical Reactivity 

Liam Carroll ,1,2 Rodrigo Martinez -Gazoni, 1,2 Roger Reeves, 1,2 Martin Allen, 2,3 Alison Downard 1,2 

> 1

School of Physical and Chemical Sciences, University of Canterbury , New Zealand  

> 2

MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, University of Canterbury, 

Christchurch  

> 3

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Canterbury, New Zealand 

liam.carroll@pg.canterbury.ac.nz 

Monoclinic beta -phase gallium oxide ( β-Ga 2O3) is a w ide bandgap semiconductor (4. 5-4.8 eV )1 that possess 

the unusual combination of high visible transparency and high mobility n-type conduction , a class of 

materials called transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) . There is considerable interest in this material for 

deep -UV sensing, high -frequency power electronics, and transparent sensor devices . β-Ga 2O3 is also 

interesting from a fundamental perspective as its surfaces are different from those of other n-type TCOs 

such as ZnO, SnO 2, In 2O3, and CdO. 2 The surfaces of the latter exhibit downward band bending and electron 

accumulation due to the presence of donor -like surface states, while β-Ga 2O3 surfaces are characterized by 

upward band bending and electron depletion .2

Using electrochemical cycli c voltammetric and spontaneous methods, a ryldiazonium ion, iodonium ion 

and phosphonic acid -derived organic films were successfully formed on the (-201) and (010) surfaces of 

β-Ga 2O3. 2-4 nm multilayers of nitrophenyl (NP), me thylphenyl (MP) , and phenyl -based films were 

deposited using aryldiazonium salt and iodonium salt electrochemistry 3,4 whereas, monolayer 

octadecylphosphonic acid (ODPA) films were spontaneously formed by submerging the substrate in 

so lution .5

Synchrotron X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy showed that all aryl modifications increased the upwards 

band bending by 0.5 eV at the Ga 2O3 surface s. Reduction of the nitro functionality was also induced by the 

synchrotron irradiation to form AP -like moieties and these layers further increased the upwards band 

bending by a further 0.1 eV . This corresponds to even more electron depletion at the surface w hich is highly 

unexpected. ODPA modification resulted in a decrease of the upwards band bending by 0.2 eV .

Figure: Electrochemical formation of aryl multilayers on β-Ga 2O3 surfaces 

(1) Ueda, N.; Hosono, H.; Waseda, R.; Kawazoe, H. Synthesis and Control of Conductivity of 

Ultraviolet Transmitting β -Ga2O3 Single Crystals. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1997 , 70 (26), 3561 –3563. 

(2) Hou, C.; Gazoni, R. M.; Reeves, R. J.; Allen, M. W. Direct Comparison of Plain and Oxidized 

Metal Schottky Contacts on β -Ga2O3. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2019 , 114 (3), 1 –6. 

(3) Brooksby, P. A.; Downard, A. J. Electrochemical and Atomic Force Microscopy Study of Carbon 

Surface Modification via Diazonium Reduction in Aqueous and Acetonitrile Solutions. Langmuir 

2004 , 20 (12), 5038 –5045. 

(4) Weissmann, M.; Baranton, S.; Coutanceau, C. Modification of Carbon Substrates by Aryl and 

Alkynyl Iodonium Salt Reduction. Langmuir 2010 , 26 (18), 15002 –15009. 

(5) McNeill, A. R.; Hyndman, A. R.; Reeves, R. J.; Downard, A. J.; Allen, M. W. Tuning the Band 

Bending and Controlling the Surface Reactivity at Polar and Nonpolar Surfaces of ZnO through 

Phosphonic Acid Binding. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016 , 8 (45), 31392 –31402. Electrochemically Assisted P olyamide Deposition at Three Phase 

# Junction 

Karolina Sipa , Karolina Kowalewska, Andrzej Leniart , Sławomir a Skrzypek, Łukasz Półtorak 

University of Lodz, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Inorganic and An alytical Chemistry, 

Ta mka 12, 91 –403 Łódź, Poland 

karolina.sipa @chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

A three phase junction 1 formed between solid electrode placed between solutions of the organic 

phase and the aqueous phase is employed for localized and electrochemically assisted nylon –6,6 

deposition. The fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) conductive support (serv ing as the working electrode –

WE ) is immersed into the cell filled with two immiscible liquids. The aqueous ph ase (being on the top )

contains 1,6 –hexamethylenediamine (1,6 –HDA) whereas the organic phase (being on the bottom ) is a

solution of adipoyl chloride (AC) dissolved in a 1,2 –dichloroethane. The interfacial polycondensation 

reaction between these two reagent s occurs spontaneously at the liquid –liquid interface at elevated pH 

and is inhibited when diamine is fully protonated. 2 This means that the local p H change can be used to 

control interfacial polycondensation reaction. 

In this respect we have designed the electrochemical set –up shown in scheme 1A. 

Electrochemical processing is optimized together with a number of experimental conditions. The pH of 

the aqueous phase was adjusted in the range from 3.0 to 8.5 by the addition of 0.1M HNO 3 to a solution of 

50 mM 1,6 –HDA . Next we have studied the effect of the applied cathodic potential . Local pH increase 

was controlled by electrochemically formed OH – ions at the WE surface only on the water side of the 

liquid –liquid interface. At pH > pK a the diamine species deprotonates and are available to react with 

adipoyl chloride species from the organic phase. This reaction occurs only at the three phase junction and 

gives a polyamide strap formed at the WE in the very localized position (scheme 1B) . We found that i ts 

dimensionality can be controlled by the experimental time, applied potential and pH of aqueous phase. 3

Scheme 1. (A) A schematic representation of the electrochemical set –up used to decorate three phase 

junction system. (B) The optical microscope image of nylon –6,6 strap formed at the FTO electrode .

The control experiment was carried out in the same phase arrangement without the use of 

electrochemistry. The reaction of polyamide deposition does not occur spontaneously, no formation of 

nylon strap was observed even for elongated experimental time s. An analysis of the obtained nylon –6, 6

strap as further performed using IR spectroscopy , atomic force microscopy and scanning electron 

microscopy . This protocol will be extended to a number of polyamide based materials that can be applied 

in corrosion studies, sensing and smart materials development.          

> 1I. Kaminska, M. Jonsson -Niedziolka, A. Kaminska, M. Pisarek, R. Hołyst, M. Opallo and J. Niedziolka -jonsson,
> J. Phys. Chem. C , 2012, 116 , 22476 –22485.
> 2K. Piradashvili, E. M. Alexandrino, F. R. Wurm and K. Landfester, Chem. Rev. , 2016, 116 , 2141 –2169.
> 3K. Kowalewska, K. Sipa, A. Leniart, S. Skrzypek and L. Poltorak, Electrochem. commun. , 2020, 115 , 106732.

# A New Approach to Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy Fitting 

# for Organic Semiconductors 

Gabriela P. Kissling , Evelyne Knapp , Kurt P. Pernstich 

Institute of Computational Physics , Zurich University of Applied Sciences 

Technikumstrasse 9, CH -8400 Winterthur, Switzerland 

gabriela. kissling kemp@ zhaw .ch 

More and more, electrochemistry is becoming an everyman’s tool. Researchers working in a variety of 

fields, such as biology, synthe tic chemistry , or physics are starting to appreciate the relative low cost and 

versatility of electrochemical methods. With this emerging mass appeal , the amount of mistakes made in 

data collection and analysis is also increasing. In electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) , where 

data analysi s is especially complex, this can lead to significant misinterpretation of the results. After all, 

the knowledge required to design a representative equivalent circuit, comprising all the relevant 

components but avoiding misleading additions, is complex an d can be a challenge even for experienced 

researchers. In addition, equivalent circuits only have limited flexibility and can struggle to represent less 

ideal electrochemical systems accurately. 

We are developing a physics based EIS model for the analysis of organic semiconductor materials using 

COMSOL Multiphysics® software [1] . The design of the model will be guided by experimental results 

obtained for N,N′ -di(1 -naphthyl) -N,N′ -diphenyl -(1,1′ -biphenyl) -4,4′ -diamine (NPB) and will endeavour 

to better understand the energy levels in organic semiconductor materials. While the scope of this model 

is relatively narrow, we believe that the general approach can be readily expanded and contribute to a

better understanding of the physical properties in a range of organic semiconductors .

The poster will present some of our initial work and contrast results obtained using the physics based EIS 

analysis approach with standard equivalent circuit models in terms of ease of use, accuracy and 

computing time . The advantages and disadvantages of the two model systems will be discussed .

References 

[1] COMSOL Multiphysics® v. 5.5. www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden. Polymediators and Polyelectrolytes in Organic Electrosynthesis 

N. Mohebbati , A.Prudlik, R. Francke 

University of Rostock ,

Albert -Einsteinstr. 3a, 18059 Rostock 

Nayereh.Mohebbati @uni -rostock.de 

Although organic electrosynthesis is generally considered to be a green method, the necessity for excess 

amounts of supporting electrolyte constitutes a severe drawback. Furthermore, the employment of redox 

mediators results in an additional separation problem.[1]  In this context, we have developed a polymer -

based approach which allows for simultaneous separation and recycling of mediator and supporting 

electrolyte in a single step (see Figure, right) using membrane f iltration . For this purpose, 2,2,6,6 -

tetramethylpiperidin -1-oxyl (TEMPO) and tetraalkylammonium groups were attached to a

polymethacrylate backbone, resulting in well -soluble and task specific homopolymers 1 and 2 (see  Figure ,

left) .[2][3] Reversible redox behaviour was observed for the polymediator using cyclic voltammetry. T he 

successful conversion of several test substrate using catalytic amounts of 1 demonstrated that such polymers 

can be applied for oxidation of alcohols under mild conditions . Furthermore , recyclability was demonstrated 

in preparative -scale electrolysis .[2] 

Since the electrolysis current is usually limited by diffusion of the redox -active species to the electrode, we 

are currently studying the influence of the molecular weight on current density for type 1 polymers . Our 

efforts are focused on finding a useful operating range in which an efficient membrane process, high current 

densities and optimum ionic conductivity can be achieved. RAFT polymerization allowed for the synthesis 

of polymers with well -defined molecular weight distribution between 3 and 100 kDa. We found that t he 

redox -activity was increased with decreasing molecular weight , whereas the retention in the membrane 

filtration follows the opposite trend.  Similarly, it is important to study the relationship between the ionic 

conductivity and molecular weight for type 2 polymers. A close investigation on polyelectrolytes’ 

performance demonstrated that ionic conductivity is independent from the chain length. 

Literature: 

[1] R. Francke, R. D. Little, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014 , 43, 2492 –2521.  [2] B. Schille, N. O. Giltzau, R. Francke, 

Angew. Chem . 2018 , 130, 429. [3] T. Janoschka, A.Teichler , A. Krieg, M. D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, J. 

Polym. Sci. A Polym. Chem . 2012 , 50, 1394 .The Electrochemical Newman -Kwart Rearrangement under 

# Microflow Conditions 

A. Prudlik , T. Broese, A. F. Rösel, M. Májek . R. Francke 

University of Rostock 

Albert -Einstein -Straße 3a, 18059 Rostock 

adrian .prudlik@uni -rostock.de 

A common pathway for th e synt hesis of thiophenols is the three -step transformation of phenols via the 

Newman -Kwart rearrangement (NKR) of an O-aryl thiocarbamate to the corresponding S-aryl compound 

as a key step .[1 ,2 ] This rearrangement is thermally induc ed at temperatures up t o 300° C. Via an 

electrochemical pathway we achieved this rearrangement at room temperature .[3] A mechanistic study 

revealed an electrochemically catalyzed pathway, in which anodic oxidation leads to a cation radical 

rearrangement, [4] thereby triggering a c hain p rocess in solution. [3] Furthermore, we investigated the 

effects of different substituents on the yield and side -reactions and identified the factors that govern the 

reactivity of specific substrates .[5] 

In addition , we devel oped a procedure for an undivi ded microflow -reactor 

(see Figure , right ), which allows for electrolysis without added supporting 

electrolyte. Since full conversion with quantitative selectivity is achieved ,

only a separation between the product and the solv ent is needed. In the 

pr esent contribution, the most important aspects of the electrochemical 

NKR under microflow conditions will be discussed. 

Literature :

[1] M.S.  Newman, H.A. Karnes , J. Org. Chem., 1966 , 31, 3980 –3984. [2] G.C. Lloyd -Jones, J. D. 

Moseley, Synthesi s, 200 8, 661 -689 . [3]  T. Broese , R. Francke , Org . Lett. 201 8, 20 , 7483 -7487 . [4]  R. 

Francke, R. D. Little, ChemElectroChem. 2019 , 6, 4373 -4382. [5] A. Roesel, M. Ugandi, H. Nguyen, M. 

Májek , T. Broese, M. Roemelt, R. Francke, manuscript submitted .Determination of the pK a of neutral molecular compounds in 

# imidazolium -based ionic liquids 

Arturo García -Mendoza , Julio C. Aguilar 

Departamento de Química Analítica, Facultad de Química, UNAM 

Ciudad Universitaria, 045 10, México , Ciudad de México. 

arturogm @unam.mx 

Room temperature ionic liquids (RTIL) are one of the main alternatives to molecular solvents 

conventionally used for electrochemical applications such as electrosynthesis, energy conv ersion and 

storage devices, or electroanalysis [1]. In any of t hese applications, chemistry in solution in RTILs 

requires specific knowledge of the equilibrium processes because they partially define the success or 

failure of a given reaction. For this reason, it is imperative to know and control chemical parameters 

under imposed chemical equilibrium conditions, such as acidity levels via the pH parameter .

In this work, a study is presented to explain the acid - base phenomenon that occurs in certain RTILs in 

terms of the Brönsted - Lowry theory. With the information obtained, the changes in reactivity observed 

in some test compounds such as pyridine (Pyr) and N, N -dimethylethylami ne (DEMEA) are explained. 

A series of spectrophotometric and electrochemical assays were performed by potentiometry, cyclic 

voltammetry (CV ) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at four different imidazolium 

RTILs: [C 2mim][NT f2], [C 3mim][NTf 2], [C 2mmim][NTf 2] and [C 2Him][NTf 2]; where C 2mm = 1 -ethyl -3-

methylimidazolium, C3mm = 1-propyl -3-methylimidazolium, C2mmim = 1-ethyl -2,3 -

dime thylimidazolium, C 2Him = 1 -ethylimidazolium and NTf 2 = bis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide. 

These RTILs were dried for 24 hours at 90 ° C before use. Spectrophotometric assays were used to 

evaluate the effect of tri flic acid (HOTf) on the protonation of a ne utral molecular indicator (In) in 

solution in the RTILs [2,3]. For the electrochemical potentiometric assays, the open circuit potential 

(OCP) was determined, during a series of acid -base titrations, using as working electrode (WE) a 

modified interface W 0|WO 3(s) ; Pt 0 was used as auxiliary electrode (AE) an d several interfaces of the type 

Ag 0|AgCl (s) , constructed and characterized previously by our research group [ 4], were used as reference 

electrodes (RE). Electrochemical assays by CV were used for dynamic determination of the pK a for the 

conjugate acid -base pair (HA +/A ) of the test compounds [5,6]. For determination, a cell was used in a 

three -electrode configuration, using a modified Pt 0-Pt 0 interface as WE. All measurements were made 

under an inert and dr y N 2 atmosphere and EIS was used to determine and compensate for th e ohmic drop. 

The spectrophotometric assays were used to determine the Hammett acidity parameter (H 00) and the pK a

value for the conjugate acid -base pair (HIn +/In). On the ot her hand, the pK a for the conjugate acid -base 

pairs of the test compounds (HA +/A) was determinate by potentiometric titrations, using the OCP data 

obtained from the tungsten sensor, by fitting them to a family of Gunnar Grand functions and a complete 

titration function without segmentation. These values were also confirmed by CV. Finally, data were 

corroborated by the correlation of acidity scales with parameter H 00, showing differences of less than 2%. 

References 

[1] H. Ohno, ed., Electrochemical Aspects of Ionic Liqu ids., Second edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc ,

Hoboken, New Jersey, 2011. 

[2] C. Thomazeau, H. Olivier -Bourbigou, L. Magna, S. Luts, B. Gilbert, Determination of an Acidic 

Scale in Room Temperature Ionic Liquids, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) .

[3] T. Robert , L. Magna, H. Olivier -Bourbigou, B. Gilbert, A Comparison of the Acidity Levels in 

Room -Temperature Ionic Liquids, J. Electrochem. Soc. 156 (2009) .

[4] A. García -Mendoza, J.C. Aguilar -Cordero, Silver(I) chlorides speciation and its relationship to 

the de sign, construction and evaluation of true Ag (s) /[AgCl n]1-n reference electrodes for their use 

in bis(trifluoromethylsulfon yl)imide RTIL , Electrochim. Acta. 302 (2019) 344 –351. 

[5] R. Kanzaki, H. Doi, X. Son g, S. Hara, S. -I. Ishiguro, Y. Umebayashi, Acid –Base Property of N -

Methylimidazolium -Based Protic Ionic Liquids Depending on Anion, J. Phys. Chem. B. 116 

(2012) 14146 –14152 .

[6] D. Millán, M. Rojas, J.G. Santos, J. Morales, M. Isaacs, C. Díaz, et al., Toward a pKa scale of N -

base amines in Ionic Liquids , J. Phys. Chem. B. 118 (2014) 4412 –4418. Activity and Stability Study of Iron Porphyrin Covalently Bound on 

# the Surface for Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalysis 

Ting Wu , Paula A. Brooksby, Christopher M. Fitchett, Alison J. Downard* 

School of Physical and Chemical Science s, University of Canterbu ry 

Christchurch, New Zealand 

ting.wu@pg.canterbury.ac.nz 

The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a crucial part for fuel cell function to produce electricity on -

demand. So as to improve the fuel cell efficiency, the slow kinetics of ORR on carbon electrode requires 

a catalyst. Non -precious metal catalysts (NPMCs) have gained increasing attention as a cheap alternative 

material to Pt. Among various NPMCs materials, molecular metal complex catalysts are attractive as they 

can be immobilized on an electrod e su rface. They can act as a model of pyrolys ed NPMC materials, 

giving well -defined active sites and insights into the ORR catalytic mechanism . They also allow the 

possibility of structure control to achieve a leap in electr ocatalyst efficiency and stability. 

The stability of molecular metal complex catalysts, especially iron tetraphenylporphyrin (FeTPP), is an 

issue for catalyz ing ORR in acid solution. Although a few studies have been done to investigate the 

deg radation mechanism of pyrolys ed NPMC materials, 1, 2 it is still not well -understood . Studying the 

composition change of the immobilized FeTPP film under OR R condition s can potentially lead to 

understanding of the degr adation mechanism. Therefore, in this project, FeTPP molecule was 

immobilized on carbon surface via an axial ligand and also directly to the porphyrin ligand by 

electrografting from aryldi azonium salts. Electrochemistry, atomic force microscopy and X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy were used to investigate and compare the film structure change before and 

after ORR in acid aqueous solution. The potential degradation mechanism for FeT PP under ORR 

condition s will be proposed. 

Figure 1. FeTPP film structure study as prepared and after ORR catalysis. 

References: 

1. Choi, C. H.; Lim, H. -K.; Chung, M. W.; Chon, G.; Sahraie, N. R.; Altin, A.; Sougrati, M. -T.; 

Stievano, L.; Oh, H. S.; Park, E. S. The Achilles' heel of iron -based catalysts during oxygen reduction in 

an acidic medium. Energy & Environmental Science 2018, 11 (11), 3176 -3182. 

2. Shao, Y.; Dodelet, J. P.; Wu, G.; Zelenay, P. PGM‐Free Cathode Catalysts for PEM Fuel Cells: 

A Mini‐Review on Stability Challenges. Advanced Materials 2019, 31 (31), 1807615. Enhancement of electrochemical redox reaction by transition metal 

# oxalates for high -performance lithium -sulfur batter y

Gyuwon Seo , Jin Won Kim, Jaeyoung Lee* 

Electrochemical Reaction and Technology Laboratory, School of Earth Sciences and Environmental 

En gineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju, 61005, South Korea 

Ertl Center for Electrochemical and Catalysis, GIST, Gwangju, 61005, South Korea 

quasilynx@gist.ac.kr , j aeyoung@gist.ac.kr *

As the growth of global EVs market and continuous advances of IT devices ’ functionality , higher 

capacity and cycle stability of secondary batteries are being demanded . Lithium -sulfur(Li -S) battery is 

one of the promising next -generation batteries due to high theoretical capacity(1,672 mAh/g), n atural 

abundance , and environmental nontoxic compare to conventional active materials of lithium -ion batteries. 

However, lithium polysulfide(PS) dissolution issue which causes capacity fade inevitably must be 

overcome for commercialization. 

In this study , we introduce d metal oxalate s synthesized with the first transition metal series as cathode 

additives. They have a high polar surface area which is able to enlarge the electrocatalytic interfacial 

boundary enabling LiPS redox reactions to occur. Furthermo re, physicochemical interactions between 

LiPS and metal oxalates were verified by UV -vis, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, and 

Electrochemical Analysis(Cyclic Voltammetry, Galvanostatic Intermittent Titration Technique, 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectrosc opy). As a result, the modified cathode by the best candidate 

effectively decreased cell overpotential and improved the cycle stability by maximized electrochemical 

sulfur utilization .

Reference 

[1] D. S. Wu, F. Shi, G. Zhou, C. Zu, C. Liu, K. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Cui, Energy Storage 

Mater. 2018 , 13 , 241 –246. 

[2] J. S. Yeoh, C. F. Armer, A. Lowe, Mater. Today Energy 2018 , 9, 198 –222. Amorphous Ni -Mn 3O4 electrodeposited on activated carbon for 

# capacitive deionization 

Anne Therese J. Angeles , Kahyun Ham, Jaeyoung Lee* 

Elec trochemical Reaction and Technology Laboratory (ERTL), School of Earth Science and 

Environmental Engineering (SESE), 

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology 

123 Cheomdan -gwagiro, Buk -gu, Gwangju, 61005, South Korea 

Email address: *jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr 

With the population increasing, the available water resource in th e world is diminishing. It has been 

predicted that by the year 2025, 60% of the world’s population will face troubles accessing fresh water. 

This will affect not only the domestic sector but also the industrial and agricultural sector. The water that 

we us e mostly come from fresh water resource, which is 2.5% of the total water on Earth. The other 

97.5% is from saline water. As a solution for water scarcity, many countries like Saudi Arabia or the 

United Arab Emirates, use desalinated water as an alternativ e. Capacitive deionization (CDI) is an 

emerging desalination technology, which extracts the salt from water through electrostatic adsorption 

with an applied potential. CDI has numerous advantages. Its operation does not require high energy input 

since desa lination can occur at low applied potentials. Moreover, it also does not require any additional 

chemical during the desalination process, which would lower down its cost compared to other 

desalination technologies. Even with its promising capabilities, CDI still has challenges in fabricating an 

electrode material that would have excellent performance and stability. Pseudocapacitive materials, 

primarily metal oxides, are potential CDI electrodes due to their exce llent capacity and cyclability. In this 

study, different metal ratios of Ni -Mn 3O4 was coated on activated carbon through anodic 

electrodeposition at constant current. The electrode surface was characterized using FESEM, XRD, BET 

and contact angle measurements. Its electrochemical performance was deter mined through CV and EIS 

analysis. The results from these measurements was used to pick the optimized Ni -Mn 3O4. The chemical 

nature of the optimized deposit was analyzed through XPS and Raman spectroscopy. Using the fabricated 

electrode, it was paired with pristine AC to form an asymmetric CDI cell. At 1.2 V , it showed an 

excellent salt adsorption capacity of 8.54 mg g -1, which is 2.5 times higher than a symmetric cell with 

AC. Moreover, it was able to retain 87% of its capacity after 50 adsorption -desorpti on cycles. Therefore, 

coating AC with Ni -Mn 3O4 has successfully improved the CDI performance of pristine AC. The low cost 

of the metal precursors used for the electrodeposition will make it a potential material for large scale or 

commercial use. 

Referen ces: 

[1] Gleick, P.H. (1996). Water resources. In Encyclopedia of Climate and Weather , ed. by S.H. 

Schneider . (vol. 2, pp. 817 –823). New York: Oxford University Press. 

[2] Mohammadi, F., Sahraei, M., Al -Abdullah, Y. & Heydt, G.T . Can Desalination be an Ec onomically 

Viable Solution for Water Scarcity? 2019 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference .

(2019). 

[3] Porada, S., Zhao, R., van der Waal, A., Presser, V. & Biesheuvel, P.M . Review on the science and 

technology of water desalination by capacitive deionization. Progress in Materials Science 58 , 1388 -

1442 (2013). 

[4] Suss, M. E., Porada, S., Sun, X., Biesheuvel, P.M., Yoon, J. & Presser, V . Water desalination via 

capacitive deionization: what is it and what can we expect from it? Energy Environ. Sci . 8, 2296 -

2319 (2015). Reinforcing t he durability of PtCo catalyst by including dissolved Co 2+ 

# capturing layer in PEMFC cathode 

Youjin Lee a, Kahyun Ham a, Dongyoon Shin b, Jaeyoung Lee a,b,*  

> a

School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology 

(GIST), 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South Korea  

> b

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, GIST, 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South 

Korea 

*C orresponding author e -mail address: jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr 

Fuel cell is the energy s ystem that converts chemical energy to electric energy, using hydrogen and 

oxygen. Among various type of fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cell ( PEMFC ) operates in low 

temperature and its electronic density is high, thus it is known as one of the promising environmentally 

friendly energy systems. Since oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in PEMFC has higher overpotential due 

to sluggish reaction kinetics, Pt -based metal catalysts are usually used as ORR catalyst. To enhance both 

ORR activity and price competitiveness , 4d transition metals (e.g. Co, Ni, Fe) have been commonly 

utilized by alloying with Pt. However, these transition metals are not thermodynamically stable as 

metallic state in the PEMFC operating condition such as pH, which causes the dissol ution of transition 

metal and deactivation of PEMFC performance during repeated operation. 

In this study, we tried to strengthen durability of the PtCo/C catalyst in PEMFC cathode. During 

PEMFC operation, Co 2+ ion is dissolved from PtCo/C . To capture these Co 2+ ion, we added N -doped 

carbon layer, consisting of mainly pyridinic N. We observed oxidation peak in cyclic voltammetry to 

confirm whether Co 2+ is captured . Then, ORR performance was compared according to the amount of N -

doped carbon. Also, accelerate d stress test (AST) was conducted to evaluate the durability of catalyst with 

N-doped carbon .Asymmetrical Electrode System for Large -scale Reverse Electrodialysis 

## Ji -Hyung Han 

## RED is an energy conversion system that generates electric power from a salinity gra 

## dient over ion -exchange membranes (IEMs) and is essentially pollution -free. In a large 

## -scale one, the cathode is highly vulnerable to significant inorganic scaling due to t he 

## high pH conditions during water reduction and crossover of multivalent ions in the na 

## tural feed solution. We surmised that asymmetrical electrode system, where the geometrical 

## area of the cathode is smaller than that of the anode, is a reasonable route to addressing the 

## fouling issues. Because the minimized contact area between the electrode solution and feed 

## solution by reducing the geometrical area of the cathode can decrease the amount of crossover 

## caused by the non -ideal permselectivity of the IEM, u phill transport, and leakage, thereby 

## decreasing the rate of precipitate formation or organic fouling. The change in the maximum 

## power with varying area of the cathode was measured in lab -scale (100 cell pairs) and large -

## scale (1,000 cell pairs) RED system s to determine the minimum geometrical area of the cathode 

## without significant power loss. It was confirmed that even though the area of the cathode 

## corresponds to 60% of the area of an individual IEM, we can obtain the maximum power with 

## only 3% of power loss in the large -scale RED stack. In addition, the asymmetrical electrode 

## can be applied to a bipolar membrane (BPM) -RED system reported in our previous work. The 

## high current density achieved by reducing the size of the cathode can induce vigorous 

## water splitting in the BPM, which leads to more effective blocking crossover of the 

## multivalent and hydroxide ions. Nanostructured Cellulose Modified via Sulf onic Acid Crossli nking as a 

# New Material for Proton Exchange Membrane 

Olena Sely anchyn 1,2, 3, Roman Selyanchyn 2, Kazunari Sasaki 2,3 and Stephen Matthew Lyth 1,2, 3

> 1

Department of Automotive Science, Graduate School of Integrated Frontier Sciences, Kyushu University, 

> 2

International Institute for Carbon -Neutral Energy Research (WPI -I2CNER), Kyushu University ,

> 3

Next -Generation Fuel Cell Research Center (NEXT -FC), Kyushu University 

744 Motooka, Nishi -ku, 819 -0395, Fukuok a, Japan 

olenaselyanchyn@gmail.com , lyth @i2cner. kyushu -u.ac.jp 

Nano structured cellulose (nanocellulose ) is an attractive material platform for pr oto n exch ange 

membrane , however its application for this purpose is not widely explored. The use of nanocellul ose 

membranes in PEMFCs was pioneered by our group and previous works have demonstrated that both 

cellulose nanofiber (CNF ) and cellulose nanocrystals ( CNC ) membranes can be used as PEM in hydrogen 

fuel cells (FC ). However, membranes made of pristine nanocellulose have quite low proton conductivity 

and lack the stability at high temperature and humid ity . The proton conductivity of unmodified CNF 

membrane was ~0.05 mS/cm and ~4 mS/cm for unmodified CNC membrane [Bayer, T. et al., Chem. 

Mater. 2016, 28, 4805 –4814] and therefore requires significant improvement to be con sidered for FC 

applica tion .

Conventional approaches for cellulos ic materials modi fication ( e.g. backbone sulfonation) can achieve 

better proton conductivity , but with worsening of mechanical properties, aqueous, and chemical stability .

In contrast, crosslinking of nanocellulose was shown to provide improved mechanical properties and 

re duced swel ling in water [Quellmalz et al. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2015, 1, 271−276], as well as better 

proton conductivity when an appropriate crosslinking agent is used (i.e. strong acid ) [Seo J. A. et al. 

Ionics 2009 15, 555 –560]. 

In this work we use chemical crosslinking of different forms of nan ocellulose with sulfosuccinic acid 

(SSA ) in order to improve properties needed for PEM applications. Crosslinking of cellulose nanofibers 

(CNF) and cell ulose nanocrystals (CNC) membranes was performed in a hot -press, to form SSA -x-CNF 

and SSA -x-CNC membra nes. Initial tests demonstrated that membranes with 10 -30 μm thickness can be 

co nveniently produced . Crosslinked membranes showed significantly decreased swelling in water ,

stability in boiling water , and increased through -plane proton conductivity .

Our research findings confirm the hypothesis that a proper ly selected crosslinking molecule can turn 

nanocellulose into an effective proton conductor . Mechanical properties, aque ous and chemical stability 

can be improved simultaneously . Investigation into the effect of crosslinking on m echanical strength, 

chemical stability , proton conductivity and f uel cell performance are still underway and will be reported. 

-

Figure 1. Schematic re presentation of the crosslinked cellulose material able to del iver useful propertie s

for the PEM applications. A membraneless and separatorless multiphase flow battery 

Lihi Amit , Matthew Suss 

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering 

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 

lihiamit@campus.technion.ac.il 

Storage of excess power generated via renewable sources , su ch as with wind turbines and solar 

plants, can help  enable increased penetration of renewable sources into the electrical grid . Many flow 

battery (FB) chemistries have been investigated , and among them the zinc -bromine flow battery (ZBFB) 

is currently comm ercially deployed. The Z BFB exhibits favourable characteristics such as high open 

circuit voltage (OCV) of ~1.84 V, abundant and cheap reagents with bromine  ~$5/KWh and zinc 

~$2/KWh , and no requirements for precious metal catalysts. As the ZBFB operate s in a closed loop form ,

the capacity of energy delivered during discharge is determined by the amount of electrodeposited zinc 

during charge. Traditionally , a membrane or separator divide s an anode and cathode compartment, and 

the anolyte and catholyte flows . However, membraneless and separatorless cells offer simplified single 

flow operation and reduced cell cost . Several strategies for membraneless and separatorless cells have 

been investigated, namely laminar flow separations , utilization of immiscible elec trolytes , use of 

complexing agents, and metal -based electrolytes. 

Bromine c omplexing agents (BCA) , such as quaternary ammonium bromide (QBr) salts , are 

example of electrolyte additives that sequester the bromine to form a separate dense polybromide phas e1,

thereby enabling membraneless operation . After complexation, the concentration of active bromine in the 

aqueous phase is reduced by as much a s two orders of magnitude. Since the sequestered bromine is 

phase -restricted , its diffusion towards the zinc electrode , which is the primary me chanism of self -

discharge and of zinc corrosion , is significantly decreased . Such QBr are recognized  also  as cont rolling 

the zinc dendrite formation and growth at the zinc electrode 2. Yet th e addition of BCA comes at a cost, 

primarily blocking of surface reaction sites 3 and lowering the OCV 4.

We here report on a membraneless and separatorless ZBFB, wh ich relies on a single, multiphase 

flow between the anode and cathode. The flow is an emulsion, consisting of a continuous, bromine -poor 

aqueous phase and dispersed particles of bromine -rich organic phase. We characterize the cell 

performance experimentall y, including polarization curves, plating efficiency, and round trip energy 

efficiency. We elucidate key mechanisms behind the enhanced performance of this battery, demonstrating 

that increasing organic phase fraction allows for enhanced current capability .

Figure 1 . At varied SOC a) limiting current without BCA and b) limiting current with BCA. 

1. Valcher, S. & Mastragostino, M. POLYMERIC SALT AS BROMINE A Zn -Br , MODEL 

BATTER Y AGENT. Elect rochim. Acta 28 , 1 –5 (1982). 

2. Kim, M., Yun, D. & Jeon, J. Effect of a bromine complex agent on electrochemical performances 

of zinc electrodeposition and electrodissolution in Zinc – Bromide flow battery. 438 , 1 –7 (2019). 

3. Jeon, J., Sun, H., Shim, J., Sik, H. & Hoon, J. Electrochimica Acta Dual function of quaternary 

ammonium in Zn / Br redox flow battery : Capturing the bromine and lowering the charge 

transfer resistance. Electrochim. Acta 127 , 397 –402 (2014). 

4. Schneider, M. et al. The in fl uence of novel bromine sequestration agents on zinc / bromine fl ow 

battery performance. 110548 –110556 (2016). do i:10.1039/C6RA23446A 

b)a) Photocurrent measurement from the controlled monolayer deposition 

# of photosynthetic reaction center proteins on a gold surface 

Daniel Jun †, Sylvester Zhang *, Dan Bizzotto *

Department of Chemistry & AMPEL *, Dept of Microbiology †

The University of British Co lumbia, Vanc ouver, BC, CANADA 

bizzotto@chem.ubc.ca 

The photosynthetic reaction centre (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides has been extensively studied for 

use in biohybrid solar cells. Much of the previous work has focussed on improvements of photocurrent 

generation, w ith currents reaching up to several uA. The basis behind t hese improvements was loading 

the electrode surface with many copies of the protein resulting in multilayers. The primary disadvantage 

with this approach is the random orientation of pro teins, with some supposedly oriented properly. Rather 

than use this ex isting approach, we used RCs with Cys for covalent attachment to a gold electrode and for 

proper orientation. Areas of bare electrode surface and RCs bound non -specifically (i.e. not bou nd via the 

Cys) were competitively displaced by an insulating, non -red ox layer of mercaptohexanol (MCH). We 

were able to determine through adsorption isotherm measurement that a single monolayer of RCs was 

produced, with the surface not covered by RCs pass ivated with an MCH blocking layer . The adsorbed 

monolayer of RCs was imaged using atomic force microscopy to detail the distribution of RCs on the 

gold surface for surfaces prepared with different RC deposition concentration s. Photocurrents were 

measured f or all RC mo dified surfaces using a LED modulation method w hich enabled measurement of 

photocurrent in the presence of large faradaic currents at a variety of applied potentials. [1] The 

photocurrents generated from a monolayer composed of RCs and MCH resul ted in much larger currents 

than without an MCH blocking layer. The rate of electron transfer generated via photoexcitation was 

measured with applied overpotential and a reorganization energy was determined. Our approach is 

different from established metho ds, in that instead of loading the electrode surface with multilayers, we 

built a single monolayer. Preparing a well -defined single monolayer is a superior approach for 

fundamental studies compared to maximising protein loading on the surface for consisten t photocurrent 

generation. 

[1] Jun, D.; Beatty, J. T.; Bizzotto, D. Highly Sensitive M ethod to Isolate Photocurrent Signals From 

Large Background Redox Currents on Protein‐Modified Electrodes. ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6 (11), 

2870 –2875. A Desloratadine Voltammetric Sensor Based on Carboxymethyl -

# Botryosphaeran Stabilized MWCNTs Aqueous Dispersion 

Carlos A . R. Salamanca -Neto a, Robert F. H. Dekker b, Aneli M. Barbosa -Dekker a, Elen R. Sartori a 

> a

Departamento de Química, Univers idade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina – PR, Brazil . 

> b

Programa de Pós -Graduação em Engenharia Ambiental, Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, 

Câmpus Londrina, Londrina – PR, Brazil. 

carlos.arsn@gmail.com 

Desloratadine (DESL) is a third -generati on selective antihis taminic drug that functions as a H1 -antagonist 

of histamine on cell receptor sites and is used to treat allergic symptoms without causing sedation. Severe 

side effects reported reinforce the need of simple , low cost, and precise methods for the determinati on of 

this drug. Voltammetric methods meet th ese requirement s with multi -walled carbon nanotubes 

(MWCNTs) extensively being used to modify electrodes since, as a nanostructured material, present 

electrocatalytic features due to their hi gh surface area and electron mobility [1] . The procedure of 

preparing and using MWCNTs as an electrode modifier is based upon their suspension/dispersion in a 

specific solvent before drop casting onto the electrode surface. Recently, polysaccharides were d iscovered 

that incre ase the water dispersive capability of carbon nanostructures [2]. In this sense, t he polysaccharide 

carboxymethyl -botryosphaeran (CMB) was used to improve the dispersion of multi -walled carbon 

nanotubes (MWCNTs) in water , and t his featu re was applied in th e modification of a glassy carbon 

electrode (GCE) to obtain a sensitive voltammetric sensor for the determination of DESL . CMB was 

obtained by the carboxymethylation of botryosphaeran , an exopolysaccharide produced by the fungus 

Botryos phaeria rhodina MAMB -05 [3]. The voltammetric measurements were performed in a three 

electrodes -arrangement electrochemical cell and a PGSTAT 101 potentiostat/galvanostat supported by 

NOVA 2.1.4 software. The supporting electrolyte of voltammetric measurem ents was a 0.10 mol L−1 

KH 2PO 4 solution with the pH adjusted to 8.0 with 2.0 mol L −1 NaOH . The 1 mg mL –1 dispers ion of 

MWCNTs in water was obtained in the presence of 1 mg mL –1 of CMB. An aliquot of 20 μL of this 

dispersion was dropped -cast into a polished -surface of a GCE an d dried at room temperature . The 

morphology and spectroscopic behavior of the sensor were evaluated . SEM images of the unmodified and 

modified GCE indicated that CMB wrapped the MWCNTs allowing it to disperse into water due to the 

amphi philic properties of the derivatized polysaccharide . The dispersion led to the formation of a

homogeneous film on the GCE surface. The electroactive area of the modified sensor increased 53% 

compared to the unmodified GCE. Electrochemical impedance experim ents showed that the addition of 

MWCNTs to GCE caused a drastic decrease (97%) in the charge transfer resistance , and after the 

incorporation of CMB, this resistance increase d 28%. Initial exploratory studies revealed that DESL does 

not present an electroc hemical response on the unmodified GCE in a potential scan from 0 to +1.4 V 

using cyclic voltammetry, but on the modified sensor, an irreversible anodic peak was observed at 1.15 V .

The sensor preparation was uniform and the relative standard deviation of the DESL peak curren t

obtained using three different modified electrodes was 1.12%. The oxidation of DESL was pH -dependent 

and the mechanism involves one proton and one electron. L inear sweep voltammetry was employed for 

the construction of the analytical curve. Different sca n rates were tested, and statistically confident results 

were achieved using 25 mV s –1. In this condition, t he modified sensor presented a sensitivity of 1.01 8 μA 

L μmol −1 in the linear working range of 1.99 –32.9 μmol L –1, with a detection limit of 0.88 μmol L –1 of 

DESL. In addition, the sensor showed excellent repeatability with a relative standard deviation of only 

1.02% over a sequence of 10 measurements. Th e selectivity was checked analyzing the influence of the 

presence of compounds present in the sample matrices in the current of DESL and no significant 

interference was observed at a ratio of 1:10 (DESL:interfering agent). The sensor was successfully 

appli ed in the analysis of pharmaceutical preparations containing DESL (tablets and oral solutions) , with 

equivalent results compared to a validated spectrophotometric method at the 95% confidence level. The 

sensor was also employed in the analysis of a spiked sample in rat serum with recovery percentages 

ranging from 100 to 105% . The results confirmed that the MWCNTs and CMB modified GCE used in 

conjunction with the linear sweep voltammetry technique presented satisfactory performance in the 

determination of DE SL in pharmaceutical and biological samples. 

References 

[1] J. J. Gooding, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3049 –3060. 

[2] Y. Zhou, Y. Fang and R. Ramasamy, Sensors, 2019, 19, 392 .

[3] R. F. H. Dekker et al., in Extracellular Sugar -Based Biopolymers Matrices, Biologically -Inspired 

Systems 12 , eds. E. Cohen and H. Merzendorfer, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2019, pp. 433 –484. Energy Efficiency and Mecha nisms of Hot Carrier Transfers in 

# Plasmonic Photoelectrochemical Reactions of Small Organic Molecules 

# on Silver Electrodes of Nanostructures 

De -Yin Wu *, Jia -Liu, Zhuan -Yun Cai, Meng Zhang, Jia -Zheng Wang, Jian -Zhang Zhou, Zhong -Qun 

Tian 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surface, Collaborative Innovation Center of 

Chemistry for Energy Materials, and Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical 

Engineering, Xiamen University 

Siming Nanlu 422, Xiame n, 361005, Fujian, P. R. China 

e-mail : dywu@xmu.edu.cn 

The main problem in plasmon -mediated chemical reactions (PMCR) is how to promote the energy 

conversion efficiency of light energy to chemical energy. This low energy conversion efficiency is due to 

th e ultrafast relaxation of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and hot carriers generated from the SPR on 

metal nanostrucutes. In order to obtain the deep insight in the relationship of PMCR and SPR in metal 

surface of nanostructures, we in vestigate the chemica l reaction processes of small organic molecules 

adsorbed silver electrodes. Here the laser is used to excite surface plasmon on silver nanoparticles 

modified silver electrodes. The small organic molecules are p-aminothiophenol (PATP) and 8-

bromoadenine (8B rAd) . The first molecule can be related to the hot hole oxidation process while the 

second molecule does the hot electron induced C-Br bond cleavage on the silver electrodes of 

nanostructures. The electrochemical surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy was use d to record the 

evolution of surface species under laser irradiations. 

Our experimental results provide a pathway to connect photonic absorption and photoelectrochemi cal 

kinetics on surface SPR hot spots , which confine incident far field light to nanosca le surfaces and 

generate high energetic electrons and holes . From the time -dependent SERS signals and absorption 

spectroscopy, we can estimate the apparent rate constants of chemical reactions, such as the 

transformations of PATP to p,p’ -dimercaptoazobenze ne (DMAB) and 8BrAd to adenine adsorbed on 

silver electrodes of nanostructures, which can exhibit the strongest surface Raman signals. By combining 

the experimental results and density functional theory calculations, we provided the reaction mechanisms 

tha t describe well the role of the hot carriers driven chemical reactions. Now we use the quantum yield to 

estimate the energy conversion efficiency of chemical reactions due to the photogenerat ion of hot carriers ,

which involved to the SPR effect . The energy efficiency is still low close to 1%, which can be modulated 

by excitation wavelengths and applied potentials. 

Figure 1. Quantum yield for e nergy conversion efficiency of PMCR in silver nanoparticles modified 

silver electrodes Incorporating a Film of -Glucan on to a Carbon Black Modified 

# Electrode : A New Architecture for Sensing of Cyclobenzaprine 

Jessica Scremin a, Carlos A . R. Salamanca -Neto a, Robert F. H. Dekker b, Aneli M. Barbosa -Dekker a, Craig 

E. Banks c, Elen R. Sartori a 

> a

Departamento de Química, Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina – PR, Brazil.  

> b

Programa de Pós -Graduação em Engenharia Ambiental, Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, 

Câmpus Londrina, Londrina – PR, Brazil.  

> c

Faculty of Science and Engineering , Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester – UK. 

carlos.arsn@gmail.com 

The application of nanomaterials for the development of new electrochemical platform s has received a 

great deal of attention due to the capacity of improvements in the signal/noi se ratio, mass transport and 

catalytic behavior [1]. Carbon black (CB) is an example of a nanoma terial used to develop new 

electrochemical sensors . F or improved adhesion, CB can be incorporated into a polysaccharide film, in 

this case , the -glucan named botryosphaeran (BOT). Thus, the purpose of this work was to develop a 

novel architecture based up on a modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) with CB onto a film of BOT 

(CB -BOT/GCE) for the voltammetric determination of cyclobenzaprine in pharmaceuticals, ta p and lake 

water , and synthetic plasma. For modification of GCE, CB was first dispersed in dimet hylformamide (2 

mg mL –1). After polishing the GCE surface, an aliquot of the CB dispersion was pipetted onto the surface 

of GCE concomitantly with a 3 μL soluti on of BOT (0.78 mg mL –1) and allowed to dry for 3 h at room 

temperature. The modification of the GCE caused an increase in the electroactive area and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy showed an improvement of the electron transfer rate on the 

modified electrode surface compared to the unmodified GCE. The electrochemical behavior of 

cyclobe nzaprine was investigated using cyclic voltammetry in a KCl solution resulting in an anodic peak 

at 0.97 V vs. (Ag/AgCl (3.0 mol L –1 KCl)). It was not possible to obs erve a reduction peak on the reverse 

scan, suggesting that cyclobenzaprine undergoes an ir reversible reaction . The fabricated electrode showed 

a better analytical response, higher current magnitude , and lower oxidation potential for cyclobenzaprine, 

when c ompared to unmodified CGE or GCE modified only with CB or BOT. The concentration of CB in

DMF was studied changing the amount of CB (1.0 – 3.0 mg mL –1), with the highe st current obtained 

using 3.0 mg mL –1, but due a better repeatability of 2.0 mg mL –1 (rel ative standard deviation (RSD) = 

1,64%), this concentration was chosen for subsequent anal ysis. NaCl solution (0.1 mol L –1) was chosen as 

the supporting electrolyte for the determination of cyclobenzaprine. The voltammetric peak current 

obtained for 50 μmo l L –1 cyclobenzaprine was observed over the scan rate range of 5 – 250 mV s –1. The 

anodic peak current varied linearly with the scan rate, suggesting that the cyclobenzaprine redox process 

on the surface of CB -BOT/GCE wa s adsorption -controlled. The number of electrons ( n) transferred in the 

oxidation of cyclobenzaprine on CB -BOT/GCE was estimat ed from the equation E p – Ep/2 = 47.7 mV /α n.

The E p and E p/2 values were respectively , 0.98 and 0.91 V, where n in the oxidation of cyclobenzaprine 

was estimated to b e 1. Following the optimization of the parameters of the square -wave voltammetry 

(SWV) and differential pulse voltammetry , the analytical curve s were built using both techniques, due to 

better linear adjustment, higher sensi tivity , and lower limit of detec tion (LOD) , SWV technique was 

chosen for the determination of cyclobenzaprine. The anodic peak currents for cyclobenz aprine increased 

linearly with the concentration in the range of 2.0 to 20.6 μmol L –1, following the regression equation 

I/μA = −1.55 + 8.0 5  10 5 [cyclobenzaprine/mol L –1] ( R2 = 0.998), with a LOD of 0.028 μmol L –1. Lastly, 

the modified electrode was successfully applied for the determination of cyclobenzaprine in real samples 

of pharmac eutical products , whose results were statistically similar to those obtain ed using a vo lumetric 

method at a confidence level of 95% . T he cyclobenzaprine concentration was also determined in tap and 

lake water , and in synthetic plasma with an average recove ry of 98.2%. The results confirmed that the 

CB-BOT/GCE used in conjunction with the SWV technique presented a satisfactory performance in the 

determination of cyclobenzaprine in pharmaceutical, water, and biological samples. 

Referen ces 

[1] C.M. Welch, R.G. Compton, Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384, 601 -619 a.Electrochemical study on the endogenous redox rhythm in 

# cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 

Tanaka Kenya , Nakanishi Shuji 

1Grad. Sch. Eng. Sci., Osaka Univ, 560 -8531, Japan ; 2 RCSEC, Osaka Univ., 560 -8531, Japan. 

1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osa ka 560 -8631, Japan 

tanaka@rcsec.chem.es.osaka -u.ac.jp 

In photosynthetic organisms, i ntracellular redox changes depending on the environment , which 

leads various acclimation process es in a cell. Thus, real time monitoring of intracellular redox of 

photosy nthetic organisms is important for understanding their physiology. We have developed a n

electrochemical s ystem which enable real time monitoring of intracellular redox by using a membrane 

permeable electron mediator: pMFc -Me 8 (Fig. 1) . This method has appl ied to various organisms including 

photosynthetic microbes [1 -3]. pMFc -Me 8 is comprised of 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine 

(MPC) unit and ferrocene unit. MPC -based polymers are known to exhibit high cytocompatibility due to 

their protein adsorptio n resistance , which allows long time scale measurement of intracellular redox .

Importantly, redox potential of the ferrocene unit (the mid -point potential ( EM): +0.18V vs. SHE) is 

adjusted to the level to that of plastoquinone ( EM: +0.1V ), which enables us to monitor the redox change 

of photosynthetic electron transport chain in vivo .

In this study, we adapted this method for studying 

circadian clock , which is one of the photo -acclimation 

function s equipped in cyanobacterium Synechococcus 

elongatus PCC79 42 ( S. elongatus ). The medium containing 

pMFc -Me 8 and S. elongatus cells was injected into an 

electrochemical cell with indium -tin -oxide (ITO) working 

electrode and Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The 

electrochemical assay revealed that intracellular redox of S. 

elongatus cell exhibited circadian rhythms under constant 

light conditions. When the transcription and translation of 

kaiABC , which are the essential clock genes [4] , is 

defunctionalized, the redox rhythm disappeared . This fact 

indicated that the trans cription and translation controlled by 

the KaiABC oscillator generates a circadian redox rhythm. It 

is noteworthy that the amplitude of the redox rhythm at a 

constant light condition was large enough to affect the 

KaiABC oscillator [5] . Based on this findi ng, the 

intracellular redox state in S. elongatus is supposed to 

actively controlled to change in a 24 -h cycle under constant 

light conditions by the circadian clock system. 

[1] Nishio , K., et al, Plant Cell Physiol. 56 , 1053 (2015) . [2] Tanaka , K. , et al , ChemPhysChem 18 , 878 

(2017) . [3] Ishikawa, M., et al., Biores. Tech . 241 , 1157 -1161 (2017). [4] Nakajima , M., et al , Science 

308 , 414 -415 (2005) . [5] Tanaka, K. , et al, Photosynth Res. 142 , 203 -210 (2019) Modeling of Mult i-Ion Transport in Shock Electrodialysis 

Huanhuan Tian , Mohammad Alkhadra , Martin Bazant 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

77 Massachusetts Avenue , Cambridge, MA 02139 

tianhh@mit.edu 

Sh ock electrodia lysis (SED) is a new water treatment method invented and developed by the Bazant lab .

SED applies an over -limiting electric current through a membrane -sandwiched, slightly charged 

microporous material, which will induce a deionization shock and split the c rossing stream into a fresh 

and a brine stream at the outlet. The process is continuous, and its energy requirement diminishes 

significantly for dilute feed solution. Desalination by SED was demonstrated early on, but it was only 

recently that we discovere d the ability to continuously and selectively remove certain ions ( mostly 

multivalent) from water, which indicate that SED has the potential to effectively remove trace toxic metal 

ions (mostly multivalent) from drinking water and industrious water at a ve ry low cost, compared with 

other traditional water treatment methods which lack selectivity. 

However, the selective ion removal by SED has not been well understood yet. Experimental data 

indicated that in most cases SED prefers to remove multivalent ions , but a counter example is the 

selective removal of K + from seawater. Moreover, the total desalination and ion removal sel ectivity can 

be dependent on various variables, such as cu rrent, feed component, surface chemistry, and geometry .

Therefore, we w ant t o develop models to help understand the multi -ion transport in SED . Though there 

have been simple models to roughly predict desalinatio n of binary electrolyte system, it’s the first time 

that multi -ion tr ansport in SED has been modeled . In this work w e hav e dev elop ed two models for multi -

ion transpor t in SED : a traditional macroscopic model whic h solve for homogenized quantities in porous 

media, and a depth -avera ged microscopic model for 3D planer channel. The latter one is able to include 

the pore -scale p rofiles, which may differ for different ions and lead to selective ion removal. We will use 

the two models to test various conditions, and evaluate the SED performance in terms of total desalination 

and ion removal selecti vi ty. We will compare the results with our experiments and learn the mechanisms 

of selective ion removal, and then use the model to explain the experimental data and help opt imize the 

experiments .

References: 

(1) Schlumpberger, S., Lu, N. B., Suss, M. E., & Bazant, M. Z. (2015). Scalable and continuous water 

deionization by shock electrodialysis. Environmental Science & Technology Letters , 2(12), 367 -372. 

(2) Conforti, K. M., & Bazant, M. Z. (2020). Continuous ion‐selective separations by shock 

electrodialysis. AIChE Journal , 66 (1), e16751. 

(3) Alkha dra, M. A., Conforti, K. M., Gao, T., Tian, H., & Bazant, M. Z. (2019). Continuous Separation 

of Radionuclides from Contaminated Water by Shock Electrodialysis. Environmental Science & 

Technology , 54 (1), 527 -536. 

(4) Alkhadra, M. A., Gao, T., Conforti, K. M., Tian, H., & Bazant, M. Z. (2020). Small -scale 

desalination of seawater by shock electrodialysis. Desalination , 476 , 114219. Effect of secondary solution concentration on lithium electrodialysis 

# using lithium ion electrolyte Li 0.29 La 0.57 TiO 3

Hiroto Takahashi 1, Kiyoto Shin -mura 1, Ryo suke Hiraka 2, Ryoya Tokuyoshi 2, Kazuya Sasaki 1, 2 

> 1

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Hir osaki University  

> 2

Department of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University 

3 Bunkyo -cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036 -8561, Japan 

k_sasaki @hirosaki -u.ac.jp 

The demand for lithium resources is rapidly increasing with the production of lithium -ion batteries. 

Toda y’s lithium is pro du ced from brine or ore [1]. The issues of the former are long process time and 

large environmental burdens . The latter issue is the high cost for high puri fication [2]. To establish a 

better lithium recove ry met hod, we ha ve investigated lithium recovery by electrodialysis using lithium 

ion conductive solid electrolyte Li 0.29 La 0.57 TiO 3 (LLTO). The electrochemical impedance of 

electrodialysis is affected by the concentration of cations in solution. When this recovery is perf ormed in 

a batch system , the lithi um ion concentration of the solution changes as the recovery of lithium proceeds .

Therefore, it is important to elucidate the influence of the lithium ion concentration in the solution on the 

electrochemical imped ance. In this study, we investigate the effect of lithium ion concentration in the 

secondary solution on lithium recovery rate by electrodialysis using LL TO .

An anode (primary side ) and a cathode (secondary side) electrodes were prepared on the surface of 

LLTO usi ng a platinum pa ste. Referenc e electrodes was prepared on both surfaces of the LLTO at 

position s apart from the an ode and cathode. A DC voltage of 2.0 V was applied between the anode and 

cathode. Electrochemical impedances were measured by the 3-terminal method using the reference 

electrode s and 2 -terminal method . The prima ry side solution was a 1.0 M aqueous lithium hydroxide 

solution. The secondary side solution was pure water or an aqueous lithium hydroxide solution having a 

concentration of 10 -3-1.0 M . The amount of tr ansf erred lithium was estimated by Faraday's l aw using the 

current value. 

As shown in Figure 1, the migration rate of lithium depended on the concentration of lithium ions 

in the secondary solution and reached a maximum at 10 -2 M. The cause of this de pende nce w as clarified 

by the AC impedance method .

Figure 1  Lithium recovery rate at different lithium co ncentration in electrodialysis secondary solutions .

[1]  L. Gong, W. Ouyang, Z. Li, J. Han , Direct numerical simulation of continuous lithium extraction from 

high Mg 2+ /Li + ratio brin es using microfluidic channels with ion concentration polarization , J. Membr. Sci. 

556 (2018) 34 -41 .

[2] X. Li, Y. Mo, W. Qing, S. Shao, C. Y. Tang, J. Li, Membrane -based technologies for lithium recovery 

from water lithium resources: A review, J. Membr . Sci . 591 (2019) 117317 -117329. Comparison of kinetics and degradation mechanism of two isomers by 

# electrochemistry 

Xul e Zhou, Qingqing Zhou, Zifeng Liu, Jiad e Wang *

Zhejiang University of Technology 

18, Chaowang Road, Hangzhou, China 

jdwang@ zjut.edu.cn 

Dimethyl phenol s (DMP s) are one of the main organic compounds in the environment and annually 

are discharge d 730,000 tons in the water environment, which are threating water quality . DMPs have six 

isomers, amon g which 2, 4-Dimethylphenol (2,4 -DMP ) is listed as a priority by the US Environmental 

Protection Agency due to its high toxicity and 2,6 -Dimethylphenol (2,6 -DMP ) also has long -term adverse 

effects on the aquatic environment. In this study, the differences in current density and hydroxyl ra dical 

utilization between the two isomers were compared. Besides , the intermediate products and degradation 

paths of two isomers were analyzed and discusse d by in -situ FT -IR spectroscopy. The purpose of this 

study wa s to compare the electrolysis informatio n of 2,4 -DMP and 2,6 -DMP in various aspects and 

reveal ed the influence of the position of the methyl on the benzene ring on the electrolysis conditions. It 

will provide a theoretical basis on the isomers pollutants of electrolytic in the future .

Fig. 1a sh ow ed that at the current density of 4.5mA cm -1, the (kinetic constants ) K of 2,4 -DMP wa s

0.004 9 min -1 and that of 2,6 -DMP was 0.01 66 min -1, indicating that the degradation rate of 2,6 -DMP was 

quicker than that of 2,4 -DMP . Fig. 1b show ed that the intensity of 2,4 -DMP was higher than that of 2,6 -

DMP by electron spin tec hnique ( ESR ) spectrometry , indicating that fewer hyd roxyl groups were used in 

the electrochemical reac tion of 2,4 -DMP and the degradation rate was lower at the same current density .

As shown in Fig.2 , the ma in intermediate products of 2,4 -DMP and 2,6 -DMP pollutants were different .

The main macromolecular intermediate s of 2,4 -DMP were 2-Methoxy -4-methylphenol (ethers) and a few 

of ketone , alcohols, carboxylic acids , while those of 2,6 -DMP inclu de 2,6 -Dimethylbenzoquinone 

(quinones ) and 5 -Hexen -2-One (ketone ) mainly and few of carboxylic acids . The open -loop voltage were 

both at 1.4V . As a result, the position of the group on the benzene ring of pollutants had significant 

influence on electrochem ical information. 

Fig. 1 . Influence of pollutant 

structure on current density : (a) 

kinetic analysis , (b ) •OH 

radicals utilization . (Ti/PbO 2

electrode, pH =5.8 , Na 2SO 4

=0.1 mol L-1; initial DMPs 

concentration =100 mg L -1). 

Fig.2. FTIR spectra collect ed 

for Ti/PbO 2 electrode, and the 

sample potential was stepped 

from 0.2V to 1.8V:(a) 2,4 -

DMP pollutant;(b) 2,6 -DMP 

pollutant (Na 2SO 4=0.1mol L -1;

DMPs concentration =100 mg 

L-1; pH =5.8;50 interferograms, 

p-polarised light, reference 

potential 0 V) . 

Refe rences: 

[1] C.J . Escudero,  O.  Iglesias,  S. Dominguez , M.J . Rivero,  I.  Ortiz,J . Environ . Manage . 195  (2017 )117 -124. 

[2 ]J.L.  Nava,  F.  Núñez , I. González, Electrochim . Acta 52  (2007 ) 3229 -3235. 

[3]C.  Flox, P.  Cabot,  F.  Centellas,  J.  Garrido,  E.  Brillas,  Appl.  Ca tal . B: Environ .l75 (2007) 17 -28. 

[4] Q.Ye, Z.  Huang, P.Wu,  J. Wu,  J.  Ma,  C.  Liu,  S.  Yang,  S.  Rehman, J . Hazard . Mater . 388 (2020) , 122120. 0 15 30 45 60 75 90            

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
> 2,4-DMP 4.5 mA cm -2R2=0.9952 K=0.0049 2,6-DMP 4.5 mA cm -2R2=0.9963 K=0.0166
> Ln(C 0 / C t )
> Time / min (a) 3420 3440 3460 3480 3500
> 2,4-DMP 2,6-DMP Blank Intensity (a.u.) Magnetic field (Gauss) (b) 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600
> 1612 1715 1280 1380 1570 1521 1238 1296 1790 1390 1470 1555
> R / R 0.05
> Wavenumber / cm -1
> 1.8 V 1.6 V 1.4 V 1.2 V 1.0 V 0.8 V 0.6 V 0.4 V 0.2 V
> 2340
> (b) 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800
> 1600 1428
> 1710 1260 1203
> Wavenumber / cm -1
> 1.8 V 1.6 V 1.4 V 1.2 V 1.0 V 0.8 V 0.6 V 0.4 V 0.2 V
> 2355 1515 1540
> 1610
> 1366
> (a)
> R / R 0.05
> 1343

# Conductivity change due to crack generation in zirconium oxide film 

Rio Takemura 1, Kazuya Sasaki 1, Eiki Niwa 2, Masatoshi Kondo 3 

> 1

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University, Aomori 036 -8561, Japan  

> 2

Graduate School of Engineering, Mie University, Mie 514 -8507, Japan  

> 3

Laboratory for Advanced Nuclear Energy, Institute of innovative research, 

Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152 -8550, Japan 

Corresponding  author, e -mail: k_sasaki@hirosaki -u.ac.jp 

We are studying cover ing the surface of the structural material of the divertor for thermonuclear 

fusion reactor in contact with the liquid metal with the corrosion resistant film. Here, the corrosion resistant 

fi lm is a film that has compatibility with liquid metal s and excellent high heat load resistance performance .

In the case of the surface of the structural material facing the plasma is made of metal zirconium, if the 

zirconium surface is oxidized to be a cor rosion -resistant film, it can have not only excellent compatibility 

and high heat load resistance performance , but also hydrogen -permeation prevention property. Furthermore, 

because zirconium oxide containing lattice defects at oxygen sites has oxygen ion conductivity, it is 

theoretically possible of in-situ diagnose of changes in the microstructure of the film due to changes in the 

conductivity characteristics measured by the AC impedance method. In this study, we measure the AC 

impedances of a dense oxide film prepared by the self -oxidation method in water vapor and an oxide film 

that has cracked by rapid thermal cycling (100  C/h ). Comparing with microstructure change observed by 

scanning electron microscope, we try to clarify the possibility of in -situ diagnosis by microstructure change 

by conductivity measurement via the AC impedance method. 

Figure 1 shows cross -sectional SEM images of the zirconium oxide film (a: as prepared by the self -

oxidation method, b: after rapid thermal cycle treatment). The zirconium oxide film prepared by the self -

oxidation method wa s dense . By the rapid thermal cycl e treatment, cracks with a width of about 1 μm and 

many small cracks were generated in the film parallel to the interface between the film and the Zr plate. 

Figure 2 shows Nyquist plots of the electrical conductivity measurement results in thickness direction of 

each film. After the crack was generated, the conductivity could be measured by AC impedance method, 

but the resistance increased 2.5 to 3.0 times of the dense film. 

Figure 1. Cross -

sectional SEM 

image of oxide 

film formed on 

Zr plate surface. 

a: as prepared 

film, b: after 

rapid thermal 

cycle treatment. 

a b

Figure 2. Electrical conductiv ity of oxide film 

by AC impedance method (Nyquist plots). a: 

Dense film after film formation, b: Crack -

introduced film by rapid thermal cycle 

treatment. Spectroelectrochemi cal Study of Phenol Oxidation on P latinum 

# Electrode 

Danfei Zhou , Tongbin Yuan , Yufan Jin, Weiyi Yang, Jiade Wang* 

College of Environment, Zhejiang University of Technology ,

18 , Chaowang Road, Hangzhou, China 

E-mail: jdwang@zjut.edu.cn 

Electrochemical oxidation is an effective way for the wastewater treatment due to it s advantages of 

non -sele ctiv ity, highly controllability . Electrochemical in situ spectroscopy (FTIR ), a real -time method, has 

been gradually used to study the mechanism of electro chemical oxidation /reduction in a molecular level .

In this work, mechanism of phenol electro -oxidation was studied by cyclic voltammetry and in-situ FTIR 

on platinum electrode .

Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammetry (a) and in situ FTIR spectra (b) of phenol on Pt electrode surface 

During the anode potential scanning, the oxidation of phenol appeared at 900 mV in contrast with the 

blank, show ing that Pt electrode exhibited a high electrochemical activity for the oxidation of phenol. The 

bands appearing on the calculated spectrum was studied with variation of potential s (from 0 to 1.1V) . The 

phenol degradation process was investigated and proved by several positive bands.  Negative -going band 

appeared starting from potential 0.9 V, the intensity of which reached the most at 1.1 V. Negative -going 

band at 1103 cm -1 is assigned to the group of alcohol. Bands at 1288 cm -1, 1716 cm -1 and 1504 cm -1 belong 

to the group of acid and carboxylate . Ketone and CO 2 were observed at 1195 cm -1 and 2345 cm -1,

respectively . Meanwhile , the result of GC -MS is consistent with the assignment of byproducts produced in 

FTIR experiment . All the results indicated that phenol can be thoroughly oxidized on Pt and the deduced 

mechanism is credible. 

References: 

[1] J. Y. Ye, Y. X. Jiang, T.S. Shen, S. G. Sun, Nano Energy. 29 (2016) 414. 

[2] Z. Taleb, F. Montilla, C. Quijada, E. Morallon, S. Taleb, Electrocatalysis. 5 (2014) 186. 

[3] M.C.Li, D.D. Bao, C. A. Ma, Electrochimica Acta. 56 (2011) 4100. 

[4] J. F. Gomes, A. C. Garcia , L. H. S. Gasparotto, N. E. De Souza , E. B. Ferre ira,C. Pires, G. 

Tremiliosi -Filho, Electrochimica Acta. 144 (2014) 361 .Additives for Low Temperature Performance of 

# Na 2SO 4-Polyacrylamide Electrolytes 

Alvin Virya and Keryn Lian 

Department of Materials Science & Engineer ing, University of Toronto 

184 College St reet , Toronto , O ntario, Canada M5S 3E4 

alvin. vir ya@uto ronto.ca 

Aqueous -based polymer electrolytes are key enablers for solid -state electrical double layer capacitors 

(EDLCs) that are inherently safe with thin and flexible form factors. Polymer electrolytes comprised of 

Na 2SO 4-polyacrylamide (PAM) were de velop ed with high ionic conductivity, good chemical stability, 

and wide voltage window at ambient conditions. However, its ionic conductivity and ability to form 

EDLC were severely degraded b elow 0 ˚C due to the formation of crystal hydrates below the free zing 

point .

In this study, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was investigated as an additive , levera ging its deep eutectic 

properties with water , to improve the low te mperature performance of Na 2SO 4-PAM . Various amount of 

DMSO was added into Na 2SO 4-PAM and its ef fects on the material and electrochemical properties under 

ambient and sub -zero temperature were assessed. Raman microscopy revealed electro lyte films with 

homogenous and chemically compatible mixture . The electrochemical performance of Na 2SO 4-PAM at 

amb ient temperatu re was minimally affected by DMSO. Meanwhile, the addition of DMSO enhanced the 

ionic conductivity Na 2SO 4-PAM below 0 ˚C (Fig. 1a) and allowed its enabled cells with activated carbon 

electrodes to maintain near -rectangular CV profile at -10 ˚C (Fig. 1b) . Th us fa r, D MSO has been 

demo nstrated as a good additive to widen the operating temperature range of Na 2SO 4-PAM. 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2                  

> 84 60 39 21 5-10 -23 -35
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 (a)
> T ( oC)
> Na 2SO 4-PAM Na 2SO 4-PAM+DMSO
> ln( ) (S cm -1 )
> 1000/T (K -1 )
> Scan rate: 1 mV s -1
> Na 2SO 4-PAM Na 2SO 4-PAM+DMSO
> Current (mA g -1 )
> Cell Voltage (V)
> (b)

Fig ure 1: Comparison in p erforma nce of Na 2SO 4-PAM +DMSO vs Na 2SO 4-PAM on their (a) ionic 

conductivit ies (Arrhenius plot) and (b) CV of activate d car bon devices ( -10 °C, 1 mV s -1)Electrochemical Properti es of CVD Graphene on Copper Substrate 

Piotr Ozga , Agnieszka Hara, Zbigniew Świątek, Janusz Pstruś 

Institute of Metallurgy and Materials Science of the Polish Academy of Sciences, 

25 Reymonta St., Kraków (Cracow), Poland 

p.ozga@im im.pl 

Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite (HOPG) as also real graphene sheets have surfaces with 

heterogeneous electrochemical properties according to the structure of sites: basal, edge , defect in the 

basal site etc. Each type of site s has own electrochem ical activity with different Butler -Volmer terms and 

cyclic vol tammetric profiles of a given redox pair [1]. However, there are also other important 

electrochemical processes as the evolution of hydrogen and electrodeposit ion on the graphene surface .

Growt h of graphene using the CVD method (so -called CVD graphene) on mono - and polycrystalline 

copper surfaces give the possibility to obtain large -area graphene coatings [2]. The μ-Raman 

Spectroscopy (μ -RS) is very sensitive on the properties of graphene layers and this method enables the 

possibility to characterise the following main properties of CVD graphene : (i) number of layers of 

graphene coating; (ii) type and density of defects, (iii) deformation/stresses in graphene co ating and (iv) 

doping charge . Simul taneously, this method permits the determination of some deposition products as tin 

and tin -zinc alloys as also their chan ges during forma tion processes . The relatively large areas of sample 

can be analysed on the base of a set of spectra from the small ar eas (about 1 μm 2 in used experimental 

conditions). This allows the formulation of statistical description, and a graphical representation of the 

distribution of heterogeneity of graphene layers in micro -areas simultaneously with the description of 

depositi on products. The surface topography and roughness of the substrate s were examined using atomic 

force microscopy (AFM, tapping mode). The examinations of the electrodeposition processes were done 

using copper, tin and tin -zinc alloys on the copper substrate covered by CVD graphene. The processes of 

the electrodeposition of Cu, Sn and Sn -Zn layers as also hydrogen evolution from citrate solutions on 

graphene/copper substrate were investigated and optimal parameters were determined. The obtained 

results indica te a strong influence of defects in CVD graphene materials (types, density), an important 

role of substrate preparation (topogra phy, roughness, oxidation) and influence of electrodepos ition 

conditions on the properties of the graphene layers. The damag es o f graphene coatings by the evolution of 

hydrogen were a nalysed by μ -Raman Spectroscopy and optical microscopy (Fig.1). The electrodeposition 

of tin on such damaged layers appears selective deposition of tin only on the not damaged graphene layer 

and lack of tin on the uncover copper surface (Fig. 2) . The elect rodeposition of tin -zinc alloys give s

similar results. The results of E -pH diagrams calculations for Cu -H2O, Cu -SO 42--H2O etc. in experimental 

conditions were presented and electrochemical processes on graphene/copper surfaces were conducted 

potentiostatic ally for chosen and different E -pH parameters where Cu, CuO, Cu 2O, Cu 2O-B2O3 (in borate 

buffer environment) were dominant compounds. The surfaces of samples after potentiostatic experiments 

were investigated by AFM, μ-RS and OM. The CVD graphene protect s the copper surface against 

oxidation except some areas contain the defects in the graphene layer. Graphene Copper Tin on the 

Graphene Copper 

Fig. 1. The damaged layer of CVD Fig. 2. The selective deposition of tin 

graphen e by the evolution of hydrogen only on the not damaged graphene layer 

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by project IMIM PAS Z1 (Environment -friendly 

technologies and materials) 

References 

[1] D.A.C. Brownso n, C.E.Banks, The Handbook of Graphene Electrochemistry, Springer -Verlag, 2014. 

[2] S. Maarof, A.A. Ali, A.M. Hashim, Nanoscale Research Letters, 14 (2019) 143. Synergistic Effect between Pt Active Sites and Readily Oxidized 

# Secondary Metal in Partially Disordered Pt -M Electrocatalysts for 

# Methanol and CO Oxidation 

Hsiang -Sheng Chen, Tania M. Benedetti, Jiaxin Lian, Cameron H. W. Kelly, Peter B. O’Mara, Kazeem 

O. Sulaiman, Robert W.J. Scott, Soshan Cheong, Christopher E. Marjo, J. Justin Gooding and Richard D. 

Tilley 

School of Chemistry, University of New South Wales 

Hilmer Building, level 7, Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia 

Hsiang -sheng.chen@unsw.edu.au 

Synergistic effect between Pt or Pd active sites that adsorb CO and metal oxides of less noble metal 

that dissociate water to form OH ad is commonly regarded as the reason bimetallic catalysts outper form 

pure -metal catalysts in processes that include CO oxidation. 1 It has been shown that alloy catalysts shorten 

the distance between sites for CO ad and sites for OH ad into sub -nano range and are effective in oxidizing 

CO at much lower overpotential than non -alloyed catalysts with similar compositions. 2 To answer whether 

the highest intimacy between atoms of Pt and secondary metal in the ordered configuration could further 

enhance the activity, we modify the degree of ordering of Pt 3Sn nanocubes while main taining the exposed 

{100} facets to exclude the influence of exposing facets. 3 Strikingly, the 60% ordered Pt 3Sn nanocubes 

outperform the 95% ordered Pt 3Sn nanocubes for the methanol oxidation reaction by almost 5 times when 

considering the charge of the o xidation peak in the anodic direction of the cyclic voltammograms. The 

onset potentials of methanol oxidation and CO oxidation using the 60% ordered Pt 3Sn nanocubes is about 

150 mV more negative than those using the 95% ordered Pt 3Sn nanocubes . Moreover, we demonstrate the 

outstanding tolerance to CO of less ordered Pt 3Sn nanocubes comparing to the 95% ordered Pt 3Sn 

nanocubes by saturating the electrolyte with CO during methanol oxidation. XANES spectra suggests that 

the d -band structures of the Pt in different degree of ordering are quite similar, whereas the XPS spectra 

reveal that the Sn at less ordered configuration are easier to be oxidized under the oxidative potential during 

methanol oxidation reaction, which provides more abundant OH ad in the vicinity of Pt -CO that boosts CO 

oxidation. This model system shows that ordered alloys are not always more active than their disordered 

counterparts, and CO oxidation via the Tafel -Heyrovsky mechanism is more facile on the disordered phase 

of alloy ca talysts. 

Reference:           

> (1) Lu, C.; Rice, C.; Masel, R. I.; Babu, P. K.; Waszczuk, P.; Kim, H. S.; Oldfield, E.; Wieckowski, A.UHV, Electrochemical N MR,
> and Electrochemical Studies of Platinum/Ruthenium Fuel Cell Catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. B ,2002 , 106 (37), 9581 –9589
> (2) Lee, M. J.; Kang, J. S.; Kang, Y. S.; Chung, D. Y.; Shin, H.; Ahn, C. Y.; Park, S.; Kim, M. J.; Kim, S.; Lee, K. S.; et a l.
> Understanding the Bifunctional Effect for Removal of CO Poisoning: Blend of a Platinum Nanocatalyst and Hydrous Ruthenium
> Oxide as a Model System. ACS Catal .2016 , 6 (4), 2398 –2407.
> (3) Chen, H. S.; Benedetti, T . M.; Goncales, V. R.; Bedford, N. M.; Scott, R. W. J.; Webster, R. F.; Cheong, S.; Gooding, J. J.;
> Tilley, R. D. Preserving the Exposed Facets of Pt 3Sn Intermetallic Nanocubes during an Order to Disorder Transition Allows the
> Elucidation of the Effect of the Degree of Alloy Ordering on Electrocatalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020 ,142 (6), 3231 -3239

# Synergistically Electronic and Structural Engineering o f

# Electrocatalysts towards Advanced Electrochemical Water Splitting 

Jin -Song Hu* 

Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100190, China 

University of Chinese Academy of Science, Bei jing 10049, China 

E-mail:  hujs@iccas.ac.cn 

The increasing concerns on severe environmental issues and rapid fossil fuel depletion stimulate the 

intensive interests in renewable and sustainable energy sources. Hydro gen energy through 

electrochemical water splitting is considered as one of ideal options to feed energy demand without 

environmental concerns. The challenge for its commercialization is to minimize the electricity 

consumption and cost, which requires the e fficient, low -cost and durable electrocatalysts for hydrogen 

evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode. 

The catalytic performance of electrocatalysts are closely related to the intrinsic activity and the numbe r of 

the accessible catalytic sites in the electrocatalysts. This presentation will focus on the exploration of 

earth -abundant efficient HER and OER electrocatalysts with an emphasis on the performance boosting by 

the synergistic engineering of catalyst s tructures. Several reasonable strategies will be introduced for 

rationally engineering the morphological structure, electronic structure, and crystalline structure of 

electrocatalyst to augment the accessible catalytic sites and boost their intrinsic activ ity, leading to the 

significant performance enhancement of these low -cost materials for practical applications.[1 -3] These 

results will open opportunities for the rational design and bottom -up synthesis of cost -effective and high -

performance electrocatalys ts for sustainable hydrogen production through electrochemical water splitting. 

Reference s          

> [1] W. -J. Jiang, T. Tang, Y. Zhang, J. -S. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res 2020 ,53, acs.accounts.0c00127 .
> [2] L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Q. -H. Zhang, L. -B. Huang, L. Gu, G. Lu, J. -S. H u, L. -J. Wan, Natl. Sci. Rev.
> 2020, 7, 27 -36.
> [3] S. Niu, W.J. Jiang, Z. Wei, T. Tang, J. Ma, J.S. Hu, L.J. Wan. J. Am. Chem. Soc. ,2019 , 141, 7005

# Iron -Containing Porphyrins Self -Assembled on ZnO Nanoparticles as 

# Electrocatalytic Materials for Oxygen Reduction 

Jia Li , Jianguo Liu *

National Laboratory of Solid -State Microstructures, College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 

Nanjing University 

22 H ankou Road, 210093, Nanjing, PR China 

lijia0226@nju.edu.cn , jianguoliu@nju.edu.cn s

Nonprecious metal electrocatalysts (NPMEs) have been recognized as highly promising oxygen 

electroreduction catalysts, but improving their activity and stability in acidic electrolyte remains critical. 

The use of porous materials with high specific surface area is one of the most direct and effective ways to 

increase the ir activity. Here , we integrated self -assembly technology induced by rotary evaporation with 

the hard -temp late method to synthesize Fe -N-codoped NPMEs with large specific surface areas and 

hierarchical pore structure. The presence of Fe 3+ dramatically decreased the carbonization temperature of 

the precursors and the vaporization temperature of carbothermally r educed zinc, which is beneficial for 

both the in situ growth of micropores/mesopores within the carbon layers and the retention of more 

nitrogen -containing groups. Meanwhile, iron atoms present in the obtained Fe -N-C/ZnO electrocatalyst 

established FeNx OR R active sites. The obtained Fe -N-C/ZnO porous carbon material exhibited 

outstanding oxygen reduction reaction catalytic activity with E 1/2 of 0.78 V (vs. RHE), along with 

respectable electrochemical stability in a perchloric acid electrolyte (only a 7 mV negative shift after the 

durability test). Applied in fuel cells, the electrocatalyst loading was reduced to 2.0 mg/cm 2 because of 

increased mass transfer arising from the hierarchical porous structure and resulting in a power density of 

700 mW/cm 2. The si gnificantly improved activity and durability are contributed by the hierarchical 

porous structure and direct 4e − ORR mechanism of NPMEs. 

Figure 1 (a) Schematic synthetic process of porous carbon materials; (b) TG and DTG curves of 

precursors collected in N 2; (c) ORR polarization curves and CV curves (inset) measured before and after 

the durability test (0.6 -1.0 V , 10,000 cycles) .A New Electrochemical Sensor Based on Oxidized 

# Capsaicin/ MW CNT /GCE for Xanthurenic Acid, Ascorbic Acid, 

# Dopamine, Epinephrine and Uric Acid Quantification 

Andresa K. A. de Almeida (1* ), Leonardo Vieira da Silva (2), Nicholas D. dos Santos (1), Andresa K. A. de 

Almeida (1), Dave Di E.R. dos Santos (1), M. O. F. Goulart (1) 

> 1

Instituto de Química e Biotecnologia, UFAL, Maceió, Al; 2Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e 

Tecnologia de Alagoas, IFAL, 57020 -600 Maceió, AL, Brazil. andresanjinho@hotmail .com. 

Chemically modified electrodes have been developed and present advantages, such as low price, 

portability and good analytical performance for the detection of target analytes [1] . In the present 

case , capsaicin (CAP) was used as a redox mediator and added to multi -walled carbon nanotubes 

(MWCNT) modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) . The CV profile for the oxidation of CAP is 

displayed in figure 1A, together with the possible oxidation mechanism (Fig. 1B) . The presence 

of the redox system (IIa/IIc) is imp ortant for the redox catalysis, which can be understood through 

the f ormation of carbocation, which undergo es hydrolysis with the formation of quinones, 

responsible for the reversible system [1 ,2 ] (Fig. 1B) . This modified platform was applied for the 

determination of xanthurenic acid (XA), ascorbic acid (AA), dopamine (DA), epinephrine (EP) 

and uric acid (UA), one at a time , using cyclic voltammetry (Fig. 1C) and chronoamperometry ,

in buffered aqueous so lutions , pH 7.0 . The diffusion coefficient s (D) for XA was obtained as 5.67 

x 10 -5 cm 2 s-1; for AA, 1.23 x 10 -6 cm 2 s-1; for DA , 6.97 x 10 -4 cm 2 s-1; for EP, 4.00 x 10 -5 cm 2 s-1

and for uric acid, 3.0 x 10 -5 cm 2 s-1The obtained analytical curves for XA, AA, DA, EP and UA 

showed linear ranges , between 10 –95, 5 –75, 5 -115, 50 -1150 and 5 –70 μmol L −1, respectively .

The detection li mits were 8.76, 1.95, 1.8 0, 7.2 0 and 1.56 μmol L −1 for XA, AA, DA, EP and UA, 

respectively. The catalytic constant s for the oxidation of XA, AA, DA, EP and UA on the 

modified electrode were 5.94 × 10 4, 1.45 × 10 4, 3.12 x 10 5, 2.41 x 10 4 and 2.10 × 10 3 L mol −1 s−1,

respectively. Th is oxidized capsaicin -based platform is reported for the first time and is able to 

detect the analytes at a micromolar level. 

Fig.1 CV for capsaicin oxidation 

Fig.2  Mechanism for capsaicin oxidation  Fig.3 Electrocatalytic activity 

for AA, AU and XA 

Acknowledgements: To CNPq, CAPES/RENORBIO, FAPEAL, INCT -Bioanalítica. *e-mail of main 

aut hor: andresanjinho@hotmail.com Ref. [1] L.V. da Silva et al., Journal of Electroanalytic al Chemistry 

827 (2018) 230 –252; [2] L.V. da Silva et al., Microchemical Journal 133 (2017) 460 –467. -0,2 0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 -3 -2 -1 

> 0123456
> I (A)
> E(V) vs. Ag/AgCl
> Tampao Fosfato pH 7,0
> 400 mol L-AA 400 mol LAA-+200 mol L-AU 400 mol LAA-+200 mol L-AU +50 mol L-AX
> (A)
> AA AU AX

# Full Cell Design Consideration for Uniform Lithium Distribution in 

# Lithium Metal Rechargeable Battery 

Goojin Jeong ,1 Hee -Kook Kang, 1 Janghyuk Moon, 2 Ye Ji Kim, 1 Sang -Gil Woo, 1 Je -Nam Lee, 1 Ji -Sang 

Yu 1 

> 1

Advanced Batteries Research Center , Korea Electronic s Technology Institute, Seongnam, Republic of 

Korea.  

> 2

School of Energy System Engineering , Chung -Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea e-mail address 

In a Li -metal rechargeable battery, it is critical to prevent the formation of dendritic or “dead” L i and 

stabilize the interface between the Li -metal and the electrolyte. Electrolyte composition, surface 

protective layer, and/or three -dimensional Li host structure are expected to play an important role for 

improving Li -metal anode performance. However, how to control the nonuniformity of current 

distribution and the corresponding spatial difference in Li volume change in a Li -metal anode can be 

another big issue once the Li -metal anode is operated under large areal cell format. Therefore, new 

strategies for uniform Li plating and stripping throughout the large Li -metal area are required in addition 

to the well -studied microscopic interfacial material designs for practical application of Li -metal 

rechargeable battery. This work exhibits relationship betwee n Li uniformity and cell design factors in a 

large areal pouch cell format, and potentially promising strategy for improving the Li uniformity by 

changing cell component design, for example, current collector for Li -metal anode, which was 

simultaneously st udied by mathematical modelling and experimental methods. These findings provide 

new perspectives for the design of large areal Li -metal rechargeable batteries needed for the practical 

application. 

<Fig. 1. Mathematical model ling on Li -metal thickness change after 1 cycle in various cell size format> Expansion of the potential region for the sustained discharge 

# of non -aqueous Li -O2 batteries 

# by surface modifications of the positive electrode 

Kiho Nishioka a, Shuji Nakanishi a 

> a

Osaka University, 1 -3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560 -8531, Japan 

ni shioka@rcsec.chem.es.osaka -u.ac.jp 

Non -aqueous Li -O2 batteries are one of the next -generation batteries, which has a much higher 

theoretical energy density than the state -of -the -art Li -ion batteries. However, due to non -conductivity of 

Li 2O2 formed on the  cathode as the discharge product, the capacity is limited to be much smaller than the 

theoretical value. There are two different paths, surface and solution paths, for the Li 2O2 formation, the 

latter of which is advantageous for the sustained discharge of  Li -O2 batteries .[1]  It is now known that (1) 

positive electrode potential is a  critical factor determin in g the  reaction path, and (2) there is an optimal 

potential window where the solution path becomes dominant. [2] Considering the above facts, in this st udy, 

I aimed to expand the potential window for the sustained discharge by modifying the surface of the 

positive electrode .

Figs. 1(a) and (b) show discharge profiles at various potentials obtained  for pristine carbon paper (p -CP) 

and  surface -modified carb on paper (m -CP) positive electrode, respectively. [3] Surface  modification of the 

CP was conducted by immersing p -CP in a  hot acid (H 2SO 4:HNO 3 = 3:1) for 2 h.  For the p -CP, the 

discharge capacity exceeded 100 mAh/g carbon  at 2.2 and 2.4 V, whereas it was les s than 10 mAh/g carbon  at 

1.8 and 2.0 V. This indicates that the discharge reaction occurred via surface and solution paths at lower 

and higher potentials, respectively. Almost no cathodic current was obtained at 2.6 V on the p -CP. On the 

contrary, for the  m-CP, large discharge capacity in the range between 80 and 100 mAh/g carbon  was 

obtained at all potentials examined.  It should be noted that  a large discharge capacity was obtained even 

at 2.6  V (Fig. 1c) . Thus, it was revealed that the potential window for  the sustained discharge could be 

expanded by the surface modification of the CP. 

Figure . 1 Discharge profiles at various positive electrode potentials for (a) p -CP and (b) m -CP. (c) 

Discharge capacity vs. potential plots for p -CP and m -CP. 

Referenc es:

[1] L. Johnson , et al. , Nat. Chem. , 2014 , 6, 1091 –1099 .

[2] Y. Hase, et al , Nat. Commun. , 2019 , 10, 596. 

[3] K. Nishioka , et al, Chem. Lett., 2019 , 48, 562 –565. Incorporation of FDU -12 mesoporous silica towards enhancement of 

# carbon paste electroanalytical properties 

> 1

Silvia H. P. Serrano , 1Fernando P. Bellini, 1Caroline G. Sanz , 1, 2Luis C. C. da Silv a, 2Márcia C.A. 

Fantini, 1Sara N. Ferreira 1Adriana D’Alessio R endelucci , 1Pedro H.M. Garcia, 1Matheus S . B. Marassatti 

> 1

Institut e of Chemistry – University of São Paulo and 2Institute of Physics – University of São Paulo 

Av. Profes sor Lineu Preste s, 748 Bloco 2 superior CEP 05508 -000 

> 1

shps@ usp.br 

Mesoporous silica FDU -12 present s applicatio ns in severa l fields of science, including food and 

environmental analysis , pollutant adsor ption , catalysis, drug deliver y, enzymatic immobilization ,

nanoscience, biotechnology , and recently in the field of im munology with adva nces towards the research 

of v accines and oral vaccines , but th ere are few reports about the u se of this material o n sensors 

development .(1, 2) In thi s work , FDU -12 structures were synthesized in acidic medium using tet -

raethox ysil ane ( TE OS) , Pluronic 127 (triblock poly mer) ,1,3,5 -trimethyl benzene as a porous expander ,

and KCl as a cataly st .(3)  The materials were characterized usin g Thermogravimetry, SAXS , and Nit rogen 

Adsorption Isotherm . The specific area of two synthe size d materials was evaluated using B ET methods 

(602m 2/g and 700m 2/g ) and the se material s were used to prepare carbon paste modified el ectrodes 

(FDU -12/CPMEs). The experimental conditions to obtai n a very re produci ble carbon paste 

(graphit e/oil ration; order of the re agen t additions ; homog enization metho d and presence of humidity )

were primarily opt imized for the co nstruction of the modified electrode s, which contained 74.1% of 

graphite , 18% of nujol 7,9% of FDU -12 concerning the total paste content . The FD U-12/ CPM E behavio r

was eva luated u sing cyclic voltammetry with [Fe(CN) 6]3-/[Fe (CN) 6]4- as an electroche mical probe. The 

pres en ce o f the FDU -12 in the composition of the modified electrode improved the performance of the 

electrode : increas e in the current peak levels, maintenance of the cat hodic and anodic peak potentials until 

 values as high as 1Vs -1 and a subtle shift on the oxi dat ion pea k potential to the less positive potential ,

Fig ure 1 . The improved performance of the modified electrode result ed from th e synergic effects betw een 

high surface area and good mesoporous structur ation of the silica FDU -12 .

Figure 1 . Cyclic voltammograms obtained with : (A) (FDU -12/CPME ) and (B) CPE in 0.5mM of

[Fe(CN) 6]3- plus 0.5mM [Fe(CN) 6]4- in 0.5M KCl , at  from 10 to 1000mVs -1.

References: (1) Ch aofan Rui et al. , Talanta 201 (2019) 342 . (2) Huihui Lou et al. , NANO:Brief Reports 

and Reviews 11 (2016) 1650094 (6 pag es) . (3) Liang Huang et.al. Langmuir, 26 (2010) 14871 -14878. Electrochemical synthesis, characterization , and antibacterial activity 

# of copper based nanocomposite. 

S. I. Hossain 1,3 *, M. C. Sportelli 1,2 ,3 , R. A. Picca 1,3 , N. Ditaranto 1,3 , N. Cioffi 1,3 

> 1

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Bari “Aldo Moro”, Bari, Italy; 2CNR, Istituto di 

Fotonica e Nanotecnologie UOS, Bari, Italy ; 3CSGI (Center for Colloid and Surface Science) , c/o 

Dept.  Chemistry, via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy . Email: syedimdadul.hossain@uniba.it 

Copper nanoparticles ( CuNPs) are considered as potential antimicrobial agents due to their imp roved 

stability and safety , and long er active period than that of organic nanomaterials, with multi -targeted 

mechanism of action [1 ]. Nevertheless, metal NPs can suffer from agglomeration , reducing their 

antibacterial activity [2]. Cu incorporation in inorganic substrates such as metal oxides or montmo rillonite 

(MMT ) plays an important role due to the possibilities of creating an antibacterial nanomaterial with slow 

release of Cu species in order to obtain a prolonged antibacterial activity. Therefore , Cu NPs were 

synthesized via a rapid electrochemical method using the inorganic micro -powders as carrier .

Characterization studies on the nanocomposite were done by Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ,

Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ), and X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy ( XPS ). The as -prepared 

Cu -based nanocomposites could be em ployed for inhibiting the growth of biofilms .

References 

1. Nanotechnology 25 , (2014), 135101 

2. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 4, ( 2012) , 178 –184 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support is acknowledged from European Union’s 2020 research and innovation program under 

the Marie Sklodowska -Curie Grant Agreement No. 813439. On the investigation of the influence of surface crystallography and 

# local packing density on the stability of thiolated DNA SAMs 

Tianxiao Ma , Is aac Martens & Dan Bizzotto 

University of British Columbia 

2036 Main Mall Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4 

matianxi@chem.ubc.ca 

The stability of DNA self -assembled monolayer (SAMs) on gold electrode has drawn great attention in the 

biosensing field. 1, 2 The performance and the lifespan or stability of the fabricated biosensor determine the 

reliability of the test results in early disease detection and point -of -care use. 3, 4 The thermal stability of a 

mixed SAMs composed of a short alkythiol and alkythiol modified DNA prepared at OCP (open circuit 

potential) on a single crystal gold bead elec trode were studied. T hese SAMs were carefully evaluated in 

buffer using in -situ fluorescence microscopy and electrochemical measurements. The single crystal bead 

electrode enabled study of a number of surface crystallographies in a self -consistent manner. For a selection 

of surface crystallographic regions, the stability and the functionability of the SAMs were studied after 

thermal treatment from 25  °C  to 95  °C  for 2 hours in buffer. The analysis showed that surfaces with 

hexagonal symmetry (111, 311, 211) were less stable than those with rectangular or square symmetry (110, 

100, 210) which suggests that the characteristics of the surface should be carefully considered when using 

for sensor application. It was also observed that the packing density of the SAMs influences thermal 

stability since high DNA coverage slows the kinetics of thermal desorption which is beneficial for making 

more stable sensor. However it has been shown that low coverage DNA SAM has sho wn to be optimal for 

effective biosensing 5 and it seems to be challenging to make DNA SAMs with both low coverage and high 

thermal stability by using current SAM preparation protocols. In this study, we found that using potential 

assisted deposition can he lp to achieve DNA SAMs with both higher thermal stability than those made at 

OCP and with a good control of surface coverage. This study may help to explain the inconsistent results 

from the DNA SAMs during the experiments while the solution was heated 6 an d provides valuable insights 

on improving the DNA biosensor preparation method in order to optimize the stability and the 

functionability at the same time. 

Figure 1 : An example of the thermally induced changes in the fluorescence images of the single crystal 

gold bead electrode for a MCH/DNA SAM. The sample was prepared by 90 min in 1 mM MCH and 24 hrs 

in 1.0 μM DNA at 25  °C . The images were taken in buffer after the thermal treatment from 25  °C  to 95  °C .

The selection of crystallographic map is provided to guide interpretation of the images. 

References 

(1) Brittain, W. J.; Brandsetter, T.; Prucker, O.; R �he, J. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019 , 11, 39397 –

39409. 

(2) Civit, L.; Fragoso, A.; O’Sullivan, C. K. Electrochem. commun . 2010 , 12 , 1045 –1048. 

(3) Sheridan, C. Nat. Biotechnol . 2020 ,

(4) Panjan, P.; Virtanen, V.; Sesay, A. M. Talanta 2017 , 170 , 331 –336. 

(5) Peterson, A. W.; Heaton, R. J.; Georgiadis, R. M. Nuc leic Acids Res . 2001 , 29 , 5163 –

5168. 

(6) Xu, X.; Makaraviciute, A.; Kumar, S.; Wen, C.; Sjödin, M.; Abdurakhmanov, E.; Danielson, 

U. H.; Nyholm, L.; Zhang, Z. Anal. Chem . 2019 , 91 , 14697 –14704. Pb - and Bi -Modified Pt Electrodes toward Glycerol Electrooxidation 

# in Alkaline Media. Activity, Selectivity, and the Importance of the Pt 

# Atoms Arrangement 

Matheus B. C. de So uza , Victor Y. Yukuhiro , Rafael A. Vicente , Cléo T. G. Vilela Menegaz Teixeir a

Pires , José L. Bott -Neto , and Pablo S. Fernández 

Chemistry Institute, State University of Campinas 

P.O. Box 6154, 13083 -970 Campinas, S �o Pau lo, Brazil 

Matheus .chem@gmail.com 

Th e necessity for green er energy source s has been the major driving force in fuel research during the last 

decades , and it has driven the production of renewable fuels, such as b iodiesel, from whic h glycerol is 

generated as a co -product . Glycerol is one of the several organic molecules which can be use d in the 

cogeneration of el ectr icity and platform chemicals in fuel cells, or in the simu ltaneous generation of 

hydr ogen gas and ch emicals in an electrolysis cell, a strategy called paired electrosynthesis (1). In this 

context, the main goal of our work is to develop Pt -based electrocatalysts for the electro -oxidation of 

glycerol (E OG) in alkaline media. In this work, we study the ef fects of th e modification by Bi (2) and Pb 

(3) adatoms on both polycrystall ine and single crystals of the main crystallographic orientations . In both 

cases, we found that adding the metal ions to the electrolyte resulted in the highest improvem ent of 

cataly tic activity . The experiments with single crystals showed that the EO G activity on all face ts was 

improved, with the (11 0) orientation showing the highest increase in current density (figure 1 ). In situ 

FTIR re vealed that both adatoms blo ck the adsorption of CO on Pt and suppress es the pat hways in which 

C-C bonds are broken , seen in a reduction of the carbonate bands (2, 3). Further investigation with online 

HPLC confirmed this observation, evidenced by the significant enhancement in the gl ycerate productio n

(figure 2) . We ascribe d these result s to a stabilizat ion of several reaction intermediates through an 

interaction between its hydroxyl groups and the positively charged adatoms (4) . We are currently 

studyi ng the effect of other p -block adatoms to understa nd ho w each of them influence the electrode 

activity and the reaction selectivity. 

Figur e 1: Effect of adding Bi (red) and P b ( blue) to the electrolyte durin g the EOG on Pt electrodes. Base 

electrolyte composition was 0.1 M NaOH + 0.1 M glycerol with add ition of either 1 0-5 M Bi 2O3 (red) or 

10 -5 M Pb 2+ (blue). Scan r ate was 10 mV/s. Adapted from (3). 

Figure 2: Distribution of the EOG oxidation products with electrode potential for po lycrystalline P t (left), 

Pb -Pt ( center ) and Bi -Pt (right) systems. Adapted from (2,3). 

References 

[1] Y. Holade et. al. , Catal. Sci. Technol ., 2020, 10, 3071 -3112. 

[2] M. de Souza et. al., ACS Catal. , 2019, 9, 5104 -5110 .

[3] M. de Souza et. al., ACS Catal. , 2020, 10, 2131 -2137. 

[4] A. Ferre -Vil apla na et. al. , ACS Catal. , 2015, 5, 645 -654. A p reliminary study of the electro oxidation of edoxaban 

Jacqueline Arguello 1, Manoelly Oliveira Rocha 1, Martin Steppe 1, Nathalie Ribeiro Wingert 2, Vladim ir 

La vayen 1

> 1

Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto A legre, RS, Bra zil 

> 2

Universidade Federal da Bahia , Salvador, BA , Bra zil 

jacqueline .arguello @ufrgs.br 

Edoxaban (EDX) is a novel oral anticoagulant drug, approved by the FDA in 2015 to prevent stroke in 

atrial fibrillation [1]. EDX act as a competitive inhibitor of factor Xa with higher selectivi ty compared to 

thrombin [2]. Here, we present a preliminary study on t he electrooxidation of EDX in aqueous media. The 

voltammograms were recorded using a potentiostat/galvanostat Autolab PGSTAT128 (Ecochemie, 

Holland) interfaced to a computer and controll ed by NOVA 2.1 software. The experiment was carried out 

in a Britton -Robinson buffer solution using a three -electrode system consisting of a carbon paste 

electrode (4 mm of diameter) as the working electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode, and SCE as the 

reference electrode. EDX was first dissolved in a mixture of wate r and acetonitrile (50:50) to prepare a 

stock solution. Fig. 1 shows the chemical structure of edoxaban and the cyclic voltammograms registered 

at different concentrations of the drug. Th e voltammograms show two overlapped peaks in the range of 

0.8 - 1.0 V, and another with higher intensity at a more positive potential, about 1.3 V. As they all 

increased by increasing the concentration of EDX, and no peak was observed by adding only aceton itrile, 

theses peaks can be attributed to the oxidation process of EDX . The three peaks shifted towards less 

positive potentials by varying the pH from 5.0 to 10.0 with a visible reduction of the intensity. The effect 

of the scan rate (25 - 500 mV s -1) was also evaluated. More analyses are being conducted to acquire more 

inf ormation about the electrooxidation process of EDX. 

Acknowledgments . The authors thank the financial support of the INCT of Bioanalytical (CNPq/INCT), 

CNPQ , PPGQ/UFRGS, PROPESQ/UFRGS, as well as to CAPES for the PhD scholarship to M. O. 

Rocha .

Fig. 1 . Cyclic voltammograms at different concentration s of edoxaban obtained in Britton -Robinson 

buffer solution (pH =6.0) at a scan rate of 50 mV s -1. Arrow indicates concent rations of 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 

50, and 6 0 g mL -1.

References: 

[1] https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug -approvals -and -databases 

[2] Camm AJ, Bounameaux H. Edoxaban: a new oral direct fact or Xa inhib itor. Drugs .

2011;71(12):1503‐1526. Electrodeposition of flower -like and lea f-like gold micros truc tures on 

# screen -pri nted carbon electrode 

Jacqueline Arguello 1, Filomeno A. D. Inroga 2, Gabrieli C.P. Desiderio 1, Vladim ir La vayen 1

> 1

Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto A legre, Bra zil 

> 2

Universidade Pedagógica de Moçamb ique, Maputo, Mo zambique 

jacqueline .arguello @ufrgs.br 

Gold micro/nanostructures are fascinating due to their wide range of applications in areas including 

electronics, catalysis, biomedicine, and chemical sensing [1]. Besides their active surface area, they 

exhibit optical, electronic, and chemical properties that make them promising candidates for the design 

and fabrication of highly effective electrochemical platforms. There are many synthet ic routes to produce 

diffe rent shapes of gold structures [2]. Among the various procedures reported in the literature, 

electrodeposition is an efficient and convenient method to create gold micro/nanostructures. The size and 

morphology can be facile contro lled by changing the conce ntration of the gold precursor, the electrolytic 

solution, the technique, applied potential, and time of experiment [3]. In this work, different gold 

microstructures were obtained on the surface of screen -printed carbon electrodes (SPCE) by performing 

cons tant -potential electrolysis and consecutive cyclic voltammograms. All measurements were performe d

using a potentiostat/galvanostat Autolab PGSTAT128 (Ecochemie, Holland) interfaced to a computer and 

controlled by NOVA 2.1 software . The electrolyte solution co nsisted of a solution of 0.1 M Na 2SO 4 and 

30 mM HAuCl4, prepared with ultrapure water (Milli -Q system, 18.2 MΩ cm). Leaf -shaped gold 

microstructures resulted by carrying out by applying a potential of -0.6V during 600 s. Howeve r, different 

ki nds of struc tures appeared after twenty consecutive cycl es of voltammograms registered at 50, 10 0, and 

200 mV s -1. Fig. 1 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. These structures significantly 

increased the electrode surface are a of SPCE, as conf irmed by comparing the electrochemical response of 

1 mM ferricyanide at the electrode surface before and after the electrodeposition. 

Acknowledgments . CNPq/MCT -Moz , Calouste Gulbenkia n Fundation, Un iversidade Pedagógica de

Moçamb ique , INCTBio, PROPESQ -UFRGS , CMM -UF RGS. 

Fig. 1. A) SEM image of the leaf -like gold structures obtained under a constant -potenti al electrolysis at 

−0.6V for 600 s . B) SEM image of the flower -like gold structures obtained by cyclic voltammetry 

experiments at 200 mV s -1.

References 

[1]  S. Ashraf, B. Pelaz, P. Del Pino , M. Carril, A. Escudero, W. J. Parak, M. G. Soliman, Q. Zhang, 

C. C arrillo -Carrion.  Top. Curr. Chem. 2016 ,370, 169 -202. 

[2] N. Sharma, G. Bhatt, P. Kothiyal . Indian J. Pharm. Biol. Res. 2015, 3(2), 13 -27. 

[3] W. Ye, J . Yan, Q . Ye, F. Zhou , J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114, 15617 –15624 .In -Situ Electrodeposition of Nickel on a Biocathode to Enhance 

# Methane Production from Carbon Dioxide in a Microbial 

# Electrosynthesis System 

Abraham Gomez Vidales 1, Sasha Omanovic 2 and Boris Tartakovsky 1

> 1

National Research Council of Canada, 6100 Royalmou nt Ave, Montreal, QC, H4P 2R2, Canada. 

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering, McGill University, 3610 University St., Montreal, QC, H3A 0C5, 

Canada 

abraham.gomezvidales@nrc -cnrc.gc.ca 

Microbial Electrosynthesis Systems (MES) use electricity and microorganis ms to produce energy carriers, 

such as hydrogen (H 2) or methane (CH 4). In what can be called Bioelectrochemical Power -to -Gas 

(BEP2G) process , MES combines CO 2 sequestration, renewable energy carrier production, and energy 

storage. In this study, a continuo us conversion of CO 2 to CH 4 in a laboratory -scale MES is ac hieved. The 

MES cell for CH 4 production was built using Plexiglass plates assembled to create two compartments 

divided by two layers of electrically insulating Nylon cloth with a total area of 96 c m2 (anode -cathode 

interface area). The cathode compartment consisted of a stainless -steel mesh (current collector) and it was 

filled with 45 g of carbon felt pieces. T he anode consisted of a Ti/IrO 2 mesh current collector. The 

cathode compartment was maint ained at a constant temperature of 30°C and continuously supplied with 

CO 2 and a solution of nutrients. The cathode compartment was initially inoculated with 20 mL of 

homogenized anaerobic sludge. To further increase the CH 4 production rate , nickel was (in -situ )

electrodeposited on the cathode carbon felt. 

The introduction of Ni at 0.2 g L-1 into the influent exhibited a remarkable improvement in 

CO 2 conversion. At an applied voltage of 2.8 V, the MES with the Ni -modified carbon -felt cathode 

accomplished a CH 4 production rate of 2.3 L d -1, which was by 30% higher than before Ni was introduced 

in to the influent stream (1.6 L d -1). Similar improve ments were noted with other performance parameters, 

such as the Coulombic efficiency and the energy consumption, w hich considerably improved from 56% 

to 73% and 11.5 Wh LH 2 −1 to 7.4 Wh LH 2 −1 , respectively. Furthermore, when the dissolved Ni was 

removed from the influent solution, the cell performance remained unchanged , suggesting successful in -

situ electrodeposit ion of Ni on carbon felt. Electrochemical characterization using the cyclic voltammetry 

technique confirmed Ni electrodeposition. Overall, the experiment was carried out for over 60 days 

without observable performance deterioration. In fact, somewhat impr oved performance was observed 

with time, likely due to the development of a stable electroactive biofilm. These results demonstrated a 

great potential of using in -situ Ni electrodeposition to improve catalyt ic properties of the MES 

biocathode. It can be concluded that bioelectrochemical conversion of CO 2 to CH 4 can be exploited as a 

potential technology for continuous stable BEP2G conversion combined with CO 2 sequestration. Can perovskite oxides be used as catalysts for the concomitant 

# production of hydrogen and fine chemicals in electrolyzers ?

Swathi P . Raju a*, Patricia V. B. Santiago b,c , Pablo S. Ferná ndez b,c  

> a*

Chemistry Institute, State University of Campinas, PO Box 615 4, 13083 -970, Campinas SP, Brazil.  

> b

Chemistry Institute, State University of Campinas, PO Box 6154, 13083 -970, Campinas SP, Brazil.  

> c

Center for Innovation on New Energies, University of Campinas, CEP 13083 -841 Campinas, SP, Brazil. 

e-mail :pablosf@unicamp .br 

The increasing concern about pollution is generating opportunities for bio -based economies . Biomass -

derived molecules like glycerol (G) can be utilized as feedstock for the production of value -added 

chemi cals and high purity H2 in low temperature el ectrolyzers 1. In traditional water based electrolyzers 

the overpotential needed to run the device is high (around 2V) , increasing the cos t of H 2 production. Once 

water is substitute d at the anode compartment by biomass derivative, the possibility of running the 

electrolyzer device with smaller overpotential arise s as shown in  Figure 1. Noble metal -based 

electrocatal ysts are well known for the electro oxidation of small organic molecules , but its high cost and 

scarcity hinders the application in large scale 2. Thus, in this work we discuss the possibilities for the 

application of perovskites oxides (PO) for the electrooxidation of small organic molecules . PO can be 

synthesized using highly abundant, cheap and non -hazardous materials. Also, they are very versatile due 

to their com positional (then structural) flexibility 3. PO have been evaluated for oxygen evolution reaction 

(OER) with promising results in terms of a ctivity 4. Considering the oxidation of small alcohols, 

preliminary studies have shown that PO can oxidize methanol 5, ethanol 6 and glycerol 7 with smaller 

overpotential th an need ed for OER. However, the overall performance of these materials with organics 

are still far from those obtained with noble metals 8. Thus, systematic studies about the use of PO in 

anode s for biomass conversion ar e necessary to link its physicochemical properties with its activity . In 

this context, fundamental studies involving in situ techniques and computational experiments are 

mandatory to speed up the fundamental knowledge in the field and open the door for the rational 

development of more active and selective materials. 

Figure 1: Most important reactions and electrochemical 

parameters for low temperature electroly zers . In this 

method, water oxidation begins at 1.23V and the current 

fol lows a Butler -Volmer relationship between current 

density and potential. The potential at the anode must be 

equal to 1.23V +  to operate the system at a current of “i 

A / cm 2." However, with a pricey catalyst like Pt, the 

hydrogen reaction may be powered close to the reversible 

potential. Standard potentials for the complete oxidation of 

several biomass molecules have values around the green 

rectangle. The difference in potential between the arbitrary 

I-V curve of the biomass oxidation and the I-V curve of the water oxidation shows that the potential input 

needed for an electrolyzer is decreased to 1V. 

References 

1 C. Coutanceau and S. Baranton, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ. , 2016, 5, 388 –400. 

2 Liming Dai, in Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment , 2018, p. 746. 

3 J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, ACS Catal. , 2014, 4, 2917 –

2940. 

4 J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenoug h and Y. Shao -Horn, Science (80 -. ). , , 

DOI:10.1126/science.1212858. 

5 Mehri -Saddat Ekrami -Kakhki, Zahra Yavari, Jilla Saffari and Seyed Ali Ekrami -Kakhki, J. 

Electr. Eng. , , DOI:10.17265/2328 -2223/2016.02.005. 

6 and N. V. M. Dan, D. Delia -andrada, 22nd Int. Symp. Anal. Environ. Probl. 

7 V. L. Oliveira, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, G. Tremiliosi -Filho and K. B. Kokoh, J. 

Electroanal. Chem. , 2013, 703 , 56 –62. 

8 Y. Holade, N. Tuleushova, S. Tingry, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, H. Guesmi, D. Cornu and K. B. 

Kokoh, Catal. Sci. Technol. , , DOI:10.1039/c9cy02446h. Long -distance electron transfer by cable bacteria and snorkel for 

# enhanced hydrocarbon degradation in marine sediments 

Ugo Marzocchi 1, Enza Palma 2, Simona Rossetti 2 Federico Aulenta 2, Alberto Scoma 3, Ian Marshall 1,

Robe rta Pi redda 4, and Grazia Mari na Quer o5

> 1

Center for Electromicrobiology, Section for Microbio logy, Department of Bioscience, Aarhus University ,

Ny Munkegade 114, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark 

ugomar@au.dk 

> 2

Water Research Institute (IRSA), National Research Council (CNR), Monterotondo, Ita ly 

> 3

Biological and Chemical Engineering (BCE), Department of Engineering, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 

Denmark 

> 4

Integrative Marine Ecology Department, Stazione Zoologic a Anton Dohrn, National Institute of Marine 

Biology, Ecology and B iotechnology, Napoli, Italy 

> 5

Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnologies, National Research Council of Italy 

(IRBIM -CNR), Ancona, Italy 

Degradation of petroleum hydrocarbo ns (HC) in sediments is often limited by the availability of elect ron 

acceptors. Cable bacteria may stimulate the regeneration of sulphate in the anoxic sediment by allowing 

long -distance electron transport (LDET) to the oxic overlying water, thereby accel erating petroleum HC 

degradation. Incubations of crude -oil contami nated sediment, showed that cable bacteria accelerate 

alkanes degradation by +24% compared to control sediment where the growth of cable bacteria was 

inhibited. Similar degradation rates (+2 5%) were obtained via the application of graphite snorkels. The 

co mbined application of cable bacteria and snorkels yielded the highest rates of HC removal (+46%), and 

sulphate production via sulphide re -oxidation. 

Screening data show that cable bacteria c an be common in HC -polluted sediments. Cable bacteria may 

thus rep resent key and so far, overlooked players in the self -healing capacity of sediments upon HC 

spillage , and inspire novel biotechnological approaches for sediment remediation. 

Marzocchi, U., Palma, E., Rossetti, S., Aulenta, F., & Scoma, A. (2020). Paralle l artificial and biological 

electric circuits power petroleum decontamination: The case of snorkel and cable bacteria. Water 

Research, 173, 115520. doi:10.1016/j.watres.2020.115520 Using ion -selective electrodes and mercury microelectrodes :

# Towards mapping local ion gradients 

Tom Philipp , Christine Kranz 

Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, Ulm University, Albert -Einstein -Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, 

Germany 

tom.philipp@uni -ulm.de 

The ion and electron transfer processes at interfaces between electrolyte and electrode are of pivotal 

importance for the overall performance of Li -ion and post -Li batteries . Due to these processes, degradation 

of the electrode mate rial as well as the electrolyte takes place and an interphase is formed. This solid 

electrolyte interphase (SEI) at the anode and cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI), respectively, is essential 

for a stable and safe operation of battery system s such as Li -ion battery and other alkali ion based batteries, 

since it serves as a protective layer which prevents further decomposition of the electrode and electrolyte 

while maintaining ionic conductivity. The formation processes of these interphases are not yet fu lly 

understood and they are characterized by heterogeneities. Hence, characterization techniques providing 

spatially resolved information are pivotal to elucidate the heterogenous nature of the interphase as well as 

the role of the shuttling ion in th e for mation process. [1] 

The combination of a scanning probe microscopy technique such as scanning electrochemical microscopy 

(SECM) with ion -selective electrodes (ISE) , as already shown for biological samples [2,3], or mercury 

microelectrodes [4] allows the localized and selective detection as well as mapping of ion gradients with 

high spatial resolution . Due to information on kinetics, ion concentration and substrate reactivity gained 

from the electrochemical approa ch and information on local heterogeneity, topographical and 

morphological changes gained from the scanning probe approach , conclusions on the mechanism of the 

SEI/CEI formation can be drawn. Next to the fabrication and thorough characterization of micro -ISEs for 

battery relevant ion sensing as well as mercury microelectrodes for the detection of cations , first SECM 

measurements at model electrodes will be presented. 

References: 

[1] Z. J. Barton, J. Rodríguez -López, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , 2016 , 408(11), 2707 -2715 

[2] H. Yamada, D. Haraguchi, K. Yasunaga, Analytical Chemistry , 2014 , 86(17), 8547 -8552. 

[3] J. G. Ummadi, C. J. Downs, V. S. Joshi, J. L. Ferracane, D. Koley, Analytic al Chemistry , 2016 , 88(6), 

3218 -3226. 

[4] Z. J. Barton, J. Rodríguez -López , Analytical Chemistry , 2014 , 86 (21), 10660 –10667 .

Acknowledgements: 

This work contributes to the research performed at CELEST (Center for Electrochemical Energy Storage 

Ulm -Karlsruhe) and was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG ) under Project ID 390874152 

(POLiS Cluster of Excellence). Digital simulation in electrocatalysis, the case of carbon dioxide 

# reduction with diffusion -convection mass transport 

Lorenzo Ripani *, Giulia Marcandalli† and Marc T.M. Koper† 

Leiden University † and University of Bologna* 

Gorlaeus Laboratories, Einsteinweg 55 , 2333 CC Leiden (NL) †

lorenzo.ripani@studio.unibo.it 

Digital simulation is a powerful tool in electrochemistry to investigate complex system s in which many 

variables influence the current -potential response, i.e. homogeneous chemical reactions, convection and 

multiple electron transfers. 

The electrochemical reduction of CO 2 (CO 2RR) is complicated by a variety of phenomena, i.e. 

homogeneous ch emical reactions, hydration of CO 2, acid -base equilibria of bicarbonate and carbonate. 

Moreover, bicarbonate electrolyte has been experimentally proven not only to be a buffer agent, but to 

actively participate in the electrochemical reaction of CO 2RR, pro viding CO 2 and to hydrogen evolution 

reaction (HER) as a proton donor. Thus, understanding the changes in surface concentration of the species 

is crucial, as they are involved in the equations of the reaction rates. 

In this study , we developed a microkine tic model of CO 2 electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide and 

hydrogen evolution reaction in bicarbonate electrolyte based on our previous experimental measurements 

of CO 2RR and HER under well -defined mass transport condition 1.

The surface concentratio n obtained b y microkinetic model ling have been used to calculate the reaction rates 

of CO 2RR based on different reaction mechanisms. Then, we tested the agreement between the current -

potential curves obtained from experiments with the theoretical ones.    

> 1. Goyal, A., Marcandalli, G., Mints, V. A. & Koper, M. T. M. Competition between CO 2 Reduction and Hydrogen
> Evolution on a Gold Electrode under Well -Defined Mass Transport Conditions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142 , 4154 –4161
> (2020).

# Antibacterial Activity of Silver -Nanoparticle -Based Films Investigated 

# with Scanning Probe Microscopy 

Giada Caniglia 1, Anna Heinzmann 1, Maria Chiara Sportelli 2, Antonio Valentini 3, Nicola Cioffi 2,

Christine Kranz 1 

> 1

Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, Ulm University, 

Albert -Einstein -Allee, 11 – 49081 Ulm, Germany  

> 2

Chemistry Department, University of Bari “Aldo Moro”, V. Orabona, 4, 70126, Bari, Italy  

> 3

Physics Department, University of Bari “Aldo Mo ro”, V. Orabona 4, 70126, Bari, Italy 

e-mail: giada.caniglia@uni -ulm.de 

Microbial biofilms are known to exhibit an increased tolerance against biocides and antibiotic treatments 

in comparison with their planktonic counterparts. Due to their high resilienc e, biofilms contaminate medical 

implants and are difficult to eliminate, leading to serious problems for infection controls, increased 

contaminations and mortality of patients [1]. Novel therapies to prevent biofilm growth, include, among 

other strategies, coatings containing metal -based nanoparticles (NPs), which are intensively studied [2], in 

respect to their ability to disrupt biofilms. In presence of silver(I), a stimulation of bacterial respiration is 

detected with the consequent death of the microbes : this mechanism is also reported in biofilms [3]. 

In this contribution, silver(I) is studied biocomplateble AgNPs -fluoropolymer (Ag -CF x) composite films, 

which were prepared by ion beam sputtering (IBS) deposition [4], are investigated as antimicrobial 

substrates. The mechanism of the silver(I) release is studied ex -situ by electrothermal atomic absorption 

spectroscopy (ETAAS) and in -situ by scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) in combination with 

square -wave stripping voltammetry (Fi g. 1). In addition, the relation between silver(I) release and the 

swelling of Ag -CF x films will be presented, combining electrochemical techniques and atomic force 

microscopy (AFM). -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 01234567

> Current / nA Potential / V
> Time (h) 0.83 1.67 2.50 4.42 6.50 8.50 10.50 22.50

Fig. 1. (A) Scheme of silver(I) release study with SECM -SWV . (B) S quare wave voltammograms at 

different immersion times of Ag -CF x samples in KNO 3 0.1 M. 

References 

[1] G.C. Anderson, et al. Innate and Induced Resistance Mechanisms of Bacterial Biofilms. In Bacterial 

Biofilms ; Romeo, T., Ed.; Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008 ; pp 85 –105. 

[2] M.C. Sportelli, et al.  Nano -Antimicrobials Based on Metals. In Novel Antimicrobial Agents and 

Strategies ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2014 ; pp 181 –218. 

[3] K.B. Holt, et al . J. Biochemistry 2005 , 44 (39), 13214. 

[4] M.C. Sportelli, et al.  Sci. Rep . 2017 , 7 (1), 11870. 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support is acknowledged from European Union’s 2020 research and innovation program under 

the Marie Sklodowska -Curie Gran t Agreement No. 813439. 

A BUsing iron sulphate to form both pseudo -n-type and p -type liquid 

# thermoelectrics: Non -hazardous and ‘second life’ thermogalvanic cells 

Mark A. Buckingham , Kristine Laws, Leigh Aldous 

King ’s College London 

7 Trinit y Street, Britannia Hous e, SE1 1DB 

Mark. bu ckingham@kcl.ac.uk 

Liquid thermoelectric (or thermogalva nic) cells use a redox -active couple to convert a temperature 

difference between two electrodes (ΔT) to e lectricity (ΔV) through the Seebeck effec t, where potential 

difference generated as a function of tempe rature difference is obser evd as the Seebeck coefficient (Se) 

where: Se = ΔV/ ΔT. High Seebeck coefficient redox couples such as the acidified Fe 2+/3+ [1] and 

[Fe (C N) 6]3-/4 - [2] have been fundamentally assessed previ ously in our group. These systems display Se of 

ca. +1.4 and -1.4 mV K -1 (for the Fe 2+/3+ and [ Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - systems resp ectively) , where the positive and 

negative sign s indic ate that th e hot electrode acts as the cathode or anode respectiv ely. 

The main drawback with thermogalvanic cells is the low overall voltage generated from these sy stems, to 

overcome this , positi ve and negat ive Se systems need to be utilized electrically in series (shown in Fig. 

1). To date, the Fe 2+/3+ an d [Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - syste ms have been typically utilized as combinations of positive 

and negative Se systems to gener ate higher voltage device s. However, a combination of the Fe 2+/3+ and 

[Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 - systems has the potential to evolve hig h concentrations of to xic HCN. [3] Due to the 

potential toxi city of the evolved produ cts, a benign combination of positive and negative Se systems 

nee ds to be developed to achiev e high volt age device s. 

Here, we demonstrate that a both positive and negative Se systems have been develope d fr om Fe (II) SO 4

and Fe(III)SO 4 and an e xcess of either the [HSO 4]- or [SO 4]2- ions . Crucially, we also demonstrate that 

these systems can be mixed safely , where the resulting mixture solution is also found to maintain 

thermoga lvanic ac tivity as a pos itive Se system that can easily be electrically conn ected. This 

demonstrates a single -source , multi -functional thermogalvanic cell that even when mixed maintains 

thermogal vanic activi ty , which we coin as a ‘se cond -lif e’ thermogalvanic cell, that remove s the inherent 

risk associated with the current state -of -the -art s ystem .

References: 

[1] – Buckingham, M. A., Marken, F., Aldous, L., Sustainable Energy and Fuels , 201 8, 2, 2717 -2726 

[2] – Buckingham, M. A ., Hamoud , S., Li, H., Bea le, C. J., Sengel, J. T., Aldous, L., Sustaina ble Energy 

and Fuels , 2020, advance article 

[3] – Buckingham, M. A., Laws, L., Sengel, J. T., Aldous, L., Submitted. Voronoi Diagrams and Diffusion at Random Arrays of Active Sites 

Giovanni Pireddu , Irina Svir, Alexander Oleinick, Christian Amatore 

PASTEUR, Département de chimie, École normale supérieure, PSL University, Sorbonne Université, 

CNRS, 24 rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France 

giovanni.pireddu@ens.psl.eu 

Many practical systems at micro - and nanoscale can be represented as arrays of active sites distributed 

randomly [1]. As shown previously these systems can be efficiently addressed theoretically by using 

Voronoi diagrams [ 2, 3] which allows facile tessella tion of the system into the unit cells around each active 

sites. The overall current flowing in the system can then be evaluated by modelling diffusion -reaction 

processes inside every unit cell and summing the contributions from individual active sites. Al though this 

approach is tempting by its simplicity and efficiency [3] one should bear in mind that Voronoi diagram 

representing the unit cells by polygonal prisms remains approximation and as each approximation remains 

valid only under certain conditions. In this work [4] we show that even for the case of diffusion limited 

electron transfer (ET) the actual shapes of the unit cells are more complicated and depend on the local 

configuration of the neighbouring active sites . This was exemplified on the small patches of the random 

arrays with band -like and disk -like active sites via simulations and in the case of band -like active sites 

confirmed by analytical derivations .

Importantly, by comparing the total array current obta ined by employing Voronoi tessellation and 

simulation of the system without any approximations we found that they agree well ( relative error ca. 5% 

or less). At the same time, the individual contributions from the active sites are reproduced with a much 

la rger relative error [4] . The latter suggests that in the case of kinetic control or reaction mechanisms that 

are more complicated than simple ET the diffusion -reaction competition between the active sites may 

become even stronger eventually leading to sign ificant deviations from the total current predicted on the 

basis of the Voronoi approximation. This is currently investigated in our team. 

Fig. 1 . Comparison between the Voronoi tessellation boundaries (white dashed lines) and the actual 

boundaries (coloured surface) of the unit cells . Three disk -type active sites are shown as white disks. 

References 

[1]  O. Sliusarenko, A. Oleinick, I. Svir, C. Amatore. J. Electrochem. Soc. 167 , 2020 , 013530 .

[2]  T. J. Davies and R. G. Compton . J. Electroanal. Chem. 585, 2005 , 63 .

[3] O. Sliusarenko, A. Oleinick, I. Svir, C. Amatore. ChemElectroChem 2, 2015 , 1279. 

[4]  G. Pireddu, I. Svir, A. Oleinick, C. Amatore, in preparation .Wastewater treatment and power generation with a scale prototype of 

# a vertical MFC at Universidad Tecnologica de Altamira, Mexico 

Castillo -Juárez, M. 1, 2 , Nava -Diguero, P. 2, Hoz -Zavala M.E.E. 2, Kamaraj, S.K. 3, Caballero -Briones, F. 1

1 Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Materiales y Tecnologías para Energía, Salud y Medio Ambiente 

(GESMAT), CICATA Altamira , Km 14.5 Car Tampico -Pto Industrial Altamira, 89600 Altamira, México 

2 Universidad Tecnológica de Altamira (UTA) 

3 Instituto Tecnológico El Llano 

m-cj@hotmail.com 

Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) , which generate electrical energy through a bioelectrogenesis process, are 

considered one of the most efficient alternative technologies [1] . Two electro chemical processes occur 

inside the cell: at the anode the oxidation of a biodegradable organic substrate and at the cathode a reduction 

reaction with oxygen from the ambient, which together lead to current generation and reduction of the 

organic matter co ntents . Although considered a promising technology for the generation of electricity, due 

to the simultaneous generation and wastewater treatment [2] , there is the need of process characterization 

to overcome the limitations encountered during scaling up [3]. This work presents the study of the process 

variables of a MFC prototype built with low -cost and recycled materials. Three 1 L MFCs were built and 

installed at UTA, using domestic wastewater as substrate, graphite felt cathode, and electrocatalyst obta ined 

from recycled anodes from alkaline batteries; graphite felt anode; proton exchange membrane of treated 

wood and external electrical resistance of 500 Ω as shown in Fig. 1. The cell s were instrumented to measure 

voltage, internal reactor temperatures, ambient temperature and relative humidity. Conductivity, pH, 

salinity, and TDS were measured on a HACH multiparameter and chemical oxygen demand (COD) with a 

Hanna Instruments photometer. In the first 100 hours a 72% decrease in COD a nd 74% decrease of pH in 

3 MFCs was observed due to the metabolic activity of bacteria (Fig . 2,3) . After 100 hours of acclimatization, 

the best performing cell (MFC3) started with recharging of new substrate. The voltage evolution during the 

180 -hour operation is shown in Fig 4. As conclusion , oxidation and reduction reaction exist and maximum 

electrical values were 0.298 V and 0.59 mA. This characterization of the factors that affect the cell will 

establish the bases for the construction of a wastewater treatment plant in this University .

Fig 1. Setup of MFCs 

Fig 2. COD evolution Fig 3. pH vs time Fig 4. Voltage evolution 

of MFC -3

Financed by : SIP -IPN Innovation 20200890 

References 

[1] F. Hernández -Fernández, et al.  Fuel Processing Technology 138 (2015) 284 –297 

[2] I. Gajda et al , Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 11 (2018) 78 –83 

[3] P. Choudhury et al. , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 79 (2017) 372 –389 Synthesis of Stable Polyfluorinated Anion Exchange Membrane by 

# Chemical Modification of Aquivion ®

Pietro Stilli a, Simone Bonizzoni a, Chiara Ferrara a, Claudio Oldani b, Piercarlo Mustarelli a

> a

University of Milano Bicocca , Via Cozzi 55, 20125, Milano, Italy 

> b

Solva y, Bollate, Milano, Italy 

s.bonizzoni1@campus.unimib.it 

Find ing new ways for sustainable energy production and storage ha s been the object of intense research 

over last decade . In this context , Fuel Cells (FCs) have attracted much attention thanks to the use of 

hydrogen, which is retained to be the energ y vector of the future. Commercial low temperature FCs are 

based on a Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) , such as Nafion ®. However , the high cost of these devices ,

chiefly due to the use of Platinum Metal Group elements as electrocatalyst s (EC s), prevents their large -

scale application . Anion Exchange Membrane s (AEM s) are largely investigated because the use of an 

alkaline pH environment opens the possibility to exploit cheaper E Cs based on Fe, Ni , Ag [1] . Moreover ,

the alkaline environment facilitate s the Ox ygen Reduction Reaction at the cathode with respect to PEM 

working conditions [2] .

Here we present a synthetic strategy to convert commercial protonic membranes into AEM . In particular, 

the polyfluor in ated PEM Aquivion ® EW=980 g/mol (Solvay) is functionalized by reaction with aqueous 

diamine solution to obtain s ulf on amide AEM (see insert of Fig. 1 ). This allows to maintain the same 

mechanical and chemical resistance of the pristine membrane but at the same time , it increases the thermal 

stability thanks to the formation of sulf on amide bond s. T his functionalization is carried out in an aqueous 

media, which is clearly advantageous from the environmental point of view. The in -plane conductivity is 

1,1*10 -1 Scm -1 at 80°C and with relative humidity 100%. 

References: 

[1] Z. F. Pan, L. 

An, T. S. Zhao, and Z. K. 

Tang, Prog. Energy 

Combust. Sci. , vol. 66, pp. 

141 –175, 2018. 

[2] D. R. Dekel, J. 

Power Sources , vol. 375, 

pp. 158 –169, 2018. 

Fig. 1 - Conductivity measured as a function of the Relative Humidity for the Pristine (black) and the Sulfonamide 

(red) Aquivion ® at 80°C. The inset shows the polymer structure of PEM (left) and AEM (right) Aquivion ®.60 70 80 90 100 

> 1E-3 1E-2 1E-1 1E+0 1E+1
> (Pristine) (Sulfonamide)
> Conductivity [S*cm -1 ]

Relative Humidity (%) CH 3CH3  

> FFFFOFFFCF 2
> CF 2
> SO 2
> OH
> nm

T=80°C CH 3CH3    

> FFFFOFFFCF 2
> CF 2
> SO 2
> NN+
> CH 3
> CH3
> CH3CH 3
> CH3
> CH 3
> nmOH-

# Validation of a two -dimensional model 

# for vanadium redox -flow batteries 

Maik Becker 1,2 , Thomas Turek 2,1  

> 1

Research Center for Energy Storage Technologies , Am Stollen 19A, 38640 Goslar Germany  

> 2

Institute of Chemical and Electrochemical Engineering, Leib nizstraße 17, 38678 Clausthal -Zellerfeld 

both Clausthal University of Technology 

maik.becker@tu -clausthal.de 

Redox -flow batteries (RFBs) can play a crucial role in the future electricity supply to balance the time lag 

between the generation of electrical energy from photovoltaics or wind power and the demand for 

electrical energy. However, to deploy the technology on a large scale, significant cost reductions are 

required. For this task, a thorough understanding of the reactions and processes taking place within a 

redox -flow battery is crucial and this knowledge can be significantly improved by using a suitable 

mathematical model to describe the processes in a single cell of a n RFB. However , the available mass 

transport correlations result in Sherwood numb ers which vary over two orders of magnitude [1 -5] and 

therefore significantly affect the accuracy of the model. 

In this work the validation of a two -dimension al model for the prediction of polarization curves of a n

RFB is presented, focusing on the refinem ent of the mass transport correlation . Newly developed 

potential probes are used for in -situ measurement s of solid and liquid phase potentials within a vanadium 

RFB [6, 7]. Combined with systematic variation of flow rate and state of charge , the experiment s build a 

robust data base . After parameter estimation , the model predictions are in good agreement with the 

experimental data (exemplary shown in Fig 1 A ). The resulting mass transport correlation is well in line 

with the most appropriate literature data (Fig. 1 B) . Using the improved correlation, the RFB model 

provide s more accurate predictions and better support for optimizing the cell design. 0.5                

> 0.75
> 1
> 1.25
> 1.5
> 1.75
> 2
> -6000 -4000 -2000 02000 4000 6000
> cell voltage / V
> current density / A∙m -2
> avg. SoC: 4%
> avg. SoC: 15%
> avg. SoC: 37%
> avg. SoC: 59%
> avg. SoC: 85%
> avg. flow: 37 ml min ⁻¹
> A) 9% compr. 0.01
> 0.1
> 1
> 10
> 0.001 0.01 0.1 110
> Sh
> Re
> Schmal
> Kinoshita 1.8 mm
> Kinoshita 2.5 mm
> Vatistas
> 9% compr.
> 42% compr.
> avg. correlation
> B)
> Sh i= 0.07 0.02 Re 0.66 Sc i0.45
> experimental
> Re max
> experimental
> Re min

Figure 1: A) Exemplary polarization curves of a 100 cm² cell setup with GFD4.6A carbon felt and 

Nafion® 117 membrane for low (left) and high (right) flow rate . Flow rate and s tate of charge of each 

half -cell electrolyte are given within the figure . Compression rate of the carbon felt is 9%. Points 

represent experimental data, lines indicate simulations . B) Dimen sionless Sherwood correlation s from 

literature compared to results from model -based parameter estimation. 

References :

[1] Kok et al. , Chem . Eng. Sci. 196 (2019) 104 –115 

[2] Barton et al. , J. Power Sources 399 (2018) 133 –143 

[3] Schmal et al. , J. Appl.  Elec trochem. 16 (1986) 422 –430 

[4 ] K inoshita et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc. 129 (1982) 1993 –1997 

[5] Vatistas et al. , Electrochim. Acta 36 (1991) 339 –343 

[6] Becker et al. , J. Power Sources 307 (2016) 826 -833 

[7 ] Becker et al. , J. Power Sources 446 (2020) 227349 Long term o xygen sensing in 3D hydrogel scaffold cell cultures 

Elżbieta Jarosińska , Zuzanna Zambrowska, Emilia Witkowska Nery 

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -124, Warsaw, Poland 

ejarosinska@ichf.edu.pl 

The launch of a new drug is an extremely long and expensive process, lasting from 7 to 15 year s with 

costs exceeding $1 400 mln per drug [1]. The p rocess includes : basic research ; in vitro (with 2D cell 

cultures ) and in vi vo (using animals ) pre clinical research and in the end clinical trials. Animal models are 

controversial not only because of the ethical aspects, but also because of their imperfect reflection of the 

human body , which results in over 30% drugs withdrawals during the clinical trial phase [2 ].

Three dimensional culture s are an alter native provid ing a better understanding of complex cell –cell 

interactions. I n contrary to simple monolayer culture s, they allow cell grow th in all directions as well as 

secreti on of signaling molecules and specific proteins in normal level s as in the human body [3 ]. Among 

many culture system s, hydrogels are the most promising platform s for cell culture s due to their 

transparency , good diffusion of nutrients and similarity to many soft tissue s[4]. While traditional analysis 

is mostly based on optical method s including broadly understood microscopy techniques and 

measurements of fluorescence , analysis in 3D requires more advanced and expensive technique s in order 

to reach deep structures . This is the main reason why 3D cell cultures ha ve not yet achieve d wide 

implementation despite their obvious advantages over 2D cultures and more than 50 years of research. 

However , using electrochemistry, we are able to do real -time analysis in vitro. Oxygen and glucose 

consumption measurements provide us with a lot of inform ation about cell viability and can be translated 

to toxicity during tests of new drugs .

For such systems electrodes need to withstand prolonged (at least 3 -4 weeks) contact with the cell culture 

matrix and the surrounding medium, thus biofouling is a major issue. That is why we have tested major 

antifouling layers including : polymers ( e.g. Nafion®, phenylenediamine , polyvinyl chloride , polysilicate 

matrix), hydrogels (e.g. poly hydroxyethyl methacrylate ), protein (e.g. albumin), polyethylene glycol and 

poly -L-lactic acid . Electrodes were first coated with syringaldazine , which is easily adsorbed on carbon 

surfaces and provides an easy to interpret response towards pH changes[5]. It is also very stable in buffer 

solutions but quickly desorbs in more compl ex media, thus making it an excellent probe for measurement 

of beneficial impact of antifouling layers. Tests were first conducted on macro - glassy carbon electrodes 

and later on low -cost pencil based sensors (250 μm diameter) as it was shown that some lay ers are less 

stable due to the big size of the electrode surface. It was revelated that polysilicate matrix, poly -L-lactic 

acid , poly hydroxyethyl methacrylate are suitable candidates for antifouling layers for electrochemical 

sensors. 

At the same time we conducted experiments directed at possibilities of oxygen sensing in hydrogels at 

various potentials. Initial experiment s revealed that 2,9 -dimethyl -1,10 -phenanthroline as well as 

a porphyrin complexes with cobalt effectively reduce the potential value for oxy gen sensing as compared 

with Nafion ® coated sensors , in both acidic and neutral pH. Whi le in PBS results are immediate ,

measurement in hydrogels results in the answer extended in time , indicating diffusion problems . Current 

measurements include oxygen sensing not only in hydrogels and cell culture medium but also with 

growing cells. 

References:               

> 1.J. A. DiMasi, H. G. Grabowski, R. W. Hansenc, Journal of Health Economics ,2016 , 47, 20 –33
> 2. Q. Meng, Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology ,2010 , 6, 6
> 3. A. D Castiaux, D. M. Spence, M. R. Scoot, Analytical Methods ,2019 ,11, 4220
> 4. S. C. Caliari, J. A. Burdick, Nature Methods ,2016 , 13, 5
> 5. M. Michalak, M. Kurel, J. Jedraszko, D. Toczydlowska, G. Wittstock, M. Opallo, W. Nogala, Analytical Chemistry, 2015 , 87, 23,
> 11641 –11645

Authors acknowledge financial support of the National Centre for Research and Development under the 

grant LIDER/38/01381/L -9/17/NCBR/2018, and EWN would like to also thank th e Foundation for Polish 

Science (FNP), from which she was supported through START programme and National Science Centre 

Poland for the MINIATURA grant NCN 2017/01/X/ST4/00463 Application of a Schiff base derivative denatured cytochrome c 

# analogue, for the analytical reporting of nitric oxide. 

A Farao , P Baker; F Ajayi 

SensorLab, Department of Chemistry, University of the Western Cape, PB X17, Bellville 7535, South 

Africa; 242 7770@myuwc.ac.za 

Biointergrated sensors involve the biological electron transport between proteins and polymeric materials. 

Immobilization of biomolecules often compromis e the activity of the enzyme. Losses have been 

attributed to conformational changes o r interactions between the biomolecule and the solid surface. 

Investigations into the redox behaviour of cytochrome c revealed compromised electron transfer to metal 

surfaces as result of adsorption denaturation 24 . Modification of electrode surfaces by chemisorbed self -

assembled monolayers (SAM) resolved this limitation. NO has been reported to coordinate strongly with 

the iron heme of cytochrome c to form linear nitrosyls with the Fe 2+ metal centres. Coordination of nitric 

oxide to the iron centres are expected to alter the redox behaviour of the system. However, n itric oxide 

has been reported to exhibit trans -effects which would inhibit coordination to the iron centre . Similar 

findings w ere recorded in study to reproduce the electrochemistry of denatured cytochrome C. The poor 

electrochemical response of the denatured cytochrome c me tal centre to nitric oxide was attributed to 

steric crowding surrounding the heme. 

In this work , a novel Schiff base was synthesized by cross -linking naphthalene to pyrrole to produce the 

monomer, N,N -bis((1H -pyrrol -2-yl)met hylene)naphthalene -2,3 -diamine), by simple reflux chemistry. 

The structural analysis of the ligand -Fe complex indicated a square planar co -ordination that presented Fe 

in a favourable position for NO co -ordination. 

A novel Schiff base was synthesized by cross -linking naphthalene to pyrrole to produce the monomer, 

N,N -bis((1H -pyrrol -2-yl)methylene)naphthalene -2,3 -diamine). The iron liga nd complex was 

electrodeposited on to screen printed carbon electrodes ( SPCE ) for electrochemical evaluation , over the 

potential window of -1 V and 1 V vs Ag/AgCl . The sensor demonstrated electrochemical properties 

analogous to that of the denatured cytoch rome c system. The response of the sensor towards NO 

generated in situ from the NO donor , diazeniumdiolates (Z) -1-(N,N -diethylamino) -diazen -1-ium -1,2 -

diolate (DEANONOate), which spontaneously decomposes to nitric oxide in neutral pH . The quantitative 

an alysis of NO was evaluated by spectroscopic and electrochemical methods, with very promising results. Electrochemical and Physico -Chemical Properties of the Separation 

# Materials for Lithium -Ion Batteries on the Basis of Electrospun 

# PVDF|PTFE, PP and Glass Fibers 

Semen V. Makhov, Aleksandr V. Ivanishchev 

Institute of Chemistry Saratov State University 

Ast rakhanskaya str. 83, Saratov 410012, Russia 

semen_mahov@mail.ru 

Nanofibers materials produce d by electrospinning method can be applied as separators in lithium -ion 

batteries. This method of synthesis is characterized by simplicity of hardware design, high energy 

efficiency and variability of conditions. The separation material based on poly vi nylidene fluoride (PVDF) 

and its copolymer with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) was obtained by capillary -less electrospinning [1]. 

In the present work t he optimal synt hesis conditions were established. The average fiber diameter was 

determined in the range of 100 -250 nm by scanning electron microscopy (MIRA LMU Tescan) (Figure 

1a). The bulk porosity of the obtained material was 71.43%, thickness 50 μm, surface density 27 g·m -2,

wettability by electrolyte 800%. We studied the electrochemical behavior of a Li 4Ti 5O12 electrode in half 

cells with a metal lic Li counter electrode and 0.67 M LiClO 4 electrolyte in a mixture of propylene 

carbonate (PC) and di methoxyethane (DME) (7:3), and three types of separators : based on electrospun 

PVDF|PTFE, commercial polypropylene (PP) and glass fibers (GF) .

Figure 1. SEM micrographs of the PVDF|PTFE -based separator (a) and galvanostatic discharge capacity 

of the Li 4Ti 5O12 electrode with electrospun PVDF|PTFE -based separator as well as conventional PP -

based and GF -based separators at cycling under the specific current in the range of 0.1C – 0.5 C during 

first three cycles and under 1C current during subsequent 100 cyc les (b) .

The galvanostatic charge -discharge cycling of the cells was carried out in the following range of currents: 

from 0.1 C to 1 C during the first four cycles and then at 1 C current up to 100 cycles. Cells with the 

electrospun PVDF|PTFE separator de monstrated higher C-rates with respect to the cells with 

conventional separators based on PP and GF : at equal currents, high er capacit y values of the Li 4Ti 5O12 

electrode during long -term cycling were observed. 

A decrease in the working electrode polarizati on and an increase in the cycl ing capacity in the case of the 

electro spun separator in comparison with the conventional separators based on PP and GF were 

established. The state of the electrodes and the separator in the cell was monitored by electrochemic al 

impedance spectroscopy (EIS) method. The parameters of the electric equivalent circuit and the diffusion 

coefficient of lithium ions in the Li 4Ti 5O12 electrode for the cells with each type of separator were 

determined and compared. 

Acknowledgments. The reported study was funded by RFBR, project No 19 -33 -90068. 

References 

[1] S. V. Makhov, A.V. Ivanishchev, A.V. Ushakov, D.V. Makhov, Energies. 13 (2020) 18. Formation of Mn -substituted Na 1+2x Mn xTi 1-x(PO 4)3 (x = 0.0 – 1.5) from 

# Density Functional Theoretical and Cluster Expansion Analysis 

Gustautas Snarskis a and Linas Vilčiaukas a

> a

Center for Physical Sciences and Technology (FTMC) 

Saulėtekio al. 3, LT -10257 Vilnius, Lithuania 

Linas.Vilciauskas@ftmc.lt 

The development of novel rechargeable batteries is currently one of the most important topics in science 

and technology. Although Li -ion batteries are bec oming the leading technology, they face a number of 

problems like safety and rare and expe nsive (Co, L i, Ni ) raw materia ls needed for production. Na -ion 

batteries might be based on inexpensive and widespread materials and could be a viable alternative in 

applications where particularly high energy densities are not required [1]. Natrium SuperIonic Conducto r

(NA SICON) framework compounds are attracting a lot of attention as potential electrodes from the 

battery research community [2]. Mn -based NASICONs are deemed as very suitable high voltage positive 

electrode materials for Na -ion batteries [3]. In this wor k, a part of the Na -Mn -Ti -PO4 phase diagram 

corresponding to Mn -poor and Mn -rich solid solutions of different concentrations in the NTP -123 system 

Na (1+2x) Mn xTi (2−x) (PO 4)3 {0 ≤ x ≤ 1.5} was constructed using the Cluster Expansion approach and periodic 

dens ity functio nal theory calculations [3]. Results indicate a limited thermodynamic stability window at 

around x = 1.0, which might provide valuable guidance for the experimental effort to prepare various Mn -

substituted NASICON compounds (Fig. 1). 

Acknowl edgements: 

This project has received funding from the European Regional Development Fund (Project No. 01.2.2 -

LMT -K-718 -02 -0005) under grant agreement with the Research Council of Lithuania (LMTLT). 

References :

[1] Nayak , P. K.; Yang, L.; Brehm, W.; Adelhelm, P , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed ., 57 , 102 -120 ( 2018 ). 

[2] Jian, Z.; Hu, Y. -S.; Ji, X.; Chen, W. Adv. Mater. , 29 , 1601925 (2017) .

[3 ] H. Gao and J. B. Goodenough , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed ., 55 , 12768 –12772 (2016 ).

[4] Puchala, B.; van der Ven, A., Phys. Rev. B , 88 , 094108 (2013 ).

[5] Lei, Ping, et al., Chem. Commun. 55 , 509 -512 (2019). .

Fig. 1. Formation energy diagram. The case where x=1.0 is used as a reference point is marked in red. Synthesis and Electrochemical Properties of the Electrode Materials 

# on the Basis of Li 2Fe xMn (1 -x) SiO 4 and Li 4Ti 5O12 for Lithium -ion Battery 

Dmitry V. Makhov, Arseni V. Ushakov, Semen V. Makhov , Aleksandr V. Ivanishchev 

Institute of Chemistry Saratov State University 

Astrakhanskaya str. 83, Saratov 410012, Russia 

semen_mahov@mail.ru 

Modern li-ion batteries based on LiCoO 2/graphite and LiFePO 4/graphite electrochemical systems offer 

customers a choice of high energy density or safety at operatio n. In th e present work , we consider ed the 

alternative of l i-ion system based on Li 4Ti 5O12 (LTO ) / Li 2Fe xMn (1 -x) SiO 4 (LFMS ).

Li 4Ti 5O12 was obtained by the solid -state synthetic rout with preliminary mechanical activation. At the first 

stage, the Li 2CO 3 and TiO 2 mixture was subjected to mechanical activation . Next step was an annealing at 

750° C for 5 hours in an air atmosphere. 

Li 2Fe xMn (1 -x) SiO 4 (x = 0.33) was obtained by sol -gel meth od. At the first stage, the initial precursors 

(LiOH ·H 2O, Fe 2C2O4·2H 2O, Mn(CH 3COO) 2·4H 2O, ethylene glycol, tetraethoxysilane) were mixed until a 

sol was formed. Then the sol was evaporated to form a gel. This gel was subjected to heat treatment at a 

temperature of 650°C for 5 hours in an argon atmosphere. 

The electrochemical properties of both anode and cathode material s were studied by galvanostatic charge -

discharge cycling . We used three -electrode laboratory cell s with lithium reference and auxili ary electrode s

to support the work of the electrode under investigation . A 0.67 M solution of lithium chlorate (VII) LiClO 4

in a mixture of propylene carbonate and 1,2 -dimethoxyethane with a volume ratio of 7:3 was used as an 

electrolyte. The galvanostatic charge -discharge cycling of the cells was carried out at the rate of 0.02 С-

0.1 С in the potential range of 1.50 –4.50 V (vs. Li) for LFMS , and at 0.2 C in the potential range of 1.00 –

2.50 V for LTO using a P20X8 multichannel potentiostat -galvanostat (Elins, Russia). 

Figure 1. Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of Li 2Fe xMn (1 -x) SiO 4 (x = 0.33) electrode at the rate 

of 0.02 C – 0.1 C (a) and Li 4Ti 5O12 electrode (b) at the rate of 0.2 C. 

LFMS electrode showed increas ing of specific capacity up to 164 m Аh·g -1 (Figure 1) at 0.02 C rate 

comparing to usual specific capacity of Li 2FeSiO 4 el ectrode [1]. The shape of charge and discharge curves 

of Li 2Fe 0.33 Mn 0.6 7SiO 4 electrode is smoother than Li 2FeSiO 4 electrode, and potential hysteresis between 

curves is lower. 

LTO -based electrode material showed specific capacity of 140 mAh·g -1. The shape of the curves is identical 

for LTO obtained by other authors [2] and is characterized by a potentiostatic plateau at 1. 55 V. 

Acknowledgments . The reported study was funded by RFBR, project No 18 -53 -45004 .

References 

[1] A.V. Ivanishchev , A.V. Churikov , A.S. Akmaev , A.V. Ushakov , I.A. Ivanishcheva , I.M. Gamayunova ,

M.J. Sneha , A. Dixit // Russ . J. Electrochem . – 2017 . – V. 53 . – P. 302 -311. 

[2] Sun X., Hegde M., Zhang Y., He M., Gu L., Wang Y., Shu J., Radovanovic P.V., Cui B. // J. 

Electrochem. Sci . – 2014. – V. 9. – P. 1583 -1596 .The effect of microstructure on overall and local corrosion and 

# passivity behaviour of high strength steels           

> A. Yilmaz 1,2,3 ,K.Traka 1,3 , C.Ornek 4,5 ,X.Li 1,2,3 , S. Pletincx 6,T. Hauffman 6, J.Sietsma 1, Y. Gonzalez -
> Garcia 1
> 1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology (TU Delft),
> 2Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO)
> 3Materials innovation institute (M2i)
> 4Division of Surface and Corrosion Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE -100 44 Stock holm,
> Sweden
> 5Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, TR -34667
> Sarıyer/Istanbul, Turkey
> 6Research Group Electrochemical and Surface Engineering, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
> Mekelweg 2, 2628 CD Delft, Th e Netherlands
> a.yilmaz@tudelft.nl

High -strength steels are widely used in many applications including oil and gas production, 

transportation and infrastructure, as a result of their optimised mechanical properties, relatively 

low price and high availab ility. However, most low -alloy steels are susceptible to corrosion. 

Corrosion of steels has significant negative consequences for the economy, the environment and 

human safety. The microstructure of the steel alloys is one of the factor s influencing their 

corrosion resistance. It is desired to optimise the microstructure design of the alloy to control or 

enhance the corrosion resistance. For this, more insight into the interaction between 

microstructure and corrosion is needed. The influence of microstructu ral features on the 

corrosion and passivity of the steels is not well understood, with occasional contradictory 

tendencies . This is due the complexity of the microstructure where many different features 

(grain size, phase, crystallographic orientation , dis location density ) play a role in the overall 

corrosion and passivity behaviour. To separate the sole effect of microstructural features, it is 

crucial to design well -controlled model alloys by heat -treatments or thermomechanical 

processes to limit the comb ined effect s of microstructural features on passivity and corrosion 

behavior. 

In this work, a study is presented in which the individual effect of grain size and microstructural 

defects (e.g. dislocation density, grain boundaries) on the passivity and cor rosion behavio ur of 

model alloys is investigated. Three aspects are considered. (1) The role of grain size on the 

passive layer of pure iron is investigated with model alloys with grain sizes between 25 and 91 

m. It was observed that grain refinement lead s to increase in the passivity current density in the 

potentiodynamic polarization curves and lower resistance in the electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. This effect in barrier properties of the passive film stems 

from the increase i n donor density measured with Mott -Schottky analysis and decrease in 

fractions of protective -Fe 2O3 in the passive film (composed of Fe 3O4, -Fe 2O3 and FeO(OH) )

that it is measured with X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). (2) The effect of dislocation 

density on the corrosion behaviour of interstitial free (IF) ferritic steels was investigated in 0.1M 

HCl solution. It is shown that the corrosion rate increases with increase in dislocation density. 

This is attributed to the increasing Volta -potential di fference in between grains with increase 

dislocation density, measured by Scanning Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (SKPFM). This 

leads to a higher driving force for galvanic coupling. (3) In the third case, the role of 

microstructural defects (dislocation de nsity and grain boundary) on passive layer properties of 

IF steels is studied. I t is revealed that the barrier properties of passive film deteriorate with 

increasing microstructural defect density due to an increase in donor density and a lower -

Fe 2O3 fraction in the passive film. Electrochemical Analysis of Fentanyl and Fentanyl Analogs 

# Towards a Rapid Screening Assay 

Natalie Sellnau, Frédérique Deiss 

Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute, Indiana 

University – Purdue University Indianapolis 

402 N Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN, USA 

nsellnau@iu.edu  ; Corresponding Author : fdeiss@iupui.edu 

The use of opioids is on the rise nationwide, and the potential danger of an unintentional exposure is increasing. 

One of the current deadliest synthetic opioids if fentanyl. There are also numerous fentanyl analogs that have 

been synthesized, often illicitly, that are hazardous: some of w hich are more potent than fentanyl itself. There 

are many laboratory -based methods used to detect fentanyl, but they lack the portability and rapid response 

necessary for early detection in the field. The focus of this project is to use electrochemistry as a fast detection 

method answering those needs and allowing for early detection of fentanyl and fentanyl analogs. In the body, 

fentanyl undergoes an oxidative N -dealkylation reaction, which generates metabolites. The electrochemical 

reaction of fentanyl ap pears to be mimicking this, with an irreversible oxidation, which then generates 

metabolites in solution. We use cyclic voltammetry to monitor oxidation of fentanyl and the oxidation and 

reduction of possible fentanyl metabolites. The irreversible oxidatio n peak appears around 0.80 V vs. Ag/AgC l

for fentanyl, and this irreversible oxidation results in additional oxidation and reduction peaks observed in 

subsequent scans. The parameters to electrochemically characterize fentanyl are currently being optimized , such 

as the supporting electrolyte, concentration of the supporting electrolyte, working electrode, and scan rate. 

Square wave voltammetry (SWV) is also being considered to analyze the oxidation of fentanyl, because of the 

greater sensitivity of the meth od. The optimal parameters for the step, amplitude and frequency are being 

explored for SWV. The long term goal of this project is to develop a method common to fentanyl and fentanyl 

analogs to allow for a rapid detection of these drugs that will benefit i n-field techniques. Electrochemical Tape -and -paper -based Chlorate Sensors for Forensic 

# Applications 

Carolina Vega , Kiyomi Kukoyi, Meagan Olsen and Frédérique Deiss 

Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute, Indiana 

University – Purdue University Indianapolis 

402 N Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN, US A

cguimara@iu.edu ; Corresponding  Author:  fdeiss@iupui.edu 

The use of chlorate salts as oxidizers in improvised explosives devices (IEDs) has recently increased. 

IEDs are a global threat due to easy access to raw materials , many manufacturing instructions available on the 

internet and their lethal potential. The standard methods to detect chlorate are mostly designed for laboratory 

testing and thus do not meet the requirements for in -field detection. Recent developments in electr oanalytical 

assays integrated with flexible substrates have led to user -friendly analytical devices which are inexpensive, 

portable and disposable. We are developing an electrochemical tape -and -paper -based device for rapid in -field 

detection of traces of c hlorate . The sensing element of our device is an electrodeposited molybdate layer. 

Indeed, chlorate was reported to have a catalytic effect on the reduction of molybdate. Our sensor detect s

chlorate by monitoring the change in redox activity of the electrodeposited molybdate using cyclic voltammetry 

and other electrochemical techniques . We have effectively demonstrated the detection of chlorate in solution 

and started evaluating the quantifi cation capabilities of the device. We optimized the conditions for the 

electrodeposition of molybdate ( supporting electrolyte, scan rate, pH, type of acid, concentration of molybdate, 

etc.) by cyclic voltammetry . In addition, we are evaluating square wave voltammetry and differential pulse 

voltammetry to achieve the most observable effect of chlorate on the molybdate sensing layer. Also, a quality 

control of the sensors has been developed through chemometric methods. In order to allow a convenient sample 

co llection at crime scenes , an in -field presumptive test, and storage and transport for in -laboratory confirmatory 

tests we a re optimizing the design of tape -encased prototypes . The sensing element of the tape -and -paper -based 

device is sandwiched in a wider layer of tape which will protect the electrodes from damage when collecting 

samples in -field . This research was made possible with the support of the National Institute of Justice (2017 -

DN -BX -0172). Fabrication and Deposition of Metallic Nanoparticles By Plasma 

# Electrochemistry In Ionic Liquids 

Amir Kaplan a* , Sharona Atlas a,b , Yanir Kadosh c, Yair Bochiln c, Eli Korin c and Armand Bettelheim c,

(a) Nuclear Research Center Negev (NRCN), Department of Chemic al engineering, P.O. Box 9001, 

Beer -Sheva, 84190, ISRAEL 

(b) Ben -Gurion University of the Negev, Department of Chemistry, P.O. Box 653, Beer -Sheva, 84105, 

ISRAEL 

(c) Ben -Gurion University of the Negev, Department of Chemical Engineering, P.O. Box 653, Beer -

Sheva, 841 05, ISRAEL 

*e -mail: (amirk@nrcn.org.il) 

Metal nanoparticles have found extensive attention due to their unique electronic properties, chemical 

reactivity and potential applications such as: catalysis, optical, magnetic and electronic devices. 

Ionic li qui ds are well known in today’s literature to be successfully employed for the synthesis and 

stabilization of metal nanoparticles without the addition of stabilizing agents. Moreover, ionic liquids 

have very low vapor pressures (typically 10 -9 Pa at room t emp erature), which makes them suitable in 

either vacuum or atmospheric pressure experiments as fluid substrates or solvents. 

Plasma electrolysis, is carried out to produce metallic, alloys or ceramic nanoparticles. Unlike 

conventional electrochemistry sys tem , in plasma electrolysis system, the cathode or the anode is 

positioned just above the electrolyte surface, and the counter -electrode is immersed in the electrolyte. For 

the fabrication of metallic nanoparticles, plasma -induced cathodic discharge electr oly sis technique is 

used. In principle, the cathode is positioned just above the electrolyte surface, and a plasma -induced 

stationary discharge is generated between the cathode and the electrolyte surface to allow for continuous 

electrolysis. The discharge is maintained by electron emission from the cathode, whereby atmospheric 

argon gas is partially dissociated to form condensed plasma in the gas phase. Therefore, when the metal 

ion source is dissolved in the ionic liquid, fine metal particles are formed o n t he surface of the ionic -

liquid, which sizes are in the nano - up to micro -meter scale (depend on the experimental conditions). The 

plasma –electrolyte interface can provide a reactive region where active species are formed; further, due to 

the high -energy el ectrons in the plasma region, plasma chemistry and electrochemistry reactions occurs, 

which deviate from the conventional Faraday Law. Ionic liquids are well suitable electrolytes for the 

plasma electrochemical processes, because compared to water it is mu ch easier to obtain stable and 

homogeneous plasma, due to their low vapor pressure. 

In this work, we will demonstrate plasma electrochemistry capabilities to fabricate metallic copper 

nanoparticles using CuSO 4 salt which is dissolved in1 -Ethyl -3-methyli mid azolium ethyl sulfate 

([EMIM][EtSO 4]). Glow plasma was formed in the cathode -electrolyte interface, under atmospheric 

pressure conditions using argon gas flow which was continuous supplied above the solution. We used a 

DC power source to apply 200V of p ote ntial difference, between the cathode (tungsten wire) and copper 

foil anode. Our visual pictures of the cell clearly show formation of particles that diffuse from the surface 

to the bulk electrolyte. Our current vs. time data, combined with in -situ opti cal emission spectroscopy, 

allow us to recognize a pattern of particle nucleation followed by growth of the nanoparticles in the ionic 

liquid bulk. Initial experiments were conducted to obtain Cu nanoparticles -coated carbon paper 

electrodes. We also extrac ted nanoparticles from the ionic liquid solution for further elemental analysis 

such as XRD and TEM. Since electrolysis using multi -discharge electrodes array can be achieved, it 

seems in the present research stage that plasma electrolysis method is suitab le for the mass production of 

a variety of nanoparticles, whether discrete or incorporated in substrates. Modification of carbonaceous nanostructure d materials for application 

# in Li -Ion batteries 

Raviolo Sofía 1*, Carraro María Paola 3, Luque Guillermina Leticia 4 and O liva Marcos Iván 1, 2.

1. Instituto de Física Enrique Gaviola, Córdoba Argentina. 

2. FaMAF, Uni versidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba Argentina. 

3. Centro de Investigación y Tecnología Química (Citeq) - UTN FRC – Conicet, Córdoba Argentina. 

4. Instituto de Investigaciones en Físico -Química de Córdoba (INFIQC) - UNC – Conicet, Córdoba 

Argentina. 

*So fía Raviolo:  sofiraviolo@gmail.com 

Li -Ion batteries (LIB) have been exhaustively studied because of their potentialities for green 

transportation and renewable energy storage due to their high power, high energ y density and long cycle 

life [1, 2] . Most commercialized LI B employ graphite as the principal material for the anode , however 

this material has a low theoretical capacity . Consequently, a wide range of materials has been considered 

to replace or modify it in order to increase the capacity of the anodes [3]. On the other hand, it was shown 

that the use of carbonaceous highly ordered two -dimensional porous material CMK -3 as anodes in LI B

leads to a significant increase in the conduction of lithium -ion and el ectrons [4]. In this work, we present 

a new material based on CMK -3, functionalized by NiFe2O4 spinel , using different impregnation 

methods. The employment of this particular spinel is grounded on his promising features , for e.g. it has a 

high theoretical capacity, and both Ni and Fe are low -cost abundant elements (which is important for the 

possible applicability to the industry) [5]. 

The resulting materials were characterized by means of the following techniques: Low and high angle x -

ray diffraction (DRX) , scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM), elemental 

analysis (EDX), nitrogen adsorption isothermal analysis with BET model, ultraviolet -Visible diffuse 

reflectance spectroscopy (UV -vis), programmed temperature reduction (TPR), X-Ray em itted 

photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 

The following graph shows the battery performance by means of galvanostatic cycling considering 

different variables: impregnation method (wet and dry) , percentage of spinel (23% y 50%) and the binder 

type (PVDF y CMC ).

[1 ] PALACIN, M. Rosa. Recent advances in rechargeable battery materials: a chemist’s 

perspective. Chemical Society Reviews, 2009, vol. 38, no 9, p. 2565 -2575. 

[2] LI, Hong, et al. Research on advanced materials for Li ‐ion batteries. Advanced materials, 2009, vol. 

21, no 45, p. 4593 -4607. 

[3] OBROVAC, M. N.; CHEVRIER, V. L. Alloy negative electrodes for Li -ion batteries. Chemical 

reviews, 2014, vol. 114, no 23, p. 11444 -11502. 

[4] ZHANG, Haijiao, et al. Ordered CoO/CMK -3 nanocomposites as the anode materials for lithium -ion 

batteries. Journal of Power Sources, 2010, vol. 195, no 9, p. 2950 -2955. 

[5] CHERIAN, Christie Thomas, et al. Morphologically robust NiFe2O4 nanofibers as high capacity Li -

ion battery anode material. ACS applied materials & interfaces, 2013, vol. 5, no 20, p. 9957 -9963. Nickel (II) atomically dispersed in carbon nitride improving TiO 2

# behavior as photoanode 

Sirlon F. Blaskievicz *1 , Hugo L. S. Santos 1, José Bott 2, Pablo Sebasti án Fern ández 2, Ivo F. Teixeira 1 and 

Lucia H. Mascaro 1.

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de São Carlo s (UFSCar )

São Carlos, SP, Brazil 

> 2

Chemistry Institute , University of Campinas 

Campinas, SP, Brazil 

sirlonblask@gmail.com 

In contrast to observed in conventional methods, like the steam methane reforming, H 2 molecule can be 

satisfactorily generated by electrochemical and photoelectrochemical (PEC) methods . The main advantages 

in methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) is the possibility to obtain H 2 by a greener method ( without large 

CO 2 emissions in comparison to fossil fuel consumption ) [1] . The use of TiO 2 in photo assisted MOR, 

especially as composites or heterojunctions, using materials of high charge mobility, like graphene, carbon 

nanotubes, and poly ( heptazine imide) (PHI) can reach high yields . PHI structure is up to date one of the 

closest structure s from a “truly graphitic” carbon nitride. Obtained from relative l ow -cost precursors [2] ,

PHI shows a suitable band gap for utilization of visible radiation (around 2.7 eV), and also can be used to 

stabi lize transition metals as single sites in its structure, proportioning the maximum utilization of the 

element, in comparison to nanoparticles or clusters [3] . In the present work , we report the synthesis and 

application in MOR of a photoanode based on TiO 2 loaded with PHI(Ni) (PHI structure containing nickel 

II atomically dispersed ). For the synthesis , the TiO 2 paste was loaded with 2.5 % wt. of PHI and PHI(Ni), 

spin coated in clean FTO electrodes at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds, obtaining initially a thin film (95 n m

thickness) , that was thermal annealed at 400 oC for 20 min in air . The photoelectrochemical experiments 

were conducted under UV light (365 nm, 100mWcm -2) using acidic solution ( 0.5 mol L -1 H2SO 4) and 

methanol 13.8 mol L -1. The bare TiO 2 film produced achieved a photocurrent of 109 μA cm -2 at 0.2 V vs. 

RHE . O n the other hand, a significant increase in the activity was observed for the photoanodes containing 

carbon nitride (pure and containing Ni 2+ single atoms) , TiO 2-PHI and TiO 2-PHI( Ni) films reached 185 and 

441 μA cm -2 at the same potential, respectively. The better activity can be explained by two factors: (i) the 

formation of a TiO 2/PHI heterojunction that leads to better charge separation, and (ii) Synergism between 

the heterojunct ion along with the cocatalysis of MOR by Ni 2+ |Ni 3+ species that facilitate the charge transfer 

process. As the TiO 2-PHI( Ni) film proved to be the most promising, i t was studied the influence of the 

thickness of the film , repeating the deposition process . The 30 -layers deposited TiO 2-PHI( Ni) film reached 

a photocurrent of 11 mA cm -2 in 0.2 V vs RHE, the best MOR photoelectrochemical activity of films with 

higher numbers of layers is directly related to the material's absorptivity. While the one -layer TiO 2-PHI(Ni) 

film was almost translucent and, the 30 layers on the other way had a high opacity. Also, the excellent 

stability of this film must to be emphasized , the initial photocurrent decays only a 5% at 120 min of 

measurement, Lastly, in sit u FTIR measurements allows insights about the reaction mechanism , the three 

samples TiO 2, TiO 2-PHI and TiO 2-PHI(Ni) apparently follows the same pathway of oxidizing methanol to 

formaldehyde in dark, and in the UV irradiation higher oxidized products as for mic acid and CO 2 are 

obtained. 

Acknowledgements 

Autors acknowledge financial support from CNPQ Capes, FAPESP/Shell grant #2017/11986 -5 and 

FAPESP/CDMF grant #2013/07296 -2. 

References 

[1] M. Gong, H. Dai, A mini review of NiFe -based materials as highly active oxyg en evolution 

reaction electrocatalysts, Nano Research 8(1) (2015) 23 -39. 

[2] F.K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. Wang, M.J. Bojdys, 

Functional carbon nitride materials —design strategies for electrochemical devices, Nature Revi ews 

Materials 2(6) (2017) 17030. 

[3] X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu, Y. Xie, Single‐atom Pt as co‐ 

catalyst for enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution, Advanced Materials 28(12) (2016) 2427 -2431. A m ultivariate exploratory analysis applied to a simultaneous 

# voltammetric determination of dopamine, ascorbic acid and uric acid 

Th ágor M. Klein , Vladimir Lavayen, Jacqueline A rguello 

Universidade Federal de Rio Grande do Sul, Instituto de Química ,

Por to Alegre, RS, Brasil, 91501 -970 

thagor.k@gmail.com 

Electrochemical techniques offer the advantages of simplicity, low cost, and quickness for analytical 

determination of several biomolecules, including dopamine (DA), ascorbic acid (AA) and uric acid (UA) .

However, due to their very close oxidation potential , to perform a simultaneous determination of these 

analytes usually requires the use of non -conventional electrodes, capable of producing well -defined and 

separated oxidation peaks . In th is case, the us e of mathematical procedures for pattern recognition on 

multivariate data analysis offers a great perspective to solve the drawback of overlapping peaks [1,2 ].

This work shows an exploratory study of analysis by hierarchical clusters (HCA) and principal 

co mponent analysis (PCA) in the simultaneous determinatio n of DA, AA, and UA using differential pulse 

voltammetry. The voltammograms were registered from 0.0 to 0.5 V , at of 5 mV s -1, in a Britton -

Robinson buffer solution (pH = 7 .0 ) using a po tentiostat/galv anostat Autolab PGSTAT302N. The three -

electrode system consisted of a carbon composite electrode ( 4 mm o f diameter) as the working electrode, 

a Pt wire as the counter electrode, and SCE as the reference electrode. The samples were in the ran ge of 

1.5 x 10 -5 – 6.0 x 10 -3 mol L -1, and identified as A1 to A7, from the most diluted to the most concentrated. 

The data was processed using the free software Chemostat for analysis by hierarchical clusters (HCA) and 

principal component analysis (PCA) [3] . The dendrog ram obtained by the HCA in Figure 1, indicates four 

groups of concentrations: the first of the lowest concentration (A1), the second group corresponds to 

samples A3 and A4. The other groups are composed of the most concentrated samples, A5 -A6, and 

finally A7. According to PCA, three main components explain the total variance, PC1 (97.1%), PC2 

(2.8%), and PC3 (0.03%). The PC2 loading showed a small overlap attributed to a slight shift of the 

oxidation potential toward more positive values wit h increasing co ncentrati ons. PC3, on the other hand, 

shows a strong positive influence from the baseline that increases during the additions, which can be 

ascribed to the adsorption of the analytes between voltammetric analyzes, which can be corrected with an 

electrochem ical clea ning step of the electrode. 

Acknowledgments. The authors thank the financial support of the INCT of Bioanalytical (CNPq/INCT), 

CNPQ, and CAPES.   

> Figure 1. Dendrogram obtained by HCA. A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6 and A7 represent the seven successiv e additions
> of the analytes.

References 

[1] Akay C, Gümüsel B, Degim T, Tartilmis S, Cevheroglu. Drug Meta bol Drug Interact. 1999 , 15, 

197‐205. 

[2] Hu Y, Zhao K, Gao F, Zhang J, Xu D, Yang Z, Yu Y, Wu H, Zheng Q, J. Electrochem. Soc. 

2020 , 167 , 027517 

[3] Helfer GA. Bock F, Marder L, Furtado JC, da Costa AB, Ferrão MF, Química Nova, 2015 , 38, 

575 -579. V2O5 as a Promising Cathode Material for Aqueous Magnesium Ion 

# Batteries 

Dimitra Vernardou 1, Charalampos Drosos 2, Benjamin Moss 3, Andreas Kafizas 3,4 

> 1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, School of Engineering, Hellenic Mediterranean 

University , 710 04 Heraklion, Crete, Greece , email dvernardou@hmu.gr 

> 2

Delta Nano – Engineering Solutions Ltd.,  Cypru s

> 3

Department of Chemistry, Molecular Science Research Hub, Imperial College London, White City 

Campus, London, W12 0BZ, U.K 

> 4

Grantham Institute for C limate Change, Imperial College London, South Kensington, London, SW7 2AZ, 

U.K. 

In this work, the electrochemical performance of aerosol -assisted chemical vapour deposited vanadium 

pentoxide cathodes at 600 oC, is presented. The as -grown oxides indicate specific discharge capacity of 

300 mAh g -1 with capacity retention of 92 % after 10000 scans, coulombic efficiency of 100 %, noble 

structural stability and high reversibility. The present study shows the possibility to grow large -area 

magnesium cathode ma terial with extended cycle stability via the utilization of an aqueous electrolyte 

under a corrosive environment. This enhanced performance may be a combination of electrode 

morphology and adherence compared to previous work employing electrode’s growth te mperature at 500 

> o

C. Screen -printed modified elec trode based on gold nano/ microstructures 

# and MoS 2 exfoliated for determination of lead (II) 

Thá gor M. Klein 1, Nathalie Ribeiro Wingert 2, Vladimir Lavayen 1, Jacqueline A rguello 1

> 1

Universidade Federal de Rio Grande do Sul, Instit uto de Química ,

Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil, 91501 -970 

> 2

Universidade Federal da Bahia, Faculdade de Farmácia, Salvador, BA , Brasil, 40170 -115 

thagor.k@gmail.com 

In the last decades, global pollution has experienced a significant increment as a direct consequence of 

anthropogenic activities. Among heavy metal, lead (II) ions are one of the primary pollutants that have a 

cumulative effect and several deleterious implications in human health [1] . As a result, alternati ve 

analytical methods apart from the classic ones needs to be developed, looking for reliability, rapidity, and 

low cost. In this sense, many electrochemical sensors are currently being developed, with great emphasis 

on the preparation of modified electrod es using various types of nanostructured systems [2,3 ]. The 

present work presents a modified electrode consisting of electrodeposited gold, exfoliated MoS 2, and gold 

nanoparticles deposited on the surface of printed carbon electrodes (SPE), Figure 1(A) sho ws the steps 

followed for the modification. Differential pulse anodic stripping voltammetry (DP -ASV) was employed 

to determine lead (II) ions, where the preconcentration step involved a potential applied of -0.8 V for 180 

s under a stirring condition. Afte r 5 s of equilibration time, a differential pulse voltammogram was 

recorded, using a pulse width of 50 mV, a potential ramp of 5 mV, and a scan rate of 40 mV s -1. The 

electrolyte solution consisted of a 0.1 mol L -1 solution of H 2SO 4. Figure 1(B) depicts th e modified and 

unmodified electrodes' responses in the presence of 5 μg mL -1 of lead (II) ions , for comparative purposes. 

The proposed modified electrode, named as SPE/Au/MoS 2/AuNPs, significantly increased the intensity of 

the anodic peak; this can be att ributed to the enlargement of the surface area caused by gold 

nano/microstructures, that also may promote an improvement in electron transfer. 

Acknowledgments. The authors thank the financial support of the INCT of Bioanalytical (CNPq/INCT), 

CNPQ, and CAP ES. 

Fi gure 1 . (A) Schematic representa tion of the modified electrode preparation . (B) Voltammograms 

obtained by DP -ASV at different modified electrodes in the presence of 5 μg mL -1 of lead (II) ions. 

References 

[1] Yu, X. L.; He, Y. Sci. Rep. 2017 , 7:2789 .

[2] Guo, Z.; Li, D. Di; Luo, X. Ke; Li, Y. H ui; Zhao, Q. N.; Li, M. Meng; Zhao, Y. Ting; Sun, T. S huai; 

Ma, C. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017 , 490 , 11 –22. 

[3] Zhang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, D.; Zhao, J.; Liu, J.; Yang, W.; Qu, K. Microchem. J. 2016 , 126 , 280 –

286 .Integration of Permeable Ceramic Baffles in Membrane -less Microbial 

# Fuel Cells 

Iwona Gajda a,* John Greenman a,b , Ioannis A. Ieropoulos a,b*  

> a

Bristol BioEnergy Centre, Bristol Robotics Laboratory, University of the West of England, BS16 1QY, 

UK  

> b

Biological, Biomedical and Analytical Sciences, University of the West of England, BS16 1QY, UK 

> *

Corresponding author:  Iwona.Gajda@uwe.ac.uk 

Microbial fuel cells can directly convert chemical energy in organic waste in to electrical energy , which 

gives an excellent opportunity for renewable energy production , wastewater clean -up and elemental 

recovery. The rapid progress in the field has led to bringing this technology closer to application. One of 

the most promising app roaches to boost MFCs implementation is the modular configuration of multiplied 

MFC units for usable electricity levels [1] . To achieve that , the anode and cathode location within the 

MFC bioreactor must be optimised to boost power performance by keeping the two electrodes in close 

proximity , i.e on the opposite sides of the Nafion membrane [2] . A cost -effective alternative to Nafion 

incudes porous ceramic materials as ion exchange membrane [3] where the permeability of the ceramic 

body allows for good ionic conductivity and sufficient cathode hydration. 

This work presents the development of a novel, simplified design of a membrane -less MFC using a

ceramic plate as a porous , permeable baffle between both electrodes that share the same electrolyte. A 

fully submerged anode and partially exposed to air cathode we re attached to either side of the ceramic 

plate in order to keep the minimum distance , while maintaining electrical separation to maximise the 

output . Such a design was investigated in individual (large scale , 300 mm height ) and stacked (medium 

scale , 100mm height ) MFCs . Finally, miniaturis ed membrane -less reactors (30mm height) were 

compare d with identical membrane -based MFCs where the ceramic functio ns as a membrane , fully 

separating the anolyte from the open to air cathode (Fig.1) . This is to understand the role of the ceramic 

separator in a simplified and optimised construction for primarily power production in both membrane -

based and membrane -less designs .

Results show ed that a single large -scale MFC constructed from a terracotta floor tile produced up to 3. 8

mW (1.9W/m 3) and successfully operated a small -scale dc motor while the cumulative power production 

from the medium -scale 6-unit stack reache d up to 13 mW of power (6.5W/m 3) over 270 days of 

operation . A m iniaturised membrane -less design showed similar or slightly increased raw (actual) power 

output up to 0.84mW (21W/m 3) in comparison to the membrane -based configuration that produced 0.75 

(37.5  W/m 3) (Fig.1) which makes it a promising application for the membrane -less MFC stack s.       

> Figure 1. Miniaturised MFC swith ceramic plate functioning as a membrane in a membrane based design and as a
> permeable baffle in a membr ane -less configuration. Power output comparison with error bars (n=3) between the two
> configurations .

Results showed increased performance with the scale -down of the reactor size and long -term stability ,

which is promising for future scale -up . The integrat ion of ceramic baffles in membrane -less MFCs shows 

similar performance to membrane -based units . Scaling down MFC reactors in vertical height is of interest 

for the future development of multi -modular cascade systems maximis ing the number of modules that ca n

be fitted within a single cascade therefore increasing the overall, usable power output of the stack. 

[1] Ieropoulos IA, et al. Environ Sci Water Res Technol 2016;2:336 –43. 

[2] Min B, Logan BE. Environ Sci Technol 2004;38:5809 –14. 

[3] Behera M, Ghangr ekar MM. Water Sci Technol 2011;64:2468. Impact of Mass Transport and other Parameters on the Measured 

# Performance of Oxygen Evolving Catalysts 

Anna K. Mechler ,1,2 Praveen V. Narangoda, 2 Marc F. Tesch, 2 Robert Schlögl 2,3 

> 1

RWTH Aachen, AVT.ERT, Forckenbeckstr. 51, 52074 Aachen, Germany  

> 2

Max -Pl anck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion, Stiftstr. 34 – 36, 45470 Mülheim, Germany  

> 3

Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, Faradayweg 4, 14195 Berlin, Germany 

Anna.Mechler@ avt.rwth -aachen.de 

The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a criti cal reaction for successful energy conversion. For instance, 

in water electrolyzers it predominately determines the energy demand for the production of green 

hydrogen. An optimization of this reaction is therefore very desirable. Electrocatalysts for the O ER are 

typically measured as thin films (either made from powders or otherwise deposited), and for laboratory 

screening the rotating disc electrode (RDE) is the classical characterization technique. 

The advantage of the RDE is supposed to be the controlle d mass -transport towards the electrode . The 

OER is typically considered to be only little mass transport dependent, especially for the educts that are 

either water or OH -, both available in excess. However, first reports indicate that there might be a 

limi tation to this assumption, and also the transport of the produced O 2 can be a limiting factor. [1,2] 

Here, we show the impact of mass transport in terms of rotation rate in the RDE and compare those 

results to complementary measurements in a n electrochemical flow cell with vari ous flow velocit ies. We

will show that the use of a flow cell can improve the mass transport especially at higher current densities. 

Additionally, we address the importance of O2-removal on thin layer electrodes with different 

hydrophobicity . These can for instance be achieved by the addition of different binders, i.e. ionomers that 

are used to stabilize the layer mechanically. However, besides affecting the hydrophobicity, we show that 

different binders can influence the electrochemical behavior by their o wn properties and current response. 

These results will illustrate how different experimental parameters can be interconnected and point out 

their influence on the measured activity of an electrocatalyst. 

References 

[1] A.C. Garcia, M.T.M. Koper, ACS Catal.  8 (2018) 9359 –9363. 

[2] A. El Arrassi, Z. Liu, M.V. Evers, N. Blanc, G. Bendt, S. Saddeler, D. Tetzlaff, D. Pohl, C. Damm, 

S. Schulz, K. Tschulik, J. Am.  Chem. Soc. 141 (2019) 9197 –9201. RuO 2-WO 3/PAni : A Novel Nano composite for Energy Storage 

# Applic ations 

Sergio Humberto Domingues , Caroline B rambilla de Aquino 

MackGraphe – Graphene and Nanomaterials Research Center, Mackenzie Presbyterian University 

Rua d a Consolação , 9 30 – CEP 01302 -907 São Paulo , SP , Brazil 

shdomingues@mackenzie.br 

Nanocomposites based on conducting polymers (CPs) and m ixed transitio n-metal oxides (MTMO) have 

be en shown distinguish properties, e. g. hig h spec ific capacitance and stability values. MTMOs, present 

multipl e cations valence , which inc rease th e electrochemical activity and the conductivity. Among meta l

oxides, ruthenium oxide (RuO 2) has higher capacitive response, but it is expensive and toxic, reducing 

sever ely its application. 1 In this way, we combined ruth enium oxide wi th tungste n oxide (WO 3), a 

transition metal oxide with unique electrochemical properties, in order to decrease the amount of

ruthenium in the mixed oxide obtaining the RuO 2-WO 3. Combining this structure with one of the most 

studied conducting polymers ( polyaniline - PAni) , is an efficient tool to improve the polymeric 

conjugation and enhance the electroc hemic al per formance of this system. In this way , we present the 

synthesis , cha racterization, and the electrochemical performance of RuO 2-WO 3/P Ani nanocomposite. The 

synthe sis the nanocomposite was performed by the in -situ chemical polymerization of aniline monomers 

in the presence of the presence of the p reviously synthesized MTMO. All the synthesized materials were 

characterized by spectroscopy and morpholo gic techniques , in order to ensure the suc cess of the 

synthesis. Comparing the electrochemical performance of the RuO 2-WO 3/PAni to the neat PAni , we 

noticed a considerable variation in the capacitance values of 930 mF cm -2 for the nanocomposit e and 100 

mF cm -2 to the polymer. Once the good electrochemical performance for the Ru O2-WO 3/PAni was 

attested, we prepared som e symmetrical energy storage devices, using the nanocomposites as electrodes. 

Theses devices showed good specific capacitance val ues an d also the good stability. Finally, these results 

allow us to say that by the synergism of all the materials we were able to develop a novel nanocomposite 

with good capacitive per formance. The a uthors acknowledges the Mackenzie Presbiterian Universi sty 

(UPM), FAPESP (2018/02142 -0, 2017/21988 -5 and SPEC 2012/50259 -8), CNPq (403544/2016 -5), 

Materials Chemistry Group (GQM – UFPR), LNNano and INCT of Carbon Nanomaterials. 

1 – Yuan, C. et al. Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 2014. 53 (6): p. 1488 -1504. Circumneutral concentrated ammonium acetate water in salt electrolyte 

# and argan shell derived carbon for green supercapacitor 

Mohammad Said EL Halimi a,b* , F ederico Poli a , Edoardo Jun Mattioli a , Matteo Calvaresi a ,

Tar ik Chafik b, Alberto Zanelli c, Francesca Soavi a,c 

a :Alma Mater Studiorum -University of Bologna, Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, Bologna, 

Italy 

b : Abdelmalek Esaadi University , Department of Chemistry, Tangier, Morocco 

c. Istituto per la Sintesi Organica e la, Fotoreattività ISOF‐ CNR Bologna, Italy 

Corresponding author: Mohammad Said El Halimi, email: mohammad.elhalimi@gmail.com 

Supercapacitors (SC) are playing a central role in the transition to a green economy based on renewable energy 

sources and electric vehicles. The exponentially growing market of supercapacitor requires to replace flammable, 

volatile and toxic chemicals such as acetonitrile by cheap and environmentally friendly components. 

Therefore, valuable strategies are the use of aque ous electrolytes and bioderived components such as biochar -

based carbon that enable the valorization of wastes in a circular economy approach. Here we report about a 

physicochemical study and electrochemical characterization of a supercapacitor based on Ar gan fruit shell derived 

carbon electrode and a non -toxic super -concentrated aqueous electrolyte, i.e. a Water In Salt (WIS) solution of 

ammonium acetate. 

Indeed, the utilization of WIS enables high voltage which are the main limitation of aqueous based ele ctrolyte. 

The reported SC featured up to 47 F/g of specific capacitance and 4 Wh/Kg of specific energy at a temperature 

room temperature 

To prove the practical applicability of this kind of electrolyte, electrochemical measure at into a wide range of 

temp eratures (from -10 °C to 80°C), have been performed. This preliminary work aims at paving the way towards 

the design of novel green SCs based on non -dangerous aqueous based electrolyte and sustainable carbon sources. 

Aknowledgement s

This work was funded by the Italian Ministers of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation -Italy under the 

Italy -South Africa joint Research Programme 2018 -2020 and by the bilateral project Italy – Marocco –CNR -

CNRST n. 7974 "Green Supercapacitors" 

References 

1. Wen Jun XIe; Zhen Zhang; Yi Quin Gao , J. Phis. Chem , 2016 , 120 , 2343 -2351 

2. Zhujie Li et al. , J. Phis. Chem , 2018 , 122 , 23917 -23924 

3. Maria R. Lukatskaya et al. , Energy Environ. Sci. , 2018 , 11 , 2876 -2883 

4. Dahbi M, J. Mater. Chem. A. 5 (2017) 9917 –9928 

5. Chafik, WO/2012/050411, (2012) 

6. Boujibar, J Environmental Chemical Engineering 6 (2018) 1995 –2002 Air Stable Black Phosp horus -based Cathodes for Na -ion Batteries 

Jéssica E. S. Fonsaca ,1 Sergio H. Do mingues, 2 Elisa S. O rth, 1 Aldo J. G. Zarbin 1*

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Paraná ( UFPR ) – Curitiba - PR; 2Graphene and Nano -

materials Research Center – Mackgraphe – Mackenzie Presbyterian University – Sao Paulo – SP .

je. fonsaca@gmail.com , a ldozarb in@ ufpr.br *

Notable progress in the field of electrochemical energy storage devices has been achieved due to the 

increasing exploitation of black phosphorus (BP) structure and properties.  BP is highly unstable under O2

exposure, which seriously limits its manipulation and consequent application. Thus, we have protected 

BP with polyaniline (PANI), leading to a stable and reliable material targe ted for energy storage devices. 

For this purpose, BP -polymeric materials were synthesized through the liquid/liquid interfacial method ,

as previously described, 1,2 leading to thin, transparent and homogenous green films of BP /PAN I

nanocomposites . After  Ram an spectroscopy confirm ing the coexistence of both materials in the resulting 

film , both bare and capped materials were exposed to the same ambient conditions and evaluated through 

different techniques.  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)  images and Raman s pectra indicated the 

beginning of degradation of the uncapped material (without PAN I) with only 3 days of exposure , while 

BP /PANI films ha ve taken up to 60 days for the same process to begin, indicating a material 1500% more 

stable than the bare one. Elect rochemical response and stability of BP /PANI nanocomposites were 

evaluated through cyclic voltammetry (CV) and charge -discharge (CD) studies ( NaCl 0.5 mol L -1 pH 3 ), 

in order to evaluate energy storage properties. 3 Films of BP/PANI were evaluated and compa red to pure 

PANI and BP , under air and inert atm (N 2(g) ). CVs r esults have shown that all materials have the same 

behaviour after 200 cycles either with or without N 2(g) purge. BP is degraded right after the first cycle, 

evidencing the expected low stabili ty. BP/PANI, however, has evidenced the preservation of BP even 

after the 2 00 cycles under air , which was confirmed through post -characterization s. CD studies were 

performed from 0. 5 A g -1 to 3 A g -1, reaching capacities up to 20 0 mAh g -1 at 0.5 A g -1 rate with a 

coulombic efficiency of 100% , without compromising the integrity of BP in the films. To further explore 

the performance of the materials and understand the ion behaviour during the process , we analysed the 

electrodes through electrochemical impedan ce spectro scopy (EIS) . In general, the obtained Nyqu ist plots 

evidenced a lower ed resistance and impro ved diffusion properties of BP/PANI composite compared to 

neat polymer , corroborating with the best results verified in CD analysis . Aiming to investigate the 

competition betwe en H + and Na + in BP intercalation dur ing the electroche mical processes, we have also 

analysed the samples in pure 1 mol L-1 HCl ( i.e. without N a). Unlike the previous case , s imilar profiles 

were found for BP /PANI and PANI , indicating equal perfo rmances towar ds H+ insertion/expulsion 

regardless of BP presence . Thus, we can attest the interference and pa rticipati on of Na + during B P/PANI 

processes in NaCl pH 3 . FIGURE 1 summarize s all described results. Overall, this work provides new 

pos sibilities heading for the development of oxygen friendl y thin films to build new BP -based electrodes 

for sodium aqueous batteries .                          

> FIGURA 1. SEM images of BP/PANI composite and its capacity values over cycl es.
> Acknowledgements: UFPR, CNPq, CAPES, INC T-Nanocarbon, PhosAgro/UNESCO/IUPAC, L’Oréal -UNESCO -
> ABC and FAPESP (SPEC project 2012/50259 -8) , MackGraphe .
> References: [1] Salvatierra, R. et. al. Chem. Mat. 22 ( 2010 )5222. [2] Fonsaca ,J. E. S. et. al. Sci. Rep .7 (2017)
> 10165. [3] Fonsaca ,J. E. S .et .al. Chem. Comm. 56 (2020) 802 .

# Alternative Me -N-C based Carbon Foams as Fe -free and non -PGM 

# Electrocatalysts 

Suzuki Sho yo , Co -Albert Mufundirwa , Kazunari Sasaki , Akari Hayashi , Stephen M. Lyth 

Kyu shu University 

744, Motooka, nishi -ku, Fukuoka -shi, 819 -0395 Japan 

suzuki.shoyo.755@s.kyus hu -u.ac.jp 

There is a demand for reducing the environmental load of automobiles to solve the current 

environmental problems. Fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) which use hydrogen as fuel emit no carbon 

dioxide, and have already been commercialized. plati num -based materials are widely used as oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) catalysts. However, their high cost and limited durability impedes large -scale 

implementation. Until now, non -platinum group metal (non -PGM) Fe and N doped carbon (Fe -N-C) 

catalysts hav e achieved promising ORR activity [1]. However, these Fe -N-C catalysts still suffer from 

poor durability, due to the formation of reactive peroxide radicals as a side reaction during the ORR. 

Meanwhile, the use of Co species avoids the production of such r adicals, potentially preserving the 

electrocatalyst [2]. Therefore, in this study we inves tigate the dependence of ORR activity on a variety of 

different metal ions by synthesizing alternative Me -N-C carbon foam electrocatalysts (Me = Co, Ni, Sn). 

Pt -fre e electrocatalysts were synthesized from nitrogen -doped carbon foams (N -C) and various met al 

salt and small molecule precursors. Porous nitrogen -doped carbon foams with large surface area were 

made in -house. These were adsorbed with metal acetate and then heated in inert atmosphere, followed by 

acid washing to remove metallic phases. Finally, h eat treatment under ammonia was performed. The 

effect of heat treatment temperature and metal loading on the microstructure and porosity was evaluated. 

The resulting catalysts were evaluated for catalytic activity using rotating -ring disk electrode voltamm etry 

(RRDE) in acid. 

For Co -N-C electrocatalysts it was found that heat treatment of the nitrogen -doped carbon foam support 

has a significant effect on catalyst per formance, largely due to changes in surface area and porosity. The 

metal loading also has a strong effect on the performance, with an optimum Co loading of 0.1 wt% 

resulting in an onset potential of 0.8 VRHE and a half -wave potential of around 0.65 VRHE. D ifferent 

metal ions were also systematically investigated, and it was found that Sn is hig hly promising as an 

alternative to Fe in non -PGM electrocatalysts. These instructions are an example of what a properly 

prepared meeting abstract should look like. Pr oper column and margin measurements a re indicated. 

References 

[1] Albert Mufundirwa et al., Journal of Power Sources, 2018, 375, 244 -254. 

[2] Qingqing Cheng et al., Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 485 -493. Influence of pH and current density on the generation of oxidizing 

# species in the peroxicoagulation process with gas diffus ion cathode 

José de Jesús Treviño -Reséndez 1, Alejandro Medel Reyes 1, Norberto Grajales Guzmán 1,

Yunny Meas 1

> 1

Centro de I nvestigación y Desarrollo Tecnológico en Electroquímica , S.C., Parque Tecnológico, 

Querétaro S/N, Sanfandila, Pedro Escobedo, Querétaro, C.P. 76730. 

Corresponding author: yunnymeas @cideteq.mx 

Abstract 

Peroxicoagulation process combines electrochemical generation of ferrous ions (Fe 2+ ) and 

hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) for the production of hydroxyl radicals ( ●OH) in acidic medium by Fenton 

reaction (eq. 1 -3), to oxidize organic pollutants in wastewater (Nidheesh, 2018; Brill as et al ., 1997). 

Nevertheless, not all the effluents present acidic conditions, requiring previous acidification before its 

treatment by peroxicoagulation process. This requirement could limit its application for the treatment of 

large amounts of water du e to the increased demand for chemicals . Also, the current density could affect 

the pH of the medium, so it is important to know the influence of the pH and current density on the 

production of the different oxidizing species during the peroxicoagulation p rocess. 

𝐹𝑒  → 𝐹𝑒 +2 + 2𝑒 − (1) 

𝑂 2 + 2𝐻 + + 2𝑒 − → 𝐻 2𝑂 2 (2 )

𝐹𝑒 +2 + 𝐻 2𝑂 2 → 𝐹𝑒 +3 + 𝑂𝐻 −+ .𝑂𝐻  (3 )

In this research, H 2O2 and ●OH production ge nerated by peroxicoagulation were assessed. A two 

electrodes (3.1416 cm 2) electrochemical cell without division (50 mL of solution volume) was used, 

applying current densities of 3. 2, 9. 5, 15. 9 and 22. 3 mA cm -2 for 30 min of electrolysis, in a synthetic 

soluti on with initial pH of 3 to 9 and 0.05 M Na 2SO 4 as supporting electrolyte. For H 2O2 generation 

assessment, a Ti/Pt anode and a graphite cloth -polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) gas diffusion electrode 

(GDE) as cathode were used . For ●OH generation assessment, an iron plate anode and a GDE as cathode 

were used. During all the experiments, the GDE was fed with pure oxygen at a flow rate of 1 L min -1.

H2O2 was analyzed by UV/Vis spectroscopy using a HACH DR -6000 spectrophotometer via the 

Ti (IV) oxysulfate method (λ = 406 nm) . For the ●OH detection, coumarin (C 9H6O2) was used as a probe 

compound, which reacts with ●OH resulting in the forma tion of the fluorescent adduct 7-hydroxycoumarin 

(C 9H6O3). The detection and quantification of 7 -hydroxycoumarin were carried out using an AGILENT 

Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer (λ ex = 340 nm, λ em = 456 nm and slit 5). 

The results indicated that the increment of current density has a positive effect on the production 

of H 2O2 at pH 3. However, increasing pH from 3 to 9 reduced almost 50% the H 2O2 at 22.3 mA cm -2.

Concerning ●OH radicals production, its concentration decreased with increasing pH, which is 

consistent with the decrement of H 2O2 in the GDE cathode at higher pH. On the other hand, the increase in 

current density decreased the ●OH radicals generation. T he highest production an d stability of ●OH radicals 

during the 30 min of electrolysis was obtained with the lowest applied current density. 

This study reflects the importance of the pH solution and the current density in the generation of 

H2O2 and ●OH radicals, making the app lication of peroxicoagulation process plausible fo r the treatment of 

wastewater. 

Reference s

Brillas E., Sauleda R., Casado J. (1997) Peroxi -coagulation of aniline in acidic medium using an oxygen 

diffusion cathode. J. Electrochem. Soc. 144:2374 -2379. 

Nidhess P.V. (2018). Removal of organic pollutants by peroxicoagulation. Env iron. Chem. Lett. 16:1283 -

1292 .Modification of the Carbon Fiber Microelectrodes with Carbon Black 

# for Dopamine and Serotonin Simultaneous Detection 

Wojciech Mazurkiewicz , Magdalena Kundys -Siedlecka , Martin Jönsson -Niedziółka, Emilia Witkowska 

Nery 

Institute of Physical Chemistry of Polish Academy of Sciences 

Warsaw, Kasprzaka 44/52 

wmazurkiewicz15@gmail.com 

Adequate concentration of neurotransmitters in the neural structures is crucial for the proper functioning of 

the whole body. Due to the small size of brain structur es and rapid nature of the neurotransmitters’ 

transport 1 microelectrodes has been proposed as a suitable de vice for their measurement. 

Carbon black (CB) is known for its excellent properties toward neurotransmitter detection 3. Deposition of 

CB on carbon fiber has until now mainly been done by chemical vapor deposition 2. In this study the 

possibility of CB deposition on microelectrodes from sol -gel solution was investigated. 

Carbon fiber microdis k electrodes (CFMEs) with a 7 μm tip have been prepared . Electroass isted deposition 

under negative potential and d ip -coating deposition from CB suspension in a polymeric matrix were tested. 

Scanning electron microscopy was applied for the analysis of the tip structure (Fig. 1) . Cyclic voltammetry 

and differential pulse vo ltammetry measurements of dopamine (DA), serotonin (5 -HT), uric acid (UA) and 

ascorbic acid (AA ) were performed . Phosphate buffer solution (PBS) and Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle 

Medium (DMEM) were used as a background solution to mimic the cell culture conditions . The d istinction 

of overlapping DA and 5-HT signals 4 was the primary objective along with the inter fer ence and stability 

study in DMEM as secondary objectives. 

During the electro assisted deposition , a thin layer on the surface of the electrode was produced , while after 

dip -coating a shell with multiple cracks was observed (Fig.1) . Test m easurements indicate stable 

microelectrode behavior of the CFMEs even a few weeks after preparation. Complete separation of DA and 

5-HT signals on CFMEs with deposited CB was not achieved, although a new peak overlapping with the 

DA /5-HT peak was observed. CV s tud ies showed that DA can be measured simultaneously with UA and 

AA without interference. The DA signal was linear in the concentration range 0 .1 - 10 μM in PBS (R 2=0 .99) 

and DMEM (R 2=0 .96) on bare CFMEs, however on modified CFMEs signal was linear only in the range 

0.1 - 1 μM in PBS and random in DMEM . 5 -HT measurement s showed low reproducibility on bare and 

modified CFMEs. 

Detection of DA and 5 -HT on CFMEs with deposited CB particles was achieved , however , the appearance 

of an additional peak might indicate incomplete cover ing of the electrode s’ surface. Further investigation 

of proper CB deposition is essential. Other catalysts should be taken into consideration. 

Fi gure 1. SEM images of the microdis k electrodes’ tips: a) bare CFME during polishing b) CFME after 

electroassisted deposition of CB c) CFME after dip -coating deposition of CB 

Authors acknowledge financial support of the National Centre for Research and Development under the grant 

LIDER/38/01381/L -9/17/NCBR/2018, and EWN would like to also thank the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP), 

from which she was supported through START programme and National Science Centre Poland for the MINIATURA 

grant NCN 2017/01/X/ST4/00463. 

EWN would l ike to thank Ann -Sofie Cans (Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University) for the training 

on fabrication of carbon fiber microelectrodes                 

> 1. Clements, J. D. Trends Neurosci. 19 , 163 –171 (1996).
> 2. Dong, J. et al .Compos. Sci. Technol. 149 , 75 –80 (2017).
> 3. Celebanska, A., Tomaszewska, D., Lesniewski, A. & Opallo, M. Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 , 4417 –4422 (2011).
> 4. Zhou, J., Sheng, M., Jiang, X., Wu, G. & Gao, F. Sensors (Switzerland) 13 , 14029 –14040 (2013).
> 5μm 5μm 10 μm

# Characterizing and mitigating the degradation of oxidized cathodes 

# during capacitive deionization cycling 

Rana Uwayid †, Nicola Seraphim‡, Eric N Guyes†, David Eisenberg‡, Matthew E Suss*, † 

†Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and ‡ Schulich Faculty of Chem istry, Technion – Israel Institu te of 

Technology, Haifa, Israel 

sranauw@campus.technion.ac.il 

The surface chemistry of carbon electrodes plays an important role in capacitive deionization (CDI) 

cell performance. Applying appropriate surface chemical treatment to CDI electrodes results in an 

improvement of maximum salt adsorption capacity (mSAC) 1 and charge efficiency 2, yet the performance 

of the treated electrodes often decreases significantly during long -term cycling, and the surface grou p

degradation mechanisms are not well understood. We here study the performance reduction of an 

oxidized cathode i n order to investigate the degradation mechanism and enhance the stability of the 

treated cathode during long -term operation. 

Single -pa ss CDI tests were conducted with flow -through electrodes, operated in constant voltage 

mode (1V) . We investigate the degradat ion of a cathode treated with nitric acid (OC) and an as -received 

cathode (AC) for a feed water containing 20mM of NaCl salt for ch arged to equilibrium for 100 cycles. 

Further, direct acid -base titrations and surface chemistry analysis were performed before and a fter CDI 

cycle test ing in order to diagnose degradation mechanisms. The cathode oxidation allows for an increase 

in the cell ’s initial mSAC from 8.2 mg/g electrode to 15.7 mg/g electrode . However, mSAC decreases during 

cycling to 11.2 mg/g electrode by the 100th cycl e ( Figure 1a). As can be seen in Figure 2b , OC post -

experiment titration curve is shifted to the right relative to the OC pre -experimen t curve . This latter 

observation indicates functional group loss, due to a lower concentration of negative ly charge d functional 

groups in the micropore relative to the OC before CDI experiments .

Figure 1 - (a) Measured mSAC of cell wi th OC and cell with AC . The feed concentration is 20mM NaCl ,

the charging voltage 1 V, and discharge voltage 0 V. (b) Results of direct titration measurements for OC 

pre - and post -experiment. Also shown is the titration applied to a blank solution without electrode .

References 

1. Gao, X. et al. Complementary surface charge for enhanced capacitive deionization. Water Res. 

92 , 275 –282 (2016). 

2. Cohen, I., Avraham, E., Noked, M., Soffer, A. & Aurbach, D. Enhance d charge efficiency in 

capacitive deionization achieved by surface -treated electrodes and by means of a third electrode. 

J. Phys. Chem. C 115 , 19856 –19863 (2011). Interfacial Degradation on Carbon and Non -Carbon Surfaces during 

# the Oxygen Evolution Reaction 

Hansaem Jang 1, Sunki Chung 1, Jaeyoung Lee 1,2 ,* 

> 1

Electrochemical Reaction & Technology Laboratory (ERTL), School of Earth Sciences and 

Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 

123 Cheomdangwagi -ro, Buk -gu, Gwangju 61005, South Korea 

> 2

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, GRI, GIST, 

123 Cheomdangwagi -ro, Buk -gu, Gwangju 61005, South Korea 

> *

jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr 

The oxy gen evolution reaction (OER) is the anodic half reaction occurring within a water electrolyzer. Its 

oxidative condition could negatively affect the surface s of materials cons isting of an anodic compartment .

Choice of the materials is strongly dependent upo n their electrical conductivity and (electro )chemical 

stability. Carbon and titanium are the most practical examples. However, they could also be deteriorated 

by the prolonged operation of the OER due to accumulated stress. Considering the over potential re quired 

for the OER, carbon could be corroded to give carbon oxides and titanium could be passivated to form an 

insulating oxide layer. These interfacial degradation phenomena would lead to the physical loss or 

electrical disconnection of the catalyst from the surfaces, thereby decreasing electrocatalytic 

performances. For the long -term functioning of the OER , the interfacial degradation must be 

comprehended to avoid it . In this study, we deploy operando techniques of surface -enhanced infrared 

absorption spe ctroscopy (SEIRA) and controlled polarization tests in order to simultaneously observe the 

interfacial degradation during the OER. In advance of it , we elaborate up on the fabrication procedure of 

structures idealized for the operando observations. We synth esize iridium -embedded carbon nanofibers 

and iridium oxide -electrodeposited titanium foils. We disclose that during the functioning of the OER, 

carbon surfaces are irreversibly impacted whereas the interfacial degradation on titanium surfaces could 

be circ umvented. Our results highlight that the future research on materials for OER compartments should 

aim at the surface engineering of non -carbon surfaces by which sufficient conductivity and stability can 

be imparted. The material selection process can be fa cilitated by the methodologies suggested in this 

study. Lithium Polysulfide -Based Electrolytes for Li Metal Anodes 

Chen -Zi Zhao , Xin -Bing Cheng , Qiang Zhang* 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University 

Beijing 100084, China 

zhang -qiang@mails. tsinghua.edu.cn , zcz15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Li metal batteries such as lithium –sulfur ( Li –S) and lithium -air batteries have been strongly considered as 

the promising candidates for the next -generation energy storage devices. Unfortunately, as the resul t of 

the notorious Li dendrite grow th inherent in these batteries upon re peated charge/discharge cycling , the 

concomitant serious safety concerns and low Coulombic efficiency have retarded their practical 

applications. 

Herein, we report a facile but effe ctive strategy to in -situ construct a stable and compact solid electrolyte 

interphase (SEI) layer to protect Li deposits by the synergetic effect of Li 2S5-based ternary -salt (LiTFSI –

LiNO 3–Li 2S5) electrolyte. LiTFSI affords a high Li conductivity of the ele ctrolyte in a working battery. 

The reactions between LiNO 3 and Li 2S5 induce Li 2SO 3 formation, which is favorable to build protective 

SEI layer. Compared with routine LiTFSI mono -salt electrolyte, the Li 2S5-based ternary -salt electrolyte 

renders Li metal an ode (1) dendrite -free morphology, (2) improved Coulombic efficiency (94% compared 

with 60% in routine electrolyte), (3) suppressed polarization, and (4) prolonged lifespan (80 h compared 

with 20 h). These superior characteristics are attributed to the enha nced stability of the SEI layer by 

deliberately introducing the Li 2S5 polysulfide as a pre -existing precursor, which, however, is always 

considered as an undesirable intermediate in Li –S batteries. Further development of this electrolyte 

enables practical applications for rechargeable lithium metal batteries, especially Li –S batteries. 

References 

[1] Zhao C -Z; Zhao B -C; Yan C; Zhang X -Q; Huang J -Q; Mo Y -F; Xu X -X; Li H; Zhang Q. Energy 

Storage Mater. 2020 , 24, 75 

[2 ] Zhao C -Z; Zhang Q . Trends in Chem. 201 9, 1, 709. 

[3 ] Zhao C -Z; Cheng X -B; Zhang R; Peng H -J; Huang J -Q; Ran R; Huang Z -H; Wei F; Zhang Q. Energy 

Storage Mater. 2016 , 3, 77. 

[4 ] Hou L -P; Yuan H ; Zhao C -Z; Xu L; Zhu G -L; Nan H -X; Cheng X -B; Liu Q -B; He C -X; Huang J -Q; 

Zhang Q. Energy Storage Ma ter. 2020 , 25: 436 -442. 

[5] Yuan H; Nan H -X; Zhao C -Z; Zhu G -L; Lu Y; Cheng X -B; Liu Q -B; He C -X; Huang J -Q; Zhang Q. 

Batt eries Supercaps 2020 , 3, 1. Open Circu it Potential and Ionic Transport of Neutralization Re dox 

# Flow Battery with Two Hydrogen Electrodes 

Loktionov P .A .1, Konev D.V. 1,2 , Modestov A.D. 4, Antipov A. E. 1,2, Kartashova N. V. 4, Glazkov A.T. 1,2 ,

Vorotyntsev M.A. 1,2,3,4 

(1) Institute for Prob le ms of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 

Chernogolovka, Russia 

(2) D. I. Mendeleev Russian University of Chemical Technology, Moscow, Russia 

(3) M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 

(4) Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemis tr y and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, 

Moscow, Russia 

e-mail:  paul.lokti onov@gmail. com 

The development of low -cost and effective energy storage systems for renewable energy sources is an 

essential problem of the modern energy industry. At the moment, redox flow battery (RFB) is one of the 

most promis ing technology to e nergy storage in distributed energy grid. However, up to date, even the 

most studied vanadium RFBs have quite high cost due to the expensive vanadium electrolytes. In this 

work, a novel chemical power source - neutralization RFB with two hy drogen electrodes i s developed. 

This RFB uses cheap and environmentally benign electrolytes - solutions of acid, alkali, and salt (fig. 1). 

Fig ure 1 – Scheme of neutralization RFB with two hyd rogen electrodes 

In the course of the discharging process, acidic and alkaline solutions ar e n eutralized due to hydrogen 

evolution/oxidation electrode re actions, while the salt solution at the middl e compartment becomes more 

concentrated as a result of ionic fluxes of cations and anions. Thus, the overall reactio n H 3O+ + OH - = 2 

H2O gives 79.9 k J p er 1 mole of H 2O. 

Several pH -dependent electrode reactions can be used as redox -component of neutralizat ion RFB. We 

consider the hydrogen gas evolution/oxidation process for that purpose since the gaseous component 

(bein g the product of the cathode proc ess and the reagent of the anodic one) can be easily transferr ed 

from cathodic to anodic compartments of th e proposed cell. Anion and cation exchange membranes 

separating positive and negative electrodes from middle space a re to prevent the leak hydroxoniu m a nd 

hydroxide ions and provide the ionic current of their co unterions across the cell. 

Energy can be ob tained from neutralization of acid and alkaline solutions and saved employing the 

reverse process with a minimal los s if hydrogen evolution reaction and hydrogen oxidation reaction is 

carried out on reversible h ydrogen electrodes in both acidic and alkalin e medium. 

The theoretical energy density of neutralization RFB using 4 M electrolyte solutions is 44 W h/L [1]. 

Reported energy density and efficiency of existing neutralization batteries are modest compared t o those 

of traditional RFBs [1, 2 ]. Advantages of proposed neutralization battery over analogs are the use of 

hydrogen as a self -supplied redox -co mpo nent and two -membrane cell concept without bipolar membrane. 

The real energy output for discharge and round -trip energy efficiency of the cell has be en d etermined for 

the laboratory -scale setup of 4 cm 2 membrane electrode assembly. 

Acknowledgements : The work was supported by Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of 

Russia. Project Number X-2020 -010 .

References :

1 W. J. van Egmond et al, Performance of an environ mentally benign acid base flow batt ery at high 

energy density, Int J Energy Re, 2018 42:1524 –1535 

2 A. Sáez et al, An Acid -Base Electrochemical Flow Battery as energy sto rage system, Int J Hydrogen 

Energ, 2016 41: 17801 -17806 Fe -N-C electrocatalysts f or oxygen reduction reaction : facile synthesis 

# strategy and stable performance in alkaline enviro nmen t

Freitas W. a, D’Epifanio A. a, Placidi, E. b, Arciprete, F. c, Mecheri, B .a 

> a

Department of Chemical Science and Technology , Univer sity of Rome Tor Vergata , Rome , Ital y.  

> b

Department of Physics, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy  

> c

Department of Physics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Ital y

Via della Ricerca Scientifica , 00133 Roma 

e-mail: williane.freitas@uni roma2.it 

Pl atinum group metal -free electrocatalysts have shown promising features for catalyzing oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode of different types of fuel cells [1 -3]. However, high costs for 

synthesis, stability and activity issues under operating co nditions, still limit their applicability. In our 

approach, Fe -N-C catalysts were synthesized from a nitrogen and iron wet impregnation of black pearls 

followed by pyrolysis steps. Three different nitrogen sources (dopamine, imidaz ole and benzimidazole), 

and two different pyrolysis atmospheres (Ar and NH 3) were used. The obtained materials were 

characterized in terms of structure, morphology, surface chemistry, thermal and electrochemical 

properties. Electrodes with a high porosity and accessible active sit es were obtained tailoring the 

synthesis parameters, as indicated by Raman and X -ray photoelectron spectroscopies , cyclic (CV) and 

linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) with rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE). In particular, we found th at 

the pyrolysis step unde r ammonia flow led to high double layer capacitance (CDL) electrodes (Figure 1a) 

and the use of imidazole as nitrogen -rich organic precursor improved ORR activity as compared to 

control Pt -based ones. In addition, the stabi lity tests were carried out to ev aluate the electrochemical 

active surface area (ECSA) changes after cycling 1000 times at a scan rate of 500 mVs -1, with acquisition 

of CVs and LSV curves at 5 mVs -1 after every 200 cycles (Fig ure 1b) in alkaline pH, and th e activity to 

ORR from RRDE exper iments in the same measurements conditions with rotation speed of 1600 rpm 

(Figure 1c). The tests shown a stable activity after 1000 cycles of the electrocatalyst pre pared using 

imidazole and pyrolyzed under ammonia atmosphere .

Figure 1. (a) C DL of all synthesized catalysts, (b ) cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 5 mVs -1 and (c )

LSV curves at 5 mVs -1 and rotation speed of 1600 rpm in N 2 and O 2 saturated electrolyte (KOH 0.1 M) 

respectively, for the be st performing material. 

References 

1. Thompson, S.T., Papageorgopoulos, D. Nat Catal , 2019, 2, 558 –561. 

2. Mecheri, B., Ficca, V. C. A., Costa de Oliveira, M. A., D’Epifanio, A., Placidi, E., Arcip rete, F., 

Licoccia, S. Appl Catal B -Environ , 2018, 237, 699 –707. 

3. Artyushkova K., Rojas -Carbonell S., San toro C., Weiler E., Serov A., Awais R., Gokhale R.R., 

Atanassov P. ACS Appl. Energy Mate r. 2019, 2, 5406 -5418. Rational Design of Stable Solid Electrolyte Interphase for Li Metal 

# Batteries 

Xin Shen , Rui Zh ang , Xiang Chen, Xin -Bing Cheng , Xiaoyan Li, and Qiang Zhang *

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology Department of 

Chemica l Eng ineering Tsinghua University Beijing 100 084, China 

zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Rechargeable batteries, powering portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, play a pivotal role in 

sustainable development. Currently, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are almost approaching to its ceiling of 

theoretical energy densities, and then the research of post -LIBs with high energy densities becomes 

urgent. Li metal has been spotl ighted as a promising anode for next -generation rechargeable batteries due 

to its ultra -high theoretical capacity and an e xtremely low redox potential. However, its practical 

application has been hindered by Li dendrite growth, which renders a low Coulombi c efficiency and short 

lifespan. A stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is crucial in suppressing the formation of Li dendrites 

(Fig ure 1 ) 1. In this work, a quantitative electrochemical –mechanical model that couples stress, diffusion, 

electric fields, and electro chemical reactions was constructed, successfully tracking the dy namical failure 

process of SEI. Furthermore, the impacts o f structural uniformity and mechanical strength on the stability 

of the SEI under different working conditions were investigated. This work affords an insight into the 

rational design of stable SEI layers and sheds light on a possible pathway toward practi cal applications of 

Li metal anodes .

Reference 

1. Shen, X.; Zhang, R.; Chen, X.; Cheng, X. B.; Li, X.; Zhang, Q. Adv Energy Mater 2020, 1903645. Ultrasensitive Electrocatalytic Analysis of Escherichia coli at DNA 

# modified Gold Electrodes 

Rimsha Binte Jamal and Elena E. Ferapontova 

> a

Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University Gustav Wieds Vej 14, 

DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark 

Corresponding author’s e -mail:  ribja@inano.au.dk 

Sensitive, specific and r apid detection of bacterial colonies is becoming the need of the hour . Food spo ilage, 

prevention of pathogenic infections and antimicrobial resistance put such detectio n systems at highest priority in 

food and medicine industry . [1] Among these microbial communities, the bacterial strain of Escherichia coli (E. 

coli ) is most commonly found, with pathogenic and non -pathogenic strains being biomarkers of bacterial 

contamination . [2] Here, we develop ed a novel electrochemical assay for E.coli utilizing DNA as electric al wires, 

mediating electron transfer between gold electrodes and a well -known DNA intercalator, Methylen e Blue 

(MB). The binding of E. coli specific target DNA to the capture DNA -modified gold electrode surface triggers the 

intercalation of MB present in solution with in the hybrid structure. The signal from MB is further 

electrocata lytically amplified in reaction with a commonly used redox indicator ferricyanide wh ose 

electrochemical reduction is otherwise very slow on the DNA -modified surfaces. The developed assay allows 

down to attomolar detection of both synthetic and isolated E. coli DNA and RNA . The high sensitivity of the 

assay allows direct appl ication of it in point -of -care and industrial platforms for analysis of raw or minimally 

processed samples. 

Keywords: Electrochemical detection, Me thylene Blue, Escherich ia coli 

References 

[1] E. E. Ferapontova, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2020 , 19 , 153 -161. 

[2] J. J. Luna -Guevara, M. M. P. Arenas -Hernandez, C. Martinez de la Pena, J. L. Silva, M. L. Luna -

Guevara, Int J Microbiol 2019 , 2019 , 2894328. An Amperometric Cholesterol Biosensor Based on the Synergistic 

# Beneficial Roles of Prussian Blue and Gold Nanoparticles 

Mahsa Farahy Yeganeh 1, Amir Homayoun Keihan 2, Sharareh Sajjadi 1*

> 1

Department of Biology, Roudehen Branch, Islamic Azad University, Rou dehen, Iran ,

shsk22@yahoo.com , sajadi@riau.ac.ir 

> 2

Molecular Biology Research Center, Systems Biology and Poisonings Institute, Baqiyatallah University 

of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran , ahkeihan@emsu.ac.ir 

An amperometric cholesterol biosensor was designe d using a glassy carbon (GC) electrode modified with 

a nanocomposite consisting of multi -walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), ionic liquid (IL), Prussian blue 

(PB) and gold nanoparticles (G NP s). 

Firstly, the GC electrode was modified with a bucky gel (BG) com prising CNTs and IL. Then, the PB and 

GNPs were co -electrodeposited on the surface of the BG/GC electrode. Afterwards, the Ni 2+ ions were 

electrochemically incorporated into the PB structure in order to increase its stability in mild alkaline 

environment. Cholesterol oxidase was then immobilized on the modified electrode via a cross -linking 

method using glutaraldehyde. 

Cholesterol w as measured at −0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.05 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The cholesterol 

biosensor exhibited a high sensitivity of 173.56 μA mM -1 cm -2 with a detection limit of 1.9 × 10 −5 M and 

a linear range of 1.9×10 −7 – 2.8×10 −6 M. The proposed biosensor displayed a good storage stability of 1 

month. 

Keywords: Cholesterol, Biosensor, Carbon nanotube, Prussian blue, Ionic liqu id, Gold nanoparticle Study of the ECʺ mechanism by cyclic voltammetry 

# and chronoamperometry 

O.A. Goncharova 1, R.D. Pichugov 1, A. V. Alekseenko 2, A.E. Antipov 1,2 , D.V. Konev 1,2 , M.A. Vorotyntsev 1, 2,3,4 

(1) Institute for Proble ms of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 

Chernogolovka, Russia 

(2) D. I. Mendeleev Russian University of Chemical Technology, Moscow, Russia 

(3) M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 

(4) Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistr y and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia 

e-mail:  goncharovaooolga@gmail.com 

The development of new electrochemical p ower sources allow s us to expand the capabilities of traditional 

energ etics . One of the promising areas of modern electrochemical energ etics is flow redox bat teries, which 

generate electricity during the electrochemical reaction of energy -intensive liquid reagents. The use of bromates 

and chlorates as chemical oxidizing agents turned out to be promising, as this allo ws one to achieve high energy 

intensity and p ower density for a flow redox battery. 

Nevertheless, until recently, the bromate anion was not considered as a promising reagent for electrochemical 

power sources due to its’ non -electroactivity in the region of positive (vs SHE) potentials even on catalyt ically 

active electrodes . A f ew years ago in [1] the possibility of electroreduction of bromate anions in acidic media on 

carbon electrodes was shown due to the presence of trace bromine concentration. 

In this c ase, the target gross process 

LiBrO 3 + 3 H 2 → LiBr + 3 H 2O

passes through a catalytic cycle consisting of a heterogeneous reaction on the electrode surface for a reversible 

bromine/bromide redox pair: 

Br 2 + 2 e - ⇄ 2 Br -

and irreversible (with high acidity of the solution) homogeneous reaction: 

BrO 3- + 5 Br - + 6 H+ → 3 Br 2 + 3 H 2O

This process demonstrates autocatalytic behavior and, by analogy with electrochemical redox -mediator catalysis 

(EC'), was called the mechanism of redox -mediator autocatalysis (ECʺ) [1] .

The purpose of the work was experiment al studies of the bromate reaction by basic electrochemical methods , an 

experimental verification of the mathematical model of the ECʺ mechanism and the search of the main transport 

(diffusion coefficients) and kinetic (rate constants of a homogeneous chem ical reaction) system characteristics. 

During the study, series of experimental chronoamperograms and cyclic voltammograms of the electroreduction 

of sodium bromate in acidic media on electrodes o f various nature were obtained. The voltammograms were used 

to evaluate the reversibility of the electrochemical sta ge of bromine electrooxidation. As a result of solving the 

inverse kinetic problem using the obtained experimental data, for the description of which an analytical model was 

applied, the values of the main process parameters were established. 

Acknowledgments 

The work was supported by Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia. Project Number 

X-2020 -010 .

References 

1. Vorotyntsev M.A., Konev D.V., Tolmachev Y.V. Electroreduction of halogen oxoa nions via 

autocatalytic redox mediation by halide anions: novel EC" mechanism. Theory for stationary 1D regime 

// Electrochim . Acta. 2015. V. 173. P. 779. Electron Transfer Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Immobilized 

# Human Cytochrome c: Effect of Tyrosine Phosphorylation 

José Luis Olloqui -Sariego a, G onzalo Pérez b, Inmaculada Márquez a, Alejandra Guerra -Castellano b, Miguel 

Molero 1, Miguel Ángel De la Rosa b, Antonio Díaz -Quintana 2, Juan José Calvente 1, Irene Díaz -Moreno 2,

Rafael Andreu 1

> a

Physical Chemistry Department, University of Seville , Profesor García González, 1.  C.P. 41012, Sevilla, 

Spain 

> b

Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas, cicCartuja. Universidad de Sevilla – Consejo Superior de 

Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) , Américo Vespucio 49 

41092, Sevilla , Spain 

jlolloqui@us.es 

Human cytochrome c (hC c) stands out as a target for post -translational modifications, such as 

phosphorylation, which are related t o the onset of diseases like ischemia. Previous works with mimetic 

phosphorylated hC c, in which tyrosine 48 or tyrosine 97 were replaced by p-carboxy -methyl -L-

phenylalanine (hC c-Y48 pCMF and hC c-Y97 pCMF, respectively ), have demonstrated that 

phosphorylation provokes significant structural changes that can be related to mitochondrial dysfunction 

of this protein [1, 2]. 

In this work, we have carried out a detailed characterization of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the 

interfacial electron transfer of wild type hC c and its phosphomimetic variants adsorbed onto gold 

electrodes modified with self -assembled monolayers of -mercaptocarboxylic acids , by analyzing their 

voltammetric response as a function of scan rate and temperature at pH 7 .

The redox behavior of immobilized hC c was found to vary strongly with temperature . In particular, the 

temperature dependence o f the redox potential and the electron transfer rate constant for the wild type 

variant were observed to be biphasic , with a transition point at approx imately 30°C . This behavior has 

been ascribed to a reversible conformational transition between two states of the oxidized form leading to 

a more opened heme structure with a weakened Fe -Met80 bond . Moreover, it is shown that immobilized 

hC c-Y48 pCMF and hC c-Y97 pCMF display more negative redox potentials than the wild type, with a 

steeper temperature dependence . Both the enthalpic and entropic terms are shown to contribute to the 

observed shift of their redox potentials towards more negative values than thos e of the native protein . At 

the same time, the electron transfer rate constant of the phosphomimetic mutants are also lower than that 

of the native protein at temperatures below 40ºC , with remarkably larger values of both the electronic 

coupling between th e redox center of the mutants and the electrode and the reorganization energy .

Overall, the present results point to a key role of phosphorylation into the modulation of the 

mitochondrial function of cytochromes that ha s be en rationalized in terms of chang es in the internal 

electric field of the protein around the heme caused by the extra negative charge brought about by the 

phosphorylation process . Bearing in mind that the electrostatic binding between the protein and the 

negatively charged surface preclud es the alkaline transition of the protein, as lysine residues are involved 

in the se electrostatic interactions, and based on the obtained thermodynamic and kinetic parameter s for 

protein reduction, the structural change experienced upon phosphorylation is rather consistent with an 

increased lability of the Fe -Met 80 bond of the native ferric state, and a larger protein solvation and 

flexibility. 

References 

[1] B. Moreno -Beltrán, A. Guerra -Castellano, A. Díaz -Quintana, R. Del Conte, S. M. García -Mauriño, S. 

Díaz Moreno, K. González -Arzola, C. Santos -Ocaña, A. Velázquez -Campoy, m. A. De la Rosa, P. 

Turano, I. Díaz -Moreno Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2017 ,114, E3041 -E3050 .

[2] A. Guerra -Castellano, A. Díaz -Quintana, G. Pérez, C. A. Elena -Real , Katiuska González -Arzola , S. 

M. García -Mauriño , M. A. De la Rosa, I. Díaz -Moreno Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2018 , 115, 7955 -7960. 

Acknowledgements 

Authors acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Science and Innovation (PGC2018 -096049 -

B-I00 , CTQ2014 -52641 -P and RED 2018 -102412 -T), European Regional Development Fund (FEDER) ,

Andalusian Government (BIO -198 , US -1254317 and US -1257019 ). I.M. acknowledges a FPI grant from 

the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (BES -2015 -071247) . G.P . was awarded a PhD 

fellows hip from the Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport (FPU17/04604). Voltammetry of Polymeric Hybrid Materials of P latin um ( IV ) Organic 

# Complex for Drug Application 

D. V. Konev 1,2 , S.V. Kurma z1, V. D. Sen ’1, and V.A. Kurma z1 

> 1

Institute for Problems o f Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sc iences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 2

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , Moscow, Russia 

Email:  dkfrvzh@gmail.com 

The electrochemical behavior of new organic lipophilic PtIV complexes, namely, cis -[bis -

nitroxyethyl isonicotinamide -N] tetrachloride platinum(IV) (1) and e-amine -d-(4 -amino -2,2,6,6 -

tetramethylpiperidine -1-oxyl) -a,f -bis(octanoato) -b,c -dichloroplatinum(IV) (2) were investigated in 

DMSO and MeCN solutions on Pt, Au and glassy carbon electrodes by cyclic (CVA) and square -wave 

voltammetry (SWVA). The results were compared with those for a model system, namely, wide -spread 

drug cisplatin. 

The water -soluble hybrid materials of compounds 1 and 2 were prepared via solubilization of 

these PtIV complexes by copolymer nanoparticles of N-vinylpyrrolidone with (di)methacrylates [1 -3]. 

They were characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS), TEM, UV -Vis, and IR -spectroscopy. 

According to TEM and DLS, the hybrid materials consist of spherical particles with a hydrodynamic 

radius mainly ~( 50 –60) nm. The water -soluble hybrid forms of these Pt (IV ) complexes were studied in 

aqueous phosphate buffer soluti ons (PBS) by electrochemical methods. The results were compared with 

those for their free and hybrid forms in DMSO and MeCN, and found to be quite different. CVA and 

SWVA curves of the water -soluble polymer particles loaded by compounds 1 and 2 and free Pt (IV )

complexes in DMSO contain 3 to 5 irreversible cathodic peaks until E ~ -(1.5 -2.5) V, resp. In contrast, 

only two overlapped peaks were o bserved for 1 within the potential region in PBS during a sufficiently 

long time. The free radical moiety of 2 exhibi ted one -electron irreversible cathodic and one -electron 

reversible anodic peaks in MeCN, and their potentials were substantially similar to those for long -lived 4 -

acetylamino -2,2,6,6 -tetramethylpiperidine 1 -oxyl radical ( 3). This free radical moiety kept i ts redox 

characteristics at the same level as 3. Electrochemical and non -electrochemical data testified in favor of 

the inclusion of Pt(IV) complexes in polymer particles that were quite stable in the aqueous medium 

during a sufficiently long time but subj ected to destruction in non -aqueous solvents under study. 

These prepared hybrid materials with antitumor activity [1, 2, 4] can be promisin g as potential 

drugs with controlled properties including, e.g., water -solubility, bioavailability, prolonged action, 

duration of circulation in blood, accumulation in tumors, toxicity and foci of inflammation. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was performed in accordance with the state task, state registration No. АААА -А19 -

119071890015 -6 using the equipment of the Multi -User Analytical Center of IPCP RAS. 

References: 

1. S.V. Kurmaz, N.V. Fadeeva, B.S. Fedorov, G.I. Kozub, V.A. Kurmaz, R.A. Manzhos, A.A. Balakina ,

A.A. Terentyev , Mendeleev Commun. 30 (2020 ) 22 .

2. S.V. Kurmaz, V.D. Sen’, A.V. Kulikov , D.V. Konev, V.A. Kurmaz, A.A. Balakina, A.A. Terent'ev, 

Russ. Chem. Bull., Int. Ed. 68 (2019 ) 1769 .

3. S.V. Kurmaz, N.A. Obraztsova, A.A. Balakina, A.A. Terent'ev, Russ. Chem. Bull., Int. Ed. 65 (2016) 

2097 .

4. S V Kurmaz, D V Konev, V D Sen’, V A Kurmaz, and A V Kulikov IOP Conf. Series: Materials 

Science and Engineering 848 (2020) 011002 Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy studies on 

# electrode/deep eutectic solvent interfaces 

Zhuo Tan, Yu Peng , Jiawei Yan *, Bing wei Mao* 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, and Department of Chemistry, College o f

Chemistr y and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, P. R. China 

jwyan@xmu.edu.cn , bwmao@xmu.edu.cn 

A deep eutectic solvent (DES) is a mixture of a salt and an appropriate molecular hydrogen bond donor at 

certain quantity ratio. Like ioni c liquids, DESs have t he properties of low vapour pressure, non -

flammable, wide electrochemical window, good conductiv ity and solubility. In addition, DESs are low 

cost and the preparation procedure is simple. As a novel class of eco -friendly solvent, DESs have already 

been pro posed for applications in various fields , such as electrochemistry. [1 -2] 

High ionic strength and the existence of non -ionic hydrogen bond donor component make DESs involve 

multi -natured interactions including columbic interaction, V an de Waals molecular interaction and 

hydrogen bonding. The multi -natured interactions lead to the complexity of electrode/DESs interface. So 

far, fundamental investigations on the electrified interfaces in DESs remain limited. 

In this work, potential -dep endent electrode surf ace structures in di fferent deep eutectic solvent s were 

revealed by in situ scanning tunneling microscopic imaging, the preliminary results on surface 

reconstr uction, etching and adsorption on single crystal electrode surface are repor ted. 

References 

[1] Stéphanie Fryars, E mmanuelle Limanton, Fabienne Gauffre, Ludovic Paquin, Corinne Lagrost, 

Philippe Hapio t, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 2018, 819, 214 -219. 

[2] Zhengfei Chen, Ben McLean, Michael Ludwig, Ryan Stefanovic, Greg ory G. Warr, Grant B. Webber, 

Alister J. Page, Rob Atkin, J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 2225 -2233. .Conductivity and Stability of BaCe 0.7 Zr 0.1 Y0.16 Zn 0.04 O3-δ Electrolyte 

# under Hydrogen and Wet Argon Atmospheres 

Berceste Beyribey , Hwan Kim and Joshua Persky 

Low Emissions Resources Global Ltd. 

Unit 2 Block A, Mid Craigie Industrial Estate, Mid Craigie Roa d, Dundee UK 

DD4 7RH 

bprice@lercorp.com 

Cost effective hydrogen production is vital to many industries tied to the hydrogen economy. Perovskite s,

such as doped barium cerate and barium zirconate , have been investigated as proton conducting 

electrolyt es f or many industrial applications including fuel cells and steam electrolysers [1,2]. Barium 

cerate has a high protonic conductivity however, poor stability under CO 2 and H2O containing 

atmosphere s leads to rapid deg radation . Oppositely, barium zirconate exh ibits good stability under those 

environments however poor protonic conductivity makes it an impractical solution [3] . In this study, the 

conductivity and stability of BaCe 0.7 Zr 0.1 Y0.16 Zn 0.04 O3-δ (BCZYZ) has been investigated under both 5% 

H2/Ar and 3% wet Ar atmospheres. The highest conductivity of 2. 7x10 -2 S·cm -1 is obtained at 7 11 °C 

under 3% wet Ar. Area specific resistance (ASR ) is similar in both atmospheres (4.0 Ω·cm 2 under 3% w et 

Ar and 4.1 Ω·cm 2 under 5% H 2/Ar ) at 711 °C. ASR increased at lower t empe rature, 511°C , and a new arc 

(with 4.45 Ω·cm 2 ASR and 2x10 -8 F equivalent capacitance) is formed under 3% wet Ar , indicat ing a

second phase formation. N o second phase form ation is observed under 5% H2/Ar . ASRs of electrolyte are 

determined as 7.6 Ω·cm 2 and 8.2 Ω·cm 2 under 5% H 2/Ar and 3% wet Ar, respectively. The second phase 

formation/degradation of electrolyte is attributed to  Ba(OH) 2 and/ or BaCO 3 form ations aroun d 500 °C 

under wet atmospheres. At elevated temperatures, ~700 °C, BaCe 0.7 Zr 0.1 Y0.16 Zn 0.04 O3-δ exhibit s both good 

protonic conductivity, and good stability for use in fu el cells and electrolysers .

Figure 1. Impedance Spectra of BCZYZ electrolyte under 5% H2/Ar and 3% wet Ar atmospheres 

[1] Yoo Y. and Lim N. Performance and stability of pro ton conducting solid oxide fuel cells based on 

yttrium -doped barium cerate -zirconate thin -film electrolyte , Journal of Power Sources 229 (2013) 48 -57 .

[2] Ricote S., Bonanos N., Manerbino A. and Coors W.G. Conductivity study of dense 

BaCexZr(0.9Lx)Y0.1O(3 - δ) prepared by solid state reactive sintering at 1500 °C , International Journal of 

Hydrogen Energy 37 (2012) 7954 -7961 .

[3] Dippon M. , Babiniec S.M., Ding H., Ricote S. and Sullivan N.P. Exploring electronic conduction 

through BaCe xZr 0.9 -xY0.1 O3- δ proton con ducting ceramics , Solid State Ionic 286 (2016) 117 -121. Enhancement factors in EC -SOERS 

Sheila Hernandez 1, Juan V. Perales -Rondon 1,2, Aranzazu Heras 1, Alvaro Colina 1

1. -Departamento de Química, Universidad de Burgos , Pza . Plaza Misael Bañuelos, 09001 Burgos . Spain. 

2. - Department of Analytical Chemistry, Physical Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of 

Alcala.  Ctra. Madrid -Barcelona, Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain. 

shmunoz@ubu .es 

EC -SOERS ( Electrochemical -Surface oxidation enhances Raman s cattering ) is a new phenomenon 

discovered in 2018, which enhances the Raman signal during the electrochemical oxidation of a silver 

electrode under particular electrolytic conditions 1. This phenomenon has proven to be really useful in 

quantification of different organic compounds such as citric acid, uric acid or nicotinic acid 1–3. Aiming to 

expand the knowledge on this phenomenon it is important to quantify the effective ness of the SOERS 

substrate . Nowadays, achieving effective and reproducible SERS substrate remains a challenge; however, 

SOERS substrates emerge as a good alternative to classical SERS su bstrates in terms of stability and 

reproducibility .

Assessment of the enhancement factors (EF) is one of the best way s to study the performance of a

SOERS/SERS substrate . EF s are usually calculated taking into account the number of molecules adsorbed 

on the surface of the substrate. Nevertheless, in EC -SOERS , which is a dynamic phenomenon, the silver 

surface is being oxidized during the experiment and , therefore , it is challenging to estimate the number of 

molecules adsorbed on the surface. Co nsidering this limitation , the analytical enhancement factor s (AEF )

could be used instead of EF, in which the concentration of the sample could substitute the number of 

molecules adsorbed on the electrode surface 4 (eq. 1). 

(Eq.1) 

Since derivatives of benzoic acid are good 

candidates to evaluate the EC -SOERS 

effect , due to the presence of carboxylate 

group and delocalized charge around the 

benzenic ring , the assessment of AEF using 

such compounds have been carried out in 

this work . Figure 1 shows the comparison 

between the ordinary Raman spectra and the 

EC -SOERS spectra of 4 -cyanoben zoi c acid 

(4 -CN -BzA) . The intensity of these spectra 

is used in eq.1 to calculate the AEF of this 

molecule and a similar treatment is made 

with other isomers and derivatives of 

benzoic acid. A higher concentration of these molecule s is necessary to have a measurable Raman spectrum 

whereas in EC -SOERS good spectra are obtained using lower concentrations. 

Refere nces 

(1) Perales -Rondon, J. V; Hernandez, S.; Martin -Yerga, D.; Fanjul -Bolado, P.; Heras, A.; Colina, A. 

Electrochim. Acta 2018 , 282 , 377 –383. 

(2) Hernandez, S.; Perales -Rondon, J. V; Heras, A.; Colina, A. Anal. Chim. Acta 2019 , 1085 , 61 –67. 

(3) Hernandez, S.; Perales -Rondon, J. V.; Heras, A.; Colina, A. Electrochim.  Acta 2020 , 334 , 135561. 

(4) Le Ru, E. C.; Blackie, E.; Meyer, M.; Etchegoint, P. G . J. Phys. Chem. C 2007 , 111 (37), 13794 –

13803. 

Acknowledgements: 

Authors acknowledge the financial support from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Grants 

CTQ2017 -83935 -R-AEI/FEDERUE), Junta de Castilla y León (BU297P18) and Ministerio de Ciencia ,

Innovación y Universidades (RED2018 -102412 -T). J.V.P -R. thanks JCyL for his postdoctoral fellowship 

(Grant BU033 -U16). S.H. thanks JCyL and European Social Fund for her predoctoral fellowship          

> Figure 1. Ordinary Raman spectra of 0.9 M 4 -CNBzA ( garnet
> line), compared with EC -SOERS spectra of 2·10 -4M 4 -CN -BzA
> (blue line) registered at +0.40 Vduring aRama n-SEC
> experiment.

## 𝐴𝐸𝐹 = 𝐼 𝑆𝑂𝐸𝑅𝑆 · 𝐶 𝑅𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑛 

## 𝐼 𝑅𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑛 · 𝐶 𝑆𝑂𝐸𝑅𝑆 Simultaneous Electrochemical Removal of Nitrate and Terbuthylazine 

# Pesticide from Low -Conductivity Groundwater 

Roger Oriol , Enric Brillas, Pere L. Cabot, Francesc Centellas, Ignasi Sirés 

Laboratori d’Electroquímica dels Materials i del Medi Ambient, Depar tament de Química Física, 

Facultat de Química, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1-11 , 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

e-mail address : rogoriol@ub.edu ; i.sires@ub.edu 

The great intensification and centralization of agricultural and farming activities ove r the last decades to

supply the increasing demand of food has entailed the accumulation of different types of organic and 

inorganic pollutants in soils and freshwater reservoirs as aquifers. Some of the former ones, mainly those 

with an anthropogenic orig in such as pesticide s or antibiotics are classified as contaminants of emerging 

concern (CEC) due to the uncertain associated ecological or human health impact . The pesticide 

terbuthylazine (TBA) , a chloro -triazine, has become ubiquitous in the EU, being f requently detected i n

natural water bodies . TBA and its main by -product desethyl -terbuthylazine (DET) are toxic towards 

aquatic organisms and act as endocrine disruptors . Unfortunately, they are only partially removed by 

conventional water treatments [1]. On the other hand, the EU is the world’s second biggest producer of 

pork after China and the biggest swine exporter. Pig farming involves the generation of large volumes of 

swine wastewater , with its associated intrinsic difficulties to get rid of it . Its disposal is getting currently 

under strict control in some of the most affected European countries such as Spain and D en mark , since it 

is a major source of nitrate in groundwater. 

In recent years, several technologies have been developed for the removal o f refractory organic 

pollutants. Electro -oxidation (EO) stands out among the eco -friendly electrochemical advanced oxidation 

processes (EAOPs) as the simplest method, with high ability to produce hydroxyl radicals ( •OH) adsorbed 

on the anode surface. Coupl ing a high ly efficie nt anode for EO with a suitable cathode that allows the 

simultaneous nitrate electroreduction in groundwater has been the aim of this work. This is not a 

straightforward task, since such water has low conductivity and contains Mg(II) an d Ca(II) ions that c an 

precipitate mainly as CaCO 3 and Mg(OH) 2 on the cathode surface, eventually causing its fouling. In 

practice, this is detrimental regarding the electrocatalytic properties of the cathodic surface and results in 

an excessive cell volta ge increas ing the en ergetic cost and making the treatment not economically viable. 

This communication reports the performance of an electrochemical system developed on the basis of our 

previous studies [2,3 ]. The cell consisted of two mesh electrodes, i.e, Nb/BDD (mainly) or DSA ®-Cl 2 (for 

comparison purposes) anode coupled with a custom Fe mesh cathode, separated 3 mm to treat 500 mL of 

solutions containing 5 mg L -1 TBA and about 100 mg L -1 nitrate. The experiments were carried in two 

different water matric es: (i) simulated gr oundwater, mimicking the main characteristics of an actual 

groundwater in presence and absence of chloride anion , and (ii) the actual groundwater, which has been 

conveniently softened prior to the electrolyses. Large percentages of both , cathodic denitrifi cation and EO 

of the pesticide, were attained at different current densities from 5 to 30 mA cm -2, decreasing their 

concentrations below human consumption threshold s. T he concentration of the main products and by -

products were followed over time. 

Referenc es 

[1] A. L. Tasca, M. Puccini, A. Fletcher , Chemosphere 202 (2018) 94 –110 .

[2] R. Oriol, P. Bernícola, E. Brillas, P. L. Cabot, I. Sirés, Electrochim. Acta 317 (2019) 753 –765 .

[3] R. Oriol, D. Clematis, E. Brillas, J. L. Cortina, M. Pa nizza, I. Sirés, Che mElectroChem 6 (2019) 

1235 –1243 .

Acknowledgments 

Financial support from project CTQ2016 -78616 -R (AEI/FEDER, EU), as well as the PhD scholarship 

awarded to R. Oriol (MINECO, Spain) are acknowledged. Understanding the Effects of Self -Assembled Monolayers and Metallic 

# Structure on Direct Electron Transfer of Fructose Dehydrogenase on 

# Au(111) and Nanoporous Gold Electrodes 

Xiaomei Yan a, Su Ma b, Jing Tang a, David Ackland Tanner a, Jens Ulstrup a,c , Xinxin Xiao a,* , Jingdong 

Zhang a

> a

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark 

> b

Biocatalysis and Biosensing Laboratory, Department of Food Science and Technology, BOKU -

University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Mu thgasse 18, 1190 Vienna, Austria 

> c

Kazan National Research Technological University, K. Marx Str., 68, 420015 Kazan, Republic of 

Tatarstan, Russian Federation 

E-ma il: xiyan@kemi.dtu.dk ; xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk .

Direct electron transfer (DET) between an electrod e and redox/catalytic center(s) in oxidoreductase s is a

core “elementary” process in enzym e bioelectrochemistry. [1,2 ] Favourable orientation and high enzyme 

loading on electrodes are paramount in DET -type bioelectrocatalysis to ascertain high catalytic act ivity 

and ET rate. [3] Fructose dehydrogenase (FDH) from Gluconbacter japonicas is a membrane -bound 

oxidoreductase with thre e subunits , subunit s I (67 kDa), II (51 kDa) and III (20 kDa). [4] Subunit I hold s a 

flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor as the active center of two -electron fructose oxidation to 5-

keto -D-fructose. Subunit II carries three heme c moieties , serving as ET relays between electron acceptors 

and FAD. Subunit III h as no redox center and possibly contributes to structural integrity of e nzyme. 

We present here systematic investigation of the effects of both self -assembled molecular monolayers 

(SAMs ) and nanoporous (Au -)electrode structure on DET -type bioelectrocatalysis of FDH absorbed on 

SAM -modified Au(111) electrodes. Two different SA Ms with varying functional terminal -groups and 

alkyl chain lengths were studied . FDH on a 2-mercaptoethanol (BME) SAM showed the best DET 

performance with a maximum current density ( jmax,det : 54.88 ± 3.03 

A cm -2) and DET -capable fraction 

derived from jmax,det over mediated jmax,m et (χ det : 13.33 %) due to the mo st favourable FDH orientation 

on the electrode surface . FDH on Au(111) functionalized with 3 -mercaptopropanoic acid (MPA) SAM 

exhibited the best mediated ET with  Δjmax of 640.76 ± 7.65 μA cm -2 usi ng ferrocenemethanol as the 

mediator . This can be explained by the negative ly charge d SAM surface efficiently adsorb ing FDH . Non -

linear fitting to the electrocatalytic profiles was performed. The FDH catalytic properties strongly depend 

on the alkyl chain length, showing significant decrease with increasing SAM carbon chain length. 

Nanoporous gold supported FDH wa s also prepar ed. Porous gold structures not only improve d the 

catalytic performance by increas ed enzyme loading and χdet , but also increase d notably the operational 

stability. 

Acknowledgments 

The PhD project is kindly supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC ). 

References 

[1] Evans , R. M. ; Siritanaratkul, B.; Megarity, C. F. ; Pandey, K ., Esterle, T . F. ;Badiani S.; Armstrong , F.

A. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019 , 48 , 2039 -2052 .

[2] Xiao, X.; Xia, H. Q.; Wu, R.; Bai, L.; Yan, L.; Magner, E.; Cosnier, S.; Lojou, E.; Zhu, Z.; Liu, A. 

Chem. Rev. 2019 , 11 9, 9509 -9558. 

[3] Adachi, T.; Kaida, Y.; Kitazumi, Y.; Shirai, O.; Kano, K. Bi oelectrochemistry 2019 , 129 , 1 -9. 

[4] Kizling, M.; Bilewicz, R. ChemElectroChem 2018 , 5, 166 -174. Noise Measurements During Charging of Lithium Metal Anode Reveal 

# Uneven Growth 

Gözde Karaoğlu , Burak Ulgut 

Bilkent University, Chemistry Department 

06800, Ankara, Turkey 

gozde.karaoglu@bilkent.edu.tr 

Electrochemical noise measurements a re well known in the corrosion literature where the noise that is to 

be measured is appreciable in amplitude. [1] From the measured noise of corroding systems it is possible 

to identify the mode of corrosion and distinguish between localized corrosion from the uniform . Our 

gro up has previously sh own that non -rechargeable batteries with Li / MnO2 chemistry shows increase in 

voltage noises after being exposed to a short circuit. [2] In our further studie s, batteries were opened in 

nitrogen environment to determine the source of the increase in the noise level of the battery and the 

chemistry of the battery was examined using the necessary characterization methods. As a result of this 

research, which was inspired by the corrosion literature, it was observed that the pure lithium me tal on the 

anode surface of the batteries exposed to the short circuit reacted inhomogeneously. No noise increase 

was observed in the noise measurements made in the slowly -discharged batteries, but it was also observed 

that the pure lithium metal on the an od e surface of the battery decreased homogeneously. In light of the 

findings obtained, it shows that the increased noise level with the short circuit is caused by the anode / 

lithium metal of the battery cell rather than the changes on other battery comp on ents such as the corrosion 

of existing collectors. [3] It is known that charging of a battery with a metallic lithium anode causes the 

lithium metal to settle unevenly on the anode surface, resulting in the formation of lithium dendrite s

and/or mossy stru ctures . G rowing lithium dendrites can disrupt the separator separating the anode from 

the cathode, exposing the battery to a short circuit or even causing the battery to burn or explode. For this 

reason, the pre -detection of any dendrite formation that may occur in the anode of the battery is both 

academically and industrially important. Some preliminary studies show that noise level increase 

drastically after it is charging and discharged. (Figure 1) Just like noise measurements on non -

rechargeable batteri es with lithium chemistry exposed to short circuits, it is worth study ing noise 

measurements during charging and discharging cycles in lithium batteries that are prone to form dendrite .

Some other preliminary noise measurements on Lithium anode indicated t hat noise levels increase after 

charge and discharge cycles. In this presentation, we will first explain the details regarding 

electrochemical noise measurements and continue to investigate the origin of increase in noise levels in 

Lithium anode . We will present optical and electron microscopy to correlate the noisy features in noise 

measurements with mossy and dendritic structures that forms during the charge and discharge 

processes. [4]

References 

[1] Cottis, R. A. CRITICAL REVIEW OF CORROSION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 

Interpretation of Electrochemical Noise Data. Corrosion 57, 265 –285 (2001). 

[2 Uzundal CB; Ulg ut B; “A New Method for Vo ltage Noise Measurement and Its Application to Abused 

Primary Batteries” Journal of the Electrochemical Society ,2018 volume 165, issue 11, A2557 -A2562 

[3] Karaoglu G; Uzundal CB; Ulgut B; “Uneven Discharge of Metallic Lithium Ca uses Increased 

Voltage Noise in Li/MnO2 Primary Batteries upon Shorting, submitted. 

[4] Wood, Kevin N., et al. "Dendrites and pits: Untan gling the complex behavior of lithium metal anodes 

through operando video microscopy." ACS central science 2.11 (2016): 790 -801.   

> Figure 1 The noise measurement of pristine CR2032 (black) and the noise measurement of
> CR2032 after charged (red), and discharged (blue)

# Methodological Considerations in Simulating Dynamic Electro -

# chemical Interfaces and Reactions from Density Functional Theory 

Rasmus Kronberg and Kari Laasonen 

Research Group of Computational Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and 

Materials Science, Aalto University, P.O. Box. 16100, FI -00076 Aalto, Finland 

rasmus.kronber g@ aalto.fi 

Atomistic density functional theory (DFT) based simulations of electrochemical interfaces and reactions 

have become irreplaceable as a compl ementary method in the rational development of sustainable 

approaches to energy conversion and storage. The field of computational electrochemistry is, however, 

still in its infancy and applied models require careful benchmarking for precise physicochemical 

predictions. Particu larly, the importance of explicit solvent dynamics remains to be rigorously assessed. 

Considering the highly dynamic nature of electrochemical interfaces, a proper sampling of finite -

temperature fluctuations by means of density functional molecular dynamic s (DFTMD) may indeed be 

highly important. 

We have explored the influence of interfacial dynamics on the potential energy surface of the 

Volmer –Heyrovský hydrogen evolution mechanism on a nitrogen doped carbon nanotube 1, as well as in 

simulating the potenti al -dependent hydrogen adsorption isotherm of single -crystal Pt(111) 2. In both cases 

a thorough comparison with corresponding static approaches, namely the nudged elastic band (NEB) 

method and the computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) formalism, is perform ed. In the former we 

demonstrate decisive competing effects of solvent reorganization and entropy on activation and reaction 

free energies which are observed to decrease considerably compared to minimum energy paths obtained 

by static NEB calculations. Alt hough the entropic contribution is intuitively expected to increase the 

energies, the relaxation of steric hindrance is found to dominate in the DFTMD simulations as compared 

to the problematic frozen solvent model conventionally employed in NEB transition path optimizations. 

However, DFTMD simulations of dynamic water –adlayer structures on hydrogenated Pt(111) 

suggest that the determination of potential -dependent hydrogen adsorption isotherms is complicated by 

the challenging description of hydrogen and wa ter co -adsorption on Pt(111) at intermediate hydrogen 

coverages. This balance appears particularly delicate, critically influencing electrostatic properties. 

Underestimation of water chemisorption by the employed RPBE -D3 functional is indeed found to 

overe stimate sampled electrode potentials due to impeded charge transfer to the metal surface, thus 

demonstrating the necessity of an accurately converged interfacial structure. Conversely, the CHE scheme 

is found to reproduce the experimental isotherm with a s urprising accuracy, thereby displaying the 

persisting value of carefully employed static, solventless approximations when considering the energetics 

of hydrogen chemisorption on single -crystal platinum. The influence of solvation and dynamics is 

neverthele ss expected to remain significant in non -equilibrium reaction path simulations, as demonstrated 

in the previous direct simulation of the Volmer –Heyrovský mechanism. 

[1] Kronberg, R.; Lappalainen, H.; Laasonen, K. Phys.  Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020 , 22, 10536 –10549. 

[2] Kronberg, R.; Laasonen, K. J. Phys.  Chem. C 2020 , in press, doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c02323. 

(a) Free energy profile of hydrogen 

adsorption at a dynamic NCNT –water 

interface using two different constraint 

definitions 

(b) Hydrogen adsorption isotherms of 

Pt(111) as derived based on static and 

dynamic models at different levels of 

density functional theory Feluric Acid Electropolymerization for a Novel Glucose Biosensor 

Gabriela Valdés -Ramírez , Leonardo R. Salgado Juárez, Laura Galicia Luis .

Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana Unidad Iztapalapa. 

Av. San Rafael Atlixco 186, Leyes de Reforma 1ra Secc, 09340 Ciudad de México, CDMX 

gabrivra@gmail.com 

In this work, a polymeric membrane based on 3-methoxy -4-hydroxycinnamic acid (fel uric acid ) has been 

used for glucose oxidase immo bilization onto carbon paste electrode by electrochemical polymerization .

Feluric a cid , is the most abundant hydroxycinnamic acid in the plant world, due to its autoinflammatory, 

anticancerogenic and antioxidant properties, it has been wide ly used in the pharmaceutical and food 

industrie s [1 -3] , due to its properties an d red ox behavior, we used feluric acid for the development of a

polymeric film for a glucose biosensor .

The membrane has been synthesized by cyclic voltammetry at scan rate of 20 mV/s in acetate s med ia 100 

mM , pH 7.05 ± 0.5 , in 2 mM of feluric aci d, by utilizing th is approa ch the enzyme has been entrapped 

into the polymeric membrane in a single step gene rating a glucose biosensor. The figure 1A , shows the 

typical cyclic voltamm ogram for the polymerization, it can be observed that after the first cycl e the 

currents decrease s as th e usual behavior for the electropolymeri zation compounds with phen olic rings [4] .

The biosensor has been evaluated for glucose response at constant poten tial of 800mV in phosphate 

buffer 100 mM , pH 7.34 a t room temperature, the glucose biosensor show s a sensitivity of 36.1 nA/mM ,

linear response in the r ange from 0 to 30 mM cover ing the glucose dynamic range of clinical relevance .

The 90% of the glucose response is achieved after 60 s for all the glucose dynamic range , the detection 

limit is 0.01mM . Th e figure 1B , shows the calibra tion curve for glucose biosensor with successive 

additions of glucose in 5mM increments . Figure 1C, shows the response stability for the calibration curve ;

all the measurements were measured vs Hg /Hg 2SO 4(sat ) electrode. 

Figur e 1. A) Cyclic voltammetry for feluric acid – glucose oxidase electropolymerization , 1 st and 10 th 

successive cycles at scan rate of 20mV/s. B) Calibration curve f or glucose biosen sor . C) 

Chronoampero metry for successive additi ons of glucose in 5 mM increme nts. 

Referenc es 

[1] Y.T. Sohn, J. H. Oh, Arc Pharm Res , 26 (2003) 1002 -1008. 

[2] P. Mattila, J. Kumpulainen, J Agric Food Chem, 50 (2002) 3660 –3667. 

[3] K. Zduńska, A. Dana, A. Kolodziejczak, H. Rotsztejn, Skin Pharmacol Physiol , 31 (2018) 332 -336. 

[4] R. J. Waltman , J. B argon Can, J. Chem , 64 (1986) 76 -95. Study of two -phase electro generated microfluidic flows 

Florent Struyven 1,2 , Philippe Mandin 1, Mathieu Sellier 2 

> 1

Univ. Bretagne Sud, UMR CNRS 6027, IRDL, F -56100 Lorient, France  

> 2

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New -Zealand 

florent.struyven@univ -ubs.fr 

The aim of the project is to certify the phenomena involved at the microfluidic scale in the production of 

electrogenerated bubbles, and to improve the efficiency of the electrolytic process by acting on the 

wettability and geometry of the electrodes. This study aims to validate the experimental results provided in 

the literature by using a multiphase model based on the VOF -HF (volume of fluid - heigh functions) 

method, which allows to model interfaces with variable surface tension and to limit the usual er rors of 

multiphase models at micro -fluidic scales (parasitic currents, volume conservation). 

Usually a force balance is done to predict bubble detachment. However, to be accurate this balance must 

include the Marangoni forces (FM) generated by the variat ion of the surface tension of the gas -electrolyte 

interface and due to the concentration and temperature gradients around the bubble [1]. 

Figure 1 – Force balance made on a 

electrogenerated bubble on a micro -electrode   

> Figure 2 –Extract from [1], Marangoni effect around
> an electrogenerated bubble, captured using the
> Particle Tracking Velocimetry technique.

The Marangoni effect results in a micro -convection motion generated at the interface by the ta ngential 

stress due to the variation of the surface tension. To avoid numerical errors (parasitic currents, volume 

conservation problems) which are not negligible at the microfluidic scale, a robust numerical model must 

be used. An interface model based on "Heigh function" implemented in a "volume of fluid" (VOF) method 

was chosen, which allows to limit parasitic currents and to model the Marangoni effect. Numerical 

modelling is carried out using the ANSYS Fluent software (Pennsylvania, USA) which provides a basis for 

multiphysical modelling. The implementation of the interface model is based on user functions programmed 

in C language. 

Reference:  

> [1] Yang, X., Baczyzmalski, D., Cierpka, C., Mutschke, G., and Eckert, K. (2018). Marangoni convection at
> electrogenerated hydrogen bubbles. 20:11542 –11548

# Dendritic Sensor for the Simultaneous Detection of Ethambutol and 

# Isoniazid in TB T reatment 

Ashiqa Fakier , Candice Franke 

Sensorlab, University of the Western Cape 

Robert Sobukwe Road Bellvile 7535 , Western Cape, South Africa 

3540637@myuwc.ac.za , cfranke@uwc.ac.za 

Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne disease that is one of the most infectious diseases in the world. It is 

specifically a problem in South Africa due to the hig h number of HIV cases present. The World Health 

Organisation has stated in a recent report that South Africa is on its way to meet the milestone of 

managing TB to some extent and that is an even greater reason to focus on the patients still battling with 

this disease [1] . TB affects the lungs, but can also affect other part of the body such as the abdomen, 

central nervous system and bones and joints. These different parts of the body require their own type of 

treatment regime of TB drugs and periods of treatment [2] . There are four first line drugs that are used in 

the treatment of TB that are isoniazid, pyrazinamide, rifampicin and ethambutol. If a patient is unable to 

take one (or a few) first line drug (s) due to the drug resistance of their TB, then a regime is made up with 

the other first line drugs with the incorporation of second line drugs [3] . Dosages for TB drugs are 

prescribed by the patient’s weight and not by the type of metabolism the patient has; i.e. the more a 

patient weighs, the higher the dosages they ar e told to consume. If the patient metabolises the treatment 

regime too fast then it is clear that a more frequent dose of the drugs are required whereby for a slower 

metaboliser, a less frequent dose is needed to give the patient’s body time to use up the drugs. The 

quantification of TB drugs is needed to check how much is present in after the patient has taken them. 

Determining the concentration of these drugs in the patient’s body allows for information on the type of 

metabolic profile the patient has. St andard methods used for detection of compounds as well as for their 

quantification requires some sort of sample preparation or is quite bulky and not fit for crowded hospitals. 

These methods include chemiluminescence, mass spectrometry and electrophoresis [4] . This is why 

electrochemical detection methods are looking more promising, especially in the case of crowded 

hospitals because of its small size and point -of -care features. The monitoring of how fast or slow a patient 

is ab le to metabolise the respective TB drugs is relevant since the effectiveness of the drugs in the 

treatment regime can be observed this way. A step forward is presented in this study whereby a dendritic 

sensor is used to simultaneously monitor two of the fi rst line drugs (isoniazid and ethambutol) in 

phosphate buffer since with TB treatment there are many drugs to be taken by the patient. The setup 

involved a three electrode electrochemical cell whereby the Au working electrode was drop coated with 

the dendr imer and used to monitor additions of various standards containing different concentrations of 

isoniazid and ethambutol. This approach is one of the ways to make TB treatment more effective for TB 

patients. 

References 

[1] WHO, “Global Tuberculosis Repo rt,” Aug. 2019. 

[2] P. Nahid and P. C. Hopewell, “Tuberculosis Treatment,” in International Encyclopedia of Public 

Health, Second Edi., vol. 7, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 267 –276. 

[3] E. Phelan, A. El -Gammal, and T. M. O’Connor, “Tuberculosis,” in Encyclopedia of Environmental 

Health, vol. 6, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 125 –134. 

[4] C. Rassie et al., “Electrochemical Ultra -Low Detection of Isoniazid Using a Salicylaldamine 

Functionalised G1 -DAB -(NH2)4 Dendritic Sensor vs. UV -VIS Spectrophotometric Detection,” J. Nano 

Res. , vol. 45, pp. 164 –174, Jan. 2017. Simulation and Optimization Method for Alkaline Water Electrolysis 

Damien Le Bideau 1, Philippe Mandin 1, Olivier Chocron 2, Patrice Kiener 3, Mohamed Benbouzid 4 

> 1

University of Bretagne Sud, UMR CNRS 6027 IRDL, 56100 Lorient, France; damien.le -bideau@univ -

ubs.fr (D.L.B.); philippe.mandin@univ -ubs.fr (P.M.)  

> 2

ENI Brest, UMR CNRS 6027 IRDL, 29238 Plouzané , France, olivier.chocron@enib.fr 

> 3

InModelia, 5 rue Malebranche, 75005 Paris, France;  patrice.kiener@inmodelia.com  

> 4

University of Brest, UMR CNRS 6027 IRDL, 29238 Brest, France; Mohamed.Benbouzid@univ -brest.fr 

In the context of global warm ing and intermittent renewables energy integration, hydrogen production via 

alkaline water electrolysis is a promising CO 2-free energy storage. However, this process produces 

expensive hydrogen and suffer from high inertia. Therefore, this study is focused on the optimization of the 

process using CFD simulation to solve those problems. The price of the hydrogen is due to initial investment 

(IC) , energy cost (EC) and the cell voltage Ucell Eq(1 -3) .

CAPEX=2 F IC T -1 S-1 MH2 -1 j-1 (1) 

OPEX=EC U cell (j) F/3600  (2) 

Ucell (j)=E rev + R j + act (j)+ conc (j)  (3) 

With T the life -time of the electrolyzer in s, F the Faraday’s constant in C mol -1, j the current density in A 

m-2, M H2 the molar mass in kg mol -1, E rev in reversible tension in V, R the ohmic resistance in Ohm m², h act 

and h conc respectively the activation and concentration overpotential in V. 

In industrial electrolyzer, an acceptable cell tension is 2V to 2.2V with a reversible tension between from 

1.1 5 to 1.23V. The activation overpotential is the energy needed to overcome the activation energy of the 

reaction, it can be decreased using a performant electrocatalyst. Because the concentration overvoltage is 

negligible. The other way of improvement is to decrease ohmic resistance by finding the perfect 

design. Owing to find the minimum cell voltage, a two -fluid model has been developed and compared to 

experimental data from Boissonneau et al [1] and other models. This model takes into account the 

momentum conservation for all the phases, charge conservation. The flow is taken as isothermal and the 

species gradients are neglected. The standard model developed by Fluent does not reproduce the 

experimental flow. The current model reproducing the experimental d ata, it could consequently be used. 

The optimization has been performed using the Vaschy -Buckingham theorem and design of experiments. 

Special efforts have been made to find the optimum inter -electrode distance (Figure 1) . Finally, a simple 

technical and economical approach has been used to find the optimum working conditions using a genetic 

algorithm .

Figure 1-CAPEX, OPEX and total cost of hydrogen in € kg -1 (left) and ohmic electrolyte resistance 

and void fractio n depending on the interelectrode spacing. 

Bibliography 

[1]P. Boissonneau et P. Byrne, « An experimental investigation of bubble -induced free convection in a 

small electrochemical cell », J. Appl. Electrochem. , vol. 30, p. 767 -775, 2000. CYP phenotype bio sensor for detection of TB drugs in spiked real 

# samples 

Candice Franke 

Sensorlab, University of the Western Cape 

Robert Sobukwe Road, Bellville, 7535 

cfranke@uwc.ac.za 

Tuberculosis is a respiratory disease that has plagued the globe fo r decades. Treatment for the disease has 

been available, however the disease remains one of the leading causes of death in the world, more 

prominently so in under -developed countries. One of the reasons for this is that patients suffer from 

adverse drug re actions (ADR’s), which cause them to not complete the 6 -month course of treatment [1] .

Another reason is the unavailability of efficient treatment in rural areas. A mobile technology, which 

reduces ADR’s is thus needed. 

Portable electrochemical s ensors for the detection of TB and the drugs used to treat it have been 

successful in the past [2] [3] . The development of biosensors are hindered by their efficiency in real life 

applications or complex matrices. T herefore, this study involves the development of a biosensor for 

detection of TB drugs in both synthetic urine and plasma. A simple sensor was developed using a 

metallodendritic elec trocatalyst and a CYP3A4 enzyme immobilized onto the surface of a gold ele ctrode. 

Smart nanomaterials such as this copper based first generation dendrimer allow for a higher surface area 

and conductivity of electrode surface for a highly sensitive sensor. The CYP3A4 enzyme was selected 

since it is a largely diverse enzyme in tha t it metabolizes up to 50% of all prescribed drugs and would 

mimic the bodily reaction sufficiently. The presence of a biological recognition element in an 

electrochemical sensor also allows for a much lower limit of detection (LOD) to be achieved. 

The s ensor was successful in detecting first line TB drugs in standard buffer as well as complex bodily 

fluids or matrices. In this case, the LOD ranged from 0.165 μM to 0.884 μM in both synthetic urine and 

plasma. Recovery studies when using real tablets in th ese complex matrices also yielded excellent results 

with an average recovery of 96%. The development of phenotype biosensors such as this is vital in 

tackling a disease that is so rampant in South Africa specifically . The possibility of determining metabol ic 

profile of individual patients will aid in the fight against TB which is a part of the national development 

plan of South Africa [4] . Electrochemical sensor technology allows for a rapid testing which occurs at the 

point of care with minimal sample preparation. All of which are huge benefits when treating TB in rural 

areas i.e. townships o r remote villages of Africa. Once a patients metabolic profile is determined, the 

dosage of treatment can be adjusted for fast , slow or intermediate metaboliz ers. Resulting in a more 

efficient treatment that avoids toxicity and adverse drug reactions and i mproves the quality of life for TB 

patients .

References 

[1] World Health Organisation (WHO), Global Tuberculosis Report 2019, 2019. 

[2] D. Bhattacharyya, P.K. Sarswat, M.L. Free, Quantum dots and carbon d ots based fluorescent 

sensors for TB biomarkers detection, Vacuum. (2017). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vacuum.2017.02.003. 

[3] S. Wang, F. Inci, G. De Libero, A. Singhal, U. Demirci, Point -of -care assays for tuberculosis: 

Role of nanotechnology/microfluidics , Biotechnol. Adv. 31 (2013) 438 –449. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2013.01.006. 

[4] Department of Health Republic of South Africa, Department of Health Strategic Plan 2016 -2020, 

2011. http://www.tbrhsc.net/about_TBRHSC/strategic_planning/TBRHSC Str ategic Plan 

2015.pdf. Mediator -free SECM for probing the diffusion layer pH with 

# functionalized gold ultramicroelectrodes 

Mariana C. O. Monteiro , Leon Jacobse, Thomas Touzalin, Marc T. M. Koper 

Leiden University 

Leiden Institute of Chemistry , P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA, Leiden, the Netherlands 

m.monteiro@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

Probing pH gradients during electrochemical reactions is important to better understand reaction 

mechanisms and to separate the influence of pH and pH gradients from intrinsic electrolyte effects. Here, 

we develop a pH sensor to measure pH changes in the diffusion layer during electrochemical reactions. 

The probe was synthesized by functionalizing a gold ultramicroelectrode with a self -assembled 

monolayer of 4 -nitrothiophenol (4 -NTP) and further converting it to fo rm a hydroxylaminothiophenol (4 -

HATP)/4 -nitrosothiophenol (4 -NSTP) redox couple. The pH sensing is realized by recording the tip 

cyclic voltammetry and monitoring the Nernstian shift of the mid -peak potential. We employ a capacitive 

approach technique in o ur home -built Scanning Electrochemical Microscope (SECM) setup in which an 

AC potential is applied to the sample and the capacitive current generated at the tip is recorded as a 

function of distance. This method allows for an approach of the tip to the ele ctrode that is electrolyte -free 

and consequently also medi ator -free. Hydrogen evolution on gold in a neutral electrolyte was first studied 

as a model system. The pH was measured with the probe at constant distance from the electrode (ca. 75 

μm) while the electrode potential was varied in time. In the non -buffered electrolyte used (0.1 M Li 2SO 4), 

even at relatively low current densities, a pH difference of three units is measured between the location of 

the probe and the bulk electrolyte. The time scale of the diffusion layer transient is captured, due to the 

high time resolution that can be achieved with this probe. The sensor has high sensitivity, measuring 

differences of more than 8 pH units with a resolution better than 0.1 pH unit. The probe was also used to 

perform direct pH measurements in the diffusion layer during CO 2 reduction. pH measurements show 

how bicarbonate can buffer the interface and maintain the pH approximately 7 within a c ertain 

potential/current range, before extreme alkalinity starts to develop.  

> 1

Monteiro, M. C. O.; Jacobse, L.; Touzali n, T.; Koper, M. T. M. “Mediator -free SECM for probing the 

diffusion layer pH with functional ized gold ultramicroelectrodes” Anal. Chem . 2020 , 92, 2, 2237 –2243 . 

> 2

Monteiro, M. C. O.; Jacobse, L.; Koper, M. T. M. “Direct and spatially resolved pH measurements 

during CO 2 reduction on gold” (in preparation) Bragg coherent diffraction imaging for in situ/operando 

# electrochemical studies : advances and future challenges 

Rafael A. Vicente 1,2 , Itamar Neckel 3, Alexander Bjorling 4, Jose Solla -Gullon 5, Pablo S. Fernán dez 1,2 

1 Chemistry Institute, State University of Campinas, 13083 -970, Campinas, SP, Brazil. 

2 Center for Innovation on New Energies, University of Campinas, 13083 -841 Campinas, SP, Brazil. 

3 Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory, Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials, 

13083 -970, Campinas , SP, Brazil. 

4 MAX IV Laboratory, Lund Uni versity, 22100 Lund, Sweden. 

5 Institute of Electrochemistry, University of Alicante, Apdo. 99, E -03080 Alicante, Spain 

pablosf@unicamp.br 

Several new research topics and technological developments in ele ctro che mistry were born in 

the last decades together with the progress of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Bragg coherent 

diffraction imaging (BCDI) have been applied since late in the 19 90 s to obtain 3D images of 

nanomaterials, also giving informa tion of lattice strain and defects. BCDI consists in imaging single 

nanocrystals using highly coherent and very inte nse x-ray beams , demanding the use of very powerful 

light sources . The us e of phase r et rieval algorithms allow s to reconstr uct thr ee dime nsional ima ges of 

single particles from dif fraction patterns .

Some examples of applications of BCDI to electroc hem istry , and other fields releva nt to the 

area , comprise very im portant contribu tions to the study of batteries 1 and the b ehavior of nanomaterials 2.

Fi gur e 1 show s an outstanding result in the field of heterogenou s catalysis 3. Through the 3D image of a Pt 

NP and measur ing the lattice displa cement, the authors were able to follow th e ch emisorption of CH 4 and 

O2 on the NP. It is worth noting that si milar experim ent s are still missing in the field of electro catalysis. 

Figure 1. a) Sch em e of in situ BCDI during methane catalytic oxidation . b) Dis placement and 3D 

reconstruct ed of a 220 nm Pt nanocrystal during CH 4 oxidation. Red (positive sign) indi cates th e p rojected 

displacements along the [111] direction and blue (negative sign) implies the opposite direction. These 3D 

images show lattice c ontraction along the edges and corners owing to ads orption of oxygen atoms and 

methane . The cross -sections sh ow that the distortio n propagates deep into the interior of the Pt 

nanocrystal and is released after catalytic methane oxidation . The image was adapted from the literature 3.

In this work , we will summarize the most relevant advances of this technique applied to different 

elec trochemical system s, including some interesting res ults recently reported at MAX IV 4, and we will 

also dis cuss abou t the future c hallenges that this technique must overcome to perform in sit u/operando 

electrochemical experiments .

References 

[1] A. Ulvesta d, J. N. Clark, A. Singer, D. Vine, H. M. Cho, R. Harder , Y. S. Meng and O. G. Shpyrko, 

Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(16), 10551 -10555 .

[2] Liu, Y., Lopes, P.P., Cha, W., Harder, R., Maser, J., Maxey, E., Highland, M.J., Markovic, N.M., 

Hruszkewycz, S. O., Stephenson, G.B. and You, H, Nano letters, 2017, 17(3), 1595 -1601 .

[3] D. Kim, M. Chung, J. Carnis, S. Kim, K. Yun, J. Kang, W. Cha, M. J. Cherukara, E. Maxey, R. 

Harde r, K. Sasikumar, S. K. R. S. Sankaranarayanan, A. Zozulya, M. Sprung, D. Riu and H. Kim, Nat. 

Commun., 2018, 9, 1 –7. 

[4] Björling, A.,C arbone, D., Sarabia, F. J., Hammarberg, S., Feliu, J.M.,Solla -Gullón, J. . J. Synchrotron 

Rad. 2019, 26, 1830 –1834. Iron -doped Calcium Titanate as co -catalyst for the Oxygen Reduction 

# Reaction ( ORR )

Lucia Mazzapioda a, Riccardo Renga a, Maria Assunta Navarra a

> a

Department of Chemistry, Sapienza University of Rome, 

Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy 

lucia.mazzapioda@uniroma1.it 

For sustainable economic growth and environment protection, energies generated from renewable sources 

result indispensable. In this field, polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are considered as a 

key element in the future clean energy becoming a promising solution. However, these devices present 

two major drawbacks, high cost and low durability that must to be solved for a their large scale 

ap plication and commercialization. One main challenge concerns the development of highly stable 

reversible electrodes capable to catalyze efficiently the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) [1,2] .

Unfortunately, this reaction is kinetically sluggish toward electrons transfer because it is 

thermodynamically unfavorable, resulting in high overpotentials at the fuel cell cathode. Consider able 

efforts, in the last decade, were addressed to improve the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction and 

to reduce Pt loading in order to achieve low -cost targets. 

To this purpose, we here propose a study based on the use of a no n-stoichiometric perov skite iron -doped 

calcium titanate (CaTi 0.8 Fe 0.2 O3-δ, CTFO) as co -catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 

Physical chemical investigations for the understanding of functional features of the proposed materials 

will be presented , such as the X-ray analysis of the perovskite reported in Figure 1 .

Figure 1: X -ray diffraction pattern of the synthesized CaTi 0,8 Fe 0,2 O3-δ powder and its structure 

Composite Pt/C electrodes, with different amounts of CaTi 0.8 Fe 0.2 O3-δ, were prepared and their catalytic 

performances were investigated by rotating -disk electrode (RDE) techniques. Two composite catalysts 

were prepared, Pt/C:CTFO 1:0,5 and Pt/C:CTFO 1:1 an d compared with a commercial Pt/C catalyst used 

as reference. RDE measurements, have shown that the catalyst Pt/C:CTFO 1:1 posses the best activity 

toward the ORR presenting a 4 e -reduction pathway and exhibiting the most high limiting current density 

than the other sample s. It is clear that the right amount of this perovskite can alter the ORR mechanism 

from 2e - pathway to a 4e - pathway, in fact a poor amount of additive seem to be not sufficient to improve 

the Pt/C catalytic activity. 

By this preliminary stud y about the physical chemical and electrochemical properties of CTFO, we have 

demonstrated that this iron -doped perovskite is a promising electroactive material to be used as cathode 

catalyst support for low temperature fuel cells. 

[1]M. Chen, L. Wa ng, H.Yang, S. Zhao, H. Xu, G. Wu, J. Power Sources 2018, 375, 2018 

[2]C. Lo Vecchio, A.S. Aricò, G. Monforte, V. Baglio, Renew.  Energy,2018, 120, 342 20 30 40 50 60 70    

> CaTi 0.8 Fe 0.2 O3-
> Fit Linear *Fe 2O3- ICSD 15840
> CaTi 0,8 Fe 0,2 O3-- 51878 ICSD

** 

> 2/ degree
> Intensity / u.a.

*Ca Ti OOxygen vacancy 

> Fe

# Mathematical modeling of diffusion and convection in MEMS 

# electroplating for energy and sensor technologies 

Daniel C. Smallwood 1, Cian O’Mathuna 1,2 , Paul McCloskey 1 and James F. Rohan 1

Micro -Nano Systems Centre, Tyndall National Institute 1

School of Engin eering, University College Cork 2

Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Lee Maltings, Cork, Ireland, T12 R5CP 

Daniel.smallwood@tyndall.ie 

Advanced energy and sensor technologies require microelectromechanical systems with increased device 

pe rformance, versatility, and efficiency . To enable this, 3D micro and nano conductor s have emerged as 

essential components for the miniaturization of next generation devices. Ubiquitous in the semiconductor 

industry, e lectroplating in wafer -scale lithography mold s is a high -throughput fabrication method for 

micro and nano conductive components. This work investigates methods to tailor the topology of 

electroplated 3D conductive components, such as electrodes , using CAD modeling in COMSOL 

Multiphysics . This ena bles meeting the design specifications of flat, convex, or concave substrate -distal 

electroactive surfaces . Flat conduct or surfaces are ideal for microbump soldering and flip -chip fabrication 

methods and concave/convex designs increase the number of availa ble electrode reaction sites for sens or 

applications . Coupled and uncoupled physics simulations were performed comprising laminar flow of a 

Newtonion fluid, the standard convection protocol for electrochemical baths, and electrochemistry 

modeling with the Nernst -Planck and Butler -Volmer formulations for mass transfer and reaction kinetics, 

respectively. Laminar flow or convection dominant electroplating conditions were found to create convex 

substrate -distal conductor topologies. Diffusion dominant electrop lating conditions resulted in concave 

formations. B oth effects can be coupled together to create a flat substrate -distal conductor topology .

Simulation results are compared to directly corresponding experimental w ork, with positive correlation. 

By use of v irtual mathematical modeling tools, such as COMSOL Multiphysics, crucial insights into the 

electroplating process can be gained. Herein, the phenomenon of substrate -distal electroactive surface 

topology is investigated with regards to the interplay between convection and diffusion dominant 

conditions. Our findings enable tailored and scalable surface topology processing options, which can be 

readily integrated into pre -existing research and industry standard operating procedures .

Acknowledgement: The auth or’s would like to thank Science Foundation Ireland for funding this research 

under the SFI ADEPT project. Carbon -supported Cu/SnO 2 Core -shell Nanoparticles for the Selective 

# Electrochemical CO 2 Reduct ion Towards Formic Acid      

> Kevin Van Daele ab , Nick Daems ab , Daniel Choukroun a,Deepak Pant b,Tom Breugelmans ab
> aAdvanced Reactor Technology, University of Antwerp
> Universiteitsplein 1, 2160 Wilrijk, Belgium
> bFlemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO)
> Boerentang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
> E-mail: Kevin.VanDaele@Uantwerpen.be

Increased levels of CO 2 in the earth’s atmosphere, originating from excessive anthropogenic 

greenhouse gas emissions, are believed to be the main cause of global warming [1] . The 

electrochemical CO 2 reduction, however, provides a viable option for re ducing anthropogenic CO 2

emissions , while at the same time closing the carbon cycle, by selectively converting CO 2 to for 

example formic acid . Formic acid is a valuable commodity chemical, not only because of its 

application in several chemical processes, such as textiles, pharmaceuticals and food chemicals, but 

also because of its potential as a hydrogen carrier [2].

Over the last decade, the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide towards formic acid 

has been studied extensively and s everal  promising Cu/Sn electrocatalysts have already been reported 

[3]. Desp ite the reported high Faradaic e fficiencies, the stability and activity of these state -of -the -art 

electrocatalysts and the contribution of the supporting material remains insufficiently studied. 

In this work, we investigate the influence of the carbon support on the stability , current 

density (activity) and Faradaic efficiency , during the electrochemical reduction of CO 2 towards 

formic acid. This is done by comparing the performance of both unsupported - and carbon -supported 

Cu/SnO 2 core -shell electrocat alysts for the CO 2 reduction , through multiple chronoamperometric 

measurements , as t his allows ranking the electrocatalysts with respect to their selectivity in function 

of applied potential. Furthermore, these catalysts were evaluated at industrially relevant conditions, 

in our in -house designed electroly zer, revealing a good stability compare d to literature. The 

supporting material is believed to play a key role in the enhancement of the sta bility and activity of 

our Cu/SnO 2 core -shell electrocatalysts. 

[1] B. B. Obama, Science . 6284 (2017) 10 –13. 

[2] M. Pérez -Fortes et al ., Int. J. Hydrogen Energy . 41 (2016) 16444 –16462. 

[3 ] X. Zheng et al. , Nat. Catal . (2018 ).Effect of Interparticle Porosity and Electrode Thickness on the 

# Desalination Performance by Capacitive Deionization 

Kamilla M. Barcelos , Kaíque S. G. C. Oliveira , Luís A. M. Ruotolo 

Federal University of S ão Carlos, Department of Che mical Engi neering 

Ro d. Washington Luiz km 235 , 13565 -905 S ão Carlos – SP, Brazil 

pluis@ufscar.br 

Capacitive deionization (CDI) emerge d as an energy -efficient de salination technology , in w hich ions are 

removed from the water and stored in the electrical do uble layer insi de the pores of an activated carbon 

material . In this work, we demonstrated a comprehensive and systematic study of polyaniline activated 

carbon (PAC) electrode s prepar ed by blade -casting (DB) and free -standing (FS) techniques in order t o

enhance th e sal t adsorpt ion capacity (SAC) and adsorption/desorption kinetics of the CDI process . The 

effects of interparticle porosity and electrode thickness on the textural and electrochemical properties of 

electrodes enabled a better understanding of how tuning the preparatio n techniqu e of the CDI electrodes 

can improve the desalination performance. Although t he different electrodes performed similarly in terms 

of gravimetric salt adsorption capacit ies , FS electrodes outperformed the DB electrodes in terms of 

vol umetric salt a dsorption capacities , because the carbon films were more compact and a large quantity of 

electroactive mater ial was available for salt adsorption . In this case, a higher amount of salt can b e

removed using small CDI units equipp ed with FS ele ctrodes. On th e other hand, when the electrosorption 

and deso rption kinetics are considered, the DB electrode present ed superior performance due to its h igher 

interparticle porosity that provide s faster m ass transfer in voids , thus increas ing the ions transport to the 

PAC surface and the el ect ro sorption rate . In this case, the DB electrode dis played the best performance 

fo r C DI applications involving aqueous diluted salt electrolytes . In summary , the presence o f large 

interparticle porosity in thin thickness electrodes is important to obtain superior performance in the CDI 

pr ocess .Copper hexacyanoferrate obtained from a nanocomposite between 

# reduced graphene oxide and copper oxide nanoparticles for 

# application in batteries 

Maria Karolina Ramos , Aldo José Gorgatti Zarbin 

Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Paran á (UFPR) 

Ce ntro Politécnico, CP 19081, 81531 -990, Curitiba, PR, Brazil 

mariakarolina05@gmail.com , aldozarbin@ufpr.br 

Prussian blue (PB) is one of the most studied mixed -valence materials and has become a class of 

comp ounds useful for large -scale metal -ion batteries , and its structure allows mod ifications that lead to a 

series of compounds, the so -called Prussian blue analogs (PBAs). 1 Among all PBAs, copper 

hexacyanoferrate (CuHCF) has unique characteristics, which can present reversible redox reactions in 

various supporting electrolytes containing Li +, Na +, NH 4+, K +, among others. Obtaining nanocomposites 

between PBA and carbon nano structures improves some PBA characteristics, increasing both the 

electronic conductivity and the electrochemical stability . S everal studies have demonstrated the potential 

of th ese nano compo sites as active materials to be used in batteries and capacitors, in which the charg e and 

discharg e processes are fast and reversible , showing high charge densities. 2 In t his work we present a new 

route to ob tain nanocomposite thin films between copper oxide nanoparticles (Cu xONPs) and reduced 

graphene oxide (rGO) through a liquid -liquid interfacial reaction developed in our research group. 3

Twenty different films between Cu xONPs and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) was obtained varying the 

ratio between the components . The precursors of the rGO/Cu xONPs nanocomposite were reduced 

simultaneously and formed a self -sufficient thin film at the interf ace of the biphasic system. These films 

were deposited on different substrates and characterized by different techniques. The morphology of the 

copper oxide nanoparticles obtained from these materials varied in each sample, in relation to shape and 

size: s maller spheres (57 nm), larger spheres (179 nm), cubes (120 nm) and ellipses (200 nm) . Through 

X-ray diffractometry, it was possible to verify that the smaller spheres are Cu 2O species and the other 

morphologies were attributed to CuO, where most of these films are formed by mixtures between these 

species. After characterization, some films were used as precursors for the formation of nanocomposites 

between rGO and CuHCF , through an electrochemical reaction with K 3[Fe(CN) 6] solution. A fter a 

systematic stu dy the optimal condition to the electrodeposition was fixed in pH 2, potential range from 

0.0 to 1.0 V (vs Ag/AgCl) and scanning speed of 20 mV s -1. The best rGO/CuHCF film obtained was 

studied as a potential material for cathodes of aqueous metal -ion batt eries. This film was evaluated for 

three different electrolytes (NaCl, KCl and LiCl) in the charge and discharge curves and different current 

densities (0.05; 0.10; 0.25; 0.50; 0.75; 1.00 and 2.00 A g -1), where the best results were for Na + and K +

reaching a capacity of 25 mA h g -1 at a rate of 0.05 A g -1. The summary of this work is represented in the 

figure below .4

1. Schmidt, A., Husmann, S. & Zarbin, A. J. G. . J. Solid State Electrochem. 22 , 2003 –2012 (2018). 

2. Husmann, S., Orth, E. S. & Zarbin, A. J. G. Electrochim. Acta 312 , 380 –391 (2019). 

3. Salvatierra, R. V., Oliveira, M. M. & Zarbin, A. J. G. . Chem. Mater. 22 , 5222 –5234 (2010). 

4. Ramos, M. K. & Zarbin, A. J. G. Appl. Surf. Sci. 515 , 146000 (2020). Atomic Layer Deposition of IrO 2 and NiO thin films as 

# anodes in Alkaline Water Electrolysis 

DJ Donn Matienzo 1, Emanuele Instuli 1, Daniel Settipani 2 and Tanja Kallio 2

> 1

New Application Research, Research and Development Division, Industrie De Nora S.p.A., 

20134 Milan, Italy; 

> 2

Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, School of Chemical Engineering, Aalto University, 

02150 Espoo, Finland 

djdonn.matienzo@denora.com 

Recent studies show that the application of thin film materials to catalytic systems ha s begun to attract 

much attention, and the capacity to deposit these catalytic films in a highly controlled manner continues 

to gain importance. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) which is a special type of chemical vapor deposition 

(CVD) technique, is consider ed as one of the most attractive thin film deposition techniques where the 

conformality, uniformity, and thickness controllability of the films are crucial [1]. 

In this work [2] , iridium dioxide (IrO 2) and nickel oxide (NiO) thin films (approximately 25 t o 60 nm) 

were deposited on Ni expanded mesh suitable for industrial applications and on an Si (100) substrate, 

which served as a reference material. Subsequently, thin films deposited on Ni -expanded meshes were 

applied as anodes for alkaline water electrol ysis. The choice of these two materials comes from the need 

to demonstrate the electrochemical activity of thin films for what are known to be particularly active 

noble and non -noble metal oxides for oxygen evolution reaction. Various ALD operating paramet ers (i.e., 

total number of deposition cycles, sublimation and deposition temperatures, and precursors pulse and 

purge lengths ) were varied to determine their eff ects on the structure and the electrochemical performance 

of the thin film materials. With the requirement to run the electrolysis system at the lowest power 

consumption as possible for industrial applications and the next generation alkaline water electrolysis will 

operate at current loads around 1000 mA cm -2 (10 kA m -2), the focus of this study is to compare the 

oxygen overpotential at such high current density. Results from the electrochemical tests (6 M KOH, 80 

C, continuous agitation ) showed the catalytic activity of the samples . Oxygen overpotential values were 

20 to 60 mV lower than the uncoat ed Ni expanded mesh. In summary, the study has demonstrated the 

feasibility of using the ALD technique to deposit uniformed and electroactive thin films on industrial 

metallic substrates as anodes for alkaline water electrolysis. 

[1] Hämäläinen, J.; Kem ell, M.; Munnik, F.; Kreissig, U.; Ritala, M.; Leskelä, M. Atomic layer 

deposition of iridium oxide thin films from Ir(acac) 3 and ozone. Chem. Mater. 2008 , 20, 2903 –2907. 

[2] Matienzo, D. D.; Settipani, D.; Instuli, E.; Kallio, T. Active IrO 2 and NiO thin films p repared by 

Atomic Layer Deposition for Oxygen Evolution Reaction. Catalysts 2020 , 10 (1), 92. Electrochemical Conversion of Furfural, a Biobased Compound, in 

# Unconventional Electrolytes 

Julien Vander Steen 1, Michel Luhmer 2, C hristophe Coutanceau 3, C laudine Buess -Herman 1, Th omas 

Doneux 1

> 1

Chemistry of Surfaces, Interfaces and Nanomaterials (ChemSIN), Université libre de Bruxelles, 

Boulevard du Triomphe 2, CP255, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium 

> 2

Laboratoire de RMN haute résolution, Université libre de Bruxelles, 

Avenue F. D. Roosevelt 50, CP 160/08, 1050 Bruxelles, Bel gi um 

> 3

Institut de Chimie des Milieux et des Matériaux de Poitiers, Université de Poitiers, 

Rue Michel Brunet (bât 27) 4, TSA 51106, 86073 Poitiers Cedex 9, France 

julien.vander.steen@ulb.ac.be 

Unconventional media like Room Temperature Ionic Liquids (RTILs) a nd Deep Eutectic Solvents (DES) 

are promising electrolytes for the electrochemical valorisation of biobased compounds . Indeed, their ability 

to solubilize lignocellulose and its by -products 1, their low vapour pressure and their large electrochemical 

window are particularly attrac tive. In addition, DES are inexpensive, easy to produce and environmentally 

friendly. 

In this work, the IL s [BMPyrr][NTf 2] and [BM Im ][NTf 2] and the DES Choline Chloride -Urea (ChCl -U) 

and Choline Chloride -Glycerol (ChCl -Gly) were used for the electroconversion of furfural (FF) , a molecule 

extracted from hemicellulose . FF can be obtained in large quantities from agricultural waste like sugar cane 

bagasse, wheat straw or corn stover 1 and is a promising building block for the chemical industry 2.

NMR measurements after long -term electrolyses and in -situ FTIR coupled with electrochemical techniques 

were used to study the FF behaviour in these media. 

In [BMPyrr][NTf 2], the reduction of FF leads to the formation of furfuryl alcohol, meso -hydrofuroin and 

d,l -hydrofu roin after electrolysis irrespective of the electrode material tested (Au, Pt, Cu, Ag, C).  At carbon 

electrode, the electrochemical window is large enough to observe the oxidation of FF, tough  electrolys es

showed a blockage of the electrode resulting from adsorption processes. 

In [BMIm][NTf 2], a single product , furoin , is observed after reduction at a gold electrode . The presence of 

carbene evidenced by NMR measurements support s an N-heterocyclic carbene c atalysis mechanism for the 

formation of furoin. 

In ChCl -U at 25°C, the degradation of FF by a condensation reaction between urea and FF was evidenced 

by NMR measurements and t his medium was thus discarded . By contrast , FF showed to be stable in ChCl -

Gly. 

In ChCl -Gly, reduction of FF and formation of furfuryl alcohol were detected by the combination of in -situ 

FTIR and electrochemical techniques at gold and copper electrodes . The electrochemical s tability of the 

DES its elf was monitored by the same techniques. Degradation of the DES appears to be less significative 

on copper in comparison with gold. The electrochemical activity of synthe sised Au/C and Cu/C 

nanoparticles for FF reduction was compared with the bulk materia ls.         

> 1. Farran, A. et al. Green Solvents in Carbohydrate Chemistry: From Raw Materials to Fine Chemicals. Chem. Rev. 115 , 6811 –
> 6853 (2015).
> 2. May, A. S. & Biddinger, E. J. Strategies to Control Electrochemical Hydrogenation and Hydrogenolysis of Furfural and
> Minimize Undesired Side Reactions. ACS Catal. 3212 –3221 (2020) doi:10.1021/acscatal.9b05531.

# The phenanthro[9,10 -d]imidazole framework as a new mediator 

# platform for photo - and electrochemistry 

Patrick Enders , Michal Májek, Robert Francke 

University of Rostock 

Albert -Einstein -Str. 3a , 18059 Rostock 

patrick.enders@uni -rostock.de 

Redox mediators are often used in electro - and photochemistry to enable reaction s that are otherwise not 

feasible or very slow .[1] For a long time, researchers in b oth fields have independently developed their own 

systems based on the individual requirements . Herein we present a new organocatalyst platform based on 

the phe nanthro [9,10‐ d]imidazole structure (MED , see figure below ), which can be used both for electro -

and photochemical applications .[2],[3] Moreover, the mediator properties can be flexibly tuned by variation 

of R 1 and R 2.

Anodic oxidation of MED leads to form ation of a radical cation , which can act as a single electron acceptor 

toward a substrate in solution an d thereby trigger synthetically useful reaction sequences. [2] On the other 

hand, photoexcitation by blue light leads to an excited state MED* that can act as a strong reductant. MED* 

is capable of performing reductive dehalogenations lead ing to radical intermediate s that can be used for C -

C bond form ing reactions .[4] 

The properties of MED were investigated using cyclic voltammetry, preparative scale electrolysis, UV -Vis 

spectroscopy, fluorescence quenching studies and photochemical test reactions. In the present contribution, 

the results of these studies will be presented, including a comparison between the photo - and 

electrochemical applications and the influence of the substitution pattern on key -properties such as redox 

potential, light absorption and reactivity. 

References :

[1] a) N. A. Romero, D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Rev. 2016 , 116 , 10075; b) R. Francke, R. D. Little, 

Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014 , 43 , 2492. 

[2] R. Francke, R. D. Little, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014 , 136 , 427. 

[3] B. M. Johnson, R. Francke, R. D. Little, L. A. Berben, Chem. Sci. 2017 , 8, 6493. 

[4] P. Enders, M. Májek, C. M. Lam, R. D. Little, R. Francke, manuscript in preparation .Electrochemiluminesce nce microscopy boosted by nanot echnologies 

Sara Rebeccani ,a Alejandro C riado, b Giovanni Valenti ,a Maurizio Prato b, c and Francesco Paolucci a 

> a

Department of chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician ”, Alma M ater Studiorum – University of Bologna 

Via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna , Italy  

> b

Center for cooperative r esearch in biomaterials C ICbio maGUNE 

Paseo Miramon 182 , 20014 Donostia/san Sebastiàn, Gipuzkoa, Spain  

> c

Depa rtment of chemical and pharmaceutic al science s INS TM Udr Triest e, University of Trieste 

Via Licio Giorgieri 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy 

sa ra. rebeccani2@unibo.it 

Electrochemiluminescence is a luminescent emission induced by an elect rochemical stimulus. In the last 

decades, ECL emerged as a powerful analytical technique i n many fields, like clini cal assay and 

bioanalysis, thanks to the unique signal -to -noise ratio and spatial control of the emission [1] .

The ECL intrinsic spatial resoluti on is crucial in the combination with microscopy, an emerging approach 

for the visualization of micro and nano -metric objects and biological materials in close proximity to the 

electrode surface. ECL microscopy applicati ons and features are being deeply st udied for increase the 

sensitivity and the successful surface -confined mapping of analytes [2] . In the quest for reaching these 

goals , ECL microscopy can be coupled to nanotechnologies. 

Nano materials , such as nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes (CNT ), are being widely studied in 

combination with ECL for enhancing the analytic al signal [3] . Herein , nanomaterials w ill be used for 

extend ing the spatial emission of ECL imaging, which is normally confined in close proximity to the 

electrode surface (distance < 3 μm) . CNT s or graphene , thanks to their highly conductivity , were used to 

create a sort of conductive layer a ll around labe lled objects [4] . Here we demonstrated that ECL emission 

active area is extended with a consequent enhance in the ECL signal . Thi s novel approach has been 

app lied to beads with d ifferent dimension (rangin g from 1 to 4 μm) provid ing novel insight s into the 

mechanisms underlying ECL generation .

Figure 1: Generation of a conductive layer for ECL signal enhancement 

[1] W. Miao, Chem. Rev. 108 (2008) 2506 –2553. 

[2] A. Zanut, A. Fiorani, S. Rebeccani, S. Kesarkar, G. Valenti, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411 (2019) 

4375 –4382. 

[3] A. Fiorani, J.P. Merino, A. Zanut, A. Criado, G. Valenti, M. Prato, F. Paolucci, Curr. Opin. 

Electrochem. 16 (2019) 66 –74. 

[4] P. Kannan, J. Chen, F. Su, Z. Guo, Y. Huang, Anal. Chem. 91 (2019) 14792 –14802. New Ways for Heat Energy Conversion : Eu(III)/Eu(II) Redox Couple 

# in Ionic Liquids 

Veronika A. Zinovyeva (a) , Thomas Salez (b,c) , Michel Beaughon (b) , Kakoli Bhattacharya (b) ,

Marco Bonetti (b) , and Sawako Nakamae (b)  

> (a)

IJCLab, CNRS -IN2P3, Université Paris -Saclay, 91406 Orsay Cedex, France  

> (b)

SPEC, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris -Saclay, CEA Saclay 91191 Gif -sur -Yvette Cedex, France  

> (c)

École des Ponts ParisTech, Champs -sur -Marne, F -77455 Marne -la -Vallée, France 

E-mail : veronika.zinovyeva@universite -paris -sacl ay.fr 

Due to technological progress and population growth, a huge increase in demand for energy is expected in 

the next years. However, energy production and consumption are accompanied by significant heat losses 

which generate a direct nuisance on the e nvironment and contribute to climate change. One of the 

promising routes to new energy resources is the use of this waste heat. In such a context, an interesting 

way for the direct conversion of low grade heat into electricity is the use of thermogalvanic cells (TGC s) 

containing ionic liquids (ILs) as electrolyte [1, 2] .

Our choice of the system was focused on the solutions of europium in 1 -ethyl -3-methylimidazolium 

bis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (EMIM.TFSI). The apparent standard potential of the redo x couple 

Eu(III)/Eu(II) strongly depends on the temperature in various IL s based on the anion TFSI - [3], our 

objective was therefore to explain this phenomenon and to develop new TGCs . We studied the properti es 

of the solutions of europium (III) and (II) as a function of temperature and in the presence of various 

ligands (water, dimethylsulfoxide, dim ethylacetamide, bromides, etc.) by numero us spectral and 

electrochemical methods. 

Cyclic voltammetry study has shown th at electroreduction of europium (III) spe cies is irreversible in an 

anhydrous medium on a glassy carbon electrode. However, the redox process becomes quasi -reversible 

after the addition of ligands or the temperature increase . In particular , we studied the compe titive 

complexation of europium (III) ions by water and TFSI - or Br - anions over a wide range of temperatures. 

The diffusi on coefficients of the europium (III) species were of the order of 10 -7 cm 2.s -1 at 61.5 ° C. In our 

work, we have shown that the Seebeck coefficient can reach a record valu e of -5.5 mV.K -1 due to the 

competitive complexation of europium ions in ionic liquid medium. 

The new TGCs were tested under open and closed circuit conditions , and the obtained data were in 

perfect agreement with the results of cyclic voltammetry. The el ectrical power measurements were 

carried out and the optimization work is underway. 

Refe rences 

[1] V. Zinovyeva, S. Nakamae, M. Bonetti, M. Roger.  Enhanced Thermoelectric Power in Ionic Liquids. 

ChemElectroChem, 1 (2014) 426 -430. 

[2] M. Bonetti, S. Naka mae, B.T. Huang, T. J. Salez, C. Wiertel -Gasquet, M. Roger. Thermoelectric 

energy recovery at ionic -liquid/electrode interface. J. Chem. Phys., 142 (2015) 244708. 

[3] Ch. Jagadeeswara Rao, K.A. Venkatesan, K. Nagarajan et al. Electrochemical behavior of 

europium(III) in N -butyl -N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide. Electrochim. Acta, 

54 (2009) 4718 -4725. Nickel Catalyst Migration in A nion Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell s

Lin Xie and Donald W. Kirk 

Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto 

200 college, Toronto, ON, C anada M5S3E5 

Nickel materials have been widely studied as non -platinum group metal (non -PGM) cathode catalysts for anion 

exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFC). Although the stabilit ies of many Ni catalysts ha ve been tested by 

accelerated potential cycling, th e studies do not fully simulate the operatin g A nion Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell 

(AEMFC) conditions. For back -up power systems, the standby AEMFCs are at a high steady state cell potential. For 

cathode catalysts, this is a more challenging condition than cycled potentials and the stability of Ni catalysts need to 

be re -examined. 

Ni is stable in many alkaline electro chemical applicat ions because of the formation of a NiO x passivation film at the 

surface under water splitting potentials, which prevents further corrosion [ 1]. However, AEMFC operating conditions 

could disrupt the  Ni  passivation mechanism. According to the thermodynamic model by Beverskog et al., Ni formation 

of Ni(OH) 3- ([I]= 10 -8 M) is possible when the pH > 11 and the potential is  within  0.1V -1. 0V vs. RHE potential, which 

covers the range of AEMFC operating conditions [ 2]. This suggests that, especially with high cathodic AEMFC 

potentials, Ni, including both Ni metal and Ni oxides, may potentially dissolve to form Ni(OH) 3-. This could cause a 

significant challenge to the known Ni passivation mechanism as the surface NiO x protection film may dissolve to form 

mobile ions leaving the underlying Ni susceptible to corrosion. Especially when the AEMFC is operating at a constant 

high voltage at standby , the steady state cathode potential could keep the Ni species dissolved and allow the mobile 

Ni species migrate to other AEMFC components, which could be detrimental to fuel cells, 

This study w as aimed at examining the stability of Ni at an AEMFC cathode , under steady state cell potentials. A 

basic Ni composite catalyst, Ni on  Vulcan®  XC72 carbon (Ni/C), was used as the catalyst to research cathodic Ni 

behavior under the study conditions in a simulated AEMFC with constan t oxygen flow. A steady state potential of 

0.9V was held across the cell for 1500 hours of testing. The resulting changes in Ni morphology due to dissolution 

and migration were significant and were examined  at multiple cell locations,  using scanning electron microscopy 

(SEM), scanning transmitted electron microscopy (STEM) , and  X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. 

These analyses on Ni migration  should provide a benchmark for the  use of Ni catalysts in AEMFC. 

[1] M. Pourbaix, Atl as of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, National Association of 

Corrosion Engineers, Houston, (1979), Page 453. 

[2] B. Beverskog and I. Puigdomenech, Revised Pourbaix diagrams for nickel at 25 –300 °C, Corrosion 

Science (1997), Volume 39, Iss ue 5, Pages 969 -980 Proton Insertion Chemistry of a Zinc -Organic Battery 

Zhiwei Tie 

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College of Chemistry, Nankai University 

Nankai Univeristy, No. 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China 

e-mail : zhiweitie@126.com 

Rechar geable aqueous zinc -ion batteries (ZIBs) are attracting more attention since the Zn anode 

possess es low redox potential ( -0.76 V vs . standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)), high specific capa city 

(820 mAh g -1), excellent stability in water and low cost. [1] The electrochemical performance of ZIBs 

mainly depends on the design of cathode materials. Recently , various active materials such as transition 

metal oxides or sulfides (based on vanadium [2] and manganese [3]), Prussian blue analogues [4] and organic 

compounds [5] were developed to serve as the cathode materials of aqueous ZIBs. Among them, organic 

materials are considered as a promising candidate because of their renewability, en vironmental 

fr iendliness, low cost and structural diversity .

The proton storage in rechargeable aqueous zinc -ion batteries (ZIBs) is attract ing extensive attention 

due to the fast kinetics of H + insertion/ extraction .[6] However, up to now, it is not achieved in organic 

materials -based ZIBs with a mild electrolyte. Herein, we developed aqueous ZIBs based on diquinoxalino 

[2,3 -a:2',3' -c] phenazine (HATN) in a mild electrolyte. Electrochemical and structural analysis confirm 

for the first time that such Zn/HATN batteries e xperience a H + uptake/removal behavior with highly 

reversible structural evolution of HATN. The H + uptake/removal endows the Zn/HATN batteries with 

enhanced electrochemical performance. Proton insertion chemistry will broaden the horizons of aqueous 

Zn/org anic batteries and open up new opportunities to construct high -performance ZIBs. 

References 

[1]  J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. 

Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C . Marschilok, L. A. Archer, Science 

2019 , 366 , 645 -648 .

[2]  J. Ding, Z. Du, L. Gu, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Gong, S. Yang, Adv. Mater. 2018 , 30 , 1800762 .

[3]  D. Chao, W. Zhou, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Gu, K. Davey, S. -Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 

2019 , 58 , 7823 -7828 .

[4]  Q. Yang, F. Mo, Z. Liu, L. Ma, X. Li, D. Fang, S. Chen, S. Zhang, C. Zhi, Adv. Mater. 2019 , 31 ,

1901521 .

[5]  Q. Zhao, W. Huang, Z. Luo, L. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Ma, J. Chen, Sci. Adv. 2018 , 4,

eaao1761 .

[6] H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. 

Mueller, J. Liu, Nat. Energy 2016 , 1, 16039 .Nanostructured Palladium Electrocatalyst Support ed on MOF -Derived 

# Carbon for Alkaline Water -Splitting Reactions 

Adewale K. Ipadeola * and Kenneth I. Ozoemena 

Molecular Sciences Institute, School of Chemistry, University of the Witwatersrand, 

Private Bag 3, PO Wits, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa 

1846796@students.wits.ac.za 

The hydrogen economy is one of the strategies to phasing out fossil fuel technology in the core sustainable 

development goal (SDG 7) where hydrogen (H 2) is generated from water and employed as fuel for clean and 

renewable energy. Alkaline water electrolysis has long histories and presently used in industries for H 2 production 

using platinum (Pt) catalysts .1 However, the Pt is scarce and poor electrocatalytic activity in alkaline condition s

compared to palladium (Pd) electrocatalysts .2 This informed the interest to design a novel nanostructured Pd 

electrocatalyst on metal -organic framework (MOF) -derived carbon support. The MOF is used as a sac rificial 

template because of its interesting properties which are inherited in the derived carbon .3 This work studies the 

cobalt -based MOF -derived carbons (MOFDC) as new carbon -based support for Pd catalyst for electrochemical 

water -splitting; i.e., hydrog en evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline medium. 

The study shows a high increase in the HER activity, in terms of low onset overpotential (onset ղ = 35 mV vs .

RHE), high exchange current density ( jo,s  0.22 mA cm -2), high mass activity ( jo,m  59 mA mg -1), high kinetic 

current ( jK  5 – 8 mA cm -2 ) and heterogeneous rate constant ( k0  4 x 10 -4 cm s -1) are attributed to the high 

porosity of the MOFDC and contribution from Co residue, while the large Tafel slope ( bc = 2 61 mV dec -1) is 

ascribed to the high hydrogen adsorption onto the polycrystalline Pd as supplementary reaction step to the 

suggestive Volmer –Heyrovsky mechanism. These values obtained for the catalyst are comparable or better than 

many recent reports that adopted nano -carbon materials and /or use bi - or ternary Pd -based electrocatalysts for 

HER. The improved HER activity of the Pd/MOFDC is associated with the positive impact of MOFDC and Co 

residue on the Pd catalyst (i.e., low activation energy, EA  12 kJ mol -1) which allows for easy desorption of the 

Hads to generate hydrogen. Moreover, the Pd/MOFDC displays satisfactory OER activity than its analogue, with 

lower onset ղ (1.29 V vs . RHE) and ba ( 78 mV dec -1), and higher current response (ca. 18 mA cm -2). Indeed, 

this study provides a new strategy of designing and synthesizing MOFDC with physico -chemical features for Pd -

based electrocatalysts that will allow for efficient electrochemical water -splitting processes. 

References 

## 1. K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Pr og. Energy Combust., 2010, 36 , 307. 

## 2. K. I. Ozoemena, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 89523. 

## 3. S. Pandiaraj, H. B. Aiyappa, R. Banerjee and S. Kurungot, Chem. Comm. , 2015, 50 , 3363. Bipol ar Electrochemical Exfoliation of Graphite for the Production o f

# Oxygen Reduction Reaction Electrocatalysts 

N.S. Komarova 1, A.S. Kotkin 1, V.K. Kochergin 2, R.A. Manzhos 1, A.G. Krivenko 1 

> 1

Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Ru ssian Acade my of Sciences ,

Academician Semenov av., 1, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russian Federation  

> 2

Department of Chemistry, M.V. Lom onosov Moscow State University ,

119991 Moscow , Russian Federation 

rmanzhos @yandex .ru 

Few -layer graphene structures (FLGS) doped with he teroatoms (N, P, S and B) and/or their 

nanocomposites with transition metals oxides demonstrate distinct catalytic activity towards the oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR). Such materials are considered as promising candidates to replace platinum -

based catalys ts in the cathodes of fuel cells and metal -air batteries [1]. Recently, the usage of 

electrochemical methods for the synthesis of few -layer graphene structures (FLGS) has become 

increasingly popular. At current densities greater than 20 A ·cm –2, high -voltag e impulses applied to the 

graphite electrodes immersed into electrolyte solution lead to the formation of electrolytic plasma [2,3]. A

certain advantage of plasma -assisted electrochemical exfoliation of graphite is the diversity of modes of 

carbon nanostru ctures synthesis .

In the present study, a bipolar electrochemistry approach was utilized to realize an electrochemical 

exfoliation of graphite in two separate electrochemical cells. A “closed” circuit was implemented in 

which a bipolar electrode (BPE) wa s located in the completely separated cathodic and anodic 

compartments and voltage pulses we re applied to the driving electrodes with a significantly larger surface 

area compared to that of BPE. The process was carried out using the set -up designed in the la boratory of 

laser electrochemistry of IPCP RAS [3] in the mode of alternating anodic -cathodic plasma . Each cell 

contained a d ifferent electrolyte , namely 1 M Na 2SO 4 and 1 M Na 2SO 4 + 0.01 M MnSO 4 were used . As a 

result, FLGS were synthesized in the first ce ll and nanocomposite of FLGS with manganese oxides were 

produced in the second one. Materials obtained in this way were characterized in detail using elemental 

analysi s, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Besides, oxygen red uction 

reaction was studied by the rotating disk electrode method at individual electro catalysts and their mixture 

as well . Based on the obtained data, it can be concluded, that the usage of solution containing manganese 

salt s allows one to produce FL GS na nocomposite s with Mn 3O4 which demonstrate high electrocatalytic 

activity towards the oxygen reduction reaction. 

Thus, these results indicate the possibility of production of active platinum -free ORR electrocatalysts 

based on the nanocomposites of carbon na nostructures with transition metal oxides in the course of 

electrochemical exfoliation of graphite in the mode of electrolytic plasma realized in a bipolar 

configuration .

This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project No. 19 -03 -00310 and 

was carried out using the equipment of the Multi -User Analytical Center of IPCP RAS and the equipment 

of the Multi -User Center of Scientific Center in Chernogolovka RAS. 

References 

1. H. Osgood, S.V. Devaguptapu, H. Xu, J. Cho, G. Wu, Transi tion metal (Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) oxides for 

oxygen reduction and evolution bifunctional catalysts in alkaline media, Nano Today 11 (2016) 601 –

625, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2016.09.001. 

2. V.P. Vasiliev, A.S. Kotkin, V.K. Kochergin, R.A. Manzhos, A.G . Krivenko, Oxygen reduction reaction 

at few -layer graphene structures obtained via plasma -assisted electrochemical exfoliation of graphite, J. 

Electroanal. Chem. 851 (2019) 113440, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.113440. 

3. A.G. Krivenko, R.A. Man zhos, A.S. Kotkin, V.K. Kochergin, N.P. Piven, A.P. Manzhos, Production of 

few -layer graphene structures in different modes of electrochemical exfoliation of graphite by voltage 

pulses, Instrument. Science Technol. 47 (2019)  535 –544 ,

https://doi.org/10.108 0/10739149.2019.1607750. A Chemically Self -Charging Aqueous Zinc -Ion Battery 

Yan Zhang 

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, Colleg e of Chemistry, Nankai University 

Tianjin, 300071, P. R. Chi na 

zhangynku @mail. nankai.edu.cn 

Rechargeable batteries are widely used in many fields such as electric devices and grid -scale energy 

storage systems . In general, t he commercial batteries are often charged by electrical grid. However, in the 

harsh environm ent or remote area , the electrical grid is unavailable , which limit s the recharging and reuse 

of batteries . In order to solve this issue, various energy harvesting technologies, such as photovoltai c

devices , piezoelectric nanogenerators , triboelectric nano generators and thermoelectrics , were integrated 

with batteries into self -charging power systems . However, the conventional integrated systems are highly 

dependent on the availability of the energy sources and generally possess complicated configuration. 

He rein, we develop chemically self -charging aqueous zinc -ion batteries with a simpli fied two -electrode 

configuration based on CaV 6O16 ·3H 2O electrode. Such system possesses the capability of energy 

harvesting, conversion and storage simultaneously. It can be chemically self -recharged by the 

spontaneous redox reaction between the discharged cathode and oxygen from the ambient environment 

without any external power supply . Chemically self -recharged zinc -ion batteries display an initial open -

circuit voltage of ab out 1.05 V and a considerable discharge capacity of about 239 mAh g -1, indicating the 

excellent self -rechargeability . Impressively, such chemically self -charging zinc -ion batteries can also 

work well at chemical or/and galvanostatic charging hybrid modes. This work not only provides a route to 

design chemically self -charging energy storage, but also broadens the horizon s of aqueous zinc -ion 

batteries. 

References 

[1] Wang, J. et al. A bi -functional device for self -powered electrochromic window and self -rec hargeable 

transparent battery applications. Nat. Commun. 5, 4921 (2014). 

[2] Ma, L. et al. A usage scenario independent “air chargeable” flexible zinc ion energy storage device .

Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1900509 (2019). 

[3] Kundu, D., Adams, B. D., Duff ort, V. , Vajargah, S. H. & Nazar, L. F. A high -capacity and long -life 

aqueous rechargeable zinc battery using a metal oxide intercalation cathode. Nat. Energy 1, 16119 (2016). 

[4] Wan, F. et al. Aqueous rechargeable zinc/sodium vanadate batteries with enhanced pe rformance from 

simultaneous insertion of dual carriers. Nat. Commun. 9, 1656 (2018). Engineering Active Sites of Polyaniline for AlCl 2+ Storage in 

# Aluminum -ion Battery 

Shuai Wang 

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College of Chemistry, Nankai Unive rsity 

Nankai Univeristy, No. 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China 

e-mail : swang@nankai.edu.cn 

Rechargeable aluminum -ion batteries (AIBs) have poured tremendous attention as energy storage 

devices due to its impressive advantages such as low cost, high sa fety, and environmental benignity. [1] 

Furthermore, aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust and possesses three -electron redox 

reaction characteristics. As a result, Al metal achieves an excellent gravimetric capacity of 2980 mAh g -1,

and a high volumetric capacity of 8040 mAh cm -3.[2] Additionally, aluminum metal electrode is stable in 

air under ambient condition, which is convenient for manufacturing as compared to other active alkali 

metals. Therefore, AIBs are considered as a promising c andidate of energy storage devices. 

The reversible capacity of AlCl 4- intercalation/de -intercalation in conventional cathodes of 

aluminum -ion batteries (AIBs) is often difficult to be improved due to the large size of AlCl 4- anions. 

Therefore, it is highly desired to realize the intercalation/de -intercalation of other Al -based ions with 

smaller size. [3,4] Here, we fabricated polyaniline/single -walled carbon nanotubes (PANI/SWCNTs) 

composite films and further protonated the PANI nanorods in them. The protona tion endows PANI with 

more active sites and enhanced conductivity. More importantly, hyper self -protonated PANI (PANI(H +)) 

exhibits the reversible AlCl 2+ intercalation/de -intercalation during discharge/charge process. As a result, 

the Al/PANI(H +) battery d isplays a twice higher discharge capacity in comparison with the initial 

composite films. Furthermore, PANI(H +)@SWCNT s electrodes also display stable cycling life with only 

0.003% capacity decay per cycle over 8000 cycles. In addition, owing to the excelle nt mechanical 

properties, PANI(H +)@SWCNT composite films can act as the electrodes of flexible AIBs. As a proof of 

concept, the flexible cable -type AIBs were assembled based on them and remained stable electrochemical 

performance at bending states. This wo rk will pave the way for the applications of conducting polymers 

in AIBs and broadens the horizons of AIBs in flexible energy storage devices. 

References 

[1] H. Chen, H. Xu, S. Wang, T. Huang, J. Xi, S. Cai, F. Guo, Z. Xu, W. Gao, C. Gao, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, 

eaao7233. 

[2] S. Wang, Z. Yu, J. Tu, J. Wang, D. Tian, Y. Liu, S. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6, 1600137 .

[3] M. -C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D. -Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B. -J. Hwang, 

Nature 2015, 520, 324 -328 .

[4] C. Wu, S. Gu , Q. Zhang, Y. Bai, M. Li, Y. Yuan, F. Wu, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 73 .Ru -doped perovskite as new electrode material for SOFCs 

Martina Marasi ,a Leonardo Duranti ,a , Cadia D’Ottavi a, Elisabetta Di Bartolomeo a

> a

Department of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Via della 

Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. 

e-mail: martina.marasi @uniroma2.it 

Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC s) have a great potential among the emerging energy conversion technologies 

because they can efficiently convert various types of fuels (hydrogen, methane, CO, biogas) into electrical 

energy in the temperature range 650 -850 °C. The choice of electrode s remains a challenge because most of 

metal oxides suffer of low chemical stability and conductivity in reducing atmosphere and low 

electrocatalytic act ivity toward oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in the intermediate temperature range [1] .

In this view, p erovskite oxides (ABO 3) have shown promising properties in terms of thermal stability, 

compatibility with other cell components, low production cost and, most important ly , great flexibility [1].

La 0.6 Sr 0.4 FeO 3-δ, (LSF) p erovskite oxide have been widely investigated for its high electrical conductivity 

and electrochemical properties [2]. However, t he main drawback is the poor activity towards ORR in the 

intermediate temperature range (500 -700 °C) , as in the case of the most iron -based perovskites [3] . The B-

site doping with metal catalysts can sensitively improve the properties and make the compounds suitable 

for el ectrodes application .

Ruthenium is a low -cost noble metal and a promising catalyst for hydrogen oxidation and methane 

reforming [4] . The addition of Ru in to LSF structure can be an innovative approach to improve the 

electrocat alytic properties . Specifically , we synthesize d B-site doped LSF powders with different mol % of 

Ru (2%, 5%, 10%) by using a solution combustion synthesis (SCS). The synthesized powders were calcined 

at quite low temperature ( 750 °C for 6h) to get as high as possible surface area (>15 m 2/g) . All compounds 

show a s ingle perovskite phase . As reported in Fig. 1 (a), the addition of Ru in the structure causes a

progressive shift of the XRD peaks to lower 2θ angles indicating an expansion of the perovskite lattice due 

to the subst itution of Fe 3+ sites (0.645 Å) with larger Ru 3+ ions (0.68 Å) .

The compounds were investigated both in oxidizing and reducing conditions. Fig. 1(b) shows the Arrhenius 

plot of area specific resistance (ASR) values of LSF Ru perovskite oxides in air . The ASR values were 

measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on LSFRu/ La 0.8 Sr 0.2 Ga 0.8 Mg 0.2 O3-δ

(LSGM) /LSFRu symmetric cells in the temperature range 550 -800 °C . By increasing Ru amount the 

activation energy is reduced, and , most importantly , the ASR values of LS FRu compounds are lower tha n

that of LSF at T<700°C. Th ese feature s suggest that Ru substitution positively affect s the electrocatalytic 

and conductivity properties valuably for cathodic applications .10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                   

> Normalized Intensity Angle (2 q)
> LSF64 LSFRu02 LSFRu05 LSFRu10
> 55 56 57 58 59 60
> Normalized Intensity Angle (2 q)0.90 0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.20 1.25 0.1 110 100 AIR LSFRu10 LSFRu05 LSFRu02 LSF
> ASR ( W*cm 2)1000/T (K -1 )
> 800 750 700 650 600 550
> T (°C)

Figure 1 . Structural and morphological characterization of LSFRu (a) XRD patterns (b) ASR values 

obtained in air flux (100 cm 3/min ) from 800°C to 550°C 

[1] Hwang J, Rao R.R. (2017). Science 358:751 -756 

[2] Hansen KK, Mogensen M (2008) . ECS Trans 13:153 –160 

[3] Chavan SV, Singh RN (2013). J Mater Sci 48:6597 –6604 

[4] Anil C., Modak J M (2020) Molec Cat 484:110805; Fan W, Sun Z. (2016) RSC Adv 6:34564 Insights into the Electrochemical Degradation of Real Effluents Using 

# Modulated Current 

Kaíque S. G. C. Oliveira , Alyne B. Veroli, Luís A. M. Ruotolo 

Federal University of S ão Carlos, Department of Chemical Engineering 

Ro d. Washington Luiz km 235 , 13565 -905 S ão Carlos – SP, Brazil 

pluis@ufscar.br 

In this work, we demonstrated the feasibility of using the modulated current (MC) technique , in w hich the 

applied current is maintained at the limiting current for energy minimization in the electroc hemical 

min er aliza tion of effluents from coffee processing using boron -doped diam ond electrode [1] . Although 

the wet coffee processing reduces the costs with drying and provides a supe rior product quality , th is 

process generates effluents contain ing hig h concentrations of phenolic compounds , among them the 

caffeic acid (CA) . Prior electrolysis, t he w astewater was filter ed and acidified with H2SO 4, which w orked 

as supporting electro lyte to increase the conductivity . Du e to th e effluent complexity , a new criterion to 

establish the operational conditions for electroox idation is presente d, based on the total organic carbon 

(TOC) and the CA diffusion coeffi ci ent (km) to determine the limit ing curr ent (Ilim ). It was demonstrated 

that a combination of the modulated and galvanostatic (CC) current control is more effec tive to remove 

TOC and phenolic compounds after 12 h of electrolysis . Using the co mbined MC+CC approach, the 

energy consumptio n dim inishe d ~79.5 % compa red with fully galvanostatic procedure. Importantly ,

attenti on must also be paid to avoid performing the MC control at currents be low the water discharge 

since electrode passivation may occur . A 100% mineraliza tion current efficien cy (M CE) was observed 

through out the electrolysis of the wastewater , indicating that the process operated under activated control .

This result suggests tha t th e criterion used to cal culate Ilim and modulate the applied current was not 

satisfactory to optim ize the reaction rate since the Ilim was underestimated . In thi s cas e, the chemical 

oxygen demand seems to be a more reliable para meter to e stimate km and Ilim , and an apparent kinetic 

constant including the contributions of mass transfer and bulk oxidants may be considered since indust rial 

effluents are complex mixtures of organics and ion s. After the waste water electrolysis, the MCE and 

energy consumption were 99.1% and 30.5 kWh kg -1 TOC , respectively , leading to a treatment cost of 

1 m³ of the coffee pro cessi ng wastewater estimated in US$ 4. 39. In summary , t he MC+CC technique is a

simple and effective tool that reduce s the energy costs of the electroche mic al treatment of effluent s

containing organic pollutant s.

Reference 

[1] K.S.G.C. Oliveira, A.B. Veroli, L.A.M. Ruoto lo, Using modulated current for energy minimization 

in the electrochemic al treatment of eff luents containing organic pollutants, J. Hazard. Mater. 399 

(2020) 123053 .Characterisation  and Application of Weakly Coordinating Solvents for 

# the Electrodeposition of Semiconductors 

Alexander W. Black , Philip N. Bartlett 

University of Southampton 

School of Chemistry, Highfield Campus, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO 17 1BJ 

Alexander.Black@soton.ac.uk 

Compound semiconductors based upon p -block elements are receiving intensive research for their use in 

advanced electronic devices. The possible combination of elements is significant and contains ternary or 

quaternary al loys. This creates a broad range of properties and permits a diversity of applications. 

Electrodeposition requires an electrolyte containing the metal precursors of interest. p -block 

complexes ha ve particularly labile ligands. In a solvated metal complex the solvent molecules can 

compete for coordination to the metal cation. As such, a complex with labile ligands in a Lewis basic ,

coordinating solvent is vulnerable to displacement by the solvent molecule. Different metal cations will 

differ in their intera ction with the solvent and therefore inconsistent speciation across metal precursors is 

possible. Metal speciation affects all aspects of an electron transfer reaction and so unpredictable 

speciation greatly complicates the process of codeposition. Hence, a plating bath composed of precursors 

sharing common ligands and a weakly coordinating solvent (WCS) is desirable. 

We present results of a study into the feasibility of five organic solvents classified as weakly 

coordinating (the classification process bei ng a part of the present investigation) , shown in Fig. 1 , for the 

electrodeposition of p -block elements. Additionally, dichloromethane is used as a control due to its 

previous demonstration as a suitable WCS for semiconductor electrodeposition. 1, 2 Firstly , the criteria of a 

suitable solvent, including the degree of coordination, are identified and quantified using Kamlet and 

Taft’s solvent descriptors, 3 and it is established that solvents typically used in electrochemistry , such as 

water, acetonitrile or d imethylsulphoxide are not suitable (see Fig. 1) . Several of the solvents have seen 

little use in electrochemistry and so their capability as electrochemical solvents is examined with 

measurements including conductivity, potential window and the electrochem istry of the model redox 

couple s decamethylferrocene and cobaltocenium hexafluorophosphate . Subsequently, those solvents 

deemed suitable are applied to the electrodeposition of bismuth telluride and other novel systems. 

Figure 1: Kamlet and Taft parameters of red: candidate weakly coordinating solvents, blue: common 

electrochemical solvents, green: typical ionic liquids , from Ref. 4. DCM: dichloromethane, TFT: 

trifluorotoluene, oDCB: o -dichlorobenzene, pFT: p -fluorotoluene, CB: chl orobenzene, TCE: 1,1,2,2, -

tetrachloroethane. 

This work has been supported by the EPSRC  Programme  Grant, Advanced Devices by Electroplating 

(ADEPT - EP/N0354371/1) 

1) Kissling G. P et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165 , D557 –67. 

2) Meng L. et al. , J. Electroan al. Chem., 2019, 839 , 134 –40. 

3) Reichardt C. and Welton T., Solvents and Solvent Effects in Organic Chemistry, Wiley ,

Weinheim, 4th ed., 2011. The Impact Of Polymer Gel Electrolytes With Varying Transport 

# Properties On Cycling Of Lithium Ion Battery Systems 

Buket Boz a b, Hunter O. Ford b, Jennifer L. Schaefer b, Alberto Salvadori a, 

> a

Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , Univ ersity of Brescia, Brescia, Via Branze 38 -

25123, Italy  

> b

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 

46556, USA 

b.boz@unibs.it 

Advanced batteries will enable more widespread adoption of electric vehicle s which, when charged with 

electricity generated from non -fossil fuel sources, can enable the achievement of global greenhouse gas 

emissions targets. 

In LIB battery systems, the ele ctrolyte has a crucial role in terms of allowing the transport of ionic 

cha rges and maintaining the physical isolation between anode and cathode. In commercial lithium ion 

batteries , dual -ion electrolytes such as LiFP 6 in organic solvent mixtures (EC/DEC o r EC/DMC v/v=1:1) 

are commonly utilised. This type of electrolyte provides high ion ic conductivity and has been widely in 

used commercial applications despite a couple of drawbacks. 

Notwithstanding the high total ionic conductivity,  common liquid Li -ion electrolytes  have Li transference 

number lower than 0. 5 [ 1].  The non -unity tr ansference number of the active cation results in formation of 

a concentration gradient during charge/discharge. Accumulation of anions at the electrode -electrode 

interface and depletion of cations lead to increased interfacial impedance and reduced limiti ng currents. 

To overcome the drawbacks, polymer based electrolytes have been propose d, specifically, single ion 

conducting polymer and gel polymer electrolytes (SIPEs) [2], [3] . In SIPE s, the anion is fixed to polymer 

backbone to prevent its migration to th e anode , which allows only Li + trans port in the system. However, 

the low ionic conductivity of SIPEs has slowed their use in practical devices. 

In this study,  we report on the fabrication of crosslinked polymer gel electrolytes with varied 

nanostructures a nd containing both free salt and bound charge , via swelling of the network ionomer s with 

liquid electrolyte solutions. We obtain a family of pol ymer gel electrolytes with varying lithium 

transference numbers ( 0.4 to 0.78 ) and total ionic conductivity ( 2.71 x10 -4 S/cm to 1.93x10 -3 S/cm ). 

Interestingly, it is found that transference number and conductivity are not mutually exclusive and, for 

certain systems, an increase in the lithium transference number is not accompanied with a decrease in 

total ionic conduc tivity . It is also observed that the structure of the polymer has a great impact on 

transport properties. The effects of varying ion transport properties on Li -ion battery rate capability are 

investigated with the Li/LiFePO 4 configuration. 

References: 

## [1] K. M. Diederichsen , E. J. McShane , , B. D. McCloskey , ACS Energy Lett. (2017 ), 2, 2563−2575. 

[2] R. Bouchet1, S. Maria, R. Meziane, A. Aboulaich, L. Lienafa, J. -P. Bonnet, T. N. T. Phan, D.Bertin, 

D. Gigmes, D. Devaux, R. Denoyel and M.Armand, Nature Mater 12 (2013 ), 452 –457 

[3] H. Zhang, C .Li, M . Piszcz , E. Coya, T . Rojo, L . M. R odriguez -Martinez , M. Armand , Z. Zhou , Chem. 

Soc. Rev., (2017 ), 46, 797 .DFT Stud y on Nitrogen Reduction Electrocatalysts Regulated by 

# Hydr ogen and p-Block Elements 

Guilan Fan , Wence Xu, Fangyi Cheng *

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry , College of Chemistr y, Nankai Universit y,

Tianjin 300071, China 

E-mail : fycheng@nankai.edu.cn 

Electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) represents an alternative eco -friendly strategy for 

sustainable N 2 fixati on wi th renewable electric energy. [1] However, the NRR suffers from sluggish 

kinetics due to difficult N 2 ads orption and triple N≡N cleavage. Mechanistic understanding of the reaction 

helps to exploit strategies for performance enhancement of the NRR electrocatalys is. Density functional 

theory (DFT) calculation has been widely used to explore the electronic struc ture of catalysts , a ctive sites 

and reaction pathways . Recently , we reported experimental and DFT computation on nanoporous 

palladium hydride as efficient electrocatalyst for electrochemical N2 reduction under ambient 

conditions .[2] We showed superior cata lyst activity of nanoporous hydrogenated palladium (exemplified 

composition of np -PdH 0.43 ) to nanoporous palladium (np -Pd ). The projected density of states (PDOS) 

indicated that the d band center of np -PdH 0.43 is closer to the Fermi level compared to np -Pd (-1.61 vs. -

1.68 eV) due to the hybridization between Pd and H atoms , resulting in the stronger interaction between 

catalysts and intermediates . The difference of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) for the energy -determined first 

proton -coupled electron transfer step was calculated at different Pd atoms on np -PdH 0.43 to predict the 

active sites . Charge density difference images further reveal ed stronger charge redistribution at np -

PdH 0.43 , which promote d the accumulat ion of internal electron concentration and enhance d the 

electrocatalytic activity . Then, the Gibbs free energy profiles of NRR confirm ed that the enzymatic NRR 

pathway was favorable compared with distal and alternating pathways for both np -Pd and np -PdH 0.43 , and 

the *NNH formation was the rate -limiting ste p. In addition to hydrogen , using p-block elements such as 

antimon y (Sb) was also found to be a promotor to fix nitrogen. Results of PD OS indicate d that d band 

center of transition metals (TMs) can be regulated by electrons from p orbitals of neighboring S b atoms. 

Analysis of charge density difference again suggested activation of N2 by TMs -Sb due to the 

redistribution of s urface charge s. In this scenario, the hydrogen injection and p -block element alloying 

would effectively modify the d -electron domination of TMs, thus stabilizing the intermediates and 

boosting the NRR.    

> Figure1 .(a)Projected density of states .(b) Charge density difference. ( c, d ) Gibbs free energy profiles of the NRR .

Reference 

[1] G. Qing, R. Ghazfar, S. T. Jackowski, F. Habibzadeh, M . M. Ashtiani, C. -P. Chen, M. R. Smith III 

and T. W. Hamann, Chem . Rev . 2020 , DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00659 .

[2] W. C. Xu, G. L. Fan, J . L. Chen, J . H. Li, L . Zhang, S . L. Zhu, X . C. Su, F . Y. Cheng and J . Chen .Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 20 20 , 59 , 3511 -3516 .Role of Additives on Tuning of the Electrochemical Roughening of 

Platinum 

Francesc Valls Mascaró 1, F.M ., Marc T.M. Koper 1, M.T.M ,Marcel J. and Ros Ros t, M.J t2.

> 1

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University .

> 2

Huygens -Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory, Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University Leiden University 

f.valls.mascaro@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

Platinum is thus by far the most active catalyst for many electrochemical devices such as e.g. 

electrolysers. However, this platinum is not only scarce and expens ive, it also metal suffers from 

degradation upon prolonged usage as an electrode . The surface rough ens significant erious ly , due to The 

the nucleation and growth of surprisingly well -ordered nanoislands leads to surface roughening and this 

is known to be t he responsible for its degradation [1 , 2, 3 , 4 ]. Additives like chlori dne might offer a 

solution to decrease this roughening ., Hhowever The the effect of additives on this phenomenon is still 

fully unclear has been not studied in depth s. In this work, we st udy In this work, we study the platinum 

deterioration roughening in the presence of chloride under potential cycling under potential control. during 

oxidation -reduction -cycling. We obtain quantitative information about the roughening process from the 

with the presence of chloride , which is a very common contaminant in electrochemistry. The evolution of 

the electrochemical signal step -peaks/signal in the CVs . Although chloride has been having often been 

identified as a n diffusion enhanc ing er agent for many diffe rent surfaces and metals , with platinum we 

surprisingly find a faster build -up of the roughness in the presence of chlorine if chloride is present in 

solution [5]. . [we could stop here…if we want…] Is chlorine now blocking the diffusion for platinum? It 

cou ld also only accelerate the mass transport being responsible for the roughening . We will address this 

difficult question. 

of the Pt(111) electrochemical signal with time conveys important information about this roughening 

process . We attribute the faster roughening with chloride to a higher flux of platinum atoms pushed out 

from the surface, before redepositing and giving shape to the nanoislands. 

Please add also the other 3 papers …maybe even at the most appropriate places…. 

[1] Jacobse, L., Huang, Y., Kop er, M.T.M. , and Rost, M.J. , Nat. Mater. 17 , 277 -282 (2018) 

[2] Jacobse, L., Rost, M.J., and Koper, M.T.M. , ACS Cent. Sci. 5 (12 ), 1920 (2019) 

[3] Rost, M.J., Jacobse, L. and Koper, M.T.M. , Nat . Commun . 10 , 5233 (2019) 

[4] Hanselman, S., McCrum, I., Rost, M. and Koper, M. T. M., Phys.  Chem. Chem. Phys. 22 , 10634 

(2019) .

[5] Yanson, Y.I. and Rost, M.J. Angew. Chem. , 52 (9), 2454 (2013) 

Finally…..everything which is marked in yellow…..is pure for “selling” reasons hoping to attract people 

in this way ….please re alize!!!          

> Formatted: Superscript
> Formatted: Superscript
> Formatted: Superscript
> Formatted: Superscript
> Formatted: Superscript
> Formatted: Not Highlight
> Formatted: English (United States)
> Formatted: Spanish (Spain), Highlight
> Formatted: Spanish (Spain)

# Synthesis and Electrochemical Characterization of 1D and 2D 

# Coordina tion Polymers for E nergy Storage Applications 

Jorge Montero 1,2 , Alessandra D’Epifanio 1, Barbara Mecheri 1, Silvia Licoccia 1 and Javier Carretero -

González 2

> 1

Department of Chemical Science a nd Technologies, University of Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 

Scientifica, 100133 Rome, Italy 

> 2

Institute of Polymer Science and Technology, ICTP -CSIC, C/ Juan de la Cierva 3, 28006 Madrid 

e-mail address : jormonter94@gmail.com 

Coordination polymers (CPs ) have attracted interest in recent years due to their properties such as gas 

adsorption, drug delivery, catalysis and ionic conductivity. CPs have advantages from its highly ordered 

and porous structure and a wide design latitude of compounds by choosing various metal ions and 

bridging ligands. In this communication, we will show a series of CPs ({[Fe(CA)(H 2O) 2]H 2O} n and 

{[Mn(CA)(H 2O) 2]H 2O} n) [1] with one or two dimensionalities synthesized by environmentally friendly 

routes and low cost precursors. These CPs contain chloran ilic acid , dihydroxybenzoquinone and pyrazine 

linkers combined with iron and manganese . These compounds were studied as electrode for lithium -ion 

batteries [2 ]. The lithium insertion potential changed depending on the metal used . This fa ct combined 

with the high voltages of reaction suggests the participation of both metal and organic linker on the redox 

processes (F ig. 1A). W e also noticed that a thermal treatment on the CPs before the half -cell assembly 

was crucial to optimize the elect rochemical performance of our compounds.       

> Furthermore s ince one of the Fe CP sshow ed two reversible redox s tages at -0.5 and 0.5 V (Fig. 1B ) it was studied as
> potential single electrolyte in redox flow batteries systems

. Not all the CPs were suitable for t he study, mainly 

due to the low stability of the suspension. However, by modifying the synthesis route, we manage to 

decrease the particle size and create slurries with high water -stability and study their electrochemical 

properties on a symmetrical cell. 

Figure 1 . Galvanostatic charge -discharge cycling profile of two of the Fe CPs (A). Cyclic voltammetry of 

the Fe CP in a n aqueous solution with 0.5 M NaCl at a current density of 20 mV/s (B). 

Acknowledgements 

JM greatly acknow ledge the funds of his doctoral grant in materials for health, environment and energy 

from the University of Tor Vergata. JCG acknowledges the Ramon y Cajal contract (RYC -2015 -17722) 

and the funding from the Retos project (MAT2017 -86796 -R). 

References 

[1 ] Novel intercalation host system based on transition metal (Fe 2+ , Co 2+ , Mn 2+ )-chloranilate coordination 

polymers. Single crystal structures and properties. S. Kawata, S. Kitagawa, H. Kumagai, T. Ishiyama, K. 

Hond a K, H. Tobita, K. Adachi , M. Katada. Che m. Mater . 1998, 10 , 3902 -3912. 

[2] Lithium ion storage in 1D and 2D redox active metal -organic frameworks.  Jorge Montero, Daniel 

Arenas -Esteban, David Ávila -Brande, Elizabeth Castillo -Martínez, Silvia Licoccia, Javier Carretero -

González, Electrochimica Act a, 2020, 341 , 136063. CuX and NiX Nano zeolites as Electrocatalysts for Alkaline Oxygen 

# Evolution Reaction 

J. Milikić 1, S. Knežević 2, R. Hercigonja 1 and B. Šljukić 1

> 1

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentskitrg 12 –16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia. 

> 2

Faculty o f Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentskitrg 12 –16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia. 

(jadranka@ffh.bg.ac.rs ; biljka@ffh.bg.ac.rs )

The electrochemical water spli tting (EWS ) is composed of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) as an anode 

process and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) as a cathode process. Pure hydrogen fuel produced by 

EWS could be a promising replacement for fossil fuels because of significantly low er pollution d uring its 

use and high energy transformation rate [1] . Alkaline water electrolysis (AWS) and its half reactions, 

OER and HER in alkaline media are presented by Eq. 1, 2 and 3, respectively. 

AWS: 2H 2O → 2H 2 (g) + O 2(g) (1) 

OER: 4OH − → O 2 + 2H 2O + 4e − E0 = 0.404 V vs. SHE (2) 

HER: 4H 2O + 4e −→ 2H 2 + 4OH − E0 = -0.826 V vs. SHE (3) 

The overall energy efficiency of AWS is largely obstructed by the slow OER kinetics as a four -electron 

process with the high energy expended for oxygen -oxygen bonding [2] and high overpotential needed to 

break it [1,3] . There fore, it is of utter importance to find appropriate low -cost OER electrocatalyst which 

could improve OER kinetics with more energy saving. Noble metals such as platinum (Pt) and their 

oxides such as ruthenium and iridium oxides (IrO 2 and RuO 2) are the most studied OER electrocatalysts 

[4] . High cost and scarcity of these electrocatalysts limit their application for OER in industrial 

electrolysers [4] . On the other hand, low -cost copper and cobalt co -doped Ni 3S2 supported on nickel foam 

(CuCo -Ni 3S2/NF) electrocatalysts were examined for OER in 1 M KOH s howing high catalytic activity 

and low OER overpotential [5] . Different types of zeolites could be an excellent choice for low -cost OER 

catalyst support because of the unique structure and large surface area [6] . The basic type of zeolite 

consists of two types of anionic groups: te trahedral (AlO 4)5- and (SiO 4)4- units charge -balanced with 

different positive ions such as sodium (Na 1+ ), silver (Ag 1+ ), nickel (Ni 2+ ), copper (Cu 2+ ) ions, etc. 

Different types of micro zeolites (A and X) with Ni ions, studied in our previous work, showed O ER 

catalytic activity and relatively good stability [6] .

Herein, copper and nickel  nano zeolites (CuX and NiX) were, for the first time, tested for OER in highly 

alkaline media by linear sweep voltammetry (LSW). 

Polarization curves of CuX and NiX  nano zeolites revealed that both of zeolite electrodes show ed activity 

for ORR in alkaline media (1 M KOH) . The current density of 1 mV s -1 was reached at overpotential of 

530 and 670 mV for CuX and NiX zeolites, respectively. OER Tafel slopes at CuX and NiX electrodes 

were found to be 173 and 187 mV dec -1, respec tively. Significantly higher Tafel slope (463 mV dec -1) was 

obtained for NiA zeolite in 1 M KOH [6] . A similar value of Tafel slope (144 mV dec -1) was obtained at 

the Pt -modified Ni foam electrode in 1 M NaOH [3] . Co -Ni 3S2/NF (150.9 mV dec −1 ) and Cu -Ni 3S2/NF 

(176 mV dec −1 ) electrodes showed similar Tafel slope as herein tested electrodes [5] . CuX and NiX gave 

a current density of 8.5 and 1.20 mA cm -2 at 2 V vs RHE , respectively. CuX electrocatalysts gave lower 

overpotential, lower Tafel slope and higher OER current density than NiX which indicat ing its better 

cataly tic activity during OER. Thus, l ow -cost CuX nano zeolite could be an excellent replacement for the 

expensive OER electrocatalysts based on scarce Pt -group metals or their oxides. 

Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the 

Republic of Serbia ( contract no. 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200146). 

REFERENCES          

> [1] Y. Liu, D. Yang, Z. Liu, J.H. Yang, Journal of Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228165.
> [2] S. Song, L. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Qin, W. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Bao, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Ren, Materials Today Physics, 2020, 13,
> 100216.
> [3] B. Pierozynski, T. Mikolajczyk, M. Luba, A. Zolfaghari, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 2019, 847, 113194.
> [4] T. Reier, M. Oezaslan, P. Strasser, ACS Catalysis, 2012, 2, 1765 –1772.
> [5] J.F. Qin, M. Yang, S. Hou, B. Dong, T.S. Chen, X. Ma, J.Y. Xie, Y.N. Zhou, J. Nan, Y.M. Chai, Applied Surface Science, 2020, 502,
> 144172.
> [6] J. Milikić, M. Vasić, L. Amaral, N. Cv jetićanin, D. Jugović, R. Hercigonja, B. Šljukić, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43,
> 18977 –18991.
> [7] A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan, L. Estevez, B.P. McGrail, R.K. Motkuri, S. Shanmugam, Advanced Energy Materials, 2018, 8, 1 –13.

# Fluoride -ion Conduction Mechanism of La -Sr -F-S Mixed -anion 

# Compounds 

Shintaro Tachibana 1, Kazuto Ide 2, Takeshi Tojigamori 2, Hisatsugu Yamasaki 2,

Yukinari Kotani 2, Yuki Orikasa 1

Affiliation : 1. Ritsumeikan University 2. Toyota Motor Corporation 

Addre ss: 1. 1-1-1 Noji -higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga 525 -8577, Japan 

2.  1200 Mishuku, Susono, Shizuoka 410 -1193, Japan 

e-mail address : sc0062kv@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 

Fluoride -ion batteries (FIBs) are expected to be one of the candidates for next -generation recha rgeable 

batteries due to their high theoretical energy density . FIBs contain monovalent fluoride ion as ion carrier ,

which can realize the multi -electron reacti ons of counter cations utilizing fluorination/defluorination in 

active materials such as metal fluoride compounds or metals . Th is feature enable s the high theoretical 

energy density of FIBs for approximately 5000 Wh L -1[1] . It was demonstrated that all -solid -state FIBs 

using MFn (M = Bi, Cu, Sn, KBi) cathode and Ce anode with La 1-xBa xF3-x solid elect rolyte performed 

charge/discharge cycles at 150℃ in 2011 [2]. The charge/discharge of liquid -type FIBs using Bi /BiF 3

cathode and Pb /PbF 2 anode with ionic liquid electrolyte at room temperature has been also reported in 

2017 [3]. Although all -solid -state bat teries are expected to be used widely owing to their high energy 

densities, long life cycles, and safety , FIBs using solid electrolytes is far from practical use due to lack of 

solid electrolyte s which ha ve high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical potential window like 

lithium -ion solid electrolytes .

The reported solid electrolytes such as PbSnF 4 [4] and La 0.9 Ba 0.1 F2.9 [5] are well known fluoride ion 

conductors. PbSnF 4 exhibits the highest ionic conductivity of 2 mS cm -1, whereas the electrochemica l

potential window is 0 -2 V vs. SnF 2/Sn , which is disadvantage for the high voltage battery operation. To 

obtain solid electrolytes which have both high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical potential 

window, it is necessary to use rather rare -earth metals than cations with their poor chemical stability in 

the low voltage such as Pb and Sn . La 0.9 Ba 0.1 F2.9 also exhibits high ionic conductivity of 10 -1 mS cm -1

having wide electrochemical potential window. Room temperature operation using the La -Ba -F

ele ctrolytes requires higher ionic conductivity than the present conductivity. Mixed -anion compounds 

have recently attracted attention, and unique structures with multiple anions have been reported [ 6]. 

Compared with existing materials such as oxides and fluo rides, mixed -anion compounds have the 

possibilities to exhibit innovative functions due to their specific crystal and coordination structure. 

In this study, we synthesized La -Sr -F-S compounds containing fluoride and sulfides ions as anions by 

solid -state reaction under vacuum. The crystal structure of the synthesized compound was characterized 

by X -ray diffraction. In order to measure the conductivity and the fluoride -ion transport number of the 

synthesized compounds, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and the DC conductivity measurement 

were performed, respectively. Moreover, cyclic voltammetry was performed to evaluate electrochemical 

potential window. In the synthesis, F －- deficient and F －-excess type of La -Sr -F-S compounds were 

successfully synthesized by controlling the weight ratio of starting materials. We discuss the mechanism 

to realize fast fluoride ion conduction comparing them. 

References 

[1] C. Rongeat, M. A. R eddy, R. Witter, and M. Fichtner, J. Phys. Chem. C , 117 , 4943 -4950(2013). 

[2] M.A.  Reddy and M. Fichitner, J. Mater. Chem , 21 , 17059 –17062 (2011). 

[3] K. Okazaki, Y. Uchimoto, T. Abe, and Z. Ogumi, ACS Energy Lett. , 2, 1460 -1464(2017) 

[4] N. I. Sorokin, P. P. Fedorov, O. K. Nikol’skaya, O. A. Nikeeva, E. G. Rakov, and E. I. Ardashinikova, 

Inorg. Chem. , 37 , 1178 -1182 (2017) 

[5] C. Rongeat, M. A. Reddy, R. Witter, and M. Fichtner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 6(3), 2103 -2110 

(2014). 

[6] H. Kageyama, K. Hayashi, K. Maeda, J.P. Attfield, Z. Hiroi, J.M. Rondinelli, and K.R. Poeppelmeier, 

Nature Comm. , 9 772(2018) Visualization and Quantification of Electrochemical H 2 Bubble 

# Nucleation at Pt, Au, and MoS 2 Substrates 

Qianjin Chen , Yulong Liu, Cheng Jin 

College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Donghua University 

Shanghai, 201620, China 

qianjinche n@dhu.edu.cn 

Electrolytic gas evolution is a significant phenomenon in many electrochemical technologies from water 

splitting, chloralkali process to fuel cells. Although it is known that gas evolution may substantially affect 

the ohmic resistance and mas s transfer, studies focusing on the electrochemistry of individual bubbles are 

critical but also challenging. Here, we report an approach using scanning electrochemical cell microscopy 

(SECCM) with a single channel pipet to quantitatively study individual gas bubble nucleation on different 

electrode substrates, including conventional polycrystalline Pt and Au films, as well as the most 

interesting two -dimensional semiconductor MoS 2. Due to the confinement effect of the pipet, well -

defined peak -shaped voltam metric features associated with single bubble nucleation and growth are 

consistently observed. From stochastic bubble nucleation measurement and finite element simulation, the 

surface H2 concentration corresponding to bubble nucleation is estimated to be ∼218, 137, and 157 mM, 

with critical nuclei contact angles of ∼156°, ∼161°, and ∼160° at polycrystalline Pt, Au, and MoS 2

substrates, respectively. We further demonstrated the surface faceting at polycrystalline Pt is not 

specifically correlated with the bu bble nucleation behavior. 

Reference 

[1]  Liu Yulong, Jin Cheng, Liu Yuwen, Ruiz Hernandez Karla, Ren Hang, Fan Yuchi, White Henry S.*, 

Chen Qianjin* , ACS Sensors , 2020, doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.0c00913 .

[2] Chen Qianjin* , Liu Yuwen, Edwards Martin A., Liu Yulong, White Henry S.*, Anal. Chem., 2020, 

92(9), 6408~6414 Potential Range Exten sion for Electropolymerized Polypyrrole Films 

O. I. Istako va1, D. V. Konev 1,2 , O.A. Goncharova 3, T. O. Medvedeva 4, M. A. Vorotyntsev 1,2, 3,5,6 

> 1

Institute for Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Chernogo lovka, Ru ssia  

> 2

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , Moscow, Russia  

> 3

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology , Moscow, Russia  

> 5

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Di jon, France  

> 6

Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, , Russia 

Email: oistakova@gmail.com , dkfrvzh@gmail.com 

Polypyrrole (pPy) polymer materials attract much atten tion of researchers due to their original properties. 

Proposed methods for deposition of pPy coatings as well as for the synthesis of various pPy -containing 

composite materials has opened prospects for their use in a wide range of practical applications, s uch as 

molecular electronics, electrochemical sensors, supercapacitors, etc. [1 -3]. One of the main methods of 

polypy rrole synthesis is the electrochemical method, the essence of which consists of electro -oxidation of 

the dissolved monomer on the electrode surface with the formation of a polymer film. 

The overwhelming majority of papers on electrodeposited polypyrrole con clude that the resulting 

conjugated polymer possesses an electrochemical activity potential region of about 1 volt. Beyond the 

negative li mit, this material turns to a neutral/insulating state. In contrast, at more positive potentials, the 

"overoxidation" process occurs, leading to irreversible degradation. Such a narrow electroactivity range is 

a disadvantage of this material, limiting its applicability, for example, as an active element of 

supercapacitors or as a matrix for electrodeposition of most metals in the synthesis of composite metal -

polymer catalysts/sensors. However, it was mentioned [4] that low deposition potentials and low 

mono mer concentrations allows to obtain the polypyrrole films exhibiting electroactivity in the broader 

range of potentials. This change is irreversible and can occur either immediately after synthesis 

(electropolymerization) or during repeated cycling of t he film in an extended potential limits. 

The goal of this work is to study and to optimize the method of electrodeposition of polypyrrole under 

non -conventional conditions (ensuring a low rate of polymer formation on the electrode surface), as well 

as to in ve stigate the structure and properties of the obtained promising materials. For that propose, we 

have studied several factors (concentration of pyrrole during electrodeposition within a sub -mmol range, 

oxidation potential, the thickness of the polymer coat in g, multi -scan parameters of the obtained polymer 

film, and the composition of electrolyte solution) affecting the electroactivity range of polypyrrole. Thus, 

the conditions for subsequent purposeful enhancement of this effect have been figured out. 

Acknow ledgments 

The study was supported by RFBR (project № 18 -33 -01303 mol_a ) and carried out within the framework 

of the thematic map of the IPCP RAS №АААА - А19 -119061890019 -5 with the u se of resources of 

National Technology Initiative Competence Center at IPCP RAS. 

References: 

1. B. Lakard, S. Carquigny, O. Segut, T. Patois, S. Lakard, Gas sensors based on electrodeposited 

polymers , Metals, 2015, 5, 1371 -1386 

2. L. H. M. Krings, E. E. H avinga, J. J. T. M. Donkers, The application of polypyrrole as counterelect rode 

in electrolytic capacitors , Synt hetic metals, 1993, 54, 453 -460 

3. R. Bittihn, G. Ely, F. Woeffer, H. Miinstedt, H. Naarmann, D. Naegele, Polypyrrole as an electrode 

material f or secondary lithium cells , Makromolekulare Chemie. Macromol ecular Symposia , 1987, 8, 51 -

59 

4. M. A. Vorotyntsev, V. A. Zinovyeva, D. V. Konev, Mechanisms of electropolymerization and redox 

activity: fundamental aspects, S. Cosnier, A. Karyakin (ed.). Elec tropolymerization: concepts, materials 

and applications. John Wiley & Sons. 201 0, 27 -50 Anodic generation of EDOT cation radicals for PEDOT -PSS 

# Dispersion Synthesis 

O. I. Istakova 1, D. V. Konev 1,2 , O. A. Goncharova 3, T. O. Medvedeva 4, N. R. Gadzhimuradova 3, M. A. 

Vorotyntsev 1,2, 3,5,6 

> 1

Institute for Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Acad emy of Sciences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 2

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , Moscow, Russia  

> 3

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology , Moscow, Russia  

> 5

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Univers ité de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Dijon, France  

> 6

Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia 

Email: oistakova@gmail.com , dkfrvzh@gmail.com 

Conducting organic mat erials and coatings based on poly 3,4 -ethylene dioxythiophene (PEDOT) are 

currently a principal component of electrochromic coatings, displays, capacitors, photoelectric converters, 

and several other devices. The range of PEDOT applications is expanding du e to intensive scientific 

research in this area. In most applications, PEDOT is used as part of a composition with 

polystyrenesulfonate anion (PSS) [1, 2]. Usually, the precursor for its preparation is an aqueous 

dispersion of PEDOT -PSS (fig. 1) representi ng a commercially available product. Its synthesis based on 

the chemical oxidation of a mixture of peroxodisulfate precursors anion, followed by ion -exchange 

purification from the products of the oxidant reduction and auxiliary substances [3]. The studies in this 

work are aimed at developing the fundamental principles and practical implementation of the 

electrochemical method for preparing a dispersion of PEDOT -PSS, consisting in the generation of EDOT 

radical cations on the surface of a porous anode with c ontinuous intensive pumping through it of a 

polymerization medium containing a PSS polyanion without using an oxidizing agent. 

Fig. 1. Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS 

Electrooxidation of EDOT was carried out in 

a solution of polystyrenesulfonic acid 

(HP SS) at the working electrode with 

simultaneous pumping of the polymerization 

medium through the pores of the electrode at 

a given speed. PEDOT -PSS dispersion was 

synthesized in a special electrochemical cell 

with separated electrode spaces, through the 

ano de of which an intensive pumping of the 

polymerization medium containing the monomer and polyanion is carried out. In addition to the direct 

oxidation of EDOT in the presence of HPSS, a redox mediator oxidation of EDOT in the presence of 

HPSS and a redox m ediator was performed. The resulting suspensions were characterized by a complex 

of electrochemical, microscopic, and spectral methods. 

Acknowledgments 

The study was supported by RFBR (project № 20 -03 -00966 A) and carried out within the framework of 

the t hematic map of the IPCP RAS №АААА - А19 -119061890019 -5 with the use of resources of 

National Technology Initiative Competence Center at IPCP RAS. 

References: 

1. K. Sun , S. Zhang , P. Li , Y. Xia , X. Zhang , D. Du, J. Ouyang, Review on application of PEDOTs an d

PEDOT:PSS in energy conversion and storage devices, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in 

Electronics, 2015, 26(7), 4438 –4462 

2. A. Malti , J. Edberg , H. Granberg , Z. U. Khan , J. W. Andreasen , X. Liu , D. Zhao , H. Zhang , Y. Yao , J. 

W. Brill , I. Engqui st , M. Fahlman , L. Wa gberg , X. Crispin , M. Berggren , An organic mixed ion –electron 

conductor for power electronics, Adv. Sci. , 2016, 3, 1500305 

3. F. Louwet , L. Groenendaal , J. Dhaen , J. Manca , J. Van Luppen , E. Verdonck, L. Leenders, 

PEDOT/PSS: Synthesis, characterizati on, properties and applications, Synthetic Metals, 2003, 135 –136, 

115 –117 Enhanced Performance of Spinel LiMn 1.5 Ni 0.5 O4 Controlled by Oxygen 

# Vacancy 

Aderemi B. Haruna , Kenneth I. Ozoemena 

School of Chemistry, University of the Witwatersrand, Wits P O, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa 

e-mail:  1739079@students.wits.ac.za 

The spinel LiMn 1.5 Ni 0.5 O4 (LMNO) is a promising cathode material for lithium -ion battery because of its high 

working voltage: 4.7 V, considerable cost, high capacity and energy [1 -3] . However, its structural relationship 

with the electrochemical properties is still a challenge [5, 6 ]. The elec trochemical properties of the spinel are 

related to the degree of disorder, doping, impurities, Mn 3+ content , morphology and oxygen vacancy, among 

others. Oxygen vacancy is identified as a key structural factor because of its correlation with the degree of disorder 

and Mn 3+ content [5] . In this research works, we examined the relationship among the structural parameters 

(oxygen vacancy, disordered phase, Mn 3+ and impurity contents ); and their electrochemi cal effects . This work 

revealed for the first time the use of oxygen vacancy: β -MnO 2-x as precursor s to synthesised spinel LMNO cathode 

material s and tune the oxygen vacancy, disordered phase, Mn 3+ content and impurity contents without doping, 

higher synthetic temperatures (› 700 oC), use of organic compound, post -annealing or modification of the cooling 

profile . We showed that varying synthetic condition s of β -MnO 2-x can tune the se structural factors in LMNO for 

improved electrochemical performance. The results of the studies showed that the oxygen vacanc y change s

concurrently with the degree of disorder and Mn 3+ content , but not with the impurities. Our study has opened 

opportunities to explore the use of β -MnO 2-x to tune these structural factors in spinel L MNO for an improved 

lithium -ion battery .2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 

> Current (mA)
> Voltage (V)
> LMNO: A LMNO: B

0.1C 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160  

> 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
> Potential / V  (Vs Li/Li +1 )
> Specific capacity (mAhg -1 )
> LMNO: A
> LMNO: B

0.1C 

Fig 1. Cyclic voltammogram Fig. 2 Charge -discharge: 1 st , 2 nd , 25 th and 50 th cycle 

Reference 

1. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 5, 2012, 7854 -7863 

2. J. Ma et al. , Chem. Mater., 28, 2016, 3578 -3606 

3. J. Lu and K. Lee, Materials Technology: Advanced Performance Materials, 31(11), 2016, 628 -641 

4. G. Liu, Y. Li, B. Ma, Y. Li, Electrochimica Acta 112 (2013) 557 -561 

5. G. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Du, K. Zhang, G. Li, H. Yu, C. Li, Z. Li, Q. Sun, L. Wen, Journal of Alloys 

and Compounds 725 (2017), 580 -586 

6. J. Xiao, X. Chen, P. V. Sushko, M. L. Sushko, L. Kovarik, J. Feng, Z. Deng, J. Zheng, G. L. Graff, Z. Nie, 

D. Choi, J. Liu, J. Zhang, M. S. Whittinggham, Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 2109 -2116 Fuel Cell Production Techniques for Self Reliance and Sustainable 

# Development in Nigeria .

## By 

> 1

## P E Ugwuoke 2D O Otokpa, and 3H I Zarma 

> daniel.otokpa.pg82550@unn.edu.ng
> 1

## National Centre for Energy Research and Development, University of Nigeria, Nsukka 

> 2

## Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, 3Energy Commission 

## of Nigeria, Abuja .

## Abstract 

## Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert chemical energy in fuels i nto electrical 

## energy directly with promising power generation, high efficiency and low environmental 

## impact. Fuel cell production techniques avoids the intermediate steps of producing heat and 

## mechanical work common with most conventional power generation and are not limited by 

## thermodynamic limitations of heat engines such as the Carnot efficiency and produce power 

## with minimal pollutant since combustion is not involve in the production and operation 

## techniques. This pap er examines fuel cell production techniques as a clean sources of 

## renewable energy, ty pes of fuel cell, advantages and disadvantages of various fuel cells were 

## also investigated. It also compares the cost effectiveness of small scale fuel cell power plants 

## with that of large scale vis a vis other renewable source. The paper conclude d that fuel cell is 

## an essential component of sustainable energy mix for self reliance of power sector in Nig eria. 

## Key words: Carnot efficiency, electrolyzers, unit cells, phase interface and fuel cell 

## stacking .Room -Temperature Conversion of the Photoelectrochemical Oxidation 

# of Methane into Electricity at Nanostructured TiO 2

Yanir Kadosh , Eli Korin and Armand Bettelheim 

Ben -Gurion University of the Negev 

Be’er Sheva 

Israel 

yanirka@post.bgu.ac.il 

The energy pot ential of methane is restrained by the energy input required to break its C -H bond. 

Therefore, most of the energy conversion processes of methane use thermochemical activation which is 

highly endothermic. The present work demonstrates the effective photoel ectrochemical (PEC) activity of 

a TiO 2 nanotube arrays photoanode towards methane oxidation in acidic electrolyte and ambient 

conditions. PEC processes can dramatically reduce the activation barrier by the interaction with light. The 

use of a semiconductor photoanode in a PEC system can produce highly reactive holes upon irradiation, 

aiming for the activation of methane’s C -H bond at moderate temperatures. The examined photoanode 

exhibits high photocurrent density response in the presence of methane as comp ared to that obtained in its 

absence (0.54 vs. 0.27 mA cm -2, respectively). Products characterization reveals a relatively high faradaic 

efficiency towards the formation of CO 2 and formic acid (72 and 16% at 0.3 V vs. RHE, respectively). 

These results are correlated to the role of the special surface architecture of the nanotube arrays in 

dictating the reaction pathways. The first time room -temperature operation of a solar driven fuel cell 

(photo -fuel cell), in which methane oxidation is converted to electr icity, is also demonstrated. The photo -

fuel cell performance is characterized by a relatively high power density (69 μW cm -2), when compared to 

such cells with liquid fuels, as well by long -term stability. Lithium -Ion High -Performance Anodes using Silicon 

# Nanowires/Graphite Composites 

Mayokun Olutogun, a,b Guk -Tae Kim, a,b Adriana Iordache, c Loïc Baggetto, c

Olga Burchak, c Stefano Passerini, a,b and Dominic Bresser a,b  

> a

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> b

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany  

> c

ENWIRES SAS, 38240 Domène , France 

E-mail:  mayokun.olutogun@kit.edu 

Lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) have enabled significant technological progress in recent years and are 

considered the state -of -the -art technology for electrochemical energy storage [1] . Yet, these LIBs still 

require substantial improvements in their power and energy density, particularly for applications in electric 

vehicles [2] . Most commercial LIBs use graphite, an intercal ation -type material with excellent cycling 

stability, as negative electrode. However, its rather low theoretical capacity of 372 mAh g -1 and slow Li -

ion intercalation kinetics result in an overall low volumetric energy density and poor rate performance. 

The use of silicon nanowires /graphite composites is of particular interest, because it is anticipated to allow 

for combining the advantages of the two components – i.e., the excellent cycling stability of the carbon -

type material and the much greater spec ific capacity (3579 mAh g -1) and good rate capability of silicon. 

Indeed, the much greater specific capacity potentially allows for an increased volumetric and gravimetric 

energy density when combined with a suitable cathode in LIBs [3] . Furthermore, silicon is non -toxic and 

abundant in the earth’s crust, rendering it a good candidate for high -performance and sustainable negative 

electrodes. The 1D silicon nanowire morphology compared to bulk silicon materials offers short Li +

transport pathways [4] and provides better contact with the graphite particles within the composite. 

Herein, we report on the evaluation of silicon nanowires/graphite composites (engi neered wires 

composites) as li thium -ion anode active material . The structural and morphological investigations were 

carried out using amongst others x-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, and scanning electron 

microscopy . Furthermore, we present our comprehensive electrochemical investigation of this material with 

galvanostatic dis -/charge tests in lithium -ion half -cells and full -cells using Ni -rich NMC as the cathode. 

The results reveal very good cycling stability and rate performance – even for high areal capacities in coin 

cells and in pouch cells .

References 

[1] M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, “Building better batteries,” Nature . 2008. 

[2] D. Bresser et al. , “Perspectives of automotive battery R&D in China, Germany, Japan, and the 

USA,” J. Power Sources , 2018. 

[3] M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, “Alloy negative el ectrodes for Li -ion batteries,” Chem. Rev. ,

vol. 114, no. 23, pp. 11444 –11502, 2014. 

[4] C. K. Chan et al. , “High -performance lithium battery anodes using silicon nanowires,” Nat. 

Nanotechnol. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 31 –35, 2008. N-doped Mesoporous Carbon Spheres from m -Aminop henol and 

# Pluronic® F127 Template as Support for ORR Catalysts 

Jithin Antony, Sakthivel Mariappan , Jean -Francois Drillet 

DECHEMA -Forschungsinstitut, Theodor -Heuss -Allee 25, 60486 Frankfurt am Mai n

sakthivel@dechema.de 

Despite the large and growing interest of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) as an energy 

converter, high cost, relatively insufficient activity and long -term stability of the catalyst materials remain 

major obstacles for commercialization. Platinum is still considered as the state -of -art for catalyst material 

in PEMFC. However, it exhibits a slow kinetics for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) that is mostly due 

to the strong bond of the oxygen molecules.  The long‐term efficiency of the electrodes is strongly 

influenced by the nature of the catalyst support that should allow optimal distribution and stabilization of 

the catalyst nanoparticles [1].  Most common mesoporous carbon syntheses rely on hard -templat e, time -

consuming routes that are not suitable for industrial scale -up. Therefore soft -template methods appear to 

be more adapted. 

In this work,  synthesis of  car bon powder samples 

was prepared by autoclave hydrothermal (C FAH )

and microwave -assisted hydrothermal (C FAH M)

route by using m-Aminophenol as carbon source 

and triblock -copolymers Pluronic F127 as soft -

template . Characterization of the as -prepared 

ca rbons was performed by means of XRD, Raman, 

TGA, BET and SEM. All synthesis led to formation 

of spherical carbon particles (Fig. 1) with diameter 

between 5 .0 μm ( CFAH ) and 0.7 μm ( CFAH M). By

varying heating time, power of heat source, 

reaction temperature, reac tion time of microwave 

reactor during polymer synthesis as well as 

optimizing pyrolysis temperature (T py ), the size of 

carbon particle was successfully reduced from 3.0 

down to 0.7 μm. Reaction time for polymer 

synthesis was substantially reduced from 12 h for 

common hydrothermal route down to 5 min for microwave -assisted one. The pore size of carbon particles 

was successfully tuned from micro - to mesoporous (5 – 15 nm) range by using xylene, toluene or 

ammonium bicarbonate as a pore forming agent. The elec tronic conductivity of carbon particles was 

enhanced from 0.6 to 5.6 Scm -1 at 100 Ncm -2 by increasing pyrolysis temperature from 700 to 1100°C 

(Fig.1). The N content of carbon was found within 8 – 10 wt% at 900°C (T py ). T hen, carbon particles 

were decorate d with 40 wt% Pt by chemical impregnation/reduction of hexachloro -platinic acid in 

formaldehyde at 80°C for 1 h. Electrochemical activity of Pt /C catalysts for ORR was studied under 

RRDE and GDE conditions. The highest performance regarding ECSA retention during acc elerated 

degradation tests (0.4 -1.4 V, dE/dt = 1 V s-1, 10 ,000 cycles) was achieved by Pt/C FAH with 77% followed 

by Pt/ CFAHM with 7 5%, compared to only 8% for Pt/C Vulcan . Best performance in terms of synthesis 

duration, particle size, conductivity, pore size distribution, Pt activity for ORR and ECSA retention was 

achieved by carbon powder from microwave -assisted hydrothermal synthesis route. 

[1] M. Sakthivel, J.F. Drillet, Appl. Cat. B , 231, ( 2018 ), 62. 

Fig.1: SEM image, conductivity and pore size 

distribution profile of as -prepared carbon Electrochromic response of WO 3 layers grown using magnetron 

# sputte ring under various pressures 

D. Louloudakis 1*, K. Mouratis 1,2 , J. Gil -Rostra 3, E. Koudoumas 1,4 , A. R. Gonzalez -Elipe 3

> 1

Cen ter of Materials Technology and Photonics, School of Engineering, Hellenic Mediterranean 

University, 71410 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 

> 2

Physics Department, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece 

> 3

Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla (CSIC -USE), A venida Americo Vespucio 49, E -41092 

Sevilla, Spain 

> 4

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, School of Engineering, Hellenic Mediterranean 

University, 71410 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 

## *corresponding author , e-mail : dimitr17@yahoo.gr 

Last decades, scientific interest has been attracted for electrochromic coating s, since these are essential in 

a variety of novel technol ogical applications such as switches, batteries and smart windows. Tungsten 

trioxide is one of the most common electrochromic film for smart window applications that can be used in 

order to reduce the energy consumption on buildings. To date many methods, such as sol -gel, 

hydrothermal synthesis, chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and magnetron sputtering, have been used for 

the deposition of WO3 layers. As has been shown, one very important parameter f or the response of the 

layers is their morphology. 

In thi s work, amorphous WO3 coatings were grown on indium tin dioxide glass substrates using 

magnetron sputtering with tungsten target and various amount of vacuum in the deposition chamber. The 

coatings were characterized by X -ray diffraction, XPS, UV -Vis -IR sp ectroscopy, scanning electron 

microscopy and cyclic voltammetry in order to investigate the importance of their porosity in the 

improvement of their electrochromic performance, including durability, time response, charge density and 

coloration efficiency. 

Acknowledgements :

This work was partial financial supported by the Greek State Scholarships Foundation (IKY), which was 

funded on the bases of «ENHANCEMENT OF HUMAN RESEARCH RESOURCES THROUGH THE 

IMPLEMENTATION OF DISSERTATION RESEARCH» funded by the EP «Development of Huma n

Resources, Education and Lifelong Learning», 2014 -2020. Electro deposition of Ni and Composite N i/T iO2 Coatings Using an 

# Electrolyte Based on D eep Eutectic Solvents with Water Addition 

F. Danilov , D. Bogdanov, O. Vasil'eva, A. Kityk, V. Protsenko 

Ukrainian State University of Chemical Technology 

Gagarin Ave., 8 , Dnipro, Ukraine 49005 

fdanilov@optima.com.ua 

Electrochemical deposition of n ickel and nickel -based coatings is considered as the most significant and 

widespread metal finishing in up -to -date industry. Ni and Ni -based coatings can be deposited from 

"comm on" aqueous electrolytes , however these have a lot of drawbacks. Recently, some attempts were 

made to use a n ew type of electrolytes based on the so -called deep eutectic solvents (DESs) [1, 2]. DESs 

are ionic liquid analogues, which consist of eutectic mix tures of some inorganic and/or organic 

compounds. DESs show a number of excellent and useful properties, such as wide electrochemical 

potential window, high conductivity, negligible vapor pressure, easy accessibility , environmental safety 

and biodegradabil ity [1]. Therefore, DESs attract c lose attention in electrochemistry , especially in 

electroplating [1, 2]. 

We investigated the electrodeposition of nanocrystalline nickel and composite Ni/TiO 2 coatings using a 

plating bath based on a deep eutectic solvent which is commercially known as ethaline (a eutectic mixture 

of ethylene glycol and choline chloride) [3 –7]. Ti tania nanopowder (Degussa P 25 , 25 –30 nm ) was used 

to prepare colloid electrolyte s for electrodeposition of composite coatings. 

It was established that the addition of some water to the nickel plating bath provides a decrease in 

viscosity and an increas e in conductivity [3, 4] . An irreversible electrochemical reaction of metal 

deposition is decelerated when water is added to the ethaline + NiCl 2 sol utions. 

The electrodeposited nickel coatings exhibit an average crystallite size of about 3 –9 nm. According to 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements, the coatings with enhanced corrosion resistance 

ca n be obtained from Ni electroplating bath containing some water additive. 

Due to relatively high viscosity and density, DESs ensure excellent dispersion stability as compared with 

"common " aqueous solutions . The content of TiO 2 in deposits reaches 10 wt.%. The composite Ni /TiO 2

coatings show nano -sized type of structure. 

The formation of composite coatings based on the nickel matrix provides an appreciable improvement in 

functional properties of deposits . T hus, t he ir microhardness is higher and the corrosion resistance in a 

corrosive medium is bett er than in the case of pure Ni coatings . The incorporation of TiO 2 particles 

imparts the photocatalytic activity towards the photochemical degradation of organic dyes and the 

electrocatalytic activity in the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions to the s ynthesized composite 

coatings .

References 

1. E.L. Smith, A.P. Abbott and K.S. Ryder , Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) and their applications . Chem. 

Rev. 114 ( 2014 ) 11060 -11082. 

2. A. Abo -Hamad, M. Hayyan, M.A.H. AlSaadi and M.A. Hashim , Potential applications of deep eutectic 

solvents in nanotechnology . Chem. Eng. J. 273 ( 2015 ) 551 -567. 

3. A.A. Kityk, D.A. Shaiderov, E.A. Vasil'eva, V.S. Protsenko and F.I. Danilov , Choline chloride based 

ionic liquids containing nickel chloride: Physicochemical properties and kinetics of Ni(II) 

electroreduction . Electrochim . Acta 245 ( 2017 ) 133 -145. 

4. V.S. Protsenko, A.A. Kityk, D.A. Shaiderov and F.I. Danilov , Effect of water content on 

physicochemical properties and electrochemical behavior of ionic liquids containing cholin e chloride, 

ethylene glycol and hydrated nickel chloride . J. Mol . Liq. 212 ( 2015 ) 716 -722. 

5. F.I. Danilov, A.A. Kityk, D.A. Shaiderov, D.A. Bogdanov, S.A. Korniy and V.S. Protsenko ,

Electrodeposition of Ni –TiO 2 composite coatings using electrolyte based o n a deep eutectic solvent . Surf. 

Eng. Appl. Electrochem. 55 ( 2019 ) 138 -149. 

6. F.I. Danilov, V.S. Protsenko, A.A. Kityk, D.A. Shaiderov, E.A. Vasil'eva, U. Pramod Kumar and C. 

Joseph Kennady , Electrodeposition of nanocrystalline nickel coatings from a deep eutectic solvent with 

water addition . Prot. Met. Phys. Chem. Surf. 53 ( 2017 ) 1131 -1138. 

7. V.S. Protsenko, D.A. Bogdanov, S.A. Korniy, A.A. Kityk, A.S. Baskevich and F.I. Danilov ,

Application of a deep eutectic solvent to prepare nanocrystalline Ni and Ni /TiO 2 coatings as 

electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 ( 2019 ) 24604 -24616. Synthesis of Polymer -TiO 2 Nanofiber Membrane s and Their 

# Photocatalysis Properties 

Junyao Wu 1,2 , Yixuan Wang 1, Jun Y ao 2, Wei Gao 1

> 1

Department of Chemical and Materials Engine ering, the University of Auckland 

Private Ba g 92019 , Auckland 11 42, New Zealand 

> 2

School of Water Resources and Environment , China University of Geosciences, Beijing 

Xueyuan R oad No.29, Beijin g 100083, P. R. China 

jwu801@aucklanduni.ac.nz , w.gao@au ckland.ac.nz 

ABSTRACT 

Polymer/semiconductor oxide composite fib er s prepared by electrospinning is a multifunctional material. 

The components can b e joined by covalent bonds, electrostatic attraction or other weak interaction forces, 

possessing combined pr operties of inorganic component and high molec ular polymer. The addition of 

polymer can stabilize transition metal oxide and avoid agglo meration of nanoparticles during the 

photocataly tic proc ess. At the same time, transition metal oxide can increase the surface area and porosity 

of fib er , giv ing full play to the adsorption and photocatalytic performance. 

In this project, electro spinning method has been used to synthesi ze semiconductor metal oxide 

nanocomposites. Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) is the polymer matri xes to hold tit anium dioxide (TiO 2)

nanoparticles. Polyvinyl Pyrrolidone (PVP) is added as a pore -forming agen t. Porous and flexible 

nanofiber me mbrane with high TiO 2 content was prepared by s electively dissolving PVP . SEM, BET, 

CA, XRD, FTIR, T GA and DSC were used to characterize the surface morphology , microstructure, 

composition and thermal stability of the fib er memb rane . The effects of different pore -forming agent s on 

the coupling adsorption and photocatalytic reaction of fiber membrane s were investiga ted .

REFER ENCES 

1. Liao, Yuan, et al . Progress in electrospun polymeric na nofibrous membranes for water treatment: 

Fabrication, modification and applications. Progress in Pol ymer Science 77 (2018): 69 -94. 

2. Lee, Chang -Gu, et al . Porou s el ectrospun fibers embedding TiO 2 for adsorption and photocatalytic 

degradation of water polluta nts. Environmental science & technology 52.7 (2018): 4285 -4293. 

3. Guettari, Moez, et al . Polyvinylpyrrolidone Behavior in Water/Ethanol Mixed Solvents: Co mparison 

of Modeling Predictions with Exper imental Results. Journal of Solution Chemistry 46.7 (2017): 

1404 -1417. 

Figure 1 Adsorption and photocataly tic processes of methylene blue : (a) De gradation rate s, and (b)

fitting the pseudo -first -order kinetic s. 300 w simulation sunlight .Electrochem ical Detection of DNA using Methylene Blue as a Marker 

Fernando Otero  [a] , Tofail Syed  [b], Edmon d Magner [a] 

Department of Chemical Sciences Bernal Ins titute, University of Limerick, Limerick (Irela nd )

Department of Physics Bernal Ins titute, University of Limerick, Limerick (Irela nd )

Fernando .Otero. Diez@ul.ie , Tofail. Syed@ul.ie , Edmond .Magner@ul.ie 

The detecti on of genetic diseases at early stage in clinical diagnosis requires the development of reliable, 

high ly sensitive and selectiv e genosensors capable of detecting si ngle -nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 1.

In contrast to traditional methods such as colorimetric, plasmonic, electrochemical sensors have 

advantages such as simplicity, low cost, ease of miniaturization, rapid response times and hi gh sensitivity, 

required for this application. 

The majority of electr ochemical methods 

of detection of DNA are based on 

hybridization process es . These 

approaches offer high selectivity for the 

target DNA and low limits of detection ,

(LOD) approaching zeptomolar levels ,

that can enable the detection of disease 

at early stage s. Nevertheless, the 

detection of SNP genos ensors are still 

not available and such sensors would fill 

a signific ant need 2. The detectio n of the 

TP53 cancer biomarker has been 

investigated electrochemical ly by 

monitoring changes in DNA structures 

before and after hybridiz ation p with a

maximum signal gain upon hybridization 

of 59.6 nA at a surface coverage of 2. 0

pmol/cm 2 (Figure. 1). The selectivity of the DNA biosensor was investigated using three types of tDNA 

sequences : complementary DNA, single base mi smatch and triple base mismatch. The biosensor is 

capable of discriminat ing between a normal healthy sequen ce and a triple base mismatch with a 

discrimination factor of 8. The electrochemical signal gain upon hybridization with single base 

mismatc hed sequence is similar to that observed with cDNA, indicating that the biosensor is not capable 

of discriminat ing between nor mal and and single base mismatch es .

References 

1 Ferapontova, E. E. Hybridization biosensors relying on electrical properties of nucleic acids. 

Electroanalysis 29 , 6 -13 (2017) .

2 Farjami, E., Clima, L., Gothelf, K. & Ferapontova, E. E. “Off− On” Electrochemical Hairpin 

DNA -Based Genosensor for Cancer Dia gnostics. Anal . Chem . 83, 1594 -1602 (2011) . 

> Figure. 1Influence of the probe surface coverage and concentration
> of cDNA on the signal increase upon hybridization. Results obtained
> via DPV in PBS at pH 7.4

Fig.1 LiFePO 4 - Li 4Ti 5O12 full -cell charge -discharge 

profile at 0.1 C.

# Irreversible Reaction of LiFePO 4 - Li 4Ti 5O12 Full -cell 

# Using Two -phase Reaction Active Material 

Yuki Omote 1, Misaki Katayama 2, Yuki Orikasa 1

> 1

Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, 

1-1-1 Noji -Higashi, Kusatsu 525 -8577, Japan 

> 2

Research Organization of Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, 

1-1-1 Noji -Higashi, Kusatsu, 525 -8577, Japan 

sc0059ee@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 

For charge -discharge test in laboratory experiments of lithium -ion batteries, half -cell configuration with 

lithium as the anode is often used . In contrast , for practical lithium -ion batteries, lithium metal is not used 

for the anode , but full -cell configuration is used, in which the capacity of the anode is almost similar to 

the capacity of the cathode. While the half -cell configuration has lithium as a source of excess carrier ions 

in the anode , in the full -cell configuration, only the limited lithium -ion s supplied from the cathode are 

used as carrier ions, limiting the actual charge -dis charge capacity of the full -cell. Previous studies have 

reported differences in the degradation behavior between full -cell and half -cell [1,2] . It is important to 

understand the unique problems that occur with full -cell in order to maximize the performanc e of lithium -

ion batteries in practice. In this research, we investigated the irreversibility in full -cell with lithium iron 

phosphate (LiFePO 4) cathode and lithium titanate (Li 4Ti 5O12 ) anode as a strange case, where both active 

materials show two -phase re action in almost all composition. In addition to the electrochemical 

measurements used three -electrode cell, the X -ray absorption fine structure (XAFS), which allows to 

observe the valence change, was used to determine the charge -discharge state in the ful l-cell. 

In a constant -current charge -discharge measurement at 0.1 C in a half -cell, the charge -discharge reaction 

proceeded reversibly with a capacity of 155 mA h g -1 in the LiFePO 4 cathode and 150 mA h g -1 in the 

Li 4Ti 5O12 anode. However, in our experi ments, we observed an irreversible reaction in the LiFePO 4 -

Li 4Ti 5O12 full -cell configuration, with a capacity decrease with each cycle. The initial charge and 

discharge capacity were 162 and 126 mAh g -1, respectively and this irreversibility was co ntinuo usly 

observed in the subsequent cycle (Fig. 1) .

By using the three -electrode cell, we 

analyzed the potential changes of the 

cathode and anode . T he potential of the 

anode increased and reached the cut -off 

voltage during the discharge before the 

change of th e cathode . The valence states 

of the cathode and anode expected to be 

similar composition during charging and 

discharging (Li xFePO 4 x = 1.00, 0.30 0.07) 

were examined by XAFS. Fe K-edge 

XA FS shown similar edge energy for the 

charged and discharged Li 0.3 FeP O4

cathode. However, Ti K -edge XA FS of 

charged Li 5.8 Ti 5O12 anode shown the 

different edge energy from that of the 

discharged anode , which agrees with the 

results from the three -electrode test. 

Therefore, the irreversible capacity was 

caused by the shifting of state of charge in 

anode due to some side reaction s on the 

Li 4Ti 5O12 anode side during charge 

reaction. 

Reference 

[1] E. Bjorklund, et. al. , J. Electrochem. Soc ., 164 (2017) A3054 -A3059. 

[2] J.H. Kim, et. al. , Electrochim. Acta. , 90 (2013) 556 -562. 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 

x in Li xFePO 4

> Voltage / V

LiFePO 4 - Li 4Ti 5O12 

1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 

x in Li 7-3x Ti 5O12 Surface Characterization of Indium Tin Oxide to Investigate the Effect 

# of Modification on its Response to Molecules 

Md. Zaved H Khan , M . Shamim Hossain , M. Daizy, M. Romzan Ali 

Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Jashore University of Science and te chnology, J ashore 7408, Bangladesh 

Laboratory of Nano -bio and Advanced Materials E ngineering (NAME), Jashore University of Science 

and technology, Jashore 7408, Bangladesh 

* Email: za ved.khan@just.edu.bd 

## Abstract 

The relationship between surface prop erties of indium tin oxide (ITO) and its effect on surface 

modification and response to several biomolecul es was investigated. ITO substrates were selected to 

compare the effect of its electrochemical surface properties o n the voltammetric measurement. It was 

found that a small difference in surface properties affect the rest potential of ITO electrode in the 

electrolyte. In addition, surface properties can effectively change the monolayer modification properties 

and it was revealed that optimiz ation of s urface properti es is important to get selective response for 

biosensor development .AuCeO 2/C as electrocatalysts towards ethylene glycol oxidation and 

# oxygen reduction reactions 

Raminta Stagniūnaitė , Virginija Kepenienė, Jūratė Vaičiūnienė, Audrius Drabavičius , Loreta 

Tamašauskaitė -Tamašiūnaitė , Eugenijus Norkus 

Center for Physical Scien ces and Technology 

Sauletekio ave. 3, LT -10257 Vilnius, Lithuania 

Raminta4ka@gmail.com 

Different fuels such as methanol, ethanol, ethylene glycol or others recently have been used in direct 

alcohols fuel cells (DAFC). However , because of low methanol elec tro -oxidation kinetics and 

complication of getting the clean catalytic process using ethanol, ethylene glycol seems more reasonable 

as a fuel for DAFC due to its low toxicity, uncomplicated storage, easy transportation and production 

from biomass. 

It is es pecially important to create and develop effective catalysts not only for fuel oxidation, but also for 

oxygen reduction . In this case Au was considered as one of the best catalyst s for the fuel cell reactions in 

alkaline medium, due to its surface resistan ce of poisoning for the intermediates, which allows to achieve 

high electrocatalytic activity towards alcohols oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions . It is known that 

addition of metal oxides, such as CeO 2, Co 3O4, SnO x, MnO 2 or RuO 2 enhanced the electro catalytic 

activity towards oxidation of ethylene glycol and reduction of oxygen. Cerium oxide is attractive because 

of its low price, synergistic effect between CeO 2 and gold and tolerance to the CO poisoning .

In this paper was investigated the electrocat alytic activity of AuCeO 2/C and Au/C catalysts prepared by 

the adsorption of AuNPs on the CeO 2/C and C substrates from an Au colloidal solution. The composition, 

morphology and structure of the prepared catalysts have been characterized using Inductively C oupled 

Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy, Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy, X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy and X -ray Diffraction. Electrocatalytic properties of the prepared AuCeO 2/C 

and Au/C catalysts have been investigated towards the oxi dation of ethylene glycol in an alkaline medium 

using cyclic voltammetry, whereas the reduction of oxygen has been investigated by means of the linear 

sweep voltammetry using the rotating disk electrode method. 

It has been found that the AuCeO 2/C catalyst showed ca. 3 times higher electrocatalytic activity towards 

the oxidation of ethylene glycol compared to that of Au/C. Moreover, AuCeO 2/C showed more positive 

onset potential, as well as higher current density in the mixed -kinetic -diffusion region towards ORR in an 

alkaline medium compared to that at the bare Au/C catalyst. Selective Electroche mical Xanthine Biosensor based on PEDOT: PSS 

# and Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles Nanocomposite Platform 

Md. Zaved H Khan , M . Shamim Hossain, M. Daizy, M. Romzan Ali 

Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Jashore University of Science and te chnology, Jashore 7408, Bangladesh 

Laboratory of Nano -bio and Advanced Materials E ngineering (NAME), Jashore University of Science 

and technology, Jashore 7408, Bangladesh 

* Email: za ved.khan@just.edu.bd 

## Abstract 

An innovative biosensor assembly relying o n glassy carbon electrode modified with nanocomposites 

consisting of poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as a host matrix with 

functionalized gold nanopa rticles (GCE/PEDOT:PSS -AuNPs) is presented for the selective and sensiti ve 

detection of xanthine (XA). The developed sensor was successfully applied for the quantification of XA 

in the presence of significant interferences like hypoxanthine (HXA) and uric acid (UA). Different 

spectroscopy and electron microscopy analyses were done to characterize the as -prepared nanocomposite. 

Calibration responses for the quantification of XA was linear from 5.0 × 10 -8 to 1.0 × 10 -5 M ( R2 = 0.994), 

with detection limit as low as 3.0 × 10 -8 (S/N = 3). Finally, the proposed sensor was applied fo r the 

analyses of XA content in commercial fish and meat samples and satisfactory recovery percentage was 

obtained. 

Keywords: Electrochemical biosensor; PEDOT:PSS, gold nanoparticle; nanocomposite; xanthine. Atomistic insight s into the structural, transport and electrochemical 

# properties of biredox ionic liquids from molecular dynamics 

Kyle G. Reeves 1,2* , Alessandra Serva 1,2 , Guillaume Jeanmairet 1,2 , Mathieu Salanne 1,2 

1 - Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Physico -Chimie des électrolytes and nanosystèmes interfaciaux, 75005, 

Paris, France 

2 - Réseau sur le Stockage Electrochimique de l’Energie (RS2E), 

CNRS, FR3459, 80039 Amiens Cedex, France 

E-mail* : kyle.reeves@upmc.fr 

Biredox ionic liquids are a new class of f unctionalized electrolytes that are receiving increasing 

consideration for use in capacitive energy storage devices. They differ from conventional electrolytes in 

that both cations and anions are functionalized with redox -active moieties, [1] which may act ively 

participate in the storage mechanism via electrochemical reactions at the electrode interface. In this work, 

TEMPO and anthraquinone are used as the redox active species. Given that these types of biredox 

systems are relatively new, much remains to be understood about the relationship between the 

size/volume of the IL cation/anion moiety, the solvent structure and dynamics , and the electrochemical 

properties of each system .

Here, we employ first -principles m olecular dynamics to study biredox ionic li quids dissolved in 

acetonitrile. We investigate several combinations of anions and cations, differing in the hydrodynamic 

radius and we compare them with the bare redox molecules. We show that in all cases, it is necessary to 

introduce a two -Gaussian -state model to calculate the reaction free energies accurately, which are found 

to be slightly affected by the presence of the IL group on the molecule. MD simulations also provide the 

atomistic details used to characterize the structure of the solvation shell around the redox active part of 

the molecules . Our investigations suggests that for TEMPO -based molecules in particular, a strong effect 

of solvent reorientation influences the electron transfer process.[2] This study represents a first step in the 

underst anding of electron transfer processes in these complex systems and will hopefully contribute to the 

design of new ionic liquids with better performances for use in energy storage devices. 

References 

[1] E. Mourad, L. Coustan, P. Lannelongue, A. Mehdi, A. Vioux, S.A. Freunberger, F. Favier, O. 

Fontaine. 2016. Electrochim. Acta , 206 : 513 – 523. 

[2] K.G. Reeves, A. Serva, G. Jeanmairet, M. Salanne. 2020. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys ., 22 : 10561 -10568. Electrochemical Synthesis of Organic/inorganic Hybrid Nanoantimicrobials 

# (NAMs) Fighting A ntimicrobial Resistance (AMR) 

Ekaterina A. Kukushkina 1, M aria Chiara Sportelli 1,2 , Nicoletta Ditaranto 1, Rosaria Anna Picca 1, N icola Cioffi 1 

> 1

Chemistry Department, University of Bari “Aldo Moro”, V. Orabona, 4, 70126, Bari, Italy  

> 2

Physics Department, University of Bari “Aldo Moro”, V. Orabona 4, 70126, Bari, Italy .

e-mail: ekaterina.kukushkina@uniba.it 

Chitosan (CS) , a natural non -toxic polysaccharide, shows intrinsic antimicrobial activity against a wide range of 

pathogens. CS and CS -based biomaterials can be effective additives in food and medicine -related industries to inhibit 

growth of pathogens. The application of i norganic nanop hases , such as metal and metal oxide nanoparticles , has received 

attention due to their broad and pronounced antimicrobial activity. Upon combination with CS, which can act as stabilizer, 

with active inorganic nanophases, robust synergistic nanoantim icrobial (NAM) system s can be produced. These hybrid 

NAMs offer an alternative strategy to fight antimicrobial resistance and overcome limitations of conventional antibiotics. 

Bioactive ZnO , Cu and Ag nanophases produced by green electrochemical approach [1] can be combined with 

antimicrobial CS to develop synergistic antimicrobial nanohybrid s with amplified biological action . CS -based NAMs 

were preliminary characterized by electron microscopies and spectroscopic techniqu es. Hybrid NAMs may find 

application in the control and inhibition of biofilm growth .

References 

[1] M.C. Sportelli, et al. ZnO Nanostructures with Antibacterial Properties Prepared by a Green Electrochemical -Thermal 

Approach. In Nanomaterials , MDPI, 2020; 10(3), 473 .

Acknowledgements 

Financial support is acknowledged from European Union’s 2020 research and innovation program und er the Marie 

Sklodowska -Curie Grant Agreement No. 813439. In Situ Acti vation of Ano dized NiFe Alloys for OER in Alkaline Media 

N. Yamada, D. Kowalski *, Y. Yato, Y. Sato, S. Kitano *, Y. Aoki * and H. Habazaki *

Graduate School of Engineering, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060 -8628, J apan 

Division of Applie d C hemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060 -8628, Japan 

habazaki@eng.hokudai.ac.jp 

Because of the limited availability of fossil fuels and global environmental is sues, hydrogen production 

by electrochemical water splitting using renewable energy sources becomes of increasing importance for 

future hydrogen economy. Currently, hydrogen is mostly produced from oil, coal and natural gas, and the 

processes generate also greenhouse gases as byproducts. Although fuel cells using hydrogen as a fuel are 

commercially available, this technology is still using fossil fuels to produce hydrogen. Thus, clean 

hydrogen production technology using renewable energies, such as solar, wind , water -based and biomass -

based ones needs to be developed. 

The main issue to utilize electrochemical water splitting for clean hydrogen production is sluggish 

kinetics of oxygen evo lution reaction (OER). The oxides of Ru and Ir are known to show high activity 

and durability for OER, but their limited natural resources and high cost hinder their wide application to 

energy conversion and storage. Currently, extensive efforts are directed towards the development of 

noble -metal -free electrocatalysts for OER. In the present study, si mple anodizing of NiFe alloys is used to 

develop a highly active electrode for OER. 

The NiFe alloys with a range of Fe contents up to 21 at% were prepared by electrodeposition on Ni 

substrate. Then, the NiFe alloy deposits were anodiz ed at 10 V in ethylene glycol electrolyte containing 

0.2 mol dm –3 NH 4F and 0.1 mol dm –3 H2O to form nanopor ous anodic films . The OER activities were 

examined in 1.0 mol dm –3 NH 4F by cyclic voltammetry at a potential sweep rate of 10 mV s –1.

The Fe content in the NiFe deposits increase d almost linearly with the Fe 2+ concentr ation in the 

deposition bath. The porous anodic films of ~400 nm thickness w ere formed by anodizing of the NiFe 

deposits in the ethylene glycol electrolyte containing NH 4F and H2O. The STEM/EDS analysis of the 

anodic film indicated that Ni, Fe, O and F wer e dist ributed uniformly in the anodic film. The anodic film 

contain ed a crystalline phase of NiF 2 and the EDS analysis discloses the high c oncentration of fluo ride in 

the anodic film. The Fe to Ni ratio in the anodic film was similar to th at in the alloy d eposit. 

The OER activity of the anodized NiFe increase d largely with CV cycling in KOH electrolyte . Thus, in 

situ activation occur red during potential cycling and the activation was much more significant in the 

anodized NiFe compared with the anodized Ni. The OER activity was largely composition dependent; the 

highest activity was obtained for the Ni -11.8 at% Fe, which showed the onset potential of OER as low as 

1.49 V vs R HE. During in situ activation, ECSA increased by 3 -5 times, but the OER current incr ease d

more markedly. More active sites for OER appeared to be developed during the potential cycling i n KOH 

electrolyte. Bidimensional spectroelectrochemistry. A new approach to compare 

# the electrochemical behavior of modified electrode surfaces .

Aranzazu Heras , Pablo López , Fabiola Olmo, Jesús Garoz -Ruiz , Alvaro Colina 

Universidad de Burgos, Department of Chemistry, Plaza Misae l Bañuelos s/n, E -09001, Burgos, Spain 

maheras@ubu.es 

Bidimensional spectroelectrochemistry (Bidim -SEC) 1,2 is an analytical technique that allows recording in 

a single experiment information related to the electr on tr ansfer process occurring at the working electrode 

(WE) surface from three very different points of view. The first one comes from the electrochem ical 

signal that includes all the aspects directly related to the oxidation or reduction process provoked by th e

potential or current applied to the electrochemical system. The other two arise from simultaneously 

recording the spectral changes taking place during the electron transfer process . Specifically, the 

electromagnetic radiation samples the solution ad jacen t to the WE in a normal (perpendicular) and 

parallel direction respect to it, deconvolving the information related to the processes mainly occurri ng at 

the WE surface and those taking place exclusively on the diffusion layer. 

In this work, a new cell (Fig . 1) is developed that allows two Bidim -SEC experiments to be performed at 

the same time. In this way, it is possible to compare in the same experiment, for example, the 

consequences or effects that the modification of the electrode surface has with r espec t to the process of 

oxidation or reduction of a certain molecule. The new Bidim -SEC cell is tested modifying partially a 

HOPG surface with a thin film of SWCNTs and comparing the electrochemical and spectroscopic 

response of different molecules such a s fer rocenomethanol (t akes as test molecule), dopamine or 3,4 -

et hylenedioxythiophene .HOPG 

Normal 

PMMA platform 

RE 

Solution 

CE 

Parallel 

SWCNTs 

Fig. 1. Scheme of the Bidim -SEC platform 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Authors acknowledge the financial support from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Grants 

CTQ2017 -839 35 -R-AEI/FEDER, UE), Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades (RED2018 -

102412 -T) and Junta de Castilla y León (Grant BU297P18).  F.O. thanks its contract funded by Junta de 

Castilla y León, the European Social Fund and the Youth Employment Initiati ve.  J.G.R. thanks Ministerio 

de Economía y Competitividad for his postdoctoral contract (CTQ2017 -83935 -R AEI/FEDER, UE ). 

REFERENCES 

(1) López -Palacios, J.; Colina, A.; Heras, A.; Ruiz, V.; Fuente, L. Anal. Chem. 2001 , 73 , 2883. 

(2) Garoz -Ruiz, J.; Heras, A.; P almero, S.; Colina, A. Anal. Chem. 2015 , 87 , 6233. Evaluation of Silver -Polyaniline -Polyvinylpyrrolidone Samples for The 

# Borohydride Oxidation Reaction 

Jadranka Milikić 1, Una Stamenović 2, Vesna Vodnik 2, and Biljana Šljukić 1

> 1

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentskitrg 12 –16, 11158 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Vinča Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of the Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, 

P.O. Box 522, 11351 Belgrade, Serbia 

Serbia (jadranka@ffh.bg.ac. rs;biljka@ffh.bg.ac.rs  )

In recent decades, direct borohydride fuel cell (DBFC) has attracted great attention because of its high 

theoretical power density (9 kWh kg -1), high theoretical open circuit potential (1.64 V) with 

environmental benign reaction products [1 –3] . Borohydride oxidation reaction (BOR) occurs at the anode 

side ( Eq. 1 ) while oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) occurs at the cathodic side ( Eq. 2 ) in a DBFC. Thus, 

the overall reaction of DBFC is given by Eq. 3. 

Oxidation: BH 4-+ 8OH - → BO 2- + 6H 2O + 8e - (E 0 = -1.24 V vs. SHE) (1) 

Reduction: O 2 + 2H 2O + 4e - → 4OH - (E 0 = 0.40 V vs. SHE) (2) 

Overall reaction: NaBH 4 + 2O 2 → NaBO 2 + 2H 2O (E 0cell = 1.64 V) (3) 

The electrochemical oxidation of BH 4- ion at the anode side is a very complex process where anode 

catalyst play s the main role. The borohydride hydrolysis reaction (BHR) has a competitive role with BOR 

lead ing to the generation of hydrogen bubbles and at the same time to decrease of the performance of 

DBFC [1] . The direct borohydride reaction could be presented by Eq. 4 where n is the actual number of 

exchanged electrons. Literature reports s ugg ested that only gold (Au) and silver (Ag) could exchange 8e -

during electrochemical oxidation of each BH 4- ion [1,4] .

BH 4-+ nOH - → BO 2- + (n -2)H 2O + (4 -0.5n)H 2 + ne - (4) 

B. Molina Cocha and M. Chatenet [5] showed that the BOR mechanism on Ag catalyst depends on 

electrolyte solution pH where increasing pH value leads to an increase in the number of exchanged 

electrons. In our previous work [4] was shown that Ag incorporated into three different types of zeolites 

offered low onset potential and high BOR current densities .

Here in , we tested three silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) -polyaniline(PANI) -polyvinylpyrrolidone( PVP) with 

different amount, morphology and size of AgNPs electrocatalysts for BOR at pH 14 by cyclic 

voltammetry (CV). Ag -PANI -PVP electrocatalysts with 3.4, 43.8 and 18.9 wt% of Ag were noted as Ag -

PANI -PVP -1, Ag -PANI -PVP -2 and Ag -PANI -PVP -3 respectively 

All three Ag -PANI -PVP electrocatalysts showed good BOR activity in the potential range from -0.6 to 

0.3 V vs SCE with appearance of several oxidation peaks. In this potential range, AgOH layer and Ag 

oxides are formed on the surface of Ag -PANI -PVP electro catalysts in 2 M NaOH [6] which indicated that 

this Ag forms catalysed BOR. CVs of Ag -PANI -PVP -2 and Ag -PANI -PVP -3 electrocatalysts showed 

well defined and high intensity oxidation peak a 1 while CV of Ag -PANI -PVP -1 showed a broad peak of 

significantly lower intensity. Namely, a 1 peak current densities of 1.29, 1.27 and 0.14 mA cm -2 were 

recorded at Ag -PANI -PVP -2, Ag -PANI -PVP -3 and Ag -PANI -PVP -1 respectively. a 2 oxidation peak was 

observed only in case of Ag -PANI -PVP -1 electrocatalyst. BOR mechanism continues to be a subject of 

discussion, but peaks a 1 and a 2 could appear ed due to the oxidation of hydroxyborohydride ion (BH 3OH -)

produced by the hydrolysis of NaBH 4 and BOR, respectively [4] . Ag/C and bimetallic Cu -Ag/C 

electrocatalyst showed anodic peaks during BOR at the same position [7] .These electrocatalysts offer a

great opportunity for improve ment o f performances of DBFC, because of their low -cost, easy synthesis 

and good electrochemical behaviour during BOR. 

Acknowledgement 

This work was partially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development 

of the Republic of Serb ia ( contract no. 451 -03 -68/2020 -14/200146). 

REFERENCES        

> [1] J. Ma, J. Li, S. Yang, H. Lu, L. Liu, R. Wang, Journal Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227866.
> [2] R.C.P. Oliveira, M. Vasić, D.M.F. Santos, B. Babić, R. Hercigonja, C.A.C. Sequeira, B. Šljukić, Electrochimica Acta, 2018, 26 9, 517 –525.
> [3] M. Martins, J. Milikić, B. Šljukić, G.S.P. Soylu, A.B. Yurtcan, G. Bozkurt, D.M.F. Santos, Microporous Mesopor ous Materials, 2019, 273,
> 286 –293.
> [4] J. Milikić, R. Costa Paes Oliveira, I. Stoševski, J. Krstić, R. Hercigonja, S. Miljanić, D.M.F. Santos, B. Sljukić, New Journ al of Chemistry,
> 2019, 43, 14270 -14280.
> [5] B. Molina Concha, M. Chatenet, Electrochimica Ac ta, 2009, 54, 6119 –6129.
> [6] U. Stamenović, N. Gavrilov, I.A. Pašti, M. Otoničar, G. Ćirić -Marjanović, S.D. Škapin, M. Mitrić, V. Vodnik, Electrochimica Acta, 2018,
> 281, 549 –561.
> [7] D. Duan, H. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Liu, Electrochimica Acta, 2016, 19 8, 212 –219.

# Electron Transfer Between The Photoactive Protein And Redox 

# Polymer Occurs Within Microsecond Time Scale 

Rafał Białek 1* , Adrian Ruff 2, Kalyani 3, Michael R. Jo nes 4, Wolfgang Schuhmann 2, Charusheela 

Ramanan 3 and Krzysztof Gibasiewicz 1

> 1

Faculty of P hysics, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, ul. Umultowska 85, 61 -614 Poznań, Poland 

> 2

Analytical Chemistry, Ruhr -Universität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany  

> 3

Department of Molecular Electronics, Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 

Mainz, 55128 Germany 

> 4

School of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 

1TD, UK 

*e-mail :rafal.bialek@amu.edu.pl 

Recently, there is more and more research on the biohybrid phot oelectrochemical systems being 

conducted. While the photoactive proteins usually maintain charge separation quantum yields close to 

100 % the further steps of electron and hole transfer are often limiting the overall system efficiency. 

Therefore, we propos e to study the process of electron transfer between Rhodobacter sphaeroides 

reaction centers (RCs) and Os -complex redox polymers (Os -P) using transient absorption spectroscopy. 

RCs and Os -P were mixed in buffered solution in different ratios with addition of electron acceptor –

water soluble quinone. Results show that the electron transfer between RCs and Os -P is 3 -exponential 

under studied conditions and the fastest lifetime is of the order of a few microseconds. It also shown that 

the electron transfer rate increases with higher concentration of Os -P and decreases with higher 

concentration of RCs. These results suggest that there are a few types of complexes between RCs and Os -

P being created. The ir nature is disc ussed. In situ Spectroelectrochemical Investigation of a Bioph otoelectrode 

# Based on Photoreaction Centers Embedded in a Redox Hydrogel 

Rafał Białek 1*, Vin cent F riebe 2, Adrian Ruff 3, Michael R. Jones 4, Raoul Frese 2 and Kr zysztof 

Gibasiewicz 1

> 1

Faculty of P hysics, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, ul. Umultowska 85, 61 -614 Poznań, Poland 

> 2

Department of Physics and Astronomy, LaserLaB Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 

1081, Amsterdam 1081 HV, The Netherlands 

> 3

Analytical Chemistry , Ruhr -Univ ersität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

> 4

School of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 

1TD, UK 

*e-mail :rafal.bialek@amu.edu.pl 

The field of biophotoelectrochemistry and its application in bioph otovoltaics and biosensors has gained 

more and more attention in recent years. Knowledge of the redox potentials of the catalytically active 

protein cofactors in biophotovoltaic devices is crucial for accurate modelling and in discerni ng the 

mechanisms of their operation. Here, for the first time, we used spectroelectrochemical methods to 

investigate thermodynamic parameters of a biophotoelectrode in situ. We determined redox potentials of 

two elements of the system: the primary electro n donor in photosynth etic reaction centers (RCs) of the 

bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides and osmium -complex based redox mediators that are bound to a 

hydrogel matrix. We observe that the midpoint potential of the primary donor is shifted towards more 

posi tive potentials in co mparison to literature data for RCs solubilized in buffered water solution, likely 

due to interaction with the polymer matrix. We also demonstrate that the osmium -complex modified 

redox polymer efficiently wires the RCs to the electrod e, maintaining a high Internal Quantum Efficiency 

with approximately one electron per two photons generated (IQE = 50±12%). Overall, this bio -

photoelectrode may be attractive for controlling the redox state of the protein when performing other 

types of ex periments, e.g. time resolved absorption or fluorescence measurements, in order to gain in -

sights into kinetic limitations and thereby help in the rational design of bioelectronic devices. (Białek et 

al. 2020) 

Reference :

Bia łek R, Friebe V, Ruff A, et al (2020) In situ spectroelectrochemical investigation of a 

biophotoelectrode based on photoreaction centers embedded in a redox hydrogel. Electrochim Acta 

330:135190. doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2019.135190 Ordered Mesoporous Carbons as Supports for Bimetallic Pt(Cu) 

# Catalysts in PEMFCs 

Julia Garcia -Cardona ,a Ignasi Sirés, a Francisco Alcaide, a,b Enric Brillas, a Francesc Centellas, a and Pere L. 

Cabot a

a Laboratori d’Electroquímica dels Materials i del Medi Am bient, Secció de Química Física, Facultat de 

Química, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

bPermanent Address: CIDETEC, Paseo Miramón 196, 20014 Donostia -San Sebastiá n, Spain 

e-mail address : jul.g ar.95@gma il.com 

One of the main drawbacks when using Pt catalyst in the anode of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel 

cells (PEMFCs) is that it is easily poisoned by CO, even at low concentrations as 1 ppm. The use of PtRu 

catalysts or other strate gies, like air -ble eding, have shown a n increas e of the CO tolerance in PEMFCs 

[1] , but limited to few ppm of CO. Another strategy has been address ed the synthesis of nanoparticles 

with a core -shell structure or bimetallic systems , thus reducing the amount o f Pt used in the electrode and 

inc rea sing its toler ance towards CO [2] . A further step would be to modify the carbon support. In this 

sense, c arbon blacks are the most typical used , but they do not have good textural properties and 

thermochemical stability [3] , which ultimately can be detrime ntal for catalyst performance . On the other 

hand, other carbonaceous materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs) 

have been tested as support for Pt(Cu) nanoparticles [4] . Furthermore , in this work, Pt(Cu ) nanoparticles 

have been synthesized on ordered mesoporous carbons (OMC), CMK -3 and CMK -8, as they also present 

improved textural and elect rochemical properties as compared to carbon blacks , showing promising 

results, as can be seen in Figure 1 , where the catalyst studied depict improved activity towards CO 

electro -oxidation. -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 CMK3 CMK3A CMK8 CMK8A Pt/C 

> j / mA · cm -2

## E vs RHE / V 

Figure 1. C O stripping c urves of prepared and com mercial catalysts in deaerated 0.50 M H 2SO 4 solution 

at scan rate of 20 mV ·s-1.

References 

[1] A. Velázquez -Palenzuela, et al. J. C atal. 298 ( 2013 ) 112 –121. 

[2] G. Caballero -Manrique , et al.  Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 39 ( 2014 ) 12859 –12869. 

[3] S. Sharma, B.G. Pollet, J. Power Sources 208 ( 2012 ) 96 –119. 

[4] J. Garcia -Cardona, et al.  Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.02.038 .

Acknowledgements 

Financial support from Excellence Network E3TECH under project C TQ2017 -90659 -REDT (MINECO, 

Spain) is acknowledge d. EC -SERS and EC -SOERS study of 5-substituted uracil derivatives 

M. Perez -Estebanez 1, W. Cheuquepan 1, S. Hernandez 1, A . Colina 1 and A. Heras Vidaurre 1.

> 1

Departamento de Qu ímica, Universidad de Burgos, 

Pza. Mis ael Bañuelos s/n, Burgos, E -09001 , Españ a

mpe stebanez@ubu.es 

Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SER S) is a phenomenon related to the amplification of the Raman 

signal of an analyte interacting with a pla smonic nanostructure. This phenomenon, discovered in 1974, 

had a significa nt impac t among the spe ctroscopy community, since it helped to overcome the main 

disadvantage of Raman spectroscopy: the lack of sensitivity. Recently, our group discovered a new 

phenomenon called Electrochemical Surface Oxidation Enhanced Raman Scattering (EC -SOERS) [1] ,

which allows to enhance the Raman signal of an analyte during the oxidation of a silver substrate .

Although many aspects of the origin of EC -SOERS remains still unclear, this phenomenon has s how n

considera ble potential for quantitative analysis, being used for the determination of uric acid, citric acid or 

acetylsalicylic acid. In one of ou r last work s, combination of EC -SERS and EC -SOERS was used to 

achieve a double quantification of ni coti ni c acid and nicotinamid e [2] , a couple of analytes with great 

similar ity between Raman spectra .

In this communication, we expose the 

possibility of using EC -SE RS and EC -

SOERS to obta in a double characterization 

of an analyte in a single experiment , as 

exposed in Figure 1. Interestingly, several 

shiftings and cha nges in the relative intensity 

of the bands are observed. An analysis of the 

spectral differences will be carried out in 

orde r to further understand the interaction 

between the analyte and the substrate 

involved in each phenomenon. 

This work show s the potential to provide a 

highly specific double characterization of 

analytes in a single experiment , giving 

enough information to avoid in terferenc es .

5-Substitut ed uracil derivatives have been 

studied using EC -SERS and EC -SOERS. 

This family of compo unds have been used for 

many decades in chemotherapy as 

antimetabolite drugs and also as 

radiosensitizers of DNA [3,4] .

References 

[1] J. V Perales -Rondon, S. Hernandez, D. Martin -Yerga, P. Fanjul -Bolado, A. Heras, A. Co lina, 

Electrochim. Acta 2018 , 282 , 377. 

[2] S. Hernandez, J. V. Perales -Rondon, A. Heras, A. Colina, Electrochim. Acta 2020 , 334 , 135561. 

[3] D. B. Longley, D. P. Harkin, P. G. Johnston, Nat. Rev. Cancer 2003 , 3, 330. 

[4] J. Wiczk, J. Miloch, J. Rak, J. Ph ys. Chem. Lett. 2013 , 4, 4014. 

Acknowledgements:       

> Authors acknowledge the financial support from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Gra nts CTQ2017 -83935 -
> R-AEI/FEDERUE), Junta de Castilla y León (BU297P18) and Ministerio de Cie ncia, Innovación y U ni versidades
> (RED2018 -102412 -T). W.Ch. V .thanks JCyL for his postdoctoral fellowship (Grant BU297P18 ). S.H. thanks JCyL
> and European Social Fun dfor her predoctoral fellowship and M.P -E. thanks its contract funded by J CyL, the
> European Social Fund and the Youth Employment Initiative

Figure 1. EC -SERS and EC -SOERS spectra of 5-

Br omouracil 1mM during a time -resolved Raman 

spectroelectrochemi cal experiment .The dynamic nature of CO adlayers on Pt(111) electrodes 

J. Wei ,1,2 R. Amirbeigiarab, 2 Y.X. Chen, 1* S. Sakong, 3 A. Gross, 3 O.M. Magnussen 2* 

> 1

Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of Science and Technology 

of China, Hef ei 230026, China , 2Institute of Experimental and Applied Physics, Kiel University, Kiel 

24098, Germany , 3 Institute of Theoretical Chemistry, Ulm University, Albert -Einstein -Allee 11, 89081 

Ulm, Germany 

The adlayers of CO on the Pt(111) surface are a fas cinating electrochemical model system of great 

relevance in electrocatalysis. The potential -dependent structure and dynamics of these adlayers are 

complex and still controversial . While at the negative limit of the double layer potential range the 

presence of a close -packed (2 × 2) -3CO adlayer is well established, a coherent picture in the pre -oxidation 

range is still lacking. 

To resolve this mystery, we here employ in situ high -speed scanning tunneling microscopy for 

studying the surface phase behavior in CO -saturated 0.1 M H 2SO 4 on the millisecond time scale. At 

potentials near the onset of CO pre -oxidation local fluctuations in the (2 × 2) -CO adlayer are observed, 

which increase towards more positive potentials. Above 0.20 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), this leads to an adlayer 

where CO ad apparently reside on every top site, but still exhibit a (2 × 2) superstructure modulation. We 

interpret this observation as a dynamic effect, caused by a small number of highly mobile point defects in 

the (2 × 2) -CO adlayer. Our data indicate the coexistence of a rather static primitive (2 × 2) CO sublattice 

with highly dynamic CO on the residual atop sites. Density functional theory calculations support this 

interpretation. They show that the CO lattice near such defects relaxes into a local (1 × 1) arrangement, 

which can rapidly propagate across the surface. This behavior resembles the “door -opening” mechanism, 

which enables a high CO ad surface mobility during CO pre -oxidation, even in the presence of ordered 

adlayers of high packing density and thus ensures effective mixing of CO ad and OH ad on the electrode 

surface. 

In addition, as the potential shifts further positively, or the partial pressure of CO in the so lution 

decreases, the above -mentioned apparent (1 x 1) -CO adlayer will be transformed into the classic ( √19 × 

√19) R23.4° -13CO structure. The potential for transformation depends closely on the density of point 

defect on the surface and CO partial pressure in the solution , and there is a sort of coexistence of (1 x 1) 

and (√19 x √19) motives in the middle of the transition .

Figure 1. Potential -dependent structure of the CO adlayer on Pt(111) in CO -saturated 0.1 M H 2SO 4

solution. Video -STM images (3 nm × 3 nm) were recorded at (a) -0.10 V, (b) 0.12 V, (c) 0.20 V, and (d) 

0.30 V and shoe gradual de viations from the (2 × 2) symmetry with increasing potential, resulting in a 

modulated (1 × 1) structure at the most positive potentials. 

Reference: 

J. Wei, R . Amirbeigiarab, Y .X Chen, S . Sakong, A . Gross, O . M. Magnussen . Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 

2020 , 59, 6182 –6186 Does the Salt Really Matter? 

# Impact of the Counterion Upon ECL Signal 

Kelly Brown , Christina Gillies, Pamela Allan, Lynn Dennany 

WestChem. Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry, University of Strathclyde 

Technology and Innovation Centre, University of Strathclyde, 99 George Street, Glasgow G1 1RD 

kelly.brown.100@strath.ac.uk 

Typical reporting of electrochemiluminescence (ECL) mechanisms details the reactions which occur 

between the luminophore complex and the core electroactive structure of the target molecule. Structural 

similarities between ECL co -reactants have long been utilized to determine the mechanistic pathways ,

predict the potential regions where emission will occur and ultimately the likelihood of a species being a 

suitable co -reactant .1, 2 

But what influence do the counterions have? 

Counterions are vital within a range of substances but in particular within the pharmaceutical industry. 

Here they are utilized to improve the physiochemistry of an active pharmaceutical ingredient, ensuring 

the required bioavailability is obtained, by providing control over properties such as s olubility, drug 

stability and dissolution rate. However, c onsideration has to date not been given to the potential impact of 

a target molecule s counterion upon its ECL response . Traditionally considered as a bystande r, counterion s

were not believed to bare influence upon the recorded ECL emission .

However, within this contribution we report, for the first time, how the simple change of a counterion 

from HBr to a HCl salt form can significantly impact upon the recorded ECL response ; how this can in 

turn in fluence the reported conc entrations and the significance this will have upon the wider analytical 

community. 

Scopolamine, a pharmaceutical product and recreational drug was utilized within this proof -of -concept 

study. Previous work has demonstrated the s uitability of scopolamine to behave as an ECL co -reactant, 

with the drug species successfully detected within a range of biological matrices via a basic [Ru(bpy) 3]2+ 

based sensor down to clinically relevant concentrations .3

With both salt forms containing the i dentical core tropane alkaloid structure (to which their electroactivity 

is attribute d) , indisting uishable pKa values and hence comparable influence of pH toward their ECL 

intensity, t he distinct difference observed within the ir obtained ECL profiles is of great interest . Direct 

comparison between the HBr salt and HCl salt relived differences in respect of their emission potentials 

and intensity. The impact of the salt form upon the ECL response has been investigated in respect of the 

calculated concentrations based upon the construction of calibrations curves which each salt form . Results 

demonstrated vastly different concentrations were obtained dependent upon the salt form within the 

sample and that used to produce the calibration curve . As such this bares the question of whether this 

phenomenon is intrinsic across all co -reactants, solely to the amine functional group or specific to 

scopolamine. The impact of this outcome would be of interest to the wider analytical community, and in 

particular forensic practitioners wh ere electrochemical and ECL based sensors are of increasing interest. 

Ultimately the application of a sensor within an analytical environment relies upon its accuracy and hence 

a thorough understand ing of such a phenomenon would only stand to widen ECL acc eptance within the 

wider analytical community and increase its potential applications .

References 

1. M. M. Richter, Chem. Rev. , 2004, 104 , 3003 -3036. 

2. K. Brown, M. McMenemy, M. Palmer, M. J. Baker, D. W. Robinson, P. Allan and L. De nnany, 

Anal. Chem. , 2019, 91 , 12369 -12376. 

3. K. Brown, C. Jacquet, J. Biscay, P. Allan and L. Dennany, Analyst , 2020, DOI: 

10.1039/D0AN00846J. Electrodeposited MnO 2 Nanostructures as Efficient P hotocatalyst for 

# Removal of TCs A ntibiotics Pollutant 

Roberto Cestaro , Albert Serrà , Laetitia Philippe 

Empa Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Laboratory for Mechanics of 

Mat erials and Nanostructures 

Feuerwerkerstrasse 39, CH -3602 Thun, Switzerland 

roberto.cestaro@empa.ch 

Nowadays antibiotics are widely used not only for human and animals medicine but also as additives in 

feedstuff industries . Tetracycline antibiotics (TCs) are the most common antibiotics all over the world ,

accounting for about half of the global antibiotical production. However, TC is poorly adsorbed by animal 

metabolism and it is released into the environment in an active form . One of the biggest problems r elated 

to its long -term presence in water and soil is the development of antimicrobial resistance in animals 

which has the potentially threatens in ecosystem and human health 1. Therefore, the global antibiotic 

resistance problem has reached an urgent point. Electrodeposited Manganese dioxide (MnO 2) has been 

considered as a promising photocatalyst for oxidative degradation of organic contaminants in wastewater 

due to its ease of synthesis , non -toxic properties , strong adsorption , strong oxidation ability , acid 

resistance and low -cost . However, only a few studies are available about the photocatalytic response of 

electrodeposited MnO 2 nanostructure s. Besides, to the best of our knowledge, none of those studies 

consider s the photoca ta lytic removal of TC pollutant . Herein, we report the synthesis of MnO 2

nanostructures by electrodeposition from a simple and green electrolyte bath under ambient conditi ons .

The photocatalytic activity of MnO 2 was tested for the removal of TC antibiotic from water using LED 

visible illumination. LED lights are up to 80% more efficient and draw much less power than traditional 

lighting . The photocatalytic performances of the MnO 2 nanostructures result in an excellent 

photodegradation as well as an elevated percentage of mineralization of the TCs antibiotic. Besides, the 

photocatalyst showed good recyclability properties after performing several successive cycles , revealing 

its high photostability . We believe that the facile synthesis process can open up a new approach for the 

possible large -scale utilization of electrodeposited MnO 2 nanostructures as an effective visible light 

photocatalyst .

Figure 1: Scheme of the electrodeposited MnO 2 photocatalytical process for the TC removal. 

Reference :

1. Van Boeckel, T. P. et al. Global trends in antimicrobial resistance in animals in low - And middle -

income countries. Science (80 -. ). 365 , (2019). Electrochemical Dissolution of Pt Ru Nanoparticles : Electrocatalyst 

# Stability During Operation and Recycling of Spent Catalysts 

Raghunandan Sharma 1,# , Sašo Gyergyek 2, Per Morgen 1 and Shuang Ma Andersen 1,* 

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering, Biotechnology and Environmental Technology, University of 

Southern Denmark, DK -5230 Odense M, Denmark 

> 2

Department for Materials Synthesis, Jozef Stefan Institute, SI -1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

Email: *mashu@kbm.sdu.dk ;,# sharmariitk@gmail.com 

PtRu alloy nanoparticles supported on high surface area carbon (PtRu/C) are common electrocatalysts 

used for the hydrogen oxidation reaction at polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PE MFC) anodes. 

Recycling of these precious metals at the end of the lifetime of fuel cells is important for their further 

applications in a sustainable energy technology scenario. In this study, 1 we explore the elect rochemical 

dissolution of Pt and Ru from the PEMFC anode catalyst layer, i.e., a PtRu alloy supported on carbon 

catalyst (PtRu/C). Effects of different dissolution routes on the relative rates of dissolution for Pt and Ru 

have been explored with different electrolytes, namely 0.1 M HCl and 1 M H 2SO 4. Apart from studying 

the effect of the presence of chloride on their stability, this study explores the electrochemical dissolution -

based recovery of Pt and Ru from PtRu/C electrocatalysts. During potential cycl ing in presence of 

chloride (0.1 M HCl), the stability of Pt is observed to be lower than that of Ru. On the other hand, in 

absence of chloride, due to redeposition of the instable dissolved species, Pt shows stability higher than 

Ru. For example, the % di ssolutions of Pt and Ru are observed to be ~72% and ~33% during potential 

cycling between 0.2 and 1.6 V for 50 cycles at a scan rate of 100 mV/s, in 0.1 M HCl. On the other hand, 

for similar initial Pt and Ru loadings, the corresponding dissolution values for Pt and Ru after potential 

cycling between 0.2 and 1.6 V for 10k cycles at a scan rate of 1 V/s in 1 M H 2SO 4 are observed to be 

~27% and ~61%, respectively (Figure 1) . This difference of behaviors is attributed to the formation and 

stability of soluble Pt and Ru species during potential cycling. The fast dissolution of Pt and higher 

stability of Ru found during potential cycling in dilute HCl may be explored towards separation of Pt and 

Ru and for separable recoveries from spent alloy catalysts. 

Fig ure 1 : Variations of dissolution rate values for Pt and Ru for (a) 50 cycles between El and 1.6 V at a 

scan rate of 100 mV/s in 0.1 M HCl and (b)10000 cycles between El and 1.6 V at a scan rate of 1 V/s in 1 

M H 2SO 4), for two different El values of 0 .2 and 0.4 V. 

Reference 

1. R. Sharma, S. Gyergyek, P. Morgen and S. M. Andersen, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2020, 167 ,

024521. Effect of Plasma Electrochemical Treatment of Boron Doped Diamond 

# on the Electron Transfer Kinetics of Model Redox Reactions 

R.A. Manzhos 1, N.S. Komarova 1, A.S. Kotkin 1, V.K. Kochergin 2, A.G. Krivenko 1 

> 1

Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of R ussian Academy of Sciences ,

Academician Semenov av., 1, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russian Federation  

> 2

Department of Chemistry, M.V. Lom onosov Moscow State University ,

119991 Moscow , Russian Federation 

rmanzhos @yandex .ru 

Due to the high stability of sp 3 carbo n towards active intermediates, boron doped diamond (BDD) is 

utilized as an electrode material in electrochemical devices for wastewater purification from toxic and not 

easily biodegradable organic ecopollutants. However, a drawback of BDD is a relatively low rate of 

electron transfer (ET) which limits the productivity of such systems. In the present study , the effect of 

plasma electrochemical treatment of BDD surface on the ET rate of outer and inner sphere electrode 

reactions was studied by the example of model redox systems. 

A typical electrode used in the study was a 10 –20 μm thick boron doped diamond film on a silicon 

substrate. ET rate constants were asse ssed on the basis of the data of cyclic voltamme try carried out in 

5 mM K 3[Fe(CN) 6] + 1 M Na 2SO 4, 5 mM [Ru(NH 3)6]Cl 3 + 1 M Na 2SO 4 and 5 mM FeSO 4 + 0.25 M

H2SO 4 solutions on the initial and treated BDD electrodes. The electrode surface was treated in 1 M

Na 2SO 4 solution as a result of ca. 20 impulses of anodic plasma generated at 300 V [1]. The rate cons tant 

of outer sphere electron transfer in the case of Ru 3+/2+ was determined not to depend on the state of BDD 

surface and equals ca. 10 –2 cm 2·s –1. For inne r sphere electron transfer ([Fe(CN) 6]3–/4 – and Fe 3+/2+ ), in 

contrast, the ET rate is sensitive to pl asma electrochemical treatment . Namely , after electrode treatment 

with the anodic plasma impulses, the rate consta nt decreases from 10 –3 cm 2·s –1 to 10 –4 cm 2·s –1 for 

[Fe (CN )6]3–/4 – and increases from 5·10 –7 cm 2·s –1 to ca. 3·10 –6 cm 2·s –1 for Fe 3+/2+ which is considered to be 

the most sensitive to the surface state . The data of X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy demo nstrate the 

in crease in concentration of oxygen -containing functional groups on the surface of BDD after its plasma 

electrochemical treatment. Thus, such a n effect of BDD electrode treatment on the electron transfer 

kinetics should be explained by the functionalization of boron doped diamond surface with oxygen -

containing groups, which affect the rate of considered model redox reactions in a different way. 

The study was carried out in the framework of the State Assignment no. АААА -А19 -119061890019 -5 of 

18.06.2019 using the equipment of the Multi -User Analytical Center of IPCP RAS and the equipment of 

the Multi -User Center of Scientific Center in Chern ogolovka RAS. 

References 

1. A.G. Krivenko, R.A. Manzhos, S.G. Protasova , Effect of impulse high voltage anodic and cathodic 

electrochemical treatment of a glassy carbon electrode on the oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline 

media, Electrochem. Commun.  96 (2018 ) 57 –60 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2018.09.012 .Iron (II) phthalocyanine on nanostructured carbon as electrocatalyst 

# for oxygen reduction in Microbial Fuel Cells 

Pedro Pablo Machado Pico 1, Maida Aysla Costa de Oliveira 1, Alessandra D’Epifanio 1, Barbara Mecheri 1 

> 1

University of Rome Tor Vergata – Dept. Chemical Science and Technologies, 

Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy 

pedro.pablo.machado.pico@u niroma2.it 

Abstract 

Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are a versatile platform that aims at harvesting electricity by using the 

electrons coming fr om organic waste degradation catalysed by microorganism metabolism. However, 

challenges , such as high cost and low durability of electrode materials, lead to the use of platinum at the 

cathode side, limiting the applicability of MFCs [1] . To overcome this issue, low cost catalysts based on 

non -noble metals were developed demonstrating promising catalytic activity toward oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR) [2] . Platinum -group -metal -free (PGM -free) are mostly based on transition metal s

supported on nitrogen -conta ining carbon matrix [2,3] . In this context , we propose novel catalyst s based 

on FeN4 macrocycle s supported on nanostructured carbon spheres (Fe -N-C), for direct oxygen reduction 

to water in neutral environment. A facile three -step -method of synthesis was developed to obtain Fe -N-C

catalysts, were Iron (II) phthalocyanine (FePc) and urea (CH 4N2O) were used as iron and nitrogen source, 

respectively , and carbon black pearls (BP) as carbon support. Figure 1 shows a flowchart of the synthesis 

strategy, together with a schematic of ORR mechanism and performance at a surface of a typical Fe -N-C

catalyst. Structural, morphological and electrochemical properties of catalysts were investigated, and the 

set of results indicated that Fe -N-C catalysts have a good catalyt ic activity towards ORR in neutral pH, 

thanks to the ir high surface area and density of active sites which make them suitable for MFC 

applications .

Figure 1 . Schematic illustration of Fe -N-C catalyst production and its electrochemical performances via 

hydrodynamic linear sweep voltammogram .

References: 

[1] Oliveira, MA C. , Mecheri B., D'Epifanio A.,  Ohnuki, H . Catalysts  10 , 1 -24  (2020). 

[2] Mecheri, B., Ficca V.A.C.,  Oliveira,  M.  A.  C. , D'Epifanio A., Placidi E., Licoccia S.  Applied Catalysis B: 

Environmental  237, 699 -707 (2018). 

[3]  Mecheri, B. ; Gokhale, R. ; Santoro, C. ; Oliveira, MA C. ; D’Epifanio, A.; Licoccia, S. ; Serov, A.; Artyushkova, 

K.; Atanassov, P.  ACS Applied Energy Materials  1, 5755 -5765 (2018). Ion –Solvent Chemistry in Alkali Metal Batteries 

Xiang Chen , Qiang Zhang 

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology 

Department of Chemical Engineering , Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 

chenxiang16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn , zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Alkali metal batteries are considered as promising next -generation energy storage devices due to t heir 

ultrahigh energy densities. However, the high reactivity of alkali metal toward organic solvents and salts 

renders inevitable side reactions, which further leads to undesirable electrolyte depletion, cell failure, and 

evolution of flammable gas. Ion –solvent chemistry was proposed to prove the intrinsic instability of 

normal organic electrolytes towards alkali metal anodes through multiscale calculations (density 

functional theory (DFT) calculations, ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations, and in situ 

microscopic observations. Once complexed with cations in electrolytes, solvent molecules exhibit a 

significantly reduced the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level, facilitating the 

electrolyte decomposition and gas evolution. The origin of such phenomenon can be explained by two 

mechanisms in ether and ester electrolytes, respectively. The LUMO energy levels of ion –ester 

complexes exhibit a linear relationship with the binding energy, regulated by the ratio of carbon atomic 

orbital in the LUMO, while LUMOs of ion –ether complexes are composed by the metal atomic orbitals. 

AIMD simulations further prove the electrolyte decomposition kinetics on alkali metal anodes. The 

broken of C –O bond in electrolyte solvents is always accompanied b y the formation of Li/Na –O bond, 

validating the role of coordinated cations in promoting electrolyte decomposition. In situ optical 

microscopic observations validated the theoretical predictions that electrolyte gassing on Li /Na metal 

surface is obviously promoted after introducing cations into electrolytes. 

Based on the proved ion –solvent chemistry, several strategies were proposed to build stable electrolytes 

for alkali metal anodes, including additive design and regulating anions in electrolyte solvati on shell. 

Both electrolyte additives and anions from salts can participate electrolyte solvation of cations and 

regulate the composition and structure of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). More importantly, a fancy 

strategy of cation additive was proposed as different cations have a different impact on solvent molecules. 

Three principles, including the LUMO energy level decrease of solvents after coordinating with cations, 

the electrode potential of introduced cations in electrolytes, the binding energy be tween cations and 

solvents, were proposed to select proper cation additives for sodium metal batteries. Besides, the role of 

electrolyte solvation in regulating ion –solvent interactions was also systematically investigated. The 

cation additive strategy aff ords emerging chances for rational electrolyte design for stable and safe Na 

metal batteries and also affords a fresh research paradigm for other batteries. 

References: 

[1] X. Chen, X. Shen, B. Li, H.J. Peng, X.B. Cheng, B.Q. Li, X.Q. Zhang, J.Q. Huang, Q . Zhang, Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 57 , 734−737. 

[2]  X. Chen, H. -R. Li, X. Shen, Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 57 , 16643 –16647. 

[3]  X. Chen, T. -Z. Hou, B. Li, C. Yan, L. Zhu, C. Guan, X. -B. Cheng, H. -J. Peng, J. -Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, 

Energy Storage Mater. 2017 , 8, 194 –201. 

[4] X. Chen, X. -Q. Zhang, H. -R. Li, Q. Zhang, Batteries & Supercaps 2019 , 2, 128 –131. 

[5] X. Chen, T. Hou, K. A. Persson, Q. Zhang, Mater. Today 2019 , 22 , 142 –158. 

[6]  X. -Q. Zhang, X. Chen, X. -B. Cheng, B. -Q. Li, X. Shen, C. Yan, J. -Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 57 , 5301 –5305. 

[7]  X. -Q. Zhang, X. -B. Cheng, X. Chen, C. Yan, Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017 , 27 , 1605989. Effect of Complex Formation on Mass Transfer during Metal 

# Electrodeposition on Rotating Disk Electrode 

A.D. Davydov 1, T.B. Kabanova 1, V.M. Volgin 2, V.V. Lyubimov 2

> 1

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry , Leninskii pr. 31, 

Mosco w, 119071, Russia 

> 2

Tula State University, pr. Lenina 92, Tula, 300012, Russia 

> 1

davydov@elchem.ac.ru 

При электросаждении металлов и сплавов достаточно широко используются раств оры, 

содержащие комплексы ионов металла с отрицательно заряженными лигандами [1]. Процессы 

массопереноса в растворах с комплексами включают гомогенные химические реакции и потоки 

ли гандов, возникающие при восстановлении комплексов, что позволяет существенно повысить 

эффективность электрохимических процессов за счет реализации электро - и авт окатализа, эффекта 

экзальтации. Известно, что электромиграция может значительно увеличить знач ение предельной 

плотности тока в случае электровосстановления катионов из растворов, содержащих комплексы, а 

при определенных условиях пр едельный ток может вообще отсутствовать [ 2]. При теоретическом 

анализе массопереноса в условиях комплексообразования об ычно использ уются упрощенные 

математические модели ( приближение диффузионного слоя Нернста, условие равновесия реакции 

ко мплексообразования, равенство коэффициентов диффузии всех компонентов), что в ряде 

случаев позволяет получить приближенные аналитически е решения [3]. Очень часто 

приближения, принятые в упрощенных математических моделях, не выполняются: ионы имеют 

существенно отличающиеся значения коэффициентов дифф узии, наряду с электродиффузионным 

осуществляется и конвективный перенос компоне нтов, реакц ия комплексообразования является 

неравновесной, что может оказывать сущ ественное влияние на закономерности массопереноса в 

условиях комплексообразования. В связи с этим представляет интерес исследование влияния 

гидродинамических условий, транспортных свойс тв и скорости гомогенной химической реакции 

на процессы переноса в условиях комплексообразования, которое можно выполнить только с 

использованием численных методов [4] .

In this work the effect of complex formation on the mass transfer during the metal ele ctrodeposition on a

rotat ing disk electrode from the solution containing three types of ions (metal cation, cationic complex 

and non -electroactive anion) is studied theoretically . The dimensionless Nernst -Planck equations in the 

approximation of solution e lectroneutrality , which tak e into account the elec tro -diffusion and convective 

trans fer of all types of ions and the homogeneous reaction of complex formation, are used as the 

mathematical model . The Butler -Volmer equa tions are used to take into account the kinetics of 

electrochemical reactions . In con trast to the known works , the approximations of the Nernst layer, 

equality of the diffusion coefficients of all types of ions, and the equilibrium of complex formation 

reaction were not used. As a result of numerical solution , the distributions of concentration, potential, and 

the rate of complex formation reac tion are obtained at various parameters of the system under 

consideration. It is shown that the constant s of the equilibrium and rate of c omplex form ation rea ction, as 

well as the ratio between the diffusion coefficients of complex cation and an ion have the strongest effect 

on the mass transfer. 

The work was performed with support of Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russian 

Feder ation. The study was partially funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research and Tula region, 

project no. 19 -48 -710008. 

References 

[1] A. Survila, Electrochemistry of metal complexes: applications from electroplating to oxide layer 

formation , John Wiley & Sons, Weinheim , 2015. 

[2] R.Yu. Bek, T.E. Tsupak, L.I. Borodikhina, N.Z. Chi, A special feature of complex -formation 

influencing the migration effect , Sov. Ele ctrochem. 19 (1983) 1 036 .

[3] Yu.I. Kharkats, Electrom igration and complexing in reactions of reduction of cations , Russ. J. 

Electrochem. 34 (1998 ) 526. 

[4] . V.M. Volgin, A.D. Davydov, Effect of migration on homogeneous redox electrocata lysis at rotating 

disk electrode, Electrochim. Acta 259 (2018 ) 56. Ultrafine Pt nanoparticles supported on double -shelled C/TiO 2 hollow 

# spheres material as highly efficient methanol oxidation catalysts 

Xiaoyu Yue *, Yuguang Pu, Wen Zhang, Ting Zhang, Wei Gao* 

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, the University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, 

Auckland 1142, New Zealand 

## * Corresponding authors. E-mail address es : w.gao@auckland.ac.nz  (W. Gao); 

## xyue037@aucklanduni.ac.nz  (X. Yue) .

Abstract 

Catalyst support is extremely important for future fuel cell devices. In this work, we developed 

double -shelled C/TiO 2 (DSCT) hollow spheres as an excellent catalyst support via a template -directed 

method. The combination of hollow structure, TiO 2 shell and carbon layer results in excellent electron 

conductivity, electrocatalytic activity, and chemical stability. These un iformed DSCT hollow spheres are 

used as catalyst support to synthesize Pt/DSCT hollow spheres electrocatalyst. The resulting Pt/DSCT 

hollow spheres exhibited high catalytic performance with a current density of 462 mA mg -1 for methanol 

oxidation reaction, which is 2.52 times higher than that of the commercial Pt/C. Furthermore, the 

increased tolerance to carbonaceous poisoning with a higher If/Ib ratio and a better long -term stability in 

acid media suggests that the DSCT hollow sphere is a promising C/TiO 2-based catalyst support for direct 

methanol fuel cells applications. 

Keywords: Catalyst support; C/TiO 2 hollow sphere; Metal -support interactions ; Methanol oxidation 

reaction 

Graph ical abstract Modeling of Electrodeless Electrochemical Nanoprinting 

A.D. Davydov 1, T.B. Kabanova 1, V.M. Volgin 2, V.V. Lyubimov 2

> 1

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry , Leninskii pr. 31, 

Moscow, 119071, Russia 

> 2

Tula State University, pr. Le nina 92, Tula, 300012, Russia 

> 1

davydov@elchem.ac.ru 

Local electrodeposition (LED) is one of effective methods for formation of 3D micro - and nanostructures. 

It exhibits several important advantages: the absence of mechanical and heat impacts on the workpi ece, 

no tool wear, wide possibilities for controlling the shape of microstructures by varying machining modes, 

low cost of electrochemical processes, and good reproducibility of results [1] . Electrodeposition is 

particularly unique in its ability to create deposit at sub -nanometer vertical resolutions [2] . Various 

schemes of maskless local electrodeposition are used: jet LED, scanning probe based LED and 

micro/nanopipette based LED (electrochemical micro/nanoprinting). At present, the schemes of LED 

using u nipolar or bipolar electrodes [3, 4] , are widely used, whereas the electrodeless LED remains 

almost unstudied. 

This work is devoted to the theoretical analysis of electrodeless electrochemical nanoprinting using a 

nanopipette filled with the electrolyte so lution more concentrated than the bulk solution. The external 

potential is not imposed onto the conductive substrate, and there are no other electrodes. As a result of 

different solution concentrations near the substrate, cathodic and anodic zones form on it. Local metal 

deposition from the solution occurs on the cathodic zone near the nanopipette, and anodic dissolution of 

substrate metal occurs on the large anodic zone on the periphery of electrochemical cell. The ionic 

transport equations, which take int o account diffusion, migration, and convection, and the condition of 

electroneutrality, are used as the mathematical model. The boundary conditions on the substrate are set 

using the Butler -Volmer equation. The numerical solution of the problem is carried out by the finite 

element method on the deformable grid that takes into account the change of the substrate surface shape 

due to the local deposition and dissolution of metal. 

As a result of simulation, the distributions of ion concentrations and potential over the solution, and the 

distributions of current density, overpotential, and concentration of electroactive ions over the substrate 

surface are obtained for various time instants and under various conditions. 

The work was performed with support of Min istry of Science and Higher Education of Russian 

Federation. The study was partially funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research and Tula region, 

project no. 19 -48 -710008. 

References 

[1] A.D. Davydov, V.M. Volgin , Electrochemical Local Maskless Micro/ Nanoscale Deposition, 

Dissolution, and Oxidation of Metals and Semiconductors (A Review) , Russ . J. Electrochem. 56(1) 

(2020) 52. 

[2] T.M. Braun, D.T. Schwartz , The emerging role of electrodeposition in additive manufacturing ,

Electrochem . Soc . Interface 25 (1) (2016) 69. 

[3] Z. Feng, Y. Xie, N.S. Georgescu, High -Resolution Nanoprinting Approach through Self -Driven 

Electrodeposition, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 (1) (2019) D3200. 

[4] T.M. Braun, D.T. Schwartz, Localized electrodeposition and patterning using bipol ar 

electrochemistry , J. Electrochem. Soc . 162 (4) ( 2015 ) D180. Cyclic Voltammetry of Homogeneous Autoc atal ytic Reduction of 

# Iodate on Rotating Disk Electrode 

V.M. Volgin 1, V.V. Lyubimov 1, I.V. Gnidina 1, A.D. Davydov 2 , T.B. Kabanova 2

> 1

Tula State University, pr. Lenina 92, Tula, 300012, Russia 

> 2

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry , Leninskii pr. 31, 

Moscow, 119071, Russia 

> 1

volgin @tsu .tula .ru 

Voltammetry is widely used in the study of electrode reaction mechanisms that involve homogeneous 

chemical processes coupled to electron transfer [1 ].  Теория  сyclic voltammetry of h omogeneous redox 

catalysis of electrochemical reactions  достаточно  хорошо  разработана  и позволяет  выразить 

(описать ) the cyclic voltammetric responses a s functions of two dimensionless parameters : a kinetic 

parameter, and a n excess factor [2] . Одним из частных, но весьма важным, случаем электрокатализа 

является гомогенный автокатализ (так называемый  CE ’’ механизм [3]) при котором количество 

катализатора увеличивается в ходе процесса. Упрощенно м еханизм гомогенного автока та ли за 

может быть представлен следующей схемой (k>1) :products ASMMeA -

+→+



k

Этот механизм реализуется при электрохимическом восстановлении иода (который присутствует в

растворе в весьма малой концентрации) с образованием  iodide , и последующим  the  reduction  of

iodate  by  iodide  (known  as  the  Dushman  reaction ) [4] . В работе  [5]  показано , что  the catalytic reduction 

of iodate at a rotating platinum disk electrode has been employed to study the kinetics of the reaction 

between iodate and iodide  и при  использовании  ряда  упрощений  получено  a closed form solution for 

the catalytic current .

Настоящая работа посвящена теоретическому исследованию процессов переноса при  of 

homogeneous  autocatalytic  reduction  of  iodate  on  rotating  disk  electrode  (RDE ). В качестве 

математич еской модели использованы нестационарные уравнения ионного переноса, 

учитывающие диффузию, миграцию, конвекцию и гомогенные химические реакции, а также 

условие электронейтральности. Кинетика электрохимической реакции учитывалась с помощью 

уравнения Батлера -Фольмера. Численное решение осуществлялось методом конечных элементов 

на нерегулярной сетке , что обеспечивало высокую эффективность и требуемую точность 

численного решения. 

В результате численного моделирования получены зависимости формы и параметров 

volt ammograms от концентрации раствора, скорости развертки потенциала и скорости вращения 

RDE . Установлено, что при достаточно больших скоростях развертки потенциала пиковое 

значение тока окисления существенно больше пикового значения тока восстановления. Это 

объясняется тем, что при больших скоростях развертки потенциала за время изменения 

потенциала от наибольшего до наименьшего значений (точно не знаю , как сказать – прямой ход, 

изменение потенциала в катодную область и т.д. ) не успевает образоваться достаточ но большого 

количества  iodide .

The work was performed with support of Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russian 

Federation. The study was partially funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research and Tula region, 

project no. 19 -48 -710008. 

Refer ences 

[1] R.G. Compton, C.E. Banks, Understanding voltammetry , World Scientific Publishing, London, 20 18 .

[2] J.M. Saveant, K.B. Su, Homogeneous redox catalysis of electrochemical reaction. Part VI. Zone 

diagram representation of the kinetic regimes, J. El ectroanal. Chem. 171 (1984) 341 .

[3] M.A. Vorotyntsev, D.V. Konev, Y.V. Tolmachev , Electroreduction of halogen oxoanions via 

autocatalytic redox mediation by halide anions: novel EC” mechanism. Theory for stationary 1D regime ,

Electrochim . Acta 173 (2015) 779. 

[4] G. Schmitz, Kinetics and mechanism of the iodate –iodide reaction and other related reactions , Phys .

Chem . Chem . Phys . 1(8) (1999) 1909. [5] P. Beran, S. Bruckenstein, Rotating -disk -electrode study of the catalytic wave produced by the 

reduction o f iodine in the presence of iodate , J. Phys . Chem . 72 (10) (1968) 3630. Comparison between microporous layered and non -layered GDLs; 

# Experimentally validated in terms of gas transport and performance in 

# membrane fuel cells 

Mainak Mukherjee , Caroline Bonnet and François Lapicque 

Laboratoire Réactions et Génie des Procédés (LRG P, Université de Lorraine )

1 Rue Grandville, 54000 Nancy. France 

Mainak.mukherjee@univ -lorraine.fr 

Gas diffusion layers (GDLs) used in membrane fuel cells are widely recognized as a critical compone nt 

that largely contributes to its performance. Essentially, properties of GDLs are known to vary 

significantly, depending upon manufacturing techniques employed [1 -2] . Recently, m any advances have 

been made in GDLs with an addition of a microporous layer (MPL) on the substrate layer to facilitate 

water management by preventing water infusion and disallowing surface wetting. This work aims at 

comparing a n MPL layered (34 BC) with a non -layered (34 BA) GDL from SIGRACET by ; (i) ex situ 

gas transport measure ment in which GDLs were stacked in 25cm 2 cell to measure equivalent gas 

permeability (in terms of viscous permeability and inertial permeability) , [1 -2] and (ii) electrochemical 

performance. Results showed a higher viscous permeability by 5 times for 34 BA due to larger pore sizes 

and the absence of MPL compared to 34 BC. From the polarization curves, 34 BC with lower gas 

transport capability, showed reasonably decent performance specifically at a higher current density of 0.8 

A/cm 2, indicating sufficient c ontrol towards water management. In 34 BA , however, which was prone to 

flooding led to pore blockage, and overall gas transport was compromised, as a consequence early decline 

was seen at a current density of 0.4 A/cm 2 [1] .

Figure 1. The performance curv es on the selected GDLs and viscous permeability values        

> References
> [1] Mukherjee M, Bonnet C, Lapicque F, Estimation of through -plane and in -plane gas permeability across gas diffusion
> layers (GDLs): comparison with equivalent permeability in bipolar pl ates and relation to fuel cell performance, Int .J.
> Hydrog. Energ 2020 ;45 : 13428 -13440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020 .03.026
> [2] Arora D, Bonnet C, Mukherjee M, Arunthanayothin, Shirsath AV, Lundgren M, Burkardt M, Kmiotek S, Rael S, Lapicque
> F, Guichard S. Long term study of directly hybridized proton exchange membrane fuel cell and supercapacitor for
> transpo rt applications with lower hydrogen losses 2020, 28 : 101205 https://doi.org/10.1016 /j.est.2020.101205

# Simulation of Electrochemical Micromachining by Nanosecond 

# Voltage Pulses 

V.M. Volgin 1, V.V. Lyubimov 1, I.V. Gnidina 1, A.D. Davydov 2

> 1

Tula State University, pr. Lenina 92, Tula, 300012, Russia 

> 2

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochem istry , Leninskii pr. 31, 

Moscow, 119071, Russia 

> 1

volgin @tsu .tula .ru 

Electrochemical micromachining (ECMM) with using nanosecond voltage pulses between a tool 

electrode and a workpiece enables one to form complex -shaped three -dimensional structures with 

submicrometer precision 1. The principle is based on the dependence of double -layer charging time on the 

interelectrode gap (local separation between the electrodes). This results in a highly localized region for 

electrochemical dissolution or deposition. Th is technique is used for local anodic dissolution of various 

metals and silicon as well as for local metal electrodeposition. 

The accuracy and productivity of ECMM depends significantly on the operating conditions, in particular, 

on the interelectrode gap, the pulse -on time and pulse frequency. The pulse -on time can be estimated 

using an approximate equation for the time constant for electric double layer charging [1] : /CS =

(1) 

Here C is the specific capacity of elec tric double layer; S is the interelectrode gap; and  is the 

conductivity of electrolyte solution. 

The results of modeling and the experimental data [2, 3] give much lower times of double -layer charging. 

This com plicates choosing appropriate machining mode. 

In this work, the transport processes in the electrolyte solution and charging -discharging of electric 

double layer are analyzed theoretically. As a result, an approximate analytical equation for the time 

cons tant for double -layer charging is obtained: 0SS F, SS F, 

ln 2

iinFi RTC 

=

## 

(2) 

Here, SS F, i is the Faraday current density for the charged electric double layer; 0i is the exchange current 

density; n is the number of electrons involved in the electrochemical reaction; R is the gas constant; and T

is the temperature. 

The results of numerical calculations agree well with the approximate analytical equation (2). 

Thus, the proposed model of electrochemical micromachining by nanose cond voltage pulses can be used 

for justified choice of pulse -on time in ECMM. 

The work was performed with support of Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russian 

Federation. 

References 

[1] R. Schuster, V. Kirchner, P. Allongue, G. Ertl, Electroch emical micromachining , Science 289 (5476) 

(2000 ) 98. 

[2] J.A. Kenney, G.S. Hwang, Electrochemical machining with ultrashort voltage pulses: modelling of 

charging dynamics and feature profile evolution , Nanotechnology 16 (7) (2005 ) S309. 

[3] E.L. Hotoiu, S. Van Damme, C. Albu, D. Deconinck, A.; Demeter, J. Deconinck , Simulation of nano -

second pulsed phenomena in electrochemical micromachining processes –Effects of the signal and double 

layer properties, Electrochim. Acta 93 (2013) 8. Acid -Base Electrochemical Flow Battery using Neutralization Energy 

Eleana Mundaray -Guilarte , Alfonso Sáez, José Solla -Gullón , Vicente Montiel 

Instituto de Electroquímica, Universidad de Alicante 

Apdo. 99, E -03080, Alicante, Spain 

jose. solla@ua.es 

The d evelopment of clean, renewable, and affordable energy sources as a consequence of the global 

warming has become a necessity for society. Consequently, is highly required the development of devices 

capable of efficiently storing the energy obtained from the se sources. In this sense, Hydrogen -based 

technologies have become a promising candidate both as fuel and transmission element. [1]. 

A redox flow battery is an electrochemical energy storage device that converts chemical energy into 

electrical energy thro ugh reversible oxidation and reduction of working fluids [2]. Based on this concept 

an Acid -Base Electrochemical Flow Battery (ABEFB) has been developed. This system is composed of 

acidic and alkaline solutions, both with a high supporting electrolyte conc entration, which are separated 

by a cationic exchange membrane. Hydrogen oxidation and evolution reactions take place during the 

charge and discharge processes, which acidifies or basifies the corresponding electrolytes. The 

neutralization energy obtai ned from these solutions is used as electromotive force [3]. In this case, HCl 

and NaOH are used as electrolytes, NaCl as supporting electrolyte, a platinised Pt electrode as cathode, a 

Pt -catalysed gas diffusion electrode as anode (catalyst loading of 0.5 mg cm -2) and a cationic membrane 

as ionic separator. 

Figure 1:a) Polarization curves and power curves for 0.3, 0.5 and 1.0 M HCl/NaOH, with 2.0 and 4.0 M 

NaCl. b) Charge/discharge cycles for a charge capacity of 3350 mAh, at 12.5 mA cm -2

In this work, the effect of the supporting electrolyte concentration, the state of charge, and the nature of 

cationic membrane have been systematically studied. Polarization curves and charge/discha rge cycles 

were obtained to evaluate the performan ce of the system. We found that this battery can provide a 

maximum power density of 10.6 mW cm -2 at 27.5 mA cm -2, and a coul ombic efficiency of around 80 %, 

depending on the H +/Na + ratio and the membrane th ickness. This study reveals a promising energy -

sto rage system, with simple operation and low cost .

References 

[1] Midilli, A.; Dincer, I. Hydrog. Energy, 2007, 32, 511 -524. 

[2] Vanýsek, P.; Novák, V. J Energy Storage, 2017, 13, 435 -441. 

[3] Sáez, A.; Mon tiel, V. Hydrog.  Energy, 2016, 41, 17801 -17806. Lithi um Bonds in Lithium Batteries 

Xiang Chen , Qiang Zhang 

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology 

Department of Chemical Engineering , Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 

chenxiang16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn , zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Lithium bonds are analogous to hydrogen bonds and are therefore expected to exhibit similar 

characteristics and functions. Additionally, the metallic nature and large atomic radius of Li bestow the Li 

bond with special features. As one of the most important applications of the element, Li batteries afford 

emerging opportunities for the exploration of Li bond chemist ry. 

In this work, we have briefly summarized the historical development of the Li bond. Especially, the 

similarities and differences between the Li and H bonds were discussed. Subsequently, the Li bond was 

described in the context of Li batteries, includ ing discussions of sulfur cathodes, liquid electrolytes, and 

Li metal anodes. Such discourse on the chemistry of the Li bond can provide fruitful insight into the 

fundamental interactions within Li batteries and thus deliver a deeper understanding of their working 

mechanism. In this way, a comprehensive understanding of the Li bond in Li batteries and an outlook on 

its future developments is presented. 

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the Li bond in Li batteries. LPS: Lithium polysulfide. 

Reference s: 

[1] Chen, X.; Bai, Y. -K.; Zhao, C. -Z.; Shen, X.; Zhang, Q., Lithium Bonds in Lithium Batteries. Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 2020 , DOI: 10.1002/anie.201915623. 

[2] Hou, T. Z.; Xu, W. T.; Chen, X.; Peng, H. J.; Huang, J. Q.; Zhang, Q., Lithium Bond Chemistry in 

Lithium -Sulfur Batteries. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56 (28), 8178 –8182. 

[3] Chen, X.; Chen, X. -R.; Hou, T. -Z.; Li, B. -Q.; Cheng, X. -B.; Zhang, R.; Zhang, Q., Lithiophilicity 

Chemistry Of Heteroatom -Doped Carbon To Guide Uniform Lithium Nucleation In Lit hium Metal 

Anod es. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5 (2), eaau7728. 

[4] Chen, X.; Shen, X.; Li, B.; Peng, H. J.; Cheng, X. B.; Li, B. Q.; Zhang, X. Q.; Huang, J. Q.; Zhang, Q., 

Ion -Solvent Complexes Promote Gas Evolution from Electrolytes on a Sodium Metal Anode. Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57 (3), 734 –737. 

[5] Chen, X.; Li, H. -R.; Shen, X.; Zhang, Q., The Origin of the Reduced Reductive Stability of Ion –

Solvent Complexes on Alkali and Alkaline Earth Metal Anodes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57 (51), 

16643 –16647. Automated In vestigation of Cyclic Voltammetry Data 

Berk Delibas , Burak Ülgüt, Can Berk Uzundal 

Ihsan Dogramaci Bilkent University 

berk.delibas@ug.bilkent.edu.tr , ulgut@ fen.bilkent.edu.tr 

Cyclic voltammetry has been a powerful and versatile tool for every modern electrochemist. It is 

straightforward to use and can easily grant information on the many properties of the system it is used on. 

Interpretation of the cyclic vo ltammetry data is traditionally done via sweep rate dependence of 

parameters such as anodic and cathodic peak currents and the separations of the said peaks. A standalone 

automated system that can do electrochemical analysis requires autonomous detection o f electrochemical 

signals. The idea of autonomous electrochemistry was first introduced by John Arthur Eklund in his thesis 

supervised by Larry Faulkner. At the time, the experiment used was chronocoulometry and not much progress 

was made afterwards. 

To da te, algorithms for finding electrochemical peaks and their respective baselines have used various 

methods that require many parameters from the operator and/or locate critical points in the data externally. 

These methods either require human input in real time, or during design time in the form of thresholds. This is 

mostly due to the potential large noise in the data that may blur t he peak locations or baseline locations. 

To remedy those problems we have developed a versatile software using Python Programm ing 

Language, “AutoCV”, which locates the positions of peaks and their respective baselines on the data using little 

to no ne operator input while accounting for the noise and artifacts in the data. In order to account for noise and 

artifacts we have develo ped a method in which we use the correlation function between an “ideal peak” 

generated from the work of Nicholson & Shain and noisy data which yields finely clarified peaks and 

diminished noise and artifacts. Then using these information “AutoCV” can determine many things including; 

reduction and oxidation peak positions (even if there is more than 1 of each), whether the system is stable or not, 

whether there are any coupled chemical reactions or not or kinet ics of the electrode. Also, in a given set of data 

it can detect if there is a peak separation and whether it is due to kinetic reasons or not . If the cyclic voltammetry 

data is inadequate satisfy wanted confidence for the inquisition of the property, soft ware will suggest another 

experiment to further analyse the property in question. This software is easily modifiable, and its parameters can 

be adjusted to obtain wanted properties of the system with desired confidence. Also, it can easily be updated to 

an alyse data from many different techniques and do analysis on all the data at the same time. Tailoring the permeability of chitosan -based coatings deposited on zinc 

# substrates with different methods 

Árpád Ferenc Szőke 1, Gabriella Stefánia Szabó 1, Zoltán Hórvölgyi 2, Emőke Albert 2, Attila Gergely 

Végh 3, László Zimányi 3, Claudine Filiatre 4, Liana Ma ria Muresan 1

> 1

Babeş -Bolyai University, Cluj -Napoca, Romania, 11 Arany János St. 

> 2

Budapest Universit y of Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary, Budafoki út 6 -8

> 3

Institute of Biophysic s, Biological Research Centre, Szeged, Hungary, Temesvári Krt. 62 

> 4

Université de Franche -Comté, UTINAM, Besançon, France, 16 route de Gray 

szokearpad@chem.ubbcluj.ro 

Chitosan is a highly versatile biopolymer, with applications in various domains , including 

medicine, agriculture and the packaging industry [1]. Recently, the use of chitosan as an anticorrosive 

barrier was also studied [2, 3]. 

Depending on the substrate nature , chitosan can be applied to a surface as a protective coating by 

multiple techniques . Conventional methods, such as dip -coating have a high success rate due to the 

simplicity and reproducibility of the coatings [4]. In the case of metal substrates, however, electrophoretic 

deposition can also yield good results [5] .

Our study aims to tailor the permeability of chitosan 

coating s through different depo sition techniques and 

impregnation/accumulation of additives which could act as 

corrosion inhibitors . As such, different types of chitosan -

based coatings were deposited on zinc substrates and studied 

mainly through electrochemical methods (electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy and potentiodynamic polarization) .

The obtained results highlight that in the case of dip -

coating, thin , native chitosan layers do not offer any 

significant protection (in some cases, even a slight reduction 

of impedance was noted). These highly permeable thin layers 

can be crosslinked, or used as accumulation matrices, 

resulting in high corrosion inhibition efficiencies of >90%, 

suggesting reduced permeability. On the contrary, thick 

chitosan layers produced from highly viscous solu tions can provide some reduced amount of protection 

(ca. 30%), but , due to the thickness of the polymer barrier, in these cases, an effective modification 

th rough crosslinking proved to be impossible. 

Electrophoretic deposition was an ineffective method i n the case of zinc substrates, possibly due 

to the presence of ZnO/Zn(OH) 2 on the metal surface , hindering the production of a uniform layer 

(proven through microscopy). Electrochemical measurements show a decent inhibition efficiency in these 

cases, howev er, due to the non -uniform coverage, leading to increased probability of pitting corrosion, 

this method was deemed inappropriate for zinc substrates. 

1. D. Zhao , S. Yu, B. Sun, S. Gao, S. Guo, S., K. Zhao, Polymers 2018 , 10 (4), 462. 

2. Á.F. Szőke, G. Szabó , Z. Simó, Z. Hórvölgyi, E. Albert, A.G. Végh, L. Zimányi, L.M. Muresan, 

Eur . Polym . J. 2019 , 118 , 205 -212. 

3. L.Y. Pozzo, T.F. Conceição, A. Spinelli, N. Scharnagl, A.T.N. Pires, Carbohyd. Polym. 2018 ,

181, 71 –77. 

4. J. Carneiro, J. Tedim, M.G.S. Ferreira, Prog . Org. Coat. 2015 , 89, 348 -356. 

5. C. Dange -Delbaere, C.C. Buron, M. Euvrard, C. Filiâtre, Colloid . Surfaces . A 2016 , 493, 1 -8.Density Functional Theory Analysis of Structural and E lectronic 

# Properties of NASICON -structured Na xTi 2(PO 4)3 (x = 1 – 4) 

Linas Vilčiauskas a and Denis Gryaznov a

> a

Center for Physical Sciences and Technology (FTMC) 

Saulėtekio al. 3, LT -10257 Vilnius, Lith uania 

Linas.Vilciauskas@ftmc.lt 

Sodium -ion batteries represent an alternative to current generation of lithium ion batteries due t o higher 

sustainability and potentially lower cost. However, there is still a lack of suitable electrode materials 

especially on the negative electrode side . Na SuperIonic CON ductor (NASICON) type systems 

demonstrates are among the leading candidates for Na -ion battery applications [1,2] . In the present study ,

first principles calculations within the linear combination of atomic orbitals and Gaussian basis set 

formalism were employed in order to study the structural an electronic structure peculiarities in 

Na xTi 2(PO 4)3 compounds with different degrees of sodiation (x = 1 -4). Hybrid exchange -correlation 

functionals (HSE06 and B1WC ) were used to investigate the band gap changes for different x [3 ]. We 

identified the Ti oxidation states and correctly predict ed the mixed oxidation state (mixed valence) for x = 

2 and 4. Moreover , the mixed oxidation states showed smaller band gaps by ~0.6 eV for x = 2 and 4 vs .

4.1 and 2.2 eV for x = 1 and 3, respectively (Fig. 1) . We discuss the nature of this effect based on the 

analysis of electronic densit y of states. We demonstrate important role of the electroneutrality condition 

to find the groun d state for each x. Finally, a correlation was found between the bulk electronic 

properties of Na xTi 2(PO 4)3 compounds and the symmetry changes due to the variation of sodium content 

and accompanying charge ordering. The calculations of phonon frequencies at the -point rev ealed no 

presence of imaginary frequencies for the ground state structures. These structural peculiarities for 

Na xTi 2(PO 4)3 compounds are suggested to have an important effect on their performance in battery 

applications such as the elect rochemical kinetics and polaronic charge transport .

Fig. 1. Electronic Density of States (DOS) for NaxTi2(PO4)3 where (a) x = 4, (b) x = 3, (c) x = 2, (d) x = 

1. The Fermi energies are marked by dashed lines. 

Acknowledgements: 

This project has received  funding from the European Regional Development Fund (Project No. 01.2.2 -

LMT -K-718 -02 -0005) under grant agreement with the Research Council of Lithuania (LMTLT). 

References :

[1] S. Chen et al. , Adv, Mater., 29, 1700431 (2017). 

[1] H. Kabbour et al. , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133, 11900 -11903 (2011). 

[3] D. Gryaznov et al. , Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , 22 , 11861 -11870 (2020 ). Layered manganese -based oxide s as cathode material s for sodium ion 

# batteries 

Kai Zhang 1, Jun Chen 1, Yong -Mook Kang 2 

> 1

Affiliation 1 Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Nankai 

University, Tianjin, P. R. China, 3000 71;  

> 2

Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Korea University, Anam -ro 145, Seongbuk -Gu, Seoul, 

Republic of Korea, 02841 

e-mail address : zhangkai_nk@nankai.edu.cn 

Benefi ting from natural abundan ce and wide distribut ion of sodium sources, sodium io n batteries 

(SIBs) demonstrate promising application prospects in hybrid electric vehicles and large -scale energy 

storage. [1] The capacity of cathode materials is , however, mainly provided by the redox reaction s of metal 

ions, which is difficult to be furt her improved. [2] Significantly, i ncorporating a certain amount of lithium 

ions into the transition metal layer of layered manganese -based oxide s can stimulate anion ic redox 

reaction s, thus realizing higher capacity .[3] Although layered manganese -based oxid es are promising to 

break through the capacity bottleneck of cathode materials, their capacity and output voltage tend to 

drastically decay . Therefore, it is imperative to put forward new strategies to stabilize the anionic redox 

reactions .

In this work, w e introduced inactive zinc ions into the sodium layer to synthesize the zinc -doped 

Na 5/6 [Li 1/4 Mn 3/4 ]O 2 (NLMO -Zn ). A new phase was generated when the undoped sample (NLMO) were 

charged to the high voltage zone through i n situ XRD to observe the phase evolut ion of zinc -doped and 

undoped samples during charging and discharging . Interestingly, the NLMO -Zn always maintain ed 

single -phase reaction (Fig. a and b ), indicating that the Zn -doping could effectively inhibit the phase 

transformation at high voltage . The charge compensation mechanism analysis of the two samples based 

on photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray absorption near -edge spectroscopy (XA NE S) 

characterization illustrates that NLMO -Zn displayed higher Mn 4+ content after cycling compared with 

NLMO (Fig. c). Moreover , the first principles theoretical calculation revealed that the zinc -doped samples 

ha d more stable intermediates and lower phase transition probability under different sodium content states 

(i.e. different charge and discharge states). This doping strategy effectively inhibits the Jahn -Teller effect 

of Mn 3+ and avoids phase transition, thus stabilizing the anion redox reaction and greatly improving the 

electrochemical properties. This study offers considerable application potential towar d the development 

of high -energy SIBs. 

Figure. In situ XRD patterns of NLMO (a) and NLMO -Zn (b) during the 1st charge and the XANES 

spectra at the Mn -K edge for NLMO and NLMO -Zn at the fully charged states (c). 

References 

[1] X. Xiang, K. Zhang, J. Ch en, Advanced Materials 2015, 27, 5343. 

[2] K. Kei, K. Shinichi, Y. Yusuke, K. Kazutoshi, K. Shinichi, Advanced Energy Materials 2018, 8, 

1703415. 

[3] R. A. House, U. Maitra, M. A. Perez -Osorio, J. G. Lozano, L. Jin, J. W. Somerville, L. C. Duda, A. 

Nag, A. Walters, K. J. Zhou, M. R. Roberts, P. G. Bruce, Nature 2020, 577, 502. Ultrafine Fe 3O4 nanoparticles immobilized on two -dimensional Ni -

# based metal -organic framework for enhanced oxygen evolution 

# reaction 

Wei Huang a, b , Jing Tang a, Fangyuan Diao a, Hongyu Sun b, Christian Engelbrekt a, Jingdong Zhang a,

Xinxin Xiao a* and Kristian Mølhave b* 

> a

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, DK -2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. 

> b

DTU Nanolab - National Center for Nanofabrication and Characterization, Technical University of 

Denmark, DK -2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. 

E-mail addr es s:  weihua@kemi.dtu.dk ; xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk ; krmo@dtu.dk .

Construction of inorganic -organic hybrid nanostructures with elaborate design is a promising strategy for 

advanced oxygen evolution reaction (OER) electrocatalysts with earth -abundant elements. Herein, we 

have successfully synthesized ultrafine Fe 3O4 nanoparticles homogeneously immobilized on two -

dimensional Ni based metal organic frameworks ( MOFs ) (Fe 3O4/Ni -BDC). The functionalized Fe 3O4

nanoparticles ( diameter: 6 ± 2 nm ) with abundant surface hydroxide groups are initial ly fabricated by 

hydrothermal method, and then anchor ed on two -dimensional ( 2D ) Ni -BDC layers ( thickness: 5 ± 1 nm )

with strong non -covalent interaction s through a sonication process. The obtained Fe 3O4/Ni -BDC 

composites inherit the superior surface structure and physic ochemical features of 2D Ni -BDC layers .

Meanwhile, t he introduction of Fe 3O4 simultaneously modif ies the integral electronic structure and 

prevent s the aggregation of 2D Ni -BDC for enhanced OER performance. In contrast, a mechanically 

mixed control group shows unmodified electronic structure and unsatisfying activities. We have 

investigated electronic structure and morphology changes for different amount s of Fe 3O4 immobilized on 

the Ni -BDC layers , by a wide range of techniques including XRD , FT -IR, XPS, SEM, AFM and TEM .

The optimized Fe 3O4/Ni -BDC -4 composite demonstrates significantly enhanced OER perf ormance with 

an overpotential of 295 mV at 10 mA cm -2, a Tafel slope of 47.8 mV dec -1 and a superior operational 

stability for more than 40 h. Further more , the reaction mechanism and the valance state of metals species 

related to OER performance are carefu lly studied .

Figure 1. TEM image of the Fe 3O4/Ni -BDC -4 composite ; Inset is the overall reaction for OER. 

## 4OH -→ O 2 + 2H 2O + 4e -Paenibacillus dendritiformis within alginate polymer covered 

# graphitized paper with artificial or self -developed redox network 

Eleonora Hubenova 1, Mario Mitov 2, Yolina Hubenova 3,4 

1Medical Faculty of the Rhein Friedrich Wilhelm University of Bonn, Bonn, G ermany 

e-mail: e.hubenova@yahoo.com 

2Innovative Center for Eco Energy Technologies, South -West University, Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria 

3 Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy Systems – Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria 

4Department of Biochemist ry and Microbiology, Plovdiv University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria 

Recently , we developed redox -active Ca -alginate polymer for fast immobilization of the Gram -negative 

bacteria Pseudomonas putida [1] . In the present study, we entrapped a Gram -positive strain Paen ibacillus 

dendritiformis MA 72 , which was proved to form electrochemically active biofilms . Before inoculation 

and polymerization of the gel , a m ix ture of 1 mM thiazolyl blue (MTT) formazan/phenazine methosulfate 

(PMS) was added to form an artificial redox network . The presence of the redox couple was observed on 

the DPV as a well -defined peak at a potential of -0.05 V (vs. SHE) with a distinguishable Faradaic current 

in the presence of bacteria, while the abiotic control showed  а twice higher capacitive cu rrent (Fig.1a) . In 

the absence of redox dyes, no peaks have been observed  in the beginning. The polymer covered 

bioelectrodes (±dyes as additive s) have been continuously poised at −0.195 V, and their electrochemical 

behavior was investigated. The current d ensity in the presence of the redox couple was 6 times higher 

during the first 70 h, but after ca. 170 h the current of both bioelectrodes bec ame equal (Fig.1b) . The 

registered peak on the DPV suggests that the bacteria have developed a self -produced redo x matrix within 

the alginate which is sensitive to different applied potentials ( Fig.1c ), indicating that divers e bacterial 

surface or mobile molecules contact with the electrode and participate in the bacterial response. -0,2 -0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 0200 400 600 -0,2 -0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 020 40 60 80 100                            

> alginate+bacteria alginate
> I /  A
> E / V (vs. SHE)
> Ep=+0.003 V Ep=-0.05 V MTTformazan/PMS alginate+bacteria MTTformazan/PMS alginate
> I /  A
> E / V (vs. SHE)
> Ip=+240 AIp=+400 A
> a050 100 150 200 250
> -50 050 100 150 200 -0,2 -0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 140 145 150 155 160
> Ep=+0.05 V
> alginate =bacteria 8th day
> I /  A
> E / V (vs. SHE)
> Ip=14 A
> MTT formazan/PMS alginate +bacteria alginate +bactera
> j / (mA m -2 )t / h
> b0200 400 600 800 1000
> 0200 400 600 800 1000 -1 012345-20 020 40 60 80 100
> Negative phase angle /  
> Log f / Hz -195 mV +45 mV +155 mV +220 mV +605 mV
> -Z``/  
> Z`/ 
> c

Fig. 1. a) DPV in the beginning; b) Current density generated at −0.195 V applied potential. Inset - DPV 

of the alginate p olymer sample on the 8 th day; c) EIS - Nyquist plot of the alginate p olymer sample on the 

8th day , 50 kHz -15mHz , ac signal 10 mV , different Edc . Inset – the corresponding Bode plot .

Acknowledgments: This study was supported by the Bulgarian National Science Fund through contract 

KP06 -N29/8/2018 and implemented in the Integrated Laboratory of the Research Infrastructure “Energy 

Storage and Hydrogen Energetics” (grant agreement D01 -160/28.08.18). 

Refer ence: 

[1] Y. Hubenova, E . Hubenova, B . Burdin, D . Vladikova, M . Mitov (2019) Development of coupled 

redox active network in Ca -alginate polymer for immobilization of Pseudomonas putida 1046 on 

electrode surface . Electrochimica acta , 312, 432 -440, doi: 10.1 016/j.electacta.2019.05.012 Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopic Investigation on the 

# Solvation/ Desolvation Process es of Lithium Ions at SEI/Electrolyte 

# Interface s of Lithium Metal Anode 

Yu Gu , Jun -Wu He, Wei -Wei Wang, Hong -Yu Xu , Jia -Wei Yan, Bing -Wei Mao* 

State Key Laboratory o f Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and Department of Chemistry, College of 

Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University 

Xiamen 361005, China 

E-mails: bwmao@xmu.ed u.cn 

The existence of solid -electrolyte interphase ( SEI ) on the surface of lithi um metal is a prominent feature 

that distinguishes it from other metals , which also inevitably exacerbate s the complexity of Li 

electrodeposition compared to traditional metal electrodeposition at solid/liquid interfaces . Li metal as 

anode is actually comp osed of Li (or current collector)/SEI/electrolyte interface s. Accordingly, Li metal 

electrodeposition starts always from the desolvation of Li ions at the SEI/electrolyte interface , which is 

then followed by transportation of Li ions through the SEI to the metal/SEI interface for discharge .

Th erefore , the SEI and its coupling interfaces in bridging the substrate and electrolyte play key roles, and 

their structures and properties could directly affect the electrodeposition behaviors of Li metal .

Herein, by adopting the strategy of controlled construction of SEI and metal/SEI/electrolyte interfaces, 

the investigation by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out to systematically 

study the processes on Li metal electrodes , especially focus in g on the solvation/ desolvation process es of 

Li ions at the SEI/electrolyte interface . First, various kinds of smooth and uniform SEIs with adjustable 

structure and thickness were fabricated on Li metal and Cu substrate s using electrochemical polishing -

base d method recently proposed by the authors ' group [1,2] , the well -defined SEI/electrolyte interfaces 

facilitat ing accurate EIS analysis . Then, potential -dependent EIS were performed to study the 

solvation/ desolvation kinetics in the electrolyte of LiTFSI /DM E-DOL. Meanwhile, the influence of 

LiNO 3 additive was also investigated . Results show that the thickness of SEI and its chemical 

composition in the outer layer , determining the structures and properties of the SEI/electrolyte interface, 

significantly affec t the solvation/desolvation of Li ion s. Our work are beneficial to the understanding of 

the metal/SEI/electrolyte interfaces and their role s in the solvation/desolvation of Li ions .

This work was supported by the Projects of National Natural Science Foun dation of China (21972119, 

21673193 ) and the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of China (2019TQ0177). 

References: 

[1] Y. Gu, W. W. Wang, Y. J. Li, et al. Nat. Commun . 9, 1339 (2018). 

[2] Y. Gu, H. -Y. Xu, X. -G. Zhang, et al . Angew. Chem. Int. Ed . 58, 3092 –3096 (201 9). Invest igation on Methanol Tolerance of Pt /C Cathode Catalyst with 

# Heteroa tom -doped C arbon Layer for D irect Methanol Fuel Cell 

Jung -goo Choi 1, Kahyun Ham 1, Jaeyoung Lee 1, 2 , *  

> 1

School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of S cience and Technology 

(GIST), 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South Korea  

> 2

Ertl center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, GIST, 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South 

Korea 

choijg95@ gm. gist.ac.kr  / jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr (*) 

Direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) is one of the most commercialized technology in direct liquid fuel 

cells due to various advantages of rapid refueling and hi gh energy density , which are cru cial 

characteristics for portable applications. DMFC consists of methanol oxidation reaction at anode and 

oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at cathode on PtRu -based and Pt -based catalyst, respectively . Most 

challenging problem toward DMFC is methanol crossov er. Methanol at the anode permeates the cathode 

and reacts with cathode catalyst, resulting in voltage drop. Pt/C is an excellent catalyst , but it actively 

reacts with methanol at the cathode. Thus, it is crucial to design a methanol -tolerant Pt -based cata lyst to 

increase the ORR selectivity at the cathode. 

In this study, we synthesize d Pt/C with heteroatom -doped carbon layer . Heteroatom -doped Pt/C showed 

both lower activity in the methanol oxidation reac tion and higher activity in ORR than pristine Pt/C . The 

origin o f selectivity will be investigated with electrochemical tests such as CO stripping voltammetry and 

XPS in aspects of oxophilicity and Pt electronic structure. Finally, we will apply heteroatom -doped Pt/C 

on the cathode and confirm selectivity co mpared with pristine Pt/C. This approach suggests the way to 

design a Pt catalyst for ORR to improve performance in DMFC. 

References 

[1] D. Strmcnik, M. Uchimura, C. Wang, R. Subbaraman, N. Danilovic, D. Van Der Vliet, A. P. Paulikas, 

V. R. Stamenkovic, N. M. Markovic, Nat . chem. 2013 , 5, 300. 

[2] Y. Wang, G. Wang, G. Li, B. Huang, J. Pan, Q. Liu, J. Han, L. Xiao, J. Lu, L. Zhuang, Energy 

Environ . Sci . 2015 , 8, 177 –181. 

[3] S. Uhm, T. Noh, Y. D. Kim, J. Lee, ChemPhysChem 2008 , 9, 1425 –1429. Fig. 2 . Potential program applied to the work ing 

electrode and MS signals (m/z 2 and 15) 

measured simultaneously at  Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C  by 

feeding  7 vol.%  CO 2 at 40 °C .

Fig. 1 . Schematic diagram of the experimental 

setup in this study. 

# CO 2 Electroreduction at Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C in a Polymer Electro lyte 

# Membrane Electrolyzer Cell 

Shofu Matsuda , Yuuki Niitsuma, Yuta Yoshida, Minoru Umeda 

Nagaoka University of Technology, Kamitomioka, Nagaoka, Niigata, 940 -2188 , Japan 

*mumeda@vos.nagaokaut.ac.jp 

Recently, CO 2 reduction is one of the most interesting topics in the field of electrochemistry. 

There are many reports on the CO 2 electroreduction at transition metal electrodes such as a Cu 

electrocatalyst. 1 In our previous study, we have proposed a n a pproach that uses a polymer -electrolyte 

based single cell containing a Pt/C electrocatalyst, which enabled to reduce CO 2 without overpotential .

Remarkably, we have demonstrated that CO 2 is reduced to CH 4 with a high efficiency and high selectivity 

by dilut ing the CO 2 concentration to be fed. 2,3 Also, we have revealed that the efficiency of CH 4

generation was Pt/C < Pt 0.5 Ru 0.5 /C < Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C when 100 vol.% CO 2 was supplied. 4 Hence, it is 

expected that more efficient CH 4 production from CO 2 reduction will b e realized by combining the 

techniques of diluting the CO 2 concentration and using a Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C electrocatalyst. In this study, we 

investigated the stationary -potential CO 2 reduction on a Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C under a reduced CO 2 concentration. 

We prepared a polymer electrolyte cell 

equipped with a Nafion ®-based membrane 

electrode assembly containing the 42.5 wt% 

Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C and 45.7 wt% Pt/C as the working and 

counter electrodes (WE and CE) , respectively .

Fully humidified H2 and Ar/CO 2 (CO 2

concentration: 7 vol.% ) were supplied to the CE 

and WE, respectively. Cell temperature was 40 °C .

The experimental setup in this study is drawn in 

Fig. 1. The WE potential was stepped from 0.4 V 

to 0.2 V. After 300 -s holding, the potential was 

stepped to 0.05 V. During the procedures , in -line 

mass spectrometry (MS) was conducted to analyze 

the products in real time. All the potentials are 

shown with the reference to reversible hydrogen 

electrode ( RHE ).

Fig. 2 shows MS signals of m/z 2 (for H 2)

and 15 (for CH 4) with applied potential program. 

The signal of m/z 15 is observed and almost 

constant under the potential holding at 0.2 V. On 

the other hand, the signal of m/z 2 is observed only 

after stepping the potential to 0.05 V. Significantly, 

the faradaic efficiency between 240 s and 299 s for 

Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C was calculated to be 18.2%, wh ich 

exceeds the efficiency for Pt/C (12.3% at 0.16 V ). 3

Overall , t his work revealed that the continuous 

CH 4 production from CO 2 reduction with a high 

efficiency without overpotential or H2 evoluti on 

was achieved using the Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C electrocatalyst 

under a reduced CO 2 concentration. 

[1] Z. Jin et al., Adv . Sci . 5, 1700275 (20 18 ).

[2] M. Umeda et al., ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 3,

1119 (20 20 ).

[3] M. Umeda et al., Electrochim. Acta 340 ,

135945 (2020). 

[4] M. Umed a et al., J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 ,

F208 (2019). 

Acknowledgement: This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20H00282. H2 Ar /CO 2  

> RHE Electrocatalyst
> (Pt 0.8 Ru 0.2 /C )
> Separator
> Nafion membrane
> Mass
> spectrometer
> End plate
> Potentiostat
> WE
> RE
> CE
> Gas diffusion layer
> out
> vent
> Electrocatalyst
> (Pt/C)

# A Diffusion−Reaction Competition Mechanism to Tailor Lithium 

# Deposition for Lithium Metal Batteries 

Xiao -Ru Chen , Yu -Xing Yao, Chong Yan, Rui Zhang, Xin -Bing Cheng, Qiang Zhang *

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology ,

Department of Chemical Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing 100084 (P. R. China) 

E-mail: cxr18 @mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

These instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper 

column and margin measurement s are indicated. Li metal is recognized as one of the most promising 

anode materials owing to its ultrahigh theoretical specific capacity and low electrochemical potential. 

Nonetheless, Li metal anode has been severely hindered from practical applications by den dritic Li 

growth. The uncontrollable Li dendrites can result in low Coulombic efficiency (CE) and short cycle life 

of a working battery . More seriously, the Li dendrites penetrate the separators and reach the cathode to 

cause internal short -circuit s, which even lead s to t hermal runaway and explosions. However, the 

continuous conversion between Li metal and Li ion s implies the inevitable existence of Li deposition 

during the plating step. Accordingly, the key to suppress the Li dendrite growth is to ta ilor Li deposition. 

Compared to available deposition morpholog ies of Li metal anode, spherical Li deposition endows two 

important merits from its unique morphology. Firstly, spherical Li deposition feature s well -defined 

morphology with smooth surface wit hout any sharp tip , thus avoiding serious safety hazards caused by 

dendritic Li deposition . Secondly, Li sphere exhibits minimum surface area per unit volume among all the 

other morphologies , which signifies higher CE and longer cycle life because of formi ng few solid 

electrolyte interphase (SEI) by the reaction between fresh Li and electrolyte . Many researches have 

focused on regulating Li depositi on into spherical shapes . However, the underlying mechanism of 

forming Li spherical deposit s has not been clar ified yet . If the fundamental rationale behind different 

morphologies of Li deposition can be unveiled , it is conceivable that safe Li metal batteries can be further 

achieved based on tailoring Li deposition morphology. 

In this work , we report a diffusion −reaction competition mechanism which can determine the ion 

concentration beneath the SEI and therefore tailor the morphology of Li deposition. When maintaining 

the same electrode reaction rate, through modifying the kinetics of Li diffusion from slow to f ast, the ratio 

of sphere/all deposition (including spherical and dendritic Li) (denoted as S/D) continuously rises due to 

the progressively higher Li ion concentration beneath SEI. Changing the electrode reaction rate is found 

to alter the Li plating morph ology, since higher reaction rate can induce ion depletion within SEI. This 

work provides a deep, fundamental understanding of Li deposition morphology that guides the design of 

future strategies to enable dendrite -free Li deposition. 

References 

[1] X. -B. Cheng, C. -Z. Zhao, Y. -X. Yao, H. Liu, Q. Zhang, Chem 2019 , 5, 74 -96. 

[2] Z. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Shi, F. Qi, Q. Wei, X. Li, Z. Sun, B. An, F. Li, J. Power Sources 2019 , 439 ,

227073. 

[3] M. Winter, B. Barnett, K. Xu, Chem. Rev. 2018 , 118 , 11433 -11456 .A Diffusion−Reaction Competition Mechanism to Tailor Lithium 

# Deposition for Lithium Metal Batteries 

Xiao -Ru Chen , Yu -Xing Yao, Chong Yan, Rui Zhang, Xin -Bing Cheng, Qiang Zhang *

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology ,

Department of Chemical Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing 100084 (P. R. China) 

E-mail: cxr18 @mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

These instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper 

column and margin measurement s are indicated. Li metal is recognized as one of the most promising 

anode materials owing to its ultrahigh theoretical specific capacity and low electrochemical potential. 

Nonetheless, Li metal anode has been severely hindered from practical applications by den dritic Li 

growth. The uncontrollable Li dendrites can result in low Coulombic efficiency (CE) and short cycle life 

of a working battery . More seriously, the Li dendrites penetrate the separators and reach the cathode to 

cause internal short -circuit s, which even lead s to t hermal runaway and explosions. However, the 

continuous conversion between Li metal and Li ion s implies the inevitable existence of Li deposition 

during the plating step. Accordingly, the key to suppress the Li dendrite growth is to ta ilor Li deposition. 

Compared to available deposition morpholog ies of Li metal anode, spherical Li deposition endows two 

important merits from its unique morphology. Firstly, spherical Li deposition feature s well -defined 

morphology with smooth surface wit hout any sharp tip , thus avoiding serious safety hazards caused by 

dendritic Li deposition . Secondly, Li sphere exhibits minimum surface area per unit volume among all the 

other morphologies , which signifies higher CE and longer cycle life because of formi ng few solid 

electrolyte interphase (SEI) by the reaction between fresh Li and electrolyte . Many researches have 

focused on regulating Li depositi on into spherical shapes . However, the underlying mechanism of 

forming Li spherical deposit s has not been clar ified yet . If the fundamental rationale behind different 

morphologies of Li deposition can be unveiled , it is conceivable that safe Li metal batteries can be further 

achieved based on tailoring Li deposition morphology. 

In this work , we report a diffusion −reaction competition mechanism which can determine the ion 

concentration beneath the SEI and therefore tailor the morphology of Li deposition. When maintaining 

the same electrode reaction rate, through modifying the kinetics of Li diffusion from slow to f ast, the ratio 

of sphere/all deposition (including spherical and dendritic Li) (denoted as S/D) continuously rises due to 

the progressively higher Li ion concentration beneath SEI. Changing the electrode reaction rate is found 

to alter the Li plating morph ology, since higher reaction rate can induce ion depletion within SEI. This 

work provides a deep, fundamental understanding of Li deposition morphology that guides the design of 

future strategies to enable dendrite -free Li deposition. 

References 

[1] X. -B. Cheng, C. -Z. Zhao, Y. -X. Yao, H. Liu, Q. Zhang, Chem 2019 , 5, 74 -96. 

[2] Z. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Shi, F. Qi, Q. Wei, X. Li, Z. Sun, B. An, F. Li, J. Power Sources 2019 , 439 ,

227073. 

[3] M. Winter, B. Barnett, K. Xu, Chem. Rev. 2018 , 118 , 11433 -11456 .Graphene Quantum Dots/Gold Nanostructure Chiral Composite for 

# Enantiomer ic Sensing 

Ruzniza Mohd Zawawi , Nurul Hidayah Mustaffar Kamal , Zakira Imana Abu Mansor 

Universiti Putra Malaysia 

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia , 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, 

Malaysia 

ruzniza@upm.edu.my 

The investigation of chiral compounds has a fundamental significance for understanding the intrinsic 

properties of the biomolecular building blocks and chemical processes occurring in living organ isms. 

Because of this, the enantioselective detection of chiral species is crucial in drug discoveries, 

pharmaceuticals and biochemical processes. It is well established that the contrary enantiomers of chiral 

compounds often differ significantly in their pharmacological, toxicological and pharmacokinetic 

properties. Previous researches have demonstrated that electrochemical enantioselective sensors have 

been attracted significant attention owing to various advantages over spectrophotometric and 

chromatogra phic techniques. By introducing chirality by organic moieties into solid inorganic materials 

creates local chiral environments for enantiosensing. Therefore, it is our main objective to investigate the 

interaction between L -/D -proline with gold nanorods (A uNRs)/graphene quantum dots (GQDs) in order 

to explain their effect in detecting the racemic mixture. The exceptionally high specific surface area, high 

conductivity, fast electron transfer kinetics and good biocompatibility of AuNRs and GQDs have 

attracte d attentions from various fields, including biological ones. Due to the simple one -step pyrolysis of 

citric acid and L -/D -proline to obtain chiral proline -functionalized GQDs and electrostatic self -assembly 

interaction between negatively charged GQDs and p ositively charged AuNRs, it is worth exploring the 

potential of this nanohybrid material as sensing material during fast sweep voltammetry. The 

characterization of this nanohybrid material was carried out by electrochemical, morphological and 

spectroscopic techniques. The electroanalysis of chiral compounds by the nanohybrid -modified electrode 

was studied thoroughly by electrochemical method and its molecular chiral recognition mechanism was 

modeled by molecular docking method. Successful investigations hav e produced a new nanohybrid 

material that suitable as a chiral sensor in nanodevices. The outcome from this research ha s led to 

important implications for biosensing, asymmetric syntheses and separation, and significant 

understanding on the nature of chira l interactions in biological systems. Earth -Abundant Coal -Derived Carbon Nanotube/Carbon Composites 

# as Efficient Bifunctional Oxygen Electrocatalysts for Rechargeable 

# Zinc -Air Batteries 

Zhenjie Lu , Haoran Pan , Xinn ing Huang, Xingxing Chen* 

Research Group of Functional Materials for  Electroche mical  Energy  Conversion , School of Chemical 

Engineering, University of Science and Technology Liaoning, 

Qianshan Middle Road 185, 114051 Anshan, P. R. China 

Email:  luzhenjie0805@foxmail.com , xingchenstar79@163.com 

The exploration of active and robust electrocatalysts for both the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the bottleneck to realize the commercialization of rechargeable metal -

air batteries and regenerative fuel cells. Here we report facile synthesis of three -dimensional (3D) carbon 

nanotube (CNT)/carbon composites using earth -abundant coal as the carbon and heteroatom dopant 

source to grow CNTs. The prepared composite fe aturing 3D structural merits and multiple active sites can 

efficiently catalyze both ORR and OER, affording high activity, fast kinetics, and long -term stability. 

With the additional incorporation of manganese, the developed catalyst afforded an overvoltag e of 0.80 V 

between ORR at the half wave potential and OER at the current density of 10 mA cm -2. The optimized 

sample has presented an excellent OER performance within a constructed solar -energy water splitting 

device with continuously generating oxygen bu bbles at anode. Notably, it can be further used as a durable 

air -electrode catalyst in constructed Zn -air battery, delivering an initial discharge/charge voltage gap of 

0.73 V, a remained voltaic efficiency of 61.2% after 160 cycles and capability to power LED lamps for at 

least 80 hours. This study provides an efficient approach for converting traditional energy resource i.e. 

coal to value -added alternative oxygen electrocatalysts in rechargeable metal -air batteries. 

References 

[1] H. Liu, X. Huang, Z. L u, T. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Cheng, Y. Wang, D. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Robertson and X. 

Chen, Nanoscale , 2020, 12, 9628 -9639. 

[2] H. Liu, J . Cheng, Z . Lu, X . Huang, Y . Zhu, X . Zhao, T . Wang, J . Masa, X . Chen, Electrochim . Acta ,

2019, 312, 22 -30. 

[3] H. Pan, D . Wu, X . Hu ang, K . Xie, B . He, Z . Lu, P . Liu, J . Cheng, X . Zhao, J . Masa, X . Chen, J.

Electrochem. Soc ., 2019, 166, F479 -F486. 

[4] Z. Lu, X. Chen, P. Liu, X. Huang, J. Wei, Z. Ren, S. Yao, Z. Fang, T. Wang and J. Masa, J. 

Electrochem. Soc ., 2018, 165, H580 -H589. 

[5] X. Chen, J . Wang, X . Huang, X . Zhao, P . Liu, B . He, T . Wang, J . Masa, Catal . Sci . Technol ., 2018, 8, 

1104 -1112. 

[6] X. Chen, X . Huang, T . Wang, S . Barwe, K . Xie, Y . U. Kayran, D . Wintrich, W . Schuhmann, J . Masa, 

Electrochim . Acta , 2016, 211, 568 -575. Electrochemical CO 2 Reduction to Multi -carbon in Continuous -flow 

# CO 2 electrolyzer 

Minjun Choi 1, Jaeyoung Lee 1,2* 

> 1

School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, 

Gwangju, Republic of Korea 

> 2

Ertl Cente r for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 

Republic of Korea 

GIST, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea 

choiminjun@ gm. gist.ac.kr, Jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr* (*Corresponding author) 

Use of electrochemical method for r eduction of carbon dioxide (CO 2) convert into valuable organic 

compounds, is a great solution to solve the problem of CO 2 accumulation. The most advantage of 

electrochemical conversion is to elect reaction to produce a few organic compounds from carbon dio xide 

depending to types of catalyst. Among many types of catalyst, metal catalysts based on Copper element 

or alloy metals offers the route to synthesize multi -carbon fuels and chemicals from CO 2 (e.g. , ethylene, 

ethanol and n -propanol). 

In this study, Copper Phosphide was determined by one of the candidate to solve the problem and it was 

synthesized by oleate method and used as a catalyst in a near Zero -gap CO 2 gas -phase electrolytic cell for 

CO 2 reduction reaction at ambient temperature and pressure. B y using a hydrophobic gas diffusion layer 

(GDL), exhibited the formation of three -phase boundary during the CO 2 reduction reaction. The 

mechanism of the reactions, verified by the onset point of CO and other oxygen -bounded intermediates 

adsorption with ATR -SEIRAS, in -situ surface analysis, which is the intermediate of most products by 

CO 2 reduction reaction. Headspace GC -MS, UV -Vis, NMR equipment was used to verify gas/liquid 

product analysis. Their results show that multi -carbon fuels, such as C4 products , acetaldehyde are 

produced. 

References 

[1]  Park G, Hong S, Choi M, Lee S, Lee J *, Catalysis today , in press 

[2]  Lee S, Choi M, Lee J *, The Chemical Record , 20 20 , 20 , 89 -101 

[3]  Kim D, Lee S, Ocon JD, Jeong B, Lee JK, Lee J. Phys. Chem. Chem Phys. 2015 , 17 , 824 The morphological change of Ni/C electrochemical catalyst for 

# hydrazine oxidation        

> Jihyeon Park a,Jaeyoung Lee a,b,*
> aEltrochemical Reaction and Technology Laboratory (ERTL), School of Earth Science and
> Environmental Engineering (SESE), Gwangju Institute of Science and technology (GIST)
> bErtl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) ,
> Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea
> e-mail address :jihyeon1@gist.ac.kr (J. Park), jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr (J. Lee)

## Hydrazine fuel cell is one of the promising liquid fue l cells due to its high theoretical 

## voltage, high energy density, and no emission of green gas . However, hydrazin e can 

## decompose chemically or electrochemically as a function of the type of catalyst used. 

## Despite being a precious metal, p latinum is an ambiguous catalyst because of faradaic 

## reaction catalyst of hydrazine as well non -faradaic reaction. Therefore, in terms of the 

## fuel efficiency, platinum is not suitable for hydrazine oxidation catalyst. Nickel, which 

## is in the same family as platinum, is non -precious metal , and due to its similar structure 

## to platinum , it perform s greatly against hydrazine oxidation. In these aspects, hydrazine 

## fuel cell s are even more important , not requiring the expensive noble metal. Here, w e

## synthesized Ni nanoparticles via polyol method by changing the type of Ni precursor, 

## since chemical , physical, and electro -chemical properties of a metal nanoparticle 

## depend on its morphology and size. When using nickel nitrate, the size of the N i

## nanopart icle s is the smallest , amorphous morphology, whereas when using nickel 

## chloride, the size is slightly larger, but the particles spread well on carbon support. Then, 

## in order to confirm hydrazine electro -oxidation reaction , catalyst ink was loaded on the 

## ro tating disk electrode (RDE), and cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep 

## voltammetry (LSV) were carried out .Precise Anionic Regulation of NiF e Hydroxysulfide Assisted by 

# Electrochemical Reactions for Eff icient Electrocatalysis 

Chang -Xin Zhao , Bo -Quan Li, Meng Zhao, Jia -Ning Liu, Li -Da Zhao, Xiao Chen , and Qiang Zhang *

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical R ea ction Engineering and Technology, 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 

zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Highly effi cient electrocatalysts with high intrinsic activity for oxygen and sulfur redox reactions ar e

st rongly required for sustainable energy systems. Generally, cations serve as the real active sites in 

transition metal compound electrocatalysts, whose electroc atalytic activity is regulated by the surrounding 

anionic structure. Herein, an electrochemic al reaction assisted by an anionic regulation strategy is 

proposed for precise construction of advanced electrocatalysts with extraordinary electrocatalytic activity. 

The electrochemical anionic regulation process ensures general release of the regulation re ag ents for 

precise substitution of sulfur anions in pristine hydroxide. The as -obtained hydroxysulfide electrocatalyst 

exhibits a desired electronic structure to aff ord supe rb electrocatalytic activity regarding reduced 

overpotential of 286 mV at 10 mA c m−2 for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution and improved polysulfide 

redox electrocatalytic activity. This contribution not only renders an emerging strategy for precise 

regulat ion of the anionic structure for improved electrocatalytic activity, but also prov ide s information for 

the rational design of advanced electrocatalysts for sustainable energy applications. 

Fig. 1 Schematic of the precise anionic regulation assisted by electrochemical reaction for enhanced 

electrocatalytic activity. 

References: 

[1] B.-Q. Li, S. -Y. Zhang, C. Tang, X. Cui and Q. Zhang, Small , 2017 , 13 : 1700610. 

[2] B. Wang, C. Tang, H. -F. Wang, X. Chen, R. Cao and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater. , 2019 , 31 : 1805658. 

[3] H.-F. Wang, C . Tang, B . Wang, B .-Q. Li, and Q . Zhang , Adv. Mater. , 2017 , 29 : 1702327 .

[4] C. -X. Zhao, B. -Q. Li, M. Zhao, J. -N. Liu, L. -D. Zhao, X. Chen, and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci. ,

2020 , DOI: 10.1039/C9EE03573G. Multiscale Construction of Bifunctional Electrocatalysts for Long -

# Lifespan Rechargeable Zinc –Air Batteries 

Chang -Xin Zhao , Jia -Ning Li u, Bo -Quan Li, Ding Ren, Xiao Chen, Jia Yu, and Qiang Zhang *

Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Rea ction Engineeri ng and Technology, 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 

zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Zinc –air batteries deliver great potential as emerging energy storage systems but suffer from sluggish 

kinetics of the c athode oxygen redox reactions that render unsatisfactory cycling lifespan. The exploration 

on bifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen r eduction and evolution constitutes the key solution, where 

rational design strategies to integrate various active sites into a high -performance air cathode remain 

insufficient. Herein, a multiscale construction strategy is proposed to rationally direct the fabrication of 

bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts for long -lifespan rechargeable zinc –air batteries. NiFe layered dou ble 

hydroxides and cobalt coordinated framework porphyrin are selected as the active sites considering their 

high intrinsic activity at t he molecular level, and the active sites are successively integrated on three 

dimensional conductive scaffolds at mesos cale to strengthen ion transportation. Consequently, the 

multiscale constructed electrocatalyst exhibits excellent bifunctional performanc e (ΔE = 0.68 V), which is 

even better than the noble metal based benchmarks. The corresponding air cathodes endow zinc –air 

batteries with a reduced voltage gap of 0.74 V, a high power density of 185.0 mW cm −2, and an ultralong 

lifespan of more than 2400 cy cles at 5.0 mA cm −2. This work demonstrates a feasible strategy to 

rationally integrate various active sites to construct multifunctional electrocatalysts for energy -related 

processes. 

Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the multiscale construction strateg y. 

References: 

[1] B. Q. Li, C. X. Zhao, J. N. Liu, Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31 , 1808173. 

[2] J. N. Liu , B. Q. Li, C. X. Zhao, J. Yu, Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem 20 20 , 13 : 1529 .

[3] J. Yu, B. Q. Li, C. X. Zhao, J. N. Liu, Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32 , 190 8488. 

[4] C. X. Zhao, J. N. Liu , B. Q. Li, D. Ren , X. Chen, Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater . 2020 , DOI: 

10.1002/adfm.202003619 .Cascade reactions by nanoconfinement of intermediates for 

# electroreduction of CO 2

Peter B. O’Mara 1, Patrick Wilde 2, Tania M. Benedetti 1, João R. C. Junqueira 2, Tsvetan Tarnev 2, Yen -Ting 

Chen 3, Soshan Cheong 4, Corina Andronescu 5, Richard D. Tilley 1,4 , Wolf gang Schuhmann 2, J. Justin 

Gooding 1,6 

> 1

School of Chemistry and Australian Centre for NanoMedicine, UNSW , Sydney 2052, Australia. 

> 2

Analytical Chemistry - Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Bioche mistry, RUB , Universitä tsstr. 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany. 

> 3

Center for Solvation Science (ZEMOS), RUB , Universitätsstr. 150, D -44801 Bochum, Germany. 

> 4

Electron Microscope Unit, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centr e, UN SW , Sydney 2052, Au stralia. 

> 5

Chemical Technology III, Faculty of Chemi stry and CENIDE, Center for Nanointegration UDE , Carl -

Benz -Str. 199; D -47057 Duisburg, Germany. 

> 6

Australian Research Council Ce ntre of Excellence in Convergent Bio -Nano Science and Te chnology, 

UNSW , Sydney 2052, Australia 

peter.omara@unsw.edu.au 

Enzymes can produce highly complex molecules with 

high efficiency because of their ability to perform 

cascade reactions via substrate channelling. Using 

substrate channelling, two different active sites can be 

connected v ia a tunnel that allows the diffusion of 

in termediates to the next active site without diffusion 

to the bulk solution. Mimicking th e ar chitectural 

feature s of enzymes in electrocatalytic nanopa rticle s, 

called nano zymes , is an approa ch we have previously 

applied to single step reactions 1,2 and now seek t o apply to cascad e reactions. 

Electrochemical CO 2 reduction is a su itable model reaction for cascade reactions, given it can be divided 

in to two steps with CO as the key intermediate. 3 In this work, we de signed an electrocatalytic 

nanoparticle , called a cascade nan oz yme, comprising a Ag core , where CO 2 can be reduced to CO , and a

po rous Cu shell , where CO is further reduced to more complex organic molecules .4 Cascade nanozymes 

were synthesised and characterised for electrochemical CO 2 reduction using GC and 1H-NMR. We were 

able to demonstrate a cascade r eaction with C3H8O forme d at -0.6 V vs. RHE on the cascade nanozymes, 

where experimental controls containing exclusively Cu showed no activity for C 3 products. 4

Operando TEM , applied for the first time to CO 2 reduction , was used to visualise the electrocatalytic 

nanoparticles in electrochemical CO 2 reduction conditions. Con trol experi ments wer e con ducted in a 

variety of conditions to help elucidate the processes . It was found that applied potential and (local) CO 

concentration had the greatest impact upon structural evolution . This understan ding was used to d esign 

and syn thesise PdCu c ascade nanoz ymes , with a lower rate of CO production and increased stability .

This work demons trates the capacity of catalytic nanopar ticle architect ure to confine intermediates from 

one active site to another in cas cade reactions . In electrochemical CO 2 reduction, such substrate 

channelling can c reate high local concentrations of important intermediates like CO. We have found that 

such high local conc entrations can enhance t he selecti vity for l onger chain hydrocarbons and influence 

structural stability , i llustrati ng the trade -off bet ween activity, selecti vity and stability that must be 

considered .

Refer ences 

1. Benedetti, T. M.; Andronescu, C.; Cheong, S.; Wilde, P.; Wordsworth, J.; Kientz, M.; Tilley, R. D. ;

Schu hmann, W.; Gooding, J. J. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018 , 140 (41), 13449 –13455. 

2. Wordsworth, J.; Benedetti, T. M.; Alinezhad, A.; Tilley, R. D.; Edwards, M. A.; Schuhmann, W.; 

Gooding, J. J. , Che m. Sci. 202 0.

3. Peterson, A. A.; N ørskov, J. K. , J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012 , 3 (2), 251 –258. 

4. O’Mara, P. B.; Wilde, P.; Benedetti, T. M.; Andronescu, C.; C heong, S.; Gooding, J. J.; Tilley, R. D.; 

Schuhmann, W. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. 20 19 , 141 (36 ), 14093 –14097. Ni -Fe Hydroxi de/ Oxide Nanostructure s generated on Stainless Steels 

# for Efficient Alkaline Water Electrolysi s

Naoto Todoroki and Toshimasa Wadayama 

Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, 

Sendai 980 -8579, JAPAN 

naoto. todoroki.b1@tohoku .ac.jp 

Developing highly active and durable electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) ha ve 

been needed for efficient hydrogen generat ion by ele ctroc hem ical water splitting . Various transi tion 

metal -based oxides , hydroxi de s, etc. have been exte nsively explor ed as OER catalysts for alkaline water 

electroly sis (AWE) [1] . Recently, Stainl ess steels (SS) have much attrac tive attentions as low -cost , highly 

act ive and stable electro de materials at hi gh current density [2] . However, relation b etween nano -level 

structure s of the surface oxide layers on the SS substrate and OER properties should be clarified . In this 

study, we investigated changes in OER proper ties and nanostructures of the surface oxide layer s

generated on the 316 SS electrode dur ing the electrolysis .

316SS (ø = 5mm, t = 4mm) substrate was used as a working electro de after the surface polishing 

by Emery paper s and alumina paste . Polarization curves for the OER with a disk rot ation rate of 1600 rpm 

we re mea sured i n N2-purged 1 M K OH solution at 75 ℃ at 5 mV/sec . Cyclic voltammograms were 

coll ected at 50 mV /sec without disk rota tion. After that , constant current den sity electrolysis (CCE) was 

condu cted at 30 m A/cm 2 for 10 h at 1600 rpm . Nanos tructure s and compos ition s of the surface 

(hydro) oxide layers generated af ter the el ectrolysis were in vestigated by sc ann ing trans mission electron 

microscopy (STEM) with electron disper sive spectroscop y (EDS ).

Fig.1 (a) shows chan ges in the OER overp otentials estimated by the polarization curv es at 10 

and 100 mA/cm 2 as a function of the CCE times. The overpo tentials de crease d with increa si ng the CCE 

times . In addition , as shown in (b) , the cyclic voltammogr am s in dicate the Ni -oxidation peaks of the 

CCE -5h sample shift to lower pot entia l compare d wi th the pristine substr ate (CCE -0h) , sugges ting the 

surface electroc he mical propert y of the SS change d during the electrolysis . STEM images of the CCE -5h 

sample with diffe rent magnifications are presented in (c) . The surface (hydro) oxi de film s are co mpo sed of 

20 nm -thick den se buffer layer (substrate side) and 60 nm -thick nano fib er-like layer s. The select ed are a

electr on diffracti on (SAED) patter ns suggest s that crystal structures of each (hydro) oxid e layers are rock -

salt Ni O and Ni(OH) 2, respectively. Furth ermore, corresponding STEM -EDS mapping s re ve als that Fe 

and Ni are only metal elements and Cr i s almost absent in both the oxide layers . Theref ore , increase in 

OER activity during the CCE pro bably ste ms from generation of the specific Ni -Fe hyd ro xide 

nano structures that acting as highly -OER -

active sites [3] . The re sults in this study 

clearl y show th at electro chemical synthes is 

of such the hetero -structured 

hydro xi de /o xide layers on the SS substrate 

is an effective appr oach for developments of 

the practi cal an ode for AWE [4].

Acknowledgments 

This s tudy was partly suppor ted by JSPS 

KAKENHI Grant Number 18H01741 ,

Toyota Mobility Foundation Hydrogen 

Initiative , and Yazaki Memorial Foundation 

for Science and Technology (N.T. ).

References 

[1] F. Lyu et al. , Small , 15 (2019) 1804201. 

[2] H. Schäfer and M. Chatenet, ACS 

Energy Lett. , 3 (2018) 574 .

[3] D. Friebel et al. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 137 

(2015) 1305 .

[4] N. Tod or oki and T. Wadayam a, ACS 

Appl. Mat. Int. , 11 (2019) 44161 .

Fig.1 (a) OER overpotentials of 316SS as a function 

of CCE times. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of CCE -0h, 

and -10h samples. STEM images (c) and (d) of the 

CCE -5h sample [4].Selective CO 2 Electroreduction to Ethylene and Multicarbon Alcohols 

# via Electrolyte -Driven Nanostructuring and Plasma Activation 

Dunfeng Gao 1,2 , Beatriz Roldan Cuenya 1

> 1

Department of Interface Science, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, 1419 5 Berlin, 

Germany; 2Present address: State Key laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, 116023 Dalian, China 

e-mail address : dfgao@dicp.ac.cn 

The electrochemical production of fuels and chemicals from CO 2 and water using electricity derived from 

renewable energy holds promise as a sustainable process that might help to mitigate some of our current 

energy and climate challenges [1,2] . The CO 2 electroreduction reaction (CO 2RR) is a complicated 

catalytic proc ess due to the broad range of products that can be obtained at high overpotential. 

Multicarbon oxygenate and hydrocarbon products (C 2+ ) with high energy density are highly desirable, but 

severely limited by the slow kinetics of multiple proton and electron transfer steps during C -C coupling. 

Cu is the only metal able to produce hydrocarbons and alcohols in considerable amounts. However, 

polycrystalline Cu usually suffers from the need to employ high overpotentials and its low C 2+ product 

selectivity. The fo rmation of C 2+ products during CO 2RR is very sensitive to the catalyst structure [ 3, 4]. It 

is desirable, therefore, to develop nanostructured electrocatalysts through rational design that could be 

capable of efficient generation of multicarbon products fro m CO 2RR. 

Surface reconstructions are commonly observed in heterogeneous catalysis, with the most active catalysts 

dynamically adjusting to the electrolyte, applied potential and other reaction conditions [5 -9]. In this work ,

an efficient electrochemical s trategy has been developed, namely, electrolyte -driven nanostructuring, for 

the synthesis of high surface area nanostructured Cu catalysts for the selective generation of C 2+ products 

from CO 2RR [10] . Chlorine -modifications lead to the growth of Cu nanocub es on the polycrystalline Cu 

surface, while iodine -modifications produce needle -like Cu structures. Interestingly, the newly -created 

rough Cu catalysts show a suppressed methane formation but improved CO 2RR selectivity towards 

ethylene and multicarbon alco hols as compared to the flatter pristine Cu foils. The iodine -modified Cu 

catalyst displays the highest Faradaic Efficiency of ~80% for C 2+ products at -0.9 V vs RHE. Operando 

high energy resolution fluorescence -detected X -ray absorption near edge structur e (HERFD -XANES) 

spectra show that some Cu(I) species can still survive in the form of Cu -halide and/or Cu 2O at the 

negative potentials relevant to CO 2RR . It provide s direct evidence of the positive correlation between the 

presence of Cu(I) species during C O2RR and improved C 2+ production. We further study the relative role 

of Cu oxidation state versus morphology/facet in the case of Cu nanocubes (c hlorine -modifi ed Cu) using 

a low temperature plasma technique [11] . The Cu oxidation state and morphology can b e tuned by O 2-,

H2- and Ar -plasma pretreatments. Of them, O 2-plasma treatment destroys the Cu(100) facets of Cu 

nanocubes but stabilizes Cu + species as revealed by quasi in situ XPS developed by our group. Our results 

demonstrate that the presence of oxyge n species in surface and subsurface regions of the Cu nanocube 

catalysts is key for achieving high activity and hydrocarbon/alcohol selectivity, even more important than 

the presence of Cu(100) facets. 

References 

[1] D. Gao , G. Wang, J. Wang, X. Bao et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015 , 137 , 4288. 

[2] D. Gao , F. Yang, G. Wang, X. Bao et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139 , 5652. 

[3] D. Gao , B. Roldan Cuenya et al., Nat. Catal. 2019 , 2, 198. 

[4] R. M. Arán -Ais, D. Gao , B. Roldan Cuenya, Acc. Chem. Res. 2018 , 51 , 2906. 

[5] D. Gao , M. J. Janik, B. Roldan Cuenya et al., ACS Catal. 2018 , 8, 10012. 

[6] D. Gao , B. Roldan Cuenya et al ., ACS Catal. 2017 , 7, 5112. 

[7] P. Grosse, D. Gao , B. Roldan Cuenya et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018 , 57 , 6192. 

[8] J. -J. Velasco -Vélez, T. E. Jones, D. Gao , B. Roldan Cue nya , R. Schl �gl , A. Knop -Gericke , C. -H. 

Chuang et al., ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2019 , 7, 1485. 

[9] J. -J. Velasco -Vélez, R. V. Mom, L .-E. Sandoval -Diaz, C .-H. Chuang, D. Gao , B . Roldan Cuenya, A.

Knop -Gericke, T . Lunkenbein, R. Schl �g et al. , ACS Energy Lett. 2020 , 5, 2106. 

[10] D. Gao , B. Roldan Cuenya, et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 201 9, 58, 17047 .

[11] D. Gao , I. Zegkinoglou , B. Roldan Cuenya, et al., ACS Nano 2017 , 11 , 4825. Molecular origin of negative component of Helmholtz capacitance at 

# electrified Pt(111)/water interface 

Jun Cheng , Jia -Bo Le, Lang Li , Q i-Yua n Fan, Jie -Qiong Li 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, iChEM, College of Chemistry and 

Chemical Engineering, 

Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 

E-mail: chengjun@xmu.edu.cn 

Electrified solid/liquid interfaces are the key to many physico -chemical pro cesses in a myriad of areas 

including electrochemistry and colloid science. De spite tr em endous efforts devoted to this topic, it is 

surprising that molecular level understandin g of electric double layers is still lacking. In particular, it is 

perplexing why compact Helmholtz layers often show bell -shaped differen tial capacitances on metal 

ele ctrodes, as this would suggest a negative capac itance in some layer of interface wat er. I will present 

our la test  ab initio molecular dynamics simulations of electrified Pt(111)/water interfaces, aiming at 

unraveling the structure and capacitive b ehavior o f interface wa ter. Our calculation reproduces the bell -

shaped differential Helmholtz capaci tance, and for the first time shows that the interface water follows the 

Frumkin adsorption isotherm when varying the electrode potential, leading to a pecu liar nega tive 

capacitive response. Our work provides valuable insight into the s tructure and capacitance of interface 

water, which can help understand im portant processes in electrocatalysis and energy storage in 

supercapacitors. Hybrid Co 3O4@CoS nanoparticles in a N/S -doped carbon matrix  as An 

# Efficient Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction and 

# Evolution Reactions in  Zn -Air Battery 

Haoran Pan a, Zhenjie Lu a, Dongling Wu b, Xinning Huang a, Tao Wang b, Xingxing Chen a,* 

> a

Research Group of Functional Materials for  Electrochemical  Energy  Conversion , School of Chemical 

Engineering, University of Science and Technology Liaoning, Qianshan Middle Road 185, 114051 

Anshan, P. R. China  

> b

Key Laboratory of Energy Materials Chemistry, Institute of Applied Chemistry, Xinjiang University, 

Shengli Road 14, 8300 46 Urumqi, P. R. China 

xingchenstar 79 @163. com 

The development of high -performance non -precious bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is urgently needed to realize the 

commercialization of rechargeable metal -air battery. Herein, we report a ZIF -67 derived hybrid Co -based 

carbon composite bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalyst exhibiting excellent performance and stability in 

a custom -built Zn -air battery. The catalyst was formed by pyrolytic carbonization of ZIF -67 followed by 

mild oxidation and sulfurization to a hybrid composite comprised of multiple active sites including Co -N4,

Co -N/S -C, C -N/S -C, Co 3O4 and CoS, as well as the surface and edge defects in the carbon matri x, that act 

concertedly yielding a highly efficient bifunctional ORR/OER catalyst for reversible oxygen electrodes. 

The catalyst affords remarkably low reversible overpotentials and stability not only in a 3 -electrode system, 

but also in a custom -construct ed Zn -air battery, exhibiting competitive performance against benchmark 

bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts reported to -date and thus placing it among the best non -precious 

metal catalysts for reversible oxygen reactions. 

[1] Qiao, Y.; Yuan, P.; Hu, Y.; Zhan g, J.; Mu, S.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Xia, H.; He, J.; Xu, Q. Adv.Mater 2018, 

30 (46), e1804504. 

[2] Xu, H.; Cao, J.; Shan, C.; Wang, B.; Xi, P.; Liu, W.; Tang, Y. Angew.Chem.In.Ed. 2018, 57 (28), 8654 -

8658. The Influence of Iron, Aluminum and Manganese Impurities on the 

# All -Vanadium Redox Flow Battery Performance 

Maedeh Pahlevaninezhad 1, Majid Pahlevani 2, Edward P.L. Roberts 1

> 1

Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Calgary, 2500 University Dr NW, 

Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada 

> 2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , Queen’s University , 99 University Avenue ,

Kingston, Ontario , K7L 3N6 , Canada 

Maedeh.pahlevaninezh@ucalgary.ca  , +1(587)429 -2944. 

Vanadium redox flow batteries (VRFB) are a rapidly emerging technology for grid scale energy storage 

and the integration of the renewable energy generation. However, the cost of the electrolyte is a majo r

barrier for implementation of VRFBs [1, 2] . The quality of the electrolyte has a significant impact on the 

cell performance and cost [1 -4] . Thus , understanding the impact of the impurities present in electrolyte on 

the performance of VRFBs is vital for commercialization of VRFBs [5] . This paper aims to conduct a 

systematic study on the effect of iron, aluminum and manganese ions (Mn 2+ , Fe 2+ and Al 3+ ) on the 

performance of VRFB s.

A three -electrode system was utilized to conduct cyclic voltammetry (CV) exp eriments.  The battery 

performance was evaluated in a flow cell using a ‘zero -gap ’ cell design with an electrode area of 5 cm 2.

The electrolyt e solution (1 M VOSO 4 in 3 M H 2SO 4) was circulated through the cell .

The CV results indicate that the rate of side reactions increase with the concentrations of the metal 

impurities. Comparison of the effect of three transition metal ions (Mn 2+ , Fe 2+ and Al 3+ ) show ed that the 

highest VO 2+ / VO 2+ peak separation was obtained in the presence of Fe 2+ . The VO 2+ / VO 2+ peak 

separation s for Mn 2+ and Al 3+ we re almost the same. The battery performance over 50 cycles with 0.1 M of 

each metal was compared at a range of current densities. The highest energy efficiency was observed with 

the pure electrolyte. Based on the cyclic voltammetry results, the kinetics of the vanadium reaction falls, 

and the peak separation increase d with increasing concentration of the contaminant metal ions Al 3+ , Mn 2+ ,

and Fe 2+ . The energy efficiencies have the same trend and illustrates that the contaminant metal ions are 

competitive with vanadium ions for adsorption on the electrode surface and thus affect the vanadium redox 

reaction kinetics [6] . The side reactions caused by the metal ions can also have a negative influence on the 

performance of VRFB s.

References: 

[1] A. Parasuraman, T.M. Lim, Ch, Menictas, M. Skyllas -Kazacos, A review of electrolyte additives and 

impurities in vanadium redox flow batteries, Electrochimica Acta, Vol.101, pp.27 -40, 2013. 

[2] Cao, L., Skyllas -Kazacos, M., Menictas, Ch., Noack, J., A review of electrolyte additives and impurities 

in vanadium redox flow batteries, Journal of Energy Chemistry, Vol.27, pp.1269 -1291, 2018. 

[3] A.K. Singh ., N . Yasr i., K . Karan, E .P. L. Roberts , Electrocatalytic Activity of Functionalized Carbon 

Paper Electrodes and Their Correlation to the Fermi Level Derived from Raman Spectra, ACS Appl. Energy 

Mater. 2019, 2, 2324−2336. 

[4] John, J. St., Imergy uses recycled vanad ium to cut materials costs for flow batteries, Greentech media, 

2014. 

[5] J.H. Park, J.J. Park, H.J Lee, B.S. Min, J.H. Yang, Influence of Metal Impurities or Additives in the 

Electrolyte of a Vanadium Redox Flow Battery, Journal of The Electrochemical So ciety 165(7), page 

A1263 -A1268, 2018. 

[6] Ding, M., Liu, T., Zhang, Y., Cai, Z., Yang, Y., Yuan, Y., Effect of Fe (III) on the positive electrolyte 

for vanadium redox flow battery, R. SOC. open sci. 6: 181309, 2019. Hybrid Co 3O4@CoS nanoparticles in a N/S -doped carbon matrix  as An 

# Efficient Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction and 

# Evolution Reactions in  Zn -Air Battery 

Haoran Pan a, Zhenjie Lu a, Dongling Wu b, Xinning Huang a, Tao Wang b, Xingxing Chen a,* 

> a

Research Group of Functional Materials for  Electrochemical  Energy  Conversion , School of Chemical 

Engineering, University of Science and Technology Liaoning, Qianshan Middle Road 185, 114051 

Anshan, P. R. China  

> b

Key Laboratory of Energy Materials Chemistry, Institute of Applied Chemistry, Xinjiang University, 

Shengli Road 14, 8300 46 Urumqi, P. R. China 

xingchenstar 79 @163. com 

The development of high -performance non -precious bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is urgently needed to realize the 

commercialization of rechargeable metal -air battery. Herein, we report a ZIF -67 derived hybrid Co -based 

carbon composite bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalyst exhibiting excellent performance and stability in 

a custom -built Zn -air battery. The catalyst was formed by pyrolytic carbonization of ZIF -67 followed by 

mild oxidation and sulfurization to a hybrid composite comprised of multiple active sites including Co -N4,

Co -N/S -C, C -N/S -C, Co 3O4 and CoS, as well as the surface and edge defects in the carbon matri x, that act 

concertedly yielding a highly efficient bifunctional ORR/OER catalyst for reversible oxygen electrodes. 

The catalyst affords remarkably low reversible overpotentials and stability not only in a 3 -electrode system, 

but also in a custom -construct ed Zn -air battery, exhibiting competitive performance against benchmark 

bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts reported to -date and thus placing it among the best non -precious 

metal catalysts for reversible oxygen reactions. 

[1] Qiao, Y.; Yuan, P.; Hu, Y.; Zhan g, J.; Mu, S.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Xia, H.; He, J.; Xu, Q. Adv.Mater 2018, 

30 (46), e1804504. 

[2] Xu, H.; Cao, J.; Shan, C.; Wang, B.; Xi, P.; Liu, W.; Tang, Y. Angew.Chem.In.Ed. 2018, 57 (28), 8654 -

8658. Electrochemical Ammonia Synthesis by Molybdenum -Decorated 

# Rhodium Catalysts 

Sunki Chung a, HyungKuk Ju b, Jaeyoung Lee a,c* 

> a

Electrochemical Reaction and Technology Laboratory, School of Earth Sciences and Environmental 

Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Scie nce and Technology (GIST), Gwangju 61005, South Korea 

> b

CSIRO Energy, Private Bag 10, Clayton South 3169, Victoria, Australia 

> c

Ertl Center for Electrochemical and Catalysis, GIST, Gwangju 61005, South Korea 

chungsk@gist.ac.kr (S Chung), jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr (J Lee) 

Ammonia is one of the important chemicals for the global economy, and generally used for the 

production of fertilizers, refrigerants and other chemical feedstock. Recently, a mmonia is also being 

considered as an en ergy carrier due to its’ high de nsity of hydrogen and carbon -free nature .[1] Haber -

Bosch process which is the main route for ammonia synthesis , requires huge energy consumption, high 

purity of hydrogen and harsh reaction conditions. To overcome such limitations, electrochemical method 

fo r ammonia synthesis at ambient conditions has been received much attention. [2] In this study, a 

molybdenum decorated rhodium electrode (Rh Mo /C) is fabricated using an electrodeposition technique. 

The Rh Mo /C produces a high er yield of ammonia and shows a hi gher faradaic efficiency comparing with a

commercial Rh/C electrode in alkaline media. The electrochemical ammonia synthesis tests have been 

also conducted in various reaction conditions such as electrolytes and operating potentials. This study 

reveals t he relationship between the reaction condition and the selectivity of ammonia synthesis .

Reference 

[1] C. Zamfirescu, I. Dincer, Journal of Power Sources 2008 , 185 , 459 –465. 

[2] G. Soloveichik, Nat Catal 2019 , 2, 377 –380. Operando Observation of a Highly Reversible Nonporous Sodium 

# Metal Anode with Shiny -Smo oth Surface 

Bingyuan Ma 1, Peng Bai 1,2, *

> 1

Department of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis 

> 2

Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis 

St. Louis, MO 63130, United States of America 

> *

pbai@w ustl.edu 

While alkali metal anodes are considered as the promising alternatives to the ion -hosti ng materials due to 

the high ener gy densit ies , the non uniform de position ( dendritic growth ) that can lead t o intern al shorts 

remains a major obstacle of their practical applications (1,2) . Here , according to the operando observation 

in our special capillary cells , we report a shiny -smooth nonporous sodium metal anod e that can be cycled 

reversibly even at high ar eal capacities , without the formation of any whiskers, mos ses , gas bubbles or 

disconnected metal particles observed in existing studies (3,4) . The plating process follows the lateral 

surface -growing mechanism , which trans forms into tip -gr owing bra nch -like dendrites at a critical time 

when appl ying over -limiting curren ts (5) . The observation reve als the possi bility th at the solid electrolyte 

interphases (SEIs ) are absent , which is supported by the elemental depth profile analysis . As a result, a

reversable high c ap acity sodium meta l a node is achieved in coin cells within a critical penetra tion -related 

current density (6 mA cm -2). Our study demonstrates the possibility of plating shiny -smooth reactive 

alkali metal in liquid electrolytes and provides a reliable option applicable for t he next -generation alkali 

metal batteries. 

1. Xu W, Wang J, Ding F, Chen X, Nasybulin E, Zhang Y, et al. Lithium metal anodes for 

rechargeable batteries. Energy Environ Sci. 2014;7(2):513 –37. 

2. Zhao C , L u Y, Yue J, Pan D, Qi Y, Hu YS, et al. Advanced Na metal anodes. J Energy Chem. 

2018;27(6):1584 –96. 

3. Rodriguez R, Loeffler KE, Nathan SS, Sheavly JK, Dolocan A, Heller A, et al. In Situ Optical 

Imaging of Sodium Electrodeposition: Effects of Fluoroe thy lene Carbonate. ACS Energy Lett. 

2017;2(9):2051 –7. 

4. Yui Y, Hayashi M, Nakamura J. In situ Mi croscopic Observation of Sodium 

Deposition/Dissolution on Sodium Electrode. Sci Rep . 2016;6 :1 –8. 

5. Bai P, Li J, Brushett FR, Bazant MZ. Transition of lith ium growth mechanisms in liqui d

electrolytes. Energy Environ Sci. 2016;9(10):3221 –9. Nanostructured Fe N4 -C Electrocataly sts for Energy Conversion in 

# Bioelectrochemical Systems 

Maida Aysla Costa de Oliveira 1, Alessandro Ia nna ci 2, Paula E. Colavita 2, Alessandra D ’Epifanio 1,

Barbara Mecheri 1 

> 1

University of Rome Tor Vergata – Dept. Chemical Science and Techn ologies, 

Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy  

> 2

Trinity College Dublin – School of Chemistry, 

College Green, D 2, Irelan d

oliveira .maida@uniroma2.i t

Bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) are an e fficient and f lexible p latform f or energy recovery and 

wastewater treatment. However, the sl ow kinetics of the oxyge n reduction is one of the main factors that 

leads to the use of expensive catalysts, such as plat inum, limiting the overall performance outp ut of BESs 

[1,2]. Plati num group meta l-free catalyst s supported on n anostructured carbon allowed to achieve oxygen 

reduction reaction (ORR) rate comparable to comm ercial Pt based catalysts [2]. ORR active s ites 

efficiency and activity are st rongly affected by catalyst s tructure , morpholo gy and carbon scaffold doping 

chemistry : nit rog en -doped carbon -based materials exhibit a great ORR catalytic activity [3]. We have 

previously demonstrated that nitrogen -dope d nanostructured car bon is an optimal substrate to support 

Fe N4 macroclyc les, d ue t o its high surface area, adjustable electroni cal and mechanical morphology, and 

tuneab le surface [4]. In this study, iron (II) phthalocyanine (FePc) was anchored on carbon black pearls .

To introduce nitrogen functionalities in the carbon structure differen t strategies have been developed, 

including p re -treatments based on urea as N source and thermal treatment s. The catalysts , labelled as 

Fe N4 -C, were characterized by combining the use of electro chemical and spectroscopic techniques to 

cor relate th e differe nt morphologies and s urface chemistry to electrocatalytic activity towards ORR. 

Figure 1 shows linear sweep voltammetr ies of a Fe N4 -C catalyst in neutral environ ment , together with a 

schematic of ORR at a surface of a Fe N4 -C catalyst .

Figure 1 . Hydrod in amic linear sweep voltammetr ies at different electrod e rotation rate of Fe N4 -C

catalyst in O2-saturated 0.1 M phosphate buffer .

As shown in Figure 1, Fe N4 -N-C onse t potential and half wave potential (E 1/2 ) were 0.13V and -0.3V vs 

SCE , respectively , indica ting good activity towards ORR . In addition, the app lic ation of both Koutecky -

Levic theory and rotating ring disk electrode experiments pointed at a charge tran sfer mechanism close t o

4 electrons thus indica ting good ORR acti vity in n eutral media . By compa rin g FeN4 -N-C to Pt/C taken as 

control, the overall per formance indicated that Fe N4 -based electroc atalysts are good candidates to replace 

platinum for energy conversion in bioelectrochemical systems .

References: 

[1]  Sant oro, C., Arbizzani, C. , Erable, B.,  Ieropoulos, I . Journal of Power Sources , 356, 225 -244  (2017). 

[2] Oliveira , M. A. C. , Mecheri B ., D'Epifanio A ., Ohnuki , H . Catalysts 10 , 1-24 (2020). 

[3] Beha n, J.A.;  Mates‐Torres, E.; Stamatin, S.N.; Domínguez, C.; Iann aci, A.; Fleischer, K .;  Hoque,  Md. K.; 

Perova, T.S.; García‐Melchor, M.; Colavita, P.E.  Small  1902081 , 1-10  (2019 ). 

[4]  Mecheri, B., Ficca V.A.C .,  Oliveira,  M.  A.  C. , D'Epifanio A .,  Placidi E .,  Licoccia S.  Appl ied Catalysis B: 

Environmental  237, 699 -707  (2018). Copper selenide  electro deposition from a deep  eutectic solvent 

M. Bougouma *1, A. Mernissi Cherigui 2, A. Sorgho 1, F. Aldibaja 2, C. Buess -Herman 2

and Th. Doneux 2 

> 1

Laboratoire de Chimie des Matériaux et de l'Environnement (LCME), UFR/Sciences et Technolo gies 

(ST), Avenue Maurice Yaméogo, Université Norbert ZONGO, BP 376 Koudougou, Burkina Faso  

> 2

Chemistry of Surfaces, Interfaces and Nanomaterials, Faculté des Sciences, Université libre de 

Bruxelles (ULB), Boulevard du Triomphe, 2, CP 255, B -1050 Bruxelles , Belgique 

E-mail address : bmoussaraphael@gmail.com 

Inorganic binary compounds such as Cu -Se and Zn -Se are precursors for the formation of 

CuInSe 2 (CIS), Cu(InGa)(S,Se) 2 (CIGS) and Cu 2ZnSn(S,Se) 4 (CZTS(Se)) , semi -conductor materials 

selected for the next generation of photovoltaic devices, owing to their near -ideal photo -electrochemical 

properties. A proper understanding and a good control of the selenium and its binary compounds 

electrodeposition is thus re quired to improve the quality of the semi -conductor materials . Deep Eutectic 

Solvents are nowadays emerging as promising and cheap alternative media for the electrodeposition of 

metals or compounds that cannot be easily prepared in aqueous or conventional organic solvents .

In the present work,  the electrodeposition  of copper selenides thin films  has been investigated in 

the choline chloride -urea (ChCl -U)  deep eutectic solvent  at a gold electrode using cyclic voltammetry. 

The strategy is focused on previews results  [1 , 2 ] in which the electrodeposition of selenium was 

conducted at various temperature s. At 110 °C, grey (trigonal) selenium was deposited at a potential of 

-0.4 V (vs. Ag QRE) using SeO 2 as the precursor. At potentials around -0.7 V (vs. Ag QRE), the 

electrodeposited Se (0) is reduced to Se ( -II) and stripped from the surface. This cathodic stripping forms 

the basis of our strategy to form a copper selenide compound by electrodeposition. 

In the presence of dissolved SeO 2/Cu 2O mixture s as precursor s at 110°C, the reduction of Se(0) 

to Se( -II) proceeds at less negative potentials, being coupled with the formation of copper selenide in one 

step by a proper choice of the deposition potential.  The voltammetric responses obtained by varying the 

depositio n potential showed that the electrodeposition of Cu 2Se can be carried out at -0.4 V. 

XPS and XRD characterisations point to the formation of Cu 2Se . Photoelectrochemical 

measurements have been conducted to characterize the semiconductor behavior and the ph otochemical 

stability of the electrodeposited material. 

[1] M. Bougouma, A. Van Elewyck, M. Steichen, C. Buess -Herman, Th. Doneux, J. Solid State 

Electrochem. 17 (2013) 527 –536. 

[2] M. Bougouma, Th. Doneux, J. B. Legma, Cl. Buess -Herman, J. Soc. Ouest -Afr. Chim. 038 (2014) 1 -

14. Long -Term Performance Assessment of Commercialized Coating 

# System s via EIS and SVET 

Sina Sheikholeslami *[1] , David Williams [2] , Geraint Williams [3], Wei Gao [1] 

> 1

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering , the University of Auckland , Private B ag 92019 ,

Auckland , New Zealand  

> 2

School of Chemical Sciences, the University of Auckland, Auckland , New Zealand  

> 3

Materials Research Center, College of Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom 

* sshe933@aucklanduni.ac.nz 

The p erformance of conventional solvent -based and newly developed waterborne coating system s was 

assessed via the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on the surface and Scanning Vibrating 

Electrode Technique (SVET ) at the cut -edge and then benchmarked with natural exposure results [1 -2] . It 

was observed that the developed environmental -friendly coating system ha s a slightly poor er performance 

via EIS compared with the conventional coating system in the coil -coating industry. The undercutting 

corrosion in the waterborne coating was also slightly more noticeable in comparison with the 

conventional solvent -based system at the cut -edge. The most important outcome of the study, however, 

was the ability to predict the lon g-term performance of these coatings by matching the trends obtained via 

EIS and SVET to the natural exposure results. Correspondingly, the results from the same coating 

systems after two years of exposure suggest that the conventional system tends to be m ore corrosion 

resistant compared to the environmental -friendly coating system. The r easons for different performance s

have also been discussed based on the inhibition efficiency of corrosion inhibitors doped within the 

organic coating , and also the effect of substrate chemical composition on corrosion performance of the 

system. 

Figure 1 – SVET current density maps : (A) conventional solvent -based coating, and (B) 

environmental -friendly waterborne coating systems after 12 hours in 5 wt.% NaCl solution 

References: 

[1] C. A. Richards, H. N. McMurray, G. Williams. (2019). Smart -release inhibition of corrosion driven 

organic failure on zinc by cationic benzotriazole based pigments, Corrosion Science , volume 154 , P:101 -

110 

[2] S.R. Tay lor, F. Contu, L. Calle, J. P. Curran, W. Li. (2012). Predicting the Long -Term Field 

Performance of Coating Systems on Steel Using a Rapid Electrochemical Test: The Damage Tolerance 

Test. Corrosion . volume 68 . 035007 -1. 10.5006/1.3693698. Ni -Based Alloy Nanostructured Electrodes for Alkaline Electrolyzers 

Fabrizio Ganci 1, Emanuele Cannata 1, Valentino Cusumano 1, Giuseppe Aiello 1, Carmelo Sunseri 1,

Philippe Mandin 2, Rosalinda Inguanta 1

> 1

Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università di Palermo 

Via le delle Scienze, 90128 Palermo, Italy 

> 2

Université Bretagne Sud 

IRDL UMR CNRS 6027, 56100 Lorient, France 

fabrizio.ganci@unipa.it 

In recent years, the installed power of renewable energy sources plants has considerably grown increasing 

[1] . One of the main drawbacks of renewable sources is their unpredictability , consequently they need a 

storage system that can efficiently manage the produced energy. In this scenario, the electrochemical 

production of hydrogen could play an important role in the future. Howe ver, the electrochemical 

hydrogen production cost is still too high in respect to other technologies. For this reason, research is 

focused on improving the electrolyzers performance, through the use of more efficient and less expensive 

materials , such as t ransition metal alloys [2] .

In water alkaline electrolyzer field, the development of Nickel -based nanostructured electrode is one of 

the possible ways to improve the water electrolysis efficiency [3]. In particular, t hrough the use of a 

simple manufacturin g method , template electrosynthesis, it is possible to realize high density surface area 

electrodes . In previous works, Ni nanowires electrodes for water -alkaline electrolysis covered by 

nanoparticles of IrO 2 as an anode and Pd as a cathode have shown good and stable performance also at 

room temperature [4-5] .

In this work, using the template electrosynthesis for nanostructures fabrication, the attention has been 

focused on the electrodeposition of Ni -based alloys. Several different alloy electrodes were ma nufactured 

starting from different aqueous solution containing various transition metal, such as zinc, cobalt and 

tungsten. Tuning the elements concentrations in the solutions and the electrodeposition operating 

conditions , alloys with different compositio ns have been obtained . Morphological and chemical 

nanostructured electrodes features will be presented and discussed. Moreover, electrochemical and 

electrocatalytic test carried out to evaluate the best alloy composition will be shown . Then, long term test 

conducted at a constant current density in aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide (30% w/w) at room 

temperature will be also reported. 

[1] IEA (2019), Renewables 2019, IEA, Paris  https://www.i ea.org/reports/renewables -2019  [Accessed: 

June 10, 2020 ]

[2] Safizadeh, F., Ghali, E., Houlachi, G., Electrocatalysis developments for hydrogen evolution reaction 

in alkaline solutions – A Review. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 2015, 40, 256 –274. 

[3] Ganci, F., B aguet, T., Aiello, G., Cusumano, V., Mandin, P., Sunseri, C., and Inguanta, R., 

Nanostructured Ni Based Anode and Cathode for Alkaline Water Electrolyzers, Energies 201 9,. 12, 3669 .

[4] Battaglia, M., Inguanta, R., Piazza, S., Sunseri.  C., 2014, Internatio nal Journal of Hydrogen Energy 

39, 16797 -16805. 

[5] Ganci, F., Lombardo, S., Sunseri, C., Inguanta, R., Nanostructured electrodes for hydrogen production 

in alkaline electrolyzer. Renew. Energy 2018, 123, 117 –124. Increasing the diameter of the vertically ordered pores in silica thin 

# films produced by electrochemically assisted self -assembly 

Nabil A.N. Mohamed, Andrew W. Lodge, Andrew L. Hector and Gillian Reid 

School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highfield 

Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom 

nanm1n18@soton.ac.uk , a.w.lodge@soton.ac.uk , a.l.hector@soton.ac.uk  and  g.reid@soton.ac.uk 

The vertical alignment of pores in hexagonal mesoporous silica films can be achieved through the 

electrochemically assisted self -assembly method (EASA). 1,2 An appropriate negative potential is applied 

to a solution containing the surfactant and inorganic precursors solubilized in an ethanol/water mix. This 

results in the generation of hydr oxide ions in solution, whereby, the pH swings from acidic to alkaline at 

the electrode surface. The electric field plays a pivotal role in the self -organization of the cationic 

surfactant into hemi -micelles and the pH change catalyses the polycondensation of the silica sol. 3,4 Our 

interest in well -ordered vertically aligned EASA films is the possibility of utilizing them as feasible 

templates for the electrodeposition of few nm -diameter metal and semiconductor nanowires. Previous 

works reveal that it is po ssible to electrodeposit nanowires into porous silica templates 5,6 . However, the 

stability of very small nanowires is poor in pore diameters below 2 nm. 7 Here we demonstrate that 

systematic increases in the pore diameter ( > 2 nm) are achievable by EASA, ut ilising larger surfactants 

formed by extending the single straight alkyl chain. Additionally, replacing the methyl substituent of an 

ammonium polar head group is another route to pore diameter expansion. 

Acknowledgement 

This work is part of the EPSRC Prog ramme Grant, Advanced Devices by Electroplating 

(EP/N0354371/1). 

References 

1. A. Walcarius and A. Kuhn, TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry , 2008, 27, 593 -603. 

2. A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, Nature , 2007, 6, 602 -608. 

3. Y. Guillemin, M. Etienne, E. Aubert and A. Walcarius, Journal of Materials Chemistry , 2010, 20, 

6799. 

4. A. Walcarius, Chemical Society Reviews , 2013, 42, 4098 

5. H. Kang, H. Lee and J. Kwak, Journal of the Korean Electrochemical Society , 2011, 14, 22 -26. 

6. A. Gou x, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, Journal of Materials Science , 2009, 44, 6601 -6607. 

7. P. Bartlett, R. Beanland, J. Burt, M. Hasan, A. Hector, R. Kashtiban, W. Levason, A. Lodge, S. 

Marks, J. Naik, A. Rind, G. Reid, P. Richardson, J. Sloan and D. Smith, Nano Letters , 2018, 18, 

941 -947. Glycerol ele ctro -oxidation in acidic and alkaline media at different 

# temperatures on polycr ystalline and single crystals Pt electrodes 

Victor Yoiti Yukuhiro a,b , Raquel Cristina Affonso a and Pablo Sebastián Fernández a,b 

a Chemistry Ins titute , St ate Univers ity of C ampinas , 13083 -970, Campinas, SP, Bra zil 

b C enter for I nnovation on New Energies , State University of Campinas, 13083 -841, Campinas, SP, 

Bra zil 

v.yo iti@gm ail.com 

The demand for greener sources of energ y resulted in a higher production of biodies el , and 

consequently glycerol , since it is a co -prod uct o f the biodiesel synthesis that has surpassed the industri al 

demand . Due to this issue, many rese arch g roups have been investigat ing alternative s to use this excess 1.

In this context , the electro -oxid atio n o f glycerol (EOG) is a n interesting option to wa rds the chemical 

valorization of this compound, generating value -added products and h igh purity H 2 in elect rolysers 2.

The EOG ha s been studied in Pt in both acid ic and alkaline med ia 3-5, however, at leas t to our 

knowledge, there is any study about the effect of the temperatu re in the activity and selectivity of the 

reactio n. Thus, herein we stud y the EOG on Pt po lycrystalline (Ptp) and Pt single crystals electrodes of the 

main cryst allographic orientation s: Pt( 111), Pt(100) and Pt(110) at 5 °C and 35 °C . In s itu FTIR and 

electrolysis coupled to HPLC will be performed to understand the electrochem ical results in te rms of 

pr oducts and/or intermedi ates that are formed dur ing the EOG. 

Figure 1 shows results ob tain ed in alkaline media . Interestingly, t his prelimin ary results suggest s

that the temperature act s increasing the rate of all the parallel processes occurring at each electrode ,

gene rating changes in the current densities , but not chan ging the I-V respon se s ha pe. For Pt(1 10) , the 

increase in the current density was approximately fourfold , threefold for Pt(1 00) and twofold for Pt(111 ),

i.e., as more open the surface is , higher the temper ature activation. It is well -know n that as more open the 

surface is , more pr one to poisoning it becomes, then we s uggest that th e increase of the temperature help 

to detach strongly adsorbed adsorbates, contributing more to the enhancement of the currents of the more 

poisoned electrodes. 

Figu re 1 – 10 th positive scan of t he EOG in 0.1 M NaOH + 0.1 M GlOH for all the electrodes at 10 mV /s .

Re ferences 

[1 ] Ciriminna, R. et. al. Eur. J. Lipid. Sci. Technol . 2014 , 116(10), 1432. 

[2] Cou ta nceau , C. ; Ba ranton, S. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Env iron. 2016 , 5 (4), 388 -400. 

[3] Fer ná ndez, P. S. et. al. Chem ElectroChem . 2015 , 2 (2), 263 -268 .

[4] Sand rini, R.M.L.M. et . al.  Electrochem . Commun . 2018, 86, 149 -152. 

[5] Sandrini, R. M.L.M. el. al. Chem ElectroC hem 2019 , 6 , 4238 .Electrochemically Addressable Nanofluidic Devices based on the 

# Integration of Electroactive Polymers into Solid -State Nanochannels 

Gregorio Laucirica, 1 Vanina M. Cayón, 1 Yamili Toum Terrones, 1 M. Lorena Cortez, 1 María Eugenia Toimil -

Molares, 2 Christina Trautmann 2,3 Waldemar A. Marmisollé ,1 and Omar Azzaroni 1

1 Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas (INIFTA), Departamento de Química, 

Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, CONICET – CC 16 Suc. 4, 1900 La Plata, 

Argentina 

2 GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany 

3 Technische Universität Darmstadt, Materialwissenschaft, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany 

Email address:  wmarmi@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

Solid -state nanochannels have attracted the interest of the scientific community due to its controlled mass 

transport properties. Particularly, the ionic transport through th ese nanometer -sized channels is strongly 

dependent on the geometry and surface charge of the channel walls. The modulation of the surface charge 

density allows modifying the permselectivity and consequently the conductance of solid -state nanochannels 

which has huge implications in fields such as electronic, biosensing, and filtrat ion .1 Considering this fact, there 

has been an increasing interest in the development of nanofluidic devices with the capability of controlling the 

surface charge density, and therefore the ionic transport, by ex perimentally controllable stimuli, such as 

temperature, pH, electrical potential, light, or the presence of a n analyte in solution. 2 However, most of these 

conditions are difficult to control in confined spaces. In this context, the electrochemical stimuli -based strategy 

is especially promising since it enables to regulate the ionic currents by an external and easy to control 

experimental input. In this sense, the integration of electroactive polymers into solid -state nanochannels offers a 

suitable option t o accomplish this aim. Thus, the use of redox -active bistable molecules that can be switched 

between different oxidation states by addressing an external electrical potential would allow an eas y modulat ion 

of the surface charge on the nanochannel walls an d, consequently, to govern the nanofluidic readout with a fast 

and highly efficient response. 

Within this framework, we present our recent results concerning the integration of electroactive polymers into 

solid -state nanochannels for developing electroche mically -addressable nanofluidic devices. 3–6 We show how the 

combination of electroactive polymers and solid -state nanochannels can lead to a myriad of new designs of 

switchable nanofluidic devices with potential applications in different fields such as biosensing, drug delivery ,

or filtrat ion. 

References 

(1) Hou, X.; Guo, W.; Jiang, L. Biomimetic Smart Nanopores and Nanochannels. Chem. Soc. Rev. 

2011 , 40 (5), 2385 –2401. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cs00053a. 

(2) Pérez‐Mitta, G.; Toimil‐Molares , M. E.; Trautmann, C.; Marmisollé, W. A.; Azzaroni, O. 

Molecular Design of Solid‐State Nanopores: Fundamental Concepts and Applications. Adv. 

Mater. 2019 , 31 (37), 1901483. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201901483. 

(3) Pérez -Mitta, G.; Marmisolle, W. A.; Burr, L.; Toimil -Molares, M. E.; Trautmann, C.; Azzaroni, 

O. Proton -Gated Rectification Regimes in Nanofluidic Diodes Switched by Chemical Effectors. 

Small 2018 , 14 (18), 1 –8. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201703144. 

(4) Laucirica, G.; Marmisollé, W. A.; Toimil -Molares, M. E. E.; Trautmann, C.; Azzaroni, O. 

Redox -Driven Reversible Gating of Solid -State Nanochannels. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 

2019 , 11 (33), 30001 –30009. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b05961. 

(5) Pérez -Mitta, G.; Marmisollé, W. A.; Trautmann, C.; Toimil -Molares, M. E.; Azzaroni, O. An 

All -Plastic Field -Effect Nanofluidic Diode Gated by a Conducting Polymer Layer. Adv. Mater. 

2017 , 29 (28), 1700972. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201700972. 

(6) Laucirica, G.; Ca yón, V. M.; Toum Terrones, Y.; Cortez, M. L.; Toimil -Molares, M. E.; 

Trautmann, C.; Marmisollé, W. A.; Azzaroni, O. Electrochemically Addressable Nanofluidic 

Devices Based on PET Nanochannels Modified with Electropolymerized Poly - o -Aminophenol 

Films.  Nan oscale 2020 , 12 (10), 6002 –6011. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9NR10336H. Integration of Conducting Polymers and Metal Organic Frameworks 

# for boosting Oxygen Reduction Reaction performance : a 

# Nanoarchitectonics Approach 

G.E. Fenoy 1,2 , A. P. Mártire 1, J.Scotto 1, M. Rafti 1, W.A. Marmisollé 1, O.Azzaroni 1

1 - Instituto de Investigac iones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas (INIFTA) – Departamento de 

Química – Facultad de Ciencias Exactas – Universidad Nacional de La Plata (UNLP) – CONICET. 64 

and 113, La Plata (1900), Argentina. 

2 - Instituto de Investigación e Ingeniería Ambiental, Universidad Nacional de San Martín - 25 de mayo y 

Francia, 1 piso (1650), Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

3 - Instituto de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Nacional Arturo Jauretche - Av. Calchaquí 6200, 

Florencio Varela, Buenos Aires, Argentina 

wmarmi@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

The term “Nanoarchitectonics” involves the integration of molecular building blocks into well -defined 

organized assemblies via a variety of approaches , where t he intimate connection between the materials 

give s origin to improved functionalities or even create s new ones. Among the vast spectrum of available 

strategies, Layer -by -Layer (LbL) and electropolymerization are two of the most employed approaches for 

creating functional materials for elec trochemical applications . While LbL allows for an accurate 

manipulation of film architecture and the incorporation of numerous building blocks ;

electropolymerization offers a precise control of film thickness, morphology, and composition, thus 

allowing the inclusion of desired moieties for further surface functionalization. 

On the other hand, Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) is an essential electrochemical process in many 

energy conversion devices , taking particular relevance in facing the increasing global demand for clean 

energy sources and vectors. Desirable features for ORR -based catalysts are operability under 

environmentally friendly conditions, biocompatible electrolytes, and the reduction of metal loadings. [1] 

Having in mind the above discussion , we hereby present examples of the integration of Conducting 

Polymers (CPs) and Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs) through different approaches in order to 

construct assemblies featuring improved ORR performance. In this wa y, t he O2 adsorption ability and 

high porosity of the Zn -based MOF ZIF -8, and the electroactivity of polyaniline -like CPs are effectively 

brought together by making use of LbL assembly and electropolymerization techniques. 

In the first example, the LbL st rategy is employed in order to perform the sequential assembly of colloidal 

suspensions of the polyaniline/polystyrene sulfonate complex (Pani -PSS) and polyallylamine 

hydrochloride -coated ZIF -8 nanocrystals (PAH -ZIF -8). The LbL -assembled films are found to be 

electrically connected and feature promising increases in the ORR current in neutral pH aqueous 

environments. [2] 

On the other hand, we introduce the use of electropolymerization as synthe tic strategy for producing 

electroactive films featuring –NH 2 moieties. Then, a MOF coating is integrated by induced growth on the 

amino pending moieties from the methanoli c precursor solutions. This strategy generated a composite 

film with improved ORR performance due to the effective combination of the electroactivity of the CP 

and the MOF capacity of acting as an oxygen reservoir. [3] Moreover, this approach also allows the 

incorporation of metallic nanoparticles ( NPs ) in order to improve the overall electrocatalytic performance 

of the nanocomposite s. In this way, the in -situ reduction of the Pt NPs precursor on the CP not only 

keeps the electroactivity of the conducting matrix but also improve s its electrocatalytic efficiency. 

Subsequent deposition of the MOF coating further increase s the ORR performance, by addin g the O 2

preconcentrating effect. [1] 

Finally, nanoarchitectonics can be seen as a toolkit from which different strategies can be taken in order 

to construct complex interfacial architectures with improved ORR featur es arising from the combination 

of the different building blocks. 

[1] G. E. Fenoy, J. Scotto, J. Azcárate, M. Rafti, W. A. Marmisollé, O. Azzaroni, ACS Appl. Energy 

Mater. 2018 , 1, 5428. 

[2] A. P. Mártire, G . M. Segovia, O. Azzaroni, M. Rafti, W. Marmisollé, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 2019 ,

4, 893. 

[3] M. Rafti, W. A. Marmisollé, O. Azzaroni, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2016 , 3, 1. Selective Recognition by Nanoparticle -Imprinted Matrices 

Sweety Ann Samuel , Gunther Wittstock 

Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg 

Department of Chemistry, 261 29 Oldenburg/DE 

sweety.ann.samuel@uni -oldenburg.de 

Nanoparticles (NPs), being the suitable candidates for various commercial and domestic applications due 

to their unique physical and chemical properties are now widely used in medical, automotive and 

ecological arenas. A major drawback is their uncontrolle d release to the ecosystem paired by inadequate 

detection techniques selective to size, shape and chemical nature of core material as well as shell. Those 

parameters decisively determine the toxicity of NPs. This calls for facile tools to detect NPs based on the 

above factors. We work towards the development of simple, inexpensive and miniature sensing layers 

capable to selectively enrich NPs on surfaces. The work follows the idea of nanoparticle -imprinted 

matrices (NAIM), with some analogy to the well -know n molecularly imprinted polymers (MIP). 

Electrochemistry is used to deposit a thin film, which is homogeneous, highly stable and thick enough to 

provide size -selective recognition of nanoparticles [1] .

Electroreduction of 4 -((triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl) be nzene diazonium salt followed by the electroreduction 

of 4 -nitrobenzene diazonium salt yields a matrix, which is 7 -9 nm thick on an indium tin oxide (ITO) 

coated glass substrate.  The initial layer is formed from a diazonium salt with a bulky substituent to induce 

steric hindrance, thereby preventing inhomogeneous, highly rough film formation [2] . The films are 

characterized by scanning force microscopy, photoelectron spectroscopy and infrared reflection 

absorption spectroscopy. Such a film entraps the template NPs on the substrate and forms a matrix. Later, 

the template NPs are removed by chemical etching which forms a cavity complementary to the template 

NPs used, forming a NAIM. This NAIM is then exposed to analyte NPs, expected to selectively recognize 

them based on their shape, size and shell .

References 

[1] S. Kraus -Ophir, J. Witt, G. Wittstock, D. Mandler, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53 (2020) 294 .

[2] Y. Leroux , P. Hapiot, Chem. Mater . 25 (2013) 489 .Structural modifi cations of model lipid rafts exposed to selected statins 

# – Langmuir and electrochem istry studies .

Michalina Zaborowska a, Dorota Matyszewska b, Renata Bilewicz a

> a

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland 

> b a

Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, 

Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02089 Warsaw, Poland 

z.mic halina@chem.uw.edu.pl , dorota.matyszewska@chem.uw.edu.pl , bilewicz@chem.uw.edu.pl 

Statins are a group of drugs that are responsible for lowering cholesterol levels by inhibiting the 

reductase 3-hydroxy -3-methyl -glutaryl -enzyme A (HMG -CoA). They are widely used to prevent 

cardiovascular diseases [1,2] and can be divided according to thei r origin into natural and synthetic ones 

[3]. These drugs interact not only with proteins but also have an effect on the organization and surface 

properties of lipid membranes. 

Preparation of model biological membranes at the air -water interface by means of Langmuir 

technique allowed us to assess the influence of selected statins on the lipid packing in the membranes and 

the fluidity of the layers. The lipid systems used consisted of phosphocholines (DOPC), sphingomyelin and 

cholesterol which are the main components of lipid rafts. The effect of the three selected statins (pravastatin, 

fluvastatin and cerivastatin) on muliticomponent monolayers was first investigated. The effect of statins 

strongly depends on the properties of the drug itself, since molecul ar differences between statins’ structures 

may lead to the changes in functions that affect cellular processes [1]. It has been shown that pravastatin 

changes the surface properties of the layers only slightly . More lipophilic fluvastatin penetrated the mo del 

membranes much easier while c erivastatin had a fluidizing effect , but only slightly changed the pa cking of 

the polar head groups in the lipid monolayer . The second stage of the research involves the transfer of layers 

from the air -water interface to a s olid substrate by the Langmuir - Blodgett/Langmuir -Shaefer meth od. The 

effect of selected statins on mult icomponent layers forming lipid rafts (DOPC:SM:Chol), was studied using 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Biological membranes by their structure act as capacitors, hence 

impedance experiments allowed us to assess changes in their capacity and barrier properties following 

exposure to statins .

Our e xperiments showed the specific nature of the interaction of cer ivastatin with model 

membranes and its negative effects upon the membrane organization which may explain why this drug was 

withdrawn from the market . Based on th e performed measurements it is possible to understand better why 

these drugs, so effective in decreasing levels of cholesterol, can also lead to unwanted disorders of the 

nervous system and myopathy, threatening the proper functioning of our body .

[1] J. Greenwood, L. Steinman, S.S. Zamvil, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6, 2006. 358 -370 

[2] C. Baigent, A. Keech, P.M. Kearney, L. Blackwell, G. Buck, C. Pollicino, A. Kirby, T. Sourjina, R. 

Peto, R. Collins, R. Simes, Lancet, London, England, 366 (2005) 1267 –1278. 

[3] M. Schachter, Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19, 2014. 117 -125 Elect rochemistry for Climate Change: 

# CO 2 Capture by An Electrochemically Mediated Amine Regeneration Process 

## Mohammad (Mim) Rahimi , T. Alan Hatton *   

> Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge MA 02139, USA
> *Corresponding author: tahatton@mit.edu

Abstract 

Global warming resulting from the emission of greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide (CO 2), has become a 

major concern in recent years. The global concentration of CO 2 in the atmosphere is increasing rapidly; in May 2019, 

atmospheric CO 2 reached 415 ppm, which is the highest level in more than 800,000 years. This prompted research 

activity to develop various approaches that could effectively mitigate emissions by capturing CO 2, especially from 

large -point sources such as post -combustion f lue gas. It is believed that electrochemistry, a key part of the 2019 Nobel 

Prize in Chemistry, is a powerful, emergent tool for the design of different approaches to directly or indirectly assist 

in achieving the goals in the action plan by effectively mi tigating CO 2 emissions. Electrochemistry will offer a unique 

advantage in the future, when the electrical energy is mostly generated by renewables. The carbon footprint and the 

cost of the electrochemical processes would be minimized, making them an attrac tive solution for addressing climate 

change. In this context, different approaches based on electrochemical processes have been proposed to drive CO 2

capture and release. We recently demonstrated an electrochemically -mediated amine regeneration (EMAR) proc ess 

as a low -energy, efficient, and potentially scalable method of capturing CO 2 from flue gas. The EMAR process scheme 

is similar to that of the amine -based thermal approach, but the high -temperature scrubbing stage is replaced with a 

two -compartment elec trochemical cell that operates at a moderate temperature. During the EMAR process, a CO 2-

rich amine stream from the absorber is introduced to the anode compartment of an electrochemical cell, in which 

copper ions are electrochemically generated from a copp er plate anode (i.e., Cu 0 → Cu 2+ + 2e −) to drive the dissociation 

of amine -CO 2 toward CO 2 desorption (i.e., Cu 2+ + n amine -CO 2 → Cu(amine) n2+ + n CO 2). Once the gas is flashed 

off through a flash tank located after the anode compartment, the CO 2-lean strea m is regenerated via the 

electrochemical plating of copper on the cathode from the copper -amine complex (i.e., Cu(amine) n2+ + 2e − → Cu 0 +

n amine). Therefore, CO 2 capture and release can be achieved by chemical absorption followed by electrochemical 

regene ration of the abso rbent through the EMAR process. 

To determine the best combination of metals and amines for the EMAR process, a systematic analysis of several 

transition metals together with monoamines, diamines, and polyamines was performed. A combinatio n of copper as 

the metal and a mixture of ethylenediamine (EDA) and a minoethylethanolamine (AEEA) as the amine absorbent was 

found to be the most effective chemistry for the EMAR cycle, mainly due to the high stability constant of the copper 

complexation with the amines , a suitable reduction potential of the complex, high CO 2 capacity, good reversibility, 

high electrochemic al performance, and low cost. Based on this chemistry , we scaled up the EMAR process to a level 

at which continuous CO 2 capture and desorption from flue gas was achieved over longer than 10 0 hours. We also 

showed that electrical energy can be efficiently t ranslated to CO 2 desorption, with an electron utilization (i.e., moles 

of CO 2 desorbed per mole of electrons transferred) of ~0.8 over more than 50 cycles.  To date, the EMAR system is 

the most advanced and scaled -up system in terms of gas desorption rate a nd efficiency among all the electrochemical 

processes developed for CO 2 capture from flue gas streams. 

Keywords: climate change; CO 2 capture; flue gas; electrochemical process; EMAR; scaled -up system; long -term 

experiment Gas Diffusion Electrode Setups: 

# A New Testing Platform For Electrocatalyst Evaluation 

S. Alinejad a, J. Quinson b, J. Schröder a, J. K. Kirkensgaard c, M. Gálvez -Vázquez a, P. Broekman na, M. Arenz a 

> a

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern , Freiestrasse 3, 3012 Bern, Switzerland  

> b

Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark  

> c

Department of Food Science, University of Copenhag en, Rolighedsvej 26, 1958 Frederiksberg, Denmark 

Shima.alinejadkhabaz@dcb.unibe.ch 

Ac curate testing platform and efficient electrochemical characterization method play a key role in develop-

ment of electrocatalysts in fuel cells and CO 2 electrolyzers . Currentl y, two approaches are well -established :

rotating disk electrode (RDE) or H-type half -cell setups with liquid electrolyte a s well as single -cell tests 

with membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) [1] . The former has the disadvantage of mass transport limita-

tio ns , which significantly limits the “accessible reaction rate” that can be analyzed, and the latter r equire s

specialized equipment and large quantities of catalyst, making th em less ideal for early -stage development 

[2] . Recently we introduced a gas diffusi on electrode (GDE) setup to overcome th ese limitation s [3]. This 

setup allows the investigation of the electrocatalysts under realistic conditions so it can be consid erd as a link 

to bridge fundamental and applied investigations . In the presented work, we discuss the application of GDEs 

for investigating the stability of high surface area fuel cell catalyst s under realistic reaction conditions in 

acidi c [4] and alkaline media . In addition, we show the identical location transmission electron microscopy 

(IL -TEM) images which were taken before and after the accelerated degradation test (ADT) . Moreover, we 

implemented the characterization of the catalysts by small -angle X -ray scattering (SAXS), which establishes 

the particle size distribution in the catalyst la yer. In contrast to IL -TEM, SAXS is an integral method which 

probes changes in the entire catalyst layer before and after performing the ADT [5]. Fur thermore, we 

demonstrate how the carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO 2RR) can be studied with sim ple minor changes 

to the setup [6]. 

Fig.1 The sketch of the GDE cell ( le ft ) and IL -TEM micrographs of a commercial 20 wt. % Pt/C cata-

lyst (HiSPEC 3000) before and after load -cycle ADT tr eatment for 1200 cycles at 60 °C (right ).

References: 

[1] T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stab, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb and R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. 

Soc., 1998 , 145, 2354 –2358. 

[2] B. A. Pinaud, A. Bonakdarpour, L. Daniel, J. Sharman and D. P. Wilkinson, J. El ectrochem. Soc., 2017 ,

164, F321 –F327 .

[3] M. Inaba, A. Wes tergaard Jensen, G. W. Sievers,  M. Escudero -Escribano, A. Zana and M. Arenz.  Energy 

Environ . Sci., 2018 , 00, 1 -7.

[4] S. A linejad, M. Inaba, J. Schröder, J. Du, J. Quinson, A. Zana, M. Arenz . J. Ph ys. Energy , 2020, 2, 

024003. 

[5] J. Speder, A. Zana, I. Spanos, J. J.K. Kirkensgaard, K. Mortensen, M. Hanzlik, M. Arenz . J. Power 

Sources . 2014 , 261 , 14 –22 .

[6] M. Gálvez -Vázquez, S. Alinejad , H. Hu, Y. Hou, P. Moreno -García, A. Zana, G. K.H. Wiberg, P. 

Broekmann, M. Arenz. Chimia, 2019 , 73, 922 -927 .Acid mine drainage treatment by means of bioelectrochemical 

# technology 

Luis Fernando Le on-Fernandez , José Villaseñor, Francisco Jesús Fernández 

Dept . of Chemical Engineering. Faculty of Chemical Sciences and Technologies.  Ciudad R eal. Spain 

Av da.  Camilo J os é Cela S/N , 130 71 , Ciudad Real , S pain 

LFernando.Leon @u clm.es 

Acid mine drainage (AMD) is an environmental problem mainly associated with the mining activity. 

AMDs are characterized by high concentrations of a wide variety of metals, high con centration o f

sulphates and low pH. 

This work has studied the sequential cathodic removal of four metals (Cu 2+ 500ppm, Fe 3+ 500ppm, Ni 2+ 

50ppm and Sn 2+ 50ppm) from a simulated AMD by using a bioelectrochemical system, first working as a 

microbial fuel cel l (MFC) and then as microbial electrolysis cell (MEC). 

Ope rating as MFC, Fe 3+ was reduced to Fe 2+ and Cu was deposited onto the cathode. All the Cu was 

recovered after 4 days and generating about 0.12 mA/cm2. When operating as MEC the Fe 2+ , Ni 2+ and 

Sn 2+ were simulta neously removed by fixing the cathode potential at -0.7 V vs Ag/AgCl, getting a current 

density of 1.75 mA/cm2. This stage recovered all the Sn, 60% of the Fe and 75% of the Ni in 3 days. 

Financial support from projects EQC2018 -004240 -P, SBPLY /19/180501/0 00254 “Rehabilitación de 

entornos abandonados de minería metálica y recuperación de recursos mediante tecnologías bio -

electroquímicas” and from the FPI grant to L.F. León through the reference BES -2017 -081718 from the 

Spanish Ministry of Econom y, Industry and Competitiveness are gratefully acknowledged. .

Fi gure 1. Scheme of the AMD treatment and sequential metal recovery process .Enhancement of the cathodic dechlorination of 2,4 -DCP in 

# bioelectrochemical systems 

Luis Fernando Le on-Fernandez , Ignacio Ramos , José Villaseñor, Francisco Jesús Fernández 

Dept . of Chemical Engineering. Faculty of Chemical Sciences and Technologies . Ciuda d R eal. Spain 

Avda. Camilo Jos é Cela S/N , 130 71 , Ciudad Real , S pain 

LFernando.Leon @u clm.es 

The use of organochlorinated pesticides and herbicides to enhance the production of crops may produce 

soil an d groundwater pollution. 2,4 -dichlorophenol (2,4 -DCP) i s o ne of these compounds, mainly used as 

precursor of 2,4 -dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4 -D), a commercial herbicide. In this work, a novel 

treatment of 2,4 -DCP by using bioelectrochemical systems (BES s) was studied. 

This work studies the influence of the ca thode pH and energy input on the electroreductive 

hydrodechlorination of 2,4 -dichlorophenol (24DCP) in an abiotic cathode. When operating as BES as 

Microbial Fuel Cell (MFC), the results showed that more acid cathod e pH enhances the electrocataly tic 

hyd rod echlorination (ECH), reaching a total dechlorination after 72 h. Also, ECH was further enhanced 

by operating under Microbial Electrolysis Cell (MEC) mode, where the cathode was poised towards more 

negative potential s and higher current densities were ac hie ved. The dechlorination was directly linked to 

the toxicity reduction and biodegradability increment, allowing to a subsequent biological treatment of 

the effluent generated which reduces the treatment cost of this kind of recalcitrant pollutants 

Finan cia l support from projects EQC2018 -004240 -P, CTM2016 -76197 -R (AEI/FEDER, UE) from the 

Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness and European Union and from the FPI grant 

to L.F. León through the referenc e BES -2017 -081718 from the Spa nish Mi nis try of Economy, Industry 

and Competitiveness are gratefully acknowledged. 

These instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper 

column and margin measurements a re indicated. 

Fi gure 1. Scheme of the bio -assiste d electro reductive dechlorination process .Electrochemical P53 Gene Detection of DNA by Formation of 

# Efficient Electron Transfer Pathways through Adsorbing 

# Gold Nanoparticles to DNA Modified Electrodes 

Jianmei Wang 1, Jin He 2, Hong Zhou 3, Jing Liu 3, and Wenrong Yang 1 

> 1

School of Life and Environme ntal Sciences, Deakin University  

> 2

Department of Physics, Florida International University  

> 3

College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology 

Geelong 3217, VIC, Australia 

jianmei@deakin.edu.au 

Abstract 

P53 gene  plays a vital role in regulating cellular processes and its  accurate quantification  is of  great 

significance  to the early screening of cancers .1, 2 Here, we proposed a simple and label -free 

electrochemical DNA biosensor based on the gold nanoparticles ( GNPs ) mediated e lectron transfer (ET) 

across different DNA monolayers modified on (gold electrode) GE surface and we also introduce nicking 

endonuclease -assisted signal amplification (NESA ) into the bio -sensing system. Additionally, hairpin 

DNA (HPDNA) was first employed in our work for better understanding of the how the different status of 

DNA strands monolayers on electrode surface affect GNPs mediated ET process. The working principle 

of p53 gene biosensor is illustrated in Scheme 1. Specifically, compared to single -st rand DNA (ssDNA ),

the HPDNA is a relatively rigid structure 3 which can prevent the adsorption of GNPs onto the GE surface, 

such blocking events cannot introduce enhanced ET between electrode and redox species. However, the 

nicking endonuclease could bind to and nick the recognition site embedded into the loop portion of the 

HP after its hybridization with p53 gene. After nicking, the HP would be cleaved into two pieces. The 

resulting ssDNA on the GE could adsorb GNPs because of the electrostatic interaction between gold and 

nitrogen -containing bases. 4 Thus, the negative electrochemical species [Fe(CN) 6]3−/4− can transfer 

electrons to electrode through adsorbed GNPs. The charge -transfer resistance ( Rct ) will dramatically 

decrease with the increase of cleavage of HPs. Consequently, the change of Rct is dir ectly proportional to 

the hybridization of p53 gene. Additionally, with the assistant of nicking endonuclease, p53 gene can be 

reused and hugely lower the detection limit. The proposed biosensor toward p53 DNA achieves a 

detection limit of 0.0835 fM with a linear calibration range of 0.1 fM ~ 1 fM. Moreover, the prepared 

biosensor also exhibited excellent sequence selectivity and reproducibility, demonstrating this strategy 

was promising for enormous potential application in clinical diagnostics and biomedi cal research. 

Scheme 1 . Schematic Diagram of the NESA coupled GNPs electrochemical biosensor for the detection of 

p53 gene. 

1. Nigro, J. M.; Baker, S. J.; Preisinger, A. C.; Jessup, J. M.; Hostell er, R.; Cleary, K.; Signer, S. H.; 

Davidson, N.; Baylin, S.; Devilee, P., Mutations in the p53 gene occur in diverse human tumour types. 

Nature 1989, 342 (6250), 705. 

2. Muller, P. A.; Vousden, K. H., p53 mutations in cancer. Nat. Cell Biol. 2013, 15 (1), 2. 

3. Goddard, N. L.; Bonnet, G .; Krichevsky, O.; Libchaber, A., Sequence dependent rigidity of single 

stranded DNA. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 85 (11), 2400. 

4. Yang, Y.; Shu, Y.; Li, G., Enhanced charge transfer by gold nanoparticle at DNA modified electrode 

and its application to label -free DNA detection. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6 (10), 7579 -7584. Development of a portable electroanalytical method using nickel 

# modified screen -printed carbon electrode for ethinylestradiol 

# determination in organic fertilizers 

Rafael de Q. Ferreira a, Luiz R. G. Silva a, José G. A. Rodrigues b, Juliana P. Franco a, Layla P. Santos a,

Eliane D'Elia b, Wanders on Romão a, c

> a

Chemistry  Department , Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, 29075 -910, Vitória, ES, Bra zil 

> b

Chemistry Institute , Universidade Fede ral do Rio de Janeiro, 21941 -909, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Bra zil 

> c

Instituto Fe deral do Espírito Santo , 29106 -010, Vil a Velha, ES, Bra zil ;

E-mail  address : rafael.q.ferreira@ufes.br 

Urine and struvite are promising organic ferti lizers that can replace conventional fertili zers 1. However, 

thes e fertilizers may contain some em erg ing organic contaminants, such as hormone. One of the most 

common ho rmones is the ethinylestradiol , which can be found in aquatic environment s and can cause 

several changes in living organisms, includin g deregulation of fis h endocrine glands, which can pro mot e

the feminization of some species 2. Thus, the present work developed a fast, sen sitive, and portable 

met hod for determining ethi nylestradiol in urine and struvite, using square wave voltammetry (SWV ) and 

screen-printed carbon electrodes modified with nickel film (S PC E-Ni) .

SPCE modifica tion was performed by cyclic voltammetry (CV ) and the variables of interest (number of 

cycles ( NC), scan rate (SR) and nickel ion concentration ([Ni 2+ ])) were optimi zed using factorial design 

23 and central compound design (CCD). The appli cation of factor ial design demonstrated that the 

varia bles NC and [Ni 2+ ] are significant . Therefore , th ese varia bles were 

submitted to CCD planning (SR was set at 5 V s −1). Fig . 1 sh ows the results 

obtained by CCD , the optimal values chosen for NC and [Ni 2+ ] were 1000 

an d 9.4 mmol L −1, respectively .

The SPCE -Ni and SPCE were characterized by Raman spectroscop y, to 

identify the modification performed on their surfaces . Fig. 2 shows Raman 

peaks at 304, 450, 473, 490, 526, and 552 cm −1, wh at can be attributed to the 

presence of Ni (OH) 2 and NiOOH 3,4. The 

results demonstrate the possible presence 

of different nicke l compounds on the 

sur face of the SPCE, especially NiOOH which has electro catalytic 

activity in the oxidation of organic molecules 5. The pH effect on the 

voltammetric response of ethinyl estradiol was evaluated by CV , in the 

pH range of 3.0 to 10.0, using KCl and BR buffe rs in the presence of 

10.0 μmol L −1 of the analyte. The res ults demonstrate that 0.1 mol L −1

BR buffer solution (pH 8.0) was the best support electrolyte. The 

optimization of the SWV operational parameters was also performed 

by factorial design (2 3) and CCD . The optimal values found were: 10 

mV (step potential ), 40 mV (modulation amplitude ) and 20 Hz (frequency ).

The analytical curve was constructed in a linear range of 0.23 to 30.0 μmol L −1

(Fig 3). The method presented a limit of detection (LOD) and quantification of

0.067 and 0.228 μmol L −1, respectively , an d R 2 of 0.996. The determination of 

ethinylestradiol in struvite and urine samples indicated that the concentration 

of the hormone is below of LOD in both . The reco very test s in different 

matrices showed values between 93.9 and 107.5%, demonstrating that ther e is 

no matrix effect. Based on all of these results , the developed procedure can be 

considered a viable and sustainab le alternative to promote green chemistry in 

the determina tion of the eth inylestradiol in urine and struvite .

Acknowledg ement : FAPES/ SEAG (nº 721/2016) and CAPES (financial code 001) 

References 

1. Fatunbi, A.O. , World Appl. Sci. J ., v. 6, p. 637 -643 , 2009. 

2. Muna, G.W ., et al ., Electroanalysis , V. 26, p. 2145 -2151 , 2 014. 

3. Kostecki, R., McLarnon, F. J. Electrochem. , Soc. V. 144, p. 48 5-493 , 1997. 

4. Kett af, S. et al . SN Applied Sci ., v. 23, 2018 .

5. Triv edi , D. et al ., Sensor Actuat B -Chem ., v. 270 , p. 298 -303 , 2018 .Electric double -layer structure and adsorption of halides on Au (111) electrode  in organic 

## solvent - SEIRAS, XPS and EIS   

> Ahmed S. Shatla , Pawel P. Bawol ,Helmut Baltruschat *
> Universitaet Bonn, Roemerstrasse 164, 53117 Bonn, Germany
> e-mail: Baltruschat@uni -bonn.de

Specific adsorption of ions  on  the electrode surface has a significant impact on the electric double 

layer (EDL) structure and the kinetics of electrode processes 1. This has a substantial effect o n

many disciplines, such as corrosion, galvanic deposition, electrosynthesis , and electrocatalysis 2.

The ion adsorption at aqueous solution interfaces 3 on various metals has been examined 

intensively, but much fewer studies from non -aqueous solvents have been conducted 4. Such 

studies are important because t he metal -solvent 5 and ion -solvent interaction energy 6 depend on 

the chemical nature of the solvent. 

In this study , three organic solvents (propylene carbonate (PC), diglyme (DG), and dimethyl 

sulfoxide (DMSO)) were investigated for the adsorption of iodide and bromide ions on Au(111) 

single crystal electrode. This analysis was conducted by using differential capacity me asurements, 

cyclic voltammetry (CV), Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS),  surface -enhanced 

infrared spectroscopy (SEIRAS) , and  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy  (XPS) te chniques. 

During SEIRAS measurements, a bipolar band is observed at around 1800 cm −1 which correlates 

to the C -O-vibration of PC as reported on silver  electrodes from SERS measurements 7. Its 

intensity enhances with going to negative potentials with shifting to lower wavenumbers because 

of increasing field and highly orientation of PC molecules . While t he presence of iodide in the 

electrolyte results in the shift in the pzc in the negative direction , which leads to stronger alignment 

of PC molecules in the d irection of positive potentials . Anion adsorption  charge in DMSO is 

approximately half the charge in propylene carbonate. Quantification of the adsorbed iodide 

amount from XPS spectra co nfirms the calculated adsorption charge from the CVs . T he magnitude 

of anion adsorption on Au(111) electrode in creases in the series of halides I - ˃ Br - due to better 

solvation 8 and in the solvent order PC ˃ DG ˃ DMSO.                 

> [1] V.V. Emets, B. B. Damaskin, J . Electroanal. Chem. 712 (2014) 62 –73
> [2] O. M. Magnussen, Chemical Reviews 102 (2002) 679 -725.
> [3] J. Lipkowski, Z. Shi, A. Chen, B. Pettinger and C. Bilger, Electrochim. Acta 43 (1998) 2875 -2888.

[4] A. S. Shatla, A. A. Abd -El -Latif, S. Ayata, D. Demir, H. Baltruschat, Electrochim. Acta 334 (2020) 135556. 

[5] V.V. Emets, B. B. Damaskin, J. Electroanal. Chem. 600 ( 2007 ) 191 -204. 

[6] B. G. Cox, , G. R. Hedwig, et al. Australian Journal of Chemistry 27( 1974 ) 477 -501.       

> [7] Hill, I.; Irish, D.; Atkinson, G. Langmuir 2 (1986 )752 -757.
> [8]M. D. Levi, A. V. Shlepakov, B. B. Damaskin and I. A. Bagotskaya, J. electroanal. Chem. 138 (1982) 1-
> 27.

# New insights into the mechanism of coreactant electrogenerated 

# chemiluminescence facilitating enhanced bioanalytical performance 

Giovanni V alenti ,a Alessandra Zanut, a Andrea Fiorani, a Sofia Canola , a Sara Rebeccani, a Massimo 

Marcaccio , a Stefania Rapino , a Antonio Barbon , b Fabrizia Negri , a Francesco Paolucci a

a) Department of Chemistry “G. Ciamician”, University of Bologna and INSTM, via Selmi 2, 40126 

Bologna, Italy .

b) University of Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy. 

g.valenti@unibo.it 

Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) is a leading technique in bioanalysis.[1] Since the excited species are 

produced with an electrochemical stimulus rather than with a light excitation source, ECL displays 

improved signal -to -noise ratio compared to photolumin escence, with minimized effects due to light 

scattering and luminescence background. The most challenging breakthrough in the development of 

analytical electrochemiluminescence (ECL) applications was reported from Bard and co workers that 

presented for the first time the generation of ECL with a coreactant.[1] This finding opened the 

application of ECL to large literature and transformed ECL from an academic curiosity to a real 

application and industrial success. In this context, the only real used material s for the ECL analytical and 

commercial application are tripropylamine (TPrA) as sacrificial ”oxidative -reductant” coreactant and 

Ruthenium(II) -tris(2,2’ -bipyridine) ([Ru(bpy) 3]2+ ) as emitting species. In this case the mechanism for the 

ECL generation was proposed by Bard and still nowadays the only one accepted.[2],[3] 

Here we show an additional, and very efficient, mechanism pathway for the generation of ECL by using 

TPrA as cor eactant. Thanks to the combination between ECL and microscopy we experimental ly prove 

the alternative mechanism with the standard [Ru(bpy) 3]2+ /TPrA system.[3],[4] These mechanistic findings 

allow us to propose alternative amines as coreactant enhancing the ECL signal of more than one order of 

magnitude. 

The reported results, besid es contributing to a better understanding of the mechanisms operating in the 

chemiluminescence generation, also pave the way for the development of very highly efficient ECL 

corea ctants for ultrasensitive bioanalysis .[5] 

[1] Miao W.; Choi J. P.; Bard A. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002 , 124 , 14478 -14485 

[2] Sentic M.; Milutinovic M.; Kanoufi F.; Manojlovic D.; Arbault S.; Sojic N., Chem. Sci. 2014 , 5, 2568 -

2572 

[3] Valenti G.; Scarabino S.; Goudeau B.; Lesch A.; Jović M.; Villani E.; Sentic M.; Rapino S.; Arba ult 

S.; Paolucci F.; Sojic N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139 , 16830 -16837. 

[4] a) Valenti G.; Zangheri M.; Sansaloni S. E.; Mirasoli M.; Penicaud A.; Roda A.; Paolucci F., Chem. 

Eur. J. , 2015 , 21 , 12640 –12645; b) Zanut A.; Fiorani A.; Rebeccani S.; Kesarkar S.; Valenti G. , Anal. 

Bioanal. Chem ., 2019 , 411 (19), 4375 -4382. 

[5]  Zanut A. at al  Nature Commun.  20 20 , 11 , 2668 Regulating Li -Ion Migration in Solid -State Electrolytes for Li Metal 

# Anodes 

Chen -Zi Zhao , Xin -Bing Cheng, Rui Zhang, Qiang Zhang* 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University 

Beijing 100084, China 

zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Lithium (Li) metal batteries are strongly considered one of the most promising candidates for next -

generation rechargeable batteries due to their high theoretical specific capacity and low reduction 

potential. However, Li metal anodes are suffering from limited cycle life, low cycling efficiency, and 

severe safety concerns resulting from sharp Li dendrites and electrolyte degradation. 

The uncontrollable Li dendrite growth caused by the uneven distribution of Li ions is an extremely 

complicated issue coupled with the t ransport of anions, cations and electrons, as well as the chemical and 

electrochemical reactions at the anode -electrolyte interphase. In terms of the ion migration, space -charge 

theory indicates that the electrolyte is divided into a quasi -neutral region a nd a space -charge region. The 

quasi -neutral region approaches the cathode side, at which the ion transfer is governed by diffusion. In 

contrast, when ions travel close to the anode side, the ion transport is mainly driven by the electric field, 

leaving a s pace -charge region that accounts for ramified Li metal growth. Consequently, it is rewarding to 

design electrolytes that can regulate the ion distribution (including both Li cations and the counter anions) 

to inhibit Li dendrite growths. 

Immobilizing anio n has been theoretically proved to influence cation distribution, where a portion of 

immobilized anions (even as small as 10%) contribute to stable Li electrodeposition. Here, we develop an 

anion -immobilized solid -state composite electrolyte for Li metal anodes. Garnet -type 

Li 6.75 La 3Zr 1.75 Ta 0.25 O12 (LLZTO) ceramic particles are well dispersed in a polymer matrix to synthesize a 

polyethylene oxide (PEO) –lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) –LLZTO (PLL) solid 

electrolyte. In contrast to routine electrolytes with mobile anions, the PLL solid electrolyte contributes to 

effective immobilization of anions for uniform ion distribution and dendrite -free Li deposition. Chemical 

and mechanical interactions between ceramic particles and the polymer matrix result in reduced PEO 

crystallinity and pinned TFSI−anions, enabling relatively fast Li + conduction. We further demonstrate the 

application of this flexible membrane in all –solid -state LiFePO 4 (LFP) || Li and LiNi 0.5 Co 0.2 Mn 0.3 O2

(NCM) || Li batteries. 

Moreover, ion migration in batteries can be analog ized to the fluid transportation in packed towers in the 

field of chemical industry. Redistributors are used to intensify the heat and mass transfer processes in a 

packed tower. Solid -state electrolyte LLZTO, with abundant 3D ion conduction channels, can a ct as a 

redistributor to regulate Li -ion distribution. We propose a concept of ion redistributors to eliminate 

dendrites by redistributing Li ions with LLZTO coated polypropylene (PP) separators in Li metal 

batteries. The standard deviation of ion concentr ation beneath the LLZTO composite separator is 13 times 

less than that beneath the routine PP separator. This approach enables a high specific capacity for 

LiFePO 4|| Li pouch cells and prolonged cycle life span of 800 hours for Li || Li pouch cells. This s trategy 

is facile and efficient in regulating Li -ion deposition by separator modifications and is a universal method 

to protect alkali metal anodes in rechargeable batteries. 

References :

[1] Zhao C -Z; Zhao Q; Liu X; Zheng J; Stalin S; Zhang Q; Archer LA. Adv. Mater. 2020 , 32, 1905629. 

[2] Zhao C -Z; Chen P -Y; Zhang R; Chen X; Li B -Q; Zhang X -Q; Cheng X -B; Zhang Q. Sci. Adv. 2018 ,

4, eaat3446. 

[3] Zhao C -Z; Zhang X -Q; Cheng X -B; Zhang R; Xu R; Chen P -Y; Peng H -J; Huang J -Q; Zhang Q. 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.A. 2017 , 114, 11069. 

[4 ] Zhao C -Z; Zhang Q. Joule , 2019 , 3, 1575 .

[5] Zhao C -Z; Duan H; Huang J -Q; Zhang J; Zhang Q; Guo Y -G; Wan L -J. Sci. China Chem. 2019 , 62, 

1286. Oxygen reduction reaction on rough massive gold electrodes – Surface 

# roughness as adjusting screw 

Andreas Köllisch -Mirbach , Helmut Baltruschat 

Rheinische Friedrich -Wilhelms -Universität Bonn 

Römerstraße 164, 53117 Bonn, Germany 

koellisch@pc.uni -bonn.de 

Surface roughness is a parameter, which is scarcely addressed in current publications , d espite the fact, that the 

surface structure can strongly affect the product distribution of an electrochemical reaction. In this work, we show 

the change in ORR product distribution in Li + and Ca 2+ containing dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) on gold . I n case 

of Ca 2+ containing DMSO we furthermore investigate the possibility of using the surface roughness as tool to get 

additional insights into the reaction kinetics. This investigation is supported by methods like Differential 

electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) generator collector 

experiments. It is already known that on gold electrodes in Li + containing DMSO soluble superoxide is formed 

prior to insoluble Li 2O2 during ORR. [1 -3] We found, that in case of Li + containing DMSO on gold electr odes, the 

amount of generated O 2- is constant for all roughness factors (f R) during a cycle , while the amount of insoluble 

Li 2O2 increases linearly with f R corresponding to a slope of approximately 660 μ𝐶 

> 𝑐𝑚 ²

, finally leading to a complete 

deactivation of the electrode . In case of Ca 2+ containing DMSO a continuous generation of soluble superoxide ,

even at CaO 2-saturated electrodes is already known ond gold electrodes .[4, 5] We furthermore found diffusion 

limited formation of soluble CaO 2 on rough Au electrodes. From the change in half –wave pot ential with electrode 

roughness, we were able to estimate the transfer coefficient  = 0.56, while the usual approach using the Tafel 

slope from the current voltage relationship gives  = , both for z = 1. Th is indicat es a one electron process as 

rate determining step for the ORR in Ca 2+ containing DMSO. 

[1] C. Bondue, P. Reinsberg, A. A. Abd -El -Latif, H. Baltruschat, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 

2015 , 17 , 25593. 

[2] Q. Yu, S. Ye, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2015 , 119 , 12236. 

[3] C. J. Bondue, M. Hegemann, C. Molls, E. Thome, H. Baltruschat, Journal of the Electrochemical 

Society 2016 , 163 , A1765. 

[4] P. Reinsberg, C. J. Bondue, H. Baltruschat, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2016 , 120 , 22179. 

[5] P. Reinsberg, A. A. Abd -El -Latif, H. Baltruschat, Electrochimica Acta 2018 , 273 , 424. Voltage -Controlled Formation of Silver Nanocap on a Gold 

# Micro electrode  for Efficient SERS of M onolayer Molecules 

Jianmei Wang 1, Jin He 2 and Wenrong Yang 1 

> 1

School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Deakin University  

> 2

Department of Physics, Florida Int ernational University 

Geelong 3217, VIC, Australia 

jianmei@deakin.edu.au 

Abstract 

Understanding of the chemical interaction and junction formation  under  molecule level brings remarkable 

interest to molecular electronics and molecular plasmonics, 1, 2 but still remains e lusive. In this work, we 

studied the effect of the surface chemistry of the collector electrode on nanoparticle (NP ) collisions and 

the molecular junctions through simultaneous electrochemical and surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy 

(SERS ) measurements. D ifferent plasmonic molecular junctions were formed through the random 

collision events of silver NPs (AgNPs) in electrolyte with a gold micro electrode (G ME) mo dified by 

benzenethiols with different terminal groups ( -SH, -COOH and CH 3). As shown in the Schem e 1, when 

we applied a positive bias to a G ME, due to the  faradic oxidation of AgNPs, typical current spikes can be 

observed when a AgNP collides on the electrode surface. However, when negative bias was applied at the 

electrode,  the AgNP s could stick on t he electrode surface and formed the AgNP -on -GME geometry. The 

AgNP -on -GME geometry is analogous to the widely used “NP -on -Mirror” (NPoM) geometry, 3 in which 

extremely high Raman signal enhancement and single molecule sensitivity has been achieved due to the 

gap surface plasmon mode. 4 Moreover, different from NPoM approach, continuous bias c an be applied in 

the AgNP -on -GME configuration. Using time -resolved electrochemical current measurement and SERS ,

we successfully observed the effect of various electrode surface chemistry on the transient 

electrochemical current changes and the evolution of newly formed molecular junctions through AgNP -

GME collision events. 

Scheme 1 . Schematic diagram for the voltage -controlled formation of silver nanocap for efficient SERS 

of probe molecules on G ME. 

1. Zhu , W.; Esteban, R.; Borisov, A. G.; Baumberg, J. J.; Nordlander, P.; Lezec, H. J.; 

Aizpurua, J.; Crozier, K. B., Quantum mechanical effects in plasmonic structures with subnanometre 

gaps. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 (1), 1 -14. 

2. Zaleski, S.; Wilson, A. J.; Mattei, M.; Chen, X.; Goubert, G.; Cardinal, M. F.; Willets, K. A.; 

Van Duyne, R. P., Investigating nanoscale electrochemistry with surface -and tip -enhanced Raman 

spectroscopy. Acc . Chem. Res. 2016, 49 (9), 2023 -2030. 

3. Park, W. -H.; Kim, Z. H., Char ge transfer enhancement in the SERS of a single molecule. Nano 

Lett . 2010, 10 (10), 4040 -4048. 

4. Sigle, D. O.; Kasera, S.; Herrmann, L. O.; Palma, A.; de Nijs, B.; Benz, F.; Mahajan, S.; 

Baumberg, J. J.; Scherman, O. A., Observing single molecules complexing with cucurbit [7] uril through 

nanogap surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem . Lett . 2016, 7 (4), 704 -710. Lithium -Sulfur Batteries : From Electrochemistry to Materials 

# Practices 

Qiang Zhang 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 

*zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Among various promising candidates with high energy densitie s, lithium -sulfur (Li -S) batteries with a 

high theoretical capacity and energy density are highly attractive; 1-2 while the commercial application of 

Li -S batteries still faces some persistent obstacles, such as the low electrical conductivity of sulfur and 

lithium sulfide and the dissolution of polysulfides. The introduction of nanocarbon into the field of Li -S

batteries sheds a light on the efficient utilization of sulfur by improving the conductivity of the 

composites and restraining the shuttle of polysu lfides. In this presentation, the concept for the rational 

design of nanocarbon for energy storage is explained. The advances in the use of advanced energy 

materials in the cathode, separator, and anode is explained. 3-14 New insights on the relationship be tween 

the nanostructure and the electrochemical performance are presented. 

References 

1)  Peng HJ, Cheng XB, Huang JQ, Zhang Q.  Adv Energy Mater  2017, 7, 1700260. 

2)  Cheng XB, Zhang R, Zhao CZ, Zhang Q.  Chem Rev  2017, 117, 10403 

3)  Peng  HJ, Huang JQ, Z hang Q.  Chem S oc Rev  2017, 46, 5237 

4)  Chen WJ, Li BQ, Zhao CX, Zhao M, Yuan TQ, Sun RC, Huang JQ, Zhang Q.  Angew Chem Int Ed 

2020, doi: 10.1002/ane.201912701 

5)  Cheng XB, Yan C, Chen X, Guan C, Huang JQ, Peng HJ, Zhang R, Yang ST, Zhang Q.  Chem  2017, 

2, 258. 

6)  Zhang XQ, Cheng  XB, Chen X, Yan C, Zhang Q.  Adv Funct Mater  2017, 27, 1605989. 

7) Peng HJ, Huang JQ, Liu XY, Cheng XB, Xu WT, Zhao CZ, Wei F, Zhang Q. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 

139, 8458. 

8) Hou TZ, Xu WT, Chen X, Peng HJ, Huang JQ, Zhang Q. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017, 56, 8178 

9) Zhang R, Chen XR, Chen X, Cheng XB, Zhang XQ, Yan C, Zhang Q. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017, 56, 

7764. 

10) Zhang XQ, Xu R, Chen X, Cheng XB, Zhang R, Chen XR, Zhang Q. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017, 56, 

14207. 

11) Kong L, Chen X, Li BQ, Peng HJ, Huang JQ, Xie J, Zhang Q. Adv Mater 2018 , 30, 1705219. 

12) Li BQ, Peng HJ, Chen X, Zhang SY, Xie J, Zhao CX, Zhang Q. CCS Chem 2019, 1, 128 -137 

13) Yan C, Zhang XQ, Huang JQ, Liu QB, Zhang Q. Trends Chem 2019, 1, 693 -704 

14) Li BQ, Kong L, Zhao CX, Jin Q, Chen X, Peng HJ, Qin JL, Chen JX, Yuan H, Zhang Q, H uang JQ. 

InfoMat 2019, 1, 533 -541. Emerging Energy Chemistry of Li Metal Anode for Safe Batteries 

Xiang Chen, Chen -Zi Zhao, Xin -Bing Cheng, Rui Zhang, Xiao -Ru Chen, 

Bo -Quan Li, Hong Yuan, Yu -Xing Yao, Qiang Zhang* 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 

*zhang -qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

Li metal is considered as the “Holy Grail” of energy storage systems. The bright prospects give rise to 

worldwide interests in the metallic Li for the next generation energy storage systems, including highly 

considered rechargeable metallic Li batteries such as Li -O2 and Li -sulfur (Li –S) batteries. However, the 

formation of Li dendrites induced by inhomogeneous distribution of current density on the Li metal anode 

and the concentration gradient of Li ions at the electro lyte/electrode interface is a crucial issue that 

hinders the practical demonstration of high -energy -density metallic Li batteries. 

In this talk, we review energy chemistry of lithium metal anode in safe batteries. Firstly, the importance 

and dilemma of Li metal anode issues in lithium –sulfur batteries are underscored, aiming to arouse the 

attentions to Li metal anode protection. Specific attentions are paid to the surface chemistry of Li metal 

anode. Next, the proposed strategies to stabilize solid electro lyte interface and protect Li metal anode are 

included. Finally, a general conclusion and a perspective on the current limitations, as well as 

recommended future research directions of Li metal anode in rechargeable batteries are presented. 

References 

[1] Che ng XB, Zhang R, Zhao CZ, Zhang Q*. Chemical Reviews 2017, 117, 10403 –10473. 

[2] Cheng XB, Huang JQ, Zhang Q *. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 2018, 165, A6058 -

A6072. 

[3] Chen X, Shen X, Li B, Peng HJ, Cheng XB, Li BQ, Zhang XQ, Huang JQ, Zhang Q *.

Angewandt e Chemie International Edition 2018, 57, 734 -737 

[4] Zhang XQ, Chen X, Cheng XB, Li BQ, Shen X, Yan C, Huang JQ, Zhang Q *. Angewandte 

Chemie International Edition 2018, 57, 5301 -5305 

[5] Zhang R, Chen XR, Chen X, Cheng XB, Zhang XQ, Yan C, Zhang Q*. Angewandte Che mie 

Interational Edition 2017, 56, 7764 –7768 

[6] Peng HJ, Huang JQ, Liu XY, Cheng XB, Xu WT, Zhao CZ, Wei F, Zhang Q*. Journal of the 

American Chemical Society 2017, 139 (25), 8458 –8466. 

[7] Hou LP, Zhang XQ, Li BQ, Zhang Q *. Angewandte Chemie International Editi on 2020, DOI: 

10.1002/anie.202002711 .

[8] Cheng XB, Yan C, Chen X, Guan C, Huang JQ, Peng HJ, Zhang R, Yang ST, Zhang Q*. Chem 

2017, 2, 258 -270. 

[9] Zhang XQ, Cheng XB, Chen X, Yan C, Zhang Q*. Advanced Functional Materials 2017, 27, 

1605989. 

[10] Zhang XQ, Li T, Li B Q, Zhang R, Shi P, Yan C, Huang JQ, Zhang Q*. Angewandte Chemie 

International Edition 2020, 59, 3252 -3257 .

[11] Yan C, Zhang XQ, Huang JQ, Liu QB, Zhang Q. Trends in Chemistry 2019, 1, 693 -704. 

[12] Shi P, Cheng XB, Li T, Zhang R, Liu H, Yan C, Zhang XQ, Huang JQ, Zhang Q *. Advanced 

Materials 2019, 31, 1902785 .

[13] Cheng XB, Zhao CZ, Yao YX, Liu H, Zhang Q *. Chem 2019, 5, 74 -96. .Electrochemically Assisted Surfactant Assembly in the hard X -ray 

# beam: an in situ GISAXS study 

Gilles E. Moehl , and Andrew L. Hector 

Chemistry, University of Southampton 

Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK. 

g.e.h.k.moehl@soton.ac.uk 

Under the Advanced Devices by E lectroplating EPSRC programme grant (EP/N035437/1) we are 

working on the integration of nanowire semiconductor structures into electronics, using aligned 

mesoporous templates as host for the electrodeposition of high quality chalcogenide semiconductors . Th is 

necessitates the making of porous hosts for template electrodeposition, such as mesoporous silica 

structures. Mesoporous silica films are typically produced by evaporation -induced self assembly (EISA) 1,

but vertical alignment of the pores to the substrate is very difficult to achieve. Hexagonal arrays of 

vertically aligned mesopores can be achieved by electrochemically assisted surfactant assembly (EASA) 2.

The self -assembly of a cationic surfactant (typically cetyltrimethylammoniu m bromide) close to the 

substrate surface relies on the application of a negative potential to an electronically conductive substrate ,

but also leads to the formation of spheroidal surface aggregates, limiting the obtainable film thickness to a 

few hundred s of nm 3,4 . Grazing incidence small angle X -ray scattering (GISAXS) allows for the non -

destructi ve structural analysis of thin films with high statistical relevance in lateral and vertical direction. 

In this work, we show the results obtained from in situ GISAXS experiments done during the EASA of 

silica, following the evolution of the structure form ation in real time with sub -second time resolution. 

From this, suggestions to a more detailed mechanism of formation are made. 

(1) Lu, Y.; Ganguli, R.; Drewien, C. A.; Anderson, M. T.; Jeffrey Brinker, C .; Gong, W.; Guo, Y.; 

Soyez, H.; Dunn, B.; Huang, M. H.; et al. Continuous Formation of Supported Cubic and 

Hexagonal Mesoporous Films by Sol -Gel Dip -Coating. Nature 1997 , 389 (6649), 364 –368. 

(2) Walcarius, A.; Sibottier, E.; Etienne, M.; Ghanbaja, J. El ectrochemically Assisted Self -Assembly 

of Mesoporous Silica Thin Films. Nat. Mater. 2007 , 6 (8), 602 –608. 

(3) Walcarius, A. Mesoporous Materials and Electrochemistry. Chemical Society Reviews . 2013, pp 

4098 –4140. 

(4) Walcarius, A.; Ghanbaja, J.; Etienne, M.; Aubert, E.; Lecomte, C.; Goux, A. Oriented 

Mesoporous Silica Films Obtained by Electro -Assisted Self -Assembly (EASA). Chem. Mater. 

2009 , 21 (4), 731 –741. Cathodic Protection of 304SS Using Triboelectric Nanogenerator 

Youbo Nan 1, 2, Xiutong Wang 1,3 *, Hui Xu 1, 2, Jizhou Duan 1, Yanliang Huang 1, Baorong Hou 1

1. Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Corrosion and Bio -fouling, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese 

Aca demy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China 

2. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 

3. Open Studio for Marine Corrosion and Pr otection, Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and 

Technology, Qingdao 266237, China 

7 Nanhai Roa d, Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China 

E-mail address : wangxiutong@qdio.ac.cn 

Metal corrosion has caused hu ge waste and serious threats to the economy and the safety of human 

lif e. Cathodic protection is the most commonly used met hod for metal corrosion prote ction in marine 

engineering , however it can cause waste of energy and anodes . In rec ent years, triboelectric 

nanogenerator (TENG) cathodic protection technology has show n good application prospects. In this 

work, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS ) and Al foil wit h different electronegativity were selected as the 

friction layer to construct a vertically separated TENG (PDMS -Al) . In addition, the chitos an and AAO 

were used to topo logically modify the PDMS and construct the micro -nano structure, and it was 

combined w ith Al to form PDMS/CS -Al and PDMS/CSr -Al TENG. The electrical output performance of 

TENG was evaluated . It was found that PDMS/CSr -Al TENG has better elect rical output performance. 

The PDMS/CSr -Al TENG was selected to build a TENG cathodi c protection syst em under the condition 

of simulating mechanical external force (Fig. 1). Driven by a simulated mechanical force of 5 Hz, it was 

found that the maximum output open -ci rcuit voltage of the TENG can reach 77.1 V, and the surface 

potential of t he exposed area o f 1 × 1 cm 2 304ss can be reduced by about 0.1 V (Fig. 2), indicating that it 

forms a cathode for 304ss polarization protection. Furthermore, it explored and evaluated the app lication 

pote ntial of TENG cathodic protection technology.      

> Fig. 1PDMS /CS r-Al TENG cathodic protect ion 304ss system
> Fig. 2 Output performance curve of PDMS -Al 、PDMS/CS -Al and PDMS/CSr -Al (a) output voltage (Voc); (b) Curve
> of 304ss OCP under PDMS/CS -Al TENG intermittent cathodic protection

# VOCs abatement from gases streams by absorption enhanced with 

# electro -scrubbing process 

F. Escalona -Durán 1,2 , C. Sáez 1, M. Muñoz -Mo rales 1, C. A. Martínez -Huitle 2, M. A. Rodrigo 1

> 1

University of Castilla 

‐ La Mancha, Department of Chemical Engineering , Ciudad Real, Spain 

> 2

Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Laboratory of Environmental and applied Electrochemistry ,

Natal, Bra zil 

floryedys_0801@hotmail.comn 

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are characterized by their high activity in atmospheric 

photochemical rea ctions . In addition, human health can also be importantly affected, because VOCs can 

be easily absorbed by the skin and the mucosa, damaging the metabolic system and , in some cases , they 

can even be carcinogenic. Therefore, the ir remo val is very import ant . A very promis ing technology for 

the treatment of gas eous polluted st reams is electro -scrubbing [ 1] , whi ch consists of the combination of 

an absorption process with a mediated electrochemical oxidation . Its p urpose is to retain gaseous 

cont aminants into a liq uid stream and then o xidize them using metal pairs as catalyst s. This work f ocuses 

on the removal of toluene using a packed c olumn and a one compartment electrolyzer . An electrolyte ,

based on the pair Co (II)/Co (III) in an acid medium, is used to capture t oluene and degrade it . This 

electrolyte is circulate d through out an absorption column and the cell . The activation of the metallic 

catalyst and the effic iency in the contact between the phases are parameters that have been carefully 

ana lyzed. The re circula tion of the washing solution through the electrochemical system allow the oxidant 

species to be re generated and keep the treatment active. Reaction intermediates have been monitored by 

GC-MS and HPLC .

Acknowledgements 

Fi nancial suppor t from the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación and European Union through project 

CTM2016 -7619 7-R (AEI/FEDER, UE) and its continua tion PID2019 -107271RB -I00 . F. Escalona -Durán 

gratefully acknowledges CAPES by the scholarship given under the CAPES -PRINT program 

[1] G. Muthuraman, Il -S Moon, A review on an electrochemically assisted -scrubbing process for 

environmental harmful pollutant’s destruction, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 18 (2012) 1540 –1550. Study of efficiency ozone electro -generation by PEM electrolyzers 

M. Rodríguez -Peña 1,2 , J. Llanos 1, J.A. Barrios -Pérez 2, C. E. Barrera -Díaz 2, M. A. Rodrigo 1

> 1

University of Castilla 

‐ La Mancha, Department of Chemical Engineering , Ciudad Real, Spain 

> 2

Autonomous University of Mexico State, Joint Center of Sustainable Technology, Toluca, Mexico 

Maay.06 @hotmail.comn 

Ozone is a very powerful oxidant with many applications in water and wastewater treatment. Despite it is 

typically produced by non -electrochemical methods, its electrochemical production is becoming a topic of the 

major interest nowadays. Ozone can be gene rated by the oxidation of oxygen contained in water throughout 

different types of electrode materials and cell designs. Use of diamond anodes can be very important to reach 

high efficiencies in a process in which the low solubility of oxygen in water is on e of the main drawbacks. To 

face this important problem, reactor design is very important and PEM electrolyzers seems to be promising 

options which allow the production of ozone at low voltages, and, hence, with high cost -effectivity. In this 

work, is eval uated the influence of pressure and use of mechanical microbubbles generators on the ozone 

electro -generation using different of PEM electrolyzers. Results highlight the great influence of these 

parameters which are of a great significance for the treatmen t of wastewater polluted with different organics, 

as it is also confirmed in different tests shown in this presentation. 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support from the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación and European Union through project 

CTM2016 -76 197 -R (AEI/FEDER, UE) and its continuation PID2019 -107271RB -I00 ; CONACYT 722138 is 

gratefully acknowledged. Generation o f O3 and H 2O2 Using High -Pressure Electrochemical 

# Rea ctor 

Gustavo Acosta, E rika Bustos, Lidia Utrilla, Pablo Cañizares , M.A. Rodrigo and Javier Llanos 

Chemical Engineering Department, University of Castilla -La Mancha 

Avenida Camilo José Cela 1 2, 1307 1, C iudad Real, Spain 

Javier.Ll anos@uclm.es 

Ozone (O 3) and hydrog en peroxide ( H2O2) are two environmentally friendly oxidants that ha ve been used 

in several applications regarding wastewater treatment , purification of water loops used in the 

pharma ceutical and semiconductor industries, wood pulp ble aching process, treatment of te xtile 

wastewaters, and other applications [1] . It is well known that these two reactions can be performed in 

aqueous solutions by cathodic and anodic reduction using different cathodes and anodes, and using air 

coming from the air [2] . The performance s of the se two different reacti ons can be increased upon 

enhancing th e pressure from 0 to up to 30 bar and , o n the other hand, increasing the current density and 

modif ying the composition of the electrolyte solution in which the reactions tak e place [3] . In this work ,

we have designed a reactor that works in high pressure conditions to facilitate the absorpt ion o f O 2 in an 

aque ous solution to react in an electrochemical reaction (Figure 1) using Boron Doped Diamond as anod e

mater ial and PTFE-Carbon Black Reticulated Vitre ous C arbon ( RV C) as cathode mat erial to achi eve the 

production of O 3 and H 2O2 in two different reactions , that would increase the efficiency using high -

pressure conditions , usin g O 2 in a closed chamber . It is expected a dramatic effect of the pressure on the 

efficiency of the se reactions , along with other paramet ers such as electrolyte composition, electrode 

materials a nd current density applied to the system .

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the experimental setup to produce H2O2 and O 3 under p ressure 

co nditions. 

Acknowledgements 

The financial support fr om the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness and 

European Union through project CTM2016 -76197 -R (AEI/FEDER, UE) is gratefully acknowledged 

References 

[1] L. G. De Sousa, D. V. Franco, and L. M. Da Silva, “Electrochemical ozone production using 

electrolyte -free water for environmental applications, ” J. Environ. Chem. Eng. , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 

418 –427, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.je ce.2015.11.042. 

[2] J. F. P érez et al. , “Effect of pressure on the electrochemical generation of hydrogen peroxide in 

undivided cells on carbon felt electrodes, ” Electrochim. Acta , vol. 248, pp. 169 –177, 2017, doi: 

10.1 016/j.ele ctacta.2017.07.116. 

[3] O. S cialdone, A. Galia, C. Gattuso, S. Sabatino, and B. Schiavo, “Effect of air pressure on the 

electro -generation of H2O2 and the abatement of organic pollutants in water by electro -Fenton 

process, ” Electrochim. A cta , vol. 182, pp. 775 –780, 2015, doi: 10.1016 /j.electacta.2015.09.109. CO 2 Fixation via Carbonation of N aOH Generat ed by an 

# Electrochemical Reactor 

Gustavo Acosta, E rika Bustos, Lidia Utrilla, Pablo Cañizares , M.A. Rodrigo and Javier Llanos 

Chemical Engineering Department, University of Castilla -La Mancha 

Avenida Camilo Jos é Cela 12, 1307 1, C iudad Real, Spain 

Javier.Ll anos@uclm.es 

The ability to convert carbon between different oxidation states in order to store and release energy relies 

on biological metabolism and in the center of human energy infrastructure and chemical industry . A

pot ential approach to reduce CO 2 emissions and fossil -fuel consumption that has attracted nowadays 

attention is the recycling of CO 2 into fuels and chemicals [1]. One of the several strategies to mi tigat e

CO 2 emis sions is Electrochemical CO 2 reduction (CO 2R) , these processes for the fixation of CO 2 have 

been the focus of many research activities mostly for the necessity of dealing with the increment of this 

compound in the atmosphere, which is correl ated with globa l warming and pollution in many 

industrialized countries and worldwide [2]. Carbon atoms in CO 2 molecules are in their highest oxidation 

state, whe reas those in c ommon fuels and chemicals such as hydrocarbons, alcohols, and acids are in 

lower states, and for the synthesis of these compounds an energy input is required, which is one of t he 

main reasons why CO 2 is not extensively used in current chemic al in dustries [3]. In this work, we aim ed 

to fixate CO 2 in a n adsorption glass column coupled to an electrochemical reactor (Figure 1) , which 

consists of two e lectrode c hambers separated by a n ionic membrane , that produces Cl 2 in the anode 

(MMO ) chamber and Na OH and H 2 in the cathode chamber ( stainless steel) , which is connected to the 

adsorption column to generate Na CO 3 and NaHCO 3. Our results show that CO 2 fix ation in t his reactor 

depends on the electrolyte concentration, the intensity app lied , which is correlated to the amount of 

NaOH and Cl 2 electr ogenerated in both chambers , and on the velocity and concentration of CO 2 that is 

injected to the adsorption colu mn . This t echnology can be used to produce secondary added value 

products (hydrogen , chlorine) and help to mitigate CO 2 emissions. 

Figu re 1. Schematic representation of the electrochemical reactor coupled to a CO 2 fixatio n col umn .

Acknowledgements 

The financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Econ omy, Industry and Competitiveness and 

European Union through project CTQ2017 -91190 -EXP is gratefully acknowledged .

References 

[1] F. Gong, H. Zhu, Y. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Biological carbon fixation: From natural to synthetic, ” J. 

CO2 Util. , vol. 28, no. October, pp. 221 –227, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jcou.2018.09.014. 

[2] H. Louis, O. U. Akakuru, P. Monday, and O. O. Funmilayo, “A review on th e state -of -the -art 

advances for CO2 electro -chemical reduction using metal complex molecular catalysts, ” Ecl ética 

Qu ímica J. , vol. 44, no. 1, p. 11, 2019, doi: 10.26850/1678 -4618eqj.v44.1.2019.p11 -39. 

[3] S. Nitopi et al. , “Progress and Perspectives of E le ctrochemical CO2 Reduction on Copper in 

Aqueous Electrolyte, ” Chem. Rev. , vol. 119, no. 12, pp. 7610 –7672, Jun. 2019, doi: 

10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00705. Impedan ce Measurements on QLED Devices: Analysis of High -

# Frequency Loop in Terms of Material Properties 

Chen You ,1 Alex Titov, 2 Baek Hyun Ki m, 2 Mark E. Orazem 1.* 

1. Depa rtment of Chemical Engineering , University of Florida, Gainesville , FL 32611 USA 

2. Na noPhotonica Inc. Research Lab, UF Innovate / The Hub, Gainesville, FL 32601 USA 

* meo@che.ufl.edu 

Quantum -dot light -emitting diodes (QLED) are used in the new generation of electronic displays. A 

QLED based display can offer superior performance, including brightness, color purity, color gamut, and 

effi cienc y, at a lower cost as compared to existing technology. Electrochemical impedanc e spectroscopy 

(EIS) has been applied over the decades to study the light -emitting diode (LED) devices and could 

provide an ability to characterize the electrical properties of the materia l. However , work is needed to 

improve the interpretation of the EIS response of QLED devices. 

Constant -phase -element (CPE) behavior is often ob serve d in EIS response of electrochemical and solid -

state systems. The CPE can be used to i mprove the fi t of the equivalent circuit model to the impedance 

data. However, interpretation of the CPE parameters to extract physical meaning requires an 

understanding of the time -constant distribution in each individual sys tem. Hirschorn et al. 1,2 developed a 

power -law model that could relate the CPE parameters to the physical properties of the fil m by regression 

of the measurement model 3-5 to synthetic data. The distri bution of re sistivity was identi fi ed by assuming a 

uniform dielectric constant. 

The objective of the present work is to interpret the high -frequency impedance response on red and green 

QLED devices in terms of the physical properties of the device. Impeda nce measurements were 

performed on red and green QLED devices under current densi ties chosen to yield specified luminescence. 

A circuit model was developed for the observed high -frequency loop in terms of the thickness, dielectric 

constant, and resistivity distribution of the hole -injection layer. di electric constant and resistivity were 

extracted with a known layer thickness obtained from Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) analysis. 

Impedance measurements performed on hole -transport only d evices were used to verify the interpretation 

of the high -frequency capaci tive loop in terms of the properties of the hole -injection layer. 

Reference 

1. B. Hirschorn, M. E. Orazem, B. Tribollet, V. Vivier, I. Frateur, and M. Musiani, “Constant -Phase -

Element Behavior Caused by Resistivit y Distributions in Films: 1. Theory,” Journal of The 

Electrochemical Society , 157 (2010) C452 -C457. 

2. B. Hirschorn, M. E. Orazem, B. Tribollet, V. Viv ier, I. Frateur, and M. Musiani, “Constant -Phase -

Element Behavior Caused by Resistivity Distri butions in Films: 2. Applications,” Journal of The 

Electrochemical Society , 157 (2010) C458 -C463. 

3. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio , “Measurement Models for Electrochemical 

Impedance Spectroscopy: 1. Demonstration of Applicability ,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society 

139 (1992) , 1917 -1927. 

4. P. Agarwal, Oscar D. Crisalle, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Application of Measurement 

Models to Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy: 2. Determination of the Stochastic Contribu tion 

to the Error Structure,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 142 (1995), 4149 -4158. 

5. P. Agarwal, M. E. Orazem, and L. H. García -Rubio, “Application of Measurement Mo dels to 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy: 3. Evaluation of Consistency with the Kramers -Kronig 

Relations,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 142 (1995), 4159 -4168. 

Acknowledgemen t

This work was supported by Nanophotonica and a matching grant from the Univer sity of Florida Industry 

Partnership (UFLIPS): Grant# OR -DRPD -UFLIPSG -2018. Mark Orazem acknowledges fi nancial support 

fro m the University of Florida Foundation Preeminence and the Dr. and Mrs. Frederick C. Edie term 

professorships. Investigations on the vanadium ion reaction kinetics on single carbon fibre 

# electrodes 

Isabelle Kroner 1,2 , Maik Becker, 1,2 , Thomas Turek 1,2 

1 Clausthal University of Technology, Institute of Chemical and Electrochemical Process 

Engineering, Leibnizstraße 17, D -38678 Clausthal -Zellerfeld, Germany 

2 Research Center Energy Storage Technologies, Am Stollen 19a, D -38640 Goslar, Germany 

> kroner@icvt.tu -clausthal.de

The vanadium redox flow battery (VFB) is a promising energy storage system, due to its durability and intrinsic 

safety. Several studies on the kinetics of the VFB reactions are already available , however  mainl y on model 

electrodes  such as pla tinum or glassy carbon [1] . The kinetics at these model electrodes can deviate significantly 

from real electrodes , since different overpotentials and reaction mechanisms might occur. Besides that, the 

electrode structure of real materials is neglected when using model electrodes. 

For understanding the interplay between the electrolyte and the electrode, investigations on commercial electrode 

materials, such as porous carbon felts are necessary . Because of the complex structure of the porous electrodes, 

especially due to the strong influence of the morphology and pore volume on the results, the interpretation of the 

electrochemical data is highly complex [2] . In addition, the low conductivity of the electrolyte results in 

inhomoge neous current density distributions in the porous electrode, which makes an exact determination of 

kinetic parameters very difficult [3] .

Therefore, neither a model electrode nor a complete c ommercial porous electrode was applied in our studies. 

Instead, we used single carbon fibre microelectrodes (similar to [4] , see figure 1 , left ), which were detached from 

commercial electrode materials, connected to a copper wire and isolated with a heat -shrink tubing. These 

electrodes were operated under technically relevant electrolyte concentrations and examined by electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and polarization curves. The results were used to determine the reaction rate 

constants, the transfer coefficients, and the reaction orders of the vanadium ion reaction kinetics . For example, the 

exchange current density was determined depending on the state of charge of the electrolyte (see figure 1, right). 

In addition, different fibres out of one single piece of elec trode were investigated to analyze the variation of kinetic 

activity within the material, which can occur due to irregularities in the production process or during activation. 

The gained precise kinetic parameters allow to improve electrode materials for V FB. Furthermore, they are useful 

for electrode models, which are applied to study the influence of mass transport and current density 

inhomogeneities in porous electrodes. Thereby, the influence of activation methods on the electrode materials can 

be inves tigated and better understood. 

Figure 1: Carbon fibre m icroelectrode (left) and experimental results from two subsequent experiments in 

negative electrolyte compared to mathematical fit of reaction order (exchange current density at different SoC ). 

Reference 

[1] W. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Qin, J. Liu, C. Yan, C. Zeng, Electrochimica Acta 283 (2018) 1313 –1322. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2018.07.071. 

[2] M. Cecchetti, M. Messaggi, A. Donazzi, A. Facibeni, V. Russo, C.S. Casari, A.L. Bassi, A. Casalegno, M. 

Zago, Electrochimica Acta 329 (2020) 135143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.135143. 

[3] M. Becker, N. Bredemeyer, N. Tenhumberg, T. Turek, Electrochimica Acta 252 (2017) 12 –24. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electa cta.2017.07.062. 

[4] M.A. Miller, A. Bourke, N. Quill, J.S. Wainright, R.P. Lynch, D.N. Buckley, R.F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. 

Soc. 163 (2016) A2095 -A2102. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1091609jes. Silicate Ions a s Inhibit ing Agents for Reinforcement Steel 

F. Montes, A.C. Rolandi, A. Frontini, M. Vázquez and M. B. Valcarce 

División Electroquímica Aplicada, 

Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata 

INTEMA, CONICET, Av. Colón 1085 0, 7600 Mar del Plata, ARGENTINA 

mvazquez@fi.mdp.edu.ar 

Reinforced concrete is a reliable building material due to many excellent properties such as strength and 

durability. However, m arine environments and chloride -contaminated aggregates accelerate dete rioration 

and failure [1] . In organic in hibitors are frequently considered to mitigate steel corrosion [2 ,3 ]. In this work, 

silicate ions were tested as corrosion inhibitors in concrete pore simulating solutions contaminated with 

chloride ions. The electroch emical evaluation included cyclic voltammetry and polarization curves. 

Weight loss tests were implemented to follow the inhibitor performance over long exposure times. Micro -

Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used to investi gate the 

composition of the surface film. 

Steel is teste d in an alkaline solution simulating the composition of pore solutions in concrete (pH 13) 

contaminated with 0.3 mol/L chloride ion, which also cont ains 0.3 mol/L silicate ion (Cl -PSS -Inh ).

Compared t o Cl -PSS, the improvement in behavior and the difference in response when silicate ions are 

present is clear from the results of all the techniques used to evaluate the electrodes. 

Anodic polarization curves show no sign of pitting or any form of localized corrosion and very low 

passive current densities when silicate ions are present in solution. These results are promising in terms of 

the ability of these inorganic ions to be used as corrosion inhibitors. 

When chloride and silicate ions are present simult aneously in an Inhibitor/Chloride = 1 ratio, complete 

inhibition of the localized attack is observed after 60 days of immersion. 

Cyclic voltammograms and XPS spectra indicate that the presence of silicate ion s affects the composition 

of the passive film (s ee Figure 1) . However, further study is needed to understand the mechanism of 

action of silicate ions as inhibitors and to explore their effectiveness when used in mortars, concrete or to 

pre -treat the steel bars. 

Figure 1: Cyclic voltammograms record ed for steel in pore simulating solutions (pH=13) showing the 

effect of chloride ions and chloride plus silicate ions. Silicate ion concentration is 0.3 mol/L an d

Inhibitor/Chloride = 1 . Scan rate = 10 mV.s -1. The ten th cycle is presented. 

Bibliography 

1. K. Y. Ann and H. -W. Song, Corrosion Science 49 (2007) 4113 

2. T. A. Söylev and M. G. Richardson, Construction and Building Materials 22 (2008) 609 

3. M. B. Valcarce and M. Vázquez, Electrochimica Acta 53 (2008) 5007 Recurrence Quantification Analysis as a Tool to I nvestigate Current 

# Oscillations Observed During the Mass -Transport Controlled 

# Electrodissolution of Fe in Sulfuric Acid S olution s

Chrysanthi Gkili , Dimitrios Valavanis , Dimitra Sazou 

Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 

Thessaloniki, T.K. 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece 

e-mail address : chrysagkili@gmail.com 

Recurrence is a fundamenta l property of nonlinear dynamical systems, which can be utilized in order to 

characteri ze the system dynamics in phase space. A v isual tool for exploiting the recurrence behavior 

of phase space trajectories is the recurrence plot (RP) introduced in 1987 by Eckman et al [1] . On the 

basis of the RP, recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) can be carried out to identify different 

dynamical regimes and characterize transit ions between them. Recurrence plots (RPs) and recurrence 

quantification analysis have been widely used in many scientific fields from chemistry, physics and 

engineering to life sciences, ecology and economy [2, 3 ]. RQA was also turned out to be a key issue 

revealing complex dynamics, phase and generalized synchronization in non -phase -coherent and even 

non -stationary time ser ies of electrochemical systems and characterizing different corrosion states of 

metals and alloys [ 4-6]. This study aims in exploring non -linear quantifiers based on RPs and RQA in 

order to investigate complex current oscillations observed during the mass -transport controlled 

electrodissolution of iron in sulfuric acid solutions ( Fe| 0.75 M H 2SO 4 interfacial system) . Under the 

potentiody namic operation mode, Fe| 0.75 M H 2SO 4 is a well -known electrochemical system exhibiting 

multip le oscillatory potential regimes depending on various control parameters [7 ]. Our focus here is 

on oscillations appeared in the limiting current region beyond a c ritical value of the ohmic potential 

drop and when proper hydrodynamic conditions are established a cross the interfacial region [8 ]. By 

applying two system configurations comprising an upward and a downward -facing Fe -disc electrode ,

visual changes in RPs p lots and RQA measures, such as the average diagonal line (ADL), the trapping 

time (TT) and the longest vertical line (LVL) along with a new entropy quantifier, reveal different 

nonlinear correlations. The new entropy quantifier was based on recurrence matr ix microstates that 

represent more general properties of the recurrence space as compared with the entropy quantifier 

based on just diagonal or horizontal lines of the recurrence space [9] . Indeed, the microstate -based 

entropy quantifier reflects correctly the system complexity in agreement with ADL, TT and LVL. All 

RQA measures indicate that the enhancement of the mass transfer affects the complexity and the 

transitions between different nonlinear dynamical regimes. 

References 

1. J. -P. Eckmann, S. Kamphorst, Recurrence Plots of Dynamical Systems. Europhysics Letters 

(epl), 4, 973 -977 ( 1987 ).

2. N. Marwan et al., Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems. Physics Reports, 

438 (5), 237 -329 (2007) .

3. J. Zbilut, A. Giuliani, C. Webber, Recurrence quantification analysis and principal 

components in the det ection of short complex signals, Phys. Lett. A, 237 ,131 -135 (1998) .

4. Y. Zou, R.V. Donner, M. Wickramasinghe, I. Z. Kiss, M. Small, J. Kurths, Phase coherence 

and attractor geometry of chao tic electrochemical oscillators , Chaos 22 (3), 033130 (2012). 

5. Y. Hou, C. Aldrich, K. Lepkova, L. L. Machuca and B. Kinsella, Monitoring of carbon steel 

corrosion by use of electrochemical noise and rec urrence quantification analysis , Corros Sci 

112 , 63 -72 (2016). 

6. D. Valavanis, D. Spanoudaki, Ch. Gkili, D. Sazou, Using recurrence plots for the analysis of 

the nonlinear dynamical response of iron passivation -corrosion processes , Chaos 28, 085708 

(2018) ; doi: 10.1063/1.5025801. 

7. D. Sazou and M. Pagitsas, Non -linear dynamics of the passivity breakdown of iron in acidic 

solutions, Chaos Soliton Fract 17 (2 -3), 505 -522 (2003). 

8. D. Sazou, M. Pagitsas, On the onset of current oscillations at the limiting current region 

emerged during iron electrodissolution in sulfuric acid solutions, Electrochim. Acta 51 (28), 

6281 -6296 (2006) 

9. G. Corso, Th.Lima Prado, G. Z. Santos Lima, J. Kurths, S. R. Lope s, Quantifying entropy 

using recurrence matrix microstates , Chaos 28, 083108 (2018); doi: 10.1063/1.5042026 .Tailored lipidic liquid crystalline phases and their nanoparticles as 

# carriers of doxorubicin and 177 Lu – drug release studies by 

# voltammetry 

Adrianna Cytryniak ,a Ewa Nazaruk, a Agnieszka Majkowska -Pilip, b Aleksander Bilewicz, b

Renata Bilewicz a 

> a

University of Warsaw, Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw, Poland  

> b

Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, Warsaw, Poland 

acytryniak@chem.uw.edu.pl 

The long -term use of conventional chemotherapeutics leads to damage of healthy cells and adverse side 

effects. To minimize the side effects of the drugs, achieve their sustained release or improve their stability 

they can be delivered encapsulated in appro priate drug carriers. Here we propose tailored liquid 

crystalline structures (LCP) and their nanoparticles (LCNP) that incorporate an anti -cancer drug together 

with complexed radioconjugates in order to obtain more effective action towards the cancer cells .

Lipidic liquid -crystalline phases, such as cubic phases, are promising as drug carriers since they have 

large interfacial area of 400 m 2/g and their structure consists of bicontinuous lipid bilayer surrounding 

two systems of non -contacting aqueous chann els. A wide range of drugs can be encapsulated in this 

biocompatible amphiphilic environment resembling that of a biological membrane. Cubic phases are 

stable in the excess of water and can be dispersed in the presence of stabilizer into colloidal nanopart icles 

– cubosomes. Cubosomes are less viscous and exist as a suspension which makes them easier to handle 

and deliver to the appropriate site. 1-4

We prepared cubic phases and cubosomes with doxorubicin (DOX), a drug with particularly negative side 

effects, and we characterized the mesophase structure by small angle X -ray scattering (SAXS) and DLS 

(for cubosomes). To investigate the behavior of the drugs incorporated in the carrier and to determine 

drugs release profile we used electrochemical methods and UV -Vis spectroscopy. We considered 

Korsmeyer -Peppas and other mathematical models in the evaluation of the drug release kinetics. In order 

to obtain more effective action, the cubosomes containing DOX were also doped with an amphiphilic 

ligand complexing 177 Lu radionuclide. We used MTT assay to evaluate cytotoxic effect of the cubosomes 

with single and two components upon selected cancer cell lines. 

_______________ 

[1] J. Zhai, C. Fong, N. Tran, C.J. Drummond, Non -Lamellar Lyotropic Liquid Crystal line Lipid 

Nanoparticles for the Next Generation of Nanomedicine,  ACS Nano ,13,  2019 , 6178 -6206 

[2] H.M.G. Barriga, M.N. Holme, M.M. Stevens, Cubosomes: The Next Generation of Smart Lipid 

Nanoparticles?, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2018 .

[3] E. Nazaruk, E. Górecka, Y.M. Osornio, E.M. Landau, R. Bilewicz, Charged additives modify drug 

release rates from lipidic cubic phase carriers by modulating electrostatic interactions, Journal of 

Electroanalytical Chemistry, 819, 2018, 269 –274 .

[4] M. Mierzwa, A. Cytryniak, P. Krysiński, R. Bilewicz, Lipidic Liquid Crystalline Cubic Phases and 

Magnetocubosomes as Methotrexate Carriers. Nanomaterials, 9, 2019, 636. The Redox Reactions of V(III)/V(II) and V(V)/V(IV) Couples in all -

# Vanadium Redox -Flow Battery Electrolyte: t he I mportance of Glassy 

# Carbon Electrode P re -treatment 

Nataliya Roznyatovskaya a,b , Matthias Fühl a, Jens Noack a,b , Peter Fischer a,b , Karsten Pinkwa rt a,b and Jens 

Tübke a,b 

(a) Fraunhofer ICT 

Joseph -von -Fraunhoferstr. 7, 76327 Pfinztal, Germany 

(b) German -Australian Alliance for Electrochemical Technologies for Storage of Renewable Energy 

(CENELEST) 

Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, University of New S outh Wales (UNSW), UNSW Sydney, 

NSW, 2052, Australia 

Email: n ataliya.roznyatovskaya@ict.fraunhofer.de 

Vanadium -redox -flow batteries (VRFB) have been intensively developed and commercialized 

since the last decade. This electrochemical processes in VRFB a re based on conversions of vanadium 

redox couples in highly acidic media: V(III)/V(II) at the anolyte and V(V)/V(IV) at the catholyte. In 

practice, the kinetics of both of these reactions are known to be sensitive to the electrode pretreatment. 

For this re ason, the widely used graphite felt electrodes for VRFB usually undergo thermal pre -oxidation 

or oxidative chemical pretreatment. However, the detailed mechanism of these electrode reactions is 

unknown and the interpretations of the effect of electrode sur face pre -treatment are controvercial 1.

n this work we present the compairison of the literature data on the kinetics of the V(III)/V(II) 

and V(V)/V(IV) electrode reactions, considerations about the effect of the electrode surface and the cyclic 

voltammetri c experimental data at glassy carbon electrode material. Special attention is given to the pre -

treatment protocol. To characterize the state of the electrode surface, the potassium hexacyanoferrate is 

used as a reference redox -active probe.  

> 1

N. Roznyatov skaya et al., Current Opinion in Electrochemistry, 19, 2020, 42 -48. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy protocol for detection of 

# Norfloxacin at a polyamic acid modified electrochemical sensor 

PGL Baker, Clementine Louw 

SensroLab research group, Chemistry department, University of the Western Cape, Robert Sobukwe 

drive , Bellville 7530, South Africa 

pbaker@uwc.ac.za 

Pharmaceuticals are introduced into the environment through many di fferent path ways including 

production and consumption waste, ineffective water treatment , improper disposal of even as unused 

pharmaceutical waste. P harmaceutical contaminants are on the WHO critical list as priority emerging 

pollutants in water , since in many countries, disposal remains un regulated . Norfloxacin is a

hemothe rapeutic antibiotic agent w hich is used to treat urinary tract infection s and respiratory infection s, 

among others. Due to the high water solubility required of antibiotics , antibiotics are able to p ass through 

all the typical filtration systems employed in water treatment plants a nd reach surface water, groundwater 

and even drinking water. 

Electrochemical sensors are devices that change electrochemical information into an analytical signal that 

is useful for quantification . Conducting polymers are widely used as transducers in the design of chemical 

sensors, however they have some disadvantages such as low sensitivity, poor selectivity and surface 

poisoning due to adsorbed intermediates or interfer ing species. The aromatic polyimides typically exhibit 

good thermal and chemical stability, mechanical strength, and low dielectric constants . Among them, 

polyamic acid (PAA) was used for different application s, including sensor modification. PAA is a 

polymer wi th cation complexing properties , due to its carboxyl groups . Integrating me tal nanoparticles 

into polymers to form polymer nanocomposites tends to improve the physical and chemical properties of 

the sensor. The unique optical, electrical, magnetic and catalytic properties of cobalt nanoparticles have 

made desirable in application s of nanoelectronic devices, nanosensors and catalysts. In this work we 

have shown how the unique combination of Co -nanoparticles incorporated into a deposited polyamic acid 

thin film has been advantageously employed for the sensitive detection of Norflo xacin. Following the use 

of a variety of techniques including microscopy and small angle X-ray measurements to verify the 

topography and morphology of the sensing layer, el ectrochemical impedance spectroscopy was employe d

to extract the mechanism of in tera ction between Norfloxacin and the modified transducer. Nanostructured Silicon as Anode for Lithium -ion batteries 

Matea Raić 1,2 , Lara Mikac 1, 2, Marijan Gotić 1,2 , Mile Ivanda 1,2 *          

> 1Laboratory for Molecular Physics and Synthesis of New Materials, Ruder Bošković Institute, Bijenička c. 54, 10000
> Zagreb, Croat ia; matea.raic@irb.hr (M.R.); lmikac@irb.hr (L.M. ); gotic@irb.hr (M.G.)
> 2Research Unit New Functional Materials, Center of Excellence for Ad vanced Materials and Sensing Devices,
> Bijenička c. 54, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
> * Correspondence: mile.ivanda@irb.hr ; Tel.: +385 -1-456 -0928

The enhancement in the morphology of anode materials leads to better capac itance properties. 

Nanostructure desig n is an effective way to improve battery cycling because nanostructures provide short 

diffusion length for Li + ions and electrons with better resistance to fracture [1]. The most widely used 

anode is graphite whose lithiated compounds have stable phases up to the LiC 6 stoichiometry 

corresponding to a theoretical specific capacity of 372 mAh / g [ 2]. In contrast, silicon possesses a very 

high theoretical capacity of 4200 mAh / g and can intercalate 4.4 Li into Si at high temperature to form 

Li 15 Si 4 [3]. Sili con also features a working potential around 0.4 V vs. Li / Li + which is safer than operating 

potential of graphite (0.05 V vs. Li / Li +). Although silicon possesses all of these advantages, silicon -

based anodes suffer from huge volume expansio n up on cycli ng (≈400%) causing electrode fracture and 

electrical isolation during repeated cycling [4]. Continuous volume changes cause the breaking -

reformation of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film which leads to the consumption of lithium -ions 

and e lectroly te .

Fig. 1 Cell failure mechanisms of silicon 

There are two strategies to avoid this problem, first one is combining Si with different kinds of carbon 

materials such as amorphous carbon , conductive carbon black , carbon nanotubes and graphene and 

secon dly , by designing nanoscale silicon wit h different structure s. In the present work, we represent 

nanostructured composite anodes. S tructural and microstructural changes in silicon nanomaterials were 

examined using several methods: X-ray powder diffraction combined with the results of Raman 

spectrosc opy, FT -IR spectroscopy, UV -Vis spectrometry, Nitrogen adsorption measurements, and TEM 

analysis. Electrochemical performances were investigated by cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic 

charge -discharge measurements .

1. Salah, M.; Murphy, P.; Ha ll, C.; Francis, C.; Kerr, R.; Fabretto, M. Journal of Power Sources 

2019 , 414, 48 -67 , Doi:  10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.12.0 68 

2. Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y. Nature M ater 2008 , 7, 845 -854 , Doi: 10.1038/nmat2297 

3. Kang, B.; Ceder, G. Nature 2009 , 458, 190 -193 , Doi: 10.1038/nature07853. 

4. Arico, A.S.; Bruce, P.; Scrosati, B.; Tarascon, J. M.; Van Schalkwijk, W. Nature Mater 2005 , 4, 

366 -377 , Doi:  10.1038/nmat1368 Mechanically interlocked carbon nanotubes as versatile and stable 

# platform for nano electrocatalysis 

Dominik Wielend ‡,1 , Mariano Vera -Hidalgo ‡,2 , Hathaichanok Seelajaroen 1, Niyazi Serdar Sariciftci 1,

Emilio M. Pérez 2, Dong Ryeol Whang 1,3  

> 1

Linz Institute for Organic Solar Cells (LIOS) / Institute of Physical Chemistry , Johannes Kepler 

University Linz , Altenberger Straße 69, 4040 Linz, Austria . 

> 2

IMDEA Nanociencia, Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco, c/Faraday 9, 28049 Madrid, Spain.  

> 3

Current address: De partment of Advanced Materials, Hannam University, 1646 Yuseong‐Daro, 

Yuseong‐Gu, Daejeon, 34054 Republic of Korea 

Email:  dominik.wielend@jku.at 

One promising way to store and distribute renewable energy li ke solar and wind energies is the 

electroc hemicals production of fuels like hydrogen (H 2), hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) and methane (CH 4)[1] .

The reported most promising electrocatalysts are based on rare and expensive noble metals as they are 

highly efficient and stable , therefore the recent research es have been focusses on the substitution of noble 

metals with earth abundant elements [2,3 ] or metal -free catalysts [4 ,5 ]. A major drawback of curren tly 

available electrocatalysts for the large -scale application, is poor long -term stability due to decomposition 

or delamination . To overcome those limitations, mechanically interlocked carbon nanotubes (MINT) has 

been investigated due to its strong immobilization of the organic compound in a rotaxane -type while still 

ma intaining the desired properties of the carbon nanotube as well as the organic catalyst. 

The successful synthesis and characterization of non -covalent rotaxane -type MINT with various organic 

molecules was demonstrated [6] . Motivated by tunable chemical cat alytic capability of anthraquinone 

MINT’s (AQ -MINT) [7] , we investigated AQ -MINT as an electrocatalyst toward oxygen (O 2) to H 2O2

reduction, as quinones in general are known for their capability of O 2 to H 2O2 transformation [8 ].

This work studied the electr ochemical behaviour of AQ -MINT’s in comparison to supramolecularly 

adsorbed species (AQ@SWCNT) in aqueous and organic solutions [9] . Thereby, the versatility as well as 

superior stability of the MINT immobilization could be demonstrated. Furthermore, the el ectrocatalytic 

O2 reduction to H 2O2 was studied in neutral and basic aqueous media over 8 h. The results revealed that 

oxygen was reduced electrochemically using AQ -MINT in basic solution yielding 7.0 μmol of H 2O2 after 

8 h electrolysis, which correspond t o a maximum catalytic activity of up to 12 μmol (H2O2) mg (AQ -MINT) -1 h-1

or a turnover number (TON) of 417. 

[1] T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. B. Rutherford, D. Macfarlane, G. F. Moore, P. Yang, D. G. Nocera, 

T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, B. Y oon, F. A. Armstrong, R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, 

Energy Environ. Sci. , 2013, 6, 695 –698. 

[2 ] S. Dey, B. Mondal, S. Chatterjee, A. Rana, S. Amanullah and A. Dey, Nat. Rev. Chem. , 2017, 1, 1 –20. 

[3 ] K. E. Dalle, J. Warnan, J. J. Leung, B. Reuillard, I. S . Karmel and E. Reisner, Chem. Rev. , 2019, 119 ,

2752 –2875. 

[4 ] L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H. -J. Choi and J. -B. Baek, Chem. Rev. , 2015, 115 , 4823 –4892. 

[5 ] M. Jakešová, D. H. Apaydin, M. Sytnyk, K. Oppelt, W. Heiss, N. S. Sariciftci an d E. D. Głowacki, 

Adv. Funct. Mater. , 2016, 26 , 5248 –5254. 

[6 ] E. M. Pérez, Chem. - A Eur. J. , 2017, 23 , 12681 –12689. 

[7 ] M. Blanco, B. Nieto -Ortega, A. De Juan, M. Vera -Hidalgo, A. López -Moreno, S. Casado, L. R. 

González, H. Sawada, J. M. González -Calbet and E. M. Pérez, Nat. Commun. , 2018, 9, 1 –7. 

[8 ] W. Manchot, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. , 1901, 314 , 177 –199. 

[9 ] D. Wielend, M. Vera -Hidalgo, H. Seelajaroen, N. S. Sariciftci, E. M. Pérez and D. R. Whang, ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2020, under revision .Templated Electrodeposition of  Na noscale p -Block Materials 

Li Shao , Andrew Hector, Philip Bartlett, Kees De Groot, Gilles Moehl, Samantha Soulé, Lingcong Meng, 

Wenjian Zhang, Yasir Noori 

University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ , UK

School of Chemi stry, University of Southampton , University Road , Southampton , SO17 1BJ , UK 

L.Shao@sot on.ac.uk 

Our project (ADEPT, EPSRC EP/N035437/ 1) aims to intergrade electrodepositi on into device 

fabrications including thermoelectric devices , infrared detectors and phase change memories. This work 

focuses on producing nano wires by templated electrodeposition , the schematic is displayed in Fig 1. 

Silica thin films with well -ordered th ree -dimensional (3D) mesop orous structure s were used to be the 

templates for electrode position . They were sy nthesised by evaporation -induced self -assembly (EISA) 

process using Pluronic F127 triblock copolymer as a structure -directing agent . FE -SEM show ed that mos t

of the pore diameters were between 6 and 10 nm. Grazing incidence small -angle X-ray scattering 

(GISAXS) showed that pore structure of the templ ate adopted Fmmm space group with [010] orientation ,

as shown in Fig 2 (a) . Bismuth and tellur ium were grown throug h the 3D mesoporous channels by 

conducting two -step pulsed electro depositio n in a non -aqueous electrolyte system. Fig 2 (b) shows the Te 

nanowires grow thr ough the mesostr ucture of the silica films . Electrodeposition conditions were 

controlled to opt imise the nucleation and growth process and to maximise pore filling. In -sit u gra zing 

incidence s mall -angle neutron scattering was used to follow Bi electrodeposition into the pores and to link 

variations in nucleation to differences in the grown material. 

Fig 1 The schematic of templated electrodeposition 

Fig 2 (a) The GISAXS pat tern of t he silica film as the template; (b) The cro ss -vi ew SEM image of Te 

nanowires gr ow through mesostr ucture of the silica film. An additional mechanism of extracellular electron uptake by 

# microorganisms : Can t he maintenance of low H2 partial pressures 

# favor the H 2 reaction on a cathode or metallic iron ?

Jo Philips 

Department of Engineering, Aarhus University 

Hangø vej 2, 8200 Aarhu s N, Denmark 

jo.philips@eng.au.dk 

Several anaerobic microorganisms , e.g. acetogenic bacteria and methanogenic archaea , are capable of 

using solid electron donors, such as a cathode or metallic iron (Fe(0)). Such m icroorganisms are of 

interest for novel ap plications such as microbial electrosynthesis (cathode as electron donor ), while they 

could also cause detrime ntal microbial induced corrosion (Fe(0) as electron donor) . Intriguingly, similar 

mi croorganisms can differ strongly in their capacity to use soli d electron donors, which likely relates to 

their extracellular electron transfer (EET) mechanism. Different EET mechanisms have been proposed for 

acetogens and methanogens (Figure ). Recently, I proposed an additional mechanism: the maintenance of 

low H 2 pa rtial pressures by microbial H 2 consumption, which thermodynamically favors the H 2 evolution 

reaction on the cathode or Fe(0) surface (Philips, 2020) . I will elaborate in my presentation how H2

consumption affect s the H 2 evolution on a cathode, as well as the anoxic corrosion reaction. In addition, I

will discussed that microorganisms strongly differ in their H2 consumption characteristics. Furthermore , I 

will explain my hypothesis that the difference in the capacity of microorganisms to use solid electron 

donors is likely related to differences in their H 2 consumption chara cteristics. Finally, I will discuss how 

the EET mechanism I propose relates to other EET mechanisms. My presentation will mainly focus on 

acetogenic bacteria, but similar considerations are also relevant for other hydrogenotrophic 

microorganisms .

Figure : Overview of the different EET mechanisms previously proposed for microorganisms capable of 

using a cathode or Fe(0) as electron donor and the additional mechanism that I will discuss (Figure 

adapted from Philips (2020) )

Reference 

Philips J (2020) Extracellular electron uptake by acetogenic bacteria: Does H 2 consumption favor the H 2

evolution reaction on a cathode or metalli c iron? Front Microbiol 10 : 13. Electro -Fenton process combined with anodic oxidation at sub -

# stoichiometric titanium oxide (Ti 4O7) ceramic electrode for the 

# mineralization of tetracycline 

Busisiwe N. Zwane a,b , Benjamin O. Orimolade a, Babatunde A. Koiki a, Nonhlangabezo Mabuba a,c , Eddy 

Pe tit b, Geoffroy Lesage b, Marc Cretin b, Omotayo A. Arotiba a,c,*  

> a

Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Johannesburg, South Africa  

> b

Institut Européen des Membranes, IEM, UMR 5635, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, ENSCM, Montpellier, 

France  

> c

Centre for Nano materials Science Research, University of Johannesburg, South Africa 

Corresponding author : oarotiba@uj.ac.za 

Keywords: Tetracycline, anodic oxidation, electro - Fenton process, Ti 4O7-ceramic anode, carbon felt, 

TOC removal efficiency 

ABSTRACT 

The explora tion of electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) have become popular for the 

degradation of pharmaceutical pollutants in wastewater treatments. This work investigated the 

degradation of tetracycline (TC), toxicity and intermediate studies using EAOPs. Carbon felt and Ti 4O7

layer deposited on Ti substrate were used respectively as cathode and anode. Electro -Fenton (EF), anodic 

oxidation (AO) and electro -Fenton coupled with anodic oxidation (EF/AO) systems were used to degrade 

TC and their perform ances were compared . EF/AO performed most efficiently, with removal efficiency 

of 64.89±0.17% and 68.27±0.43%, at 20 ppm and 50 ppm TC, respectively, as compared to EF and AO. 

Then different applied currents were investigated for 20 ppm and 50 ppm TC, usin g EF/AO. Optimal 

conditions were established for 20 ppm and 50 ppm TC to investigate the intermediate products using 

HPLC and toxicity tests. The toxicity of the solution was less than initial stage of treatment, 

corresponding to the formation of less toxi c by -products. EF/AO process using Ti 4O7 anode and CF 

cathode provides low energy and high mineralization current efficiency (MCE) with high removal 

efficiency, because of the production of hydroxyl radicals at the surface of the anode and also a large 

sur face area and porosity of CF. The ceramic sub -stoichiometric Ti 4O7 anode with CF (EF/AO) can be 

used to degrade pharmaceuticals successfully. 

REFERENCES 

[1]. Arotiba, O.A.; Orimolade, B.O.; Koiki, B.A. Curr Opin Electro chem . 2020, 22, 25 -34 

[2]. An T, Yan g H, Li G, et al. Applied Catalysis B. 2010; 94:288 –294. 

[3]. Peleyeju MG, Arotiba OA. Environ. Sci. Water Res. Technol. 2018; 4: 1389 –1411. Electrochemical pressure imp edance spectroscopy applied to p olymer 

# ele ctrolyte membrane fuel ce ll s: investigation of di ffusion and water 

# transport 

Anantrao Vijay SHIRSATH , Caroline BONNET, St éphane RAËL 1, Françoi s LA PICQUE 

Laboratoire Réactions et Génie d es Procédés, CNRS -Université de Lorraine, 1 rue Grandville, 54000 

Nancy, France ; 1Groupe de Recherche en Energie Electrique de Nancy, Université de Lorraine, 

2 Avenue de la Foret de Haye, 54505 Vandoeuvre, France. 

e-mail address : anantrao -vijay.shirsath@univ -lorraine.fr 

The polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is a simple power device but inside it a complex 

and coupled mass transport phenomena are key facto rs in governing its perf orm ance and durability [1]. 

Over operation time membrane electrode assembly degrades, the diagnosis is usually done by a popular 

technique called electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). It gives out information on the cause of 

degradation, but it fai ls c onsiderably to comment on and distinguish between mass transport processes 

wi th comparable time constants [2]. The PEMFC offer s gas pressure as a non -electric variable to observe .

When combined with current or voltage it gives us additional definitions of impedance and using this 

technique in harmonic conditions is called electrochemical pressure impedance spectroscopy (EPIS) [3,4].

Niroumand et al [5], made the first attempt to analyze the dynamic relationship between pressure and 

voltage by exami nin g pressure -induced voltage oscillations in polymer electrolyte fuel cell s. It has been 

demonstrated that cell voltage exhibits oscillations with an identical frequency of the cathode outlet 

pressure modulation an d concluded that a spe ctrum of such relation sh ip over a range of 0.1 Hz to 20 Hz 

frequency can be used as a diagnostic tool to understand transport processes such as water t ransport, 

limitations in electrode gas flow transport. Hartmann et al [4] applied EPIS to sodiu m-oxygen batter ies by 

monitoring pressure amplitude in relation to electric current and obtained vital information about 

hydration imbalance, changes in reactant distribution , their effects on mass transport and concluded that 

EPIS was signific antly sensitive to oxygen transport properti es of porous electrodes. In addition, Rho et 

al . [6] showed that the significan t control by diffusion of the react ing gas in the inert gas can be 

specifically examined by comparing the p hase shift of the system with inert gas -oxygen mixture ( e.g. air )

to t hat with pure oxygen .

In this work, the focus is on ap plying EPIS to PEMFC and developing it for better understanding the 

transport process having comparable time constant inside PEMFC. A sinusoidal variation in the cathode 

backpressure wa s applied and th e voltage respons e of the fuel ce ll was recorded at constant current in a 

frequency range of 1 mHz to 1 Hz with pressure amplitudes of a few mbar . In order to better reso lve the 

transport processes , experiments with varying oxygen mole fraction were carrie d out. It was observed that 

the impedance mo du lus decrease s rapidly with increase in oxygen mole fra ction (beyond 0.4 ) and it is the 

lowest in case of pure oxygen . In case of pure oxygen, it was observed that the absence of nitrogen 

contribution in diffusi on causes the overall impedance to reduce dramatically ove r wh ole spectrum and 

phase shift in low fre quency region ( below 50 mHz ) depicti ng the detection of diffusion when compa red 

to air . These observation s about oxygen sensitivity are in accordance with resul ts obtained by Hartmann 

et al [4] and Rho et al [6]. Experiments with reduced stoichiometry of pure oxygen at high polarization 

and 100 % R H are underway for po ssible detection of flooding by EPIS , enabling the proper resolution of 

the diffusion an d w ater transport inside PEMFC. 

Acknowledgement: The authors would like to thank the ANR -EPISTEL (ANR -17 -CE05 -0031) for the 

Ph.D. grant support for A.V. Shirsath and funding of the overall project. 

References 

[1] D.J.L. Brett, et al, ChemPhysChem . 11 (2010) 2714 –2731. 

[2] M.E. Orazem,et al, Electrochemical Impedan ce Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons , Inc., USA, 2008. 

[3] A.V. Shirsath, et al, Curr. Opin. Electrochem . 20 (2020) 82 –87 .

[4] P. Hartmann, et al, J. Phys. Chem . C. 2 (2014) 1461 –1471. 

[5] A.M. Niroum and, et al , Electrochem. Commun . 12 (2010) 122 –124 .

[6] Y. W. Rho, et al , J. Electrochem. Soc . 141 (1994) 2084 .Electrochemiluminescence – Counter Claims 

Lynn Dennany 1, Ashton Theakstone 2, Paul Francis 2

> 1

WestCHEM Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry, University of Strathclyde, Technology and 

Innovation Centre, 99 George Street, Glasgow, G1 1RD 

> 2

School of Life a nd Environmental Sciences, Deakin University, Pigdons Road, Waurn Ponds 3216, 

Australia 

lynn.dennany@strath.ac.uk 

Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) analytical applications have been increasingly exploited in recent years. 

The majority of these applications a re based upon the tris(2,2’ -bipyridine)ruthenium(II), [Ru(bpy) 3]2+ 

system with various secondary or tertiary alkylamine co -reactants such as tri -n-propylamine (TPrA) 

which generally follows the oxidative -reductive or anodic co -reactant ECL mechanism. 1,2,3 However, the 

mechanisms at the counter electrode have largely been ignored. This offers a unique opportunity to 

further exploit ECL based systems, particularly for multiplexed analysis, by examining the 

electrochemical processes occurring at the counter el ectrode. Indeed, this work highlights the importance 

of considering this in the elucidation of ECL reaction mechanisms.  Not surprisingly, the processes 

observed at the counter electrode were dependent on the configuration of the electrochemical cell, as (i )

the voltage at the counter electrode is adjusted by the potentiostat to account for any change within the 

system to maintain the desired potential at the working electrode, and (ii) the position and geometry of the 

counter electrode will determine the po rtion of emitted light that is measured by the photodetector. 4

Beyond the implications for investigation into ECL reaction mechanism, the recognition of processes at 

the counter electrode resulting in intense ECL and the development of our instrumental app roach to 

distinguish the source of the emission creates exciting possibilities for analytical applications involving a 

dual ECL response at the working and counter electrode. A new approach to examine 

electrochemiluminescence (ECL), in which the potentials at both the working and counter electrodes are 

measured and the emitted light is detected by a photomultiplier tube, camera and then a charge -coupled 

device (CCD) spectrometer, provides unequivocal evidence that the purported cathodic ECL of 

[Ru(bpy)3]2+ and tri -n-propylamine actually arises from anodic reactions at the counter electrode. 

References  

> 1

L. Shaw, L. Dennany, Curr Op Electrochem , 2017, 3 (1) , 23 -28.  

> 2

R. Russell, A.J. Stewart, L. Dennany, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, (408), 71 29 - 7136.  

> 3

K. Brown, M. McMenemy, M. Palmer, D.W. Robinson, M.J. Baker, P. Allan, L. Dennany, Anal Chem ,

2019, 91 , 12369 -12376.  

> 4

A.G. Theakstone, E.H. Doeven, X.A. Conlan, L. Dennany, P.S. Francis, Chem Comm , 2019, 55 , 7081 -

7084. Synthesis and electrocatalytic reduction of CO 2 on nanostructured 

# materials 

Anand Kumar 

Department of Chemical Engineering 

College of Engineering, Qatar University, P O Box 2713, Doha, Qatar 

akumar@qu.edu.qa 

Fossi l fuels accounts for a large portion of the total energy required for human beings over the past 

decades as they produce higher current density than other energy systems, resulting in an exponential 

growth in CO 2 emission to the atmosphere. This causes env ironmental pollution as CO 2 is considered to 

be one of the major contributors to global warming. On the other hand, CO 2 is also an essential material 

for the growth of all plants and many industrial processes. In order to maintain the ecosystem stability, the 

total release of CO 2 in the environment by all sources should be balanced with what is consumed in an 

ideal scenario. Considering the worldwide total energy consumption trends, it is challenging is to stop 

using fossil fuels until environmentally clean energy systems are invented and adopted. Another possible 

approach is to capture and sequestrate CO 2 geologically or to convert CO 2 into useful chemicals such as 

low -carbon fuels. All over the word, many research groups are working on green technologies f or the 

environmental friendly energy such as solar, wind, tidal and biomass energies whereas other research 

groups throughout the world are attempting to convert CO 2 into useful chemicals such as H 2, HCHO, 

HCOOH, CH 3OH, C 2H5OH, CH 4 and CO with photo - or el ectro -catalysis and others or to capture and 

sequestrate with different adsorbents. 

Herein, I plan to discuss the novel strategies adopted for synthesizing nanostructures for metallic 

and bimetallic catalysts and their performance for electrocatalytic red uction of CO 2. Some selected 

catalysts are also evaluated for thermal catalysis to compare the differences in activity and the nature of 

product when two different platforms are used. Catalysts are primarily composed of transition metals and 

their alloys ( Cu, Ni, Zn, Co etc. and alloys with Ag). Combustion synthesis, hydrothermal techniques and 

galvanic exchange methods were adopted to fine -tune the surface and structure of the catalysts [1,2] .

Some selected catalysts, e.g. Ni, Cu and Ag, were also deposited on fumed silica and calcined at high 

temperature to obtain supported catalysts for thermal -catalytic reduction of CO 2 [3] . Electrocatalytic 

results indicate selectivity towards for mic acid, and formate species; whereas thermal catalytic results 

show a greater tendency towards methane and CO formation. All the catalysts were characterized in detail 

using XRD, XPS, SEM/TEM before and after the reaction to understand the structural cha nges owing to 

the reaction. Reaction pathway studies were also performed by using in -situ FTIR studies in DRIFTS 

mode to monitor the reaction intermediates with temperature. 

References: 

[1] Nazir R, Kumar A, Ali S, Saad MAS, Al -Marri MJ. Galvanic Exchange as a Novel Method for 

Carbon Nitride Supported CoAg Catalyst Synthesis for Oxygen Reduction and Carbon Dioxide 

Conversion. Catalysts 2019;9:860. 

[2] Nazir R, Kumar A, Saleh Saad MA, Ashok A. Synthesis of h ydroxide nanoparticles of Co/Cu on 

carbon nitride surface via galvanic exchange method for electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction into 

formate. Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem Eng Asp 2020;598:124835. 

[3] Aheed A, Saad MAHS, Kumar A, Al -Marri MJ. Synthesis of fum ed silica supported Ni catalyst 

for carbon dioxide conversion to methane. Greenh Gases Sci Technol 2020:in -press. 

DOI:10.1002/ghg.1975 Influence of Aspect Ratio on the Current Density Profile 

# of Recessed Stimulation Electrodes 

Thomas NIEDERHOFFER *, Anne VANHOESTENBERGHE †, Henry T. LANCASHIRE * 

> *

Dpt . of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering , University College London  

> †

Aspire Centre for Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology, University College London 

Address: Gower Street, WC1E 6BT, London, UK 

E-mail : thomas.niederhoffer.19@ucl.ac. uk 

Introduction Electrical  stimulation is a therapeutic technique  aiming at restoring impaired biological 

functions by injecting a controlled amount of charge in the body . Commonly used planar stimulation 

electrodes exhibit a non -uniform current density distribution (j) that can lead to locally exceeding the safe 

stimulation threshold 1. An electrode can be recessed into an insulating part, which results in a different j 2,

thus a different injection of charge, which can induce damage or in sufficient stimulation . However, few 

studies 3 have focused on the influence of the recess parameters on j and how it could be used in electrode 

design . Material & Methods A finite element m odel was us ed to calculate j at recessed and non -recessed 

planar disc platinum electrode s in saline in response to an applied potential (COMSOL 54 Electrochemistry 

module). Recess shape (tubular and conical) and aspect ratio (AR), defined as recess depth divided by 

electrode diameter, were varied . Fig. 1 (c) shows a transverse view of a conical (l eft) and tubular (right )

recess with the electrode covering the entire base of the recess . Results The tubular recess presents a uniform 

j at the electrode surface and at most depths throughout the recess, except at the open end of the recess, 

where the apparent j is more similar to the one of a non -recessed electrode , fig. 1 (a, c). The conical recess 

presents a distribution more similar to a non -recessed electrode at the electrode surface , which becomes 

more uniform towards the recess end , fig. 1 (b, c). Increasing the AR makes j more uniform, both at the 

electrode surface and at the end of the recess , fig . 1 (a, b, d). At a given AR, varying the dimensions of the 

recess doe s not affect j, with relative standard deviations typically smaller than 0.5% (7 ARs tested , 3 pairs 

of dime nsions per AR) . Discussion The non -uniformity of j depend ed only on the recess shape and AR .

Understanding this relationship will allow finetun ing the current density profile at the electrode surface and 

at the recess end . For instance, a tubular recess with an AR larger than 2 will yield a uniform distribution 

at the electrode surface. Similarly, a conical recess of AR = 1/3 will reproduce the current density profile 

of a non -recessed electrode with less than 6% error , while being straightforward to manufacture. This study 

used a purely resistive model under steady -state conditions , which is a simple model for charge injection at 

an electrode -electrolyte interface . Fu rther studies will consider a more realistic charge -transfer model and 

conditions closer to real dynamic electrical stimulation experiments.  

> 1

S. F. Cogan, 2016,  Neurobionics: The Biomedical Engineering of Neural Prostheses , 3 55 ; 

> 2

M. F. Suesserman , 1991 , Biomed. Eng. IEEE Trans. , 38 401 ; 3 A. C. West and J . Newman , 1991 ,

J. Electrochem. Soc. , 138 1620 Comparison of Electrocatalytic Properties of AuCo 3O4/C and 

# PtCo 3O4/C Catalysts towards alcohols oxidation reaction 

Virginija Kepenienė , Gerardas Laurinavičius, Raminta Stagniūnaitė, Jūratė Vaičiūnienė, Vidas Pakštas, 

Loreta Tamašauskaitė -Tamašiūnaitė, Eug enijus Norkus 

Center for Physical Sciences and Technology 

Sauletekio ave. 3, LT -10257 Vilnius, Lithuania 

virginija.kepeniene@ftmc.lt 

In recent decades, direct alcohol fuel cells have been interested due to their advantages over hydrogen 

fuel cell. Alcohol s such as methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol are the most common types of fuel used 

in direct liquid -feed fuel cells . Moreover some of fuels are especially attractive as they can be produced 

from renewable biomass . Main advantages of liquid, low -molecul ar weight alcohols as fuel are that they 

can be easily handle storage and transported compared with hydrogen fuel .

One more important thing is research based on the development of new, various rare earth metals and 

metal oxides compositions, the improveme nt of known materials such as carbon with various additives 

with the aim to reduce or completely refuse of noble metal and to find low cost, more efficient and greater 

performance catalysts.  Nanoparticles -based catalysts are usually heterogeneous catalysts broken up into 

metal nanoparticles in order to speed up the catalytic process. Metal nanoparticles have a higher surface 

area so there is increased catalytic activity because more catalytic reactions can occur at the same time. Pt 

is known as one of the b est electrocatalysts for alcohols oxidation. However, a mong the many various 

catalysts studied for oxidation of alcohols in alkaline media Au was noticed to have high electrocatalytic 

activity towards the oxidation of alcohols and great tolerance for surfa ce poisoning .

This paper presents comparison of electrocatalytic activities of AuCo 3O4/C and Pt Co 3O4/C catalysts 

towards methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol oxidation reactions in an alkaline medium . The Au and Pt 

nanoparticles were deposited on the Co 3O4/carbon (Co 3O4/C) substrate using microwave irradiation 

method. The composition, morphology and structure of the prepared catalysts were characterized using 

Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP -OES), Transmission Electron 

Microsco py (TEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). 

Electrochemical analyses were performed using a cyclic voltammetry and chrono -techniques. 

The amount of Au and Pt in the catalysts was evaluated by ICP -OES and equal to 0.105 and 0.147 mg 

cm -2, respectively. The electrochemically active surface area of Au and Pt nanoparticles was calculated 

from the cyclic voltammograms recorded on the investigated cat al ysts and was equal to 0.23 and 1.1 cm 2,

respectively. It has been determined t hat the Au Co 3O4/C catalyst show ed 3, 8 and 5 times higher 

electrocatalytic activity towards methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol oxidation compared with that 

obtained for the Pt Co 3O4/C catalyst. The AuCo 3O4/C and Pt Co 3O4/C catalysts also showed an enhanced 

electrocatalytic activity towards the oxidation of all investigated alcohols compared with the bare Au /C 

and Pt/C catalysts and Co 3O4/C substrate. Investigation of Electrochromism Process through Ultrafast Broadband 

# Spectroelectrochemistry 

Musah Zakaria , Hamza Kahri, Mohammed Ahmed Zabara, Can Berk Uzundal, Gozde Karaoglu, Burak Ulgu t

Bilkent Un iversity 

Department of Chemistry, Bilkent University , Ankara 06800, Turkey 

musah.zakaria@bilkent.edu.tr 

Electrochromism is the reversible change in optical properties such as ab sorbance and transmittance of a n electroactive 

material as a result of an induced redox reaction [1] . Electrochromic materials have gained much research attention 

since the discovery of organic conduct ing polymers with high prosp ects for diverse applications. The redox reaction 

leading to a color change in electrochromic materials is accompanied by doping/dedoping step s. Considering the 

oxidation of a neutral conducting polymer (for simplicity), first , the polymer loses electron s in a heterogeneous 

electron transfer leading to net positive charge creation. To achieve further oxidation, e lectroneutrality is restored by 

anions that diffuse from the bulk solut ion into the polymer. Since the diffusion rate of counterions is much slowe r

than electron transfer, it i s widely assumed that the oxidation process is limited by ion transport [2]. 

To test this assumption we employ Ultrafast Cy clic Voltammetry and br oadband UV -visible spectroscopy to decouple 

ionic charge transfer from heterogeneous electron transfer during electrochromism in poly(3,4 -

ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) thin films. We will present cyclic voltammetric 

experimental results at sweep rate s up to 50kV/ s obtained with a home -built fast potentiostat equip ped with IR 

compensation . A t such high swee p rates, the period for a full voltage sweep is reduced to the order of microseconds 

in whi ch counterion s do not h ave enough time to diffuse in to the diffusion layer and we effectivel y exclude their 

contribution towards electrochromism in the PEDOT:PSS films . At these fast sweep rates , we monitor the 

electrochromic behavior of the polymer by in situ UV -visible spectroscopy. The collected spectra are compound or 

averaged spectra (because the spectromet er cannot keep up with the rate of conversion between the redox forms of 

the polymer during Ultrafast Cyclic Voltammetry). Using p rincipal component anal ysis algorithm, we will decompose 

the compound spectra and calculate the time the polymer spends in each of its redox forms during the Ult rafast Cyclic 

Voltammetric experiments. We will also present the dependence of absorbance of the PEDOT:PSS thin films on sweep 

ra te .

Fig 1. a) Spectroelectrochemistry setup b) Effect of sweep rate on diffusion layer thickness. 

References: 

[1] Zhang, L., Wang, B., Li, X., Xu, G., Dou, S., Zhang, X., Chen, X., Zhao, J., Zhang, K. and Li, Y., 2019. Further 

understanding of the mechanisms of electrochromic devices with variable infrared emissivity based on polyaniline 

conducting polymers. Journal of Materials Chemistry C , 7(32), pp.9878 -9891. 

[2] Ikenoue, Y., Outani, N., Patil, A.O., Wudl, F. and Heeger, A.J. , 1989. Electrochemical studies of self -doped 

conducting polymers: verification of the ‘cation -popping’ doping mechanism. Synthetic metals , 30 (3), pp.305 -319. Screening Metal -free Carbon -based Electrodes for the Electrochemical 

# Reduction of CO 2

Edurne S. Larrea a,b , Jesús Iniesta c, Encarnación Raymundo -Piñero b, Conchi O. Ania b 

> a

CEMHTI, CNRS (UPR 3079), Université d’Orléans, 45071 Orléans, France  

> b

Le Studium F ellow, Loire Valley Institute of Advanced Studies, Tours & Orléans, France  

> c

Dept. Química Física e Instituto Universitario de Electroquímica, Universidad de Alicante, 03080 

Alicante, Spain 

edurne.larrea@cnrs -orleans.fr 

In a world that urgently needs to r edress the balance of energy derived from fossil fuels, an efficient 

transformation of CO 2 into valuable chemicals (e.g., formic acid, methanol, methane) has become the key 

towards combatting climate change, environmental pollution and natural resource cha llenges. However, 

being a thermodynamically stable molecule, the ideal concept of a direct conversion of CO 2 into chemical 

energy has to overcome several limitations such as kinetic barriers to lower overpotentials, increase 

faradaic efficiency and promote products selectivity [1,2]. As such, its conversion into added value 

chemical feedstocks and fuels demands highly efficient catalysts. Noble metals are among the most 

performing catalysts, although they face challenges related to a high cost, sustainabili ty and scarcity of 

precious metals. For this reason, the research in metal -free catalysts as sustainable and low -cost 

alternatives is attracting many efforts; advances in the development of highly performing non -metallic 

catalysts can make possible to over take metal -based catalysts in the race towards the technological 

marketplace of carbon dioxide conversion into chemicals [3] .

In this context, the objective of the study is to screen metal -free carbon materials as sustainable and 

efficient electrocatalyst s for the conversion of CO 2 into fuels. Despite some carbon materials have been 

successfully used for this purpose, yet the origin of their electrocatalytic activity and/or the nature of the 

active sites capable of reacting with the CO 2 molecule remain unc lear. Thus a smart design of carbon -

based catalysts with adequate electroactive sites is needed . For this reason, we have selected a series of 

carbons with different chemical, structural and textural properties, and analyzed their response as 

electrocataly sts for the reduction of carbon dioxide under different polarization conditions. A detailed 

rationalization of the conversion yields and selectivity towards different products will be discussed 

considering the interactions CO 2-carbon material, analyzing th e effect of the pore confinement, the 

presence of specific surface bonds that might control charge transfer reactions and/or electrochemical 

features necessary to activate a stable electrocatalytic transformation of carbon dioxide. 

Acknowledgments. This project has received funding from the European Research Council through a 

Consolidator Grant (ERC -CoG PHOROSOL, grant agreement 648161). 

References 

[1] Zhang, B.; Sun, L. Artificial Photosynthesis: Opportunities and Challenges of Molecular Catalysts. 

Chem . Soc. Rev. 48 (2019), 2216 –2264. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8cs00897c. 

[2] Tuller, H. L. Solar to Fuels Conversion Technologies: A Perspective. Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy 

6 ( 2017 ) 1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40243 -017 -0088 -2. 

[3] Dai L. (ed). Carbon -Base d Metal -Free Catalysts. Design and Applications, 2 vol. Wiley -VHC, 2018 .Comparative Study of the Electrical Conductivity of C arbon Materials 

# Measured Using Various Approaches 

Eder A mayuelas , Hafssa A rraghra ghi , Ana C asanova , Encarnacion R aymundo , Conchi A nia 

CEMHTI, CNRS (UPR 3079), Université d’Orléans, 45071 Orléans, France 

eder.amayuelas -lopez@cnrs -orleans.fr 

Carbon -based electrodes are largely used in many electrochemical applications over a wide variety of 

competitors owing to the diversity of existing carbon material s with good chemical and mechanical 

stability, relati vely high electronic conductivity , and low cost and sustainability [1 -3]. Although some 

carbons present electronic properties close to those of metallic electrodes (e.g., graphite, graphene and 

derivatives) , this is not the case for many other members of t he carbon family, since the heir conductivity 

depends strongly on the spatial arrangement of the carbon atoms. One example is the case of nanoporous 

carbons which usually display a low structural order, as a result of which their electronic conductivity is 

about 4-5 orders of magnitude lower than that of graphite or graphene [4]. For such materials, measuring 

the electrical conductivity is complex, and despite various method s have been reported in the literature, 

the comparison of the values obtained by dif ferent authors is not straightforward [5, 6]. Considering this, 

the objective of this study was to determine the electrical conductivity of a selection of carbon materials 

with different structural order , chemical composition, and porous features using vari ous methodologies: 

four -point probe technique, impedance spectrosco py, Van der Pauw method . Gathered data has shown 

that the dispersion in the conductivity values is quite low when the carbons display high electron mobility 

(e.g., graphite, graphene, carbo n black). In contrasts, when carbons with moderate to low electron 

mobility are measured (e.g., amorphous and functionalized porous carbons, graphene oxide, reduced 

graphene oxide), the differences between the values obtained with different methods become more 

pronounced. The values obtained using the four probe methods are reliable for carbon materials with a 

low level of anisotropy, provided that the pellets are homogenous at a macroscopic scale. In contrast, the 

values obtained by impedance spectroscopy of thin pellets seemed to be quite consistent in all cases. 

Acknowledgments. This project has received funding from the European Research Council through a 

Consolidator Grant (ERC -CoG PHOROSOL, grant agreement 648161). 

References 

[1] Iniesta J, Garcia -Cruz L , Gomis -Berenguer A , Ania CO, Carbon materials based on screen printing 

electrochemical platforms in biosensing applications. In Electrochemistry Series (Banks, Mortimer, 

Mclntosh, Eds.) RSC Publishing: Croydon, UK, 2016; Vol. 13, 133. 

[2] Dubey R, Gu rubiah V, Review of carbon -based electrode materials for supercapacitor energy storage, 

Ionics 25(2019) 1419. 

[3] McCreery RL, Advanced Carbon Electrode Materials for Molecular Electrochemistry, Chem. Rev. 

108 (2008) 2646 .

[4] Pandolfo AG, Hollenkamp AF, Carbon properties and their role in supercapacitors. J . Power Sources 

157 ( 2006 ) 11. 

[5] Rey -Raap N , Calvo EG, Bermúdez JM, Cameán I, García AB, Menéndez JA, Arenill as A, An 

electrical conductivity translator for carbons, Measurement 56 (2014) 215. 

[6] Casa nova A, Gomis -Berenguer A, Canizares A, Simon P, Calzada D, Ania CO , Carbon Black as 

Conductive Additive and Structural Director of Porous Carbon Gel, Materials ( MDPI ), 13 (2020) 217. Synthesis of ZnO nanostructures in different ethanol containing 

# electrolyte s for hydrogen production 

P. Batista -Grau a, R. M. Fernández -Domene a, R. Sánchez -Tova r b, J. García -Antón a 

> a

Ingeniería Electroquímica y Corrosión (IEC), Instituto Universitario de Seguridad Industrial, 

Radiofísica y Medioambiental (ISIRYM), Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 

Valencia, Spain.  

> b

Departamento de Ingeniería Química, Universitat de València, Av de les Universitats, s/n, 46100 

Burjassot, Sp ain. 

Presenting author’s email: raferdo1@etsii.upv.es 

Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a n -type semiconductor with numerous applications in photocatalysis due to its 

abundance, non -toxicity, versatility and unique photoelectrical properties , as a wide band gap of 3.37 eV 

and high electron mobility, from 10 to 100 times higher compared to titanium dioxide. 

In the present study, ZnO nanostructures were synthesized by anodization method in an aqueous 

bicarbonate electrolyte with different amounts (10, 25 and 50 v /v %) of ethanol (E) under controlled 

hydrodynamic (H) and stagnant (S) conditions followed by thermal annealing. Morphology, crystallinity, 

and vibrational properties of the samples were studied by means of Field Emission Scanning Electron 

Microscop y (FE -SEM) and Confocal Laser -Raman Spectroscopy. Finally, photoelectrochemical water 

splitting measurements using ZnO nanostructures as photoanodes were performed. 

According to the results, the synthesized ZnO nanostructures presented high photosensibility during wat er 

splitting experiments in aqueous Na 2S/Na 2SO 3 electrolyte as it is shown in Figure 1 . In particular, the 

sample anodized in 10 v/v % ethanol electrolyte at stagnant conditions (S -E-10 in Figure 1 (a)) present ed 

the highest photocurrent density response with a value of 0.34 mA/cm 2 at an applied potential of -0.46 

VAg/AgCl .

Figure 1. Current density under on/off simulated sunlight as a function of the applied potential for the 

nanostructures anodized at stagnant (a) and hyd rodynamic (b) conditions .

Acknowledgements 

Authors thank MINECO (CTQ2016 -79203 -R) for the financial support and, as well, to E3TECH under 

project CTQ2017 -90659 -REDT (MINECO, Spain). Authors would also like to thank the Ministerio de 

Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades (Project Code: CTQ2017 -90659 -REDT). R. M. Fernández -Domene 

also thanks the UPV for the concession of a postdoctoral grant (PAID -10 -17). Finally, project co funded 

by FEDER operational programme 2014 -2020 of Comunitat Valenciana (IDIFEDER/18 /044) is 

acknowledged. 

a)  b) Use of WO 3 nano wires for fenamiphos photoelectrochemical 

# degradation 

G. Roselló -Márquez a, R. M. Fernández -Domene a, R. Sánchez -Tovar b, J. García -Antón a 

> a

Ingeniería Electroquímica y Corrosión (IEC), Instituto Universitario de Seguridad Industrial, 

Rad iofísica y Medioambiental (ISIRYM), Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 

Valencia, Spain.  

> b

Departamento de Ingeniería Química, Universitat de València, Av de les Universitats, s/n, 46100 

Burjassot, Spain. 

Presenting author’s emai l: raferdo1@etsii.upv.es 

Wastewater usually contains a large amount of recalcitrant pollutants and its composition is complex. The 

wastewater pollutants include textile dyes, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, heavy metals, pulp and paper, 

surfactants, and othe r chemicals. Therefore, it is crucial to apply clean, environmentally friendly, and 

efficient wastewater treatment technologies that can remove these pollutants. 

Nanostructures of different materials are interesting for being used as photocatalysts in adv anced 

oxidation process es like the one known as photoelectrocatalysis (PEC) . Tungsten oxide is one of the best 

options due to its properties, such as suitable band gap , non -toxicity , high chemical stability in low pH 

values and ability to absorb a reasonab le fraction of the solar spectrum .

In this work, the synthesis of WO 3 nanostructures by electrochemical anodization has been optimized by 

means of an experiment design 3 3 in which three factors of the process have been varied with three 

different levels. These factors have been the electrolyte used during anodization, the annealing 

temperature and the annealing atmosphere in the post -anodiz ation thermal process. The acids used as 

electrolyte have been sulfuric acid (H 2SO 4), methanesulfonic acid (CH 4O3S) an d nitric acid (HNO 3). The 

heating temperature varied between 400 °C, 500 °C and 600 °C, while the atmospheres tested were air, 

nitrogen and argon. 

In order to analyze the properties of each sample obtained, different morphological, structural, 

electrochem ical and photoelectrochemical techniques were used to characterize the nanostructures. 

Once the optimal nanostructures were obtained, they were used to degrade fenamiphos, a harmful and 

toxic organophosphate pesticide. For this purpose, the technique know n as photoelectrocatalysis was 

used, where the nanostructures obtained previously acted as photoanodes . This process was monitored 

using UV -Visible and HPLC to verify that the entire process was going as expected and to subsequently 

analyze the percentage and kinetics of degradation. 

The obtained results showed that the optimal conditions for the synthesis of nanostructures are as follows: 

use of CH 4O3S and subsequently heat the nanostructures in an air atmosphere at 600 °C, since a better 

photoelectrochem ical behaviour was obtained.  The fenamiphos degradation was achieved at 2 h of 

experiment and the intermediate formation was noticed at 1 h of PEC experiment. 

Acknowledgments 

Authors thank MINECO (CTQ2016 -79203 -R) for the financial support and, as well, to E3TECH under 

project CTQ2017 -90659 -REDT (MINECO, Spain). Authors would also like to thank the Ministerio de 

Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades (Project Code: CTQ2017 -90659 -REDT). R. M. Fernández -Domene 

also thanks the UPV for the concession of a postdo ctoral grant (PAID -10 -17) and G. Roselló -Márquez 

also thanks the Generalitat Valenciana for the concession of a pre -doctoral grant (ACIF/2018/159). 

Finally, project co funded by FEDER operational programme 2014 -2020 of Comunitat Valenciana 

(IDIFEDER/18/044 ) is acknowledged .Synergic Effects between Carbon and Redox Couples D ispersed in 

# Electrolytes for Zn -air Batteries 

E. Pujades -Otero , D. Tonti, N. Casañ -Pastor 

Institut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB, CSIC) 

Campus UAB, E-08193, Bellaterra , Barcelona, Spain 

epujades@icmab.e s

The use of nanocarbons as dispersed conducting particles can bring interesting advantages in the electrolyte 

of electrochemical storage devices as this material can ensure a high conductivity and area. Moreover, the 

introduction of multiredox couples dispersed in the electrolyte can also lead to remarkable impr ovements, 

as seen in Li/air batteries [1], [2] . These redox couples can act both as redox mediators and catalysts for the 

oxygen reduction or evolution reactions (ORR, OER) that take place during the battery cycling. 

Polyoxometalate clusters or othe r nanoparticles such as IrOx are already known by their catalytic activity 

in O2 reduction and reoxidation processes [3] .

Herein, the influence of carbon and redox couples in aqueous alkaline and organic media has been studied 

for Zn -O2 cell electrolytes. Furthermore, the interaction between carbons and the redox compounds have 

also been tested, as a significantly enhanced catalytic activity is expected being the redox particles coupled 

to the carbons. We do observe a synergy between the redox and the conducting species giving rise to 

enhanced currents and lower overpotenti als. The relevant parameters and hypothesis for a mechanism will 

be discussed. 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Spanish Government, through the “Severo Ochoa” Programme for 

Centers of Excellence in R&D (SEV -2015 -0496) and the projec ts MAT2017 -91404 -EXP and RTI2018 -

097753 -B-I00 with FEDER co -funding. The authors participate in the FLOWBAT 2021 platform promoted 

by the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). 

References 

[1] T. Homewood et al. , “Using polyoxometalates to enhance the capacity of lithium -oxygen 

batteries,” Chem. Commun. , vol. 54, no. 69, pp. 9599 –9602, 2018, doi: 10.1039/c8cc03832e. 

[2] J. -S. Lee, C. Lee, J. -Y. Lee, J. Ryu, and W. -H. Ryu, “Polyoxometalate as a N ature -Inspired 

Bifunctional Catalyst for Lithium -Oxygen Batteries,” ACS Catal. , vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 7213 –7221, 

2018, doi: 10.1021/acscatal.8b01103. 

[3] R. Zhang et al. , “A Dissolution/Precipitation Equilibrium on the Surface of Iridium -Based 

Perovskites Con trols Their Activity as Oxygen Evolution Reaction Catalysts in Acidic Media,” 

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. , vol. 58, pp. 1 –6, 2019, doi: 10.1002/anie.201814075. Nitrogen -doped Nanoarrays Modified 3D Hierarchical Graphene as Co -Function 

## Host for High Performance Flexible Li -S Battery 

Ruichao Lu , Meng Cheng, Lijuan Mao, Miao Zhang, Yuena Meng,* Zhixiang Wei* 

National Center for Nanoscience and Technology 

No. 11, Be iyitiao Zhongguancun, Beijing 100190, P. R. China 

Lithium -sulfur (Li -S) batteries with high energy density and low cost are regarded as promising 

candidates for the next -generation energy storage systems. 1 Practical application of Li -S batteries is st ill 

hindered by both the shuttle effect of polysulfides and the severe Li dendrites growth.  To  overcome 

challenges in Li -S batteries , various ways have been thoroughly explored for Li anode or S cathode 

separately with little attention to the co -function h osts for both Li and S. 2, 3 We believe that the co -

function hosts are prospective with simultaneous promotion for both Li anode and S cathode. Luckily, 

there are various similarities in the design of structures and properties , such as highly conductive skeleton 

to effectively host active materials and uniformly polar surface to improve the performances, which 

makes it possible to u se the same material to improve performances simultaneously. Therefore, to build 

an app roach of co -function hosts for Li anode and S cathode simultaneously, a rational design of 3D 

hierarchical skeleton is highly desired. 

Herein, we designed and fabricated a 3D , freestanding and hierarchical porous reduced graphene 

oxide with N-doped nanoarr ays (3DRGO/NC) as the co -function host for Li anode and S cathode. The 3D 

freestanding porous RGO forms the main skeleton structure to hold the Li metal and elemental S , and 

hetero atom N doping can lower th e Li nucleation overpotential and immobilize the p olysulfide s. More 

importantly, the well -aligned nanoarrays can effectively confine Li -ions flux and provide an optimized 

ion -diffusion pathway for better Li plating/stripping behavior and enhanced S utilization/conversion .

Particularly , an  ultrathin graphe ne barrier layer  was built on RGO with N-doped  nanoarrays 

(3DRGO/NC -BL)  which  can effectively retain intermediate polysulfides staying in the cathode through 

physical confinement . As a result, the 3DRGO/NC shows a perfect Li plating behavior without growth of 

Li dendrite or “bulk” Li deposition, high CE of 98.0% for 300 cycles with low nucleation overpotential 

(14 mV), long cycle lifespan (500 h) and perfect rate performance.  The 3DRGO/NC -BL exhibit high 

initial discharge capacity of 1185 mAh g −1 with excel lent  CE  and present a long stability up to 500 cycles 

with high -reversible specific capacity of 927 mAh g-1. Most  importantly , a flexible battery is 

demonstrated  with  excellent performance in flat, bent, and even rolled states by combining 

3DRGO/NC@Li anod e and 3DRGO/NC -BL@S cathode, which provide a promisi ng strategy for flexible 

energy -storage devices. Li Anode 

> S Cathode

Co -Function Host GO

Reference s:

1. Bruce PG, Freunberger SA, Hardwick LJ, Tarascon JM, Li -O2 and Li -S batteries with high energy 

storage. Nat . Mater . 2011; 11: 19 -29. 

2. Chang J, Shang J, Sun Y, Ono LK, Wang D, Ma Z, Huang Q, Chen D, Liu G, Cui Y, Qi Y, Zheng Z, 

Flexible and stable high -energy lithium -sulfur full batteries with only 100% oversized lithium. Nat .

Commun . 2018; 9: 4480. Surface modification of electroactive materials particles with titanium 

# carbosilicide : structural and electrochemical study 

A.V. Ivanishchev 1, I.A. Ivanishcheva 1, S. -C. Nam 2, J. Mun 3 

> 1

Institute of Chemistry, Saratov State University, Saratov, Russia  

> 2

Re search Institute of Industrial Science & Technology, POSCO Global R&D Center, 100 

Songdogwahak -ro, Yeonsu -gu, Incheon 21985, Republic of Korea  

> 3

Department of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Incheon National University, Academy -ro 119, 

Yeonsu -gu, Incheon 22012, Republic of Korea 

ivanischevav@inbox.ru 

The compounds of the so -called MAX phases class (where M is a transition metal, A is an element of the 

main subgroup of the III -V groups of the periodic system, X is carbon or nitrogen), which were firstly 

synthesized in the 1970s are widely used as the basis of structural materials due to high mechanical 

strength, outstanding heat and electroconductive properties, as well as chemical stability [1]. We used one 

of s uch compounds – Ti 3SiC 2 (TSC) [2] for the particles surface modification of polyanionic cathode 

materials for lithium -ion battery e.g.  Li 3V2(PO 4)3/carbon composite (LVP/C). TSC modified LVP/C 

demonstrates improved electrochemical behavior (Fig. 1) [3]. 

Fig. 1: Scanning electron micrograph ( a) and galvanostatic charge/discharge capacity behavior ( b) of the 

TSC -modified LVP/C -electrode. Empty markers of (b) correspond to the material with bare particles, 

filled markers – TSC -modified particles .

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project No 

20 -03 -00381). 

References :

[1] W. Jeitschko, H. Nowotny // Monatsh. Chem. – 1967 . – V. 98 – P. 329 -337. 

[2] M.W. Barsoum // Prog. Solid St. Chem. – 2000 , – V. 28 . – P. 201 -281. 

[3] I.A. Ivanishcheva, A.V. Ivanishchev, A. Dixit // Monatsh. Chem. – 2018. – V. 150 – P. 489 -498 .

# (a)  (b) Modified Blue Algae Biochar Electrode for CO2RR 

Qu n Yan , He Wang 

Jiangnan University 

School of Environmental and Civil Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China. 

yanqun@jiangnan.edu.cn s

The CV curves of ABC app ear s with a nearly -rectangu lar shape indic ating that the samples possess better 

capacitance traits and smaller internal resistance . After the iron loading , the CV curve is significantly 

narrow ed and the current peak shifts to -0.5 V. This is due to the iron loading blocked the porou s algal 

biochar structure, thereby reducing the electric double layer capacitance . In addition, the right shift ing and 

widening of the current peak could be attributed to the reduction of Fe(III) via the presence of ligand to 

metal charge transfer ( LMCT ).

EIS curve of the ABC electrode appeared as an approximate semicircular arc with smaller diameter than 

that of Fe(III) -AB C-20, SBC and Fe(III) -SBC -20 electrodes, implying the ABC based electrode possess 

lower electron transfer resistance than their SBC bas ed counterparts .Nitrogen -doped graphenic materials: towards platinum -free catalytic 

# layers in PEMFCs 

Lilian Moumaneix 12* , Sébastien Fontana 1, Claire Hérold 1, François Lapicque 2 

> 1

IJL CNRS UMR 7198, Université de Lorraine, 2 allée André Guinier 54000 Nancy  

> 2

LRGP CNRS U MR 7274, 1 rue Grandville 54001 Nancy 

(*email: lilian.moumaneix@univ -lorraine.fr )

Platinum nanoparticles dispersed over porous carbon materials are still widely used as catalysts for 

oxygen reduction reaction in polymer fuel cells. However, platinum reso urces are diminishing rapidly, 

and the lack of recycling solution will aggravate the situation for this critical metal during the next 

century. Nitrogen -doped graphenic materials are investigated as cheap alternative to platinum since 

nitrogen is able to c atalyze oxygen reduction by partially redistributing the electric charges of the 

nei ghboring carbon atoms. 

An original synthesis route to nitrogen -doped graphenic foam has been developed, this material 

exhibiting both polycrystallinity with surface area u p to 2200 m 2.g -1, and electrochemical properties 

brought by the nitrogen doping (1 -3 at.%). 

Recently, our materials have been tested in a complete PEMFC setup in impedance and potentiometric 

measurements, to assess their performance in energy production a nd their kinetic capacities. First tests 

showed that N -doped graphenic foam as cathode catalyst, allows current density over 30 mA .cm -2, a 

power density of 3.2 mW.cm -2, approximately 50 -fold larger than with nitrogen -free graphenic foam. 

While nitrogen ato ms appear essential to catalytic activity, intrinsic carbon defects nature, pore size o r

oxygen functions content could also play an essential role for catalysis purpose, as currently studied to 

optimize furthermore our materials.     

> TEM mic rograph sof N-doped graphenic foam ;electrochemical performance of N -doped graphenic foam as cathode
> catalyst during PEMFC operation

# Photoremoval of Cyanobacteria and Cyanotoxins by Magnetic ZnO -

# based Photocatalysts 

Albert Serrà ,a Petai Pip, a,b,c Elvira Gómez, d and Laetitia Philippe a 

> a

Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Feuerwerkerstrasse 39, CH -

3602 Thun, Switzerland.  

> b

Laboratory for Mesoscopic Systems, Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland.  

> c

Laboratory for Multiscale Materials Experiments, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232, Villigen PSI, 

Switzerland.  

> d

Departament de Ciència de Materials i Química Física and Institute of Nanoscience and 

Nanotechnology (IN2UB), Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès, 1, E -08028, Barcelona, 

Catalonia, Spain. 

albert.serraramos@empa.ch 

Promoted by rising global temperatures and anthropological trends such as water pollution, the formation 

of harmful cyanobacterial algal blooms and, in turn, the release of cyanotoxins are becoming major 

problems worldwide. In response, the development of efficien t, effective strategies and technologies for 

treating cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins, especially in drinking and recreational water, is urgently required. 

In the study reported here, a circular process ( Figure 1 ) for water decontamination and biofuel produc tion 

to minimize the generation of residues and improve the efficiency of photocatalysts was proposed. 

Spirulina was cultivated using microalgal ashes while carbon dioxide was fixed and oxygen was released, 

and microalgal ashes generated during the combust ion of microalgal pellets were recycled as a 

supplement for the cultivation media. Next, magnetic hybrid ZnO -based photocatalysts were synthesized 

following a biotemplating process involving Ni electroless deposition, ZnO deposition, and sulfidation, 

which led to the formation of onion -shape Ni@ZnO@ZnS -microalgae hybrids. Ultimately, the hybrids, 

which exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity for the degradation of cyanotoxins (i.e., anatoxin -A) and 

two species of cyanobacteria, were implemented for wate r decontamination using sunlight irradiation and 

recycled after their effective lifetime for the manufacture of microalgal biopellets as biofuel. 

Acknowledgment 

Albert Serr à would like to acknowledge funding from the EMPAPOSTDOCS -II program (Marie 

Sk 1odowska -Curie grant agreement number 754364). The 200020 -172774 project from the Swiss 

National Science Foundation (SNF) is also acknowledged. 

References 

[1] Serrà, A.; Pip, P.; Gómez, E.; Philippe, L. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2020 , 268, 118745 .

Figure 1 : Schematic representation from reference [1]. Green Electrosynthesis of 4 -Aminophenol by using Electrodeposited 

# Porous Au Micropillars 

Albert Serrà ,a Maxime Tranchant, a Christopher Gunderson, a Enrico Bertero, a Jaume García‐Amorós, b

Elvira Gómez, c Johann Michler, a and Laetitia Philippe a 

> a

Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Feuerwerkerstrasse 39, CH -

3602 Thun, Switzerland.  

> b

Departament de Química Inorgànica i Orgànica (Secció de Química Orgànica), Universitat de 

Barcelona, Martí i Franquès, 1, E -08028 Barcelona, Ca talonia, Spain.  

> c

Departament de Ciència de Materials i Química Física and Institute of Nanoscience and 

Nanotechnology (IN2UB), Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès, 1, E -08028, Barcelona, 

Catalonia, Spain. 

albert.serraramos@empa.ch 

Using 4 -aminophenol as an intermediate in manufacturing analgesic and antipyretic drugs has given the 

product important commercial value. Currently, several methods are available for synthesizing 4 -

nitrophenol, the most rel evant being the multistep iron -acid reduction of 4-nitrochlorobenzene or 4-

nitrophenol, the catalytic hydrogenation of nitrobenzene, and the electrochemical reduction of 4-

nitrophenol. However, the necessary use of highly corrosive mineral acids and danger ous toxic reducing 

agents, poor chemoselectivity and yields, and the growing demand for 4 -aminophenol demonstrate the 

need for developing or optimizing green, efficient routes for preparing 4 -aminophenol. Among possible 

options, organic electrosynthesis ca n realize an environmentally friendly, chemoselective redox 

transformation under conditions free of exogenous reductants due to the use of electric current. However, 

the optimization of efficient electrocatalysers and electrochemical media conditions needs to be further 

studied to propose such a route for synthesizing 4 -aminophenol. 

In the study reported here, the electrosynthesis of highly accessible, well -defined porous Au micropillars 

for use as electrocatalyzers in the chemoselective electroreduction of 4-nitrophenol was optimized. Using 

the double shape -controlled electrodeposition of Au based on the combination of 3D laser lithography 

and colloidal lithography allowed the reproducible synthesis of porous Au micropillars with highly 

accessible surface a reas. Additionally, using the porous Au micropillars in moderately acidic conditions 

realized the electrosynthesis of 4 -aminophenol, both in high yields and with high chemoselectivity. 

Porous Au micropillars can thus also contribute to an efficient, enviro nmentally friendly method of 

removing 4-nitrophenol from wastewater. The electrosynthesis of porous Au micropillars as 

electrocatalyzers for 4-nitrophenol reductions can offer a competitive, ecofriendly strategy for 

electrosynthesizing 4 -aminophenol and de contaminating wastewater. 

Acknowledgment 

Albert Serr à would like to acknowledge funding from the EMPAPOSTDOCS -II program (Marie 

Sk1odowska -Curie grant agreement number 754364). 

Figure 1: (a) FE -SEM micrographs. Scale bar: 2 μm. ( b) Time -dependent UV -vis spectra at 20 °C. Investigation on the Photoconductivity of Covalently Grafted None -

# noble Metal Polyoxometalates -porphyrin Copolymer 

Jingjing Wang , Yiming Liang, Corinne Boudon, Vasilica Badets, Antoine Bonnefont, Laurent Ruhlmann 

Institut de Chimie - UMR au CNRS n° 7177, Université de Strasbourg 

4 rue Blaise Pascal, 67000 Strasbourg, France 

jingjing.wang@etu.unistra.fr 

Polyoxometalates (POMs) are composed of cations and polyanion clusters with structural diversity. POM 

anions in their ground states can be excited by UV or near - visible light .[1, 2] The essence of excitation is 

the charge transfer from an oxygen atom to the d 0 TM (transition metal) in the presence of light with 

abundant energy. In order to expand its app lication scope, we expect it to be connected with porphyrins, a 

common photosensitizer, and applied to the visible region.[3] Here, a non -noble Fe -based POM 

(Anderson) with ZnT 2P porphyrin was synthesized by electropolymerization. This process was also 

mon itored by EQCM (Electrochemical Quartz Crystal Microbalance). The copolymer was characterized 

by UV -Vis -NIR spectroscopy, electrochemistry. 

Their electrical properties have been studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and their 

photovoltaic perf ormances have been investigated by photocurrent transient measurements under visible -

NIR light irradiation. The photocurrent for the Fe III POM -ZnT 2iso P• copolymer can be up to 200 μA/cm 2.

Figure 1. a) Structure of Fe III POM -ZnT 2isoP • copolymer . b) Consecutive cyclic voltammograms (first 25 

scans) and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance measurements (Δm) for the first 25 scans during 

the electropolymerization . c) Transient photocurrent study for Fe III POM -ZnT 2iso P• copolymer .

Reference s

[1] T. Yamase. Photo - and Electrochromism of Polyoxometalates and Related Materials. Chem. Rev., 

1998 , 98 , 307 - 326. 

[2] S. Wang, G. Yang. Recent Advances in Polyoxometalate -Catalyzed React ions. Chem. Rev., 2015 ,

115 , 4893 - 4962. 

[3] C. Allain, S. Favette, L. Chamoreau, et al. Hybrid Organic –Inorganic Porphyrin –Polyoxometalate 

Complexes. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008 , 2008 , 3433 - 3441. Versatile Decoration of Carbon Support with Metal Nanoparticles for 

# Electro catalytic Application 

Meng Liu ,a Giovanni Valenti, a Ferdinand Hof, b Miriam Moro, a Alain P énicaud, b and Francesco 

Paolucci *,a

> a

Department of Chemistry “G . Ciamici an”, Universi ty of Bologna 

via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy 

> b

CNRS, Centre de Recherche Paul Pascal (CRPP) 

UMR 503 1, F -33600 Pessac, France 

meng. liu4 @unibo.it 

The development of efficient catalysts is significant in order to achieve the shift from fossil fuels to 

sustainab le alternatives, such as hydrogen energy. [1] One of the promisi ng ways to synthe size 

electrocatalysts is to combin e metal nanostructures with support s that possess high electrical conductivity 

as well as high surfac e area .[2,3 ] Here, w e reported a general metho d for the synthesis of metal 

nanoparticle /nano carbon composite , denot ed as M( nP )/nC, which incl uded generation of graph enide 

solution from graphitic carbon source and reaction between graphenide solution and metal salt .

Electro catalytic performance o f the prepared mat erials were measured for reactio ns in water electrol yzer 

and fuel cell , such a s the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) , oxygen evolution reaction (OER) , and 

oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) .

On the one hand , starting with various carbon so urces , graphenide solutions with carbon flake s differ ing 

in lateral dimension were achieved ; after reaction with iron salt , iron nano particle /nano car bon composite s

were generated with controllable size o f iron nano particles . Electrochemi cal measurements sh owed that 

the choice of initial carbon was cr uc ial for determining the scale of carbon flake and simultaneously 

tailoring the size of iron nanoparticle s, which ha d a major impact on electrocatalytic performance for the 

ORR and OER. On the other hand , follo wing the same synthetic method , when tu ning metal species from 

transition metal iron to noble me tal rhodium , nano carbon with de coration of rhodium nanoparticles was 

also successfully synthesized and displayed eff icient electrocatalytic activity for the OER and HER in 

alkaline condition .

[1] Wei, C.; Rao, R. R.; Peng, J. ; Huang, B.; Stephens, I. E. L.; Risch, M.; Xu, Z. J.; Shao -Horn, Y. 

Recommended Practices and Benchmark Activity for Hydrogen and Oxygen Electrocatalysis in Water 

Splitting and Fuel Cell s. Adv. Mater. 2019 , 31 , 1806296. 

[2] Hof, F.; Liu , M.; Valenti, G .; Picheau, E.; Paolucci, F.; Pénicaud , A. Size Control of Nanographene 

Supported Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Enhances Their Electrocatalytic Performance for the Oxygen 

Reduction and Oxygen Evo lution Reactions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019 , 123 , 2077 4.

[3] Hof , F.; Boni, A.; Valenti, G.; Huang, K.; Paolucci, F.; Pénicaud , A. From Food Waste to Efficient 

Bifunctional No np recious Electrocatalyst. Chem. Eur. J. 2017 , 23 , 15283 .Enhancin g the Catalyti c Activity of Pd Nano particles for the Ethanol 

# Oxidation Reaction in Alkaline Media by Developi ng a Vulcan Support 

# Functionalized with the Mesityl Cu Organometallic Compound 

P. C. Meléndez González 1, M. E. Sánchez -Castro 1,2 , I. L. Alon so -Lemus 3, B. Escobar -Morales 4, W .J. Pech -

Rodr íguez 5, T .W. Napporn 6, F. J. Rodríguez -Varela 1,2 ,*.

> 1

Programa de Nanociencias y Nanotecnología, Cinvestav Unidad Saltillo, Av. Industria Metalúrgica 

1062, Parque Industrial Ramos Arizpe. Ramos Arizpe, Coahuila, C.P 25900, México .

> 2

Programa de Sustentabilidad de los Recursos Naturales y Energía, Cinvestav Unidad Saltillo. 

> 3

CONACYT, Sustentabilidad de los Recursos Naturales y Energía, Cinvestav Unidad Saltillo. 

> 4

CONACYT , Centro de Investigación Científica de Yucat án, Calle 43 No. 130 , Col. Chuburná de 

Hidalgo, Mérida, Yuca tán, C.P. 97200, México. 

> 5

Universidad Politécnica de Victoria, Av. Nuevas Tecnologías 5902, Par que Científico y Tecnológico de 

Tamaulipas, Cd Victoria, Tamps., C.P.87138, México 

> 6

Université de Poi tiers, IC2MP UMR 7285 CNRS, «Equipe SAMCat», 4, rue Michel B runet, B27, TSA 

51106, 86073 Poitiers Cedex 09, France. 

*javier.varela@cinvestav.edu.mx 

Herein, Vulcan XC -72 was functionalized with the hom e-obtained mesityl copper (Cu -mes) 

organometallic compound . CCu -mes was characterized by FTIR, and Raman. The results showed the 

successful incorporation of organometallic compound and structural modification of Vulcan. Afterward s,

Pd nanoparticles were di spersed on the novel supports by the pol yol method, obta ining 20 wt. % Pd/C Cu -

> mes

. The nanocatalyst was characterized by XRD , where a shift towards higher 2θ angles indicated the 

formation of alloyed Pd -Cu phases . The crystallite size was estimated using the Sche rrer equation ,

obtaining values of 2.9 and 6.9 n m for Pd/C Cu -mes and conventional Pd/ C, respectively. Chemical 

composition analysis showed that the organometallic compounds are chemically stable, maintaining a 

high Cu concentration after the synthes is of the nanocatalyst. XPS analysis of Pd/C Cu -mes indicate d mainly 

the presence of Cu 0 and Cu +2 in the Cu 2p region. At the Pd 3d region, the Pd 0, Pd +2 , Pd +4 species have 

been identified. In the case of Pd/C the three species were a lso observed . Moreover , there was a shift to 

higher BE of the doublets in Pd/C Cu-me s compared Pd/C, attributed to the chemical interaction betw een Pd 

and Cu. The electrochemical characterization was performed in 0.5 mol L -1 KOH. The ECSA values of 

Pd/C Cu-mes and Pd/C were 118.72 and 2 4.55 m 2 g-1, respectively. A hig her value was obtained for Pd/C Cu -

> mes

, indicating a large number of active sites that participate in the electrochemical reaction, w hich can 

also be related to the electrocatalytic activity of the nanocatalyst. The cat alytic activity of the nanocatalyst 

in CO -stripping tests showed th at the CO oxidation occurs at more negative potentials in Pd/C Cu -mes 

compared to Pd/C. The polarization curves of the EOR at the nanocatalysts showed that Pd/C Cu -mes 

promotes the reaction a t a more negative onset potential, i.e., E onset = 0. 38 V/ RHE, compared to 0.41 

V/RHE of Pd/C . The mass current density ( jm) was considerabl y higher at Pd/C Cu -mes (1234 mA mg -1Pd ), 

compared with Pd/C ( 665 mA mg -1Pd ). An electrolysis test was carried out for 4 h where is important to 

remark that the n anocatalysts supported in functionalized Vulcan con sume d a higher percentage of 

ethanol (61 %) during electro lysis than Pd/C (47 %) , which indicated a higher catalytic activity and 

stability over time. In AEM -DEFC test s, the cell equipped with a Pd/C Cu-mes nanocatalyst anode showed 

the highest open circuit volt age (OCV) 0.60 V, compared to 0.50 V at the cell having a Pd/C anode ,

respectively. The maximum power density value was 0.14 W cm -2 at 0.5 A cm -2 by Pd/C Cu -me s. The results 

of this study clearl y showed an enhanced behavior for the EOR in alkaline media by the nanocatalysts 

supported on functionalized Vulcan w ith Cu -mes, attributed to the formation of alloy phases between Pd 

and Cu and therefore the combination of the bifunctional mechan ism, as well as ligand and strain effect s.

In summary, Pd/C Cu -mes show ed a high cata lytic activity in AEM -DEFC applications. Electrochemical Investigation of Gramicidin Reconstituted into Liquid 

# Crystal line Cubic Phases 

A. Buta, a,b E. Nazaruk, a R. Bilewicz a

> a

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland. 

> b

Laboratory of Intracellular Ion Channels, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology Polish Academy of 

Science,  Pasteura 3, 02 -093  Warsaw, Poland. 

e-mail: abuta@chem.uw.edu.pl 

Liquid crystal line phases composed of lipids, water and incorporated ionophores such as 

gramicidin, provide a useful tool for the study of membrane transport.  Lipid ic cubic phase (LCP) consists 

of interpenetrating but noncontacting aqueous channel s surrounded by a lipid bilayer. These 

compartments are continuous in three d imensions, so the mesophase is called "bicontinuous". Specific 

features of lipid cubic phase  structure  make them convenient  for electrochemical measurements : they are 

stable in the presence of excess of water , highly viscous,  and can be easily placed at th e electrode surface .

The amount of protein sample needed for the measurements is small and its stability is increased.  Such 

membrane is bio mimetic and the conditions resemble those typical for biological bilayers - therefore the 

incorporated proteins and peptides can maintain their activity .

Gramicidin is a polypeptide antibiotic , a dimer that forms small pores in the membrane and 

allows the movement of monovalent cations . The antibacterial effect of gramicidin is based on increasing 

the permeability of e.g. potassium ions through membranes, which ultimately leads to the death of the 

bacterial cell . In the literature the re are other examples of the po re forming peptides applied as drugs 1 and 

a number of studies on diseases in which the formation of pores occurs in the cell membrane including 

bacterial infections 2 or Alzheimer's disease 3. Gramicidin, due to its small size and easy accessibility, can 

serve as a good model of transmembrane channels. 

Th e goals of our study were to prepare a stable monoolein cubic phase ( Pn3m ) with and without 

incorporated gramicidin. The phase identity and stru ctural parameters of the lipid samples were 

determined by Small -Angle X -ray Scattering ( SAXS). The ion transport of gramicidin incorporated into 

LCP was studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronoamperometry ( CA). The glassy carbon 

electrode s covered with a film of cubic phase with and without gramicidin w ere exposed to solutions of 

different concentrations of KCl and the currents were recorded upon application of potential steps 

towards positive and negative values of potential. The electrode capacitance and resistance of the films 

were evaluated by impedance spectroscopy (EIS) .

The project is implemented under the Operational Program Knowledge Education Development 

20 14 - 2020 co -financed from the European Social Fund.  

> 1

S. Liu, M. Yu, Y. He, L. Xiao, F. Wang, C. Song, S. Sun, C. Ling and Z. Xu, Hepatology, 2008, 47, 

1964 –1973.  

> 2

S. Bhakdi and J. Tranumjensen, Microbiol. Rev., 1991, 55, 733 –751.  

> 3

H. A. Lashuel, D. Hartley, B. M. Petre, T. Walz and P. T. Lansbury, Nature, 2002, 418, 291. Disulfide Bridges -based  Polymer as  Cathode for Rechargeable Li and 

# Mg Batteries 

Anh Ngoc Tran , Jean -Claude Leprêtre, Fannie Alloin 

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LEPMI, 38000 Grenoble, France 

E-mail address: ngoc -anh.tran@grenoble -inp.fr 

The  new technological era  to take  over from Li battery system  is currently investigated at a fast rate. 1 In 

this regard, the Mg based battery system h as gained considerable popularity as an alternative system since 

they proffer to provide one of the best economical solutions for electrical storage .2,3  Contrary to metal -

based inorganic active materials, organic materials seem very well adapted to the divalent character of 

Mg 2+ , and the performance obtained with Mg 2+ opening a wide window of in vestigations for the 

development of organic positive electrodes with high capacity using Mg as negative electrode.  In this study, 

polybe nzoquinonyldisulfide (PBQDS)  in lithium and magnesium -based electrolytes were investigated 

using cavity micro -electrode technic and galvanostatic cyclic tests.  In this study,  diglyme and sulfolane 

solvents, associated with both LiTFSI and Mg(TFSI) 2 were used. The electrochemical characteristics of 

PBQDS are truly  similar in term of potential and Epeak in both lithium and magnesium systems at a relative 

high scan rate, i.e. 1 mVs -1. An improvement of the redox couple reversibility seems to be observed in Mg 

form, with a Epeak = 400 mV with E 1/2 near 3 V vs Mg 2+ /Mg . Based on this interesting behavior, PBQDS 

was investigated in a coin cell configuration  as active material  in the present of glyme or sulfolane based 

electrolyte s. The cell achieved a stable capacity of 1 40 mAh .g-1 in sulfolane + LiTFSI at C/ 20 , whereas a 

value of 105 mAh.g -1 in sulfolane + Mg(TFSI) 2 can be obtained . The electrochemical process involved in 

both Mg and Li based electrolytes was compared. 

(1) Ponrouch, A. ; Bitenc, J.; Dominko, R.; Lindahl, N.; Johansson, P.; Palacin, M. R. Multivalent 

Rechargeable Batteries. Energy Storage Mater. 2019 , 20 , 253 –262. 

(2) Shea, J. J.; Luo, C. Organic Electrode Materials for Metal Ion Batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 

2020 .

(3) Muench, S.; Wild, A.; Friebe, C.; Häupler, B.; Janoschka, T.; Schubert, U. S. Polymer -Based Organic 

Batteries. Chem. Rev. 2016 , 116 (16), 9438 –9484. 

(4) Bitenc, J.; Pirnat, K.; Mali, G.; Novosel, B.; Randon Vitanova, A.; Dominko, R. Poly(Hydroquinoyl -

Benzoquinonyl Sulfide) as an Active Material in Mg and Li Organic Batteries. Electrochem. 

Commun. 2016 , 69 , 1 –5. A kinetic study of the chemical interaction between neurotransmitter 

# dopamine and the highly used anti -psychotic drugs olanzapine and 

# quetiapine. 

Raphael P. Bacil a*, Estenio Augusto de Oliveira Marcondes Filho a, Kevin de Aquino Dias a,

William Reis de Arauj ob, Diogo de O. Silva c, Alcindo A. dos Santos a, Leandro Helgueira de 

Andrade a and Silvia H. P. Serrano a

> a

Instituto de Química , Universidade de Sao Paulo - Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 748 - Bu tantã - São Paulo –

SP, Brazil. CEP: 05508 -000 

> b

Instituto de Química, Universidade Estadual de Campinas – UNICAMP – Rua Josué de Castro, 126, 

Cidade Universitária, Campinas, SP – Brazil. CEP: 13083 -861 

> c

Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêu ticas - ICAQ F, Universidade Federal de São 

Paulo – UNIFESP - Rua Prof. Arthur Riedel, 275 - Jardim Eldorado, Diadema, SP – Bra zil . CEP: 

09972270 

*bacil @i q.usp.br 

Mental disorders like schizophrenia affect about 0.7 % of the wor ld population 1. Nowadays, the 

treatment consists of atypical anti -psych otic drugs, mainly olanzapine (OLZP) and quetiapine (QTP) 2. It 

was observed a chemical interact ion between both OLZP and QTP , anti -psychotic drugs, with dopamine 

(DA) in ph osphate buff er solutions at physiological pH using cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry 

techni que s. DA electrochemical oxidation was hinder ing in th e presence of both OLZP and QTP . A

solution containing both anti -

psychotic drugs and DA 

presented a shi ft of DA ’s 

redox processes, hindering it s

electrochemical oxidation . We 

investigate the chemical 

int eraction voltametrically and 

obtained that bBoth drugs 

presented a first first -order 

kinetics with DA, presenting 

kinetic rate c onstants of 1.54 

10 -2 s-1 an d 7.78 10 -3 s-1 for 

OLZP and QTP, respectively. 

To further evaluate the the 

chemical reaction, a

minimalist model between 

was proposed using PIPES 

buffer molecule and 

cathecol catechol to simulated 

the DA - drug inter action . was 

proposed and tested . The 

mo del presente d a similar 

signal decrease and kinetic 

rate constant with those 

observed for both OLZP and 

QTP reaction with DA ,

suggesting that a chemical 

interaction occurs between 

pi perazine and catechol moiet ies .

Figure 1: DPV of solutions containing A) 1.0 mM , eac h, of OLZP and DA ; D) 1.0 mM , each, of QT P and 

DA ; G) 1.0 mM , each, of Pipes and CAT in PBS 0.1 M, pH = 7.4; I x t plots of the respective DPV (B -A; 

E-D; H -G); ln I x t pl ots of the respective DPV ( C-A; F-D; I-G) .References 

1 H. Y. Meltzer an d S. M. Stah l, The Dopamine Hypoth esis of Schizophrenia: A Review*, Schizophr. 

Bull. , 1976, 2, 19 –76. 

2 J. van Os and S. Kapur, Schizophrenia, Lancet , 2009, 374 , 635 –645. PEDOT Nanotubes : From Synthesis to Energy Storage and 

# Electrocatal ysis Applications 

Bruna M. Hryniewicz , Larissa Bach -Toledo and Marcio Vidotti 

Federal University of Paraná, Chemistry Department 

CP 19032, 81531 -980, Curitiba, PR, Brazil 

brumahry@gmail.com 

Nanostructured conducting polymers have been extensively studied to improv e properties and 

achieve new characteristics when compared to bulk polymers. In this work, poly -

3,4(ethylenedioxythiophe ne) nanotubes (PEDOT -NTs) were successfully electrodeposited onto flexible 

stainless -steel mesh electrodes in the presence of methyl orange (MO) template [1] . It was found that the 

pH of the reaction medium is an important parameter to tune up the final morphology (Fig. 1) . The modified 

electrodes were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron 

microscopy. To better understand the mechanism of nanotube formation, the current -time transient s

obtained in the synthesis were fitted according to a theoretical mod el. 

Fig . 1. SEM images of PEDOT synthesized in the presence of MO at (a) pH 2, (b) pH 4 and (c) pH 7 

In  this work, we report the study of the multifunctionality of PEDOT -NT s synthesize d at pH 2 in 

energy storage and electrocatalytic degradation of nitrophenol isomers. The United States Environmental 

Protection Agency listed NPhs as priority pollutants, and ortho and para are classified as hazardous 

substances [ 2]. Moreover, nitroaromati cs compounds are stable and recalcitrance to degradation [ 3]. The 

NPh reactions (Fig. 2(a)) provided an enhanced pseudocapacitance performance, reaching a specific 

capacitance 50% higher than PEDOT -NTs in the absence of NPhs (Fig. 2(b)) . The presence of NP hs during 

the charge and discharge curves also increased the stability of the material (Fig. 2(c)) by forming 

poly(aminophenols) during the electrocatalytical processes. The extension of NPh degradation was 

evaluated by UV -Vis spectroscopy and the electrod es were characterized by electrochemical, vibrational 

spectroscopic and scanning electron microscopy techniques. By this way, this contribution presents an 

interesting perspective gathering the degradation of micropollutants and the energy storage devices which 

are certainly two of the biggest concerns of the scientific community nowadays [4] .

Fig. 2. (a) CVs of PEDOT -NTs at 20 mV s -1, (b) specific capacitances calculated from GCD cycles at 

different current densities and (c) stability of the modified ele ctrode during 1000 GCD cycles at 3 A g -1 in 

1 mol L -1 NaCl in the absence and in the presence of NPhs. 

References: 

[1] B. M. Hryniewicz and M. Vidotti. ACS Appl. Nano. Mater. 1, 3913 –3924 (2018). 

[2] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Fed. Reg. 52 . 25942 –25953 (1989). 

[3] K. -S. Ju and R. E. Parales. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 74, 250 –272 (2010). 

[4] B. M. H ryniewicz, L. Bach -Toledo and M. Vidotti. Appl. Mater. Today. 18, 100538 (2020). -1.2 -0.8 -0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 -3.0 -1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 NaCl NaCl + Mix NPhs NaCl + 2-NPh NaCl + 3-NPh NaCl + 4-NPh 

> j / A g -1
> E / V vs Ag/AgCl/Cl -sat
> NPhs reduction

(a) 0 200 400 600 800 1000        

> 050 100 150
> Electrolyte: NaCl NaCl + Mix NPhs NaCl + 2-NPh NaCl + 3-NPh NaCl + 4-NPh
> Capacity Retention (%)
> Cycles 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 50 100 150 200 Electrolyte: NaCl + Mix NPhs NaCl + 2-NPh NaCl + 3-NPh NaCl + 4-NPh
> Specific Capacitance / F g -1
> Current Density / A g -1
> pure NaCl electrolyte

(b) (c) Pt Dimers in a Pd Lattice for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction 

Sushila Marlow , Ruoyu Xu, Liqun Kang, Hao Gu, Hiroyuki Asakura, Feng Ryan Wang 

Department of Chemical Engineering, University College London 

Roberts Building, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, U K

s.marlow.16@ucl.ac.uk 

The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is widely studied in energy materials as it occur s at the 

cathode of a hydrogen fuel cell. Materials used currently face two major challenges – the high cost of Pt 

(reducing or replacing Pt) and the sluggish reaction kinetics (Pt is still the most active material known). 

We propose the economical use of Pt in cathode systems by the precise design of atom efficient 

catalyst materials. Dimers are some of the smallest active centers that dissociat e double and even triple 

bonds ( e.g. O2, NO, CO 2). This is particularly important in the electrochemical ORR where the O=O 

dissociation and subsequent desorption of oxygen species are crucial in achieving high mass activity. 

Here we report the design of Pt dimers within a Pd nanoparticle (NP) framework to reach a mass activity 

of 4. 867 A.mg Pt -1, 2 3 times that of commercial Pt/C. 

Pt -Pd NP s we re synthesiz ed through co -reduction with Pt:Pd ratios of 1:10, 1:50 and 1:100 .

Elect ron microscopy and elemental mapping in Fig . 1 confirmed the even distribution of Pt on highly 

porous, flower -like Pd NP framework s. The catalytic performance of NPs in Fig . 2 was comparable with 

commercial Pt/C ( Fig . 2a,b,c ). The alloying effect achieved with colloidal growth increase d activity ,

proven by comparison of an alloy and a physical mixture with the same ratio (Pt1:Pd50 ), plotted in Fig .

2b . It is believed that t he Pt dimer absorbs and dissociate s O2, while the neighbouring Pd atoms activate 

H+. The Pt cluster size in Fig. 2d was extrapolated from extended X -ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) 

fitting of Pt coordination. Increase in Pt cluster size le d to a 60% decrease in the mass activity .

In situ XAFS monitoring found that a bulk sample (Pt1: Pd1) was oxidized during ORR while in 

extreme ratios ( Pt1:Pd50 ) oxidation state was constant , attributed to Pt stabilization at the surface. The 

high mass activity achieved and in situ characterization of catalysts during ORR makes this research 

particular ly relevant. We conclude that t he precise molecular engineering of well -defined dimers is the 

key to activating chemically stable compounds, particularly in the utilization of renewable energy.               

> Figure 1(left): 20nm scale transmission electron microscopy (T EM) images of nanoparticles (first column) and energy
> dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping showing the Pt (yellow), Pd (blue) and combined signal (last column) distribution.
> Figure 2( top right): (a) Electrochemical re sults of prepared nanoparticles, (b) comparison of mixture and alloy alongside
> reference materials, (c) cyclic voltammetry results and (d) exponential relationship observed between m ass activity and Pt
> cluster size.Figure 3(bottom right): In situ electrochemical cell designed to monitor changes in oxidation state.

# Design of low potential viologen -modified redox polymers 

# for bioelectrochemical applications 

Anna Lielpetere , Julian Szczesny, F elipe Conzuelo , Adrian Ruff , W olfgang Schuhmann, 

Analytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty o f Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr -University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

anna.lielpetere@rub.de 

Bioelectrocatalysis is a promising research field for the development of sustainable energy 

conversion devices [1] and biosensors. T he two main challenges for the development of new devices are 

the typically low current output due to inefficient wiring of enzymes or slow electron transfer in the 

matrix, and short lifetimes that can be attributed to the fragility of enzymes or instabili ty of components 

forming the electrode archi -tecture [2,3]. 

A widely used strategy to ensure high electron transfer rates is to use redox polymers that 

electrically connect the redox centres of enzymes to electrodes through redox functions attached to the 

polymer backbone [4,5]. Possible limitations can be addressed by wiring enzymes in specifically designed 

redox polymers that are stable, provide a more efficient electron transfer and have an adapted potential to 

maximize the e.g. the open -circuit voltage of a biofuel cell or a self -powered sensor or to circumvent side 

reactions due to the co -oxidation/ -reduction of interferences. 

This work explores the design of tailored viologen -modified redox polymers for efficient wiring 

of low potential redox protein s, such as e.g. hydrogenases for the use in bioelectrodes. Firstly, the redox 

potential, determined by the potential of the redox mediator, the stabilizing effect of the polymer matrix 

[4, 6] and charged functional groups that can change the potential by e lectrostatic interaction [7], is 

adjusted with respect to the properties of the enzyme. Secondly, anchoring of viologen units to the 

polymer backbone needs to ensure both stability of the connection and mobility of polymer segments [5]. 

Thirdly, the stabil ity and solubility of the polymer is determined by the ratio of hydrophobic and 

hydrophilic groups and the degree of crosslinking. 

Considering these prerequisites, we have synthesized various viologen -modified redox polymers, 

changing the nature and the r atio between functionalities. Newly synthesized redox polymers have been 

evaluated for the use in bioelectrodes e.g. by integrating hydrogenases for possible application as 

bioanodes in biofuel cells [6, 8]. 

References: 

[1] A. Ruff, F. Conzuelo, W. Schuh mann, Nat.  Catal. 2019 , 114 , 4366. 

[2] S. Tsujimura, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem. 2019 , 83 , 39 –48. 

[3] S. D. Minteer, B. Y. Liaw, M. J. Cooney, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2007 , 18 , 228 –234. 

[4] A. Ruff, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 2017 , 5, 66 –73. 

[5] A. He ller, Cur. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2006 , 10 , 664 –672. 

[6] A. Ruff, J. Szczesny, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, N. Plumeré, W. Schuhmann, ACS Energy Lett. 

2017 , 2, 964 –968. 

[7] E. Katz, A. L. de Lacey, J. L.G. Fierro, J. M. Palacios, V. M. Fernandez, J. Electro anal. Chem. 1993 ,

358 , 247. 

[8] J. Szczesny, N. Marković, F. Conzuelo, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, W. Lubitz, N. Plumeré, W. 

Schuhmann, A. Ruff, Nat. commun. 2018 , 9, 4715. Figure 1. Left: structures of copolymers poly -

ZnT 2P and  poly -ZnT 2isoP •. Right: optical and 

photocurrent characteristics of poly -ZnT 2P and 

poly -ZnT 2isoP • copolymers .

# Stable metallo -isoporphyrin copolymer: electrochemical mechanism 

# and photovoltaic properties 

Y. Liang, a Y. Lv, a C. Boudon ,a V. Badet, a A. Bonnefont, a L. Ruhlmann a

Laboratoire d’Electrochimie et de Chimie -Physique du Corps Solide 

Institut de Chimie (UMR 7 177), Université de Strasbourg, 67000 Strasbourg, France 

yiming.liang@etu.unistra.fr 

Isoporphyrin are mainly described in the literature as an intermediate of the reaction (biosynthesis of 

chlorophyll mol ecules as well as heme oxidation). The formation of isoporphyrins can be obtained upon 

nucleophilic attack on oxidized porphyrin. Optical spectrum of isoporphyrin present a typical strong 

absorption at the near -IR region but also remarkable redox behavior [1]. Most of the isoporphyrin 

reported show a high tendency to decompose either by ring opening or by rearomatization to give the 

starting porphyrin [2]. But, different procedures have developed to synthesize stable isoporphyrins [3]. 

In this presentation , new strategy to obtain 

stable isoporphyrin integrated in the polymers 

will be presented and will be compared with 

“classical” porphyrin copolymer with viologen 

spacers developed in our group [4]. 

Electrogenerated radical cation as well as 

dication porphy rin using porphyrin such as zinc 

5,15 -ditolyl -porphyrin (ZnT 2P) are powerful 

electrophiles which can rapidly react with 

nucleophiles such as dipyridyl ligand (py -R-py) 

to form copolymers containing stable 

isoporphyrins (poly -ZnT 2isoP •) or porphyrin 

(poly -ZnT 2P) depending of the applied 

potential chosen. Mechanisms of 

electrochemical routes to these electroactive 

copolymers will be presented as well as the 

optical and amazing redox properties of poly -

ZnT 2P and poly -ZnT 2isoP • (Fig. 1). Formation of these two copolymers has been monitored by EQCM. 

The impedance properties (EIS) as well as the photovoltaic performances have been investigated where 

poly -ZnT 2isoP • present considerably better performance in comparison of poly -ZnT 2P. Excitatio n of this 

new NIR band for the isoporphyrin radical copolymer lead, in the aerated media (presence of O 2), to the 

formation of the singlet state of the dioxygen 1O2 which is the first step for the use of such materials for 

the photodynamic therapy for canc er. 

REFERENCES 

[1] K. M. Kadish; E. V. Caemelbecke; G. Royal; in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. 

Smith and R. Guilard, Elsevier, 2003 , 8, 1. 

[2] E. C. Johnson; D. Dolphin; Tetrahedron Lett. , 1976 , 26, 2197 .

[3] a) J. Bhuyan, Dalton Trans. , 2015 , 44 , 15742; b) P. Schweyen; M. Hoffmann; J. Krumsieck; B. 

Wolfram; X. Xie; M. Brçring; Angew. Chem. 2016 , 55 , 10118. 

[4] a) L. Ruhlmann; A. Giraudeau; J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1999 , 121, 6664; Z. Huo; E. Saint -Aman; C. 

Bucher; L. Ruhlmann; Electrochimica Acta , 2014 , 122, 108 ; b) Z. Huo; A. Bonnefont; E. Saint -Aman; 

C. Bucher; L. Ruhlmann; Electrochimica Acta , 2018 , 274, 177; c)  M. Boudiaf; Y. Liang; R. Lamare; J. 

Weiss; A. Bonnefont; L. Ruhlmann; Electrochimica Acta ; 2019 , 309 , 432 -449. Understanding of the Electrochemical Degradation 

# of Nitrogen -doped Pt/C Electrocatalysts for PEMFC 

B. Mahrt 1, P. Weber 1, C . Dosche 2, M. Oezaslan 1

> 1

TU Braunschweig , Institute for Technical Chemistry, Franz -Liszt -Straße 35a, D -38106 Braunschweig 

b.mahrt@tu -braunschweig.de 

> 2

Carl -von -Ossietzky -Universität Olde nburg , Carl -von -Ossietzky -Straße 9 -11, D -26111 Oldenburg(Oldb) 

Currently,  carbon black as support material has been widely used for PEM fuel cells. Degradation of state -

of -the -art Pt nanoparticles (NPs) supported on carbon black is based on Ostwald ripening, particle 

agglomeration, Pt dissolution and/or Pt NP detachment associated with carbon corrosion.[1] The use of 

fu nctional groups such as nitrogen incorporated in the carbon structure improves the (electro -)chemical 

stability of the Pt NPs by anchoring sites [2] and corrosion resistance of the support material.[3] However, 

the (electro -)chemical degradation of differe nt N species during the ORR is still unclear. 

In this work, we have combined a synthetic approach to tune the N content incorporated into the carbon 

material by using pyrolysis of 1,10 -phenanthroline and iron(II) -acetate[4] with a deposition of platinum 

NPs (20 wt. -%) via wet -impregnation technique. Based on comprehensive XPS analysis, the N -doped 

carbon contains pyridinic (48%), pyrrolic (41%) and graphitic (11%) N surface species giving a total N 

content of 2 at. -%. The as -prepared N -doped Pt/C shows sim ilar mass activity (i mass =0.23 ± 0.07 A mg -1Pt )

and electrochemically active Pt surface area (ECSA= 65 ± 10 m² g-1) towards ORR compared to 

commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts (Tanaka TEC10E30E) by using RDE technique. Thus, an effect of the N -

doped support m aterial on the initial ORR activity is not observed if the particles are well dispersed on the 

support material. In the second step, we performed various accelerated stress test (AST) studies to 

investigate the (electro)chemical degradation of N -doped Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO 4. We observed that the N -

doped Pt/C shows comparable stability behaviour to the commercial Pt/C catalyst in relation to the changes 

in ECSA and particle growth. However, the XPS analysis signifies that the N pyridinic degrades much stronger 

than the other N surface species as a function of potential range and cycle number. For instance, after 4,000 

cycles between 0.5 — 1.5 V vs. RHE the N pyridinic content decreases by up to 60% (from 44% to 27% of the 

Ntotal ) and simultaneously an increase of the N pyrrolic content of 15% (from 44% to 53% of N total ) and of the 

Ngraphitic by up to 100% (from 10% to 20% of N total ) is observed. Obviously, the dynamic (cyclic 

voltammetry) AST protocols accelerate the degradation of N pyridinic compared to OCP experim ents over 24 

hours in 0.1 M HClO 4. After 24 h OCP, the N pyridinic decreases only from 48% to 44% of N total , while N pyrrolic 

content increases by the same amount. 

The combination of different AST protocols with XPS analysis reveals an advanced degradation m odel of 

different N surface groups ranging from pyridinic to graphitized N species for N -doped Pt/C catalysts under 

fuel cell conditions. 

Literature: 

[1] P. Weber, ECS Trans. 2018, 86(13):433 -445; [2] S. Campisi, Appl. Sci. 2018, 8:1159; [3] Zheng, small 

2012, 8(23):3550 -3566; [4] E. Proietti, Nat.  Comm. 2011, 2:416. Influence of the Axial, Peripheral and Non -peripheral Substituents 

# on the Redox Properties of Subphthalocyanines: 

# an Electrochemical and DFT Study 

Jeanet Conradie , Pieter J. Swarts 

University of the Free State 

Nelson Mandela Drive,  Bloemfontein, 9300, S outh Africa 

conradj@ufs.ac.za 

A subphthalocyanine (SubPc) with a hydroxy group in the axial position and alkyl ligands (C 12 H25 ) on the 

non -peripheral positions, namely (HO)BSubPc(C 12 H25 )6(H) 6, was synthesized in our lab. It contains an 

electron -rich macr ocycle, with the lowest macrocycle -based oxidation potential of all reported SubPc 

molecules till date, namely 0.398 V vs Fc +/Fc in DCM [1] . The ring oxidation process for molecule 

(HO)BSubPc(C 12 H25 )6(H) 6 shows electrochemical quasi -reversibility, with ΔE = 0.084 V (at 0.100 Vs -1). 

A density functional theory study was conducted of (HO)BSubPc(C 12 H25 )6(H) 6 and a series of related 

SubPc molecules (with peripheral and non -peripheral substituents = H, F or alkyl group; and with the 

axial substituent = Cl, alkoxy or phenoxy group), of which the ring -based oxidation and reduction 

potentials in DCM vs Fc +/Fc were known [2 –7] . This DFT study provided l inear relationships between 

the first oxidation potential and HOMO energies (E ox vs EHOMO ), as well as between the first reduction 

potential and LUMO energies (E red vs ELUMO ), which can be used in future to determine the first ox idation 

and first reduction potential from HOMO and LUMO energies of further related SubPc molecules (and 

vice versa ). 

Figure: Optimized (HO)BSubPc(C 12 H25 )6(H) 6 and relationship between the DFT en ergies and redox 

potentials. 

References 

1. Swarts PJ and Conradie J. Electrochim. Acta 2020; 329 : 135165. 

2. Sullivan P, Duraud A, Hancox L, Beaumont N, Mirri G, Tucker JHR, Hatton RA, Shipman M 

and Jones TS. Adv. Energy Mater. 2011; 1: 352 -355. 

3. Kasuga K, Idehara T, Handa M, Ueda Y, Fujiwara T and Isa K. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1996; 69 :

2559 -2563. 

4. Potz R, Go M, Hu H, Cornelissen U, Tutaû A and Aza -bru È. 2000; 626 : 588 -596. 

5. González -Rodríguez D, Torres T, Guldi DM, Rivera J, Herranz MÁ and Echegoyen L. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2004; 126 : 6301 -6313. 

6. Morse GE, Helander MG, Maka JF, Lu ZH and Bender TP. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010; 2:

1934 -1944. 

7. Sampson KL, Josey DS, Li Y, Virdo JD, Lu Z -H and Bender TP. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018; 122 :

1091 -1102. In situ Raman Studies of Zinc Ion Intercalation /Deintercalation 

# Mechanism in a Rechargeable Zinc -Polypyrrole Battery in Aqueous 

# and Bio -Ionic Liquid Electrolytes 

Li Yang 1, Abhishek Lahiri 1,2 , Guozhu Li 1, Frank Endres 1

> 1

Institute of Electrochemistry, Claust hal University of Tec hnology 

Arnold -Sommerfeld Str. 6 , 38678, Clausthal -Zel lerfeld , Germany 

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering, Brunel University London, Uxbridge UB8 3PH, UK 

li.yang@tu -clausthal.de 

Because of its low cost and high safety zinc -ion batter ies ( ZIBs ) are regarded as promising alternative to 

lithium -ion batteries (LIBs ). 1 Inorganic materials such as MnO 2, Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) have 

been intensively studied as cathode materials for ZIBs. 2-4 However, these inorganic materials dissolv e

during the charge/discharge process, which cause s loss in specific capaci ty during cycling . Therefore, 

organic materials such as polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI) are considered as potential candidate s as 

cathode materials . 5

Here we present in situ Raman studies of different zinc intercalation/deintercalation mechanism in 

rechargeable Zn/PPy battery in aqueous and bio -ionic liquid -water mixture electrolytes. Zn/ PPy battery in 

the bio -ionic liquid -water mixture electrolyte showed a higher specific cap acity than in the aqueous 

electrolyte. However, a significant capacity loss was observed during cycling which was related to 

polymer phase transform ation and zinc ion trapped into the polymer matrix . Nevertheless, the existence 

of bio -ionic liquid in the e lectrolyte helps to reduce the stain in the polymer matrix during the cycli ng and 

improve the capacity. 6

1. Zhao, Q.; Huang, W.; Luo, Z.; Liu, L.; Lu, Y.; Li, Y.; Li, L.; Hu, J.; Ma, H.; Chen, J. Sci. Adv. 2018 , 4,

eaao 1761 

2. Lee, B.; Lee, H. R.; Kim, H.; Chung, K. Y.; Cho, B. W.; Oh, S. H. Chem. Commun. 2015 , 51 , 9265 -

9268 

3. Xu, C.; Li, B.; Du, H.; Kang, F. Angew.  Chem. 2012 , 51 , 9 33 -935 

4. Liu, Z., Pulletikurthi, G.; Endr es, F. ACS App. Mater. Interfaces 2016 , 8, 15158 -15164 

5. Poizot, P.; Gaubicher , J.; Renault, S.; Dubois, L.; Liang, Y.; Yao, Y. Chem. Rev. 2020 , DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00482 

6. Lahiri, A.; Yang, L.; Li, G.; Endres, F. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019 , 11 , 45098 -45107 Novel compounds with the potential membranolytic activity .

K. Burdach ,a J. Juhaniewicz -Dębińska, a S. Sęk a 

> a

Biological -Chemical Research Center, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw 

Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02 -089 Warsaw, Poland 

kburdach@chem.uw.ed u.pl 

The discovery of antibiotics became a turning point in the struggle against infectious diseases and 

contributed to a significant improvement in the quality and length of human life. However, the 

widespread abuse of antibiotics caused that numerous ba cteria have develop ed a resistance to their action 

[1] . Therefore, it is necessary to look for new, natural or synthetic active substances with a broad 

spectrum of antimicrobial activity and at the same time with low cytotoxicity on the eukaryotic cells. 

Lipopeptides appear to be one of the promising alternatives to the current antibiotics due to a completely 

different mode of action on bacteria cells [2] . Most antibiotics block the physiological processes of 

bacteria, such as the synthesis of the cell wa ll or DNA multiplication. In contrast, lipopeptides interact 

directly with the bacterial cell membrane, causing its destruction and, as a consequence, lead to cell death 

[3]. 

The interaction s of two, novel synthetic lipopeptides with model lipid films mim icking bacterial cell 

membrane s were examined . We verified whether branching in the fatty acid chain influences the mode of 

lipopeptide action on model bacterial cell membranes. For these purposes, t hree techniques were 

employe d: Electrochemical Quartz Cry stal Microbalance with Dissipation monitoring , Langmuir 

monolayer technique and Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy . Two 

model bacterial membranes were used reflecting the lipid composition of gram -negative bacteria: 

Escher ichia c oli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa . For E. coli lipid membrane the mixture of POPE, DPPG 

and POPG was used, whereas P. aeruginosa model membrane was prepared using POPE, DPPG, POPG 

and cardiolipin. 

EQCM -D measurements show ed that both lipopeptides influ ence the model lipid membranes .

Lipopeptides incorporate into the membranes and lead to the disorder ing of the lipid bilayer. Moreover, 

the extent of the interaction of lipopeptides depends on the branching in the fatty acid chain. Langmuir 

monolayer and ATR -FTIR studies confirmed that lipopeptides influence the fluidity of the lipid 

membranes, but the extent of this action depends on both lipid membrane composition and branching in 

the fatty acid chain. The combination of these techniques enable d the detai led characterization of 

lipopeptide -membrane interactions and in situ monitoring of structural changes occurring within 

biomimetic assembly upon exposure to the active agent. 

This study was financially supported by Polish National Science Centre, Project No. 

2013/10/E/ST4/00343. 

[1] Y. Belguesmia, et al. , Functionalized nanomaterials for the management of microbial infection: a 

strategy to address microbial drug resistance , Elsivier, 2017, 1 -22 .

[2] I.W. Hamley, et al., Lipopeptides: from self -ass embly to bioactivity , Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8574 -

8583 

[3] R.M. Epand, et al. , Molecular mechanisms of membrane targeting antibiotics , Biochim . et Biophys .

Acta 1858, 2016 , 980 -987 Electrochemical characterisation of α -hemolysin reconstituted into 

# DMPC/CHAPSO bicelles 

D.Dziubak , S.Sęk 

Biological and Chemical Research Centre, Faculty of Chemistry, 

University of Warsaw 

Zwirki i Wigury 101, 02 -089 Warsaw 

ddziubak@chem.uw.edu.pl 

Bice lles belong to the class of model membranes, which were originally developed for NMR 

studies. The morphology of these structures resembles the intermediate form between liposomes and 

micelles 1. Additionally, the process of incorporation of protein into the bicelles is relatively simple. 

Therefore, we have attempted to reconstitute α -hemolysin in DMPC:CHAPSO bicelles and investigate 

the effect of protein on a model eukaryotic cell membrane. α -hemolysin is a toxic transmembrane protein, 

which creates ion chan nels in the membrane. In nature, the monomers of α -hemolysin bind to the cell 

membrane and pore assembly occurs upon collision during lateral diffusion in the bilayer 2. Consequently, 

the presence of the pores leads to leakage of cellular fluid and cell dea th. 

The process of incorporation of α -hemolysin requires a lot of space between the membrane and 

solid substrate. Therefore, for electrochemical measurements, we used stBLM (sparsely tethered bilayer 

lipid membranes) system. In the first step, we incorpor ated the α -hemolysin into the bicelles. Then 

bicelles were adsorbed on gold substrate modified with tethering molecules diluted by backfiller (1 -thio -

β-D-glucose). Every step was characterized by surface -enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy 

(SEIRAS). Further electrochemical experiments enabled monitoring the effect of α-hemolysin on 

membrane hydration. The results obtained by alternating current voltammetry and electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy confirmed that the presence of ion channel s significantly facilitates water 

diffusion through the membrane. Moreover, protein incorporated in the membrane changes the potential 

of zero charge (pzc). The shift of pzc is around 200mV to more negative values, which may be directly 

related to the cell lysis. 

Financially supported by Polish National Science Centre, Project No. 2016/21/B/ST4/02122 

(1) Sanders, C. R.; Prosser, R. S. Bicelles: A Model Membrane System for All Seasons? Structure 

1998 , 6 (1 0), 1227 –1234. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969 -2126(98)00123 -3. 

(2) Vockenroth, I. K.; Atanasova, P. P.; Toby, A.; Jenkins, A.; Köper, I. Incorporation of α-

Hemolysin in Different Tethered Bilayer Lipid Membrane Architectures. 2007 .

https://doi.org/10.1021/ la7030279. Realizing Highly Stable Sodium Metal Batteries with Tactically 

# Design ed Graphene Structures 

Huan Wang 

College of Chemistry, Nankai University 

No.94 Weijin Road, Nankai District, Tianjin, P.R.China 300071 

Huan.wang0520@nankai.edu.cn 

Sodium (Na) metal is a promising anode for grid -scale energy storage systems owing to its high 

theoretical capacity, low cost, and high earth abundance . However, the implementation of Na metal anode 

has been primarily hindered by Na dendrite growth and severe volume expansion t hat leads to low 

Coulombic efficiency, short lifespan and even safety issues. Therefore, it is critical to engineer the 

electrode -electrolyte interface and direct uniform Na deposition. Graphe ne, a representative of two -

dimensional materials, has many uniq ue features including chemical inertness, strong mechanical strength 

and tunable surface chemistry, which make it an ideal interfacial candidate to regulate Na deposition and 

thus suppress dendritic Na growth. By adjusting the kinetic parameters for chemic al vapor deposition 

(CVD), graphene films can be readily tuned from single layer to multilayers, which can directly serve as 

coating layers to stabilize Na metal anodes. Our findings reveal that the rate capability of Na anode is 

critically dependent on th e thickness of graphene films. Through rational design of precursor, a series of 

graphene films with different heteroatom dopants are synthesized to serve as substrates for Na plating and 

stripping. By probing the Na nucleation and growth behaviors, we rev ealed a binding -energy -dominated 

Na nucleation -growth pattern, and discovered that the strong binding affinity can decrease Na nucleation 

barriers and enables dendrite -free Na metal anodes. Furthermore, three -dimensional N -doped graphene 

microcubes can be achieved by employing sodium chloride salt as growth template. The as -grown N-

doped microcubes can be directly blend ed into bulk Na metal to serve as solid additives, which can offer 

well -distributed nucleation sites to promote uniform Na deposition and mi nimize volume change over 

repeated cycles. As a result, highly stable Na metal anode s can be realized with ultra high capacity and 

rate capability over long -term cycles in carbonate electrolyte. Our works provides effective solutions to 

stabilize Na metal a nodes from the perspective of designing CVD -grown graphene structures, paving the 

way towards the realization of high -energy Na battery systems. 

References 

[1] Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, DOI: 10.1039/d0cs00033g. 

[2] Nano Letters, 2017, 17, 6808 -6815. 

[3] Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 1807974. Three -Dimensional Porous Polyaniline Nanofibers Coated on 

# Activated Carbon Fiber Electrodes for High -Performance 

# Supercapacitors 

P. Röse 1*, S. Rahman 2, A. H. A. Sha h3, U. Krewer 1, S. Bilal 2

> 1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology – Institute for Applied Materials 

Adenauerring 20b, D -76131 Karlsruhe  

> 2

University of Peshawar, National Centre of Excellence in Physical Chemistry, PAK -25120 Peshawar  

> 3

University of Peshawar, Institute of Chemical Sciences, PAK -25120 Peshawar 

*philipp.roese@kit.edu 

Polyaniline (PANI), a member of the class of intrinsically conductive polymers, possesses a great potential 

for energy storage applications, due to its tuna ble pseudocapacitive performance. [1,2] Yet, the 

understanding of its structure -property relationship is far from complete while the potential practical 

applications are also not fully exploited. [3]

In our efforts to close this gap, we developed a cost ef fective, advanced and optimized chemical oxidative 

route for the synthesis of three dimensional PANI nanofibers with large surface area and pore volume .

Electrodes for supercapacitors were manufactured by depositing the PANI on high surface area carbon fib er 

electrodes and were assembled to symmetric supercapacitors in two - and three electrode setups and in -

depth electrochemical analysis including cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge -discharge and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was performed. 

Figure: SEM image of PANI nanofibers (left); corresponding Ragone plot (right). 

The overall results showed, that the various supercapacitors exhibited very good performance, rate 

capability and cycle stability. It is particularly interesting that the combination of the PANI nanofibers and 

the carbon fiber electrodes with its microporous graphene surface morphology showed a synergetic effect 

which resulted in a superior specific capacitance (up to 1107 F/g at 0.5 A/g), high capacitance retention 

(70 -96% ) and excellent coulombic efficiencies (92 -98%). 

With respect to practical applications, we believe that the presented study provides an efficient and 

promising way to produce electrode material with low cost, easy processability and excellent energy -

stora ge performance. 

[1] J. Banerjee, K Dutta, M. A. Kader, S. K. Nayak, Polym.  Adv. Technol. 2019 , 30 , 1902 -1921. 

[2] P. Singh, S. K. Shukla, J. Mater. Sci. 2020 , 55 , 1331 -1365. 

[3] H. Gul, A. H. A. Shah, U. Krewer, S. Bilal, Nanomater. 2020 , 10 , 118 -142. Visible Laser Scribing Fabrication of Porous Graphitic Carbon 

# Electrodes: Electrochemical Properties and Applications as a

# Disposable Sensor Platform 

Eoghan Vaughan , Daniela Iacopino 

Tyndall National Institute 

University College Cork, Dyke Parade, Cork, I reland 

Eoghan.vaughan@tyndall.ie 

Porous graphitic carbon electrodes were fabricated by laser scribing of commercial polyimide sheets. The 

process was performed by a simple one -step procedure using visible wavelength laser irradiation from a 

low -cost hobby ist laser engraver. The obtained electrodes displayed a highly porous morphology, rich in 

three -dimensional interconnected networks and edge planes, suitable for electrochemical sensing 

applications. Spectral characterization by Raman and XPS spectroscopie s revealed a crystalline graphitic 

carbon structure with high percentage of sp 2 carbon bonds. 

Extensive electrochemical characterization performed with outer -sphere [Ru(NH 3)6]3+ and inner -sphere 

[Fe(CN) 6]4-, Fe 2+/3+ and dopamine (DA) redox mediators show ed quasi -reversible electron transfer at the 

graphitic carbon surface dominated by mass diffusion process. Fast heterogeneous electron -transfer rates, 

higher than similar carbon -based materials and comparable to other graphitic carbon electrodes obtained 

by infrared laser irradiation, were obtained for these electrodes. 

Thin -layer transport mechanisms occurring in parallel to the main linear diffusion -limited mechanism 

were taken in consideration . O verall the ob served enhanced electron -transfer rates effe cts were ascribed 

to the large specific surface area of the extended 3D porous network which rich in edge -planes and 

electrocatalytic sites. The as -fabricated electrodes were capable of differentiating the three biomarkers 

ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid in solution and selective detection of dopamine. Moreov er, the 

compatibility with light -weight , portable and handheld instrumentation make s such electrodes highly 

promising for the realization of low -cost disposable sensing platforms for point -of -care applications. Electrophoretically Deposited Bioceramic Composite Coatings on Ti 

# Substrate Intended for Medical Use 

Milena Stevanović 1, Marija Dj ošić 2, Ana J anković 1, Maja Vukašinović -Sekulić 1, Vesna K ojić 3, Vesna 

Mišković -Stanković 1 

> 1

University of Belgrade, Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Institute for Technology of Nuclear and Other Mineral Raw Materials, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

University of Novi Sad, Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Faculty of Medicine, 21204 Sremska Kamenica, 

Serbi a

Bo ne implant materials are increasingly attracting attention in the biomaterials field . Among them, 

hydroxyapatite  (HAP) has stood out as a prospective biomaterial due to excellent osseointegration ability, 

owing t o its similarity with natural bone. Ho wever, due to the lack of adhesive an d antibacterial 

properties, it is usually combined with polymers and antibacterial agents . N atural polymer chitosan (CS) 

was proven as an effective component of HAP -based composites, improving the adhesion and serving a s

a drug carrier. 1 Inclusion of antibiotics into composite biomaterials has gained a lot of attention, as it is 

thus possible to achieve the desirable antibacterial activity.  Gentamicin (Gent) was shown to be one of the 

most effective antibiotics in treati ng bone infections. In this work,  bioceramic composite HAP/CS and 

HAP/CS/Gent coating s were  successfully asse mbled on Ti plates by electrophoretic deposition technique 

(EPD) .2 Deposition  was carried out at a constant voltage of 5 V and for 12 min in a sing le step process 

from three -component aqueous suspension (Figure 1) . Bioactive properties of deposited coatings were 

investigated in vitro , by immersion in simulated body fluid solution (SBF). After 7 -day immersion in 

SBF, f ield emission scannin g electron m icroscopy (FE -SEM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 

(FTIR) were employed to investigate the coatings ’ bioactivity, whereas electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) and polarization measurements were carried out during 28 -day immersion in SBF in 

order to obtain valuable information about osseop romotive coatings ’ nature . Biological testing included 

monitoring of alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP ) that is associated with the coatings ’ ability to promote 

new bone growth.  The high increase in ALP activity (50 %) relative to the control pointed to the strong 

coatings ’ aptitude for the osseointegration process and new bone growth . FTIR and FE -SEM analysis 

gave evidence of carbonate -substituted HAP, whose presence is desirable in bone implant applica tions. 

The formation of the new apatite layer was also confirmed by electrochemical measurements pointing to 

the high biomineralization potential of the coatings . Antibacterial activity kinetics in suspension against 

Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia c oli was also monitored to examine the potential coatings ’

application . As expected, the gentamicin addition strongly improved the antibacterial activity of 

HAP/CS/Gent coating , and the effect was more pronounced against  S. aureus .

All the obtained results potentially indicated a strong o sseointegration ability of the  HAP/CS/Gent  coating 

classifying it as a promising material for bone tissue engineering. 

Figure 1. Electrophoretic deposition of composite HAP/CS/Gent coating 

Reference: 

[1] M. Đošić, S. Eraković, A. Janković, M. Vukašinović -Sekulić, I. Matić, J. Stojanović, K. Y. Rhee, V. 

Mišković -Stanković, S.J. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2017 , 47, 336 –347 .

[2]  M. Stevanović, M. Đošić, A. Janković, V. Kojić, M. Vukašinović -Sekulić, J. Stojanović, J. Odović, 

M. Crevar Sakač, K. Y. Rhee, V. Mišković -Stanković, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng . 2018 , 4, 3994 –4007. TdT vs RCA: DNA isothermal ampl ificati ons t o imp rove the analytical 

# performance of aptamers 

Ramón Lorenzo -Gómez a,b, Daniel González -Robles a, Rebeca M iranda -Castro a,b, Noemí de -los -Santos -

Álvarez a,b and M aría Jesús Lo bo -Castañón a,b 

> a

Dpto. Química Física y Analítica, Universidad d e Oviedo, Julián Clavería 8, 33006 Oviedo (Spain) 

> b

Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias, Avenida de Roma s/n, 33011 Oviedo 

(Spain) 

lorenzoramon @uniovi.es 

Liq uid biopsy is the most de sirable but also the most challenging approach to diagnose cancer. This 

method relies on the presence of spe cific biomarkers in the accessible body fluids of cancer patients .

How ever, m any of these biomarkers are glycoproteins foun d in low concentr ation le vels in a high protein 

content medium , the serum, thus hind ering their detection . For this reason, biomarker detection requires 

strategies to boost sensitivity. Nucleic acid -based receptors such as aptamers are especially appropria te 

for this ta sk because they can be easily manipulated with molecular biology tools such as polymerases 

and ligases , so they can be integrated in analytical schemes forbidden to other receptors like antibodies 

[1 -2] .

Af finity characterization is an esse ntial step to develop rel iable aptam ers for tumor biomarker detection. 

For alpha -fetoprotein (AFP), a biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), two DNA aptamers were 

described with very different affinity . In this work, we esti mate the dissociation c ons tant of both of them 

by m eans of a d irect assay on magnetic beads modified with AFP and electrochemical detection on 

screen -printed carbon electrodes (SPCE). Unlike previous works, both aptamers showed similar 

dissociation constan ts (Kd) values, in the s ub μM range. In order to imp rove the pe rformance of these 

aptamers, we proposed the isothermal amplification of the aptamers by both terminal deoxynucleotidyl 

transferase (TdT) and rolling circle amplification (RCA). Both DNA amplific ations improved the 

sen si tivity and also the appar ent binding constants of the aptamers . Nevertheless, this improvement 

depends on the true affinity of the binding pair, which ultimately limits th e analytical usefulness [3].

Refer ences  

> [1]

Lorenzo -Gómez R. , Miranda -Castro R., de -los -Santos -Álvarez N ., Lobo -Castañón M.J . Cu rrent 

Op inion in Electroche mistry 201 9, 1 4, 32 -43 . 

> [2]

Díaz -Fernández A., Lorenzo -Gómez R., Miranda -Castro R., de -los -Santos -Álvarez N., Lobo -

Casta ñón M. J. Analytica Chimica Acta 2020 , 1124, 1 -19 . 

> [3]

Lorenzo -Gómez R., Gonz ález -Robles D., Miranda -Castro R., de -los -Santos -Álvarez N ., Lobo -

Castañón M.J . Biosensors 2020 , 10(5), 46 .

Ackno wledgements 

This research was funded by the Spanish Government (project RTI -2018 -095756 -B-I00) and Principado 

de Asturias Government (IDI2018 -000217), co -financed by F EDER funds. R.L. -G. thanks the Sp anish 

Government for a predoctoral FPU fellowship (FPU16/05670). Graphite Felt Modified with Organic Diamines as an Anode for 

# Efficient Microbial Fuel Cells 

Benas Petronis 1, Egidijus Griškonis 1, Nerita Žmuidzinavičienė 1, Arminas Ilginis 1, Ilona Jonuškienė 2,

Kristina Kantminienė 1

> 1

Department of Physical and Inorganic Chemistry, Kaunas University of Technology 

> 2

Department of Organic Chemistry, Kaunas University of Technology 

Radvilėnų pl. 19, Kaunas LT 50221, Lithuania 

egidijus.griskonis@ktu.lt ; kristina.kantminiene@ktu.lt 

Over the last couple of decades , microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have been attracting considerable attention as 

a promising technology that exploits microbial electrochemical activit y for energy production from organic 

wastes and renewable biomass. This technology deals with several major issues of the modern society at 

once : production of sustainable energy, purification of water and/or utilization of waste .

In a MFC, electricity -generating bacteria – exoelectrogens – transfer electrons from oxidised organic 

compounds to an anode as the electron acceptor, and these electrons then pass through an electrical circuit 

and combine with a terminal electron acceptor at the cathode [1]. 

Ho wever, it is of crucial importance to improve the performance of MFCs before they can be scaled up, 

since, to date, their practical implementation is limited. The power output of MFCs is limited by the 

processes on the surface of electrodes, their rate and stability. Surface modification of graphite based anode 

materials could enhance bacterial cell adhesion, cell viability and facilitate extracellular electron transfer 

[2]. C-, N -, O -, and S -containing functional groups have been frequently investigated in anode surface 

modification for the purpose of enhancing bacterial attachment [3]. 

In this study, graphite felt (GF) was electrochemically oxidi sed and subsequent reactions with organic 

diamines were carried out with the aim to introduce am ine group on the surface of GF. Modified GF 

electrodes were investigated by Fourier -Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT -IR) and Energy Dispersive 

X-Ray Analysis (EDX) techniques. Two -chamber MFCs were assembled with cathodes made of bare GF 

and PBS (pH 7.2 ) aerated with air as a catholyte. Shewanella putriefaciens was used as exoelectrogenic 

bacteria. The minimal medium was prepared as described in [ 4]. Sodium lactate was an electron donor. The 

MFCs operated at room temperature (21 1 C). 

At the end of the first 24 h period after bacterial inoculation , the MFCs reached the maximal stable values 

of generated voltage. Over the period of 2 –7 day s ( 25 –168 h) , the MFC with the anode from GF modified 

with m-xylilenediamine provided up to 4 5% higher voltage and current than the control MFC with bare GF, 

whereas the voltage and current generated by the MFC with the anode from GF modified with 2,4 -

diaminotoluene were 3 6% higher than those of the control , when electric circuits of the investigated MFCs 

were loaded with resistors of 659 . Volume power density of the MFC with the anode from GF modified 

with m-xylilenediamine and the one with the anode from GF modified with 2,4 -diaminotoluene, was 

approx. 2. 3 and 2.0 times, respectively, higher than that of the control MFC. 

It can be assumed, that bacterial adhesion of Shewanella putrefaciens bacteria is more favoured on the GF 

filaments , surface of which has been modified with m-xylilenediamine and 2,4 -diaminotoluene. 

References 

1. Microbial Electrochemical and Fuel cells. Fundamentals and Applications Ed. K. Scott, E. H. Yu. 

Elsevier Ltd., 2016 , 410 p. 

2. Y. Hindatu , M. S. M. Annuar, A. M. Gumel. Mini -review: Anode modification for improved 

performance of microbial fuel cell. Re newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews . 2017 , 73 , 236 –248. 

3. Ch. Li , Sh. Cheng . Functional group surface modifications for enhancing the formation and performance 

of exoelectrogenic biofilms on the anode of a bioelectrochemical system. Critical Reviews in 

Biotechnology . 2019 , 39 , 1015 –1030. 

4. A. A. Carmona -Martínez, F. Harnisch, U. Kuhlicke, T. R. Neu, U. Schröder. Electron transfer and biofilm 

formation of Shewanella putrefaciens as function of anode potential. Bioelectrochemistry . 2013 , 93 , 23 –

29. Electrochemical In Situ Method to O btain Silver Nanoparticles in 

# Hydrogels for Wound Dressing Applications 

Katarina  Nešović 1, Ana Janković 1, Vesna Kojić 2, Ljiljana Živković 3, Tamara Radetić 1, Maja 

Vukašinović -Sekulić 1, Aleksandra Perić -Grujić 1, Vesna Mišk ović -Stanković 1

> 1

University of Belgrade , Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, Karnegijeva 4, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, 

Serbia 

> 3

University  of Belgrade, Vin ča  Inst itute of Nuclear Sciences, M ike Petrovića Alasa 12 –14, Belgrade, 

Serbia 

The constantly evolving biomaterials fields is more and more shifting towards finding new solutions to 

the problem of multidrug resistant bacteria, and one of major aspects in this re gard is deep and chronic 

wound care. Wound dressings for such a purpose have to be designed for long -term usage, and therefore 

must have significantly improved properties over the traditional cotton -based materials. One of the most 

promising directions are moisture -retentive hydrogel wound dressings, which can be tailored to meet 

many specific requirements of wound management and care, such as biocompatibility, debridement, gas 

exchange , low adherence, ease of maintenance, moisture and thermoregulation and mechanical stability .1

Moreover, hydrogels represent ideal carrier vehicles for incorporation of antibacterial agents that are 

frequently loaded directly into the dressing material as this provides for quick delivery directly to the 

wound site and more eff icient prevention of infections by skin -inhabiting bacteria, such as 

Staphylococcus aureus . Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are more and more used as a replacement for 

systemic antibiotics administration , due to the advantages such as the possibility for topi cal application 

over longer time periods without the issues of bacterial resistance. AgNPs are difficult to control and 

stabilize due to their high surface reactivity, but polymer -based hydrogels can be an excellent choice for 

their immobilization and cont rolled release. 

In this work, we present the method to obtain physically cross linked poly(vinyl alcohol)/chitosan 

(PVA/CHI) hydrogels and an in situ electrochemical constant -voltage route to synthesize AgNPs directly 

inside their polymer matrix. The new e lectrochemical method consists of swelling the PVA/CHI hydrogel 

in AgNO 3 solution, followed by constant -voltage (90 V) -mediated reduction of Ag + ions in the hydrogel 

disc, which is placed between two platinum electrodes in a sandwich -type electrochemical c ell setup 

(Figure 1). 2,3 The obtained AgNP -loaded hydrogels were evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 

and scanning electron microscopy in order to analyze their structure and morphology, whereas the 

successful incorporation of AgNPs smaller than 1 0 nm was confirmed using UV -visible spectroscopy, 

dynamic light scattering and transmission electron microscopy. Swelling and silver release behaviors 

were tested in phosphate buffer at 37 ⁰C that simulated physiological conditions. Finally, in vitro 

biolo gical validation confirmed their antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia 

coli bacterial strains, and biocompatibility towards model fibroblast cell lines (MRC -5 and L929), 

unquestionably indicating the strong potential of these hydrogels for wound dressing applications. 

Figure 1. Scheme of the electrochemical synthesis of AgNPs inside poly(vinyl alcohol)/chitosan hydrogel 

References 

1. A. Bianchera, O. Catanzano, J. Boateng, L. Elviri, The Place of Biomaterials in Wound Heali ng . I n

Therapeutic Dressings and Wound Healing Applications (Ed.: J. Boateng), John Wiley And Sons Ltd, 

London, 2020 , pp. 337 –366. 

2. K. Nešović, A. Janković, T. Radetić, M. Vukašinović -Sekulić, V. Kojić, L. Živković , A. Perić -Grujić, 

K. Y. Rhee, V. Mišković -Stanković, Eur. Polym. J. 2019 , 121 , 109257. 

3. K. Nešović, A. Janković, A. Perić -Grujić, M. Vukašinović -Sekulić, T. Radetić, L. Živković, S. J. 

Park, K. Yop Rhee, V. Mišković -Stanković, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2019 , 77, 83 –96. Differential Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry studies of nitrite 

# reduction catalyzed by Keggin polyoxometalates 

Yulin Zhou, Antoine Bonnefont, Laurent Ruhlmann, Vasilica Badets 

Université de Strasbourg, Institut de Chimie, UMR CNRS 7177, Laboratoire d’Electrochimie et de 

Chimie Physique du Corps Solide 

4 Rue Blaise Pascal, CS 90032, 67081, Strasbourg Cedex, France 

badets@unistra.f r

Nitrite electrochemical reduction is catalyzed, among others, by polyoxometalates (POMs), a class of 

inorganic metal -oxides clusters. Since early 19xx different POMs have been tested, ranging from small 

compounds from Keggin and Dawson families [1,2] to more complex structures (such as Wells -Dawson -

der ived tetramers [3], crown -type structures), and even organic -inorganic hybrids. One important issue in 

the electrochemical reduction of nitrite is to identify the products. Nitrite is the first product obtained 

from the reduction of nitrate, and both compo unds are known as environmental pollutants, despite their 

use as food preservatives. Thus, research is conducted to convert these two species into harmless 

compounds. Form this point of view, disposing of an analytical technique able to rapidly identify in a

single test as many products as possible becomes an important tool in the research of those catalysts that 

able to convert nitrite (and/or nitrate) into nitrogen. Differential electrochemical mass spectrometry 

(DEMS) is the analytical technique able to identify the gaseous products during one single run. 

In this presentation the reduction of nitrite catalyzed by a series of polyoxometalates (POMs) 

belonging to the Keggin family will be discussed. The POMs were selected due to the increase in their 

global charge and decrease of the redox potential, from K 4SiW 12 O40 , K 5BW 12 O40 and (NH 4)6H2W12 O40 

respectively. DEMS analysis was performed for these compounds for the first time in order to identify the 

gaseous products. An isotopically marked source of nitrite was used for the first time, i.e. the nitrogen 

contains 98% of isotope 15 N. This allowed the specific attribution to the m/z signals to products of 

reaction thus eliminating the possible interference from atmospheric nitrogen and carbon dioxide. 

Experiment s were conducted at both pH 2 and 5 in order to compare the differences on the products as a 

function of the source compound that is either nitrous acid or nitrite. The main found gaseous products 

were only 15 NO and 15 N2O both at pH 2 and 5. A clear relati on between the formation of NO and its 

consumption for the production of N 2O was observed suggesting that all POMs are able to bind NO. At 

pH 2 the less negative potential correlated with the formation of NO is recorded for SiW 12 O40 4- (followed 

by BW 12 O40 5- and H 2W12 O40 6-), while at pH 5, the N 2O appears at the less negative potential for 

H2W12 O40 6- (followed by BW 12 O40 5- and SiW 12 O40 4-). 

3D view (upper) and ball -and -

stick view (lower) of SiW 12 O40 4-

(Si: yellow; W: grey; O: red) 

DEMS analysis of nitrite reduction catalyzed by studied POMs 

References: 

[1] S. Imar et al. , Electrochimica Acta 2015 , 184 , 323 –330. 

[2] B. Wang, L. Cheng, S. Dong, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2001 , 516 , 17 –22. 

[3] L. Ruhlmann, G. Genet, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2004 , 568 , 315 –321. The Immobilisation and Reactivity of Fe(CN) 63-/4 - in a n Intrinsically 

# Microporous Poly amin e (PIM -EA -TB )

Lina Wang ,1 Neil B. M ck eown, 2 Mariolino C arta ,3 Frank M arken 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK  

> 2

School of Chemistry, U niversity o f Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland EH9 3JJ, UK  

> 3

Department of Chemistry, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK 

lw2 165 @bath.ac.uk 

Heterogenization of homogeneous electrocatalysts is possible into polymers of intrinsic microporosity 

(PI Ms). [1] Here, it is shown that p rotonation of the molecularly rigid polymer of intrinsic microporosity 

PIM -EA -TB can be coupled to immobilisation of Fe(CN) 63-/4 - (as well as immobilisation of Prussian blue) 

into 1 -2 nm diameter channels . The resulting films provide redox active coatings on glassy carbon 

electrodes. Uptake, transport, and retention of Fe(CN) 63-/4 - in the microporous polymer are strongly pH 

dependent requiring protonation of the PIM -EA -TB (pK A ≈ 4 ).[2] Both Fe(CN) 64- and Fe(CN) 63- can be 

immobilised, but Fe(CN) 64- appears to bind tighter to the polymer backbone presumably via bridging 

protons. Loss of Fe(CN) 63-/4 - by leaching into the aqueous solution phase become s significant only at pH 

> 9 an d is likely to be associated with hydroxide anions directly entering the microporous structure to 

combine with protons . Th is and th e interaction of Fe(CN) 63-/4 - and protons within the molecularly rigid 

PIM -EA -TB host are suggested to be responsible for ret ention and relatively slow leaching processes. 

Electrocatalysis with immobilised Fe(CN) 63-/4 - is demonstrated for the oxidation of ascorb ic acid. 

Figure 1. Schematic illustra ti on of elect ron pathway of PIM -EA -TB /Fe(CN) 63-/4- electrode  during 

electron h opping and electrocatalysis application for ascorbic acid oxidation. 

Refer ences :

[1] Rong, Y.Y.; Malpass -Evans, R.; Carta, M.; McKeown, N.B.; Attard, G.A.; Marken, F. Electrochem. 

Commun. , 2014 , 46 , 26. 

[2] Madrid, E.; Rong, Y.Y.; Carta, M.; McKeown, N .B.; Malpass -Evans, R.; Attard, G.A.; Clarke, T.J.; 

Taylor, S.H.; Long, Y.T.; Marken, F. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014 , 53 , 10751. Fundamental Insight into Metal Adsorption, Migration, and 

# Electrolyte Interaction at the Alkali Metal Ion Battery Anode Surface 

# and Interface 

Emilia Olsson , Qiong Cai 

Department of Chemical and Process Engineering, University of Surrey 

GU2 7XH, Guildford, United Kingdom 

k.olsson@surrey.ac.uk 

Energy storage battery technologies are receiving increasing attention due to the need for a transition to a 

more sustainable energy economy. Alkali metal ion batteries includ ing lithium (Li) ion batteries (LIBs), 

sod ium (Na) ion batteries (NIBs) , and potassium (K) ion batteries (KIBs) , are currently being 

investigated , with a lot of efforts on discovering and optimizing electrode materials . Carbon materials 

such as h ard carbon s have gained considerable scientific inte rest as anode materials in these batteries, due 

to their low cost, natural abundance, and suitability for the intercalation /storage of alkali metal ions . Hard 

carbons are complex disordered carbon structures with randomly orientated, defective, and curved 

graphene nanosheets, and turbostratically stacked graphitic layers. This complex str ucture leads to a 

plethora of carbon structural motifs being present in the anode, resulting in a large number of potential 

morphologies . These disparate morphologies need explicit consideration when investigating the metal 

adsorption and migration at the anode surface , and when modelling the anode electrolyte interface. In this 

work we aim to shed light on these mechanisms through systematic computational modelling studies . 1–4

Density functional theory (DFT) simulations of Li, Na, and K on different carbon motifs 

(defective gra phene basal planes, planar graphitic layers, and curved pores) found in hard carbon anode 

materials were conducted to investigate their effect on the metal adsorption .1,2,5 Our calculations show 

that oxygen -, and nitrogen -containing defects are energetically favorable to form on single layer car bon 

fragment surfaces ,5 and on curved morphologies. Th ese defects were found to be highly beneficial for the 

initial metal storage , with Li, Na, and K adsorption energies greatly improved as compared to the non -

defective carbon surface. Hence, it was deduced , as also s uggested by experiment, that the presence of 

surface defects could indeed lead to a higher degree of metal storage. The effect of these defects on metal 

migration, which would influence the cycling properties of anode materials , was investigated through 

nu dged elastic band calc ulations , and showed that metal adsorption on surface defects can lead to 

capacity loss and irreversible metal storage. 5

The anode -electrolyte interface is know n to have a direct impact on the battery performance. 

One consequence of electrolyte m olecule breakdown is the presence of functional groups at the anode 

surface. From DFT simulations of functional groups O, OH, NH 2, and COOH at different carbon motifs 

(planar basal plane, H -terminated edges, and curved morphologies) , we show that O-functio nal groups 

from an energetical perspective are highly probable to form on these surfaces, and can act as favorable 

metal storage sites. The hydroxyl group on the other hand are found to form inorganic compounds, which 

could contribute to ir reversible capac ity. 

Finally, we use ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) to investigate the effect of surface 

roughness, disorder, defects, and termination on the electrolyte anode interactions in the ethylene 

carbonate (electrolyte solvent) | hard carbon (anode) system. These simulations show that solvent 

intercalation and breakdown is directly influenced by the anode surface termination and roughness. 

Furthermore, defects are found to be more probable to form in terms of defect formation energies at 

strained and curved carbon morphologies , and to have a direct impact on the metal binding to the anode. 

The effect s of different structural motifs on metal adsorption, intercalation, and diffusion are investigated, 

to form an understanding of the anode electrolyte interfacial reactions. 

Acknowledgment 

The financial support from EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Council) under the grant number 

EP/R021554/2 is acknowledg ed. 

References  

> 1

J. Mater. C hem. A 8, 743 (2020), 2 Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1908209 (2020), 3 Nano Energy 44, 327 

(2018), 4 Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1501588 (2016), 5 Nanoscale 11, 5274 (2019). Perfluorinated Additives Improving HT -PEM Fuel Cell Performance 

Maximilian Kutter a, Mohammad Zeyat b, Bruna Lobo a, Dieter Lentz b, Christina Roth a

> a

Chair of Electrochemical Process Engineering, Universität Bayreuth, Universitätsstr. 30, 95447 

Bayreuth, Ger many. 

> b

Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Fabeckstr. 34 -36, 14195 Berlin, 

Germany 

maximilian.kutter@uni -bayreuth.de 

Due to the dependence on fossil fuels and therefore an increas e of greenhouse gas emissions and the 

res ul ting accelerated global warming, environmentally -oriented energy supplies, such as hydrogen, offer 

an attractive option for the deep decarbonization of our global energy systems. [1] 

Fuel cell s, as a local, emission -free and versatile system, have been a major research activity throughout 

the years. Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are considered one of the most promising 

technologies among the various kinds of existing fuel cells. Especially high temperature polymer 

electrolyte membrane f ue l cells (HT -PEMFCs) can offer an improved performance due to the ir higher 

operating temperatures between 100 -200 °C and therefore lead to better reaction kinetics, higher tolerance 

to fuel im purities and to an improved heat and power management of the syst em. However, some issues 

regarding durability and performance, such as poisoning of the platinum catalyst by phosphoric acid 

adsorbents, long -time stability and low oxygen solubility, are still unsolved. [2] 

To overcome these difficulties we introduced pl anar polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) to the 

electrode , which have a positive influence on the fuel cell system. [3] In our approach, fluorinated 

polycyclic aromat ic hydrocarbons with specific functional groups were synth esized and integrated as 

addi tives into the electrode. Here, the specific structural features of the fluoranthene derivatives were 

designed to interact via π-π interactions with the porous carbon catalyst support and by their N-donor 

functionali zation with the Pt -catalyst nanoparticles, to protect the active site from poisoning with 

phosphoric acids. 

Rotating disc electro de (RDE) measurements have shown tha t the additives reduce poisoning of the 

platinum catalyst and can improve oxygen -solubility at the electrode/electrolyte interface. We have also 

shown that the additives can replace an additional binder, such as PTF E, fo r optimizing the 

membrane/electrode assembly. Even without PTFE, fuel cell tests have shown that the PAH additives, 

implemented to the electrode, increase the full cell performance significantly. The modified electrode 

showed double the power density compa red to the untreated electrode. 

Fig . 1 Illustration of the additive -modified electrode. 

[1] I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P. E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah, K. R. 

Ward, Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 463 –491. [2] R. E. Rosli, A. B. Sulong, W. R. W. Daud, M. A. 

Zulkifley, T. Husaini, M. I. Rosli, E. H. Majlan, M. A. Haque, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2017, 42, 9293 –

9314. [3] Ö. Delikaya, M. Zeyat, D. Lentz, C. Roth, ChemElectroChem 2019, 6, 3892 –3900. Nickel -rich Cathode Coated with Designed Binder for Cycling 

# Performance Improvement at High -Voltage 

Sehyun Kwak, a Jisoo Han, a Hyun Min Jung, b Seung -Wan Song a,* 

> a

Dept. of Chemical Engineering & Applied Chemistry, Chungnam National University 

Daehak -ro 99, Daejeon 34134, South Korea 

> b

Dept. of Applied Chemistry, Kumho National Institute of Technology 

61 Daehak -ro, Gumi 39177, Pohang 37673, South Korea 

swsong@cnu.ac.kr 

A cathode which is one part of a battery has a large impact on the capacity of the battery. For this reason, 

Ni -rich layered oxides, LiNi 0.8 Co 0.1 Mn 0.1 O2 (NCM811) is a promising high -capacity cathode active material 

for high -energy density lithium -ion batteries for electric vehicles and energy storage s ystems. Generally, 

cathode is fabricated by coating the slurry of mixed active material, conductive agent and conventional 

polyvinylidenfluoride (PVDF) binder on aluminum current collector. NCM811 cathode coated with PVDF 

binder has however shown unstable cathode -electrolyte interface and structural degradation, especially, 

particularly under high charge voltages and elevated temperatures by fading capacity and reducing the life 

span of a battery. This problem originates from the physical binding mechanism of PVDF binder, which 

weaken the binding ability to active materials and current collector and insufficient thermal stability under 

harsh condition. In order to resolve those problems, we were motivated to develop a new highly functional 

binder as an alter native to PVDF. In this study, we present the effects of our new designed binder in 

improving the stability of NCM811 cathode and its performance in commercial electrolyte. 

## Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Ministry of SMEs and Startups (S2788978) of Korea , National 

Research Foundation grant funded by the Korean Ministry of Science and ICT (No. 2019R1A2C1084024) 

and  Creative Human Resource Development Consortium for Fusion Technology of Functional 

Chemical/Bio Materials of BK Plus program by Ministry of Education of Korea .Composition, Electrical and Optical properties of Nano Porous 

# Titanium Oxide doped with Fe 

Iva Betova, 1 Martin Bojinov, 2 Vasil Karastoyanov ,2 Elitsa Petkucheva , 1Evelina Slavcheva, 1

(1) Acad. E. Budevski Institute of Electrochemistry and Energy System - Bulgarian Academy of Sciences ,

Acad. G. Bonchev Str.10, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria, 

(2) University of Chemical Technology and Metallurgy, "Sveti Kliment Ohridski" 2 Bld., Sofia 1756 Sofia, 

Bulgaria 

e.petkucheva@iees.bas.bg 

Anodic oxidation of Ti is a p romisi ng method to produce nano -porous oxides as photocatalysts for water 

spli tting. Modification of the nano -porous structures via adsorption doping, pore -filling and/or deposition 

of material in the pores to produce effective optically absorbing and catalytic coatings is a strategic 

direction in contemporary photo catalysis material science. 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 

> h1/2

hn / eV 

> TiO 2
> Fe-TiO 2

Fig. 1 Photocurrent spectra of undoped TiO 2 (blue) and Fe -doped TiO 2 (red) measured at potential of 

0.3V in 0.1 M KOH 

The present research reports an investigation of TiO 2 modified with Fe as prospective photocatalyst for 

water splitting. 

Nanoporous anodic titanium oxides are synthesized in electrolytes based on ethylene glycol solvent with 

water and ammonium fluoride additions by anodic oxidation in a galvanostatic/te nsi ostatic regime 

(Agilent N5752A) using 99.6% Ti (Goodfellow) as working electrode and Pt mesh as counter electrode .

The porosity of the oxides is estimated by re -anodization in a suitable non -dissolving electrolyte, their 

optical properties are assessed using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. 

Modification of the titanium oxides is achieved via anodization in electrolytes containing K 3Fe(CN) 6.

Surface composition of oxides is studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The conduction 

mechanism in such do ped titanium oxides is assessed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 

Photocurrent measurements indicate improved absorption of visible light i n comparison with pristine 

nano -porous TiO 2 which points to prospective photocatalytic abilities of the modi fied oxides as 

photoanodes . Further optimization of the experimental conditions is needed to achieve better photo -

catalytical performance .

Acknowledgements : This work was supported by the National Science Fund of Bulgaria under contract 

ДН19/3 -2017 „Modelling, optimi zation and modification of nano -porous anodic oxide films as catalysts 

for water photo electrolysis “. Molecular Understanding of Ionic -liquid -based Superc apacitors 

Guang Feng 

School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 

Wuhan 430074, China 

gfeng@hust.edu.cn 

Electrical dou ble layer capacitors (EDLCs) , also called supercapacitors, store electrical energy via ion 

electrosorption directly at the electrolyte -electrode interface during the charging process, suggesting that 

the liquid -solid interfaces and the charging kinetics pl ay a dominant role in the underlying energy storage 

mechanism and the resulting device performance. Among electrolytes used in supercapacitors, room -

temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) have emerged as promising electrolytes, because of their exceptionally 

wi de electrochemical window, excellent thermal stability, nonvolatility, and relatively inert nature. 

Despite considerable work on RTIL -based supercapacitors, the details of what would happen at RTIL -

electrode interfaces still require in -depth exploration. 

Adopting molecular dynamics simulation, we studied RTIL electrolytes with different electrodes, in 

comparison with the corresponding experimental measurements, to understand the energy storage 

mechanism underlying supercapacitors and thus to promote the des ign of supercapacitors. The contents of 

this talk would include: 

1) Understanding the structural and dynamic nature of bulk RTILs at a molecular level, which would 

reveal the nano -aggregate, dynamics and ionic mobility, as well as the ion size impact on liqui ds 

without confinement. 1

2) Investigating RTILs -based EDLs at open surfaces (e.g., planar, cylindrical, spherical, with defects, 

etc.), by integration of molecular modelin g and the nano -/microscale experimental techniques 

(e.g., atomic force microscopy, in situ X -ray reflectivity, and neutron scattering), which would 

focus on the EDL structure and capacitance as well as the influence from ion size, ion type, 

applied potenti al, electrode curvature, etc. 2-4

3) Exploring the influence of water impurity on RTIL EDLs, which would show for the first work on 

the adsorption of water on electrode surfaces in contact with humid RTILs and the possi ble 

strategy to reduce the water electrosorption at polarized electrodes. 5, 6 

4) Studying the capacitance and charging dynamics of RTILs in porous electrodes, which would 

show how conductive MOF as electrode could achi eve promising capacitive performance 7 and 

how to tune pore size to obtain higher power density 8.

Referenced papers: 

(1) Feng, G.; Chen, M.; Bi, S.; Goodwin, Z. A. H.; Postnikov, E. B.; Brilliantov, N.; Urbakh, M.; Kornyshev, A. A. 

Free and B ound States of Ions in Ionic Liquids, Conductivity, and Underscreening Paradox . 2019 , 9, 021024. 

(2) Black, J. M.; Walters, D.; Labuda, A.; Feng, G.; Hillesheim, P. C.; Dai, S.; Cummings, P. T.; Kalinin, S. V.; 

Proksch, R.; Balke, N. Bias -Dependent Molecu lar -Level Structure of Electrical Double Layer in Ionic Liquid on 

Graphite . Nano Lett. 2013 , 13 , 5954 -5960. 

(3) Black, J. M.; Baris Okatan, M.; Feng, G.; Cummings, P. T.; Kalinin, S. V.; Balke, N. Topological Defects in 

Electric Double Layers of Ionic Liq uids at Carbon Interfaces . 2015 , 15 , 737 -745. 

(4) Feng, G.; Li, S.; Zhao, W.; Cummings, P. T. Microstructure of Room Temperature Ionic Liquids at Stepped 

Graphite Electrodes . 2015 , 61 , 3022 -3028. 

(5) Feng, G.; Jiang, X.; Qiao, R.; Kornyshev, A. A. Water in Ionic Liquids at Electrified Interfaces: The Anatomy of 

Electrosorption . 2014 , 8, 11685 -11694. 

(6) Bi, S.; Wang, R.; Liu, S.; Yan, J.; Mao, B.; Kornyshev, A. A.; Feng, G. Minimizing the Electro sorption of Water 

from Humid Ionic Liquids on Electrodes . 2018 , 9, 5222. 

(7) Bi, S.; Banda, H.; Chen, M.; Niu, L.; Chen, M.; Wu, T.; Wang, J.; Wang, R.; Feng, J.; Chen, T.; Dincă, M.; 

Kornyshev, A. A.; Feng, G. Molecular Understanding of Charge Storage and Charging Dynamics in 

Supercapacitors with Mof Electrodes and Ionic Liqu id Electrolytes . 2020 , 19 , 552 -558. 

(8) Mo, T.; Bi, S.; Zhang, Y.; Presser, V.; Wang, X.; Gogotsi, Y.; Feng, G. Ion Structure Transition Enhances 

Charging Dynamics in Subnanometer Pores . 2020 , 14 , 2395 -2403. PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL SYSTEM WITH 

# p- CuBi 2O4

Dergacheva M.B ., Puzikova D.S. , Khussurova G.M. 

D.V. Sokolsky Institute of Fuel, Catalysis and Electrochemistry, Almaty,050010, 142 

Kunaev str, Kazakhstan E-mail:  m_dergacheva@mail.ru 

CuBi 2O4 is a p-semiconductor and has many promising physico -chemical 

properties including magnetic susceptibility, dielectric constant, high -temperature heat 

capacity, electrochemical capacitance, photoelectrochemical ability and cata lytic 

properties  In this work the spin coating method was used, which is carried out under 

standard laboratory conditions from aqueous salt solutions, uses the advantages of 

centrifugation to uniforml y distribute the coating on the surface, is characterize d by 

low material consumption, allows the formation of thin nanocrystalline layers with a 

given thickness. The polyethylene glycol (PEG) was used to the uniform distribution of 

soluti on droplets over the entire surface of the deposited films . A solution fo r

depositing CuBi 2O4 films was prepared by mixing copper nitrate trihydrate and 

bismuth nitrate pentahydrate (at 0.05M and 0.1M, respectively) with acidification with 

concentrated (65%) nitric acid. Subsequently, the resulting mixture was evaporated 

withou t boiling to an amount of 1/5 of the original volume and cooled to room 

temperature. The preparation of solutions containing polyethylene glycol - 2000 (PEG) 

additives was performed after cooling the initial solution, adding PEG in the amount of 

0.25 grams to each 5 ml of the solution. After that, the solution was subjected to 

treatment in an ultrasonic bath.  The c entrifugation procedure with r otation during 

90 s . at a frequency of 500 rpm. on support glass/FTO wascarried out. After 

application, the films we re annealed in a muffle furnace for 2 hours at a 

temperature of 600° C.  Photoelectrochemical studies were performed in real time in a 

solution of 0.2 M Na 2SO 4 + 0.1 M phosphate buffer + 10 mM H 2O2 under modulated 

illumination with a wavelength of 465 nm in a GillAC (ACM Instruments) apparatus 

using a quartz cuvette and a silver chloride reference electrode .

Surface micrographs showing the ordering of the growth of CuBi 2O4 particles 

(size ≈200 nm) with the addition of polyethylene glycol to the solution were obtain ed 

by SEM. The results of AFM indicate 1.5 times decrease in the roughness of the relief 

and the formation of equidimensional rounded crystallites. For all films, the XRD 

method confirmed the presence of the crystalline Kusachiite phase corresponding to th e

CuBi 2O4 compound. Comparative analysis of the XRD diagram of samples obtained 

from solutions containing PEG and "pure" (without PEG) shows an increase in the 

number of peaks and their intensity in the first case. Based on photoelectric 

measurements , it is established that CuBi 2O4 films precipitated from solutions 

containing polyethylene glycol show a photoactivity of 2 times higher. Thus, the 

developed method of deposition of a complex copper -bismuth CuBi 2O4 system makes 

it possible to obtain polycrystall ine films with high photosensitivity, p-type 

conductivity, which are promising for use in photoelectrochemical converters as 

photocathodes. Electrochemical Synthesis of ( Hydro)oxides for Oxygen Evolution 

Zhenhua Yan , Xiang Chen, Fangyi Cheng, Jun Chen 

Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy 

Conversion and Storage Center, College of Chem istry, Nankai University 

No 94, Weijin Road, Nankai District, Tianjin 300071, China. 

E-mail:  yzh @nankai.edu.cn 

Electrochemical water splitting is a promising technology for hydrogen production and sustainable ener gy 

conversion, but the currently available electrolyzers still require highly active and robust anodic 

electrodes for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In this talk, we focus on two electrochemical 

synthesis strategies for (hydro)oxide design and water oxidation applications. On the one hand , we

developed a universal electrodeposition method for synthesizing of metal hydroxides/oxides on varied 

substrates via reduction of oxyacid anions. On graphitic substrates, we find that the insertion of nitrate ion 

in graphene layers significantly enhances the electrodeposit –support interface, resulting in high mass 

loading and low interface resistance . For the electrocatalytic OER , the nanocrystalline cerium dioxide and 

amorphous nickel hydroxide co -electrodeposited on graphite sustains long -term robust durability (over 

300 h) at a large current density of 1000 mA cm −2. On the other hand, a n electrochemical reduction 

etching method has been developed for controllable tailoring of the cationic defects in iron -based oxide s

under mild conditions. The optimized defective spinel -type iron nickel oxide exhibits an overpotential as 

low as 270 mV at 10 mA cm −2 and a Tafel slope of only 33.8 mV dec −1 for the OER, outperforming the 

benchmark RuO 2 and pristine oxide. Experimental investigations and theoretical calculations further 

demonstrate that the presence of iron defects increases the Ni –O covalency that pr omotes the adsorption 

and activation of H 2O, modulates surface electronic structure that endow moderate oxygen intermediate 

species adsorption, promote electron transfer, and enrich active sites, thus boosting the OER activity. 

These results provide new an d effective electrochemical methods for synthesis and construction of 

efficient OER eletrocatalysts. 

Fig .1 Electrodeposition strategy and principles. 

References 

1. X. Chen, M . Yu, Z .H. Yan*, W .Y. Guo, G .L. Fan, Y .X. Ni, J .D. Liu, W . Zhang, W . Xie, F .Y. 

Cheng* , J. Chen, Boosting electrocatalytic oxygen evolution by cation defect modulation via 

electrochemical etching, CCS Chem. 2020, 2, 675 -685. 

2. Z.H. Yan, H .H. Liu, Z .M. Hao, M . Yu, X . Chen, J. Chen*, Electrodeposition of (hydro)oxides for an 

oxygen evolu tion electrode, Chem. Sci. 2020, DOI: 10.1039/d0sc01532f 

3. K. Zhang, Z .H. Yan* and J . Chen*, Electrodeposition accelerates metal -based batteries, Joule , 2020, 

4, 10 –11. 

4. Z.H. Yan, H .M. Sun, X . Chen, H .H. Liu, Y .R. Zhao, W . Xie, F .Y. Cheng*, J . Chen, Anion ins ertion 

enhanced electrodeposition of robust metal hydroxide/oxide electrodes for oxygen evolution, Nat. 

Commun. , 2018, 9, 2373. Tailoring Heterojunction Architecture on IrO 2 Based Dimensionally Stable 

# Anodes for Environmental Applications 

## Evandi RAHMAN 1, Eunju Hwang, Seokhwa Hong, Jieun Shin , Seok Won HONG 1 ,

## Kangwoo CHO 2*       

> 1Water Cycle Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Hwarangro 14 gil, Seongbuk -gu,
> Seoul 136 -791, Republic of Korea .
> 2Division of Environmental Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology
> (POSTECH), Pohang 790 -784, Republic of Korea .
> *Presenting/C orresponding author. Tel :+82 -54 -279 -2289 , E -mail: kwcho1982@postech.ac.kr

## Dimensionally stable anodes (DSAs), most often based on IrO 2 as a core component, have been 

## widely utilized for industrial chlorine production (chlor -alkali) and high -salinity wastewater 

## treatment via generation of reactive chlorine species (RCS) . For an effective electrochemical 

## water treatment, a competition between oxygen and chlorine evolution reactions for the surface 

## coordinated reactive oxygen species would be an important consideration. This study report s

## variable strategies on heterojunction architecture over the conventional DSA configuration to 

## enhance reactive chlorine species (RCS) generation in dil ute aqueous solution in terms of 

## current and energy efficiency. Firstly, we investigated the effects of TiO 2 over -layers with 

## variable loadings on Ir 0.7 Ta 0.3 Ox anodes. The IrTaO x layer was found to serve as ohmic contact 

## with the Ti substrate by redox cycl e of Ir(IV)/Ir(VI) couple , while the outer TiO 2 layer could 

## shift the heterogeneous reaction selectivity. In particular , an elevated concentration of adsorbed 

## hydroxyl radical could enhance the rate of RCS generation . Secondly, we demonstrated that 

## bismuth titanate outer layer on the IrTaO x layer could significantly enhance the current and 

## energy efficiency of reactive chlorine generation, while allowing •OH mediated oxidation in 

## the absence of the chloride ion. In particular, fo rmation of Bi 2Ti 4O11 was noted at Ti:Bi ratios 

## of 5:5 and 3:7 in precursor . Considering relatively low electrical conductivity of TiO 2 and Bi 2O3

## as well as the instability of Bi 2O3 in circum -neutral pH, our findings would boost the efficacy 

## of IrO 2 based D SA with minimal losses in current generation and operation lifetime. 

## Keywords: Heterojunction electrode, electrochemical chlorine generation, water treatment Pd - and Pt -Polypyrrole coated Nitrogen -doped Reduced Graphene 

# Oxide for Vol tammetric Sensing of Formaldehyde 

Pei Meng Woi 

Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya 

50603, Kuala Lumpur, MALAYSIA 

pmwoi@um.edu.my 

The study presents the synthesis of polypyrrole -coated palladium platinum/nitrogen -doped reduced 

graphene oxide nanocomposites (PdPt -PPy/N -rGO NC) via direct the reduction of Pd(II) and Pt(II) in the 

presence of pyrrole monomer, N -rGO and L -cysteine as the reducing agent. X -ray diffraction confirmed 

the presence of metallic Pd and Pt from the reduction of Pd and Pt cations. Transmission electron 

microscopy images revealed the presence of Pd, Pt and PPy deposition on N -rGO. Impedance spectroscopy 

results gav e a decreased charge transfer resistance due to the presence of N -rGO. The nanocomposites were 

synthesized with different Pd/Pt ratios (2:1, 1:1 and 1:2). A glassy carbon electrode (GCE) modified with 

the nanocomposite showed enhanced electrochemical sensi ng capability for formaldehyde in 0.1 M sulfuric 

acid solution. Cyclic voltammetry showed an increase in the formaldehyde oxidation peak current at the 

GCE modified with Pd2Pt1 PPy N -rGO. At a typical potential of 0.45 V (vs. SCE), the sensitivity in the 

linear segment was 345.8 μA.mM −1. cm −2. The voltammetric response was linear between 0.01 and 0.9 

mM formaldehyde concentration range, with a 27 μM detection limit (at S/N = 3). 

Keywords : Voltammetric sensing ; Polypyrrole ; Nanostructure ; Nitrogen -doped reduced graphene oxide ;

Formaldehyde sensor Toward s Personalization of Electropolishing Post -Treatments 

Zahra Chaghazardi a, Ro lf  Wüthrich a,b  

> a

Department of Mechanical, Industrial, and Aerospace Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, 

Quebec, H3G 1M8 , Canada  

> a,b

Department of Chemical and Mate rials Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 

1M8 , Canada 

zahra.chaghazardi@concordia.ca 

Rolf.wuthrich@concordia.ca 

The present study investigates the possibility of introducing the conce pt o f mass personalization to 

electropolishing treatments. The goal of product personalization is to cater to the unique preferences of 

the customers by close integration of t hem in the design process (1-2).

Electropolishing is among the flexible industries that are suited to the concept of personalization because 

it presents a re latively small machining overhead . It enhances the aesthetics and durability of metal parts 

by smoothening and brighten ing of their surface (3-4). The flexible yet effective nature of 

electropolishing makes it highly appealing to many applications, especially industries such as 

watchmaking that can benefit from the aesthetically pleasin g metal surfaces as well as the possibility of 

demanding different surface appearances. Such industries need to adopt strategies to increase their level 

of product customization to maintain their c ompetitiveness in today’s market . Elec tropolishing serv ices 

offered nowadays do not offer diverse options at least in terms of the appearance of the final surface, 

much less the possibility of providing the customer’s specific selection of surface glos s. There seems to 

be a huge potential in c ustomization of t he electropolishing services, where the process can be tuned in 

order to achieve the specific surface finish demanded by the customer. 

In this study, various surface finishes are obtained for st ainless steel 316L and grade 5 Titanium sa mples, 

which are tw o of the most used alloys by the watchmaking industry. In order to achieve different surface 

roughness and brightness, some electropolishing parameters (time and electric potential) are modified. 

Figure 1. Var ious surface finishes achievable for Stainless Steel 316 L samples , by electropolishing at 

different time s and applied potentials 

References: 

1. L. Hof , R. Wüthrich , Int. J. A dv. Manuf. Lett ., 15, 76 -80 (2 01 8). 

2. I. Torn, T. Vaneker, Procedia . Manu f., 28 , 135 –41 (201 9). 

3. G. Yang, B. Wang, K T aw fiq, H Wei, S Zhou, and G. Chen,  Surf Eng. , 33(2) , 149 -66 (201 7). 

4. A. M. Awad Abouelata, ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci., 13 (7) , 2422 –8 (2018). Moderate Oxophilic CoFe in Carbon Nanofiber for the Oxygen 

# Evolution Reaction in Anion Exchange Membrane Water Electrolysis 

Sinwoo Kang a, Kahyun Ham a, Jaeyoung Lee a,b,*  

> a

School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology 

(GIST), 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South Korea  

> b

Ertl Center for Electrochemistry and Catalysis, GIST, 123 Cheomdangwagi -Ro, Gwangju 61005, South 

Korea 

*C orresponding author e -mail address: jaeyoung@gist.ac.kr 

We propose corrosi on -resistant carbon -coated Co 0.9 Fe 0.1 alloy nanoparticles as highly active and durable 

electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in anion exchange membrane water electrolysis 

(AEMWE). In the presence of 10% Fe atoms, the oxophilicity of Co m etal is modulated in a direction to 

facilitate OH - adsorption on Co 3+ ; thus, Co 0.9 Fe 0.1 -carbon nanofiber (CNF) can exhibit smaller 

overpotentials than other metal ratios in Co 1-xFe x-CNF. Additionally, we confirm catalytic degradation 

from the oxidation of the carbon layer, which is triggered by defects in the carbon originating from Fe 

during the pyrolysis step. The Co 0.9 Fe 0.1 metal is further optimized by increasing graphitization to 

simultaneously achieve superior activity and durability for application o n AEMWE. This work not only 

demonstrates the role of Fe in Co metal for controlling the proper oxophilicity but also shows the 

importance of graphitized carbon as a catalyst support for stable water oxidation. The Influence of O 2 and Local Changes of pH on Pt Oxide Formation 

Oliver Rodriguez, Guy Denuault 

Chemistry, University of Southampton 

Southampton, SO17 1BJ U.K. 

G.Denuault@soton.ac.uk 

The effect of oxide coverage on the oxygen reduction reaction has been widely studied and it has been 

reported that a partially oxidised surface is less electroactive towards the ORR than a fully reduced 

metallic surface. In contrast, the effect of molecular oxygen on oxide formation and reduction has not 

received much atten tion, probably due to the difficulty to separate the contribution from both processes 

that occur at similar potentials and time scales. Some groups have studied this by forming oxide in the 

presence of molecular oxygen and reducing it in its absence; this requires precise control to change the 

solution or to fully degas it before the reduction takes place. Furthermore, these experiments do not take 

into account the different states of the surface due to the availability of molecular oxygen. Recently, our 

gr oup reported the presence of oxygenated species that are pre -adsorbed on metallic electrodes after being 

exposed to oxygen (1, 2). Recent results in neutral me dia suggest that these species are related to oxide 

formation that could be influenced by the pre sence of molecular oxygen in solution and by local changes 

of pH. To study this, we exploit the negative feedback mode of SECM and control the tip/substrate 

distance to minimise the influence of dissolved oxygen on the reduction response; this procedure al so 

ensures that the state of the surface is the same since it is always exposed to oxygen. The results in acidic 

conditions show a good correlation between the oxide coverages obtained under hindered diffusion and 

the coverage obtained in a fully degassed solution, suggesting that the oxide formation is not influenced 

by the presence of dissolved oxygen at low pH. In neutral and unbuffered media the oxide formation 

shows a dependence on the tip/substrate distance. Furthermore, under hindered diffusion we ob serve a 

diffusion controlled wave that we ascribe to OH - oxidation; this suggests that the differences seen in the 

oxide formation region in the presence and absence of oxygen are due to local changes of pH. Overall, we 

show that Pt electrochemistry is not influenced by the presence of O 2 in solution as previously reported ,

but by the local changes of pH that occur during reactions under neutral and unbuffered media. 

References 

(1) Perry, S.; Denuault, G. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2015 , 17 , 3000 5-30012. 

(2) Perry, S.; Denuault, G. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2016 , 18 , 10218 -10223. Consecutive Ag I Ion Incorporation into Oligonucleotides containing 

# Cytosine -Cytosine Mispairs 

M. Nur Hossain a, Syed Ahmad a, b, Heinz -Bernhard Kraatz a,b

> a

Department of Physical and Environmental Sciences, University of Toronto, 1065 Military Trail, 

Scarboro ugh , ON M1C 1A4, Canada ; Ema il: mnur.hossain@utoronto.ca 

> b

Department of Chemistry , University of Toronto , 80 St. George Street, Toronto, M5S 3H6, Canada. 

Metal ions interact with DNA at various sites and play an essential role in stabilizing the diverse po ssible 

confirmations. In particular, Ag I binds to bridges the nucleobases, effectively putting it within the double helix, 

instead of phosphate backbone, and it is selectively captured by cytosine -cytosine mispairs in the DNA duplex. 

Herein, we have demons trated the consecutive incorporation of Ag I ion into the dsDNA containing adjacent C -C

mispairs and the corresponding conformational effects on the overall duplex conformation. Our ultraviolet (UV) and 

circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy studies have show n that a stable bridging of C -Ag I-C upon the incorporation of 

the stoichiometric amount and significant structural changes in the presence of an excess amount of Ag I.

Subsequently, the Ag I-mediated DNA strands are immobilized on Au surfaces, and their elec trochemical properties 

are monitored using CV, EIS and SECM showing increased overpotentials and charge -transfer resistances and 

decreased the rate constant in the presence of an excess of Ag I, respectively, which are linked to dramatic structural 

changes . These results are further supported by the XPS and sulfide -Au reductive desorption measurements. Our 

findings demonstrate that metal ion mediation of nucleobase mispairs plays an important role in the conformational 

stabilization of DNA duplexes and to ch ange their electrochemical properties, two facts indispensable to the study of 

DNA and DNA based sensors. Combustion synthesis of La -perovskites for fuel cell reaction s

Anand Kumar 

Department of Chemical Engineering 

Qatar University, P O Box 2713, Doha, Qatar 

akumar@qu.edu.qa 

High energy density technologies of fuel cell and metal air batteries are considered as the energy 

conversion and storage systems to meet the future energy requirements. These technologies are greatly 

dependent on a pair of sluggish electrochemical reactions such as oxygen reduction reaction (OR R) and 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER ). Both reactions require high cost metals to enhance the activity and 

stability, but their availability and cost limits the worldwide application in electrochemical technologies. 

Recently, a new class of materials, per ovskites, have shown great potential for energy conversion and 

other relevant applications. In this paper, I plan to discuss the synthesis and electrocatalytic property 

evaluation of lanthanum based perovskites. Combustion based techniques were used to syn thesize LaMO 3

(M=Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) perovskites by using metal nitrate precursors in presence of glycine fuel [1] . The 

structural and morphological properties of the catalysts were studied using XRD, SEM, and TEM. The 

synthesis conditions are found to have a significant effect on the nature of the nanoparticles and it can be 

tuned to synthesize amorphous or crystalline materials. The perovskites showed exceptional per formance 

for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline medium. LaMnO 3

is found to be most active for ORR, whereas LaCoO 3 for OER. The onset potential of LaMnO 3 is -0.12 V, 

and for other La -transition metals is nearly -0.2 V. The Koutechy -Levich plot obtained from rotating disk 

electrode shows a higher number of electron transfer for LaMnO 3 catalyst and the least for LaCrO 3,

whereas the stability results indicate the LaCoO 3 to be more stable as compared to LaMnO 3. Based on the 

experimental results and literature survey, it is suggested that the improved activity of Mn and Co based 

lanthanum perovskite catalyst could be due to the optimum stabilization of reaction intermediates 

involved in the rate -determining step (RDS) o f ORR/OER. 

Another aspect of this paper is based on a novel approach to the synthesis of perovskites. Addition of a 

small quantity of leachable salts during combustion helps in creating a thin coating of salt around the 

nanoparticles, in addition to lowe ring the combustion temperature resulting in smaller crystallites. Post 

combustion leaching of the salts results in agglomeration controlled smaller nanoparticles with high 

surface area and oxygen deficient surface cites suitable for electrocatalytic appli cations. Initial results 

indicate approximately two -fold increase in the kinetic current density of LaMnO 3 after salt assisted 

synthesis [2] .

References: 

[1] Ashok A, Kumar A, Bhosale RR, Almomani F, Malik SS, Suslov S, et al. Combustion synthesis 

of bifunctional LaMO 3 (M=Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) perovskites for oxygen reduction and oxygen 

evolution reaction in alkaline media. J Electroanal Chem 2018;809 :22 –30. 

[2] Ashok A, Kumar A, Ponraj J, Mansour SA, Tarlochan F. Enhancing the electrocatalytic 

properties of LaMnO 3 by tuning surface oxygen deficiency through salt assisted combustion 

synthesis. Catal Today 2020 , in -press . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catt od.2020.05.065. Indirect Photo -electrochemical Detection of Carbohydrates Mediated 

# by Hydrogen and Enhanced by a Polymer of Intrinsic Mircoporosity 

Yuanzhu Z hao ,1 Neil B. M ck eown, 2 Mariolino C arta ,3 Frank M arken 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK, y.zhao@bath.ac.uk  

> 2

School of Chemistry, University o f Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland EH9 3JJ, UK  

> 3

Department of Chemistry, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK 

y.zhao@bath.ac.uk 

An “indirect” photo -electrochemical sensor is presented for mea suring a mixture of analytes including 

reducing sugars (e.g. g lucose, fructose) and non -reducing sugars (e.g. sucrose, trehalose). The novelty is 

in the employment of a palladium film creating a two -compartment cell to separate the analytical 

compartment and electrochemical responsive compartment (see Figure 1) . The photo -catalytic 

co mpartment reli es o n a well -known photocatalyst Pt@g -C3N4[1] immobili sed in to a polymer of intrinsic 

microporosity (PIM -1) [2]. The immobilised photocatalyst is deposited onto a thi n palladium membrane, 

which al lows rapid pure hydroge n diffusion . W hen appl ying blue LED lig ht , hydrogen is generated 

driven by quenchers , captured by the polymer coating , and the n driven across the palladium foil. 

Chronopotenti ometry (zero current) res po ns es from the localized pho to -driven production are ob served in 

the electrochemical compartment . This concept demonstrated potential to measur e any types of hole -

quenching analytes with no conductivity or buffer requirement s. Potential for application s of “indirect 

se ns ing” is demonstrated with com mercial soft drinks . Th is design is proposed to pa ve the way for 

sensing applications stud ying complex samples like co lloids, foods, formulations, or drugs without any 

direct ly applied electrochemical process. [3 ]

Figure 1. Schematic illustra ti on of an experimental direct photo -elec trochemical sensor. 

Refer ences :

[1] Zhang, G.; Lan, Z. A.; Lin, L.; Lin, S.; Wang, X. Chem . Sci. , 2016 , 7, 3062. 

[2] Madrid, E.; Lowe, J. P.; Msayib, K. J.; McKeown, N. B.; Song, Q.; Attard, G. A.; Düren, T.; Ma rk en, 

F. ChemElectroChem , 2019 , 6, 252. 

[3] Zhao, Y.; Dobson, J. ; Harabajiu, C.; Madrid , E.; Kanyannee, T.; Lyall, C.; Reeksting , S.; Car ta, M.; 

Mc Keown, N. B.; Torrente -Murciano, L.; Black, K.; Ma rken , F. Bio electrochemist ry , 2020 , 7,1074 99 .Enzymatic Biofuel Cells for Controlled Drug Release 

Xinxin Xiao ,1 Edmond Magner 2

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) , DK -2800 Kongens Lyngby, 

Denmark 

> 2

Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute, University of Limeric k (UL) , Limerick, Ireland 

e-mail address : xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk ;

Self -powered drug delivery systems based on conductive polymers (CPs) that eliminate the need for 

external power sources, are of significant interest for use in clinical applications. Osmium redox polymer 

mediated glucose/O 2 enzymatic biofuel cells (EBFCs) were prepared with an additional CP -drug la yer on 

the cathode. On discharging the EBFCs in the presence of glucose and dioxygen, model drug compounds 

incorporated in the CP layer were rapidly released with negligible amounts released when the EBFCs 

were held at open circuit. Controlled and ex situ release of three model compounds,  ibuprofen  (IBU), 

fluorescein (FLU) and  4',6 -diamidino -2-phenylindole  (DA PI), was achieved with this self -powered drug 

release system. DAPI released in situ in cell culture media was incorporated into retinal pigment 

epithe lium (RPE) cells. We present a proof -of -concept responsive drug release system that may be used 

in implant able devices .Industry 4.0: Model Sized Smart Factory for Electropolishing 

Gobinath Vellapalayam Manoharan a and Rolf Wuthrich a, b  

> a

Department of Mechanical, Industrial, and Aerospace Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, 

Quebec, Canada  

> b

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada .

E-mail: vmgobinath@gmail.com and rolf.wuthrich@concordia.ca 

Abstract: 

With the  arrival  of Industry 4.0, manufacturing industries are initiating the manufacturing process through 

the latest smart technologies, which allows them to make faster, smarter, more confident decisions. Notably, 

the small and medium -sized industries are moving their manufacturing facility to smart factories.  However, 

most of the  electro polishing industries do not have enough  know -how  and assets to build high technology 

like smart factories. In fact, automation and smart technologies are almost non -existent in industrial 

electropolishing . As a resul t, the industry  is facing  problems in terms of automation, long term quality 

control, and  data collection . This paper proposes a model sized automated smart manufacturing setup for 

the electropolishing manufacturing process in the laboratory environment. T he proposed model sized 

manufacturing setup ha s automated loading & unloading of workpieces, real -time monitoring of bath 

parameters (such as bath temperature, pH, electrical conductivity, density, and viscosity) and machine to 

machine communication without the need for human intervention. The process parameters information  is 

stored and processed  in  a cloud. We  employed  a machine learning approach to adjust the process 

parameters of electrop olishing to maintain consistent quality and repeatability of manufacturing products 

using the long -term history of data. Finally, the performance of the model sized smart factory is analysed 

from the viewpoint of real -time monitoring of bath parameters, ma chine to machine communication, and 

consistent quality of the product. The results show that the system is effective in the monitoring of bath 

parameters and  delivers  consistent quality. 3D print ed electrodes for fuel electroanalysis: Simultaneous 

# determination of lead ( II) and copper (II) in ethanol 

Afonso F. João (1,2) , Raimundo R. Gamela (3) , Silvia V. F . Castro (1) , Rafael M. Car doso (1) , Eduardo M. 

Richter (1) , Rodrigo A. A. Muñoz (1)* 

> 1

Institute of Chemistr y, Federal University of Uberlândia, MG 38408 -100, Brazil  

> 2

Department of Math and Natural Science, Púnguè University, Chimoio, Mozambique 

> 3

Department of Chemistry, Federal  University of São Car los, São Carlos , 13565 -905, Brazil 

afonso. filipe.joao.acad@gmail.com 

In this work, we r eport a simple and sensitive protocol for the simultaneous sensing of lead and copper at 

low levels in liquid fuel samples (bioethanol) by square -wave anodic stripping voltammetry (SWASV) at 

a carbon black/poly lactic acid (CB/PLA) 3D -printed working electr ode . A 3D printing pen was used to 

fabricate the working electrode in a similar design to a convention al disc e lectrode. The CB/PLA 

electrode was treated by the application of a potential of +1.4 V per 200 s an d then by -1.0 V for the same 

time in 0.5 mol L-1 NaOH . The CB/PLA surface treat ment dramatically improved the electrochemical 

respo nse of copper and lead as shown in Figure 1 , probably expos ing the CB conducting sites of the 3D

printed surface. The parame ters that affect the SWASV technique for the d etermination of metals in the 

hydroethanolic samples w ere carefully optimized using univariate a nd multivariate designs. Under the 

optimized conditions, wide linear ranges were observed up to 200 μg L −1 (R 2 = 0.991) for lead and up to 

400 μg L −1 (R 2 = 0.995) for copper. The limits of detection (LOD) were estimated as 1.0 and 1.7 μg L −1 

with sensitivi ties of 0.0054 and 0.0047 μA μg L -1 for lead and copper, respectively. The inter -day (n=3) 

and interelec trode (n=2) studies provided RSD results lower than 2.8%, showing good stability of the 

proposed CB/PLA 3 D-printed sensor in hydroethanolic medium with 30% (v/v) ethanol. The proposed 

protocol was applied to determine lead and copper in fuel ethanol sample s, which were just diluted in the 

supporting electrolyte (HCl). Recovery values for two fortified samp les in three different levels of lead 

and copp er ranged from 82% to 107%. The developed method is feasible to be applied for the quality 

control of automo tive (bio)fuels in gas stations (in -loco analyses) and the use of the CB/PLA 3D -printed 

working electr ode makes this protocol very attractive in ter ms of cost -effectiveness and sustainability as 

low volumes were used and the 3D -printed electrodes are biode gradable. Figure 1 sho ws 

Figure 1. Baseline -corrected SWASV recordings for Pb 2+ and Cu 2+ (both 100 μg L -1) before (black line) 

and after (red line) electrochemical treatment. SWASV conditions: deposition time: 180 s; deposition 

potential: -1.1 V; st irring rate: 1500 rpm; conditioning potential: +0.6 V; conditioning time: 30 s; step 

potential: 1 mV; modulation amplitude: 40 mV; frequency: 10 Hz. Supporting electrolyte: ethanol:water 

(30:70%; v v -1) containing 0.1 mol L -1 HCl. 

Ac knowledgments : CAPES (001) , TWAS (137634/2017 -0 and 158587/2017 -0), CNPq, INCTBio and 

FAPEMIG .Assessing the Reacti vity of Poly phenolic Antioxidants with 

# Electrochemically Generated Superoxide A nion Radical by Cyclic 

# Voltammetry 

Tyra Lewis , Dr. Sanela Martic *

Department of Forensi c Sciences, Environmental and Life Sciences , Trent University 

Peterbo rough, ON Can ada 

*sanelamartic@trentu .ca 

Ele ctrochemistry is a valuable tool that has been used to stud y the interaction between reactive oxygen 

species (R OS) and antio xidant compounds, such as phenols .1-3 ROS, such as the supe roxide anion radical ,

O2˙– (SAR) is naturally produc ed within the biological environment via a single electron r eduction of 

molecular oxygen (O 2).2,4 Excess ROS can contribute to oxidative stress leading to cellular death and to

the onset of health issues, such as cancers, diabet es and neurodegenerative disease s.1,2,4 Flavonoids, such 

as quercetin (QCR) , are polyp henolic compounds with antioxidant proper ties which react with SAR ,

further preventing cell damage .3-5 Biologically relevant metal ions are also known t o regulate ROS 

act ivity via Fenton reactions .4 Interactions between flavonoids with metal ion s, and the role of metallo -

flavonoid complexes on the antioxidant capacity and activity remains poorly understood .4,5 Using a t hree -

electrode electrochemical cell , cy clic voltamme tr y (CV) was carried out to identify antio xidant activities 

of QC R and its metal ion complexes. A glassy carbon working electrode, a Pt wire counter electrode and 

an Ag/AgNO 3 re ference electrode immersed in DMF were used to generate the O2˙–/O 2 redox couple 

electrochemically in -situ .2 The current and potential associated with the O2˙–/O 2 redox couple were 

mo nitored to measure and quantify the scavenging ability of met al ion s (Fe 3+ or Cu 2+ ), QCR and their 

metallo -QCR complexes . In addition, in -situ or prefo rme d metallo -QCR complex es were also tested and 

compared. CV data indicated that all additives play ed a role as free radical scavengers and decreased the 

concentration of SAR in solution . Overall, the copper -QC R complex es induced greate r reduction of SAR 

conc entrati on compared to the iron -QCR complexes. 

Referen ces 

1. Ren é A.; Abasq M -L.; Hauchard D.; Hapiot P. Anal. Chem. 2010 , 82, 8703. 

2. Zabik N.L.; Anwar S.; Ziu I.; Martic -Milne S. Electrochim Acta. 2019 , 296, 174. 

3. Ahmed S.; S hakeel F .; Czech J. Food Sci. 201 2, 30 (2), 153 .

4. Bodini M.E.; Copia G.; Tapia R.; Leighton F.; Herrera L. Polyhedron . 1999 , 18, 2233. 

5. Gil E. S.; Couto R. O.; Braz. J. Pharmacogn. 2013 , 23, 542. Performance m odelling and design of the electrode microstructure for 

# batteries using a 3D pore -scale lattice Boltzmann model 

Qiong Cai , Duo Zhang 

Department of Chemical and Process Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, 

University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, United Kingdom 

q.cai@surrey.ac.uk 

The 3D microstructure of porous electrodes plays an important role in the performance of electrochemical 

energy devices including fuel cells, batteries and electrolysers. Computational models are useful as they 

can provide a direct link between microstructure properties and the complex transport phenomenon and 

electrochemical performance [1]. A three -dimensional (3D) pore -scale lattice Boltzmann modelling 

(LBM) framework has been developed at University of Surrey to simulate the transport mechanisms of 

gases, liquid electrolyte flow, species and charge in the porous electrodes [2 -4], coupled with 

electrochemical reactions. 

In this paper, we will show the application of t he 3D pore -scale LBM framework for modelling 3D 

porous fibrous electrode microstructures in redox flow batteries (RFBs) , with electrochemical reactions 

implemented at the interfaces between the solid fibres and the liquid electrolyte. The model is able to 

capture the multiphase flow phenomenon and predict the local concentration for different species, over -

potential and current density profiles under charge/discharge conditions [3]. It is found that the 

electrochemical performance is reduce d with air bubbles trapped inside the electrode [3]. To validate the 

model, the simulated pressure -drop and electrochemical performance are compared against the 

experimental measurement based on the same electrode structures [4]. Three electrode structures (SGL 

paper, Freudenberg paper, Carbon Cloth) are reconstructed from X -ray computed tomography (CT). 

These electrodes are used in an organic aqueous RFB based on TEMPO. Excellent agreement is achieved 

between the simulated and experimentally measured elect rochemical performance, indicating the validity 

of our model [4]. The effects of different porous structures on the performance are also investigated , to 

reveal the desirable electrode micro structural features for RFBs. 

We will also report the applicatio n of 3D pore -scale LBM framework for simulat ing lithium -ion battery 

(LIB ) electrodes [5] . The model is further developed to simulate the complex transport processes of ions, 

electrons, and multicomponent liquid species in real electrode geometries , and pre dict electrochemical 

performance. The simulated discharge curves of a realistic nickel -manganese -cobalt (NMC) battery 

electrode are in good agreement with the experimental measurement, demonstrating the validity of the 

model . The LBM framework is then appl ied to simulate a series of electrode structures generated using a 

discrete element method, to understand the effects of particle size and distribution, porosity, surface area, 

and tortuosity on the performance of the electrode. It is revealed that surface area and porosity are the 

determining factors for the performance, and structured patterns are beneficial for achieving uniform local 

distribution of lithium and current densities within the electrode. The current modelling work enhances 

our understanding of the impact of electrode microstructure on electrode performance, leading to design 

principles for electrodes with optimal microstructure for LIBs applications. 

Finally, we will report our recent work on using the 3D pore -scale LBM framework to help de sign 3D 

porous carbon structures as lithium host, to suppress Li dendrite growth and enable long cycle life for 

lithium metal batteries (LMBs). 

Acknowledgment : The financial support from EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Council) 

under the grant n umber EP/R021554/2 is acknowledg ed. 

References 

[1] D. Zhang et al. Progress in Energy 1 (2019) 1 -35.  doi: 10.1088/2516 -1083/ab38c7 

[2] D. Zhang et al. Electrochimica Acta 262 (2018) 2 82 -296.  doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2017.12.189 

[3] D. Zhang et al. Electrochimica Acta 283 (2018) 1806 -1819.  doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2018.07.027 

[4] D. Zhang et al. Journal of Power Sources 447 (2019) 227249.  doi:10.1016/j.jpowso ur.2019.227249 

[5] D. Zhang  et al . Applied Energy, under review. Model -Based System Design of Alkaline Water E lectrolyze rs Powered 

# by Renewable E nergy 

Jörn Brauns , Thomas Turek 

Institute of Chemical and Electrochemical Process Engineering, Clausthal University of Technology 

Leibnizstr. 17, 38678 Clausthal -Zellerfeld, G ermany 

brauns@icvt.tu -clausthal.de 

Alkaline water electrolysis is a key technology to utilize increasing amounts of fluctuating and 

intermittent renewable energy . Conventional alkaline water electrolyzers are designed for a stationary 

operation at fixed p rocess conditions. Therefore, this technology needs to be enhanced to handle the 

required dynamic operation. The main problem of existi ng systems is the limited part -load range. Below 

10 – 20 % of the nominal load, the gas purities decrease significantly. As hydrogen and oxygen can form 

explosive mixtures in a very broad range, this is a major safety issue. In consequence, electrolyzers 

perform a safety shutdown when reaching a gas impurity of 2 vol.% hydrogen in oxygen, which is 50 % 

of the lower explosion limit [1]. An additional problem is the electrode degradation due to an increased 

number of on/off cycles [2]. Furthermore, the system temperature needs to be in a fixed range for an 

efficient operation. Since most electrolyzers powered by renewable energ y do not provide a heating unit, 

only the heat generation of the reaction is used to maintain a suitable temperature. Hence, the system 

inertia defined by the liquid electrolyte volume should be optimized for the local conditions [3]. As this 

parameter als o influences the product gas purity, an optimal sizing without an adequate process model is 

difficult. 

Fig ure 1: Scheme of model -based system design. Location depended availab ility of renewable power can 

be used to determine the optimal system dimension s. 

This contribution shows how model -based system design can help to improve the overall system 

performance and production availability. Since every location offers different conditions, the electrolyzer 

must be adapted accordingly. A mathematical model i s used, which extends an existing approach by 

implementing dynamic balance equations, pressure effects and concentration drifts [4]. Model validation 

is performed by stationary and dynamic experiments in a lab -scale electrolyzer. In Figure 1, a typical 

flu ctuating wind power profile is provided, which can be utilized to optimize the system dimensions. The 

combination of suitable system designs and dynamic operation strategies enables longer production 

periods by enhancing the gas purity. As a result, more r enewable energy can be used and the system 

components benefit from a longer lifetime. Whereas the local renewable energy production rate 

determines the nominal load, the fluctuation amplitude and frequency can be used to calculate the optimal 

system dimens ions. 

References 

[1] P. Haug, M. Koj, T. Turek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42 (2017) 9406 –9418. 

[2]  A. Ursúa, E.L. Barrios, J. Pascual, I. San Martín, P. Sanchis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 41 (2016) 

12852 –12861. 

[3] A. Khalilnejad, G.H. Riahy, Energy Convers.  Manage. 80 (2014) 398 –406. 

[4] P. Haug, B. Kreitz, M. Koj, T. Turek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42 (2017) 15689 –15707. In sights into the ORR and OER in Ca 2+ containing DMSO: 

# A DEMS, RRDE , AFM and XPS study 

P. P. Bawol, I. Park, A. Koellisch, P. H. Reinsberg and H. Baltruschat 

Rheinische Friedrich -Wilhelms Universität Bonn 

Abteilung Elektrochemie, Roemerstrasse 164, 53117 Bonn, Germany 

* Baltruschat@uni -bonn.de 

Calcium, being the fifth most abundant metal on earth, combines high abundance with competitive 

volumetric capacity. As newer studies show promising results concerni ng electrochemical Ca 

plating/stripping (1 -5) , a combination with an oxygen cathode promise s impressive theoretical energy 

densities. In l iterature some pioneering work on the Ca –O2 system exists (6 -8) but deeper fundamental 

research is necessary to get insights into the reaction mechanism of oxygen reduction r eaction (ORR) and 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 

In this study we are investigating the ORR and OER in Ca 2+ containing system with various electrochemical 

and analytical methods. The product distribution of ORR products is investigated with differential 

electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) and rotating ring disc electrode (RRDE) using Pt and Au as 

electrocatalysts. The main products are Ca -peroxide and Ca - superoxide. Both products are soluble in 

DMSO. A complete blocking of the electrode surface , as it is known from Li -O2 literature, was not 

observed. Still the formation of s uperoxide in presence of the deposited film on the electrode is observed. 

Characterization of the ORR products was done via ex situ XPS measurements. There we could confirm 

calciu m peroxide and calcium superoxide as ORR products. Another oxygen containing product seems to 

be calcium oxide, which is located close to the electrode (shown by Ar + etching and XPS). In the 

electrochemical experiments the electrocatalysts can fully be reg enerated by applying higher electrode 

potentials as XPS studies showed . In addition the deposition of products on the electrode was investigated 

with EC -AFM. 

On basis of the new findings the reaction mechanism of the ORR in Ca 2+ containing DMSO will be 

dis cussed. 

1. A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Barde and M. R. Palacin, Nat.  Mater. , 15 , 169 (2016). 

2. D. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Jin, C. Kuss and P. G. Bruce, Nat.  Mater. , 17 , 16 (2017). 

3. Z. Li, O. Fuhr, M. Fichtner and Z. Zhao -Karger, Energy Environ. Sci. (2019). 

4. A. Shyamsunder, L. E. Blanc, A. Assoud and L. F. Nazar, ACS Energy Letters , 4, 2271 (2019). 

5. K. Ta, R. Zhang, M. Shin, R. T. Rooney, E. K. Neumann and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces , 11 , 21 536 (2019). 

6. P. Reinsberg, C. J. Bondue and H. Baltruschat, J. Phys. Chem. C , 120 , 22179 (2016). 

7. P. Reinsberg, A. A. Abd -El -Latif and H. Baltruschat, Electrochim. Acta , 273 , 424 (2018). 

8. T. Shiga, Y. Kato and Y. Hase, J. Mater. Chem. A , 5, 13212 (20 17). Pillar[5]arenes: comparison of electrochemical behavior in different 

# organic solvent 

Magdalena Z. Wiloch, Grzegorz Sobczak , Volodymyr Sashuk , Martin Jönsson -Niedziółka 

Institute of Physical ChemistryPolish Academy of Sciences 

Kasprzaka 44/52 01 -224 Warsa w, Poland 

mwiloch@ichf.edu.pl 

We have studied the electrochemical properties of d imethoxypillar[5]arene in two organic solvents, 

dichloromethane and acetonitrile. 

Research based on host –guest chemistry has attracted considerable interest in supramolecul ar chemistry 

for many years . Over the last decade, not only in optical but also electrochemical sensing, macrocyclic 

hosts like cyclodextrins, calixarenes or crown ethers have been in the spotlight. However, recently , in 

2008 Ogoshi [1] [1] reported a new type of macrocyclic compounds called Pillar[n]arenes . Pillar[n]arenes 

consist of five or six hydroquinone units linked by methylene bridges in the para position . Thei r r igid, 

symmetrical and cylindrical structures as well as the ease of functionalization make them particularly 

attractive in comparison to many other host molecules . Host -guest complexation as well as structure 

properties of different pillar[n]arenes are mainly studied by spectroscopic techniques. Far less research 

has been carried out by voltammetric techniques. Since most of the pillar[n]arenes are dissolved in 

organic solvents, voltamerometric studies were performed mainly in dichloromethane [2] [3] solution or with 

aqueous electrolyte s[4] mixed with acetone .

The main goal of this work was to investigate the anodic voltammetric behavior of 

dimethoxypillar[5]arene using cyclic voltammetry and pulse techniques . The influenc e of different 

organic media - dichloromethane and acetonitrile in which we conduct ed our voltammetric experiments, 

on redox properties were studied . Discrepancy of red ox reaction reversibility were compared using 

different scan rate and range of potential s. The p roposed approach could provide better description o f

pillar[n]arenes voltammetric behavior and thus could be helpful in the understanding of the electron 

donor properties in supramolecular host –guest interactions. 

[1] T. Ogoshi, S. Kanai, S. Fujinami, T. Yamagishi, 2008 , 5022 –5023. 

[2] B. Cheng, A. E. Kaifer, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015 , 137 , 9788 –9791. 

[3] N. Pearce, E. S. Davies, N. R. Champness, Molecules 2020 , 25 , 1627. 

[4] V. A. Smolko, D. N. Shurpi k, R. V. Shamagsumova, A. V. Porfireva, V. G. Evtugyn, L. S. 

Yakimova, I. I. Stoikov, G. A. Evtugyn, Electrochim. Acta 2014 , 147 , 726 –734. 

Acknowledgments 

This work has been financially supported by National Science Center within a framework of SONATA 

BIS project (nr 2015/18/E/ST4/00319 ) and by Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Poland 

within a framework of Luventus Plus III (nr IP2012 050772 ). Comparison of Photoelectrochemical Activities of Calcined and 

# Uncalcined TiO 2 / BiVO 4 Photoanodes 

Abrar Ahmad 1, Fatih Tezcan 1,2 , Gurbet Yerlikaya 1, Halime Paksoy 1, Gülfeza Kardaş 1

> 1

Çukurova University, Arts and Science s Faculty, Chemistry Department, Balca lı, Adana, Turkey 

> 2

Mersin University, Arts and Science s Faculty, Chemistry Department, Çiftlikköy, Mersin, Turkey 

e-mail: gulfeza@ cu.edu.tr 

Among the various energy sources, hydrogen is considered as an efficient energy source which stands out 

due to its high energy per mass content, easy transportability and clean electricity generation. 

Furthermore, hydrogen production not only obtained from water splitting with solar light irradiation but 

also zero CO 2 emission to earth. A most of promising photoanode m aterial TiO 2 has more advantage 

because of easy synthesis method with various surface morphology for photoelectrochemical hydrogen 

production [1, 2] . Herein , we introduced that one -dimensio nal, versatile TiO 2 with rutile phase structure 

was synthesized via hydrothermal method on conductive glass substrate (FTO) and then modified with 

BiVO 4 by electrochemical deposition and drop casting method. Fig. 1 shows Nyquist (a) , Bode (b) and 

Phase angle -frequency (c) plot s of electrodes. EIS measurement was carry out under a bias potential of 0.6 

V to examine oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on electrode surface. It indicates that Uncal_TiO 2/BiVO 4

electrode is the smallest semi -circle in order to utmost ph otocatalytic response under solar irradiation 

compare to applied calcination on TiO 2. LSV result of electrodes display in Fig. 1 d. Uncal_TiO 2/BiVO 4

electrode demonstrates a high photo -current density at 1.0 V (0.474 mA cm -2) in contrast to calcinated 

TiO 2 electrodes for photocatalytic hydrogen production under solar light. It suggests hindering rate of 

electron -hole recombination and improved photoelectrode separation. 

Fig. 1. Nyquist a), Bode b), phase angle -frequency c) and LSV d) graph of electrodes in 0.1 mM Na 2SO 3

electrolyte with 0.1 mM phosphate buffer. 

Acknowledgement 

The author would like to thank Çukurova University, Faculty of Arts and Science s, Department of 

Chemistry for provid ing the opportunity to work in the laboratory and also financial support to the 

Scientific Research Projects Unit (FBA -2019 -12171) of Çukurova University. 

References 

[1] Ma C, Wei M. BiVO 4-nanorod -decorated rutile/anatase TiO 2 nanofiber s with enhanced 

photoelectrochemical performance. Mater Lett ers . 2020;259:126849. 

[2] Derbali M, Othmani A, Kouass S, Touati F, Dhaouadi H. BiVO 4/TiO 2 nanocomposite: 

Electrochemical sensor for hydrogen peroxide. Materials Research Bulletin. 2020;125. Electrochemical Study of The Effect of Aluminum Ions on The 

# Stability and Performance of Cu -Based Catalysts in Atom Transfer 

# Radical Polymerization in Organic Media 

Jie Luo , Abdirisak Ahmed Isse, Christian Durante and Armando Gennaro 

Department of Chemica l Sciences, University of Padova 

Via Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy 

jie.luo@studenti.unipd.it 

Copper -based catalyst complexes played a critical role in the development of atom transfer radical 

polymerization (ATRP) .1 Among recently developed various advanced techniques, electrochemically 

mediated ATRP ( eATRP) proved to be a clean , robust and versatile method . The applied potential or 

current ( Eapp or Iapp ) determines the Cu I/Cu II ratio, allowing easy fine -tuning of reaction rate and 

polymerization control. 

However, eATRP is usually carried out in a divided cell with a separator that significantly increases 

the overall resistance . Also, Pt electrodes are often used. However, it has been shown that eATR P can be 

successfully achieved on non -noble metals and also in undivided cells with Al anodes. In the latter case s,

a significant challenge arouse d due to the small amount of released metal cations. Indeed, i t was observed 

that the presence of Al 3+ in DMF str ongly interfer es with the catalytic system, drastically affecting the 

performance of eATRP catalyzed by [Cu II Me 6TREN] 2+ .2 However, the nature of the interference of Al 3+ 

ions with Cu complexes was not inves tig ated in depth. Here we report a detailed investigation on the 

effect of Al 3+ on the performance of two of the most active and widely used ATRP catalysts, 

[Cu II Me 6TREN ]2+ and [Cu II TPMA] 2+ , in DMF, DMSO, and MeCN .

These complexes have been previousl y use d i n eATRP in both organic solvents and water. 2-5 In 

general, very stable Cu complexes with 1:1 Cu II to ligand stoichiometry are formed. 6 Fig. - 1 illustrate d the 

effect of Al 3+ on the voltammetric behavior of [Cu II Me 6TREN] 2+ . When CAl 3+ /CL=1.5 in DMF (Fig. 1a) ,

two well -separated irreversible reduction peaks followed by an anodic stripping peak were observed in 

place of the reversib le peak couple of [Cu II Me 6TREN] 2+ , which instead disappears. The presence of Al 3+ 

caused dissociation of [Cu II L] 2+ with release of Cu 2+, which is reduced to Cu + at less negative potential .

Fast disproportionation of the latter to Cu 0 and Cu 2+ and/or reduct ion at the electrode produced a deposit 

of metallic Cu o n the GC electrode . Similar phenomena were observed also in DMSO and MeCN (Fig. 1b 

and c) . Interestingly, the typical voltammetric pattern of [Cu II L] 2+ could be restored by add ing excess 

ligand s. Conv ersely , the stability of [Cu II TPMA] 2+ was affected by Al 3+ only in Me CN. 

The role of Al 3+ was also investigated in eATRP of butyl acrylate , providing results in agreement 

with the voltammetric analysis . In conclusion , t his study, together with an ongoing work in water, 

provides useful guidelines for eATRP in undivided cells with sacrificial Al anodes .

Fig . 1 CVs of 1 mM Cu ( OTf) 2 in the presence of 1 mM Me6TREN , 1.5 mM Al 3+ , and excess Me6TREN 

in (a) DMF, (b) DMSO, and (c) MeCN , recorded on a GC electro de at v = 0.2 V·s −1.

References 

[1] Matyjaszewski, K.; Xia, J. Chem.  Rev. 2001, 101, 2921 -2990. 

[2] Lorandi, F.; Fantin, M.; Isse, A. A.; Gennaro, A. Polym.  Chem. 2016, 7, 5357 -5365. 

[3] Park, S.; Chmielarz, P.; G ennaro, A.; Matyjaszews ki, K. Angew . Che m. Int . Ed it. 2015, 54, 2388 -92. 

[4] Fantin, M.; Lorandi, F.; Isse, A. A.; Gennaro, A. Macromol . Rapid . Commun . 2016, 37, 1318 -22 .

[5] De Bon, F.; Isse, A. A.; Gennaro, A. Electrochim . Acta . 2019, 304, 505 -512. 

[6] Bortolamei, N.; Isse, A . A.; Gennaro, A. ; Matyjaszewski, K. Macromol . 2010, 43, 9257 -9267. Modeling of Charge Transfer and Mass Transport at 3D Printed 

# Composite Electrodes 

Táňa Sebechlebská a,b , Viliam Kolivoška b

Department of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University in 

Bratislava, Mlynská Dolina, Ilkovičova 6, 84215 Bratislava 4, Slovakia 

J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Dole jskova 3, 18223 

Prague, Czech Republic 

tana.sebechlebska@uniba.sk 

3D printing has been applied to every field of chemistry including electrochemistry. In recent years 

conductive composites containing different allotropes of carbon [1,2] or metal s such as copper [3] have 

been used to manufacture 3D printed electrodes. For carbon nanotube -based composites it was recently 

demonstrated that after simple anodic activation procedure almost the whole surface of the electrode 

becomes electrochemical ly acti ve ( 85  % relative area, further denoted as  AEC ). On the other hand, current 

sensing atomic force microscopy imaging revealed that only 33% of the electrode surface is electrically 

conductive (A CON ). [1] To explore relationship between A EC and A CON we performed finite -element -method 

numerical simulation s of cyclovoltammetric experiments with the electroactive probe in the electrolyte and 

composite electrodes . Simulations consider ed model 2D geometries and were performed in program 

COMSOL Multiphysics® . [4] In the electrolyte phase a continuity equation is formulated for both (oxidized 

and reduced) forms of the probe . The charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface is formulated as 

Butler -Volmer kinetic expressions introduced as source/sink ter ms of the electrode boundary condition of 

continuity equations. Results (Figure 1) indicate that the non -linear diffusion is of great significance at the 

interface of electrolyte and composite electrode s. The simulated cyclovoltammetric response of the 

ele ctroactive probe at the composite electrode with A CON = 33 % (corresponding to the electrode surface 

shown Figure 1B) leads to A EC = 98 %. This value is comparable to experimental value obtained at the 

electrode 3D printed from this composite (A EC = 85 %) .

Fig. 1 COMSOL simulations. (A) Concentration profiles of the reaction product generated at composite 

electrodes with A CON values of 3 to 100 %. (B) Corresponding simulated voltammograms. 

[1] E. Vane čkov á, M. Bou ša, Š. Novakov á Lachmanov á, J. Rathousk ý, M. G ál, T. Sebechlebsk á, V. 

Kolivo ška, 3D printed polylactic acid/carbon black electrodes with nearly ideal electrochemical behavior, 

J. Electroanal. Chem. 857 (2020 ) 857 113745. 

[2] E. Vane čkov á, M. Bou ša, F. Vivaldi, M. G ál, J. Rathousk ý, V. Kolivo ška, T. Sebechlebsk á, UV -VIS 

spectroelectrochemistry with 3D printed electrodes, J. Electroanal. Chem. 857 ( 2020 ) 857, 113760. 

[3] E. Vane čkov á, M. Bou ša, R. Sokolov á, P. Moreno -Garcia, P. Broekmann, V. Shestivska, J. Rathouský, 

M. Gál, T. Sebechlebs ká, V. Kolivoška, Copper electroplating of 3D printed composite electrodes, J. 

Electroanal. Chem. 858 (2020) 113763. 

[4] COMSOL Multiphysics® v. 5.2. www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden. Structure and Stability of Cu Single Crystal Electrodes in Phosphate 

# Electrolyte studied by In -situ Surface X -ray Diffraction 

B. F. Baggio 1, P.  Rodriguez 2, J. Beane, A 1. Kolodziej 2, C. A. Lucas 1, Y.  Grunder 1

> 1

University of Liverpool, Peach Street, Liverpo ol, L69 7ZF, United Kingdom 

> 2

University of Birmingham,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom 

B.F.Baggio@liverpool.ac.uk 

Electrochemical reduction of CO 2 into carbon -based fuels has received great attention due its importance 

as source of renewabl e energy. Copper and copper oxide electrodes are well known to electrochemically 

convert CO 2 to a range of products. The selectivity is associated to the species adsorbed on the surface 

and/or its crystallographic orientation [1]. For example, methane is t he dominant product on Cu(111), 

whilst ethylene is favoured on Cu(001) [2]. 

Surface x -ray diffraction (SXRD) can be used to study Cu electrodes in electrochemical environment and 

correlates the changes in the atomic structure with the redox reactions. In t his work in -situ SXRD studies 

are presented on Cu(111) and Cu(001) electrodes in a neutral phosphate buffered electrolyte (pH 8). 

Strong dependence in the morphology and stability of the Cu(111) surface during the potential cycling 

arises from the preparat ion method and history of the electrode. The phosphate adsorption and 

deprotonation of the (di) -hydrogen phosphate can lead a fully reversible adsorption process of oxygenated 

species for a smooth and defect free surface. 

However, in the presence of defect s on the electrode surface, the formation of a mixed copper -oxygen 

layer is accompanied by irreversible changes on the surface morphology due to a 3D Cu growth 

mechanism [3]. Results for Cu(001) oriented electrodes in the same electrolyte suggest a potent ial 

dependent roughening and facet formation. In the presence of defects and for prolonged potential changes 

the formation of Cu(111) terminated islands is observed. 

Literature: 

[1] Le Duff, C.S., Lawrence, M.J., Rodriguez, P., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017 , 56 , 12919. 

[2] Kim, Y. G., Baricuatro, J. H., Javier, A., Gregoire, J. M., Soriaga, M. P., Langmuir 2014, 30, 

15053−15056. 

[3] Grunder, Y., Beane, J., Kolodziej, A., Lucas, C., Rodriguez, P., Surfaces 2019 , 2, 145. Electrical Conductivity of Films Formed 

# by Few -Layer Graphene Structures 

V.P. Vasiliev , R.A. Manzhos, A.G. Krivenko 

Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Science 

Acad. Semenov Ave., 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, Russia 

vpvasil iev@mail.ru 

The m ass production of high -quality graphene is important for  its  application in  next -generation 

electronic s, composite materials, energy storage devices, humidity sensors and  development  of  platinum 

group metals  free catalysts  of  oxygen reduc tion reaction ( ORR ).  Therefore, d etermination  of conductivity 

of films  formed by  graphene structures is of both fundamental and applied importance. In th is  study , we 

propose a simple and effective method  to  estimate the resistance of films  formed by  fe w-la yer graphene 

structures obtained by plasma -assisted  electrochemical  exfoliation  of graphite electrodes in  0.3 –1 M 

Na 2SO 4 solution s [1] . The analysis of the influence of humidity and the nature of solvent on the 

conductivity of  FLGS  films was carried out. 

Synthesized g raphene -like  structures are particles with a wide distribution of lateral size ,which 

varies  from 60 to 550 nm.  The thickness of FLGS flakes was estimated at 2–4 nm ; the thickness of  FLGS 

films  is  200 –300 nm.  According to X -ray photoelectron spe ctroscopy, the content of O and S is 18.8 and 

1.3 at.% for c -FLGS and 23.8 and 4.1 at.% for a -FLG S. 

In a dry atmosphere, a current  observed for  FLGS  film s is determined by their  electronic 

conductivity. An increase in the relative humidity always leads to a sharp decrease in the current and a 

subsequent gradual decrease in its value. The observed decrease in conductivity of  FLGS  films in a humid 

atmosphere is associated with the shielding  of  FLGS  flakes by a film of water. Returning a sample to a 

dry atmosp here leads to an abrupt growth and further slow recovery of the current values. Probably, the 

reverse process proceeds much slower, since the rate of water molecules removal and restoration of 

electrical contacts between  FLG S flakes is less than the rate o f formation of water film around  FLGS 

particles. The electronic conductivity  of  films in a dry atmosphere  could  be a qualitative criterion for a 

small degree of functionalization of  FLG S surface. However, in our case, the oxygen content in  FLG S is 

sufficie ntly  high and electronic conductivity should be explained by the fact that functional groups are 

mainly concentrated at the edges of graphene planes. 

We observed a change in the conductivity of  FLG S films in vapors of  various  solvents : heptane, 

CCl 4, et han ol and water. Despite high  saturation vapor pressure , in the atmosphere of non -polar solvents 

(heptane, CCl 4),  the conductivity of  FLG S film s is higher than that in the case of  eth an ol  and  water .

Evidendly , high concentration of hydrophilic groups  at  the e dges of graphene planes contributes to faster 

wetting of flakes and to more intensive diffusion of  polar molecules into the film. 

Thus, t he conductivity of  FLGS  films can be controlled by external  conditions , i.e.  by  increasing 

or decreasing the  vapor pres sure of various solvents . With  the  increase  in  vapor pressure , the  molecules  of 

polar solvents  diffuse into  FLG S film . It causes a lessening of  the number of contacts between  FLG S

flakes and, consequently, the electric current decreases.  Moreover,  establis hed influence of chemical 

nature of solvent on the electrical conductivity of  FLGS films  is due to the hydrophilic nature of 

synthesized  FLG S particles. 

The study was performed in accordance with the State Assignment (state registration No 0089 -

2019 -0007) . T he work has been performed using the equipment of the Multi -User Analytical Center of 

IPCP RAS. 

[1] V.P. Vasiliev, A.S. Kotkin, V.K. Kochergin, R.A. Manzhos, A.G. Krivenko, J. Electroanal. 

Chem. 851 (2019) 113440, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.201 9.113440. Proton Conductivity of Graphene Oxide and Nafion Films :

# Effect of Dry Charged Battery 

V.P. Vasiliev 

Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics , Russian Academy of Science 

Acad. Semenov Ave., 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, Russia 

vpvasiliev @mail .ru 

Afte r separation of individual graphene sheets in 2004, the world’s interest in graphene and 

graphene -like materials increased dramatically. Graphene oxides (G O) were initially considered as a 

source product for the production of graphene but are currently bei ng actively studied to be used in 

various materials and devices. Materials with proton conductivity are used in various devices: fuel cells; 

electrolysis cells; electrochemical sensors; electrochemical reactors, electrochromic devices. Proton 

transport is observed in biological systems. In the dry state GO is an insulator, and in a humid atmosphere 

GO demonstrates proton conductivity. As a proton conductor the GO has various applications: humidity 

sensor, a separator in a supercapacitor, also in a field -eff ect transistor, and nanocomposite membranes. 

The proton conductive Nafion is widely used in fuel cells as membranes, it possesses high proton 

conductivity and the ability to control its swelling in water. In the present work the effect of charge 

accumulati on in film was shown to be common to proton conductors. The effect of charge accumulation 

and conservation was studied using the example of proton conductors - Nafion and GO films 

GO and Nafion films are typical proton conductors in water vapor and their c onductivity depends 

on the humidity of the environment. The charging curve (curves 1 in Fig. 1) has a characteristic feature 

with a maximum in the initial period and a gradual decrease in current to a stationary value in the course 

of measurement. Such beh avior of the current can be explained by vacancies filling with protons from the 

negative electrode and electrons from the positive electrode. The current decrease on curve 1 is 

comparable with the discharge current on curve 2 (Fig. 1). The amount of accum ulated charge (discharge 

current) is proportional to the charging current. In this case, their difference (the sum of curves 1 and 2) 

corresponds to the stationary current in the cell, as can be seen from curve 3 in Fig. 1.

In the case of GO at a voltage of 400 mV and a film thickness of about 400 nm, the charge is about 

10 -6 C. The maximum charge value is limited by the concentration of traps in GO (OH groups) and can 

theoretically be ~ 10 -2 C. In a dry atmosphere, the charge is maintained even when the v oltage is applied 

to the electrodes - the current occurs 

only in a humid atmosphere. The 

observed behavior of the current in the 

films of GO and Nafion is similar to a 

charged capacitor, this process can be 

compared with the behavior of a dry -

charged batte ry, unlike liquid batteries, 

where the charge is stored as a

chemical compound accumulated 

during charging. 

Fig. 1. 1 – The kinetics of charge 

accumulation in GO film at RH = 75%, 

U = 0.4 V. 2 – Process of GO film 

discharge at RH = 75%, U = 0 V. 

3 – The sum of curves 1 and 2. 

For the first time, the possibility of accumulation and storage of charge in films of typical proton 

conductors was shown experimentally using GO and Nafion films. The amount of charge accumulation 

depends on the humidity of the e nvironment. In a dry atmosphere the accumulated charge can be stored 

for up to several days. Accumulation of charge occurs directly in GO or Nafion film, which significantly 

distinguishes proton conductors from electric capacitors and liquid batteries. 

The study was performed in accordance with the State Assignment (state registration No 0089 -

201 9-00 12 ). T he work has been performed using the equipment of the Multi -User Analytical Center of 

IPCP RAS. 0 300 600 900 1200 -4 

> 048

RH RH 

> I, nA

t, s 

123Assessment of Antioxidant Activity of Some C hlorogenic Acids by an 

# Electrochemical DNA -based Biosensor 

Ivana Tomac 1* , Marijan Šeruga 1, Jan Labuda 2, Lidija Jakobek 1

> 1

Faculty of Food Technology Osijek, Department of Applied Chemistry and Instrumental Method s, F. 

Kuhača 18, 31 000 Osijek, Croatia 

> 2

Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava, Institute of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical 

and Food Technology, Radlinského 9, 812 37 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 

*e -mail: ivana.tomac@ptfos.hr 

An electroc hemical DNA -based biosensor, dsDNA/SWCNT -COOH/SPCE, was applied for the first time 

to assessment of antioxidant activity of six chlorogenic acids (CGAs) After the incubation of the 

electrochemical biosensor in the mixture of a DNA cleavage agent created by the Fenton type reaction ,

the degree of dsDNA degradation was determined using cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the redox indicator 

[Fe(CN) 6]3-/4 -. The normalized biose nsor responses observed from CVs (ΔI rel and Δ(ΔE p, rel )) were used to 

express the antioxidant activity of CGAs. The results showed that addition of CGAs in the cleavage agent 

significantly reduces the degree of DNA degradation and t he antioxidative activit y decreases in order 

caffeic acid, CFA, > caffeoylquinic acids, CQAs, > dicaffeoylquinic acids, diCQAs, exposure the relative 

portion of survived DNA of about 71 %, 70 % and 69% .

References: 

Ahammad, A. J. S., Lee, J. -J., & Rahman, Md. A. (2009).  Electroc hemical Sensors Based on Carbon 

Nanotubes. Sensors , 9, 2289 –2319. 

Labuda, J., Brett, A. M. O., Evtugyn, G., Fojta, M., Mascini, M., Ozsoz, M., Palchetti, I., Paleček, E., & 

Wang, J. (2010). Electrochemical nucleic acid -based biosensors: concepts, terms and methodology, 

IUPAC Technical Report, Pure and Applied Chemistry, 82 , 1161 –1187. 

Tomac, I., Jakobek, L., & Šeruga, M. (2018). Chromatographic and voltammetric characterization of 

chlorogenic acids in coffee samples. Croatica Chemica Acta , 91, 501 -511. 

Tošović J, & Marković, S. (2019). Antioxidative activity of chloroge nic acid relative to trolox in aqueous 

solution - DFT study. Food Chemistry , 278, 469 -475. Electrochemical Imaging of Biomarkers for Oral Cancer Staging 

Yen -Tzu Lin , Tzu -En Lin* 

Institute of Biomedical Engineering 

National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan 

Email:  telin@nctu.edu.tw 

Each year, approximately 450,000 new cases are reported with oral or oropharyngeal cancer 

worldwide. Despite their high incidence, oral cancers are often neglected at the first stage, resulting in 

cancer metastasis with high mortality rate, especially for men. Conventional methods for diagnosis of 

oral cancer rely on the visual inspection and biopsy. However, it may lead to misdiagnosis or delayed 

diagnosis because of insufficient information. Theref ore, it is important to develop a novel tool for the 

detection of oral cancer at an initial stage itself. 

Electrochemical screening methods have shown to be very promising for the rapid, sensitive, 

and cost -effective detection of oral cancer biomarkers. 1 To enhance the resolution of the 

electrochemical imaging, we employ the concept of image fusion, with the image obtained by scanning 

electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and optical microscopy. Through the prediction of the presence of 

biomarkers in tissue ar ea, the fused image can provide a more accurate description of the biomarker 

distribution of the oral cancer slices. For the purpose of investigating the distribution of IL -6 protein, a 

biomarker of oral cancer, in different cancer stages, we use SECM to i mage tissue sections and fused it 

with H&E stain images obtained by optical microscope. SECM is a scanning probe technique that is 

composed of three electrode system and soft probe can scan closely over a sample surface. The primary 

antibody and secondary  antibody labeled with horse radish peroxidase (HRP) were applied to reveal 

the locations of IL -6 on the samples. Then, the cancer sections were immersed in electrolytes 

containing FcMeOH and H 2O2. The FcMeOH + ions were generated from the catalytic reaction  of HRP, 

and hence, the Faradaic current signals from the reduction of FcMeOH + can be recorded through the 

scanning of SECM probe. Due to the fusion of SECM with H&E stain, IL -6 distribution patterns in 

cancers with different stages can be analyzed precisely. We discovered that in stage III of oral cancer, 

the IL -6 expression level  is the highest as compared to the normal tissue and cancer tissue at earlier 

stages. 

1.  T. -E. Lin, Y. -J. Lu, C. -L. Sun, H. Pick, J. P. Chen, A. Lesch, H. H. Girault, Angew.  Chem. Int. Ed. 

2017 , 56 , 16498 -16 

2.  L. -E. Lin, C. -L. Chen, Y. -C. Huang, H. -H. Chung, C. -W. Lin, K. -C. Chen, Y. -J. Peng, S. -T. Ding, 

M. -Y. Wang, T. -L. Shen, C. -C. Hsu  Anal. Chim. Acta . 2019 Electrochemical dual biosensor platform for the early diagnosis of 

# prostate cancer 

Raquel Sánchez -Salcedo 1,2 , Re beca Miranda -Castro 1,2 , Noemí de -los -Santos -Álvarez 1,2 , Mar ía Jesús 

Lobo -Castañ ón 1,2 

> 1

Departamento de Química Física y Analí tica , Universidad d e Oviedo 

Avenida J ulián Clavería 8, 33006 Oviedo , S pain 

> 2

In stituto de Investigación Sanitaria d el Principado de Asturias , Avenida de Roma , 33011 Oviedo, Spain 

e-mail : sanchezraquel@uniovi.e s

The early diagnosis of cancer is decisive for the survival of pa tients . However, traditional protein tumor 

markers do not always exhibit the sensitivity and selectivity required in clinical diagnostics applications. 

For this reason, current trends search f or specific biomarkers wi th clinical validity and high ly sensi ti ve

detection methods . Recent progress in modern biology has revealed that the proportion of DNA that 

encodes proteins represents only 2% of the human genome, so the vast majori ty is transcribed in to the 

form of non -coding RNAs. Among the latter, long non -coding RNAs (lncRNAs) i.e. transcripts with 

leng th above 200 nucleotides, make up a large group that has aroused special interest due to their 

participation in a wide range of biological processes, thus freeing themselves of their initial n ame of “junk 

RNA” . Altered expression levels of certain lncRNAs in human body fluids have been recently related to 

different diseases including cancer, turning them in to potential non -invasive biomarkers (liquid 

biopsy). [1 ][2] Among them, prostate cancer antigen -3 or PCA3 is the only one so far approved by the 

US -FDA as a urinary mark er for prostate cancer diagnosis. In fact, PCA3 is a good alternative to 

traditional serum PSA able to distinguish between a ggressive and indolent tumours. [3] [4] However, to 

exclude any nonspe cific variation, levels of PCA3 should be normalized with an internal RNA control of 

stable expression, which demands the developmen t of multiplex tests. 

In this work we report a sandwich -type hybridization assay for the detection of the urinary biomark er 

PCA3. To overcome the challenge of the long size and internal secondary structure of this transcript, as 

well as its low abundanc e, we have propo sed the use of multiple fluorescein -tagged hybridization 

assistant probes to favour the selective capture on to the sensing platform, while incorporating multiple 

redox enzymes per target molecule, via fluorescein -antifluorescein interaction . This strategy enabled on -

surface quantification with an enhanced sensitivity and a wider range of linear response . An equi valent 

approach was also designed and developed for the detection of PSA mRNA, selected as endogenous 

control for normalization , bec ause it is not u p-regulated in cancer . Both optimized geno sensors were 

successfully integrated into the same sensing platform for simultaneous assessment of PCA3 and PSA 

RNA levels. The usefulness of this multiplex platform was demonstrated by analysing to tal RNA extracts 

from the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. 

[1] R. Miranda -Castro, N. de-los -Santos -Álvarez, and M. J . Lobo -Castañón.  Anal. Bioanal. Chem ., 411 

(2019) 4265. 

[2] H. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Huang, Z. He, and Y. Chen. J. Hematol. Onco l. , 6 (2013) 37. 

[3] D. A. Sartori and D. W. Chan. Curr. Opin. Onc ol ., 26 (2014) 259. 

[4] X. Filella and L. Foj. Int. J. Mol. Sci. , 17 (2016) 1784. 

Acknowledgements: The work has been supported by the Spanish and the Principado de Asturias 

Governments (projects RTI -20 18 -095756 -B-I00 and IDI/2018/0000217, respectively) .Electroactive Organically Modified Mesoporous Silicates on 

# Graphene -Graphite 3D Architectures Operating with Electron -

# Hopping for High Rate Energy Storage 

Jianren Wang , Neus Vil à, Alain Walcarius 

Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et l’Environnement (LCPME), 

UMR 7564 CNRS – Université de Lorraine, 405 rue de Vandoeuvre, 54600 Villers -lès -Nancy, France. 

jianren.wang@univ -lorraine.fr 

The ever -growing energy demand calls for energy storage devices with both high energy and power 

density.  In contrast to electrical double -layer capacitors, the faradic pseudo capacitors can gain much 

higher energy density by involving faradic reactions, but the slow reaction rate severely restricts their 

power outputs. Here, a pseudo -capacitive material operating with electron -hopping as the charge transfer 

mechanism is generat ed onto a high surface area graphene current collector to study its interest in 

delivering fast redox reactions over a large -scale (contrary to monolayer -based electroactive systems). 

The extensive assembly of fixed redox molecules is achieved by anchoring ferrocene moieties onto the 

surface of graphene -supported mesoporous silica film and various physico -chemical techniques are used 

to characterize the resulting composite material. The obtained EG@Fc -MS electrode (ferrocene 

functionalized silica film coate d onto electro -exfoliated graphene) can deliver a specific capacity of 196 

mC cm -2 (326 mF cm -2) at a current density of 2 mA cm -2 and a 69% capacity retention even at 3800 C, 

which is much better than the traditional faradic materials. The electrochemical analyses reveal the 

energy storage behavior of EG@Fc -MS is a fast surface -controlled redox process with the time constants 

τ0 of 0.78 s due to the low resistance of charge transfer (no obvious semi -circle in Nyquist plot) and fast 

counter -ions compensation rate (diffusion coefficient ~ 1.9 ×10 -5 cm 2/s ). The electrode can be assembled 

into an asymmetric device which exhibits excellent cycling stabi lity (no noticeable fading after 10  000 

cycles) and competitive energy densities ( respectively 17.7 or 9.2 μWh cm -2 at power densities of 0.53 

or 13.7 mW cm -2). These results open up new opportunities for pseudocapacitive materials based on 

electroactive inorganic frameworks bearing surface -tethered molecular redox sites with high energy 

storage capability. Redox Properties of Electrophilic Fatty Acids 

Martina Zatloukalova , Jan Vacek 

Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 

Palacky University, Hnevotinska 3, Olomouc 775 15, Czech Republic 

Martina.Zatloukalova@seznam.cz 

A new class of lipidic signaling molecules known as nitro -fatty acids (NO 2-FAs) has been 

recently identified. NO 2-FAs possess unique electrophilic properties affecti ng enzyme activity regulation, 

the modulation of inflammation and various cellular responses in a broad spectrum of pathologies 1.

Because of their tissue -protective and anti -inflammatory properties, synthetic analogs of these species are 

involved in clinical evaluation s as new drug can didates for the treatment of renal and pulmonary diseases 

etc. 

In this study, we focused on an evaluation of the redox properties of nitro -oleic acid ( NO 2-OA ),

conjugated nitro -linoleic acid (NO 2-cLA ) and nitro -linoleic acid (LNO 2) using cyclic voltammetry and 

constant -current chronopotentiometric stripping (CPS) analysis . Nitroalkenes are stable in free and/or 

esterified form in hydrophobic micellar, lipoprotein, or membrane environments . Based on the reduction 

signal of the nitro group at a potential of around -0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at pH 7.4 , the reactivity and 

stability of NO 2-FAs and NO 2-oleoyl -glycerol were studied 2. EPR and fluorescence probe DAF -2 were 

used to evaluate its ability to release NO· .

The key mechanism of NO 2-FA s signaling actions is based on the post -translation al modification 

of proteins. Electrophilic compounds mainly react with the -SH groups (Cys residues) of a variety of 

biological nucleophiles through Michael ’s addition reac tion (Fig. 1) . In our study we also focused on the 

interaction of NO 2-FAs with basic amino acid residues by CPS analysis . In a single CPS scan we can 

observe the reduction peak of NO 2-FAs at a potential of around -0.8 V and the peak H related to 

electrocat alytic process in which proton -donating amino acid residues ( Cys , His , Lys and Arg ) are 

involved . Depending on the decrease in both reduction peak s, the interaction s of NO 2-FAs with the 

protein w ere monitor ed . Mass spectrometry ( peptide mapping ) and spectr ophotometric (Ellma n’s and 

ninhydrin) methods were utilized to evaluat e the formation of Michael’s adduct s.

Fig. 1. Schema tic repres entation of interaction of 9 -nitro -olei c acid with human serum albumin . In the 

model of human serum albumin,  electro active amino acid residues (His -blue, Arg -brown, Cys -black and 

Lys -purple) are highlighted .

The data presented here are the first mechanistic view of the redox properties, reactivity and stability of 

NO 2-FAs , and could be used in fur ther molecular studies focusing on other electrophiles with high 

biological relevance .

The authors wish to thank the Czech Scie nce Foundation (GACR 19 -21237Y), prof. B. Freeman 

(University of Pittsburgh, USA) for his cooperation and the preparation of nit ro fatty acids and prof. M. 

Mojovic for EPR analysis. 

REFERENCES 

1. Freeman A. B., Baker P. R. S., Schopfer F. J., Woodcock S. R., NapolitanoA., d'Ischia M.: J. Biol. 

Chem., 283, 15515, (2008) .

2. Zatloukalova M., Mojovic M., Pavicevic A., Kabelac M., Freeman A. B., Pekarova M., Vacek J.: 

Redox. Biol., 24, 101213, (2019). Physical and Electrochemical Studies of Carbon Coated LiNi 0.6 Mn 0.2 Co 0.2 O2

# Cathode Material in Lithium B attery Configuration 

Anish Raj Kathribail a, b, Jürgen Kahr a, Arlavinda Rezqita a, Marcus Jahn a, Maitane Berecibar b, Joeri Van Mierlo b,

Annick Hubin c 

> a

Center for Low -Emission Transport , AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Giefinggasse 2, 1210 

Vienna, Austria  

> b

Department of Electrical Engineering and Energy Technology (ETEC) , Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050 

Brussels, Belgium  

> c

Department of Ele ctrochemical and Surface Engineering (SURF) , Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050 Brussels, 

Belgium 

e-mail:  anish.kathribail@ait.ac.at 

The nickel -rich NMC (LiNi xMn yCo zO2, x+y+z =1; where, x≥0.6) is regarded as promising cathode active material 

for future Li -ion batteries due to their ability to deliver high specific capacities. However, their capabilities are 

limited by the unwanted side reactions with the electrolyte leading to decomposition on the surface of the particles 

at high voltage (> 4.2 V vs. Li +/Li) . This also leads to surface degradation and limited cycling performance [1] .

Surface coating is a predominant strategy to minimi ze side reactions that occur on the surface preventing material 

degradation [2] .Due to high electronic conductivity and stability of carbon against electrolytes at higher voltages, 

this study presents for the firs t time a carbon -coated LiNi 0.6 Mn 0.2 Co 0.2 O2(NMC622/C) material using the approach 

of polymerising furfuryl alcohol monomers on the surface of NMC particle s followed by a carbonization step .

This simple mixing approach for the coating process opens up the po ssibility of an easy implementation in 

industrial processes. Numerous analytical techniques were performed to characterize the coated materials, i.e. 

Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) to understand the kinetics during carboni sation, in -situ High -Temperature X-

Ray Diffraction (HT -XRD) to monitor the phase changes, Scanning and Transmission Electron Microscopy (SEM 

& TEM) were used to observe the morphology of the particle. Fourier -Transform Infrared (FT -IR) spectroscopy 

to observe the presence of polymerisati on and the carbon in the sample, CHNS(O) analysis to quantify the amount 

of carbon in the sample after the heat treatment step. Furthermore, electrochemical; analysis such as cyclic 

voltammetry, charge -discharge and rate capability tests were carried out t o investigate the impact of the carbon 

coating on the electrochemical performance and structure stability of the material. The results from the XRD show 

no phase change in the sample after the calcination , SEM and TEM show the homogenous coating of the car bon 

on top of the NMC and FT -IR shows the presence of the carbon bonds on the calcined samples, TGA results show 

the decomposition of the polymer ~230 oC and formation of carbon . Further, the rate capability test show s ~15% 

improvement in the capacity of the coated sample s.

Reference s:

[1] W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, M.J. Lee, W. Cho, S. Chae, Y. Kim, J. Cho, Ang ew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 54 (2015) 

4440 –4457. 

[2] Z. Che n, Y. Qin, K. Amine, Y. -K. Sun , J. Mater. Chem. 20 (2010) 7606 –7612. Insights into Carbon -Carbon Bond Formation on Silver S urfaces 

S.J. Raaijman 1, M. Schellekens 2, M.T.M. Koper 1,*

> 1

Leiden Univeristy, 2Shell 

> 1

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 

> 2

Shell Global Solutio ns International B.V., Grasweg 31, 1031 HW Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

*m.koper@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

The electro -valorization of carbon dioxide has be en investigated for decades ,1 with fairly recent renewed 

interest and investments sparked by its detrimental environmental effects. Disregarding current catalyst 

performance and economic viability, the study of the formation of liquid carbonic species and carbon -

containing platform molecules is an important and interesting scientific endeavor due to the industria lized 

world’s widespread employment and reliance on such molecules . Its importance is further substantiated 

by the fact that the current source of these chemicals (i.e. oil) is an exhaustible commodity that is 

distributed unequally globally, as opposed to CO 2, H 2O and electricity, which are readily available .

Regarding the electro -reduction of CO 2, copper catalysts have long enjoyed the limelight due to their 

capability of forming C -C coupled products such as ethanol and ethylene with somewhat reasonable 

faradaic efficiencies. 2,3 However, notwithstanding the enormous amounts of effort invested in studying 

this system ,4 selectivity and activity for the production of C 2+ species still remain an obstruction to 

industrial viability. In part, the non -selectivity of the reaction can be explained mechanistically: the 

proposed pathways for different carbon -coupled products share many intermediates before eventually 

bi furcating at the later stages. 4-6

As the pathway depends predominantly on the catalyst’s attributes and local surface structure, the 

selectivity issues of copper catalysts are rather an inherent property of the system. On this account, we 

decided to step away from copper catalysis and investigate a different catalytic system capable of forming 

C2+ speci es: Ag .7 Silver is part of a small group of catalysts known to date that are capable of produ cing 

carbon -coupled products ,7-10 and was chosen on the basis of a theoretical study wherein it was calculated 

that (thermodynamically speaking) silver surfaces sh ould be superior to copper in producing ethanol. 11 

Thus , this study concerns itself with investigating the mechanism of C -C bond formation on silver. 

Because of the unfavorable adsorption energy of carbo n monoxide on silver surfaces ,12 the CO reduction 

re action (CORR) was studied at a series of elevated CO pressures so as to increase the fractional coverage 

of CO ads . This enhances the likelihood of the reaction between two adsorbed carbon (e.g., monoxide )

species, which is important for the C -C coupling st ep (s) that is (are) fundamental in producing C 2+ 

species. The reaction was carried out on a GDE to maximize surface area and thereby product formation ,

and conducted in alkaline electrolyte to negate any local pH effects. 

It was observed that at pressures between 10 -60 bar g, CO can be further reduced on metallic silver to 

yield methane (gaseous ) and methanol, ethanol, n -propanol, acetate and ethylene glycol (l iquid ). Notably, 

ethylene was not observed as a product. By increasing the pressure, faradaic effi ciency towards CO 

reduction (vs. HER) at the same applied potentials was found to increase, with the sum of C 2+ product 

faradaic efficiency reaching ~6% at 60 barg of CO at an applied potential of -2 VRHE (non -IR corrected). 

As is evident from the product distribution, the silver surface is capable of breakin g C -O bonds. B ut , the 

absence of ethylene formation indicates that the final C -O bond breaking step appears to be suppressed on 

silver, which is in agreement with computational predictions. 11 

Reference s: 

> 1

Y. Hori et al. , Chem Lett , 1695 -1698 (1985)  2C. -T. Dinh et al. , Science 360 , 783 -787 (2018) 

> 3

C. W. Li et al. , Nature 508 , 504 -507 (2014)  4S. Nitopi et al. , Chemical Reviews 119 , 7610 -7672 (2019) 

> 5

B. Schmid et al. , Catalysts 7, 161 (2017)  6A. H. Shah et al. , J Phys Chem C 122 , 18528 -18536 (2018) 

> 7

T. Hatsukade et al. , Phys Chem Chem Phys 

16 , 13814 -13819 (2014) 

> 8

R. Kortlever et al. , Chem Commun 52 , 10229 -10232 (2016) 

> 9

Y. Hu et al. , Science 333 , 753 -755 (2011)  10 D. A. Torelli et al. , ACS Catal 6, 210 0-2104 (2016) 

> 11

S. Hanselman et al. , ACS Energy Letters 3,

1062 -1067 (2018). 

> 12

F. Calle -Vallejo, M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal 7, 7346 -

7351 (2017). Hierarchically Porous Mn 2O-Inlaid Carbon Hybrids for Lithium -

# Sulfur  Batteries 

Weilin Liu, Ji ehua Liu *

Future Energy Laboratory, School of Materials Science and Engineering, HeFei University of 

Technology, Tunxi Road No. 193 HeFei, Anhui, 230009, China. 

Corresponding: liujh@hfut.edu.cn 

Abstract :

Lithium -sulfur batteries possess tremendous prospect in the future energy evolution, despite facing 

some tough challenges on the road. Carbon coated low -valence state polar metal oxide Mn 2O rarely 

reported, which owning a hierarchical porous nanosheet in figure 1a benefit to alleviate the shuttle effect 

of lithium -sulfur batteries and immobilize the soluble polysulfide in the process of galvanostatic 

charge/discharge to improve the electrochemical property b y chemisorption and physical limitation. And 

the composite synthesized by simple hydrothermal and pyrolysis methods in the scheme 1. The mode of 

Mn 2O-PC/S -800 established reveals 1384 mAh g -1 at 0.2 C in the initial discharge which closes to the 

theoretica l specific capacity 1675 mAh g -1 and high -retention capacity of 593 mAh g -1 after 200 cycles in 

figure 1b .

Keywords: lithium -sulfur batteries, chemisorption, carbon coated, Mn2O, low 

-valence state 

Scheme 1. Schematic illustration the synthesis process of Mn 2O-PC/S .

Figure 1. (a) The FESEM images of Mn 2O-PC: (b) Cycling performance of Mn 2O-PC obtained at different 

temperatures after sulfur melted. 0 50 100 150 200  

> 0200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 Mn 2O-CNS-700 Mn 2O-CNS-800 Mn 2O-CNS-900
> Discharge capacity(mAh g -1 )
> Cycle number

# Mo S2-Ti O2-rGO Composite as  Electrode  Material for Na -Ion Capacitor 

# Device For Durable Cycle Performance 

N.Gnanaseelan 1, E. Duraisamy 2, P.Elumalai 2 S.K. Kamaraj 3, and F. Caballero -Briones 1*

> 1

Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Materiales para Energía, Salud y Medioambiente (GESMAT), CICATA Altamira, 

Km 14.5 Carretera Tampico -Puerto Industrial Altamira, 89600 Altamira Tamaulipas, México. 

> 2

Department of Green Energy Technology, Madanjeet School of Green Energy Technologies, Pondicherry 

University, Puducherry 6 05014, India 

> 3

Tecnológico Nacional de México, Instituto Tecnológico El Llano Km. 18 Carr. Aguascalientes -San Luis Potosí, 

20330 El Llano, Ags, México 

*Email: fcaballero@ipn.mx 

Ever growing demand of portable electronic devices and EV, which requires Li b ased storage devices leads to the 

depletion of Li reserves in the earth. With practically inexhaustible and less cost, Sodium could replace the Li as 

charge carriers in electro chemical storage devices. Na -ion capacitor is one type of hybrid storage device which 

delivers high energy density, high power density and long -life span . In present work , MoS 2-TiO 2-rGO (MTG) was 

synthesized  composite using hydrothermal route . MoS 2 possesses layered structure where Mo atoms are sandwiched 

between two planes of S atom s and it leads to higher charge diffusion at layer interfaces. Large charge accumulation 

is possible due to higher surface area of MoS 2. Further, MoS 2 was composited with TiO 2 and reduced graphene oxide 

(rGO) for following reasons: (a) TiO 2 has large ion di ffusion length and improved electron mobility due to presence 

of Ti 3+ and Ti 4+ at the su rface , which confirmed by XPS . (b) Graphene oxide has excellent electrical, mechanical 

properties and power handling capability. The device was fabricated using coin ce ll with non -aqueous electr olyte, 

NaClO 4 in DEC/PC (diethylene carbonate/ propylene carbonate) . Both anode and cathode electrodes were coated 

with MTG by Doctors blade method. Cyclic voltammetry was performed for the device at different scan rate s, which 

sho wn in the figure 1a. The CV results shows the rectangular shape and symmetrical patter n discloses better 

suitability of composite ma terial for electrochemical storage devices. The charge -discharge profile of the MTG 

device is shown in the figure 1b at di fferent current densities such as 1 Ag -1, 1.25 Ag -1, 1.5 Ag -1, 1.75 Ag -1 and 2 Ag -

> 1

. Symmetric charge and discharge curves show good capacitive storage behavior of the device. Energy density of 

the device is about 17 KW -hkg -1 and power density stands at 1 300 W-hkg-1. Excellent cycle stability was exhibited 

by the device for 10000 cycles at the current density of 2Ag -1 without any degradation in efficiency , which is shown 

in the figure 1c . The remarkable cyclic stability is attributed from positive synerge tic effect from MoS 2, rGO and 

TiO 2. The pr ese nce of rGO is not only ensured the stability electrode but also improv ed the electrical conductivity 

of MoS 2 and prevented the agglomeration. The interfacial charge transfer between individual elements in the 

composite improved the intercalation and ion transfe r. This work gives more insights about the synergetic effect of 

MTG composites in cycle stability which is very crucial for practic al applications . In best of our knowl edge, it is the 

first time in reporti ng MTG for Na -ion capacitor 

Figure 1. Electrochemical characterization of MTG device a) Cyclic voltammetry b) Cha rge -discharge profile c) 

Cycle lif eLow -Over potential Li -O2 Battery with Ru nanoparticles in -situ 

# Formed on Binder -free Carbon Paper 

De jian Tang , Jiehua Liu 

Future Energy Laboratory, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hefei University of 

Technology, Tunxi Road No.193 Hefei, Anhu i, 230009, China 

> 

Corresponding: liujh@hfut.edu.cn 

Today, for numerous next -generation energy storage devices 1, non -aqueous Li -O2 batte ry ha s

triggered worldwide atte ntion due to its ultrahigh energy density (about 3500Wh/kg) 2. But one of the 

problem s is the sluggish redox kinetics caused by insoluble and insulating Li 2O23, thus develop ing high -

efficiency electrochemical catalyst s is necessary for Li -O2 batter y. Hence, we achieve Ru nanoparticles 

catalyst that in -situ generate on carbon paper with out bind er by electrochemical method . Firstly, we 

prepare electrolyte contai ning Ru 3+ to assemble coin -type cell with c arbon paper , the c onstant -current 

discharging of cell exhibit s a steady platform corresponding to “Ru 3+ →Ru ”, Ru nanoparticles uniformly 

coat on 3D space network skeleton s of c arbon paper . We find that the b inder -free carbon paper with Ru 

nanoparticles in Li -O2 cell shows remarkable ORR and OER low -overpotential (0.15 V and 0.2 V, 

respectively ). The work presents a new design of a binder -free O 2 electrode for Li -O2 batter y, which gives 

an insight into the improvemen t about the p reparation of in -situ catalysts .

Scheme 1. Illustration of the preparation of catalysts and battery testing. 

1. (a) Xu, L.; Liu, J.; Chen, P.; Wang, Z.; Tang, D.; Liu, X.; Meng, F.; Wei, X., High -Power 

Aqueous Zn -H2O2 Batteries for Multiple Applications. Cell Reports Physical Science 2020, 1 (3), 

100027; (b) Wei, X.; Liu, X.; Liu, H.; Yang, S.; Zeng, H.; Meng, F.; Lei, X.; Liu, J., Exfoliated graphitic 

carbon nitride self -recognizing CH 3NH 3PbI 3 grain boundaries by hyd rogen bonding interaction for 

improved perovskite solar cells. Solar Energy 2019, 181 , 161 -168; (c) Liu, P.; Wang, Y.; Liu, J., 

Biomass -derived porous carbon materials for advanced lithium sulfur batteries. Journal of Energy 

Chemistry 2019, 34 , 171 -185; (d ) Wei, X.; Zhang, M.; Liu, X.; Chen, F.; Lei, X.; Liu, H.; Meng, F.; 

Zeng, H.; Yang, S.; Liu, J., Semitransparent CH 3NH 3PbI 3 Films Achieved by Sol vent Engineering for 

Annealing and Electron Transport Layer -Free Planar Perovskite Solar Cells. Solar RRL 2018 , 2 (6), 

1700222; (e) Liu, J.; Chen, W.; Xing, A.; Wei, X.; Xue, D., Lithium cell -assisted low -overpotential Li -O2

batteries by in situ discharg e activation. Chemical Communications 2017, 53 (76), 10568 -10571. 

2. Bruce, P. G.; Freunberger, S. A.; Hardwic k, L. J.; Tarascon, J. -M., Li -O2 and Li -S batteries with 

high energy storage. Nature materials 2012, 11 (1), 19 -29. 

3. Lyu, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Dai, W.; Cui, X.; Lai, M.; Wang, L.; Huo, F.; Huang, W.; Hu, Z.; Chen, W., 

Recent advances in understanding of the mecha nism and control of Li 2O2 formation in aprotic Li -O2

batteries. Chemical Society Reviews 2017, 46 (19), 6046 -6072. Exploring dynamic interactions of single nanoparticles at interfaces for 

# surface -confined electrochemical behavior and size measurement 

Wei Ma 

Department of Chemistry, East China University of Science and Technology, 

130 Meilong Road, Shanghai, China 

weim a@ecust.edu.cn 

Single -entity electrochemistry has attracted increasing attention not only for its extremely high sensitivity 

but also for the insight that it offers with respect to individual direct electron transfer that is masked in 

ensemble -averaged me asurements. 1 Over the past several decades, electrochemical measurements of 

individual entities, including nanoparticles (NPs), cells, molecules, and atoms, have been achieved 

conveniently with the use of stochastic collision measurement at a ultramicroele ctrode (UME) or 

nanoelectrode. Significant advances have been made in the analysis of the dynamic electrochemical 

behaviors of individual entities. 2–4 Although the combination of stochastic collision electrochemistry with 

scanned nanoprobe microscopies or optical -based techniques was introduced as a new tool for real -time 

analysis of the electrochemical reaction mechanism/kinetics of individual NPs with high spatial and 

temporal resolution, it remains an open and challenging issue to elucidate how nanoscale particles interact 

with an electrode interface to clearly understand the dynamic electrochemical processes of such particles. 

Here, using first -principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we study the adsorption -energy 

scaling relations by exa mining NPs on two different UME surfaces. This allows us to semi -quantitatively 

predict the adsorptive interaction effect of NPs on UME interfaces and helped helps in identifying the 

dynamic electrochemical nature of single NPs during the stochastic collis ion process. Based on the 

theoretical predictions, we explored the interaction -modulated electrochemical oxidation behavior of 

individual AgNPs, producing significantly distinguished current traces (Fig. 1). 5 By attempting to 

suppress the stochastic path o f AgNPs and control their motion in an alkaline media, we observed the 

complete oxidation of the AgNPs with different diameters of 10, 18, 34, 55, 65 and 75 nm, and 

successfully realized the in -situ size discrimination of AgNP mixtures with multi -parameter analysis 

using the stochastic collision electrochemistry. 

Figure 1. Interaction -modulated dynamic elec trochemical behaviors of single NPs. 

Reference 

1. Ma, W; Ma, H; Chen, J ; Peng, Y -Y; Yang, Z; Wang, H -F; Ying, Y -L; Tian, H ; Long, Y -T. Tracking 

motio n trajectories of individual nanoparticles using time -resolved current traces , Chem . Sci . 2017 , 8: 

1854 .

2. Hafez, M E; Ma, H; Ma, W ; Long, Y -T. Unveiling the intrinsic catalytic activities of single -gold -

nanoparticle -based enzyme mimetics , Angew . Chem . In t. Ed . 2019 , 58 : 6327. 

3. Peng, Y -Y; Ma, H ; Ma, W ; Long, Y -T; Tian, H . Single nanoparticle photoelectrochemistry a t a 

nanoparticulate TiO2 -filmed ultramicroelectrode . Angew . Chem . In t. Ed . 2018 57 : 3758. 

4. Ma, W ; Ma, H; Peng, Y -Y; Tian, H ; Long, Y -T, An ultrasensitive photoelectrochemical platfor m for 

quantifying photoinduced electron -transfer properties of a single entity , Nature Protoc . 2019 , 14 : 2672. 

5. Ma, H; Chen, J; Wang, H -F; Hu, P; Ma, W; Long, Y -T. Exploring dynamic interactions of single 

nanop articles at interfaces for surface -confined electrochemical behavior and size measurement, Nature 

Commun . 2020 , 2037. Durability of nickel electrode coated with manganese -based mixed 

# metal oxide for alkaline water electrolysis 

Kazuaki Oda , Yoshiyuki Kuroda, 1 and Shigenori Mitsushima 1,2 

> 1

Graduate School of Engineering Science , Yokoh ama Nati onal Universit y, 79 -5 Tokiwadai , Hodogaya -

ku, Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

> 2

Institute of Advanced Sciences, Yokohama National University, 79 -5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya -ku, 

Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

cel@ml.ynu.ac.jp 

Introduction 

Alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) has attrac ted much attention fo r hydrogen prod uction from 

renewabl e energy . One of the most important issues in water electrolysis is to prevent degradation of 

electrodes under fluctuation of power from renewable energy . Ni ckel is well kn own as a good AWE 

anod e; however, fre qu ent star t/stop simultaneously cause s its corro sion due to oxidation and reduction .1)

It has been reported that the coat ing of nickel with conducti ve metal oxides improve s durability , whereas 

activity was somewhat lowered .2) Mangane se -based mixed me tal oxide s (MMMO ) ha ve high oxygen 

evolution reaction (OER) activity and are used as secondary battery electrodes with high cycle stability ;

thus, MMMO is expect to have both high activity and durability . Here , the activity and durability o f

MMMO -coated nickel electrode were inve stigated under potent ial cycling test .

Experi ment al 

Catalyst deposition : a nickel plate was e tched 10 min in 20 wt . % HCl solution at 90 ℃. The pla te was 

then vertically im mersed into 0.2 mM KMnO 4 aq . (50 mL ) and hydrothermal ly reacted at 180 ℃ for 20 h. 

This coated electro de was again immersed into 0.2 mM CoCl 2 aq. (50 mL) and hydrothermal ly reacted at 

130 ℃ for 3 h, followed by calcinate d a t 50 0 ℃ for 1 h . The obta ined nickel plate co vered with Co -Mn 

mixed metal oxide is denoted CMN 130 .

Electrochemical measurement : the working , counter, and reference electrode s were CMN130 , Ni coil ,

and reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE ), respectivel y. 1.0 M

KOH was used as an electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was 

performed at 50 mV s –1 between 0.5 and 1.8 V vs. RHE for 100 

cycles as pretreatment . The durability test was perf ormed by 

repeating the following processes for 20 times. CV at 5 mV s –1

be tween 0.5 and 1.8 V vs. RHE for 2 cy cles , CV at 500 mV s –1

in the same range for 1000 cycles , and AC impedance at 1.6 V 

vs. RHE to correct iR .

Results and discussion 

The formation of δ-MnO 2 and Co -Mn -O spinel oxide at the 

firs t and secon d hydrothermal reactions, respect ively , was 

confirmed by XRD. The δ-MnO 2 consisted of platy particles, 

and the spinel layer con siste d of nanoparticles. The po lar ization 

curves of CMN 130 and nickel prese nted the overpotential ( η)

276 and 24 mV , respectively, at 10 mAcm -2, showing that 

CMN130 is more active for OER than the nickel (Fig . 1 ).

In the durability test (Fig. 2), nickel was activated at 

1000 th –2000 th cycle s, w hereas η significantly increas ed after 

the 3000th cycle . On the other han d, CMN130 show ed low er 

over potential compared to Ni in every cycle . Almost no 

degr adation was observed up to the 60 00th cycle . η increased 

aft er the cycle, though η is always lower than those of nickel at 

the same cycle . At the 20000th cycle, the redox peaks due to 

Co(II/III) t 1.38 V vs . RHE and Ni(II/III) at 1.41 V vs. RHE 

were observed for CMN130 , implying that the nickel surface is 

exposed by parti al detachment of the MMMO layer. In 

conclusion MMMO made b y hydr othermal reaction showed 

good stability and durabili ty und er potential fluctuations .

References 

(1) M. Samarai et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interface 11 , 38595 (2019) .

(2) S. Fujita et al ., Electrocatalysis. 9, 162 (2018 ).

Fig.1 CV curves of Ni and CMN -

coated Ni at 1st and 20000th cycles. 

Fig.2 OER overpotential as a functi on 

of durabil ity test cycles. Distribution of relaxation times: A tool for measuring oxygen 

# transport resistivity in the catalyst layer of a low -Pt PEM fuel cell 

Andrei Kulikovsky a, Tatyana Reshetenko b

> a

Research Centre Juelich, IEK -14 

Juelich, 52425, Germany 

a.kulikovsky@fz -juelic h.de 

> b

Hawaii Natural Energy Institute 

University of Hawaii 

Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA 

tatyanar@hawaii.edu 

Oxygen transport ohmic resistivity Rox in a low --Pt PEM fuel cell has been determined using two 

methods. The first one is fitting of our recent phys ics --based impedance model [1] to the experimental 

impedance spectra. The second method is calculation of distribution of relaxation times (DRT) using the 

same experimental spectra. Comparison of the two methods shows that the DRT peak with the 

characteri stic frequency on the order of 500 to 100 0 Hz describes oxygen transport in the open pore and 

in Nafion film covering Pt/C agglomerates in the catalyst layer. The resistivities Rox calculated by the two 

methods agree well. This result makes it possible usi ng experimental impedance spectroscopy and DRT 

for routine measurements of Rox in low -Pt PEMFCs. 

References 

1. T.Reshetenko and A.Kulikovsky. A single -pore model for cathode catalyst layer impedance: The 

effect of Nafion film on PEM fuel cell performance. RSC Adv . 9, 38797, 2019. 

doi:10.1039/C9RA07794D. 

2. T.Reshetenko and A.Kulikovsky. Distribution of relaxation times: A tool for measuring oxygen 

transport resistivity in the catalyst layer of a low -Pt PEM fuel cell . J.Electrochem. Soc. 2020 , ( to 

be submitted) 

Figure 1. DRT of a low -Pt PEMFC ( blue 

open  circles) and the real part of cell 

impedance : measured (solid points) and 

reconstructed from DRT (red open circles). 

Figure 2. Oxygen transport resistivities 

determined from DRT (red squares) and 

from impedance model fitte d to the spectra. 

Figure 2. Oxygen transport resistivities 

determined from DRT (red squares) and 

from impedance model fitted to the spectra. Interface Engineering and Performance Improvement of 

# Solid -state Batteries Based on Garnet Electrolytes 

## Hanyu H uo 1, Wei Luo 1 and Yunhui Huang 1, *  

> 1

## Institute of New Energy for Vehicles, School of Materials Science and Engineering, 

## Tongji University, Shanghai, 201804 China 

## (* huangyh@tongji.edu.cn )

## The solid -solid interfacial contact is a critical issue during the studies of solid -state 

## batteries (SSBs), which greatly affects the electrochemical perf ormance of SSBs, such 

## as the Coulombic efficiency, and cycle life. For flexible polymer/garnet electrolytes 

## (PGEs ), the interfacial issue mainly comes from the interactions between the inorganic 

## fillers and the polymer matrix. The slow Li + transport through the polymer/garnet 

## interface can lead to the low ionic conductivity of PGEs. While for garnet ceramic 

## electrolytes ( GCEs ), the ceramic bulk with a relative density over 99% shows no 

## obvious grain boundary, leading to the ionic conductivi ty over 10 -3 S cm -1 at room 

## temperature. Under this circumstance, the interfacial issue could be attributed to the 

## poor interfacial contact between the GCEs and Li metal anodes. It can induce the large 

## interfacial resistance as well as the lithium dendrite growth. In this presentation, I’ll 

## focus on the aforementioned interfacial issues, various targeted strategies will be 

## introduced to construct the excellent interfacial structure, thus significantly improving 

## the performance of SSBs [1 -3] .             

> Keywords: Garne t;Solid -state batteries ;Interfacial engineering; Li dendrite suppression
> References ：
> [1] H. Y. Huo, X. X. Guo, X. L. Sun, Advanced Energy Materials, 2019, 1804004.
> [2] H. Y. Huo, X. X. Guo, X. L. Sun, Energy & Environmental Science , 2020, 13,127.
> [3] H. Y. Huo, X. X. Guo, C-W. Nan, X. L. Sun, ACS Energy Letters , 2020, 5, 252−262.

# Graphene Based Hybrid Electrodes for Supercapacitors 

Syeda Wishal Bokhari *1, Ahmad Hassan Siddique 2, Amanda Vera Ellis 3, Wei Gao 1

> 1

Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, the University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019 

Auckland 1142, New Zealand  

> 2

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 

1219 , Zhongguan West Road, Zhenhai district, Ningbo 315201, P. R. China.  

> 3

Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3 010, Australia. 

* sbok703@aucklanduni.ac.nz 

ABSTRACT 

Supercapacitors are a promising energy storage system owing to their high power density and long 

cycling life [1]. One of the limitations, however, is th eir low energy density as compared to the batteries 

which hinders their wide applications [2]. This problem can be effectively solved by designing the hybrid 

electrodes: combin ing capacitor and battery materials to result in synergistically high electroche mical 

performance by incorporating two distinct energy storage mechanisms in a single device [3]. 

We report two hybrid electrodes designed by using graphene -based conductive matrix and compositing 

them with high capacity bimorph akaganeite and manganese d ioxide nanoparticles [4,5] via a simple 

hydrothermal self -assembly method. The resultant nanocomposites have a high surface area and a large 

number of mesopores which facilitat e channels for ion transport [4]. When used as the electrodes in 

symmetric and a symmetric supercapacitors in an aqueous electrolyte system, excellent energy -power 

profile, high specific capacitance and remarkable cyclic stability of up to 99.8% after 20,000 

galvanostatic charge -discharge cycles have been obtained. This performance is attributed to a dominant 

capacitive charge storage mechanism by the synergistic combination of the components of the 

nanocomposites , well -structur ed hybrid electrodes , and chemically bonded components. This approach 

can be useful in designing high -performa nce electrodes for long life supercapacitors with both high 

energy and power densities. 

Figure 1. Energy -power profile of designed supercapacitor systems. 

REFERENCES 

1. Salanne, M. et al, Nat. Energy 2016, 1 (6), 16070. 

2. Peng, L. et al, Adv. Ener. Mat. 2018 , 8 (9), 1702179. 

3. Bokhari, S. W. et al, RSC Adv. 2017, 7 (31), 18926 -18936. 

4. Bokhari, S. W. et al, Mat. Lett. 2018, 220 , 140 -143. 

5. Bokhari, S. W. et al, RINMA 2019, 1, 10007. Rational Material Design for Ultrafast Rechargeable Organic Lithium 

# Ion Batteries 

Kamran Amin , Zhixiang Wei 

National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, School of Nanoscience and Technology, University of 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China 

No.11.Beiyitiao Zhongguancun 100190 Beijing, P. R. China. 

kamran@nanoctr.cn 

It is very important to design the devices capable of fast charging and long life for commercial application .

But fabrication of lithium ion batteries with high power and energy d ensity is quite challenging. In recent 

years, a lot of work has been done to improve the rate performance and life of LIBs. [1] We believe that 

better understanding of the kinetics limitations for faster batteries can guide us to design materials for 

ultrafast long -life batteries. [2] To prove this, we started e xploring redox active conjugated microporous 

polymers as an electrode for LIBs. In these systems i nterconnected microporous network can facilitate 

faster diffusion of ions. Large surface area can make the deep buried active sites accessible on or near to 

surface and conductivity can be improved by making composite with suitable conductive media. Combining 

all these effects together we were able to develop a lithium ion cell that can be charged as fast as 66C with 

significant capacity retention. Also, we fou nd that cell can be charge and discharge for 3000 cycles without 

any capacity loss . Through carefully investigation we revealed that high surface area, porosity, and 

conductivity lead to energy storage process through surface or near surface pseudo capacit ive energy 

storage mechanism which is usually found in supercapacitor and is faster than batteries. This study shows 

how we can transfer kinetically slow, diffusion controlled faradic reactions in batteries to faster pseudo 

capacitive reactions by rational ly designing the materials. [3] We expect that this will pave the way for high 

power batteries with high energy density. 

Figure 1: Important factors need to consider for high -power high -energy density batteries 

References: 

[1] K. Amin, Q. Meng, A. Ahmad, M. Cheng, M. Zhang, L. Mao, K. Lu, Z. Wei, Adv. Mater. 2018 ,

30; K. Amin, L. Mao, Z. Wei, Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2019 , 40, e1800565. 

[2] S. Wang, Q. W ang, P. Shao, Y. Han, X. Gao, L. Ma, S. Yuan, X. Ma, J. Zhou, X. Feng, B. Wang, 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139, 4258. 

[3] K. Amin, J. Zhang, H. -Y. Zhou, R. Lu, M. Zhang, N. Ashraf, Y. Cheng, L. -J. Mao, C. F. Faul, Z. 

Wei, Sustainable Energy & Fuels 2020 .Probing Single -Particle Electrocatalytic Activity at Facet -Controlled 

# Gold Nanocrystals 

Natasha P. Siepser , Myunghoon Choi , Soojin Jeong, Yi Wang, Gargi Jagdale, Xingchen Ye , and Lane A. 

Baker 

Department of Chemistry, Indiana University 

800 E. Kirkwood A venue, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, United States 

xingye@indiana.edu and lanbaker@indiana.edu 

Electrocatalytic reduction reactions (i.e., the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen reduction 

reaction) at individual, faceted Au nanocubes (NCs) and nan o-octahedra (ODs) expressing predominantly 

{100} and {111} crystal planes on the surface, respectively, were studied by nanoscale voltammetric 

mapping. Cyclic voltammograms were collected at individual nanoparticles (NPs) with scanning 

electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) and correlated with particle morphology imaged by electron 

microscopy. Nanoscale measurements from a statistically informative set of individual NPs revealed that 

Au NCs have superior HER electrocatalytic activity compared to that of Au ODs, in good agreement with 

macroscale cyclic voltammetry measurements. Au NCs exhibited more particle -to -particle variation in 

catalytic activity compared to that with Au ODs. The approach of single -particle SECCM imaging 

coupled with macroscale CV on we ll -defined NPs provides a powerful toolset for the design and activity 

assessment of nanoscale electrocatalysts. Voltammetric characterizat ion of hesperidin with electroactivated 

# pencil graphite electrode 

Silvija Šafranko 1, Anamarija Stanković 2, Abdelilah Asserghine 3, Martina Medvidović -Kosanović 2, Stela 

Jokić 1 

> 1

Faculty of Food Technology Osijek, Josip Juraj Stross mayer University of Osijek, Franje Kuhača 20, 

31000 Osijek, Croatia  

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek, Ulica cara Hadrijana 8/A, 

31000 Osijek, Croatia  

> 3

Department of General and Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences , University of Pécs, 7624, Ifjúság 

u. 6. Pécs, Hungary 

e-mail: martina.medvidovic@gmail.com 

Flavonoids represent a large group of polyphenolic compounds whic h are widely distributed in plants and 

show beneficial effects on human health. Their biologica l activity can be connected with structural 

diversity and a w ide range of their derivatives. Hesperidin is a phytochemical classified as bioflavonoid 

and can be primarily found in citrus fruits as well as in some other fruits and vegetables. Due to the 

sup pression of pro -inflammatory cytokine production and its antioxidant defense mechanism, hesperidin 

shows different pharmacological activities such as cardio protective, antihypertensive, antidiabetic, anti -

inflammatory , and antihyperlipidemic activity [1] . Graphite can be used as an electrode material since it 

has nonmetallic and metallic properties. The pencil graphite leads are composite materials which contain 

approximately 65% of graphite, approximately 30 % of clay, and around 5 % is a binder (wax, res ins, or 

high polymer) [2]. The use of a disposable pencil graphite electrode (PGE) is proven to be a simple, 

cheap , and fast alternative with superior sensitivit y and performance compared to more expensive 

electrodes [3] .

In this study, PGE and electroact ivated pencil graphite electrode (ePGE) were used for voltammetric 

ch aracterization of hesperidin in model system with cyclic and differential pulse voltammetry . Both 

electrode s were characterized with electrochemical impedance spectr oscopy (EIS ) and scann ing 

electrochemical microscopy ( SECM ) and the enh ancement of electron transfer kinetics was observed 

after electroactivation . The effect of scan rate, pH , and hesperidin concentration on oxidation peak current 

were also studied. It was determined that oxid ation peak current increases with the increase of scan rate 

and hesperidin concentration. The hesperidin oxidation was the most pronounced at pH = 5. The peak 

current and the hesperidin concentration showed linear dependence in the concentration range from 5x10 - 

> 7

mol dm -3 to 1x10 -5 mol dm -3. Estimated li mit of detection (LOD) was 5x10 -7 mol dm -3.

[1] E. Brglez Mojzer, M. Knez Hrnčič, M. Škerget, Ž. Knez, Molecules 21 (2016) 901 .

[2] E. Alipour, M. R. Majidi, A. Saadatirad, S. M . Golabi, A. M. Alizadeh, Electrochim Acta 91 (2013) 

36. 

[3] I. G. Dav id, D. -E. Popa, M. Buleandra , J. Anal. Method. Chem. 2017, Article ID 1905968 ,

https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/1905968 

Acknowledgment This work has been supported in part by Croatian Science Foundation under the 

project “Application of innovative tec hniques of the extraction of bioactive components from by -products 

of plant origin” (UIP -2017 -05 -9909). Cathode Materials for M etal -Air Batteries based on Ti tanium 

# Compounds 

Mario Aparicio, a Jadra Mosa, a Sho Ishiyama, b Nataly C. Rosero -Navarro, c

Akira Miura, c and Kiyoharu Tadanaga c 

> a

Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (CSIC), Kelsen 5, Madrid, Spain  

> b

Graduate School of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060 -8628, 

Japan  

> c

Division of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060 -8628, Japan 

maparicio@icv.csic .es 

TiO xNy powders were synthesized by sol -gel using titanium (IV) isopropoxide. Interconnected porosity 

was incorporated through phase separation of hydrophilic and hydrophobic blocks, and elimination of 

organic components with a thermal treatment. Part ial substitution of oxygen by nitrogen was 

accomplished using thermal treatment in NH 3 atmosphere and incorporation of urea during the synthesis 

procedure. Powder characterization includes surface area (BET), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 

X-ray diffr action (XRD) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). The results show a high surface area around 200 

m2/g and a combination of titanium oxides, nitrides and oxinitrides. 

These instructions are an example of what a properly prepared meeting abstract should look like. Proper 

column and margin measurements are indicated. 71st Annual Meeting of the International Society of Electrochemistry (30 August - 4 September 2020 )

# Self -assembly of Mesoporous Nanostructured Catalysts for Enhancing 

# the Electrochemical Energy Reactions 

Mohamed A. Ghanem, * Abdullah M. Al -Mayouf, Prabhakarn Arunachalam, Mabrook S. Amer, Maged 

N. Shaddad 

Chemistry Department, King Saud University, Riya dh 11451, Saudi Arabia 

*Email: mghanem@ksu.edu.sa; +966 114670405 

Abstract 

Nanostructured mesoporous materials are of interest for a variety of applications for developing 

renewable and clean energy sources. This work presents the synthesis of entirely new classes of 

nanostructured mesoporous transition metal oxides, hydroxides and phosphate nanocatalysts with 

improved electrocatalytic properties for hydrocarbon oxidation, water splitting, and fuel -cell reactions [1 -

5]. Mesoporous nanocatalysts of nicke l, cobalt, tungsten and titanium oxides, hydroxides and phosphates 

with high surface areas, mesoporosity, and different nano -architectures are prepared via the surfactant 

template chemical deposition and hydrothermal approaches. The compositions, periodici ties, surface 

areas, pore diameters, and architectures of the nanocatalysts can be varied in a controllable way through 

changes in the template compositions and deposition conditions. The electrochemical and catalytic 

activity of the resulting mesoporous n anocatalysts investigated and screened for electrochemical energy 

reactions of hydrocarbon (urea, methanol) oxidation and water splitting reactions of hydrogen, oxygen 

evolution and oxygen reduction reactions. 

Keywords: Mesoporous; Oxides; Phosphates; En ergy Reactions. 

Acknowledgements 

This Project was funded by the National Plan for Science, Technology and Innovation (MAARIFAH), 

King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology(KACST), Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Award Number 

13 -ENE -1227 -02 .

References 

1. MS Amer , MA Ghanem , AM Al -Mayouf , J. Electroanal. Chem., 871 (2020) 114268. 

2. MS Amer, MA Ghanem, AM Al -Mayouf, P Arunachalam, NH Khdary, Arabian J. Chem. 13 

(2020) 2257 -2270. 

3. 2020 2. M. S. Amer, M. A. Ghanem, A. M. Al -Mayouf, P. Arunachalam, J. Electrochem. Soc., 

165 (2018) H300 -H309. 

4. M. A. Ghanem, A. M. Al -Mayouf, J. P. Singh, P. Arunachalam, Electrocatalysis, 8 (2017) 16 –

26. 

5. M. A. Ghan em, A.M.Al -Mayouf, P. Arunachalam, T.Abiti, Electrochimica Acta, 207 

(2016) 177 –186 Lithiophilic Polymer Interphase Anchored on Laser -punched 3D 

# Holey Cu Matrix Enables Uniform Lithium Nucleation Leading to 

# Super -stable Lithium Metal Anodes 

Jiangmin Jiang a,b , Zhenghui Pan b, Zongkui Kou b, Ping Nie c, Chenglong Chen d, Zhiwei Li a, Shaopeng L ia,

Qi Zhu a, Hui Dou a, Xiaogang Zhang a,* and John Wang b,* 

> a

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Electrochemical Energy Storage Technology, College of Material Science 

and Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 210016, China 

> b

Departm ent of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117574, Singapore 

> c

Key Laboratory of Preparation and Application of Environmental Friendly Materials, College of 

Chemistry, Jilin Normal University, Siping, 136000, China 

> d

College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, 

China 

e-mail address: Xiaogang Zhang* (azhangxg@nuaa.edu.cn), John Wang* (msewangj@nus.edu.sg) 

High energy density, long cycle lifespan, sufficient safety along with l ow manufacturing cost are among 

the ultimate goals for both the widely used lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) and other battery types. Owing to 

the high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mAh g −1), lowest reduction potential ( -3.04 V) and ultra -small 

theoretic al density (0.534 g cm −3), metallic lithium is regarded as the “Holy Grail” among various anode 

materials for the next -generation rechargeable batteries. Unfortunately, the inhomogeneous Li deposition 

and uncontrolled dendrite growth during repeated cyclin g lead to low Coulombic efficiency, poor 

performance, and serious safety issues. 

Herein, a novel two -pronged strategy is proposed to effectively guide Li nucleation and suppress the 

unwanted Li dendrites growth, by a synergized approach of combining the laser -machined 3D holey Cu 

matrix (3D Cu) and lithiophilic polydopamine (PDA) surface coating layer. The PDA@3D Cu scaffold is 

shown to exhibit the wanted dendrite -free Li plating/stripping behavior. It delivers a remarkable 

Coulombic efficiency of 96.4% after 150 cycles (2.0 mA cm −2 at 1.0 mAh cm −2), and achieves an 

excellent lifespan of over 1000 h operation tested in Li/Li symmetric cells, together with good stability 

for Li//FePO 4 full batteries. Our molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, density functio nal theory (DFT) 

calculations, and in -situ real -time monitoring using optical microscopy together have established the 

direct correlation between reversible Li electrodeposition and lithiophilic 3D holey structure scaffold. 

Significantly, the new findings suggest that a synergistic combination of 3D Cu with lithiophilic PDA 

coating layer represents an effective pathway to regulate metallic Li anodes towards practical 

applications. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Fou ndation of China (U1802256, 51672128, 

21773118, 21875107, 51802154), the Key Research and Development Program in Jiangsu Province 

(BE2018122) and Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher 

Education Institutions (PAPD). M r. Jiangmin Jiang would like to acknowledge the financial support from 

the Funding of Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation in NUAA (BCXJ19 -07), Postgraduate Research & 

Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX19_0174) and China Scholarship Counc il 

(201906830060). Electrochemical Behaviour and Anodic Dimerization of New Donor 

# Acceptor Oligothiophenes for Organic Electronics Applications 

Daniele Rocco , Fabiana Pandolfi, Marta Feroci, Valerio Valeri, Leonardo Mattiello 

Dept. of Basic and Applied Sciences for Engineeri ng, Sapienza University of Rome 

Via del Castro Lauren ziano 7, 00161 Rome, Italy 

daniele.rocco@uniroma1.it 

The term Organic Electronics is used to indicate the vast field of science regarding the use of organic 

materials (either “small” molecules, oligomer s or polymers) in electronic devices. Thiophene derivatives 

are among the most studied and used organic semiconductor materials due their excellent charge transport 

properties and well -established synthetic procedures. These requisites are fulfilled by oli gothiophene 

derivatives: in many cases they possess better characteristics (physical, optical, electronic and self -

assembly properties, possibility to work in solution, ease of purification, low -cost synthetic procedures, 

and so on) over their polymeric co unterparts. Electrochemical studies on a series of new conjugated 

oligothiophene derivatives are carried out . The molecular architectures (D -π-A and A -π-D-π-A, Figure 1 )

of these compounds present different donor cores (thiophene, bithiophene) with differe nt numbers of 3 -

octylthiophene units (that act as π -bridge and solubilizing components). The acceptor end groups adopted 

were, in all the cases, ethyl cyanoacrylate units. The obtained results from electrochemical studies gave us 

the possibility to develop a new synthetic strategy including electrosynthesis (Figure 2) with an approach 

more environmentally friendly than classic al synthetic procedures .

Figure 1 . D–π-A and A –π-D–π-A molecular architectures adopted in this work. 

Figure 2 . Anodic dimerization of a D-π-A oligothiophene ( BT1N ). 

[1] Pandolfi, F. , Rocco , D. , Mattiello , L. , Synthesis and characterization of new D –π-A a nd A –π-D–π-A

type oligothiophene derivatives , Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry , 2019 , 17 , 3018 -3025. 

[2] Feroci, M., Civitarese, T., Pandolfi, F., Petrucci, R., Rocco, D., Zane, D., Zollo, G., Mattiello, L., 

Electrochemical Studies of New Donor -Acceptor Ol igothiophenes. ChemElectroChem , 2019 , 6, 4016 -

4021. Hydroxyapatite /Chitosan /Collagen Coatings By Galvanic Coupling 

C.Zanca , G. Cordaro, E. Capuana, V. Brucato, F. Carfì Pavia , V. La Carrubb a, G. Ghersi, R. Inguanta 

Department of Engineering 

Department of Biological, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Scien ces a nd Technologies 

University of Palermo , Viale delle Scienze, 90128 – Palermo ( It aly) 

claudio.zanca@unipa.it 

For o rthopedic prosthesis , titanium alloy s, chromium alloys or stainless steel are suitable materials since 

mechanical properties are more sim ilar to human bones. However, metal ions or nanoparticles release 

could produce Adverse Local Tissue Reactions (ALTRs) around periprosthetic tissues of the patients 

during post -surgery period [1] , causing pain and rejection effects. In addition, corrosion pheno mena could 

be occurred since after surgery , the local pH could be decrease d around 5. Covering the metal substrate 

with b iocoating s could be a solution in order to overcome these issues. In the last decades, many works 

were focused on composite coatin gs no t only to improve the corrosion resistance but also to increase 

biocompatibility with human environment. In fact, in composite coatings the different components are 

able to act synergistically to give properties superior to those provided by component alon e. Among the 

differe nt composite coatings, those ones based on calcium phosphate compounds are the most interesting. 

In particular , hydroxyapatite is largely studied , since bones are constituted by hydroxyapatite crystals 

interspersed in the collagen fiber s. Considering the bone structure, it is clear that a composite coating of 

hydroxyapatite and collagen c ould improve the performance of an orthopedic prosthesis . Another 

interesting material is c hitosan , that is increasingly used in biocoating technolo gies tha nk s to its bioactive 

and biocompatible features. 

In this work Hydroxyapatite/Chitosan/Collagen composite biocoating on AISI304 Stainless Steel was 

investigated. Biocoatings were realized through the deposition method of galvanic coupling. This pro cess 

occ ur s without external power supply, because starting just from the coupling between two materials with 

different standard electrochemical potential [2-5]. In particular, the corrosion of the material with the low 

redox potential (sacrificial anode) prod uces the electrons necessary for the deposition. Electrons flow 

towards the cathode, where are used to produce hydroxyl ions thanks to electrogeneration of base 

reactions of nitrate ions and water molecules. The increasing of local pH at electrode/elec trol yte in terface 

leads to the deprotonation of amine group s of chitosan (pKa=6.4) while positively charged collagen fibrils 

start to self -assemble into fibers . Simultaneously, several equilibria reaction cause the precipitation of 

calcium phosphate (brush ite/ hydro xy apatite). The global process is the co -deposition of three components 

with the hydroxyapatite crystals that are incorporate d in polymeric composite chitosan/collagen. 

Physical -chemical characterizations of the samples were executed in order to eval uate m or phology and 

chemical composition. In addition, potenziodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy were carried out in a simulated body fluid to scrutinize the corrosion resistance. 

Furthermore, the metal ions release due to cor rosion phenomena were quantified through Inductively 

Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry . Also, cytotoxicity tests using MC3CT cells line was 

carried out in order to verify coatings’ biocompatibility. 

References 

1. Eltit, Felipe, Qiong Wang, and Rizhi Wan g. "Mechanisms of adverse local tissue reactions to hip 

implants." Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology 7 (2019). 

2. Blanda, Giuseppe, et al. "Galvanic deposition and characterization of brushite/hydroxyapatite coatings 

on 316L stainles s st eel."  Mat erials Science and Engineering: C 64 (2016): 93 -101. 

3. Blanda, Giuseppe, et al. "In Vitro Corrosion and Biocompatibility of Brushite/Hydroxyapatite 

Coatings Obtained by Galvanic Deposition on 316LSS." Journal of The Electrochemical Society 

165. 2 (2 018): G1 -G10. 

4.  Blanda, Giuseppe, et al. "Chitosan -coating deposition via galvanic coupling." ACS Biomaterials 

Science & Engineering 5.4 (2019): 1715 -1724. 

5. Zanca, Claudio, et al. "Co -Deposition and Characterization of Hydroxyapatite -Chitosan and 

Hydrox yapa tite -Poly vinylacetate Coatings on 304 SS for Biomedical Devices."  Key Engineering 

Materials. Vol. 813. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, 2019. Defect Chemistry of Electrocatalysts 

Shuangyin Wang *

School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University , Changsha, China 

*Corresponding Author’s E -mail: shuangyinwang@hnu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Surface engineering on the electrocatalyts is one of th e most popular strategies to tune the 

electrocatalytic activities. Here, we will present our recent progress on the Co -based electrocatalyst 

for o xygen evolution reaction (OER), which is the key process for metal -air batteries, and water 

splitting. Curren tly, the typical electrocatalyst for O ER is RuO2 and IrO2 -based precious metal 

compounds . However, these noble metal -based electrocatalysts are of high cost and poor stability. 

Therefore, various strategies have been developed to enhance the electrocatalys t performance 

through the surface control. Recently, we have developed the plasma technology to tune the 

electrocatalytic performance of carbon -based metal -free electrocatalyst, Co -based compound and 2D 

layered nanomaterials for OER . In this talk, we will focus on the recent development of plasma 

treated electrocatalysts in the aspects of defect chemistry. IrO 2/Ir/ Ti and IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/ Ti Oxygen Evolution Anodes prep ared by 

# Galvanic D eposition and Galvanic Replacement 

Aikaterini Touni 1, Orestis Anastasios Grammenos 1, Angeliki Banti 1, Dimitrios Karfaridis 2,

Athanasios Papaderakis 1, Dimitra Lambropoulou 1, Eleni Pavlidou 2, Sotirios Sotiropoulos 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece  

> 2

De partment of Physics , Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece 

aikattouni @chem.auth.gr 

IrO 2-modified Ti electrodes have been prepared by either a simple galvanic deposition process or a Ni -

mediated galvanic replacement method. In the former case a freshly etched Ti substrate has been treated 

with an Ir(IV) solution, resulting in the spontaneous deposition of metallic Ir on the surface of the Ti 

substrate with the simultaneous oxidation of nearby freshly etched Ti sites [1] . In the latter case, a smooth 

Ni film has been electrodeposited on the Ti substrate from a Watts bath and its surface layers 

spontaneously exchanged with metallic Ir upon treatment with an Ir(IV) solution [2 -3] . Anodization of the 

resulting Ir/Ti and Ir(Ni)/Ti electrodes by means of continuous potential cycling in acid solutions resulted 

in the formation of IrO 2 porous surface layers (or IrO x, depending on the positive potential limit) ,

showing typical Ir oxide surface electrochemistry ( Figure 1 ). SEM pictures revealed that the thus 

prepared IrO 2/Ir/ Ti electrode is made of sparse IrO 2/Ir micrometer -sized islands and nanoparticles , while 

the IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/Ti electrode consisted of a continuous film with a nodular morphology (as confirmed by 

AFM). The composition of the coatings was estimated by EDS and XPS spectroscopy while Ir mass 

loading was determined by ICP -MS f ollowing etching in acid. These electrodes have been tested as 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER) anodes by slow potential sweep voltamm etry (Figure 2) . IrO 2/Ir/ Ti 

electrodes exhibited mass specific activities for OER (ca 200 mA mg Ir -1 at  η=300 mV ) better or 

comparable to traditional Ir DSAs [4] or state -of -the -art thin therma l films [5], whereas the IrO 2/Ir (Ni)/Ti 

electrodes were proven comparable or better than both state -of -the art thin thermal films [6] and 

nanoparticle Ir Ni Ox catalysts [7] (ca 2 A mg Ir -1 at  η=300 mV ). The recently established enhancement of 

IrO 2 OER activity by Ni, combined with the widespread use of Ti as a stable electrode substrate, make 

IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/Ti attractive DSA electrodes. 

[1] A. Touni et al , J. Electroanal. Chem. , 2019 , 855, 113485 

[2] A. Papaderakis et al, J. Phys. Chem. C , 2016 , 120(36), 19995 

[3] A. Papaderakis et al, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018 , 808, 21 

[4 ] Y. Matsumoto et al , J. Electrochem. Soc. 1986 , 133 , 2257 

[5] D. Bernsmeier et al , ChemSusChem. 2018 , 11, 2367 

[6] T. R eier et al, J.Am.Chem.Soc. 2015 , 137, 13031 

[7] H. N. Nong et al , Nature Catalysis , 2018 , 1 (11), 841 

Acknowledgement s

This research has been co -financed by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union 

and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and 

Innovation, under the call RESEARCH – CREATE – INNOVATE (project code:T1EDK -00461). 

Figure 1 Cyclic voltamogram s (at 100 mVs -1)

of IrOx/Ir(Ni)/Ti and IrOx/Ti (Inset) electrodes 

in a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution 

Figure 2 Linear sweep voltamograms (at 5mVs -1)

of IrOx/Ir(Ni)/Ti and IrOx/Ti (Inset) electrodes in 

a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution In Vitro Redox Activity of Haemozoin and β-Haemozoin Interacting 

# with Artemether, Lumefantrine and Quinine .

J.L. Imbert Palafox 1, L. González Linares 1, V.E. Reyes -Cruz 2, M.A. Becerril Flores 1, J.C. Ruvalcaba 

Ledezma 1, C.M. Gonzalez Alvarez 3, A. Arenas Flores 2, J.E. Bautista Garcia 1.

> 1

Área Académica Medicina, Instituto de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de 

Hidalgo, Pachuca, Estado de Hidalgo, México . 2Área Académica Ciencias de la Tierra, Materiales y 

Metalurgia, Instituto de Ciencias Básicas, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Hidalgo, Pachuca, Estado 

de Hidalgo, México . 3Facultad de Ciencias Químicas. Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, 

Puebla, México. 

imbertox@ hotmail.com , joseluis_imbert@uaeh.edu.mx 

Abstract. In the malaria disease, the released haem group into erythrocytes is oxidized to haematin and inert 

dimeric haemozoin bio -crystals form, which provides the parasite a unique way to avoid the toxicity 

associated with the haem group. Due that, antimalarial drugs to inhibit dimer formation; however, recent 

electrochemical studies indicate that an inert dimer also promotes a toxic oxidizing environment. This work 

explores drug reactivity with monomers and dimers and their contribution to maintain redox balance. 

Materials and methods. Through cyclic voltammetry three medicines mixed with haemozoin or β -

haemozoin were tested. Results and discussion . The data indicated again that the drugs "per se " (Figure 1) 

and in combination (Figures 2 & 3) , modify the natural redox state of haemozoin and β -haemozoin. The 

natural oxidation potential of the drugs alone was evident . It was found that the oxidation potential 

decreased through quinine, lumefantrine and artemether with the same tendency in the haemozoin presence 

but with less current density. Finally , the oxidation response between the monomer haemozoin and 

antimalarial drugs is car ried out at more negative potentials. 

The results indicate that antimalarials per se can contribute to oxidation processes and that in combination 

with monomeric or dimeric haemozoin can increase or decrease the oxidizing power of the haemozoin 

forms. The various oxidizing environments suggest that the cell membranes can also be damaged by the 

unique presence of the antimalarial. To maintain the intracellular redox balance is very important, so 

indicate treat ments that could potentially alter it, (artemether ) or (benflumetol,) should consider that maybe 

there will be an imbalance. 

1) Reyes CVE, Urbano GR, Veloz RMA, Imbert PJL.  Analysis of the electrochemical reactivity of natural 

hemozoin and β -hemozoin in the presence of antimalarial drugs. Electrochim Acta 2011; 56: 9762 -9768. 

2) González LL, Reyes CVE, Velóz RMA, Urbano RG, Imbert PJL, Cobos MJA.  New Method of 

Production and Characterization of Haemozoin and -Haemozoin from Meccus longipennis.  Iran J 

Parasitol 2019; 14: 59 -67. 

3) Imbert P JL , González L L, Reyes CVE , Becerril F MA , Ruvalcaba L JC , Gonzalez A CM , Arenas F A,

Bautista G JE.  In vitro redox activity of haemozoin and β-haemozoin interacting with the following 

antimalarials: artemether, lumefantrine and quinine . Eur Rev Med Phar Sci 2020; in press. 

Figure 1 , on left . CV on CPE -AQ (green curve, i), CPE -CQ (blue curve, ii), CPE -QN (orange curve, iii), 

CPE -ART (gra y curve, iv) and CPE -LF (black curve, v) anodic direction. Figure 2 , in the middle . CV of 

CPE -AQ -Hz (green curve, i), CPE -CQ -Hz (blue curve, ii), CPE -QN -Hz (orange curve, iii), CPE -ART -Hz 

(gray curve, iv) and CPE -LF -Hz (black curve, v). Figure 3 , at right . CV on CPE -graphite -Hz -LF (a); 

CPE -graphite -Hz -ART(b); CPE -graphite --Hz -LF (c) and CPE -graphite --Hz -ART (d). Removal of Pesticides by Coupled Electrochemical 

# and Photochemical Oxidation 

Susana Gouveia , Claudio Cameselle , Adrián Cabo 

BiotecnIA, Chemical Engineering, University of Vigo. 

Rua Maxwell s/n. Buildi ng Fundicion. 36310 Vigo. Spain. 

claudio@uvigo.es 

Th e pesticides Thiamethoxam (THI), Acetamiprid (ACT), Imidacloprid (IMI) and Thiacloprid (TCP) are 

four examples of common chemicals used in the control of plagues in agriculture. The manufacturing, 

formulation, storing, manipulation and use of pesticides ge nerate effluents difficult to treat due to the high 

toxicity of those compounds. This work tests the use of photochemical and electrochemical oxidation as 

an effective method to eliminate pesticides from aqueous effluents. Both, the photochemical and the 

electrochemical oxidation were able to oxidize the pesticides molecules, but the efficiency largely 

depended on the chemical nature of the compounds. THI was easily degraded with UV -C light 

photochemical oxidation, whereas TCP was removed by electrochemical oxidation. ACT was the 

compound that showed the highest resistance to be degraded by both, photochemical and electrochemical 

oxidation. The combination of the photochemical and the electrochemical oxidation in a dual reactor (a 

reactor with two separate c hambers for the photochemical and electrochemical reactions) enhanced the 

degradation of the THI, IMI and TCP reaching a complete removal in 1 h. ACT was only removed by 

50% in 2 h. the removal of ACT was enhanced up to 70% in 2 h by electro -Fenton oxidati on, using 

ferrous iron in the effluent treated in the electro -photochemical reactor. Combination of Electrochemical and Photochemical Methods for 

# TOC/COD Removal in Industrial Effluents 

Claudio Cameselle , Sus ana Gouveia, Adrián Cabo 

BiotecnIA, Chemical Engineering, University of Vigo. 

Rua Maxwell s/n. Buildi ng Fundicion. 36310 Vigo. Spain .

claudio@uvigo.es 

Activated carbon is a common adsorbent material for the retention of organic and inorganic contaminants. 

Various industrial sectors use activated carbon in purification of liquid and gaseous streams and in the 

retention of valuable mate rials. These industrial sectors include Au mining, water purification, 

pharmaceutical and chemical industry, etc. The reactivation and reuse of the spent activated carbon is a 

more sustainable practice than “one -use” and dumping. However, the classical the rmal regeneration of 

activated carbon shows a large impact due to the emission of CO 2 and the partial loss of carbon and 

activity. The electrochemical regeneration of saturated activated carbon has been proposed as an efficient 

and sustainable alternative to the classical reactivation methods. The electrochemical treatment consumes 

less energy and produces less CO 2 than the traditional thermal activation. The electrochemical 

regeneration of activated carbon is based on the application of a DC electric curre nt directly to the carbon 

specimen using a solution of sulfuric acid as electrolyte. The electric current desorbs and mobilizes the 

contaminants retained in the activated carbon. The contaminants include organic compounds and 

inorganic ions. At the end of the regeneration process, the contaminants released from the carbon remains 

in the electrode solutions (anolyte and catholyte). Such end -waste effluents require treatment before their 

final disposal. This work has analyzed the chemical composition of the e nd -waste effluents and have 

proposed and tested various technologies for the separation/degradation of organic and inorganic 

contaminants. The chemical neutralization and precipitation of the contaminants is a practical method to 

remove all the toxic metal s in the effluent that it can be discharged directly in the sewage system. The 

precipitation with NaOH, NaCO 3, CaCO 3 and CaO showed similar metal removal results, but the 

precipitation with CaCO 3 showed the additional benefit of TOC and nitrogen removal. D espite the good 

results of the neutralization/precipitation method, this treatment did not allow for the recycling of the 

effluent to the activated carbon regeneration process. Various advanced oxidation processes 

(electrochemical, photochemical and chemic al oxidation) have been tested to identify an alternative 

method that allowed for the recycling of the effluent to the carbon regeneration system. A combination of 

electrochemical and photochemical oxidation with persulfate was identified as a practical tr eatment to 

remove the TOC and COD from the effluent. The electro -photochemical treatment was able to remove all 

the organic contaminants in the effluent, expressed as COD, in 8 h with 16 W UV -C lamp and an electric 

consumption of 5.7 Wh/L. The treated effl uent can be recycled back to the electrochemical regeneration 

system. Bioelectrochemistry of neuronal protein tau 

Dr. Sanela Martic 

Trent University 

1600 West Bank Drive, Peterborough, ON, Canada, K9 L0G2 

sanelamartic@trentu.ca 

Tau is a ne urona l protein and one of the biomar kers of neurodegenerative dis eases , such as Alzhei mer ’s

di sease . Tau protein undergoes post -translational modifications, aggregation, and is a viable drug target. 

In addition , this protein is a vital biomarker in biological fluids towards early detection of 

ne urodeg enerative di sease s. We repor ted on using electrochemical imp edance spectroscopy and cyclic 

voltammetry for detection of protein -protein interactions (1) , protein -ligan d interactions (2) , enzymatic 

catalysis and enzyme inhibition (3) while focusing on tau protein and its biochemistry . For example , tau -

tau , tau -ferritin, tau -tra nsferring protein intera ctions were mon itored, and protein kinase -catalyzed 

phosphorylation of tau protein was detected. The phosphorylation inhibitors, such as antibodies , were 

screen ed for their effi cacies. New research direction s in neuro electr ochemistry of tau pr otein alongside 

other neur onal biomarkers , such as Amyloid beta and alp ha synuclei n, will also be described. 

Referenc es 

1. A) Carlin, N., Martic -Milne, S. (2018). Anti -tau antibodies based electrochemical sensor fo r

detection of tau protein. J. Electrochem. Soc.165: G3018 -G3025 . B) Jahshan, A., Esteves, 

J.O.V., Martic -Milne, S. (2016). Evaluation of ferritin and transferrin binding to tau protein. J. 

Inorg. B iochem. 162: 127 -134 . C) Esteves, J.O.V., Trzeciakiewicz, H., Loeffler, D.A., Martic, S. 

(2015). Effects of tau domain -specific antibodies and intravenous immuno globulin on tau 

aggregation and aggregate degradation. Biochemistry. 54: 15 -18 .

2. Trzeciakiewicz, H., Esteves, J.O.V., Carlin, N., Martic, S. (2015). Elect rochemistry of heparin 

binding to tau protein on Au surfaces. Electrochim. Acta. 162: 24 -30 ,

3. Esteves, J.O.V., Martic -Milne, S. (2016). Electrochemical detection of anti -tau antibodies 

binding to tau protein and inhibition of GSK -3-β-catalyzed phosphorylati on. Anal. Biochem. 

496: 55 -62 Exclusive solution discharge in Li -O2 batteries 

# as revealed by operando X-ray scattering 

Christian Prehal 1, 2 , Manfred Nachtnebel 3, Stefan Freunberger 1, 4 

1 Institute for Chemistry and Technology of Materials, Graz University of Technology, Stremayrgas se 9 ,

8010 Graz, Austria 

2 Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zürich, Gloriastrasse 35, 

8092 Zürich, Switzerland 

3 Graz Centre for Electron Microscopy, Steyrergasse 17, 8010 Graz, Austria 

4 Institute of Science and Technol ogy Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria 

cprehal@ethz.ch 

Lithium -air (Li -O2) batteries promise a drastic increase in energy densities and a reduced ecological 

footprint compared to intercalation -type Lithium -ion batteries. Considering mas s and volume of non -

active materials, real performance improvements are only achieved if lithium peroxide (Li 2O2) is packed 

as dense as possible in the nanoporous carbon cathode host. [ Freunberger, S. A. , Nature Energy 2, 17091 

(2017)] . To understand how structural features of the formed Li 2O2, dynamic phenomena during product 

growth and the underlying reaction mechanisms determine the discharge capacity,  quantitative real -time 

in situ metrologies with structural information at the atomic to micron level  are required. 

Here we present operando small and wide angle X -ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS) as a novel method to 

study the morphological evolution of Li 2O2 during charging and discharging a custom -built in situ Li -O2

cell [ChemRxiv 2019, DOI 10.26434/chemrxiv. 11447775.v1 ]. For data analysis a recently developed 

method was adapted [Prehal, C. et al. , Nature Energy 2, 16215 (2017)] and synergistically combined with 

modelling of Li 2O2 nucleation and growth in a realistic 3D carbon pore model.  This allows visualizi ng the 

nanoscale product formation in real -time and distinguishing between Li 2O2 formed via disproportionation 

(solution mechanism) or a second, consecutive electron reduction (surface mechanism). We show that 

Li 2O2 is formed exclusively via solution media ted disproportionation of LiO 2 across the whole range of 

organic electrolytes and carbon electrodes. Deciding for particle morphology is the concentration 

distribution of associated LiO 2 in solution, governing nucleation and growth rates of Li 2O2 formation .

Discharge capacity and Li 2O2 pore filling hence equally depends on electrolyte solvation energies, true 

areal current densities and species mobilities in solution. Given that species mobilities are high and 

current densities low, this allows for high dis charge capacities even in low donor number electrolytes, 

previously thought to be prototypical for Li 2O2 surface growth with poor discharge capacities. Next to 

rotating ring disc measurements, electron microscopy and numerical modelling, operando SAXS/WAXS 

was the essential tool for these insights. On a wider perspective operando SAXS/WAXS proofs as a 

powerful in situ metrology to study electrodeposition in all conversion -type batteries and more generally 

structural changes in complex electrochemical energy storage systems at length scales ranging from 

atomic to sub -micron resolution. Exploiting glucose meters for early detection of pro state cancer 

Clara Abardía -Serrano 1,2 , Rebeca Miranda -Castro 1,2 , Noem í De -los -Santos -Álvarez 1,2 , María Jesús Lobo -

Castañón 1,2 

> 1

Dpto. Qu ímica F ísica y Analítica, Facultad d e Química, Universidad de Oviedo 

Av. Julián Cla vería 8, 33006 Oviedo, Spain. 

> 2

Ins titu to de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias 

Av. De Roma, 33011 O viedo, Spain 

abardiaclara@uniovi.es 

Cancer is a major global public health problem with enormous human and economic costs [ 1]. Liquid 

biopsy has emerged as a potential supplement of traditional biopsy for early cancer diagnosis. 

Specifically, appropriate bodily fluids are analysed to monitor the level of tumour biomarkers present in 

the medium. There is, therefore, a clear nee d to develop non -invasive, easy -to -use and inexpensive 

methods for the detection of biomarkers that allow improving diagnosis and minimizing the mortality of 

cancer, while reducing healthcare expenditure of cancer ca re. In this context, electrochemical pla tforms 

have demonstrated great potential due to their high sensitivity, low cost, fast response as well as 

compatibility with point -of -care (POC) testing, what contributes to decentralize the analyses and favours 

the implementation of screening studies. Am ong them, personal glucose meter (PGM) employed daily in 

the measurement of blood glucose is the most used analytical method worldwide. Taking advantage of 

this mature technology, PGM has been recently applied to qua ntitate a wide range of non -glucose 

anal ytes by establishing a relationship between their recognition and glucose generation [2]. This strategy 

is of particular interest for monitoring tumour biomarkers since PGMs are already approved by 

international agen cies for application to clinical practic e, thus paving the way for the launch of the new 

device to the market. 

Thus motivated, we describe the development of a hybridization assay for the detection of prostate cancer 

antigen -3 o PCA3, a urinary RNA biomark er for prostate cancer diagnosis [3]. S pecifically, a sandwich -

type genoassay has been implemented onto magnetic microparticles functionalized with streptavidin in 

combination with a personal glucose meter and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) as a glucose -genera ting 

enzyme for signal transduction. Mo reover, with the goal of detecting clinically relevant PCA3 levels, an 

isothermal DNA amplification strategy such as Rolling Circle Amplification (RCA) has been designed 

[4]. In this strategy, a circular DNA called pa dlock acts as a template for the phi29 polymerase, which is 

capable of generating thousands of padlock copies, resulting in multiple binding sites for a fluorescein -

tagged reporting probe. Numerous antifluorescein -ALP conjugates are then incorporated per t arget 

analyte, for enzymatic conversion of glucose -1-phosphate into glucose, whose concentration is 

subsequently determined with a glucometer. This isothermal and portable approach allows the reliable 

detection of PCA3 at picomolar levels. 

References 

[1]  World Health Organization (http://www.w ho.int/cancer/en) 

[2] F. Lisi, J. R. Peterson, J. J. Gooding, Biosens. Bioelectron., 148, 2020, 111835. 

[3] A. E. G. Lemos, A. D. R. Matos, L. B. Ferreira, E. R. P. Gimba, Oncotarget, 10, 2019, 6589 .

[4] M. G. Mohsen, E. T. Kool, Acc. Chem. Res., 49, 2016 , 2540. 

Acknowledgements 

The work has been financially supported by Spanish Government (project RTI -2018 -095756 -B-I00) and 

Principado de Asturias government (Project IDI/2018/000217, co -financed by FEDER funds) .New insights into the mechanism of coreactant electrogenerated 

# chemiluminescence facilitating enhanced bioanalytical performance 

Giovanni V alenti ,a Alessandra Zanut, a Andrea Fiorani, a Sofia Canola , a Sara Rebeccani, a Massimo 

Marcaccio , a Stefania Rapino , a Antonio Barbon , b Fabrizia Negri , a Francesco Paolucci a

a) Department of Chemistry “G. Ciamician”, University of Bologna and INSTM, via Selmi 2, 40126 

Bologna, Italy .

b) University of Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy. 

g.valenti@unibo.it 

Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) is a leading technique in bioanalysis.[1] Since the excited species are 

produced with an electrochemical stimulus rather than with a light excitation source, ECL displays 

improved signal -to -noise ratio compared to photolumin escence, with minimized effects due to light 

scattering and luminescence background. The most challenging breakthrough in the development of 

analytical electrochemiluminescence (ECL) applications was reported from Bard and co workers that 

presented for the first time the generation of ECL with a coreactant.[1] This finding opened the 

application of ECL to large literature and transformed ECL from an academic curiosity to a real 

application and industrial success. In this context, the only real used material s for the ECL analytical and 

commercial application are tripropylamine (TPrA) as sacrificial ”oxidative -reductant” coreactant and 

Ruthenium(II) -tris(2,2’ -bipyridine) ([Ru(bpy) 3]2+ ) as emitting species. In this case the mechanism for the 

ECL generation was proposed by Bard and still nowadays the only one accepted.[2],[3] 

Here we show an additional, and very efficient, mechanism pathway for the generation of ECL by using 

TPrA as cor eactant. Thanks to the combination between ECL and microscopy we experimental ly prove 

the alternative mechanism with the standard [Ru(bpy) 3]2+ /TPrA system.[3],[4] These mechanistic findings 

allow us to propose alternative amines as coreactant enhancing the ECL signal of more than one order of 

magnitude. 

The reported results, besid es contributing to a better understanding of the mechanisms operating in the 

chemiluminescence generation, also pave the way for the development of very highly efficient ECL 

corea ctants for ultrasensitive bioanalysis .[5] 

[1] Miao W.; Choi J. P.; Bard A. J., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002 , 124 , 14478 -14485 

[2] Sentic M.; Milutinovic M.; Kanoufi F.; Manojlovic D.; Arbault S.; Sojic N., Chem. Sci. 2014 , 5, 2568 -

2572 

[3] Valenti G.; Scarabino S.; Goudeau B.; Lesch A.; Jović M.; Villani E.; Sentic M.; Rapino S.; Arba ult 

S.; Paolucci F.; Sojic N., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017 , 139 , 16830 -16837. 

[4] a) Valenti G.; Zangheri M.; Sansaloni S. E.; Mirasoli M.; Penicaud A.; Roda A.; Paolucci F., Chem. 

Eur. J. , 2015 , 21 , 12640 –12645; b) Zanut A.; Fiorani A.; Rebeccani S.; Kesarkar S.; Valenti G. , Anal. 

Bioanal. Chem ., 2019 , 411 (19), 4375 -4382. 

[5]  Zanut A. at al  Nature Commun.  20 20 , 11 , 2668 Photoelectrochemical CO 2 Reduction in Aqueous and Room -

# Temperature Ionic L iquids -Based Media by Scanning Electrochemical 

# Microscopy 

Lin ZHANG , Carlos M. SANCHEZ -SANCHEZ, Vincent VIVIER 

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire Interfaces et Systèmes Electrochimiques, 

LISE, 75005 Paris, France 

zhanglin_irene@163.com 

The photoelectrochemical (PEC) carbon dioxide (CO 2) reduction reaction (CO 2RR) can convert CO 2 to various 

products such as carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH 4), methanol (CH 3OH) , which 

can contribute to remit environmental and energy issues caused by increasing CO 2 concentration. The Scanning 

Electrochemical Microscopy (SECM) 1 employs an ultramicroelectrode (UME) as the tip to apply a suitable 

potential and collec t the corresponding electrochemical signal response as a current , which allows to explore 

the electrocatalytic properties of different materials . The UME tip can be replaced by an optical fiber (OF), 

which is connected to a Xenon light source and provides UV -visible or visible light. This illumination can be 

locally driven on the candidate catalysts for PEC -CO 2RR activity evaluation by scanning photoelectrochemical 

microscopy (SPECM). Possessing many physicochemical properties, r oom -temperature ionic l iqui ds (RTILs) 

can dissolve more CO 2 and inhibit competitive side reactions (ex: H 2 evolution) during CO 2RR . Furthermore, 

it is reported that the cation of imidazolium based RTILs (C nmim +) has a co -catalyst role for electrochemical 

CO 2RR on Ag electrode .2

In our work, we apply SPECM to locally illuminate p -type semiconductor materials such as CuCo 2O4 immersed 

in different electrolytes solutions for evaluating the performance of PEC -CO 2RR . The PEC reduction currents 

obtained by SPECM in aqueous solution (KH CO 3), in binary mixture solution (25% [C 2mim][BF 4]/H 2O and 

25% [C 4mim][BF 4]/H 2O) and in pure RTILs are compared in this work . We get a relevant increase in 

photocurrent in 25% [C 2mim][BF 4]/ H 2O mixture in comparison with all other media tested either under UV -

Visible or Visible illumination, pointing out the co -catalyst role of imidazolium cation for the 

photoelectrochemical reduction of CO 2. In contrast, we find a decrease in photocurrent in 25% 

[C 4mim][BF 4]/H 2O mixture, probably due to the strong interac tion of [C 4mim] + and CO 2. Meanwhile, as 

reported by Zigah et al, 3 we fabricated a dual tip which combined optical fiber and Pt UME (OF -UME) acting 

simultaneously as a light source and a se nsor for detect ing the PEC -CO 2RR products in SPECM .

References 

(1) Bard, A. J.; Mirkin, M. V. Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy ; second ed., CRC Press, Boca 

Raton, 2012 

(2) Lau, G.P.S .; Schreier, M. ; Vasilyev , D.; Scopelliti , R.; Gratzel , M.; Dyson, P.G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

2016 , 138 , 7820 -7823 

(3)  Badets, V.; Loget, G.; Garrigue, P.; Sojic, N.; Zigah, D. Electrochimica Acta 2016 , 222 , 84 –91. Chemically Modified Electrodes with 

# Clickable Thiosemicarbazones for Metal Ions Sensing 

George -Octavian Buica , Matei D. Raicopol, Nicoleta Aurelia Chira 

University Politehnica of Bucharest, Faculty of Applied Chemistry and Material Science, 1 -7 Gheorghe 

Polizu, 011061, Sector 1, Bucharest, Romania 

buica_george@yahoo.com 

Originally designed as a tool in organic synthesis , t he concept of "click chemistry " introduced by 

Sharpless and co. in 2001 [1] emerged very rapid as one of the most employed routes for designing the 

architecture and functions of different types of surfaces with important applications (e.g. nanomaterials) 

[2]. Moreover, due to the mild conditions , this method can be applied even in aqueous solvents in the 

presence of a catalyst and of man y functional groups without protection. The process is fast, selective and 

resistant to side reactions. However, this approach has rarely been applied to modify electrodes with 

chelating groups for heavy metal ions sensing .

We report here, the synthesis o f novel thiosemicarbazone ligands bearing azido groups, which 

were further immobilized on a phenylethynyl -functionalized glassy carbon surface, through a Cu(I) -

catalyzed azide -alkyne cycloaddition reaction. In this manner, new modified electrodes were obta ined, 

and their ability to coordinate metal ions, due to the intrinsic properties of the immobilized ligands, was 

studied .

Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge for the financial support of the Romanian National Authority for 

Scientific Rese arch, UEFISCDI, under grant PN -III -P1 -1.1 -TE -2016 -0860 , contract no. 1 14 /201 8.

Regerences 

1.  Kolb , H.C. ; Finn , M.G. ; Sharpless , K.B. Angew. Chem . 2001 , 113 , 2056 –2075. 

2.  Such , G.K. ; Johnston , A.P.R. ; Liang , K. ; Caruso , F. Prog. Polym. Sci ., 2012 , 37 , 985 –1003 .High -capacity and ultra -long -cyclability lithium –sul fur battery with a 

# dual -porosity cathode matrix derived from brewing wast es 

Alvaro Y. Tesio [a], Juan Luis Gómez -Cámer [b] , Julián Morales [b] , Alvaro Caballero [b]  

> a

Cen tro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Materiales Avanzados y Almacenamiento de Energía de Jujuy 

CIDMEJu (CONICET -Universidad Nacional de Jujuy), Centro de Desarrollo Tecnológico General 

Savio, 4612 – Palpalá, Jujuy, Argentina . 

> b

Departamento de Química Inorgá nica, Instituto Universitario de Investigació n en Química Fina y 

Nanoquímica (IUNAN), Campus de Rabanales, Universidad de Córdoba, 14071 Córdoba, España .

jl. gome z@uco.es 

The large development of re newable energy sources requ ire s the parall el development of 

sustainable energ y storage systems because of its non -continuous production. In this reality , the lithium –

sulfur batter y emerge s as one of the most promising technologies to face this problem. Mor eover, t he use 

of biomass t o p roduce catho des for these batteries addres ses n ot only the aforementioned problem, but 

also it reduces the carbon footprint and gives added value to something normally considered waste . In this 

work, we report the production, by simple and non -activatin g p yrolysis, of a carbon material usi ng the 

abund ant 'after -boiling waste' derived from beer brewing. 1

In a typical fabrication, the after -boiling waste that come directly from the factory was dried 

overnight , then heated from to 900 °C for 60 min for car bon isation unde r a nitrogen atmosphere . No 

further activation or washing was needed. The material was named ABW -C.

Regarding the structural characterization , a carbon percentage of 88% was found by TG analys is

on the ABW -C materi al in oxygen atmosphere . Th is is a value t hat confirms a material with a high carbon 

content, a strictly necessary condition for suitable carbon materials from biomass or industrial waste. The 

XRD pattern of the ABW -C sh ows the expected two broad peaks of low intensity, with the pea ks centred 

at 2 5 and 44º coming from to the crysta llographic planes of graphi te (002) and (100), respectively.  Pore 

size distribution calculated by DFT method revealed dual micro - and mesoporous str ucture of the ABW -

C. From BET isotherm a total pore volume of 0.2 77 cm 3 g–1 with a micropore volume of 0.141 cm 3 g–1,

can be calculated (approx. 50% microporosity) .

After adding a high sulfur loading (70%) to this biowaste -derived carbon by the 'melt diffus ion' 

method, the sulfur –carbon composite (ABW -C@S ) was us ed as a cathode in Li –S batteries. The ca thode 

exh ibited excellent performance, reaching high capacity values and ultra -long cyclability at high current: 

847 mAh g –1 (at 1C , Fig. 1), 586 mAh g –1 (at 2C) and even 498 mAh g –1 (at 5 C) after 400 cycles, 

drasti cal ly reducing the loss of capacity per cycle to v al ues close to 0.01% per cycle. 

In co nclusion, carbon derived from brewing waste, without any activation process, has 

demonstrated suitable textural pro perties for the preparation of high -sulfur -content com pos ites to use as 

effective cathodes in Li –S cells . Its high surface area, combined with its interconnected micro - and 

mesoporous system, raises its performance, in both capacity values and cyclability, even at high current 

densi ties. Therefore, this work dem onstrates th e possibility of revaluing the brew ing waste by 

transforming it into a porous carbon, using a simple process without activation stages, with promising 

performance in a sustainable cathode for ultra -high -cyclability Li –S batteries. In short , thi s work 

demon strates the possibility of obtainin g low -cost, highly sustainable cathodic materials for the design of 

advanced energy storage systems. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 

> 0500 1000 1500
> Capacity (mAhg -1 S )

Cycle number 

050 100 Coulombic efficiency (%) 

Figure 1. Long -term cycl ing performance of Li/LiTF SI -LiNO 3-DOL:DME/ABW -C@S at 1C (1675 mA g –1). 

> 1

A.Y. Tesio et a l., ChemSusCh em ., 2020, Accepted Manuscript , 10.1002/cssc.202000969 .Hybr id Capacitor with Anthraquinone -Grafted C arbon as Battery -Typ e

# Electrode Operating in Low pH Aqueous Salt S olution 

## Emmanuel Pameté Yambou *, Barbara Górska , Paula Rataj czak and François Béguin 

## Poznan University of Technology , ul.  Berdychowo 4, 6 0-965, Poznan, Poland 

## *emmanuel.yambou@doctorate.put.poznan.pl 

Hybrid capacitors combine one electrical double -layer electrode - usually a high surface area carbonaceous 

material, together with a faradaic battery -type component [1]. Recent examples of high conductivity battery -like 

electrodes are realized by operating carbon electrodes in a redox -active electrolyte [2] or by modifying carbon 

with electroactive molecules [3]. Grafted carbons, e.g., with anth raquinone (AQ) moieties, are recognized to 

display highly reversible redox activity in acidic electrolytes such as sulfuric acid, unlike in basic electrolytes 

where quinone -dianions are formed causing AQ detachment from the surface [ 3]. However, in H 2SO 4 electrolyte, 

expensive gold current collectors are required to avoid corrosion issues, and the operational voltage of carbon -

based c apacitors is restricted (~ 1V). 

In the present study, a nthraquinone (AQ) moieties (0.1eq. vs. carbon) have been grafted using the corresponding 

diazonium salts on the surface of the SC2A carbon black (Cabot, SDFT =1502 m 2 g-1, total pore volume = 1.05 

cm 3·g -1). The AQ mass loading in SC2A@AQ was ~1 6 wt% as det ermined by CV and TG analysis. The DFT 

specific surface area of SC2A@AQ was reduced to 191 m2 g-1, and the total pore volume dropped to 0.46 cm 3·g -

> 1

. Despite the large difference in S DFT values of the materials, the EDL capacitance values of SC2A and SC2A@AQ 

electrodes in 1 mol L -1 BeSO 4 (pH = 2.1) were comparable, owing to the improved wettability of the latter material. 

The performance of a ( -)SC2A@AQ // SC2A(+) hybrid capacitor (HC aq ) in 1 mol L -1 BeSO 4 was characterized by 

a quasi -linear GC/GD profile and twice higher capacitance compared to the symmetric ( -)SC2A // SC2A(+) cell. 

The capacitance retention of the HC aq reache d 87 % after 10,000 galvanostatic cycles up to 1.6 V. Owing to the 

AQ grafting, the negative SC2A@AQ electrode of the HC aq demonstrate d a very low potential decay (so -called 

self -discharge) of 0.11 V after 4 -hour voltage hold at 1.5 V, as opposed to 0.92 V for the SC2A negative electrode 

in the SC aq . Overall, the HC aq deliver ed energy and power performance comparable with a symmetric SC2A/SC2A 

capacitor operating up to 2.7 V in usual organic electrolyte (SC org ), whilst succeed ed by being an economically 

viab le energy storage device. 

Scheme 1: (a) hybrid cell with reference electrode (to study the behavior of individual electrodes) made of as 

received SC2A carbon black as positive EDL electrode and its modified SC2A@AQ counterpart employed as 

battery -type negative electrode operating in 1 mol L -1 BeSO 4 aqueous electrolyte; (b ) cyclic voltammograms of 

the electrod es at cell voltage of 1.6 V; (c ) illustration of the ( -)SC2A@AQ//SC2A(+) hybrid capacitor (HC aq )

which ensures a low production cost , high power and energy; (d ) Ragone plot of HC aq and ( -)SC2A//SC2A(+) 

symmetric (SC aq ) cells in BeSO 4 (range of 1.5 -0.75 V) at constant power; it shows that HC aq advantageously 

competes with the ( -)SC2A//SC2A(+) cell in TEABF 4/ACN organic electrolyte (SC or g; in the range 2.7 -1.35 V). 

## References 

[1 ] W.G. Pell, B.E. Conway, J. Power Sources, 136 (2004) 334 -345. 

[2 ] P. Przygocki, Q. Abbas, F. Béguin , Electrochim. Acta, 269 (2018) 640 -648. 

[3 ] G. Pognon, T. Brousse, D. Bélanger, Carbon, 49 (2011) 1340 -1348. a b c dTemperature Dependent Non -linear Electrochemical Impedance 

# Spectroscopy Analysis to Elucidate the Solid Electrolyte Interface on 

# Li Metal in Li \SOCl 2 Batteries 

Mohammed Ahmed Zabara , Burak Ulgut 

Department of Chemistry, Bilkent University, 06800 Ankara, Turkey 

mohammed.zabara@bilkent.edu.tr 

The Solid Electrolyte Interface (S EI ) plays a very important rule in the stability, safety and voltage 

behavior of Li based batter ies . Lithium Thionyl Chloride (Li \SOCl 2) primary batteries ar e among the 

most used Li metal -based batteries due to high energy densit ies . The stability of the Li metal used as 

anode is governed by the SEI formed from the reaction of Li with the electrolyte SOCl 2 [1] . In the voltage 

performance of the battery, t he SEI is shown to have drastic effect on the voltage behavior of the battery 

during operation [2] .

The non -linear data obtained during the performance of Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (E IS) 

measurements of Li \SOCl 2 can be used to study the SEI formed on the Li metal anode . The non -linear 

data is obtained as higher order harmonics which have certain amplitudes at the multiple frequencies of 

the excited signal as shown in Figure 1(a) . In ou r previous work , we have shown that the presence of 

thicker and denser SEI causes non -linearit ies in the voltage response in the form of second harmonic 

signals in the non -linear harmonic spectrum shown in Figure 1(b) [3] .

In this work , we will show the results obtained from the further investigation of the SEI on the Li anode 

by non -linear harmonic analysis coupled with temperature and State of Charge variations . The obtained 

harmonics provide information related to the formation and degradation kinetics and composition of the 

SEI. Further, the relation of varying electrode/electrolyt e composition to the parameters of the SEI will be 

shown . The results will demonstrate how non -linear harmonics , which are usually avoided in EIS 

measurements, can be utilized to investigate the SEI in Li based batteries. 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 1. (a) Non -linear Harmonic Analysis for Li/SOCl 2 battery, (b) Non -linear harmonic spectr a for 

cells with different Solid Electrolyte Interphase structure 

References: 

[1] M. B. Mogensen and E. Hennesø, “Properties and Structure of the LiCl -films on Lithium Anodes 

in Liquid Cathodes,” Acta Chim. Slov. , vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 519 –534, Sep. 2016. 

[2] M. A. Zabara and B. Ulgut, “Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy based voltage modeling of 

lithium T hionyl Chloride (Li ∖SOCl2) primary battery at arbitrary discharge,” Electrochim. Acta ,

vol. 334, p. 135584, Feb. 2020. 

[3] M. A. Zabara, C. B. Uzundal, and B. Ulgut, “Linear and Nonlinear Electrochemical Impedance 

Spectroscopy Studies of Li/SOCl 2 Batterie s,” J. Electrochem. Soc. , vol. 166, no. 6, pp. A811 –

A820, 2019. Liquid based synthesis of argyrodite structure solid electrolytes for all -

# solid -state batteries 

KyungSu Kim*, Woosuk Cho *, Jaehee Jang, Minjeong Kim , Kern -Ho Park, Goojin Jeong, Ji -sang Yu 

Advanced batteries Research Center, Korea Electronics Technology In stitute 

#25 Saenari -ro, Bundang, Seongnam, Gyeonggi -do, 463 -816 South Korea 

Cho4153@keti.re.kr 

High energy density with safety is important point to develop the large sized batteries for electric 

vehicle. Safety issues of current lithium ion battery syst em mainly comes from the oxide cathode and 

flammable organic electrolyte. All solid state batteries with non -flammable inorganic solid electrolytes 

have received great attention from electric vehicle companies due to its potential for securing higher 

energ y density and safe characteristi cs over current lithium ion battery system. A high lithium ion 

conducting solid electrolytes is core technology to the development of all solid state batteries . Solid 

electrolytes were mainly synthesized by solid state metho d with high energy ball milling and het 

treatment process. A high energy mechanical milling system is not sufficient for large scale synthesis 

process. Recently, new synthesis method with liquid based system was proposed to avoid milling process. 

Moreover, new materials might be synthesized via liquid based synthesis method which cannot be 

successfully obtained by solid state synthesis. 

In this study, liquid based synthesis process was examined by controlling kinds of solvents, purity, 

reaction order, rati o of precursors and vacuum drying process. An argyrodite structure solid electrolytes, 

Li 6PS 5X (X=Cl, Br) were successfully synthesized by liquid based synthesis method. Crystallinity and ion 

conductivity was evaluated by X -ray diffraction method and AC im pedance technique. All solid state 

batteries were fabricated by powder pressed type half -cell and electrochemical tests were investigated and 

the detailed results will be discussed in this presentation. 0 50 100 150 200 250 

> 050 100 150 200 250
> -Im(Z)/Ohm
> Re(Z)/Ohm

Fig 1. Nyquist plots of Li6PS5Br electrolyte obta ined by liquid based synthesis method Soft O btaining of the C omposite LiMn 1.6 Ni 0.4 O4-LiFePO 4/C by 

# Microwave H eating 

F.A. Vásquez a, N.C. Rosero -Navarro b, A. Miura b, J. A. Calderón a, K. Tadanaga b 

> a

CIDEMAT, Universidad de Antioquia, Street 70 N# 52 – 21, Medellín, Colombia  

> b

Division of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan 

ferley.vasquez@udea.edu.co 

Simple preparation process by  microwave heating to obtain composite materials  LiFePO 4/C olivine (2% 

w/w) deposited as a coating on LMNO spinel (98% w /w)  was studied  in order to avoid the spinel phase 

dissolution in the liquid electrolyte. Microwave radiation allows local melting of the carbon precursor in 

the LiFePO 4/C resulting in a compact protective layer without further phase transition. The compos ite 

formation and the phase transit ions during microwave heating were characterized by synchrotron XRD, 

SEM and TEM . The electrochemical performance of composite materials was characterized by 

charge/discharge cycling, rate -capability and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The 

degradation process after cycling was also characterized by synchrotron XRD. With a heating of 10W the 

composite LMNO -2LFP/C was obtained with superior crystallographic order without impurities 

precipitation , see Fig. 1a . This composite retains the 97% of initial capacity after 100 cycles and higher 

discharge capacity was achieved (see Fig. 1c). After 100 cycles, the composite material LMNO -2LFP/C -

10W retains the lattice parameters of the spinel phase, while olivine phase is partially delithiated and 

additional peaks at 2θ of 9.35° and 14.85° significantly smaller than those of LMNO appear (see Fig. 1b ). 

At heating power of 100W changes in the lattice parameters of spinel phase take place and impurities 

precipitat e decreasing discharge capacity, possibly due to degradation of the spinel structure by 

overheating .

Fig. 1 (a) LMNO -2LFP/C (10W) TEM. (b) Synchrotron XRD of LMNO -2LFP (10W) before cycled and 

LMNO, LMNO -2LFP/C without heating and heated at 10W after 100 cycles. (c) Discharge profile at 

0.5C of LMNO and LMNO -2LFP/C without heating and heated at 10W and 100W. Unde rstanding the interplay between Li insertion and Li plating 

## in single graphite anode 

Tao Gao 1, Dimitrios Fraggedakis 1, Supratim Das 1, William Chueh 2, Ju Li 1, Martin Z. Bazant 1

> 1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

> 2

Stanford University 

Bazant@mit.edu 

The potential safety hazards of lithium ion batteries (LIBs), as well as their capacity fade and long 

charging time, are major challenges that currently prevent the widespread adoption of electric vehicles. 

These effects are strongly correlated with lit hium plating, a parasitic reaction on graphite anodes that 

competes with lithium intercalation when LiBs are charged at high rates or under low temperature. Li 

plating is known for depletion of the lithium inventory, cell shorting, and thermal runaway. 

Addressing Li plating problem relies on material engineering and battery operation optimization. The 

efficacy of these approaches lies in the fundamental understanding of Li plating mechanism. Despite Li 

ion battery has been invented for 30 years, a systema tic understanding on the onset and growth of Li in 

graphite anode is still lacking. Thermodynamics criterion requires the voltage of graphite to be negative 

vs. Li metal for Li plating to happen. However, in practice graphite is usually able to tolerate ce rtain 

degree of negative voltage without plating. Such discrepancy necessitates the incorporation of kinetic 

factors. Several kinetic mechanisms have been proposed, which include electrolyte transport limitation 

and solid diffusion limitation. However, nei ther of them are validated experimentally on graphite 

electrode .

In this work, we test these hypotheses and elucidate the mechanism of Li plating, by investigating the 

interplay between Li intercalation and Li plating on a single graphite particle , using in -situ optical 

microscopy coupled with electrochemical test. The results show Li plating happens when the surface of 

graphite saturates , which shuts down the intercalation reaction. The saturation can happen much earlier 

than full lithiation of graphite p article due to solid diffusion limitation, resulting in severe under -

utilization. The physical picture was discussed by analyzing the energy landscape of the two competing 

reactions and their kinetics. A theory was proposed , followed by a 1D simulation of the dynamics of Li 

insertion and Li plating. The discovery sheds light on directions and guidelines of materials innovation or 

electrode design for reducing the risk of Li plating and extreme fast charging .The Effect of a Filler Type on the Electrical Percolation Threshold 

# of a Biocompatible Neural Interface Composite 

Katarzyna Krukiewicz , Małgorzata Skorupa, Daria Więcławska 

Department of Physical Chemistry and Technology of Polymers, Silesian Universit y of Technology 

M.Strzody 9, 44 -100 Gliwice, Poland 

katarzyna.krukiewicz@polsl.pl 

Electrical stimulation as the way to treat neural tissue disorders has been known in medicine for the last 

decades [1] . Currently, deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a common tool to treat several neurological 

disorders, including chronic pain, depres sion, tremors associated with Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy .

One of the drawback s of existing DBS technologies is the lack of the integration between electrode 

material and neural tissue, leading to foreign body reaction and inflammation. Therefore, cur rent 

strategies are focused on the development of conducting coatings which could increase the 

biocompatibility of neural electrodes, while maintaining their high conductivity. 

In our studies, we have chosen an aliphatic polyester as a biocompatible matri x, and we have loaded it 

with selected conducting fillers differing in size, conductivity and surface morphology, namely carbon 

nanotubes (CNTs), silver nanowires (AgNWs) and conducting polymer microspheres (CPMs). It is 

known that the addition of a conduc ting filler can significantly enhance the electrical properties of non -

conducting polymers. Usually, the change in electrical properties is not linear with the content of a 

conducting filler. Hence, even a small amount of conducting filler can dramatically improve the 

conductivity of the composite material if only this amount is enough to form long range networks, called 

percolation paths [2] .

To determine the minimum amount of conducting fillers that provide s conductive behavior to polyester 

matrix , electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and cyclic voltamm ograms (CV) of composites were 

collected, and the corresponding charge storage capacities (CSC) were calculated. Th e percolation 

behavior of t he composites wa s clearly seen from the changes in impedance and CSC, and was found to 

be highly dependent on the filler type. The lowest percolation threshold was found for CNTs (0.1 %), but 

the highest value of CSC (10.7 ± 0.3 mC/cm 2) and the lowest impe dance (167 ± 10 Ω) were found for 10 

% AgNWs. The results of our work clearly demonstrated the potency of AgNWs to be used as conducting 

fillers in composite coatings for neural electrodes. AgNWs were shown to form an extended uniformly 

distributed network within polyester matrix, resulting in advantageous electrochemical properties. 

This work has been supported by the National Science Centre in Pol and (Sonata 2016/23/D/ST5/01306, 

OPUS 2019/35/B/ST5/00995). 

References: 

[1] D.M. Thompson, A.N. Koppes, J.G. Hardy, C.E. Schmidt, Electrical Stimuli in the Central 

Nervous System Microenvironment, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 16 (2014) 397 –430. 

[2] S.I. White, R.M. Mutiso, P.M. Vo ra, D. Jahnke, S. Hsu, J.M. Kikkawa, J. Li, J.E. Fischer, K.I. 

Winey, Electrical percolation behavior in silver nanowire -polystyrene composites: Simulation and 

experiment, Adv. Funct. Mater. 20 (2010) 2709 –2716. Electro active O rganic Monolayers as Multifunctional Neural Coatings 

Katarzyna Krukiewicz , Małgorzata Skorupa 

Department of Physical Chemistry and Technology of Polymers, Silesian University of Technology 

M.Strzody 9, 44 -100 Gliwice, Poland 

katarzyna.kru kiewicz@polsl.pl 

Rapid growth and development at the intersection of neuroscience, computer science, engineering and 

medicine has allowed the creation of revolutionary neurotechnologies to evaluate and treat nervous 

system disorders. Neural interfaces hav e become a major focus in current research in an effort to identify 

and develop novel approaches to augment human cognitive or sensory -motor functions, to interface with 

computer systems or to control external devices [1] . The implantation of metal electrodes may, however, 

lead to persistent inflammation – this is why intensive research efforts have been made to develop 

biocompatible coatings preventing implant -associated adverse effects [2] . The optimal interface should 

not only exhibit biocompatibility, conductivity, low interfacial impedance, high stability and high charge 

injection capacity, but i t should also prevent glial scar formation and inflammation [3] . Therefore, the 

range of biomaterials that can be used in this spec ific application is limited. 

Our aim wa s to improve the efficiency of neural electrodes through the design of a novel type of coatings 

based on electroactive monolayers. The objectives of our work include d the formation of electroactive 

monolayers with t he use of the electrochemical reduction of diazonium salts (Fig.1) . The formation of 

monolayers was monitored in situ, with the use of electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance and cyclic 

voltammetry. T he as -formed monolayers were extensively investigate d in terms of their electrochemical 

properties (charge storage capacity, charge injection capacity, impedance characteristics, conductivity), 

surface roughness, mechanical stability and biocompatibility. 

The results confirmed that the electrochemical met hod s can be successfully employed to form and further 

modify electroactive monolayers. The examination of as -formed monolayers showed the formation of a 

uniform coating being able to be further modified by electrochemical methods, e.g. surface -induced 

elec tropolymerization. Moreover, the monolayers were shown to enhance the growth of neural cells when 

compared with a bare surface of platinum . Furthermore, unmodified and electrochemically modified 

monolayers were shown to differ in terms of surface character istics (roughness), leading to the differences 

in the interactions with cells. 

Combining the advantageous physicochemical properties of monolayer coatings together with their high 

tailorability for specific needs, we expect that the electroactive organic monolayers could serve as 

promising materials not only for neuroprosthetic coatings, but also for a variety of applications in the field 

of molecular scaffolds and medical devices. 

Fig.1. The schematic representation of a two -step process of the formation of a monolayer .

This work has been supported by the National Science Centre in Pol and (Sonata 2016/23/D/ST5/01306, 

OPUS 2019/35/B/ST5/00995). 

References: 

[1] W.M. Grill, S.E. Norman, R. V. Bellamkonda, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 11 (2009) 1 –24. 

[2] R. Wadhwa, C.F. Lagenaur, X.T. Cui, J. Control. Release. 110 (2006) 531 –541. 

[3] S.F. Cogan, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10 (2008) 275 –309. Determination of membrane potential dependent structural changes in 

# of a model of the outer membrane of Gram -negative bacteria 

Izabella Brand and Bishoy Khairalla 

Department of Chemistry, University of Oldenburg 

26111 Oldenburg, Germany 

e-mail : izabella.brand@uni -oldenburg.de 

Cell envelope of bacteria differs in the composition and structure from cell membranes of eukaryotes .

Gram -positive bacteria contain one phospholipid membrane which is surrounded by a 20 – 80 nm thick 

peptidoglycan film. T he cell envelope of Gram -negative bacteria has one of the most complex structure in 

nature . It is composed of two lipid bilayers. The inner membrane contains phospholipids. The inner 

membrane is separated from the outer membrane (OM) by a thin (7 -10 nm) pe ptidoglycan layer. The two 

leaflets of the OM have a distinct composition . Lipopolysaccharides are present in the outer leaflet. They 

have a complex structure. Lipid A consists the amphiphilic fragment of each lipopolysaccharide . A core 

fragment of a lipop olysaccharide is bound to the lipid A molecule . It is subdivided into an inner and outer 

core. The inner core is bound to lipid A via rare sugars: 2 -keto -3-deoxyoctulosonate (Kdo) and L -glycero -

D-manno -heptose. The outer core is composed of few common sugar residues (hexoses and hexosamines). 

The polar head group of lipid A and core regions are negatively charged. Divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ ) are 

coordinated to the phosphate, carboxylate and hydroxide groups of this rigid fragment of a

lipopolys accharide molecule . A large structural diversity of LPS combined with the complex 

supramolecular structure of the OM limit biomimetic studies of the cell membrane envelope of Gram -

negative bacteria. 

In this work Langmuir -Blodgett and Langmuir -Schaefer (LS -LB) transfer s were used to deposit a

multicomponent asymmetric lipid bilayer , mimicking the composition of the OM of Gram -negative 

bacteria, onto an Au(111) electrode surface. The inner leaflet is composed of 1-palmitoyl -2-oleoyl -sn -

glycero -3-phosphoethan olamine (POPE) whereas the outer leaflet conta ins di[3 -deoxy -D-manno -

octulosonyl] -lipid A (KLA) . The capacitance of the model OM depends on the potential applied to the 

Au(111) electrode. At negative membrane potentials, the bilayer desorbs from the electr ode surface. The 

potential -driven adsorption -desorption process is reversible. Molecular scale changes in the model 

membrane exposed to physiological electric fields were investigated using in situ polarization modulation 

infrared reflection absorption spe ctroscopy . The orientation of the lipid molecules in the asymmetric OM 

depends on the membrane potential. The hydrocarbon chains of both lipids POPE and KLA exist in a liquid 

state. The orientation of the acyl chains in POPE, in the inner leaflet, does not change as a function of the 

membrane potential. In contrast, the hydrocarbon chains in KLA change their average orientation as a 

function of potential, reaching the largest disorder at negative membrane potentials, proceeding the bilayer 

desorption from t he Au(111) electrode surface. The polar head groups response also to membrane 

potential s. The orientation of the line connect ing the two O atoms in the carboxylate group slightly change 

as a function of the membrane potential . The ester carbonyl groups in POPE and KLA lipids have a 

preferential parallel to the bilayer plane orientation , which is not affected by the membrane potential . Our 

results demonstrate that electric potentials cause significantly smaller changes in the packing and hydration 

of lipid molecules compared to pure phospholipid bilayers . To understand interactions of bacterial 

membranes with antimicrobial peptides or other antibiotics, biomimetic studies of realistic models of 

bacterial cell envelopes are required. Choosing the right carbon is of vital importance for high performance 

# Sb -based Na -ion batteries 

K. Pfeifer a, S. Arnold a, Ö. Budak b, X. Luo a, V. Presser b, H. Ehrenberg a,c , S. Dsoke a,c 

> a

Institute for Applied Materials (IAM), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann -von -Helmholtz -

Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany 

> b

INM - Leibniz Institute for New Materials, 66123 Saarbr� cken, Germany 

> c

Helmholtz -Institute Ulm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

E-mail: kristina.pfeifer@kit.edu 

Electrodes based on alloying reactions for sodium -ion batteries (NIB) offer high specific capacity but 

require bespoken electrode material design to enable high -performance stability. This work addresses that 

issue by systematically exploring the impact of carbon properties on antimony/carbon composite electrodes 

for NIBs. Since the Sb surface is covered by an insulating oxide layer, carbon additives are crucial f or the 

percolation of conductive pathways and to enable the electrochemical activity of Sb based anodes. Instead 

of using complex hybridization strategies, the ability of mechanical mixing to yield stable , high -

performance Sb/C NIB electrodes is shown. Thi s is only possible by considering the physical, chemical, 

morphological, and structural features of the carbon phase. A comparison of carbon nanohorns, carbon 

onions , carbon black, and graphite as conductive additives is given in this work. The best perfor mance does 

not require a high or low surface area, and not a h igh or low heteroatom content . Instead, the best 

performance is obtained for electrodes displaying a homogenous distribut ion of carbon w ithin the Sb matrix. 

The latter provides an optimum intera ction between carbon and Sb and is best enabled by carbon onions . A 

remarkable rate performance is attained, electrode cracking caused by volume expansion is successfully 

prevented, and the homogeneity of the solid/electrolyte interphase is significantly i mproved as a result of 

it. With this composite electrode, a reversible capacity of 490  mAh /g at 0.1  A/g and even 300  mA /g at 8  A/g 

is obtained. Additionally, high stability with a capacity retention of 73  % over 100 cycles is achieved at 

charge/discharge r ates of 0.2  A/g. [1] 

Acknowledgment s:

This work contributes to the research performed at CELEST (Center for Electrochemical Energy Storage 

Ulm -Karlsruhe) and was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Project ID 390874152 

(POLiS Cluster of Excellence). 

Reference s:

[1] K.Pfeifer et al. , Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 8, 6092 -6104 , 2020 .Enhanced air -stability of argyrodite solid electrolyte for all -solid -state 

# batteries 

Woosuk Cho *, Wonrak Lee, Dong -geon Lee, Kyung -su Kim, Kern -Ho Park, Goojin Jeong, Ji -sang Yu 

Advanced batteries Research Center, Korea Electronics Technology Institute 

#25 Saenari -ro, Bundang, Seongnam, Gyeonggi -do, 463 -816 South Korea 

Cho4153@keti.re.kr 

Over recent year, the range of Li ion battery (LIB) application has been rapidly extended to large scaled 

uses such as electric vehicles (EVs). This has driven demand for Li ion battery system that can offer 

higher energy density, higher current drain, and greater safety. All -solid -state batteries (ASB) have 

received great attention as a next generation power source due to its high energy densitsy with safe 

characteristics. Whole battery reactions are occurred in solid -state Li+ migration in ASB, therefore the 

well -contacted interfacial area is critical for battery performance. Solid electrolyte is key materials in 

ASB. Sulfide solid electrolyte is favorable to form a contac t area effectively due to its elastic powder 

character compared to oxide. However, sulfide solid electrolyte is chemically unstable with humidity in 

air. It easily generates H 2S gas that is toxic and hazardous. Residual Li 2S and bridge sulfur in structure are 

known as main cause of H 2S generation. The ionic conductivity is also decreased by the decomposition of 

solid electrolyte by undesirable H 2S generation. Our previous works proposed the addtive such as zeolite 

and metal oxide as H 2S scavenger. H 2S gas g eneration and ionic conductivity after air exposure were 

greatly imptoved by introducing additive. In this study, we reports new argyrodite -type solid electrolyte 

that shows improved ionic conductivity at room temperature. The amount of H 2S gas generation was 

reduced for new arygrodite after exposured in moisture air (Rh50% for 60 min). Decease of ionic 

conductivity after air exposure is also suppressed. Electrochemical performance such as specific capacity 

and cycle performance is also improved for new arg yrodite. The detailed results will be discussed at the 

meeting. 

Fig. a) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity values of LPSCl and new argyrodite, b) amount of H2S gas 

generation from solid electrolyte during exposure to air (Rh 50%) 2) Solvent separation      

> Cation 2
> Solvent 1
> Anion Cation 1 Solvent 2
> Ion -selective membrane Electrolyte
> 3) Concentration
> gradient
> 1) Ion flux change
> 4) Selective diffusion

# New Role s of Ion Selective Membranes for Capacitive Deionisation and 

# Battery Desalination 

Juhan Lee ,a Rafael Linzmeyer Zornitta ,b Choonsoo Kim c 

> a

University of Liverpool, School of Engineering, Liverpool L69 3GQ, United Kingdom  

> b

Wageningen University , Laboratory of Organic Chemistry , Wageningen 6708 WE , the Ne therlands  

> c

Kongju National University, Department of Environmental Engineering/Environment Convergence 

Technologies, Cheonan 31080 , Republic of Korea 

juhan.lee@liverpool.ac. uk 

In a recent decade, a wealth of new electrochemical ion -separation 

technologies, such as capacitive deionisation (CDI) and battery 

desalination, have emerged as energy -efficient alternatives to 

conventional technologies. 1, 2 Relying on reversible electrochemical 

reactions as a driving force such as electric double -layer formation 

and insertion/intercalation, conversion type redox reactions, desired 

species such as metal and halide ions can be efficiently removed 

from feed solutions .2, 3 Furthermore, large facilities based on these 

technologies can be coupled to grid -scale energy storage systems 

since the deionisation cell is essentially operated by e lectrical 

charging/discharging procedures .

For further development of these ion -separation technologies with 

reversible electrochemical reactions, the key challenges are to 

enhance removal selectivity, energy efficiency, operation stability, 

and productio n rate, and to reduce the environmental influence and the cost. While the majority of the 

work has been focused on electrode materials to achieve these requirements, ion -selective membranes 

have played their conventional role to improve ion removal efficie ncy. The letter approach, k nown as 

membrane CDI (MCDI), prevents the inefficient ion removal process by providing a guided direction for 

ion flux . Recently, various new roles of membranes have been explored for CDI and battery desalination 

technologies via innovative cell design and the use of advance new membranes. 

Herein, we introduce the new roles of ion -selective membranes for ion -separation processes with 

reversible electrochemical reactions based on our recent scientific achievements. First, the tradi tional 

roles of membranes in terms of providing a guided ion flux will be discussed as well as its novel functions 

of changing the traditional direction of ion flux. 4-6 Second, we will introduce the new role of solv ent 

separation with our proof of concept study demonstrating the feasibility of applying aqu eous/organic bi -

electrolyte configuration. 7 Third, we will present how the ion -separation performance can be enhanced by 

applying concentration gradient with the aid o f ion -selective membranes in a multi -channel cell. 8, 9

Finally, we will show how ion -selective feature of the membranes can provide innovative solutions for 

ion separation technologies with a syne rgi stic combination with the redox -active electrolytes. 4, 10 

References: 

1. M. Pasta, C. D. Wessells, Y. Cui and F. La Mantia, Nano Lett. , 2012, 12 , 839 -843. 

2. P. Srimuk, X. Su, J. Yoon, D. Aurbach and V. Presser , Nat. Rev. Mater. , 2020, DOI: 

10.1038/s41578 -020 -0193 -1. 

3. X. Su, A. Kushima, C. Halliday, J. Zhou, J. Li and T. A. Hatton, Nat. Commun. , 2018, 9, 4701. 

4. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, S. Carpier, J. Choi, R. L. Zornitta, C. Kim, M. Aslan and V. Presser, 

ChemSusCh em , 2018, 11 , 3460 -3472. 

5. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, R. Zwingelstein, R. L. Zornitta, J. Choi, C. Kim and V. Presser, J. Mater. 

Chem. A , 2019, 7, 4175 -4184. 

6. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, K. Aristizabal, C. Kim, S. Choudhury, Y. C. Nah, F. Mücklich and V. Presser, 

ChemSu sChem , 2017, 10 , 3611 -3623. 

7. C. Kim, P. Srimuk, J. Lee and V. Presser, Desalination , 2018, 443 , 56 -61. 

8. C. Kim, P. Srimuk, J. Lee, M. Aslan and V. Presser, Desalination , 2018, 425 , 104 -110. 

9. C. Kim, J. Lee, P. Srimuk, M. Aslan and V. Presser, ChemSus Chem , 2017, 10 , 4914 -4920. 

10. J. Lee, P. Srimuk, R. L. Zornitta, M. Aslan, B. L. Mehdi and V. Presser, ACS Sustainable Chem. 

Eng. , 2019, 7, 10132 -10142. Analysis of Single -Phase Water -Management Signatures in Fuel -Cell 

# Impedance Spectra 

Aslan Kosakian a,b , Luis Padilla Urbina a,c , Aidan Heaman a, Marc Secanell a,*  

> a

Energy Systems Design Laboratory, Dep t. of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada  

> b

Dep t. of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Canada  

> c

Dep t. of Chemical Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada 

116 St. and 85 Ave., Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2R3  

> *

secanell@ualberta.ca 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is widely used for the characterization of proton -exchange -

membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) as it allows researchers to separate physical processes occurring at varying 

temporal scales [1,2]. The PEMFC impedance spectra often contain a low -frequency inductive loop that is 

attributed to the electrolyte hydration [2 -6]. Since water management plays an important role in achieving 

high PEMFC performance, better understanding of the physical meanin g of this inductive behavior will 

help in future fuel -cell design. 

Developing physical insight by using equivalent circuits to analyze the impedance spectra [1,2] is difficult 

due to the oversimplification of the physical phenomena. Only a few multi -dimen sional numerical models 

have been used to investigate the inductive behavior of fuel cells [3 -5]; however, in -depth parametric 

studies of water transport were not performed. 

In this work, the detailed transient 2D PEMFC model from our recent publication [7] is used to simulate 

and analyze fuel -cell impedance spectra. The model was thoroughly validated against in -house 

experimental polarization curves, ohmic resistance, and EIS data, as well as the recent experimental data 

for the humidity -dependence of t he inductive loop [8]. The low -frequency inductive behavior of PEMFCs 

is shown to be directly affected by the water -transport mechanisms in the membrane and in the ionomer 

phase of the catalyst layers, including the finite -rate kinetics of water absorption /desorption by the 

electrolyte. Additionally, an ohmic -resistance breakdown of an in -operando fuel cell is performed with the 

model . The results indicate that the high -frequency resistance of the PEMFCs does not include the protonic 

resistance of the conve ntional carbon -based catalyst layers, while the latter is still significant in the overall 

ohmic losses. 

Figure: A PEMFC impedance spectr um simulated at 1 A/cm 2 (a) and ohmic -resistance breakdown (b). 

References 

1. S. M. R. Niya and M. Hoorfar. Journal of P ower Sources 240 (2013): 281 -293. 

2. I. Pivac and F. Barbir. Journal of Power Sources 326 (2016): 112 -119. 

3. B. P. Setzler and T. F. Fuller. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 162.6 (2015): F519 -F530. 

4. C. Bao and W. G. Bessler. Journal of Power Sources 278 (2015): 675 -682. 

5. G. A. Futter et al. Journal of Power Sources 391 (2018): 148 -161. 

6. P. Moçotéguy et al. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy (2020) (in press). 

7. A. Kosakian et al. Electrochimica Acta 350 (2020): 136204. 

8. A. Schiefer et al. Fuel Cells (2019). Electrochemical and surface analysis of biofunctionalized anodized 

# zirconium to promote osseointegration 

Silvia . Ceré 1, Valentina Mariscotti 1, Raul Procaccini 1, Andrea Gomez Sanchez 2,3 , María R. Katunar 1,

María Florencia Tano de la Hoz 1

1. INTEMA UNMdP – CO NICET, División electroquímica aplicada, Av. Colón 10850, Mar del 

Plata, Argentina . smcere@fi.mdp.edu.ar 

2. CIT Villa María – CONICET, Arturo Jauretche 1555, Villa María, Córdoba, Argentina 

3. UTN -FRVM, Boulevard Alvear 1900, Villa María, Argentina 

Zircon ium is a promising candidate for permanent implants both in orthopedic and dental applications 

due to its capability of promote the growth of new bone tissue with low cytotoxicity and excellent 

corrosion resistance [1,2]. Zirconium is covered in air or oxy genated media by a thin surface film of 

zirconium oxide, responsible of its outstanding in vivo and in vitro results [3,4]. Anodization represents 

an efficient route for surface modification that allows the surface design in the nano and micro scales 

funda mental for the improving implants performance [5]. In previous work s, anodic growth of ZrO 2

surface films in phosporic acid resulted beneficial for implant osseointegration due to the modification of 

the topography and the chemistry of the surface , includi ng P incorporation to the oxide film structure 

[1,2] . This, in turn, can induce the precipitation of Ca -P compounds on the surface. Furthermore, in vitro 

and in vivo tests have shown that the surface of ZrO 2 created by anodic oxidation at 60 V improves cel l

proliferation and the integration of the material into bone tissue [2 ,6]. In the past decade, numerous 

studies have focused on controlling the interaction between tissue and implanted material s by 

immobilizing functional biomolecules that could stimulate and interact with the extracellular matrix 

environment [ 7-9]. 

In this work, the effect of functionalization of anodized zirconium with a bioactive peptide (RGD) as 

potential manufacturing material for osseointegrable implants to stimulate early bone inte gration is 

presented. The surface modification was evaluated by surface methods including scanning electron 

microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS ). Surface analysis shows 

the presence of ZrO 2 covering the surface. XPS sh ows the presence of the peptide on the surface after 

modification. Electrochemical tests were performed in simulated body fluid solution (SBF) in order to 

determine the effect of functionalization with the organic molecules on the corrosion resistance of 

anodized zirconium . Anodic polarization curves and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results 

indicate that both anodized and functionalized with the RGD peptide surfaces present excellent corrosion 

resistance in SBF after 24 hours of immersion. EIS res ults evidences that both surfaces behave as non -

ideal capacitor s, characteristic of passive films on valve metals. T hese results demonstrate that the 

functionalization treatment with RGD peptide does not cause any detrimental effect on the anodic oxide 

for med on zirconium during anodization. 

References 

1. A. Gomez Sanchez, W. Schreiner, G. Duffó and S. Ceré, Appl. Surf. Sci. 257 (2011 ) 6397 –6405. 

2. R.M. Hoerth, M.R. Katunar, A. Gomez Sanchez, J.C. Orellano, S.M. Ceré, W. Wagermaier, J. 

Ballarre, J. Mater . Sci. Mater. Med. 25 (2014) 411 –422. 

3. S.B. Farina, A.G. Sanchez, S. Ceré,Procedia Mater.  Sci. 8 (2015) 1166 –1173.. 

4. T. Hanawa, , Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 267 (1999) 260 –266. doi:10.1016/S0921 -5093(99)00101 -

5. Y.T. Sul, Biomaterials. 24 (2003) 3893 –3907. doi:10.1016/S0142 -9612(03)00261 -8. 

6. M.R. Katunar, A. Gomez Sanchez, A. Santos Coquillat, A. Civantos, E. Martinez Campos, J. 

Ballarre, T. Vico, M. Baca, V. Ramos, S. Cere, , Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 75 (2017) 957 

7. C. Mas -moruno, R. Fraioli, F. Albericio, J. Mar, F.J. Gil, , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 6 

(2014) 6526 –6536. 

8. G. Lucci, C.Battocch io, M.Dettin, F. Ghezzo, G. Polzonetti, Solid State Sci 12 (2010), 1861 -1865. 

9. V. Paredes, E.S alvagni, E. Rodriguez -Castellón, F.J. Gil, J.M. Manero, J Biomed. Mate r. Res. B 

(2015) 103(3):495 -502 .Effect of Specific Cation Adsorption on CO 2 Electroreduction in Ionic 

# Liquids 

Alexander V. Rudnev ,*1,2 Kiran Kiran, 1 Peter Broekmann *1

> 1

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of B ern 

Freiestrasse 3, 3012 Bern, Switzerland 

> 2

Frumkin Institute o f Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences 

Leninskii pr. 31, build ing 4, Moscow, 119 071 Russia 

rudnev@phyche.ac.ru , peter.broekmann@dcb.unibe.ch 

Ionic liquids (ILs) have rec ently gained substantial attention as promising solven ts for the capture and 

sequestration of CO 2 and as reaction medium for its electrochemical conversion into valued -added 

products . It has been reported that ILs can co -catalyze the electrochemical CO 2 re duction reaction 

(CO 2RR), in particular when Ag or Ag -based materials are applied as the primary metallic electrocatalyst 

[1]. Despite several attempts to explain the co -catalytic effect of ILs in CO 2RR, the mechanism is not yet 

fully understood. Recently, the co -catalytic effect was explained by stabilizatio n of CO 2RR intermediate, 

CO 2 radical anion, with IL cations adsorbed on a Ag electrode surface [2]. In order to broaden th is co -

catalysis concept and to develop an in -depth understanding of the co -catalytic action of the IL, we prese nt 

herein a comprehensi ve study on a number of electrode materials (Pt, Pd, Ag, Au, Bi, Pb, Sn, Ni, Mo, Fe, 

Zn, Cu, and glassy carbon) exposed to several ILs, differing in the chemical nature of their anions and 

cations (Fi g. 1) [3]. The activity of the elec trode/IL combinations towards CO 2RR is examined on the 

basis of cyclic voltammetry (CV) data recorded in Ar - (blankets) and CO 2-saturated ILs. The 

voltammetric experiments are further complemented by online gas chromatography analysis of the 

electrolysis p roducts, demonstratin g that CO is the main CO 2RR product for most of the electrode/IL 

combinations chosen. Based on our analysis we identify three major classes of electrode materials 

diffe ring in their synergistic interaction with the IL cations and the in resulting CO 2RR act ivity : (i) non -

active (CO 2RR is negligible in the potential range of IL stability), (ii) moderately active ( CO 2RR is 

hindered and proceeds together with the cathodic degradation of ILs), and (iii) highly active (CO 2RR 

proceeds with nearly 100% faradaic eff iciency) . We also demonstrate that IL cations have a strong effect 

on the CO 2RR overpotential (Fig. 1 a-c, compare data for [BMP][TFSI] and [BMIm][TFSI]). Moreover ,

th e co -catalytic effect depends on the electrode material: [BMIm] + promotes CO 2RR on Ag and Sn more 

than [BMP] +, while the situation is opposite for a Au electrode (Fig. 1a -c). Therefore, co -catalytic effect 

of ILs in CO 2RR is determined by specific IL cation adsorption , and only particular combinations of 

electrode materials and IL cations enhan ce the CO 2RR activity. 

Figure 1 . (Left) Cations and anions of ILs used in this work. (Right) Comparison of the CV fragments in 

CO 2-saturated ILs for the (a) Ag, (b) Sn, and (c) Au electrodes. 

This work was supported by the CTI Swiss Competence Center for Energy Research (SCCER Heat and 

Electricity Storage). A.R. also acknowledges financial support from the Ministry of Science and Higher 

Education of the Russian Federation (Theme no. 00812019 -0003). P.B. acknowledges financial support 

from the Swiss Nat ional Foundation (no. 200020_172507). 

[1] B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi -Khojin, M.R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D.T. Whipple, P.J.A. Kenis, R.I. Masel, 

Science 334 (2011) 643 -64 4.

[2] G. P. S. Lau, M. Schreier, D. Vasilyev, R. Scopelliti, M. Grätzel, P. J. Dyson, J. Am er . Ch em. Soc. 138 

(2 016) 7820 -7823. 

[3] A.V. Rudnev, K. Kiran, P. Broekmann , ChemElectroChem, 7 (2020) 1897 -1903 .Electrochemical sensors for iron detection in artificial water systems 

Muhammad Nabiil Auckburally (a)(b) , Laure Latapie (a) , David Evrard (a) , Christine Roques (a) , Laurent 

Boumati (b) Pierre Gros (a) 

(a) Laboratoire de Génie Chimique, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INP, UPS, Toulouse, France 

(b) Resonet Services, Zone Artisanale Lafourcade, 32200 Gimont 

auckburally@chimie.ups -tlse.fr 

Iron is a very abundant chemical element naturally present in the Earth’s crust [1]. It plays an important 

role and has major effects in environment (like in fresh and sea water), in industry (for instance in corrosion 

problems) or in humans (as it is implied in many biological or metabolic systems). Iron is mainly pres ent 

as ferrous Fe(II) and ferric Fe(III) in aqueous media. However, Fe(II) is spontaneously oxidized in the 

presence of oxygen whereas Fe(III) is weakly soluble and forms stable complexes and precipitates at neutral 

pH [2]. Furthermore, the permissible val ues of iron concentration in drinking water is between 0.3 – 3 mg 

L-1 (i.e. 5.3 10 -6 – 5.3 10 -5 mol L -1). Consequently, the assay of total iron at low concentration as well as the 

determination of iron speciation is of key interest and still represent an a nalytical challenge. 

Many analytical methods have been developed in routine to detect and quantify iron in natural water 

involving chromatography, spectrophotometry, fluorescence, chemiluminescence and so on. However, all 

these techniques are expensive, bulky and time -consuming. Alternatively, electrochemical methods have 

been advantageously considered since they are low -cost, user -friendly, produce results in real time and can 

be used in situ [3 -4]. If polarographic methods are currently not used anymore for evident toxicity reasons, 

mercury -free electrodes techniques based on adsorptive stripping voltammetry have been extensively 

developed these last ten years [5 -6]. Nevertheless, these imply chelating agents including catechol or 

cupferron, thus making the procedure complicated and chemical -consuming. 

In this work reagentless electrochemical sensors have been considered for the detection of Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ .

Two amperometric sensors have been developed based on glassy carbon electrodes modified by depositi on 

of a Nafion® cation exchange resin film containing sulfonic groups. Fe 2+ and/or Fe 3+ were pre -concentrated 

at open circuit conditions during 5-10 minutes, allowing ion exchange with protons. Electrochemical 

detection was then performed by cyclic or square wave voltammetry. In both techniques signals related to 

iron were recorded, the peak currents of which being proportional to Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ concentrations, 

respectively. Satisfactory calibration curves were achieved in the micromolar concentration range when 

analyzes were made in synthetic solutions. Limits of detection down to 0.1 and 0.01 μmol L -1 were reached 

for Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ respectively a nd the sensors exhibited a reproducible response for at least 15 

measurements. Furthermore, accuracy was verified by comparing electrochemical results with ICP -OES 

analyzes. Finally, promising results obtained with real water samples from artificial circui ts will be 

presented. 

[1] S.R. Taylor and al., The Continental Crust. Its composition and Evolution, Blackwell Scientific, Oxford 

1985. 

[2] X.W. Liu and al., Mar. Chem., 2002, 77, 43 -54 

[3] M. Lu and al., Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 1693 –1702 

[4] L.M. Lag lera and D. Monticelli, Curr. Op. Electrochem. , 2017, 3, 123 -129. 

[5] M.M. Abualhaija and al., Mar. Chem., 2014, 164, 60 -74. 

[6] F. Sanvito and al., Electroanalysis, 2019, 31, 212 -216. Pressurized Heterogeneous Electrofenton Reactor for the Treatment of 

# Hospital Effluents 

A. Moratall a1, S. Cotillas 2, E. Lacas a2, S. Ruiz 3, C. Sainz de B ara nda 4, P. Cañizares 1, M.A. 

Rodrigo 1, C. Sáez 1

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering. Faculty of Chemica l Sciences and Technologies University of 

Castilla -La Mancha. Avenida Camilo Jos é Cel a 12,13005. Ciudad Real. Spain 

> 2

Department of Chemical Enginee ring. School of Industrial Engineering. University of Castilla -La 

Mancha. A venida de España S/N, 02071. Alba cete. Spain 

> 3

Pharmacy area . Hospital University Complex of Albacete . C/Hermanos Fa lcó 37, 02006 Albacete, Spain 

> 4

Clinical parasitology and microbiology area . Hospital University Complex of Albacete . C/Hermanos 

Fa lcó 37, 02006 Albacete, Spain 

Salva dor.Cotillas@ uclm.es 

The presence of pharm aceutical compounds in hospital effluents is causing the emergence of bacteria 

res istant to antibiotics. These effluents have low biod egradability making them potent ial pol lutan ts . At 

this point , electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) are an alternative clean and effective 

to conventional processes. Especially, electro -Fenton process has provided promising results for the 

removal of pharmaceuticals compo unds [1 ], which involves the use of hydroxyl radicals to oxidize these 

contaminants . The mechanism of this process consists in -situ hydrogen peroxide el ectrogen eration via 

cathodi c reducti on o f oxygen and the ge neration of OH * via Fenton ´s reaction .

The objective of the present work was the partial eliminat ion of drugs to improve the biodegradability of 

these effluents using a microfluidic flow -through c ell with a pressurized -jet aeration . It was also 

incorporated a fluidized bed of iron particles, to cata lyse the decomposition of H 2O2 into oxidizing 

species . Figure 1 shows an outline of the experimental set -up. Reservoir     

> tank
> VA-+
> Power Supply
> Pump
> Electrochemical
> cell MF -FT
> Liquid
> rotameter
> Jet
> Bed
> of iron
> Gas
> rotameter
> Heat
> Exchanger
> 25 ºC
> Ba r
> Manometer Bar

Figure 1 . Experimental set -up 

Tests were conducted using a 3D -Mixed Metal Ox ide (MMO - IrO 2Ta 2O5) as anode and a 3D titanium 

mesh with a deposit ion of C arbon Black and P FTE as catho de with different current densities (1 mA/cm 2,

5 mA/cm 2 and 10 mA/cm 2) and pressure ranged from 1 to 4 Bar. Previous experiments have shown that 

current density and pressure have an import ant role in the degradation of antibiot ics .

Reference s

[1] Monteil H., Péc haud Y., Ouran N., Oturan M.A. , A review on efficiency and cost effectiveness of 

electro -and bio -electro -Fenton pr ocesses: Aplication to the treatment of pharmaceutical pollutants i n

water, Chemical Engineering Journal, 376 (2019) 119577. 

Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by Junta de Comunidades de Casti lla -La Mancha and European Union 

through the project SBPLY/17/180501/000396 . The Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and 

Universities is also acknowledged for the “Juan de la Cierva -Incorporación” post -doctoral grant 

(IJC2018 -036241 -I) awarded to Dr. Salvador Cotillas. The role of water matrix on the removal of antibiotic -resist ant bacteria 

# by elec troc hemical oxidation 

Miguel Herr aiz-Carboné 1, Salvador Cotillas 1, Engracia Lacasa 1, Caridad Sainz de Baranda 2, Eva 

Riquelme 2, Pablo Ca ñizares 3, Manuel A. Rodrigo 3, Cristina S áez 3

> 1

Department of Chemical Enginee ring. School of Industrial Engineering.  University of Castilla -La 

Mancha. A venida de España S/N, 02071.  Albacete. Spain 

> 2

Clinical parasitology and microbiology area . Hospital University Complex of Albacete . C/Hermanos 

Falcó 37, 02006 Albacete, Spain 

> 3

Department of Chemical Engineering. Faculty of Chemical Sciences and Technologies University of 

Castilla -La Mancha.  Avenida Camilo Jos é Cel a 12,13005. Ciudad Real. Spain 

Salv ador.Cotillas@ uclm.es 

The occurrence of antibiotic -resistant bacteria (ARB) in wastewater has become an important concern for 

today´s society because they are one o f th e main cause s of deaths during the last years . Thi s problem is 

mor e dangerous in sani tary facilities where the concentration of ARB is higher due to the different 

infections of hospitalized pati ents . Specifically, large concentration s of ARB can be fou nd in urine since 

many of them are mainly e xcreted by this way. Theref ore, hospital urine can be considered as a targe t

effluent to treat for the remo val of ARB bef ore its discharge to sewage. In this context, i t is n ece ssary to 

develop environmentally -fri endly and efficient technologies that allow to remove ARB from hos pital 

urines , av oidin g the formation on undes irable disinfe ction by -products (DBPs). One of the t echnologies 

that has been proven efficient for disinfection of urban treated wast ewater is el ectroc hemical oxidation 

[1] . This process consist s of the production of large am ounts of disinfectant species , mainly free and 

com bined chlorine compounds, from the oxidation of the ions natu ra lly found in wastew ater . These 

species at tack the microorganism s pres ent in the effluent , causing their death and guaranteeing a

persi stent disinfection treatment. The process efficiency is clearly affected by the anode material, current 

density and wastewater co mposition. Hence, these are the main o perating paramet er s that should be 

evaluated .

With th is background, the present work aims the app licabilit y of electrochemical oxidation as disinfection 

technology for hospital urines polluted wi th two differ ent types of ARB : Klebsiella pneumoniae (gram -

negative) and Enter ococcu s faecalis (gram -positive ). Boron Doped Diamond (BDD) and Mi xed Metal 

Oxides (MMO) were tested as anode material s during the electrodis infection of hospital urines a t current 

densi ties within the range 5-50 A m-2. Likewise, the removal of ARB with BD D and MMO anodes was 

studied in urban treated wastewater at different current densit ies to evaluate the in fluence of the effluent 

compos ition. Res ults show that it is possible to at tain a complete removal of ARB in both effluents, 

hospital urine and urban treate d wastewater. The disinfection eff icien cy is higher during the process in 

urban tre ated wastewater. This behavior can be explained by the higher organic load of hospi tal urines .

Specifically, this effluent contains not only inorganic i ons and bacteri a but also other organics s uch as 

ure a, creatinine and uric acid in high concentrations . The oxidation of these compounds can comp ete with 

the removal of ARB, decreasing the d isinfection eff icien cy. On the other hand , the formation of DBPs 

was discarded du ri ng t he treatment of hospital urines whereas significant amounts of chlorates were 

detec ted in urban treated wastewater. This can be related to the higher nitrogen content of hospital urines 

that favo rs the production of large concentration s of chlor amine s inst ead the promotion of hypochlorite to 

other haza rdous chlorine compounds in high oxi dation state. These results reveal that it is more 

appropriate to remov e ARB in hospital urine despite the low er efficien cy sin ce it is possible to avoid the 

forma tion of DB Ps. 

References 

[1] N. Gonzalez -Rivas , H. Reyes -Pérez and C.E. Barrera -Díaz . Recent Advances in Water and 

Wastewater Electrodisinfection. ChemElectroChem, 2019. 6(7): p. 1978 -1983. 

Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by Junta de Comunida des de Castil la -La Mancha (JCCM) and European 

Union (European Regional Development Fund) th rough the project SBPLY/17/180501/000396 and the 

grant SBPLY/18/180501/000009 (Miguel Herraiz -Carboné). The Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation 

and Universities is als o ackno wledged for the “Juan de la Cierva -In corporación ” post -doctoral grant 

(IJC2018 -036241 -I) awarded to Dr. Salvador Cotillas. Synthesis and characterization of textile electrodes coated with Pt 

# nanoparticles on electrochemically reduced oxide: treatment of 

# industrial effluents loaded with organic dyes 

Hanene H amous b,Javier Fernández a,José Bonastre a, Aicha K henifi b and  Francisco C ases *a 

> a

Departamento de Ingeniería Textil y Papelera, EPS de Alcoy, Universitat Politècnica de València, Plaza Ferrándiz y 

Carbonell s/n,03801 Alcoy, Spain  

> b

Physical and Chemical Laboratory of Materials, Catalysis and Environment (LPCMCE) Faculty of Che mistry 

University of sciences and technology of Oran ( USTO M -B ), BP 1505 Oran, Algeria 

E-mail : hamous.hanene@yahoo.fr 

Pollution of dyes is a great problem of the environment in many countries and frequently de tected in 

watercourses and groundwater, and may have proven toxicity. The use of textile materials, as substrates 

for electrodes for dye degradation , offers many possibilities due to its mechanical properties, such as 

flexibility, and a high specific area. Moreover, graphene has attracted the attention of researchers due to 

its very high specific surface area (2630 m 2 g-1) and the unique and outstanding mechanical and electrical 

properties [1] . That is why the main objective of this work was to study the be haviour of textile electrodes 

coated with reduced graphene oxide and platinum nanoparticles in the electrochemical treatment of 

wastewater containing dyes [2]. Initially, we determined the adequate experimental conditions to obtain 

thin layers Pt nanopartic les, with good reproducibility of synthesis. The characterizations of material at 

the microscopic scale, using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) and Energy -

dispersive X -ray spectroscopy (EDX) have allowed us to deepen our knowledge on the material before 

his use, and to validate its structural stability after electrochemical treatment. 

The degradation of Orange G dye was studied by anodic oxidation with Pt -RGO using sulphate as 

electrolyte. A significant decrease in total organic carbon (T OC), chemical oxygen demand (COD), and 

total nitrogen (TN) was obtained. The chromatography and the UV -Visible spectrophotometry assays 

indicated that decolourisation is obtained at a loaded charge of around 0.17 Ah L -1 which is associated 

with an electric power consumption of 1.28 kWh m -3. These encouraging results were obtained at very 

low energy costs, allowing us to consider the possible application for wastewater treatments, in addition 

to existing treatments or directly to the source of pollution. The influence of the presence of chloride in 

solutions has been also studied. 

Keywords: Dyes, Pt nanoparticles, textile materials; degradation, anodic oxidation 

References: 

(1) J.Molina ; J.Fernandez .;  A.I del Rio .;  J.Bonastre .;  F.Cases. Materials Characterization .2014,56 -58,57. 

(2) A.I del Rio .;  C.Garcia .; J Molina.;  J.Fernandez .; J.Bonastre.; F.  Cases. Chemosphere 2017,242 -250, 

244. 

Acknowledgements: Financial support from Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI) and 

European Union (FEDER funds) for the financi al support (contract MAT2016 -77742 -C2 -1-P) and 

Excellence Network E3TECH under project CTQ2017 -90659 -REDT (MINECO, Spain) are 

acknowledged. Reaction Mechanism Investigation of Orthorhombic V 2O5 as Positive 

# Electrode Material for Aqueous Rechargeable Zinc Batteries 

Qiang Fu a,* , Jiaqi Wang a, Angelina Sarapulova a, Lihua Zhu a, Alexander Missyul c, Edmund Welter d,

Xianlin Luo a, Michael Knapp a,b , Hel mut Ehrenberg a,b , Sonia Dsoke a,b 

> a

Institute for Applied Materials (IAM), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann -von -

Helmholtz -Platz 1, D -76344 Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany. bHelmholtz Institute Ulm for 

Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. cCELLS -ALBA 

Synchrotron, E -08290 Cerdanyola del Valles, Barcelona, Spain. dDeutsches Elektronen -Synchrotron 

DESY, Notkestraße 85, D -22607 Hamburg, Germany .

Email:  qiang.fu@kit .edu  (Q. Fu) 

Recently, aqueous rechargeable zinc batteries (ARZBs) have received much attention for application 

in large scale energy storage thanks to their advantages, such as low cost, sufficient abundance , and high 

safety 1-2. Aqueous electrolytes have higher ionic conductivity (up to 1 S cm -1) than that of non -aqueous 

electrolytes, resulting in a higher rate capability and lower activa tion energy for charge transfer 1.

Meanwhile, the u sage of aqueous electrolytes can reduce t he  manufacturing costs of  ARZBs  due to the ir 

properties  such as non -toxic, inflammable, and non -strict humidity control 3-4. Moreover, Zn has a high 

specific capacity (820 mAh g -1) and high volumetric capacity (5854 mAh cm -3), making it promising as a 

negative electrode. Thanks to its high potential ( -0.76 V vs. SHE) , it can be directly used as a negative 

electrode in aqueous -based electrolytes. However, the lack of high -performance positive electrode 

materials and t he heavy mass an d large polarization of Zn 2+ hinder the practical applications of ARZBs. 

V2O5 is considered a promising positive electrode for ARZBs due to its typical layered structu re and 

relatively high capacity . De spite its good electrochemical perfor mance, the structural changes of V 2O5

during electrochemical processes are still in debate. Three different viewpoints regarding the structural 

changes of V 2O5 in ARZBs have been proposed so far: (i) Zhou et al. 5 reported the formation of a new 

phase Zn xV2O5 upon Zn insertion into V 2O5 via ex situ XRD. (ii) Zhang et al. 6 proposed t he co -

intercalation of hydrated Zn ions into V 2O5 crystal structure based on the ex situ XRD, XPS, and TEM 

experiments. (iii) Chen et al. 7 reported that o rthorhombic V 2O5 underwent a phase transition to zinc 

pyrovanadate during the first discharge via ex situ XRD, Raman, and XPS. However, the electrochemical 

reaction mechanism of V 2O5 in the above -reported works was i nvestigated through ex situ techniques. The 

findings are in co ntroversy with each other and detailed structural changes of V 2O5 upon Zn -ion 

insertion/extraction are still missing. Moreover, non -equilibrium or intermediate species /states cannot be 

detected using ex situ studies while in operando studies can provide a more reliable understanding of the 

structural evolution of a battery material in “real time”. 0 100 200 300 400      

> 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
> 020 40 60 80 100
> 0100 200 300 400
> Potential / V Zn 2+ /Zn
> Specific capacity / mAh g -1
> 1st 2nd 5th
> (a)
> 50 mAg -1
> discharge at 50 mA g -1
> charge at 50 mA g -1
> discharge at 200 mA g -1
> charge at 200 mA g -1
> Specific capacity / mAh g -1
> Cycle number (b)

Figure 1 Discharge -charge profiles (a) and cycling performance (b) of V2O5 nanowires in 1 M ZnSO 4

Besides , it has been frequently reported that a mass of complex byproducts was 

produced/decomposed during the cycling of vanadium oxides in ARZBs . Interestingly, byproducts were 

not observed in the three works related to the study of V2O5 reported above. To better understand the 

electrochemical mechanism of V 2O5 in ARZBs, in operando synchrotron characterizations are required. 

In the present work , orthorhombic V 2O5 was prepared by a simple hydrothermal method . V2O5 nanowires 

exhibit an initial discharge and charge capacity of 277 and 432 mAh g -1, respectively, at a current density 

of 50 mA g -1 (Figure 1 ). V 2O5 undergoes quick capacity fading during cycling under both 50 mA g -1 and 

200 mA g -1 current densities. The detailed structure evolution and reaction mechanism of V 2O5 in ARZBs 

are studied via in operando synchrotron diffraction and X -ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) together 

with ex situ Raman and X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 

References : [1] Kim, H . et al ., Chemical Reviews 2014, 114 (23), 11788 -11827. [2] Wan, F. et al ., 

Nature communications 2018, 9 (1), 1656. [3] Song, M. et al ., Advanced Functional Materials 2018, 28 

(41), 1802564. [4] Xu, C. et al ., Angewandte Chemie 2012, 51 (4), 933 -5. [5] Zh ou, J. et al ., Chemical 

communications 2018, 54 (35), 4457 -4460. [6] Zhang, N. et al ., ACS Energy Letters 2018, 3 (6), 1366 -

1372. [7] Chen, X. et al ., Journal of Energy Chemistry 2019, 38 , 20 -25. N-doped Porous Carbons Derived from Tofu Solid Waste as 

# Composite Electrodes for Lithium Sulfur Battery 

Arenst Andreas Arie 1*, Hans Kristianto 1, Ratna Frida Susanti 1, and Joong Kee Lee 2

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Industrial Technolog y, Parahyangan Catholic 

University, Ciumbuleuit 94 Bandung 40141 , Indonesia 

> 2

Advanced Materials Energy Processing Laboratory, Center of Energy Convergence, Korea Institute of 

Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea 

*Corresponding Author: Dr. A.A. Arie, E -mail:  arenst@unpar.ac.id 

Actually, lithium sulfur (LiS) battery system is quite old battery technology since it has been studied since 

the 1960s. In addition, as a raw material, sulfur is very abunda nt and environmentally friendly, so it can 

offer economic benefits in the production cost of Li -S batteries. However, the problems in Li -S battery 

are very complex mainly due to poor kinetic properties, large volume expansions and dissolution of 

polysulfid es into the electroylte made by aprotic solvent. All of these problems have caused a poor cycle 

properties and very severe capacity fading in Li -S battery. There are a lot of efforts devoted to enhance 

the performance of Li -S batteries, includes those are focusing on the sulfur cathodes, lithium anodes, new 

electrolytes and binders. In terms of the sulfur cathodes, many attempts have been proposed to enhance 

their electrochemical properties (discharge capacity, rate and cycling capabilities, and Coulombic 

efficiency) with the addition of heterogeneous materials. One of the most promising materials is the 

nanostructured carbons such as porous carbon, carbon nanotube or graphene. The nanostructured carbons 

own some remarkable chemical and physical properties which can contribute to the improved 

perfor mance of sulfur cathodes in LiS battery system. Those kinds of properties include a highly porous 

structures provides a high surface area and pores for encapsulation of sulfur, a high electrical 

conductivity, goo d mechanical strength a nd an excellent inert property . N-doped porous carbon with high 

surface area, high nitrogen content and well connected porous structure has been synthesized from tofu 

waste by using hydrothermal carbonization and activation method. D ue to the mesoporous structure, the 

carbon product has high surface area of large pore volume of 1.47 cm3 g −1 and mesoporous volume of 

0.95 cm 3 g −1 . Attributed to the simultaneous effect of the mesoporous structure, high surface area and 

high nitrogen content ratio, the obtained porous carbon exhibits show excellent performance when used as 

composite cathodes along with sulfur for LiS battery. The carbon -sulfur composite was prepared by a 

melt diffusion method. The sulfur content in the composite was about 53.8 wt %, when utilized as cathode 

for LiS battery, the carbon -sulfur composite performs a high initial sp ecific capacity of 1125 mAh·g −1 as 

well as 707 mAh·g −1 after 200 cycles at a current rate of 0.2 C. Preparation of Microalgae Based Hard Carbons 

# as Anode Materials for Sodium Ion Battery 

Arenst Andreas Arie 1*, Angela Justina Kumalaputri 1, Livia Nathania 1, Henky Muljana 1 and Lorenzo 

Stievano 2

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Industrial T echnology, Parahyangan Catholic 

University, Ciumbuleuit 94 Bandung 40141 , Indonesia 

> 2

Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier, Univ. Montpellier, CNRS, 34090 Montpellier, France 

*Corresponding Author: Dr. A.A. Arie, E -mail:  arenst@unpar.ac.id 

In recent years, sodium -ion batteries (SIBs) have emerged as promising candidate to replace lithium -ion 

batteries due to the low cost and high abundance of sodium (Na). The SIBs performance is essentially 

determined by the e lectrode materials applied. Hard carbon is a type of carbon that is relatively difficult 

to be graphitized and usually is synthesized from pyrolysis of polymer’s precursors such as phenolic 

resins or epoxy resins. Hard carbon is highly irregular and disord ered, and primarily consists of single -

layered carbon atoms that are closely and randomly connected. Hard carbon is one component that plays 

an important role as an anode material in sodium -ion batteries. In this work, one of microalagae species, 

namely Ch lorella pyrenoidosa was used to prepare hard carbons by using hydrothermal carbonizations 

and pyrolysis. The hydrothermal carbonization process was conducted in the autoclave at temperature of 

200 ℃ for 24 hours. The obtained hydrochars were subjected to the pyrolysis process at pyrolysis 

temperature of 900 ℃. The physical characterizations of hard carbons were done by Scanni ng Electron 

Microscope (SEM) and X -Ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis. The as -obtained hard carbons were then used 

as anode materials for SIBs. Hard carbon can deliver the highest reversible capacity of 228 mAh g −1 , and 

show the high capacity retention of 95% at the current density of 100 mA g -1 after 100 cycles .Electron Transfer and Ion Transport within Attoliter -Volume 

# Nanopore Electrode Arrays 

## Kaiyu Fu 1,2 , Seung -Ryong Kwon 3, Donghoon Han 4, Paul W. Bohn 3,5

> 1

## Department of Electrical Engineering , Stanford University , Stanford , CA, 94305, USA 

> 2

## Department of Radio logy, Stanford University , Stanford , CA, 94305, US A

> 3

## Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame, 

## Notre Dame, IN , 46556 , USA 

> 4

## Department of Chemistry, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Gyeonggi -do 

## 14662 , Republic of Korea 

> 5

## Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, 

## IN , 46556 , USA 

## kaiyufu @stanford .edu 

## Single entity electrochemistry, a rapidly developing field that tackles one of the most 

## urging questions on the boundaries of m odern electroanalytical me thods and related 

## disciplines. To effectively implement the single entity detection, the prior task for 

## instrumentation is to fabricate electrode with a comparable size of a single entity that 

## captures small signals with enough te mporal and spatial resolut ion at a reasonable cost. 

## Nanopore electrode, as a widely used nanoelectrode, not only addresses how electron 

## transfer and ion transport in confined volumes, also seeks to understand how ultrasmall 

## volumes impact electrochemical d etection. Over the past ye ars, we have observed and 

## described several unusual effects enabled by working in confined volumes. In this 

## presentation, I will describe a novel nanoelectrode developed by our group, viz. 

## nanopore electrode arrays (NEAs). I will begin by discussing the de sign flow of NEAs 

## and the critical points for the device fabrication and post -processing. Then, I will 

## present studies showing significant signal amplification from highly efficient redox 

## cycling and additional sensitivity and sel ectivity that arise from t he migration -induced 

## ion accumulation. Lastly, I will highlight practical applications using NEAs, including 

## in situ molecular separation and detection with external stimuli, redox -based 

## electrochemical rectification in individual ly encapsulated nanopores, and coupled 

## sorters and analyzers for nanoparticles. These examples should provide significant 

## motivation for listeners to pursue work in the area of nanoscale electrochemistry. Electrodeposition of Rare Earth Metals and Their Alloys from a 

# Dicyanamide Ionic Liquid 

A.V. Rudnev , E.B. Molodkina, M.R. Ehrenburg 

Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences 

Leninskii pr. 31, build ing 4, Moscow, 119 071 Russia 

rudnev@phyche.ac.ru 

Rare -earth elements (REEs) are one of the most important raw materials and are of great importance for 

the modern high -tech industry [1] . Low -temperature electrochemical deposition of REE -co ntaining 

materials for the purpose of recycling and obtaining functional materials can provide a real alternative to 

the currently used high -temperature processes of molten salt electrolysis. The growing interest in ionic 

liquids (IL s) as media for electrochemical deposition of metals and semiconductors is due to their 

excellent physicochemical properties, including non -volatility, intr insic conductivity, thermal and 

electrochemical stability [2] . The possibility of electrodeposition from IL -based solutions was 

demonstrated for various meta ls and semiconductors from the first to sixteenth groups of the periodic 

table [2] . However, studies on electrodeposition of REEs from ILs are scarce . Here, we pre sent the 

investigation of electrochemical deposition of some chosen REEs in the 1-butyl -1-met hylpyrrolidinium 

dicyanamide IL ([BMP][DCA]) at room temperature. Analysis of literature data shows that the 

dicyanamide ILs can be a proper choice as a medium for lanthanide deposition due to their relatively low 

viscosity (for [BMP][DCA], 50 mPa s at 293 K [3] ) and good solubilizing ability [3] . The 

electrodeposition of REEs is studied on different si ngle crystal electrodes with a controlled surface 

structure (Pt(111), Au(111), HOPG) as well as on a polished glassy carbon electrode. Cyclic voltammetry 

and chronoamperometry in the absence and presence of REE ions are used to identify REE -rel ated 

electrochemical processes, while atomic force microscopy (AFM) is employed to characterize the deposit 

morphology obtained after potentiostatic polarization of the working electrodes. The voltammetric results 

demonstrate clear reduction of REEs at pot entials more positive than reductive degradation of the IL (see 

the data for Eu deposition on Pt(111) in Fig. 1a). The AFM data confirm the REE deposition and reveal a

strong dependence of deposit morphology on the substrate material and el ectrode potential, at which the 

deposit is formed (Fig. 1b -d). We also use the obtained data as a basis for studies on electrochemical 

deposition of REE –transition metal (TM) alloys fro m the dicyanamide ILs. As demonstrated in literature 

[4] , TM with a more positive reduction potential can induce REE co -deposition with its reduction onset 

shifted to less negative potentials .

Figure 1. (a) Cyclic voltammogram s of Pt(111) in pure [BMP][DCA] and in the presence of 1 0 mM 

Eu(OTf) 3. (b -d) AFM images of Eu deposits formed at different potent ials: (b) -1.0 V, (c) -1.5 V, (d) -2.0 

V) for 1200 s . The morphology changes from quasi -2D triangular or hexagonal islands to a compact 

granular deposit, depending on the overpotential .

The work was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (projects nos. 20 -53 -10007 -KO_a, 

20 -03 -00612_a). 

[1] S.V. Eliseeva, J. -C.G. Bünzli, New J. Chem., 35 (2011) 1165 -1176. 

[2] F. Endr es, A. Abbott, D. MacFarlane, Electrodeposition from Ionic Liquids, Wiley -VCH Verlag 

GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2017. 

[3] D.R. MacFarlane, S.A. Forsyth, J. Golding, G.B. Deacon, Green Chemistry, 4 (2002) 444 -448. 

[4] X. Xu, S. Sturm, J. Zavasnik, K.Z. Rozman, ChemEl ectroChem, 6 (2019) 2860 -2869. Unravelling the Capacity Fading Enigma of Spinel Li xMn 2-yTi yO4 by 

# using Distribution of Relaxation Times (DRT) 

Franky Bedoya -Lora , Nerly Mosquera , Victoria Vásquez , Ferley A. Vásquez, Jorge A. Calderón 

Centro de Investigación, Innovación y Desarrollo de M ateriales – CIDEMAT, Univers idad de Antioquia 

Cr. 53 No 61 – 30, Torre 2, Lab. 330, Medellín, Colombia 

franky.bedoya@udea.edu.co 

The demand for high capacity and inexpensive batteries is increasing rapidly with the upcoming energetic 

needs of an ever -incr easing population, especially in the transportation sector. Spinel -type Li xMn 2-yTi yO4

cathode materials have been proposed as an alternative to the more expensive and toxic Li CoO 2 for Li -ion 

batteries [1] ; however, stability issues persist [2] and the inte raction between the activ e m ater ial an d

electro lyte at potential s below 3 V vs. Li|Li + is still a matter of discussion . We prese nt an anal ysis of 

elect rochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS ) using distribution o f rela xation times (DRT ) [3] as a 

method to reveal new insights regarding the capacity fading of Li xMn 2-yTi yO4 cathode materials. 

A facile and improved sol -gel method was used to synthesised optimised Li xMn 2-yTi yO4 while 

maintaining nanostructured features. The stoichiometry LiMn 1.8 Ti 0.2 O4 exhibite d the best initial specific 

capacity (215 mAh g -1) at 30.8 mA g -1 in a cycling window po tential of 4.6 – 2.0 V vs. Li|Li +. The 

incorporation of Ti increased the number of Li + diffusion pathways in the structure ; adding Ti to replace a 

‘y’ amount of Mn in t he spinel, i.e. Li xMn 2-yTi yO4 improves the specific capacity of the cathode materials 

by allowing both transitions , Mn 4+ |Mn 3+ and Mn 3+ |Mn 2+ , to take place [1] .

The effect of Ti incorporation and the underlying degrad ation processes during cycling were st udied by 

cyclic voltammetry, cycling and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), the latter was analysed 

by widely used equivalent electrical circuit and the more recent method of distribution of time constants 

(DRT) , see Fig . 1. Cathode materials we re also characterised at different cycling stages by XRD, 

Synchrotron XRD and SEM. Additionally, cathode materials were characterised by XPS, Raman and 

BET surface area. The results showed a clear indication of undesired st ructure modifications when the 

tr ansition Mn 3+ |Mn 2+ occurs, i.e. characteristic feature of topotactic two -phase reaction, and formation of 

irreversible tetragonal phase of the spinel which increases the charge transfer resistances at the active 

material | electrolyte interface. The presen ce of Ti did not inhibit completely undesired structure 

transformation s, even after several strategies were implemented, e.g. addition of HF scavengers, different 

calcination temperatures and active material:binder ratios.  A comparison between equivalent e lectrical 

circuit and DRT analysis is also presented. The investigation here offers a b etter understanding of the 

cathode materials and their correlations with electrochemical properties , which are of utmost i mportance 

for future researches on reaction kin etics and Li + transfer mechanisms in Li -ion bat teries .

Fig . 1. (a) Nyquist plot of impedance spectra of LiMn 1.8 Ti 0.2 O4 | 1.2 M LiPF 6 EC:DMC 1:2 | Li recorded 

at 4.0 V vs. Li|Li + after 30 cycles through a window potential of 4.6 – 2.0 V vs. Li|Li +, (b) Computed 

DRT spectra and respective deconvoluted pea ks. 

Reference s:

[1] B. Yinhua, Z. Xingyu, Z. Xu, J. Power Sources, 321 (2016) 120 –125. 

[2] S. Wang, et al. , J. Power Sources, 245 (2014) 570 -578. 

[3] J. Sch midt , et al. J. Power S ources. 196 (2011) 5342 –5348 Theoretical Analysis of the Oxygen Reduction Reaction Limited by 

# Surface Diffusion at a Rotating Ring -Disk Electrode 

Antonio M. Chaparro 

Dep. of Energy, CIEMAT 

Avda.  Complutense, 40, 28040, Madrid, Spain 

antonio.mchaparro@ciemat.es 

The oxygen reduction r eaction (orr) is the limiting process for power production in many electrochemical 

devices, like proton exchange membrane fuel cells and metal -air batteries. High orr rate s in these devices 

can be attained with high active area cathodes based on catalyst nano particles supported i n a porous 

matrix . In the ir reaction path, o xygen molecules diffuse in the gas and electrolyte phases until they arrive 

at the pores walls where they may interact with an active catalyst center or an inactive site . In the second 

cas e, orr may proceed either by successive desorption/adsorption steps until arriving at a catalyst center, 

or by surface diffusion towards a nearby catalyst site . The later may be the principal path w ith a low 

density of catalyst sites and sufficient surface diffusivity. 

In this communication, a previously developed surface diffusion model [1] [2] [3] [4] is applied to the orr at 

a dispersion of catalyst centers. The orr mechanism is depicted in Fig. 1a. The oxygen molecule adsorbs 

reversibly ( k1, k2) on the supporting area by electrochemical or chemical reaction, wher e it may be 

partially reduced to hydrogen peroxide ( ki), or diffuse towards a catalyst center for complete reduction. 

Fig. 1. a) Scheme of the orr mechanism mediated by surface diffusion. b) Disk current and c) ring current 

densities for orr on a dispersi on of catalyst centers, under surface diffusion limitation , at four surface 

diffusivities. Inset in c: diffusion length as a function of overpotential ( 

). Overpotential s in b and c are 

referred to the electrosorption /desorption potential. 

The model provi des analytical expressions for the currents at a rotating ring -disk electrode, including disk 

(Fig. 1b) and ring (Fig. 1c) current densities as a function of surface diffusivity and parameters of the 

catalyst dispersion . Surface diffusivity is characterize d by a diffusion length ( 

s), which depends on 

reactivity and overpotential (Fig. 1c, inset). The disk current may show a slope at high overpotential 

and/ or a peak when maximal surface diffusivity is attained (F ig. 1b ). Low surface diffusivity increases 

hydrogen peroxide reaction probability as observed in the ring (Fig. 1c). The analytical model show s how 

the efficiency of an electrode improves by increasing the surface diffusivity over supporting area s, which 

has high technological interest in the search for low catalyst loading electrodes. 

References 

[1] A.J. Martín, A.M. Chaparro, M.A. Folgado, J. Rubio, L. Daza, Rotating disk electrode analysis of 

oxygen reduction at platinum particles under limiting diffusion conditions, Electro chim. Acta. 54 

(2009) 2209 –2217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2008.10.036. 

[2] A.M. Chaparro, Study of spillover effects with the rotating disk electrode, Electrochim. Acta. 58 

(2011) 691 –698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2011.10.013. 

[3] A.M . Chaparro, Analysis of the Steady State and Transient Currents for a Rotating Disk Electrode 

under Surface Diffusion Limitation, J. Electrochem. Soc. 161 (2014) E3078 –E3085. 

https://doi.org/10.1149/2.012408jes. 

[4] A.M. Chaparro, Current at a Rotating Dis k Electrode under Electrosorption and Surface Diffusion 

Limitation, J. Electrochem. Soc. 164 (2017) E3522 –E3530. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0491711jes. 

## a) b) c) Tuning Of Photoelectrochemical Activity of Nanostructured W O3

# Films Through Modification of Sol -Gel Synthesis Procedure 

M. Parvin, M. Petrulevičienė, I. Savickaja, B. Šebeka, A. Naujokaitis, V. Pakštas, J. Juodkazytė 

Center for Physical Sciences and Tech nology (FTMC) 

Saulėtekio av. 3, Vilnius 10257, Lithuania 

jurga.juodkazyte@ftmc.lt 

Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is considered as one of the most promising technologies in 

clean and renewable energy production. Numerous semiconductor material s have been intensively studied 

as photoelectrodes in PEC systems. Among them tungsten trioxide (WO 3) nanomaterials have received 

considerable attention due to the ability of capturing 12% of the solar illumination , band gap energy of 

around 2.5 -2.7 eV, hi gh crystallinity, moderate hole diffusion length, good chemical stabilit y, low cost 

and low toxicity [1 ]. 

In this study, nanostructured layers of WO 3 on fluorine -doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate were formed by 

sol -gel method. Six different reductants were used to investigate their influence on photoelectrochemical 

activity and properties of WO 3 photoanodes. Peroxytungstic acid was synthesized using sodium tungstate 

(Na 2WO 4 x 2H 2O), HCl and H 2O2 as precursors and (NH 4)2C2O4 as capping agent. Subsequently, 

methanol, ethanol, propanol, isopropanol, butanol or acetic acid was added separately as reductant, which 

slowly and controllably reduced peroxotungstates to form uniform and ordered WO 3.H2O films on FTO 

under soft water bath conditions at 85 oC. After coati ng procedure, samples were annealed at 500 °C for 

2 h with heating rate of 1°C/min to obtain a crystalline nanostructured WO 3 films and to remove residual 

carbon.  The crystallographic structure of the calcined  WO 3 films was characterized by X -ray diffra ction 

(XRD)  and photoelectrochemical behaviour of the samples was investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) 

(Fig. 1). 20 30 40 50                            

> *
> Relative intensity (a.u) 2()
> Propanol Butanol Acetic Acid Isopropanol Methanol Ethanol Propanol
> *(002) *(020) *(200) *(120) *(112) *(022) *(202) *(212) *(222) *(123) *(312) *(004) *(040) *(223) *(124) *(214)
> **
> *
> *** ***** * ** * ****************** *********** ** ****************** * **** ****** * * **

a) 1 Isopropanol 2 Ethanol 3 Butanol 4 Propanol 5 Methanol 6 Acetic Acid            

> -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
> i(mA/cm 2)E(V),Ag/AgCl 123456

b) 

Fig. 1. a) XRD spectra of sol -gel derived WO 3 films formed using different reductants, b) cyclic 

voltammograms of the same films in 0.5 M H 2SO 4 solution, 50 mV s -1, illumination P ~ 100 mW cm -2

Fig.1 a shows the XRD patterns of WO 3 samples formed using six different reductants. Films formed with 

isopropanol  have the most intensive peaks in the whole range of  which is attributed to the h ighest 

crystallinity . Cyclic voltammograms of  FTO/WO 3 photoanodes recorded in 0.5 M H2SO 4 under 

illumination represent typical response of WO 3. Using isopropanol as a reductant in the reported synthesis 

has been found to be the most effective route to incr ease the photoelectrochemical activity of WO 3

photoanodes, as these films  showed the highest photocurrent density at 1.8 V (Fig. 1b). 

Photoelectrochemical activity of FTO/WO 3 electrodes prepared with six different reductants decreased in 

the following order: isopropanol > ethanol > butanol > propanol > methanol > acetic acid.  Correlation 

between PEC activity and morphology, structure, phase composition of sol -gel derived WO 3 films will be 

discussed at the conference. 

Referenc es 

1. J. Joy, J. Mathew, and S. C. George, Nanomaterials for photoelectrochemical water splitting –review, 

Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 43 , 4804 -4817 (2018). Interactions between Oligonucleotides and Daunorubicin , Doxorubicin 

# and Their Formamidino Derivatives Studied by Volta mmetric and 

# Spectrometric Methods 

Adriana Pali ńska -Saadi 1, Magdalena Łukasiewicz 2, Iva Marinović 1,2 , Magdalena Maj -Żurawska 1,2 *

> 1

Biologi cal and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02 -089 

Warszawa, Poland 

> 2

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland 

* e-mail:  mmajzur@chem.uw.edu. pl , phone number: +48 22 5526 634 

Anthracyclines, such as d oxorubicin (DOX) and d aunorubicin (DAU) , are anticancer drugs widely 

applied in therapy because of their cytostatic and cytotoxic activity [1,2]. Although they are very useful in 

chemotherapy, the y reveal high toxicity inducing i.e. cardiac effects, gastrointestinal and hepatic effects, 

as well as bone marrow suppression and secondary malignancies [3]. For these reasons, seeking novel 

compounds with better biological properties is extremely importa nt .

A new group of anthracycline derivatives has been synthesized [4,5]. In obtained formamidino 

anthracycline derivatives, the –NH 2 group in the daunosamine moiety was replaced by the amidine group 

(–N=CH –NR 1R2) containing the rest of cyclic secondary am ine ( –NR 1R2), a rest of morpholine or 

hexamethyleneimine . The first part of our studies on novel derivatives of anthracyclines have shown that 

daunorubicin and its two formamidino derivatives interacts differently with DNA chains containing GC 

and AT base pairs [6]. However, we have broadened our researches including doxorubicin and its 

derivatives , as well as using other spectrometric methods. 

The purpose of the presented work was to investigate the interactions of DAU, DOX and it s formamidino 

derivatives with oligonucleotides using voltammetric and spectrometric m ethods. The y were investigated 

by monitoring changes in the UV -Vis and the Circular Dichroism spectra of the anthracyclines interacting 

with oligonucleotides in the solution, as well as by monito ring the changes in redox properties of 

oligonucleotides interacting with anthracyclines on the surface of screen -printed graphite electrodes by 

square wave voltammetry (SWV). 

Our o bserv ations point to changes in DNA conformation caused by its interactio ns with anthracyclines 

and to dependence of these interactions mainly on two factors: the DNA sequence and the detailed 

structure of the daunosamine moiety of anthracycline. The influence of these factors on the interactions is 

discussed. 

[1] D.A. Gewirt z, A critical evaluation of the mechanisms of action proposed for the antitumour effects of 

the anthracycline atibiotics adriamycin and daunorubicin. Biochemical Pharmacology 1999, 57 , 727 -741. 

[2] J.A.P. Piedade, I.R. Fernandes, A.M. Oliveira -Brett, Elect rochemical sensing of DNA -adriamycin 

interactions. Bioelectrochemistry 2002, 56 , 81 -83. 

[3] D.S. Richardson, S.A. Johnson, Anthracyclines in hematology: preclinical studies, toxicity and 

delivery systems, Blood Rev. 1997, 11, 201 –223. 

[4] I. Oszczapowicz, J. Grodner, H. Glazman -Kusnierczyk, C. Radzikowski, A. Opolski, New derivatives 

of daunorubicin, the method of their synthesis and containing them pharmaceuticals, Polish Patent 

Application (1997) No. 186762. 

[5] I. Oszczapowicz, M. Wasowska, J. Oszczapowi cz, E. Dominiczak, A. Opolski, J. Wietrzyk, New 

derivatives of anthracyclines antibiotics, method of their synthesis and containing them pharmaceuticals, 

Polish Patent Application (2005) No. 381367. 

[6] A. Palinska -Saadi, M. Lukas iewicz, J. Oszczapowicz, M. Lukawska, I. Oszczapowicz, E. 

Zwierkowska, S. Achmatowicz, M. Maj -Zurawska, Voltammetric and Spectrophotometric Studies on 

DNA Interacting with Daunorubicin and its Amidino Derivatives. Electronalysis 2017, 29 , 172 -181. Development of Acid -Base Flow Batteries for Renewable Energy 

# Storage: Reversible Bipolar Membrane Electrodialysis 

Constanza Bueno ,1 Luis F . Arenas ,1, 2 Georgina Blass ,1 Mario R. Díaz ,1 Joseph J. H. Pijpers 1

1. - Department of Materials and Chemical Processes, National Institute of Electricity and Clean Energy ,

Re forma 113, Cuernavaca, 62490, Mexico. 

2. - Electrochemical Engineering Laboratory, Energy Technology Group, Faculty of Engineering and 

Physical Sciences, University of Southampton, SO 17 1BJ, United Kingdom. 

constanzabuenog@outlook.com 

Acid -base flow batteries (ABFBs)  are receiving increasing attention due to their promising advantages for 

low -cost, utility -scale energy storage [1].  By using bipolar membrane s in addition to cationic and anionic 

membranes, the concentration gradient across the key boundary can be increased, providing higher voltages 

than conventional reverse electrodialysis systems using  concentrate and dilute water streams. During the 

charge p rocess, water is dissociated into an acid and a base at the bipolar membrane . During discharge, a 

spontan eous neutralization takes place, generating electricity as a result of ionic transport processes . ABFBs 

use extremely low -cost and abundant reactants a nd the cell stacks have no bipolar electrodes (in contrast to 

redox flow batteries) , but instead mesh separators and two monopolar electrodes [2]. ABFBs are closed 

systems, recirculating the electrolytes between their respective tanks and the stack s. As a result, the purity 

of the solutions can be guaranteed, eliminating problems such as ‘up -hill transport’ and biological fouling. 

The main challenges consist in the development of cost -effective membranes with very high selectivity in 

order to prevent capacity loss [3], and in the substitution of the inefficient water electrolysis taking place at 

the electrodes with the interconversio n of fully reversible redox species. 

Figur e 1. ABFB based on bipolar e lectrodialysis . a) Experimental arrangement with a 100 cm 2 cell and 

Luggin capillaries. b) Potential difference across an individual bipolar membrane during charge and 

discharge. c) Conductivity vs. time of the acid, alkaline, saline and rinse electrolytes during charge. 

This work describes the advances made at t he National Institute of Electricity and Clean Energy (INEEL) 

towards the development of ABFBs. As shown in Fig . 1a), an ex perimental arrangement with 5 L tank 

capacity per electrolyte controlled by a 30 A battery analyzer has been established for the study of individual 

membranes, unit cells and stacks . Performance and efficiency has been studied by OCP monitoring ,

polarization curves and by the measurement of conductivity and concentration of the electrolites during 

charge and discharge; see Fig . 1b ). and Fig. 1c ). Cross -over of ionic species and pressure drop over the 

mesh spacers have been also studied [4] , with m ore advanced electrode and stack designs on the work. 

References 

[1] J. Xia, G. Eigenberger, H. Strathmann , U. Nieken  (2018). Flow battery based on reverse electrodialysis 

with bipolar membranes: Single cell experiments. Journal of Membrane Science , 565: 157 -168. 

[2] L.F. Arenas , C. Ponce de León, F.C. Walsh (2020 ) The versatile plane parallel electrode geometry: An 

illust rated review. Journal of the Electrochem ical Soc iety, 167(2):023504. 

[3] J. Xia,  G. Eigenberger, H. Strathmann , U. Nieken  (2020). Acid -base flow battery based on reverse 

electrodialysis with bi -polar membranes: Stack e xperiments. Processes , 8(1): 1-14. 

[4] M.R. Cruz , G. Aparicio, F.A. Rodríguez, L.F. Arenas, J. J.H. Pijpers, E.P. Rivero. CFD modeling of 

residence time distribution in mesh spacers for electrodialysis -based energy storage, in progress. Thickness Uniformity of Nickel Coatings Deposited on Mild Steel from 

# a Watts Bath Using a Tailored 3D Printed Flow Cell 

Luis Fernando Arenas ,1 Nan Zhou, 1 Tzayam Pérez, 2 José Luis Nava, 3 Carlos Ponce de León 1

1. Electrochemical Engineering Laboratory, Energy Technology Group, Faculty of Engineering 

and Physical Sciences, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom .

2. Departamento de Ingeniería Química, División de Ciencias Naturales y Exactas, Universidad de 

Guanajuato, Noria Alta S/N, C.P 36050 , México 

3. Departamento de Ingeniería Geomá tica e Hidráulica , Universidad de Guanajuato, Av. Juárez 

77, Zona Centro, Guanajuato, C.P. 36000 , México. 

lfam1c17@soton.ac.uk 

Electrochemical flow cells provide a well -defined experimental environment for applied electroc hemistry ,

given the possibility of controlling both current/potential distribution and mass transfer conditions [1]. 

Recent ly, innovative use s of these cells beyond the classical conversion of ions in solution have been 

proposed, involving novel design -opt imization processes [2], and the electrodeposition of composite 

coatings in tailor -made flow cells [3 ]. Nickel coatings prepared by electrodeposition are of paramount 

importance in many technical applications. Given the two -phase composition of nickel bath s for 

composite coatings and the need to achieve a high dispersion of particles, it is desirable to produce the 

coatings under reproducible hydrodynamic conditions and current/potential distributions [4]. 

Fig. 1. Ni coatings produced on mild steel using a 3D -printed flow cell with a controlled hydrodynamic 

environment. a) 3D -printed frame and turbulence promoter. b) Components of the cathodic half -cell, 

showing a mild steel electrode. c) C oating thickness at the cathode surface for two current density va lues. 

This work presents an analysis of the thickness uniformity of nickel coatings produced on mild steel 

substrates in a  tailor -made flow cell by electrodeposition from a Watts bath. SEM images of cross -

sectional samples of the coatings at different loc ations of the work pieces were collected and used to 

produce thickness maps. The results suggest that coatings prepared in this way can have a thickness 

variability below ±2 micrometres at relatively low current densities of 5 mA cm -2. The coatings were le ss 

uniform at higher current densities of 40 mA cm -2, displaying a variation of ±6 micrometres .

References 

[1 ] L.F. Arenas, C. Ponce de León, F.C. Walsh.  The versatile plane parallel electrode geometry: An 

illustrated review. Journal of the Electrochemica l Society (2020) 167(2):023504. 

[2] F.C. Walsh, L.F. Arenas, C. Ponce de León.  Developments in plane parallel flow channel cel ls. 

Curr ent Opin ion in Electrochem istry (2019) 16:10 -18. 

[3] F.C. Walsh, L.F. Arenas, C. Ponce de León.  A virtuous cycle in materi als engineering and surface 

finishing: Design -print -image. Transactions of the IMF. (2020) 98(2):65 -72. 

[4 ] T. Pérez -Segura, L.F. Arenas, J.L. Nava, C. Ponce de León, F.C. Walsh. Design of a flow cell with 

parallel plate electrodes to guarantee homogeneous current distributions in turbulent flow conditions. 

ECS Meeting Abstracts (2018) MA2018 -02(28):934. Manganese Dioxide Film for Supercapasitors 

Giorgi Tsagareli , Shota Makhatadze , Marina Soselia and N ino Maisuradze 

R.Agladze Institute of Inorganic Chemistry and Electrochemistry of the Iv.Javakhishvili Tbilisi State 

University, 11 Mindeli str. 0186, Tbi lisi, Georgia )

Presenting author’s email:  gitsagareli@gmail.com 

Manganese dioxide (M D) due to its electrochemical properties and availability is a promising 

materia l for use in supercapacitors (SC ). There are m any modifications of MD and not all of them have 

the necessary activity. As a modifying agent, we used iron to obtain a MD film with properties 

acceptable for SC. MD films on the platinum surface were obtained by the electrochemical method at 

room temperat ure from acidic solutions of manganese sulfate with the addition of Fe (II) or Fe (III) . The 

addition of iron increased the film capacity, improved the shape of the cyclic voltammogram , and 

enhanced cycling stability . In order to elucidate the mechanism of i ron incorporation into the MD film, 

the iron -free film obtained was anodically polarized in 0.5 M Na 2SO 4 at a potential of 1.2 V (all 

potentials were given vs silver chloride electrode ). Then, Pt/ MnO 2 electrode was kept i n a solution 

containing only Mn(II) , Fe(II), or Fe (III), and after washing in distilled water, the anode voltammogram 

was recorded in a solution of 0.5 M Na 2SO 4. When the electrode was preliminary kept in a Mn (II) 

solution and washed, an anode current peak was observed in the region of the electrodeposition potential 

of MD in 0.5 M Na 2SO 4 solution . We explained this beha vior by the chemisorption of Mn (II) ions on the 

surface of MD :

MnO 2 + [Mn(H 2O) 6]2+ → MnOOH [Mn(H 2O) 5OH] 2+ ads .

Afterwards , when the polarization curve was taken in Na 2SO 4 sol ution , the resulting particle was 

oxidized to MD . When the electrode was kept in a Fe (II) solution, a similar chemisorption of its ions on 

the surface of the MD occurred with the formation of Fe (III) and Mn(III). Therefore , the oxidation 

current of Mn (III) was observed on voltammogram , but the peak was less because less amount of Mn (III) 

was formed during the chemisorption of Fe(I I). Keeping Pt /MnO 2 elec trode in a Fe (I II) solution did not 

lead to the formation of Mn (III), therefore, anodic peaks were not ob served on the polarization curve. 

However, Fe (III) ions are adsorbed , without charge transfer, on the surface of the MD and thus pass into 

its structure. This conclusion is confirmed by the calculation of the current efficiency of the MD by the 

amount of c onsumed electricity for electrodeposition and the electrochemical dissolution of the films .

The current efficiency of iron -free MD was 97%, doped with Fe (II) - 83%, and doped with Fe(III) -

110%. During the electrochemical dissolution of the film, part of the electricity was al so spent on the 

reduction of Fe (III). Therefore, the current efficiency of the MD film exceeded 100%. The film capacity 

was calculated by the equation C=IΔt/ΔVm. 

The best results were obtained by electrodeposition of a film in the p resence of Fe (III). The capacity 

increased if the film was preliminarily polarized at a potential of 1.2 V in 0.5 M Na 2SO 4 and increased 

even more when it was then kept in a solution of 0. 00 5 M MnSO 4. The specific capacity of a 70 nm thick 

MD film doped wi th Fe (III), preoxidized at a potential of 1.2 V in 0.5 M Na 2SO 4 and kept in a Mn(II) 

solution was 470 F/g. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The work was carried out with the financial support of the Shota Rustaveli National Science 

Foundation of Georgia within the fra mework of the Fundamental grant № FR17_478. Figure 1 Photo of the 

Electrochemical pen 

and paper device. 

# Electrochemical Pen and Paper – a New Approach to Ion Transfer 

# Voltamme try 

M. Jönsson -Niedziółka a, M. Podrażka a, E. Witkowska Nery a, T. G. Henares b, D. W. M. Arrigan b 

> a

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01 -224 Wa rsaw, Poland  

> b

Curtin Institute for Functional Molecules and Interfaces, School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curt in 

University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, Western Australia 6845, Australia 

martinj@ichf.edu.pl 

Ion transfer has been explored directly for the detection of a large number of analytes but taking the 

technique out of the laboratory has been hampered by the mechanical sensi tivity of the interface.  A

common approach to ensure a more stable organic -aqueous interface is also using gelled organic or 

aq ueous phases , 1 but we recently showed that both phases can be stabilised in the cellulose matrix of 

paper 2.

Here w e com bine a paper -stabilised aqueous phase with a gelled organic 

phase. The organic phase is held in a pen -like device co mprising a g lass -

tube sealed with a porous plastic membrane in one end . Measurements are 

perfo rmed by press ing the pen agains t the paper . We demonstrat e th at the 

device functions as expect edly by measuring facil it ated transfer of small 

inorganic ions. But we also show un ique capabilities b y “dip and pick” 

pre -concentration , where a sample is concentrated in the gel from several 

spots on the pa per and then measured through stripping voltammetry. 

Finally , we show that the EC pen can be used for electrochemical 

detection of proteins chromatographically separated in a paper -based flow 

channel. In this way we can get a di rect electronic readout without the 

need for p rotein staining. 

We envision that the co ncept of the electrochemical pen will move liquid -

liquid an alysis c loser to practical application , where a sample can be 

spotted on paper or collected by swabbing and then measured using the 

pen device .

Figure 2 . Electrochemical chromatogram . Dependence between the current and time plotted for chosen 

forward and backwa rd sweep potentials for 5μl of Lysozyme and BSA mixture injected into the flow 

system. 

References 

1 Silva, F. et al. Electrochim. Acta 42, 30 95 –3103 (1997) 

2 Podra żka, M. et al. Anal. Chem. 90, 8727 –8731 (2018) Effect of the s ynthesis route of p latinum group metal -free catalysts for 

# oxygen reduction reaction on microbial fuel cell performance 

*Carlo Santoro 1,2 , Santiago Rojas -Carbonell 1,3 , Rohan Gokh ale 1, 4, Mounika Kodali 5, Alexey Serov 1, 6,

Kateryna Artyu sh kova 1, 7, Plamen Atanassov 5 

> 1

Chemical and Biological Engineering Depart ment, University of New Mexico,  Albuquerque, NM, USA  

> 2

Dept. Chemical Engineering and Analytical Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK  

> 3

W7ENERGY LLC 200 Powder Mill Rd E400 -3443 Wilming ton DE, USA  

> 4

Nissan Techn ical Center of North America (NTCNA), 39001 Sunrise Dr. Farmington Hills, MI , USA  

> 5

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National Fuel Cells Resea rch Center ,

University of California, Irvine, Irvin e, California 92697, United States  

> 6

Pajarito Powder, LLC, 3600 Osuna Rd NE, Suite 309, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87109, United States  

> 7

Physical Electronics, 18725 Lake Drive East, Chanhassen, MN 55317, Uni ted States 

Corresponding author: Carlo Santoro, e-mail: carlo. santoro@ manchester.edu 

Microbial Fuel Cell (MFC ) belong to the larger cat egory of bio -electrochemical system s (BES) .

MFCs oxidize organics on the anode and on the cathode an oxidant is reduced . Among several oxidants, 

oxygen is the most used due to the large availability in the atmosphere and it does have high reductio n

potential. Due to its sluggish kinetics and low concentrations of reagents, o xygen reduction reaction 

(ORR) is one of the main bottlenecks the system , therefore several i nvesti gati ons have been conducted in 

order to improve the performance. 

At the cathode, in order to accelerate the reaction kinetics , a catalyst is used. Diverse biological, 

enzymatic and inorganic catalysts were adopted. Biological catalysts require high overpo tential to 

operate. Enzymatic catalysts are very active but they are expensive and not durable in harsh environment. 

Inorga nic catalysts are therefore the most used. This category can be di vided in other three sub -

categories : i) platinum group met al (PGM); ii) carbonaceous based ; iii) platinum gro up met al -free (PGM -

free) containing transition metal. PGM catalysts are expensiv e and are prone to get inactivated when in 

contact with pollutants . Carbonaceous based catalysts are cheap and durable but operates at high 

overpotentials. PGM -free composed by a tra nsition metal (Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, etc) coordinated with nitrogen 

in pyridinic en vironment over a carbon backbone structure are the most promising .

In this work, the effect of pyrolysis process steps during the fa brication of Fe -N-C catalyst on : i) 

surface che mistry; ii) electrocatalytic activity towards ORR; iii) MFC performance were studied. Fe -N-C

was synthesized using sacrificial support method (SSM) technique. The pyrolysi s process followed six 

steps: 1) precu rsors mixing with silica; 2) first pyrolysis in reducing atmosphere (hydrogen rich) ; 3) ball 

milling of the obtained catalyst ; 4) silica template etching using HF ; 5) second pyrolysis in reducing 

atmosphere (ammonia rich) ; 6) ball milling. 

The surface che mi stry of the Fe -N-C catalyst varied after the high temperature process es and 

after the acid washing. The electrocatalytic activity was studied through r otating ring disk electrode 

(RRDE) experiment show ing an i mprovement in the half wave potential and lim iting current after each 

pyrolysis step . Perfor mance in MFC were also evaluated. Particularly, power density was measured to be 

167 ± 2 μWcm −2 when the cat alyst subject to first pyrolysis was used. The power density increased after 

ball milling and silica etching measuring 181 ± 8 μWcm −2 and 185 ± 3 μWcm −2 , respectively . The second 

pyrolysis improved more importantly the power dens ity produced, that was recorded to be 214 ± 5 

μWcm −2 . The final ball -milling occurring after the second pyr olysis did not improv ed the performances 

that remained approximately stable at 212 ± 3 μWcm −2 . The change in catalyst surface chemistr y was also 

rela ted to the i ncrease in ORR electrocatalytic activity and overall MFC performance .

[1] C. Santoro , S . Rojas -Carbonell , R . Awais, R . Gokhale, M . Kodali, A . Serov, K . Artyushkova, P .

Atanassov . Influence of platinum group metal -free catalyst synthesis on mic robial fuel cell performance .

J. Power Sources . 2018, 275, 11 -20. Electro polishing of biomedical Ti -alloy in eco -friendly deep eutectic 

# solvent Ethaline 

Anna Kityk 1,2 , Felix Danilov 1, Vyacheslav Protsenko 1, Viliam Pavlik 3, Miroslav Hnatko 2,3 

> 1

Ukrainian State Uni versity of Chemical Technology, Gagarin Ave., 8, Dnipro, Ukraine 49005 

> 2

Centre of Excellence for Advanced Materials Application, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 

Dúbravská St., 5807/9, Bratislava, Slovak Republic 84511 

> 3

Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 

Dúbravská St., 9, Bratislava, Slovak Republic 84536 

kitykanna7@gmail.com 

Titanium and its alloys are widely used to produce biomedical implant devices , since they combine 

high strength, inert behavior and low elastic modulus close to the bone elasticity , corrosion stability and 

good biocompatibility. However, commercial titanium and its alloys do not meet high requirements for 

biomaterials and medical equipment without preliminary special treatment of their surfaces (mechanical, 

chemical or electrochemical ). The electrochemical surface treatment (electropolishing) is one of the most 

efficient methods of improving surface morphology and corrosion characteristics, but most common 

polishing electrolytes for the electropolishing of Ti and Ti -alloys are based on concentrated acidic 

solutions that often contain toxic additives , which create danger for the environment and human health .

In the present work , a deep eutectic solvent , Ethaline , was used as an environmentally friendly 

electrolyte for the electro polishing of Ti -based alloy (98.2% Ti, 0.30% Al and 1.50% C) . Ethaline, a

eutectic mixture of choline chloride (vitamin B4) and ethylene glycol, can be considered as a promising 

alternative to “conventional” electropolishing electrolytes . A unique combinat ion of such properties of 

this deep eutectic solvent , as high viscosity and relatively high electrical conductivity , allows conduct ing 

electropolishing procedure under diffusion control , providing highly efficient surface leveling and 

improving corrosion resistance .

We establish ed the optimal conditions for electropolishing of biomedical Ti -based alloy in deep 

eutectic solvent Ethaline as follows : the electro polishing potential of +3.0 V , the treatment duration of 

30 min and the electrolyte tempe rature of 25 °C . It should be noted that the best result s of 

electropolishing can be achieved by using Ethaline -based bath at ambient temperature s, where as 

common aqueous electropolishing electrolytes for the treatment of titanium require the use of eithe r very 

high or very low temperatures . As shown in Figure , electropolishing in Ethaline contributes to a 

noticeable improvement in surface morphology . After electropolishing , the surface of Ti -based alloy 

samples exhibit the reduction in the amount of surface defects that are dissolved during anodic 

processing . The results of AFM analysis showed that a decrease in the surface roughness by more than 

30% is observed after electropolishing .

SEM images of unpolished (a) and electropolished (b) Ti -based alloy (electropolishing was carried out in 

Ethaline at E=3 V, =30 min, and t=25 C) .

The line ar polarization measurements revealed that electropolishing in Ethaline affect not only 

surface appearance and surface roughness , but also corrosion resistance (in NaCl aqueous solution) .

Electropolished samples of Ti -based alloy showed an enhanced corrosion resistance as compared with 

unpolished ones. The results of EDS meas urements demonstrated that improved corrosion resistance after 

electropolishing may be associated with chang es in both the surface morphology and surface chemical 

composition of Ti -based alloy .

Thus, deep eutectic solvent Ethaline can be considered as an available , eco -friendly and cheap 

electrolyte for the high -efficient surface treatment of biomedical titanium alloy s that allows improv ing 

their surface appearance, surface roughness , corrosion properties and wettability .Development of Graphene -Based Supports for Direct Methanol Fuel Cells. 

A. J. Sabejeje and N. A. Adebare 

Department of Chemistry, University of the Western Cape, Bellville 7535, South Africa. 

3872155@myuwc.ac.za 

Palladium catalysts supported by graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, n -doped graphene oxide and reduced n -

doped graphene oxide have been synthesized in this study. The graphene oxides and their reduced counterparts were 

obtained through modified hummer’s method and thermal reduction using hydrazine hydrate, respectively. The 

catalysts were synthesized using modified polyol method. The structures were examined using Fourier Transform 

Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) and X -ray Diffraction (XRD) for the prepared suppor ts and prepared catalysts 

respectively. The FTIR showed that the surface of the supports exhibit oxygen containing functional groups 

(carboxyl, nitrosyl and hydroxyl) which serve as the anchor sites for metal deposition while the XRD confirmed that 

the cat alysts exhibit face -centered crystal structure. High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR -TEM) 

image showed spherical and agglomerated Pd nanoparticles and narrow particle size distribution dispersed on the 

support materials. The particle size a nd crystalline size of the prepared electrocatalysts were determined using HR -

TEM and XRD techniques. From HR -TEM, the particle sizes are in the range of 4.685nm to 6.860nm while the 

crystalline sizes from XRD ranged from 3.286nm to 6.568nm. The surface ar eas of the supports were analyzed using 

Brunauer -Emmett -Teller (BET) Technique. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) showed the highest surface area 

compared to other supporting materials. Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP -OES) 

was used to estimate the Pd metal loading for the prepared electrocatalysts and it was observed to be closest to that 

of Vulcan XC -72. Cyclic voltammograms showed Pd/rGO to be the most electroactive due to its higher electroactive 

surface areas than other catalysts. Furthermore, chronoamperometry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 

showed that catalyst supported on rGO proved to be most stable with highest kinetic rate compared to other 

supported catalysts examined. Hence, rGO has been proven in this study to be the best material for supporting 

electrocatalyst for direct methanol fuel cells. 

Keywords : graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, n -doped graphene oxide, reduced n -doped graphene oxide, 

palladium catalyst, methanol oxidation, direct methanol fuel cell. A Flexible Approach to Parameter Estimation of Physics -Based 

# Battery Models with Bayesian Optimization 

Yannick Kuhn , Birger Horstmann, Arnulf Latz 

Helmholtz Institute Ulm, German Aerospace Center, University of Ulm 

Helmholtzstraße 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

Yannick.Kuhn@dlr.de 

A wealth of measurement techniques are available for determining transport or thermodynamic properties 

of batteries. Some examples are GITT [1], pulse experiments [2] or least squares with impedance 

spectroscopy [3], which are excellent at automatically retrieving a subset of model parameters with 

relatively low computational cost. They achieve this at the cost of accuracy and compatibility, since each 

employs a different approximation in order to obtain analytic expressions. 

So it rema ins a challenge to study the interactions and effects of multiple model parameters at once, since 

various measurement techniques would need to be combined into one so -called cost functional. This cost 

functional is a function of the measurement data and t he battery model parameters and can be used to 

determine the parameters that best describe the data. The automated computation for this usually 

leverages the derivative/gradient of the cost functional by the parameters. Beyond some degree of 

complexity, th is gradient would become intractable or unfeasible to analytically calculate, making the 

computation expensive and/or numerically unstable. 

We want to eliminate the need for those gradients. The goal is to enable automated material screening 

with flexible selection of various measurements. Our approach uses the existing specialized techniques 

(e.g. [1 -3]) as a starting point and refines their results by performing simulations with randomized 

parameters and comparing them with all available measurements. Th is Monte Carlo approach is made 

computationally feasible by utilizing Bayesian Optimization for sparse sampling and preprocessing the 

measurements into intuitive features. The latter also enables us to use measurements that are most often 

fitted by hand, e .g. discharge curves. Additionally, we make use of a single particle model with 

electrolyte from [4] and/or PyBaMM [5] to make the simulations as efficient as possible, but any 1D+1D 

model can be used thanks to the sparse sampling approach. 

References 

[1] W. Weppner and R. A. Huggings, "Determination of the Kinetic Parameters of Mixed -Conducting 

Electrodes and Application to the System Li3Sb", Journal of The Electrochemical Society, Vol. 124, No. 

10, pp. 1569 -1578, 1977. 

[2] J. Landesfeind and H. A. Gast eiger, "Temperature and Concentration Dependence of the Ionic 

Transport Properties of Lithium -Ion Battery Electrolytes", Journal of The Electrochemical Scoiety, Vol 

166 (14), pp. A3079 -3097, 2019. 

[3] A. M. Bizeray, J. Kim, S. R. Duncan and D. A. Howey, "I dentifiability and Parameter Estimation of 

the Single Particle Lithium -Ion Battery Model", IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, Vol. 

27, Issue 5, pp. 1862 -1877, 2017. 

[4] S. G. Marquis, V. Sulzer, R. Timms, C. P. Please and S. J. Chapman, "An A symptotic Derivation of a 

Single Particle Model with Electrolyte", Journal of The Electrochemical Society, Vol. 166 (15), pp. 

A3693 -A3706, 2019. 

[5] Sulzer, V., Marquis, S. G., Timms, R., Robinson, M. and Chapman, S. J., "Python Battery Mathe -

matical Model ling (PyBaMM)", ECSarXiv, 7 (2020). 1E-10 1E-9 1E-8 1E-7 1E-6 1E-5 1E-4 1E-3 0.01 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 SS 14d 13-93 14d 13-93-BS 14d BS-Cu 14d  

> E vs SCE (V) i(A/cm 2)
> SS
> 13-93 13-93-BS BS-Cu

# Corrosion resistance and bioactivity of s ilica -based coatings with 

# borosilicate/copper glasses on stainless steel implants .

Silvia M. Ceré , Marina Balestriere, Julieta L. Merlo, Josefina Ballarre 

Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología de Materiales (INTEMA ) CON ICET -UNMdP 

Av. Colón 10850 – 7600 – Mar del Plata, Argentina 

smcere@fi.mdp.edu.ar 

In developing countries, stainless steel is still a material that is employed for the fabrication of permanent 

implants as fixation plates and hip prosthesis. The aim of th ese implants is to replace the lost mechanical 

function of the damaged hard tissue, and to generate a bond with the existing bone to avoid movement 

and loosening. The main disadvantage of stainless steel is regarding its corrosion behaviour and the 

release of potentially toxic ions to the surrounding tissues when implanted [1], [2] . Besides, stainless steel 

does not present bioactivity and it does not exhibit any antibacterial behaviour [3] . In this context a 

challenge to improve the material appears: to modify the surface implant to improve the osseo integration 

process when cement -less impla nts are used to improve bone fixation and stabilization together with the 

searching for antibacterial properties of the material to be implanted. Since corrosion is a surface 

phenomenon, the implant surface and its engineering , play a key role in the perf ormance in service of the 

implant .

In this work, stainless steel plane samples were coated with a hybrid organic inorganic silica based layer 

made by sol -gel method. The system consists in a two - layer coating of tetraethyl orthosilicate, (TEOS )

and methyl trimethoxysilane (MTMS ). The first layer is a protective one , and the second is a

functionalized one: this is achieved by the incorporation of silicate (13 -93) and borosilicate (BS) glasses 

as a bioactive phase. Also a copper -borosilicate (BS -Cu ) glass wa s used as an attempt of giving 

antibacterial properties to the surface as well as bioactivity. Surface behavior and corrosion resistance of 

the generated systems were analyze d by roughness measurements , adhesion of the coatings, FTIR, SEM 

and corrosion tes ts in simulate body fluid solution at 37 °C. Also antibacterial behavior was evaluated. 

All coatings with the addition of silicate and borosilicate glasses showed bioactivity after 14 days of 

immersion in SBF. Also 13 -93 glass presented the faster rate of dissolution, generating pits or holes in the 

coatings surface.The coatings presented a good electrochemical response , with high breaking potential 

and lower current density than the bare material . Although the dissolution rate of the BS -Cu and BS 

particle s was high, the coatings presented excellent corrosion resistance.       

> [1] R. F. V Villamil, H. Aranha, M. L. Chaves de Andrade Alfonso, M. Tomanik Mercadante, and S. M. Leite Agostinho,
> “Stainle ss steels in orthopaedic implants: fundaments and corrosion resistance,” Rev. Bras. Ortop. , vol. 37, no. 11/12, pp.
> 471 –476, 2002.
> [2] J. Walczak, F. Shahgaldi, and F. Heatley, “In vivo corrosion of 316L stainless steel hip implants: mophology and
> elementa l composition of corrosion products.,” Biomaterials , vol. 19, pp. 229 –237, 1998.
> [3] S. G. Steinemann, “Metal implants and surface reactions,” Injury , vol. 27, no. Supplement 3, p. S -S, 1996.

# Influence of Cyano Substituents on the Electron Density and Catalytic 

# Activity towards the Oxygen Reduction Reaction for Iron 

# Phthalocyanine. 

Joseph Govan a, Gabriel Abarca b, Carolina Aliag ac, Walter Orellana d, Gloria Cárdenas -Jirón c, José H. 

Zagal c, Feder ico Tasca c*

> a

Departamento de Ingeniería y Suelos, Facultad de Ciencias Agronómicas, Universidad de Chile, 

Santiago, Chile .

> b

Centro de Nanotecnolog ía Aplicada, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Mayor, Santiago, Chile 

> c

Facultad de Química y Biología, Univers idad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile. 

> d

Departamento de Ciencias F �sicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile 

*Corresponding aut hor email: federico.tasca@usach.cl 

Iron(II) 2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24 -octa(cyano)phthalocyanine (OCNFePc) , was test ed as a catalyst for the 

oxygen reduction reaction (O RR) adsorbed on carbon nanotubes. The composite was analyzed 

spectroscopically and electrochemically characterized at pH 13 a nd pH 1. The composite show ed close to 

4 electron processes at pH 13 . Computation al analysis indicates that the O 2 molecule binds end -on to the 

metal center and that the dioxygen molecule is dissociated on both the Fe metal center and the corral ring .

An Analysis of the molecular electrostatic potential confirms the behavior of cyano residue s as electro n-

withdrawing moieties in OCNFePc. As a result of its catalytic behavior and theoretical analysis of its O 2

binding energy , OCNFePc was placed in a high position on a volcano correlation of similar 

phthalocyanine composites .Effect of Thioabiraterone and T hioabiraterone -Modified 

# Nanoparticles on Hepatocytes or Human Prostate Epithelial C ells 

Krzysztof Stolarczyk a, Elżbieta U. Stolarczyk b, Andrzej Leś b, Marta Łaszcz b, Marek Kubiszewski b,

Weronika Strzempek c, Elżbieta Menaszek d, Massimo Fusaro b, Katarzyna Sidoryk b 

> a

University of Warsaw, Faculty of Chemistry, 1 Pasteura Str., 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland  

> b

Łukasiewicz Research Network - Pharmaceutical Research Inst itute, 8 Rydygiera Str., 01 -793 Warsaw, 

Poland  

> c

Faculty of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University, 2 Gronostajowa Str., 30 -387 Krakow, Poland  

> d

Department of Cytobiology, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University, 9 Medyczna Str., 30 -068 

Krakow, Poland 

e-mail:  kstolar@chem.uw.edu.pl 

Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) conjugated with drugs are used in diagnostics and therapies [1 -4].

For many years research has been carried out to form efficient drug carriers. We present novel 

modification of gold nanoparticles: AuNP conjugated with thioabira terone (AuNP -S-AB ) (Fig. 1) . The 

synthesis of AuNP -S-AB and new analytical procedures are described based on the application of UV -

Vis, TEM, IR, NMR and TG A. Our synthetic approach involves ligand exchange of citrate s to 

thioabiraterone on gold nanoparticl es and shows that citrate anions preadsorbed on AuNPs can be readily 

displaced by thioabiraterone. The biological part of the work is done on hepatocytes or human prostate 

epithelial cells and proved that newly synth esized thiol derivatives of abi ra terone , as well as AuNP -S-AB, 

are more biocompatible than the original abiraterone.  Biological studies have established a safe 

concentration of  AuNP -S-AB  (IC 50 ) for the vital cell functions,  up to 25 μM of AuNP -S-AB can be safely 

used in the therapy. The idea of delivering abiraterone in the form of AuNP -S-AB is hence a promising 

candidate for the application in cancer therapies .

Fig. 1 Scheme of AuNP -S-AB 

References :

1. E. U. Stolarczyk, K. Stolarczyk, M. Łaszcz, M. Kubiszewski, W. Maruszak, W. Olejarz, D. Bryk. Eur. 

J. Pharm. Sci. 96 (2017) 176 

2. E .U. Stolarczyk, M . Łaszcz, A . Leś, M . Kubiszewski, K . Kuziak, K . Sidoryk, K . Stolarczyk ,

Nanomaterials 8 (2018) 641 

3. E.U. St olarczyk, K. Sidoryk, M. Cybulski, M. Kubiszewski, K. Stolarczyk, Nanomaterials 8 (2018) 

1018 

4. E.U. Stolarczyk, A. Le ś, M. Łaszcz, M. Kubiszewski, W. Strzempek, E. Menaszek, M. Fusaro, K. 

Sidoryk, K. Stolarczyk, Int. J. Pharm. 583 (2020) 119319 Enhancing the hydrogen evolution reaction activity of platinum 

# electrodes in alkaline media usi ng Ni -Fe clusters 

Song Xue 1,2, Richard W. Haid 1, Regina M. Kluge 1, Xing Ding 1, Batyr Garlyyev 1, Johannes Fichtner 1,

Sebastian Watzele 1, Shujin Hou 1 and Aliaksand r S. Bandarenka 1

> 1

Physics of Energy Conversion and Storage, Physik -Department, Technische Universität München 

James -Franck -Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany.  

> 2

Key Laboratory of Biofuels, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Biopr ocess Technology, Chinese 

Aca demy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, Shandong, China 

xuesong@qibebt.ac.cn 

Pt surfaces modified with non -noble metal hydroxide clusters have been examined : the Pt surfaces offer 

optimal hydrogen adsorption energy, whereas the non -noble metal hydroxides suppo rt water 

dissociation. [1] According to the Bronsted -Evans -Polanyi principle, the ability of a catalyst to dissociate 

water is correlated with the OH -adsorption energ y. On the other hand, a too strong OH -adsorption is 

undoubte dly counter -productive, as the ac tive sites get blocked. As the state -of -the -art , Pt surfaces 

modified with Ni -hydroxide clusters show ed the best HER activity . The current understanding of the 

origin of such high activity is that the hydroxides facilitate water dissociation , while at th e same time Pt 

promotes H 2 generation. Moreover , various studies on the Ni -Fe hydroxide s, which are among the best 

catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), proved that the addi tion of iron to the Ni -hydroxide 

film s can im prove the ir conductivity by more than 30 times .[2] It was further shown by X -ray absorption 

spectroscopy and coulometric titration that the addition of iron can in general increase the oxidation state 

of Ni atoms in the vicinity of Fe ,[3] which implies an improved water dissociati on ability due to the 

increas ed OH binding energy [4]. Herein, w e demonstrate an easy way to improve the hydrogen evolution 

reaction activity of Pt electrodes in alkaline media by introducing Ni -Fe hydroxide clusters to their 

surface s. As a result , the over po tential needed to achieve the current density of 10 mA cm -2 in 0.1 M 

KOH is reduced down to ~70 mV . To the best of our knowledge, th ese modified electrode s outperform 

any other reported electro catalysts tested under similar conditions . Moreover, the infl ue nce of (i) Ni to Fe 

ratio, (ii) cluster coverage, and (iii) the nature of the alkali metal cations present in the electrolyte on the 

resulting electrocatalytic activity has been investigated . The observed catalytic performance likely 

origin ate s from both the improved water dissociation at the NiFe -clusters and the subsequent optimal 

hydrogen adsorption and recombination at Pt atoms present at the NiFe /Pt boundary .[5]

A B

Figure . (A) Typical polari zation curves of Pt(111), Ni@Pt(111), and NiFe@Pt(111) recorded in H 2

saturated 0.1 M KOH aqueous electrolytes at a scan rate of 50 mV s -1 and a rotation al speed of 1600 rpm .

(B) Proposed mechanism of HER on NiFe@Pt( 111) electrodes in alkaline media. 

REFERENCES 

[1] R. Subbaraman, T. Dusan, D. St rm cnik, K. C. Chuang, U. Masanobu, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic, 

N. M. Markovic, Science 201 1, 334 , 1256 -1260. 

[2] L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney, S. W. B oettcher, J. Am . Chem. Soc. 2014 , 136 , 6744 -6753. 

[3] M. G�rlin, P. Chernev, J. Ferreira de Ara �jo, T. Reier, S. Dresp, B. Paul, R. Krähnert, H. Dou, P. 

Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016 , 138 , 5603 -5614. 

[4] Q. Zhao, J. Yang, M. Liu, R. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Tang, C. Liu, Z. Mei, H. Chen, F. Pan, 

ACS Catal.  2018 , 8, 5621 -5629. 

[5] S. Xu e, R.W. Haid, R .M. Kluge, X . Ding, B . Garlyyev, J . Fichtner, S . Watzele, S . Hou, A.S. 

Bandarenka , Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. DOI: 10.1002/anie.202000383 .Tyrosine Based Electrochemical Detection of DNA 

Elena V. Suprun 1, Svetlana A. Khmeleva 1, Gulnaz R. Kutdusova 2, Insaf F. Duskaev 2, Sergey P. Radko 1

> 1)

Institute of Biomedical Chemistry 

Pogodinskaya Street, 10/8, Moscow, 119121 Russia 

> 2)

Lomonosov Moscow Stat e University, 

GSP -1, Leninskie Gory, Moscow, 119991  Russia 

lenasuprun@mail.ru 

Nucleic acids are the bio mpolymer s which carry genetic information for protein production essential to 

all known forms of life. Deoxyr ibonucleic acid s (DNA) are promising subject s for a point -of -need test ing 

as markers of environmental contamination or human deseases. In a search for robust, portable, and 

sensitive DNA detection systems for in situ application s, the development of electr ochemical sensing 

principles for nucleic acid s is of high interest [ 1].

DNA are known to be electoactive through their nitrogenous bases : guanine, adenine, cyto sine, and 

thymine [2, 3 ]. However, the direct electrochemistry of DNA characterizes by  high oxid ation /reduction 

potentials  and low value s of registered current s. Guanine possess ing the lowest electrooxidation potential 

among nucleobases oxidizes at 0.6 –0.8 V ( vs. Ag/AgCl ) [2] . Electroreduction of nucleobases takes place 

at the potentials over –1.5 V [3]. T he signals of DNA are severely affected by the molecular weight of 

biopolymer [4] and the formation of double helix – nucleobases  linked together by hydrogen  bonds insid e

the DNA double helix become hardly accessible for electrode reactions [1]. To o vercome this problem, 

we  are suggesting a novel strategy  for detection of double stranded DNA (dsDNA) through the tyrosine 

(Tyr) oxidation . As it was shown previously, there is an  intercalative  interaction between tyrosine and 

dsDNA  with the binding consta nt of 4 × 10 3 mol −1 L [5].

In this work, oxidation of free Tyr in the presence of native DNA and Zn(II) ions was studied by 

square wave voltammetry on carbon screen printed electrodes. The addition of DNA to the Tyr or Tyr + 

Zn(II) sample s induced the significant decrease of the oxidation signal at 0.6 V , especially in the presence 

of Zn(II) ions. The calibration curves in coordinates ‘Ip (Tyr), μA – lg( c(DNA), M) ’ were linear from 2 to 

500 μM of herring sperm DNA with different slopes in the absence and in the presents of Zn(II) ions . At 

the same time, direct electrochemical detection of the DNA through the oxidation of guanine residue 

(Gua) at the potential of about 0.8 V gave a linear calibration curve in coordinates ‘ Ip (Gua), μA –

c(DNA), M ’ from 10 to 500 μM. Other am ino acids tested, namely cysteine (Cys) and tryptophan (Trp) ,

which electrochemical oxidation occur s in the same potential range as Tyr (0.5 –0.7 V) , demonstrated no 

pronounced effect of DNA on their signals both in the absence and the presence of Zn(II) io ns . The 

oxidation signals of Cys or Trp just slightly decreased and shifted to more positive potentials in the 

presence of DNA. Interesting, that these amino acids demonstrated unequal responses to addition of 

Zn(II) ions (DNA free controls) : oxidation pea ks of Tyr and Trp decreased, while the signal of Cys 

became more developed. To detect DNA, instead of Tyr, w ell -known redox indicator K 3Fe(CN) 6 was 

studied as well, but found less sensitive to the presence of DNA than free Tyr . Finally, t wo possible 

mechan isms of registered decrease of Tyr oxidation peak may be suggested: (i) a formation of the 

complex between Tyr, DNA, and Zn(II) ions; (ii) the blockage of Tyr oxidation by the DNA adsorption 

on electrode surface, enhanced by Zn(II) ions. 

This work was fin ancially supported by the Russian Science Foundation, grant 19 -14 -00247 .

1. M. Trotter, N. Borst, R. Thewes, F. von Stetten, Electrochemical DNA sensing – Principles, 

commercial systems, and applications, Biosens. Bioelectron. (2020) 112069. 

2. A. M. Oliv eira -Brett, Electrochemical DNA Assays, in: P. N. Bartlett (Ed.), Bioelectrochemistry: 

Fundamentals, Experimental Techniques and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2008, pp. 411 –442 .

3. J. Špaček, A. Daňhel, S. Hasoň, M. Fojta , Label -free detection of canonical DNA bases, uracil and 5 -

methylcytosine in DNA oligonucleotides using linear sweep voltammetry at a pyrolytic graphite 

electrode, Electrochem. Commun. 82 (2017 ) 34. 

4. V. Brabec, J. Ko udelka, Oxidation of deoxyribonucleic acid at carbon electrodes. The effect of the 

quality of the deoxyribonucleic acid sample, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 116 (1980) 

793. 

5. L. Fotouhi, R. Tabatabaee, A study of the interaction tyrosine and DNA using voltammetry and 

spectroscopy methods , Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 121 (2014) 152 .Deoxy uridine Triphosphates Modified with Amino Acid Side Chains 

# for Direct Electrochemical Detection of Double -Stranded DNA 

Elena V. Suprun 1, Svetlana A. Khmeleva 1, Gulnaz R. Kutdusova 2, Insaf F. Duskaev 2, Viktoriya E. 

Kuznetsova 3, Sergey A. Lapa 3, Alexan der V. Chudinov 3, Sergey P. Radko 1

> 1)

Institute of Biomedical Chemistry 

Pogodinskaya Street, 10/8, Moscow, 119121 Russia 

> 2)

Lomonosov Moscow State University, 

GSP -1, Leninskie Gory, Moscow, 119991  Russia 

> 3)

Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian A cademy of Sciences 

Vavilov Street, 32, Moscow, 119991  Russia 

lenasuprun@mail.ru 

The detection of nucleic acids – macromolecules that store genetic information and enable protein 

production – is of  a great interest for fundamental and applied biochemical s tudies. Nuclec acids are 

promising subject s for a point -of -use test ing  as markers of environmental bacterial and viral 

contamination s or human deseases. Deoxyribonucleic acids ( DNA ) are known to be electoactive through 

their nitrogenous bases : guanine, ade nine, cytosine, and thymine [1]. However, the direct 

electrochemistry of nucleic acids suffers from  high oxidation /reduction potentials  and low value s of 

registered current s. Guanine possess ing the lowest electrooxidation potential among nucleobases oxidiz es 

at 0.6 –0.8 V ( vs. Ag/AgCl ), while 2' -deoxyguanosine -5' -triphosphate (dGTP) oxidizes at 0.9 –1. 0 V [1] .

The oxidation current is strongly affected by the length of a nucleic acid strand [2] and the formation of 

double helix – nucleobases  linked together b y hydrogen  bonds insid e the helix become hardly accessible 

for electrode reactions [1]. To overcome these problems, an exciting strategy of electrochemical sensing 

of nucleic acids has been suggested by M. Hocek and M. Fojta with coworkers [3]. They insert ed a palette 

of electrochemically active moieties into nucleic acid sequences by polymerase incorporation of 

chemically modified nucleotides. 

In this work, we present a set of 2' -deoxyuridine -5' -triphosphate s (dUTP) modified with amino acid 

side chains att ached through a linker at the C5 position of the pyrimidine ring which can be introduced 

into double stranded DNA (dsDNA) by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR) [ 4, 5]. The modified nucleotides 

and corresponding PCR products were studied by square wave voltamm etry on carbon screen printed 

electrodes suitable for in situ analysis . A strong effect of all additional functional groups on the 

electrochemical behavior of dUTP was revealed . Compared to the 2′ -deoxythymidine -5′ -triphosphate (a 

natural substrate for DNA polymerases) , oxidation of dUTP derivatives took place at less positive 

potentials. In particular , 5-aminoallyl -dUTP derivatives modified with indole acetic, indole -3-propionic, 

indole -4-butyri c, or 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid s demonstr ated well -defined oxidation peaks at 0. 5–0.7 

V, similar to tryptophan and tyrosine amino acids, respect ively. These signals were about 0.2 –0.3 V less 

positive than the oxidation potential of dGTP . Moreover, PCR -gen erated ds DNA fragments (amplicons) 

with modified nucleotides show ed novel oxidation signals at micromolar concentrations , while no peak 

was observed for unmodified dsDNA at the same conditions . Therefore , the tested dUTP derivatives well 

complement the exi sting collection of electroactive ‘labeled’ nucleotides for direct electrochemical 

detection of nucleic acids. The main advantage of the developed dUTP is a good compatibility of amino 

acid side chains with polymerase enzymes including those used in PCR. 

This work was financially supported by the Russian Science Foundation, grant 19 -14 -00247 .

1. A. M. Oliveira -Brett, Electrochemical DNA Assays, in: P. N. Bartlett (Ed.), Bioelectrochemistry: 

Fundamentals, Experimental Techniques and Applications, John Wil ey & Sons, 2008, pp. 411 –442 .

2. V. Brabec, J. Koudelka, Oxidation of deoxyribonucleic acid at carbon electrodes. The effect of the 

quality of the deoxyribonucleic acid sample, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 116 (1980) 

793. 

3. M. Hocek, M. Fojta, Nucleobase modification as redox DNA labelling for electrochemical detection, 

Chem. Soc. Rev. 40 (2011) 5802 .

4. S. A. Lapa, K. S. Romashova, M. A. Spitsyn, et al ., Preparation of Modified Combinatorial DNA 

Libraries via Emulsion PCR with Subsequent Strand Separation , Mol . Biol . 52 (2018) 854. 

5. A. V. Chudinov, Y. Y. Kiseleva, V. E. Kuznetsov, et al ., Enzymatic synthesis of high -modified DNA, 

Mol. Biol. 51 (2017) 534 .Forensic e lectrochemistry: A voltammetric screening method to 

# identif y selected synthetic cannabinoids 

Anaam Ameen , Lynn Dennany 

Dept. of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Centre for Forensic Science, Technology and Innovation Centre, 

University of Strathclyde , 99 George Street, Glasgow, G1 1RD, UK 

anaam -r-m-rameen.2017@strath.ac.uk 

At present, numerous synthetic cannabinoid (S C) products are emerged and available for sale online as 

well as off -line with a variety of street names  ‘spice’ and K2 , and in th e form of herbal incense . It is 

extremely i mportant to identify these SC which are described as new psychoactive substances (NPS) 

presented in the herbal mixtures, to control the health, regulatory and legal risk associated with the 

production, sale and co nsumption of these products .1 The se illicit drugs can result in binding 

cannabinoids receptors CB1, and CB2 relatively with higher empathy and effectiveness of 100 times 

stronger compared to natural cannabis marijuana  Δ9-tetrahydrocannabino l (Δ9THC ).2 Forensic scientist 

find s it challenging to identify SC in bio logical and street sample s. Although gas chromatography -mass 

spectrometry (GC -MS) is considered as a gold standard in forensic field specifically for the identification 

and quantification of SC . However, it is a bulky , expensive and laboratory -based instru ment. In addition, 

these compounds do not have screening methods such as presumptive test that can be used . 3 Thus , there 

is a need for new portable screening tools to detect these NPS with no conventional drug screening 

methods available to fulfil this task and thus, require developing a necessary on -site screening to ol for 

NPS detection that can be utilised for street and toxicological samples . Currently, electrochemical 

techniques have shown promising results for the detection of 5F -ADB -PINACA and STS -135 which are 

indazole and indole derivatives of SC . Initial results for the detection of SC are explored here . Differential 

pulse voltammetry (DPV) provides excellent sensitivity with limit s of detection of 0.3 nM and 0. 5 pM of 

indazole and indole -base respectively. Practical responses to the challen ges such as the availability of 

reference standards and validation methods cannot match the increase in varieties of NPS reported by 

laborator ies .4 A rapid and a non -destructive analytical method is needed in forensic drug and 

toxicological analysis and this works highlights the promis e of electrochemical sensors to address this 

gap .

1. UNODC. The challenge of new psychoactive substances,. In: Vienna: United Na tions Office on 

Drugs and Crime; 2013. 

2. Castaneto MS, Gorelick DA, Desrosiers NA, Hartman RL, Pira rd S, Huestis MA. Synthetic 

cannabinoids: epidemiology, pharmacodynamics, and clinical implications. Drug and alcohol 

dependence. 2014;144:12 -41. 

3. Namera A, Kawamura M, Nakamoto A, Saito T, Nagao M. Comprehensive review of the 

detection methods for synth etic cannabinoids and cathinones. Forensic toxicology. 

2015;33(2):175 -194. 

4. EMCDDA. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. Fentanils and synthetic 

cannabinoids: driving greater complexity into the drug situation. 

http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/system/files/publications/8870/2018 -2489 -td0118414enn.pdf .

Published 2018. Accessed2019. NC CN ADN CN + 2 e -   

> CN ACN + ACN Dimerization NC CN + 2 H ++ 2 e -
> + 2 H +
> OHO OH Formaldehyde Ethylene glycol 2

# Feasibility of demand re sponse in the chemical industry 

N. Milojević , R. Schomäcker 

Technische Universität Berlin, 

Department of Chemistry, Strasse des 17. Juni 124, D -10623 Berlin 

natasa.milojevic@campus.tu -berlin.de 

Abstract 

In the field of power generation, the aim is to increase the part of renewable energy. This brings an increase 

in fluctuations in power supply, which leads to a higher need for adaptability, meaning more flexibility in 

production and consumption of electri city. Load changes in energy -intensive industries as seen in the 

chemical industry would be a way to provide this. In the joint project ChemEFlex the feasibility of demand 

response in various electrochemical processes of the chemical industry is analyzed. In this work, two 

processes with different levels of development were studied by evaluating s uitable operating parameters 

and their tolerable limits. The commerciali zed process for the electrohydrodimerization of Acrylonitrile 

(ACN) to Adiponitrile (ADN) was the first case considered suitable for further studies: 

Fig. 1: Electrohydrodimerization of Acrylonitrile to Adiponitrile. 

Adiponitrile is an intermediate in the production of Nylon. Worldwide the production rate of ADN is around 

1,31 Mio. t/a, of which 300.000 t are made through cathodic hydrodimerization. This makes the so -called 

Monsanto -Process the most important electroorganical synthesis. 

The second case is t he piloted process of t he electrohydrodimerization o f Formaldehyde to Ethylen e glycol .

Fig. 2 : Electrohydrodimerization of Formaldehyde to Ethylen e glycol .

Ethylene glycol nowadays is almost exclusively made from direct oxidation of Ethylene , followed by 

hydrolysis of Ethylene oxide. Even though this process has a poor selectivity and is high in energy 

consumption , the use of mineral oil results in a very low price. Still, with increasing prices for crude oil and 

the additional profit from the control energy market , the electrochemical process could be a good 

alternative. 

Experimental section 

Two experimental plant s were built in a laboratory scale [1], [2] to test the application of demand -side 

management . The changes in selected parameters like aging of electrodes, product quality , etc. are 

documented and evaluated while various flexibility profiles (load changes in seconds or minutes , adapted 

to the requirements of the control energy market ) were applied .

Experiments were carried out in Microflowcell s by ElectroCell AB (Sweden) . For the Monsanto -Process 

the effects on an undivided cell were studied , whereas for the synthesis of Ethylene glycol , a Nafion 324 

membrane was used for separation .

References 

[1] N. L. Weinberg , D. J. Mazur , J. Appl . Electroc hem. , 21 (1991 ) 895 – 901 .

[2] K. Scott , B. Hayati , Chem. Eng . Sci. , 45 , 8 (1990 ) 2341 –2347 .Treatment of Water P olluted with Cr (VI) Using an Electrodialysis 

# System 

Lucía Guadalupe Alvarado Montalvo , Dulce María Vargas Aguilera, Guadalupe Vázquez Rodríguez, J. 

Carlos Baltazar Vera 

Department of Mining Engineering, Met allurgy and Geology, Enginee ring Division, University of 

Guanajuato. 

Ex. Hda.  San Matías s/n, Frac.  San Javier, C. P. 36020, Guanajuato, Gto., Mex. 

lucia.alvarado@ugto.mx 

The metals in aqueous state are substances commonly found in water from various processes, such as 

electroplating and mining, among others. Some of the metals found in this kind of effluent s attract 

attention because they have an adverse effect o n the environment and on health, s uch as substances as 

chromium, cadmium, ar senic and lead, mainly; this is why the discharges with the presence of these 

metals are regulated through environmental standards [1] . However, it is a fact, that there is a growing 

need to develop better methods for the removal of metals, and thus avoid a negative impact on the 

environment. In the particular case of chromium, it is known that it is an element used for decorative 

purposes a nd protection against corrosion and in its trivalent form it is necessary during the human 

metabolism. However, this element has the peculiarity that, being in a more oxidized state, Cr (VI) has 

characteristics that relate it to diseases such as cancer, being that this is one of the most stable states of 

chromium and very much used in the processes described above, as p igments industry [2] .

In this sense among the methods that exist for the elimination of metal ions is the e lectrodi alysis, which is 

an electrochemical technology that allows the separation of aqueous ions, releasing the effluent of these 

and allowing to re cover the component in question [3, 4] . Therefore, the present work addresses a study 

of hexavalent chromium removal, from a synthetic solution of 100 ppm of Cr (VI) using an

electrodialysis small cell, with electrodes of stainless steel and titanium mesh, of 30 cm 2 of effective area, 

seeking to have a free effluent of the metal. The results obtained showed an energy consumption of 1.14 

kWh per m3, with a total removal of the pollutant. The above shows the potential of the technique to be 

used with other ty pes of ionic contaminants and be scaled and the obtaining of valuable sub products .

Reference s

[1 ] Roy Chowdhury, A., Datta, R., Sarkar, D. Green Chem. Ch. 3.10 (2018) 359 -373 

[2] Zhitkovich, A. Chem. Res.  In Toxicol.18:1 (2005 ) 3-11 .

[3] Scialdone, O ., D´Angelo, A., De Lumé, E., Galia, A. Electrochim. Acta, 137 (2014) 258 -265. 

[4]  Alvarado Montalvo, L. G. (2014). Mecanismo de Electrodeionización aplicado a la remoción 

de Cr(VI), Publicia, ISBN: 978 -3-639 -55148 -8.Galvanic Cell Operated with Hexavalent Chromium to Remove I t

José Guadalupe Cruz Arellano , Guadalupe Vázquez Rodríguez, J. Carlos Baltazar Vera, Lucía Guadalupe 

Alvarado Montalvo 

Department of Mining Engin eering, Metallurgy and Geology, Eng ineering Divisi on. Uni versity of 

Guanajuato. 

Ex. Hda.  San Matías s/n, Frac.  San Javier, C. P. 36020, Guanajuato, Gto., Mex. 

lucia.alvarado@ugto.mx 

Hexavalent chromium is considerate a toxic compound to the human health [1] , this is why, find new 

strategies to remove it become important. Traditional methods involve the use of chemicals to achieve 

the p recipitation of this compound, which implies filtration systems and solids waste generation [2] . In 

other hand, some electroc hemical methods to remove it have been showing efficiency: as electrochemical 

filtration [ 3] or electrodialysis; never the less , although the results are promising, ever that implies the use 

of a n external potential application, which means an extra energy c ost. This is a limiting, since that it 

mean that the use of this technologies are exclusively in places with access to electricity. 

In this work, we proposing a system that does not need external potential, conversely, the system gives it. 

The main goal was the removal of hexavalent chromium from a synthetic solution, but without the use of 

an external electric field applied. For this, we use a membrane´s electrochemical cell, where by two 

compartments, of 30 cm 2 of effective area, separated by ion excha nge membranes, synthetic solution of 

potassium dichromate were recirculated at 20 mL per min, and a third compartment with hydrogen 

peroxide were recirculated. We add a salt in one compartment to promote a chemical reaction in the 

electrodes compartments and so an electrical field between them and the pH were adjusted. After 22 

hours of operation, the system removed 90% of the hexavalent chromium from one channel, and at the 

same time, energy was generated. 

Reference s

[1 ] Speer R. M., Wise S. S., Cro om -Perez T. J., Aboueissa A, Martin -Bras M., Barandiaran M, Bermúdez 

E. & Wise J. P. A comparison of particulate hexavalent chromium cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in human 

and leatherback sea turtle lung cells from a one environmental health perspective. T oxicology and 

Applied Pharmacology , 376:3 (2019). Pages 70 -81. 

[2 ] Sriram S., Nambi I. M. & Chetty R. Hexavalent chromium reduction through redox electrolytic cell 

with urea and cow urine as anolyte. Journal of Envir onmental Management, 232:6 (2019) 554 -56 3.

[3] Lie L., Xu Y., Wang K., Li K., Xu L., Wang J., & Wang J. Fabrication of a novel conductive 

ultrafiltration membrane and its application for electrochemical removal of hexavalent chromium. Journal 

of Membrane Science , 584:3 (2019) 191 -201. Simultaneous monitoring of the e lectrochemical behavior of both 

# positive and negative carbon electrodes of electrochemical double layer 

# capacitors in different electrolytes 

Vedran Petrić 1, Zoran Mandić 1

> 1

Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Department of Electrochemistry, University of 

Zagreb, Croa tia 

Savska cesta 16, Zagreb, Croatia 

vpetric@fkit.hr 

Despite their high power and high energy contents comparing to other capacitor technologies, 

electrochemical double layer capacitors still suffer from several drawbacks which limit their widespread 

use. In order to boost their performance in the application s where batteries are currently used, the 

electrical and electrochemical properties, such as energy content, ohmic resistance and self -discharge rate, 

need to be improved. 

The testing of supercapacit ors is routinely done by electrochemical me thods in two -electrode system .

With such methods overall properties of supercapacitors are obtain ed . However, in order to make further 

improvements of supercapacitors properties, it is of key importance to separat e the processes occurring at 

both electrodes during charging/discharging reactions. Such measurements would reveal electrodes of 

limiting capacitance , potential distribution through the supercapacitor as well as the occurrence of various 

resistance s within different parts of the cell. The aim of this work was to simultaneously test the 

electrochemical properties of both electrodes of self -assembled supercapacitors in different electrolytes 

by inserting a Pt wire as a reference electrode inside the se parator. 

Supercapacitor carbon electrodes consisting of activated carbon (AC), carbon black (CB), and poly 

(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) as a binder , were made in the lab by mixing the aforementioned ingredients 

in the ratio of 80:10:10 . The dry mixture were then dissolved in N-mehtyl pyrrolidone ( NMP ) to form a 

paste which w ere painted at to an aluminum current collector in the form of a thin film. After drying the 

film was cut into circular electrodes. The electrodes were then used in the construction o f a supercapaci tor 

with different electrolytes consisting of different tetraalkylammounium and lithium salts in an EL -CELL 

three electrode cell . The supercapacitor had a layered structure consisting of two electrodes on each side 

of a fiberglass separator. The reference electrode was Pt foil aligned to the side of the separator so that it 

was in contact with it but did not interfere with the charge flow between the electrodes. 

Both DC and AC techniques have been used to determine the behavior and status of each electrode during 

the operation of the supercapacitor . First ly , a large number of charge/discharge cycles were performed 

with “staircase” impedance measurements at regular charge/discharge intervals. The aim was to observe 

the changes of potential and the impedance response on each electrode during the initial “conditioning” of 

the supercapacitor. Secondly, the charge redistribution was monitored on each individual electrode by 

letting the supercapacitor rest when fully charged and also by keeping eith er electrode at a constant 

potential while observing the potential changes of the other electrode. 

Significant differences between the responses of positive and negative electrodes of the supercapacitor 

were noticed , primarily in the discrepancy between t he potential ranges of both electrodes during cycling 

in each electrolyte. Also it wa s observed that the negative electrode possesses higher resistance values in 

the impedance measurements. Mathematical Modeling of Temper ature Dependent D egradation of 

# Supported Pt -based Electrocatalyst in Voltage Cycling E xperiment 

Ambrož Kregar 1, Mat ija Gatalo 2, Nik Maselj 2, Primož Jovanovič 2, Nejc Hodnik 2, Tomaž Katrašnik 1

> 1

University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Aškerčeva 6, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenija 

> 2

National Institute of Chemist ry, Hajdrihova 19, 1001 Ljubljana, Slovenija 

ambroz.kregar@fs.uni -lj.si 

Hydrogen fuel cells, employing carbon -supported platinum -based materials to catalyze o xygen reduction 

reaction, represent one of the most promising technologies of future energy conversion. However, their 

wider adoption is currently limited due to the relatively fast degradation of the membrane electrode 

assembly during their operation, dec reasing the ir performance and limiting their life -time. 

To improve the understanding of degradation phenomena in the fuel cell catalyst , recently developed 

mechanistic model [1] of platinum particle degradation was used to describe the decrease in 

electroc hemical surface area (ECSA) during accelerated stress tests on supported platinum based 

electrocatalysts in thin film rotating disc electrode setup. The model describes several degradation 

processes by mathematically modeling the rates of electrochemical p henomena, i.e. platinum and carbon 

surface oxidation and corrosion, which strongly depend on the local electric potential and temperature 

according to Arrhenius law. The dissolution of platinum from smaller particles and its redeposition on 

larger particle s, the so -called Ostwald ripening, leads to the net growth of platinum particles and 

consequent decrease of ECSA [2], while the corrosion of carbon support results in detachment of particles 

and their eventual agglomeration into larger clusters, again caus ing the loss of ECSA. Both of thes e

phenomena are described by mathematical model ing of platinum particle size re distribution resulting 

from aforementioned electrochemical processes. 

The model is calibrat ed based on the changes in ECSA of Pt/C catalyst fro m Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo 

(TEC10E50E) with 46.3 wt% of Pt on high surface area carbon during long -term accelerated stress test. 

Changes in ECSA were measured by cycling voltammetry several times during aging at various 

temperatures (RT , 40, 50 and 60 °C) an d using two different potential windows (0.4 - 1.2 V and 0.8 - 1.2 

V) for volta ge cycling [3] . As shown in Figure 1, the model is capable o f describing the change of ECSA 

for all six experiments using the same set calibration parameters, proving its merit in mechanistically 

describing all relevant processe s of catalyst degradation. The results indicate strong effect of temperature 

on the rate of degradati on. According to the model, low ECSA loss , detected at voltage cycling at high 

potential window (0.8 - 1.2 V) is attributed to the high coverage of platinum surface with oxides, reducing 

the rate of Ostwald ripening, and lower rate of carbon corrosion, emerging from complex dynamic 

interplay between surface oxide groups on platinum and carbon surface. 

Figure 1: Comparison between measured (points) and modelled (lines) change in ECSA during voltage 

cycling experiment at different potential windows and temperatures. 

[1] Kregar A, Tavčar G, Kravos A, Katrašnik T. Appl. Energy 2020 , 263, 114547. 

[2] Kregar A, Katrašnik T. Open Phys . 2019 , 17, 779 –89. 

[3] Meier, J. C. et al. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2014, 5, 44 –67. Gou y-Chapman versus Reality :

# An Interpretation of Diffuse Capacitance s using Mean -Field Methods 

Katharina Doblhoff -Dier 

Leiden University, Netherlands 

PO Box 9500 , 2300 RA Leiden , The Netherlands 

k.do blhoff -dier@lic.leidenun iv.nl 

The capacitance of the electric dou ble layer is often described via the G ou y-Chapman -Stern equation as 

that of two capacitances in series 1/C s=1/C H+1/C GC , where CH is expected to be independent of ion 

concentration and CGC can easily be derived from thermodynamic principles for non -interacting point like 

pa rticles . For concentrated electrolytes , deviations from this theory are expected and have be en shown .

Dilute electrolytes , on the other ha nd , are generally expected to follow th is Gou y-Chapman -Stern 

behavior. In r ecent e xperime nt s, however, Ojha , Koper et al. [Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 711 ] have 

shown that a deviation from the Gou y-Chapman behavior can also be observed in dilute ele ctrolytes .

Figure 1: Experimentally, shorter sc reening lengths than expected are observe d on Pt and Au. Our mean -

field model can explain this somewhat unexpected behavior by ion adsorp tion. 

While the ideal behavior is observed fo r Hg and while for all metal electrodes studied the screening 

length is suggested to s cale with 1/ √c, the inverse root of the ion density , as predicted by the G ou y-

Chapman theory, the overall magnitude of the sc reening length seems to be considerably reduced on gold 

and platinum (i.e., C diffuse =αC GC ).

Figure 2 : Results of mean field simul ations for different ion adsorption strengths (c rosses); circles: fit to 

1/C H+1/( α CGC ). A value of α smaller than 1 suggests a reduced effective screening length. The inset 

schema tically shows the model used in a generalized Poisson -Boltzmann approach. 

We show that such an increase d screening len gth can be ca ptured in m ean -field theories when t aking ion 

adsorption close to the inter face into ac count. Extremely simple , an alytical models can be used to capture 

this effect in ideal ized situations , but would lead to a non -linear scaling of the screening length with 1/ √c 

in contradiction to experiment . Using a mean -field, modified Poisson -Boltzmann description , however, 

we can qualitatively reproduce the experimental da ta, giving a tentat ive interpretation to the experimental 

observations . Interestingly, we onl y observe a behavior similar to that found experimentally if ions can 

adsorb in regions of strongly reduced dielectric constant as shown schematically in the inset of Fig. 2 ,

thus providing additional information on the atomic -scale behavior of the interface. New Strategies for the Evaluation of the Anti -tumor Effect of Some 

# Drugs using Electrochemical T echniques 

Mihaela Tertiș , Iulia Rus, Bianca Melean, Robert Săndulescu and Cecilia Cristea 

Analytical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Iuliu Hațieganu Unive rsity of Medicine and 

Pharmacy 

4 Louis Pasteur Street, 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

mihaela.tertis@umfcluj.ro 

Doxorubicin is an antitumor drug from the group of anthracyclines widely used in the treatment of 

various malignancies like breast and bladd er cancer, Kaposi sarcoma, Hodgkin and non -Hodgkin 

lymphoma, acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemia. It can be found on the market in different 

formulations, starting from lyophilized powder for injection to liposomal doxorubicin and other types of 

delivery systems in which it can be incorporated alone or in combination with other molecules (1). 

Simvastatin is an inhibitor of HMG -CoA reductase, the most important enzyme from the process of 

cholesterol biosynthesis. It is use in the treatment of hype rcholesterolemia to reduce serum levels of 

cholesterol and therefore to reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases. There are several studies in the 

literature which demonstrated the decrease of cellular proliferation in the presence of high dose 

simvastat in and that this molecule potentiates the cytotoxic activity of antitumor drugs. Therefore, various 

types of drug delivery systems containing both antitumor drug and statin started to be investigated for the 

improvement of cancer therapy (2). 

The aim of t his study was to develop a disposable, simple, fast and sensitive sensor for the simultaneous 

electrochemical detection of doxorubicin and simvast atin, which could be used in preclinical studies of 

the development of a new pharmaceutical formulation for dr ug delivery. Firstly, the electrochemical 

behavior of each molecule was analyzed regarding the influence of electrode material, electrolyte solution 

and scan rate. After this, the proper electrode material, electrolyte solution and scan rate for both 

medic ines were chosen and a LSV (Linear Sweep Voltammetry) procedure was optimized for the 

simultaneous detection. In the same time, two chronoamperometry procedure s were tested, one for the 

detection of doxorubicin in the presence of simvastatin, and the other one for the detection of doxorubicin 

and simvastatin together . Finally, calibration curves for doxorubicin and simvastatin in the presence of 

each other were obtained using both electrochemical methods and the results obtained were compared. 

This detecti on strategy represent a promising tool in the development of a new pharmaceutical 

formulation for targeted drug delivery containing both drugs, whose association was proved to bring 

benefits in the treatment of cancer. 

Achnowledgements: 

This work was su pported by a grant of the Romanian Minister of Research and Innovation, CCCDI –

UEFISCDI, project number PNIII -P1 -1.2 -PCCDI -2017 -0221/59PCCDI/2018 (IMPROVE), within 

PNCDI III. Iulia Rus acknowledges UMF Grant no.  1529/58/18.01.2019. 

References 

(1) Paşcalău, V.; Pall, E.; Tertis, M., Suciu, M., Cristea, C., Borodi, G.; Bodoki, A.; Topală, T.; 

Stiufiuc, R.; Moldovan, A.; Pavel, C.; Marinca, T.; Popa, C. Int. J. Polymer. Mat. Polymer. 

Biomat . 2019 , 68 (1 -3), 60. 

(2) Buranrat, B.; Suwannaloet, W. Onco l. Lett. 2017 , 14 (5), 6243. St ate of Health Identification of Lithium -ion Battery by A dvanced 

# Instantaneous EIS 

Xinhua Zhu , Benny Wouters, Raf Claessens, Annick Hubin 

Research Group Electrochemical and Surface Engineering, Department Materials and Chemistry 

Vrije Universiteit Brusse l, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium 

Xinhua.Zhu@vub.be 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is the most popular non -destructive method for lithium 

ion batteries (LIBs) diagnosis and materials characteriza tion . Generally, EIS is operated on a non -

operational steady state of the battery system in order to satisfy the basic principles of EIS measurements, 

i.e., causality, linearity and stationarity [1]. In this work, EIS characterizations of LIB systems i n a non -

steady state or an operando condition are explored by using the in -house developed multisine technique 

(including both hardware and software): Odd Random Phase EIS (ORP -EIS) [2] with the time -resolved 

instantaneous impedance calculation [3]. This a ppro ach provides mechanistic insights into the dynamic 

interfacial properties of LIB systems and, therefore, can be applied for the online monitoring of battery 

conditions. Moreover, the in -house designed hardware is potentiostat -free setup, which shows po tent ial to 

be integrated in battery management system (BMS). 

This work is based on the state -of -the -art LiNi 0.80 Co 0.15 Al 0.05 O2 (NCA) cathode material, and ORP -EIS 

experiments are operated in the galvanostatic mode. In the non -steady state experiment, the ORP -EIS is 

measured directly after charging or discharging pulses. The time -resolved impedance spectra during the 

relaxation per iod can be calculated as shown in Figure 1. The charge -transfer resistance (Rct ), the 

dominant impedance response in the low freque ncy region (< 10 Hz), changes with the relaxation time. 

The phenomena can be correlated to the alternation of ionic concentration i n the interfacial vicinity .

Cycling aged NCA electrode materials are measured with the identical approach . A more significant 

evolution of the Rct during the same per iod of relaxation time is observed , indicating a deteriorated 

interfacial microstructure of NCA e lectrodes . Th is ΔRct could work as a stand -alon e SoH identification 

paramet er , which is dependent only on the interfac ial condition of electrode materials. 

Fig.1. Nyqu ist plot of the time -resolved 

in stantaneous impedance of an NCA/lithium cell 

during the relaxation period after the charging 

pulse. 

[1] Barsoukov, E. and Macdonald, J.R. eds., 2018. Impe dance spectroscopy: theory, experiment, and 

applications. John Wiley & Sons. 

[2] Van Gheem, E., Pintelon, R., Vereecken, J., Schoukens, J., Hubin, A., Verboven, P. an d Blajiev, O., 

2004. Electrochimica Acta, 49(26), pp.4753 -4762. 

[3] Breugelmans, T., Lataire, J., Muselle, T., Tourwé, E., Pintelon, R. and Hubin, A., 2012. 

Electrochimica Acta, 76, pp.375 -382. Self -powered Single -use Glucometer – A New Approach for 

# Sustainable Analyte Detection 

Irene Merino Jimenez a, Anna Llorella a, Marina Navarro -Segarra a, Juan Pablo Esquivel a, Neus Sabaté a,b 

a Instituto de Microelectrónica de Barcelona, IMB -CNM (CSIC), 

C/ de l Til·lers, Campus Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 

b Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), 

Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010, Barcelona, Spain 

Irene.merino@imb -cnm.csic.es; Neus.sabate@i mb -cnm.csic.es 

Paper -based electrochemical biosensors  are able to provide diagnostics and immediate health information 

near the patient [1 ]. Ideally, these point of care devices could be used by the patient with no need for 

laboratory instruments or tra ined specialists,  allowing patients to se lf -diagnose and self -care monitoring 

from their own homes, enhancing their quality of life and  decongesting the overloaded healthcare system .

However, these device s generally require external power sources or expens ive  readout units [2, 3] . A new 

paradigm of autonomous , sustainable and cost effective , single use electrochemical bio sensors is needed. 

One of the main difficulties in the fabrication of an autonomous sensor is the development of transducer s

to effectivel y convert the electrochemical response to a user recognizable signal without using complex 

electronics or sophisticated equipment .

In this work, a cost -effective, fully printable, stand -alone glucose -sensing system has been developed 

with an enzymatic fu el cell as the only power source and with no nee d for an external readout unit . A 

novel and simple approach to transduce the electrochemical signal from an enzymatic fuel cel l into a 

digitalized response. A self -powered single use device for the diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus 

has been designed, fabricated and tested. The self -powered device consists of: i) an enzymatic fuel cell, 

which acts as both the glucose sensor and the energy source; ii) an electronic circuit, which transduces the 

biologic al response into an electrical response and ultimately into electrochromic displays that show the 

result; iii) and an electro -fluidic timer, which times the sequence of events and allow the connection of 

the different parts of the electronic circuit at spe cific times. The working princ iple of this electrochemical 

sensing device is based on the fuel cell response, while charging a capacitor. By monitoring the capacitor 

built -up voltage, the concentration of glucose can be determined. T he device was able to d etermine 

whether the concentration of glucose in a sample was within healthy levels (< 140 mg/dl, 7.8 mmol/l) ,

indicates pre -diabetes (≥ 7.8 mmol/l and < 11.1 mmol/l) or provisio nal diagnosis of diabetes (≥ 11.1 

mmol/l) [4] . The results show reproducibili ty and selectivity, turning on the displays according to the 

glucose concentration. 

This self -powered, autonomous glucose bio -sensing device offers an energy saving, environmentally 

friendly and low cost solution for the point -of -care testing systems. This approach is a conceptual 

pathway that can lead t o instrument -free electrochemical bio sensor design. It could potentially be used for 

the diagnosis of human diseases besides diabetes , by measuring concentrations of other health care 

parameters such as la ctate, urea, ammonia, creatinine, cholesterol and uric acid. This measuring approach 

could dramatically contribute to the early detection and palliation of life threaten diseases in developed 

and developing world, in remote areas and emergency situations, since it does not need trained specialist, 

laboratory infrastructure or external power source. 

[1] Yetisen, A.K., M.S. Akram, and C.R. Lowe, Lab Chip 2013 , 13 (12): 2210 -2251. 

[2] E. Katz, A.F. Bückmann, I. Willner, “Self -powered Enzyme -Based Biosensors”, Journal of the 

American Chemical Society 123 (43), 10752 -10723. 

[3] T. Kulkarni, G. Slaughter, “Self -powered glucose biosensor operating under physiological 

conditions”, IEEE Sensors 2016 Conference, Orlando, FL, USA, Oct 30 - Nov 3, 2016, pp. 1 -3. 

[4] Wor ld Health Organization, “Diabetes Mellitus: Report of a WHO Study Group”, Report number 727; 

1985. Influence of carbon support modification on non -noble MNC catalyst 

# for oxygen reduction reaction 

M. Pri mb s, Y. Sun, M. Dalkilic, P. Schroeer, J. Schmidt, D. Bernsmeier, J. Huebner , A. Thomas, P. 

Strasser 

Technical University Berlin 

Strasse des 17. Juni 124 Berlin 

mathias.primbs@tu -berlin.de 

Metal nitrogen carbon catalysts (MNC) are a promising alternative for platinum based catalyst s in the 

oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in PEM fuel cells , but at the moment s tate of the art MNC catalyst still 

suffer from low activity and instability. Wang et al . showed t he positive effect on catalyst activity, by us ing 

carbon supports as basis to depos e and polymer ize the precursor s.[1] In this work we studied interactions of 

surface functionalization on the polymer deposition and their characterizations in regards to their activity .

The surface of t wo commercial carbon supports, Ketjen black EC -600 JD and MWCNT were functionalized 

by two methods: oxidizing and grafting of functionalized benzenes. Functionalities such as sulfonic acid 

and nitrate groups wer e achieved by radical grafting via in situ formed diazonium compounds. The modified 

carbon supports were characterized by infrared spectroscopy, XPS as well as elemental analysis .

The functionalized carbons were used a s support for later oxidative polymerization with different nitrogen 

containing monomers : m-phenylene diamine, p-phenylene diamine, aniline and melamine. In order to obtain 

the final catalyst, t he support /monomer mixes were polymer iz ed , impregnat ed with iron precursor, 

pyrolyzed at 950 °C and acid leach ed of unspecifically bound iron species .

The final catalyst s were characterized for their electrochemical activity in rotating ring disc setup, their site 

density via CO -chemisorption and their respec tive turnover frequency. The physico chemical 

characterization consists of the analysis of surface area and pore structure via nitrogen physisorption, SEM 

and TEM ; for the surface structure and compositional analysis via elemental analysis, ICP -OES, and XPS. 

We could show improved mass activit ies up to 0.95 A g -1 at 0.85 V RHE with surface modification of the 

used carbon supports in comparison to the unmodified carbon supports or no carbon support . The good 

dispersion of nitrogen containing monomers is assumed to lead to i ncreased surface area and high site 

densit y. Applying this highly scalable method of surface functionalization to different synthesis methods 

for MNC catalyst s could be a viable way to achieve high performance catalyst s for ORR .

[1] Q. Wang, Z. -Y. Zhou, Y. -J. Lai, Y. You, J. -G. Liu, X. -L. Wu, E. Terefe, C. Chen, L. Song, M. 

Rauf, N. Tian, S. -G. Sun, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2014 , 136 , 10882 -10885. Dramatic Differences in the Electrochemical and Spectral Behavior of 

# Hexameric and Heptameric DNA Fragments 

Libuse Trnkova 1, Iveta Triskova 1, Jakub Veznik 1,2 , Karel Lacina 2

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, CZ -625 00 Brno 

> 2

CEITEC - Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University , Kamenice 5, CZ -625 00 Brno 

Czech Republic 

libuse@chemi.muni.cz 

Dramatic electrochemical and spectroscopic differences , caused by the loss of the adenine nucleotide 

residing in the middle of the heptamer d(GCGAAGC) , were revealed [1]. Based on comparative 

voltammetric, circular dichroic and electrophoretic studies of the hexame r (Hx) - d(GCGAGC) and the 

heptamer (Hp) - d(GCGAAGC) we illustrate how a single nucleotide sequence and a neighbouring 

nucleotide species in ODNs strongly affect their secondary structure. 

Dedicated studies suggest that the heptamer (Hp) possesses a hairpin structure, whereas the hexamer (Hx) 

appears to be rather a duplex. Both of the structures exhibited completely different adsorption behavior at 

the hanging mercury drop electrode, and this factor was readily confirmed by means of elimination 

voltammetry with linear scan (EVLS)  [2]. We established that the Hp hairpin (~ -1300 mV), compared to 

the Hx duplex (~ -1360 mV), is the thermodynamicall y favored electron acceptor. The adsorption 

isotherms were constructed based on the voltammetric peak height values, reflecting the reduction of the 

adenine (A) and cytosine (C) moieties as well as the oxidation of the 7,8 -dihydroguanine (7,8 -DHG) 

moieties [3,4]. The comparative spectroscopic and electrochemical studies of heptameric and hexameric 

DNA fragments showed that not only the Hx structure but also the Hp structure (denoted as a 

thermodynamically very stable formation in solutions [ 5]) is vulnerabl e by an electrode field. 

Finally, as revealed by both the spectroscopic and electrochemical results, Hx forms a bimolecular 

antiparallel homo -duplex carrying both Watson –Crick base pairs (CG or GC) and mismatched edge -to -

edge base pairs (GA or AG). 

References 

1. I. Triskova, J. Veznik, K. Lacina, L. Trnkova, Bioelectrochemistry 2020, in press. 

2. L. Trnkova, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2005, 582, 258. 

3. A. Vecerova, I. Triskova, L. Trnkova, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2018, 821, 104. 

4. I. Pilarova, I. Kejno vska, M. Vorlickova, L. Trnkova, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 2118. 

5. I. Hirao, G. Kawai, S. Yoshizawa, Y. Nishimura, et al., Nucleic Acids Research, 1994, 22, 576. 

Acknowledgement 

This research has been financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MEYS) of 

the Czech Republic under two projects: MUNI/A/1424/2019 and CEITEC 2020 (LQ1601). Ara h1 Food Allergen Electrochemical Detection by 

# Gold -Chip DNA -based Sensor 

Oana Hosu 1, Flavia Ognean 1, Luiza Butica 1, Diana Acojocaritei 1, Wolfgang Schuhmann 2, Cecilia Cristea 1

> 1

Analytical Chemistry Department, "Iuliu Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 

Faculty of Pharmacy, 4 Pasteur Street, 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 2

Analytical Chemistry - Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Ruhr University Bochum, 

Universitätsstr. 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

hosu.oana@umfcluj.ro 

In 2015, World Health Organization (WHO) published a detailed report of an estimation of the global 

burden of foodborne diseases. According to this, there are four leading causes of unsafe food due to the 

presence of viruses, harmful bacteria, parasites or chemicals [1] . The latter is further categorised into 

aflatoxins, arsenic, cassava cyanide , peanut allergens and dioxins.  Food allergy affects 1 -10 % of the 

population and reports show that  its prevalence in children increased by 50% between 1997 and 2011 [2]. 

Peanuts are one of the most common allergic reac tion -induced foodstuffs as being often introduced in 

human dietary. The most frequently allergenic protein which is responsible of peanuts allergy is Ara h1, 

2, 3, and 6  trigger ing to an immunological response in more than 50% of the allergic population 

re presenting the first leading cause of anap hylactic fatalities worldwide [3 ]. Symptoms can occur from 

minutes to hours after exposure, and may include difficulty in breathing, low blood pressure, itchy rash, 

swelling of the tongue, and life -threatening syst emic reaction called anaphylaxis. As there is no cure for 

peanuts allergy yet developed but only effective care and emergency treatments, the only viable solution 

is a free peanut -based diet. ELISA is the most commonly used method for determining low level s of food 

allergens in food (ingredients, p rocessed foods and beverages) [4 ], but lacks of simplicity and reduced 

costs and oftentimes leads to delays in acquiring results. Therefore, risk management and mandatory 

labelling system of food allergens are cri tical steps in food industry to guarantee consumers safety. For 

these reasons, the development of an easy -to -use, fast and accurate device for peanuts allergen detection 

is fundamental to prevent life -threatening reactions in  sensitized  subjects. 

This work presents the ele ctrochemical detection of Ara h 1 by means of a biomimetic approach using 

oligonucleotide -modified microarray gold chips. The sensing strategy for the production of DNA 

microarrays was performed using a 32 -electrode chip comprising of (70 × 70 μm 2) gold electrodes [5] and 

synthetic DNA strands w ith sequences specific to Ara h 1. The affinity reaction was performed on 

microarrays consisting of 32 individually addressable modified gold microelectrodes. The affinity 

reaction be tween the DNA stra nds and Ara h 1, followed by conformational and structural changes in the 

recognition layer, was triggered by means of electrochemical mediators labelled at the DNA sequence. 

Each step of electrode modification was characterized by electrochemical technique s such as cyclic 

voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and chronocoulometry for determination of DNA 

coverage. P ossible applications on food sample analyses will be presented. 

References 

[1] Jayasena DD, Kim HJ, Yong HI, Park S, Kim K, Cho e W, et al. Food Microbiol. 2015 ;46(3):51 –7. 

[2 ] Facts and statistics|food allergy research.  www.foodallergy.org/life -with -food -allergies/food -allergy -

101/facts -and -statistics .

[3] Mueller GA, Maleki SJ, Pedersen LC. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep . 2014 ;14(5):429. 

[4] Hosu O, Selvolini G, Marrazza G. Curr Opin Electrochem. 2018 ;10:149 –56. 

[5]  Jambrec D, Kayran YU , Schuhmann W, Electroanalysis 2019 ;31:1943 -1951. 

Acknowledgments 

The Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and Innovation, CCCDI -UEFISCDI, project 

no. ERANET -RUS -PLUS -PLASMON -ELECTROLIGHT/46/2018, within PNCDI III and in the fra me of 

European Social Found, Human Capital Operational Programme 2014 -2020, project no. 

POCU/380/6/13/125171. Quantum -Chemical Modeling of Structure Modification in Neutral 

# Polypyrrole Complexes with Anions 

D. V. Konev 1,2 , O. I. Istakova 1, A. S. Zyubin 1, T. S. Zyubina 1, M. A. Vorotyntsev 1,2, 3,4,5  

> 1

Institute for Problems o f Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sc iences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 2

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , Moscow, Russia  

> 3

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Dijon, France  

> 5

Frumkin Institute of Phy sical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, , Russia 

Email:  dkfrvzh@gmail.com , oistakova@gmail.com 

Polypyr role is widely used in various electronic, electrochemical, and membrane technologies as an 

electroactive polymer with high electrical conductivity and high chemical stability [1]. For the vast 

majority of polypyrrole applications in various electrochemica l devices is the fundamentally important 

question of the range of electroactivity pot entials and conductivity of the polypyrrole chain, a change in 

these parameters during redox transitions from a charged to an uncharged state, as well as concomitant 

chang es in other polymer parameters. 

Recently, an interesting experimental effect for thin films of polypyrrole noticed by authors of work [2]: 

the electroactivity region expands into the negative potential region when such films undergo multiple 

charge/dischar ge cycling in a monomer -free solution of the background electrolyte. In this case, th e

questions arise - does the expansion of the electroactivity potentials range correlate with a conductivity 

change of the material during multiple cycling of thin polypyr role films, and what is the reason for this 

correlation? It was found that at the fir st stage of this process, the characteristics of the system (redox 

charges, shape of voltammetric response) noticeably change, and then reach saturation, which can be 

caus ed by structural changes in the polymer. This work aims to find out whether the confo rmational 

changes of macromolecular complexes with anions can cause the observed behavior .

We considered the change in the shape of the polypyrrole chain upon interaction with strong acceptors 

(for example, BF4 –) and during the formation of neutral oligopy rrole complexes with a different number 

of anions. The quantum chemical modeling was performed using the density functional B3LYP and basis 

6-31G*. It has been shown that in such complexes, it is energetically favorable to reorient the pyrrole 

rings closes t to the anion from the trans to cis position, which leads to the formation of meanders, 

including 3 –5 pyrrole rings per loop. It was noted that a decrease in the loop si ze would decrease the 

interaction energy with the acceptor. Contrary, an elongation of such a loop reduces the number of 

attached anions with a slight energy change of interaction of each of them with the polypyrrole chain. 

The vibrational spectra of oligo pyrrole complexes with a different number of BF 4– anions were 

calculated, and the pros pects for the experimental detection of calculated conformational states by IR 

spectroscopy were evaluated. 

Acknowledgments 

The study was supported by RFBR (project № 18 -33 -01303 mol_a ) and carried out within the framework 

of the thematic map of the IPCP RAS №АААА - А19 -119061890019 -5 w ith the use of resources of 

National Technology Initiative Competence Center at IPCP RAS. 

References: 

1. T. A. Skotheim, J. Reynolds, Handbook of Conducting Polymers, 2 Vo lume Set, CRC press, 2007, 

1680 

2. M. A. Vorotyntsev, V. A. Zinovyeva, D. V. Konev, Mechanisms of electropolymerization and redox 

activity: fundamental aspects, S. Cosnier, A. Karyakin (ed.). Electropolymerization: concepts, materials 

and applications. John Wiley & Sons. 2010, 27 -50 Colorimetric Sensing System B ased on Multiplexed Enzyme Assay 

# Mediated by Smartphone Camera Readout 

Oana Hosu 1,2 , Robert Sandulescu 2, Cecilia Cristea 2, Giovanna Marrazza 1,3 

> 1

Department of Chemistry ”Ugo Schiff”, University of Florence, 

Via della Lastrucc ia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Fi) Italy 

> 2

Analytical Chemistry Department, "Iuliu Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 

Faculty of Pharmacy, 4 Pasteur Street, 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 3

Instituto Nazionale Biostrutture e Biosistemi (INBB), Unit of Florence, 

Viale delle Medaglie d’Oro 305, 00136, Roma, Italy 

hosu.oana@umfcluj.ro 

Polyaniline (PANI) is a conducting polymer highly sensitive to pH changes in its microenvironment and 

its conductivity is known to increase by 8 –10 orders of magnitude on doping with acids. This is due to the 

transition of its emeraldine salt (ES) form to emeraldine base (EB) which is also accompanied by colour 

change from green to blue [1]. 

In this work, we present a smartphone -based naked eye one spot biosensor utilizing the unique 

colorimetric properties of the poly(aniline -co -anthranilic acid) (ANI -co -AA) composite film coupled 

with tyrosinase (Tyr), horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and bi -enzymatic horseradish peroxidase -glucose 

oxidase (HRP -GOx). The enzyme is immobilized on the composite polym er film by physical adsorption 

and in the presence of its substrate, catalyzes a reversible redox color change in the host polymer from 

green to blue (Fig. 1) . A Google Play Store, free of charge software application, was used to enable easy 

and clear disp lay of the sensors’ response indicating remarkable changes in the optical features. 

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Attenuated Total Reflectance -Infrared Spectroscopy 

(ATR -IR) were used for the characterization of synthesized composite. The poly (ANI -co -AA) enzyme -

modified films were applied to colorimetric detection of catechol, hydrogen peroxide and glucose, 

respectively. The developed colorimetric biosensor was studied and optimized in relation to different 

experimental parameters by using a 96 micro -well plate plastic sup port and different polyester strips were 

imagined. A linear correlation between the analytes concentration (0 -200 μM) and the Hue value of the 

colored modified film was observed after only 2 minutes reaction in the case of Tyr - and HRP -based 

sensor, and 8 minutes for HRP -GOx sensor. The results were confirmed by the spectrophotometric 

measurements performed at 655 nm. By smartphone camera readout and analysis, LODs of 12.31 μM, 

51.20 μM and 49.42 μM were obtained for catechol, hydrogen peroxide, and glucose , respectively. 

Different molecules with similar structure were tested as interferences for glucose determination. 

Moreover, the sensor being disposable, its applicability to food and pharmaceutical analysis was 

demonstrated. It has been shown by these stu dies that the naked eye biosensor is promising as quick and 

simple test for handheld analysis in various fields [2]. 

Fig. 1. Colour change of the Tyr/poly(ANI -co -AA) sensor in the presence of catechol in 0.1 M PB pH 5.0 

References: 

[1] B. Thakur, C. A. Amarnath, S. H. Mangoli, and S. N. Sawant, Sensors Actuators, B Chem. , 207, 262 –

268 (2015). 

[2] O. Hosu, M. Lettieri, N. Papara, A. Ravalli, R. Sandulescu, C. Cristea, G. Marrazza, Talanta, 204 ,

525 -532 (201 9). 

Acknowledgments 

This work was support ed by a grant of the Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and 

Innovation, CCCDI – UEFISCDI, project number PN –III –P1 -1.2 -PCCDI2017 -0407. CoO x Nanoislands on Au(111) – Structure, Stability , and Dynamics 

# under Reaction Conditions 

C. Stumm a, M. Bertram a, M. Kastenmeier a, F. Speck b, Z. Sun c, J. Rodríguez -Fernández c,

J. V. Lauritsen c, S. Cherevko b, K. Mayrhofer b, O. Brummel a, J. Libuda a.

a In terface Research and Catalysis, E CRC , Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, 

Egerlandstrasse 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

b Helmholtz -Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg, FZ Jülich GmbH, Egerlandstrasse 3, 91058 Erlangen, 

Germany 

c Interdisciplinary Nano science Center (iNANO) and Department of Physics and Astronomy, 

Aarhus University, DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark 

Cobalt oxide is a highly active electro catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) [1] and a model 

sy stem in electrocat aly sis .[2, 3] In order to study the stability and dynamics of cobalt oxide we 

investigated well defined CoO x nanoislands on Au(111) by complimentary electrochemical in -situ 

methods and surface scie nce techniques . We prepa red the CoO x nanoislands by physical vapor deposition 

(PVD) in ultra -high vacuum (UHV) using a procedure described previously. [1] We characterized the 

system in UHV by scanning tunneling micr oscopy (STM ). After transferring the sample from UHV into 

the electrochemical environment, we studied the system by electrochemical STM (EC -STM), on -line 

inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP -MS) , and cyclic voltammetry (CV) . The studies were 

performed at pH 10 (phosphate buffer) in a potential region from -0.4 to 1.8 V RHE .

After preparation , we observed two types of nanoislands, which we assign to bilayers and double bilayer s.

At 0.7 V RHE the nanoislands are stable and do not show mobility. By decreasing the potential to 0.5 VRHE ,

we observe that the bilayer s become dynamic and start to dissolve. Online ICP -MS measurements show 

that Co dissolution is highest for potential steps from 0.8 to 0.5 V RHE , while the dissolution rate decreases 

by ste ppi ng from 0.8 V RHE to lower potentials . This indicates that the dissolution process is transient. 

Close to the reduction potential of Co 2+ to Co 0, we observe the re deposition of (adsorbate covered) Co 

aggregates on the Au surface. 

Scanning from 0.8 V RHE in the positive scan direction bilayers and double bilayers are stable up to a 

potential of 1.0 V RHE . At 1.1 V RHE striped features appear on the bilayers which we assign to oxygen 

adatoms. These oxygen adatoms fully cover the bilayers upon increasing the poten tial further . At 1.5 

VRHE we observe o xidation of the Au(111) support. 

[1] J. Fester, A. Makoveev, D. Grumelli, R. Gutzler, Z. Sun, J. Rodríguez -Fernández, K. Kern, J.V. 

Lauritsen, The Structure of the Cobalt Oxide/Au Catalyst Interfa ce in Electrochemical Water Splitting, 

Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 57 (2018) 11893 -11897. 

[2] F. Faisal, C. Stumm, M. Bertram, F. Waidhas, Y. Lykhach, S. Cherevko, F. Xiang, M. Ammon, M. 

Vorokhta, B. Šmíd, T. Skála, N. Tsud, A. Neitzel, K. Ber anová, K.C. Prince, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, T. 

Wähler, R. Schuster, M.A. Schneider, V. Matolín, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, O. Brummel, J. Libuda, Electrifying 

model catalysts for understanding electrocatalytic reactions in liquid electrolytes, Nature Materials, 17 

(2 018) 592 -598. 

[3] O. Brummel, J. Libuda, Electrifying Oxide Model Catalysis: Complex Electrodes Based on 

Atomically -Defined Oxide Films, Catalysis Letters, (2020) 10.1007/s10562 -10019 -03078 -x. Secondary Alcohols as Rechargeable Electrofuels: 

# Electrooxidation of 2 -Propanol at Pt and PtRu electrodes 

O. Brummel 1, F. Waidhas 1, M. Kastenmeier 1, C. Stumm 1, M. Bertram 1, D. Sandbeck 2, P. Khanipour 2,

S. Haschke, 3 S. Bochmann 3, J. Bachmann 3,4 , S. Cherev ko 2, I. Katsounaros 2, K.J.J. Mayrhofer 2,

P. Wasserscheid 2, 5, J. Libuda 1.

> 1

Interface Research and Catalysis, ECRC, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, 

Egerlandstr. 3, D -91058 Erlangen, Germany 

> 2

Helmholtz -Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renew able Energy (IEK -11), Forschungszentrum 

Jülich GmbH, Erlangen, 91058, Germany 

> 3

Chemistry of Thin Film Materials, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, IZNF, 

Cauerstr. 3, D -91058 Erlangen, Germany 

> 4

Institute of Chemistry, Saint Petersburg State University, 26 Universitetskii Prospect, Saint Petersburg, 

Petergof 198504, Russia 

> 5

Lehrstuhl f ür Chemische Reaktionstechnik, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg ,

Egerlandstr . 3, Erlangen, 91058, Germany. 

olaf.brummel@fau.de 

Iso propanol (IPA) and its deh ydrogenated counterpart acetone (ACE) can be used as a rechargeable 

electrofuel. In this concept IPA is oxidized to ACE in a fuel cell and, subsequently, hydrogenated again 

catalytically. [1] 

Addressing this concept, we investigated the IPA oxidation on catalysts with different levels of 

complexity , ranging from single crystal surfaces to commercial alloy catalysts. Specifically, we used Pt 

single crystals as well as polycrystalline and nanostructured Pt electrodes .[2] Further we studied carbon 

supported Pt and PtRu model electro catalysts , which we prepared in ultra -high vacuum ,[3] as well as 

commercial Pt and PtRu electro catalysts .[1] 

We investigated the reacti on mechanism of the isopropanol oxidation as well as the catalyst stability 

using complimentary in -situ techniques . Namely , we used electrochemical infrared reflection absorption 

spectroscopy (EC -IRRAS), cyclic voltammetry (CV), differential electrochemica l mass spectrometry 

(DEMS), electrochemical real -time mass spectrometry (EC -RTMS) , electrochemical scanning tunneling 

microscopy (EC -STM) , and online inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP -MS) .

We observe the onset for the IPA oxidation on Pt el ectrodes at 0.3 V RHE , yielding ACE formed with high 

selectivity. At potentials above 0.9 V RHE , the formation of Pt oxide inhibits the reaction. The only side 

reaction observed is the formation of small amounts of CO 2. We show that the product ACE adsorbs a t

the Pt electrodes poisoning the surface. On nanotubular electrodes with high surface area, ACE stays 

mainly adsorbed on the surface and only a small fraction desorbs. These observations suggest that 

poisoning of the Pt electrode by adsorbed ACE limits th e oxidation of IPA. However, we did not observe 

any influence of the IPA oxidation on the stability of the electro catalyst s. By using PtRu alloy catalysts, 

the onset potential is shifted down to 0.1 V RHE and the poisoning can be reduced. 

[1] G. Sievi, D. Geburtig, T. Skeledzic, A. Bösmann, P. Preuster, O. Brummel, F. Waidhas, M.A. 

Montero, P. Khanipour, I. Katsounaros, J. Libuda, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, P. Wasserscheid, Towards an 

efficient liquid organic hydrogen carrier fuel cell concept, Energy & Environmental Science, 12 (2019) 

2305 -2314. 

[2] F. Waidhas, S. Haschke, P. Khanipour, L. Fromm, A. Görling, J. Bachmann, I. Katsounaros, K.J.J. 

Mayrhofer, O. Brummel, J. Libuda, Hydrogen Storage with Secondary Alcohols: Electrooxidation of 2 -

Propa nol on Pt Electrodes, (submitted). 

[3] C. Stumm, M. Kastenmeier, F. Waidhas, M. Bertram, D. Sandbeck, S. Bochmann, S. Cherevko, J. 

Bachmann, K.J.J. Mayrhofer, O. Brummel, J. Libuda, A Model System for Supported Platinum 

Nanoparticle Catalysts: Stability an d Secondary Alcohol Oxidation for Fuel Cell Application, (in 

preparation). Electroreduction of Ni and Co in the presence of MWCNT in choline 

# chloride based ionic liquids 

Anca Cojocaru 1,2 , Sabrina Patricia Rosoiu 2, Oana Lazar 2, Stefania Costovici 2, Aida Ghiulnare Pantazi 2,

Marius Enachescu 2, Liana Anicai 2, Teodor Visan 2

> 1

Dept. of Inorganic Chem ., Physical Chem . and Electrochemistry, Faculty of Applied Chemistry and 

Materials Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest 

-7 Gh. Polizu St., sect. 1, 011061 Bucharest, Romania 

> 2

Center of Surface Science and Nanotechnology, University Politehnica of Bucharest 

313 Splaiul Independentei, sect. 6, 060042 Bucharest, Romania 

anca.cojocaru @chimie.upb.ro 

Choline chloride -ethylene glycol (1:2) ionic liquid (ILEG) has been used as electrolyte to study 

nickel -cobalt alloy electrodeposition proc ess and the influence of multi wall carbon nanotube ( MWCNT )

presence on NiCo MWCNT composite deposition processes. 

Cyclic voltammograms were recorded at different scan rates in the range 10 -200 mV s−1 on platinum 

electrode in Choline chloride -ethylene glycol (1:2 ) electrolyte containing 0.5 M Ni 2+ and 0.5 M Co 2+ ions .

The cyclic voltammograms illustrated that nickel -cobalt and nickel -cobalt MWCNT reactions involve 

quasireversible processes. The exper iments were recorded at a constant temperature of 70 0C. 

The electrochemical cell contained a Pt electrode as working electrode , a Pt plate as auxiliary electrode, 

and a n Ag wire immersed in the ionic liquid as quasi -reference electrode. 

In order to demons trate the mass -transport control (diffusion control) of cathodic process, we represented 

the plots of cathodic peak current (I p) versus the square root of scan rate (v 1/2 ). (Fig. 1) 

The deposits surface shows a rather rough surface with irregular cone depo sits that increase with 

increasing current density. In the case of 

composite films, the carbon nanotubes 

incorporated in the film can be observed. 

The presence of MWCNT lead s to an increase 

of the current density and an increase of the 

diffusion coeffici ent from 0.56 ×10 −7 cm 2 s−1 

for NiCo alloy to 1.85 ×10 −7 cm 2 s−1 for NiCo 

MWCNT composite. 

The obtained results of diffusion coefficients 

are at the same order of magnitude as 

calculated for Ni by Urcezino et al [1] and Co 

by Cojocaru et al [2]. 

References 

1. Urcezi no, A. S., dos Santos, L. P., Casciano, P. N., Correia, A. N., & Lima -Neto, P. D. (2017). 

Electrodeposition study of Ni coatings on copper from choline chloride -based deep eutectic solvents. 

Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society , 28 (7), 1193 -1203. 

2. Cojocaru, A., Mares, M. L., Prioteasa, P., Anicai, L., & Visan, T. (2015).  Study of electrode processes 

and deposition of cobalt thin films from ionic liquid analogues based on choline chloride. Journal of Solid 

State Electrochemistry , 19 (4), 1001 -1014. 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 

> NiCo 2CNT NiCo 1CNT NiCo Ip, mA v1/2 , (V s -1 )1/2

Fig. 1  The current densities of cathodic peaks 

versus scan rate for NiCo and NiCo MWCNT 

deposition in ILEG Deep Eutectic Solvents Based on Lithium Nitrate and Acetamide as 

# Electrolyte in High -Temperature Electric Double -Layer Capacitors 

Adam Maćkowiak , Przemysław Galek, Krzysztof F ic 

Poznan University of Technology,  Berdychowo 4, 60 -965, Poznan, Poland 

adam.ma ckowiak@put.poznan.pl 

Electric double -layer capacitors (EDLCs), have received much attention in recent years because of their 

outstanding properties such as long cycle life (cyclability) and high power density sustained . Currently, 

the most commonly used electrolytes in EDLC s are aqueo us solutions, as far as the sustainability is 

concerned. However, solvent evaporation and components corrosion are major drawbacks at elevated 

temperatures, e.g. 100℃. Organic solvents , because of their flammability and environmental toxicity, 

could be als o discarded for high -temperatures applications. Ionic liquids may be another solution, but 

their production price is too high for commercial use yet . Therefore, a promising solution for high -

temperature operating capacitors is the use of electrolytic solut ions based on deep eutectic solvents 

(DESs). The se electrolytes can be easily obtained just by mixing two compounds in specific molar ratio s.

Usually, DES are thermally and electrochemically stable and have negligible vapour pressure. 

Furthermore, b y using high temperatures, one can eliminate several problems related to the viscosity of 

liquids, and thus even improve the conductivity or ionic mobility. 

In this work, the properties of DES made of lithium nitrate and acetamide as the electrolyte for high -

tem perature capacitors were examined. A mixture of acetamide and LiNO 3 in the molar ratio of 78:22 is 

observed to form a DES with freezing point below room temperature . Basic electrochemical tests were 

carried out, such as cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic ch arge/di sc harge and impedance spectroscopy ; the 

capacitance values obtained for symmetric capacitors with porous carbon electrodes was ca. 133 F⸱g -1 at 

mild current regimes. In further studies, o ptimal capacitor operating conditions were determined, i.e. 

voltage - 1.4 V and current density - 0.2 A⸱g -1. Under these cond itions, it has been shown that the DES 

mixture has better capacitance than individual components separately. The addition of organic solvents or 

water reduces the quality of the electrolyte at 100°C. Lithium nitrate and acetamide mixture was 

compared with 5M LiNO 3 aqueous solution as electrolytes in EDLC s and proved the advantage of DES 

over aqueous solutions at elevated temperatures. The processes occurring on both electrodes were also 

explaine d. Furthermore, i t has been shown that changing the Li + cation to K + or Na + does not significantly 

affect the quality of the capacitor, while the change of the NO 3- anion to NO 2- causes a significant 

deterioration of capacitance properties. The cycle life of the capacitor and the effect of the addition of 

inorganic salt on conductivity were also investigated. The tests were carried out on various electrode 

materials, however , microporous Kynol ACC -507 -20 turned out to be the most suitable one . Moreover ,

detailed analysis has been conducted using gas chromatography, DSC, Raman and FTIR spectroscopy. 

The European Research Council is acknowledged for the financial support within the Starting Grant 

project (GA 759603) under European Unions’ Horizon 2020 Re search and Innovation Programme. 

Figure 1: a) cyclic voltammograms (v = 1 mV ⸱s-1, I = 0.2 A⸱g -1) with current values recalculated prior to 

scan rate ; b) galvanostatic charge/discharge (I = 0.2 A⸱g -1); c) Nyquist pl ot (100 kHz – 10 mHz) in fi rst 

350 cycles of EDLCs based on 5M LiNO 3 and DES at 100°C. 

References 

[1] Abbott, A.P., Boothby, D., Capper, G., Davies, D.L., Rasheed, R.K., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 

9142 -9147, 

[2] Zaidi, W., Timperman, L., Anouti, M., RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45647 -456 52 Impact of nitrates ions on the corrosion mechanisms of a silicon -rich 

# stainless steel in nitric acid medi a at boiling temperature 

Ines BAHTIT a,b* , Nathalie GRUET b, Beatriz PUGA b, Ramón NÓVOA c , Vincent VIVIER a 

> a

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire Interfaces et Systèmes Electrochimiques, 4 Place Jussieu, F -

75005, Paris, France  

> b

DEN - Service de la Corrosion et du Comportement des Mat ériaux dans leur Environnement (SCCME), 

CEA, Université Paris -Saclay, F -91191, Gif -sur -Yvette, France 

> c

ENCOMAT Group , EEI, Campus Universitario Lagoas -Marcosende, 36310 Vigo, Spain 

*e mail address: ines.bahtit@cea.f r

The reprocessing process of spe nt fuel is carried out in France using the Purex process. The first chemical 

step of this process is the dissolution of the spent fuel in aqueous concentrated and hot nitric acid . Corrosion 

is an electrochemical process involving oxidation and reduction reactions in which the anodic reaction is 

influenced by material factors, whereas the cathodic reaction is influenced by environmental factors. 

Corrosion of stainless steels in n itri c acid is strongly affected by the cathodic reaction . [1 -2] 

The silicon -rich stainless steel X1 C r Ni Si 18 -15 -4 evaluated in this study, spontaneously forms a protective 

oxide s film that is composed of mixed chromium and silicon oxides. This film ensures good durability of 

the industrial facilities operating with hot and concentrated nitric acid in the presence of oxidizing species .

In particular, it has been shown that this all oy is not subject to transpassive interg ranular corrosion [3 -4] .

In the present work, th e impact of nitrates on the reduction and oxidation mechanisms of the silicon -rich 

stainless steel in conc entrated and hot nitric acid has been investigated using electrochemical techniques 

(Linear sweep voltammetry, chronoamperometry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy ) coupled with 

surfaces analyses (SEM, XPS,…). 

Linear p olariz ation curve s (Figure 1) show the influence of nitrates at boiling temperature . Despite a 

constant proton concentration, current and corrosion rate increase with the addition of nitrates to the 

medium . Nitrates are directly involved in reduction mechanisms of nitric acid, which can explain the 

increase in the cathodic curren t. It seems that nitrate ion s could also play a role in the anodic dissolution of 

the considered alloy as the anodic current is significantly enhanced . Fu rther experiments were performed 

by examin ing the variation of the oxide layer properti es. XPS measurements show variatio ns in the oxide 

layer formation depending on nitrate s concentration .

Figure 1: Linear p olarization curves of the Si -

rich stainless steel in nitric acid media 

[H +]fixed =2.5mol/L with different nitrate 

concentrations at bo iling temperature . v= 0.2 

mV .s -1

Refe rences 

[1] F. Balbaud, G. Sanchez, P. Fauvet, G. Santarini, and G. Picard, Corros. Sci., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 1685 –

1707, (2000) .

[2] M. Benoit , “Modélisation de la cinétique de réduction de l’acide nitrique concentré sur acier 

inoxydable 304L,” Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, (2016 ).

[3] A. Desestret, I. Epelboin, M. Froment, and P. Guiraldenq, Corros. Sci. , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 225 –234, 

(1968 ). 

[4] B. Laurent, N. Gruet, B. Gwinner, F. Miserque, K. Rousseau, and K. Ogle, Electrochimica Acta , vol. 

258, pp. 653 –661, (2017 ). Understanding Electrochemical Oxidation of Methylguanines -

# Theory and Experiment 

Libuse Trnkova 1, Iveta Triskova 1, Alan Liska 2, Jiri Ludvik 2 

> 1

Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry , Kamenice 5, CZ -625 00 Brno ,

Czech Republic  

> 2

J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Che mistry of the CAS, Dolejškova 3, CZ -182 23 Prague, 

Czech Republic 

libuse@chemi.muni.cz 

The oxidation of guanine (G) plays a major role in the redox processes of DNA due to the relative ease 

with which this nucleobase may be oxidized [1,2]. The general mechanism of G oxidation has been 

examined on different graphite electrodes depending on the environment, such as pH, ionic strength , and 

the type of a supporting electrolyte [3 -5] . In our study, we show how the established mechanism is 

changing when G will be methylated. We investigated the oxidation processes of f our N -methyl 

derivatives of G (1N, 3N, 7N, and 9N ) on a polymer pencil graphite electrode (pPeGE) [6 ] to ascertain 

the relationship between the position of the methyl group and the corresponding oxidation behaviour. In 

the context of the oxidation peak potentials it was found that energetically easier oxidation can be 

expecte d in the case of methyl substitution at the pyrimidine ring rather than at the imidazole one. The 

position of the methyl affects the rapid protonation/deprotonation and tau tomeric equilibria that are 

present in the oxidation processes. The assumption was proved by our theoretical study . The 

voltammetric data were completed with quantum chemical calculations : (i) the HOMO energies of all N -

methylGs , (ii) the SOMO energies of the corresponding cations, and (iii) the theoretical oxidation 

potentials obtained from thermochemical cycles. Possible tautomeric structures of all the methyl 

derivatives were optimized using COSMO solvation models at B3LYP/6 -31+G(d) level [ 7]. While 1 -, 7 -

and 9 -mG tautomers of lowest energy resemble G, guanosine an d GMP derivatives in the sense that their 

species have hydrogen atoms located on N1 and N9 atoms [ 8], 3 -mG prefers to have N7 atom protonated. 

This finding will be discussed in more detail with respect to specific electrochemical properties of 3 -mG 

reporte d from experiments. 

References 

1. S. Steenken, Chem. Rev. 1989, 89, 503. 

2. C. J. Burrows, J. G. Muller, Chem. Rev. 1998, 98, 1109 

3. A. M. Oliveira -Brett, V. Diculescu, J. A. P. Piedade: Bioelectrochemistry 2002, 55, 61. 

4. E. E. Ferapontova, Electrochim. Acta 2004, 49, 1751. 

5. Q. Li, C. Batchelor -McAuley, R.G. Compton: J. Phys. Chem. B 2010, 114, 7423. 

6. R. Navratil, A. et al, J. Electroanal. Chem . 783 ( 2016), 152 -160 

7. M. J. Frisch et al.: Gaussian 09, Revision D.01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT, 2013. 

8. A. Liska, I. Triskova, J. Ludvik, L. Trnkova, Electrochimica Acta 2019, 308, 108. 

Acknowledgement 

This research was supported by the project MUNI/A/1 424/2019 of the Ministry of Education, Youth and 

Sports (MEYS) of the Czech Republic. Access to computing and storage facilities owned by parties and 

projects contributing to the National Grid Infrastructure MetaCentrum provided under the programme 

“Projects of La rge Research, Development, and Innovations Infrastructures” (CESNET LM2015042), is 

greatly appreciated.      

> The v oltammetric oxidation signals of
> N-methylguanines on a polymer pencil
> graphite electrode (pPeGE); the ESP
> map of G (the isosurface le vel = 0.03) .

## Understandin g the Reconstruction of Ni Nanoparticles on N -Doped Carbon 

## Materials 

Paulina Prslja , Nuria Lopez 

Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ) 

Avinguda dels Països Catalans 16, 43007 Tarragona , Spain 

nlopez@iciq.es 

The development of efficient and selective electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reaction (eCO 2RR) catalyst s

is an important but challenging task . Metal -nitrogen -carbon (MNC) materials, where the single metal atom is 

coordinated to pyridinic or pyrrolic nitrogen atoms, are promising candidates to achiev e high activity and 

selectivity towards CO and can proceed to alcohols and  hydrocarbons . Among th em, the Ni derivative  (NiN xC)

exhibit s the highest efficiency for producing CO, at the different potentials and industrial current densities . 1,2

The variation in the synthesis of defects can change the surrounding electronic structure and coordination 

environment of metal s, where directing feature s are the size of vacancies and N unsaturated and saturated 

coordination sites. The metal can change its oxidation state depending on these variables. Therefore, the need 

for different potentials. Furthermore, it has been shown that Ni nanoparticles supported on carbon materials can 

reach the same selectivity as single -metal atom catalyst s when the reaction is consistently pe rformed under 

electrochemical condition. 3

In the pr esent work , with Density Functional Theory (DFT) we focus on the Ni nanoparticle reconstruction, taking 

CO 2 reduction as an example. We have evaluated the activity and selectivity of potential NiN xC active sites 

together with the reconstruction and redispe rsion of supported nanoparticles under electrochemical conditions. 

We show that such  reconstruction occurs due to the disintegration of Ni(CO) x complexes on low N saturated 

materials. The selectivity, on the other hand, is higher on N saturated materials. 

(1) Varela, A. S.; Ju, W.; Bagger, A.; Franco, P.; Rossmeisl, J.; Strasser, P. Electrochemical Reduction of 

CO2 on Metal -Nitrogen -Doped Carbon Catalysts. ACS Catal. 2019 , 9 (8), 7270 –7284. 

(2) Li, J.; Pršlja, P.; Shinagawa, T.; Martín Fernández, A. J.; Krumei ch, F.; Artyushkova, K.; Atanassov, P.; 

Zitolo, A.; Zhou, Y.; García -Muelas, R.; López, N.; Pérez -Ramírez, J.; Jaouen, F. Volcano Trend in 

Electrocatalytic Co2 Reduction Activity over Atomically Dispersed Metal Sites on Nitrogen -Doped 

Carbon. ACS Catal. 20 19 , 9 (11), 10426 –10439. 

(3) Varela, A. S.; Ju, W.; Bagger, A.; Franco, P.; Rossmeisl, J.; Strasser, P. Electrochemical Reduction of 

CO2 on Metal -Nitrogen -Doped Carbon Catalysts. ACS Catal. 2019 , 9 (8), 7270 –7284. The Polymer Pencil Graphite Electrode – the Most Sensitive Tool for 

# the Simultaneous Determination of Purine Metabolism Products 

Iveta Triskova , Libuse Trnkova 

Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry 

Kamenice 5, CZ -625 00 Brno 

175126@mail.muni.cz ; libuse@chemi.muni.cz 

Xanthine (XA) , hypoxanthine (HXA) and uric acid (UA) are degradation products of purine metabolism .

It is commonly known, that a bnormalities of the metabolite concentrations in human serum and u rine are 

sensitive indicators of many disorders, such as gout, xanthinuria, hyperuricemia , and perinatal asphyxia. 

The detection and quantification of XA, HXA and UA in body fluids is very important in the study of 

homeostasis of the xanthine oxidase (XOD) syste m and clinical diagnostics [1, 2] . Many techniques were 

developed for the simultaneous determination of the purine degradation products , e.g. enzymatic methods 

[2 ,3 ] high -performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) [2, 4, 5], capillary electrophoresis (CE) [ 2, 6],

and also electrochemistry based methods [2, 7-14].

In the context of electrochemistry, it has been shown that the oxidation processes of purines can be 

observed and studied using different types of graphite electrodes, e. g. pyrolytic graphite, polymer pencil 

graphite electrode (pPeGE) or screen printed graphite electrode (SPGE), with good re producibility. In 

addition, t his electroanalysis is fast, cheap and applicable in medicine and food industry. 

The aim of our research wa s the electrochemical determination of HXA, XA and UA at chosen graphite 

electrodes by using linear sweep voltammetry (L SV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) in connection with the 

elimination voltammetry with linear scan (EVLS). The oxidation behaviour of the above -mentioned 

purine derivatives was investigate d not only with respect to pH (pH 2 -9; phosphate – acetate buffer) and 

(micromolar and submicromolar ) concentration but also with respect to the type of the graphite electrode 

used (pPeGE – polymer pencil graphite electrode, BPPGE - basal plane pyrolytic graphite and EPPGE -

edge plane pyrolytic graphite) . As results from the voltammetric experiments , the oxidation behavio ur of 

purine derivatives is strongly pH -dependent . However, the posi tion of the oxidation signal s of XA, HXA, 

and uric acid allows to distinguish these three important derivatives at all pH values . Based on the 

concentration dependence s, it can be concluded that polymer pen cil graphite electrode (pPeGE) is the 

most sensitive sensor for the determination of purine metabolites , as follows from the comparison of 

different types of graphite electrode s.

References 

1. M. Heinig, R.J. Johnson, Cleve. Clin. J. Med. 73 (2006) 1059 –1064 

2. F. Zhang et al., Talanta 93 (2012) 320 -325. 

3. 3. E.E. Kelley, et al , J.Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 37231 –37234. 

4. M. Czauderna, J. Kowalczyk, J. Chromatogr. B: Biomed. Sci. Appl. 744 (2000) 129 –138.; 

5. N. Cooper, R. Khosravan, C. Erdmann, J. Fiene, J.W. Lee, J. Chromatogr. B 837 (2006) 1 –10 

6. F. Carlucci, A. Tabucchi, et al. Electrophoresis 21 (2000) 1552 –1557. 

7. M. Cubukcu, S. Timur, U. Anik, Talanta 74 (2007) 434 –439.; 

8. X. Cai, K. Kalcher, C. Neuhold, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem. 348 (1994) 660 –665.; 

9. J.M Zen, Y.Y. Lai, H.H. Yang, A. Se nthil Kumar, Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 84 (2002) 237 –244. 

10 . Z.H. Wang, X.Y. Dong, J. Li, Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 131 (2008) 411 –416. 

11. A.S. Kumar, P. Swetha, J. Electroanal. Chem. 642 (2010) 135 –142. 

12. R.N. Goyal, A. Mittal, S. Sharma, Electroanalysis 6 (1994) 609 –611 

13. R. Navratil, I. Pilarova, F. Jelen, L. Trnkova, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 8 (2013) 4397 – 4408; 

14. R. Navratil, A . et al , J. Electroanal. Chem . 783 ( 2016 ), 152 -160 

Acknowledgement 

This research has been financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MEYS) of 

the Czech Republic under the project: MUNI/A/ 1424 /201 9. Model ing and Simulati on of All -Solid -State Batteries 

# with B lock Co polymers 

Daniel O. Möhrle a,b ,* , Katharina Becker -Steinberger a,b , Birger Horstmann a,b ,c , Arnulf Latz a,b ,c 

> a

Helmholtz Institute Ulm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), 

Helmholtzstr. 11 , 89081 Ulm, Germany 

> b

German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Engineering Thermody namics, 

Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, 70569 Stuttgart , Germany 

> c

Ulm Unversity, Institute of Electrochemistry, 

Helmholtzstr. 16, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

* daniel.moehrle@dlr.de 

All -solid -state batteries (ASSB) are experiencing a growing scientific interest in recent years as potential 

next -generation high -voltage batteries with great intrinsic sa fety. Using polymer electrolytes in ASSBs 

can solve problems with current battery technolo gies, such as dendrite growth [1] and flammability [2]. 

Particularly with regard to mechanical properties and stability, polymers are promising compared to other 

solid electrolytes. A large number of different polymers are currently being discussed [3] .

In this contribution, we investigate the processes in block copolymer elec trolytes [2] by a multi -physics 

continuum transport model . The methodological framework for thermodynamically consistent modeling 

is given in previous work of Latz et al. [4 ]. 

The desc ription of the polymer electrolyte material is based on the specific free energy, which includes 

contributions due to mechanics, configuration and polarization. For the configurational free energy, the 

Flory -Huggins solution model is applied to catch the e ntropic b ehaviour of a polymer solution. In contrast 

to transport theories of other electrolytes, we formulate our model with respect to the polymer velocity. 

This enables us to parameterize the model with data from simulations on the atomic scale , e.g. fr om 

molecular dynamics simulations [5].

We investigate the beh avio r of ASSBs with polymer electrolytes under different operating conditions and 

compare our simulation s to experiments as well as simulations of other types of electrolytes . The most 

prominent differences are expected for the configurational and mechanical properties. 

This is a first step towards the theory -based spatially and time -resolved description of processes in ASSBs 

with block copolymer electrolytes .

[1] R. Khurana et al., Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2014, 1 36, 7395−7402 

[2]  H. -D. Nguyen et al. , Energy Environ.  Sci. , 2018, 11, 3298. 

[3] S. A. Aziz et al., Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices 3 , 2018 , 1-17 

[4] A. Latz, J. Zausch , Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology , 2015, 6, 987 .

[5] D. Diddens e t al., Macromolecules , 2010, 43, 2028 –2036 Sensitive and Selective Detection of Pyocyanin with a Thermosensitive 

# Hydrogel with Au/Ag Nanoalloy 

Andreea Cernat , Alexandra Canciu, Mihaela Tertis, Cecilia Cristea 

Analytical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medic ine and 

Pharmacy ,

4 Louis Pasteur St., 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania Addres s

ilioaia.andreea@umfcluj.ro 

The rapid detection of bacterial strains represents a hot topic thoroughly discussed across the biomedical 

field. Together with the existence of nosocom ial pathogen agents that impose extreme medical and 

financial challenges throughout diagnosis and treatment, the development of rapid and easy -to -use 

sensing devices has gained an increased amount of attention. Moreover, antibiotic resistance considered 

by World Health Organization one of the “biggest threats to global health, food security, and development 

today” enables this topic as high priority. Pseudomonas aeruginosa , one of the most ubiquitous bacterial 

strains, has various quorum sensing systems tha t are a direct cause of their virulence. One of them is 

represented by pyocyanin, a blue pigment with electroactive properties synthesized from early stages of 

bacterial colonization. Thus, the sensitive detection of this biomarker could enable a personali zed and 

efficient therapy (1, 2). 

A thermosensitive polymer, modified with Au/Ag nanoalloy was employed for the rapid and accurate 

detection of pyocyanin, a virulence biomarker of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . The sensor displayed a linear 

range from 0.12 to 25 μM, and a limit of detection of 0.04 μM (signal/noise=3) and was successfully 

tested in real samples spiked with the target analyte without any pretreatment other than a dilution step. 

The detection of pyocyanin with high recovery in whole blood in a time frame of 5 -10 minutes from the 

moment of collection was performed with this electrochemical sensor. 

References 

(1) Ciui, B; Tertiş, M; Cernat, A; Sǎndulescu, R; Wang, J; Cristea, C. Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 7761 –

8. 

(2) Zheng, L; Cai, G; Wang, S; Liao, M; Li , Y; Lin, J. Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 124 –125, 143 –9. 

This work was supported by grants of the Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and 

Innovation, CNCS/CCCDI -UEFISCDI, INTELMAT project number PN -III -P1 -1.2 -PCCDI2017 -0407. Electrochemical and in situ XAS/XRD Investigation s of Nitride -

# Stabilized Non -Noble Metal Core - Pt Shell Nanocatalysts 

X.Zhao 1, K.Sasaki 2, N.Marinkovic 3

> 1

Tianjin University, Tianjin, China; 2Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA and 3Columbia 

University , New York, NY, USA 

Emil addresses:  xueruzhao@bnl.gov ; ksasaki@bnl.gov ; marinkov@bnl.gov 

The ina dequate activity and stability of Pt as a cathode catalyst under severe operation conditions are the 

critical problems facing the application of prot on exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). Novel route to 

synthesize highly active and stable oxygen reduction catalysts involves deposition of Pt monolayer on a n

appropriate metal/alloy core. Platinum monolayer electrocatalysts offer ultimately low Pt content, complete 

utilization of Pt atoms and tunable activity induced by a suitable underlying structure [1]. Nitrogen atom in 

the core of the metal nitride (M = Fe, Co, Ni) nanoparticles covered by a thin Pt shell promotes the Pt ORR 

activity and provide a stabilizing effect under high oxidizing co nditions suppressing the core dissolution 

during potential cycling [2]. Nitriding metal nanoparticles in a mmonia enhances the corrosion resistance of 

the cores, and simultaneously encapsulating them by one to two Pt monolayer shells. Pt ML NiN core -shell 

nanoparticle was found to have properties that meet or exceed the DOE 2020 target .

The Synchrotron Catalysis Consortium (SCC) is partnered with the QAS and TES beamline s at the National 

Synchrotron Light Source II at Brookhaven National Laboratory to promote the utilization of synchrotron 

techniques for cutting -edge catalysis research under in -situ conditions . SCC provides dedicating facilities, 

in s itu reactors gas, delivery and analysis systems and offers a variety of combined techniques including 

IR, Raman and electrochemical spectroscopies combined with X-ray absorption spectroscopy ( XAS ) and 

X-ray diffraction (XRD ) [3]. Electrochemical and in situ XAS and XRD experiments were conducted in 

the attempt to clarify processes of the formation of nitride cores and Pt shell during thermal annealing, the 

correlation to the activity to the core -shell structures and the effects of e lectronic states on the stability of 

the catalyst. Octahedral Pt NiN was found to have excellent performance and improved stability over other 

Pt catalysts . As shown in the XANES spectra of Fig.1, electrochemical excursion into oxide region does 

not induce changes in NiN core as it is protected by the Pt shell . The catalyst is also stable to the accelerated 

electrochemical cycling test as shown by XRD spectra of Fig. 1. 

Fig.1 In situ spectra of PtNiN catalysts : XANES spect ra after accelerated electrochemical cycling to 10,000 

cycles and electro chemical excursion to oxide region (left) , and XRD spectra of uncycled and cycled to 

30,000 cycles catalysts at 0.42 V. 

References: 

1. Tiean XL et al (2016). J Am Chem Soc 138: 1575 -15 83 .

2. Kuttiyiel KA et al (2012) . Nano Lett 12: 6266 -6271. 

3. Marinkovic NS et al (2020) . Sync Rad News 33: 4 -9.00.5 11.5 8250 8300 8350 8400 8450 8500 1.12 V 0.92 V 0.72 V 0.42 V normalized x (E) Energy (eV) Ni K-edge PtNiN - 10K 1 M HClO 4Bridging the Gap B etween Fundamental and Applied Fuel Cell 

# Electrocatalysis Using a Gas Diffusion Electrode Half -Cell 

Konrad Ehelebe a,b , Serhiy Cherevko a

(a) Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Helmholtz Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy 

(IEK -11), Egerlandstr.  3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

(b) Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -

Nürnberg, Egerlandstr. 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

E-Mail:  k.ehelebe@ fz -juelich.de , s.cherevko@fz -juelich.de 

Although modern fuel cells are based on the utilization of solid membranes, fundamental catalyst research 

is mainly done in aqueous solutions via rotating disk elect rode (RDE) or similar techniques. However, 

due to low solubility of reactant gases in those electrolytes mass -transfer limitation occurs at potentials 

relevant for the fuel cell operation. Hence, k inetic parameters are estimated in a narrow potential regio n

of low currents and further extrapolations are required to achieve kinetic data in the relevant potential 

range s. There are many open questions on the validity of such extrapolations. Therefore, in addition to 

RDE measurements, membrane electrode assembl ies (MEA) tests are employed to evaluate catalysts in 

realistic fuel cell conditions. These experiments are complex (as they include a variety of different 

parameters), time -consuming and require large quantities of catalysts and expensive test equipment. To 

close the gap between fundamental and applied research intermediary testing methods nee d to be 

introduced, which combine the advantages of both approaches. Half -cell measurements using gas 

diffusion electrodes (GDE) have recently shown to be the most su itable method to enable high mass 

transport catalyst screening in relevant potential ranges and realisti c electrode structures. [1, 2] 

This work will concentrate on activity and stability evaluation for o xygen reduction reaction (ORR) 

catalysts. A proof -of concept on Pt/C GDEs reveal s that, using this approach, current densities of up to 

2 A/cm² can be achieved [3] . In con trary to other formerly used methods [2] , it is possible to overcome 

mass transport limitations at relevant fuel cell operating potentia ls. The experimental shows good 

compliance with MEA experiments p ro ving the method´s suitability for catalyst evaluation in realisti c

fuel cell potential ranges. 

In a next step the method is transferred to alkaline media for the first time reported. [4] Th ereby 

Fe -N-C cathodes with Aemion TM ionomer are evaluated towards there ORR activity for anion exchange 

membrane fuel Cells (AEMFC). The impact of ionomer activation o n the electrode ’s performance is 

revealed an d the long -term stability of the se non -no ble catalyst layers in alkaline media successfully 

proven. 

To gain deeper insights into stability of electrocatalysts in realistic electrode structures , the setup 

is coupled to an  inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP -MS). It will be shown that usi ng 

solid electrolytes, the dissolution of Pt is minimized in comparison to aqueous electrolytes mostly used 

for stability experiments. This exhibits the necessity for intermediate techniques between MEA and RDE. 

Besides that, also th e mobility of Pt -ions t hrough Nafion is further investigated. 

Thus, it can be concluded, that a new powerful experimental tool for decidedly catalyst layer evaluation 

for fuel cells or other electrochemical three -phase reactions (e.g. CO 2 reaction) is develope d and 

successfully applied in fuel cell research. In the further development this approach will be transferred to 

enabl e high -throughput screening of catalysts. For this , a modification t o a scanning flow cell (SFC) [5] 

setup is suggested. With this new device it is possibl e to rapidly screen the activity and stability of 

electrocatalyst layers depending on different material properties (e.g. catalyst loading gradients on one 

axis and structural property gradients such as pore size, ionomer content of membrane etc. on the ot her 

axis) using GDEs. Thus the most suitable electrodes under realistic fuel cell conditions can be worked out 

in a fraction of the time require d for conventional methods. 

References 

[1] Pinaud, B.A., et al., J . Electrochem . Soc ., 2017. 164(4): F321 -F327 ,

[2] Inaba, M., et al., Energy Environm. Sci., 2018. 11(4): 988 -994 ,

[3] Ehelebe, K., et al., J . Electroch em. Soc ., 2019. 166(16): F1259 -F1268, 

[4] Ehelebe, K. et al. submitted 

[4] Klemm, S. et al., Electrochem. Comm., 2011. 13(12): p.1533 -1535 Towards stable catalyst layers for water electrolysis based on anion -

# exchange membranes 

Susanne Koch *a,b , Caroline Schneider a , Carolin Klose a,b , Phili pp Veh b,c, Matthias Breitwieser a,b , Severin 

Vierrath a,b,c  

> a

Hahn -Schickard, Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 7 9110 Freiburg, Germany  

> b

Electrochemical Energy Systems, IMTEK - Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of 

Freiburg , Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany  

> c

Institute and FIT – Freiburg Center for Interactive Materials and Bioinspi red Technologies, University 

of Freiburg, Georges -Köhler -Allee 105, 79110 Freiburg 

* susanne.koch@hahn -schickard.de 

Water electrolyzers based on anion -exchange membranes (AEMs) have gained attention in the last years 

due to promising cost reductions and greatly improved performances.[1] However, most anion -exchange 

ionomers still lack stability , as membranes and specifically when employed as a binder in the catalyst 

layers upon AEM water electrolyzer (AEMWE) operation .[2] 

Here, we focus on the stability of catalyst layers for AEMWE and on measures to reduce the loss o f

catalyst due to poor adhesion and mechanical and hydrolytic stabilit y issues of the ionomer binder .

Fabricating catalyst -coated membranes (CCMs) using a spray coater allows the exact contro l of the layer -

by -layer deposition rate of the catalyst layer on the membrane . By adjusting the deposition rate and hot 

plate temperature following experiences published recently by Klose et al. [3] , as well as the ink 

composition, the stability of the cat alyst layers was improved . As can be seen in (Figure 1 b), the catalyst 

layer integrity was mostly maintained after ion -exchange to the OH --form and exposure to water , while 

non -optimized spraying results in poor adhesion and areas without any catalyst (Fi gure 1 a) . To quantify 

and compare the degradatio n of full MEAs under operating conditions short -term current holds and 

performance evaluations were performed in a water electrolyzer employing 0.1 M KOH at 60 °C (Figure 

1 c) . This work summarizes the recen t achievement in the establishment of a stable AEMWE based on 

Aemion ™ ionomer. 

Figure 1 : The IrOx catalyst layer sprayed on an Aemion ™ membrane shows significant loss of catalyst 

upon ion -exchange to the OH --form and subsequent washing with deionized water (a), while 

optimized spray parameters result in a maintained cover with catalyst (b). This instability of the 

catalyst layer also contributes to the degradation observed when measuring CCMs in an AEM water 

electrolyzer overnight, as indicated by the changes in recorded polarization curves (c). 

References 

[1] Miller, H. A., Bouzek, K., Hnat, J., Loos, S., Bernae cker, C., Weissgaerber, T., Röntsch, L., & Meier -

Haack, J. (2020).  Green hydrogen from anion exchange membrane water electrolysis: A review o f

recent developments in critical materials and operating conditions. Sustainable Energy & Fuels .

[2 ] Fortin, P., Khoza, T., Cao, X., Martinsen, S. Y., Barnett, A. O., & Holdcroft, S. (2020). High -

performance alkaline water electrolysis using Aemion™ anion exchange membranes. Journal of 

Power Sources , 451 , 227814. 

[3 ] Klose, C., Saatkamp, T., Münchinger, A., Bohn, L., Titv inidze, G., Breitwieser, M., Kreuer, K. -D. &

Vierrath, S. (2020).  All‐Hydrocarbon MEA for PEM Water Electrolysis Combining Low Hydrogen 

Crossover and High Efficiency. Advanced Energy Materials , 1903995. 

b) a)  c) Rheological changes of polypyrrole films from “salt in water” to 

# “water in salt” solutions 

Thiago T. Obana, Marina M. Leite , Vitor L. Martins , Roberto M. Torresi 

Instituto de Química da U niversidade de São Paulo 

Avenida P rofessor Lineu Prestes, 748, Buta ntã, São Paulo,SP 

ttobana@iq.usp.br 

Pseudocapacitive materials, together with carbonaceous ones, hold the promise for high -performance 

electrochemical capacitors , since they display high energy density due to fast faradaic reactions on 

electrode surface (pseudocapacitive process es )1. Among t hem conductive polymers (CP) figure as 

interesting materials, since they present many advantages as low cost, high voltage window and redox 

activity , being the last one dependent on chemical modifications 1. However, CP major disadvantage 

consists of polymeric chains structure breakdown along redox process, due to vo lumetric changes cause d

by ions and solvent exchange. Such fading compromise CP -based device cyclability 1. Several attempts 

were made to circumvent it, such as 3D nanostructuring and CP -carbon composites 1. Nevertheless, 

solvent effects seem to be scarcely explored. In this sense, the present work explores the volumetric 

changes of Polypyrrole /Dodec ylbe nzenesulfonate (Ppy /DBS ), as sisted with electrochemical crystal quartz 

microbalance with dissipation (EQCM -D), in traditional “salt -in -water electrolyte” and other one “water -

in -salt electrolyte” (WiSE) 2, both based on LiTFSI salt . EQCM -D measurements show n that, in LiTFSI 

1.0 mol L -1 solutions, Ppy behaves as a viscoelasti c film during oxidation (high dissipati on (∆D) values) 

and contrary during reduction. Such viscoelastic change is attributed to water exchange during oxidation 

and the variation of film stiffness. On the other hand in WiSE, the same film behaves as a rigid one (Δ D ~ 

0), showing th at , in WiSE, solvent exchange barely affects film stiffness and indicates lower volumetric 

changes. To explore that effects, the motion of freestanding PPy /DBS in both electrolytes were studied. 

Since it is well known that such mov ements mainly stems from wate r exchange 3. Figure 1 shows the 

bending angles differences during oxidation and reduction for PPy at both electrolytes. It is noticeable 

that PPy bending in WiSE is negligible in comparistion with the one in LiTFSI 1.0 mol L -1.

Figu re 1: Freestanding Ppy films bending angle at L iTFSI 1.0 mol L -1 (left) and LiTFSI 7m (right) 

Acknowledgements 

FAPESP grants: TTO ( 17/10046 -9), VLM (13/22748 -7) MML (19/02669 -1)and 15/ 26308 -7, CNPq and 

CAPES 

References 

1. Wang, G., Zhang, L. & Zhang, J. A review of electrode materials for electrochemical 

supercapacitors. Chem. Soc. Rev. 41 , 797 –828 (2012). 

2. Suo, L. et al. ‘Water -in -salt’ electrolyte enables high -voltage aqueous lithium -ion chemistries. 

Science (80 -. ). 350 , 938 –943 (2015). 

3. Martinez, J. G. & Otero, T. F. Mechanical awareness from sensing artificial muscles: 

Experiments and modeling. Sensors Actuators, B Chem. 195 , 365 –372 (2014). Tetracycline Detection Using a Gold Nano structured 

# Electrochemical Aptasensor 

Gheorghe Melinte 1, Oana Hosu 1, Magdolna Casian 1, Geanina Ștefan 1,2 ,

Diana Bogdan 3, Cecilia Cristea 1

> 1

"Iuliu Haţieganu " University of Medicine and Pharmacy Faculty of Pharmacy, 

Analytical Chemistry Department , 4 Pasteur Street , 400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> 2

Robert Bosch SRL, Physical and Chemical Analysis Department (RBRO/EQV -A), 

Tetarom 3 Industrial Park, Jucu Herghelie 407352, Cluj, Romania 

> 3

National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular Technologies, 

67 -103 Donat h St reet , 400293 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

> *Melinte.Gheorghe@umfcluj.ro

Tetracycline (TC) is one of the most common used antibiotics for the treatment of infectious diseases in 

veterinary medicine and due to its high accumulation, important levels can be found in animal based products 

and environmental samples [1]. Therefore, there is an imperative need to develop highly sen sitive and 

selective methods with easy operation and on -site applications for TC .

An electrochemical sensor for TC selective detection based on a gold nanopatterned platform and DNA -

sensing strategy was developed .

Firstly, gold was electrodeposited on gl assy carbon electrodes , after a previous polystyrene beads deposition, 

from a HAuCl 4 solution to obtain a 3D -nanostructure d gold nanovoid s (AuNVs) platform ( Fig.1 ). The 

platform generation steps were optimized to obtain the best platform design which was characterized by 

electrochemical (CV, EIS) and microscopy analysis (SEM, AFM, EDX) .      

> Fig. 1. AFM image of the Au -nanovoids platform resulted after the polystyrene dissolution.

A thiolated Ferrocene -labelled DNA sequence specific to TC was further covalently immobilised on t he 

optimized AuNVs/GCE platform . Different strategies for Fc -DNA immobilization at AuNVs/GCE platform 

were investig ated; multipulse amperometry ( -0.5 V to +0.2 V profile pulses for 10ms, 3 2s total time) showed 

the highest peak intensities in terms of Ferrocene signal I(μA)/STDEV ratio. The next step was represented by 

the free active gold binding sites blocking using an unspecific short -thiol was electrochemically immobilized 

at the Fc -DNA /AuNVs/GCE platform , followed by the affinity reaction with TC . The optimized sensor was 

able to selectively detect TC in the nanomolar range with very low interference from similar anti biotics. A

signal -off ferrocene -labelled DNA -sensor for tetracycline detection was developed based on a gold 

nanopatterned platform and possible applications on sewage, river and food samples will be presented. 

Reference s

[1] X. Liu et al.  TrAC Trends Ana l. Chem. 2018 , 109, 260 –274. 

Acknowledgments 

The Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and Innovation, CCCDI -UEFISCDI, project n o. 

ERANET -RUS -PLUS -PLASMON -ELECTROLIGHT/46/2018, within PNCDI III and in the frame of European 

Social Found, Human Capital Operational Programme 2014 -2020, project no. POCU/380/6/13/125171 . G.M. 

thanks to UMF “Iuliu Hațieganu” Cluj -Napoca, for the financial support provided within grant no. 

1529/42/18.01.2019. Application of the Co -Mo -Cu coatings as cathodes for hydrogen 

# evolution reaction 

Hug o Leandro Sousa Santos , Patricia Gon Corradini , Lucia Helena Masc aro 

University Federal of São Car los , Chemistry Department 

Ro dovia Washington Luiz, k m 235, São Carlos -SP , 13565 -905, Braz il

e-mail : hugolssantos@outlook.co m

The most of energy expended in the world 

originates from fossil fuels . However , it is 

expected the future shortage of these fuels as a 

result of the depletion of oil sources . Besides 

that , the high cons umption of petrol eum 

derivatives discharges a huge amount of toxic 

and polluting substances for the envir onment .

In this context, fuels with high energy densities 

and that do not harm the environment, for 

example, molecular hydrogen (H 2) are indicated 

as ideal substitutes for petroleum products .1,2 

This wo rk reports the investigation of the 

electrodeposition of Co -Mo and Co -Mo -Cu 

coatings as a catalyst for the hydrogen evolution 

reacti on (HER). Fo ur deposition bath s were 

proposed in the molar ra tio s of 2:1:0 , 2:1:0.0 1,

1.5 :1:0. 05 , and 1.5 :1:0. 2 of Co :Mo: Cu usi ng

sodium citrate as complexing agent and pH 8.7 .3 Co -Mo -Cu coat ings were obtained in constant current of 

-30 mA cm -2 for 40 min o n a glass embedded 1010 steel billet substrate with a 0.2 cm 2 exposed area. The 

electrocatal ytic activities of the coatings were evalu ated by stationary cathodic polarization curves ( and 

Tafel curves), elect rochemical impedanc e spectroscopy (EIS) and conti nu ous electrolysis in 6.0 mo l L-1

KOH aqueous solution. The amount of cobalt, molybdenum, an d copper in the coa tings varied from 67 to 

43 , 33 to 22 and 35 to 7 at. % , respectively. Co-Mo deposit exhibi ted a smooth morphology with 

spherical nodules and crack s ac ross the surface . On the other hand, Co -Mo -Cu presented an irregular 

surface w ith well -defined grains, whi ch are in rounded sha of different sizes. The XRD diffractograms 

with few peaks suggesting that all coatings present an amorphous or nanocrysta llin e structure, even 

though the peak near to 45° is correlated for fcc cobalt. The XPS analys is showed that Co, Mo and Cu are 

pr esent on the surface of the coating. The deposit obtained in the molar ratio bath 2:1:0.0 5 of Co:Mo: Cu 

showed better activity for HER , with current of the order of -100 mA cm -2 ob tained in only -200 mV 

overpotential . In a ddition, Co -Mo -Cu c oatings exhibited excellent HER stability. At 48 h continuous 

electrolysis at -135 mA cm -2 the potential varied only 3.7% for more positive po tenti als . The slopes of 

Tafel near 40 mV dec -1 and the EIS experiments indicated a Volmer -Heyro vsky type mechanism with 

Heyrovsky being the rate -determining step. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank the São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP ) (grant# 201 9/26860 -2, grant# 

2018/16401 -8, FAPESP/CDMF (#20 13/07296 -2). The authors also wish to thank to the Coordenação de 

Ape rfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) - Finance Code 001 and, by Conselho Nacional 

de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento (CNPq ).

Referen ces

(1) Luo, Z.; Miao, R.; Huan, T. D.; Mosa, I. M.; Poyraz, A. S.; Zhong, W.; Cloud, J. E.; Kriz, D. A.; 

Thanneeru, S.; He, J.; Zhang, Y.; Ramprasad, R.; Suib, S. L. Mesoporous MoO -x Material as an 

Efficient Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution Reactions. Adv. Energy Mater. 2016 , 6 (16), 

1600528. https://doi.org/10.100 2/aenm.201600528. 

(2) Kapdan, I. K.; Kargi, F. Bio -Hydrogen Production from Waste Materials. Enzyme Microb. 

Technol. 2006 , 38 (5), 569 –582. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enzmictec.2005.09.015. 

(3 ) Kublanovsky, V. S.; Yapontseva, Y. S. Electrocatalytic Proper ties of Co -Mo Alloys 

Electrodeposited from a Citrate -Pyrophosphate Electrolyte. Electrocatalysis 2014 , 5 (4), 372 –

378. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12678 -014 -0197 -y. Conducting Polymer Nanoc omposites :

# Electrochemical Characterization and 

# Application for Arsenic Detection 

Gheorghe Melinte 1,2 , Oana Hosu 1, Giulia Selvolini 1, Alina Adumitrachioaie 1,

Cecilia Cristea 2, Robert S ăndulescu 2, Giovanna Marrazza 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry “Ugo Schiff”, University of Florence, Via della Lastruccia 3, 

50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy 

> 2

Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, 

"Iuliu Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 4 Pasteu r Street, 

400349 Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

Melinte.Gheorghe@umfcluj.ro 

In the last couple of years, most of the work was devoted to synthesize new sensing nanocomposites to 

improve a sensor performance in terms of sensitivity, selectivity, and biocompatibility. Of those 

synthesized nanomaterials, conducting polymer composites have been widely used in the construction of 

sensor surfaces. Several conducting polymers i.e. polythiophene, polyaniline, polymethylene blue, 

polyanthranilic acid, polypyrrole, and poly(o -phenylenediamine) display advantages due to their charge 

transport properties and electrochemical redox efficiency, which are attributed to the delocalization of π -

electrons over the polymeric backbone [1, 2] .

For a greater enhancement of the electrochemical sensor performance , different electrode systems have 

been devel oped based on surface modification with nanomaterials . The synergy of multifunctional 

materials, recognition elements, and electrochemical methods is improving the selectivity, stability, and 

reproducibility, thus promoting the development of sensors for a ssays and bioassays. 

Polyaniline (PANI) was used to obtain a nano/micropatterned surface at graphite screen printed electrodes 

(GSPEs) with applications in the biosensors field. The obtained polymeric film w as electrochemically 

characterized by cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in different redox 

probes. Different architectures were obtained by depositing noble metal nanoparticles (AuNPs, PtNPs ,

Au -PtNPs ) at the modified electrodes and t he performance of the hybrid composites was assessed. An 

application of the newly developed polymer -based electrodes will be presented .

Arsenic (As) is one of the most abundant mineral and one to the most toxic compounds. The chronic 

exposure to arseni c can cause DNA mutation, which can lead to aberrant gene expression and 

carcinogenesis. Platforms based on Au -PtNPs/GSPE and Au -PtNPs/PANI/GSPE were tested for direct 

detection of As[III] by means of square wave anodic stripping voltammetry(SWASV). The fi rst platform 

allowed the As(III) determination in the range of 0 -200 nM As(III) while the second one in the range of 

0.1 -1.25 mM As(III). Interference studies were performed in the presence of Cu(II), Pb(II), Hg(II). Novel 

and easy to use nanohybrid platfo rms based on a mixed film of PANI and bimetallic composite Au -PtNPs 

for As(III) electrochemical fingerprinting was obtained  [3 ].

References 

[1] M.M. Barsan, M.E. Ghica, C.M.A. Brett, Anal.Chim.Acta 881 (2015) 1 –23. 

[2] R. Rapini, A. Cincinelli, G. Marrazz a, Talanta 161 (2016) 15 –21. 

[3] G. Melinte, O. Hosu et al, Sensors 19 (2019) 2279; doi:10.3390/s19102279 

Acknowledgments 

Proc. 465571/2014 -0, Brasil CNPq : National Institute for Alternative Technologies of Detection, 

Toxicological Evaluation and Removal of Micropollutants and Radioactives. 

The Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research and Innovation, CCCDI -UEFISCDI, project 

no. ERANET -RUS -PLUS -PL ASMON -ELECTROLIGHT/46/2018, within PNCDI III .

Ghe.M. thanks to the UMF “Iuliu Hațieganu” Cluj -Napoca, for the financial support provided within 

grant no. 1529/42/18.01.2019. Operando X-Ray Analytics and Electrochemical Characterization 

# Illuminate SOFC Perovskite Materials 

M. Arce (a,b), C . Jiménez (a), J. Basbús (b) , M. Santaya (b), E. A. Carbonio (a, c), R . Garcia -Diez (a), G.

J. Cuello (d), M. T. Fern �ndez -Díaz (d), J. A. Alonso (e), H. Troiani (b), R. Got tesma n (a), R. G. 

Wilks (a), A. Knop -Gericke (c), M . Bär (a, f, g), L . Mogni (b) 

(a) Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und E nergie GmbH, Albert -Einstein -Str.15, 12489, Berlin, 

Germany; (b) INN -CNEA -CONICET, Centro Ató mico Bariloche, Av. Bustillo 9500, S. C. de Bariloche, 

Rio Negro, 8400, Argentina; (c) Fritz -Haber Institute, Dept. of Inorganic Chemistry, Faradayweg 4, 

14195 Berlin, Germany; (d) Institute Laue Langevin, 38000 Grenoble ,France; (e) Instituto de Ciencia de 

Materiales de Madrid (CSIC), 28049 Madrid , Spain; (f) Friedrich Alexander Universität Erlangen -

Nürnberg, Egerlandstr. 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany; ( g) Helmholtz Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for 

Renewable Energy (HI ERN), Albert -Einstein Str. 15, 12489 Berli n, Germany 

mauricio.arce@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) represent a key technolog y for the transition to renewable sources of energy 

due to the ir high efficiency. The main advantages of SOFC compared to other fuel cell s are the use of 

non -precious metal electrodes and fuel versatility . Nonetheless, the high operation temperatures lead to 

degradation processes and the need for expensive materials, thus much effort is focused on reducing 

operation temperatures [1] . Two main approaches inv olve the use of proton conduct ors as electrolytes and 

nanoparticle exsolution f rom mixed ionic and electronic (MIEC) electrodes [2, 3] . SOFC work under high 

temperature, oxid izing /reducing atmospheres and under polarization potential . These conditions great ly 

affect properties such as the electronic and atomic structure of electrode surfaces and electrode/electrolyte 

in terfaces. In this sense, the combination of complementary advanced characterization techniques for 

operando studies is essential to understan d the complex processes occurring on the fuel cell components. 

In this work, the two afore mentioned approaches to lower ing SOFC operation temperatures are 

addressed : The nanoparticle exsolution processes in Sr(Ti,Fe)O 3-δ (STF ) and Ni -doped STF (STFN) 

MIEC electrode model cells are studied using ambient pressure X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AP -

XPS) and electron -yield X-ray absorption spectroscop y (AP - XAS) in combination with electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy (E IS) and electrode polarization . These techniques give information on the 

surface chemistry of the electrodes under reducing and oxidizing atmospheres at device operation 

temperatures, allowing to follow nanoparticle exsolution processes , its reversibility, and it s effect s on the 

electrode perfor mance. The second approach , the use of proton -conducting electrolytes, is examined in a 

study of BaCe 0.4 Zr 0.4 Y0.2 O3-δ (BCZY) proton conductor s by a combination of in -situ X -ray diffraction 

combined with EIS, taking advantage of the H/D isotopic effect to determine the range where this 

electrolyte is a pure proton conductor and where it coe xists with O -ion conduction. Furthermore, n eutron -

based techniques, such as neutron powder diffraction (NPD) and quasi -elastic neutron spectroscopy 

(QENS) were used to elucidate the crystalline structure and proton transport mechanism, respectively. 

Figure 1. a) BCZY conductivity vs . temperature under H2O- and D 2O-containing atmospheres and 

rhombohedral -to -cubic phase transition, and b) STF/STFN cell setup for operando characterization. 

References: [1] Z Gao, LV Mogni, E. Miller, J. Railsback, S. Barnett, Energy Environ.  Sci. , 2 , 2016, 9 

(5), 1602 -1644. [2] J. Basbus, M. Arce, F. Napolitano, H. Troiani, J. Alonso, M. Saleta, M González, G. 

Cuello, M. Fernández -Díaz, M. Pardo Sainz, N. Bonanos, C. Jimenez, L. Giebeler, S. Figueroa, A. 

Caneiro, A. Serquis, L. Mogni, ACS Appl.  Energy Mater. 2020, 3, 3, 2881 -2892 . [3] T . Zhu , H. Troiani, 

L. Mogni, M. Han, S. Barnett, Joule 2018, 2, 478 -496 Enhancement of Electrocatalytic Formic Acid Oxidation on Au(111) 

# by the Pyridine Group 

Johannes M. Hermann , Timo Jacob, Ludwig A. Kibler 

Institut für Elektrochemie, Univer sität Ulm, 890 69 Ulm, Germany 

johannes.hermann@uni -ulm.de , timo.jacob@uni -ulm.de , ludwig.kibler@uni -ulm.de 

The use of structurally well -defined Au(111) electrodes allows for a better understanding of the influence 

of adsorption processes on electrocatalytic reactions. The formic acid oxidation (FAOR) on Au(111) 

electrodes exhibits current density -potential curves indicating a self -inh ibition due to the blocking of active 

sites by strongly adsorbed formate (Figure 1a , blue curve) [1] . Similarly, the specific adsorption of 

phosphates also lowers the activity [2] . For platinum electrodes , the presence of bismuth adatoms leads to 

a CH -down adsorption of formate facilitating the abstraction of the hydrogen atom, which is supposed to 

be the rate determining step of the reaction [3] . The systemati c modification of the electrode surface by 

adsorption of suitable molecular species allows to influence the adsorption behavior of formate and to tailor 

the interfacial structure. 

In this study , the effect of two prominent organic adsorbates, pyridine (Py ) and 4 -mercaptopyridine (4 -PyS) 

on the FAOR on Au(111) , is discussed . Both molecules form ordered adlayer structures in the potential 

range where the electrocatalytic reaction occurs [4,5] . The irrever sibly adsorbed 4 -PyS (S -bonded) exposes 

its pyridinic nitrogen to the solution , which leads to an enhanced activit y towards FOAR . The hysteresis 

observed for the positive and negative potential sweep is due to a change in configuration of the adlayer 

(Figu re 1a , red curve). The significance of the pyridinic nitrogen for the reaction mechanism is stress ed by 

the comparison with the strongly blocking and inactive thiophenol (black curve). While pyridine is 

reversibly adsorb ed with the nitrogen bonded to the Au(111) surface , it causes a surprisingly strong 

enhancement in FAOR activity (Figure 1b , compare red and blue curve) [5,6] .-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 

Au(111) Au(111)/PhS 

> 0.1 M HCOOH 0.1 M HClO 4
> 10 mV s -1
> j / μA cm -2

E vs. MSE / V 

Au(111)/PyS -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -1  

> 0123
> 10 mV s -1
> j / mA cm -2
> E/ V vs. MSE

Au(111)    

> 0.1 M Py + HClO 4/NaOH pH 3.6 pH 3.8
> 010 20
> 0.1 M HCOOH + HClO 4/NaOH pH 3.4
> j / μA cm -2
> 0.1 M HCOOH + 0.1 M Py + HClO 4/NaOH
> -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of current density -potential profiles for SAM -modified Au(111) surfaces in 0.1 

M HClO 4 + 0.1 M HCOOH. While 4-mercaptopyridine (PyS) enhances FAOR, thiophenol (PhS) inhibits 

the re action .

(b) Current density -potential curves for formic acid oxidation on Au(111) in 0.1 M HCOOH + 0.125 M 

NaOH + 0.075 M HClO 4 (pH 3.4, red curve) and for Au(111) in 0.1 M pyridine + 0.1 M HCOOH + 0.05 

M HClO 4 + 0.1 M NaOH (pH 3.6, blue curve) at a scan rate of 10 mV s -1. The black curve displays the 

behavior of Au(111) in 0.1 M pyridine + 0.3 M HClO 4 + 0.2 M NaOH. 

References 

[1] L.A. Kibler, M. Al -Shakran, J. Phys. C hem. C. 120 (2016) 16238 –16245. 

[2] A. Abdelrahman, J.M. Hermann, L.A. Kibler, Electrocatalysis. 8 (2017) 509 –517. 

[3] J.V. Perales -Rondón, A. Ferre -Vilaplana, J.M. Feliu, E. Herrero, J. Am. Che m. Soc. 136 (2014) 

13110 –13113. 

[4] M. Bron, R. Holze, J. Solid State Electrochem. 19 (2015) 2673 –2682. 

[5] W. -B. Cai, L. -J. Wan, H. Noda, Y. Hibino, K. Ataka, M. Osawa, Langmuir. 14 (1998) 6992 –6998. 

[6] J.M. Hermann, Y. Mattausch, A. Weiß, T. Jacob, L.A. Kibler , J. Electro che m. Soc. 165 (2018) 

J3192 –J3198. 

(a)  (b) Model -based and Experimental Analysis of Inhomogeneous Gas 

# Diffusion Electrodes by EIS 

Maximilian Röhe 1, 2, David Franzen 3, Barbara Ellendor ff 3, Fabian Kubannek 1, Thomas Turek 3,

Ulrike Krewer 2

> 1

Institute of Energy and Process Systems Engineering, TU Brau nschweig, Germany 

Langer Kamp 19b, 38106 Braunschweig 

> 2

Institute for Applied Materials - Materials for Electr ical and Electronic Engineering, KIT, Germany 

> 3

Institute of Chemical and Electrochemical Process Engineering, TU Clausthal, Germa ny

m.roehe@tu -bra unschweig.de 

Gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) are utilized in many technical applications in order to avoid an early 

limitation by mass transport. A n example is given by oxygen depolarized cathodes (ODC), which are 

used in advanced chlor -alkali electrolysis and enable high current densities despite the poor solubility of 

the reactant oxygen in the liquid electrolyte. As shown lately, the composition and structure of OD Cs is of 

high importance for achieving small potential losses and high limiting current den sit ies [1 ]. Furthermore ,

it has been shown that the electrode structure as well as the position of the three -phase boundary within 

the ODC are highly inhomogeneous [2]. 

In this work, the influence of the ODC structure on the performance is investigated. E lectrochemical 

Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) spectra and polarizations curves were recorded for ODC with various 

binder and silver catalyst compositions . A dynamic one -dimensiona l three -phase ODC model [3] has 

been extended to simulate the influence of an i nhomogeneous electrode structure . The model considers 

inter alia Tafel -equation for kinetics, Nernst -equation for open circuit potential , Stefan -flow in the 

gaseous phase, Maxwell -Stefan -diffusion in the liquid phases as well as the oxygen dissolution by 

Henry’s law and the water evaporation by Raoul t’s law .

Fig. 1: a) Simulated (-) and measured (--) a) EIS  at 2 kA m -2 and  b) polarization cur ves of  ODC with 

different catalyst contents .

Th e polarization curves show high limiting currents densities, whereas the EIS indicates relatively high 

charge transfer resistances. The se contrasting observations are explainable by the inhomogeneous 

electrode structure : Some pores are high ly active, which leads to high current densities . Other pores show 

a poor activity, which increases the impedance and enlarges the measured charge transfer resistance . This 

behaviour is illustrated by the distortion of the semi -circles in the Nyq uist -pl ot and can be reproduced 

well by the extended model (cf. fig, 1 a)). Since all processe s are stimulated at high frequencies above 

1 Hz, which is the frequency range of double layer charge, no influence of m ass transport has been 

detected . A comparison of ODC of different composition lead s to the conclusion that the main indicator 

for a high electrode performance is the si ze of the three -phase boundary . Due to these new insights , on the 

one hand the distortion of the semi -circles in the Nyquist -plot is understood; on the other hand based on 

the identification of inactive pores , a fundamental f or further improvement of the ODC is laid. 

[1 ] D. Franzen, et al., J . Applied Electrochemistry 49 (7) , pp. 705 -713 (2019) . [2 ] M. C. Paulisch, et al., 

Materials 12 (17 ), pp. 2686 (2019). [3 ] M. Röhe, et al, ChemSusChem vol. 12 , pp. 2373 -2384 (2019) .MicroRNA Detection on Microsensor Arrays by SPR Imaging 

# Measurements with Enzymatic Signal Enhancement 

Hiroshi Aoki 1,2 ,* , Robert M. Corn 2, Brandon Matthews 2

> 1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) 

16 -1 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305 -8569, Japan 

> 2

University of California, Irvine , Irvine, CA 92697, USA 

> *

aoki -h@aist.go.jp 

Oligonucleotide detection -based tests, including safety screening for environmental chemical toxicity 

and healthcare management, are increas ingly being adopted in the fields of environmental and biological 

evaluation. Micro RNAs (miRNAs), short non -coding RNAs with a length of 20 –25 bases, have recently 

been attracted as biomarkers for potential applications to evaluation of stresses caused by environmental 

chemicals an d diagnosis of lifestyle -related diseases or cancers. Rapid and simple detection methods are 

needed to permit the application of these miRNA detection tests in the se fields as fast screening tools. 

In this study, w e investigated sequence -specific and simultaneous miRNA detections by surface plasmon 

resonance (SPR) imaging measurements on SPR chips possessing an Au spot array modified with probe 

DNAs based on a miRNA -detection -selective SPR signal amplification method . SPR chips were fabricated 

by deposition of Au/Cr thin films to a mechanically polished glass covered with a stencil template of the 

SPR chip pattern (16 spots with diameters of 0.8 mm). The Au spot surfaces were modified with DNA -

NH 2_miR17 and DNA -NH 2_mi R21 as probe DNA s ( targeting miRNA biomarkers of hsa -miR -17 and hsa -

miR -21 for lung cancer , respectively ), mPEG -NH 2 (a negative control), and A 30 -NH 2 (a positive control). 

When the fabricated SPR chips were soaked in 5 μM hsa -miR -21, only DNA_miR21 (a complementary 

probe) -modified spots showed a sequence -specific SPR signal. Extension reaction of polyadenine (poly(A)) 

tails by poly(A) polymerase selectively enhanced this signal. The difference of the SPR signal s between 

complementary and non -complemen tary probes amplified about five times before and after the poly(A) 

extension. For more sequence -specific SPR signal enhancement, we used a ternary complex of T 30 -

biotin/horseradish peroxidase (HRP) -biotin/streptavidin. Binding of the complex to the poly(A ) tails 

showed larger responses for spots of the complementary probe than those for the positive control. In 

contrast, responses for the non -complementary probe and negative control were revealed to be quite small. 

Then, oxidation reaction of tetramet hylbenzidine (TMB) via HRP was utilized to enlarge the observed 

SPR signal. The SPR signal for the complementary probe remarkably increased, while those for the non -

complementary probe and negative control slightly increased. Th ese results show TMB was oxi dized on 

HRP of the ternary complex to be changed to blue precipitation of Ox -TMB. The difference of SPR signals 

between the complementary and non -complementary probes showed another 4.5 times -amplification. We 

concluded that this process sequence -specific ally and dramatically amplified the SPR signals. Moreover, 

further experiment s of dependence of SPR signal on concentration s of miRNA solutions revealed the 

detection limit of this method is the attomole (10 –18 mole) level. This is a simple, cost -effective , and feasible 

signal amplification method based on the organic compound TMB instead of metal nanoparticles. 

[1] H. Aoki , R. M. Corn, and B. Matthews , Biosens. Bioelectron. 142 (2019) 111565.         

> Fig. 1. SPR signal amplification process
> based on enzymatic reaction .
> Fig. 2. Layout of spot modification on a SPR
> chip .SPR image and response to amiRNA

# Detecting o xygen in catalyst layers by scanning electrochemical 

# microscopy (SECM) 

Mahdi Moghaddam , Pekka Peljo 

Research group of Physical Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Physics, Aalto University 

Kemistintie 1, 02150 Espoo, Finland 

mahdi.moghaddam@ aalto.fi 

Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) is a powerful scanning probe technique for tracking the 

local electrochemical activity of an electrolyte -immersed substrate , by employing an ultra -micro -

electrode . As the Thin Layer Electrochemistry regu lations apply for the SECM setup, high spatial and 

time -related resolution is obtained, providing the SECM with the ability of being employed in various 

applications in the fields from biology to energy materials .

In this research SECM feedback mode is us ed to detect the presence of excess of o xygen in the catalyst 

inks drop -casted on a n electrode . Catalyst inks containing either carbon supported Pt nanoparticles or 

carbon black were drop -casted on a glassy carbon electrode , with Nafion ionomer as binder. 

SECM approach curves obtained by ORR -potential biased Pt tip (a = 12.5 m, RG = 8) displayed positive 

feedback type behavior when approaching electrodes covered with catalyst layers , both in H 2SO 4 and 

KOH solutions (Figure 1) . Approach curves on clean gl assy carbon electrode showed negative feedback. 

As it is unlikely that true positive feedback would be observed on a catalyst layer, these measurements 

indicate that the increase in the tip current when approaching the catalyst layer results from excess 

ox ygen present in the catalyst layer due to hydrophobicity or the porous surface structure of the layer . A 

similar observation has been reported when approaching a porous poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane 1,

or CNT -based catalyst. As the tip depletes oxygen from the solution, oxygen from the porous film 

partitions into the solution, resulting in similar behavior to that observed when approaching a water –air 

interface. Simulations were performed to reproduce this effect. 

Figure 1. Theoretical Positive feedback curve and a pproach curves of different catalyst layers, in KOH 

and H 2SO 4 electrolyte s.

References: 

1. Lin, Tzu -En & Cortés -Salazar, Fernando & Lesch, Andreas & Qiao, Liang & Bondarenko, 

Alexandra & Girault, Hubert. (2015). Multiple scanning electrochemical m icroscopy mapping of 

tyrosinase in micro -contact printed fruit samples on polyvinylidene fluoride membrane. 

Electrochimica Acta. 10.1016/j.electacta.2015.03.224 .

2.  Mohammad Tavakkoli, Emmanuel Flahaut, Pekka Peljo, Jani Sainio, Fatemeh Davodi, Egor V. 

Lobiak , Kimmo Mustonen, and Esko I. Kauppinen . (2020).  Mesoporous Single -Atom -Doped 

Graphene –Carbon Nanotube Hybrid: Synthesis and Tunable Electrocatalytic Activity for 

Oxygen Evolution and Reduction Reactions . ACS Catal. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c00352 .

3. Outi Toikkanen, Maija Lähteenmäki, Timo Moisio, Pirkko Forssell, Riitta Partanen, and Lasse 

Murtomäki. (2014). Study of Oxygen Transfer across Milk Proteins at an Air –Water Interface 

with Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy . Journal of Agricultural and F ood Chemistry .

10.1021/jf5008715 .Performance Improvement of PEM Water Electrolyzer Anodes via a 

# Bi-Functional Binder Polymer Blend s for Ionic and Electrical 

# Conduction 

Edgar Cruz Ortiz a, Friedemann Hegge a , Matthias Breitwieser a, b, Severin Vierrath a, b 

> a

Laboratory for MEMS Applications, IMTEK Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of 

Freiburg , Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany  

> b

Hahn -Schickard, Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 

E-Mail of corresponding author: edgar.cruz@imtek.u ni -freiburg.de 

Reducing the anode catalyst loading of proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers (PEMWE) is one 

of the major challenges for their mass commercialization [1,2] . In recent studies, the role of in -plane 

conductivity in low -loade d catalyst layer s (CL s) has been studied intensively , suggesting that electrically 

isolated portions in the CL [2] and ionomer swelling during operation [3] , result in higher resistances and 

hence lower catalyst utilization . We present a novel approach to reduce the CL in -plane resistivity by 

blending the proton conductive iono mer (Nafion) in the CL with an electrically conductive polymer 

(PEDOT:PSS) . With th is blend of ionomer and electrically conductive polymer we are able to increase the 

in -plane conductivity and reduce the contact resistance s of a CL with a n Ir -loading of 0.2 2 mg cm -². This 

results in a significant performance increase of a 120 mV lower overpotential at 3 A cm -2 compared to a 

conventional CL with ionomer only as binder and identical Ir -loading .

Figure 1 Blending of Nafion and PEDOT:PSS as a bi -functional binder in the CL resulted in lower 

overpotentials (left) . The highest improvement was observed with a 50 % Nafion 50 % 

PEDOT:PSS blend (right) . Operating conditions were: 80 °C, cathode and anode flowrate 

40 ml min -1, at ambient pressure , N115 membrane, anode loading of 0.2 2 mg cm -2 Ir and a cathode 

loading of 0.5 mg cm -2 Pt 

# References 

[1] C. Rozain, E. Mayousse, N. Guillet et al., “Influence of iridium oxide loadings on the performance 

of PEM water electrolysis cells: Part I –Pure IrO 2 -based anodes,” Applied Catalysis B: 

Environmental , vol. 182, pp. 153 –160, 2016. 

[2] M. Bernt, A. Siebel, and H. A. Gasteiger, “Analysis of Voltage Losses in PEM Water Electrolyzers 

with Low Platinum Group Metal Loadings,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society , vol. 165, no. 5, 

F305 -F314, 2018. 

[3] T. Schuler, J. M. Ciccone, B. Krentscher et al., “Hierarchically Structured Porous Transport Layers 

for Polymer Electrolyte Water Electrolysis,” Advanced Energy Materials , vol. 285, p. 1903216, 

2019. 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 

1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 

> Cell voltage (V)

Current density (mA cm -2 )    

> 025 50 75 100
> PEDOT:PSS Content (%)

0 25 50 75 100 

1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 

> @ 3 A cm -2
> @ 1 A cm -2
> Cell Voltage (V)

PEDOT:PSS as Binder (%) 100 75 50 25 0Nafion as Binder (%) Improving the morphology and performance of all -hydrocarbon PEM 

# fuel cell MEAs based on Pemion TM ionomer 

Hien Nguyen a,c, Florian Lombeck c, Andrew Belletti b, Ben Britton b , Severin Vierrath a,c , and Matthias 

Brei twieser a, c 

> a

Electrochemical Energy Systems , IMTEK Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of 

Freiburg , Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 

> b

Ionomr Innovations Inc. , 111 -2386 East Mall , Vancouver, BC Canada , V6T 1Z3 

> c

Hahn -Schickard, Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 

E-Mail of corresponding author: hien .nguyen @imtek.uni -freiburg.de 

Perfluorinated sulfonic acid -based ionomers (PFSAs) are the state -of -the -art proton conducting material in 

polymer electrolyte fuel cells nowadays . PFSAs , however, feature several dr awbacks including the high 

cost, restricted operating temperature range, insufficient chemical stability and environmental hazard due 

to the use of fluorine -based chemistry 1. Under these circumstances, several non -fluorinated hydrocarbon -

based ionomers were introduced in recent years to replace PFSAs. A very promising candidate is a 

sulfonated phenylated polyphenylenes -based (sPPP) ion omer introduced b y Skalski et al. 2. The authors 

reported competitive MEA performance in comparison to a Nafion TM membrane . In this work, we present 

different approaches to improve and engineer the electrode structure employing a sPPP -based ionomer 

(Pemion TM ) resulting in strongly improved performance of the all -hydrocarbon fuel cell 2. This includes an 

adjustment of ionomer contents in the catalyst layers, as well as improved processing conditions of the 

CCM fabrication. This work reports electrochemical performance from all -hydrocarbon MEA s at different 

operating conditions, as well as ex -situ characterization via electron microscopy and dynamic light 

scattering .

References 

1. Peron, J., Shi, Z. & Holdcroft, S. Hydrocarbon proton conducting polymers for fuel cell catalyst layers. 

Energy Environ. Sci. 4, 1575; 10.1039/c0ee00638f (2011). 

2. Skalski, T. J. G. et al. Sulfophe nylated Terphenylene Copolymer Membranes and Ionomers. 

ChemSusChem 11, 4033 –4043; 10.1002/cssc.201801965 (2018). 

Figure 1 Elevated performance of PEMFC s (Pt -loading anode/cathode = 0.1/0.4 mg /cm²) with 

Pemion TM (15 μm membrane thickness) in H 2/O 2 with a fixed flow of 0.25/1 l/min, 80°C, 95% r.H. 

and 1 atm (left) in comparison to literature (37 μm membrane thickness) and SEM micrograph of a 

CL with Pemion ionome r (right). Application of electroche mical approach and motility analysis 

# in algal cell s characterization 

Nives Novosel 1, Damir Kasum 1, Petar Žutinić 2, Tarzan Legović 1, Nadica Ivošević DeNardis 1 

> 1

Ru đer Bo škovi ć Institute , Bijeni čka cesta 54, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 

> 2

Faculty of Sciences , Rooseveltov trg 6, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 

nives.n ovosel@irb.hr 

Th is study aimed to examine the influence of the morphological characteristics of green alga l cells on the 

adhesion process and their mobility . The used model or ganisms we re Tetraselmis suecica and 

(Chlorophyceae), motile microalgae of micrometer size, with different morphological characteristics of 

the cell envelope. The D. tertiolecta cell consists cell membrane [1,2] enveloped by a glycopr otein cover 

(glycocalyx), while T. suecica cell consists of a cell membrane with complex theca made of scales, 

encrusted with calcium carbonate . D. tertiolecta cells have two flagella of equal length emerging from 

one basal body, whereas T. suecica cells h ave four flagella that pair out of two basal bodies. 

Using the electrochemical method of polarography and chronoamperometry on a dropping mercury 

electrode, D. tertiolecta cells were characterized based on characteristic adhesion signals occurring over a 

wide potential range. T. suecica cells do not adhere to the charged electrode, which is a consequence of 

the compact cell envelope. 

Using computer -assisted video microscop y an d an Open Source Image Processing Software Icy 

(http://icy.bioimageanalysis.org/) cell swimming speed, the displac ement length , and shape of their 

trajectories were quantified on 500 individual cells . Resu lts showed that the speed of T. suecica cells is 

up to 4 times higher than that of D. tertiolecta , which is a consequence of a complex flagellar system .

Based on a lgal cell adhesion and motility characterization , the obtained results could contribute to a better 

understanding of the spati al distribution of green alga l cells in the aquatic environ ment under stress .

Acknowledg ment 

This work is supported by the Croati an Science Foundation Projects " From algal cell surface properties to 

stress markers for aquatic ecosystems " (IP -2018 -01 -5840) .

References 

[1] F. Pillet, E. Dague, J. Pečar Ilić, I. Ružić, M -P.Rols, and N. Ivošević DeNardis,  Changes in 

nanomechanical properties and adhesion dynamics of algal cells during their growth, 

Bioelectrochemistry, 127, 2019, 154 -162 .

[2] N. Ivošević, J. Pečar Ilić, I. Ružić, N. Novosel, T. Mišić Ra dić, A. Weber, D. Kasum, Z. Pavlinska, R. 

K. Balogh, H. Balint, A. Marček Chorvátová, and B. Gyurcsik, Algal cell response to laboratory -induced 

cadmium stress: a multimethod approach,  Eur. Biop hys. J. , 48, 2019, 124 -142 .Synthesis of Nanoporous A nodic Alumina Architectures Involving 

# Deep Eutectic Solvents for Supercapacitor Application s

Nourhan Mohamed a, Sabrina Rosoiu b, Liana Anicai b, Mustafa Urgen a 

> a

Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering , Istanbul Tec hnical University, 34469 Maslak, 

Istanbul, Turkey  

> b

Center of Surface Science and Nanotechnology, University Politehni ca of Bucharest, Splaiul 

Independentei 313, Bucharest, 060042, Romania 

Self -standing nanowires arrays have shown great potential in a v ariety of important applications, 

including supercapacitors because of the high volum e to weight ratio . They act as a c urrent collector and 

as a substrate on which the active materials can be grown. Usually , controllable arrays of nanowires are 

obtained involving template assisted electrochemical deposition where nanoporous ordered alumi num 

anodic oxide (AAO) architecture s represent the host matrix. Conventionally AAO patterns are produced 

through aluminum anodization in oxalic acid based electrolytes at l ow operating temperatures and 

relatively low anodic film growth rates. Low temperat ures are preferred because the heat generated 

during anodization at high temperatures causes inhomogeneous growth of the porous AAO. In order to 

optimize the anodization p rocess to form ordered AAOs, a quite novel approach involves the use of ionic 

liquid s (ILs) as potential environmentall y benign solvents and widespread application in materials 

chemistry and electrochemistry in a green synthetic strateg y [1] .

In this stud y, we aimed to bring insight to the synthesis of AAO architectures involving novel 

fo rmulations of deep eutectic solven ts based on eutectic mixtures of cholinium compounds , respectively 

of choline dihydrogencitrate/oxalic acid/ethylene glycol systems and c omparing them with the anodic 

oxides formed in traditional aqueous electrolytes . The structural -morphological character istics of the 

obtained AAO films formed under various operating parameters (i.e. anodization voltage, electrolyte 

temperature, anodizatio n duration) were studied. The formed AAO architectures involving ILs were then 

used as patterns to electrodeposit Ni na nowires (Ni NWs) from aqueous solution at constant potential 

conditions. Afterwards , the surface of the Ni NWs was converted directly int o Ni(OH) 2 involving the 

hydrothermal method [2]. The structure, composition and mor phology of the obtained AAO, Ni NWs and 

Ni(OH) 2 were investigated by XRD, Raman and SEM techniques . The electrochemical performance of 

Ni(OH) 2 was studied by cyclic voltamme try and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 

The influence of the AAO structural characteristics on the final self -standing Ni NWs and their 

electrochemical characteristics is also discussed. 

Acknowledgements: This project has received founding from  th e European Union’s Horizon 2020 

research and innovation programme under the  Marie S kłodowska -Curie grant agreement No76 4977 and 

from the  Romanian UEFISCDI, INTELMAT project, Contract No. 39PCCDI/2018. 

References 

1. Salerno, Marco, Niranjan Patra, and Roberto Cingolani. "Use of ionic liquid in fabrication, 

characterization, and processi ng of anodic porous alumina." Nanosc ale research letters 4.8 (2009): 865 

2. Ma, Qian, et al. "Freestanding core -shell Ni (OH) 2@ MnO2 structure with enhanced energy density 

and cyclic performance for asymmetric supercapacitors." Journal of Alloys and Compo unds 803 (2019): 

866 -874. Cathodic Corrosion of Polycrystalline Au Electrodes: 

# Applications in Electrocat alysis and Surface Spectroscopy 

Ludwig A. Kibler , Mohamed M. Elnagar, Johannes M. Hermann, Timo Jacob 

Institute of Electrochemistry, Ulm University 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 47, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

ludwig.kibler@uni -ulm.de 

Faceting and nanostructuring of polycrystalline Au electrodes by cathodic corrosion in concentrated 

aqueous alkali metal hydroxide electr olytes have been studied systematically. Scanning electron 

micrographs show the formation of octahedral Au nanocrystals and triangular pits by using NaOH and 

KOH solutions, respectively. These Au surfaces with preferential (111) -texture and a unique nanost ructure 

are of special interest for new developments and applications in electrocatalysis and surface -enhanced 

Raman spectroscopy (SERS) [1,2] .

Cathodic corrosion of Au leads to a single -crystal -like electrochemical behavior with characteristic features 

of Au(111) electrodes [3 ,4 ]. The electrocatalytic behavior of this new type of nanostructures will be 

presented for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and for the formic acid oxidation reaction (FAOR). 

The Raman activity of adsorbed pyridine on the nanost ructured Au electrodes was studied with SERS. 

While untreated polycrystalline Au is not SERS -active, the use of cathodic corrosion opens up a way for 

in -situ applications of SERS in electrochemistry. 

Figure 1: (left) Raman spectra of Au in 0.1 M pyridine + 0.05 M HClO 4 before and after cathodic corrosion 

in 10 M KOH with application of 3. 5 V for 60 seconds. (right ) Selected SEM micrographs of gold surfaces 

after cathodic corrosion. 

References: 

[1] J. -F. Li, S. -Y. Ding, Z. -L. Yang, M. -L. Bai, J.R. Anema, X. Wang, A. Wang, D. -Y. Wu, B. Ren, S. -M. 

Hou, T. Wandlowski, Z. -Q. Tian, Extraordinary Enhancement of Raman Scattering from Pyridine on Single 

Crystal Au and Pt Electrodes by Shell -Isolated Au Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (2011 ) 15922 –

15925. 

[2] C.L. Bentley, M. Kang, P.R. Unwin, Nanoscale Surface Structure−Activity in Electrochemistry and 

Electrocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 (2019) 2179−2193. 

[3] L.A. Kibler, J.M. Hermann, A.A. El -Aziz, T. Jacob, New insights on hydrogen evo lution at Au single 

crystal electrodes, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 9 (2018) 265 -270. 

[4] L.A. Kibler, M. Al -Shakran, Adsorption of Formate on Au(111) in Acid Solution: Relevance for 

Electro -Oxidation of Formic Acid, J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (2016) 16238 -16245. Electrochemical synthesis of graphene paper for supercapacitor 

# application 

> a

Roko Kranjčec, aNicole Mesaroš , aDajana Mikić, bMagdalena Kralj, aMarijana Kraljić Roković a

> a

Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of Zagreb, Marulićev trg 19 , Zagreb 

> b

Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička cesta 54, 10000, Zagreb 

mkralj@fkit.hr 

Graphene is a two dimensional material characterised by a honeycomb structure and sp2 hybridization 

that provides outstanding properties of this material. It can be prep ared as a powder or as a poro us 

monolithic structure (hydrogel or graphene paper). Graphene paper is characterized by high surface area, 

low weight, high electrical conductivity and furthermore it is a flexible and free -standing material, which 

makes it a perfect candidate for energy storage applications. 

The objective of this research was electrochemical synthesis of graphene paper (ErGO) and its application 

in the flexible supercapacitor as freestanding active material. In order to obtain ErGO , graphene o xide 

(GO) paper was prepared by vacuum filtration or drop -casting while electrochemical reduction of GO 

paper was carried out by chromoamperometry method. During the reduction process GO paper was 

connected as working electrode by pressing a titanium road on to the paper . B y using a number of 

techniques , including Fouirer -transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, X -ray 

diffraction analysis (XRD) and conductivity measurement , it was shown that the reduction process was 

carried out successf ully. The obtained ErGO papers were used for assembling supercapacitors with nickel 

current collector or supercapacitor with freestanding flexibile ErGO paper. The p repared supercapacitors 

were tested by cycling voltammetry and electrochemical imp edance sp ectroscopy method s. The obtained 

results indicated good reversibility with specific capacitance of 44 F g -1

a)  b) 

c) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0   

> I / mA
> E/ V
> 1/4 under Ni current collector 1/2 under Ni current collector all under Ni current collector

d) 

Fig. 1. Different forms of supercapacitors (a, b, d) and cyclic voltammetry response of freestanding ErGO 

paper or ErGO paper covered by Ni current collector ( c). Photoelectrochemical Degradation of Pharmaceutical Compounds at 

# TiO 2/SnS 2 Electrode 

Mia Tominac, Tihana Bošnjak, Klara Perović, Tayebeh Sharifi, Hrvoje Kušić, Marijana Kraljić Roković 

Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of Zagreb, 

Marulićev trg 19, Zagreb 

mkralj@fkit.hr 

Pharmaceuticals are known to have a significant impact on aquatic environment causing ecological risk 

and human health damage. Accordingly, it is important to develop an innovative and practical water 

treatment tec hnique, which will be able to remove them. Photoelectrochemical oxidation is one of the 

promising techniques due to its simplicity and combination of photocatalytic and electrochemical process. 

Additionally, recombination of photogenerated electron/hole pa irs that occurs decreases by applying 

external potential, leading to enhancement in pharmaceutical degradation efficiency. One of the most 

important photocatalytic candidates is TiO 2. Since it is limited to UV -irradiation, significant efforts have 

been don e to extend its absorption into the visible light region through TiO 2 doping or TiO 2 composite 

formation. Therefore, the aim of this work was to investigate photoelectrochemical activities of 

TiO 2/SnS 2 nano -composite. The examination was performed using ph otoelectrochemical techniques in 

0.1 mol dm -3 NaCl solution, for degradation of pharmaceuticals such as diclophenac, salicylic acid and 

memantine hydrochloride. For this purpose, TiO 2/SnS 2 nano -composite was immobilised on FTO 

electrodes. 

Good sensitivity of photocatalyst was shown by monitoring OCP in chopped light irradiation and by 

comparing EIS response in dark to the one under light irradiation . Electrochemical and 

photoelectrochemical degradation of pharmaceutical was monitored by linear polarisation . The 

experiments showed that it is possible to degrade pharmaceutical using electrochemical process and to 

improve degradation using solar irradiation for TiO 2/SnS 2 nano -composite electrode (Fig. 1) . The 

obtained response is dependent on the on the type o f pharmaceutical and its affinity towards the 

adsorption at TiO2 -SnS2 surface [1] .-0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 -80 -40 040 80 120               

> I / mA
> E/ V
> TiO 2/SnS 2dark TiO 2/SnS 2DCF dark TiO 2/SnS 2LED TiO 2/SnS 2DCF LED 040000 80000 120000 160000 200000
> 040000 80000 120000 160000 200000
> TiO 2/SnS 2dark TiO 2/SnS 2LED
> -Z im  / 
> Zre /

Fig 1. a) Linear sweep voltametry photocurrent response of  TiO 2/SnS 2 in the presence  and absence  of 

diclofenac (DCF) and b) the Nyquist plot of TiO 2/SnS 2 composite in da rk and under LED irradiation. 

[1] M. Kovačić, J. Papac, H. Kušić, P. Karamanis , A. Lončarić Božić, Degradation of polar and non -polar 

pharmaceutical pollutants in water by solar assisted photocatalysis using hydrothermal TiO 2-SnS 2,

Chemical Engineering Journal , 13821 (2020) 122826 .Operando Investigation of Different Polysulfide Retention 

# Approaches in Magnesium -Sulfur B atteries 

Joachim Häcker a, Duc Hien Nguyen a, Zhirong Zhao -Karger b, Norbert Wagner a, K. Andreas Friedrich a, c 

> a

German Aerospace Center, Institute of Engineering Therm odynamics, 

Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany  

> b

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) Electrochemical Energy Storage, 

Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> c

University of Stuttgart, Institute of Building Energetics, Thermal Engineering and 

Ener gy Storage (IGTE), Pfaffenwaldring 6, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany 

Since the first reported magnesium -sulfur (Mg -S) cell by Kim et al. in 2011 [1] interest in t his po st -

lithium battery system has steadily increased due to its promising properties in regards of volumetric 

energy density, safety and costs. In recent years many research groups have attempted to unveil the 

underlying electrochemical mechanisms by sophisticated structure analysis of the solid product (MgS) [2] 

as well as spectroscopic investigati ons of the soluble intermediates (magnesium polysulfides, MgS x) [3] .

Analogous to lithium -sulfur (Li -S) batteries, the solubility of the latter causes the loss of active material 

and charge compensation through the polysulfide shuttle. Furthermore, the sul fur species contribute to the 

formation of an anodic SEI, which – in the case of magnesium metal – exhibits a rather passivating 

nature. This is supposed to be one of the origin s for the fast capacity decay and the short cycle life of 

magnesium -sulfur batt ery cells. 

Benefitting from previous Li -S research to retain sulfur species within the cathode and prevent the 

polysulfide shuttle, several retention approaches can be considered for the Mg -S system . Among the 

different strategies, the most promising ones are the sulfur incorporation in micro pores, separator coatings 

with ionomers or carbons, covalently bound sulfur or the use of polar cathode additives as adsorption 

sites. In this study, the capability of selected attempts on magnesium polysulfide retenti on was 

investigated via operando UV/Vis spectroscopy and operando microscopy in optical cells. Besides the 

analysis of the separator coloration during galvanostatic cycling, the self -discharge during OCV was 

surveyed. In addition, significant influence of the electrolyte solvent and the polysulfide diffusion length 

on the reoxidation of the sulfur species was observed. 

Reference s:

[1] H.  S.  Kim, T . S. Arthur, G . D. Allred, J . Zajicek, J . G. Newman,  A. E. Rodnyansky, A . G. Oliver, 

W. C. Boggess  and  J. Muldoon , Nat. Commun . 2 (2011) 427 

[2] A. Robba, A. Vizintin, J. Bitenc , G. Mali, I. Arcon, M. Kavcic , M. �itnik, K. Bucar, G. Aquilanti, 

C. Martineau -Corcos, A. Randon -Vitanova and R. Dominko, Chem. Mater.  29 (2017) 9555 -9564 

[3] G. Bieker, D. Didden s, M. Kolek, O. Borodin, M. Winter, P. Bieker and K. Jalkanen , J. Phys. Chem. 

C 122 (2018) 21770−21783 Cysteine Self -Assembly on Au(100) Studied by In Situ STM, 

# Voltammetry and DFT 

Christian Engelbrekt ,a Renat R. Nazmutdinov, b Tamara T. Zinkicheva, b Dmitrii V. Glukhov, b Jiawei Yan, c

Bingwei Mao, c Jens Ulstrup a,b , Jingdong Zhang a 

> a

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark. b Kazan National 

Research Technological University, K. Marx Str. 68, 420015 Kazan, Republic of Tatarstan, Russian 

Federation . c State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and College of Chemistry and 

Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China 

cheng@kemi.dtu.dk 

Functionalization of metal surfaces with organic molecules play key role s in biosensor fabrication, 

hybrid nanomaterials design, and controlled g rowth of nanostructures. Detailed understanding of the 

chemistry and dynamics involved can therefore lead to increased surface performance and control . Gold 

surfaces are widely used in catalys is and in molecular and bio molecular electrochemistry , where cat aly st 

functionalization frequently relies on gold -sulfur chemistry. 

We have explored monolayer formation and structure of cysteine (Cys) , a natural amino acid that holds 

–NH 3+, –COO - and –SH functionalities, on Au(100), which is much less studied tha n the other low -index 

Au -surfaces .1 We have mapped the dynamics of Cys self -assembled monolayer (SAM) formation by a 

combination of open circuit potential evolution and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. The structure of the 

SAMs is imaged using in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) with single -molecul e resolution 

supported by DFT calculations and STM contrast simulations (Figure 1). Unusual one -dimensional 

features were disclosed by the in situ STM images, unique to Au(100) and closely correlat ing with unique 

reductive desorption behavior (Figure 1b). Based on deta iled analysis of in situ STM images and DFT 

calculation of Cys monomer and dimer adsorbates, we propose that the bright two -dimensional STM 

structures and high -energy reductive desorption peak represent Cys dimers. The dimers associate via two -

prong electr ostatic interaction between ammonium and carboxylate functional groups and bind vertical ly 

to Au(100) via a single Au –S bond leaving the other –SH group pointing away from the surface. 

This level of m olecular understanding of the chemistry involved in C ys SAM formation and structure is 

achiev ed by the combination of electrochemistry, microscopy and theoretical efforts , and can help to 

guide future electrochemical device design and gold nanomaterial functionalization protocols. [110] 

0 10 nm 

A B

Figure 1. (A) In situ STM micrograph of L -Cys SAM on Au(100). Two distinct unit cells are observed 

highlighted with the green and blue squares. (B) CV of reductive desorption along with DFT simulations 

of L -Cys dimer formation. 

(1) Engelbrekt, C.; Nazmutdinov, R. R.; Zinkicheva, T. T.; Glukhov, D. V.; Yan, J.; Mao, B.; 

Ulstrup, J.; Zhang, J. "Chemistry of cysteine assembly on Au(100): electrochemistry, in situ STM 

and molecular modeling", Nanoscale 2019 , 11 (37), 17235 –17251. Bovine Serum Albumin Based Biosensor for Folic A cid Detection 

# through Biomolecular I nteraction Monitoring 

Melinda David 1, Claudia G. Chilom 2, Monica Florescu 1,* 

> 1

Faculty of Medicine, Transilvania University of Brașov , Bulevardul Eroilor 29, Brașov 500036, 

Romania 

> 2

Faculty of Physics, University of Bucharest, Str. Atomistilor no. 405, CP MG - 11, Bucuresti -Magurele 

Măgurele, Romania, 

florescum@unitbv.ro 

Folic acid (FA) is a bioactive food component whose deficiency can lead to a variety of health problem s, 

while a high intake can reduce the cytotoxicity of natural killer cells. One of the most commonly used 

proteins in small molecule s transport is bovine serum albumin (BSA). BSA interacts with these ligands at 

one or more of its sites, located in hydropho bic cavities. Herewith, the development of a BSA based 

biosensor for small molecule detection can be of great importance. 

The binding mechanism of FA to free BSA was studied using fluorescence, while cyclic voltammetry and 

electrochemical impedance spect roscopy offer an insight on both the overall characteristics on the 

phenomena at the gold electrode surface (BSA binding to the electrode surface ) and the detection of FA 

[1] .

The fluorescence quenching mechanism of BSA by FA shows that there occurs a FA -BSA complex 

formation where one molecule of FA binds per one molecule of BSA, and the binding process is 

characterized by a moderate interaction with a binding constant of Kb = 8.72 × 10 4 M−1 at 25 °C. Knowing 

this, a BSA biosensor was used for electrochemical FA detection. Confinement of BSA to gold surfaces 

occurred through drop casting , inducing conformational changes, which influenced the orientation of 

BSA molecules binding sites toward s free FA . T hus, t he apparent binding constant calculated using 

electrochemical methods was 5 times higher , proving a stronger binding . Preliminary results show a 

sensitivity of 67 nA cm -2 μM -1, with a linear range up to 20 μM FA. These results enabl e furt her studies 

towards BSA -biosensor development for the detection of small molecules such as FA. 

References :

[1] C.G. Chilom et. al. Spectrochim Acta A: 230 (2020) 118074 The Impact of Bronze Composition on Properties of Self -Assembled 

# Monolayers of Phosphonic Acids 

Dajana Mikić , Magdalena Osrečak, Helena Otmačić Ćurković 

Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of Zagreb 

Savska cesta 16 , Zagreb , Cr oatia 

dajana .mikic@fkit.hr , helena .otmacic@fkit.hr 

Self -assembled monolayers (SAMs) of long -chain organic acids are formed by adsorption of acid on the 

surface of oxide -covered metal, resul ting in acid -base reaction between metal oxide and acid. This 

reaction is followed by the self -organization of alkyl chains which creates a very thin and compact film .

Due t o their unique properties , they are used in many fields, from na no fabrications, se nsoric s, 

electro catalysis to micro electronics . In addition to the listed fields , they have also proven to be good 

corrosion inhibitors on various metal substrates. Given that corrosion is a significant problem globally, 

SAMs are emerging as a potential sol ution to this global problem. 

There are many parameters in the preparation of SAMs that can influence the quality of the formed fi lm, 

but in this work we will deal with the influence of the composition of the bronze substrate on their 

fo rmation. More spec ifically, we will form films on pure copper and several bronzes of varying 

composition so that we can see how and to what extent i ndividual alloy ing element affect the quality and 

arrangement of the SAMs. This information is important giv en that better arr anged films provide stronger 

and longer lasting protection. 

In order to obtain a compact well -ordered film which will provide long term protection, SAM s

preparation procedures consist of bronze pretreatment and phosphonic acid adsorption by dip -coating 

followed with drying period. Protective properties of pho sphonic acid SAMs are examined by linear 

polarization measurements and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. These measurements are carried 

out in simulated acid rain (0.2 g/L NaNO 3 + 0.2 g/L Na 2SO 4 + 0.2 g/L NaHCO 3 at pH 5) which simulat es 

the rain in urban atmosphere. The surface of modified samples is also examined by scanning electron 

microscopy and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy in order to verify adsorption of phosphonic acid 

on metal and formation of an ordered organic laye r. 

Acknowledgment: This work has been fully supported by Croatian Science Foundation under the project 

IP -2019 -04 -5030 .Calculation of mechanistic parameters of the oxygen evolution reaction 

Denis Antipin , Marcel Risch 

Nachwuchsgruppe Gestaltung des Sauerstoffentwicklungsmechanismus ,

Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH 

Hahn -Meitner Platz 1, 14109 Berlin, Germany 

denis.antipin@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Energy is the most important issue of the 21st century. With the increase of worldwide energy demands, 

sustainable energy resources are in focus more than ever. In addition to currently existing inte rmittent 

energy sources, efficient energy conversion and storage systems are required. Electrochemical water 

splitting is one of the promising approaches to contain excess of energy in form of hydrogen. However, the 

efficiency is limited by the sluggish ki netics of anodic half -cell reaction, viz., oxygen evolution reaction 

(OER, 4OH - → О2 + 2H 2O + 4e -). To overcome this limitation, researchers have examined a number of 

strategies to develop more active OER catalysts. However, d espite numerous studies devoted to OER, the 

mechanism of OER on transition metal oxides remains controversial. 

There are several mechanistic schemes proposed by different scientific groups since the 1960’s . We 

classified them into three prototypical mecha nism recently [1]. First, the most commonly discussed 

mechanisms emphasize the acid -base chemistry of the adsorbates with little change of the metal valence. 

Second, mechanisms have been proposed where a high metal valence must be achieved for breaking of the 

oxygen bond , which is known for oxygen evolution by natural photosynthesis. We have previously 

compared the mechanism of LiMn 2O4 to that of photosystem II (PSII) under the assumption that the latter 

was an electrocatalytic surface [2], which provides a link to commonly studies oxides. Thirdly, mechanisms 

gained renewed interest recently where oxygen comes from the crystal lattice rather than adsorbed 

water /hydroxide . It is currently unknown how these prototypical mechanisms can be distinguished best. 

We calculate d the Tafel slopes for these cases based on microkinetic analysis. We assumed OH -covered 

metal sites as resting state, which is more likely in alkaline solution. This contrasts previous similar analyses 

[3] based on bare metal sites. This informa tion will guide the design of in situ experiments to experimentally 

identify one of the prototypical mechanisms on an oxide catalyst. A deeper understanding of the mechanism 

is desperately needed as it opens the ability to improve the mechanism and thereby enhance the activity 

beyond the present limitations. 

Fig.1. Tafel slope simulations of the two mainly discussed rate -limiting steps of the adsorption 

mechanism .

References 

[1] D. Antipin, M. Risch, Trends of epitaxial perovskite oxide films catalyzing the oxygen evolution 

reaction in alkaline media, J. Phys. Energy , accepted. 

[2] L. K �hler, M. Ebrahimizadeh Abrishami, V. Roddatis, J. Geppert, M. Risch, ChemSusChem 2017, 10 ,

4479. 

[3] T. Shinagawa, A . T. Garcia -Esparza, K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep. 2015 , 5, 13801. Development and upscaling of gas diffusion electrodes for CO 2

# reduction and electrosynthesis of chemicals 

Deepak Pant , Yuvraj Birdja, Metin Bulut, Jan Vaes 

Separation & Conversion Technology, Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Boeretang 

200, 2400 Mol, Belgium 

Deepak.pant@vito.be 

Technologies related to gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) offer solutions for gaseous reagents taking part 

in electrochemical reactions. ( Bio)electrochemical processes s uffer from challenges like high costs of 

platinized electrodes 1; rapid catalyst degradation and low  performance  due to non -uniform electrode 

quality 2; difficulties in upscaling.  Scaling up microbial fuel cells (MFCs) requires use of large electrodes 

which are often  difficult to fabricate without loss in quality. VITO has developed GDEs tailored for 

systems with aqueous electrolytes and a gas -water in terface, which are characterized by controllable pore 

diameters in the polymer -bound active layer, mechanica l robustness and low water permeability 2. The se 

cold -roll ed  (VITOCORE ®) and phase -inversion  based  (VITO CASE ®) electrodes enabl e reproducible 

quality in sizes from 10 cm² to 1 m².  Large -scale VITOCORE ® air cathodes were recently developed and 

tested in 85 L and 255 L  MFCs  to evaluate the impact of the cathode size  on MFC performance 4,5 . For 

CO 2 electroreduction, GDEs based on Sn, Cu and Pd were developed and evaluated  for  production of 

formic acid  and  oxalic acid. 

[1] J. Materials Chemistry A, 7(4 2), 24420 , 2019 .

[2] Electrochim. Acta , 82, 415, 2012. 

[3] Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem. , 16, 47, 2019. 

[4] Wat . Res . 148, 51 , 2019. 

[5] Biores . Technol. , 294, 122227 , 2019 .Search for Organic Molecules for Use in Redox Flow Batteries 

Mahsa Shahsavan , Rasmus Rönkä, Pekka Peljo 

Research group of Physical Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Physics, Aalto Univ ersity 

P.O. Box 16100, 00076, Finland 

mahsa.shahsavan@aalto.fi 

Nowadays, large fracti on of energy generation is from renewable sources ; however, due to their 

intermittent behavior, it is impossible to make use of them whenever more energy is needed. Therefore, it 

is importa nt to store large amount of the produced energy for use when the de mand for energy is high. 

Redox flow batteries (RFBs) are a well -suitable choice to store energy but their current cost is too high, 

and commercialized systems require critical raw materials such as vanadium [1-3]. Our aim is to look for 

alternative materials for fl ow batteries. For this purpose, i n our research we are looking for new organic 

molecules that can be used in aqueous RFBs . Although molecule screenin gs like th is has been done 

befo re , i n our work we evaluated over 20 commercially available organi c molecules for flow battery 

applications that most of them were not st udied before for the purpose of using in RFBs . These 

compounds were selected based on their commercial av ailability and based on their chemical structures 

that indicate redox activity because of t heir functional groups . The best possible candidates for use in 

RFBs were chosen according to their redox behavior, solubility and stability . Carminic acid ,

Gallocyanine , Indigo Carmine , Methylene Blue , Neutral Red , O-Dianisidine , Promethazine 

hydrochlorid e, Safranin O, Toluidine Blue O, H2TauNDI (N, N’ -di(ethanesulfonic acid) -1,4,5,8 -

naphthalenediimide ) were the ones with promising results so that the y can be tested for us e in RFB s.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were done to determine redox b ehavior and stability of 

compounds. Concentration of 1mM of the solute and three different solvents such as 0.5M Sulfuric acid, 

0.5M Potassium Sulfate and 100 mM S odium Hydroxide was used for pH 1,7 and 13 respectively . During 

the first scans, the full poten tial range was examined, and appropriate parameters were selected based on 

the redox peaks present , then scanning was repeated with different scan rates. Accordi ng to the resul ts ,

afore mentioned molecules shows reversible reaction peak in acidic solut ion expect Carminic acid and 

H2TauNDI . Standard redox potential of th ese molecules based on their CV result at scan rate 10mV /s , is 

shown in Figure 1.       

> Figure 1-Stan dard re dox potentia lof promising candidates ,sweep rate 10 mV/s

References: 

1- E.S. Beh , D. De Porcellinis , R.L. Gracia , K.T. Xia , R.G. Gordon , & M.J. Aziz , A neutral pH aqueous 

organic –organo metallic redox flow battery with extremely high capacity rete ntion , ACS Energy Letter s, 2

(2017 ) 639 -644 .

2- K. Lin , R. Gómez -Bombarelli , E. S. Beh , L. Tong ., Q. Chen , A. Valle , ... & R. G. Gordon, A redox -flow 

battery with an alloxazine -based organic electrolyte. Nature Energ y, 1 (2016 ), 1 -8.

3- D. G. Kwabi , K. Lin , Y. Ji , E.F. Kerr , M. A. Goulet , D. De Porcellinis , ... & M.J. Aziz , Alkaline 

quinone flow battery with long lifetime at pH 12. Joul e, 2 (2018 ) 1894 -1906 .Fermented whey as natural descaling agent: Electrochemical and 

# microscopical analysis 

Aisholpan K aziullayeva , Kayode Olaifa, Enrico Marsili 

School of Engineering and Digital Sciences, Nazarbayev University 

53 Kabanbay Batyr Avenue, 010000 Nur -Sultan, Kaza khstan 

aisholpan.kaziullayeva@nu.edu.kz 

The characterization of fouling and corrosion of steel is relevant to many industries including oil and gas, 

automotive, construction and home appliances. Elec trochemical characterization of fouling and corrosion 

is rapid and effective, allowing routine analysis under a broad range of environmental conditions. Tap 

water in Nur -Sultan, Kazakhstan, is rich in carbonate due to contamination of surface water and 

ins ufficient drinking water treatment. This leads to strong fouling and corrosion -related problems in both 

home appliances and water transportation infrastructure. A broad range of de -scaling agents is available 

for industrial applications. However, access to chemical and services is still a major problem in rural 

Kazakhstan community, thus traditional methods are still used, which employ locally available materials. 

In the rural communities of the south -west regions, de -scaling of cooking equipment is carried out by 

fermented whey, which is widely available as by product of small -scale faming activities, and is rich in 

lactic acid, with a low pH ~ 2.8. The de -scaling properties of lactic acid are well -known, thus it is 

possible to formulate a low -cost, environ mental friendly de -scaling agent for use in rural communities. 

In this work, the scaling process of mild steel coupons was carried out through carbonate precipitation, 

which were then cleaned with water, fermented whey and food -grade vinegar as control (pH ~ 3) . The 

scaling and de -scaling process were characterized through electrochemical methods and scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM). While the traditional cleaning time was ~ 15 h, it was observed that 3 h of treatment 

are sufficient for the de -scaling pro cess. The corrosion potential and the corrosion current decrease after 

formation of the carbonate deposit (Figure 1) . While both application of fermented whey and vinegar 

remove the fouling layer, they cause substantial pitting corrosion ( Figure 1). A corr osion inhibitor should 

be added to prevent this effect. Overall, these results show that fermented whey can be used as 

environmentally friendly de -scaling agent. However, the traditional method of application causes damage 

to the steel surface and must be op timized, decreasing the exposure time and adding a n inorganic 

corrosion inhibitor. 

Figure 1: (A) Linear Sweep Voltammetry of mild steel coupons before (black) and after carbonate 

fouling (red), after cleaning with distilled water (blue), vinegar (ma genta) an d fermented whey (green ); 

(B) Corrosion potential ; SEM of (C) Scaled mild steel coupon; ( D) whey cleaned. Recurrence Quantification Analysis as a Tool to I nvestigate Current 

# Oscillations Observed During the Mass -Transport Controlled 

# Electrodissolution of Fe in Sulfuric Acid S olution s

Chrysanthi Gkili , Dimitrios Valavanis , Dimitra Sazou 

Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 

Thessaloniki, T.K. 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece 

e-mail address : chrysagkili@gmail.com 

Recurrence is a fundamenta l property of nonlinear dynamical systems, which can be utilized in order to 

characteri ze the system dynamics in phase space. A v isual tool for exploiting the recurrence behavior 

of phase space trajectories is the recurrence plot (RP) introduced in 1987 by Eckman et al [1] . On the 

basis of the RP, recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) can be carried out to identify different 

dynamical regimes and characterize transit ions between them. Recurrence plots (RPs) and recurrence 

quantification analysis have been widely used in many scientific fields from chemistry, physics and 

engineering to life sciences, ecology and economy [2, 3 ]. RQA was also turned out to be a key issue 

revealing complex dynamics, phase and generalized synchronization in non -phase -coherent and even 

non -stationary time ser ies of electrochemical systems and characterizing different corrosion states of 

metals and alloys [ 4-6]. This study aims in exploring non -linear quantifiers based on RPs and RQA in 

order to investigate complex current oscillations observed during the mass -transport controlled 

electrodissolution of iron in sulfuric acid solutions ( Fe| 0.75 M H 2SO 4 interfacial system) . Under the 

potentiody namic operation mode, Fe| 0.75 M H 2SO 4 is a well -known electrochemical system exhibiting 

multip le oscillatory potential regimes depending on various control parameters [7 ]. Our focus here is 

on oscillations appeared in the limiting current region beyond a c ritical value of the ohmic potential 

drop and when proper hydrodynamic conditions are established a cross the interfacial region [8 ]. By 

applying two system configurations comprising an upward and a downward -facing Fe -disc electrode ,

visual changes in RPs p lots and RQA measures, such as the average diagonal line (ADL), the trapping 

time (TT) and the longest vertical line (LVL) along with a new entropy quantifier, reveal different 

nonlinear correlations. The new entropy quantifier was based on recurrence matr ix microstates that 

represent more general properties of the recurrence space as compared with the entropy quantifier 

based on just diagonal or horizontal lines of the recurrence space [9] . Indeed, the microstate -based 

entropy quantifier reflects correctly the system complexity in agreement with ADL, TT and LVL. All 

RQA measures indicate that the enhancement of the mass transfer affects the complexity and the 

transitions between different nonlinear dynamical regimes. 

References 

1. J. -P. Eckmann, S. Kamphorst, Recurrence Plots of Dynamical Systems. Europhysics Letters 

(epl), 4, 973 -977 ( 1987 ).

2. N. Marwan et al., Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems. Physics Reports, 

438 (5), 237 -329 (2007) .

3. J. Zbilut, A. Giuliani, C. Webber, Recurrence quantification analysis and principal 

components in the det ection of short complex signals, Phys. Lett. A, 237 ,131 -135 (1998) .

4. Y. Zou, R.V. Donner, M. Wickramasinghe, I. Z. Kiss, M. Small, J. Kurths, Phase coherence 

and attractor geometry of chao tic electrochemical oscillators , Chaos 22 (3), 033130 (2012). 

5. Y. Hou, C. Aldrich, K. Lepkova, L. L. Machuca and B. Kinsella, Monitoring of carbon steel 

corrosion by use of electrochemical noise and rec urrence quantification analysis , Corros Sci 

112 , 63 -72 (2016). 

6. D. Valavanis, D. Spanoudaki, Ch. Gkili, D. Sazou, Using recurrence plots for the analysis of 

the nonlinear dynamical response of iron passivation -corrosion processes , Chaos 28, 085708 

(2018) ; doi: 10.1063/1.5025801. 

7. D. Sazou and M. Pagitsas, Non -linear dynamics of the passivity breakdown of iron in acidic 

solutions, Chaos Soliton Fract 17 (2 -3), 505 -522 (2003). 

8. D. Sazou, M. Pagitsas, On the onset of current oscillations at the limiting current region 

emerged during iron electrodissolution in sulfuric acid solutions, Electrochim. Acta 51 (28), 

6281 -6296 (2006) 

9. G. Corso, Th.Lima Prado, G. Z. Santos Lima, J. Kurths, S. R. Lope s, Quantifying entropy 

using recurrence matrix microstates , Chaos 28, 083108 (2018); doi: 10.1063/1.5042026 .Doped -MnO 2 Nano -Electrocatalysts for the ORR in 

# Non -Aqueous Solvent s

E. Pargoletti ,a,b A. Salvi ,a A. Vertova ,a,b M. Longhi ,a,b G. Cerrato c and G. Cappelletti a,b  

> a

Dipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Milano, via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy 

(eleonora.pargoletti@unimi.it)  

> b

Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM), Via Giusti 

9, 50121, Firenze, Italy  

> c

Dipartimento di Chimica & NIS, Università degli Studi di Torino, Via P. Giuria 7, 10125, Turin, Italy 

Due to the remarkably high theoretical energy and light weight, metal -air batteries represent one class of 

promising power sources for applications in ne xt -generation electronics, electrified transportation and 

energy storage of smart grids [1]. The most prominent feature of a metal -air battery is the combination of 

a metal anode with high energy density and an air electrode with open structure to draw cat hode active 

materials ( i.e. oxygen) from air [1]. Gas Diffusion Electrodes (GDEs), made of a two -layer or a three -layer 

structure, are widely used as cathode in metal -air devices [3]. However, one of the main drawbacks related 

to the cathodic reaction (ORR ) is the overpotential loss (about 0.3 -0.4 V) under operation condition. Thus, 

lots of efforts were spent to inhibit the voltage loss requiring an effective ORR catalyst [1,4]. One of the 

most promising materials, in terms of both performances and costs, s eems to be manganese dioxide. 

According to the recent literature , MnO 2 would ensure capacities comparable to those of platinum, letting 

higher capacity retention to be reached in non -aqueous electrolytes to prevent Li decomposition [5,6]. 

In the present work, the electrochemical performances of either bare or Fe/Co -doped (at both 2% and 5%) 

MnO 2 nano -electrocatalysts are evaluated by Linear Sweep Voltammetries (LSVs). The crystal structure 

and the surface properties of the present materials are examined by means of XRPD, BET -BJH , TEM, 

SEM/EDX and XPS analyses. Correlations be tween the ir physico -chemical features and the final 

electrocatalytic performances are drawn. Experimental results reveal that the as -synthesized powders have 

excellent electrochemical properties in organic electrolytes (0.15 M LiNO 3 in propylene carbonate, PC )

showing a shift of the onset potential of about 150 mV with 2% Co -doped MnO 2 (Figure 1), thus resulting 

very promising candidate s to be used in lithium -air batteries. 

Figure 1. Comparison of ORR onset potentials obtained with (a) Co -doped and (b) Fe -doped MnO 2 nano -

electrocatalysts modified glassy carbon electrodes through LSVs tests (in 0.15 M LiNO 3/PC).                           

> References
> [1] F. Cheng, J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 2172 –2192.
> [2] N. I. Ander sen, A. Serov, P. Atanassov, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2015, 163, 623 –627.
> [3 ]S. Orsini, E. Pargoletti, A. Vertova, A. Minguzzi, C. Locatelli, S. Rondinini, G. Cappelletti, J.of Electr oan. Chem .2018, 808, 439 –445.
> [4] E. Pargoletti, G. Cappelletti, A. Minguzzi, S. Rondinini, M. Leoni, M. Marelli and A. Vertova, J .of Power Sources 2016, 325, 116 -128 .
> [5] A. Minguzzi, G. Longoni, G. Cappelletti, E. Pargoletti, C. Di Bari, C. Locatelli, M. Marelli, S. Rondinini, A. Vertova , Nanomaterials
> 2016, 6, 10.
> [6] Z-L. Wang, D. Xu, J. -J. Xu, Xin -Bo Zhang ,Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 ,7746 –7786.

## a bPlatinum black - and Prussian bl ue -modified microelectrodes for 

# biomedi cally rele vant hydrogen peroxide detection 

Andreas Hellmann 1, Sven Daboss 1, Clair Hartmann 2, Peter Radermacher 2 and 

Christine Kranz 1

> 1

Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistr y, Ulm University, Albert -Einstein -Allee 11, 89081 

Ulm, Germany 

> 2

Institute of Anesthesiological Pathophysiology and Process Development, Helmholtzstr. 8/1 89081 Ulm, 

Germany 

andreas.hellmann@uni -ulm.de 

Next to the free radical superoxide ( O2-·) and hydro xyl radical ( OH ·), the stable and non -radical hydrogen 

peroxide (H 2O2) is one of the most extensively studied reactive oxygen species (ROS). This g roup of 

destructive molecules can lead to protein oxidation, lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage and elevated 

ROS production leads to oxidative stress. Therefore, its detection is of particular interest since the 

involvement and concentration levels of H 2O2 at the cellular level are not fully understood yet. H 2O2 is 

frequently determined via electrochemical measur ements. However, the relatively high oxidation 

potential (+0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl) of H 2O2 may lead to false positive results due to co -oxidizable 

compo unds such as ascorbic acid, catecholamine s etc., present in biomedically relevant samples [1]. 

To overcome th ese challenges, strategies for electrochemical H 2O2 detection at low potential will be 

presented avoiding such interference problems based on electr ocatalytically modified microelectrodes. As 

these studies are targeted towards cell measurements (granulocyt es and peripheral blood mononuclear 

cells from pigs, which are subjected to an acute subdural hematoma) at low sample volumes, 

microelectrodes will be used. To enhance sensitivity for H 2O2 detection, microelectrodes are modified 

with Platinum black (H 2O2 detection at +0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl) [2] or Prussian Blue (PB) (H 2O2 detection at 

+0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl) [3,4]. As catecholamines are administered during t he recovery phase of pigs, a 

two -electrode approach is pursued using Platinum black modified electrode for H 2O2 detection and for 

example, a carbon fiber electrode (+0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl) for the detection of catecholamines. Carbon 

based electrodes are suitab le for the detection of catecholamines such as norepinephrine and epinephrine 

[5] but show no significant si gnal for H2O2 at the detection potential. Next to the thorough 

characterization of the microsensors, measurements alongside control experiments at g ranulocytes and 

peripheral blood mononuclear cells from pigs, which are subjected to an acute subdural hemat oma, will 

be presented. 

References :

[1] Y. Zang, Y. Hu, G. S. Wilson, D. Moatti -Sirat, V. Poitout, G. Reach, Anal. Chem. 1994, 66, 1183 -

1188. 

[2] Y . Li, C. Sella, F. Lemaitre, M.G. Collignon, L. Thouin, C. Amatore, Electroanalysis 2013, 25, 895 -

902. 

[3] A. A. Karyakin, E. E. Karyakina, L. Gorton, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1998, 456, 97 -104. 

[4] A. A. Karyakin, Electroanalysis 2001, 13, 813 -819. 

[5] K. Pi hel, T. J. Schroeder, R. M. Wightman, Anal.  Chem. 1994, 66, 4532 -4537. 

Acknowledgements :

This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, (SFB 1149). S. Daboss and the 

FIB Center UUlm are acknowledged for assistance in SEM imaging. Electrochemical impedance time variation of electrodialysis using 

# lithium ion electrolyte La 0.57 Li 0.29 TiO 3

Kiyoto Sh in -mura 1, Yuma Hachinohe 2, Sogo Shinohara 2, Kazuya Sasaki 1,2  

> 1

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Hirosaki Un ive rsity,  

> 2

Department of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University 

> 1,2

3 Bunkyo -cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036 -8561, Japan 

k_sasaki@hirosaki -u.ac.jp 

There is a need for a better recovery technology for supplying a large amount of high -purity lithium 

for a lithi um -ion battery at l ow cost. Electrodialysis using a lithium -ion electrolyte is a promising 

candidate technology. When electrodialysis was performed using a lithium ion electrolyte La 0.57 Li 0.29 TiO 3

(LLTO) plate, despite the constant applied voltage, as sho wn in Figure 1, the lithium transfer rate 

increased with the dialysis time to a certain value. In this research, we clarify the cause of this peculiar 

phenomenon. 

An anode (primary solution side) and a cathode (secondary solution side) electrodes were form ed on 

both sides of the LLTO. Reference electrodes were formed on the LLTO surfaces away from the anode 

and cathode. The reference electrodes were placed inside or outside the solution, depending on the 

experimental purpose. A DC voltage was applied betwee n the anode and the cathode. The 

electrochemical impedances between the reference electrode on the primary solution side and the anode 

and between the reference electrode on the secondary solution side and the cathode during the application 

of this voltage were measured by AC impedance method. The measured electrochemical impedances 

correspond to the ionic conduction resistance and electrode reaction resistance of the electrolyte near both 

surfaces of the LLTO. 

As shown in Figure 2, all these resistances wer e stable on the pri mary side regardless of time, but on 

the secondary side, they decreased toward constant values during voltage application. The values on the 

secondary side were greater than those on the primary side. 

It is considered that these phen omen a are caused by une ven distribution of Li + concentration 

generated in the LLTO plate during electrodialysis. That is, the Li + elution reaction into the solution that 

occurs on the secondary surface of LLTO is slow, and the Li + concentration increases n ear the secondary 

surfa ce of LLTO during voltage application. At this time, titanium ions are reduced from tetravalent to 

trivalent for charge compensation. This reduction causes the crystal lattice to expand. As a result, the 

bottleneck of Li + migration w iden s, and the electrod e reaction resistance on the secondary solution side of 

LLTO and the electrolyte resistance near the surface decrease. These changes stop when equilibrium is 

reached. The phenomenon shown in Figure 1 may be the result of these series of changes due to the 

uneven distribution of Li +.

Fig ure 1 Current change with electrodialysis 

time .

Fig ure 2 Changes in electrolyte resistance 

and electrode reaction resistance with 

electrodialysis time. n-doped GaP nanowires: Potential Photocatalytic cathodes for Carbon 

# (IV) oxide reduction 

O.O. Fashedemi . a,b* K. Krischer, a 

> a

Nonequilibrium Chemical Physics, Tecnische Universität Mϋnchen, German 

> b

Chemical Sciences, Augustine University Ilara Epe, Lago s, Nigeria 

*E -mail: omobosede.fashedemi@tum.de 

Increasing CO 2 concentration in the atmosphere is believed to have a profound impact on the global 

climate. One of the ways to reverse this negative impact is developing effective strategies to capture and 

ut ilize CO 2 from the atmosphere. Among several available strategies, CO 2 reduction via the 

electrochemical or photochemical approach is particularly attractive since the required energy input can 

be potentially supplied from renewable sources such as solar e nergy [1] 

Compared to other available semiconductors, gallium phosphide (GaP) is considered a highly promising 

photocathode material for solar -fuel conversion. Its high conduction band edge allows it to reduce not 

only water into hydrogen but also CO 2 into chemical fuels [3] 

However, the conventional planar geometry from a single crystalline wafer poses an obstacle to exploring 

the potential of GaP fully, since in the planar geometry most of the photons absorbed by GaP do not fall 

within the charge collecti on layer, as is required for an efficient photo electrode. [3] Recent progress 

indicates that this issue could be solved when the photo electrode is composed of semiconductor micro 

wires [4] 

We have synthesized GaP nanowires by the reaction between galliu m vapor and phosphorus vapor inside 

a tube furnace system. The as synthesized nanowire Gap were also deposited on carbon nanotubes 

(CNTs). The nanowires were characterized by Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) 

and X -ray diffraction (XRD) . We present some of our findings on the exploration of these nanowires 

deposited on glassy carbon surfaces and GaP wafers as effective photocathodes for CO 2 reduction. 

References 

[1] Khezri,B , Fisher, A. C, Pumer , M. J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017 , 5, 8230 –8246 ,

https://doi.org/10.1039/C6TA09875D 

[2] Barton, E. E.; Rampulla, D. M.; Bocarsly, A. B. J. Am. Chem. Soc . 2008 , 130 , 6342 -6344; 

https://doi.org/10.1021/ja07 76327 

[3] Hagedorn, K.; Collins, S.; Maldonado, S. J. Electrochem. Soc .2010 ,157 (11) D588 -D592; https//DOI: 

10.1149/1.3490764 

[4] Cho, I. S.; Chen, Z.; Forman, A. J.; Kim, D. R.; Rao, P. M.; Jaramillo, T. F.; Zheng, X. Nano Lett .

2011 , 11, 11, 4978 -4984  https://doi.org/10.1021/nl2029392 Faceting and Nanostructuring of Au through Cathodic Corrosion: 

# Role of Cationic Electrolyte Species and Water 

Mohamed M. Elnagar , Johannes M. Hermann, Timo Jacob, Ludwig A. Kibler 

Institute of El ectrochemistry, Ulm University 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 47, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

mohamed.elnagar@uni -ulm.de 

Gold is one of the most frequently employed electrode materials in electrochemistry due to its exceptional 

properties such as chemical inertness and high resistance to oxidation and dissolution [1]. According to 

Pourbaix diagrams, gold is considered stable against degradation under cathodic polarization [ 2]. In 

contrast, applying relatively high negative potentials in the presence of alka li metal cations induce notable 

changes on Au electr ode surfaces [ 3]. In this study, cathodic corrosion of polycrystallin e gold in different 

electrolytes of alkali metal hydroxides has been systemically investigated. In comparison to the recent work 

[3], this study provides new findings as a function of the applied parameters for the nanostructuring of gold 

surfaces. Cell de sign and the distance between the electrodes have carefully been controlled and optimized. 

The progression of surface restructuring and corrosion features was investigated using cyclic voltammetry 

(CV) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The results sh ow different corrosion features depending 

on the nature and the concentration of alkali metal hydroxides, on the applied voltage, and on time. Current -

potential curves for the modified electrodes in 0.1 M H 2SO 4 show characteristic features in the double -la yer 

and oxidation regions. Cyclic voltamogramms of the corroded electrodes provide evidence about the 

preferential orientation of facets and the electrochemical active surface area as a functio n of the applied 

parameters. SEM micrographs show that polarizi ng the gold surfaces at relatively high negative potentials 

generates different size and orientation of octahedral nanocrystals using NaOH, spherical nanoparticles and 

triangular pits using KOH and triangular pits using LiOH. Besides the alkali metal catio ns, the electrolyte 

concentration and the applied voltage are important parameters. 

Furthermore, the role of water in cathodic corrosion of gold has been investigated using mixtures of 

different mole fraction of water and non -aqueous electrolytes. The abs ence of corrosion features using 

water -free non -aqueous electrolytes reveal that water plays a key role in t he cathodic corrosion process. 

In addition, various aqueous mixed electrolytes have been systemically investigated. The results show 

combined corro sion features according to the mole fraction of different cations. For example, a 1:1 NaOH 

+ LiOH mixture leads to the formation of rectangular pits which are attributed to (100) -facets compared to 

a 1:1 KOH + LiOH mixture which leads to triangular pits re vealing the formation of (111) -facets. 

References 

[1] J. M. Hermann, Y. Mattausch, A. Weiß, T. Jacob, L.A. Kibler, J. Electroche m. Soc. 165 (2018) J3192 -

J3198. 

[2] M. Pourbaix, Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous sol utions, National Associati on of 

Cor rosion Engineers, 1974, p. 644. 

[3] T. J. P. Hersbach, I.T. McCrum, D. Anastasiadou, R. Wever, F.C. -Vallejo, M.T.M. Koper, Appl. Mater. 

In terfaces 10 (2018) 39363−39379. 

Figure 1. (a ) Current density -potential curves for Au after cathodic corrosion in concentrated hydroxide 

solution at -3.5 V for 60 se conds. Different roughness factor s and distribution of facets are shown in the 

inset . (b ) Selected SEM micrographs of gold surfaces before and after cathodic corrosion. 

# (a)  (b) Electrochemical Evaluation of Various Nanoparticle s-based Sensors 

# for L evo thyroxine D etection 

Melinda David , Adrian Şerban, Monica Florescu 

Faculty of Medicine, Transilvania University o f Brașov , Bulevardul Eroilor 29, Brașov 500036 , Romania 

melinda.david @unitbv.ro 

Carbon -based nanoparticles , such as graphene and carbon nanotubes or gold nanoparticles are widely 

used since they are good conducting materials, assure an enhanced effective surface area and 

biocompatibility or are able to catalyze specific r eactions. 

Levothyroxine (LT4) is used as medication in a large variety of medical conditions, like hypothyroidism, 

where the best therapy is the hormone replacement. LT4 replaces the thyroxine hormone normally 

produced by the thyroid gland which regulate s the body's energy and metabolism . Since the effect of 

administration of LT4 can be monitored mainly through clinical observations, monitoring of LT4 levels 

requires a simple, reliable tool, such as label -free nano particle based sensors. Analyzed carbon n anotubes 

in this work can act similar to enzymes, and thus they have be en used for label -free sensors development 

as rapid screening tools for LT4 with a sensitivity of 4 μA cm -2 μM -1 and a limit of detection in 

nanomolar range .

Electrochemistry was used for the characterization , comparison and optimization of the most suitable 

nanoparticle -based sensors for LT4 detection (Fig. 1) . The oxidation mechanisms of LT4 together with 

the interfacial changes, which occur due to their electrochemical properties at sensor surfaces, were 

studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). The analytical 

performance of the sensors was evaluated by differ ential pulse voltammetry (DPV). pH = 1.0 pH = 4.0 pH = 5.5 pH = 7.0 pH = 8.0 

> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> j / A cm -2
> pH variation
> CNT - j O1
> CNT - j O2
> C-Au - j O1
> C-Au - j O2
> G - j O1
> G - j O2
> AuNP - j O1
> AuNP - j O2

Fig. 1. Histogram repres enting current densities of the two oxidation peaks O1 and O2 from DPVs in 0.1 

M various electrolytesfor carbon nanotubes ( CNT ), graphene (G), gold nanoparticles (AuNP ) and a

mixture of CNT -AuNP ( C-Au ).

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by a grant of the Romanian Ministry of Research and 

Innovation, CCCDI - UEFISCDI, Project number PN -III -P1 -1.2 -PCCDI -2017 -0062, contract no. 58, 

within PNCDI III. Electrochemica l fingerprint ing of cathinones and adulter ants for their 

# sensitive detection in street samples 

A.Florea 1, J. Schram 2, F. Truta 1, A. Dragan 1, A. Cernat 1, M. Tertis 1, B. Feier 1, K. De Wael 2, C.Cristea 1

1 University of Medicine a nd Pharmacy ‘Iu liu Hatiega nu ’ Cluj -Napo ca, Romania 

Pasteur 6, Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

2 University of Antwerp 

Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020, Antwerp, Belgium 

Anca.Florea@umfcluj.ro 

The abuse of illicit drugs has be come a global concern considering its close relationship wi th the 

increasing incidents of crimes and severe social problems. The widespread us e of illicit drugs and the 

consequences of drug abuse on individuals and societies has led to increasing efforts to quickly and 

accurately detect drugs on -site. The current m ethods used to quickly detect drugs on -site are presumptive 

tests, such as color -te sts. However , they la ck se lectivity, giving a high number of false negative and false 

positive results , due to the presence of adulterants and cutting agents .

Electrochemi cal methods proved to be excellent techniques for the fast determination of drugs w ith high 

sens itivity and s pecificity, suitable for the develo pment of miniaturized portable devices to be used in -

field. 

Drugs are u sually adulterated with adulterants ( added to modify the properties of the drugs or to mimic 

the drugs ’ effects, e.g. procaine has local anesthetic eff ect similar to co caine ) or diluted with cutting 

agents (used to ‘cut ’ or ‘dilute ’ the sample ). The characterization of cutting agents and adulterants in 

seized cocaine samples is important from a forensic point of view in order to link different seizures t o one 

original batch , as well as for the health implications some of them might have. For instance, levamisole 

used as adulterant in cocaine samples was linked to serious adverse effects such as leukoencephalopathy .

We used nan omaterials -modified ele ctrod es to d etec t cathinones and adulterants/cutting agents by means 

of square wave voltammetry . We tested several nanomaterials -based platforms and depending on the 

obtained signal for the oxidation of drugs we chose graphene and car bon -nanotubes based pl atfor m to 

further test cathinones . We investigated several cathinones (such as methcatynone, chloro etcat hinone ) and 

adulterants /cutting agents such as mannitol , sorbitol, p rocaine, benzocaine, creatine . The effectiveness of 

the developed method was tested for the detection of drugs in simulated drugs samples .

Acknowledgements: 

This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

programme under grant agreement No 833787 , BorderSens .Electrodeposition of 1D Bismuth N anostructures Using Deep E utectic 

# Solvents for Electrochemical D etection 

Liana Anicai a, Aurora Petica a, Veronica Anastasoaie a, Oana Laza ra, Andreea Cernat b, Cecilia Cristea b,

Marius Enachescu a, Teodor Visan a

> a

Center of Sur face Science and Nanotechnology, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Splaiul 

Independentei 313, Bucharest, 060042, Romania  

> b

Analytical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and 

Pharmacy, 4 Louis Pasteur St., Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

lanicai@itcnet.ro 

1D nanostructures exhibit a very high surface to volume ratio as well as unique electrical properties 

which make them ideal candidates to build high performance electrochemical sensors and bio -sensors [1]. 

Bismuth nanostructures are considered as “green” electrode materials since 2000 and gained an increased 

in terest for detecting various analytes  [2].  Usually,  size - and shape -controlled Bi nanowires (Bi NWs) are 

electrochemically synthesized involving  aqueous electrolytes and  template -assisted method. Other 1D Bi 

nanostructures may be prepared using the hydroge n bubble template  electrodeposition method [3]. 

Herein, the electrochemical synthesis of Bi NWs is reported, involving electrolytes based on eutectic 

mixtures of choline chloride with oxalic acid or malonic acid ( the so -called “deep eutectic solvents” –

DE S). The ”soft template” electrodeposition based on a proper selection of the surfactant/stabilizer, as 

well as the classical  template -assisted method using porous membranes  have been applied (see Fig.1). 

The electrochemically synthesized nanowires  have be en characterized using SEM, STEM and XRD 

investigations. Cyclic voltammetry has been selected as electrochemical technique in order to get more 

information on the  Bi NWs deposition  process and on the 

influence of the main operation parameters, mainly the a pplied 

current density/deposition potential, and the electrolyte 

composition.  A comparative analysis of the structural features of 

the obtained Bi NWs using the soft template method and the 

traditional template -assisted technique is provided, too. 

In addi tion, preliminary results related to their electrochemical 

sensing performance for folic acid and hydrogen peroxide are also 

discussed. 

Acknowledgements 

Part of this work was supported by the INTELMAT project, Contract No. 39PCCDI/2018. 

References 

[1] M . Garcia, P. Batalla, A. Escarpa, Trends Anal. Chem. 57 (2014) 6 -22. 

[2] V Jovanovski, S.B. Hočevar, B. Ogorevc , Curr. Opin. Electrochem . 3 (2017) 114 -122. 

[3] A. Ananthi, S. Senthil Kumar, K. Lakshminarasimha Phani, Electrochim. Acta 151 (2015) 584 -590.   

> Figure 1. SEM micrograph of Bi
> NWs using „soft” template

# Electrochemica l fingerprints of cocaine and cathinones on 

# nano materials 

A.Florea 1, J. Sch ram 2, F. Truta 1, A. Dragan 1, A. Cernat 1, M. de Jong 2, B. Feier 1, K. De Wael 2, C.Cristea 1

1 University of Medicine a nd Pharmacy ‘Iuliu Hatieganu ’ Cluj -Napoca 

Pasteur 6 , Cluj -Napoca, Romania 

2 University of Antwerp 

Groenenborgerlaan 171 , 2020, Antwerp , Bel gium 

Anca.Florea @um fcluj.ro 

Il licit drugs use and abuse remains an increasing challenge for worldwide authorities and , therefore, it is 

important to have accurate met hods to detect them in seized samples, biological fluids and wastewaters. 

They are re cent ly classified as th e latest gro up of emerging pollutants as their consumption increased 

tremendously in recent years. 

Nanomaterials have gained much attention over th e last decade in the development of sensors for a 

myriad of applications. The applic ability of these nanomat erials , func tionalized or not, significantly 

incr eases and are therefore highly suitable for use in the detection of drugs of abuse. 

We have assess ed the suitab ility of various nanoplatform s for the electrochemical detection of illi cit 

drugs , such as grap hene, single d-walled carbon nanotubes, multi -walled carbon nanotubes functionalized 

with p lati num nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles and p latinum nan oparticles . G raphene and singled -walled 

carbon nanotubes were drop -casted on to graphi te screen printed elect rodes and le ft to dry at room 

temperature. Multi -walled carbon nanotubes were function alized with platinum nanoparticles using a 

simple and efficien t chemical process , in which carboxylic acid -functionalized multi -walled carbon 

nanot ubes were mixed with c hloroplatinic acid in a mixture of ethylene glycol and water to result in 

platinum -functionalized multi -walled carbon nanotubes. Th e functionalized multiwalled carbon 

nanotubes were drop -casted onto graphite screen printed electrodes. Gold and platinum nano particles 

we re deposited by electrodeposition from a solution of chloroauric acid and chloroplatinic ac id ,

respectively, by cyclic voltammetry. 

The electrochemical fingerprints of cocaine and cathinones (such as mephedrone, alpha -

po lyvinylpir olidone, methylmethcatinone, chloro et hcati none , chlorometh cathinone, etylone ) were 

elucid at ed on the above -mentioned nanoplatforms . S quare wave voltammetry wa s p erforme d as a high -

performance electrochemical method . This al lowed for the sensitive and select ive ( class selectivity ) of the 

inves tigated illicit drugs .

Acknowledgements: 

This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

programme under grant agreement No 833787 , BorderSens .Ceramic Nanofibers: A versatile material class to improve 

# Electrochemical E nergy Applications 

Florian Lombeck a, Friedemann Hegge b, Miriam v on Holst a , Severin Vierrath a, b, Matthias Brei twieser a, b

> a

Hahn -Schickard, Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 

> b

Electrochemical Energy Systems , IMTEK Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of 

Freiburg , Georges -Koehler -Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 

E-Mail of corresponding author: florian.lombeck@h ahn -schickard.de 

Nanofibers exhibit a large surface -to -volume ratio as well as high porosity. Ceramic materials have 

excellent thermal stability and are largely chemically inert. [1] In electrochemical energy devices, such as 

fuel cell s, electrolyz ers and b atteries, (electro -) chemical reactions take place at the interface of an electrode 

with gas (H 2/O 2), a liquid or an electrolyte, respectively. In these devices, the combination of a high active 

surface area for improved reaction rates, large porosity for a substantial material flux, thermal and chemical 

stability for long term operation as well as conductivity for electron transport processes are of vital interest. 

Nanofibers are usually fabricated by the electrospinning technique . T he liaison of appropria te material 

combinations, spinning parameters and post -treatment procedures gives rise to a vast spectrum of tailored 

nanofibers with fine -tuned properties such as catalytic activity, electrical conductivity , radical scavenging 

activity or chemical resistance .[2] 

In our work, we demonstrate with two recent examples, that the in tegration of ceramic nanofibers into 

electrochemical energy systems enables significant improvement of the properties of electrochemical enery 

systems: In Fig. 1 (left) CeO 2 nanofibers are shown, which can be used as radical scavenging membrane 

additive. Secondly, IrOx nanofibers enable a significant reduction of - usually expensive - catalytic material 

via providing electrically conductive pathways (Fig. 1, right ). Upon reducing the amount of catalytic 

material, islands of non -connected catalyst are formed. Conductive ceramic nanofibers electrically link 

these islands, thus utilizing more catalytically active surface area. By this approach, we sho wed a reduction 

of 80% I ridium o xide at the anode of a proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolyzer cell while 

maintaining its high performance. [3] 

Figure 1. left: Cerium oxide nanofibers as radical scavenger for PEM fuel cells, right: Iridium oxide 

nanofibers co nnecting isolated catalyst islands. 

References 

1.  E. Antolini, E.R. Gonzalez, Ceramic materials as supports for low -temperature fuel cell catalysts Solid 

State Ionics , 2009 , 180 , 746 –763 .

2. Z. Zhang, J. Liu, J . Gu, L . Su and L . Cheng , An overview of metal oxide mate rials as electrocatalysts 

and supports for polymer electrolyte fuel cells, Energy Environ. Sci ., 2014 , 7, 2535 .

3. F. Hegge, F . Lombeck, E . Cruz Ortiz, L . Bohn, M . von Holst, M . Kroschel, J . Hübner, R . Zengerle, M .

Breitwieser, P . Strasser and S . Vierrath,  Efficient and stable low iridium -loaded anodes for PEM water 

electrolysis made possible by nanofiber interlayers , submitted .Stabilization effect of Pt on FeNC: A gateway to elucidation of 

# degradation mechanism of FeNC in PEMFC 

Sabita Bhandari a, Dongyoon Shin a, Marc F . Tesch a, Frédéric Jaouen b, Sonia Chabbra a, Shannon Bonke a,

Alexander Schnegg a, Robert Schlögl a,c , Anna K. Mechl er a

a Max -Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion, Stiftstr. 34 – 36, 45470 Mülheim, Germany 

b Université Montpellier, ICGM - Equipe AIME, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France 

c Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, Faradayweg 4 -6, 

Berlin, 14195, Germany 

sabita.bhandari@cec.mpg.de 

Hydrogen fuel cells (such as PEMFC) could reduce or possibly replace the fossil fuel dependency if the 

high cost and low durability issues of the fuel cells are r esolved. Non -precious metal -based materials 

(such as FeNC) are promising candidates to replace expensive Pt -based catalysts and thereby reducing the 

cost of the fuel cells. Although these catalysts show a decent activity, their poor stability, especially a t

high potentials, limits their applicability. 1,2 

Among the various approaches to stabilize FeNC catalyst, our recent approach of adding minute amount 

(0.5 -2 wt%) of Pt was successful in stabilizing FeNC . Pt itself remain s in an ORR -inactive state 

through out the measurement. 3 Although stabilization with the addition of Pt , which itself is an expensive 

metal , may not be a better option, a proper illustration of how Pt stabilizes FeNC during ORR in fuel cell 

would give us a better insight into the degradatio n mechanism of FeNC. 

Here, we elucidate the nature of this Pt -species and its role in the stabilization of the Fe -N-C to 

understand FeNC degradation mechanism and possible ways to prevent them. Structural analysis with 

high -resolution TEM of the hybrid P t/Fe -N-C catalyst, indicate a protective Fe -shell is formed around the 

Pt -particles, making them ORR -inactive. Nevertheless, electrochemical analysis prove s that the hybrid 

catalyst reduce s H2O2 formation (an undesirable side product of ORR) as well as red uced catalyst 

degradation. Besides, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy on hybrid Pt/Fe -N-C shows 

the formation of less radical oxygen species (ROS), which are potentially harmful to the catalyst 

(Figure 1) . These results prove the ability o f the deposited Pt -species to significantly reduce the amount of 

ROS , ultimately increasing the stability of hybrid Pt/Fe -N-C in PEMFC. 

1. Lefèvre, et al., Science, 324 , 71 –74 (2009). 

2. Wu , et al. Science, 332 , 443 –447 (2011). 

3. Mechler , et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc. 165 , F1084 –F1091 (2018).  

> Figure 1: X-band EPR spectra recorded at 298 K of DMPO/•OH spin adduct generated during H 2O2
> treatment of FeNC (dashed line) and Pt -FeNC (solid lin e) in presence of DMPO spin trap.

# Automat ed Image Analysis for Supported Nanoparticulate 

# Electroc atalyst Characterization 

Ana Rebeka Kam šek 1, Goran Dražić 1, Mat ija Gatalo 1, Francisco Ruiz -Zepeda 1, Nejc Hodnik 1, Miran 

Gaberšček 1, Simon Čopar 2

> 1

Laboratory for Electrocatalysis, Department of Materials Chemistry , Nati onal Institute of Chemistry 

Hajdrihov a 1 9, SI -1000 Ljubljana 

> 2

Fa culty of Mathematics and Physics, University of Ljubljana 

Jadranska 19 , SI -1000 Ljubljana 

ana. rebeka.kamsek@ki.si 

In order to tackle the environmental issue s, caused by our excessive reliance on fossil fuels , one of the 

things we need to develop are efficient alternatives to internal combustion engines for transportation . One 

alternative are low -temperature proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells . To produce clean 

elec tricity, PEM fuel cells requi re a n electrocatal yst that is usually based on Pt or Pt -alloy nanoparticles 

supported on high surface area carbons. 

In order to study the structure -activity and structure -stability relations of such materials , transmission 

electron microscop e (TEM) is one of the essential tool s commonly used to do so . As part of TEM 

analysis, n umerous micr oscop ic images (in other words large amounts of data) of the studied materials 

must be taken and analyzed. 

To quantify the data within t he TEM images , different software options a re a vailable [1] . However, most 

software solution s cannot reliably recognize all the relevant features in an image , such as overlapping and 

out -of -focus features . For a given type of material, it often turns out t hat resear chers write their own 

software which is more rel iable than the one -size -fits -all commercial options , but the exact code is 

commonly not made availab le to the public [2]. 

In this contribution, we will pr esent new image -analyzing algorithms , whic h have the potential to be more 

efficient and reliable than the classical ways of analyzing STEM image s. Here, various m achine learning 

methods are included, where the goal is to analyze large amounts of information in a short time and care 

is taken that t he user interaction is kept to a minimum , which will ensure less biased output information 

[3] .

As the studi ed system, a series of HAADF -STEM images of a platinum -based electrocatalyst wer e

selected , which are in the form of platinum -copper alloy nanopar ticles, embedded in a carbon suppo rt [4] .

The o utput information includes all the quantifiable data that can b e extr acted from the images , such a s

the histograms of size distribution, information about homogeneous surface coverage, spatial information 

and more. As part of this work, we will discuss how to prepare the input data for analysis , how to obtain 

output dat a with n ovel computational methods and how to deal with challenges such as resolving 

over lapping particles .

References: 

[1] Woehrle, G. H., H utchison, J. E., Özkar, S., & Finke , R. G. (2006). Analysis of nanoparticle 

transmissi on electron microscopy data using a public -domain image -processing program, Image. Turkish 

Journal of Chemistry, 30(1), 1 -13. 

[2] Rossouw, D., Burdet, P., de la Pe �a, F. , Ducati, C., Knappett, B. R., Wheatley, A. E., & Midgl ey, P. 

A. (2015). Multicomponent signal unmixing from nanoheterostructures: Overc oming the traditional 

challenges of nanoscale x -ray analysis via machine learning. Nano letters, 15(4), 2716 -2720. 

[3] Voyles, P. M. (2017). Informatics and data science in materials microscopy. Current Opinion in Solid 

State and Materials Science, 21(3), 141 -158. 

[4] Gatalo, M., Bele, M., Ruiz‐Zepeda, F., Šest, E., Šala, M., Kamšek, A. R., ... & Gaberšček, M. (2019). 

A Double‐Passivation Water‐Based Galvanic Displacement Method for Reproducible Gram‐Scale 

Production of High‐Performance Platinum‐Alloy E lectrocatalysts. Angewandte Chemie, 131(38), 13400 -

13404. Influence of Inorganic Acids during Precipitation on Stabilization of 

# Poly(acrylic acid) coated Silver Nanoparticles 

Irena Ivanišević , Matej Zlatar, Petar Kassal, Stjepan Milardović 

Departiment of General and Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Engin eering and Technology 

Marulićev trg 19, 10000 ZAGREB, Croatia 

ivaniseivc@fkit.hr 

In recent years, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have received great attention due to their unique 

optoelectronic and physicochemical properties resulting in various application s [1, 2]. This study reports a 

wet chemical synthesis of AgNPs, using hydrazine monohydrate as a reducing agent and poly(acrylic 

acid) (PAA) as a capping agent [3]. PAA -coated silver nanopowders, precipitated with inorganic acids 

(perchloric, phosphorous a nd sulfuric), were used for nano -ink formulations. Characterization of the 

reaction mixture, as well as of the prepared conductive inks, was performed by cyclic voltammetry and 

UV -Vis spectroscopy, respectively. 

Schematic presentation of PAA -encapsula ted AgNPs in acidic and alkaline medium .

PAA adsorbed on the nanoparticle surface behaves as a weak acid. In alkaline media, negative surface 

charge generated due to the dissociated PAA engenders repulsion forces between nanoparticles. Thus, 

efficiency of electrostatic stabilization of the prepared suspension depends on the acid dissociation rate. 

The stability of the formulated nano -inks was tested in a wide range of Britton -Robinson buffer solutions. 

The highest anodic current responses and maximum absorbance ( λ = 419 nm) were plotted versus pH to 

determine the quantity of surface bound PAA. 

References: 

[1] S. Sundar, K. -J. Kim, S. -J. Kwon, Nanomaterials 2019 , 9 (12), 1 -13. 

[2] I. Fratoddi, Nanomaterials 2018 , 8 (1), 1 -25. 

[3] S. Milardović, I. Ivanišević, A. Rogina, P. Kassal, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci , 2018 , 13 (11), 11136 -

11149. Folded V2O5 Scaffolds for High Energy Density Aluminum -Ion 

# Batteries 

Zaklina Burghard , Achim M Diem, Joachim Bill 

Institute for Materials Science, University of Stuttgart, Germany 

Heisenbergstarsse 3, 70569 Stuttgart 

zaklina.burghard@imw.uni -stutt gart.de 

Unidirectional ice -templating of aqueous V2O5 nanofiber dispersions yielded scaffolds with an 

anisotropic structure, wherein well -aligned lamellas form ordered channels ( Figure 1a). The latter are 

optimally suited to facilitate ion diffusion throughout t he entire scaffold architecture. The micrometer -

sized pores in the form of cavities as well as the mesoporosity (~5 nm pore size) of the lamellas and 

pillars lead to an exceptionally high porosity of 99.9% and a high specific surface area of 211 m²/g. By 

compressing the scaffolds, compact electrodes were obtained. To ensure their mechanical stability, the 

scaffolds were tested under compression and the microstructure of the resulting compact electrodes was 

investigated. From the compressive stress -strain c urves we concluded that above 50% strain the scaffold s

start to densify forming a densely packed disc at 80% strain. The latter shows a two -fold enhancement of 

the electrical conductivity vs. the pristine sample. Microstructural analysis of the densely pac ked disc 

evidenced the presence of an open surface porosity, as well as a corrugated lamella structure th at 

comprises new contact points (Figure 1b) . The preservation of a high porosity (99.6%) and the 

transformation into a folded lamella structure without any appreciable damage represent exceptional 

features of these scaffolds , appointing them as outstanding in respect to other cathode materials. The 

extraordinary anisotropic porosity of the electrodes, combined with their large surface area, effectively 

compensate for the restricted diffusion of the ions, thus allowing for the discharging of the cathodes at 

higher current densities (500 mA/g, 105 mAh/g vs. 2000 mA/g, 58 mAh/g) [1] . Moreover, in comparison 

to the dense paper -like cathode materials, higher c apacities at the same current density were achieved, 

which further highlights the importance of the unique porous structure. The increased area of the 

electrode /electrolyte interface and the channel -like structure along the ion diffusion paths ( Figure 1c)

synergistically enable the increase of the applied current densities, while largely preserving the capacity. 

Remarkably, the porous scaffolds feature significantly increased energy densities up to 52 Wh kg -1, which 

outperform not only the paper -like cathod es [2] , but also the state -of -the -art V 2O5-based electrodes for 

aluminum -ion batteries (Figure 1d). The developed nanostructured cathodes are promising for 

application as binder -free electrodes in metal -ion batteries , featuring enhanced capacity and energy 

density at high current densities .

Figure 1. SEM images of the V 2O5 scaffold microstructure, showing the cross -section and su rface 

(a) before and (b ) after compression at 80% strain , respectively . ( c) Higher magnification SEM 

image of the microstructure with characteristic folded lamellas. Overlaid is a schematic illustration 

of the electron and ion paths during electrochemical cycling. ( d) Comparison of the electrochemical 

performance to state -of -the -art V2O5- and carbon -based cathodes. 

[1] Diem, A.M. et al . Creasing Highly Porous V 2O5 Scaffolds for High Energy Density Aluminum -Ion 

Batteries , ACS Appl. Energy Mater., Just Accepted Manuscript doi : 10.1021/acsaem.0c00455 

[2] Diem, A.M. et al. Binder‐Free V2O5 Cathode for High Energy Density Rechargeable Aluminum‐Ion 

Batteries , Nanomaterials 2020, 10, 247 doi:10.3390/nano10020247 Mesoporous Highly Flexible and Biodegradable Cellulose Aerogels as 

# Battery Separators 

Leila Raafat 1, Bernd Wicklein 2, Zaklina Burghard 1, Joachim Bill 1

> 1

Institute for Materials Science, University of Stuttgart, Germany 

Heisenbergstarsse 3, 70569 Stuttgart 

leila.raafat@imw.uni -stuttgart.de 

> 2

Materials Science Institute of Madrid -CSIC , Spain 

Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz 3, 28049 Madrid 

Flexible separators with minimal 

impact on the battery cell 

performance , are nowadays 

important due to the rapidly 

developing flexible electronics. In 

this context, a novel bio -

degradable and highly flexible 

cellulose -nanofiber aerogel (CNF -

AG) separator is developed ,

fabricated by ice -templating . [1], [2] 

The tailored channel -like structure 

provides a network of meso - and 

macropores , yielding a high 

porosity of 99.5% . The synergy of 

the high structured porosity , affinity of the cellulose to the electrolytes and mechanical stability greatly 

improves the separator performance , compared to the state -of -the -art glass fiber (GF) membranes . An enhance d

electrolyte uptake capability is obtained , one order of magnitude higher than that for the GF . In addition, the 

thermal characteristics analysis revealed a high stability up to 200°C, ensur ing the separator ’s suitability for 

batteries working under harsh conditions. Furthermore, an enhanced ionic conductivity of 2.4 mS cm -1 and 8.4 

mS cm -1 is achieved for Li - and Al -based electrolytes, respectively. The comparison of the Li + diffusion 

coefficient in GF and CNF -AG, revealed 60% faster diffusion in the CNF -AG. Compared to GF, an improved 

electrochem ical performance is obtained , in regards of a decreased interfacial resistance of 300 Ω , and the 

significantly stable cell cycling ability reaching high specific capacit ies . The good mechanical stability as well 

as the low impact on the battery cell perfor mance revealed the suitability of the CNF -AG as separators for metal 

ion batteries. 

[1] B. Wicklein, “Thermally insulating and fire -retardant lightweight anisotropic foams based on 

nanocellulose and graphene oxide,” Nat. Nanotechnol. , vol. 10, p. 7, 2015. 

[2] B. Wicklein et al. , “Dual -Fiber Approach toward Flexible Multifunctional Hybrid Mate rials,” Adv. 

Funct. Mater. , vol. 28, no. 27, p. 1704274, 2018, doi: 10.1002/adfm.201704274. 

CNF -AG as highly flexible, high performance separator for shape -

conformable metal ion batteries. Inherently C hiral Artificial Membranes 

# as Key Components in Chiral Potentiometric Sensors 

Sara Grecchi 1, Serena Arnaboldi 1, Daniele Vigo 1, Mariangela Longhi 1, Francesco Orsini 2,

Tiziana Benincori 3 and Patrizia Romana Mussini 1

> 1

Università degli Studi di M ilano, Dipartimento di Chimica, Via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy. 

> 2

Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Fisica, Via Celoria 16, 20133, Milano, Italy. 

> 3

Università degli Studi dell’Insubria, Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tecnologia, Via Valle ggio 11, 

22100, Como, Italy. Addres s

sara. grecchi@unimi.it 

Chiral membranes are important tools for enantiomer discrimination or/and separation in a broad range of 

applications , es pecially concerning preparative separations in the pharmaceutic field. Many chiral 

membranes are of natural origin ( e. g. polysaccharides, polyaminoacid derivatives), or based on natural 

chiral components while less common so far are membranes based on synthetic chiral components ( e. g. 

calixarenes or crown ethers). However, synthe tic chiral membranes have interesting intrinsic features, like 

wide range of molecular designs and functional properties, equal availability of both enantiomers, and 

easy synthesis scalability. Among analytical applications of chiral membranes, a potential ly interesting 

one concerns implementation as key compone nts in chiral potentiometric sensors. Concerning design of 

synthetic membranes, different stereogenic elements can be considered to endow t hem with chirality, the 

most common ones being localized ste reocenters , but it was observed that much better enantioselection 

performances can be obtained by implementation of the “inherent chirality” strategy. [1 -2] In this frame 

we have discovered that the electrooligomerizatio n, in acetonitrile as solvent, for 1 08 deposition cycles, 

on an ITO electrode support, of our “inherently chiral” benchmark monomer, leads to self -standing 

racemic or enantiopure membranes. These ones were obtained by simply peeling off the solid deposit 

from the ITO immersed in water after the electrodeposition in acetonitrile. We have then characterized 

inherently chiral membranes with different technique s (e.g FTIR , HR LDI, scanning electron microscopy, 

BET for surfa ce area and pore size distribution, CD spectra to check that chirality was fully transferred 

from the monomer to the oligomer films , and atomic force microscopy) comparing the racemic vs 

enantiopure deposit properties. We have decided to implement enantiopure inherently chiral membranes 

in a “ion -selective like” set -up in order to study their enantiorecognition capability (as depicted in the 

Figure ). First of all we have verified the potential difference was read correctly through the membrane to 

allow correct determinations of transmembrane 

potentials. After that we have tested 

enantiopure membranes in the presence of 

chiral charg ed species (in all configurations for 

both membranes and internal/external electrode 

solutions) for determining their 

enantioselective capability [3] . Preliminary 

results are very promising and encourage us to 

perform the scaling up of the membrane 

electrosynt hesis to be used for industrial scopes 

and to extend the study to other probe useful in 

the analytical and pharmaceutical field. 

References: 

[1] S. Arnaboldi, M. Magni, P. R. Mussini, Curr. Op. in El ectrochemistry 8 ( 2018 ) 60 -72. 

[2] S. Arnaboldi, S. Grecc hi, M. Magni, P.R. Mussini, Curr. Op. in Electrochemistry 7 (2018 ) 188 -199. 

[3] S. Arnabold i, D. Vigo, M. Longhi, F. Orsini, S. Riva, S. Grecchi, E. Giacovelli, V. Guglielmi, R.

Cirilli, G. Longhi, G. Mazzeo, T. Benincori , P. R. Mussini , Chem Electrochem , DOI: 

10.1002/celc.201900779 (2019 ). (R)-ENANTIOMER -60 60 -50 050 250 700 300 400 500 600 CD [mdeg] Wavelength [nm] (R)-ENANTIOMER 1 Gutiérrez , O., Birdja, Y., Bulut, M., Vaes, J., Breugelmans, T., Pant, D., “Recent Advances in Industrial CO 2

Electroreduction ”, Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry, (2019), 16, 47 -56  

> 2

Gutiérrez, O., Bulut, M., Pant, D., Breugelmans, T. (Publication on current topic in preparation) 

# Electrocatalytic Conversion of Bicarbonate Promoted by Surface 

# Hydrophobicity 

Oriol Gutiérrez a,b , Nick Daems a, Yuvraj Birdja b, Willem Offermans b, Jan Vaes b, Metin Bulut b, Deepak 

Pant b, and Tom Breugelmans a 

> a

Applied Electrochemistry and Catalysis ELCAT, University of Antwerp, Campus Drie Eiken D.B10 7,

Universiteit splein 1 , B-2610 , Antwerp , Belgium  

> b

Separation and Conversion Technology SCT , Flemish Inst it ute for Technological Research VITO ,

Boeretang 200 , 2400 , Mol, Belgium 

oriol.gutierrez@uantwerpen.be 

Typical CO 2 electrolyzers require gas feeding or to prior saturate the electrolyte to be able to 

electrocatalytically convert CO 2 to carbon products. If CO 2 is captured and st ored in aqueous alka li solution 

as a carbon pool, then it can be used as a feedstock for a CO 2 electrolyze r. In weak alkali media, CO 2 is 

present as bicarbonate (HCO 3-) and, since it requires high thermal energy to extract the CO 2 back , it is 

convenient to find an active catalyst and an optimal electrochemical cell able to electrocatalytically convert 

bicarbonate directly to carbon products. Firsts electrolysis experiments using different concentrations of 

bicarbonate as carbon source showed faradaic efficienc ies around 10% towards formate (HCOO -) at -0,7 V 

vs RHE using bulk Sn as cathode . The faradaic efficiency variations were negligible when increasing the 

concentration of bicarbonate and, by comparing the results to analogous experiments using saturated CO 2

solutions , where the faradaic efficiency raised up to more than 70% , it is concluded that, even though there 

is conversion from bicarbonate solutions, the efficiency is very low compared to typical CO 2 saturated 

electrolytes. A model is proposed (figure 1) in order to increase the faradaic efficiency of the reduction of 

bicarbonate by approaching the inhibition of the main co -reaction undergoing at the same time, which is 

consuming most of the current, the hydrogen evolution reaction ( HER ). HER is inhibited by forming an 

hydrophobic non -polar layer close to the surface of the working electrode with the addition of cationic 

surfactants to the electrolyte. The model is tested by measuring the response of the current within a certain 

potential range in electrolyte s with surfactants of different nature . C etrimonium bromide (CTAB) is chosen 

as a potential inhibitor obtain ing an increase in the faradaic efficiency from 10 to 50% at -0,7 V v s RHE in 

2 M bicarbonate and 2.5 mM CTAB electrolyte . After that, the cationic surfactant is optimized in order to 

not only inhibit HER, but also promote HCO 3- reduction . A benzyl -functionalized surfactant, cetalkonium 

chloride (CKC) , is used as HER inhibitor and CO 2R promotor obtaining conversion efficienc ies up to 80% 

in the same conditions , higher than CO 2 saturated electrolytes. It is proven that , by increasing the 

hydrophobicity of the cathode surface , polar molecules , like water , are repelled while non -polar molecules, 

like CO 2 (derived from the HCO 3- aqueous equilibrium ), are promoted to cross the hydrophobic layer ,

approach the surface of the electrode and re duce .Electrodeposited Polypyrrole/Polyelectrolyte Films for Ammonia Gas 

# Optical Sensing 

O.L. Gribkova , V.A. Kabanova , O.D. Ya kobson , A.A. Nekrasov 

A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry RAS 

Leninsk y prospect 31, Moscow, 119071, Russ ia 

е-mail:  oxgribkova@gmail.com 

We present a comparative study of pyrrole electrochemical polymerization in aqueous solutions of 

sulfo nated polyelectrolytes with different structure and flexibility of the polymer backbone. Polyp yrrole 

(PPy) synthesis was carried out in the presence of the following polyelectrolytes: flexible -chain 

poly(styrene -4-sulfonic acid) (PSSA) and poly -2-acrylamido -2-methyl -1-propanesulfonic acid 

(PAMPSA), semi -rigid -chain poly -(4,4’ -(2,2’ -disulfoacid) -diphenylen -iso -phthalamide) (i -PASA), rigid -

chain poly -(4,4’ -(2,2’ -disulfoacid) -diphenylen -tere -phthalamide) (t -PASA) and their sodium salts . The 

process es of PPy ele ctro deposition in potentio dynamic , potentiostatic and galvanostatic regimes was 

studied by in situ spectroscopy in the UV -Vis -NIR spectral regions and Raman spectroscopy with 

simultaneous monitoring of the electrochemical parameters of the synthesis. For comparison, the 

electro synthesis of PPy was also carried out in common aqueous solutions of H2SO4 and Na2SO4 . The 

obtained films were characterized by cyclic voltammetry, UV -Vis -NIR spectroelectr ochemistr y.

It was shown that the course of synthesis and the electronic structure of PPy /polyelectrolyte complexes 

depend ed strictly on t he structure of polyelectrolyte and the nature of its cation. In the presence of the 

acid form s of flexible -chain polyelectrolytes the films are formed with higher absorbance in the NIR 

range (higher degree of charge carriers’ delocalization ), with more ro ugh surface and 

spectroelectrochemical properties similar to those of PPy films obtained in inorganic electrolytes. 

Contrarily, PPy films obtained in the presence of the acid form of semi -rigid -chain i-PASA are 

characterized by lesser roughness and lesser degree of charge carriers’ delocalization .

PPy films were successfully tested as sensitive layers in optical ammonia sensors (Fig.1a). The optical 

responses of these sensors in Vis -NIR spectral range were dependent on the polyelectrolyte structure 

(Fig.1b) . It was shown that optical sensors based on films of PPy complexes with salt form s of all 

polyelectrolytes and rigid -chain polyelectrolytes in the acid form can detect 25 ppm ammonia with 

response time about 6 min. 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65       

> 380 480 580 680 780 880 980
> Wavelength, nm
> Absorbance

## a) 012345678        

> 0100 200 300 400 500 600 700
> Time, s
> D, %
> 5
> 2
> 1
> 4
> 3

b) 

Fig.1. Evolution of UV -Vis -NIR absorption spectra of PPy -t-PASA film (a) and responses of PPy films 

(b) obtained in the presence of PSSA (1) , PAMPSA (2) , i -PASA (3) , t -PASA (4) and H 2SO 4 (5) exposed 

to 529 ppm NH 3.The Anode Behavior in Novel Polymer Gel E lectrolyt es for Secondary 

# Aluminium B atteries 

Sandra Steiner a, David Moser b, Álvaro Miguel c, Pilar Tiemblo c, Gerald Kothleitner b, Bernhard Gollas a

> a

Institute for Chemistry and Technology of Materials , Graz Universi ty of Technology ,

Stremayrgasse 9/II, 8010 Graz, Austria 

> b

Institute of Electron Microscopy and Nanoanalysis (FELMI), Graz University of Technology 

Steyrergasse 17, 8010 Graz, Austria  

> c

Instituto de Ciencia y Tecn ología de Polímeros, ICTP -CSIC 

Juan de la Ci erva 3, 28006 Madrid, Spain 

sandra.steiner@tugraz.at 

The production of cheap and sustainable batteries with long lifetime that can compete with Li -ion 

batteries has been of great interest in recent years. A promising alternative are aluminium batteries, which 

promise high energy density and low prices. 1 Similar to Li , however , aluminium is prone to dendritic 

growth ultima tely leading to device failure. 2 A promising strategy to circumvent dendritic metal 

deposition and to enhance battery safety is the u se of polymer gel electrolytes. Polyethylene oxide (PEO) 

as a matrix material has already been studied extensively in Li -ion batteries because it is cheap and shows 

good electrochemical and thermal stability while maintaining its shape and flexibility. 3,4,5 They can 

further act as spacer between electrodes without the need of an additional separator. 4 The preparation of 

polymer gel electrolytes can be done by adding specific amounts of the polymer to the ionic liquid and 

heating the mixture until the polymer is dissolved . However, it is also possible to add the required 

monomers directly in the ionic liquid using it as the solvent for polymer synthesis. 6 The presence of a 

strong native oxide layer present on the aluminium anode also pro vides a challenge . It is, however, 

reported in literature that leaving the aluminium anode to soak for a certain amount of time in the 

electrolyte has a positive effect on the electrochemical performance of the electrode. 7

We measured t he conductivities of the DES and the polymer electrolytes with electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy. The deposition /dissolution characte ristics of the aluminium anode was tested by 

galvanostatic cycling in PEO based gel electrolytes with a AlCl 3:urea deep eutectic solvent (DES) .8 The 

mere DES was tested as well as mixtures with different ratios of PEO (1-5 wt %). The experiments were 

carried out in symmetrical aluminium half -cell s and the surface morphologies of the aluminium anodes 

were studied with SEM/EDS. The soaking time of the aluminium anode in AlCl 3:urea DES was 

optimized to improve the morphology of th e deposited aluminium during galvanostatic cycling. The 

soaking tests were also performed with the polymer electrolytes after finding the optimum with the pure 

AlCl 3:urea deep eutectic. Since the loading of the cells with the viscous polymer electrolytes i ntroduced 

gas bubbles , a method to remove those and improve the electrode/electrolyte contact was sought. This 

could be achieved by heating the assembled cells with the PEO based electrolytes to 60 °C (melting point 

of polymer) .9 Further, t he impact of this heating step on the overpotentials and the final an ode 

morphology was examined showing good correlations .

(1) Angell, M.; Pan, C. J.; Rong, Y.; Yuan, C.; Lin, M. C.; Hwang, B. J.; Dai, H.; Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. U. S. A. 2017 , 114 (5), 834 –839 

(2) Tu, X.; Z hang, J.; Zhang, M.; Cai, Y.; Lang, H.; Tian, G.; Wang, Y.; RSC Adv. 2017 , 7 (24), 

14790 –14796 

(3) Ji, X.; Zeng, H.; Gong, X.; Tsai, F.; Jiang, T.; Li, R. K. Y.; Shi, H.; Luan, S.; Shi, D.; J. Mater. 

Chem. A 2017 , 5 (46), 24444 –24452 

(4) Jiang, Y.; Yan, X.; Ma, Z.; Mei, P.; Xiao, W.; You, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Polymers (Basel). 2018 , 10 

(11), 1 –13 

(5) Mejía, A.; García, N.; Guzmán, J.; Tiemblo, P.; Electrochim. Acta 2014 , 137 , 526 –534 

(6) Liao, C.; Sun, X. G.; Dai, S.; Electrochim. Acta 2013 , 87 , 889 –894 

(7) Shvartsev, B.; Gelman, D.; Amram, D.; Ein -Eli, Y.; Langmuir 2015 , 31 (51), 13860 –13866 

(8) Abood, H. M. A.; Abbott, A. P.; Ballantyne, A. D.; Ryder, K. S.; Chem. Commun. 2011 , 47 (12), 

3523 

(9) Nieradko, M.; Eskandarian, L.; Semenikhin, O. A.; Electrochi m. Acta 2019 , 327 , 135023 Enhan cing the CO -Toleran ce of Hydrogen Oxidation Electrocatalys ts 

# using Tung sten Oxide : Mechanistic Insights from 

# Spectroelectrochemistry 

Andrew J. Wain ,1 Tim othy E. Rosser ,1 Douglas Stewart ,2,3 Keith Scott ,3 Edward Br ightman ,2, 4 Donald 

Macphee ,2,5 Moham ed Mamlouk 3

1. National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Rd, Tedding ton, TW11 0LW. 

2. Enocell Ltd., BioCity Scotland, Motherwell, ML1 5UH. 

3. Chemical Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU. 

4. Department of Chemical and Process Engin eering, Uni versity of Strathclyde, Glasgow, G1 1XJ. 

5. Department of Chemistry, University of Abe rdee n, AB24 3UE. 

andy. wain@ npl. co.uk 

The tolerance of hyd rogen o xidation electro catalysts towards fuel contam inants such as carb on monoxide 

is an impo rtant figure of mer it in assessing their viability for use in proton exchange membrane fuel cells 

(PEMFCs) . Signi fic ant cost reductions could be reali zed if PEM FCs were eng ineered to run on low -purity 

hydrogen , so efforts are underway to develop electrocataly st s with improved tolerance to CO poisoning. 

The CO tolerance of Pt elect ro catalysts is we ll -known to be improved by alloying with Ru, but this is a 

relatively expensive raw material and further lowering of the p otential of CO oxidation is soug ht . One 

alter nat ive appr oach is to use tungsten ox ide (WO 3) as a support or co -catalyst for Pt -based 

electrocatalysts, w hich has been shown to facilitate CO oxidation on Pt at pot entials below that ac hieved 

by Ru . However, the detailed mechanism of i mp roved tolerance is not ful ly understood , which is a

bottleneck to fully exploiting this phenomenon .

In this wo rk we use the combination of elect rochemistry with in situ Raman spectroscopy and in sit u

attenuated total reflection infrared (ATR -IR) spectr oscopy to probe the me chanism of imp rov ed CO 

tolerance obser ved by physically mixing a commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst with WO 3. We conclude that 

the WO 3-assisted CO tolerance is imparted through a bifunctional mechanism , with the WO 3 itself 

mediating oxid ation of Pt -adsorbed CO at po tential s lower than in the absence of WO 3, as well as 

providing surface oxygen species . We also rule out an electronic mechanism (where the additiv e weakens 

the Pt -CO bond thus facilitating its oxidation) since our data in fa ct suggest a slight st rengthening of the 

Pt -CO bond in the presence of WO 3. We discuss the implications of t hese i nsights on the potential 

application of WO 3 as a fuel cell catal yst additive , a s well as pro viding a framework for distinguishing 

between the above mechanisms usi ng complementar y in situ spectro scop ic techniques to characterize the 

roles of multipl e components as a f unction of poten tial .Towards Holistic Understanding of Electrochemical Energy 

# Conversion and Storage Systems Using High Energy X -rays. 

Jakub Drnec 1, Isaac Martens 1, Raphael Chattot 1, Cedric Gommes 2, Timo Fuchs 3, Tim Wiegmann 3 and 

Olaf M. Magnussen 3

> 1

ESRF, Grenoble, France 

> 2

University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 

> 3

Kiel University, Kiel, Germany ,

drnec@esrf.fr 

Complete physico -chemical operando characterization of electrochemical devices in whole, or it’s 

constituent materials separately, is necessary to guide the development a nd to improve the performance. 

High brilliance synchrotron X -ray sources play a crucial role in this respect as they act as a probe with 

relatively high penetration power and low damage potential. Synchrotron sources will undergo major 

upgrades in next dec ade and will provide even higher brilliance and, more importantly, coherence. These 

upgrades will be particularly advantageous for beamlines providing high energy X -rays as they will allow 

use of advanced scattering techniques with highly penetrating probe . Therefore, the techniques typically 

used for ex -situ measurements or at lower X -ray energies could be used on materials in liquid half -cells 

and operating electrochemical devices. In this contribution the new possibilities of using high energy, 

high inte nsity, coherent X -rays to probe model systems and whole electrochemical devices will be 

presented. The focus will be on defects tracking, local structure determination and correlative multimodal 

characterization using advanced WAXS, SAXS and surface scatte ring techniques. 

To study fuel cells or batteries as a whole, elastic scattering techniques such as wide angle and small 

angle scattering are typically employed, as they can provide important complementary information to 

more standard X -ray imaging and tom ography. The advantage is that the chemical contrast and sensitivity 

at atomic and nm scales is superior. Coupling these technique with the tomographic reconstruction (XRD -

CT and SAXS -CT) is much less common as it requires bright synchrotron sources, fast 2D detectors and 

advanced instrumentation [1]. However, such combination allows spatial reconstruction of materials 

important atomic parameters in operando conditions. This will be demonstrated on imaging of standard 5 

cm 2 PEM fuel cell during operation an d Li -ion battery Si/C composite anode during charge and 

discharge. 

Furthermore, local atomic and mesoscale structure, together with defect content, can also be determined 

by using Rietveld fitting, Pair Distribution Function (PDF) analysis and advanced SAX S theory. This in 

principle allows holistic investigations of interfaces at the device level, specification of defects’ role in 

catalysis and determination of interplay between different phases during operation. These are critical 

questions needed to be an swered in order to incorporate novel materials into the electrochemical devices. 

Examples will be given on studies of the defectous ORR catalysts [2,3] and amorphous Li -ion anodes. 

HESXRD (High Energy Surface X -ray Diffraction) [4] and TDS (Transmission Su rface Diffraction) [5] 

provide ideal tools to study structural changes during reaction conditions on single crystal model 

electrodes. The main advantage of both techniques is the possibility to follow the surface structural 

changes precisely with atomic re solution. While HESXRD is ideally used to determine exact atomic 

position, the TSD is easier from experimental perspective and allows studies with high spatial resolution. 

Advantages and disadvantages of both approaches will be discussed and examples of me asurements on 

ORR and OER catalysts will be given. The future possibility to use high energy coherent beams will open 

new opportunities for both techniques to study single defects and surface dynamics in operando 

conditions. 

[1] A. Vamvakeros et al., Nat. Commun., 9, 4751 (2018) 

[2] R. Chattot et al., Nat. Matter., 17(2018) 

[3] C.J. Gommes et al., J. Appl. Cryst., 52(2019) 

[4] J. Gustafson et al., Science 343, 758 (2014) 

[5] F. Reikowski et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 5, 1067 -1071 (2017) Germanium O xide as Negative Electrode for Li-Ion Batteries – Phase 

# Stabilization and Enhanced Electrochemical Performance via Fe 

# Doping 

Tobias Eisenmann , Stefano Passerini, Dominic Bresser 

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), 89081 Ulm, Germany 

Karlsruhe Insti tute of Technology (KIT), 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany 

tobias.eisenmann@kit.edu 

The transportation sector is continuously transitioning from combustion engines to wards fully electric 

vehicles , and lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) are the energy storage device o f choice due to their high 

volumetric and gravimetric energ y density .1 However, to meet future targets in terms of driving range and 

re -/charging times, the state -of -the -art graphite anode needs to be replaced with materials offering even 

higher energy densities and, especially, better power capabilities. Alloying metal -oxides such as ZnO and 

SnO 2 have been widely studied so far si nce they offer high theoretical specific capacities (966 mAh g-1

and 1 494 mAh g-1, respectively) at relatively low cost. Furthermore, such alloying metal oxides have high 

densities, which leads to substantially higher volumetric capacities compared to grap hite. However, these 

high densities, in combination with the high overall Li + uptake, lead to pronounced volume expansion 

upon cycling. Furthermore, the eventually irreversible Li 2O formation limits the practically achievable 

specific capacity to the alloy ing contribution only. It has been shown that these detrimental effects can be 

overcome by introducing a transition metal (e.g., Fe, Co) into the lattice , leading to a reversible Li 2O

formation and less pronounced volume expansion and, consequently, to cap acities which are close to the 

theoretical values. 2,3 This concept of transition metal doping has also been transferred to g ermanium 

oxide – an example for an Li + alloying oxide with even higher theoretical specific capacity (i.e., 

2152 mAh g-1) – and was shown to partially enable re -oxidation of the germanium to germanium oxide, 

though (so far) only in the initial cycles. 4

Within this study, we tackled the problem from a different perspective and elaborate on the effect of Fe in 

GeO 2 on the structural stability of different germanium oxide phases and, as a result, its electrochemical 

performance. The techniques employed include, amongst others, highly complementary in situ/operando 

characterization such as in situ high temperature XRD, operando XRD and operando dilatometry. The 

results on germanium oxi de as a model compound shed light on a commonly overlooked impact factor for 

the electrochemical performance of such materials and, in fact, metal oxides in general. 

1. N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee, and G. Yush in, Mater. Today , 18 , 252 –264 (2015). 

2. D. Bresser et al., Chem. Mater. , 25 , 4977 –4985 (2013). 

3. Y. Ma et al., Sustain. Energy Fuels , 2, 2601 –2608 (2018). 

4. J. Wu, N. Luo, S. Huang, W. Yang, and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A , 7, 4574 –4580 (2019). Staircase Voltammetry: The Effect of the Applied Potential Ramp on 

# the HUPD in Cyclic Voltammogram s of Platinum 

Urša Petek , Nejc Hodnik , Miran Gaberšček 

Department of Materials Chemistry, National Institute of Chemistry 

Hajdrihova 19, SI -1000 Ljubljana, S lovenia 

ursa.petek@ki.si 

Although cyclic voltammetry (CV) is widely relied upo n to interpret the behaviour of electrochemical 

systems, it is often overlooked that the measured response s depend not only on the studied system, but 

also on the applied settin gs and technical capabilities of the potentiostat . The main device -dependent 

variable is the type of the applied potential ra mp, which can be either a truly linear or a stepwise function 

of time . While a linear change of potential is typically assumed for interpreting the results, most 

potentiostats operate with a digital ramp by default and a true analog ramp generator is only offered as an 

optional feature .

The analog ramp is defined by only one param eter – the scan rate – but a staircase function is al so 

determined by the size of the potential step ΔE or the step duration Δ t. Additionally, the delay time of a 

current measurement within the step duration (α ∙Δ t) strongly affects the measured current response. 

Taking into account the technical differences among potentiostats and the user -defined variabi lity , there 

are many ways of recording a cyclic voltammogram with a given scan rate. Despite this, detailed 

descriptions of the applied ramps and current recording modes are rarely reported as experimental 

conditions [1]. This practice is acceptable only w hen the results of a staircase ramp are equivalent to an 

analog experiment. But it is not obvious what set of conditions apply for a given electrochemical process .

It is well est ablished that surface reactions are more sensitive to the staircase shape than diffus ive 

processes . [2] One such surface phenomenon is the hydrogen underpotential deposition (HUPD) on 

platinum electrodes , which is the most studied electrode material in electrocatalysis . Surprisingly, the 

practical effect s of staircase ramp parameter s on the HUPD response are not widely understood .

In this contribution, we showcase some experimental settings that can drastically affect the HUPD 

response on platinum when measured with a staircase potential ramp . T he size of the potential step for a 

gi ven scan rate was systematically varied, as was the parameter α of the current sam pling delay . The 

settings that yield ed a response equivalent to an analog ramp will be discussed . T he advantages of 

averaging multiple current measurements within one potenti al step will also be demonstrated. This study 

aims to point out the pitfalls of the established practice of not reporting fundamental experimental 

parameters when studying the HUPD process on Pt electrodes .

Cyclic voltammograms of polycrystalline Pt elec trode in 0.1 M HClO 4 recorded with different potential 

steps ΔE at a scan rate of 20 mV s–1. The current was measured at the end of each potential step (α=1). 

References 

1. Shinozaki , K.; Zack , J. W. ; Richards, R. M. ; Pivovar , B.S. ; Kocha , S.S. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015 ,

162 , F1144 –F1158. 

2. He, P. Anal. Chem . 1995 , 67, 9 86 –992. Anodic Production of Hydrogen Peroxide on Carbon -based Materials 

Dhananjai Pangotra 1,2 , Luciana Vieira 1, Arne Roth 1, Volker Sieber 1,2 

> 1

Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology IGB, Straubing Branch, Schulgasse 

11a, 94315 Straubing, Germany 

> 2

Technical University of Munich, Straubing Campus for Biotechnology and Sustainability, Schulgasse 16, 

94315 Straubing, Germa ny 

e-mail address : dhananjai.pangotra@igb.fraunhofer.de 

The production of hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) using renewable electricity, oxygen (O 2) and water (H 2O) is 

an alternate ‘‘green’’ route to the current anthraquinone process [1] . There are two approaches for the 

electrochemical synthesis of H 2O2. One pathway is the partial reduction of O 2 at cathodes employing either 

noble metal alloys or doped carbon . Another possible rout e is the two -electron oxidation of water to H2O2,

which competes with the four -electron oxidation of H 2O to O 2[2] . This anodic production of H2O2 is 

desirable since it can be coupled with other cathodic reactions, such as CO 2 reduction reaction to valuable 

products.  However, it remai ns a great challenge to develop efficient electrocatalysts for H 2O2 anodic 

synthesi s, which can suppress the thermodynamically favored oxygen evolution reaction (OER) . The 

objective of our research is to identify the parameters that will allow maximizing the efficiency of the 

catalyst and the electroc hemical process for the anodic production of H 2O2. Carbo n has been used as an 

electrocatalyst due to its large surface area, conductivity, chemical stability in alka line electrolytes, and low 

cost. Selective oxidation of water to hydrogen peroxide on different carbon materials was conducted using 

a two compartm ent H-cell , where copper was used as a counter electrode . The i mpact of electrolyte 

concentration, current density , pH values of the electrolyte, temperature, and ion exchange membranes ,

have been investigated in order to optimize reaction conditions for the anodic production of H 2O2. A

concentration of 1.73 mM for H 2O2 was achieved at the applied current density of 100 mA cm -2 in 2.7 M

KHCO 3 electrolyte using a cation exchange membrane in a flow cell. (Figure 1 ).

Figure 1: Hydrogen peroxide concentration in the anolyte during electrolysis at (a) different current 

densities using 2 M KHCO 3 and (b) in different electrolyte concentrations of KHCO 3 at 100 mA cm -2

Reference s:

[1] S. C. Perry, D. Pangotra, L. Vieira, L. -I. Csepei, V. Sieber, L. Wang, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, 

Nature Reviews Chemistry 2019 , 3, 442 -458. 

[2] K. Fuku and K. Sayama, Chem Commun (Camb) 2016 , 52 , 5406 -5409. 

This work is performed in collaboration with the partners and supported as part of the CO 2-based 

electrosynthesis of ethylene oxide (CO2EXIDE) project, which receives funding from the European 

Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program in co -operation with the SPIRE initiative under 

grant agreement No. 768789 

# a b0 25 50 75 100 125 150       

> 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5
> Time (min)
> 10 mA cm -2
> 50 mA cm -2
> 100 mA cm -2
> Current density H2O2 Concentration (mM) 025 50 75 100 125 150
> 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0
> Electrolyte Concentration
> 1 M KHCO 3
> 2 M KHCO 3
> 2.7 M KHCO 3
> H2O2 Concentration (mM) Time (min)

# Effect of secondary solution concentration on lithium electrodialysis 

# using lithium ion electrolyte Li 0.29 La 0.57 TiO 3

Hiroto Takahashi 1, Kiyoto Shin -mura 1, Ryo suke Hiraka 2, Ryoya Tokuyoshi 2, Kazuya Sasaki 1, 2 

> 1

Graduate School of Science and Technology, Hir osaki University  

> 2

Department of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University 

3 Bunkyo -cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036 -8561, Japan 

k_sasaki @hirosaki -u.ac.jp 

The demand for lithium resources is rapidly increasing with the production of lithium -ion batteries. 

Toda y’s lithium is pro du ced from brine or ore [1]. The issues of the former are long process time and 

large environmental burdens . The latter issue is the high cost for high puri fication [2]. To establish a 

better lithium recove ry met hod, we ha ve investigated lithium recovery by electrodialysis using lithium 

ion conductive solid electrolyte Li 0.29 La 0.57 TiO 3 (LLTO). The electrochemical impedance of 

electrodialysis is affected by the concentration of cations in solution. When this recovery is perf ormed in 

a batch system , the lithi um ion concentration of the solution changes as the recovery of lithium proceeds .

Therefore, it is important to elucidate the influence of the lithium ion concentration in the solution on the 

electrochemical imped ance. In this study, we investigate the effect of lithium ion concentration in the 

secondary solution on lithium recovery rate by electrodialysis using LL TO .

An anode (primary side ) and a cathode (secondary side) electrodes were prepared on the surface of 

LLTO usi ng a platinum pa ste. Referenc e electrodes was prepared on both surfaces of the LLTO at 

position s apart from the an ode and cathode. A DC voltage of 2.0 V was applied between the anode and 

cathode. Electrochemical impedances were measured by the 3-terminal method using the reference 

electrode s and 2 -terminal method . The prima ry side solution was a 1.0 M aqueous lithium hydroxide 

solution. The secondary side solution was pure water or an aqueous lithium hydroxide solution having a 

concentration of 10 -3-1.0 M . The amount of tr ansf erred lithium was estimated by Faraday's l aw using the 

current value. 

As shown in Figure 1, the migration rate of lithium depended on the concentration of lithium ions 

in the secondary solution and reached a maximum at 10 -2 M. The cause of this de pende nce w as clarified 

by the AC impedance method .

Figure 1  Lithium recovery rate at different lithium co ncentration in electrodialysis secondary solutions .

[1]  L. Gong, W. Ouyang, Z. Li, J. Han , Direct numerical simulation of continuous lithium extraction from 

high Mg 2+ /Li + ratio brin es using microfluidic channels with ion concentration polarization , J. Membr. Sci. 

556 (2018) 34 -41 .

[2] X. Li, Y. Mo, W. Qing, S. Shao, C. Y. Tang, J. Li, Membrane -based technologies for lithium recovery 

from water lithium resources: A review, J. Membr . Sci . 591 (2019) 117317 -117329. Investigation of Aniline and p-aminodiphenylamine Oxidation 

# Products formed using Fe 3O4 NPs /H 2O2 system :

# Structure and Electrochemical Behavior 

Jana Mišurović , Gordana Ćirić -Marjanović, Danica Bajuk -Bogdanović 

University of Belgrade -Faculty of Physical C hemistry, Studentski trg 12 -16, 11158 Belgrade, Sebia 

e-mail address : janamisurovic @gmail.com 

Polyaniline (PANI) is one of the most studied conducting polymers thanks to its simple synthesis and 

wide range of favorable properties [1] . In this work we pre sent a comparative study of polymeric products 

obtained from two different monomeric species, aniline and p-aminodiphenylamine (p -ADPA) oxidized 

in similar conditions using Fe 3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) /H 2O2 cataly st/oxidant system. So far H2O2, as a 

clean oxi dant (the product of its reduction is only water) , has mostly been used in polymerizations 

catalyzed by enzymes. In our approach Fe 3O4 NPs replace much expensive enzymes, while synthetic 

conditions are tuned to achieve good conducti vity of products. 

The pr ocess of p -ADPA oxidation occur red much faster than the oxidation of aniline , due to lower 

oxidation potential of p -ADPA , which is documented by the color changes of reaction mixtures and 

changes in UV -Vis spectra with time . Based on the structural charact erization of products (PANI/Fe 3O4

and Poly( p-ADPA )/Fe 3O4) it was found that the oxidation s of aniline and p-ADPA led to the formation of 

PANI in the electr oconductive , half -oxidized form called emeraldine salt (ES) [1,2] . FTIR spectra of both 

products cont ain characteristic bands of PANI -ES and evidenc e that the materials have very similar 

molecular structure. On the other side , Raman spectr a showed that there are some fine differences in the 

molecular structure of the two materials. The Raman spectrum of P oly(p -ADPA)/Fe 3O4 contains some 

bands indicating the intramolecular oxidative cyclization in the polymer chains , which are absent in the 

spectrum of PANI/Fe 3O4 sample. SEM images evidence d considerably different morphology of the two 

samples. PANI/Fe 3O4 ha s heterogeneous morphology with a large content of regularly shaped 

microspheres, while Poly(p -ADPA)/Fe 3O4 contains dominant plate -like morphology. Such differences in 

the material s’ surface implicate that their electrochemical behavior differs largely , wh ich was confirmed 

by cyclic voltammetry measurements (Fig.1.) . The electrochemical behavior of both materials was tes ted 

in 1M HCl solution. The cyclic voltammogram (CV) of PANI/Fe 3O4 shows t ypical redox pair of PANI :

the dominating redox couple at lower potentials correspond s to the interconversion between 

nonconducting leucoemeraldine base and ES , and the redox couple at higher potentials corresponds to the 

interconversi on between ES and fully oxidized pernigraniline salt form . In CV of Poly(p -ADPA)/Fe 3O4

the redox pair at higher potentials is more pronounced and the two oxidation (reduction) peaks are 

merged . Differences in molecular structure and surface morphology of the two samples clearly support 

the electrochemical behavior and higher capacitance of PANI/Fe 3O4 (~180 Fg -1) in comparison to Poly(p -

ADPA)/Fe 3O4 (~50 Fg -1), even though their electrical conductivities are of the same order of magnitude 

(10 -2 Scm -1). This makes PANI/Fe 3O4 a better electrode material for charge storage applications. 

Figure 1. CVs of PANI/Fe 3O4 and Poly(p -ADPA)/Fe 3O4 in 1M HCl at the scan rate 20 mVs -1.

References 

[1]  G. Ćirić -Marjanović,  Synth . Met . 177 (2013) 1 –47. 

[2 ] J. Mišurović, M. Mojović, B. Marjanović, P. Vulić, G. Ćirić -Marjanović,  Synth.Met . 257 (2019) 

1161 74 .Three -dimensional Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7/Na 2FeP 2O7 polyanionic 

# heterostructure: the synthes is a nd electrochemical behavior in the 

# aqueous lithium and sodium nitrate solutions 

Aleksandra Gezović 1, Milica Vujković 2, Veselinka Grudić 1, Miloš Milović 3, Danica Bajuk -Bogdanović 2

and Slavko Mentus 2, 4

> 1

University of Montenegro, Faculty of Metallurgy and Technology, Cetinjski put bb, Podgorica, 

Montenegro 

> 2

University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physical Chemistry, Studentski Trg 12 –16, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

Institute of Technic al Sciences of SASA, Knez Mihailova 35/IV, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 4

Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Knez Mihajlova 35, Belgrade, Serbia 

saskagezovic @gmail.com 

Polyanionic compounds attract attention as a cathodic materials for Li - and Na -ion rechargeable batteries. 

The main advantages are open 3D framework capable of intercalating large amount of alkaline ions, an 

excellent thermal/structural stability and high safety. Mixed phosphate -pyrophosphate Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7

and pyrophosphate Na 2FeP 2O7 possess attrac tive sodium insertion structures , displaying low activation 

barrier for Na -ion diffusion. The idea of this work is to hybridize these polyanionic phases through the 

control of synthesis conditions and capture each individual redox process during charg ing /d ischar ging of 

the hybridized powder . By adjusting the synthesis condition s in the citric acid -assisted sol -gel process, 

followed by a heat treatment at 500 °C under Ar/5%H 2, the composite containing Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7 and 

Na 2FeP 2O7 (denoted as NFPP/C) was sy nthesized, as confirmed by X -ray diffraction . The contribution of 

these phases was found to be ~ 29% for Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7 and ~71% for Na 2FeP 2O7. Vibrational modes 

of PO 43- and P 2O74- groups are identified by means of Infrared and Raman spectroscopy. The to tal carbon 

content of 21 .7 %, which originates from citric acid and sucrose, was determined by thermogravime tr y in 

air atmosphere . Both cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronopotenciometry (CP ) indicate that NFP P/C 

behaves differently in Li - and Na -nitrate solu tions , Fig.1 . Comparative CV and CP curves, measured 

under common current conditions , reveal better intercalation ability of 3D polyanionic framework for Na -

than for Li -ions . In dividual redox processes of both Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7 and Na 2FeP 2O7 phases can be 

recognized in CV of NFPP/C obtained at 1mV s -1 in NaNO 3. As a result , a very high specific capacity of 

~ 108 mAh g -1 (at ~ 300mA g -1) was measured in NaNO 3, while the corresponding value in LiNO 3 was 

~ 69 mAh g -1.

Figure 1. Comparative CVs (l eft , scan rate was 1 mV s -1) and charge/discharge curves (right , current 

density was ~ 0, 3 A g -1) of the NFPP/C composite measured in NaNO 3 and LiNO 3 solution. 

Acknowledgment 

This rese arch was reali zed by the support of the Ministry of Science of Montene gro through the project 

"Scholarships for Doctoral Research in Montenegro", in cooperation with the Faculty of Physical 

Chemistry, University of Belgrade and Institute of Technical Sciences of SASA, Belgrade, Serbia. 

Authors are also greatful to the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the 

Republic of Serbia for financial support. Electrochemical Synthesis of [Bi 6O5(OH) 3](NO 3)5⋅2H2O by

# Electrodeposition from Water and Ethanol Bi 3+ Solution s and 

# Compa rison of their Sorption Performance for Removal of Reactive 

# Blue 19 from Water 

Slobodan Najdanović, Milica Petrović, Nena Velinov, Jel ena Mitrović, Miloš Kostić, Miljana Radović 

Vučić , Aleksandar Bojić 

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences and Mathematics, University of Niš, Višegradska 33, 

18000 Niš, Serbia 

najda89@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Due to their large -scale production and exten sive application s ynthetic dyes are the major industrial 

pollu tants and water contaminants 1. Because of that wastewater from dye production and application 

industries presents a seriou s threat to the environment. Adsorption due to its simplicity and high 

efficiency is o ne of the most often employed methods for the treatment of wastewater 2.

The aim of this research is electrochemical synthesis of basic bismuth nitrate from wat er and ethanol Bi 3+ 

solutions and its application as a sorbent . The main a dvantages of electrochemical synthesis are 

simplicity, rigid contro l of film thickness, uniformity, deposition rate and low cost of equipment and 

starting materials 3. Organic electrolytes have been u sually used to realize a wide electrochemical window, 

avoid hydrogen embrittlement, improve the wettability of the electrode and improve anti -wear 

performance of deposit 4.

Materials were synthesized by galvanostatic electrodepos ition in the two electrode cell with a Ti sheet as 

a substrate (cathode) and a stainless steel sheet as an auxiliary electrode (anode) , followed by thermal 

treatment in air at 20 0 ºC . Electrodeposition was done from an acidic Bi 3+ solution in water or 96% 

ethanol at con stant current density of 150 mA cm –2 for 5 minutes . Obtained m aterial s were characterized 

by SEM -EDX, XRD, BET and FTIR methods . The resul ts of anal yses show ed that both mate rial s

(synthesized from water and ethanol solution s) are pure trigon al [Bi 6O5(OH) 3](NO 3)5⋅2H 2O with high 

crystallinity . Morphologically, they are composed of aggregates which were formed of several smaller 

particles of various shapes and sizes, some smaller than 100 nm. According to the IUPAC classification 

the N2 adsorpti on/desorption isotherm s of materials are type II, which is related to unrestric ted 

monolayer -multilayer adsorption and nonporous or macroporous adsorbents. The material synthesized 

from the ethanol solution has the specific surface area of 1.43 m 2 g–1, whi le the specific surface area of 

the material synthesized from the water solution is 0.95 m 2 g–1.

The sorption performance s of these materials w ere investigated b y rem oval of textile d ye Reactive Blue 

19 from water. The resul ts showed that both material s ha ve significantly higher sorption capacit ies 

comparing with the inorganic sorbents found in literature , mak ing them promising means for the textile 

dyes removal from water 5–7. The m aterial synthesized from the ethan ol solution has higher sorption 

capacit y (1344 .99 mg g –1) than the material synthesized from the water (1049.19 mg g –1). The main 

reason of impro ved sorption capacit y by using ethanol solution is higher specific surface area of obtained 

material. Also, imp ortant characteristics of material synthesized from ethanol solution that affect a better 

sorption performance of that material is its high er hydrophilicity , i.e. higher tendency of getting solvated 

by water .

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from t he Ministry of Education, Science and 

Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Grant No TR34008). 

References 

(1) Menkiti, M. C.; Ania gor, C. O. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2018 , 43 (5), 2375 –2392. 

(2) Khalid, A.; Zubair, M.; Ihsanullah. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2018 , 43 (5), 2167 –21 79. 

(3) Zhitomirsky, I. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2002 , 97 (1 –3), 279 –317. 

(4) Thiemig, D.; Bund, Appl. Surf. Sci. 2009 , 255 (7), 4164 –4170. 

(5) Ayazi, Z.; Khoshhesab, Z. M.; Norouzi, S. Desalin. Water Treat. 2016 , 57 (52), 25301 –25316. 

(6) Khoshhesab, Z. M.; A hmadi, M. Desalin. Water Treat. 2015 , 57 (42), 20037 –20048. 

(7) Nga, N. K.; Hong, P. T. T.; Lam, T. D.; H uy, T. Q. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2013 , 398 , 210 –216. Electrochemical Studies of Semi -transparent NiCo 2O4/ITO 

# Supercapacitor E lectrodes 

A. Banti 1, M. Xaralabakis 2,3 , V. Binas 2,3 , S. Sotiropoulos 1

> 1

Physical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 

Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece 

> 2

Department of Physics, University of Crete, Herakleion, Greece 

> 3

Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser, Foundation for Research and Technology -Hellas (FORTH -

IESL) , Herakleion, Greece 

ampantic@chem.auth.gr 

A semi -transparent NiCo 2O4/ITO electrode for supercapacitor application s has been prepared by an ink -

printing method using a Dimatix 2D materials printer (Fujifilm) (Figure 1) . Structural and morphological 

characterization of the Ni Co 2O4 film was performed using XRD, SEM and AFM measurements . The 

average nanoparticle size in the film was estimated by SEM to be ca 100 nm whereas film thickness for 

films produced after two successive print ing steps varied between 200 -300 nm, as measured by AFM 

(Figure 1). Film transparency in the 400 -800 nm range was measured to be 35 -50%. The electrochemical 

characterization of the NiCo 2O4/ITO thin film electrodes was carried out by Cyclic Voltammetry (CV), 

Electro chemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) and Galvanostatic Charge -Discharge (GCD ) in 1 M NaOH 

electrolyte (Figure 2) . A nearly constant areal capacitance in the 30 -25 mF cm -2 range is obtained for 

discharge rates up to 1 mA cm -2. Th is is among the highest rep orted for very thin, transparent/semi -

transparent supercapacitor electrodes [1-2]. The onset of capacitance loss at higher discharge current 

densities indicates electron transfer and/or reactant diffusion limitations of the associated faradaic reaction .

In summary , the present work has proven the feasibility of preparing low cost and high performance binary 

metal oxide materials for semi -transparent supercapacitor applications , by a facile in kje t printing method .

References 

[1 ] Danqin Li et al., “Transparent 1T -MoS 2 nanofilm robustly anchored on substrate by layer -by -layer self -

assembly and its ultra -high cycling stability as supercapacitors”, Nanotechnology (2017). [2 ] Hongwei 

Sheng et al., “Ultrathin, Wrinkled, Vertically Aligned Co(OH) 2 Nanosheets/Ag Nanowires Hybrid Network 

for Flexible Transparent Supercapacitor with High Performance”, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 11 (2019) 

8992−9001 .

Figure 1 Photograph (left) and AFM micrograph 

(right) of a semi -transparent printed NiCo 2O4/ITO 

electrode 

Figure 2 Galvanostatic Charge -Discharge 

curves of a semi -transparent NiCo 2O4/ITO 

electrode in 1M NaOH at various current 

densi ties Understanding the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction Kinetics of 

# Electrodeposited Nickel -Molybdenum in Acidic, Neutral, and Alkaline 

# Conditions 

Fuxi Bao , Erno Kemppainen, Iris Dorbandt, Radu Bors, Fanxing Xi, Rutger Schlatmann, Roel van de 

Krol, and Sonya Calnan 

Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH 

Schwarzschildstraße 3 , 12489 Berlin, Germany 

fuxi.bao@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Effective water splitting via electrolysis driven by renewable energy requires highly active catalysts to 

minimi ze the sensitivity of the hydrogen generation rate to fluctuating operating conditions [1,2]. NiMo 

alloys can potentially replace platinum as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalysts because of their 

low overpotential over the entire pH range [3,4]. However, the pH -dependent kinetics of NiMo are not 

fully understood. In ad dition, it is still not clear if the low HER overpotential of NiMo is caused by high 

intrinsic catalytic activit y or by extrinsic factors , such as increased surface area or mass loading [5,6],

which would have cost implications for large -scale hydrogen production. Here in we present a study of 

HER kinetics of NiMo electrodeposited on fluorine -doped tin oxide glass in alkaline, neutral and acidic 

media by polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques. 

The polarization mea surements indicate d that the high HER activity of NiMo film was cause d by both its 

high active surface area and high intrinsic catalytic activity . In subsequent measurements , the NiMo films 

show ed the lowest HER activities in neutral condition s and the highest activities in acidic condition s. We 

found that the higher HER ac tivity in acidic media was accompanied by more favorable hydrogen 

adsorption and charge transf er kinetics than in neutral and alkaline media. While two different Tafel -slope 

regions were observed for acidic and neutral media, only o ne was obtained for alka line condition s. The 

EIS results suggest ed that the change of Tafel -slope wa s caused by the increased hydrogen surface 

coverage at high overpotential region. In acidic and neutral media, both Volmer and Heyrovsky steps 

significantly affect ed the HER kineti cs at the low overpotential region, while at high overpotential s the 

Volmer step limit ed the HER kinetics. In alkaline condition s, however, the HER rate wa s controlled by 

the Volmer step , and other steps were not visible in the EIS data .

NiMo films with d ifferent thicknesses were also measured in electrolytes with different pH and in all 

cases the thickest layers provided the best HER performance due to high est active surface area . Because 

the highest HER activity was due to surface area, initial performan ce optimization by increasing film 

thickness should be quite simple, but further development of deposition methods for even higher specific 

surface area could also prove beneficial .

This research was done under the PECSYS project. The project has received funding from the FUEL 

CELLS AND HYDROGEN 2 JOINT UNDERTAKING under grant agreement No . 735218. This Joint 

Undertaking receives support from the EUROPEAN UNION’S HORIZON 2020 RESEARCH AND 

INNOVATION programme and Hydrogen Europe and N.ERGHY. The project st arted on the 1 st of 

January 2017 with a duration of 48 months. 

References 

[1] J. R. McKone, S. C. Marinescu, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray , Chem. Sci. , 2014, 

5, 865 –878 .

[2] I. Roger, M. A. Shipman a nd M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem. , 2017, 1, 1–13 .

[3] C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. , 2015, 137 , 4347 –4357. 

[4] T. Shinagawa and K. Takanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C , 2016, 120 , 1785 –1794. 

[5] M. Sch alenbach, F. D. Speck, M. Ledendecker, O. Kasian, D. Goehl, A. M. Mingers, B. Breitbach, 

H. Springer, S. Cherevko and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Electrochim. Acta , 2018, 259 , 1154 –1161. 

[6] C. González -Buch, I. Herraiz -Cardona, E. Ortega, J. García -Antón and V. Pérez -Herranz, J. Appl. 

Electrochem. , 2016, 46 , 791 –803. Sodium redox behavior of maricit e NaFePO 4

# in an aqueous electrolytic solution 

Tamara Petrović 1, Milica Vujković 1, Miloš Milović 2, Danica Bajuk -Bogdanović 1, Slavko Mentus 1

> 1

University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physical Chemistry, Studentski Trg 12 –16, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Institute of Technical Sciences of SASA, Knez Mihailova 35/IV, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 3

Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Knez Mihajlova 35, Belgrade, Serbia 

tamara @ffh.bg.ac.rs 

Since the discovery of the electrochemically active LiFePO 41, the three -dimensional frameworks built on 

transition metals and polyanions (XO 4)n− have experienced a huge expansion in the research field of 

alkaline -ion batteries . NaFePO 4 exists in two polymorphic structures : triphylite and maricite 

(thermodynamically more stable ). The maricite NaFePO 4 phase was initially considered as 

electrochemical ly inactive fo r sodium rechargeable batteries, but somewhat later its activity was 

demonstrated 2. In this paper, the maricite NaFePO 4/C composite , is synthesized in an unusual way , by 

targeting the stoichiometric composition of the Na 4Fe 3(PO 4)2P2O7/C using the glycine -nitrate process and 

then applying the temperature corresponding to the structural decomposition of this polyanionic 

compound (65 0oC) . XRD , FTIR and Raman spectroscopy observations of such obtained powder 

confirmed the formation of the maricite phase, while the cyclic voltammetry , measured in the 

electrochemical stability window of NaNO 3 aqueous solution , showed its electrochemical inactivity . By 

exposing the maricit e phase to high anodic potentials in NaNO 3 (beyond the stable potential window), the 

redox peaks have appear ed and electrochemical performance of the maricit e itself is improved . Further 

holding the electrode at a de ep positive potential (1.6 V vs. SCE) for a certain periodic time , results in the 

gradual increase of redox peaks , Fig.1a .The integrated surface area under CV curve of anodic or cathodic 

part (which corresponds to the specific capacity of the material ) was increased by ~50%. The shape of 

redox peaks remains retained upon changing the scan rate, Fig.1b . To reveal what really happens at the 

NaFe PO4 surface under deep anodic polarization and what is the most responsible for the observed 

electrochemical activation, the activated powder was subjected to further characterization. Based on FTIR 

and Raman measurements , i t can be concluded that the high anodic polarization result s in the phase 

transformation of electrochemically inactive maricite NaFePO 4 to active FePO 4 phase. Whether the active 

phase is triphylite or amorphous maricite is still a question which will be addressed . The obtained results 

open novel directions regarding the use of NaFePO 4 in Na -ion rechargeable batteries .

Figure 1. a) CVs of maricite NaFePO4/C before (pristine) and after anodic polarization , at 20 mVs -1; CVs 

of activated NaFePO 4/C at different scan rates (b) . The electrolyte is aqueous solution of NaNO 3.

References: 

1. A.K. Padhi, K.S. Nanjundaswamy, J.B.J. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc. 144 (1997) 1188. 

2. M.Vujković, S. Mentus , J. Power Sources, 247 (2014) 184. 

3.J. Kim, D. -H. Seo, H. Kim, I. Park, J. -K.Yoo, S. -K.Jung, Y. -U. Park, W.A.Goddard, K. Kang, Energy 

Environ. 8 (2015) 540. Scanning Electrochemical Cell Microscopy – Investigation of the 

# Hydrogen Evolution Reaction on Thin Film Dichalcogenides 

Simon Schumacher a, Lukas Madauß b, Marika Sch leberger b, Tsvetan Tarnev c, Wolfgang Schuhmann c and 

Corina Andronescu a 

> a

Technical Chemistr y III – Faculty of Chemistry, University Duisburg -Essen, Carl -Benz -Straße 199, 

47057 Duisburg, Germany  

> b

Faculty of Physics, University Duisburg -Essen, Lotharstraße 1, 47057 Duisburg, Germany  

> c

Analytical Chemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstra ße 150, 44780 Boch um, Germany 

Email: simon.schumacher@uni -due.de 

The usage of fossil fuels as energy source and the excessive emission of CO 2 into the atmosphere is 

proven to be a major threat for the environment. Therefore, the research on sustainable and efficie nt 

energy storage and alternative fuels is of great importance. Hydrogen can be produced using renewable 

energy via water electrolysis but catalyst materials are required to run the reaction efficiently. For the 

electrocatalytic evolution of molecu lar hydr ogen, materials based on noble metals such as Pt and Pd show 

the highest activity. Due to the cost -intensity of rare precious noble metals the development of active and 

stable non -noble metal based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reacti on (HER) is promoted. 1

In recent years, thin film dichalcogenides, like MoS 2 and WS 2, have been established as promising 

candidates for the HER and various reports indicate that the edges and defects show higher catalytic 

activity compared with the basal p lane. 2 Aiming on materials with increased activity defect engineering 

comes into focus. One approach for a controlled formation of defects into thin film materials is the 

irradiation with ions that also results in an increase of the catalytic activity for the HER. 3

Different electrochemical methods can be used to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity of materials. From 

this, scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) was established in the recent years as a 

powerful tool to assess the electrocatalyti c activi ty of different materials at nanoscale. Using pulled 

nanocapillaries as probes, measurements can be performed utilizing electrolyte droplets in the size of less 

than 100 nm as electrochemical cells. This results in an unparalleled resolution in the observa tion of 

electrochemical reactions leading to a better understanding of catalytically active sites or intrinsic activity 

of a single catalyst particle. 4,5 

References 

(1) Masa, J.; Weide, P; Peeters, D.; Sinev, I.; Xia, W.; Sun, Z.Y.; Somsen, C.; Mu hler, M. ;

Schuhmann, W. Advanced Energy Materials 2016, 6 (6), 1502313 

(2) Takahashi, Y.; Kobayashi, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ito, Y.; Ota, M.; Ida, H.; Kumatani, A.; Miyazawa, K.; 

Fujita, T.; Shiku, H.; et al.  Angewandte Chemie Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2 -10 

(3) Madauß, L .; Schle berger, M.; et al. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 22908 –22916. 

(4) Bentley, C. L.; Kang, M.; Maddar, F. M.; Li, F.; Walker, M.; Zhang, J.; Unwin, P. R. Chem. 

Sci., 2017, 8 , 6583 - 6593 

(5) Tarnev, T.; Aiyappa, H. B.; Botz, A.; Erichsen, T.; Ernst, A.; Andron escu, C. ; Schuhmann, W. 

Angewandte Chemie Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14265 -14269 IrO 2/Ir/ Ti and IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/ Ti Oxygen Evolution Anodes prep ared by 

# Galvanic D eposition and Galvanic Replacement 

Aikaterini Touni 1, Orestis Anastasios Grammenos 1, Angeliki Banti 1, Dimitrios Karfaridis 2,

Athanasios Papaderakis 1, Dimitra Lambropoulou 1, Eleni Pavlidou 2, Sotirios Sotiropoulos 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece  

> 2

De partment of Physics , Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece 

eczss @chem.auth.gr 

IrO 2-modified Ti electrodes have been prepared by either a simple galvanic deposition process or a Ni -

mediated galvanic replacement method. In the former case a freshly etched Ti substrate has been treated 

with an Ir(IV) solution, resulting in the spontaneous deposition of metallic Ir on the surface of the Ti 

substrate with the simultaneous oxidation of nearby freshly etched Ti sites [1] . In the latter case, a smooth 

Ni film has been electrodeposited on the Ti substrate from a Watts bath and its surface layers 

spontaneously exchanged with metallic Ir upon treatment with an Ir(IV) solution [2 -3] . Anodization of the 

resulting Ir/Ti and Ir(Ni)/Ti electrodes by means of continuous potential cycling in acid solutions resulted 

in the formation of IrO 2 porous surface layers (or IrO x, depending on the positive potential limit) ,

showing typical Ir oxide surface electrochemistry ( Figure 1 ). SEM pictures revealed that the thus 

prepared IrO 2/Ir/ Ti electrode is made of sparse IrO 2/Ir micrometer -sized islands and nanoparticles , while 

the IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/Ti electrode consisted of a continuous film with a nodular morphology (as confirmed by 

AFM). The composition of the coatings was estimated by EDS and XPS spectroscopy while Ir mass 

loading was determined by ICP -MS f ollowing etching in acid. These electrodes have been tested as 

oxygen evolution reaction (OER) anodes by slow potential sweep voltamm etry (Figure 2) . IrO 2/Ir/ Ti 

electrodes exhibited mass specific activities for OER (ca 200 mA mg Ir -1 at  η=300 mV ) better or 

comparable to traditional Ir DSAs [4] or state -of -the -art thin therma l films [5], whereas the IrO 2/Ir (Ni)/Ti 

electrodes were proven comparable or better than both state -of -the art thin thermal films [6] and 

nanoparticle Ir Ni Ox catalysts [7] (ca 2 A mg Ir -1 at  η=300 mV ). The recently established enhancement of 

IrO 2 OER activity by Ni, combined with the widespread use of Ti as a stable electrode substrate, make 

IrO 2/Ir(Ni)/Ti attractive DSA electrodes. 

[1] A. Touni et al , J. Electroanal. Chem. , 2019 , 855, 113485 

[2] A. Papaderakis et al, J. Phys. Chem. C , 2016 , 120(36), 19995 

[3] A. Papaderakis et al, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018 , 808, 21 

[4 ] Y. Matsumoto et al , J. Electrochem. Soc. 1986 , 133 , 2257 

[5] D. Bernsmeier et al , ChemSusChem. 2018 , 11, 2367 

[6] T. R eier et al, J.Am.Chem.Soc. 2015 , 137, 13031 

[7] H. N. Nong et al , Nature Catalysis , 2018 , 1 (11), 841 

Acknowledgement s

This research has been co -financed by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union 

and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and 

Innovation, under the call RESEARCH – CREATE – INNOVATE (project code:T1EDK -00461). 

Figure 1 Cyclic voltamogram s (at 100 mVs -1)

of IrOx/Ir(Ni)/Ti and IrOx/Ti (Inset) electrodes 

in a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution 

Figure 2 Linear sweep voltamograms (at 5mVs -1)

of IrOx/Ir(Ni)/Ti and IrOx/Ti (Inset) electrodes in 

a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution Surface -alloying During Pb Underpotential D eposition on Au and Cu 

Alicja Szczepanska 1,2 *, Mattia Cattelan 3, Neil A. Fox 1,2,3 , Natasa Vasiljevic 1,2 

1: Bristol Centre for Functional Nanomaterials, Tyndall Avenue, University of Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK 

2: School of Physics, H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory , Tyndall Avenue, University of Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK 

3: School of Chemistry, Cantock's Close , University of Bristol , BS8 1TS , UK 

e-mail address:  alicja.szcze panska@bristol.ac.uk 

Surface -alloys can form spontaneously dur ing the deposition of one metal onto another, especially in 

systems with a very large lattice mismatch that do not have bulk counterparts (so -called immiscible 

systems). Th e sponta neous surfa ce alloying has been widely stu died in Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) [ 1], 

but these new materials have not been exploited much in practical applications. Because the high control 

and scalability make the transfer to real and practical systems viable a nd versatil e, surface -alloying in an 

elect rochemical environment is an idea l route to the design of new functional materials. 

In this study, we have investigated the surface -alloying process during underpotential deposition (UPD) 

of Pb on Au(111) [2,3] a nd Cu(100) in the presence of various anions , e.g. perchlorate, c hloride or 

bromide. Th is phenomenon has been studied using several e lectrochemical pr otocols such as repeated 

potential cycling over a limited UPD range (as illustrated in Fig. 1) or polarisa tion at a fixed potential in 

the UPD region. By f ollowing the changes in electrochemical behavio ur, we established the range of 

potentials and conditions at which the surface -alloy s form and quantified their composition . In addition to 

that , we inv estigate d the struc tural and comp os itional changes by surface sensitive techniques such as in -

situ Scanning Tunneling Micr oscopy (STM) , X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Ultraviolet 

Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS), Energy -Filtered Photoemission Electron Mic roscopy (EF -PEEM) and 

Work Function (WF) mapping. 

References 

[1] F. Besenbacher, L. P . Nielsen, P. T. Sprunger , The Chemical Physics of Solid Surfaces , D. A. King, D. 

P. Woodruff, Eds. (Elsevier, 1997), vol. 8, 207 -257. 

[2] J. Nutariya, J. Velleuer, W . Schwarzac her, N. Vasiljevic, ECS Transactions 28 (2010) 15 -25. 

[3] A. Szczepanska, G. Wan, M. Cattelan, N. A. Fox, N. Vasiljevic, Surfaces 2 (2019) 56 -68. 

Fig . 1. Cyclic Voltammetrie s of Pb UPD on Au(111) in 1 mM Pb(ClO 4)2 + 0.1 M HClO 4

solution after different nu mber s of potential cycles. Scan rate 10 mV /s. Investigat ing The Effe ct of Thiourea on The Electro refining of Copper 

# with An Extended Operando ORP -EIS Technique 

Thom as Collet 1, Benny Wouters 1, No ël Hallema ns2, Raf Claessens 1, Kristof Ramharte r3, Tjakko Zijlema 3,

John Lataire 2, Rik Pintelon 2, Annic k Hu bin 1

1 Vrije Universit ei t Br ussel, Research g roup Electro chemistry and Surface Engineering ,

Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium 

2 Vrije Univer sit eit Brusse l, R esearch g roup Fun damental Electricity a nd Instrumentation ,

Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belg ium 

3 Aurubis Belgium N .V. , Wat ertorenstraat 35, 2250 Olen, Belgium 

thomas.col let@vub.be 

Electrorefinin g is an essential technique to obtain pure (LME grade A) copp er . During this p ro cess a 

consumable and imp ure copper anode is place d near a ste el cathode . A di rect current supplies the 

necessary energy to oxidize the anode (dissolv e the copper in the electrolyte) and reduce (d eposit) the 

dissolved co pper on to the cat hode while impurities remain in the refining bath , resulting in a pure copper 

cathode [1] . Electr op lating process es need the support of additives , which are added to pro duce smooth 

copp er deposits without nodules and st riation s [1]. In the case of elec tro refining is thiourea one of the 

common additives. The thiourea concen tration decreases , during th e time span of the electrorefining ,

since it partially becomes incorporated in the cathodes and partially reacts with cupric ions to form 

forma midine disul fide (FDS) [1]. This evolution in additive composition subsequently affects the copper 

deposition.  An EIS study of copper plating with and without certain additives is already performed by 

Ga brielli [ 2] and Gladysz [ 3] to name  a few. Although, to the best of our knowledge, the effect of 

thiourea  and FDS on the copper plating  is not yet investigated to the fullest .

We perform operand o Odd Random Phase EIS (ORP -EIS) measurements on the copper reduction syst em 

by apply ing the sum of a bias current and a multisine signal . This allows us to study the effect of thiourea 

on the copper reduction process. With ORP -EIS we are able to quantify the impedan ce, noise, non -

li nearities and non -stationa rities at t he me asured frequencies [4] and to quantify the non -stationarities of a 

linear system by estimating a time -varying impedance [5]. An extension of this technique al lows u s to 

model we ak non -linear and non -stationary sy stems and to calculate the uncerta inty intervals -containing :

noise, non -linearities o r both - at every time interval and around every measur ed frequency of the 

instantaneous impedance. The estimation of the instantaneous impedance and the quantification of the 

non -linearities in the non -stationary system enables us to approach the transfer fu nction of the systems as 

close as possible. 

In our st udy we noti ce th e presence of non -linearities, even and odd, even with an RMS potential value o f

10mV or less for the multi sine output signal . We also discovered non -stationarities , prese nt by skirt s at 

the even and odd non -excited frequencies , and calculated the time evo lution of the impedance spectra .

Both observ ations , non -linearities and n on -stationarities, demo nstrate the importance of our technique in 

this research .

Figure: The pr esence of non -linearities ( left ) and skirts ( right ) in the frequency domain of the output 

potenti al signal. 

[1] S chlessinger M. E., Extractive Metallurgy of Copper, Elsevier, 2011. 

[2] Gabrielli C.  et al. , Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 154 (3), D1 63 -D169, 2007. 

[3] Gladysz O. e t al., Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 41, 713 -719, 2011 .

[4] Van Ingelgem Y. et a l., Electroanalysis, 21, No. 6, 730 – 739, 2009. 

[5] Br eugelman s T . et al., Electro chimica Acta , 76 , 375 -382 , 2012. Functionalization of Polycrystalline Au Electrodes 

# with Glycosylated Poly(acryoyl hydrazide) 

# for the Electrochemical Detection of Cholera Toxin 

Carlos Guillén Posteguillo, Francisco Fernández -Tri llo & Paramaconi Rodríguez 

School of Chemistry, University of Birmingham 

Edgbaston, B15 2 TT , Birmingham, UK 

cxg623@student.bham.ac.uk 

According to the World Health Organization up to 1 in 10 people fall ill and around 400,000 die every year 

all over the world after consuming contaminated food and/or wa ter 1. Foodborne diseases do not only affect 

the wellbeing of individual s but hinder the socio -economic development of communities through the loss 

of days of school and wor k, medical costs and economic losses . One of the main vectors of food/water 

contamin ation are bacteria. 

The standard methods of detection of bacteria, based on cell culture, are reliable but present a very important 

drawback: detection time s extend into days making it difficult to stop outbreaks . Other faster methods are 

too complex or expensive to be use d in most affected populations. 

Electrochemical biosensors are a promising alternative with their high sensitivity, simplicity, low -cost, 

fastness and portability 2. Herein we present the first stages of development of an elec trochemical biosensor 

for the detection of the subunit B of the cholera toxin (CTB). Galactose (Gal) was used as a biorecognition 

elemen t to mimick the mechanism of recognition of our intestinal cells by CTB .

A polymeric linker , poly(acryloyl 

hydrazide) (PAH) 3, was employed 

to immobilize Gal on the surface 

of a polycrystalline Au electrode 

(Au -PAH -Gal ): first , Gal was 

coupled to PAH (PAH -Gal); then, 

PAH -Gal was adsorbed onto the 

electrode from aqueous solution .

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and a 

redox probe [K 4Fe(CN) 6] were 

used (Fig. 1) to study the surface 

of the electrode modified with 

PAH (Au -PAH, red scan) and 

PAH -Gal (Au -PAH -Gal, blue 

scan). For Au -PAH the 

voltammogram indicates, either a 

diffusion limited process across 

the layer; or a much slower 

electron transfer. With Au -PAH -

Gal , only an attenuation of the 

signal of the probe with respect to the obta ined on the bare electrode (black scan) is observed . The stripping 

peaks at low potential (dashed scans) corroborated the adsorption of PAH and PAH -Gal on the electrode. 

The se results point towards the immobilization of Gal on the electrode surface . The s ignal obtained with 

Au -PAH was probably due to a slower electron transfer forced by the chelating character of the hydrazide 

group s4 of PA H. Another redox probe , FcMeOH , will be use d to study this circumstance. 

References 

1. WHO.  https://www.who.int/news -room/fact -sheets/detail/food -safety  (access ed 29, Feb, 2020). 

2. J. Monz ó, I. Ins úa, F. Fern ández -Trillo and P. Rodr íguez, Analyst , 2015, 140 , 7116 -7128. 

3. D. N. Crisan, O. Creese, F. Fernandez -Trillo et al ., Polym Chem , 2017, 8, 4576 -4584 .

4. N. A. Mohamed, et. al. , International Journal of Polymeric Materials , 2018, 67 , 68. 

Fig. 1  – CV characterization of polycrys tal line Au electrode with 

redox probe [K 4Fe(CN) 6]; dashed lines indicate stripping processes .Evidence of Lead Ions Detection on Azulene Based CMEs by 

# Voltammetry 

Veronica Anastasoaie 1, 3 , Laura Bianca Enache 1, 3 , Magdalena Rodica Bujduveanu 1,

Eleonora -Mihaela Ungureanu 1*, Liviu Birzan 2, Marius Enachescu 3

> 1

"Politehnica" University of Bucharest, Gheorghe Polizu 1 -7, 0 11061, Sector 1, Bucharest, Romania, 

> 2

Institut of Organic Chemistry "C. D. Nenitzescu "of the Romanian Academy, Spl. Independentei 202B, 

PO Box 15 -258, 71141 -Bucharest, Romania 

> 3

Center for Surface Science and Nanotechnology, "Politehn ica" Univ ersity of Buc harest, Splaiul 

Independentei 313, 060042 Bucharest, Romania 

*veronica.anastasoaie@cssnt -upb.ro 

Chemically modi fied electrodes ( CMEs ) based on 2-(azulen -1-yldiazenyl) -5-phenyl -1,3,4 -thiadiazole (L)

has been prepared for heavy metal ions recognitio n [ 1, 2]. L electrochemical characterization was carried 

out by CV, DPV and RDE. The film formation has been evidence d by cyclic voltammetry, 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, atomic force micro scopy and scanning electron micros copy [3]. 

Different conditions for CMEs preparation have been examined. L direct electropolymerization by 

controlled potential electrolysis lead to the im mobilization of L complexing monomer on the electro de 

surface. The complexing properties of L and poly L have been in vestigated t owards heavy met al io ns in 

water solutions by anodic stripping technique . The obtained results confirmed that CME s are sensitive 

tool s for lead ions identification and detection in comparison to Cd(II), Cu(II), Hg(II) ions .

Acknowledgement 

The authors are grateful f or the financial support from: UEFISCDI Romanian project 39PCCDI/2018 

INTELMA T, PN -III -P3 -3.1 -PM -RO -FR -2019 -0309 , MySMIS 124705 

References 

[1] E. Diacu, G. -O. Buica, I. Chilibon, L. Birzan, G. -L. Arnold, E. -M. Ungureanu, Journal of Solution 

Chemistry, 45, (11), 588 -1597, 2016. 

[2] A.C. Răzuș, L Bîrzan, M Cristea, V. Tecuceanu, C. Drăghi ci, A. Hanganu, M. Maganu, L. Pintilie, E. -

M. Ungureanu, Revista de Chimie , 70 (5), 1518 -1529 , 2019 .

[3] M. D. Pop, O. Brinc oveanu, M. Cristea, G. -O. Buica, M. Enachescu, E. -M. Ungureanu, Revista de 

Chimie, 68 (12 ), 2799 -2803, 2017. Mixed Oxide Elect rodes Based on Ruthe nium and M anga nese. 

# Influence of Precurso r Salts o n the Electrochemical Performances. 

Giovanni Sotgiu 1, Monica Orsini 1, Serena De Santis 1, Francesco Porcelli 1, Elisabetta Petrucci 2

1 Department of Engineering, Universi ty of di Roma Tre, Via Vito Volterra, 62 - 00146, Rom e, Italy 

2 Department of Chemical Engineering Materials & Environment, Sapienza University of Rome , Via 

Eudossiana, 18 - 00184, Rom e, Italy 

giovanni.sotgiu@uniroma3.it 

Thin -film of metals oxides coati ng titanium supports (MMO films) have been extensively used i n

industry for a long time. Several metals and various compositions have been used for the construction of 

electrodes, in particular for the treatment of wastewater. 

In previous works [1], [2] we have prepared different types of MMO and studied their electr ochemical 

performances. In a standard procedure, the films were obtained by drop -cast. This method is very simple 

but unfortunately, it is not easy to obtain a uniform and well -controlled film. 

In this work, electrodes coated with thin -film of ruthenium (R uOx) and manganese oxide (MnOx) were 

fabricated by thermal decomposition after deposition on a titanium substrate by spin -coating, a more 

accurate and controllable technique. In particular, we s tu died the influence of different salt precursors on 

the elect rocatalytic properties. The investigated salts were: Ruthenium (III) acetylacetonate (Ru(acac)3), 

Ruthenium(III) chloride (RuCl3·xH2O), Manganese(II) nitrate (Mn(NO3)2·4H2O) and Manganese(III) 

ace tylacetonate (Mn(acac)3). 

A ruthenium salt and a manga nese salt were mixed in a 1:1 mo lar ratio an d dissolved in a n organic 

solvent . Organic s olutions were spin -coate d on titanium foil (Ti) with a multilay er approach. All t itanium 

substrate s were prev io usly cleaned by ultrasound treatment and then used a s is or with a further HF etch. 

The aim of this work was to determine if and how the specific combination of salt precursor s could 

influence the morphology and the electrochemic al performances. 

A sche me of prepared substrates is reported in table 

1. 

Table 1 

Id Ti 

surface  Ru salt  Mn salt 

1 smooth  RuCl 3 Mn(acac) 3

2 etch  RuCl 3 Mn(acac) 3

3 smooth  Ru(acac) 3 Mn(acac) 3

4 etch  Ru(acac) 3 Mn(acac) 3

5 smooth  Ru(acac) 3 Mn(NO 3)2

6 etch  Ru(acac) 3 Mn(NO 3)2

Figure 1: SEM & EDX image for sa mple 5 

The thin -film electrodes were characterized by scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) and X -ray 

diffraction (XRD). In figure 1 is presente d the SEM image for sample 5. 

The electr ochemical activity w as investigated by potentiodynamic polarization, cyclic voltammetry and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). 

E. Petrucci, D. M ontanaro, M. Orsini, G. Sotgiu , J. Electroanal. Chem. 808 (2018) 380. 

G. Sotgiu, D. Mon tanaro, M. Orsini, E. Petrucci , Chem. Eng.  Tran s. 57 (2017) 1639. Sn -Cu -Ni Ternary Alloy Solders Electrodeposited from Deep Eutectic 

# Solvents 

Sabrina Patricia Rosoiu a, Stefania Costovici a, Calin Moise a, Marius Enachescu a,

Liana Anicai a, Teodor Visan a,b ,

> a

Center of Surface Science and Nanotechnology, University Politeh nica of Bucharest, Splaiul 

Independentei 313, Bucharest, 060042, Romania 

> b

Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, University Politehnica of 

Bucharest, 132 Calea Grivitei, Bucharest, Romania, 010737, Bucharest, Romania 

sabrina.rosoiu@cssnt -upb.ro 

As a result of the imposed restrictions on the use of hazardous materials by electronic industries, 

an increased interest was focused towards the development of cost -effective l ead -free solders . Candidate 

additives that are usually introduced to improve the performance of solder alloys include Ag, Cu, Ni, Bi, 

In, Zn, rare elements and nanoparticles. Sn -Cu based solders with nickel additions are considered as 

lower -cost alternativ es to the well -known Sn -Ag -Cu ones [1]. 

Electrodeposition represents a faster and cheaper route suitable to synthesize solder layers, with 

a great potential for scaling up to industrial level production. Moreover, in the last decades the use of 

electrol yt es based on deep eutectic solvents (DESs) was considered as a “greener” route for a large range 

of metals and alloys. Compared to classical aqueous electrolytes, the DESs allow the obtaining of quite 

constant alloys composition without the addition of su rf actants, grain refiners, brighteners or oxidation 

inhibitors, thus providing an easier bath control especially for binary and ternary alloys electrodeposition. 

Here we report the synthesis and characterization of the Sn -Cu -Ni alloy electrodeposited fr om 

choline chloride -ethylene glycol ( denoted ILEG) eutectic mixture containing 500mM SnCl 2+0.055 mM 

NiCl 2+0.345 mM CuCl 2. The alloys were electrodeposited onto Cu substrate under direct and pulse 

current conditions. The influence of several operation param ete rs such as: the electrolyte temperature, the 

applied current density and pulse frequency on the morphology and crystallite size of the final alloy 

deposit has been investigated and discussed . The objective was to optimize the main operation parameters 

in o rder to achieve the corresponding alloy composition (Sn99.4Cu0.6 + Ni) able to possess the eutectic 

or near eutectic melting temperature of about 227 o C. 

Acknowledgements: This project has received founding from  the  European Union’s Horizon 2020 

re sea rch and innovation programme under the  Marie Skłodowska -Curie grant agreement No764977 and 

from the  ROFCC project Contract No.  25 PCCDI/2018 .

References 

1. S. Cheng, C -M. Huang, M. Pecht, A review of lead -free solders for electronics applications, Micr oel ectron. 

> Reliab. , 75 (2017) 77 -95.

# Electroanalytical characterization of polysulfides (SX2-) in model 

# solution and euxinic seawater conditions 

Sarah Mateša , Irena Ciglenečki 

Ru đer Bo škovi ć Institute, Division for Marine and Environmental Research 

Bijeni čka 54, Zagreb, Croatia 

Sarah.Matesa @irb.hr 

Sulfur (S) , an ubiquitous element in the environment, occurs in different oxidation states from -2 (sulfide ,

S2-) to +6 (sulfate , SO 42−). Between the thermodynamically stable end members (S2-, SO 42−), a variety of 

intermediate S species exist, exa mples of which are sulfite, polythionates, thiosulfate, elemental sulfur 

(S 0), and polysulfides (S X2-). S species with intermediate oxidation states are produced during a variety of 

biotic and abiotic processes including the oxidation of hydrogen sulfide (HS -) and sulfide minerals , SO 42−

reduction , and the transformation of organic S compounds . Reduced forms of S, reduced sulfur species 

(RSS : S2-, HS -, S0, SX2-, RSH ), are most important forms for processes related to S biogeochemistry and 

environmental quality [1 , 5]. Polysulfides are im portan t RSS which play a role in numerous 

environmental processes , and so far there is not methodology for their direct determination in natural 

water environments , and conditions with presence of other RSS .

In this work for the first time differential pul se volt ammetry (DPV) at the Hg electrode  [1], was used for 

determination of  SX2- in natural euxini c sea water environment (Rogoznica Lake , pH=7 .0 - 7. 5; oxygen 

concentration = 0 – 0.4 mg L -1), i.e. conditions where total RSS (mainly in form of  HS -) could va ried 

between 10 -8 M to 10 -3 M [2, 5]. In this approach a n adsorption phenomenon associated with  SX2- or a 

product of it ’s cathodic reaction with the Hg electrode created a characteristic current minimum at -1.0 V

(vs.Ag/AgCL), which magnitude is proportio nal to the concentration of S(0) existing in the form of 

polysulfidic sulfur  [1]. In our case,  well defined DPV peaks were recorded for model K2SX (42% K 2S

basis) NaCl/NaHCO 3 carbonate buffer solution (pH~9.5) in the concentration range between 10  mg L -1

and 5 00  mg L -1 (Figure 1 a).  The same approach , and obtained calibration, demonstrated presence of  SX2-

in the chemocline and anoxic euxinic layer of Rogoznica Lake, in the concentration range between  18  mg 

L-1 to  75  mg L -1 (Figure 1b) . Additionally, sample d DC polarography (SDC) at the Hg electrode revealed 

in the studied samples a ratio between anod ic and cathodic current s, i.e. the ratio between sulfide and  S(0) 

presence in the  SX2- [1,2]. Established  electrochemical approach for RSS determination [2-5] , based on 

accidification and purging step , determined total concentration of RSS and presence of its volatile and 

non -volatile fractions .

Concentration of SX2- as well as total RSS varied with environmental conditions (depth, oxygen 

concentration , light in tensity) that are seasonaly dependent (Figure 1b) .   

> This work was funded by Croatian Science Foundation ,IP -2018 -01 -1717 -MARRES

a)  b) 

Figure 1. a) Calibration curve for model polisulfide K 2SX; b) DPV voltammograms of natural euxinic 

seawater samples recorded between 8 – 11m depths 

[1] S. Kariuki et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 442 (2001) 277 -285 .

[2] I. Ciglenečki et al., J. Electrochem. Sci. Eng. 4(4) (2014) 155 -163 .

[3] T.F. Rozan et al., Anal . Chim . Acta 415 (2000) 175 –184 .

[4] I. Ciglenečki and B. Ćosović, Electroanal. 9 (1997) 775 -780 .

[5] E. Bura -Nakić et al. , Geochim Cosmochim Ac ta 73 (2009 ) 3738 -375 .Ion transfer voltammetry of drugs at the liquid -liquid interface 

# towards electrochemically controlled crystallization 

Magdalena Kaliszczak ,1 Grégoire Herzog ,1 Damien W.M. Arrigan 2 

> 1

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, LCPME, F -54000 Nancy, France 

2 Institute fo r Functional Molecules an d Interfaces, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth WA 6845, 

Australia 

magdalena.kaliszczak@univ -lorraine.fr 

The development of new crystallization methods for sparingly soluble drugs is a subject of constant 

interest since 50% of the products are organic salts , which polymorphs may have different activity, 

bioavailabili ty, toxicity or solubility 1. A novel class of pharmaceutical substances which can improve 

these properties are co –crystals of drugs.  Such homogeneous crystalline materials may contain two or 

more components incorporated in crystal lattice in definite stoichiometric amounts. Pharmaceutical co -

crystals can incorporate pharmaceutically acceptable guest molecules into a crystal lattice along with the 

API (active pharm aceutical ingredient) and simultaneously not affecting pharmacological activity the 

drug 2.

In this work, the  form ation of crystals (co -crystals) by using ion -transfer processes at  the interface 

between two immiscible electrolyte solutions  (ITIES) 3, the c ontrol of the crystallization process by means 

of electrochemistry . For the purpose of this study, three drugs with low solubility in water, chemical 

structure proper for creation of co -crystals, amphiphilic properties with 0 < log P < 3, and bearing an 

electrical charge were selected:  piroxicam 4, sildenafil 5 or diclofenac 6. Such drugs are classified as a Class 

II API (low solubility and high permeability) based on the Biopharmaceutics Classification System. 

Cyclic voltammetry at ITIES and μITIES was used to investigate of the ion transfer from an organic 

phase to an aqueous phase and to initiate precipitation of crystals (co -crystals). The selected drugs were 

dissolved in the organic phase in ionic form to allow the transfer of cationic or anionic form of the drug 

into the aqueous phase with the aim of forming insoluble drug (co -)crystal on the aqueous side of the 

liquid -liquid interface . A range of experimental parameters: nature of the drugs, composition of both 

organic and aqueous phases, nature of the polarization (electrochemical or chemical), dimension of the 

interface (macro - or microscopic) were investigated to control the interfacial processes and induce the 

formation of drug crystals. Such an electrocrystall ization process at the ITIES will open new 

opportunities for the formation of organic drugs crystals.  

> 1

E.g. P. H. Stahl, C.G. Wermuth (Eds) Pharmaceutical Salts: Properties, Selection, and Use, 2nd edition, 

Wiley, Weinheim, 2011. Censi R, Di Martino P. Molecules., 2015, 20, 18759 -18776.  

> 2

Tha yyil A.R, Juturu J, Nayak S. Kamath S. Adv.  Pharm. Bull., 2020, 10, 2, 203 -212.  

> 3

Reymond F, Fermın D, Lee H.J, Girault H. H. Electrochim. Acta ., 2000, 45 , 2647 – 2662 . 

> 4

Childs S.L, Hardcastle K.I. Cryst. Growth Des., 200 7, 7 , 1291 -1304 . 

> 5

Sanphui P, Tothadi S, Ganguly S, Desiraju R.G. Mol. Pharmaceutics ., 2013, 10, 12, 4687 -4697 . 

> 6

Aakeröy C.B, Grommet A.B, Desper J. Ph armaceutics., 2011, 3, 601 -614. Electrochemical -Mechanical Characterisation of 

# Energy Storage Materials 

Svetlozar Ivanov , Daniel Sauerteig, A ndreas Bund 

Technische Universität Ilmenau, Electrochemistry and Electroplating Group ,

Gustav -Ki rchhoff -Straße 6, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany ,

svetloz ar -dimitrov.ivanov@tu -ilmenau.de 

The in -situ/operando mechanical behavior of materials for electrochemical energy storage is an important 

factor, having a major influence on the cell performance and ageing phenomena. There is a broad variety 

of materi als and involved reaction mechanisms, displaying a specific impact on the mechanical properties 

during battery operation. For example, the process of Li ion intercalation into the active material is 

typically accompanied by accumulation of mechanical stres s, w hich is followed by volume increase, 

deformation, disintegration or phase transition [1 ,2 ]. Most of the alloying and conversion materials 

experience a huge volume expansion when accommodating Li [3]. Furthermore, considerable change of 

the mechanical prope rties of structures for next generation batteries (e.g. sodium -, potassium intercalating 

and polymer active materials) has been detected as well [4,5 ].

Depending on the material structure and reaction mechanism the cumulative impact of these phenomena 

can finally resu lt in a deteriorated performance, i.e. considerable reaction irreversibility and capacity loss. 

Therefore, the in -situ characterization of these processes and minimizing the induced mechanical stress 

and the subsequent material disintegration a re amongst t he major challenges on the road to the effective 

and safe battery operation. 

The current talk will provide a brief overview and corresponding discussion on the recent achievements in 

our lab, related to the in -situ characterization of the mech anical prope rties of electroactive materials for 

reversible energy storage. The presentation will comprise several sub -topics, including, 1) reversible and 

irreversible volume change of battery materials (Li intercalating materials, electroactive polymers and 

electrod eposited silicon layers); 2) Impact of the external pressure on the electrochemical performance; 

and 3) actual strategies for modeling of the electrochemical -mechanical behavior. 

The main techniques employed in our studies are electrochemical dilatometry (ECD) [6,7 ],

electrochemical measurements under external mechanical load [8], electrochemical quartz crystal 

microbalance with damping monitoring (EQCM -D) [9] and finite element method (FEM) [8].

References :

[1] M. Kabir, D. Demirocak, Int. J. Energy Res. 41 (2017) 1963 –1986. 

[2] A. Mukhopadhyay, B. Sheldon, Progress in Materials Science 63 (2014) 58 –116. 

[3] S. Park, T. Kim, S. Oh, Electrochem. Solid -State Lett, 10 (2007) A142 -A145 

[4] T. Palaniselvam, M. Goktas, B. Anothumakkool, Y.‐N. Sun, R. Schmuch, L. Zhao, B.‐H. Han, M. 

Winter, P. Adelhelm, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2019) 1900790. 

[5] M. Goktas, C. Bolli, E. J. Berg, P. Novák, K. Pollok, F. Langenhorst, M. v. Roeder, O. Lenchuk, D. 

Mollenhauer, P. Adelhelm, Adv.  Funct. Mater. 8 (2018) 1702724 .

[6] D. Sauerteig, S. Ivanov, H. Reinshagen, A. Bund , J. Power Sources 34 2 (2017) 939 -946. 

[7] S. Ivanov, D. Sauerteig, A. Dimitrova, S. Krischok, A. Bund , J. Power Sources, 457 (2020) 228020 

[8] D. Sauerteig, N. Hanselmann, A. Arzberger, H. Reinshagen, S . Ivanov, A. Bund , J. Power So urces 

378 (2018) 235 -247. 

[9] S. Ivanov, S. Mai, M. Himmerlich, A. Dimitrova, S. Krischok, A. Bund, , ChemPhysChem, 20 (2019) 

655 -664. Electrochemical Sensor with Redox Cycling in Nano -space for Highly 

# Sensitive Detection of Endotoxin 

Kentaro Ito 1, Kumi Y. Inoue 1, Kosuke Ino 2, Yuji Nashimoto 2, 3 , Tomokazu Matsue 4, Hitoshi Shiku 2 

> 1

Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku Universi ty, Japan,  

> 2

Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Japan,  

> 3

Frontier Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science, Tohoku University, Japan,  

> 4

Center for Promotion of Innovation Strategy, Tohoku University, Japan, 

Aoba, 468 -1, Aramaki, Ao ba -ku, Sendai, Japan, 

ito.kentaro.p7@dc.tohoku.ac.jp 

Many approaches are proposed to improve the sen-

sitivity of electrochemical sensors. Among them, the redox 

cycling in nano -space which amplifies amperometric cur-

rent by repeating reduction and oxida tion of redox mole-

cules at neighboring electrodes in nano -scale applied at dif-

ferent potentials is an especially powerful tool for a highly 

sensitive electrochemical sensor 1, 2 . In this research, we ap-

plied redox cycling to the endotoxin sensing 3 which re-

quires high sensitivity for medical safety. Previously, we 

successfully developed an electrochemical endotoxin detec-

tion method with detecting p-aminophenol (pAP) liberated 

from peptide -conjugated pAP (LGR -pAP) by Limulus ame-

bocyte lysate (LAL) reaction 4. Here, we detected pAP using 

redox cycling in nano -space for ultra -high sensitive endo-

toxin sensing (Fig. 1) .

First, the device with a pair of electrodes facing 

each other across a 190 nm gap was fabricated using 

photolithography and sputtering. Ti/Pt bot tom electrode, 

Cr sacrificial layer , and Pt top electrode was deposited 

onto glass slide with lift -off process. An insulation layer 

was fabricated on the device except for sensor area us-

ing SU -8 negative photoresist . Finally, the sacrificial 

layer was re moved by etching, and then the nanogap 

device was obtained (Fig. 2 a and b ). Characterization of 

the nanogap device was performed using cyclic volt-

ammetry (CV) with 500 μM ferrocenemethanol (FMA) 

dissolved in 0.1 M KCl introduced onto the device. An 

Ag/AgCl electrode was used as a reference and a coun-

ter electrode. The potential of the bottom electrode was biased at 0.0 V, while the bottom electrode was 

swept at a scan rate of 20 mV/s. CV of non -redox cycling condition was also simulated using COMSOL 

Multiph ysics with the model of the nanogap device without the bottom electrode. Finally, endotoxin as-

say was performed using 0.5 mM LGR -pAP as substrate for LAL reaction. After 60 min of LAL reaction, 

the solution was introduced onto the nanogap device, and then the current of the bottom electrode biased 

at -0.2 V was monitored while the top electrode was stepped from -0.2 V to 0.5 V. 

From the result of CV for FMA with redox -cycling condition, the cycling efficiency (the steady -

state current from the bottom elec trode/the steady -state current from the top electrode) of the nanogap 

device was 98%. This result indicates almost all of oxidant generated at top electrode reached the bottom 

electrode. Comparing to the CV with redox -cycling condition and non -redox cyclin g condition, the cur-

rent was amplified by 1680 fold by redox cycling. These results showed that our nanogap device can be 

used for highly sensitive sensor. From the result of the endotoxin assay, the detection limit was 0.2 EU/L 

with 60 min of LAL reaction time. Th is result showed the sensitivity was improved by 5 fold comparing 

to our previous study 2. This nanogap device can be used for sensitive, rapid and easy -to -use endotoxin 

sensing system to ensure the medical safety. 

[1] M. A. G. Zevenbergen et al., Nano Lett ., 2007, 11 , 2881. [2] E. Kätelhön et al., Anal. Chem. , 2010, 

82 , 8502. [3 ] K. Ito et al., Analyst , 2019, 144 , 3659. [4 ] K . Y. Inoue et al., Analyst , 2013, 138 , 6523. 

Fig. 1 The principle of this study 

Fig. 2 Nanogap d evice. (a) Optical im-

age. (b ) Illustration of cross -sectional 

view. 

Fig. 3 Endotoxin assay. (a) Amperograms. 

(b) Calibration plots (n=3) .Model ing of Droplet Formation During Lithium Dissolution 

Martin Werres ab , Arnulf Latz abc , Birger Horstmann abc  

> a

Helmholtz Institute Ulm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), Ulm, Germany  

> b

German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, Stuttgart, Germany  

> c

Ulm University, Institute of Electrochemistry, Ulm, Germany 

E-mail:  martin.werres@dlr. de 

Lithium metal anode batteries are promising candidates for next -generation energy storage systems as they have 

a high theo retical energy density . The cyclabil ity has to be i mproved to make them commercially viable . It is 

limited by the irreversible loss of active lithium due to the formation of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and the 

formation of unreactive “dead” metallic lithium . The latter is the dominating source of capacity loss in certa in 

battery systems [1]. Experiments show that during the dissolution of lithium whiskers , the tip c an not be 

dissolved , hint that mechanical instabilities occur [2]. We developed a generalized phase -field model of the 

dissolution process to gain insights into the underlying mechanisms of “dead” lithium formation and capacity 

fade. 

Our phase -field model describes the dissolution of a single lithium whisker in a liquid electrolyte based on 

lithium surface tension and the interaction between lithium and the SEI , utiliz ing the framework of non -

equilibrium thermodynamics [3,4]. We study the shape evolution of the lithium whisker under galvanostatic 

condition s and under which circumstances instabilities occur . Our model predict s the nucleation of a Rayleigh 

instability induced by interactions with the SEI. Thus, the lithium whisker does not dissol ve completely , and an

electrically disco nnected metallic lithium droplet is formed (Fig. 1) . This is in agreement with optical 

microscope observations of lithium dendrite dissolution [ 2]. 

Figure 1: Droplet formation during galvanostatic discharge at different times. The dendrite tip di sconnects from 

the base and a stable droplet forms while the rest of the dendrite dissolves. 

Th is work has been developed in the project Lillint. Lillint is partly funded by the German ministry of education 

and research (BMBF) under grant 03XP0225A .

Reference s:

[1] Fang, C. et al. Nature 572 (2019) 511 –515. 

[2] Steiger, J., Kramer, D. & Mönig, R. J. Power Sources 261 (2014) 112 –119. 

[3] Bazant, M. Z. Faraday Discuss. 199 (201 7) 423 –463 .

[4] Horstmann, B. et al. J. Phys. Chem.  Lett. 4 (2013) 4217 –4222. Investigation of Solvothermally Prepared NaTi 2(PO 4)3 Nanocubes as 

# Anode Material with High -Rate Capability for 

# Aqueous Na -ion Batteries 

G. Plečkaitytė, J. Juodkazytė , M. Petrulevičienė , J. Pilipavičius, L. Vilčiauskas 

Center for Physical Sciences and Technology (FTMC) 

Saulėtekio al . 3, Vilnius LT -10257, Lithuania 

jurga.juodkazyte@ftmc.lt 

Recently, NASICON -structured NaTi 2(PO 4)3 (NTP) has attracted a lot of attention as potential Na -ion 

battery material . This 3D open framework structure exhibits great potential for long cycle life due to 

strong covalent P -O bond and insignificant volume changes during sodium ion insertion/extraction. 

Moreover, it shows high Coulombic efficiency, good thermal stability, excellent rate capability for 

reversi ble intercalation of two sodium ion s per formula corresponding to a theoretica l capacity of 

133 mAh/g at ~2.1V vs. Na +/Na . In addition , its favorable potential, low cost and environmental 

friendliness makes NTP a good candidate as anode material for aqueou s sodium ion batteries [1]. 

However, its poor electronic conductivity affects the sodiation kinetics and overall performance as an 

electrode material . Two common methods ha ve been reported for improving the NTP electrochemical 

properties: reducing ionic an d electronic transporting path by decreasing the particle size and by particle 

surface coating with carbon or other conductive additive s [2].

In this study , NTP nanoparticles were synthesized via solvothermal method using ethanol by heating the 

mixture at 180 oC for 12 hours. Powders were coated with glucose and calcinated at 700 oC for 2h in 

nitrogen atmosphere. The average size of nano cubes was 70 ± 9 nm (Fig. 1a) . The slurry for the working 

electrode was prepared by mixing 70 wt% of active material, 20 wt% of carbon (Super -P, TIMCAL) and 

10 wt% of polyvinylidene fluoride (HSV1800, Kynar) in N -methyl -2-pyrrolidone (Sigma Aldrich, 99.5 

%) solvent. After ball -milling the mixture for 1 hour at 900 rpm, it was coated on stainless steel mesh and 

dried in vacuu m (120 °C) for 3 hours. The electrochemical performance of the synthesized samples was 

measured in a three -electrode beaker -type cell with Ag/AgCl as reference and graphite rod as counter 

electrode s in 1M Na 2SO 4(aq.) electrolyte. 

The results show the mate rial capable of extremely high -rate cycling performance even up to the rates of 

100C (~13.3 A/g ) with relatively slow degradation on cycle number. However the low -rate performance 

at 0.1C – 1C rates showed much faster capacity fade rates upon cycling, indi cating significant degradation 

issues of the active material in simple aqueous electrolytes (e.g. Na 2SO 4(aq.)) and the need for new 

strategies to mitigate these issues in aqueous batteries. 

Fig. 1 . a) SEM micrograph of nanostructured NaTi 2(PO 4)3, b) cyclic voltammogram at 5 mV/s ,

c) charge /discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency of nanostructured NaTi 2(PO 4) during 

galvanostatic c ycling at 100 C rate in 1 M Na 2SO 4

References 

1. Il Park, S.; Gocheva, I.; Okada, S.; Yamaki, J ., Electrochemical Properties of NaTi 2(PO 4)3 Anode for 

Rechargeable Aqueous Sodium -Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem . Soc . 2011, 158 , A1067 -A1070. 

2. Wu, W.; Yan, J. Y.; Wise, A.; Rutt, A.; Whitacre, J. F., Using Intimate Carbon to Enhance the 

Performance of N aTi 2(PO 4)3 Anode Materials: Carbon Nanotubes vs Graphite. J. Electrochem . Soc . 2014, 

161 , A561 -A567. 

Acknowledgement: This project has received funding from the European Regional Development Fund 

(Project No. 01.2.2 -LMT -K-718 -02 -0005) under grant agreement with the Research Council of Lithuania (LMTLT). -1,6 -1,2 -0,8 -0,4 0,0 -15 -10 -5      

> 0510 15
> I, A/g E, V (Ag/AgCl) 0200 400 600 800 1000 40 60 80 100
> 40 60 80 100
> CE (%)
> Specific Capacity (mAh/g) 100 C
> Discharge Charge CE
> Cycle number

a)  b)  c) Towards Reliable High -Temperature Electrochemical Devices: 

# Proton Conducting Ceramic Cells in Metal Supported Architecture 

Noriko Sata 1, Feng Han 1, Haoyu Zheng 1, Rémi Costa 1,

Amir Masoud Dayaghi 2, Truls Norby 2, Marit Stange 3, 

> 1

German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics /

Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, D -70569 Stuttgart, Germany  

> 2

Centre for Mater ials Science and Nanotechnology/ University of Oslo/Norway  

> 3

SINTEF/ Forskningsveien 1, NO -0373 Oslo, Norway 

noriko.sata@dlr.de 

Electroche mical energy conversion from renewable resources offers promising routes to alternative 

energy resources, as well as to significant reduction of CO 2 emission. For their functionality at high 

temperatures and high stability of the components , solid oxide c ells (SOC ) demonstrate many potential 

applications , e.g. fuel cells and Power -to -X (P2X) technologies, of high efficiency and durability for long 

term operation. P2X technologies cover various processes converting electric energy into heat, hydrogen 

or synt hetic fuels, while reducing CO 2 emission and providing h uge capacity of energy storage . Proton 

conducting ceramic cells (PCC) were developed and their potentials for fuel cells and P2X applications 

were reported decades ago . The PCC geometry allows to supp ly and to produce pure hydrogen in fuel cell 

and steam electrolysis operations, respectively, which prevents fuel dilution and maintains PH2O low in Ni -

based fuel electrode , in contrast to conventional SOC s. PCCs are also promising in the application of 

hydrogen extraction, pumping and compression as well as direct synthesis of hydrocarbons. However, t he 

refractory character of the PCC electrolytes restrict s upscaling of cell size and the manufacturing yield ,

and reliable air electrode materials are not yet well identified to realize highly efficient and reliable PCCs .

In contrast to ceramic supported cells , metal supported (MS) architecture offer s intrinsically superior 

mechanical strength, tolerance under thermal /re -dox cycles and cost reduction by replac ing expensive 

ceramic based supporting materials with cheap metal alloys . One of t he specific challenge s is to find a 

process for the manufacturing of gas -tight electrolyte layers below 1000 °C that MS can withstand. 

Transferring the know -how and technolo gies developed on MS -SOCs with thin film electrolyte [1] , here 

we report o ur development of MS -PCC in the project DAICHI (EIG CONCERT -Japan): Thin and dense 

electrolyte coating s of BaZrCeO 3-based perovskites were successfully fabricated by pulsed laser 

dep osition (PLD) technique implementing macro -/mesoporous electrode layer s laminated on to ITM 

support s – commercial porous metallic substrate – having pore size of a few tens of μm [2 ]. Latest status 

of the MS -PCC development will be presented and prospects a nd challenges will be discussed towards 

the manufacturing of robust, durable, efficient and cost -effective MS -PCCs. 

Figure 1. Electrochemical energy conversion via proton conducting ceramic cells, from renewable 

resources to gas and chemicals, and to po wer source .

Acknowledgements: this work was financially supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and 

Research in Germany (01DR18002) and the Research Council of Norway (284289, 268010/E20). 

[1] R. Costa, F. Han, P. Szabo, V. Yurkiv, R. Semerad, S.K. Cheah, L. Dessemond, Fuel Cells, 18, p. 255 -

259 (2018). 

[2] F. Han, X. Zhou, A. M. Dayaghi, T. Norby, M. Stange, N. Sata, R. Costa, ECS Transactions, 91, 

p.1035 -1045 (2019). Functio nalisation of Carbon Black s by Nitrogen Plasma Treatment for 

# PEMFC Application s

Alice Parnière a, Pierre -Yves Blanchard a, Sara Cavaliere a, b , Jacques Rozière a, Deborah J. Jones a

> a

Agrégats Interfaces et Matériaux pour l’Energie, ICGM Université de M ontpellier, CNRS, ENSCM, 

Place E. Bataillon CC1502, 34095 Montpellier cedex 5, France 

> b

Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, France 

alice.parniere@umontpellier.fr 

Proton exchange membrane fuel cell s (PEMFC) are widely considered as an effective means of reducing 

the carbon footprint of transport . PEMFC e lectrodes commonly comprise a carbon support on which a 

platinum catalys t is deposited , an ionomer and gas diffusion media, collectively ensur ing the transfer of 

reactants, electrons and protons . Although the reaction is kinetically slow, carbon is thermodynamically 

unstable u nder PEMFC operating conditions , and oxidation of the carbon support lead s to aggregation 

and/or electrical insulation of platinum, increased hydrophilicity, and a decrease of fuel cell performance .

The main goal of this work is to increase the durability and the activity of the PEMFC cathode 1 2. With 

the aim of modifying the carbon support to improve its corrosion resistance and its interaction with 

catalyst and ionomer , c arbon blacks were functionalised by a nitrogen plasma treatment. A range of 

carbon support s with different specific surface area and porosity were used to study the impact of their 

properties on the functionalisation. 

Ele menta l analys is and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were perform ed to quantify and determine the 

chemical speciation of for med nitrogen functionalities (pyrrolic, pyridinic, etc …) . The influence of the 

nitrogen plasma treatment on the morphology of carbon supports was observed by transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM , Fig. 1 ). The interaction strength between the carbon suppor t and the ionomer was 

quantified by isothermal titration c alorimetry 3. The impact of the functionalisation on the stability of the 

carbon support s was studied by chronoamperometry at high potential giving access to the ir corrosion 

resistance. 

By modifying the experimental conditions, carbon blacks with different nitrogen contents were obtained 

in a controlled way , allowing a relationship to be established between the level of functionalisation and 

the properties relevant for the ir application as catalyst support in PEMFC cathodes .

Figure 1: TEM images of carbon black Vulcan XC72R before (a) and after nitrogen plasma treatment (b) 

1. Kim, S., Cho, M. H., Lee, J. R. & Park, S. J. Influence of plas ma treatment of carbon blacks on 

electrochemical activity of Pt/carbon blacks catalysts for DMFCs. J. Power Sources 159 , 46 –48 

(2006). 

2. Loganathan, K., Bose, D. & Weinkauf, D. Surface modification of carbon black by nitrogen and 

allylamine plasma treatme nt for fuel cell electrocatalyst. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 39 , 15766 –

15771 (2014). 

3. Thoma, M. et al. Simple and Reliable Method for Studying the Adsorption Behavior of Aquivion 

Ionomers on Carbon Black Surfaces. Langmuir 34 , 12324 –12334 (2018). 

The aut hors acknowledge the GAIA Project 826097 (Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2, Horizon 2020 research 

and innovation programme, Hydrogen Europe and Hydrogen Europe Research) for funding and Johnson 

Matthey Fuel Cell s (UK) for providing the carbon black samples. Demonstration of the no vel imaging system based on bipolar 

# electrochemistry for high spatio -te mporal resolution bioimaging 

Tomoki Iw ama , Kumi Y. Inoue, Hiroya Abe, Tomokazu M atsue, Hitoshi Shiku 

Gra duate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Japan 

6-6-11, Aramaki -aza Aoba, Aoba -ku, Sendai, Japan 

tomoki.iwam a.s8@dc.tohoku.ac.jp 

Electrochemical im aging based on amperometr ic 

detection using multi -electrode arra y has been 

used for various biological sample ob servations 

such as metabolic activit y of cell spheroids, and a 

neuro transmitter release activity in a rat brain 

slice, with its advanta ges of high sensitivity, high 

temporal re solutio n, label free feat ure . However, 

conventional multi -electrode arrays require the 

presence of connecting lines between the voltage 

supplier and indiv idual electrodes, which severely 

limits the spatial reso lutio n of the resulting 

electrochemical image s. Therefore, the behavior 

of biomolecules associated with some biological 

phenomena which occu rs in small area cou ld n’t be 

obse rved with conventional m ulti -electrode arra y

method . To overcome this problem, we have 

develope d “Bi polar electro chemical microscopy 

(BE Ms )” for high spatio -temporal resolut ion 

im aging of biological molecules . The BEMs 

employ s closed bipolar e le ctrode (cBPE) with electrochemilumines cence (ECL) detecting syste m as a

pixel unit o f im ag es . Due to the feature that each cBPE need no connecting lines , hi gh densit y cBPE arra y

can be realized , and high spatio -temporal resolution imaging of target molec ules using ECL signals can 

be rea lized .

Figu re 1 shows the schemati c of cBPE imaging system. Two driving electrodes (Counter electrode, 

refer ence electrode, working electrode) were inserted to the sample chamber and the detecting chamber .

By applying a dri vi ng voltage, reduction reaction of sample molecule and oxidation r eaction of the 

luminophore mole cul es occurs simultaneously, therefore, ECL signal generates on the surface of the 

cBPEs in the detecting chamber .

To monitor the MCF -7 respiration activity , living MCF -7 spheroid and a dead MCF -7 spheroid treated 

with para formaldehyde was put on a cBPE array. D riving voltage was applied while observing the ECL 

signal by CCD camera. As a result, a 

larger ECL signal decrease was 

observed at the position where th e

live cell spheroid was placed. The 

results indicate that the cB PE 

imaging system can be applied in the 

ob servation of biological activities 

(Figure 2).

In future, various biological 

phenomena will be observed by 

enhanc ing the target molecules by 

using enzyme modification on cBPE 

array. Moreover, higher spatial 

resolu tion imaging will be realized 

by fab ricating hig her density cBPE 

array. 

(1) T. Iwama, K. Y. Inoue, H. Abe, and T. Matsue, Chem. Lett., 47, 843 (2018) Reference Electrode 

(-)

(+) Sample chamber 

Detecting chamber 

（ Luminophore solution ）

ECL signal   

> Driving electrode
> (WE terminal)
> red
> ox
> Driving electrode
> (CE terminal)
> (Sample solution)

e-

cBPE array 

Inverted microscopy 

& CCD camera 

Fig. 1 Sc he matic of BEM s

Fig. 2 (A) The l iving/ dead cel l sph eroids placed on t he surface 

of cBPE arra y, ( B) ECL image o bse rved while app lying the O 2

mapping voltage .Lithium Interphase Enhancement for Lithium Sulfur Batteries 

Morteza Rahmanipour , Giampaolo Lacarbonara, Catia Arbizzani 

Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna, Dep t. of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, 

via F. Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna (Italy) 

E-mail : morteza .r ahmanipour @unibo.it 

Achieving stable dendrite -free and corrosion -free lithium metal anode is regarded as the 

utmost challenge in battery applications. Dend rit e formation stem ming from the non -uniform 

plating of Li during the battery charge will eventually perforate the separator and will internally 

short circuit the battery causing serious safety concerns. Beside s, lithium metal is intrinsically 

very reactive and can easily reac t with the electrolyte and lithium salt , and thu s solid electrolyte 

interphase (SEI) will be formed on its surface that is an unstable layer and leads to a

substantial capacity loss. Moreo ver, regarding lithium -sulfur (Li -S) batteries, the migration of 

the soluble polysulfides through the separator towards the anode (polysulfide shuttling) and 

the subsequent reaction with the lithium will complicate the SEI composition and hinders a 

stable SEI formation. 

To circumvent the abovementioned issues, several approaches have been investigated 

through designing lithium interphase via electrol yte additives or artificial SEI, designing lithium 

metal hosts with and without pre -stored lithium as well as any hybrid solutions .[1] 

Herein, we have initially examined the role of the electrolyte additive in tuning the SEI 

formation by applying LiNO 3 as one of the most promising and widely used additives in two 

different concentrations. The comparison of the overpotiential profiles of the Li//Li symmetric 

cells during g alvanostatic cycling showed that symmetric cells with concentrated LiNO 3

electrolytes demonstrated very small and relatively smooth overpotential profiles suggesting 

that LiNO 3 at higher concentration is beneficial to have stable interphase between Li metal and 

the electrolyte. With the aim of suppressing the formation of the l ithium dendrites and achieving 

prolonged cycling, t he study was further broadened to fabricate ex -situ protective layers on 

lithium anode. The attention was given to choose artificial layers that are mechanically and 

chemically stable, possess simple fabri cation method s, and are preferably lithium ion 

conductors. Considering these criteria , Poly -dimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) and Li 3N were chosen 

as artificial layers of interests [2,3] . A facile , economical synthesis method is proposed to 

fabricate each modified lithium anode . The electrochemical behaviors of the modified 

electrodes in terms of galvanostatic cycling performance and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy were probed in both symmetric configurations and later as anodes in Li -S cells. 

In -situ dilatometry can be adopted to investigate the volumetric fluctuations of the Li -S cells 

with pristine and modified anodes during the charge/discharge cycles. 

References :

[1] H. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Cui, Lithium Metal Anode Materials Design: Interphase and 

Host, Electrochem. Energy Rev. 2 (2019) 509 –517. 

[2] B. Zhu, Y. Jin, X. Hu, Q. Zheng, S. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Zhu, Poly(dimethylsiloxane) 

Thin Film as a Stable Interfacial Layer for High -Performance Lithium -Metal Battery 

Anodes, Adv.  Mater.  29 (2017) 2 –7. 

[3] G.G. Eshetu, X. Judez, C. Li, O. Bondarchuk, L.M. Rodriguez -Martinez, H. Zhang, M. 

Armand, Lithium Azide as an Electrolyte Additive for All -Solid -State Lithium –Sulfur 

Batteries, Angew.  Chemie - Int. Ed. 56 (2017) 15368 –15372. Investigation of structural changes in different metal ion battery 

# electrodes by in -situ dilatometry 

Giampaolo Lacarbonara a, Morteza Rahamanipour a, Juri Belcari b/c , Lorenzo Lodi c, Catia Arbizzani a

> a

Alma Mater Studiorum - University of Bologna, Dept. of Ch emistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, 

Via F. Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy 

> b

Alma Mater studiorum - Engineering School, Industrial Engineering Department (DIN), 

Viale del Risorgimento 2, 30136, Bologna, Italy 

> c

Marposs Spa Italy, Via Saliceto, 13, 40010 Bentivoglio (Bo), Italy 

E-mail: giampaol.lacarbonar2 @unibo.it 

Metal ion batteries are the most familiar energy storage figured for consumer electronics, portable 

devices, and electric vehicles. Accordingly, it is fundamental to improve their safety, to prevent failu res 

and damages as well as to increase energy density and reduce the production costs. To understand the 

structural properties of electrodes materials during the battery operation and simulate their ag eing are 

trivial steps to let a reliable battery functi oning . T he insertion /deinsertion of metal ions in the battery 

electrode’s lattice leads to structural changes and expansions/shrinking that can limit the performance of 

the battery. [1, 2] 

Between the different approaches useable for studying these volume changes, electrochemical dilatometry 

enables us to deliver versatile information about macroscopic in -situ expansions helpful for material 

design, details about SEI formation and irreversible/reversible components of dilatation which can be 

used to predict the long term stability. [3] 

The present study aims to take this information into three typologies of batteries using various operating 

conditions such as use sundry electrochemical techniques and different applied forces. The thickness 

changes were inve stigated in lithium ion, sodium ion, and lithium sulfur systems during galvanostatic 

charge -discharge as well as cyclic voltammetry. Recording the dynamic behavior of the thickness change 

over several cycles was possible to consider the eventual structural instability during the operation of the 

systems investigated and dimensional change mechanisms. 

Acknowledgements: 

The authors would like to thank  Ma rposs Spa  for  kindly providing  the  equ ipment for el ectrochemical 

dilatometry .

[1] J. B. Goodeno ugh, Nat. Electron. , 2018, 1, 204. 

[2]  M. Winter, G.H. Wrodnigg, J.O. Besenhard, W. Biberacher, P. Nov ák,  J. Electrochem . Soc .,  2000, 

147  (7) , 2427 -2431 .

[3] D. Sauerteig, S . Ivanov, H . Reinshagen, A . Bund , J. Power Sources , 2017, 342 , 939 -946 .Functionalization of Titanium Surface by Innovative Anticorrosion 

# Coating 

Jozefina Katić 1, Ankica Šarić 2, Ines Despotović 2, Marin Petković 3, Željka Petrović 2

> 1

University of Zagreb, Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, 

Marulićev trg 19, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 

> 2

Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička c. 54, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia 

> 3

Adentro Dental Studio, Petrova 67, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 

jkatic@fkit.hr 

Since implantation success strongly depends on the osseointegration process, c urrent trends in 

dental implant research are based on surface properties modifications by biomimetic and bioactive 

coatings that mimic biochemical surroundings and architecture of the human bone . Calcium phosphate 

ceramics, like hydroxyapatite, with mineral composition similar to natural bone, as a single compound 

coating or as a composite with collagen, bioglass, or silica are used to promote osseointegration or overall 

implant system’ s ch aracteristics [ 1]. Drug -based coatings with bis phosphonates like Zolendronate or 

Alendronate, drugs for bone diseases, promote mechanical fixation of implant and bone mineralization [2].

However, it must not be forgotten that a fundamental prerequisite for the success of 

osseointegration is a long -term corrosion stability of implant materials. Human body fluids, especially 

oral cavity fluids, in which pH is constantly changing, represent very aggressive media with high 

concentrations of chloride ions th at are among the most aggressive an d corrosive to metals. Although 

titanium is a gold standard in dental implantology due to its exceptional biocompatib ility and corrosion 

resistivity , there is an increasing data reported regarding complications caused by titanium dental implant 

fixation. It was shown that titanium ions, that originated as product from corrosion reaction in body 

fluids, caused negative immune reactions or skin allergies immediately or shortly after implant fixation 

[3]. Therefore, it is cru cial to design a coating which will make titanium surface more 

bioactive/osseoinductive and at the same time more corrosion resistant during a long -term exposure to 

oral cavity fluids. 

In this study the titanium surface was modified by vitamin D3, molecu les that are crucial for 

maintaining bone mineral density and normal functioning of the immune system [ 4]. The main goals were 

(i) to improve titanium corrosion resistivity during exposure to an artificial saliva solution and 

simultaneously (ii) to induce in vitro processes of “new bone” formation. According to results of all 

techniques , the D3 vitamin layer imparted very good corrosion protection to the oxide -covered titanium 

and induced a formation of biocompatible bone -like calcium phosphates what confir med enhanced 

titanium's bioactivity level. 

References: 

[1 ] A. H. Choi, B. Ben -Nissan, J. P. Matinlinna, R. C. Conway, Current Perspectives: Calcium 

Phosphate Nanocoatings and Nanocomposite Coatings in Dentistry, J Dent Res . 92 (2013) 853. 

[2 ] L. Rojo, B. Gharibi , R. McLister, B. J. Meenan, S. Deb, Self -assembled monolayers of alendronate 

on Ti6Al4V alloy surfaces enhance osteogene sis in mesenchymal stem cells, Sci Rep . 6 (2016) 30548 .

[3 ] H. Yan, S. Afroz, J. Dalanon, N. Goto, M. Hosoki, Y. Matsuka, Metal allergy patient treated by 

titanium implant denture: A case report with at least 4 -year follow -up, Clin Case Rep 6 (2018) 1972. 

[4 ] G. Trybek, M. Aniko -Włodarczyk, J. Kwiatek, O. Preuss, A. Brodkiewicz, A. Sinicyn, A. 

Grzywacz, The effect of vitamin D3 on the osteointegration of dental implants, Balt. J Health Phys. Act. 

10 (2018) 25. Styrene -ethylene -but ylene -styrene  (SEBS)  Copolymer Bas ed Alkaline 

# Anion Exchange Membrane with Pi peridine C ross -linking reagents 

Ziqi Xua,c , Aldo Gago a, Vladimir Atanasov b, Andreas Friedrich a,c  

> a

Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, German Aerospace C enter ( DLR), Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, 

70569 Stuttgart, Germany  

> b

Institute of Chemical Process Engineering (I CVT ), University of Stuttgart , Böblinger Straße 78 , 70199 

Stuttgart Germany  

> c

Institute of Building Energetics, Thermal Engineering and Energy Storag e (IGTE ), University of 

Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 31, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 

Xu.Ziqi @dlr.de 

There is a paramount importance for us to develop a cos t-effective elec trol ysis technolog y for green 

hydrogen in power suppl y s ystem . On this point, polymer ele ctrol yte membrane (PEM) electrolysis stands 

out due to its compactness and high efficiency and A lkaline e xchange membrane with non -precious 

catal ys t becomes a future primary choice . Here in we develop a novel alkaline anion exchange membrane 

with SEBS as th e backbone a nd piperidine based diamine a s the cross -linking agents . In detail, fi rst 

Membrane with mutication crosslinking structure has better conductivity than and r eplace the quaternary 

ammonium with quaternary piperidine groups can increase membrane’s chemical stability. Then, adding 

oxygen in the crosslinking structure can further increase its conductivity and 6 carbon between functional 

group has relatively balanced conductivity and chemical stability. Finally, SEBS -P2O6 has a conductiv ity 

of 20.8mS/ cm ( OH -) at room temperature, which is much higher than SEBS piperidine membrane 

published before. 

m

Conductivity 

(mS/cm) 

Conductivity 

(mS/cm) 

IECa  IECb 

Cl - form 

100% humidity 

OH - form 

100% humidity 

SEBS -N2C6  5.66  10.2  0.96  0.44 

SEBS -P2C6  6.45  12.5  1.05  0.40 

SEBS -P206  11.7  20.8  1.10  0.42 

Table 1 . Conductivity on SEBS -P2C6 -TMA, SEBS -P2O6 -TMA and SEBS -N2C 6Fig 1. Structure of SEBS -P2C6 , SEBS -P2O6 and SEBS -N2C6 Electrical Properties of m olten TiO 2 – SiO 2 – Al 2O3 – MgO – CaO slag 

Samuel Martin Treceno 1, Antoine Allanore 2, Catherine Bishop 3, Aaron Marshall 1, Matthew Watson 1

> 1

Department of Chemical and Process Engineering University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand 

> 2

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Inst itute of Technology, Cambridge, 

Massachusetts 02139, USA 

> 3

Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand 

samuel.martintreceno@pg.canterbury.ac.nz 

The use of molten oxide electrolysis to produce metals has been proven more sustainable and 

environmentally friendly than most common traditional metallurgical processes. The po tential to reduce 

emissions to the environment increases if large -scale waste materials are to be used as feedstock for this 

process. Previous work has shown that the electrochemical recovery of metals from the molten TiO 2 –

SiO 2 – Al 2O3 – MgO – CaO slag , a by -product of the ironmaking process, is feasible. However, a more 

extensive understanding of the electrochemical  behaviour  of this complex oxide system in its molten state 

is paramount in the design of industrial electrolytic cells . In this work, we stu dy the effect of the 

experimental processing conditions, such as atmosphere, electrode material and electrolyte composition, 

on the electrical properties of the slag, crucial information to foster its recycling. Electrochemical Dealloying as a Tool to Tune Composition, Porosity 

# and Catalytic Activity of Nano particles 

Christian Rurainsky 1, Alba Garzón Manjón 2, Felix Hiege 1, Yen -Ting Chen 3, Christina Scheu 2, Kristina 

Tschulik 1

> 1

Ruhr University Bochum, Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Chair of Analytical Chemistry II, 

Bochum, Germany 

> 2

Max -Planck -Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH, Max -Planck -Straße 1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany 

> 3

Ruhr University Bochum, Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, ZEMOS Facility, Boch um , Germany 

Christian.Rurainsky@rub.de 

Electrochemically dealloyed nanoparticles have be en the focus of electrocatalyst research work for more 

than a decade . Th is research ranges from fundamental understanding of the dealloying processes [1] to 

prac tically relevant materials that show highly increased catalytic activity for important reactions like the 

methanol oxidation reaction [2]. Despite all th ese research efforts , general guidelines what to look for 

during dealloying and how to properly tune a dealloyin g process to receive the best results , are lacking up 

until now .

Our work investigates in detail how different numbers of cycles influence the result ing morphology, 

composition and catalytic properties, using cyclic voltammetry (CV). Using A gAu nanoparticl es as an 

easy to understand bimetallic system [3] and the hydrogen reduction reaction (HER) as an example 

reaction, we reveal the existence of an optimal amount of cycles and how it can be easily spotted in a 

dealloying CV. When the CV gets featureless and does not change in the consecutive cycles , then the 

highest catalytic activity was found. Interestingly , complimentary identical location electron microscopy 

analysis showed that at this point the particles did not show the highest porosity. Longer cycling increased 

the porosity found in the particles, but decreased the overall catalytic activity, which indicates that higher 

porosity in nanoparticles does not necessarily lead to a higher catalytic activity. 

Figure 1. Schematic representation of electroch emical dealloying. 

[1] Li, X.; Chen, Q.; McCue, I.; Snyder, J.; Crozier, P.; Erlebacher, J.; Sieradzki, K. Dealloying of noble -

metal alloy nanoparticles. Nano letters 2014 , 14 , 2569 –2577. 

[2] Glüsen, A.; Dionigi, F.; Paciok, P.; Heggen, M.; Müller, M.; G an, L.; Strasser, P.; Dunin -Borkowski, 

R. E.; Stolten, D. Dealloyed PtNi -Core –Shell Nanocatalysts Enable Significant Lowering of Pt Electrode 

Content in Direct Methanol Fuel Cells . ACS Catal . 2019 , 9, 3764−3772 

[3] Grasmik, V.; Rurainsky, C.; Loza, K.; Evers, M. V.; Prymak, O.; Heggen, M.; Tschulik, K.; Epple, M. 

Deciphering the Surface Composition and the Internal Structure of Alloyed Silver -Gold Nanoparticles. 

Chemistry 2018 , 24 , 9051 –906 0. Tracking Structural Change s usin g Electrocatalytic Reac tion s –

# HER on Au(111) during Potential -Induced Reconstruction 

Johannes M. Hermann , Areeg Abdelrahman, Timo Jacob, Ludwig A. Kibler 

Institut für Elektrochemie, Univer sität Ulm, 890 69 Ulm, Germany 

johannes.hermann@uni -ulm.de , areeg.abdelrahman@uni -ulm.de , timo.jacob@uni -ulm.de ,

ludwig.kibler@uni -ulm.de 

Au(111) is one of the extensively studied single crystal s. Its surface is able to reconstruct n ot only in UHV 

but a lso in electrochemical environment [1] . The phase transitions between the reconstructed and 

unreconstructe d electrode surfaces have mostly been investigated by means of in -situ scanning tunneling 

microscopy , which revealed the existence of a variety of potential -dependent morphologies [2] . Kinetic 

studies are sparse and in the case of potential -induced reconstruction limited to in -situ surface x -ray 

scattering [3] . Classical electrochemical methods such as cyclic voltammetry can provide structural 

information of the electro -neutral reconstruction in an indirect way by considering changes in the signals 

of anion adsorption processes. Sin ce, the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on gold 

electrodes is strongly structure -sensitive [4] , it is used in this study to monitor structural changes of the 

Au(111) surface. The electrocat alytic activity is highest at t = 0 , directly after the surface reconstruction 

had been lifted, and decreases while the potential -induced reconstruction proceeds , following a simple first -

order rate law (Figure 1a). In contrast to expectations from conventional electrode kinetics , the rate of the 

reconstruction process is decreased with more negative potential, as the reconstructed surface is stabilized 

by increas ing negative excess charge. The observed trend can further be explained by a change in bond 

strength between Au surface atoms , as indicated by a potential -dependent compression of the topmost Au 

layer [5] . The systematic investigation clearly exhibits an exponential potential -dependence of the rate 

constant if specific adsorption is avoided. Tempe rature -dependent measurements at -0.4 V yield an 

apparent activation energy of ~0.6 eV. The adsorptio n of anions slows down surface reconstruction (Figure 

1b), while the adsorption of carbon monoxide leads to an enormous enhancement of the reconstruction rate .0 500 1000 1500 2000  

> -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12
> -0.65 V -0.55 V -0.45 V
> j / μA cm -2
> t/ s

Au(111)        

> 0.1 M H 2SO 4
> Ep= -0.9 V
> T= 20 °C
> Er=
> j-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5
> 0.1 M HClO 4
> 0.1 M H 2SO 4

Au(111)     

> Ep= -0.9 V
> T= 20 °C
> log( k / s -1 )
> Ervs. MSE / V

Figure 1: (a) Current density -time curves of HER at Au(111) in 0.1 M H 2SO 4 at probing potential 

Ep = -0.9 V and 20 °C for different reconstruction potentials, Er = -0.45 V (black), Er = -0.55 V (blue), and 

Er = -0.65 V (green). Correspond ing exponential fits are depicted in red. The range for stationary current 

density j∞ derived from the fitted curves is indic ated in gray. (b) Logarithm log( k / s -1) of average rate 

constants extracted from exponential fits vs. reconstruction potential for Au(111) in 0.1 M H 2SO 4 (black) 

and 0.1 M HClO 4 (red). Error bars indicate scatte ring of different measurements. 

[1] A.S. Dakkouri, D.M. Kolb, in: A. Wieckowski (Ed.), Interfacial Electrochemistry: Theory, 

Experiment, and Applications, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1999: pp. 151 –173. 

[2] L.A. Kibler, J.M. Hermann, A. Abdelrahman, A.A. El -Aziz, T. Jacob, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 9 

(2018) 265 –270. 

[3] J. Wang, B.M. Ocko, A.J. Davenport, H.S. Isaacs, Phys. Rev. B. 46 (1992) 10321 –10338. 

[4] L.A. Kibler, Hydrogen electrocatalysis, ChemPhysChem. 7 (2006) 985 –991. 

[5] Y. Gründer, G.S. Harlow, E. Cocklin , J . Fogg, J.W. Beane, C.A. Lucas , Surf. Sci. 680 (2019) 113 –

118. Reduced Graphene Oxide as an Advanced Supporting Material for Pt -

# based ORR Electrocatalyst s in PEM F uel Cell Applications 

Luka Pavko a, Matija Gatalo a, Boštjan Genorio b, Nejc Hodnik a, Miran Gaberšček a 

> a

National Institute of Chemistry, Hajdrihova 19, 1001 Ljubljana, Slovenia  

> b

Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, Večna pot 113, 1001 

Ljubljana, Slovenia 

National Institute of Chemistry, Hajdrihova 19, 1001 Ljubljana, Slove nia. 

luka.pavko@ki.si 

Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have attracted wide attention due to their high energy 

efficiency and zero harmful emissions. However, providing high catalytic activity and long -term stability 

of the electrocatalyst rem ains a challenge. Currently, the most common oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 

electrocatalysts are based on Pt or Pt -alloy nanoparticles (NPs) supported on high surface area carbons 

(commercially available carbon blacks such as Ketjen Black EC300J or Vulcan XC72) [1] . Despite many 

inherent good properties of carbon black supports (e.g. low cost, high conductivity , high surface area ,

etc.), poor electrochemical stability ( i.e. carbon corrosion) as well as sub -optimal Pt utilization ( i.e. nano -

porosity) hinder performance under operational conditions of the PEMFC. Carbon corrosion results in 

secondary degradation mechanisms such as agglomeration of Pt/Pt -alloy NPs or their detachment which 

both consequently low er the active Pt surface area. On the other hand, Pt /Pt -alloy NPs located in nano -

pores of carbon blacks are known to not efficiently contribute to the electro catalyst performance at high 

curr ent densities. This is due to their sub -optimal three -phase boundary as a consequence of poor ionomer 

coverage and accessibility for reactants and prod uc ts . Past studies have revealed that many properties of 

the carbon support such as degree of graphitizat ion, surface area, porosity type and size, functional groups 

etc., play a key role on both the aspects of carbon corrosion as well as Pt utilization [2]. 

This work is , thus, focus ing on improving the properties of the supporting material by exchanging 

conventional carbon blacks with graphene -based materials. Graphene oxide with different degrees of 

oxidation, graphitic particle size and functional groups was used as precursor for prep aration of various 

reduced graphene oxide supports (rGOs) that were decorated with nanoparticles of less noble metals 

(namely Cu and Ni). Using our in -house developed double passivation with galvanic displacement 

method [3] , Pt -alloy nanoparticles were pre pared on different types of rGO supports. Various s tructural 

and electrochemical analysis methods were performed for comparison of the Pt -alloy/rGO 

electro catalysts . This includes X-Ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM), Energy 

Dispersi ve X -Ray Spectroscopy (EDX), Brunauer –Emmett –Teller (BET) specific surface area, Raman 

spectroscopy and elemental analysis for structural analysis as well as half -cell TF -RDE (ORR and CO 

electrooxidation) and a proprietary high temperature disk electrode (HT -DE) for electrochemical analysis. 

Specifically HT -DE was used to gain insight into the electrochemically induced carbon corrosion at an 

elevated temperature (60 oC - temperatures more relevant to operation of PEMFCs ) by comparing Pt 

surface area degrada tion of different rGOs and carbon blacks .

References: 

[1] I. Katsounaros, S. Cherevko, A.R. Zeradjanin, K.J.J. Mayrhofer , Oxygen electrochemistry as a 

cornerstone for sustainable energy conversion, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 53 (2014) 102 –121. 

[2]  P. Trogadas, T.F. Fuller, P. Strasser, Carbon as catalyst and support for electrochemical energy 

conversion, Carbon N. Y. 75 (201 4) 5 –42. 

[3] M. Gatalo, M. Bele, F. Ruiz ‐Zepeda, E. Šest, M. Šala, A.R. Kamšek, N. Maselj, T. Galun, P. 

Jovanovič, N. Hodnik, M. Gaberšček, A Double ‐Passivation Water ‐Based Galvanic Displacement 

Method for Reproducible Gram ‐Scale Production of High ‐Perfor mance Platinum ‐Alloy Electrocatalysts, 

Angew. Chemie. 131 (2019) 13400 –13404. Insights into the formation and composition of the SEI on carbon -

# coated TiO 2 electrodes for Na -ion batteries by depth -dependent X -ray 

# photoelectron spectroscopy 

Andreas Siebert ,1 Xinwei Dou, 2,3 Roberto Félix, 1 Giorgia Greco, 4 Evelyn Handick, 1 Regan G. Wil ks, 1, 5

Ivana Hasa, 2,3 Raul Garcia -Diez, 1 Stefano Passerini, 2,3 Marcus Bär 1, 5,6,7 

> 1

Interface Design, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB), Berlin, 

Germany  

> 2

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) , Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> 3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) , P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany  

> 4

Institute for Nanospectroscopy, HZB, Berlin, Germany  

> 5

Energy Materials In -Situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL), HZB , Berlin, Germany  

> 6

Helmholtz -Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (HI ERN), Berlin , Germany  

> 7

Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, 

Erlangen, Germany 

andreas.siebert@helmholtz -berlin.de 

The continuously growing demand of lithium ion batteries (LIBs) for portable electronics and in the 

rapidly increas ing sector of electric vehicles raises concerns about the long term availability of critical 

raw materials employed in the LIB industry, such as lithium, cobalt, graphite and copper [1]. Owing to 

their pote ntial lower cost and higher sustainability compared to the current lithium -based technology, 

SIBs have the potential to dominate the future stationary storage market. Among the anode materials 

proposed for SIB application, easy -to -synthesize TiO 2 nanoparti cles exhibit promising properties 

especially in terms of high reversible delivered capacity and excellence cyclability [2,3] , however the 

understanding of the processes occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces (EEIs) and their 

degradation modes is stil l incomplete. 

It is evident that the EEIs in SIBs play a key role , i ndeed, the successful design of well -performing SIBs 

relies in the stabilization of the interfaces governing these complex systems . The formation and evolution 

of the solid electroly te interphase (SEI) layer as well as its morphology , chemical composition , and 

stability significantly influence the cell lifetime and performance. 

Due to its high chemical sensitivity and tunable penetration depth, photoelectron spectroscopy is a

powerf ul technique for the investigation of the chemical composition and in -depth profile of the SEI 

layer . In particular, hard X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) allows probing the relevant near -

surface region including the SEI/anode interface . HAXPES th us enables the differentiation of the 

components of the SEI from those related to the Na + uptake in the electrode .

In order to gain more insights on the formation of the SEI on a high -performance carbon -coated TiO 2-

based SIBs anode, electrode samples at d ifferent stages of (dis )charge have been investigated with 2

different excitation energies (i.e. different probing depths) in the HiKE endst ation [3 ] at the BESSY II 

KMC -1 beamline [4] at HZB . A detailed evaluat ion of the core -level spectra associated with the 

electrode , reveal the formation of a stable SEI layer partially composed of polyethylene oxide, sodium 

alkyl carbonates , sodium alkoxides , and minor contributions from sodium fluoride and sodium chloride 

derived from salt, binder and carbonate -based e lectrolyte decomposition . In addition to t he formation of a 

polyolefin -based layer between the electrode surface and the SEI during the first cycle , the appearance of 

an accumulation layer could be detected , which could account for the charge neutrality of the system in 

highly sodiated states of the electrode and which induces an observable downward band bending. By 

considering the different inelastic mean free paths (IMFP ) used in the experiment, the thickness of the 

SEI on the C -TiO 2-based electrode as we ll as the change of the Ti oxidation state due to Na + insertion in 

the discharging process has been estimated . The results provide comprehensive insights into the SEI 

formation and composition on C -TiO 2-based anodes used in SIBs, representing a useful data set toward a 

better understanding of the complex nature of the interfacial processes occurring in SIBs. 

[1] C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil, S. Passerini, Nat Rev Mater 3, 18013 (2018) .

[2] L. Wu et al., Journal of Power Sources 251, 379 -385 (2014). 

[3] M. Gorgoi et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 601 , 48 –53 (2009). 

[4] F. Schaefers et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 , 123102 (2007) .Sodium in sertion in to TiO 2 electrodes during (dis )charging of 

# sodium -ion batteries monitored by operando XANES 

Andreas Siebert ,1 Xinwei Dou, 2,3 Roberto Félix, 1 Giorgia Greco, 4 Evelyn Handick, 1 Regan G. Wilks, 1, 5

Ivana Hasa, 2,3 Raul Garcia -Diez, 1 Stefano Passerini, 2,3 Marcus Bär 1, 5,6,7 

> 1

Interface Design, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB), Berlin, 

Germany  

> 2

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU) , Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany  

> 3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) , P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany  

> 4

Institute for Nanospectroscopy, HZB, Berlin, Germany  

> 5

Energy Materials In -Situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL), HZB , Berlin, Germany  

> 6

Helmholtz -Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (HI ERN), Berlin , Germany  

> 7

Dep artment of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, 

Erlangen, Germany 

andreas.siebert@helmholtz -berlin.de 

The s odium ion battery (SIB) technology has the potential to represent a readily available, cheap er , and 

more envi ronmentally friendly alternative electrochemical energy storage system to the most widely 

adopted lithium ion batteries, especially for stationary energy storage application filling the gap between 

clean energy produced by renewable sources and its utiliza tion . In order to meet the requirements for 

practical applications, research on improved electrode materials is necessary. Recently, the excellent 

performance of a TiO 2 nanopa rticles (np -TiO 2) anode for application in SIBs has been reported [1,2 ]. 

TiO 2 is certainly an attractive candidate, especially in terms of sustainability , cost and promising 

electrochemical performance. Nonetheless, the Na uptake and release mechanism is still heavily debated 

as well as a comprehensive understanding of the process occu rring upon sodiation [2 ]. 

In particular, one of the main challeng es is to unravel the structural and electronic changes of the anatase 

TiO 2 nanoparticles and the loss of crystallinity of the anodic nanomaterial upon Na uptake. 

In this work, X-ray absorpt ion near edge spectroscopy (XANES) at the Ti K-edge is used to investigate 

the electronic and geometric structure around the Ti atom and its nearest neighbors , allowing the 

identification of the sodiation effects on the TiO 2-based electrode . To gain direct , relevant insights into 

the in sertion process of Na into the anatase -TiO 2 nanoparticle anode material, we designed an operando 

XANES experiment using a modified coin cell equipped with an X -ray transparent Kapton® window and 

a 6 μm -thick Al foil current collector adapted for the HiKE endstation [3 ] at the BESSY II KMC -1

beamline [4] at HZB . This setup allowed the measurement of the highly sensitive Ti K-edge of the np -

TiO 2–based anode upon cycling , i.e. (de -)sodiating the electrode .

The analysis of the Ti K-edge absorption reveals a change in the average oxidation state of Ti upon 

sodiation from Ti +4 in the original anatase structure to around +3 .4 (i.e. 0.6 Na atoms per unit formula) .

The operando results show that the oxidation state increases upon desodiation but does not reach the 

original Ti +4, which is attribute d to the presence of irreversibly trapped Na (~0.2 Na atoms ), most likely 

responsible for the permanent loss of crystallinity i n the nanoparticles observed during the first cycle . The 

analysis of the evolution of the pre -edge structure of the Ti K-edge , which is highly sensitive to 

coordination and oxidation , reveals that upon sodiation the pre -peak changes from the four -pe ak feat ure 

typical of the anatase structure [5 ] to a structure dominated by a single peak, suggesting a change in the 

number of nearest neighbors around the probed Ti atoms (from 6 to 5 neighbors) [6 ]. The subsequent 

cycling shows the same spectroscopic trend s in the pre -edge feature, revealing a stable Na + uptake 

process after the initial irreversible structural rearrangement of the TiO 2 during the first sodiation process. 

The analysis performed enables an identification of t he structural changes upon (de)sodiati on of the np -

TiO 2–based anode , which is crucial for a further insight -driven optimization of the electrode material .

[1 ] L. Wu et al., Journal of Power Sources 251, 379 -385 (2014). 

[2 ] L. Wu et al., Adv. Energy Mater . 5, 1401142, 1 -11 ( 2015). 

[3 ] M. Gorgoi et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 601 , 48 –53 (2009). 

[4] F. Schaefers et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 , 123102 (2007). 

[5 ] R. Brydson et al., J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 797 -812 (1989). 

[6 ] F. Farges et al., Physical Review B, Vol. 56, No. 4 , 1809 -1819 (1997). Ir -Nanoparticles Decorated TiO 2 Nanotube Arrays: Boosting the 

# Hydrogen Evo lution Activity through Morphological and Synergistic 

# Effects 

Uroš Lačnjevac a, Rastko Vasilić b, Ana Dobrota c, Slađana Đurđić d, Ondřej Tomanec e, Radek Zbořil e,

Shiva Mohajernia f, Nha t Truong Nguyen g, Natalia Skorodumova h,i, Dragan Manojlović d, Nevenka 

Elezović a, Igor Pašti c,h, Patrik Schmuki e,f 

> a

Institute for Multidisciplinary Resea rch, University of Belgrade, Kneza Višeslava 1, 11030 Belgrade, 

Serbia . 

> b

Faculty of Physics, Universi ty of Belgrade,  Studentski trg  12 -16, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia  

> c

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade,  Studentski trg  12 -16, 11000 Belgrad e, Serbia  

> d

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Belgrade,  Studentski trg  12 -16, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia  

> e

Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Šlechtitelů 27, 78371 Olomouc, Czech 

Republic  

> f

Department of Materials Science, WW4 -LKO, University of Erlangen -Nuremberg, Martensstrasse 7, D -

91058 Erlangen, Germany . 

> g

Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 Saint George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H6, 

Canada  

> h

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Industrial Engineering and Management, 

KTH –Royal Institute of Technology, Brinellvägen 23, 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden  

> i

Department o f Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, 751 20 Uppsala, Sweden 

e-mail address : uros.lacnjevac@imsi.bg.ac.rs  (U.  Lačnjevac )

Ultrapure hydrogen fuel produced by water electrolysis using renewable electri city from photovoltaic 

modules or wind turbines is seen as a viable future solution to alleviate the growing energy and 

environmental concerns of the modern world. T he platinum group metals (PGMs) are unparalleled 

electrocatalytic materials for the cathodi c hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in terms of activity and 

chemical stability in acidic environments. However, their scarcity and expensiveness impede further 

deve lopment of the water electrolysis systems, so more cost -effective PGM -based electrocatalyst designs 

are in demand to bring the hydrogen economy concept closer to reality. Herein, we introduce a galvanic 

displacement strategy to decorate self -standing, prot onated TiO 2 nanotube (H -TNT) arrays with ultrafine 

Ir nanoparticles. The procedure is based on a galvanic displacement -type reaction between the Ir(III) ions 

in IrCl 3 solutions and the H-TNTs se rv ing as r educing agent s. We demonstrate that a controlled 

mor phological change from neat open -top tubes to disordered nanostripe bundles (“nanograss”) during 

th e step of anodic formation of TNT supports is beneficial for providing an abundance of exposed Ir 

active sites at the final self -standing Ir@TNT composites. Combined experimental evidence and 

computational modeling show that the nanograss H-TNT structures act as conductive supports that 

optimize the hydrogen adsorption energy of the firmly anchored Ir and regenerate its active sites during 

the HER, thus enabli ng the obtained Ir@TNT composite electrocatalysts to deliver an amazing HER 

performance . With only 5.7 μg Ir cm –2 in the optimum Ir@TNT, we achieve an overpotential of –63 mV at 

–100 mA cm –2, a low Tafel slope of –36 mV dec –1, a mass activity of 34 A mg –1Ir at –80 mV and superior 

durability in 1 M HClO 4. Moreover, the Ir@TNT catalytic structu res outperform commercial Pt/C and 

Ir/C as well as most state -of -the -art PGM catalysts at high current densities . This work highlights the 

great perspective for the applicati on of H -TNT arrays in HER electrocatalysis. Nanosecond laser fabricated monolayer of gold nanoparticles on ITO 

# for bioelectrocatalysis 

Elisabeth Lojou 1, Vivek Pratap Hitaishi 1, Ievgen Mazurenko 1, Anjali Vengasseril Murali 2, Anne de 

Poulpiquet 1, Gaëlle Coustillier 2, Philippe Delaporte 2 

> 1

Aix Marseil le Univ, CNRS, BIP, Bioénergétique et Ingénierie des Protéines, UMR 7281, 31, chemin 

Joseph Aiguier, CS 70071 13402 Marseille cedex 09, France  

> 2

Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LP3, UMR 7341, Parc scientifique et technologique de Luminy, 163 avenue 

de Luminy, Ca se 917, 13288 Marseille cedex 9, France  Lojou@imm.cnrs.fr 

Redox enzymes can be envisioned as biocatalysts in various electrocatalytic -based devices. Electrode 

nanostructuration allowed enhanced loading of biocatalysts, hence higher current output. Howeve r, a 

weak percentage of loaded enzyme is operating, increasing the costs linked to enzyme production. 

Enhanced electron transfers were obtained by controlling key parameters for efficient immobilization. 

However, stability is limited to days in most cases (1 -3). Among factors that play roles in these two 

limitations, the effect of enzyme -enzyme neighboring interaction on electrocatalysis has rarely been 

investigated, although critical in vivo (4). 

Gold nanoparticles prepared by laser ablation may be a way for determining the relationship between 

activity and enzyme density on electrodes (5 -6). We report in this work nanosecond laser interaction with 

nanometric gold films deposited on indium tin oxide support to generate in -situ AuNPs free from any 

stabiliz ers. A comprehensive analysis of AuNP size and coverage, as well as total geometric surface 

versus electroactive surface is provided as a function of the thickness of the treated gold layer. Using 

microscopy and electrochemistry, the long -term stability of AuNP -based electrodes in the atmosphere and 

in the electrolyte is demonstrated. AuNPs formed by laser treatment are then modified by thiol chemistry 

and their electrochemical behavior is tested with a redox probe. Finally, enzyme adsorption and 

bioelectro catalysis are evaluated in the case of two enzymes, i.e. the Myrothecium verrucaria bilirubin 

oxidase and the Thermus thermophilu s laccase. Behaving differently on charged surfaces, they allow 

demonstrating the validity of laser treated AuNPs for bioelectr ocatalysis.      

> SEM images of Au nanoparticles obtained from laser ablation of Au film on ITO .

1. Hitaishi, V.P. et al. (2018), Acs Catal. 8, 12004 -12014. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.8b03443 

2. Mazurenko, I. et al. (2017), Cur. Op. Electroch em. 5, 74 -84. doi:  10.1016/j.coelec.2017.07.001 

3. Hitaishi, V.P. et al. (2018), Catalysts 8, 193. doi:  10.3390/catal8050192. 

4. Kuchler, A. et al. (2016), Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 409 -420. doi:  10.1038/nnano.2016.54 

5. Naser, H. et al. (2019), J. Nanoparticl e Res. 21, 249. doi:  10.1007/s11051 -019 -4690 -3. 

6. Stankevicius, E. et al. (2019), Electrochim. Acta . 297, 511 -522. doi:  10.1016/j.electacta.2018.11.197. Reve aling degradation and recovery mechanism s of Co 3O4

# nanocatalysts for oxygen evolution by in situ impedance analysis 

Zhibin Liu, Julia Linnemann and Kristina Tschulik* 

Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Analytical Chemistry II, Ruhr University Boch um, 44801 

Bochum, Germany 

Presenting author : Zhibin.Liu@ru b.de ; *Cor responding author:  Kristina.Tschulik@rub.de 

Co 3O4 is one of the most active pre cious metal free e lectrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction 

(OER) .[1] Hence, extensive efforts have been made on studying its active sites .[2] In contrast, few 

investigation s exist on its degradation mechanism and so comparably little is known about this important 

process. Herein , Co 3O4 nanoparticles are used as OER catalysts under alkaline conditions and their 

degrada ti on and re -activation are investigated by electrochemical studies linked to spectroscopy and high -

resolution electron microscopy. A degraded activity is observed after chronopotentiometr ic catalyst 

ageing , which can be recovered by a simple experimental p rocedure . This behavior of the Co 3O4

nanoparticles used in this study is further explained by extracting in situ information at different stages 

from electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS , Figure 1). By systematically varying experimental 

conditions , such as potential, catalysts ’ loading and pH, and by applying several EIS analysis methods, 

mechanistic insights into the OER catalysis mechanism of Co 3O4 are gained .

Based on this, a feature appearing in the high -frequency region described by an RC element wi th 

increasing resistance and decreasing capacitance by several orders of magnitude , is identified as crucial 

for the catalyst deactivation . The corresponding structural changes are affected by the amount of OH -

available at the interface and the near -surfa ce region of the cobalt oxide . Moreover , the evolution of th e

structur al alteration with time and, hence, the decrease of OER performance during aging is influenced by 

this factor . This emphas iz es the importance of solvation states and processes occurring during the linear 

sweep pre -OER wave . The easy -to -access in situ method of EIS is, highlighted as a powerful tool to 

analy ze changes of el ectro catalysts under working conditions and to shed light on the underlying catalysis 

mechanism. 

Figure 1 . LSV, EIS and DRT graphs of Co 3O4 nanoparticles in their initial , aged and recovered state. 

Reference s

[1] X. Deng, H. Tüysüz, ACS Catalysis 2014 , 4, 3701 -3714. 

[2] a) A. Bergmann, E. Martinez -Moreno, D. Teschner, P. Chernev, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araújo, T. 

Reier, H. Dau, P. Strasser, Nature Communications 2015 , 6, 8625; b) H. -Y. Wang, S. -F. Hung, 

Y. -Y. Hsu, L. Zhang, J. Miao, T. -S. Chan, Q. Xiong, B. Liu, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 

Letters 2016 , 7, 4847 -4853; c) M. Zhang, M. de Respinis, H . Frei, Nature Chemistry 2014 , 6,

362 -367. Organic Electrocatalytic Synthesis of Dimethyl Carbonate: 

# Production, Analysis and Quantification 

Bethan J. V. Davies , Matthias Arenz, Jan Rossmeisl and Maria Escudero -Escribano 

University of Copenhagen 

Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Universitetspark en 5, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark 

bethan@chem.ku.dk 

Electrification is a potential solution to solving the challenges of the chemical industry , such as 

environmental pollution and use of petroleum as a starting material . Organic electrocatal ysis offers a 

cha nce to perform cleaner chemical synthesis, ultimately with renewable energy and sustainable 

resources. In order to develop new synthesis routes, we ideally must first study and optimise reactions 

suitable for electrocatalysis. Dimethyl car bonate (DMC) is o ne candidate for investigation. DMC is a 

valuable chemical used on industrial scale for both production (e.g. carbonylation reactions) and in end 

products (e.g. paints and batteries). DMC is currently formed by thermal catalysis but can be formed 

electroca talytically, it is a carbonylation product of methanol 1, formed electrochemically by the reaction 

2CH 3OH + CO → (CH 3O) 2CO + 2H + + 2e -.

The purpose of the work is to understand the fundamental aspects of the carbonylation reaction over an 

electrode surfa ce, i.e. by heterogeneous electrocatalysis, rather than homogeneous or indirection 

electrosynthesis. Knowing the steps of formation and the reaction intermediates involved will allow us to 

develop the catalyt ic system in a rational manner a s well as apply the knowledge to later reactions of 

interest (e.g. carbonylation of other alcohols, such as phenol, to form valuable products). Understanding 

the active site and mechanism of the reaction is paramount for rational optimisation strategies. 

Different trans ition metals (Cu, Au, Pt) have been tested for their activity towards DMC production 1,2,3 .

Au is more ac tive than P d in term s of current effi ciency as well as current density (Figure 1 ), where as Cu 

catalysis DMC synthesis via an inefficient solution phase mechanism. We have used different techniques 

to understand different aspects of the reaction and catalyst activity: in situ infrared 

spectroelectrochemistry (in situ FTIR) is u sed to study the interface and the reaction at relatively short 

timeframes while headspace gas chromatography mass spectrometry (HS -GC -MS) has allowed us to 

determine the selectivity and reaction efficiency, whilst learning about chemical steps that occur after 

electrolysis to the products in the solution. Detecting su ch reactions in solution are important for 

determine the catalyst mechanism of the end products. The results that we have obtained so far have been 

discussed in combi nation with a theoretical analysis which has helped us understand the mechanisms 

involved. Further development is underw ay for optimising the catalyst as well as reactor system. 

Figure 1. Partial current density for the formation of DMC and DMO on Au an d Pd electro des. 0. 1

M NaClO4 in methanol saturated w ith CO , ro om temperature and atmospheric p ressure. 

[1] Šarić , M., Davies, B .J.V. et al, Green Chem. , 2019, 21 , 6200 -6209 

[2] Davies, B .J.V. et al, ACS Catal. , 2019, 9, 2, 859 -866 

[3] Davies, B .J.V. et al, J. Phys. Chem. C , 2019, 123, 20, 12762 -12772 Mathematical modeling of PEM water electrolyser performance  and 

# degradation for different IrO 2 loadings 

Alexander Kalinnikov a, Sergey Grigoriev a,b , Karel Bouzek c 

> a

National Research Centre “Kurchatov Institute” 

1, Kurchatov Sq., Moscow, 123182, Russia  

> b

National Research University “Moscow Power Engineering Institute” 

14, Krasnokazarmennaya St., 111250 , Moscow, Russia  

> c

University of Chemistry and Technology Prague 

5, Technická, 166 28 , Praha 6 – Dejvice , Czech Republic 

Karel.Bouzek@vscht.cz ; sergey.gri goriev@outlook.com 

The aim of present study is to investigate numerically an effect of the IrO 2 loading on anode onto proton -

exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolys er (WE) performances . The rate of the IrO 2 dissolution 

depending on WE operation modes has been estimated as well. 

Physic ochemical model [1] was used as the basis for the calculations. Two -phase mass transport in 

current collectors/gas diffusion electrodes has been considered. Electrochemical reactions in catalytic 

layers associated with IrO 2 dissolution have been included in the developed mathematical model as well .

The rate of anode dissolution of the IrO 2 was estimated depending on the anode overvoltage based on the 

results reported in [2, 3]. Figure 1 shows the cell voltage V and the rate of degradation of WE 

performances due to the anode dissolution of the supported and unsupported IrO 2.Current density,A/cm 2          

> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> IrO 2 at anode,mg/cm 2
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 2.10 1.95 1.95 1.95 1.80 1.80 1.80 1.65 1.65 1.50 1.50 1.35 1.35 Ucell , V
> 3342222111000-1 -1 -1 Log( U/ t), V/h

Current density,A/cm 2        

> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> IrO 2 at anode,mg/cm 2
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> 2.10 1.95 1.95 1.80 1.80 1.80 1.65 1.65 1.50 1.50 1.35 1.35 Ucell , V
> 2223341111000-1 -1 -1
> Log( U/ t), V/h

Fig ure 1. Dependence of WE voltage (Ucell ) and it ’s degradation rate ( log( ΔUcell /Δt) upon current density 

and IrO 2 loading in catalytic layer for the cases of unsupported (left) and TiO 2-supported IrO 2 (right). 

The calculation data demonstrate good correlation with the experimental results [2, 3]. In particular, 

calculations sh ow that the use of a n ultra -low IrO 2 loading o n the anode increase s the rate of the 

performance degradation by a factor of 1-2. The use of the supported catalyst allows to reduce th is 

degradation rate by 2 -3 times. It should be noted that the degradation r ates of PEM WE performances 

observed in experimental studies may be caused not only by the dissolution of the IrO 2. Therefore, the 

calculated degradation values may differ from those determined experimentally. The proposed numerical 

data allow to estimate the trend of performance degradation of WE at change of membrane -electrode 

assembly parameters .

The present study was financially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research and Czech 

Science Foundation according to the research project No. 19 -58-26022 and 20 -06422J , respectively .

References 

[1] S.A. Grigoriev, A.A. Kalinnikov // Int J Hydrogen Energy 42 (201 7) 1590 –1597 .

[2] C . Rozain, E . Mayousse, N . Guillet, P . Millet // Appl Catal B - Environ 182 (2016) 123 –131 .

[3] S . Cherevko, S . Geiger, O . Kasian, A . Mingers, K .J.J. Mayrhofer // J Electroanal Chem 774 (2016) 

102 –110 .Composite PAAm -based hydrogel electrolyte for hybrid aqueous (Zn -

# Li -ion) battery 

Orynbay Zhanadilov a,b *, Zhanna Beisbayeva b, Magzhan Amze b, Zhumabay Bakenov a,b ,

Almagul Mentbayeva a,b ** 

> a

National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, Kazakh st an; 

> b

Department of Chemical and Material Engineering , School of Engineering and Digital Sciences ,

Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, Kazakhstan. 

* orynbay.zhanadilov@nu.edu.kz 

** almagul.mentbayeva@nu.edu.kz 

Hybrid aqueous rechargeable batteries are ver y attractive altern ative to conventional rechargeable lithium 

ion batteries for stationary application because of production and usage safety, reduced production cost 

and environmental friendliness. Previously aqueous rechargeable batteries with Zn/LiCl -Zn Cl 2/LiFePO 4

system with liquid electrolyte has been reported [1]. The system performed a high rate capability up to 60 

C with the average operation voltage 1.2 V and cycling performance with a capacity retention of 80 %

over 400 cycles at 6 C. 

However, the re are several drawbacks including water decompo sition and zinc dendrite formation 

hindering the commercialization [1] . The present study aimed to develop a PAAm -based hydrogel 

electrolyte with inclusion of montmorillonite and halloysite clay nanoparticles for hybrid aqueous 

rechargeable zinc/lithium ion batteries to overcome above mentioned probl ems. Polyacrylamide hydrogel 

was chosen because of its high ionic conductivity, high water content and simple fabrication method in 

which cross -linking degree, thi ck ness, etc. were optimized. Inclusion of clay could improve mechanical 

stability of hydrogel electrolyte, prevent water decomposition and dendrite formation. 

All tests performed in Zn/LiFePO 4 cell operating in an optimized LiCl/ZnCl 2 aqueous electrolyte b as ed 

hydrogel. 

Acknowledgement 

This research was supported by the targeted state program No. BR05236524 “Innovative Materials and 

Systems for Energy Conversion and Storage” from the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic 

of Kazakhstan for 2018 -20 20. 

References 

1. N.Yesbolati, N.Umirov, A.Koishybay, M.Omarova, I.Kurmanbayeva, Y.Zhang, 

Y.Zhao, Z.Bakenov. Electrochimica Acta, 152 (2015), 505 –511. Amplification -free point -of -care microRNA detection in urine using 

# molecular beacon based electrochemiluminescence 

Emily Kerr 1, Luke C. Henderson 1, Beatriz Prieto -Simon 2, Nicolas H. Voelcker 2 

> 1

Institute for Frontier Materials , Pigdons Rd, Waurn Ponds, De akin University, Australia  

> 2

Monash Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Royal Parade, Parkville, Monash University, Australia 

emily.kerr@deakin.edu.au 

The burgeoning field of miRNA detection using electrochemiluminescence (ECL) has garnered a great 

dea l of attention in recent times. 1 ECL presents many advantages over alternative detection strategies as 

ECL analyses generally exhibit low -background signals, high sensitivity, are reproducible and scale -

able. 2 When combined with magnetic -beads for the immobilisation of biological recognition el ements, 

ECL biosensors offer exceptional sensitivity owing to the ability to disperse the beads in large sample 

volumes to capture the biological target of interest via mixing then concentrate prior to analysis via 

magnetic extraction. 3, 4 

Herein, we present a novel biosensor for the sensitive detection of miRNA -21 comprising a molecular 

beacon ECL probe immobilised on magnetic beads. We obtained a limit of detec tion of 500 attomoles for 

miRNA -21 without enzymatic amplification or the addition of detection probes or intercalating labels, 

negating the need for lengthy and stringent washing procedures to reduce the background signal. 

Furthermore, we demonstrate the immense potential for point -of -care applications by developing a fully 

integrated miRNA detection platform. 

The platform comprises a portable -potentiostat for ECL generation, mob ile phone for ECL detection and 

a custom 3D -printed cell holder t o readily in terface a disposable screen -printed electrode with the 

potentiostat and phone camera . When combined with point -of -care miRNA extraction methods, the 

molecular beacon based ECL system we have developed presents a promising tool for point -of -care 

diagnosis a nd management of numerous disea ses. 

1. P. K. K alambate, N. S. Gadhari, X. Li, Z. Rao, S. T. Navale, Y. Shen, V. R. Patil and Y. Huang, TrAC, 

Trends Anal. Chem. , 2019, 120 , 115643. 

2. Y. Cheng, L. Dong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z. Li, Ana lyst , 2018, 143 , 1758 -1774. 

3. M. H. Shamsi, K. Choi, A. H. Ng, M. D . Chamberlain and A. R. Wheeler, Biosens. Bioelectron. , 2016, 

77 , 845 -852. 

4. W. Liu, X. Zhou and D. Xing, Biosens. Bioelectron. , 2014, 58 , 388 -394. A Comprehensive Study on the Electro -catalytic Activity and 

# Selectivity of Single -crystal line and Poly -crystal line Zirconium Ni tride 

# Thin Films Towards N itrogen Electroreduction and Ammonia 

# Synt hesis 

Fatemeh Han ifpour 1,2 , Arnar Sveinbjörnsson 2, Camila P ía Canales 1,2 , Younes Abghoui 1, Friðrik 

Magnus 1,3 , Árni Sigurður Ingason 3, Tryggvi Kristmar Tryggvason 3, Jian Yang 1, Kristina Johansson 4, Erik 

Lewin 4, Fredrik Eriksson 5, Guðjón A. Auðunsson 6, Kristmann Gíslason 6, Connel Arthur 1, Anna L. 

Garden 1, 7, Sveinn Óla fsson 1, Kristján Leósson 6, Liney Árnadóttir 8, Helga Dögg Flosadóttir 2,6 & Egill 

Skúlason 1,2 

> 1

Science Institute and Faculty of Industrial Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science ,

University of Iceland, VR -III, Hjardarhaga 2, 107 Reykjavík, Iceland. 

> 2

Atmoni a, Arleyni 8, 112 Reykjavík, Iceland. 

> 3

Grein Research, Dunhagi 5, 107 Reykjavík, Iceland. 

> 4

Department of Chemistry – Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala U niversity, Uppsala, Sweden .

> 5

Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping Uni versity, Linköping, Sweden .

> 6

Innovation Center Iceland, Keldnaholt, 112 Reykjavík, Iceland .

> 7

Department of Chemistry and MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and nanotechnology, 

University of Otago, Dunedin , New Zealand .

> 8

Sch ool of Chemical, Biolog ical and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 

United States. 

fatemeh@atmonia.com 

The Haber -Bosch process which is currently responsible for the whole production of ammonia for 

nitrogen (N) -fertilizers, oper ates at high temper atures and pressures releasing around 1.6 -3.8 tons of CO 2

per ton of NH 3 produced. The process also operates on a vast scale in a few locations worldwide, 

necessitating a network of transportation to deliver the fina l N -fertilizer to ind ividual farmers. Th us, there 

is an unmet need for a distributed ammonia production process that can operate locally at a smaller scale 

under ambient conditions for a single farmer or a group of farmers. This study presents the steps to wards 

the realization of this goal throu gh the alternative of electrochemistry. 

Electrocatalytic conversion of N 2 to NH 3 at ambient and semi -ambient conditions in an aqueous 

electrolyte, using a zirconium nitride catalyst – predicted by density functional theory (DFT) calcula tions 

–was comprehe nsively studied in batch -cell and flow -cell. The catalysts were deposited as thin films in 

various single -crystal structures with orientations of (111), (100), and (110) facets and polycrystalline thin 

films, using r eactive magnetron spu ttering. For each s urface, two electrolytes were tested in an H -type 

batch -cell and depending on the cyclic voltammograms obtained in N 2 vs. Ar gas, the most promising 

electrolytes were tested further in a micro -reactor flow -cell which was connected in -lin e to an ammonia 

qua ntification unit. A new electrochemical pulsing methodology was developed to address persistent 

challenges associated with this electrochemical reaction, namely low current efficiencies and low reaction 

rates. The ex periments aimed to un derstand the effect s of the applied potential and its duration on the 

surface reactivity and stability for each of the ZrN facets. X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X -

ray reflectivity (XRR) analysis were carried out on pristin e and used catalysts to study the surfac e

changes throughout the electrochemical processes. Control experiments in Ar gas and isotope -labeling 

experiments were performed, as well, to investigate the source of ammonia produced. Presence of 

hydrazine and nit rate was ruled out as side -products. The results show significant difference s between 

surf ace structure and applied potential for both reaction rates and current efficiency towards ammonia 

formation and indicate that surface engineering may help in designi ng more efficient catalysts for 

nitrogen reduction reaction ( NRR ).

Keywords: nitrogen reduction reaction; ammonia; e lectrocatalysis; electro -catalytic activity ; electro -

catalytic selectivity Hybrid hydrogen -bromate redox flow battery as a rechargeable power 

# source 

Natalia Kartashova 1,2 , Dmitry Konev 2,3 , Pavel Chukanov 3, Pavel Loktionov 2, Anatoly Antipov 2,3 , 

> 1,2,3, 4

Mikhail Vorotyntsev  

> 1

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russ ia  

> 2

In stitute for Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Acad emy of Sciences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 3

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Dijon, France 

e-mail address : kartasova9natali@gmail.com 

Flow batteries have recently bec ome one of the most promising technolog ies in the field of large scale 

energy stor age since they provide a possibility to adjus t their power -to -energy ratio in the wide range with 

minimal expenses . In the search for novel types of such devices i t was demonstrated [1] that it is possible 

to carry out the electroreduction of bromate anions in acidic solution on carbon electrodes due to the 

presence of bromine , even in trace amounts . In this case, an auto catalytic cycle consists of a

heterogeneous reaction on the electrode surface for a reversible redox couple of Br 2/Br - and an 

irreversible homogeneous reaction of the BrO 3- and Br - com proportionation into Br 2. Use of bromates as 

energy -intensive substa nces is a promising approach because it allows one to increase the energy density 

of flow batteries from tens to hundreds of W h/kg. 

The main purpose of this study has been to investigate the whole process of electrooxidation of a 

bromide anion and then in verse electroreduction of the bromate anion in a testing cell with one membrane 

electrode assembly . Two modes of the cell operation were studied - for acidic and alkaline sodium 

bromide solution s. Also, different methods such as spectrophotometry and elect rospray ionization -mass 

spectrometry (ESI -MS) were applied to control the composition of solution at the outlet of anodic 

compartment . It was found that after deep oxidation of acidified sodium bromide solution the resulting 

bromate -containing electrolyte might be successfully used for in combination with electrochemical 

hydrogen oxidation at anode inside the same electrochemical unit for the current generation, thus 

demonstrating for the first time the whole charge -discharge cyc le of the hydrogen -bromate flow battery 

(Fig.1). Its energy efficiency exceeding 72% was achieved for the second redox cycle in the 5 -cycle 

series. Among the reasons of capacity decay, the main role is played by degradation of porous carbon 

material at positive side of the positive electrode of the cell. Several strategies to overcome this drawback 

have been formulated. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8      

> 0,8 1,2 1,6 2,0
> E,  Vequivalent charge
> a01234560,0 0,4 0,8 1,2 1,6
> E, V
> equivalent discharge
> b

Figure 1 - Charge -discharge curves of H 2/BrO 3- redox flow battery. Membrane electrode assembly 

design: positiv e electrode - Toray EC -TP1 -120 carbon paper , negative electrode - Freudenberg H23C8 

carbon paper (loading Pt / C 1 mg/cm 2), membrane - Nafion 117. a) galvanostatic mode:1 A, positive 

electrode - 0.5 M NaBr 1 M H 2SO 4, 50 ml/min, the negative electrode is op en to the atmosphere ,

termination after passing 7 equivalents of the Br -/Br 2 transformation charge ; b) galvanostatic mode: -1 A, 

positive electrode -product of the stage (a) , negative electrode - hydrogen, 10 ml / min. 

Acknowledgments. The work was support ed by Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of 

Russia. Project Number X -2020 -010. 

References 1. Modestov A.D. Konev D.V., Tripachev O.V, Antipov A.E., Tolmachev Y.V., Vorotyntsev 

M.A. A hydrogen -bromate flow battery for air -deficient en viroments// Ene rgy Technology. 2018. V. 6. № 

2. P.242 -245. Sodium chlorate as catholyte in hybrid hydrogen -chlorate redox flow 

# battery 

Natalia Kartashova 1,2 , Dmitry Konev 2,3 , Pavel Chukanov 3, Anatoly Antipov 2,3 , Mikhail Vorotyntsev 1,2,3,4  

> 1

Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia  

> 2

Institute for Proble ms of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Chernogolovka, Russia  

> 3

Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia, Moscow, Russia  

> 4

ICMUB, UMR 6302 CNRS -Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, Dijon, France 

e-mail address:  kartasova9natali@gmail.com 

A promising direction of modern electrochemical energy science is redox flow batteries (RFB), which 

allow to generate and store electric energy as a result of electrochemical reactions of liquid reagents with 

high energy capacity - an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent. In the article [1] it was shown that it is 

possible to carry out the electroreduction of bromate anions in acidic media on catalytically weakly active 

electrodes (for example, ca rbon) via the redox mediator mechanism provided by the Br 2/Br – redox couple. 

Later in the article [2], a hybrid chemical power source was demonstrated — a hydrogen -bromate redox 

flow battery using the cathodic reaction of the reduction of bromates in an ac idic medium. In order to 

expand the range of oxidiz ing agents that are potentially prospective for chemic al power sources of this 

type . We studied a flow cell with hydrogen gas oxidation at anode an в reduction of solutions of chlorates 

and their mixtures with bromates at cathode. 

Positive electrode based on Toray TGPH 120 cаrbon paper and the negative one consisted of Pt / C 

catalyst with a Pt loading of 1.175 g/cm 2 spread on Sigraset 39AA gas diffu sion layer were separated by 

Nafion 117 membrane . Hydrogen gas was supplied to the negative electrode, and 25 ml of an acidified 

solution of sodium halogenates of various compositions were pumped through the positive electrode in a 

cyclic mode. The current generated by the cell was measured at a constant voltage of 0.5 V (the OCP 

voltage was about 1.4V) until the oxidizer has been completely exhausted. The moment of complete 

conversion of catholyte solution was determined by the current approach to zero. It was found that for 

sulfuric acid concentration in the bromate -chlorate mixture below 1 M, the current generated by the cell is 

associated with the process of bromate reduction only , while chlorate acts as an indifferent additive. With 

an increase of the acid con centration over 3 M, the fraction of chlorate ions involved in the redox 

transformation increases and reaches unity at 6 M H 2SO 4. In addition, the use of oxidizing solution 

containing 6 M H 2SO 4 acid without addition of bromate results in a discharge current that flows after a 

certain induction period up to the complete reduction of chlorate to chloride. To s tudy the processes 

occurring at cathode, we used the method of spectrophotometric analysis of the electrolyte at the outlet of 

cathode half -cell, which allowed us to determine the nature of the redox -mediator couple during reduction 

of the chlorate anion. 

Acknowledgments. The reported study was funded by the Russian Science Foundation according to the 

research project № 20 -63 -46041. 

References :

1.Vorotyntsev M.A., Konev D.V., Tolmachev Y.V. Electroreduction of halogen oxoanions via 

autocatalytic redox mediation by halide a nions: novel EC” mechanism. Theory for stationary 1D regime// 

Electrochim. Acta. 2015. V. 173. P.779. 

2.Vorotyntsev M.A., Antipov A.E. Bromate electroreduction in acidic solution inside rectangular channel 

under flow -through porous electrode conditions// E lectrochim. Acta. 2019. V. 323. P. 134799. Electrochemical study of anatase TiO 2 nanotube array s

# electrode in low viscosity ionic liquid electrolyte 

Snežana Papović , Nikola Cvjetićanin *, Milan Vraneš , Slobodan Gadžurić 

Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry andEnvironmental Pro tection, University of 

Novi Sad, Trg DositejaObradovića 3, Novi Sad 21000, Serbia 

> *

Faculty of Physical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentski trg12 -16, Belgrade 11158, Serbia 

Ionic liquids (ILs) , room temperature molten salts, can be considered as electrolytes for next generation of 

lithium -ion batteries (L IBs),  because of their low flammabilit y, thermal stability , good conductivity and 

wide electrochemical stability window . In order to decrease viscosity and further increase conductivity 

ILs are us ually combined with some organic solvent (cosolvent) for L IBs applications 1,2 . In this work the 

0.5 M solution of LiTFSI salt in low viscosity ionic liquid 1,3 -diethylimidazolium 

bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, (C 2C2imTFSI), without cosolvent, was teste d as electrolyte for LIBs by 

using robust anatase TiO 2 nanotube array s (NTAs) electrode . The galvanostatic (GS) testing was 

performed at different current rates and also at different temperatures, 25 -55 oC, at current rate 3C, Fig. 1. 

Capacity of TiO 2 NTAs is due to both bulk and surface storage of Li +-ion, and significantly increases with 

temperature increase. GS experiments demonstrated excellent capacity retention with improved 

Coulombic efficiency during final cycling at current rate ~3 C , but with the d ecre ase in capacity of TiO 2

NTAs comparing to values before temperature raise or change of current rate 3. The decomposition of 

electrolyte was observed by detecting the change of colo ur of electrolyte in bottle type cell during 

experiments at elevated temp eratures. The formation of film on electrode surface and its increase after GS 

cycling at elevated temperatures was confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 T = 55 C      

> T= 45 C
> T= 35 C
> T= 25 C
> discharge capacity
> charge capacity

Cycle number         

> 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Capacity / mAh g−
> Coulombic efficiency / %

Fig 1. Charge /discharge performance of anatase TiO 2 NTAs in LiTFSI/ C2C2imTFSI electrolyte at 

different temperatures at current rate  3 C 

## 1. M. Vraneš, N. Cvjetićanin, S. Papović, B. Šarac, I. Prislan, P. Megušar, M. Bešter -Rogač, S. 

Gadžurić, Electrical, electrochemical and thermal properties of the ionic liquid + lactone binary 

mixtures as the potential electrolytes for lithium -ion batteries, J. Mol. Liquids 243 (2017) 52 –60. 

## 2. S. Papović, N. Cvjetićanin, S. Gadžurić, M. Bešter -Rogač, M. Vraneš, Physicochemical and 

electrochemical characterisation of imidazolium based IL + GBL mixtures as electrolytes for 

lithium -ion batteries, PCCP 19 (2017) 28139 –28152. 

## 3. M. Vraneš , N. Cvjetićani n, S. Papović , M. Pavlović , I. Szilágyi , S. Gadžurić , Electrochemical 

study of anatase TiO 2 nanotube array electrode in electrolyte based on 1, 3 -diethylimidazolium 

bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ionic liquid, Ionics 25 (2019) 5501 .

Acknowledgement s: This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Education , Science 

and Technological Development of Serbia under project contract ON172012 and III 4501 4.Quinone -bromide redox flow battery with inexpensive negolyte based 

# on anthraquinone sulfonation products 

M.M. Petrov 1,2 , R.D. Pichugov 1, A. V. Alekseenko 2, P.A. Loktionov 1, A.E. Antipov 1,2 , D.V. Konev 1,2 ,

M.A. Vorotyntsev 1, 2,3,4 

(1) Institute for Proble ms of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 

Chernogolovka, Russia 

(2) D. I. Mendeleev Russian University of Chemical Technology, Moscow, Russia 

(3) M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 

(4) Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistr y and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, 

Moscow, Russia 

mikepetrovm @gmail.com 

Redox flow batteries (RFB) is a promising secondary chemical source of current for long -term 

energy storage used for sm art energy networks [1]. Recently the attent io n of researchers has been 

attracted to various RFBs organic redox couples which are characterized by good kinetics, availability of 

primary products and variability: the addition of certain functional groups ca n significantly change the 

solubility or sta nd ard potential of the redox pair. 

Anthraquinone -bromine RFB was presented in [2], where anthraquinone -2,7 -disulfonic acid 

used as n egoly te can be synthesized by relatively simple anthraquinone sulfonation proces s. This RFB 

demonstrated promising character is tics, however, the possibility to use the products of synthesis as 

negoly te was not demonstrated ether in this or in subsequent papers. 

In this study, a series of anthraquinone sulfonic derivatives was obtaine d by sul fonation of 

anthraquinone with oleum varying following key parameters: synthesis time, concentration of reagents, 

temperature. As a result, we obtained various mixtures of anthraquinone (2 ,6 and 2 ,7-) disulfonic acids as 

well as monosulfonic acids, the quantitative ratios of which were estim at ed using deconvolution of cyclic 

voltammetry data. 

The resulting mixtures were tested as negoly te in anthraquionone -bromine RFB. It was shown 

that the characteristics of tested RFBs do not differ and in some ca ses even surpass the similar 

characteristics for RFBs , using pure anthraquinone -2,7 -disulfonic acid as n egoly te. F or example, a 

mixture of products with a total concentration of 0.212 M disulfonic acid with the trace concentration of 

monosulfonic derivativ e demonstrated maximum discharge power about 145 mW/cm 2 (similar 

characteristic for RFB with pure anthraquinone -2,7 -disulfonic acid was 105 mW/cm 2), energy efficiency 

and electrolyte utilization during cycling tests are about 70 and 85%, respectively . The data obtained 

confirm the possibility to use sulfonation products of anthraquinones as n egoly te s in organic RFB .

Acknowledgements: 

The reported study was funded by RFBR according to the research project № 18 -03 -00574 .

References: 

[1] Weber, A.Z., Mench, M.M ., Meyers, J.P. et al. (2011). Redox flow bat teries: a review. Journal of 

Applied Electrochemistry, 41, 1137 –1164. 

[2] Huskinson, B., Marshak, M., Suh, C. et al. (2014). A metal -free organic –inorganic aqueous flow 

battery. Nature, 505, 195 –198. The Successive Reduction Approach in Water in Oil Microemulsion 

# Synthesis of Bimetallic Nanoparticles 

Mila N. Krstajic Pajic 1,* , Sanja I. Stevanovic 2, Vuk V. Radmilovic 1, Piotr Zabinski 3, Nevenka R. 

Elezovic 4, Velimir R. Radmilovic 5, Snezana Lj. Gojkovic 1, Vladislava M. Jovanovic 2

> 1

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, Serbia ,2Department of Electrochemistry, 

ICTM, University of Belgrade, Serbia , 3AGH University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Non -

Ferrous Metals, Krakow, Poland ,4Institute for Multidisciplinary Research, University of Belgrade, 

Serbia , 5Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, Serbia 

*mpajic@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

Ever growing need for en ergy has le d the world to the edge of complete exploitation of fossil fuels, a nd 

the verge of irreversible environmental damage. It is imperative that we start fully relying on renewable 

sources, and for that, the electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems are required. Fuel cells, 

as energy conversion devices, are the most promising ones, using hydrogen or small organic molecules -

SOMs as fuels ( energy carrier s). SOMs such as methanol, ethanol or formic acid have been use d as an 

alternative to hydrogen, due to their low production cost, safe handling and use in the liq uid sate and ease 

of implementation in the existing distribution systems. The reactions of methanol oxidation (MOR) and 

formic acid oxidation (FAOR) are studied in the present study. 

State of the art anodic catalysts are usually platinum group metals (PGM ) or their bimetallic 

combinations, in the form of nanoparticles (NPs), supported on high area carbons. One of the ways to 

synthesize them is the water in oil microemulsion method [1] , which allows the use of surfactants and 

capping agents to affect the pa rticle shape. Since MOR and FAOR are structure sensitive, NP shape and 

composition affect the catalytic performance. In our previou s work we have successfully synthesized 

shaped Pt/C catalysts, and then bimetallic PtAu/C catalysts with this method, using t he simultaneous 

reduction approach (both precursors are in the same microemulsion - ME) [2,3 ], while at this point the 

successive approach is employed ( reduction of Pt in one ME, joining with other ME with Au precursor, 

second reduction) , with low Au loadi ng of less than 5% . The results of Energy Dispersive X -ray 

Spectroscopy ( EDS ) and electrochemical characterization are shown in Fig 1 (A -D). This way, more Au 

was obtained on the surface, as expected, which contributed to a better catalysis in FAOR – highe r

activity and favoring of a direct mechanism (due to more pronounced ensemble effect), and better catalyst 

stability in MOR (due to weaker CO bonding). The change in particle shape and surface structure with 

extremely fine distribution of Au, and a higher share of Au at particle surface, as benefits of the 

successive reduction synthesis proc edure have a high impact on catalytic performance. 

Fig 1. HAADF image (A) and EDS map (B) of the PtAu/C SUC (25%HCl) sample; initial CV at AP surface 

of Pt and PtAu samples (C), initial anodic scan of FAOR at AP surface of Pt and PtAu samples (D) 

References 

[1] R.A. Martinez -Rodriguez et al. J. A m. Chem. Soc. 136 (2014) 1280 -1283 

[2] M.N. Krstajić Pajić et al.  Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 196 (2016) 174 -184 

[3] M.N. Krstajić Pajić et al.  Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 243 (2019) 585 -593 Electrolyte pH as a means of controlling the selectivity of CO 2

# reduction reaction and the kinetics of H2 evolution reaction 

Akansha Goyal , Marc T.M Koper *

Leiden Institute of Chemistry , Leiden University 

PO Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 

a.goy al@lic .leidenuniv.nl 

It has long been recognized that metal -electrolyte interactions at the electrified solid -liquid interface play 

an important role in controlling the intrinsic kinetics of electrocatalytic reactions. Additionally, reaction 

(heterogeneou s and/or homogenous) induced concentration gradients in the d iffusion layer can further 

alter the mechanistic pathways of electrocatalytic reactions by modifying the availability of the competing 

reactant species. In this framework , (local) electrolyte pH is one of the most important parameter in 

aqueous electrocatalysis, since it affects both the composition and the structure of the electrical double 

layer. In this work , we emphasize the importance of this crucial parameter, by first discussing the role of 

electrolyte pH in controlling the selectivity of the CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2RR) on Au electrodes in 

weakly buffered bicarbonate electrolytes and thereafter, by presenting a detailed quantitative 

understanding on the pH dependent kinetics of hydrogen e volution reaction (HER) on Au electrodes 

under alkaline conditions .

At present, the economic feasibility of electrochemical CO2RR remains an issue, primarily due to 

efficiency losses from the concomitant HER . In this context, a better understanding of pola rization 

induced local pH gradients at the interface and their role in the kinetic competition of CO2RR and HER 

will be crucial for the optimization of this reaction . Here , we will present a new implementation of the 

well -known rotating ring -disk electrode (RRDE) technique to study the role of local pH gradients on the 

selectivity of CO2RR under well -defined mass transport conditions 1. In essence, this work shows that 

enhanced mass transport acts as a pH regulator and supp resses the local build -up of hydroxyl ions, which 

in -turn inhibits the HER (w ater mediated) during CO2RR and dictates the overall Faradaic selectivity of 

these two competing reactions (as shown in Figure 1) .

Interestingly, this work also shows that OH - ion s affect the kinetics of water reduction reaction on Au 

electrodes such that the HER activity improves with the increasing p H. This de viat es strongly from the 

previously reported trend for the Pt (111) surface and the well -established trends for pH dependen ce of 

HER under acidic pH conditions 2. In addition to the pH dependence, we observe that the activity of HER 

also increases with the cation concentration in the electrolyte . Here, we will show that these two 

seemingly independent trends are in -fact caused by the same phenomenon, namely, the cation assisted 

enhancement of the rate determining water dissociation step (Volmer step). It is well known that the 

interfacial electric field shifts with the electrolyte pH (on the RHE scale) . We propose that this pH 

dependent electric field i nduce s cation concentration changes near the surface , leading to a pseudo pH 

dependence for HER (as shown in Figure 2) . We also p resent a quantitative analytical model formulated 

from theory, which captures the pH (and/or mass transport) dependence of HER as an inherent feature of 

the cation dependence of HER which further validates our experimental findings. Therefore, this work 

pr ovides crucial insights for the design of optimized electrolyte pH conditions for HER in alkaline media. 

1. Goyal, A.; Marcandalli, G.; Mints, V. A.; Koper, M. T. M., Competition between CO2 Reduction and 

Hydrogen Evolution on a Gold Electrode under Well -Defined Mass Transport Conditions. Journal of the 

American Chemical Society 2020, 142 (9), 4154 -4161. 

2. Ledezma -Yanez, I.; Wallace, W. D. Z.; Sebastián -Pascual, P.; Climent, V.; Feliu, J. M.; Koper, M. T. 

M., Interfacial wat er reorganization as a pH -dependent descriptor of the hydrogen evolution rate on 

platinum electrodes. Nature Energy 2017, 2, 17031. Interactions of Zn(II) with DNA Holliday Junction Assemblies: 

# Genotoxicity of ZnCl 2 and Its Prevention 

Toni Vitasovi ć, Steffan Møller Sønderskov, Mingdong Dong, and Elena E. Ferapontova 

> a

Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University , Gust av Wieds Vej 14, 

DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark 

Corresponding author’s e -mail:  tvitasovic@inano.au.dk 

Over the past two decades, DNA -based nanotechnology has largely focused on developing ultrasensitive 

bioelectr onic nanodevices that are capabl e of processing environmentally generated signal s.1

Consequently , branched DNA Holliday Junctions (HJ) have attracted increased attention as cation -

controlled nanosc ale switches .2-3

In this work, we investigate d the feasibility of controlling reversible switching of DNA HJ and formation 

of the DNA HJ -based origami scaffolds by Zn 2+ ions , introduced in the form of either chlorid e or sulfate. 

Besides being one of the most abundant essential micro elements in the human body, Zn 2+ ions are not 

directly involved in redox reactions in biological s ystems ,4 which have made them appealing cation 

candidate s for our researc h. The conformational switching of HJ was monitored using Fluorescence 

Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) between donor and acceptor dyes each located at the terminus of one 

of the arms, while liquid Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) was used for visualization of th e switching 

process by the construction of DNA origami assemblies in Zn 2+ solutions .

Surprisingly, the Cl – ions , unlike the SO 42– ions, detrimenta lly affected the HJ switching process in the 

presence of Zn 2+ ions . The evidence of that outcome was clearly visible using AFM imaging technique 

which displayed Zn /Cl -containing deposits formation within DNA HJs , which was also confirmed 

electrochemically . However, f urther research demonstrated that the presence of ascorbic acid or other 

antioxidant species prevented the effect of zinc removal from solutions caused by Cl – ions. Thus, t his 

work represents a plain way of controlling the switching /assembly pro cess es induced by zinc chloride 

with the presence of biologically relevant antioxidants and allow s a flawless design of new DNA HJ -

based nanosw itch ing biosystem s.

Keywords : DNA Holliday Junction, zinc cations , FRET, AFM, nanoswitch ing 

References 

1. Lu, C. -H.; Willner, B.; Willner, I., DNA Nanotechnology: From Sensing and DNA Machines to 

Drug -Delivery Systems. ACS Nano 2013 , 7, 8320 -8332. 

2. Mount, A. R., et al., The Stability and Characteristics of a DNA Holliday Junction Switch. 

Bi ophys Chem 2006 , 124 , 214 -21. 

3. Ferapontova, E. E.; Mountford, C. P.; C rain, J.; Buck, A. H.; Dickinson, P.; Beattie, J. S.; 

Ghazal, P.; Terry, J. G.; Walton, A. J.; Mount, A. R., Electrochemical Control of a DNA Holliday 

Junction Nanoswitch by Mg2+ Ions. Biosens Bioelectron 2008 , 24 , 422 -8. 

4. Tapiero, H.; Tew, K. D., Trace Elements in Human Physiology and Pathology: Zinc and 

Metallothioneins. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 2003 , 57 , 399 -411. Ultrasensitive Electrocatalytic Analysis of Escherichia coli at DNA 

# modified Gold Electrodes 

Rimsha Binte Jamal and Elena E. Ferapontova 

> a

Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University Gustav Wieds Vej 14, 

DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark 

Corresponding author’s e -mail:  ribja@inano.au.dk 

Sensitive, specific and r apid detection of bacterial colonies is becoming the need of the hour . Food spo ilage, 

prevention of pathogenic infections and antimicrobial resistance put such detectio n systems at highest priority in 

food and medicine industry . [1] Among these microbial communities, the bacterial strain of Escherichia coli (E. 

coli ) is most commonly found, with pathogenic and non -pathogenic strains being biomarkers of bacterial 

contamination . [2] Here, we develop ed a novel electrochemical assay for E.coli utilizing DNA as electric al wires, 

mediating electron transfer between gold electrodes and a well -known DNA intercalator, Methylen e Blue 

(MB). The binding of E. coli specific target DNA to the capture DNA -modified gold electrode surface triggers the 

intercalation of MB present in solution with in the hybrid structure. The signal from MB is further 

electrocata lytically amplified in reaction with a commonly used redox indicator ferricyanide wh ose 

electrochemical reduction is otherwise very slow on the DNA -modified surfaces. The developed assay allows 

down to attomolar detection of both synthetic and isolated E. coli DNA and RNA . The high sensitivity of the 

assay allows direct appl ication of it in point -of -care and industrial platforms for analysis of raw or minimally 

processed samples. 

Keywords: Electrochemical detection, Me thylene Blue, Escherich ia coli 

References 

[1] E. E. Ferapontova, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2020 , 19 , 153 -161. 

[2] J. J. Luna -Guevara, M. M. P. Arenas -Hernandez, C. Martinez de la Pena, J. L. Silva, M. L. Luna -

Guevara, Int J Microbiol 2019 , 2019 , 2894328. A novel CuO/Cu -N-C electrocatalyst -based gas diffusion electrode for 

# the selective electro -reduction of CO 2

Vimanshu Chanda 1, Joao Junqueira 2, Tim Bobrowski 2, Wolfgang Schuhmann 2 and Corina Andronescu 1 

> 1

Technical Chemistry III – Faculty of Chemistry, University Duisburg -Essen, Carl -Benz -Straße 199, 

47057 Duisburg, Germany  

> 2

Analytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany 

Email:  vimanshu.chanda@uni -due.de 

The efficient electrochemical conversion of CO 2 to valuable energy -dense chemicals and synthetic fuels 

such as e.g. ethylene and ethanol is an attractive r oute for curbing greenhouse gas emissions. 1 However, 

the reduction of CO 2 is quite tedious as it involves multi proton -multi electron transfer reactions to 

overcome the inherent large energy barriers. Among various metals, Cu is the only metal that can red uce 

CO 2 into various value -added multi -carbon (C 2+ ) products. 2 Recently, metal -nitrogen -doped carbon 

materials (M -N-Cs) have emerged as a class of materials displaying up to 80% faradaic efficiency for CO 

formation (Fe -N-C) at comparatively low overpotenti als ( -0.55 V vs. RHE) 3 compared to metals alone. 

These M -N-C materials contain M -Nx sites which have been shown to be active sites in the CO 2RR. Gas 

diffusion electrodes (GDEs) were recently reported as ideal electrodes for conversion of gaseous reactants 

in aqueous environment at relevant current densities (> 200 mA cm -2). 4 The presence of a three -phase boun -

dary allows a higher gas concentration to reach the catalyst’s active sites, since a high solubility of gaseous 

reactants in aqueous environment is no longer required. Additionally, the use of GDEs allows that CO 2RR 

is performed in alkaline environment which was shown to favour the C -C coupling and formation of high 

C products (C≥2) via CO 2RR together with suppression of the H 2 evolutio n reaction. Herein, we report the 

fabrication of a CuO/Cu -N-C type electrocatalyst directly immobilized on the current collector by using a 

benzoxazine monomer 5 and copper acetate as carbon, nitrogen and Cu precursor, respectively. This 

involves direct cat alyst synthesis on the current collector by spray coating the mixture of the benzoxazine 

monomer and Cu acetate onto a carbon paper followed by pyrolysis. The catalyst coated carbon paper is 

further converted into a gas diffusion electrode by spray coating of a Teflon layer. As control experiment, 

the “classical” approach in which the catalyst is pre -synthesized and then spray coated on a commercial gas 

diffusion layer is also presented and the results are comparatively discussed. Scanning electron microsco py 

(SEM) was used to assess the electrode morphology. The influence of the electrode structure on the CO 2RR 

selectivity performed in H -type modified cell in alkaline environment (pH ~ 13) evaluated based on gas 

chromatography (GC) and high liquid performan ce chromatography (HPLC) will be presented. 

Scheme: Electrochemical cell and SEM image of CuO/Cu -N-C. 

(1) Nielsen, D. U.; Hu, X. -M.; Daasbjerg, K. & Skrydstrup, T. Nat.  Catal . 2018 , 1, 244 –254 (2) Hori, Y.; 

Wakebe, H.; Tsukamoto, T.; Koga, O. Electrochim . Acta 1994 , 39, 1833−1839 (3) Varela, S. A.; Ju W.; 

Bagger, A.; Franco, P.; Rossmeisl J.; Strasser P.; ACS Catal . 2019 , 9, 7270−7284 (4) Burdyny T. and Smith 

W. A . Energy Environ. Sci . 2019 ,12, 1442 -1453 (5) Barwe, S.; Andronescu, C.; Masa, J.; Ventosa, E.; 

Klink, S.; Genc, A.; Arbiol, J.; Schuhmann, W.; ChemSusChem 2017 , 10, 2653 -265 

Acknowledgement : This research was funded by BMBF (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung) 

within the p roject “MatGasDif – NanoMATerialen als Basis für GasDIFfusionselektroden für die 

hochselektive CO 2 Reduktion“ – 03XP0263.  V. C. acknowledges a PhD fellowship of the international 

Max Planck research school – SURMAT Electrospinning of carbon nanofibers decorated with Pt nanoparticles 

# as fuel cell electrocatalysts 

Nejc Hodnik 1,2,3 , Luigi Romano 1,2 , Francisco Ruiz Zepeda 3, Marjan Bele, 3 Luana Persano 1,2 , Andrea 

Camposeo 1,2 and Dario Pisignano 1,2,4 

> 1

Dipartimento di Mat ematica e Fisica “Ennio De Giorgi”, Università del Salento, via Arnesano, I -73100 

Lecce, Italy 

> 2

NEST, Istituto Nanoscienze -CNR, Piazza S. Silvestro 12, I -56127 Pisa, Italy 

> 3

Laboratory for Electrocatalysis , D epartment of Materials Chemistry , National Instit ute of Chemistry, 

Hajdrihova 19, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

> 4

Present address: Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo 3, I -56127 Pisa, Italy 

nejc.hodnik@ki.si 

Nanoscale architecture is very important for complex and advanced products like electro catalysts. The 

position and coordination of each atom define its activity, selectivity and also stability. In order to 

understand and optimize these properties, it is crucial to have control over thes e nanostructures. For the 

optimized operation of electro catalysts also the mass transport of reactants and products must be 

optimized. Typically movement of molecules is effected at the nano - to micro -scale. In order to combine 

both , mass transport and int rinsic electrocatalyst activity, electrospinning is recognized as a suitable 

method , where nano -sized fibers are produced with gr eat precision and relative ease. [2] 

The objective of electrospinning, as a simple, versatile, cost -effective and up -scalable approach, in our 

study was to fabricate one -dimensional mesostructured carbon nanofibers of controlled hierarchical 

features with Pt nanoparticles on the surface as electrocatalyst model electrode (Fig. 1a,b,c) . By taking 

advantage of the modern advanced characterization techniques like in -situ heating transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) and electrochemistry (cyclic voltammetry, methanol oxidation reaction, oxygen 

reduction reactions, floating electrode ) together with classical characterization like sca nning electron 

microscopy (SEM), we reveal several new insights. By appropriate annealing protocol (Fig. 1d) , we were 

able to produce carbon nanofibers decorated with Pt nanoparticles from polyacrylonitrile (PAN) mixed 

with Pt salt in one step ; with no Pt trapped inside the carbon matrix . This synthesis provides a facile way 

to produce effective high surface area Pt -electrodes. 

Figure 1 . a) photography, b) SEM, c) TEM and d) STEM of electrospun and s ubsequently annealed at 

1100°C Pt/C electrode. In the c) and d) Pt nanoparticles are clearly distinguished on the carbon nanofiber. 

References 

[1] N. Hodnik, G. Dehm, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Acc. Chem. Res. 49, 9 (2016). 

[2] D. Pisignano, Polymer Nanofibers : Building Blocks for Nanotechnology (Royal Society of 

Chemistry), 50 (2013). Structure activity investigation of Co 3O4 nanoparticles for the OER 

# reaction using scanning electrochemical cell microscopy 

Swapnil Varhade a, Sascha Saddler b, Harshitha Bari ke Aiyyappa a, Emmanuel Tetteh a, Thomas 

Quast a, Tsvetan Tarnev a, Simon Schumacher c , Corina Andronescu c, Stephan Schulz b, Wolfgang 

Schuhmann a 

> a

Analytical Chemistry – Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES) , Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry , Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany  

> b

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Duisburg -Essen, Institute of Inorganic Chemistry ,

D-45117 Essen, Germany  

> c

Chemical Technology III, Faculty of Chemistry and CENIDE - Center for Nanointegration 

University of Duisburg -Essen, Carl -Benz -Str. 199 , D-47057 Duisburg, Germany 

Email: swapnil.varhade@ rub .de 

Conventional ensemble -based electrochemical techniques such as rotating disk electrode and rotating ring 

disk electrode experiments provide insight into the electro catalytic reactions and hence forth provide 

information about activity, possible reaction mech anisms and understanding about the long -term stability 

of materials of interest . However, any further improvement in the intrinsic activity for a given 

electrocatalytic reaction of such nanopar ticles necessitates a thorough understanding of their structur e-

property relationships, particularly with respect to the size and shape -dependent electrocatalytic activity .

Importantly, in case of non -precious metal -based catalysts , the impact of the exposed crystal lattice 

including defects, local compositio nal changes as well as its dynamics during catalytic turnover needs to 

be understood to allow for a rational design of improved electro catalysts for complex multi -electron/multi -

proton transfer oxidation reactions. [1 ,2] 

In this direction, scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECC M) provide s vital insight into the 

structure -activi ty correlation at the nanoscale and is effective to study the morpho logy -based activities 

with in the confined area on a single substrate. [3 ,4 ] In the present wor k, Co 3O4 nanoparticles with different 

structural morphologies were studied using SECCM for the oxygen evolution reaction. Co 3O4 nanoparticles 

with different morphologies were deposited on glassy carbon plate s as well as on transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) grid s. Cyclic voltam mograms and linear sweep voltammogra ms were collected at 

nanoparticles from a large number of investigated droplet -wetted spots in a suitable potential range in 

presence of a redox couple as inter nal potential standard. Electrochemical results of SECCM scan were 

correlated with the particle morphology imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission 

electron microscopy (TEM) to elucidate the structure activity relations. 

[1] C. L. Bentley, M. Kang, P. R. Unwin, J. Am . Chem . Soc . 2019 , 141 , 2179 –2193. 

[2] M. Choi, N. P. Siepser, S. Jeong, Y. Wang, G. S. Jagdale, X. Ye, L. A. Baker, Nano Lett. 2020 .

[3] C. L. Bentley, J. Edmondson, G. N. Meloni, D. Perry, V. Shkirskiy, P. R. Unwin, Anal . Chem . 2019 ,

91 , 84 –108. 

[4] T. Tarnev, H. B. Aiyappa, A. Botz, T. Erichsen, A. Ernst, C. Andronescu, W. Schuhmann, Angew .

Chem . Int . Ed. 2019 , 58 , 14265 –14269. 

Acknowledgement: This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German 

Research Foundation) within the collaborative research centre/transregio 247 "Heterogeneous Oxidation 

Catalysis in the Liquid Phase" TRR 247 [388390466] as well as under Germany´s Excellence Strategy –

EXC 2033 – 390677874 – RESOLV . This project has received funding from the European Research 

Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Ca sCat 

[833408]) . S. V. acknowledges a PhD fellowship of the international Max Planck research school -

SURMAT Environmentally Friendly Synthesis of Platinum Group Metals 

# Nanoparticles and Electrocatalytic M aterials Based on Them 

Alexandra Kuriganova 1, Nikita Faddeev 1, Igor Leontyev 2, Nina Smirnova 1

> 1

Platov South -Russian St ate Polytechnic University (NPI), Russia 

> 2

Southern Federal University , Russia 

kuriganova_@mail.ru 

Nanoparticles of platinum group metals (PGMs) in particular Pt, Pd, Rh, are still the most effective 

catalysts for processes that occur in low -temperature fuel cells [1] . As a rule, chemical and 

electrochemical methods for producing nanostructures containing nano particles of PGMs are based on a 

“bottom -up ” approach, when simple elements (atoms, ions or molecules of precursor compounds) form 

systems with a complex structure . We propose a “top -down” method for producing electrocatalysts (M/C) 

based on Pt, Pd and Rh nanoparticles, which is based on the electrochemical dispersion of metal 

electrodes (Pt, Pd or Rh) under the action of an alternating pulse current. 

For the M/C ca talysts preparation two metal electrodes (Pt, Pd or Rh) with the same area immersed 

in the suspension of carbon support Vulcan XC -72 (CabotCorp., 240 m 2g−1 ) in aqueous electrolyte 

contained Na + cat ions. The electrodes are connected to ac source operatin g a t 50 Hz, current density 

1 A cm -2. Bulk metal electrodes were disper se to nanosized metal particles. Then, suspension was 

filtrated; prepared catalyst was rinsed with H 2O to a neutral pH and dried at 80 ◦C to constant weight. 

The mechanisms of the formati on of Pt, Pd, Rh nanoparticles in the conditions of electrochemical 

dispersion were established [2 -4] . It has been established that platinum and rhodium electrodes are 

dispersed to Pt and Rh nanoparticles, while palladium electrodes are dispersed with the formation of Pd -

PdO particles . Electrocatalystic activity of synthesized materials was studied using ethanol and formic 

acid oxidation reactions as an example and a high catalytic effect compared to standard materials was 

detected .

Based on the data ob tained on the processes of electrochemical dispersion of Pt, Pd and Rh 

electrodes and the formation of metal nanoparticles under the conditions of electrochemical dispersion of 

metals, we developed methods for the synthesis of Pt/C, Pd -PdO/C and Rh/C mater ials and investigated 

their electrocataly tic activity in anode processes [2 -4] .

Thus, t he proposed method M/ C obtaining as a re sult of electrochemical dispers ion of metals is 

technologically simple and environmentally safe because it does not involve the u se of organic solvents 

and capping agents. 

1. Durst , J.,  Simon , C.,  Hasché , F.,  Gasteiger  H. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015, 162 , F190 -F203 

2. Leontyev, I.,  Kuriganova , A.,  Kudryavtsev, Y., Dkhil, B.,  Smirnova , N. Appl. Cat. A. 2012, 431 -432 ,

120 -125 

3. Faddeev, N., Kuriganova, A., Leont′ev, I., Smirnova, N. Russ. J. Electrochem . 2019, 55 , 346 -350 

4. Kuriganova, A. , Faddeev, N. , Leontyev, I. , Allix, M. , Rakhmatullin, A. , Smirnova, N. 

ChemistrySelect , 2019, 4, 8390 -8393 

This work was funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Grant No. 18 -33 -20064 mol_a_ved) and 

Grant from the Presid ent of the Russian Federation for young Ph.D. scientists (MK -194.2019.3). Understanding the electrified interface of Cu -aqueous solution for CO 

# electroreduction 

Paula Sebastián -Pascual 1, F.J . Sarabia 2, V. Climent 2, J.M. Feliu 2, María Escudero -Escribano 1

1) Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen , Universiteparken 5, 2 100 Copenhagen, Denmark 

2) Instituto Universitario de Electroquímica, C./ San Vicente del Raspeig, 03690 Alicante , Spain 

paula.pascual @chem.ku.dk 

The conversion of greenhouse gases such as  CO 2 into renewable fuels and chemicals is one of 

the most importan t technological and environmental challenge s facing humanity . Electro chemical 

reduction of CO 2 and CO on Cu is a promising and sustainable alternative to produce fuels and chemicals, 

while contributing to close the unbalanced carbon cycle [1]. Recently, ef forts have been dedicated to find 

rational description of the mechanism of both CO 2 and CO reduction on Cu, which continue s being f ocus 

of debate [2]. Well -defined s tudies on Cu single -crystalline surfaces are key to elucidate the properties of 

the Cu -aque ous electrolyte interface , necessary to understand the ele ctrocatalytic properties of Cu. 

Here in, we study the interfacial properties of Cu (100) and Cu(111) in contact with di fferent 

classical electrolytes such as phosphate buffer solutions, bicarbonate so lutions and 0.1M NaOH solutions. 

In this study, we have combined cyclic voltammetry and the laser induced jump temperature technique to 

elucidate the structure of the Cu -electrolyte interface.  Voltammetric experiments aim to provide the 

fingerprint of both Cu(111) and Cu(100) , to be used as a parameter control of the surface state and 

experimental conditions in studies with Cu  [3] [4] . The laser induced temperature jump technique has been 

employed to obtain information about the distribution of the charge on both Cu(111) and Cu(100) 

surfaces, and then determinate their potential of zero charge ( pzc ) [5 ].  Overall, we discuss different 

aspects that we consider essential while investigating the interfacial properties for both CO and CO 2

reduction on Cu: evolutio n of the voltammogram features at different selected potential windows, specific 

anion adsorption and pH effects . This experimental study provides deep insights of the interfacial 

properties of Cu(111) an d Cu(100) which are crucial to reach deeper understa nding of the reduction of 

CO 2 and CO on Cu electrocatalysts .-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 

E / V vs RHE dE M/dT / mVK -1  pzc 

> Cu(111)|0.1M NaOH solution -150 -100 -50 050 100 150
> j /  A cm -2

Figure 1: Blank voltammogram of Cu(111) -0.1 M NaOH solution interface at 50mV/s and t hermal 

coefficients of the interfacial potential drop. 

REFERENCES 

[1] P. Sebastián -Pascual , …, M. Escudero -Escribano, ChemCatChem 2019 , 21 (0), 3626 –3645. 

[2] A. Bagger , et al., …, J. Rossmeisl J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 , 141 (4), 1506 –1514. 

[3] A. Tiwari, et al., …, S. H orch, ACS Energy Lett. 2019 , 4 (7), 1645 –1649. 

[4] P. Sebastian -Pascual , M. Escudero -Escribano, ACS Ene rgy Lett. 2020 , 5 (1) , 130 -135 

[5] P.Sebastián -Pascual, F. Sarabia, V. Climent, J.M. Feliu, M. Escudero -Escribano, in  preparat ion , 2020 .Hardness and Wear Resistance of Multilayered Ni -P Films Fabricated 

# by Pulsed Electroplating 

Hiroshi Kanemoto , Takuya Aoyagi, Toshinori Kawamura 

Hitachi , Ltd. 

Hitachi, Ibaraki, Japan 

hiroshi.kanemoto.uz@hitachi.com 

Industrial chrome plating, which has ex cellent hardness, corrosion resistance and wear resistance, 

has been widely used for various industrial products. In the plating process, hexavalent chromium 

specified as a substance of very high concern by environmental regulations is used. Therefore, pla ting 

technologies replacing the conventional chromium plating, such as trivalent chromium plating and Ni -

based composite plating, have been studied. In particular, multilayer plating in which different kinds of 

metal layers are alternately laminated, has b een also studied as one of the methods to improve hardness 

and wear resistance of the plated film. We focused on a multilayered Ni -P film to create a plated film that 

have hardness, wear resistance and corrosion resistance. In this study, multilayered Ni -P films were 

fabricated by pulsed electroplating, and the effe ct of multilayering on hardness and wear resistance was 

evaluated. 

A stainless steel SUS303 (thickness 3 mm) was used 

for the substrate. Typical pretreatments such as mirror 

polishing, degreasin g, acid treatment, and Ni strike plating 

(0.1 μm thick) were performed. In a multilayered Ni -P

plating process, a Ni plating bath containing additives such 

as phosphonic acid, sulfur -containing organic compounds 

and others was used. A pulsed constant current was applied 

to the substrate in the plating bath to fabricate multilayered 

Ni -P films with different layer thicknesses and layers 

structures. Heat treatment was performed at a predetermined 

temperature to harden the films. The plated films obtained by 

the above process was used as specimens (multil ayered 

films). For a reference, a monolayer Ni -P film was prepared 

by applying a con stant current (monolayer film). Each specimen had a total plating film thickness of 10 

μm. The cross section of each specimen was observed by SEM and STEM . Trace components in the film 

were analyzed by SIMS (Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry) and 3D atom pro be tomography. The 

Vickers hardness of each specimen was measured under a load of 25 gf. Wear resistance was evaluated 

using a reciprocating sliding tester in the air, at room temperature, under non -lubricated or lubricated 

conditions. The worn scar was ob served to measu re the worn volume quant itatively .

The cross -sectional microstructures of the monolayer and the multilayered (layer thickness: 500 nm) 

Ni -P films after annealing are shown (Fig. 1). The monolayer film showed a smooth surface, while the 

multi layered film showed a layered structure. Analysis of the trace components in the multilayered film 

showed that P concentration hardly changed and the concentration of the elements such as sulfur and so 

on derived from the additives increased along the boun dary of each layer. This is presumably because the 

additives were adsorbed on the plated film surface during the period when no current was applied and 

then were incorporated into the film during the subsequent period when a current was applied, in the 

pul se d electroplating process. The multilayered structure was maintained even after heat treatment, which 

is probably due to the suppression of grain growth b y the additives solid -soluted between the layers. 

Hardness and wear resistance of each film were meas ured. There was no signi ficant difference in 

hardness between the monolayer and the multilayered films. The multilayered film exhibited about 1.3 

times higher wear resistance than the monolayer film under non -lubricated. This result was discussed by 

fractography and molecular dynamics simulation for the Ni -P films. During the sliding test, cracks seem 

to occur not only on the surface of the film but also the inside due to the effect of shear stress distribution. 

Multiple c racks probably propagated and combined to cause significant del amination in the monolayer 

film. On the other hand, the interfaces between layers seem to suppress crack propagation in the 

multilayered film, resulting in small delamination, though cracks occ ur as in case of the monolayer film. 

The above results suggest that multilayering is e ffective for improving wear resistance , maintaining 

hardness in the multilayered Ni -P films. Solid state ionic conductors based on Lu -doped δ -Bi 2O3

A.  Petričević 1, A. Malešević 2, A. Radojković 2, M. Žunić 2, G. Branković 2, A. Dapčević 1

> 1

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, Karnegijeva 4, Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Institute for Multidisciplinary Research, Kneza Višeslava 1a, Belgrade, Serbia 

aleksandar.petricevic27@gmail.com 

Regarding limited fossil energy resources and 

hence the increasing demands for new highly efficient 

and environmentally friendly energy conversion 

devices, the widespread use of soli d oxide fuel cells 

(SOFCs) might become a keystone in near future. An 

SOFC is consisted of dense electrolyte which is 

sandwiched between two porous electrodes. Since the 

electrolyte is the most important part of an SOFC, 

oxide ion conductors applicable in SOFCs became the 

hot topic of modern research. The main requirement is 

to find a stable dense electrolyte material with 

increased conductivity at intermediate temperature. Two commercial electrolytes, yttria stabilized 

zirconia (YSZ) and gadolinia doped ce ria (GDC), are far to be ideal. The use of YSZ requires operating 

temperature s above 1000 °C while devices based on GDC are not efficient enough due to GDC lower 

conductivity at intermediate temperatures. 

The best candidate for an electrolyte in intermedi ate temperature SOFCs is undoubtedly fluorite 

structured bismuth oxide, i.e. δ -Bi 2O3, being the fastest known ionic conductor . However, this material is 

unstable upon heating/cooling but the use of dopant, such as Tm, led to the impressive stability and hi gh 

conductivity at intermediate temperatures [1] . Our findings indicated that Lu -doped δ-Bi 2O3 could show 

even better performances since Lu is smaller and more rigid dopant than Tm .

In this study, the possibility to stabilize -Bi 2O3 in Bi 2O3–Lu 2O3 system was investigated . Two 

starting mixtures of α -Bi 2O3 and Lu 2O3 with the following compositions (Bi 1–xLu x)2O3, x = 0.20 and 0.25, 

were dry homogenized in an agate mortar, heat treated at 750 °C for 3 h and then slowly cooled. The 

obtain powders we re characte rized by XRD and DTA techniques. Based on these results, t he targeted 

cubic single -phase δ -Bi 2O3 was successfully obtained within both systems. The unit cell parameter of 

obtained Lu -doped -Bi 2O3 decreases as the dopant content increases , as expected sinc e Lu 3+ is smaller 

cation than Bi 3+ . According to cyclic DTA curves, no phase transitions (25 – 980 °C) w ere observed for 

both phases, (Bi 0.8 Lu 0.2 )2O3 and (Bi 0.75 Lu 0.25 )2O3, indicating that these -Bi 2O3 phases are stable. 

Afterwards, half of obtained quant ity of each powder was mechanochemically treated (in 

planetary ball mill Retsch PM -100) in order to decrease the crystallite size. Namely, before performing 

EIS measurements the powders undergo to pressing and then sintering to obtain dense ceramic pellets. 

This is also important for their future application in SOFC since the density of almost 100% is mandatory 

in order to avoid the direct contact of air (oxygen) and fuel (hydrogen). The density of sintered pellets 

obtained fr om both untreated and mechanochemically treated powders will be compared. Using EIS 

technique, t he ionic conductivity will be measured for the samples having the highest density. We expect 

that these materials will exhibit the conductivities which are high er than those obtained for Tm -doped 

-Bi 2O3 (0.1 – 0.4 S cm –1 at 550 – 800 °C). 

Such stability and extraordinary conductivit y would open the possibility for application of 

(Bi 0.8 Lu 0.2 )2O3 and (Bi 0.75 Lu 0.25 )2O3, which could result in the significant enhan cement of electrochemical 

performance of intermediate temperature SOFC s but also in their good stability over long time service. 

[1] A. Dapčević, D. Poleti, J. Rogan, A. Radojković, M. Radović, G. Branković, A new electrolyte based 

on Tm 3+ -doped δ -Bi 2O3-type phase with enhanced conductivity, Solid State Ionics 280 (2015) 18 –23. Fe2O3-HC and Fe 2N-HC Com posite s as Negative Material s for 

# Sodium -ion battery 

Bowen Liu , Andrew L. Hector , Richard G. A. Wills 

School of Chemistry, University of Southampton , SO17 1BJ , UK 

BL3Y17 @soton.ac.uk 

Sodium -ion batter ies (SIB s) are a low cost and high performanc e alternati ve to lithium -ion batteries . [1]

Hard carbon ( HC ) has graphitic regions but overall a diso rdered structu re . HC exhibit s fairly good 

performance as a SIB negative electrode mater ial with over 250 mA h g-1 of re versible capacit y. The

majority of its capacity is utili sed nea r 0V (vs. Na +/Na ). [ 2] Metal oxides and nitrides (MO and MN ) have 

high theorical ca pacit ies due to a conversion mechanism in which they are reduced to the metal . [3] Our 

interest is combining MO or MN with HC to increase the capacity oh HC whilst mitigating some of the 

deficiencies in the oxide or nitr ide, inclu ding cost and volume changes, by supporting them in 

nanoparticle form on HC surfaces . [4 ] Here we have use d a hy drothermal method to coat iron (II ) oxalate 

on HC surface s and calcine d the precursor in air to obtain Fe 2O3-HC composite s. Heating the same 

precursor in ammonia results in Fe 2N-HC composite s. The compos ite s were test ed in sodium half -cell s.

The hydrothermal process reduced the performance of the HC itself, but the co nversion materials adde d

significant extra capacity to th at of the HC and this extra capacity persisted during cycling . Future work 

will aim to find routes to such composites that do not damage the performance of the HC host but do 

allow the extra capacity to be accessed. 

Fig 1 cycling performance of HC (after hyd rothermal treatment ), Fe 2O3-HC and Fe 2N-HC between 2 and 

0.001V (vs. Na +/Na ) at 100 mA g -1 in sodium half -cells .

[1] M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Fu nct. Mater. , 2013, 23 , 947 -958 .

[2] K. C. Wasalathilake, H. Li, L. Xu and C. Yan, J. Energy Chem. , 2020, 42 , 91 -107 .

[3] X. Deng , Z. Chen and Y . Cao, Mate r. Today Chem. , 2018, 9, 114 -132. 

[4] H. Cheng, A. L. Hector, N. Garcia -Araez and S. Soulé, Inorg. Ch em., 2019, 58 , 5776 -5786 .Novel Double Passivation G alvanic Displacement Method for 

# Production of High Performance Pt -alloy Electrocatalysts 

Matija Gatalo , Marjan Bele a, Francisco Ruiz -Zepeda, Ana Rebeka Kamšek , Primož Jovanovič, Nejc 

Hodnik , and Miran Gaberšček 

Department of Mate rials Chemistry, N ational Institute of Chemistry 

Hajdrihova Ulica 19, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

Matija.gatalo@ki.si 

The most vital part of proton exchange membrane fuel cell s (PEMFC) – the electrocatalyst still contains 

too high quantities of critical raw material platinum (Pt) . While so -called non -PGM catalysts are expected 

to become the solution in a quite distant future, the current state -of -the -art approach of lowering the need 

for Pt can be achieved by alloying Pt with other transition metals. While Pt -alloys (Pt -M; M = Cu, Ni, Co, 

...) are already pretty well understood and have already by -far exceeded the targeted goals for sluggish 

oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), methods for its facile and high scale production are still rather limited. 

We hereby pr esent a novel approach towards well -known galvanic displacement (GD) method that was 

initially made popular by R.R. Adržić with the Pt -monolayer electrocatalysts. [1] 

Our ''trick'' is a unique ''double passivation'' approach towards galvanic displacement method. [2,3] The 

method enables facile (energy efficient), highly reproducible on several gram s scale, wat er -based (green) 

production of carbon supported Pt -M nanoparticles . The method offers great flexibility over the 

electrocatalyst design such as (i) the choice of the sacrificial metal (M), (ii) variation of the chemical 

composition of alloy (Pt:M ratio) , ( iii) variation of total metal loading (Pt+M) on carbon support or (iv) 

even variation of the carbon support itself. Among other benefits of the double passivation method, the 

sacrificial M on carbon (M/C) precursor does not need to have M in the form of na noparticles, as well as 

the methods exploits only spontaneous processes that occur at room temperature and ambient pressures. 

We have tested the method reproducibly on gram scale or above with respect to 4 different commercially 

available carbons, 4 differ ent Pt:M chemical compositions, 4 different total metal loadings (Pt+M) and 3 

different sacrificial M (Cu, Ni and Co which are the most promising state -of -the -art Pt -alloys). 

Scheme 1: Novel d ouble passivation with galvanic disp lacement method. 

References: 

[1] K. Sasaki, H. Naohara, Y. Cai, Y.M. Choi, P. Liu, M.B. Vukmirović, J.X. Wang, R.R. Adzić, 

Core -Protected Platinum Monolayer Shell High -Stability Electrocatalysts for Fuel -Cell Cathodes, 

Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 49 (2010) 8602 –8607. 

[2] M. Gatalo, M. Bele, F. Ruiz Zepeda, E. Šest, M. Šala, A.R. Kamšek, N. Maselj, T. Galun, P. 

Jovanovič, N. Hodnik, M. Gaberšček, A Double‐Passivation Water‐Based Galvanic Displacement 

Method for Repr oducible Gram‐Scale Production of High‐Performance Platinum‐Alloy 

Electrocatalysts, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 58 (2019) 13266 –13270. 

[3] M. Gatalo, N. Hodnik, M. Gaberšček, M. Bele, Method for Preparation of a Supported Noble 

Metal -metal Alloy Composite, and the Obtained Supported Noble Metal -metal Alloy Composite, 

LU101157, 2019. Single Bacterium Detection By Cellulase -Linked Sandwich 

# Immunoassays 

Elena E. Ferapontova a, Dmitrii Pankratov, a Mads Bendixen, a Stepan Shipovskov, a Ulrich Gosewinkel b

> a

Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University, Gustav Wieds Vej 14, 8 000 Aarhus 

C, Denmark, 

> b

Department of Environmental Science, Aarhus University, Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde ,

Denmark 

e-mail address:  elena.ferapontova@inano.au.dk 

Rapid detection of microorgani sms in water, food and air is the 1 st step in protection of human health. 

According to WHO, p athogenic bacteria , being one of the major human health threats , caused 15 million 

deaths only in 2010 and 13 million deaths are estimated for 2050 . Sensitive, spe cific, and yet inexpensive 

electrochemical biosensing approaches can provide the required tools for fast and robust analysis of 

pathogen s and thus disease prevention [1 -3]. 

Here, I discuss our recent achievements in the development of electrochemical “lab el -free” sensing 

approaches for detection of bacteria based on hydrolase -linked DNA and immunoassays on magnetic 

beads (MB). While bacterial DNA/RNA can be detected at a 1 fM level [4], electrochemical aptamer -

based and immunoassays on MBs allow single bac terium cell detection ( Figure 1 ), at a cost below 1 -2 € 

that favorably compete with the existing standard microbial counting and quantitative PCR analytical 

schemes. Fundamental problems and benefits of a

single cells detection as compared to traditional 1: 1

affinity DNA and protein assays [4,5] and arising 

specificity issues are discussed. 

Figure 1: Schematic presentation of the cellulase -

linked sandwich assay on MBs. An E. coli cell is 

sandwiched on MB between the aptamer and antibody; 

the sandwich is labelled with cellulase that digests the 

nitroc ellulose film on the electrode surface. Such 

digestion changes electrical properties of the film -

modified electrodes, which is electrochemically 

detected. 

References 

[1] Ferapontova E., Basic concepts and recent advances in electrochemical analysis of nu cleic acids. 

Curr. Opin. Electrochem . 2017 , 5, 218 -25 

[2] Campuzano S., Yáñez -Sedeño P., Pingarrón J.M., Electrochemical biosensing for the diagnosis of 

viral infections and tropical diseases. ChemElectroChem 2017 , 4, 753 -77 

[3] Ferapontova E.,  Electroche mical assays for microbial analysis: how far they are from solving 

microbiota and microbiome challenges.  Curr. Opin. Electrochem . 2020 , 19 , 153 -161 

[4] Fapyane D., Nielsen J., Ferapontova, E., Electrochemical enzyme -linked sandwich assay with a 

cellulase l abel for ultrasensitive analysis of synthetic DNA and cell -isolated RNA, ACS Sensors 2018 , 3,

2104 -2111; Shipovskov, S., Saunders, A.M., Nielsen, J.S., Hansen, M.N., Gothelf, K.V., and 

Ferapontova, E.E. Electrochemical sandwich assay for attomole analysis of DNA and RNA from beer 

spoilage bacteria Lactobacillus brevis , Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012 , 34 , 99 -106 

[5] Malecka K., Pankratov D., Ferapontova E. Femtomolar electroanalysis of a breast cancer biomarker 

HER -2/neu protein in human se rum by the cellulase -linked sandwich assay on magnetic beads, Anal 

Chim Acta 2019 , 1077, 140 -149 Investigation on Layered Double Hydroxides as Anode for 

# Lithium -Ion Batteries 

X. Li a, M. Fortunato b, A. Cardinale b, Q.Fu a, S. Dsoke a, c

> a

Institute for Applied Materials (IAM), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann -von -

Helmholtz -Platz 1, D -76344 Eggenstein -Leopoldshafen, Germany 

> b

Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale, Università di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 31, 16146 

Genova, Italy 

> c

Helmholtz -Institute Ulm for Electrochemical Energy Storage (HIU), P.O. Box 3640, D -76021 Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

E-mail: xinyue.li@partner.kit.edu 

NiAl layered double hydroxide ( NiAl LDH) with nitrates in its interlayer has been studied as anode 

material for lithium -ion batteries (LIBs). The e lectrochemical study demonstrate s that the NiAl LDH 

materials c an be applied as anodes with a very high specific capacity, with an initial discharge capacity of 

2222. 0 mAh g -1. The excellent Li +-storage performance is attributed to the expanded interlayer space of the 

NiAl LDH pillared by the interlayer nitrates, providing effective paths for Li + diffusion [1 -4] . CV cur ve s

show evident oxidation and reduction peaks corresponding to the flats of charge and discharge in the 

galvanostatic profile. In this work, we highlight the importance of the binder on th e cycling stability. 

Na + alginate can improve the stability respect to electrodes prepared with PVDF. The hypotesis is 

that Na + alginate as binder can estabilsh strong bonding between pillare d sites which lead s to a lower 

exfoliation of the material during cycling and consequently improve the stability performances .            

> Fig. NiAl LDH’s: (a) FE -SEM , (b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve with PVDF as binder, (c) Charge -discharge profil e
> with PVDF as binder (d)cycling performance with PVDF and Na +alginate as binder.

Acknowledgments: 

X. Li received financial support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC No. 201807565019, [2018]3101) 

during pursuit PhD degree in the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. This work contributes to the research 

performed at CELEST (Center for Electrochemical Energy Storage Ulm -Karlsruhe). 

References :

[1 ] L. Shi, et al. Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . Vol. 20 , no. 24 , pp. 16437 -16443 , 2018. 

[2] D. Bresser, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati , Energ . Environ . Sc i., vol. 9, no. 11, pp: 3348 –3367 , 2016. 

[3] Y. Lu, et al., Chem . vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 972 -996 , 2018. 

[4] Y . Zhao, et al., J. Mater.  Chem. A, vol. 25, no 7, pp. 15371 -15377, 2019. Mechanistic analysis of the catalytic oxidation of epinephrine by an 

# immobilized multicopper oxidase from Thermothelomyces thermophila 

# with the FTacV technique         

> D. Zouraris a,S. Kiafi a, A. Zerva b, E. Topakas b, A. Karantonis a
> aLaboratory of Physical Chemistry and Applied Electrochemistry, School of Chemical
> Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 15780 Zografou, Athens, Greece
> bInduBioCat Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National
> Technical Univers ity of Athens, 15780 Zografou, Athens, Greece
> dimzouraris@mail.ntua.gr

Several chemical scenarios, concerning the reaction of redox enzymes with their substrates, can 

be accessed electrochemically with the most common electrochemical technique for the k inetic 

analysis of enzyme reactions being cyclic voltammetry. When direct electron transfer between 

the enzyme and the electrode surface is possible, some problems that occur are the low currents 

and the dominance of capacitance currents. One attractive al ternative to overcome such problems 

is the use of FTacV (Fourier transform alternating current voltammetry) which has the advantages 

of both enhancing the Faradaic signal and eliminating the capacitance [1,2]. In this work, a kinetic 

analysis is made conce rning the reaction of an electroactive immobilized enzyme with a free 

substrate, based on a Michaelis -Menten scheme, the proposed kinetic equations are investigated 

numerically, under different reaction states (transient or steady state for the reaction in termediate 

as well as quasi or complete reversibility of the electrochemical step) and the dependence of two 

chief observables is examined. The FTacV method is applied experimentally for an immobilized 

laccase -like multicopper oxidase from Thermothelomyces thermophila , Tt LMCO1 [3], and its 

reaction with epinephrine is monitored. From the experimental findings it is shown that the 

intristic characteristics of the system do not lead to the extraction of the desired kinetic data, 

although indications on the re lation between the kinetic constants is revealed. Finally, the 

response of the third harmonic for the first additions of epinephrine at subnanomolarity range can 

be exploited for the detection of epinephrine at rather low concentrations. 

> References

1.D. Z ouraris, A. Karantonis,, J. Electroanal. Chem. 847 (2019) 113245. 

2. D. J. Gavaghan, A. M. Bond, J. Electroanal. Chem. 480 (2000) 133 –149. 

3. A. Zerva, E. Koutroufini, I. Kostopoulou, A. Detsi, E. Topakas, New Biotechnol. 49 (2019) 

10 –18. 3-cyano propionic acid methyl ester as alternative solvent for high 

# voltage dual carbon l ithium ion capacitors 

María Arnaiz 1, Eider Goikolea 2, Teófilo Rojo 1,2 , Ladyna Wittscher 3,4 , Andrea Balducci 3,4 and Jon Ajuria 1

> 1

Centre for Cooperative R esearch on Alternative Energies (C IC energiGUNE ), Basque R esearch and 

Technology Alliance (BRTA), Alava Technology Park, Albert Einstein 48 , 01510 Vitoria -Gasteiz , Spain 

> 2

University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, P.O. Box 644, 48080 Bilbao (Basque Country) 

> 3

Institute for Technical Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry Friedrich -Schiller -University Jena 

Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany 

> 4

Center for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena Friedrich -Schiller -University Jena 

Philosophenw eg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany 

marnaiz@cicenergigune.com 

Lithium ion capacitors (LICs) are aimed to cover the gap between lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and 

electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs), providing b oth high energy and high power densities. 

However, the performance of LICs can be hindered due to the high reduction potential of some negative 

electrodes or the limited electrochemical stability of the electrolyte at high potential values, ultimately 

redu cing the operational voltage window of the devic e. Thereby, in order to increase the operational 

voltage window of LICs and target high energy applications, the use of new solvents providing a wide 

electrochemical stability window at high potentials is for eseen. 

In this work we report for the first time the use of 3 -cyano propionic acid methyl ester (CPAME), with 

vinylene carbonate (VC) as additive, as an alternative solvent when targeting high voltage LICs [1] . In 

view of the promising viscosity, conductiv ity and electrochemical stability window, its use in a LIC is 

explored. To this end, a hard carbon (HC) is selected as the negative electrode, while an activated carbon 

(AC) is the preferred choice as the positive electrode, both being biomass (olive -pits) waste derived. 

Electrochemical characterization of the HC shows good specific capacities at both low and high current 

densities ( e.g. 322 mAh g-1 at C/10 and 80 mAh g-1 at 10 C). In addition, the cyclic voltammogram of the 

AC reveals a stable electrochemi cal potential window rising to 4.6 V vs. Li +/Li. This fact allows to 

develop a LIC operating at 1.5 - 4.5 V able to deliver high energy and high power density values 

(i.e. 121 Wh kg -1AM at 299 W kg -1AM and 69 Wh kg -1AM at 2217 W kg -1AM , Figure 1 ). Moreover, it shows a 

capacitance retention of 70% after 5000 cycles. 100 1000 10000 10 100 

> LIC (CPAME,1:1, 1.5-4.3V) LIC (CPAME,1:0.5, 1.5-4.5V) LIC (EC:DMC, 1:1, 1.5-4.2V) EDLC (ACN, 0-2.7V)
> Energy density (Wh kg AM -1 )

Power density (W kg AM -1 )   

> 10h 1h 10min 1min 10s 1s

Figure 1. Ragone plot with the studied LICs and their EDLC counterpart. Open points show where 

lithium plating occurs. 

[1] M. Arnaiz, E. Goikolea, T. Rojo, L. Wittscher, A. Balducci, J. Ajuria, On the use of 3 -cyanopropionic 

acid methyl ester as alternative solvent for high voltage dual carbon lithium ion capacitors, Journal of 

Power Sources. 434 (2019) 226757. Intermetallic Compounds as Platform Materials  to 

# Discriminate Electronic and Geometric E ffects in Electrocatalysis 

Ridha Zerdoumi , Stefan Barth, Marc Armbrüster* 

Chemnitz University of Technology, 

09107 Chemnitz, Germany 

marc.armbruester@chemie.tu -chemnitz.de 

Bimetallic systems can provide enhanced electrocatalytic activity and/or selectivity due to their altered 

electronic and/or crystal structure, which changes the adsorption energies of the reactants and/or the 

products in a chemical reaction [1 -3]. These two effects are the main parameters governing the catalytic 

properties of a material. However, they are often interrelated and can be difficult to distinguish from one 

another due to segregation and random distribution of the elements in  substitutional alloys . Interme tallic 

compounds are formed by at least two elements and possess an at least partially ordered crystal structure 

different from that of the constituting elements. In combination with the reduced segregation tendency, they 

provide an excellent material platform for a knowledge -based approach aiming for the evaluation and 

optimization of struc tural and/or electronic effects in heterogeneous catalysis (Fig. 1) . The gradual 

substitution of one element by another from a different group in isostructural intermetallic compounds 

allows a systematic variation of the total number of electrons per unit cell with a minor variation of the cell 

parameters [4] . Thus, electronic influences can be evaluated with only small structural influences. In 

addition , the substitution of one element by another from the same group allows a systematic variation of 

the cell parameters , thus interatomic distances, with the same total number of valence electrons per unit 

cell , therefore limiting electronic influences .

Figure 1. The isostructural triangle MPd 2 (M = Sn , I n or Ga) with the corresponding unit cell. 

Herein, the correlation between electronic , geometric and electrocatalytic properties in the electrochemical 

methanol oxidation are investigated by increasing the valence electron count per unit cell by substituti on 

of indium (three valence electrons) with tin (four valence electrons) in the isostructural series In 1-xSn xPd 2.

Furthermore, geometric effects were evaluated by decreasing the volume of the unit cell by substitution of 

indium with gallium in the isostructural series Ga 1-xInxPd 2. The use of unsupported bulk electrode materials 

enables the evaluation of the electrochemical behaviour of the material without support interference or other 

phenomena that might occur with the use of supported materials. The results contribute to the knowledge -

based development of catalytic materials for electrochemical energy conversion by direct experimental 

evidence of electronic influences using isostructu ral intermetallic compounds as platform materials and 

model catalysts. 

Reference 

[1] M. Mavrikakis et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett , 81 (1998) 2819 -2822 .

[2 ] T. Bligaard et al. , Electrochim. Acta , 52 (2007) 5512 -5516 .

[3] L. R �ßner et al ., ACS Catal, 9 (2019) 2018 -2062 .

[4] O. Matselko et al ., J. Phys. Chem. C, 122 (2018) 21891 -21896 .The use of nucleotides for the sustainable manufacture of high -

# performing graphene cathodes for NaO 2 batteries 

Marina Enterría a*, J.L. Gómez -Urbano a,b , José M. Munuera c, Juan I. Paredes c, Silvia Villar -Rodil c, D. 

Carriazo a,d , Amelia Martinez -Alonso c, J.M.D. Tascón c, Nagore Ortiz -Vitoriano a,d  

> a

Centre for Cooperative Research on Alternative Energies (CIC energiGUNE), Basque Research and 

Technology Alliance (BRTA), Alava Technology Park, Albert Einstein 48, 01510 . 

> b

Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Universidad del País Vasco UPV/EHU, P.O. Box 664, 48080, 

Bilbao, Spain . 

> c

Instituto Nacional del Carbón, INCAR -CSIC, C/Francisco Pintado Fe 26, 33011 Oviedo, Spain  

> d

Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, María Díaz de Haro 3, 48013 Bilbao, Spain. 

menterria@cicenergigune.com 

Graphene has emerged as a promising material due to its superior electrical conductivity and highly 

accessible 2D area. The real integration of graphene as electrode material in energy storage d evices, 

however, requires the development of sustainable and scalable approaches for its production and 

processing. Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) has proven its suitability to act as an intercalation agent for 

the obtention of high -quality graphene nanoshe ets by electrochemical exfoliation of graphite. In addition, 

this natural biomolecule can act as a dispersing agent, enabling the production of stable graphene aqueous 

bio -inks that can be readily processed into 3D graphene aerogels .1 This graphene aerogel obtained by an 

easy, sustainable and scalable method has shown a superior performance in a Na -O2 battery cathode using 

a glyme -based electrolyte. The Na -O2 battery assembled with this unprecedented cathode delivered a 

discharge capacity as high as 9.64 mAh cm -2 (Figure 1) while performed 95 cycles with a 9 7 % efficiency 

at shallow cycling (0.5 mAh cm -2) and high current density (0.2 mA cm -2). The origin of such performance 

was studied and ascribed to t he pho sphate groups present in the natural biomolecule , which is adsorbed on

the surface of the graphene sheets comprising the porous aerogel cathode (Figure 1). The phosphate groups 

modify the nucleation mechanism of the discharge products by i) enhancing the i nteraction of the cathode 

with oxygen reactive species and ii) catalyzing the ORR/OER reactions which take place while 

discharging/charging metal -air batteries. The latter aspect is of paramount importance for the real 

implementation of rechargeable Na -O2 batteries as their reversible cycling is the major bottleneck for their 

commercialization .2

Figure 1. Discharge of the AMP -derived graphene aerogel at 0.2 mAh cm -2 using a glyme -based electrolyte 

and proposed effect of phosphate groups on the cathode per formance. 

1. Munuera, J. M. et al. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 1, 494 -506. 

2. Gómez Urbano, J. L. et al.  ChemSusChem 2020,  https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201902972 

Acknowledgements 

Funding by MINECO/ MICINN and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through projects 

MAT2015 -69844 -R and RTI2018 -100832 -B-I00. J.M.M. This work was also financially supported by the 

European Union (Graphene Flagship, Core 2, grant number 785219). The effect of trap states in semiconductor electrodes on their 

# optoelectronic and photoelectrochemical behavior 

Ádám Balog ,1 Gergely F. Samu, 1,2 Csaba Janáky 1,2 

> 1

Department of Physical Chemistry and Materials Science, Interdisciplinary Excellence Centre, 

University of Szeged, Aradi square 1, Szeged, H -6720, Hungary 

> 2

ELI -ALPS Research Institut e, Dugonics sq uare 13, Szeged, H -6720, Hungary 

balogadam@chem.u -szeged.hu 

Detailed mechanistic understanding of the optoelectronic features is a key factor in designi ng efficient 

semicon ductor (photo)electrodes. In situ spectroelectrochemical methods and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy provides an opportunity to scrutinize the effect of trap states on the optical and electronic 

properties of semiconductors. Diff erent metal oxides a nd halides were studied, and results gathered for 

TiO 2, NiO and CuI will be presented in this talk. The absorption bands in the UV -visible spectrum and 

the Raman spectral features were directly influenced by the applied bias potential. These spectral chang es 

correlate with the alterations observed in the electrical conductivity. Interestingly, the 

population/depopulation of the trap states, that are responsible for both the changes in the optical and 

electronic properties, occur in a dif ferent potential/ene rgy regime. 

In the function of these results, we can optimize the properties of the given semiconductor to make it the 

most appropriate for different applications. The hole transporting behavior of p -type semiconductors is 

very importa nt for solar cell re search, however if there are a lot of defects inside the band gap which can 

trap the holes, we must know the conditions, which allow us to use the transporting layers efficiently. In 

the case of TiO 2, hydrogen treatment causes a remarka ble increase in the donor density by creating 

oxygen vacancies which behave as shallow electron donors. I will show how the presence of these states 

affects the (photo)catalytic activity and the photoelectrochemical performances of TiO 2.Deep dive into thin film copper oxide layers 

Authors: Valentina Belova -Magri, Th omas Fischer, Philipp Haarmann, Martin Thoms, Mirko Kloppisch, Tatjana 

Königsmann, Constanze Donner 

Corresponding author : Valentina Belova -Magri 

Address: Atotech Deutschland GmbH, Erasmusstrasse 20, 10553 Berlin, Germany 

Copper ha s been extensively explored especially since the revolution of the telecommunication industry. Exposed 

metal copper to air, moisture or temperature forms an oxide duplex film consisting of cuprous (Cu 2O) and cupric (CuO) 

oxides. Understanding the composition of the oxide layer is immense for the corrosion and conductive properties of 

copper . The o xide film of well -defined quality can passivate the underlying metal copper thus protecting from 

environmental damage .

Various surface analytical techniques have been implemented to characterize and differentiate both surface oxides. A 

double sweep cyclic voltammetry (DSCV) , as a promising technique for the quantitative characteriz ation of copper 

oxide films has been succe ssfully applied to study oxide films at m scale (1, 2) . Reduction of Cu 2O and CuO in the 

selected electrolytes shows a clear separation between two cathodic well -assigned peaks. 

However, a s the oxide film gets thinner, characteriz ation of the nature of copper oxides is challenging . This is due to 

the fact that the stability range of Cu 2O covers only a small potential window and therefore the electrochemical 

separation of both oxides strongly depends on the thickness of the whole fi lm as well as on its architecture. 

In the present paper, we will demonstrate how the DSCV method must be adapted in order to identify the composition 

of thin oxide films on nm scale. Both the reduction kinetics and the potential separation require a compromise between 

the oxide differentiation and the quantitative thickness determination . Hence, even in thin oxide layers of 10 nm we 

were able to distinguish the ratio of both oxides with a sensitivity of 1nm. This op ens the opportunity to record external 

physical parameters such as influence of humidity and type of underlying copper substrates , which can significantly 

influence the oxide growth and its behavior at high temperature s.

The crystallographic orientation of modified copper substrates will be discussed in relation to its ratio of copper oxides. 

An impedance study combined with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) as well a s Fourier -transform infrared 

spectroscopy (FTIR) reveals the structure within the copper oxide layers. 

References: 

[1] S. Nakayama, A. Kimura, M. Shibata, S. Kuwabata, T.Osakai Voltammetric characterization of oxide films 

formed on copper in air, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 2001, 148 (11) B4 67 -B472 

[2] S. Nakayama, M. Shibata, T. Notoya, T. Osakai Voltammetric determination of cupr ic and cuprous oxides 

formed on copper Journal New Materials, SEI TEchnical review, 57, 2004, 22 -25. Electrochemical study of the effect of composition on the CO 2

# reduction reaction at Pd 100 -xCu x nanoalloys 

E. Torralba 1, N. Blanchard 1, C. Cachet -Vivier 1, D. Muller -Bouvet 1, J. González 2, S. Bastide 1 

> 1

Institut de Chimie et des Matériaux Paris -Est, U MR 7182 CNRS —UPEC, 94320 Thiais, France  

> 2

Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Química, 30100 Murcia, Spain 

Torralba -Penalver@icmpe.cnrs.fr 

Carbon dioxide (CO 2) is a greenhouse gas that produc es global warming with undesirable 

climate effects , such as sea level rising and erratic weather patterns. Reducing the CO 2 atmospheric 

concentration is a current research priority. Among the different technologies proposed to achieve this 

goal , the electr ochemical reduction reaction of CO 2 (CO 2RR ) to useful low -carbon fuels (CO, CH 4,

CH 3OH, HCOOH, …) is particularly attractive given its compatibility with renewable electricity sources. 

Metal catalysts in various forms have been tested for CO 2RR , including bulk or nanostructured metals ,

and more recently, bimetallics , for which the catalytic activity, efficiency and selectivity is boosted [1]. 

In this work , we report on the synthesis and characteriz ation of bimetallic Pd 100 -xCu x

nanoparticles with differ ent compositions and its application as nanoelectrocatalysts for CO 2RR . Few 

studies using this kind of alloy under different configurations ( Cu overlayers on Pd [2], Pd -decorated Cu 

electrodes [3], mesoporous CuPd films [4], CuPd NPs of different mixing p atterns and morphologies [5])

have pointed out the higher performance of bimetallic Pd Cu with respect to each single metals (higher 

current densit y, lower overpotentials, higher resistance to CO poisoning). In most of the se works ,

electrochemistry has been used as a tool for product generation (i.e. quantitative electrolysis at selected 

potentials) without attention paid to record ing and interpret ing the electrochemical signals . More in -depth 

electrochemical stud ies could improve our understanding of CO 2RR at Pd 100 -xCu x compounds .

Here, we present and in -depth electrochemical study of CO 2RR at Pd 100 -xCu x, with a special 

focus on the influence of the bimetallic composition on the CO 2RR response and the related CO -

poisoning. Cyclic voltammetry and chronoamper ometry have been selected, in combination with a cavity 

microelectrode (CME) for the first time. The l ow -distorted voltammetric signals obtained with the CME 

have evidenced that for alloys with low or moderate Cu content (up to 50 at.%) the typical CO 2RR 

inhibition peak, related to CO blocking Pd active sites, becomes a current plateau. This indicates not only 

a better tolerance of Pd 100 -xCu x towards CO poisoning but also the attainment of a pseudo -steady state 

where mass transport should be controlled by d iffusion. The synergy between Cu and Pd is thus 

established for the first time at the level of the voltammograms. 

We have observed that t he chronoamperometric responses exhibit three well defined regions 

corresponding to 1) double layer charging and diffu sion/reaction establishment, 2) beginning of CO 

poisoning by formation of a CO adlayer and (3) final collapse of the catalytic activity at a critical time, tc,

which depends directly on the bimetallic composition. A plot of tc vs. Pd content exhibits a cle ar volcano 

shape, from which ~ Pd 70Cu 30 is identified as a close to optimal composition in terms of CO tolerance and 

Pd 35 Cu 65 as the composition from which the advantage of alloying Pd with Cu is lost. Based on these 

studies, the potential benefit of devel oping a pulse -based method to increase the lifetime of Pd -based 

catalysts is demonstrated. 

[1] W. Zhu, Bimetallic Electrocatalysts for CO 2 Reducti on, Topics in Current Chemistry (2018) 21. 

[2] T. Takashima, T. Suzuki, H. Irie, Electrochimica Acta 229 (2 017) 415 –421. 

[3] F. -Y. Zhang, T. Sheng, N. Tian, L. Liu, C. Xiao, B. -A. Lu, B. -B. Xu, Z. -Y. Zhou, S. -G. Sun, Chem. 

Commun 53 (2017) 8085 –8088. 

[4] M. Li, J. Wang, P. Li, K. Chang, C. Li, T. Wang, B. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Yamauchi, N. 

Umezawa, J. Ye ,, J ournal of Materials Chemistry A 4 (2016) 4776 –4782. 

[5 ] Y. Mun, S. Lee, A. Cho, S. Kim, J.W. Han, J. Lee , Applied Catalysis B: E nvironmental. 246 (2019) 

82 –88. Performance o ptimization of an integrated battery and electrolyser 

# system 

Andrea Mangel Raventos ,a Fokko M. Mulder, b Wiebren de Jong, a Ruud Kortlever a

> a

Department of Process and Energy, Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering 

> b

Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Sciences 

Delft University of Technology 

Leeghwaterstraat 39, 2628 CB Delft, The Netherlands 

A.MangelRaven tos@tudelft.nl 

The absence of large -scale electricity storage methods is currently one of the major factors 

limiting widespread deployment of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power [1] [2]. The 

Battolyser –an integrated nickel -iron battery and alkaline electrolyser – can bridge the gap between 

intermittent energy production and consumption fluctuations [3] . During charging, the pocket electrodes 

consisting of Ni(OH) 2 and Fe(OH) 2 powder form NiOOH and Fe, which can evolve oxygen and 

hydrogen. Thereby, the charged electrodes can electrocatalytically split water efficiently to produce 

hydrogen as a long -term storage fuel, while fast discharging of the electrodes can provide electricity for 

short -term fluctuations in renewable energy availability. 

To upscale the Battolyser device, a comprehensive characterization of the design parameters was 

necessary. Using these parameters, we have developed and validated a COMSOL multi -physics model 

describing the integrated operation of the Battolyser. The mode l was validated using experimental results, 

and new configurations of design parameters have been compared and optimized for the upscaling of this 

lab -scale prototype. Here, we present an optimization study of the integrated electrolyser and battery 

system with regards to the energy efficiency. The model will be used to design larger and optimized 

device configurations to allow for efficient large -scale energy storage. 

To further optimize the performance of the integrated device, a study on the synergistic effects 

of alkali met al cations in the electrolyte was performed. In alkaline electrolysis different cations have 

different effects on the overpotentials of oxygen evolution [4] while certain alkali metal cations are used 

to improve the cycleability of nickel iron batteries. The addition of LiOH in the KOH electrolyte used in 

Ni -Fe batteries is widely reported [5] . However, this is not usual in alkaline electrolysis. The integration 

of both devices must therefore be taken into account when choosing the electrolyte for the Battolyser. 

Here, we present the effect of the electrolyser alkali cations on the battolyser charge/discharge cycles and 

el ectrolyser functionality. This study presents the electrocatalytic response to a change in electrolyte 

composition. Overall the results presented will allow for ideal electrolyte selection in the upscaling of this 

device, providing efficient and integrated short -term and long -term energy storage requirements. 

Bibliography 

[1]  B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. -M. Tarascon, "Electrical Energy Storage for the Grid: A Battery of 

Choices," Science, vol. 334, no. 6058, pp. 928 -935, 2011. 

[2]  A. Zuttel, A. Remhof, A. Borgschulte and O. Friedrichs, "Hydrogen: the future energy carrier," 

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, vol. 368, pp. 3329 -3342, 2010. 

[3]  F. M. Mulder, B. M. Weninger, J. Middelkoop, F. G. Ooms and H. Schreuders, "Efficient electricity 

storage with a battolyser, an integrated Ni -Fe battery and electrolyser," Energy & Environmental 

Science, vol. 10, pp. 756 -764, 2017. 

[4]  A. C. Garcia, T. Touzalin, C. Nieuwland , N. Perini and M. T. Koper, "Enhancement of Oxygen 

Evolution Activity of Nickel Oxyhydroxide by Electrolyte Alkali Cations," Angewandte Chemie, vol. 

58, no. 37, pp. 12999 -13003, 2019. 

[5]  J. F. Jackovitz, G. A. Bayles, and R. J. Brodd, “Iron electrode b atteries,” in Handbook of Batteries, 

Third Edit., D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Eds. McGraw Hill, 2001, p. 25.1 -25.26. Prussian Blue – Nickel Hexacyanoferrate a s Superstable 

# Electrocatalyst for Bioanalysis a nd Biotechnology 

E.V. Karpova , E.V. Shcherbacheva , E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin 

Lomonosov Moscow State University 

Lenin Hills, 119991, Moscow, Russia 

e-mail: karpowa. ew@gmail.com 

Prussian Blue (PB) is known to be the most advantageous (thousands times more active and selective than 

platinum) electrocatalyst for hydrogen peroxide reduction, the very reaction catalyzed by the enzyme 

peroxidase. PB possesses unique prope rties of the electrocatalyst allowing elaboration of sensors and 

biosensors with advantageous analytical characteristics [1]. Probably the only disadvantage of the PB is 

its inherent instability, particularly in neutral solutions. Non -iron transition metal hexacyanoferrates 

(isostructural to PB, but chemically and mechanically more stable than PB), especially nickel 

hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF), being silent in the electrocatalysis of H 2O2 reduction serve as excellent 

matrixes for stabilization of Prussian Blue .

In this work PB based advanced hydrogen peroxide transducer is deposited onto screen -printed electrode 

structures (Rusens Ltd, Russia) and stabilized with NiHCF, both in open circuit mode. In severe 

conditions under 1 mM H 2O2 the developed electrodes re tain the response for more than one hour. 

Moreover, we could confirm that operational stability of the oxidase -based biosensors can be significantly 

improved stabilizing the transducer used. The method describing stabilization procedure was done 

according to [2]. To develop the biosensors suspending the suspension of lactate / glucose oxidase 

aqueous solution in isopropanol containing γ-aminopropyltriethoxysilane / Nafion analogue was 

deposited onto the top of iron -nickel hexacyanoferrate modified electrode . The dynamic range of PB -

NiHCF based biosensors is similar to range observed for conventional PB based ones but their 

performance characteristics are dramatically improved. 

Immuno - and DNA - (RNA -) sensors as well as affinity based analytical kits compris e an important part 

of vital activity for modern society since they are used in a variety of areas from medicine to agriculture. 

For signal generation these devices use labels, among which one of the leading positions belongs to the 

enzyme peroxidase. Nove l rapidly growing field of modern science is synthesis of nanozymes –

nanoparticles with enzyme -like activity. The most progressive and actual application of nanozymes is to 

substitute natural enzymes in various fields of science and technology allowing to avoid the most 

important problems of the enzymes: their inherent instability and relatively high cost. Nanozymes 

obviously require advanced catalysts. 

Techniques of catalytic synthesis of PB nanoparticles and elaboration on it basis the nanozymes “artifi cial 

peroxidase” were just published [3]. Catalytic rate constants of the nanozymes are up to 4 orders of 

magnitude higher as compared to the natural peroxidase. Except for the activity defeating even the natural 

enzyme, the advantages of the reported PB n anoparticles over the known peroxidase -like nanozymes are 

enzymatic specificity (an absence of oxidase -like activity) and an ability to operate in physiological 

solutions, similarly to the enzymes. 

Unfortunately, PB nanoparticles demonstrate inherent inst ability in neutral and basic solutions (pH>6). In 

current research stabilized by nickel hexacyanoferrate composite core -shell PB nanoparticles were 

synthesized. We also deposited obtained nanoparticles onto screen -printed electrode structures to produce 

hy drogen peroxide sensors and biosensors. Composite PB -NiHCF nanoparticles demonstrate around one 

order of magnitude improved stability compared to PB nanoparticles (pH 7.4). 

References 

[1] A.A. Karyakin, Electroanalysis. 2001, 13, 813 -819. 

[2] E.V. Karpov a, E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164(5), B3056 -B3058. 

[3] M.A. Komkova, E.E. Karyakina, A.A. Karyakin, JACS. 2018, 140, 11302. 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support through Russian Science Foundation (grant # 19 -13 -00131) is greatly acknowledged. Microwave -assisted fabrication of V 3O7· H 2O

# nanowires/reduced graphene oxide composite for 

# aqueous zinc -ion battery application 

## Huili Cao a, Susanne Mossin a* and Poul Norby b    

> aDenmark aDepartment of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, 2800
> Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
> bDepartment of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of
> Denmark, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark .(* E -mail: slmo @kemi.dtu.dk )

## Rechargeable multivalent ion batteries have attracted significant technical and scientific 

## interests, especially aqueous zinc ion batteries, due to their low cost and high safety. 1 Layered 

## V3O7·H 2O is a promising material due to easy intercalation of doubly charged Zn 2+ ions. This 

## is due to the special structure with extended hydrogen bonding between VO 6 octahedrons and 

## VO 5 trigonal bipyramids. 2 In addition, the mixed oxidation state of vanadium (IV and V) can 

## help improving the electric conductivity. With the addition of reduced graphene oxide, rGO, 

## the active materials obtain high el ectrochemical stability. Herein, we have synthesized 

## V3O7·H 2O nanowires/reduced graphene oxide composite by a microwave method through 

## controlling pH by a nonoxidizing acid and have thoroughly investigated the reaction 

## mechanisms of the synthesis. A compos ite used as cathode of the zinc -ion battery can deliver 

## a high specific capacity of 385.7 mAh g -1 at a current density of 4 A g -1. Impressively, the 

## capacity retention after 1000 cycle is up to 96%. This excellent performance suggests that 

## vanadium oxide and rGO composite may be a good cathode candidate for aqueous zinc ion 

## battery. 

Figure 1 TEM image of the V 3O7·H 2O nanowire ( a) and cycling performance of the pure V 3O7·H 2O

nanowire and V 3O7·H 2O nanowires/reduced graphene oxide composite (b). 

## Acknowledgments 

H. C. acknowledges the China Scholarship Council for a PhD scholarship (No. 20170 6220078) 

## Reference 

1. Alfaruqi , M. H.; Mathew, V.; Gim, J.; Kim, S.; Song, J.; Baboo, J. P.; Choi, S. H.; Kim, J. . Chem. 

Mater. 2015, 27 (10), 3609 -3620. 

2. Pang, Q.; Sun, C.; Yu, Y.; Zhao, K.; Zhang, Z.; Voyles, P. M.; Chen, G.; Wei, Y.; Wang, X. 

Advanced Energy Materials 2018, 8 (19) , 1800144 Restructured B ismuth Metal -Organic Framework Boosts 

# Mass Activity for Carbon Dioxide -to -Formate Production 

Paolo Lamagni ,a,b ,c ,‡ Matteo Miola, a,d,e, ‡ Jacopo Catalano, b Mathias S. Hvid, f Mohammad Aref H. 

Mamakhel, g Mogens Christensen, g Monica R. Madsen, a,d Henrik S. Jeppesen, f Xin -Ming Hu, a,d

Kim Daasbjerg, a,d Troels Skrydstrup, a,d and Nina Lock a,b 

> a

Carbon Dioxide Activation Center (CADIAC), Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus 

University, Gustav Wieds Vej 14, DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark  

> b

Section of Biological and Chemical Engineering, Department of Engineering, Aarhus University, 

Åboga de 40, DK -8200 Aarhus N, Denmark  

> c

Catalonia Institute for Energy Research (IREC), Jardins de les Dones de Negre 1, 2ª pl. ,

08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs , Barcelona, Spain  

> d

Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, Langelandsgade 140, DK -8000 Aarhus C, Den mark  

> e

Engineering and Technology Institute Groningen (ENTEG), Groningen University, Nijenborgh 4, 

9747 AG Groningen, Netherlands  

> f

Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University, Gustav Wieds Vej 14, 

DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark  

> g

Center for Materials Crystallography, Department of Chemistry and Interdisciplinary Nanoscience 

Center (iNANO), Aarhus University, Langelands gade 140, DK -8000 Aarhus C, Denmark  

> ‡

These two authors contributed equally. 

plamagni@irec.cat 

Limiting anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions and exploiting such compound as a resource to 

produce valuable chemicals, fuels and materials , especially when using renewable energy inputs, are key 

strategies to reduce our carbon footprint. [1] We proved in this work that the metal -organic framework 

(MOF) Bi(1,3,5 -tris(4 -carboxyphenyl)benzoate) , or Bi(btb) , promote s the efficient and selective 

electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction (eCO 2RR) to formate , a relevant compound in industrial 

applications and in fuel cell technology .[2] The MOF Bi(btb) acts as a pre -catalyst and under eCO 2RR 

conditions undergoes a structural re construction that generates an organic porous matrix embedded with 

highly active Bi nanoparticles. In a typical H -cell configuration, this new material produces formate with 

Faradaic efficiencies up to 95(3)% at 770 mV overpotential and exhibits a metal -based mass activity which 

is competitive or even larger than most state -of -the -art catalysts reported in scientific literature. [3 -6] The 

electrocatalytic features of the MOF -derived material and the structural change lea ding to the active Bi 

nanoparticles were thoroughly monitored with a broad ensemble of techniques. [7] 

[1] IPCC - Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2015 .

[2] X. Yu, P. G. Pickup, J. Power Sources 2008 , 182, 124. 

[3] N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Li, Nat. Commun. 2018 , 9, 1320. 

[4] Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. 

Li, W. Zhou, Y. Li, Nat.  Commun. 2019 , 10, 2807. 

[5] S. Zhang, P. Kang, T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014 , 136, 1734. 

[6] F. Li, L. Chen, G. P. Knowles, D. R. MacFarlane, J. Zhang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017 , 56, 505. 

[7] P. Lamagni, M. Miola, J. Catalano, M. S. Hvid, M. A. H. Mamakhel, M. Christensen, M. R. 

Madsen, H. S. Jeppesen, X. M. Hu, K. Daasbjerg, T. Skrydstrup, N. Lo ck, Adv. Funct. Mater. 

2020 , DOI: 10.1002/adfm.201910408. In-Depth Stability Studies  of Gold Nanoparticles – Electrochemistry 

# Coupled with TEM and ICP -MS Investigations 

M. Smiljanić a, U. Petek a, F. Ruiz -Zepeda a, P. Jovanovič a, M . Bele a, M. Šala b, M. Gaberšček a, N. Hodnik a

> a

Department of Material s Chemistry, Na tional Institute of Chemistry ,

Hajdrihova 19, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

> b

Department of Analytical Chemistry, National Institute of Chemistry, 

Hajdrihova 19, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

milutin.smiljanic@ki.si , nejc.hodnik@ki.si 

Gold nanoparticles (NP) have attracted significant attention in electrocatalysis , especially for CO 2

reduction to CO [1] and production of H 2O2 through 2e - oxygen reduction [2]. Despite numerous wor ks 

on the activity, only a few studies have deal t with the equally important descriptor for the applicability of 

Au catalyst s – stability under the relevant electrochemical conditions [3,4 ].

Here we present an in -depth study of the electrochemical stabili ty of commercial carbon -supported Au 

nanoparticles (Au/C) . Stability of Au/C samples was probed by an adapted accelerated stress test: 10 000 

fast scans (1 V/s) in the potential region between 0.3 V and 1.13 V ( vs . Ag/AgCl) in a 0.05 M H 2SO 4

electrolyte wi th and without the presence of chlorides . A s ignificant loss of Au was observed even in Cl - -

free electrolyte , while the addition of Cl - promot ed Au dissolution , as expected (Fig. 1a). TEM imaging 

clearly showed a variety of changes upon degradation, such as loss and growth of the Au N Ps and 

appearance of various shapes of NPs (Fig. 1b-e), which were more expressed in the presence of chlorides. 

This implies that different degradation mechanisms occur red simultaneously , including dissolution, 

redeposition, Ostw ald ripening, agglomeration, particle detachment and carbon corrosion . Coupling an 

electrochemical flow cell with ICP -MS confirmed that the dissolution of Au is highly affected by the 

presence of chlorides and transient in nature under the applied condi tions [5]. 

Figure 1 . (a) Gradual loss of electrochemical surface area of Au during cycling; (b) STEM imaging of 

fresh Au/C sample and of samples degraded in: (c) 0.05 M H 2SO 4; ( d) 0.05 M H 2SO 4 + 10 -4 M Cl - and 

(e) 0.05 M H 2SO 4 + 10 -2 M Cl -.

Besides ass essing the stability of Au/C NPs, the results obtained in this study are opening a new 

perspective towards another very important subject – electrochemical recycling of Au from end -of -life 

electrodes and, more importantly , from non -conductive samples conta ining not only Au , but other 

precious metals as well (such as e lectronic waste) . As shown by Hodnik et al . for Pt [6], transient 

dissolution can be mimicked by alternate changes between oxidative and reductive potential s on metal by 

alternate exposure to o xidative and reductive gasses . A parallel study on the application of this approach 

for recycling of gold i s c urrently underway in our laboratory .

References 

[1] Y. Chen et al. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 134 (2012) 19969 .

[2] E. Pizzutilo et al., Chem. Phys. L ett. , 683 (2017) 436 .

[3] A.C. Cruickshank and A.J. Downard, Electrochim. Acta, 54 (2009) 5566. 

[4] J.T. Steven et al. , Electrochim. Acta, 187 (2016) 593. 

[5] S. Cherevko et al., RSC Advances, 3 (2013) 16516. 

[6] N. Hodnik et al., Nat. Commun.,  7 (2016) 13164. 1

# A self -powered glucose sensor with optical readout 

Jana M. Becker ,a Tim Bobrowski ,a Felipe Conzuelo, a Adrian Ruff, a Wolfgang Schuhmann a 

> a

Analytical Chemistry - Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr University Bochum, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

E-mail:  Jana.Becker@rub.de 

As main energy source, g lucose has a critical role for living organisms. Diabetes, a m etabolic disorder, 

which is linked to elevated blood glucose level s in the body , can have vast impacts for the people affected. 

Hence, the glucose levels must be closely monitored , making easy -to-apply point -of -care devices, which 

allow on -site monitoring of the glucose level in the blood , highly desired . Therefore , s ubstantial efforts 

have been put into the creation of miniaturized low -cost point -of -care devices [1] , which can be handled by 

the patients themselves .

In this context, we report the fabrication o f a self -powered glucose sensor with an optical readout system 

for simple and fast optical readout with the bare eye . The sensing device con sist s of a glucose -powered 

biofuel cell compartment and a poly(3,4 -ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT )-based electrochromic reporter 

for optical readout , both immobilized on a singl e screen -printed electrode chip (Figure 1) . A glucose/O 2

biofuel cell is used, in which glucose is oxidized to glucono -𝛿 -lactone by the oxygen -insensitive enzyme 

PQQ -GDH that is wired to the electrode surface by the low potential redox polymer poly(1 -vinylimidazole -

co -allylamine) -[Os(dmxy -bpy) 2Cl]Cl .[2] A bilirubin oxidase -based biocathode is used for the O2 reduction 

to H 2O. The electrochemically deposited PEDOT films reveal a blue color and decolorize upon oxidation 

by the glucose -limited current of the connected biofuel cell . Using the power output generated by the biofuel 

cell to oxidize the PEDOT film any necessity for external powering devices is excluded. Thus, the 

complexity of the system is reduced, showing potential for applications as point -of -care device .      

> Figure 1:Screen -printed device for glucose detection , consisting of an integrated biofuel cell coupled to an electro -
> chromic reporter for optical readout.

References: 

[1] P. Pinyou, F. Conzuelo, K. Sliozberg, J. Vivekananthan, A. Contin, S. Pöller, N. Plumeré, W. 

Schuhmann, Bioelectrochem istry 2015 , 106 , 22 -27 .

[2] S. Alsaoub, F. Conzuelo, S. Gounel, N. Mano, W. Schuhmann, A. Ruff, ChemElectroChem 2019 , 6,

2080 -2087 .Cobalt Quaterpyridine Complex Supported on Different Carbon 

# Materials for Selective C O2 Electrochemical Reduction to C O

Paul Rayess (a) , Min Wang (b) , Clément Comminges (a) , Claudia Morais (a) , Aurélien Habrioux (a) ,

Marc Robert (b) , Kouakou B. Kokoh (a) 

(a) Unive rsité de Poitiers, IC2MP UMR CNRS 7285, 4 rue Michel Brunet B27, TSA 51106, 

86073 Poitiers Cedex 09, France 

(b) Université de Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Laboratoire d’Electrochimie Moléculaire, 

UMR CNRS 7591, Bâtiment Lavoisier, 15 rue Jean de Baïf, 7 5025 Paris Cedex 13, France 

paul.rayess@univ -poitiers.fr 

The electrochemical reduction reaction of carbon dioxide (CO2RR) is a promising method for obtaining 

various carbon -based products such as carbon monoxide CO used in industry. This reaction require s the 

use of an appropriate electrode material. Molecular materials based on transition metals turn out to be 

promising catalysts for the CO 2 reduction reaction due to their high selectivity and low overpotentials [1] .

The Cobalt 2,2’:6’,2’’:6’’,2’’’ -quaterpyridine complex [Co(qpy)] 2+ supported on multi -walled carbon 

nanotubes was shown to b e a good can didate with high selectivity and Faradaic efficiency (ca. 100%) for 

the conversion of CO 2 to CO [2] . It also shows high current densities of up to 19.9 mA.cm -2 for an 

overpotential of 440 mV [2] .

Here we show that supporting the [Co(qpy)] 2+ complex on diffe rent carbo naceous materials (carbon 

Vulcan, graphene oxide GO, reduced graphene oxide rGO, N and N, S doped rGO) induces a significant 

change in the catalytic current. The nature of the interaction between the support and the complex as well 

as the onset p otential f or CO 2 reduction were investigated with cyclic voltammetry , as shown in Fig. 1A .

Linear sweep voltammetry coupled to in situ FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. 1B) were performed to identify the 

reaction products and to determine the geometry of the complex on the su pport . Preparative scale 

electrolys is was performed on each material to determine the maximum current density and the selectivity 

for carbon monoxide formation. 

Fig. 1: Cyclic Voltammograms of Coqpy -NSRGO deposited o nto a glassy carbon electrode in 0.5 M 

NaHCO 3 solution saturated in N 2 (blue) and CO 2 (red) at a scan rate v = 50 mV/s (A) .

Infrared spectra of Coqpy -NSRGO deposited onto a glassy carbon electrode (B) .

Acknowledgements 

This work was mainly conducted with in the framework of a collaborative pro gram financially supported 

by the French National Agency (ANR) through “E -Clock”. 

References 

[1] S. Ren, D. Joulié, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert, C. P. Berlinguette, Science 

2019 , 365 , 367 -369. 

[2] M. Wang, L. Chen, T .-C. Lau, M. Robert, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2018 , 57 ,

7769 -7773. 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 2750 3000 

> 2139 cm -1
> R/R Wavenumber (cm -1 )
> 0.05
> -0.4 V  = 50 mV -1.35V 2341 cm -1

## A B CO 

> CO 2

References 

1. Köhler, L. et al . ChemSusChem 2017 , 10 (22), 4479 –4490. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201701582. 

2. Song, F.; Hu, X. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014 , 136 (47), 16481 –16484. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja5096733. 

3. Melder, J et al . Zeitschrift fur Phys. Chemie 2020 . https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch -2019 -1491. 

4. Villalobos , J. et al. Impact of Mn valence on the current during cyclic voltammetry in manganese oxide 

and mixed cobalt -manganese oxide , in preparation. 

# Impact of Mn valence on the current during cyclic voltammetry in 

# manganese oxide and mixed cobalt -manganese oxide 

Javier Villalobos & Marcel Risch 

Nachwuchsgruppe Gestaltung des Sauerstoffentwicklungsmechanismus, 

Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialen und Energie 

Hahn -Meitner Platz 1 , 14109 Berlin, Germany 

javier.villalobos@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Among the wide range of transition metal oxides used for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), manganese 

oxides have received much attention because their low toxicity and high abundance 1. Currently, this 

attention is being shifted to mixed Mn -based oxides, particularly mixed Co/Mn oxides are interesting due 

to their low o verpotential and high stability at alkaline pH 2. The catalytic properties of Mn -based oxides 

have been studied in more detail as compared to Co/Mn oxides, as well as in the context of activation and 

degradation of the material . Degradation is usually associated with changes on surface or bulk com position, 

long range order or microstructure. These modifications can be electrochemically observed as changes in 

overpotential at fixed current or vice versa .

We electrodeposited non -crystalline MnO x and (Co,Mn)O x films in alkaline electrolyte and their catalytic 

stability was studied by electrochemica l experiments. Changes in the catalytic properties are especially 

observed in MnO x such as a decrease in the maximum OER current during 100 cycles and a decrease in the 

Tafel slope , in contrast with (Co,Mn)O x where both the OER current and Tafel slope remains fairly constant 

after 100 cycles . The current profile as function of cycles was studied during 100 cycles at three selected 

potentials , namely no OER, onset of OER and OER . An ad ditional 10 cycles were performed after a break 

at OCP for 30 min (Figure 1). For MnO x, a mono tonous decay is observed at all shown potentials, and after 

the OCP break , the current is only partially recovered. In contrast with (Co,Mn)O x, where the highest 

potential shows an increase with cycling , which might be related to an activation process. All t hese results 

suggest possible structural changes especially in MnO x films, but since these materials are non -crystalline, 

X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) wa s used to study the ir chemical structure. 

Figure 1. Current profile (j/ 

j1.5V ) as function of cycle at selected potentials (shown in figure) for a) MnO x

and b) (Co,Mn)O x. Open square represent data before OCP and solid square after OCP. 

The Fourier transform of the EXAFS gives information about the local chemical structure , Co and Mn K -

edge spectra suggest an amorphous layered oxide structure . Additionally, the Mn -K edge of (Co,Mn)O x is 

shift ed to higher energy in comparison with MnO x, meaning a higher average oxidation state of Mn. The 

Mn -L3 edge showed two components in MnO x: Mn 3O4 and MnO 2, but a fter 100 cycles a clear decrease of 

the peaks corresponding to Mn 3O4 is observed .

These results suggest that the inclusion of Co in the electrodeposition promotes a higher oxidation state of 

Mn (between Mn 3+ and Mn 4+) in the structure of the Mn/Co oxide s4, which seems to have key role 

enhancing stability during catalysis , by means of co nstant current and Tafel slope . This result agrees with 

previous reports suggesting more stability in those materials with oxidation states Mn +3.7 3. This study 

provides insight into the importance of Mn valence for the design of Mn/Co oxide catalysts. 

This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 804092. 

> (Co,Mn)O x
> MnO x

a.  b. Elucidating the interaction between Ir and Ti in active and stable 

# iridium /titanium -based OER catalysts by advanced x -ray analytics 

Marianne van der Merwe 1, Olga Kasian 1,2,3 , Johannes Frisch 1, Regan Wilks 1,4, Raul Garcia -Diez 1,

Marcus Bär 1,2, 4,5 

> 1

Helmholt z-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energ ie GmbH (HZB), Berlin, Germany ; 2Helmholtz -

Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Renewable Energy, Berlin, Germany; 3Department Interface Chemistry 

and Surface Engineering, Max -Planck -Institut für Eisenforschung, Düsseld orf , Germany; 4Energy 

Materials In -situ Laboratory Berlin, HZB, Berlin , Germany ; 5Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, 

Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg , Erlangen, Germany 

marianne.vdm@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Polymer exchange membrane (PEM) w ater electrolyzers predominantly employ expensive and rare 

iridium based anode materials 1, and thus reduction of th e noble metal loading will foster their large scale 

development and deployment . Iridium oxide -based anode s exhibit the best combination of reactivity and 

stability compared to other anode candidate materials , still they slowly undergo degradation under oxygen 

evolution reactio n (OER) conditions 2. Considering the high cost of Ir, even a slow dissolution rate 

presents a challenge for large -sc ale implementation . The combin ation of highly active iridium oxide 

(IrO x) with a significantly more stable transition metal oxide, e.g. TiO 2, can be a good strategy for 

stability improvement and reduction of the precious metal loading 3,4 . Considering the semiconducting 

nature of the Ti oxides and their poor catalytic properties, t he chemical and electronic interaction s with Ir 

are thus crucial to result in a long -term stab le anode material with high activity . However , the exact 

nature of the Ir -Ti interaction has not yet been unveiled 5.

To investigate the underlying interaction s within the Ir -Ti mixed oxides , co -sputtered libraries of Ir and Ti 

with a continuous Ir loading gradient of 20 – 70 at .% were annealed at mid -range temperatures to form 

the mixed oxide . By means of x -ray spectroscopic techniques , insights into the chemical and electronic 

structure of the resulting material were gained . For instance, depth resolved information of the annealed 

Ir -Ti alloy libraries was determined using soft and hard x -ray photoelectron spectroscopy in combination 

with more bulk sensitive photon in/photon -out soft x-ray absorption and emission spectroscopy .

Combining the electrochemical activity results with the spe ctroscopic data , we gain further understanding 

of the interaction between highly active IrO x and stable TiO 2, and how this contributes to a better OER 

electrocatalyst , e.g. p reliminary results show that materials containing more than 60 at.% Ir show ed 

cata lytic activity comparable to pure IrO 2 while showing a superior stability .

References: 

1. M. Bernt and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc ., 163 , F3179 –F3189 (2016). 

2. O. Kasian, J.P. Grote, S. Geiger, S. Cherevko, and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed ., 57 , 2488 –2491 

(2018). 

3. S. Cherevko et al., Electrochem. Commun ., 48 , 81 –85 (2014). 

4. O. Kasian et al., Electrocatalysis , 9, 139 –145 (2018). 

5. D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao, and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev ., 115 , 9869 –9921 (2015). Investigation and Comparison of Different Recovery Procedures of 

# Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells 

Qian Zhang 1,2 , Mathias Schulze 1, Pawel Gazdzicki 1, K. Andreas Friedrich 1,2  

> 1

German Aerospace Center, Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, 

Pfaffenwaldring 38 -40, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany  

> 2

University of Stuttgart, 

Institute of Building Energetics, Thermal Engineering and Energy Storage (IGTE) ,

Pfaffenwaldring 31, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany 

Qian.Zhang@dlr.de 

One of the main barriers hindering the commercialization of PEMFC applications is the limited durability 

caused by a series of chemical and physical degradation phenomena. Mitigation and elimination of the 

degra dation effects has been a research focus during the last several decades . However , some of 

performance loss can be recovered by certain operation proced ures and are therefore considered as 

reversible losses (also denominated falsely reversible degradation )1. Hence, detailed understanding of 

reversible effects and procedures are of particular interest .

This work evaluates the effectiveness of three recovery procedures . Two are proposed by activities of EU, 

and DOE and the third is the overnight rest procedure which was recognized as an effective approach in 

literature 2,3,4. These three procedures are compared in single cell durability test s using fuel cell dynamic 

load cycling (FC -DLC) . With the polarization curves before and after each recovery procedure the 

recovered voltage losses (see Fig ure 1) have been determined. T he overnight rest procedure and the EU 

protocol recover ed partial performance, which was not recovered by DOE procedure at low and 

intermediate current density . However, a t current density >1.7 Acm -2 all three procedures lead to a

recovery of ~60% . Moreover , the recovery effic ien cy s trongly dep ends on operation history of the cell 

which was analyzed in this study in detail . Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) tested before 

and after each recovery procedure provides insight into the ohmic, charge transfer and mass transport 

ef fects during due to recovery (see Fig ure 2) . The se preliminary data demonstrate that ohmic resistance is 

recovered most efficiently by the DOE procedure at low and overnight rest procedure at high current 

density. Charge transfer resistance is recovered less effic ie ntly by DOE protocol than by the tw o others. 

The efficiency of recovery of mass transport resistance is similar for all three protocols .

References :

1. Pei, P.; Chen, H., Applied Energy 2014, 125 , 60 -75. 

2. Gazdzick i, P.; Mitzel, J.; Garcia Sanchez, D.; Schulze, M.; Friedrich, K. A., J. Power Sources. 2016, 

327 , 86 -95. 

3. https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/downloads/fuel -cell -technologies -office -multi -ye ar -research -

development -and -22 

4. Tsotridis, G.; Pilenga, A.; De Marco, G.; Malkow, T., EU harmonised test protocols for PEMFC 

MEA testing in single cell configuration for automotive applications. JRC Science for Policy report 2015, 

27632 .

Figure 1 Recovered voltage loss of each 

procedure under different current density 0 500 1500 2000 1000            

> 030 60 90 120 150 100
> EU Protocol (after 1 cycle) DOE Protocol (after 2 cycles) Overnight Rest (after 3 cycles)
> Recovered Voltage Losses / % Current density /mA·cm -2 EIS@0.1A·cm -2 EIS@1A·cm -2 EIS@1.4A·cm -2
> 0150 300 450 600
> EU Protocol
> R_Ohmic R_Charge transfer R_Mass transfer BoC: Begin of cycle EoC: End of cycle After Re.: After recovery 0150 300 450 600
> DOE Protocol
> R / mOhm·cm 2
> BoC EoC After Re. BoC EoC After Re. BoC EoC After Re. 0150 300 450 600
> Overnight Rest

Figure2  Resistance before and after each recovery procedure Direct CO 2 Reduction on Bimetallic Electrocatalysts 

Dan iël van den Berg , Ruud Kortlever 

Process & Energy, Uni ver sity of Technology D elft 

Leeghwaterstraat 39 , 2628 CB , Delft 

d.v andenberg -2@tudel ft. nl 

The main problem with re newable en ergy sources is thei r intermittent nature, which leads to a mismatch 

in power supply and global demand. Here, large scale energy storage of renewable energy by 

electrochemically converting CO 2 into renewable fuels can solve this dynamicity in the power sup ply can 

be smoothed out. However, the electrochemical conversion of CO 2 particularly suffers from low 

selectivities, due to its complex and multi -step reaction network. In order to selectively produce one 

specific reaction product, different ads orption sit es need to exist on the surface, each of which optimally 

bind the reaction intermediates of the desired product to the surface. Until now, mainly copper -based 

electrodes have been shown to be able to convert CO 2 into higher hydrocarbons yet stil l at high 

overpotentials and lo w selectivity [1, 2] .

This is where the alloying of different metals in the electrodes comes into the picture. By mixing different 

metals, a larger range of different adsorption sites can be achieved on the electrode surface . Here, the 

electrode surface ca n be more freely tuned by changing its (bulk) composition or by placing one metal 

upon another host -metal, i.e. near -surface alloying [3] . Hereby, the adsorption properties of the topmost 

layer are changed by the subsurface a tomic layers. One recent example of this is a gold -palladium 

electrode by Kortlever et al. which showed the production of higher hydrocarbons, which was even able 

to produce larger hydrocarbons than copper [4] . This is one of the only electrod es that showe d the 

electrochemical production of higher hydrocarbons from CO 2 reduction other than copper. Also, Nickel -

Gallium electrodes have shown similar results [5] . These electrodes show the great potential of electrode 

alloying. 

However, not all PdAu electrodes that were tested in literature, observe the formation of hydrocarbons 

while reducing CO 2 [6, 7] . In our research, we study what our experimental choices (choice of buffer, 

surface morphology) might be of influence on this observed difference between the di fferent studies. 

1. Hori, Y ., K. Kikuchi, and S.J.C.L. Suzuki, Production of CO and CH 4 in electrochemical 

reduction of CO 2 at metal electrodes in aqueous hydrogencarbonate solution. 1985. 14 (11): p. 

1695 -1698. 

2. Kuhl, K.P., et al., New insights into the electro chemical re duction o f carbon dioxide on metallic 

copper surfaces. Energy & Environmental Science, 2012. 5(5): p. 7050 -7059. 

3. Larraz �bal, G.n.O., A.J. Martín, and J. Perez -Ramirez, Building blocks for high performance in 

electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction: m aterials, o ptimizati on strategies, and device engineering. The 

Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 2017. 8(16): p. 3933 -3944. 

4. Kortlever, R., et al., Palladium –gold catalyst for the electrochemical reduction of CO 2 to C 1–C5

hydrocarbons. Chemical Comm unications, 2016. 52 (67): p. 10229 -10232. 

5. Torelli, D.A., et al., Nickel –gallium -catalyzed electrochemical reduction of CO 2 to highly 

reduced products at low overpotentials. 2016. 6(3): p. 2100 -2104. 

6. Wang, Y., et al., Ensemble Effect in Bimetallic Ele ctrocatalys ts for CO 2 Reduction. Journal of 

the American Chemical Society, 2019. 

7. Hahn, C., et al., Synthesis of thin film AuPd alloys and their investigation for electrocatalytic 

CO 2 reduction. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2015. 3(40): p. 20185 -201 94. EQCM Analysis of Zn Negative Electrode during 

# Deposition/Stripping Processes 

Yuki Ishida, Masahiro Shimizu *, Kazuki Tagashira, Susum u Arai 

Department of Materials Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Shinshu University 

4-17 -1 Wakasato, Nagano, 380 -8553, Ja pan 

shimizu@sh inshu -u.ac.jp 

The development of Zn -air batter ies with a high energy density of 1350 Wh kg −1 is one of 

breakthrough required to achieve a low carbon society. There are, however, two main challenges 

concerning the morphology control of Zn deposit and the development of catalyst with high activity for 

oxygen evolution reaction. Focusing on the ne gative electrode side, Zn undergoes remarkable shap e

change during charge −discharge, causing poor cycle performance . At a low current density, 

electrochemical deposition of Zn results in mossy structure. This is caused by continuous two -

dimensional nucleat ion followed by the formation of protrusion s on wid e terrace and the suppression of 

microstep growth toward lateral direction . At a high current density in diffusion -limited condition ,

dendritic growth is dominant . Strategies for the suppression of non -uni form Zn deposition are mainly 

classified into followi ng five methods; (1) the use of additives such as metal -ion and surfactant , (2) the 

change from aqueous electrolyte to /mixing with an organic electrolyte or an ionic -liquid electrolyte , (3) 

the optimizat ion of substrate, (4) the introduction of a nion -exchange ionomer between Zn electrode and 

electrolyte , and (5) the construction of matrix accommodating shape change . Considering simplification 

of the processes, the strategy of use of additive is industrial ly preferred , a nd we have achieved smooth 

morphologies of Zn deposit in 0.25 M ZnO /4 M KOH. In ou r previous repo rts, it was fou nd that cationic 

surfactant, trimethyloctadecylammonium chlori de (STAC) suppressed the shape change and resulted in 

smooth and de nse morphology. Zeta potential measurement s, kinetic current densit ies observed from 

Tafel plots, and constant potential electrolysis indicate that quaternary ammonium cations (STAC) with 

bulky size adsorb to protrusion s which are cause of shape change and suppress Zn deposition in the 

region to promote lateral growth . Although the adsorption of STAC increased an average overvoltage for 

Zn -deposition/stripping in a symmetric Zn|Zn cell under current density of 10 mA cm −2, significant ly 

stable behavior continued during 200 h . In th is work , an electrochemical qua rtz crystal microb alance was 

applied to stud y Zn -deposition/strippi ng beha vior in the aqueous -based electrolyte .

An aqueous -based electrolyte solution (so calle d alkaline zincate bath) was prepared by 

dissolving ZnO powder at a concentration of 0.25 mol dm −3 (M) in 4 M KOH aqueous sol ution (13.5 

mL) . An AT -cut quartz crystal coated wi th Cu (fundamental frequency; 9.0 MHz) was incorporated into 

an EQCM cell with a Hg/HgO reference electrode was assembled . The mass change on QCM electrode 

during Zn -deposit ion/stri pping reactions at a galva nostatic condition was calculated from the change in 

resonance frequency using the Sauerbrey equation . In addition, w e studied th e influence of current 

densit ies on reversibility based on mass change s.Graphite as a Positive Electrode Material for 

# Aqueous Zn -based Rechargeable Batteries 

Yuki Ishida, Masahiro Shimizu *, Kazuki Tagashira, Susum u Arai 

Department of Materials Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Shinshu University 

4-17 -1 Wakasato, Nagano, 380 -8553, Japan 

shimizu@shinshu -u.ac.jp 

The development of Zn -air batter ies with a high energy density of 1350 Wh kg −1 is one of 

breakthrough required to achieve a low carbon society. There are, however, two main challenges 

concerning the morphology control of Zn deposit and the development of catalyst with high activity for 

oxygen evolution reaction. Focusing on the ne gative electrode side, Zn undergoes remarkable shap e

change during charge −discharge, causing poor cycle performance . At a low current density, 

electrochemical deposition of Zn results in mossy structure. This is caused by continuous two -

dimensional nucleat ion followed by the formation of protrusion s on wid e terrace and the suppression of 

microstep growth toward lateral direction . At a high current density in diffusion -limited condition ,

dendritic growth is dominant . Strategies for the suppression of non -uni form Zn deposition are mainly 

classified into followi ng five methods; (1) the use of additives such as metal -ion and surfactant , (2) the 

change from aqueous electrolyte to /mixing with an organic electrolyte or an ionic -liquid electrolyte , (3) 

the optimizat ion of substrate, (4) the introduction of a nion -exchange ionomer between Zn electrode and 

electrolyte , and (5) the construction of matrix accommodating shape change . In this study, we focused on 

concentrated electrolytes . In addition to this, the concentra ted electrolyte s were applied to anion -

intercalation /deintercalation into/from graphite interlayer s. Although t he reversible capacity based on the 

inter ca lation /deintercalation of anions would be muc h smaller than a capacity obtained from oxygen as a 

posit ive electr ode material , the reversibility of the re action thought to be high and stable in a l ong -life 

cycle .

Zn -deposition/striping behavior was investigated by galvanostatic charge−discharge test s using 

an electrochemical m easurement system (HJ -1001 SM 8A, Hokuto Denko Co., Ltd.) and by cyclic 

voltammetry (CV) measurements though the use of an electrochemical ana lyzer (SP -200; Bio -Logic 

Science Instruments) at a sweep rate of 1 mV s –1 at room temperature . In the test of anion -intercalation ,

graphite powd er and P VDF binder w ere used for the preparation of a slurry electrode . For investigati on of 

the effect of powder s ize on charge−discharge capacities was also studied. 

Figure 1 shows cyclic volta mmograms corresponding to Zn -deposition/stripping on a Ti foil as a 

current collector in aqueous -based electrolytes at a sweep rate of 1 mV s −1. In a dilute electrolyte of

ZnCl 2∙50 H2O ( molar ratio ), no response originating from Zn -deposition/stripping reactions was observed .

This is be cause of the narrow electrochemical windo w. Below 0 V , the hyd rogen evolution reacti on 

preferentially took plac e in stead of Zn deposition. In contrast , at concentrations of 2.33 or more, 

reversible deposition /st riping react ions were confirmed . When using the concentrated elect rolytes, the 

anion in tercalation into graphi te interlayer progressed to form partially graphit e intercalation compo und 

even in an aqueous -based electrol yte .

Fi gure 1 Cyclic volta mmograms corresponding to Zn -deposition/stripping on a 

Ti foil as a current collector in aqueous -based electrolytes at a sweep rate of 1 

mV s −1. The counter electrode is Zn foil. [1] K. Ayers et al., Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 219 –239, 2019.     

> [2] P. Nikolaidis et al., Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 67, pp. 597 –611, 2017.
> [3] I. Dincer, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 157 –175, 2000.
> [4] J. González -Cobos et al., Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, vol. 42, no. 19, pp. 13712 –13723, 2017.
> [5] S. Shiva Kumar et al., Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 442 –454, 2019.
> [6] J. González -Cobos et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 120, no. 13, pp. 7155 –7164, 2016.

# Hydrogen production by electrolysis of methyl pivalate: A first 

# approach to an efficient treatment of PMMA waste 

N. Grimaldos -Osorio 1,2 , F. Sordello 2, M. Passananti 2, P. Vernoux 1* , A. Caravaca 1*  

> 1

Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, IRCELYON, F -69626, Villeurbanne, France  

> 2

Dipartimento di Chimica, Universitá di Torino, Turin, Italy 

e-mail addres s: nicolas.grimaldos@ircelyon.univ -lyon1.fr 

In recent years, hydrogen has become a focus of research and an essential industrial target area, not only 

because of its use as an energy carrier and practical employment in fuel cells but also for its role as a 

significant raw material of the chemical in dustry [1]. Today, the steam reforming of fossil fuels (primarily 

methane) is the most common and cost -effective H 2 production process [2]. Notwithstanding its advantages, 

it requires additional units to separate H 2 from the coproduced CO and CO 2, and it a ctively contributes to 

greenhouse gas emissions [3],[4]. Hydrogen can also be produced by electrolysis of water; this 

environmentally friendly process has taken force lately because it can be easily integrated to the electrical 

grid and use renewable energ y sources (i.e. solar or wind) to produce pure H 2 from water, producing only 

O2 as a by -product [5]. 

However, the energy requirement correlated to the thermodynamic data shows a relative standard cell 

voltage of around 1.23 V to achieve the water electrolysis reaction at room temperature [6]. Consequently, 

different researchers have proposed to electroly ze organic molecules instead of water to reduce ene rgy 

demand. Plastic wastes contain an abundant source of hydrogen and can be a promising renewable 

feedstock for electrolysis . Among the different plastics, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is a widely 

used polymer in several applications [40]. Even if dif ferent recycling methods are implemented , such as 

thermal and chemical processes , any other processes than the incineration for direct Energy Recovery is 

used . In this sense, the present study proposes a new route to valorize plastic waste s by producing H 2 using 

an electrochemical process. Due to the complexity and the 

heterogeneity of real PMMA -based plastics, we decided , as a first 

approach, to investigate a Methyl pivalate (MP) as a model molecule 

representative of the polymer containing similar chemical unit s,

including atoms, bonds and functional groups (ester) . We studied the 

electrooxidation of MP in a Polymer Electrolyte Membrane -based 

(PEM) reactor with an acid membrane (Nafion®) and commercial 

Pt/C electrodes between 50 and 80°C. T his system allows operating 

in aqueous media without an electrolyte and under continuous 

conditions. A complete study of the operation conditions was carried 

out to enhance th e production of H 2.

The electrooxidation process of MP shows an entirely different 

behaviour than the electrolysis of water at similar conditions and 

higher activity at potentials lower than 1.23 V. Experiences at 

different temperatures demonstrate that 80ºC is optimal for the 

electrolysis of MP. As showed in Figure 1, a critical oxidation step takes place at ~700 -750 mV when cyclic 

voltammetry is perfo rmed with a second peak registered when 

the potential is decreasing. That phenomenon is attributed to 

an unfinished cleavage process of the MP molecule in the 

surface of the Pt/C anode. Typically, at the presented 

conditions, the only possible reaction is the electrolysis of the 

ester group to form pivalic acid and methanol, with a

subsequent electrooxidation of the alcohol to produce H 2 and 

CO 2. Chronoamperometries (Fig. 2) at different potentials 

have confirmed that higher and stable currents could be 

ach ieved when the PEM cells work near 750 mV . The MP 

electrooxidation leads t o a constant production of hydrogen at 

much lower potentials than in the case of traditional 

electrolysis of water , with a theor et ical value of 103,6 mol.m -

> 2

.s -1 calculated from Far aday’s Law of Electrolysis. 

Figure  1. Cyclic voltammetry of 

water and MP at 80ºC  and 10mV/s .

Figure  2. Chronoamperometry at 

different potentials for MP at 80ºC. SPM S tudies on electrochemically deposited polydopamine films 

Julian Kund 1, Sven Daboss 1, Christine Kranz 1

> 1

Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, Ulm University 

Albert -Einstein -Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

julian.kund@uni -ulm.de 

Polydopamine (PDA), a synthetic eumelanin polymer ha s gained interest in many research areas . PDA films are 

used as adhesive coatings for cell immobilization, for sensing, as coatings for energy -related research and as 

biomimetic electron gates for artificial photosynthesis due to its plethora of functional groups [1]. A widely used 

method for PDA deposition is dip coating by oxidation of dopamine in basic buffer solutions in t he presence of 

oxygen or other oxidants [2]. An alternative method is electrochemical deposition via cyclic voltammetry or pulse 

deposition . For many applications, the film morphology, thickness and electrochemical properties are crucial and 

require contro llable and reproducible depositions . In addition, the surface properties of PDA films can be altered 

by external parameters such as applied potential or pH, which plays a role in various applications. 

Within this contribution, we present scanning probe microscopy techniques as useful methods to characterize 

PDA films in respect of the film morphology, film thickness and electron transfer behavior depending on the 

number of cycle s or pulse s applied during electro deposition [3] . Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) 

is a powerful technique to investigate heterogeneous electron transfer rate constants of modified electrodes using 

approach curves (Fig. 1A ) [4]. PDA deposited on gold substrates are investigated with respect to e lectron transfer 

kinetics by applying different substrate potential or at different pH values. Using atomic force microscopy (AFM) 

contact mode the film morphology and film thickness ( Fig. 1B ) is determined in dependence of the applied number 

of cycles or pulses . Also, adhesion properties of PDA film in dependence of surface groups obtained by AFM 

force spectroscopy will be discussed .

Fig. 1 . A CV recorded in 5 mM  hexaammineruthenium (III) chloride and 0.1 M KCl . B Thickness of the PDA 

films in dependence of number of cycles/pulse s obtained by contact mode AFM .

References 

[1] Y. Liu, K. Ai, L. Lu, Chem. Rev . 2014 , 114, 5067 -5115. 

[2] H. Yang, Q. Wu, L. Wan, Z. Xu, Chem. Commun.  2013 , 49, 10522 -10524. 

[3] J. Lin, S. Daboss, D. Blaimer, C. Kranz, Nanomaterials 2019 , 9, 242/1 -242/12 .

[4] R. Cornut, C. Lefrou, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2008 , 621, 178 -184. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120         

> 510 15 20 CV Deposition Pulse Depositon
> Thickness / nm Number of cycles/pulses 0246810 12 14
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> theoretical approach curve experimental approach curve
> IT / I T,∞
> d / r T

## A BDevelopment of Precise Pressure -Control Unit Equipped Compact 

# PEM Water Electrolyzer for Catalyst Evaluation 

Kensaku Nagasawa 1, Hayato Kashiwagi 2, and Shigenori Mitsushima 1,2 

> 1

Institute of Advanced Sciences, Yokohama National University, 79 -5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya -ku, 

Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

> 2

Graduate school of Engineering Science , Yokohama National University, 79 -5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya -ku, 

Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

nagasawa -kensaku -st@ynu.ac.jp 

Introduc tion 

For the low -carbon society, the h ydrogen production using the renewable energy is essential technology. 

The proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE) is one of the candidate methods in several 

water electrolysis . In the development of PEMWE, the performance evaluation of synthesized catalyst is 

indispensable factor. The precise performance evaluation of membrane electrode assembly (MEA) and the 

anode and cathode polarization measurement using the reference electrode is the essential factor for the 

catalyst evaluation. In this study , the small -size electrode electrolyzer was developed, which can precisely 

control the pressure to the electrode area, and measure the anode and cathode polarizations by the equipment 

of two reference electrodes for the anode and cathode side surface of PEM. The electrochemical 

measurements using these functions were performed. 

Experimental 

The electrode size of developed electrolyzer was 1×1 cm 2.

The first feature was that this electrolyzer has the precise 

pres sure control structure to the only electrode area , and t he 

second future was that the two reference electrodes, which 

connected at the faces of anode and cathode sides on PEM, was 

equipped in the electrolyzer as shown in Figure 1 . The MEA 

was fabricated by the transcription method. The anode and 

cathode catalysts and PEM used IrO x (ELC -0110, TKK), Pt/C 

(TEC10E50E, TKK) and Nafion ®117 (DuPont), respectively. 

The electrochemical measurements performed for the 

chronoamperometry (CA, 1. 3-2.5 V), the electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy (EIS, frequency; 10 k -1 Hz, amplitude; 10 mV) 

and the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV, 1.0 -2.5 V, scan rate; 4 mV s -1). 

Results and discussion 

The developed 1 cm 2 electrolyzer was compared with the conve ntional 

16cm 2 electrolyzer , and the difference of performance was 1.6 % for the 

cell voltage at 1.0 A cm -2. The optimized electrode -pressure as the specific 

value for developed electrolyzer -component was 0.52 MPa. Figure 1 

shows t he polarization measuremen t using two reference electrodes. The 

sheet resistivity of Nafion 117 using this method showed a 0.26 Ω cm 2,

which was close to the reported -value [1] . The anode and cathode 

polarization curves, which were iR -corrected by PEM sheet resistivity, 

showed the linear tendency in Tafel plot. As a result, it was showed that 

this polarization measurement was the reasonable method as the 

polarization measurement of the anode and cathode reactions. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported by the development of fundamental technology for advancement of water 

electrolysis hydrogen production in advancement of hydrogen technologies and utilization project 

(JPNP1402 1) commissioned by the new en ergy and industrial technology development organization 

(NEDO). 

Reference 

[1] J. Malis, P. Mazur, M. Paidar, T. Bystron, K. Bouzek, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (2016) 2177 –2188. 

Fig ure  1 The structure of developed 

compact PEM water electrolyzer. 

Fig ure  2 The anode and cathode 

polarization carves using  two 

reference electrode s.Selective Electrooxidation of Glycerol on Mixed Nickel Cobalt Boride 

# Embedded in a Polybenzoxazine -derived Nitrogen -doped Carbon 

# Matrix 

Michael Braun ,1 Dulce M. Morales, 2,a Adarsh Koul, 2 Justus Masa, 2,b Wolfgang Schuhmann, 2 Corina 

Andronescu 1

> 1

Faculty of Chemistry, University Duisburg -Esse n, Technical Chemistry III , Carl -Benz -Straße 199, 

D-47057 Duisburg 

> 2

Analytical Chemistry - Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr Universit y Bochum , Universitätsstr aße  150, D-44780 Bochum 

> a

Current address: Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für M aterialien und Energie GmbH, Nachwuchsgruppe 

Gestaltung des Sauerstoffentwicklungsmechanismus, Hahn -Meitner -Platz 1, D -14109 Berlin 

> b

Current address: Max Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion, Stiftstraße 34 -36, D -45470 

Mühlheim an der Ruhr 

michael.braun @uni -due.de 

The ox ygen evolution reaction is one of the major factor s that limit economically feasible water electrolysis 

on a large scale. Not only it necessitates a substantially higher overpotential than the hydrogen evolution 

reaction, but also produces already abundant ly available oxygen, a not highly valuable product .[1] 

Glycerol is a well -known non -poisonous reducing agent . An in creasing demand for biodiesel has led to its 

excess supply and low price on the global market. It offers three possible oxidation sites and thus can be 

converted to a wide variety of products. Amongst them is lactic acid, w hose bifunctionality as a 

hydroxycarboxylic acid makes it versatile for industrial application e.g. for production of biodegradable 

polymers and non -toxic esters. The su bstitution of water oxidation by glycerol oxidation (GOR) as the 

anode reaction in the water electrolysis process could hence make electrocatalytic hydrogen production 

more profitable in the future . In order to be competitive, electrocatalysts for GOR do not only need to be 

active and made from earth -abundant materials , but also be selective and stable. [2 -3] 

In this work mixed cobalt nickel borides were synthesized via wet chemical reduction of nickel and cobalt 

precursor salts by sodium borohydride and su bsequent annealing at different temperatures in an inert gas 

atmosphere. To further improve catalyst stability and provide additional adsorption sites during glycerol 

oxidation, the catalyst was mixed with benzoxazine monomers (BO) in different mass ratios prior to the 

annealing step. The resulting cobalt nickel borides embedded in a N -doped carbon matrix were evaluated 

as electrocatalysts for glycerol electrooxidation using rotating dis k electrode voltammetry in alkaline 

electrolyte . (Co 0.5 Ni 0.5 )2B/BO - with a catalyst:monomer ratio of 7:1, annealed at 500 °C - revealed 

increased activity as compared to the corresponding catalyst in absence of the benzoxazine -derived carbon 

matrix . Investigations on the catalyst selectivity and stability were performed using a flow -through cell set -

up for up to 18 hours. The a nalysis of the reaction products by liquid chromatography indicated the presence 

of lactate in addition to other oxygenates from glycerol. Fu ture experiments aim on further improving the 

selectivit y towards lactic acid. [4 -6]

[1] W. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich, Y. Shao -Horn, Energy Environ. Sci .

2015 , 8, 1404 -1427. [2] R. Ciriminna, C. D. Pina, M. Rossi, M. Pagliaro, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 2014 ,

116 , 1432 -1439. [3] J. Pradima, M. R. K. Archna, Resource -Efficient Technol . 2017 , 3, 394 -405. [4] C. 

Andronescu, S. Seisel, P. Wilde, S. Barwe, J. Masa, Y. -T. Chen, E. Ventosa, W. Schuhmann, Chem. Eur. 

J. 2018 , 24 , 13773 -13777.  [5] J. Masa, I. Sinev, H. Mist ry, E. Ventosa, M. de la Mata, J. A rbiol, M. Muhler, 

B. Cuenya, W. Schuhmann, Adv.  Energy Mater . 2017 , 7, 1700381 . [6] J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. 

Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Mu hler, W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016 , 6, 1502313. Cascade reactions in double confinement . Ag -Cu nanozyme -modified 

# gas diffusion electrodes for CO 2 reduction 

João R. C. Junqueira 1, Peter B. O’Mara 2, Patrick Wilde 1, Nivedita Sikdar 1, Tania M. Benedetti 2, Jonas 

Weidner 1, Corina Andronescu 3, Richard D. Tilley 4, J. Justin Gooding 2, Wolfgang Schuhmann 1

> 1

Analytical Chemistry - Center for Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr -Universität Bochum , Universitätsstraße 150, D -44780 Bochum, Germany 

> 2

School of Chemistry and Australian Centre for NanoMedicine, University of New South Wales ,

Sydney 2052, Australia 

> 3

Chemical Technology III, Faculty of Chemistry and CENIDE, Center for Nanointegration University 

Duisburg Essen , Carl -Benz -Straße 199, D -4705 7 Duisburg, Germany 

> 4

Electron Microscope Unit, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, University of New South Wales ,

Sydney 2052, Australia 

joao .junqueira @ruhr -uni -bochum.de 

The electrochemical CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2RR) is a crucial technology for the fo rmation of gaseous 

and liquid fuels and chemicals feed stock . So far Cu is one of the few catalysts able to perform C -C coupling 

at significant rate s leading to longer chain carbon molecules. However, it requires high overpotentials and 

lack s selectivity . Bimetallic nanoparticles have shown improvement in selectivity for CO 2 to C ≥2 products 

taking the advantages of the two spatially closely located ind ependent active sites. A first reduction of CO 2

to CO takes place at Ag and then this interme diate diffuses towards Cu, where the final products are formed ,

enabling the formation of C>2 products at comparatively low overpotentials. The sequential transfer of 

intermediates across different site s in close proximity is called spillover catalysis. [1] 

The Ag -Cu nanozyme (Fig. 1 a) is one step forward in the design of catalyst s enabling confined spillover 

catalysis . I ts structure does not only place two different active centres in clo se proximity, but also create s a

nano -confinement to increase the turnover on Cu. The nanozyme was designed to first produce CO at the 

Ag -core surface from where it is diffused into the porous Cu shell for further reduction. This tailored 

structure allows the formation of up to C 3 products at -0.6 V vs. RHE .[2] These results were achieved in a n

H-type cell , in which the formation rate of CO 2RR products are limited by CO 2 depletion, low current 

densities and competition with the hydrogen evolution reaction .[3] 

Previous studies showed an improvement in the current density and the production rate of C >2 when the 

same catalyst is introduced to a g as diffusion electrode (GDE) with CO 2 flow. [3,4] We herein present a

strategy to combine these two advantages for an improved CO 2RR selectivity and current density. By 

dispersing Ag -Cu nanozymes into a GDE a double confinement en vironment is established . This is a result 

of placing the nanozyme catalyst at the gas -solid -liquid (three -phase) interface, allowing locally high CO 2

concentrations with minimal diffusional loss . By keeping the CO 2 concentration constant allows for an 

increase d conversion rate and enhance d currents densities leading ultimately to an increased C≥2 products 

formation rate alongside with a lower overpotential .  

> Figure 1. Schematic of the Ag -Cu nanozyme catalyst (a), H -type cell design (b) and the GDE electrode (c).

[1] J. Huang, M. Mensi, E. Oveisi, V. Mantella, R. Buonsanti, J. Am.  Chem. Soc. 2019 , 141 , 2490. 

[2] P. B. O'Mara, P. Wilde, T. M. Benedetti, C. Andronescu, S. Cheong, J. J. Gooding, R. D. Tilley, W. 

Schuhmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019 , 141 , 14093. 

[3] T. Burdyny, W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci. 2019 , 57 , 2165. 

[4] T. -T. Zhuang, Z. -Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. de Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. 

Min, R. Quintero -Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B . Zhang, J. Li, P. -N. Chen, X. -L. 

Zheng, H. Liang, W. -N. Ge,  B. -J. Ye, D. Sinton, S. -H. Yu, E. H. Sargent , Nat.  Catal. 2018 , 1, 421. On the border of electrochemistry and optics – studies of reaction 

# products in a microcavity 

Andrzej Krześniak* , Mateusz Śmietana**, Monika Janik**, Martin Jönsson -Niedziółka* 

*Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences 

Kasprzaka St. 44/52, 01 -224 Warsaw (Poland) 

akrzesniak@ichf.edu.pl 

* *Warsaw University of Technology 

pl. Politechniki 1, 00 -661 Warsaw (Poland) 

The main aim of our research is to couple electro chemistry with spectroscopic methods in a novel system 

made of a microcavity in an optical fiber (Fig. 1.) 

Fig. 1. Scheme of experimental setup – microcavity fabricated in an optical fiber 

A microcavity fabricated in an optical fiber wit h the use of femtosecond laser has dimensions around 60 

μm (length and depth) and acts as an electrochemical cell, in which picoliter volumes of solution can be 

analyzed, and simultaneously as an inline Mach -Zender interferometer. 

We are preparing platinu m microelectrodes, which put into microcavity play the role of working electrode. 

At their surface, electrochemical oxidation and reduction processes of studied analyte are carried out. The 

optical response to these processes is then examined, which gives more information about possible 

products. 

We will compare the electrochemical response of the electrode inside the cavity with calculations in 

Comsol. We also present measurements of the optical response from the microcavity inline Mach -Zehnder 

interferom eter recorded during electrochemical measurements. Electrochemical fabrication of a LiZn -alloy – A two -step approach to 

# reduce the volume expansion of alloy anodes 

J. J. A. Kreissl a,c , A. Ringleb b,c , D. Schlettwein b,c , D. Schröder a,c,* 

> a

Institute of Physical Chemistry, Justus -Liebig -University Giessen, Heinrich -Buff -Ring 17, D -35392 

Giessen Germany 

> b

Institute of Applied Physics, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Heinrich -Buff -Ring 16, D -35392 Giessen, 

Germany 

> c

Center of Materials Research (LaMa), Justus Liebig University Giessen, Heinrich -Buff -Ring 16, 

D-35392 Giessen, Germany 

* daniel.schroeder@phys.chemie.uni -giessen.de 

The current state -of -the -art electrochemical energy storage systems, i.e., lithium -ion batteries (LIB), reach 

almost their theoretical limit in energy density (584 Wh kg −1). [1] Thus, the aim of current research is to 

increase the theoretical energy density. Especially the use of pure lithium anodes would l ead to an immense 

increase in energy density due to the high specific capacity of lithium (3870 mAh g−1). However, a lot of 

challenges hinder the commercialisation of pure metal anodes, e.g. , the growth of dendrites during metal 

deposition, which pose high safety risks. [2] 

In order to build a bridge between safe and high capacity anodes, lithium -metal alloys are moving more in 

the focus of research. [3 –5] In addition to the benefits, a number of challenges still need to be addres sed, e.g. ,

the volume expansion and the contraction during lithiation and delithiation that can lead to cracking / 

deformation of the electrode. 

Within this work we aim to reduce the negative effects of the volume effects using the example of a LiZn 

alloy . We thereby apply the alloy to a 3D -host structure (carbon mesh) over two steps (Figure 1 a). First, a 

porous ZnO -film is electrodeposited onto the carbon fibres of a carbon mesh. Afterwards, the ZnO -film is 

electrochemically converted into LiZn by reacti on R 1. 

ZnO + 3 Li + + 3 e− → LiZn + Li 2O R 1

First results indicate that ZnO is electrochemically converted into LiZn as intended. In the next steps, the 

LiZn@C -mesh is used as anode material in a LIB and the electrochemical reversibility is in vestigated by 

means of operando XRD. However, small cracks are still formed in the anode material (Figure 1 f). In order 

to decrease the negative effects of these cracks even further, ZnO nanorods [6] will be used in future 

experiments. 

Lit. : [1] M. M. Thackeray, et al., Energ . Environ. Sci. 2012, 5, 7854.; [2] J. J. A. Kreissl et al., 

ChemSusChem 2020, just accepted.; [3] Y. Liu, et al., Nat.  Commun. 2016, 7, 10992.; [4] T. Krauskopf, 

et al., Adv. Energy Mater. 2019, 1902568.; [5] L. Kong, et al., Adv.  Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1808756. 

[6] Z. N. Urgessa, et al., J. Alloys Compd. 2019, 798, 249 –256. Development of innovative electrolytes for potassium -ion batteries 

Lukas Medenbach , Siqi Liu, Lars H. Heß , Christian Leibing and Andrea Balducci 

Centre for Energy and Environmental Chemistry, Jena (CEEC, Jena) 

Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany 

Lukas. Medenbach@uni -jena.de 

As one very promising post -lithium -ion battery candidate, potassium -ion batteries (KIBs) attracted the 

interest of researchers in recent years. Although potassium is much heavier than lithium or sodium, 

potassium -based batteries woul d reveal a number of advantages towards the lighter alkali -metal 

analogues. First, the half -cell potential of K +/K can be even lower than the one of Li +/Li depending on the 

used electro lyte composition [1] . Second, K + has usually a higher transference number within the 

electrolyte phase compared with Li + or Na + [1] . Third, potassium salts like KPF 6 are much less 

hygroscopic and can be produced at lowe r cost. And, in contrast to sodium ions , graphite is able to 

intercalate K + reversibly with a stoichiometric composition of C 8K (2 79 mA h g−1 ) [2] .

In this work we investigated the use of electrolyte s based on 3 -cyanopropionic acid methyl ester 

(CPAME) [3] , tetraethoxy glyoxal (TEG) and tetramethoxy glyoxal (TMG)  [4] for KIBs. From former 

studies, it is known that elect rolyte s based on these solvents display large electrochemical stability and 

are suitable candidates for the application in supercapacitors [3] as w ell as Li -ion batteries [4] . To the best 

of our knowledge, however, till now they have not considered in KIBs. The conductivity, viscosity, 

density , electrochemical and thermal stability of these electrolytes have b een investigated in detail and 

compared to that of the frequently investigated electrolyte based on KPF 6 dissolved in ethylene carbonate/ 

diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC). Furthermore, the use of these electrolytes in combination with 

K2Fe[Fe(CN) 6] (prussian whi te) based cathodes and with grap hite or soft carbon based anodes have been 

considered. The results showed that these unconventional electrolyte s are promising in view of the 

realization of high performance KIBs. 

Figure: Cyclic voltammograms of K 2Fe[Fe(CN )6] at different scan rates. 3-cyanopropionic acid methyl 

ester (CPAME) was used as electrolyte solvent. 

[1] K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, T. Hosaka, S. Kumakura, S. Komaba, Chem Rec 2018 , 18 , 459 -479. 

[2] Z. Jian, W. Luo, X. Ji, J Am Chem Soc 2015 , 137 , 11566 -11569. 

[3] M. Arnaiz, E. Goikolea, T. Rojo, L. Wittscher, A. Balducci, J. Ajuria, Journal of Power Sources 

2019 , 434 .

[4] a) L. H. Hess, A. Balducci, ChemSusChem 2018 , 11 , 1919 -1926; b) L. H. Hess, S. Wankmüller, 

L. Köps, A. Bothe, A. Balducci, Batteries & Supercaps 2019 , 2, 852 -857. Dim ensionally Stable Anodes Using Titanium Substrates for 

# Advanced Oxidation Processes 

## Jong -Hyeok Park 1, Yong -Hyun Kwon 2, Jin -Soo Park 1,2, *

> 1

## Future Environment and Energy Research Institute 

> 2

## Department of Green Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, Sangmyung 

## University 

## *energy@smu.ac.kr 

## Over hundred years, so many oxidation technologies have been developed in 

## environmental engineering fields. Mostly, chemical and biological oxidation processes 

## have been enough to treat organic and/or inorganic pollutants to meet the legal emission 

## targets. However, r ecent wastewater including non -degradable organic compounds 

## demands the development of advanced oxidation technology since non -degradable 

## organic compounds are hardly decomposed by chemical and/or biological treatment 

## technology. Particularly, discharge of toxic or highly concentrated industrial wastewater 

## has been significantly increased due to rapid industrial development to be a serious water 

## pollution. To overcome this problem, various water treatment technologies such as 

## chemical oxidation, precipitati on, adsorption, capacitive deionization, electrochemical 

## oxidation and so on have been recently developed and introduced to industry. Among 

## them, electrochemical oxidation of the compounds at anode is environmentally friendly, 

## easily operated and maintaine d compared to conventional treatment processes. 

## Nonetheless, cost reduction and enhancement of performance/durability of anodic 

## electrodes are highly necessary for commercialization. In this study, TiO 2/IrO 2/RuO 2

## electrodes that IrO 2 and RuO 2 coated on ano dized Ti substrate were prepared and 

## investigated in terms of various electrochemical properties. 

## Acknowledgement 

## This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Small and Medium -sized 

## Enterprises(SMEs) and Startups(MSS), Korea, under the “Regional Star -Enterprise 

## Development Program(R&D, P0010142) supervised by the Korea Institute for 

## Advancement of Technology(KIAT). Ionic Connection between Anodic and Cathodic Catalyst Layers 

Seohee Lim 1, Yoon -Ah Hwang 2, Jong -Hyeok Park 1, Jin -Soo Park 1,2 *

> 1

Future Environment and Energy Research Institute 

> 2

Department of Green Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, Sangmyung Un iversity 

31 Sanmgyungdae -gil, Dongnam -gu, Cheonan, Chungnam Province, 31066 Republic of Korea 

*energy@smu.ac.kr 

Most of electrochemically driven energy conversion devices consist of a pair of electrochemical reactions 

at electrodes and ion movement throug h electrolytes to complete full electrochemical cells. Ions move 

from anode to cathode or vice versa for electron exchanges. Pathway for ions is normally in an aqueous 

phase. Regardless, the introduction of any aqueous phase in energy conversion devices ca uses many 

problems during fabrication, operation, maintenance, and so on. Thus, much efforts have been devoted to 

develop quasi -solid electrolytes such as gel polymer, ion exchangeable polymers, impregnation of ions in 

porous matrix and so on. An approach to minimize areal resistance of film -type polymeric electrolytes is 

to make membrane thickness as thin as possible. Thus composite membranes have been highlighted as a 

new type of electrolytes. Composite membranes are made by impregnating polymeric electro lytes into 

thin porous substrates. However, hydrophilic ionomer is hardly impregnated into hydrophobic substrates. 

In this study, three -layered (e lectrolyte -skeleton/electrolyte -electrolyte) composite membranes with the 

thickness of 20 -50 μm were prepared using porous substrates of various thicknesses. A technique to 

impregnate ionomer into hydrophilically treated porous substrates were developed so as to prepare void -

free composite membranes. Characterization in terms of ion conductivity, ion exchange capacity, water 

uptake, dimensional stability, mechanical strength was carried out. 

Acknowledgment 

This research was supported by the Technology Deve lopment Program to Solve Climate Changes of the 

National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT ＆ Future Planning(NRF -

2018M1A2A2063866). Formation of Durable Triple Phase Bou ndary in Porous Catalyst 

# Layers 

Jong -Hyeok Park 1, Beom -Seok Kim 2, Jin -Soo Park 1,2, *

> 1

Future Environment and Energy Research Institute 

> 2

Department of Green Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, San gmyung Univers ity 

31 Sanmgyungdae -gil, Dongnam -gu, Cheonan, Chungnam Province, 31066 Republic of Korea 

*energy@smu.ac.kr 

Energy conversion devices such as water electrolyzers or fuel cells require the movement of ions 

generated and consumed at two electrodes, i.e., ano de and cathode. Ions should be transported inside 

electrodes to participate in anodic and cathodic reactions. Ion p athway is normally in liquid electrolyte .

Regardless, the introduction of any aqueous phase in energy conversion devices causes many problems 

during fabrication, operation, maintenance, and so on. In addition, if gas penetration or gas evolution is 

one of phenomena taking place at electrodes, the electrodes should be porous. Thus, much efforts have 

been devoted to develop quasi -solid electrolyt es such as gel polymer, ion exchangeable polymers, 

impregnation of ions in porous matrix and so on. Among the candidates, ion exchangeable polymers are 

quite often chosen as ion conducting media for energy conversion devices. The technique to introduce ion 

exchangeable polymers within electrodes for oxidation and reduction reactions is to solidify catalyst inks 

consisting of electrocatalyst, dispersion of ion exchangeable polymers, controlling solvents and additives 

by evaporation of all solvents in catalys t inks. Ion exchangeable polymers could be dispersed in various 

solvents. It causes different shapes of ion exchangeable polymers in solvents, for instance, cylindrical 

rods, a less -defined large particles, coils and so on. Such different types of ion exch angeable polymers 

form distinguished structure catalyst layers. In this study, the effect of solvents dispersing ion 

exchangeable polymers on the performance and durability of catalyst layers was investigated. 

Electrochemical characterization such as I -V p olarization, cyclic voltammetry, impedance and so on and 

microscopic characterization such as SEM and TEM were carried out to evaluate the performance and 

durability of catalyst layers. 

Acknowledgment 

This research was supported by the Hydrogen Energy Inn ovation Technology Development Program of 

the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT ＆ Future 

Planning( NRF -2019M3E6A1063677 ). Understanding the Effect of Porosity in Biomass -derived Carbon 

# Electrocatalysts for CO 2 Reduction 

Shilong Fu , Marilia Pupo, Wiebren De Jong, Ruud Kortlever *

Large -Scale Energy Storage section, Department of Process & Energy 

Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, Delft University of Technology 

Leeghwaterstraat 39, 2628CB, Delft, The Netherlands 

S.Fu -1@tudelft.nl ; R.Kortlever@tudelft.nl 

Electrochemical CO 2 conversion is a promising method to use renewable energy and waste CO 2, that 

other wise would have been emitted into the atmosphere, and produce fuels and bulk chemicals.[1] 

Biomass -derived carbon electrocatalysts have triggered a considerable attention recently due to their 

excellent electrocatalytic performance, highly abundant resourc e, relatively low costs and good long –term 

durability.[2] Moreover, protein(heteroatoms), vascular bundle(tunnel), and inorganic salts(templates) 

present in the biomass source can modify the charge distribution and morphology of the carbon materials, 

resul ting in enhanced electrocatalytic performance. 

In a typical heterogeneous electrocatalytic reaction involving a gas reactant, the catalytic efficiency is 

limited by mass transport limitations of the reactant and the complexity of the reactions at the thre e-phase 

electrochemical interfaces (e.g., gas, solid, and liquid three -phase interfaces). In these cases, porous 

electrode structures with a high number of pore sites can promote a catalytic reaction at the interface, 

electrolyte ion diffusion and electron transport. Previous research has demonstrated that the optimization 

of the pore structure, including specific surface area, pore volume, pore size, and pore size distribution, is 

a highly effective approach to improve the electrocatalytic performance of b iomass -derived carbon -based 

materials for CO2RR (CO 2 Reduction Reaction). [3] However, the difference in biomass sources, 

activators, preparation methods and conditions, bring different electrochemical performance, making it 

impossible to judge the specific functions of different porous structures in the electrochemical CO 2

reduction process. 

Here, we designed a series of systematic experiments to explain the functions of porous structure in 

different bio -based carbon catalysts. The biomass -derived carbon c atalysts were produced by a one -step 

method, using the same preparation procedure but altering activators. The textural analysis, such as: 

specific surface area, pore size distribution, degree of graphitization, etc. is combined with an analysis of 

the ele ctrocatalytic performance (overpotential; product selectivity; current density and durability) 

towards CO2RR. From this study, we will show how the porous structure of biomass -derived carbon 

affects mass transfer during the electrochemical reduction of car bon dioxide. Finally, we will obtain an 

understanding of the role of different activators and the function of porosity in the CO2RR on biomass -

derived carbon materials. 

References :    

> [1] Kuhl K P, Cave E R, Abram D N, et al. New insights into the electro che mical reduction of carbon dioxide on metallic copper
> surfaces[J]. Energy & Environmental Science, 2012, 5(5): 7050 -7059.
> [2] Zhang Z, Yang S, Li H, et al. Sustainable Carbonaceous Materials Derived from Biomass as Metal ‐Free Electrocatalysts[J].
> Advance d M aterials, 2019, 31(13): 1805718.
> [3] Li F, Xue M, Knowles G P, et al. Porous nitrogen –doped carbon derived from biomass for electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to
> CO[J]. Electrochimica Acta, 2017, 245: 561 -568.

# Direct electron transfer of oriented bilirubin oxidase on three -

# dimensional carbon paper with reduced graphene aggregation 

Jing Tang a, Xiaomei Yan a, Wei Huang a, Christian Engelbrekt a, Jens Øllgaard Duus a, Jens Ulstrup a,b , *,

Jingdong Zhang a, Xinxin Xiao a, *

> a

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark 

> b

Kazan National Research Technological University, K. Marx Str., 68, 420015 Kazan, Republic of 

Tatarstan, Russian Federation 

Email:  jita@kemi.dtu.dk ; ju@kemi.dtu.dk ; xixiao@kemi.dtu.dk 

Aggregation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) due to π -π stacking is a problem, as aggregation decreases 

the effective RGO working area. 1-2 Dispersing RGO on three -dimensional (3D) carbon paper electrode is 

one strategy towards relieving aggregation, but some aggregation still remains. 3 In this report we describe 

a study, where a negatively charged molecule 4 -aminobenzoic acid (4 -ABA) is grafted onto the graphene -

based ca rbon paper electrode surface to induce orientation of the blue multi -copper enz yme Myrothecium 

verrucaria bilirubin oxidase (BOD) favourable for direct electron transfer (DET) for the oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR) at neutral pH , Scheme 1 . Simultaneous e lectroreduction of GO to RGO and surface 

grafting of 4 -ABA are achieved by apply ing alternatingl y negative and positive electrochemical potential 

pulses, resulting in very high catalytic current density ( ∆jcat :193 ± 4 μA cm -2) under static condition. 

Surprisingly we found that electrochemically grafted 4 -ABA not only favours proper or ientation of BOD 

validated by numerical model fitting to the electrocatalytic currents. RGO aggregation is also alleviated as 

disclosed by scanning electron microscopy , probably due to the electrostatic repulsion between the 4-

ABA grafted graphene layers. Further, the bioelectrode shows outstanding operational stability with a 

half -lifetime of 55 h. Such a degree of stability has not been reported before. The bioelec trode is finally 

exploited in a gas diffusion configuration, offering gr eat potential for ap plications for bioelectrochemical 

devices such as biofuel cells and biosensors .

Sche me 1. Schematic illustration of the prepared BOD on 4-ABA functionalized RGO -carbon paper 

electrode and its bioelectrocatalysis process. A possible orientation of MvBOD ( PDB:2XXL), with 

surface charge distribution indicated with blue and red colour symbolizing positive and negative charges, 

respectively, is proposed (not drawn to scale). The left 4 -ABA linker form s an amide bond with BOD, 

while the right 4 -ABA wi th free –COO - is still unreacted .

References :

(1) Dreyer, D. R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C. W.; Ruoff, R. S., The Chemistry of Graphene Oxide. Chem. 

Soc. Rev. , 2010, 39 (1), 228 -240. 

(2) Di Bari, C.; Goñi -Urtiaga, A.; Pita, M.; Shleev, S.; Toscano, M. D.; Sainz, R.; De Lacey, A. L., 

Fabrication of High Surface Area Graphene Electrodes with High Performance towards Enzymatic 

Oxygen Reduction. Electrochim. Acta , 2016, 191 , 500 -509. 

(3) Tang, J.; Werchmeister, R. M. L.; Preda, L.; Huang, W.; Zheng, Z.; Leimkühler, S.; Wollenberger, U.; 

Xiao, X.; Engelbrekt, C.; Ulstrup, J.; Zhang, J., Three -Dimensional Sulfite Oxidase Bioanodes Based on 

Graphene Functionalized Carbon Paper for Sulfite /O2 Biofuel Cells. ACS Catal. , 2019, 9 (7), 6543 -6554. Quantum dots on electrodes for a parallel read -out of biochemical 

# reactions 

S. Zhao 1, M. Riedel 2, Z. Yue 3, W. Parak 1 and F. Lisdat 2,

1 Department of Physics, University of Hamburg, 22761 Hamburg, Germany 

2 Biosystems Technology, Technical University Wild au, 15745 Wildau, Germany 

3 Department of Microelectronics, Nankai University, 300350 Tianjin, China 

flisdat@th -wildau.de 

Semic onductor nanoparticles ( quantum dots - QDs ) have become attractive tools in bioanalysis because 

of their optical and electroche mical properti es. This is related to applications using fluorescence, 

electrochemiluminescence or photocurrent generation [1] . For photoelectrochemical systems QDs are 

immobili zed on conductive electrodes. By illumination electron -hole -pairs are formed ins ide the 

nanoparticles which can be used for photocurrent generation. Signal chains can be constructed when 

suitable donor or acceptor molecules are present in solution . The special feature of such electrodes is that 

the response is triggered by illuminati on of the sensing surface [1] . In this study, a l ight -switchable 

photoelectrochemical sensor was built by coupling QDs with two different oxidases to detect the 

respective enzyme substra tes in parallel .

For this purpose  CdSe/ZnS QDs have been immobi lised via a dithiol compound on gold electrodes. 

Two different enzymes, glucose oxidase (GOD) and sarcosine oxidase (SOD) have been deposited on this 

QDs -electrode at spatially wel l resolved places. Here small spots can be achieved . A laser beam is moved 

over the se spots to allow photocurrent generation . Since oxygen can act as electron acceptor at the 

illuminated QDs the photocurrent is correlated to the oxygen concent ration near the surface . By action of 

the enzymes in the presence of the corresponding su bstrate a competitive situation for oxygen is created 

in front of the QD layer and thus, the photocurrent decrease s [2, 3]. Since this occurs in a concentration 

dependent manner , analysis of the enzyme substrate is feasible. 

Due to the spatially separated immobilis ation of two oxidases , an independent read -out of the two enzyme 

reactions is fe asible . The experiments indicate good lateral re solution and selectivity of th e multi -

detection system without any crosstalk between the two sensing regions and witho ut any response at 

regions, which are not modified with an enzyme [4] .

Furthermore , the possibility of an imaging of the enzyme spot by photocurrent measurement has been 

investigated . When the laser is moved over the spot of GOD with a constant speed , the size of the spot 

can be determined from the photocurrent - time curve (with a defined moving speed). The photocurrent 

correlates to different local enzyme activities. Consequently, an imaging of the enzyme activity 

distribution on the surface has als o bee n achieved by this method. 

References 

[1] F. Lisdat, D. Schäfer, A. Kapp,  Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 405 (2013) 3739 -3752 

[2] M. Riedel, et al., Chem. Phys. Chem. 2013, 14, 2338 -2342. 

[3] J. Tanne et al., Anal.  Chem . 2011 , 83 , 7778 -77 85 .

[4] S. Zhao et al. , ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2019, Vol. 11 (24), p. 21830 -21839 Photo -Induced Electrochemiluminescence 

# at Semiconductor Electrodes 

Jing Yu, a Yiran Zhao, b Hiba Saada, b Guobao Xu, c,d Neso Sojic, a,* Gabriel Loge tb,*  

> a

University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, ISM, UMR CNRS 5255, 33607 Pessac, France.  

> b

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISC R-UMR 6226, F -35000 Rennes, France.  

> c

State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, China  

> d

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 

gabriel .loget@univ -rennes1.fr 

Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) is a light -emitting process and a powerful tool in analytical chemistry. 

This phenomenon is induced by the excited state of a luminophore, which is generated by an 

electrochemical reaction at an electr ode surface.[1] Conversely, photoelectrochemistry on illuminated 

semiconductors is a process where an electrode absorbs light, and that can be used to decrease the 

potential required to trigger an electrochemical reaction.[2] In this communication, we will introduce the 

photo -induced electrochemiluminescence (P -ECL ) of anodic ECL system s involving [Ru(bpy) 3]2+ and a

luminol analog (L -012) . In th is approach, the ECL emission is triggered by holes photogenerated in an n-

type semiconductor electrode, which is normally highly challenging due to competing photocorrosion 

occurring at semiconductor electrodes in aqueous electrolytes.[3] In a first example, w e will present the 

results we obtained on Si -based tunnel electrodes protected by a Ni stabilizing thin films and demonstrate 

that th ese photoanodes allow generating P -ECL in water. We will show that , in this case, P-ECL can be 

used as an upconversion process where light absorption at 810 nm induces ECL emission (635 nm) at a 

record low electroche mical potential of 0.5 V vs SCE. [4] Also , recent results obtained using a UV 

incident light to induce simultaneously L -012 fluorescence and the formation of oxidizing holes in the 

photoanode suggest that P -ECL leads to a stronger emission than fluorescence and that this p henomenon 

can be employed to finely tune the overall luminescence. [5]

References 

[1] Miao, W., Chem. Rev. 2008, 108 , 2506 –2553 .

[2] Gerischer, H. , Solar Energy Conversion: Solid -State Physics Aspects 1979, Springer: Berlin, 115 –172 .

[3] Bae, D .; Seger, B .; Vesborg, P. C. K .; Hansen, O .; Chorkendorff, I. , Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46 , 1933 –

1954. 

[4]  Zhao, Y. ; Yu, J. ; Xu, G. ; Sojic, N. ; Loget, G. , J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 , 13013 –13016. 

[5]  Manuscript in preparation Characterization of real -world electrocatalysts under operating 

# condit ions by soft x -ray spectroscopy : The EMIL@BESSY II operando 

# infrastructure 

Raul Garcia -Diez 1, Regan G. Wilks 1, 2, Johannes Frisch 1, Wolfgang Bremsteller 1, Marianne van der 

Merwe 1, En ggar Wibowo 1, Marcus Bär 1,2 ,3,4  

> 1

Interface Design, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH (HZB), Berlin, 

Germany  

> 2

Energy Materials In -Situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL), HZB, Berlin, Germany  

> 3

Helmholtz Institute Erlangen -Nürnberg for Re newable Energy (HI ERN), Berlin, Germany  

> 4

Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg, 

Erlangen, Germany 

raul.garcia_diez@helmholtz -berlin.de 

In conte xt of the growing need for a more sustainable energy sector , catalyst materials research to 

improve water electrolysis and fuel cell (FC) electrodes plays a significant role in the transition to a green 

energy production. In-situ stud ies of promising elect rocatalysts in conditions close to real operation is of 

crucial importance to understand the limiting mechanisms occurring in catalytic reaction s. The 

combination of soft x -ray absorption (XAS) and emission (XES) spectroscopies is an established method 

tha t can probe the (local) chemical and electronic structure of solid, liquid, and gaseous samples from an 

atom -specific perspective , providing insights into their catalytic activity. 

For this purpose, in the Energy Materials In -situ Laboratory Berlin (EMIL) at the BESSY II synchrotron 

facility , we have developed an infrastructure that allows XAS, XES, and RIXS (resonant inelastic x -ray 

scattering) studies of electrocatalysts under operating conditions. This setup is based o n a 3 -electrode 

electrochemical flo w-cell attached to an ultra -high vacuum chamber (UHV) dedicated for in -

situ /operando studies . The modular design of the electrochemical cell ensures project -specific upgrades 

besides the standard use with liquid electrolyte; for instance, the implementatio n of a microfluidic gas 

system that allows membrane -based design s for acidic water oxidation electrocatalysts or proton -

exchange -membranes for FC applications. The system is installed at a two undulator -based beamline 

covering a probing energy range from t he extreme ultraviolet (~ 80 eV) up to the hard x -ray regime (~10 

keV) . In combination with the high detection efficiency and (moderately) high energy resolution of the 

newly developed high -transmission soft x -ray emission sp ectrometer (HiTS) , high -quality XES and RIXS 

spectra of all relevant elements can be collected at appropriately fast timescales i.e. several minutes ,

enabling measurements during normal operation of a myriad of electrocatalysts .

We present the current status of the instrumentation dedic ated for in -situ characterization of real -world 

electrocatalysts under operating conditions at EMIL @BESSY II and the first operando experimental 

results on highly active iridium oxide -based oxygen evolution reaction catalyst .

Figure : Schematics of the op erando x-ray spectroscopy infrastructure at EMIL@BESSY II. The 

incoming x -rays generated at the synchrotron source impinge into the material through a thin membrane 

that separates the UHV environment from the examined material in the liquid electrolyte. Th e emitted 

fluorescence photons are collected with the energy dispersive spectrometer .Towards Operando Studies of Electrolyte /Catalyst In terface s in HT -

# PEMFC : Reference Material s Probed by X-ray Spectroscopies 

Enggar P. Wibowo 1, Raul Garcia -Diez 1, Martin Prokop 2, Regan G. Wilks 1, 3, Wanli Yang 4, Karel Bouzek 2,

Marcus Bär 1, 3,5,6 

> 1

Department Interface Design, Helmholtz -Zentrum für Materialen und Energie GmBH (HZB) .

Hahn -Meitner -Platz 1, 14109 Berlin, Germany .

> 2

Department of Inorganic Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague .

Technicka 5, Prague 6, 166 28, Czech Republic 

> 3

Ene rgy Material In -Situ Laboratory (EMIL), HZB , Albert -Einstein Str . 15, 12489.  Berlin, Germany 

> 4

Advanced Light Source (ALS), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . 1 Cyclotron Rd, Berkeley, CA 

94720, USA 

> 5

Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy , Friedrich -Alexa nder -Universität Erlangen -Nürnberg .

Egerlandstr.  3, 91058. Erlangen, Germany 

> 6

Department of X -ray Spectroscopy at Interfaces of Thin F ilms, Helmholtz Institute Erlangen -Nürnber g

for Renewable Energy (HI ERN) , Albert -Einstein -Str. 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany 

enggar.wibowo@helmholtz -berlin.de 

High -temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (HT -PEMFC s) using polybenzimidazole (PBI) 

membrane doped with concentrated phosphoric acid are a promising candidate for a sustainable stationary 

energy source due to the promising combined heat and power efficiency 1. However , long -term durability 

remains a n issue and further optimization is needed to push HT -PEMFCs further into the market. By 

investigating the phenomena at the electrolyte /catalyst interface, light can be shed on the degradation 

mechanism s governing the lifetime of these devices . Several (ex -situ ) studies have reported on the 

interaction between phosphoric acid -based electrolyte and Pt catalyst 2, b ut  investigation s dedicated to the 

reactions occurring at the electrolyte /catalyst interface under operati ng conditions are scarce .

We aim to elucidate the crucial interaction s at the interface between H 3PO 4-based electrolyte and Pt 

catalys t by using op erando absorption (XAS) and emission (XES) x -ray spectroscopy at the phosphorus 

K- and L 2,3 -edge . Photon -in/photon -out x-ray spectroscopies are powerful tool s to investigat e the 

electrolyte /catalyst interface due to the detailed , element -specific informati on on oxidation state and local 

chemical structure that they can provide 3,4. However , the interpretation of x -ray spectra can prove very 

intricate, since several phosphorus oxoacids might be generated when electric potential is ap plied to the 

Pt surface in conta ct with H3PO 45, resulting in multiple and superposed contributions to the spectroscopic 

signal .

In order to pave the way towards operando investigation s, a fundamental XAS and XES study on relevant 

phosphorus -containing compounds with different oxi dation 

states and chemical environment s has been performed at the 

P K- and L2,3 -edges . Complementary hard x-ray 

photoe lectron spectroscop y (HA XP ES) measurements have 

also been performed , and this unique dataset will facilitate 

the identification of the spe cies emerging under operation 

conditions . Moreover, as an intermediate step towards real 

operando  studies , differently prepared pellets containing Pt 

catalyst were immersed in aqueous phosphoric and 

phosphorus acid electrolyte and afterwards were probed at 

the P K -edge in order to gain insights into the electrolyte/ Pt 

interaction at open circuit voltage (OCV) .

As shown in the figure, both P K -edge and L 2,3 - spectra are 

highly sensitive to the oxidation state and chemical 

environment of the different referen ce compounds , allowing 

use as speciation tool s in the operando study . 

> 1

Chandan et al. Journal of Power Sources 231 : 264 –78 . 2013 . 

> 2

He et al . PhysChemChemPhys 12 : 12544 –55 . 2010 . 

> 3

Schmidt et al. Chemical Communications 54: 4939 –42 . 2018 .

> 4

Kruse et al. J. Synchrotron Rad 16: 247 –259. 200 9.  

> 5

Prokop et al. Electrochimica Acta 212: 465 –72 . 2015 .Simulation of Electrochemical Time -of -Flight Experiments in a 

# Scanning Electrochemical Microscope for the Investigation of 

# Electron -Transfer Reactions 

Sebastian Pleis , Gunther Wittstock 

Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg 

Ammerländer Heerstraße 114 -118, D -26129 Oldenburg, Germany 

sebastian.pleis@uol.de 

Reaction mechanisms in homogeneous catalysis using transition metal complexes often involve the 

formation of short -lived intermediates. To detect these intermediates, it is necessary to choose a technique 

with a short time -window relative to the lifetime of the investigated species. It has been shown that a 

scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) can be employed to detect electrochemically active 

intermediates with short lifetimes and to investigate their electron -transfer kinetics [1 -3]. 

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the tip -generation substrate -collection (TG/SC) mode for the 

investigation of an E rCi-mechanism 

In this contribution COMSOL Multiphysics was used to simulate electrochemical time -of -flight 

experiments using the tip -generation substrate -collection mode (TG/SC). A simple reaction mechanism of 

the E rCi-type was chosen as the basis of the simulation. As shown in figure 1 the oxidized species is 

generated at the ti p-electrode via a heterogeneous electron -transfer and diffuses to the substrate -electrode 

where it is collected by electrochemical reduction. The collection efficiency depends on the distance d

between the electrodes and the rate constant k of the coupled homogenous reaction. The simulation was 

used to explore the redox behavior of the species for varying tip -substrate distances and rate constants. 

[1] S. Bi, B. Liu, F. -R. F. Fan, A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 3690. 

[2] J. Chang, A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 311. 

[3] F. Cao, J. Kim, A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 18163. Novel and Facile Synthesis of Cu 2-xS-Based  Electrocatalysts for 

# Selective CO 2 Conversion into HCO OH 

Sasho Stojkovikj ,1 Gumaa A. El -Nagar ,1 Metodija Najdoski, 2 Violeta Koleva, 3 Matthew T. Mayer 1

> 1

Young Investigator Group: Electrochemical Conversion of CO 2, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin für 

Materialien und Energie GmbH, Hahn -Meitner -Platz 1, D -14109 Berlin, Germany 

> 2

Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematic, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, 

1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia 

> 3

In stitute of General and Inorganic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 

e-mail address : sasho.stojkovikj@helmholtz -berlin.de 

Formic acid is  a valuable feedstock chemical  that is utilized  in broad industrial fields  and is promising to 

be used in  fuel cells. [1] The production of HCOOH or HCOO - via renewable energy driven 

electrochemical reduction of CO 2 is a promising strategy which combines renewable chemical synthesis, 

CO 2 emissions mitigation , and energy storage . Various materials have been investigated as promising 

electrocatalyst materials for selective and efficient CO 2 conversion into  HCOOH  (e.g., Sn, Pb, In and 

Cu xS) .[2,3] Among them, copper sulfide based electrocatalysts (Cu 2-xS) are promising candidates due to 

their activit y, non -toxicity, and chemical abundance .[4] Moreover, the properties of Cu sulfides can be 

tuned by adjusting the stoichiometry, morphology, structure, and Cu valence state . Synthesis of Cu 2-xS

par ticles with defined shape,  particle  size distribution, hier archical organization, controlled stoichiometry, 

and defined crystal structure via a simple, low cost, and scalable process is still a challenge. Herein, we 

propose a simple , novel and inexpensive route for synthesis of digenite/roxbyite mixed phase cuprou s

sulfides via a direct reaction between elemental copper and sulfur dissolved in CS 2 and PhCH 3 at room 

temperature. The as -synthesized materials were characterized using variety of techniques including SEM, 

XRD , TGA /DSC  and XPS . Electrochemically, the as -pre pared materials showed that HCO OH  is the only 

CO 2ER product  (at <  –1 V vs RHE in  aqueous  0.1 M KHCO 3) and is produced with promising selectivity 

(55% FE). Additionally, we will provide our insight into the nature of the active site and the role of 

sulfu r, and the subsequent mechanistic implications with reference to the conventionally described shift 

from carbophilic to oxophilic binding which characterizes the HCO OH  production pathway .[4]

[1] Y. Li et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017 , 56(21) , 5734 –5737 .

[2] M. Jouny et al.  Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.  2018 , 57(6) , 2165 −2177 .

[3] S. Lee et al. Chem . Rec. 2020 , 20(2) , 89 −101. 

[4] Z. Pan et al. ACS Catal . 2020 , 10(6) , 3871 −3880 .

`Electron -Hopping Governed Redox -Active Vertically -Aligned 

# Mesoporous Silica Thin Films as Transparent Surfaces for Energy 

# Storage Applications 

Jianren Wang , Neus Vil à, Alain Walcarius 

Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et l’ Environnement (LCPME), 

UMR 7564 CNRS – Université de Lorraine, 405 rue de Vandoeuvre, 54600 Villers -lès -Nancy , France .

jianren.wang @univ -lorraine.fr 

The slow redox reaction rates always restrict the power densit ies of faradic materials. Different from th e

conventional electron transfer mechanism, electron -hopping , namely charge transfer between close but 

isolated redox molecules, may have the potential to accelerate redox reaction s.1 However, large -scale 

spatial assembly of redox molecules to increase the energy density remains difficult , and few studies 

systematically evaluate the value of electron -hopping mechanism in the energy storage field . Therefore, 

organic -inorganic hybrid membranes made of a high density of redox active moieties covalently bonded 

to the internal surfaces of vertically -aligned mesoporous silica thin films have been prepared from the 

combination of an electrochemically -induced self -assembly method 2 (to generate azide functionalized 

silica) and a copper -catalyzed azide -alkyne click re action 3 (to derivatize the material with electroactive 

groups such as ferrocene ). In such rigid and insulating porous membranes, the charge transfer reactions 

take place through a pure electron -hopping mechanism between adjacent redox sites, which are favo red 

by the ordered and oriented mesostructure containing large amounts of uniformly distributed ferrocene 

functions. The density of ferrocene molecules in the mesochannels can be controlled by adjusting the 

ratio of organosilane in the precursor solution a nd the relationships among the energy storage behavior, 

ferrocene density, and materials structure are analyzed in detail. The most effective system is the 

ferrocene -functionalized silica film prepared from 40% organosilane due to both high charge transfer 

rates (electron -hopping) and easy mass transport (fast diffusion of counter ions) , which is able to deliver a 

capacity of 175 F cm -3 at the current density of 0.4 A cm -3. (with up to 48% capacity retention achieved at 

a charging time as short as 2.8 s). Moreover, the very small thickness (105 nm) and the uniformly 

distributed vertical meso channel s with ultranarrow diameter (2 nm) also deliver 82% transparency at 550 

nm, mak ing the hybrid film s promising energy storage material s for transparent device s.

(1) Finklea, H. O.; Hanshew, D. D. Electron -Transfer Kinetics in Organized Thiol Monolayers with 

Attached Pentaammine(Pyridine)Ruthenium Redox Centers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114, 3173 –

3181. 

(2) Walcarius, A.; Sibottier, E.; Etienne, M.; Ghanbaja, J. Electrochemi cally Assisted Self -Assembly of 

Mesoporous Silica Thin Films. Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 602 –608. 

(3) Vilà, N.; Ghanbaja, J.; Aubert, E.; Walcarius, A. Electrochemically Assisted Generation of Highly 

Ordered Azide -Functionalized Mesoporous Silica for Oriented Hybri d Films. Angew. Chemie - Int. 

Ed. 2014, 53, 2945 –2950. Electrochemical characterization of aptamers against a potential 

# biomarker of p ancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 

Noemí de -los -Santos -Álvarez a,b , Ramón Lorenzo -Gómez a,b , Marcos García -Ocaña c, Clara Barneo -

Caragol b, Rebeca Miranda -Castro a,b , Juan Ramón de -lo s-Toyos c, María Jesús Lobo -Castañón a,b 

> a

Dpto. de Química Física y Analítica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Oviedo, Av. Julián Clavería 

8, 33006 Oviedo, Spain 

> b

Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias, Av. de Roma, 33011 Oviedo , Spain 

> c

Área de Inmunología, Facultad de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Oviedo, Av. Julián 

Clavería 6, 33006 Oviedo, Spain 

> d

Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain 

santosnoemi@uniovi.es 

Biomarker discovery is an active research area , especially in oncology. Cancer diagnosis still relies on 

invasive tumor biopsies that are not exempt from risks. In recent decades , the search for specific 

biomarkers which assist clinicians in diagnos ing cancer and enable disease monitoring , selection of the 

appropriate treatment and early detection of recurrence , has enormously increased. Unfortunately, 

pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) lacks suitable biomarkers that h elp improve the devastating 

survival rate due to a late diagnosis. In this disease, the stroma plays a relevant role as a physical barrier 

against drugs and as a promoter of the tumor formation, invasion and metastasis . Therefore, abnormal 

components of th e extracellular matrix are regarded as potential targets for therapy and diagnosis. With 

the aim of identifying these components, specific receptors are needed and aptamers possess features that 

make the m ideal for this task. 

In this study , w e were able t o select DNA aptamers against a potential extracellular matrix component by 

designing a 4 -round SELEX protocol on magnetic beads. Several sequences were selected for detailed 

characterization based on their sequence homology and secondary structure. Electr ochemical bioassays 

on magnetic beads were used to estimate the binding constant of the aptamer -target complex formation. 

The best sequences showed dissociation constants in the nanomolar range similarly to other tumor 

biomarkers. Likewise, electrochemical inhibition experiments support ed the affinity of the aptamer for its 

target in solution . Selectivity was assessed by a ptahistoche mistry in healthy and PDAC tissues, and by 

aptacytochem istry using different tumor cell lines with and without target expressi on. 

Acknowledgements 

This work is funded by the Spanish Government (RTI -2018 -095756 -B-I00) and the Principado de 

Asturias Government (Project IDI/2018/000217). R.L.G. thanks the Spanish Government for a

predoctoral FPU grant (FPU16/05670). Construction and Characterization of a Flow Cell System in Comparison 

# to the Rotating Ring Disk Electrode System. 

Frederik J. Stender ,a, Keisuke Obata c, Fatwa Abdi c, Marcel Risch a,b  

> a

Institut für Materialphysik, Georg -August -Universität Göttingen  

> b

Nachwuchsgruppe Gestaltung des Sauerstoffentwicklungsmechanismus, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin GmbH  

> c

Institut für Solare Brennstoffe, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin GmbH 

Institut für Materialphysik, Friedrich -Hund -Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen 

frederik.stender01@stud.uni -goettingen.de 

The generation of renewable energy fluctuates due to the intermittence of wind and sun. To have a stable energy 

grid, this energy has to be stored during highly productive days and released as needed. Electrochemical w ater 

splitting is attractive to store electricity in the form of hydrogen but limited by the slow kinetics of the oxygen 

evolution reaction (OER). [1,2] To understand this li mitation, a mechanistic insight of the reaction is needed and 

can be gained using in situ spectroscopic studies on model electrodes. However, thin film model electrodes are 

difficult to integrate with commercially available electroanalytical instruments such as the well -established 

rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE ) setup. [3] Furthermore, interfac ing spectrometers with RRDEs is 

challenging . Therefore, we design a modular flow cell assembly that uses planar 5 ×10 mm electrodes and offers 

a simple interface with different spectr oscopic systems. Our system can be adapted to various target reactions 

by changing the position, geometry and material of the electrodes as well as the flow geometry. The working 

and detector electrodes can be easily removed for post -mortem analysis. To va lidate our system, t he redox 

behavior and mass -transport limitation were investigated using the ferri -/ferrocyanide redox couple in different 

electrolytes. Figure 1 shows the transport limitation as constant currents for both electrodes below ca. 0 V vs. 

SCE. The collection efficiency of the system in the mass -transport limit ing case was simulated using 

multiphysics models in COMSOL® . The collection efficiency was found to be nearly independent of the flow 

rate at a value of around 35 %, which agrees with that calculated analytically. [4] The independence of the 

collection efficiency on the flow rate was also observed in cyclic voltammetry experiments using ferri -

/ferrocyanide , where the collection efficiency 

was around 33(1) %, i.e. within 10% of the 

calculated value. The simulations have shown 

that products from the worki ng and counter 

electrodes do not mix at experimentally used 

flow rates between 0.5 and 8 ml/min . In 

comparison to the RRDE system, we found that 

large flow rates are needed to produce the 

limiting current densities of typical RRDE 

experiments and that the time delay between 

production of the species and detection is larger 

in our flow cell. In conclusion, we find that our 

modular flow cell is a suitable alternative or 

addition to the common RRDE setups due to its 

flexible design and easy integration with fu rther 

analysis systems to increase the information 

density of the measurement in future work. 

References 

[1] C. Wei, et al., Adv. Mater. 2019 , 1806296. 

[2] H. Dau, et al., ChemCatChem 2010 , 2, 724 –761. 

[3] J. Scholz, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 2016 , 120 , 27746 –27756. 

[4] R. G. Compton, et al., J. Appl.  Electrochem. 1988 , 18 , 657 –665. -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -100μ -80μ -60μ -40μ -20μ 020μ 40μ 60μ 80μ 100μ 

> 1 ml/min 3 ml/min 7 ml/min
> E-iR vs. SCE [V]
> Working Current [A]
> Detection Working
> -30μ -20μ -10μ 010μ 20μ 30μ
> Detection Current [A]

Figure 1. Collection efficiency measurements of the 

modular flow cell. Membraneless microfluidic fuel cells with increased power density by 

# passive flow control 

Wiebke Rösing , Jörg König, Christian Cierpka 

Institute of Thermodynamics and Fluid Mechanics, Technische Universität Ilmenau, Germany 

Am Helmholtzring 1, 98693 Ilme nau, Germany 

Wiebke. Roesing@tu -ilmenau.de 

Microfluidic fuel cells are considered as the most promising candidates for power sources in portable 

electronic devices [1 -3]. In membraneless microfluidic fuel cells, fuel and oxidant flow in parallel at low 

Re ynolds number without convective mixing. The membraneless architecture eliminates many of the 

problems encountered with PEMFCs. However, it is still difficult to commercialize microfluidic fuel 

cells, because at practical flow rates and useful cell voltage s poor fuel utilizations below 10% and low 

power densities persist problematic [4 ]. This is mostly caused by the formation of concentration boundary 

layers at the electrodes . A possibility to reduce the thickness of the concentration boundary layers is to 

increase the flow rate. However, this results in a further decrease in fuel utilization. A simple alternative 

method for the suppression of the concentration boundary layer expansion is a passive flow control by 

using a curved microchannel, which induces a transversal secondary flow as sketched in Fig . 1b) [5]. The 

generated cou nter rotating vortices enhance the transport of fresh reactant from the center of the channel 

to the concentration boundary layers. In order to investigate the correlation between th e current density 

and the transversal secondary flow, a fuel cell with a U-shaped microchannel was fabricated (Fig . 1a). 

Segmented electrodes on the top and bottom of the microchannel enabled an electrochemical characteri-

zation of the fuel cell within the straight and curved channel part. In addition, optical flow measurements 

were conducted using astigmatic particle tracking velocimetry (APTV) [ 6]. Besides the experiments, nu-

merical simulation s demonstrate that, using a curved microfluidic fuel cell the cu rrent density increases 

compared to a fuel cell w ith only a straight section , due to the induced counter rotating vortices (Fig . 1c) 

[5]. The higher the flow rate, the higher the curren t density. At a flow rate of 30 ml/h the current density 

increases abou t 8%, while at a flow rate of 100 ml/h an increase of more than 30% is achieved. Further 

results, including measured polarisation curves and APTV flow measurements will be presented and dis-

cussed at the conference to emphasize the correlation between fuel cell efficiency and the flow physics 

based on our experimental findings .

Figure 1. a) Photograph of the microfluidic fuel cell with segmented platinum electrodes on the top and the bottom 

of a curved microchannel. b) Cross -sectional view of the microc hannel with sketched transversal flow induced in the 

curve of the channel. c) Simulated polaris ation curves for straight and curv ed microfluidic fuel cell at three volumet-

ric flow rates. 

References 

[1] E. Choban. Microfluidic fuel cell based on laminar flow. J Power Sources 128 : 54 –60, 2004. 

[2] J. Massing, N. van der Schoot, C. J. Kähler, C. Cierpka.  A fast start up system for microfluidic direct methanol 

fuel cells. Int J Hydrogen Energ . 44 : 26517 –26529, 2019. 

[3] R. Ferrigno, A.D. Stroock, T.D. Clark , M. Mayer, G.M. Whitesides. Membraneless Vanadium Redox Fuel Cell 

Using Laminar Flow. J Am Chem Soc. 124 : 12930 –12931, 2002. 

[4] E. Kjeang, N. Djilali, D. Sinton.  Microfluidic fuel cells. J Power Sources 186 : 353 –369, 2009. 

[5] W. Rösing, T. Schildhauer, J. König, C. Cierpka.  Passive control of the concentration boundary layer in micro-

fluidic fuel cells using Dean vortices. Microfluid Nanofluid. 23 : 110, 2019. 

[6] C. Cierpka, R. Segura, R. Hain, C.J. Kähler. A simple single camera 3C3D velocity measurement technique 

without errors due to depth of correlation and spatial averaging for microfluidics. Meas Sci Technol. 21 : 45401, 

2010. Mo O3-CNTs Hybrid Material by Spray Coating and Electrodeposition 

# as High Performance Negative Electr ode for Supercapacitor s

C. Rogier 1, 2 , G. Pognon 1, P. Bondavalli 1, C. Galindo 1, G. T.M. Nguyen 2, C. Vancaeyzeele 2, P.H. Aubert 2

> 1

Thales Research & Technol ogy, 1 avenue Augustin Fresnel, 91767, Palaiseau, France 

> 2

Laboratoire de Physicochimie des Polymères et des Interfaces (EA 2528), Université de Cergy -Pontoise, 

5 mail Gay -Lussac, 95031 Cergy -Pontoise Cedex, France 

clemence.rogier@thalesgroup.com 

Combining transition metal oxides and nanostructured carbon materials is considered as one of 

the best strategy to achieve high performance supercapacitors electrodes [1]. Here is reported a novel way 

to increase energy densities while maintaining high power densit ies of supercapacitors exploiting 

pseudocapacitance and nanostructuration of electrode materials. 

MoO 3 has been recently reported as an appropriate pseudocapacitive anode material with a high 

capacitance [2] . Carbon nanotubes are used for their high elect rical conductivity and rapid charge storage 

kinetics. The challenge is to assemble both material in a homogeneous nanostructured electrode with 

controlled composition and structuration aiming to create a synergetic effect between both charge storage 

mechan isms to improve electrochemical performances. 

First , MWCNTs are deposited directly onto a current collector by dynamic spray -gun deposition. 

This deposition method used for nanostructuration of thin films insures the formation of homogeneous 

mats with tuna ble thickness [3] . This method is reproducible, easily scalable and low -cost considering 

that it is compatible with large surfaces. Then , molybdenum trioxide is deposited by a cathodic 

electrodeposition method directly onto the nanostruc tured carbon framew ork formed by the carbon 

nanotubes. Electrodeposition is very versatile and allows a good control of the composition of the hybrid 

material and of the morphology of the metal oxide , both impacting the final electrochemical performances 

of the hybrid materi al . The mechanism of growth of this specific metal oxide is quite complex with 

several possible intermedia tes presenting different oxidation states depending on the environment [4 ]. We 

study the influence of deposition conditions (such as pH, concentration in Mo 6+ ions, current density ) on 

the physicochemical and electrochemical properties of the resulting composite material .

The composition and structure of this electrode material is characterized by SEM, XPS, Raman 

spectroscopy, and microporosity analysis . Influence of an additional heat treatment after the 

electrochemical growth on the performances of th e material is studied as well. A great amelioration of 

electrochemical performances after treatment under air at 350°C can be note d and the capacitance of the 

final material can reach up to 220 F/g for this hybrid negative electrode in an organic electrolyte (LiTFSI 

at 0.5M in γ -Butyrolactone ). Indeed solubility of the deposited MoO 3 has been found to be a major issue 

in aqueous electrolytes. 

Finally a full asymmetric supercapacitor with two dif ferent metal oxide based hybrid materials 

using this particular organic electrolyte was developed , as can be shown in the figure below . A hybrid 

MnO 2-rGO -CNTs material presented in one of our previous publications [5] is used as the positive 

electrode. Per formances of th is hybrid system compared to a symmetric system based on carbon 

nanomaterials developed at our laboratory show a great gain in terms of energy densities from 5 to 25 

Wh/kg with a power density of 100 W/kg when pseudocapa citive materials are added. 

[1] National Science Review, 4, 1 (2017) 71 –90 

[2] Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10058 –10060 

[3] ChemNanoMat, Volume 3, Issue 6, 2017, 436 -446 

[4 ] Analytica Chimica Acta 49 6 (2003) 39 –51 

[5] Surface & Coatings Technology 384 (2020) 125310 Electrodeposition of Copper from Deep Eutectic Solvents – Influence 

# of Composition 

Tanja Geng 1, Maximilian Ceblin 1,2,3 , Timo Jacob 1,2,3  

> 1

Institute of Electrochemistry , Ulm University , Albert -Einstein -Allee 47, 89081 Ulm (Germany)  

> 2

Helmholtz -Institute Ulm (HIU), Helmholtzstra ße 11, 89081 Ulm (Germany)  

> 3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), P. O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe (Germany) 

tanja.geng@uni -ulm.de 

Recently, there has been an increasing interest i n the deposition of various metals from Deep Eutectic 

Solvents (DES) as an alternative to other non -aqueous electrolytes such as ionic liquids. DES typically 

consist of an organic ( DES type III) or inorganic ( DES type IV) salt in combination with a hydrogen bond 

donor. [1 ,2 ] If mixed in the eutectic ratio , they form a liquid due to freezing -point depression. Advantageous 

characteristics of DES include but are not limited to a rather low viscosity compared to ionic liquids , high 

conductivity , and a broad electroche mical stability window. Further, t he two components are usually 

inexpensive and can be purified separately .[1 -3] 

Despite the extensive research in the field of DES performed over the last years , there is little knowledge 

about their thermal behavior. [4] This holds especially true for the impact of composition on the freezing 

point and the resulting freezing -point depression. However, this can influence the conductivity as well as 

the complexes present in the electrolyte , and thus the electrochemical behav ior. In this study, we 

investigated the thermal and electrochemical characteristics of different DES as a function of their 

composition. The influence of the hydrogen bond donor, the salt, and their ratio is studied systematically. 

Differential scanning calorimetry is applied to generate phase diagrams of DES type III and to determine 

the eutectic composition and eutectic temperature of the respective mixtures. The focus of the subsequent 

electrochemical characterization is on copper deposition as a model system. Investigated electrolytes are 

combinations of choline chloride or choline nitrate with hydrogen bond donors such as ethylene glycol or 

trifluoroacetamide. As a copper source, Cu(I) or Cu(II) species are added to the mixtures. An Au(111) 

single crystal is employed as a model electrode to study the initial stages of the copper deposition . Cyclic 

voltammetry , chronoamperometry , and the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance are applied to 

elucidate the nucleation mechanism o f copper on Au(111) from DES type III . Literature believes that 

high chloride concentrations influence the deposition .[5] Our study with choline nitrate suggests, however, 

that a high concentration of anions in general is crucial. The reaction mechanism of copper deposition 

also depends on the hydrogen bond donor, its ratio to the salt , and the copper species involved. In all 

media, deposition follows a nucleation and three -dimensional growth mechanism controlled by diffusion. 

The bulk deposition is probabl y preceded by underpotential deposition at more positive potentials .

Furthermore, we are applying these methods to copper -based DES type IV. Analogous to DES type III, 

these show a freezing -point depression and can be used as electrolytes in metal deposi tion. Because of the 

high concentration of copper salt , their deposition behavior in terms of the nucleation mechanism is 

different. 

# References 

[1] A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed, V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun. 2003 , 70 –71. 

[2] A. P. Abbott, J. C. Barron, K. S. Ryder, D. Wilson, Chem. Eur. J. 2007 , 13 , 6495 –6501. 

[3] E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott, K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev. 2014 , 114 , 1 1060 –11082. 

[4] X. Meng, K. Ballerat -Busserolles, P. Husson, J. -M. Andanson, New J. Chem. 2016 , 40 , 4492 –4499. 

[5] P. Sebastián, E. Vallés, E. Gómez, Electrochim . Acta 2014 , 123 , 285 –295. Degradation of OER Based Reversal T olerant PEFC Anodes – Innovative 

# Characterization Methods and Further I nsights 

D. Bentele 1,2 *, K. Aylar 2, K. Olsen 2, E. Klemm 1, S. H. Eberhardt 2 

> 1

University of Stuttgart, Institute of Chemical Technology, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, 

Germany  

> 2

Mercedes -Benz AG, 70546 Stuttgart, Germany 

*(presenting author email address : dominik.bentele@daimler.com )

Durability is a major lever for cost competitiveness of polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs) with 

respect to combustion engines for automotive and stationary applications. 1 The occurrence of cell reversal 

events due to gross fuel starvation in one or more membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) can significantly 

reduce fuel cell lifetime . In th is case, t he increase in anode potential during cell reversals causes irreversible 

damage to the anode catalyst layer (ACL) and other PEFC components. 2,3 

The introduction of an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst , such as IrO x, constitutes a material 

based mitigation strategy to reduce cell reversal induced degradation. 2–6 By lowering the activation energy 

of the water splitting reaction , the OER catalysts significantly reduces carbon corrosion during c ell 

reversal. 7 To achieve increased lifetime and cost reduction, comprehensive understanding of degradation 

processes within reversal tolerant anodes (RTAs) is crucial for MEA manufacturing and material 

development. 

In this work , a supported IrO x catalyst is combined with a state of the art carbon supported platinum 

hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) catalyst . To facilita te fast and cost -efficient research, innovative 

characterization methods and procedures are developed for single cell (< 50 cm 2) testing . A major focus is 

set on a cyclic combination of cell reversal and normal operation to characterize HOR and OER 

performance and interaction . The use of such a combination is still comparatively low 4, whereas state of 

the art accelerated stress test s ( ASTs ) focus on uninterrupted cell reversal testing . Therefore, focusing more 

on OER lifetime rather than normal operation lifetime estimation during repetitive, short -term reversal 

events occurring within automotive application. 

Combining the developed AST pro cedure with advanced performance characterization s, such as 

hydrogen pump experiments , the individual contribution of mass transport, ohmic and HOR activation 

overpotential can further be quantified .

Beside s the significant impact of using different HOR catalysts, a strong ACL structure dependency 

regarding the reversal tolerance was found (cf. Fig. 1). Using identical components and catalyst loadings, 

varying the ACL structure reveals a reversal tolerance increase by a factor of nine .

Figure 1: Reversal tolerance investigated by the developed cell reversal AST procedure for two different 

MEAs . Their ACLs differ regarding their structure whereas used components and catalyst loadings are 

identical. 

1. S. Satyapal, US Dep. Energy Hydrog. Fuel Cells Progr. 2019 Annu. Merit Rev. Peer Eval. Rep. 

April 29 –May 1, 2019, Cryst. City, Virginia. , 173 –313 (2019). 

2. M. P. Hogarth and T. R. Ralph, Platin. Met. Rev. , 46 , 146 –164 (2002). 

3. A. Taniguchi, T. Akita, K. Yasuda, and Y. Miyazaki, J. Power Sources , 130 , 42 –49 (2004). 

4. T. R. Ralph, S. Hudson, and D. P. Wilkinson, in ECS Transactions ,, vol. 1, p. 67 –84, ECS (2006). 

5. B. K. Hong, P. Mandal, J. G. Oh, and S. Litster, J. Power Sources , 328 , 280 –288 (2016). 

6. L. Hu, B. K. Hong, J. G. Oh, and S. Litster, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. , 2, 7152 –7161 (20 19). 

7. K. H. Lim, W. H. Lee, Y. Jeong, and H. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 164 , F1580 –F1586 (2017). A Novel Multi -Functional Electrolyte Additive for Ni -Rich Cathode 

# Materials 

Hieu Quang Pham , Sigita Trabesinger 

Battery Electrodes and Cells, Electrochemistry Laboratory, Paul Scherrer Institute, 

Forschungsstrasse 111, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 

quang .pham@psi.ch 

Ni -rich layer oxides Li[Ni xCo yMn 1− x−y]O 2 (x ≥ 0.8, NCMs) are promising advanced cathode materials for 

high -energy Li -ion batteries because of their high specific capacity (≥ 200 mAh g −1 ) with an average 

discharge voltage of 3.8 V vs Li +/Li, as compared to the commercialized cathode mate rials (e.g. LiCoO 2,

LiFePO 4). 1 However, the instability of cathode –electrolyte interface causes the structural degradation of 

cathode active material and the electrolyte consumption, as well as gas evolution due to oxidative 

decomposition of electrolyte, r esulting in a rapid capacity fading. 2

Thus, improvement in the stability of cathode –electrolyte interphase is a key requirement to inhibit their 

structural degradation and enhance their electrochemical properties. The formation of a protective surface 

film via electrolyte additives is considered a cost -effective and reliable way to improve the cathode –

electrolyte interfacial stability, as the stable surface film, uniformly distributed over the entire cathode 

surface, would prevent direct contact of oxide wi th the electrolyte, still allowing Li + transport between the 

cathode and electrolyte. 3 In this work, we report the high -performance NCM cathode through interfacial 

stabilization using a novel electrolyte additive. The details of surface film stability and formation 

mechanism, and their relation to gas evolution as well as cycling performance would be discussed. 

References:  

> 1

S. -T. Myung, F. Maglia, K. -J. Park, C. S. Yoon, P. Lamp, S. -J. Kim, Y. -K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett. 

2017 , 2, 196  

> 2

H. Q. P ham, E. -H. Hwang, Y. -G. Kwon, S. -W. Song, Chem. Commun., 2019 , 55, 1256  

> 3

K. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Parka, H. J. Yang, S. J. Park, K. Shin, J. -Je Woo, S. Kim, S. Y. Hong, N. -S. Choi, J. 

Power Sources 2018 , 396, 276. Pitfalls in Lithium M etal Battery C haracterisation 

Eric Winter a, Thomas J. Schmidt b, Sigita Trabesinger a

> a

Battery Electrodes and Cells, Ele ctrochemistry Lab oratory, 

Paul Scherrer Institut e, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 

> b

Energy and Environment Division, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 

E-mail: eric.winter@psi.ch 

Since the early days of rechargeable battery research ,1,2 metallic lithium as an anode material has been 

considered a “holy grail” due to its highly negative potential ( -3.0 4 V vs. SHE ) and high theoretical capacity 

(3860 mAh·g -1).3 In the age of electro -mobility, exploiting the resulting high energy density of lithium 

metal has become even more desirable. 4

However, even after intensive efforts in the last decade, lithium metal b atteries (LMBs) still suffer from 

severe problems such as low cycling stability and low coulombic efficiency .5 These performance 

shortcomings are mainly due to the high reactivity of the lithium metal towards electrolyte s and dendrite 

formation during cycling. Major concern they cause is the safety of the LMB cells. 

In order to tackle these issues, there has been growin g consensus in the scientific community to aim for 

common reporting standards and testing conditions .6 However, before these are established , it is necessary 

to understand the impact of the different experimental parameters on the trustworthiness of the testing 

results .

The aim of this study therefore was to investigate the influence of different experimental parameters , such 

as current density, amount of lithium metal moved, type , and quantity of electrolyte , in symmetric and 

asymmetric lithium metal cells. To better understand the morphology changes happ ening during lithium 

plating and stripping, complimentary techniques , such as operando dilatometry and post -mortem scanning 

electron microscopy , were used. We will discuss why p otentially neglected parameters could have a 

significant impact on the outcome of measurements and in what way the findings of this study could be 

used to establish a reliable baseline fo r future LMB tests. 

Figure 1: The t hickness change of the working electrode (d = 7.5 mm) during cycling (2 mAh ·cm -2,

2 mA·cm -2) can be positive or negative depending on cell configuration and electrolyte .

Reference s:

[1] F. Conti and G. Pistoia, J. Appl. Chem. Biotechnol. , 1971, 21 , 77 –81. 

[2] J. P. Gabano, G. Gerbier and J. F. Laurent, Chemie Ing. Tech. , 1970, 42 , 210 –213. 

[3] S. Li, J. Yang and Y. Lu, in Encyclopedia of Inorganic and Bioinorganic Chemistry , John Wiley 

& Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK, 2019, pp. 1 –21. 

[4] K. G. Gallagher, S. Goebel, T. Greszler, M. Mathias, W. Oelerich, D. Eroglu and V. Srinivasan, 

Energy Environ. Sci. , 2014, 7, 1555. 

[5] F. Ding, W. Xu, X. Chen, J. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, Y. Zhang, B. R. Johnson, J. V. Crum, T. A. 

Blake, X. Liu and J. -G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2013, 160 , A1894 –A1901. 

[6] C. Fang, X. Wang and Y. S. Meng, Trends Chem. , 2019, 1, 152 –158. Study of CO 2 Electrochemical Reduction Over CuO x Nanoparticles 

# Suppor ted on Graphene -based M aterials 

Enrico Verlato a, Ferdinand Hof b,c , Marco Musiani a, Francesco Paolucci a,d , Giovanni Valenti d.

a: ICMATE, CNR, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127, Padova, Italy 

b: CNRS, Centre de Recherche Paul Pascal (CRPP), UMR 5031, Pessac, F -33600, France 

c: Université Bordeaux, CRPP, UMR 5031, Pessac, F -33600, France 

d: Department of Chemistry G. Ciamician, University of Bologna, Via Selmi, 2, Bologna, 40126, Italy 

enrico.ve rlato@cnr.it 

Capturing and converting CO 2 to eas il y stora bl e fuels has become a hot research topic, in the last few 

years, due to its potential contribution to obtaining carbon neutral energy cycles . Among all the metals 

used for CO 2 electrochemical conve rsion, copper takes a special place; the main reason is related to its 

unique capacity of generating a wide range of CO 2 reduction products like HCOOH, CH 4, CO and 

promoting carbon –carbon coupling to obtain ethylene and ethanol. Copper electrodes ha ve been 

extensively studied as electrode s for electrochemical CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2RR)[1] . Nanoparticles ,

in particular, were reported to imp rove selectivity and increase energy efficiency . However , the choice of 

nanostructured supporting materials received only limited attention . Our aim was to study the effect of a 

graphene -based supporting material on copper nanoparticles stability and on products distribution. 

We studied copper nanoparticle supported on two types of graphenide compounds. The f irst material was 

prepared from a graphenide solution obtaine d dissolving a nanocarbon intercalation compound of formula 

KC 8 in THF  [2] ; this solution act as a reducing agent for CuCl 2 salt, resulting in t he precipitation of 

copper oxides nanoparticles over graphene 

sheets (Fig.1) . T he other material was a n

interca lation compound where copper 

nanoparticles are entrapped in between 

graphene sheets of larger dimension . XPS 

analysis confirmed the presence of copper 

(I) and copper (II) , in agreement with what 

we found with the XRD analyses that 

showed reflections due to Cu(OH) 2 and 

Cu 2O phases. 

Powders were first suspended in an 

appropriate solvent, then dropcasted o nto a 

glassy carbon disc and electrochemically 

reduced to metallic copper in situ before 

perform ing electrolysis. 

Preliminary results showed that 

electroch emical reduction of CO 2 in a

carbonate buffer at Cu Ox(NP )/nC 

electrodes ga ve a formate yield close to 

50%; higher than what reported for 

polycrystalline copper [3] , to confirm t he 

efficiency of nanostructures.  The graphene 

intercalated copper oxide nanopar ticles 

compared to surface anchored nanoparticles 

exhibit a very small activity but a better current stability for prolonged electrolysis (20 h). Using 

oxidation/reduction charge of copper oxides, obtained from cyclic voltammetries, we verified that we had 

negligible loss of materi al after prolonged polarization, even at potential where gas evolutio n on the 

electrode was massive. 

References 

[1] Nitopi S .; Chem. Rev. 119 ( 2019 ) 7610−7672 .

[2] Hof F.; Chem. Eur. J. 24 (2018) 1 –6. 

[3] Hori, Y. ; J. Chem. So c. Faraday Trans. 1 , 85 (1989 ) 2309−2326 .  

> Fig. 1. (a) Lower magnification HR -TEM image of an aggregate
> of the CuOx(NP)/nC composite; (b) the corresponding EDX
> map; (c, d) Respectively lower and higher magnification HR -
> TEM image of the Cu(nP)/nC

.Platinized Ti and Black Titania Nanotube Electrodes prepared by 

# Galvanic D eposition Methods 

Aikaterini Touni 1, Xin Liu 2, A thanasios Chatzitakis 2, Angeliki Banti 1, Athanasios Papaderakis 1, Sotirios 

Sotiro poulos 1 

> 1

Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece  

> 2

De partment of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Centre for Materials Science and Nanotechnology , 03 49 ,

Norway 

aikattouni@chem.auth.gr 

This work aims at the preparation of Pt -coated Ti -based electrodes and their testing in the hydrogen 

evolution reaction (HER). Metallic Ti and black TiO 2 nanotubes (b-TNTs ) were used as substrates. TNTs 

were annealed at 500 oC in a vacuum quartz ampule, in the presence of CaH 2 powder to form anatase b-

TNT s, which show high electronic conductivity [1] . Both substrates were pretreated before surface Pt 

loading ; metallic Ti was etched in an acidic solution, wh ereas b-TNTs were subjected to electrochemical 

reduction -cathodiz ation . Galvanic deposition [2 ,3 ] of Pt on both pretreated materials took place 

spontaneously in a PtCl 62- ion solution ; Pt(IV ) complex ions were reduced -deposited as metallic particles 

on the pretreated Ti metal and b -TNT surface s, while the freshly reduced substrate ( etched Ti or 

cathodized b-TNTs ) was partially re -oxidized . XRD measurements of the b-TNTs confirmed the 

preferred [001] orientation, which is highly desirable for improved electronic conductivity of the oxide. 

Top and cross sectional SEM/EDS observations show the distribution of the precious metal particles on 

the surface of both the metallic Ti and the b-TNTs. In both cases, c yclic voltamograms revealed Pt 

surface electrochemistry ( Figure 1a ), proving that the galvanic deposition method can also be applied to a

partially reduced conductive oxide. Finally , HER in a cid was studied by means of near steady state linear 

sweep voltammetry with a potential sweep rate of 5 mVs -1 (Figure 1b ). Re sults at Pt/b -TNTs electrodes 

were compared to those of Pt/Ti electrode s and proved th e latter to be more efficient HER cathodes. 

Figure 1 a . Cyclic voltamogram s of Pt/Ti, Pt/b -TNT and bare Ti and b-TNT electrodes , recorded at 50 

mVs -1 in a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution and b. HER activity of Pt/Ti and Pt/b -TNT electrodes ,

recorded at 5 mVs -1 in a 0.1 M deaerated HClO 4 solution 

[1] X. Liu et al. , J. Phys. Chem. C 2019 , 123, 36, 21931 

[2] A. Papaderakis et al. , Catalysts 2017 , 7, 3, 80 

[3] A. Touni et al. , J. Electroanal. Chem . 2019 , 855, 113485 

Acknowledgement s

This research has been co -financed by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union 

and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and 

Innovation, under the call RESEARCH – CREATE – INNOVATE (proje ct code:T1EDK -00461). X. L., 

and A. C. acknowledge funding from the Research Council of Norway (EnCaSE, project number 275058). 

The authors wish to thank Dr. Patricia Almeida Carvalho for SEM , TEM and EDS analyses ( SI NTEF 

Industry, Oslo) , Prof. Eleni Pavlid ou for SEM/EDS, Dimitrios Karfaridis for XPS and Prof. Dimitra 

Lambropoulou for ICP -MS measurements (AUTh, Greece) .Treatment of an industrial winery wastewater by anodic oxidation : a 

# compar ison between the DSA Cl 2, DSA O 2 and BDD electrode s

Yeney Lauzurique 1,2 , César Huiliñir 1, Verónica García 3, Ricardo Salazar 2

> 1

Laboratorio de Biotecnología Ambiental , 2Laborat orio de Electr oquímica del Medio Ambiente .

> 3

Laboratorio de Microbiología. 

Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Ave Libertador Bernardo O’Higgins 3363, Santiago, Chile .

yeney .lauzurique@usach.cl 

Winery wastew ater (WW) cont ains various organic and inorganic contaminants and its environmental 

impact is notable, mainly due to the large volumes produced and its seasonal variability [1] . The 

biological process requires large spaces and produces high quantities of sludge . In this context, 

electrochemical technologies represent a potential way to reach efficient elimination of organics from 

industrial wastewater . Anodic oxidation (AO) stands out among these processes. In this process , organic 

pollutants are completely mineralized t o CO 2, water and inorganic salts by means of physisorbed 

hydro xyl radicals ( ●OH) [2] . The objective of this work was to compare the effect of three electrodes on 

the AO of t he WW from a Chilean industry without the addition of salts (supporti ng electrolyte ), at room 

temperature 25.0  1.0 ºC and at the original pH value (pH = 4) . The e lectrolysis wa s carried ou t in a n

undivided 0.10 L open cell with alway s vigorously stirred to ensure the mass transfer . A Boron Doped 

Dia mond (BDD) el ectrode , an d dimensionall y active anodes, one of chlorine and the other oxygen (DSA -

Cl 2 and DSA -O2) were use d as anode. A stainless -steel cathode was used for each electrolysi s. All the 

experiments were performed applying a current density of 30 mA /cm 2. The degradati on of th e organic 

compounds present in the wastewater was followed by spectrophotometric techniques and the 

mineralization was studied by removal total organic carbon (TOC). 

Table 1. Parameters of WW treated by industrial biologic digestion and anodic oxi dation 

Par ameters  Final industry 

effluent  AO (BDD ) AO (DSA Cl 2) AO (DSA O 2)

Color  Unc olored  Unc olored  Unc olored  Unc olored 

Total organic carb on (mg/L)  605 ± 41  225 ± 35  1610 ± 68  1300 ± 30 

pH  7.30 ± 0 .11  8.15 ± 0 .10 4.22 ± 0 .12  4.58 ± 0 .20 

Turbi dity (NTU)  22 ± 0 .20  12 .80 ± 0 .23  4.85 ± 0 .20  6.73 ± 0 .30 

Abs. a t 280 nm (U.A)  0.10 ± 0 .08  0.37 ± 0 .01  0.25 ± 0 .13  0.25 ± 0 .01 

Conductivi ty (mS)  2.10 ± 0 .30  2.73 ± 0 .21  2.42 ± 0 .32  2.82 ± 0 .15 

Mineralization e ner gy (kW h /m3) - 279 ± 7 .64  75 ± 0 .01  134 ± 0 .95 

Min eral ization cost by liter of solution ($ USD ) - 48 .90 ± 1 .34  13 .13 ± 0 .01  23 .51 ± 0 .17 

Tabl e 1 shows that when working with the BDD electrode, the greatest degradation is achieved (86% ). In 

addition, it is possible to achieve a degradation approxi mately 2 .7 times greater than when the aerobic 

treatment is applied . Howev er , it present s the highest mineralization energy . On the other hand , it is 

observed that the decolorization of t he solution is dependent on the anode material used . In this context, 

absorban ce decay reaches about 77% with DSA Cl 2 and DSA O 2 electrodes and 65% with BDD .

However, in all cases a n uncolored solution was obtained , t hese results are in concordance with the 

turbidity decay . This work demonstrated that AO can be successfully applied without the addition of 

supporting electrolyte, without adjusting the pH and at room temperature to remove the organic matter 

from wastewater produced by the wine industry .

Acknowl edgments : We are grateful to, Associative DICYT project N° 021811H C_DAS , FO NDECYT 

GRANT 1170352 and PhD fellowship N° 21170083 awarded to Y. Lauzurique -Guerra. 

1. Ioannou, L.A., Li Puma, G., Fatta -Kassinos, D., 2015. Treatment of winery wastew ater by 

physicochemical, biological and advanced processes: a review. J. Hazard M ater. 286, 343 -368. 

2.  Candia -Onfray, C., Espinoza, N., Sabino da Silva, E.B., Toledo -Neira, C., Espinoza, L.C., Santander, 

R., García, V., Salazar, R., 2018.  Treatment of winery wastewa ter by anodic oxidation using BDD 

electrode. Chemosphere. 206, 709 -717. Electrocatalytic activity of Au -Cu nanomosaic towards CO 2 reduction 

Wiktoria Lipińska 1, Katarzyna Grochowska 1, Jacek Ryl 2, Jakub Karczewski 3, Katarzyna Siuzdak 1

> 1

Centre for Plasma and Laser Engineering, The Szewalski Institute of Fluid -Flow Machinery Polish Academy of 

Sciences , Fiszera 14 St. , 80 -231 Gdańsk, Poland 

> 2

Department of Electrochemistry, Corrosion and Material Engineering, Faculty of Chemistry, Gdańsk University 

of Technology, Narutowicza 11/12 St., 80 -233 Gdańsk, Poland 

> 3

Faculty of Applied Physics and Mathematics, Gdańsk University of Technology, Narutowicza 11/12 St., 80 -233 

Gdańsk, Poland 

Since the consumption of fossil fuels increases as well as the deforestation , the level of CO 2 in the 

atmosphere is growing. Furtherm ore, it is well known that CO 2 is causing the expand of global warming effect 

and ocean acidification. Therefore , many efforts are undertaken to recycle carbon dioxide into carbon -containing 

fuels that can help solve both above -mentioned problems. The ele ctrochemical reduction of CO 2 supported by 

solar radiation, seems to be an promising solution [1, 2] . Among others, such metals like gold, silver, copper or 

platinum were studied to obtain methane or methanol out of CO 2. Nevertheless, the combination of two metals can 

be an interesting alternative, especially when it comes to gold and copper. On one hand, Au is one of the most 

efficient catalyst for CO 2 reduction [3] ; on the other one, Cu is selective towards production of hydrocarbons at 

relatively low overpotential [4] . Following that, in this work we present the unique approach resulting in the 

formation of stable bimetallic structure, namely Au -Cu nanomosaic. 

Fabrication of nanomosaic onto structured titanium foil is based on the sequen tial procedure including :

anodization , chemical etching of as -formed nanotubes , magnetron sputtering of thin metal layers and finally rapid 

thermal treatment. SEM inspection performed after chemical etching reveals the creation of regularly distributed 

dimples in Ti substrate that can act as host wells for guest metal species . As also confirmed by SEM analysis, Au -

Cu nanoparticles or coatings are formed depending on the temperature of thermal annealing . UV -Vis absorption 

measurements show over 400 nm shift of the band maximum towards red as well as its broadening for bimetallic 

materials in comparison to the monometallic ones . The chemical natu re of prepared electrodes were checked by 

XPS and the presence of diverse Cu species (Au -Cu alloy, CuO, Cu(OH) 2) was noticed. Moreover, the 

electrochemical activity of samples was characterized in dark and under electrode illumination in 0.1M NaHCO 3

saturated with Ar and CO 2. Obtained results strongly suggest that proposed in here material can be used for CO 2

photo reduction and since applied techniques are already available in industry, the facile scaling up of the whole 

fabrication process is reason able. 

[1]  L. Guo, J. Cao, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, K. Bi, Photoelectrochemical CO 2 reduction by Cu 2O/Cu 2S hybrid catalyst 

immobilized in TiO 2 nanocavity arrays, J Mater Sci, 54 (2019) 10379, DOI: 10.1007/s10853 -019 -03615 -4

[2]  T. Butburee, Z. Sun, A. Centeno, F. Xie, Z. Zhao, D. Wu, L. Wang, Improved CO 2 photocatalytic reduction 

using a novel 3 -component heterojunction, Nano Energy ,62 (2019) 42 6, DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.05.060 

[3]  Y. Chen, C. W. Li, M. W. Kanan, Aqueous CO 2 Reduction at Very Low Overpotential on Oxide -Derived Au 

Nanoparticles. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 134 (2012) 1996, DOI:10.1021/ja309317u 

[4]  Z. Weng, J. Jiang, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Guo, K. L. Materna, H. Wang, Electrochemical CO 2 Reduction to 

Hydrocarbons on a Heterogeneous Molecular Cu Catalyst in Aqueous Solution. Journal of the American Chemical 

Society, 138 (2016 ) 8076, DOI :10.1021/jacs.6b04746 Ir/TiON x/C  High -Performance  Oxygen  Evolution  Reaction 

# Nanocomposite  Electrocatalysts in  Acidic  Media:  Electrochemical 

# Activity Benchmarking Protocol 

Anja Lon car , Le onard Moriau , Kevin Stojanovski , Francisco Ruiz -Zepeda , Primoz Jovanovic ,

Marjan Bele , Mir an Gaberscek and Nejc Hodnik 

Department of Materials Chemistry, National Institute of Chemistry, SI -1000 Ljubljana, Sloveni a

anja .loncar @ki.si 

Electrocataly sis play s an importan t role in the future transition to sustaina ble energy . The s tate -of -the -art 

electroly zer cata lysts for oxyge n evoluti on reaction (OER) are based on iridium and its oxides , since the y

exhibit the optimal ratio between a ctivity and stability . Beca use of the  scar city of th is cri tical metal , a lot 

of effort s are invested in the develop ment o f new electrocatalysts material s, which would  either  be 

intr insica lly more active with at least  the same stability as Ir  or  would have improved  utilization of Ir. 

Achie ving the latter is directly related to the  development of suf fi ciently stable and conductive supports. 

To increase the utiliz at ion, Ir has been supported  on  oxides , such as antimony tin oxide (ATO ), indium tin 

oxide (ITO ) and  titan ium  oxynitride (TiON x).[1 ]

Here we present a new  Ir -based high -performance electrocatalytic nanocomposit e for OER , consisting  of 

Ir nanoparticles with an average size of 3 –4 nm, effectively anchored  on a titanium oxynitri de s upport 

(TiO Nx), which is distributed across  a high -sur face -area Ketjen Black  carbon (Ir /TiON x/C). We note that 

direct physica l contact between iridium and carbon has been omitte d in order to avoid carbon corrosion. 

Additionally , new variations of the material have been developed , where p rior to the addition o f Ir ,

various amounts of Cu were added to the support (Ir/Cu -TiON x/C). 

One of the unresolved questions in the OER community is how to ad equate ly and reliably measure the 

activity of the new catalysts and compar e th em with the li te rature data . This i s obvi ously due to the lac k

of unified benchmark ing protocol . To study the effects of differe nt paramet ers on the activity 

measurement, an investigation was made on a benchm ark catalyst Ir black (Alfa Aesa r) . The impa ct of 

parameters , such as  loading, activation protocol, backing electrode and catalyst ink composition  was 

sys temat ically eval uated .

Our findings  present guidelines on how to  measure  intrinsi c OER  mass  activity. By appropriate 

benchmarking  of  OER activity via r eproducible  measure ments and with meani ngful  normalization, we 

can now accurately compare Ir  bla ck to our n ew  Ir /TiON x/C ele ctrocatalytic composite and justly 

proclaim its superior activity .

The new Cu -doped Ir/Cu -TiON x/C materials exhibited even hig her activities. The e ffec t of the am ount of 

the added non -noble metal was studied. It was sh own that the increas ing amounts of Cu enhance s the 

ac tivity of the cataly st , however , exhibits some stability issues .        

> Figure 1:(a) Activation o f T iON x/C and Ir/TiON x/C on Au electro de; (b) Activity for OER. Activation protocol: 0.45 –1.45 V
> versus RHE, ink: 5 mlMQ +3 ml Iso p. [1]

Reference: 

[1] A. Loncar, L. Moriau, K. Stojanovski, F. Ruiz -Zepeda, P. Jovanovic, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, N. 

Hodnik, ‘Ir/TiON x /C high -performance oxygen evolution reaction nanocomposite electrocatalysts 

in acidic media: synthesis, characterization a nd electrochemical benchmarking protocol’, J. Phys. 

Energy 2020 , 2, 02LT01. Enzyme functionalized AuNPs -TiND electrode towards glucose sensing 

Wiktoria Lipińska 1, Katarzyna Siuzdak 1, Jacek Ryl 2, Jakub Karczewski 3, Katarzyna Grochowska 1

> 1

Centre for Plasma and Laser Engineering, The Szewalski Institute of Fluid -Flow Machinery, 

Fiszera 14, 80 -231 Gdańsk, Poland 

> 2

Department of Electrochemistry, Corrosion and Material Engineering, Faculty of Chemistry, Gdańsk University 

of Technology, Narutowicza 11/12 st., 80 -233 Gdańsk, Poland 

> 3

Faculty of Applied Physics and Mathemati cs, Gdańsk University of Technology, Narutowicza 11/12 St., 80 -233 

Gdańsk, Poland 

Nowadays diabetes is one of the most dangerous civilization diseases. Above 400 million people are sick 

and additionally, that value is still growing [1] . The reason for this is an increased insulin level in the human body 

caused by a high carbohydrate diet in particular. Therefore, there is a need for sensors that can monitor the level 

of glucose especially in body fluids other than blood .

This work is intended to show th e preparation method of the enzymatic biosensor as well as the 

characterization of its electrochemical properties. The electrode material was prepared starting from the 

anodization process of Ti foil. As a result, the TiO 2 nanotubes were created (Fig.1a). Then after the chemical 

etching , the Ti nanodimples (TiND) hidden underneath NTs were exposed (Fig.1b). Finally, the nanodimples were 

covered by Au film by magnetron sputtering (Fig.1c) and thermally treat ed in furnace (Fig.1d) and AuNPs -TiND 

was received .

Fig. 1 The SEM images show all stages of material preparation: a) TiO 2 nanotubes, b) Ti nanodimples, 

c) Ti nanodimples cov ered by thin Au film, d) Ti nanodimp les covered by Au nanoparticles. 

Afterwards , the AuNPs -TiND material was modified by the enzyme [2] . The modification mixture consisted of 

three components: glucose oxidase (GOx), glutaraldehyde (GA) and bovine serum albumin (BSA). The chemical 

nature of functionalized material was characterized using X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Additionally, 

the complete coverage of the enzyme layer onto AuNPs -TiND was confirmed.  The obtained electrodes were tested 

in 0. 1 M PBS with an addit ion of glucose using cyclic voltammetry (CV).  Basing on the series of CV 

measurements, the sensitivity of 25.74 μA/cm 2mM, the linear range of 0.051 -3.05 mM and the limit of detection 

equal to 7.61 μM were determined . These parameters ensures the successful glucose detection in human body 

fluids and therefore fabricated material can potentially find its application in developing fully operating sensor. 

This work was financed by National Center for Research and Develop ment under grant no LIDER/2/0003/L -

8/16/NCBR/2017. 

[1] World  Health Organization (WHO), Global Report on Diabetes, (2016 )

[2] W. Lipińska, K. Siuzdak, J. Ryl, P. Barski, G. Śliwiński, K. Grochowska, The optimization of enzyme 

immobilization at Au -Ti nanotextured platform and its impact onto the response towards glucose in neutral media, 

Materials Research Express, 6 (2019) 1150 e3, DOI: 10.1088/2053 -1591/ab4fab LiMn 2O4 – a model catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction : the 

# origin of the total current and the impact of oxidation on the OER in 

# aqueous solution 

Max Baumung, 1 Florian Schönewald, 1 Cynthia A. Volkert 1, Marcel Risch 1,2 

1) Institute of Materials Phy sics,  University of Goettingen , Friedrich -Hund -Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen, 

Germany 

2) Nachwuchsgruppe Gestaltung des Sauerstoffentwicklungsmechanismus, Helmholtz -Zentrum Berlin, 

Hahn -Meit ner -Platz 1,14109 Be rlin, Germany 

max.baumung@uni -goettingen.de 

Contr olling the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a crucial step for the long -time storage of electricity 

from renewables in chemical energy carriers .[1] Using LiMn 2O4 as a model catalyst for this multi -electron 

tra nsfer reaction, we aim to un ravel the influence of bulk manganese valence state on the performance of 

catalytic water oxidation. 

Using nano -size LiMn 2O4 par ticles in a rotating ring -disk electrode (RRDE) setup , we identified the 

detection potentials of oxygen and manganese in separate calibration 

experiments to evaluate the catalytic performance and activation of our 

catalyst in a sodium hydroxide electrolyte (pH 13). Our analysis confirmed 

that total current per electrochemical surface area (ECSA) is the sum of the 

oxygen evolution and manganese loss at the investigated reference voltage. 

Additionally , we calculated a n average Fara dic efficiency of 75% after the 

electrode reached steady state after five cycles. The initial decay of disk 

current was assigned to manganese loss , while fairly constant oxygen 

evolution is detected at the ring (Fig . 1) .[2] 

The LiMn 2O4 behaved differen tly in LiOH [3] electrolytes than i n NaOH .[2,4] 

Definite redox peaks in the LiOH el ectrolytes with a concentrat ion below 

pH 14 indicate manganese oxidation during rotating ring -disk electrode 

(RRDE) experiments that is more distinct at lower pH and Li +

concentration . This pH -dependent oxidation of the active material was 

confirmed by X -ray absorption spectroscopy ( XAS) of post mortem electrodes and has a disastrous effect 

on the onset of the OER causing an increase of the overpotential in less 

concentrated LiOH electrolytes and an unexpected non -zero Nernst slope 

(dE/dpH) of -40(4) mV/pH. [3] A ERHE -pH diagram based on a

thermodynamic model of Li xMn 2O4 lithiation and delithiation (Fig . 2) 

agrees with the experimental data and gives the same Nernst slope of 

delithiation of 116(25) mV/pH. [3] Thus, we believe that the observed 

oxidation is due to delithiation of the catalyst in aqueous solution. Our 

conclusion s and the graphical represen tation of stability against redox 

changes may be useful for other battery materials that are increasingly 

used as electrocatalysts. It is crucial to get a better understanding of 

catalyst stability in different pH as it can chan ge its catalytic properties. 

References                                

> [1] N. Armaroli, V. Balzani, Angew. Chemie -Int. Ed. 2007 ,46 , 52 –66.
> [2] M. Baumung, F. Schönewald, T. Erichsen, C. A. Volkert, M. Risch, Sustain. Energy Fuels 2019 ,3, 2218 –2226.
> [3] M. Baumun g, L. Kollenbach, L. Xi, M. Risch, ChemPhysChem 2019 ,20 , 2981 –2988.
> [4] L. Köhler, M. Ebrahimizadeh Abrishami, V. Roddatis, J. Geppert, M. Risch, ChemSusChem 2017 ,10 , 4479 –4490.
> Figure 1. Calculated assignment
> of the currents due to Mn loss
> (orange) and catalysis (blue) to
> the measured disk current in
> NaOH for nano sized particl es. [2]
> Figure 2. ERHE -pH diagram of
> LiMn 2O4showing the boundary
> line o fdelithiation and the onset
> of the OER in LiOH. [3]

# Electrocataly sis at t he Liquid /Gas I nterface : The Gas Accessible 

# Membrane E lectrode ( GAME ) for High -rate Reactio ns and In -

# Si tu/ Operando Characterisation 

Guohui Zhang , Anthony Kucer nak 

Depa rtment of Chemistr y, Imperia l College London 

South Kensington, Lond on SW7 2AZ , United Kingdom 

g.zhan g@imper ial.ac.uk 

Elect rocat alys is play s a sign ifi cant rol e in energy st orage devices , such as fuel cells and wa ter 

electroly zers . However , t he study of gas -involving electrocatalytic processe s is cur rently associat ed with 

several issue s, including slow ma ss t ransport of g ases to the reaction interface and la ck of analytical tools 

that facilitat e the online and i mme diate analysis of the product distribution . Alth ough so me metho ds h ave 

be en de veloped to alleviate the se barrie rs , suc h as the rotating disc and rotating ring -disk electrode s (RDE 

and RRDE ) and thin -layer flow cell s,1-2 the mass tr ansport is stil l intrinsically limited by the low 

solubility of g as es and the y are also not sui table for rea l ti me and in si tu characterisation of comple x

(ga seous ) products . These limitations have adversely hinder ed the ass essment of reaction kinetics on 

electrocatalysts , and the appropriate underst anding of reac tion me ch anis ms and dy namics. 

In t his regar d, we demo nstrate the us e of the gas access ible membrane electrode (GAME ) as a versatile 

tool for electrocatalysis rese arch . The GAME syste m tak es the benefits of the previous fl oating electr ode 

technique ,3 allow ing low -loading (μg cm -2 scale ) catalysts to be dep osi ted . By employ ing an efficient gas -

circulating loo p, the GAME e nable s t he gaseo us reactant s to be directly utili sed from the gas phase ,

leading to high er cur rent den sit ies (~ hund red s of m A cm -2) than conve ntional configurations . Mo re ove r,

the GAME can be merged with other tec hniques , such as mass sp ectroscop y and Fourie r-transfo rm 

infrared spectroscop y (FTIR ), evolving into a series of corre lative platform s for evaluat ing the produ cts 

tha t are simultaneously collected from the reaction interface . As shown in Figure 1 , the se co rre lative 

pla tforms have a myriad of applications , and in si tu /operando ch aract eri sati on of reaction products can be 

carri ed out with high temporal resolu tion , provid ing mech anistic information about react ion s involving 

multiple pathways (i.e. CO 2 reductio n).4 This work contri bute s to high -throughput scr eening of 

elec trocatalysts an d fu rther offe rs promising strate gies for the ration al design of electrode s tructure s and 

reacto rs for practical im plementation. 

Figu re 1. (a) Sc hem atic of the GAME and possibl e applicat ions . (b) Comparison of cycli c

voltamm ograms for oxyg en reduction reaction ob tained from the GAME (black) and RDE (red ). (c)

Representative c yclic voltammogr am and mass spectrometric cyc lic voltammogram of CO 2 (m/ z=44 ) for 

meth anol oxid ation .

Refe rences 

1. Garsany, Y.; Baturi na, O. A.; Swider -Lyons, K. E.; Kocha, S. S., Anal. Chem. 2010, 82 (15), 

6321 -6328. 

2. Jusys, Z.; Kaiser, J.; Behm, R. J., Electrochim. Acta 2004, 49 (8), 1297 -1305. 

3. Zalitis, C. M.; Kramer, D .; Kucernak, A. R., Phys. Chem. Chem. P hys. 2013, 15 (12), 432 9-

43 40. 

4. Nitopi, S.; Bertheussen, E.; Scott, S. B.; Liu, X. Y.; Engstfeld, A. K.; Horch, S.; Seger, B.; 

Stephens, I. E. L.; C han, K.; Hahn, C.; Norskov, J. K.; Jaramillo, T. F.; Chorkendorff, I., Chem. Rev. 

2019, 119 (12), 7610 -7672. Crosslinked Polymer Electrolytes Encompassing Protic Ionic Liquids :

# A New Class of Solid Electrolytes for Energy Storage Devices 

Timo Stettner 1, Gabriele Lingua 2, Marisa Falco 2, Claudio Gerbaldi 2, Andrea Balducci 1 

> 1

Friedrich Schiller University , Jena, Germany  

> 2

Politecnico di Torino, Turin,  Italy 

timo.stettner@uni -jena.de 

In the last years, the use of polymer -based electrolytes in electrochemical energy storage devices ha s been 

intensivel y investigated due their favorable properties in term s of electrochemical /chemical stability and 

safety (leakage free) .[1] Although most of these studies have been dedicated to the use of polymer 

electrolytes in batter ies , they have also been used in electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) , as 

well as with fuel cells .[2]

Polymer electrolytes encompassing room temperature ionic liquids ( RT ILs ) show interesting features in 

terms of enhanced ionic conductivit y, wide electrochemical stability and successful utiliz ation in high -

performance lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) and EDLCs .[3] The large majority of these studies have been 

conducted employing aprotic ionic liquids (AILs), which are the most commonly used RT IL s for energy 

storage application s. Protic ionic liquids (PILs), on the other hand, ha ve only been used in fuel cells , so 

far .[4]

In this work , we present for the first time a protic ionic liquid -based polymer matrix , based on n-butyl 

pyrrolidinium bis(trifluromethylsulfonyl)imide (PYR H4 TFSI ) and soft crosslinked polyethylene oxide 

(PEO) that shows remarkable cycling s tability as electrolyte and separator in lab -scale EDLCs as well as 

Li -metal cells . The innovative polymer electrolytes are produced by UV -induced polymerization, which is 

easily scalable, ra pid, highly efficient and green .[5] Crosslinking allows the incorporation of high amount 

of RTIL and lithium salt, leading to polymer electrolytes with remar kable homogene ity and robustness . The 

thermal and transport properties, as well as the reactivity with elemental lithium of th is innovative 

electrolyte have been investigated. Furthermore, its use in combination with activated carbons (AC) in 

addition to lithium iron phosphate (LFP) and lithium nickel manganese cobalt (NMC) cathodes has been 

studied and successfully demonstrated for the first time . The results of these studies indicat e that protic 

ionic liquid -based polymer electrolyte s can be considered as a novel and very interesting class of 

electrolytes for the development of safe and high performance EDLCs and even Li -metal based batteries .0 100 200 300 400 500 600  

> 020 40 60 80 100
> Time [h] Capacitance Retention [%]
> OPV: 2.0 V 2.4 V 2.2 V
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Efficiency [%]

Figure 1 Stability investigations via float tests of an EDL C using the PIL based polymer electrolyte (left) 

as well as proof -of -concept rate tests via galvanostatic charge discharge measurements of a LFP based 

lithium metal polymer cell (right). 

References  

> 1

O. Garcia -Calvo et al. , Electrochimica Acta 220 (2016) 587.  

> 2

A. A. Łatoszyńska et al. , Electrochimica Acta 242 (2017) 31.  

> 3

J. R. Nair et al. , Journal of Power Sources 412 (2019) 398.  

> 4

V. M. Ortiz -Martínez et al. , Polymer 179 (2019) 121583.  

> 5

M. Falco et al. , Langmuir 35 (2019) 8210. Effect of endothelial cell networks on respiratory activity of spheroids 

Kaoru Hiramoto a, Hao -Jen Pai a, Kosuke Ino b, Yuji Nashimoto b,c , Hitoshi Shiku b

a Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

b Graduate School of Engin eering, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

c Frontier Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 

Addres s 980 -8579 , C10 -604, 6 -6-11, Aramaki -aza Aoba, Aoba -ku, Sendai, Japan 

e-mail address kaoru.hiramoto.e1@tohoku.ac.j p

Three dimensional (3D) cultured cells such as spheroids are gaining much interest in drug screening and 

regenerative medicine as they express relevant characteristics to in vivo in comparison with two -

dimensional (2D) cultured cells. However, engineerin g of thick 3D cell constructs is a challenging issue, 

because c ells inside a large engineered construct lack sufficient supply of nutrients and oxygen, resulting 

in poor cellular viability. Incorporation of vascular str uctures in 3D cell construct s is one of the strategies 

to overcome this problem, expecting the endothelial cell (EC) networks to enhance mass transportation. 

To support the elaboration of engineering tissue models, evaluation system for 3D cell constructs needs to 

be developed. Since electro chemical measurement s provide label -free in situ analysis , we have been 

developing var ious electrochemical devices including probe electrodes and on -chip devices and adapted 

for evaluation of 3D cell constructs [1] .

In this study, we fabricated fibroblas t spheroids containing EC networks for the preliminary step of 

vascularized tissue models. With the incorporation of EC networks, the cellular activity as well as the 

capacity of drug penetration may differ . As oxygen consumption is one of the fundamental cellular 

functions of cells, we performed electrochemical measurement of respiratory activity for the spheroids 

with both non -treated and drug -treated conditions [2] (Fig. 1). 

Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of electrochemical me asurement of spheroids containing EC networks 

For spheroid fabrication, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and normal human dermal 

fibroblasts (NHDFs) were co -cultured at different seeding ratios (HUVEC concentrations of 0, 10, and 

30%) in a hanging drop -based microwell plate . To investigate the drug sensitivity of the spheroids, 

doxorubicin (DOX) was added during the culture. The electrochemical measurement of respiratory 

activity was performed with scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM ) and an electrode array device. 

During culture , HUVECs were partially connected to each other and formed networked structures. After 

DOX treatment, the respiratory activity of the spheroids with 10 % HUVEC ratio was relatively small 

compared to those of 0% HUVEC, whereas, there was little difference between those in diameter . The 

incorporation of HUVEC networks in the spheroids promoted the penetration of DOX , resulting in lower 

respiratory activity in the spheroids with higher HUVEC ratio . Overall, respirat ory activity may be a 

sensit ive indicator for drug capacity of spheroids containing EC networks .

[1] K. Hiramoto , M. Yasumi, H. Ushio, A. Shunori, K. Ino, H. Shiku, T. Matsue, Development of Oxyge n

Consumption Analysis with an O n-Chip Electrochemical Devi ce and Simulation , Anal . Chem., 89 (2017) 

10303 -10310 .

[2] K. Hiramoto , H. Pai, K. Ino, Y. Nashimoto, H. Shiku, Electrochemical measurement of respiratory 

activity for evaluation of fibroblast spheroids containing endothelial cell networks , Electrochim. Ac ta, 

340, (2020), 135979 Scanning Gel Electrochemical Microscopy (SGECM): Local 

# Electrochemistry with Flexible Spatial Resolution 

Ning Dang, Mathieu Etienne, Alain Walcarius, Liang Liu 

Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour les Matériaux et 

l’Environnement (LCPME), F -54000 Nancy, France 

ning.dang@univ -lorraine.fr 

Scanning gel electrochemical microscopy (SGECM) is a new scanning electrochemical probe techniq ue 

that measures spatially localized electrochemistry based on gel probes in contact with the sample surface. 

So far, the gel probes are fabricated by electrodeposition of chitosan on micro -disk electrodes or etched 

metal wires and approached to the sample by current or shear force feedback. Proof -of -concept works have 

been published for topography, amperometric and potenti ometric mapping [1, 2]. 

Like in any other scanning probe technique, spatial resolution is a key characteristic of SGECM, which 

determines the applications and the market. Especially considering the soft nature of gel , the contact area 

between the gel and the sample surface is tunable by pressing or stretching the gel. This offers an important 

feature of SGECM, that is, flexible re solution with the same probe, which is quantitatively analyzed from 

two aspects in this work: (1) marking single sampling points by locally oxidizing Ag to AgCl and measuring 

their size (Figure s 1 and 2) ; (2) line scan over reference samples with periodic topography and composition 

(Figure s 3 and 4). It is revealed that for an optimal gel probe based on 25  m diameter Pt disk electrode 

of Rg ≈ 2, the lateral physical resolution of SGECM at contact position is ca. 50  m for current feedback 

and ca. 63  m for shear force feedback. More importantly, it can be flexibly tuned in the range of 14 to 78 

m by pulling or pressing the gel probe after t ouching the sample. Current feedback is more sensitive to 

gel -sample contact than shear force feedback , b ut the latter is more versatile which is also applicable to 

non -conductive samples. 

References 

(1) Liang, L.; Mathieu E.; Alain W. Anal. Chem . 2018 , 90, 8889 –8895. 

(2) Ning, D.; Mathieu E.; Alain W.; Liang, L. Electrochem. Commun. 2018 , 97, 64 –67.  

> Fig.1 Scheme of SGECM patterning.

z 

> Fig. 2AgCl depositions on Ag substrate .

z 

> Fig. 3Scheme of SGECM line scan .

z 

> Fig. 4Line scan of profile and steady state current .

# Intelligent Microelectrodes Array for Schizophrenia Treatment Monitoring 

Matan Aroosh 1, Rajendra Prasad Shukla 1, Yuly Bersudsky 2, and Hadar Ben -Yoav 1, * 

> 1

Nanobioelectronics Laboratory (NBEL), Department of Biomedical Engineering, 

Ben -Gurion University of the Negev, 8410501 Beer Sheva , Israel 

> 2

Beer -Sheva Mental Health Center, 8461144 , Beer Sheva , Israel 

*e -mail:  benyoav@bgu.ac.il 

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a chronic mental disorder that affects 23 million people worldwide [1]. Clozapine (CLZ) 

is the most effective antipsychotic medication for treatment -resistant SCZ patients . Despite the superior efficacy 

of CLZ, it is dramatically underutilized due to the unavailable objective tests to measure CLZ efficac y [2] . Several 

redox biomarkers in the blood have been correlated to CLZ efficacy. Yet, existing analytical methods change the 

molecules levels , their redox state, and eventually destroy the sample. By bridging the analytical gap and profiling 

the r edox biomarkers, rapid and accurate CLZ treatment efficacy monitoring can be provided . Our overall goal is 

to develop a novel intelligent elec trochemical biosensor based on an array of microelectrodes for CLZ treatment 

efficacy analysis . Here, we present the fabrication of the microelectrodes array , modification of the array with 

diffusion -limiting films, and characterization of the film’s effect on the generated electrochemical activity . The 

novelty of the biosensor lies with in an array of microel ectrodes modified with the positively charged biopolymer 

chitosan generat ing a set of complex electrochemical signals that are analyzed by using intelligent chemometric 

models . To achieve our goal, w e microfabricated an array of 24 gold microelectrodes (10 0-μm -diameter working 

and 1,50 0-μm -diameter counter electrode s) by using photolithography and thin film deposition techniques (Fig. 

1A) . We used a 1.2% chitosan solution and applied cathodic current to electrodeposit thin films of chitos an onto 

the microelectrodes . To fabricate chitosan films with similar thicknesses and different densit ies, we measured the 

relationship between the thickness of the electrodeposited film and the applied electrodeposit ion current fo r 90 s

and 180 s durations (Fig 1 B). A s imilar wet chitosan thickness (57.6±0.8 μm) was successfully achiev ed with 510 

nA for 90 s and 950 nA for 180s durations . Moreover, different dry chitosan thicknesses were obtained for 90s 

( 710.  ±0.1 μm ) and 180s (13. 2±0.6 μm) durations . Therefore, w e calculated the porosity of the electrodeposited 

films as the ratio between the thick ne ss es of the wet and the dry films (5.38±0. 09 and 4.36±0.20 at 510 nA for 

90s and 950 nA for 180s , respectively) . Furthermo re, w e used cyclic voltammetry to characterize the permeability 

of the modified films by measuring the ratio of the electrochemical signal s generated from differently charged 

redox molecules (negatively charged ferrocyanide, neutral ferrocene, and positive ly charged 

hexaammineruthenium ) before and after the modification (Table 1) . Statistical T-test analysis of the resulted 

perm eabilities revealed significant differences for the charged molecules (P=0.85% for ferrocyanide ; P= 4.57% 

for hexaammineruthenium ), while no significant difference was observed for the neutral molecule ferrocene . By 

providing a new way to analyze molecular profiles in blood, we anticipate establishing a new detection scheme 

for CLZ treatment efficacy that will help to transform schizophrenia management .

Figure 1 : (A) Optical photos of the fabricated microelectrodes array. (B) The relationship between the w et 

chitosan thickness and the applied electrodeposition current for 90 s (red stars) and 180s (blue circles) 

durations. The resulted calibration curves enabled calculating the conditions required to achieve chitosan films 

with similar thicknesses and different porosities (horizontal green line) .

Table 1 : The influence of differently charged redox molecules on the pe rme abilities measured with the chitosan 

modified electrode s. 

Molec ular properties  Ferrocyanide  Ferrocene  Hexaammineruthenium 

Molecular weight / Physiological charge  211.95 / -4 216.06 / 0  197.2 / +2 

Applied current  Electrod eposition duration  Modified electrode permeability for each molecu le

510 nA  90s  1.26 ± 0.02  0.757 ± 0.131  0.429 ± 0.02 0

950 nA  180s  0.97 2 ± 0.051  0.678 ± 0.056  0.379 ± 0.025 

References: 

[1] World Health Organization, "Fact Sheets -Schizophrenia," 9 April 2018. URL:  https://www.who.int/news -

room/fact -sheets/detail/schizophrenia  [Accessed 18 July 2019] 

[2] Samanite at el., 2019, "Biological Predictors of Clozapine Response ", Frontiers in Psychiatry , 9, 327 -356. 

A BElectrochemical Corrosion Studies on Carbon Containing 

# CrFeNiMnCo Thin Films in Acidic Environments 

E. M. Paschalidou 1* , L. Zendejas Medina 1, R. Lindblad 1, U. Jansson 1, L. Nyholm 1

> 1

Department of Chemistry, The Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Upp sala, Sweden 

*Corresponding Author:  maria.paschalidou@kemi.uu.se 

Based on the equimolar High Entropy Alloy (HEA) composition CrFeNiCoMn  [1 -3] , multi -component 

thin films about 500nm in thickness were de posited by means of dc magnetron sputtering on a Si 

substrate.  Different amounts of carbon  corresponding to 0 to 10 at. %  were added to the films, which 

simultaneously increased the film ductility and hardness as well as changed the structure of the materi al 

[4].  The films were studied regarding their electrochemical corrosion properties in acidic environments 

such as 0.05 M H 2SO 4 and 0.05 M HCl aqueous solutions and the results were compared with those 

obtained for a CrFeNiCoMn bulk sample. The results ind icate improved corrosion properties of the thin 

films due to their more homogeneous elemental distribution. The role of the carbon in terms of corrosion 

was studied using SEM/EDS, XRD, XPS/HAXPES, ICP -MS and electrochemical experiments, such as 

cyclic volt ammetry, polarization curves and impedance spectroscopy (EIS). A beneficial influence of 

carbon was observed below 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl in H 2SO 4 and at potentials above 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 

HCl. The latter indicates a decreased pitting corrosion tendency in t he presence of carbon. 

References 

[1] Easo, P. George et al. / High -entropy alloys , NatRevMatls (2019) 515 -535 

[2] Cantor, B. et al. / Mater.  Sci. Eng. A 375 (2004) 213 –218 

[3]Gludovatz, B. et al. / Science 345 (2014) 1153 –1158 

[4] Fritze, S. et al. / Sci.  Rep. , 8:14508, 2018. Polyfluroalkyl substances sensing with serum proteins: transposing 

# toxicological studies to biosensing strategies 

Giulia Moro 1-2, Elise Daems 2, Matteo Trande 1, Lorenzo Maso 3, Sonia Covaceuszach 4, Alberto Cassetta 4,

Laura Cendron 3, Frank Sobott 5, Alessandr o Angelini 1, Ligia M. Moretto 1 and Karolien De Wael 2

> 1

Department of Molecular Science s and Nanosystems, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Via Torino 155 ,

Mestre, Italy . 2AXES research group, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan, 171, Antwerp, Belgiu m.

> 3

Department of Biology, University of Padua, Via U. Bassi 58, Padova, Italy. 4Istituto di Cristallografia –

CNR, Trieste Outstation, Italy. 5Univeristy of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK. 

giulia.moro@unive.it 

The study of the interactions between per - and poly fl uroalkyl substances (PFAS), a class of ubiquitous 

global contaminants, and serum proteins can improve the design of protein -based electrochemical 

biosensors for the on -site monitoring of these perfluorinated compounds in natural and industrial waters 

[1] . In the last decade, the affinity of PFAS for serum proteins (particularly albumins and globins) was 

subjected to extensive toxicological studies to explain their accumulation patterns, elimination rates and 

toxicity [2]. To transpose these findings in th e design of bioreceptors, human serum albumin (hSA) was 

first considered. Untreated and delipidated hSA performances towards perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 

binding were characterized with a multi -analytical approach. Isothermal titration calorimetry 

measure me nts allowed to define the stoichiometry and the affinity constants of the complexes showing a 

higher reproducibility of the binding event with the delipidated hSA. The stability of this latter was 

confirmed also by collision induced unfolding analysis p erf ormed by native nano -electrospray ionization 

mass spectrometry. Moreover, the molecular basis of PFOA interactions were clarified by the X -rays 

crystallography. Delipidated hSA was confirmed to be a more suitable bioreceptor than untreated hSA 

and so fu rth er applied in a proof -of -concept study for the development of an impedimetric biosensor. 

Aiming to design a portable device, the bioreceptor was immobilized at graphite screen -printed electrodes 

previously modified with pyrrole -2-carboxylic acid (Fig.1) . This step was instrumental to obtain 

carboxylic acid groups on the surface to immobilize the protein via EDC/NHS coupling and to improve 

the conductivity of the working electrode. The impedimetric data interpretation was supported by the 

small -angle X-ray s cattering  analysis of the bioreceptor -target complex. A parallel investigation of PFAS 

impact on globins activity was performed following the changes in the heme electroactivity in presence of 

perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and PFOA. The resu lts sugg ested the potential of serum protein -

PFAS interactions monitoring for sensing , toxicological as well as precision medicine applications. 

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the procedure optimized for human serum albumin immobilization at 

graph ite screen -printed electrodes for the impedimetric biosensing of perfluorooctanoic acid. 

[1] G. Moro, K. De Wael, L. M. Moretto, Curr.  Opin. Electrochem. 2019, 16, 57. 

[2] T. Stahl, D. Mattern, H. Brunn, Environ. Sci. Eur., 2011, 23, 38. Oxygen Evolving Activity and Stability of Nanoparticulate Pyrochlore s

# with Mixed Occupancy in B Site s

Petr Krtil 1, Rebecca Pittkowski ,1 Daniel F Abbott ,2 Thomas J. Schmidt 2

> 1

J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry, Dolej škova 3, 18223 Prague, Czec h Republic  

> 2

Electrochemistry Laboratory,Paul Scherrer Institut,CH -5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 

Rebecca.pittkowski@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Efficient electricity storage in chemical bonds is of vital importance for the replacement of fossil fuels 

with renewable energy sources. Hydrogen is a particularly suitable energy -rich molecule capable of 

renewable energy storage . Electrolytic hydrogen production is, however, limited by the sluggish kinetics 

of the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) which is di fficult to optimize. The state of the art 

OER catalysts are based on oxides of Ru and Ir the feasibility of which is compromised by the catalysts 

cost or stability. Hence , there is a great motivation to develop novel catalysts based on these elements 

whic h show increas ed stability w ith simultaneous reduc tion in the noble metal content .

This paper reports on synthesis and behavior of novel 

pyrochlore (A 2B2O7) catalysts simultaneously containing 

iridium and ruthenium in the B-site . Mixed Ru/Ir 

pyrochlores with a fraction of Ru in the B -site of x Ru 

=0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 were synthesized by the spray -freeze 

freeze -dry approach The pyrochlores if stabilized with 

trivalent lanthanide in A site are single phase materials 

showing promising activity in oxygen evolu tion reaction 

(OER) in acid media. Increased catalytic activity of the 

pyrochlore based catalysts is achieved by the coexistence 

of Ir and Ru in the B -site of the pyrochlore structure. The 

observed activity is not , apparently , dependent on the size 

of the lanthanide (Yb, Gd, or Nd) cation in the A site and 

in this manner o n the lattice constant of the prepared 

materials (see Fig. 1). All prepared mixed pyrochlore 

catalysts are surpassing the OER activity of the 

corresponding iridium and ruthenium analogs f eaturing 

no cation mixing as well as that of the benchmark IrO 2

catalyst. The synergy of Ir and Ru in the B -site of the 

pyrochlore structure suppresses the effect of the A -site 

cation radius on the OER activity. The observed OER 

activity scales with the Ir -Ru bond distance which 

represents the local structure of the prepared materials. 

The most active ytterbium containing catalyst s also show 

significant stability improvement under OER operando 

conditions over the benchmark IrO 2.

Figure 1 Typical linear sweep 

voltammograms of pyrochlore based catalyst 

samples of Ru/Ir mixed composition, 

measured in acidic media (0.1 M HClO 4,

v = 10 mV/s) and b) potential in V vs RHE at a 

current density of 1 mA/cm 2 (in 0.1 M HClO 4)

plotted versu s the catalysts’ ruthenium 

contents as determined by EDX, including the 

data for the pure lanthanide ruthenates and 

iridates. Ageing induced e xfoliation of LaNiO 3 perovskite OER catalysts using 

# ge latin as a structure -directing agent 

Rebecca Pittkowski ,1 Spyridon D ivanis, 2 Mariana Klementova, 3 Jan Rossmeisl, 2 Pe tr Krtil 1

> 1

J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical C hemistry , Dole jškova 3, 18223 Prague, Czech Republic 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhag en , 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark 

> 3

Institute of Physics , Czech Academy of Sciences , Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Prague , Czech Republic 

Rebecca.pittkowski@jh -inst.cas.cz 

Electrochemical pro duction of hydrogen is a key process to chemically st ore the energy of intermittent 

renewable source s. The bottle -neck of this process i s the o xyge n e volution reaction at the anode , a four -

electron transfer process of sluggish kineti cs. Op timizat ion of the anodic oxygen evol ution is thus 

necessary to make this process economically feasible .1,2 Perovskites based on first -ro w transition metals 

have been s tudied as che ap catalysts of abundant elements with high catalytic ac tivity in alkaline medi a. 3,4 

This report outlines LaNiO 3 perovsk ites as OER catalysts tha t were obtained via spray -freeze freeze -dry 

synthesi s with gelatin as a structure -directing agent . Using a range of diffe rent concentrations of gelatin 

(0.3 -7.5 g /L ), LaNiO 3 perovskite powders were successfully synthesize d. Nano -pa rticles of 30 -40 nm size 

were obtaine d after calci nation at 700 °C in air . The morphology of th e obtained nanoparticles was 

analyzed with both SEM and HR -TE M and shows a tenden cy to form distorted cubi c particles as a 

function o f the gelatin concentration used in the synthesis. The HR -TEM reveals also a large number of 

planar defects in the crystal grow th in gelatin containing samples (Figure 1a) . X-ray absorption spectr a

were measured for all obtained s amples. The EXAFS analysis unveils Ni -rich inclusions in the structure 

as a result of the g elatin -based synthesis (Figur e 1b) .

The electrochemical activity in oxygen evolution initially sho ws no dependence on th e gelatin 

concentration in the synthesis . Af ter age ing of the electrochemical ink , a dramatic incre ase in OER 

activity is observed for the nanoparticles synthesized with gelatin concentration s of 1.5 g/L and higher 

(Figure 1c) . Th is can be rationalized a s an acid -induced exfol iation pro ce ss along the defe cts of 

crystallograp hic mismatc h. In return, a more active surface area is formed expo sing the Ni -rich 

inclusion s.

Figure 1a) SEM and HR -TEM micrographs b) Fourier transfor med EXAFS functions measured at the Ni 

K-edge in R-space, weighed with k2 c) cyc lic volta mmograms sh ow ing the OER activi ty of 

electrochemical ink s initially and aft er ageing , all data are presented for the LaNiO 3 sample with 7.5 g /L 

gelatin co ncentratio n. 

References:                    

> (1) Schalenbach, M.; Tjarks, G.; Carmo, M.; Lueke, W.; Mueller, M.; Stolten, D. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2016 ,
> 163 (11), F3197 –F3208.
> (2) Suen, N. -T.; Hung, S. -F.; Quan, Q.; Zhang, N.; Xu, Y. -J.; Chen, H. M. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017 ,46 (2), 337 –
> 365.
> (3) Suntivich, J.; May, K. J.; Gasteiger, H. A.; G oodenough, J. B.; Shao -Horn, Y. Science 2011 ,334 (6061),
> 1383 –1385.
> (4) Hwang, J.; Rao, R. R. ; Giordano, L.; Katayama, Y.; Yu, Y.; Shao -Horn, Y. Science 2017 ,358 , 751 –756.

# Analysis of quasi -reversible CVs and DEIS data :

# transformation to potential -program independent form s

Tamás Pajkossy 

Institute of Materials and Environmental Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, 

Magyar tudósok körútj a 2, Budapest, Hungary, H -1117 

pajkossy.tamas@ttk.hu 

Recently a numerical procedure has been suggested by which the j(E) cyclic voltammograms, CVs, 

pertinent to partially diffusion controlled charge transfer reactions can be analyzed [1]. Using this 

procedure , from a set of “quasi -reversible” CVs taken at varied scan -rates v, two scan -rate independent, 

hysteresis -free functions can be calculated. One of them is the diffusion -free polarization curve, jinf (E), 

the other is the semiintegrated form of the reversible CV, Mrev (E). 

As this has been discussed in Ref. 2, the resulti ng j(E) = jinf (E) – [jinf (E) / Mrev (E)] × M(E) equation is a 

general and exact solution to the problem of charge transfer coupled with semiinfinite diffusion. Various 

cases have been illustrated by numerical simulation s; one is shown below. 

Simulated CVs (a), their semiintegrals (b) , and the calculated jinf and Mrev functions (c) . Simulation 

parameters: Dred = Dox =10 –5 cm 2/s, cred =10 –6 mol/cm 3, cox =0 mol/cm 3, E0=0, k0=0.001 cm/s, α=0.5 .

Separating the contributions of charge transfer and diffusion to electrode kinetics can be done also by 

measuring and analyzing electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS). Parameters characterizing c harge 

transfer and diffusion are Rct , the charge transfer re sistance and ϭ W, the Warburg coefficient. These can be 

calculated from impedance spectra measured under dc conditions and also from spectra recorded during 

potential scans . T his latter method, the combination of (sufficiently low scan -rate) CV and (suffici ently 

high frequenc y) EIS is called dynamic EIS (DEIS). 

Both Rct and ϭ W, obtained from DEIS, depend on the scan -rate. However, the scan -rate dependence can be 

eliminated using the linear equations derived in [ 3]. As a result, we have the following set of equations 

connecting the meas ured j, M, Rct and ϭ W; the coupling parame ter H (= kox /√Dred + kred /√Dox ) is composed 

of rate and diffusion coefficients only. Note the simplicity and symmetry of the equations. 

The theory opens a new route for the high -accuracy, fast determination of charge transfer rate coefficients 

of quasi -reversible redox systems by employing DEIS. 

1 T. Pajkossy, Analysis of quasi -reversible cyclic voltammograms: Transformation to scan -rate 

independent form, Electrochem. Comm. 90 (2018) 69 .

2 T. Pajkossy, S. Vesztergom, Analysis of voltammograms of quasi -reversible redox systems: 

Transformation to potential program invariant form , Electroch im. Acta, 297 (2019) 1 121. 

3 T.Pajkossy, Dynamic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of quasi -reversib le redox 

systems. Properties of the Faradaic impedance, and relations to those of voltammograms, 

Electrochim. Acta 308 (2019) 410 -417 Effects of relative humidity at dry periods of wet and dry corrosion on 

# hydrogen permeation behavior of steels 

Masatoshi SAKAIRI *, Xiaole HAN ** 

> *

Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University 

> **

Graduate School of Engineering, Hokakido University 

Kita -13, Nishi -8, Kita -ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan 

msakairi@eng.hokudai.ac.jp 

High strength steels are widely used in automobiles , trains and construction industry with the recent 

demands for increase in fuel efficiency and save natural resources 1-3) . It is, however, well known that 

increasing the strength of steels lead s to increase su sce ptibility to hydrogen embrittlement. To reduce the 

susceptibility to hydrogen embrittlement of these steel s is an important issue to ensure reliability in practical 

use of the steels. Therefor e, the deleterious effects of hydrogen on high strength steels have attracted much 

attention recently 4-8).

Atmospheric corrosion plays an important role in the hydrogen generation for the practical use of steels 

and coated steels. Some studies have focused on the hydrogen generated by atmospheric corrosion inducing 

the hydrogen embrittlement of steels. There are reports that the permeation rate during a wet and d ry 

corrosion cycle showed a maximum during the drying process 9) , and temperature, relative humidity (RH) 

and amount of sea salt on the steel surface strongly affected hydrogen entry 10 ). It is not fully elucidate d

relative humidity on the hydrogen permeation behavior during wet and dry cycle corrosion. The purpose of 

this study is to investigate the effects of different RH at dry period on hydrogen permeation behavior of 

steels during wet and d ry corrosion cycles. 

The steel sheet s (20 mm × 15 mm × 1 mm ) were used as specimens . Both sides of the specimen were 

mechanically polished with SiC papers up to 1200 grit under running water . One side of the sample used 

as hydrogen detection side was electroplated by Ni . Before the wet/dry corrosion cycles, sample was 

cleaned with purified water and ethanol. The hydrogen detection side was placed on the hydrogen detection 

cell with 1 kmol m-3 NaOH solution, and the cell was placed in a RH and temperature controlled chamber. 

The specimens were polarized at -30 mV vs Pt during the tests. After the current of the hydrogen detection 

cell reached lower than 40 nA cm -2, 10 μL of 0.1 kmol m -3 NaCl solution was placed on the samp le surface 

of hydrogen entry side. Wet (303K, 90 %RH) and dry (323 K) cycle corrosion tests were carried out in a 

chamber. The RH of dry period was controlled between 65 % and 20 %. Total 12 wet and dry cycles were 

carried out. The temperature dependent cu rrent was 

subtract ed from the currents that were obtained during 

wet and dry corrosion tests. An optical microscope and 

SEM -EDS were used to observe the sample surface. 

The amount of permeated hydrogen through the steel 

during the wet/dry corrosion tests decreased with the 

increase of the cycle number and the decrease of the RH 

at dry period . Fig. 1 shows hydrogen permeation current 

at 4th cycle. The hydrogen permeation current during dry 

period decreases with decreasing RH at drying period . A 

relatively larger permeation current was detected when 

the RH was controlled at 60 % and 65 %. 

References 

1) Y. Tanaka and S. Fujita; JFE Giho, 16 , 1 (2007). 

2) Y. Mukai; Kobe Steel Eng. Rep., 55 , 30 (2005). 

3) N. Fujita, K. Kusumi , K. Matsumura, T. Nonaka and T. Tomokiyo; Shinnittetsu Giho, 393 , 99 (2012) .

4) E. Akiyama, S. Li, T. Shinohara, Z. Zhang and K. Tsuzak; Electrochimica Acta, 56, 1799 (2011). 

5) S. Takagi and M. Sakairi ; Zairyo -to -Kankyo, 60, 435 (2011). 

6) M. Sakairi and S. Takagi; ISIJ Int., 56, 452 (2016). 

7) K. Igarashi and M. Sakairi; ISIJ Int., 56, 461 (2016). 

8) T. Hashimoto, M. Sakairi, F. Yuse, and W. Urushihara ; Zairyo -to -Kankyo , 66, 357 (2017). 

9) T. Tsuru , Y. Huang, M. R. Ali and A. Nishikata ; Corros. Sci., 47 , 2431 (2005). 

10 ) T. Ohmura , S. Kudo and S. Fujimoto ; Mater. Trans., 47 , 2956 (2006). 

Fig. 1 Hydrogen permeation current at 

4th cycle. Optimizing the Oxygen Electro -Reduction Activity of Pt -based 

# Catalysts 

Batyr Garlyyev ,a Johannes Fichtner ,a Sebastian A. Watzele ,a Aliaksandr S. Bandarenka, a 

> a

Physics Department, Technical University of Munich, D -85747 Garching bei München, Germany. 

batyr.garlyyev@tum.de 

One of the key factors limiting the widespread applications of fuel cell technologies is the cost of the 

electrocatalysts utilized in catalyzing the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cat hode side. More 

specifically, only platinum based electrocatalysts have shown sufficient activity; however, due to the 

scarcity and cost of Pt, it is of a particular interest to increase their activity per mass. We tackle these 

challenge by optimizing the size, 1 shape 2 and composition 3,4 of Pt -based nanoparticles. 

Results from Pt model catalyst surfaces have demonstrated that surface defects, in particular surface 

concavities, can improve the ORR kinetics. It is, however, a challenging task to synthesize nanostructured 

catalysts with such defective surfaces. Hence, we produced Pt/C catalyst with high density of surface 

concavities, which was confirmed by high -resolution transmission electron microscopy, 3D -tomography, 

high energy X -ray measurements and pos itron annihilation spectroscopy (Figure 1 ). The ORR activity of 

the developed catalyst exceeds that of commercial Pt/C catalyst, at least 2.7 -times in terms of specific 

(~1.62 mA/cm 2 at 0.9V) and at least 1.7 -times in terms of mass activity (~712 mA/mg Pt ), which can be 

correlated to the enhanced amount of surface defects. 2 In a separate study, we investigated the influence 

of the nanoparticle size on the ORR activity. ~1 nm sized Pt nanoparticles were produced by metal 

organic framework template approach. The produced electrocatalyst showed mass activity of 0.87 A/mg Pt ,

which was in well agreement with computational ly predicted values 1 (0.99 A/mg Pt ) (Figure 2).

Furtherm ore, the alloyed Pt xPr nanoparticles were synthesized and their ORR activity was investigated. 3

The alloyed nanoparticles showed 4 -fold enhancement in the specific activity and 1.5 times increase in 

mass activit y in comparison to the commercial catalyst ( Figure 3 ).                   

> 1B. Garlyyev, K. Kratzl, M. Rück, et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed .2019 ,58 , 9596 -9600 .
> 2J. Fichtner , S. Watzele, B. Garlyyev , et al. ACS Catal. 2020 ,10, 3131 -3142 .
> 3J. Fichtner, B. Garlyyev, S. Watzele, et al. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces ,2019 ,11 , 5129 -5135.
> 4B. Garlyyev, M. Pohl, V. Čol ić, Y. Liang, F.K. Butt, A. Holleitner, A.S. Bandarenka. Electr ochem. Commun. 2018 ,88 , 10 -14.

Figure 1. The ORR activity of Pt 

nanoparticles with high density of 

surface concavities . High resolution 

TEM and 3D Tom ography images 

with mass activity of the Pt 

nanoparticles are shown in comparison 

to commercial Pt/C cat alyst 

Figure 2. The ORR a ctivity of ultra -

small ~1 nm Pt nanoparticles. High 

resolution TEM and mass activity of 

the Pt nanoparticles are shown in 

comparison to theoretically predicted 

values. 

Figure 3. The ORR activity of alloyed 

Pt xPr nanopar ticles. TEM and EDX 

mapping images with mass activity of 

the Pt xPr nanoparticles are shown in 

comparison to commercial Pt/C 

catalyst .Metals Dissolution in Reline and Ethaline 

Mihael Bučko 1, Alexandre C. Bastos 2, Má rio G.S. Ferreira 2, Jelena B. Bajat 3

> 1

University of Defense, Military Academy, 33 Pavla Juriši �a Šturma St, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia ,

> 2

CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials and DEMaC – Department of Materials and Ceramic 

Engineering, University of Aveiro , 3810 -193 Aveiro, Portugal 

> 3

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, P.O.Box 3503, 11120 Belgrade, Serbia 

mbuck o@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

Ionic liquids are inevitable solutions for the recovery of metal -based materials in future 

environmentally friendly and energy efficient technologies [1] . The present processes of metal recoveries 

are based on hydrometallurgy, pyrometallur gy and /or cyanidation, i.e. either high temperature procedures 

that are closely followed with high energy consumption and release of carbon dioxide, or a toxic 

procedure. Besides, they are associated with large amounts of wastes, in gaseous, liquid or soli d form that 

has to go through special treatments before being disposed, which requires additional energy. Designing 

adequate solutions for low cost clean metal recoveries is still a great challenge. Ionic liquids are powerful 

solvents that could be used as electrolytes for selective metal dissolution and recovery. Deep eutectic 

solutions (DES) are types of low cost environmentally friendly ionic liquids that are easily prepared at 

large scale and with potential of being suitable for metal recoveries. They o ffer the avoidance of water 

chemistry and all the drawbacks of aqueous electrolytes. However, in order to develop the DES based 

metal recovery technology, the experience on metal dissolution in these electrolytes has to be gained. 

To overcome these challe nges, the work aims to follow dissolution of a range of metals in 

differently formulated DES s. Namely, the dissolution of Fe, Zn, Al and Cu will be monitored in two deep 

eutectic solvents : reline (choline -chloride:urea , 1:2 ) and ethaline (choline -chloride :ethylen e glycol , 1:2 ). 

The kinetics of metal degradation in DESs will be determined by inductively coupled plasma mass 

spectrometry and electrochemical measurements: potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy . The dissolution o f various metals will be followed in their natural state, i.e. at 

the open circuit potential, providing data about metal dissolution, for example, from the waste dust. The 

other way to follow the metal dissolution is by applying positive voltage to metal e lectrode, thus inducing 

electrochemical dissolution at higher rate. This technique will be assessed as a suitable one for 

determining bet ter solvent for anodic leaching of metallic waste in solid form. 

References 

[1] N. V. Plechkova and K. R. Seddon, Ch em. Soc. Rev.37 (2008) 123 –150. 

[2] A. P. Abbott, R. C. Harris, F. Holyoak, G. Frisch, J. Hartley, G. R. T. Jenkin, Green Chem. 17 (2015) 

2172 –2179. 

[3] S. Wellens, R. Goovaerts, C. Möller, J. Luyten, B. Thijs , K. Binnemans, Green Chem. 15 (2013) 

3160 -316 4. Insights on t he role of the copper electrode microstructure in CO 2RR 

Simone Asperti ,a Marilia Pupo, a Yaiza Gonzalez -Garcia ,b Ruud Kortlever a

> a

Large -Scale Energy Storage section, Department of Process & Energy, 

> b

Materials Science and Engineering Departme nt 

Faculty of Mechanical, Maritime and Materials Engineering, TU Delft 

Leeghwaterstraat 39 , 2628 CB , Delft , The Netherlands 

S.Asperti@tudelft.nl 

Many scientists nowadays are looking for alternative technologies to reduce the amount of CO 2 in 

atmosphere . Among them, one of the most promising technolog ies is the electrochemical conversion of 

CO 2 to highly -value carbon products (hydrocarbons, alcohols) . This t echnique can be performed at 

atmospheric pressure and ambient temperatures . On the other hand, high overpotentials , limited stability, 

low selectivity and low yield are limiting the use of this technique [1] .

In order to improve the CO 2 reduction reaction ( CO 2RR ) and proceed to the upscaling on an industrial 

level as soon as possible , we aim to study the effect of compositional and morphological changes of 

copper electrodes during CO 2 reduction. We especially use copper electrodes, since they have proven to 

be the most efficient for the conversion of CO 2 to hydrocarbons such as methane and e thyle ne.

Here, we investigate the role of the manufacturing procedure of copper foils on their electrocatalytic 

performance for CO2RR.  Moulijn and coworkers have previously compared the performances between 

Eurofysica ® and Alfa Aesar ® copper foils , demonstrating a clear difference in the product distribution for 

Eurofysica ® copp er el ectrodes before and after electropolishing procedure, in contrast with Alfa Aesar ®

copper electrodes that did not show any difference [2] :   

> Left image : Eurofysica copper electrode before electropolishing, weight fraction .Centre and right image : Eurofys ica ®copper
> electrode after electropolishing. Product distribution after 360 min (A) and after 1160 min (B), pr oduct distribution .

They claimed that the main parameter responsible for such differ ence is the difference in atoms 

orientation that, consequently, affects also the copper oxide amount on the copper electrode’s surface ,

whereas the presence of impurities seems to be negligible. 

Following this study, we compare commercial copper foils fr om mu ltiple manufacturers, namely : Sigma 

Aldrich ®, Alfa Aesar ®, Goodfellow ®, Mateck ®. We lin k th e difference in their electrocatalytic behavior 

for CO2RR to the surface and microstructure features :

1) Surface roughness 

2) Grain sizes 

3) Crystallographies and crystallite sizes 

4) Dif ferent copper oxide amount                

> Images af ter etching with HNO 3/H2Osolutio n1:1. Left side : Goodfellow ®low purity .Variable grain size (20 -50 μm ).Right side :
> Eurofysica ®.Average grain size: 10 μm. Magnification: 50 X.
> Bibliography
> 1. X. Zhu, Y. Li, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. , 9 (2019) 1 –13.
> 2. H. Shibata, J.A. Moulijn, G. Mul, Catal. Letters , 123 (2008) 186 –192.

# Nucleation and Growth of Lithiation Patterns on Methylated 

# Amorphous Silicon Layers Monitored by Operando Optical 

# Microscopy 

Yue Feng a, Thuy -Doan -Trang Ngo a, Marianthi Panagopoulou a, Abdelhak Cheriet a, b, c , Bon Min Koo a,

Anne Charrier d, Éric Larquet a, Cat herine Henry -de -Villeneuve a, Michel Rosso a, François Ozanam a

a) Laboratoire de Physique de la Matière Condensée, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS 

91128 Palaiseau, France 

b) CRTSE, Division Couches Minces Surfaces et Interfaces 

2 Bd Franz Fanon, BP 140 Alger 7 -Merveille s 16038, Algérie 

c) Faculté des sciences, Far hat Abbas University, Sétif 19000, Algérie 

d) Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de Marseille, Aix -Marseille Université, CNRS, France 

yue.feng@polytechnique.ed u

Silicon is an excellent candidate for negative electrode materials in Li -ion batteries because of its 

high theoretical capacity. However, it suffers from poorly resisting to charge /discharge cycles , due to the 

large volume variations associated with th em. We have shown that amorphous methylated silicon 

a-Si 1-x(CH 3)x:H has a better cyclability than amorphous silicon a -Si:H while keeping a very large capacity 

[1]. This was attributed to a lower densit y and stiffness of a -Si 1-x(CH 3)x:H as compare d to a -Si:H, 

allowing for better accommodating of the volume deformation upon Li loading/release. The presence of 

voids in the bulk material was observed by TEM imaging and the material mechanical stiffness was 

measured by AFM. The chemical changes during the first lithiation was investigated by Attenuated -Total -

Reflection FTIR Spectroscopy (ATR -FTIR). For a -Si 1-x(CH 3)x:H and a -Si:H, our results indicate a two -

step process in which i) a heavily lithiated phase of constant composition progressively invades t he 

materials and ii) after total invasion, the whole electrode is progressively enriched in Li [2]. 

Operando observations by optical microscopy were performed on thin layers (100 nm) during 

the first lithiation . Unlike a -Si:H, a -Si 1-x(CH 3)x:H undergoes a first spatially non -homogeneous lithiation 

[3]: lithiated zones appear on the surface as colored spots (Fig.1), which grow circularly and 

progressively invade the active layer. These spots have a thickness great er than that of the initial layer, 

which can be estimated from their color change. The morphology of the lithiation spots and their 

evolution are accurately determined by ex situ AFM. The resistive character of the layer is responsible for 

this inhomogeneo us behavior. A simple model has been worked o ut and is in semi -quantitative agreement 

with the combined electrochemical and microscopy measurements. 

Using Raman spectroscopy, we investigated the properties of fully lithiated, semi -lithiated and 

non -lithia ted layers, in and out of the lithiated areas (Fig.2). Our results give some insight into the 

structural and electrochemical changes during the first cycle. The Li -rich layer invading the material is 

“opaque” , i.e., optically absorbing over a large wavele ngth range. After delithiation, the Raman peak s are 

better recovered in a -Si 1-x(CH 3)x:H than in a -Si:H. 

Fig.1 Non -uniform lithiation of a-Si 0.9 (CH 3)0.1 :H Fig.2 Raman analysis during the first lithiation 

[1]  L. Touahir, A. Cheriet, D.A. Dalla Corte, J. -N. Chazalviel, C. Henry de Villene uve, F. Ozanam, I. 

Solomon, A. Keffous, N. Gabo uze, M. Rosso, J. Power Sources.  240 (2013) 551 –557. 

[2] B.M. Koo, D.A. Dalla Corte, J. -N. Chazalviel, F. Maroun, M. Rosso, F. Ozanam, Adv. Energy Mater. 

8 (2018) 1702568. 

[3] Y. Feng, T. -D. -T. Ngo, M. Panagopoulou, A. Cheriet, B.M. Koo, C. Henry -de -Vill eneuve, M. Rosso, 

F. Ozanam, Electrochim. Acta 302 (2019) 249 -258. New evidence on oxide -oxide galvanic displacement reactions 

L. Vázquez -Gómez , L. Armelao, S . Cattarin, N. Comisso, S. Fasolin, L. Mattarozzi, M . Musiani, M.

Rancan , E . Verlato 

ICMATE CNR, 4 Corso Stati Uniti, 35127 Padova, Italy 

lourdes.vazquezgomez@cnr.i t

Galvanic displacement reactions between sacrificial oxides and metal cations have been used to produce 

secondary oxide nanoparticles [ 1, 2 ] and electrocatalytic layers [ 3]. Our group has inve stigated the 

mechanism of oxide -oxide galvanic displacement re actions , using PbO 2 layers and various cations (Mn 2+ ,

Co 2+ , Ni 2+ , Sn 2+ ), reaching the following conclusions [4] : (i) There is no correlation between the 

thermodynamic driving force of the reaction and the secondary oxide growth rate which is controlled by 

solid -state diffusion of Pb species across secondary oxides. (ii) The growth occurs at the secondary 

oxide/solution interface; cations in solution need not to reach the sacrificial oxide to react with it . (iii) 

Secondary oxides contain significant amounts of the sacrificial oxide metal , i.e. they are mixed oxides. 

We have collected new evidence about the effect of the concentration of Pb 2+ ions in the solutions used in 

galvanic displacement reactions. In the figure s we show data relevant to the reaction be tween PbO 2

(deposited on Au screen printed electrodes) and Mn 2+ ions, performed with 0.02 M Mn 2+ acetate solution s

containing up to 0.1 M Pb 2+ .0 1200 2400 3600           

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1
> 10 mM Pb 2+ = 1 mM
> 30 mM 100 mM 3 mM 1 mM
> EOC  / V vs. Ag|AgCl
> tge /s
> [Pb 2+ ] = 0 020 40 60 80 100
> 025 50 75 100
> Pb (EDS) Mn (EDS) Pb (XPS) Mn (XPS)
> Pb, Mn  / at% [Pb 2+ ]/ mM
> tge 60 min

Chronoamp erometric curves show that the open 

circuit pot ential (E OC ) declines progressively more 

slowly, and stabilizes at higher values, as [Pb 2+ ]

increases. Instead, in the absence of Mn 2+ ions, the 

EOC stabilizes soon after immersion of PbO 2 in the 

acetate solution and becomes lower when [Pb 2+ ]

increases, wi th a slope close to the theoretical value 

(29 mV per [Pb 2+ ] decade). 

By analyzing PbO 2/MnO 2 samples prepared with 1 

h reaction time (t ge ), we found essentially identical 

compositions using EDS and XPS, whereas, for 

samples prepared with t ge = 10 min, EDS yielded 

much higher Pb percentages than XPS. This shows 

that, using the thicker layers, EDS sampled only 

the secondary (mixed) oxide, which had a uniform 

bulk composition very close to the surface 

composition determined by XPS. By increasing the 

Pb 2+ conc entration in solution from zero to 0.1 M, 

the composition of the secondary mixed oxide 

changed approximately from Mn 0.75 Pb 0.25 O2 to 

Mn 0.5 Pb 0.5 O2. The larger Pb content in the 

secondary oxide explains the higher E OC values 

observed at progressively higher [Pb 2+ ]. The 

marked influence of [Pb 2+ ] on the secondary oxide 

composition shows that the reaction by which the 

Pb species leaves the oxide to enter the solution is 

reversible. 

[1] Z. Wang, D. Luan, C.M. Li, F. Su, S. Madhavi, F.Y.C. Boey, X.W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 

(2010) 16272. 

[2] M.H. Oh, T. Yu, S. -H. Yu, B. Lim, K. -T. Ko, M.G. Willinger, D. -H. Seo, B.H. Kim, M.G. Cho, J. -H. 

Park, K. Kang, Y. -E. Sung, N. Pinna, T. Hyeon, Science 340 (2013) 964. 

[3] N. Comisso, L. Armelao, S. Cattarin, P. Guerriero, L. Mattarozzi, M. Musiani, M. Rancan, L. 

Vázquez -Gómez, E. Verlato, Electrochim. Acta 253 (2017) 11. 

[4] N. Comisso, M . Rancan, L . Armelao, S . Barison, S . Cattarin, P . Guerriero, L . Mattarozzi, M . Musiani, 

L. Vázquez -Gómez, E . Verlato, Electrochim. Acta 3 41 (2020) 136056 .Time -Resolved Investigation of Liquid CO 2 Reduction Products on 

# Copper and Oxide -Derived Copper Electrocatalysts 

Mario Löffler a,b , Peyman Khanipour a,b , Nadiia Kulyk a, Ioannis Katsounaros a

> a

Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Helmholtz Institute Erlangen -Nürnbe rg for Renewable Energy 

(IEK -11), Egerlandstraße 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

> b

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Friedrich -Alexander -Universität Erlangen -

Nürnberg, Egerlandstraße 3 , 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

E-mail: m.loeffler@fz -juelich.de 

Valorization of waste gas CO 2 by means of electrochemical transformation is about to be realized in 

industrial plants. Yet fundamentals about the reaction are not understood to date. Landmark work from 

Hori and coworkers found that copper shows the unique capability to catalyze the formation of 

hydrocarbons such as methane or ethylene at high rates from CO 2.1, 2 Later, more products of the 

electrochemical reduction of CO 2 such as alcohols, and aldehydes were identified. 3 Especially products 

containing two or three carbon atoms are interesting for a wide range of applications as fuels. Li and 

Ka nan had success in finding a catalyst based on thermally annealed copper metal that promotes the C -C

bond formation. 4, 5 Such oxide -derived catalysts show exceptionally low overpotential and high yield of 

liquid fue l. The product yield of such electrodes is typically quantified by established techniques such as 

gas chromatography, liquid chromatography, or nuclear magnetic resonance. 1-3, 6 -8 Thereby, the time scale 

of characte rization is minutes to hours. To accelerate the screening process of potential catalysts, to 

enable the detection of transient events and short -living products, we introduced the electrochemical real -

time mass spectrometry (EC -RTMS). 9

Herein, we present an unprecedented approach to quantify the liquid reaction products from carbon 

dioxide electroreduction short time after their formation on the electrode. By coupling mass spectrometry 

successfully to an electrochemic al flow cell, we monitor seven different liquid products. By employing 

soft ionization, fragmentation of the compounds is suppressed. The partial currents of formation, and 

Faradaic efficiencies are resolved in one single potential sweep. Polycrystalline a nd oxide -derived copper 

catalysts are characterized and the role of reaction intermediates is discussed. 

References 

1. Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett. , 1985, 14 , 1695 -1698. 

2. Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata and S. Suzu ki, Chem. Lett. , 1986, 15 , 897 -898. 

3. K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy and Environmental Science ,

2012, 5, 7050 -7059. 

4. C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2012, 134 , 7231 -7234. 

5. C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kan an, Nature , 2014, 508 , 504 -507. 

6. Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J Chem Soc Farad T 1 , 1989, 85 , 2309 -2326. 

7. A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. , 1991, 64 , 123 -127. 

8. Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, The Journal of Physical C hemistry B , 2002, 106 ,

15 -17. 

9. P. Khanipour, M. Löffler, A. M. Reichert, F. T. Haase, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and I. Katsounaros, 

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 2019, 58 , 7273 -7277. Decoration Of Soft Polarized Junction With Nylon -6,6 

Lukasz Poltorak , Karolina Kowalewska, Karolina Sipa, Andrzej Leniart, Sławomira Skrzypek 

Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Electroanalysis and Electrochemistry Group, Faculty 

of Chemist ry, University of Lodz, Tamka 12, 91 -403 Lodz, Poland. 

E-mail: lukasz.poltorak@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

Under certain conditions, the liquid – liquid interface (LLI, e.g. water solution of the inorganic 

salt contacted to an organic and immiscible with water so lution of hydrophobic salt) can be polarized and 

studied with the full scope of techniques offered by the electrochemical toolbox. Especially interesting are 

the systems where the polarized LLI is modified with functional materials . This can be achieved by 

means of (i) self -assembling molecules, micro - or nano -objects; (ii) polymeric or (iii) inorganic films or 

(iv) patterned membranes. 1 In either case the modifier brings new properties to the interfacial region that 

can be further harvested for sensing, energy conversion, catalysis, bio -interface development, molecular 

separation among many other examples .

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the microscopic liquid – liquid interface modified with the nylon -

6,6 and its size sieving properties. 

In this work the interfacial polycondensation of polyamide (nylon -6,6,) was studied at the 

interface between two immiscible electrolyte solutions. The reaction between 1,6 -diaminohexane initially 

dissolved in the water phase and adipoyl chloride dissolved in the organic phase was controlled and 

investigated in the presence of the potential difference applied to the soft junction from the external 

power source. The effect of a number of experimental conditions, this is (i) the concertation of the 1,6 -

diaminohexane; (ii) the concertation of adipoyl chloride and (iii) the pH of the aqueous phase on the 

electrochemic al response of the system was studied. Optimized system was then applied for the 

miniaturized LLI modification (see Fig. 1). Fused silica capillaries having 25 μm in diameter were used in 

this respect. 2 Obtained films were then characterized with the ion transfer voltammetry showing partial 

and completer blockage of tetramethylammonium and teterabutylammonium cations interfacial ion 

transfer, respectively. 

Acknowledgements: This project was financially supported by the National Science Center (NCN) in 

Krakow, Poland ( Grant no. UMO -2018/31/D/ST4/03259 ). 

References: 

1 L. Poltorak, A. Gamero -Quijano, G. Herzog and A. Walcarius, Appl. Mater. Today , 2017, 9, 533 –

550. 

2 K. Rudni cki, L. Poltorak, S. Skrzypek, and E. J. R. Sudholter, Anal. Chem. , 2018, 90 , 7112 –7116. Low -cost Fabrication of Miniaturized Platforms f or Sensing at The 

# Electrified Liquid – Liquid Interface 

Lukasz Poltorak, a Paulina Borgul, a Konrad Rudnicki, a Táňa Sebechlebská ,b Viliam Kolivoška, b Paweł 

Krzyczmonik, a Ernst J.R. Sudhölter ,c Marcel de Puit, c Sławomira Skrzypek a

a. Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Electroanalysis and Electrochemistry 

Group, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Lodz, Tamka 12, 91 -403 Lodz, Poland. 

b. J. Heyrovsky´ Institute of Physical Chemistry of CAS , v.v.i., Do lejsˇkova 3, 18223 Prague, Czech 

Republic 

c. Delft University of Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering, Van der Maasweg 9, 

2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands 

E-mail: lukasz.poltorak@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

Electrified soft interphases , especially the inter face between two immiscible electrolyte solutions 

- ITIES, hold a special place in electroanalysis . This is due to a unique detection mechanism that can arise 

from the ion (s) crossing the liquid – liquid interface . This means that the reaction s occurring a t the ITIES 

are not limited to an electron transfer reaction. The second point that is setting the ITIES apart is the 

detection selectivity which is governed by the molecular partitioning between two adjacent phases , or in

other words, the analyte hydrophi licity/hydrophobicity. Since the liquid – liquid interface is flowing in 

nature it requires a support that can be used to control its geometrical dimensions. Microscopic apertures 

used as the ITIES supports are especially exciting in this respect, as these can be used to improve 

analytical performance of the concerned platforms: (i) smaller capacitive currents lower the limits of 

detection, (ii) ITIES gains mechanical stability and (iii) unique diffusion layer profiles established above 

the soft junction as sures higher mass transfer which in turn improve s detection sensitivity. 1

In this work, a few of low cost and easy to prepare electrified liquid – liquid interface (LLI) 

supports fabrication protocols that are applied in electroanalysis will be presented . on the focus will be 

given to three platforms, that are based on: (i) fused silica capillaries w ith a pore diameter equal to 5, 10 

or 25 μm; 2,3 (ii ) array of apertures with micrometer dimensions that are micro -punched in an adhesive 

polyamide films and (iii) 3D printed supports with complex and pre -defined geometry. These platforms 

are comprehensively studied and described with the help of electroche mical (e.g. ion transfer 

voltammetry) and microscopy (optical and scanning electron microcopy) investigation techniques. The 

fully operational ITIES supports are then used to study the chemical species such as illicit drugs or 

antibiotics (e.g. detect ion o f cocaine in street samples ,4 ephedrine in urine or pharmacochemical study of 

fluoroquinolones antibiotics 2,3 ). I n all cases, the effect of matrix and interfering chemical species 

(especially cocaine street samples adulterating additives) is comprehensively described. 

Acknowledgements: This project was financially supported by the National Science Center (NCN) in 

Krakow, Poland ( Grant no. UMO -2018/31/D/ST4/03259 ). 

References: 

1 L. Poltorak, A. Gamero -Quijano, G. Herzog and A. Walcarius, Appl. Mater. Today , 2017, 9, 533 –

550. 

2 K. Rudnicki, L. Poltorak, S. Skrzypek, E rnst J.R. Sudholter, E. J. R. Sudhölter and E. J. R. E. J. 

R. Sudholter, Anal. Chem. , 2018, 90 , 7112 –7116. 

3 K. Rudnicki, L. Poltorak, S. Skrzypek and E. J. R. Sudhölter , Anal. Chim. Acta , 2019, 1085 , 75 –

84. 

4 L. Poltorak, I. Eggink, M. Hoitink, M. de Puit, E. J. R. Sudhölter and M. de Puit, Anal. Chem. ,

2018, 90 , 8 –13. Electrochemical properties of AuNP -TiND nanostructures as glucose 

# sensing materials and thorough interference study 

Adrian Olejnik 1, Jakub Karczewski 2, Katarzyna Siuzdak 1, Katarzyna Grochowska 1

> 1

Centre for Plasma and Laser Engineer ing, Polish Academy of Sciences 

14 Fiszera st., 80 -231 Gdańsk, Poland 

adrian.olejnik96@gmail.com 

> 2

Faculty of Applied Physics and Mathematics, Gdańsk University of Technology, 

11/12 Narutowicza st., 80 -233 Gdańsk, Poland 

Non -enzymatic glucose sensors are prominent alternatives to the commercially avail able glucometers. 

Th eir main advantages over enzyme –based devices are higher stability to changes of the environment 

such as pH and temperature and lack of comp licated immobilization procedure [1]. However , non -

enzymatic glucose sensitive materials are typ ically less selective, so there is a strong requirement for the 

development of proper coatings or membranes in order to minimize the negative influence of 

interferences. Therefore we present Au -Ti heterostructure covered with various coatings (e.g. Nafion, 

poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate)) and novel approach for analysis of interfering species influence onto 

electrode performance in neutral solution .

Fabrication procedure of material consists of the following steps: preparing structured titanium template 

(Ti ND) by anodization and etching of nanotubes, gold sputtering and subsequent dewetting. After those 

steps electrode morphology is investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force 

microscopy (AFM) [2] revealing the presence of gold nanopar ticles (AuNPs) in every dimple of Ti foil .

Lastly, as formed material is covered by protective coating. Electrochemical properties and catalytic 

activity towards glucose oxidation are determined by standard techniques - cyclic voltammetry (CV) and 

impedanc e spectroscopy (EIS). Examining interference phenomena of various compounds (such as 

ascorbic acid (AA), acetaminophen (AAp), urea and glycine) is realized by both CV and EIS techniques 

in certain configuration. Moreover , the influence of those species on the catalytic activity of the material 

is established. Obtained results confirm the high application potential of prepared electrodes for sensors 

towards noninvasive glucose detection in human body fluids. 

Fig. 1 a) Voltammograms of AuNP -TiND electrod es covered with Nafion in electrolyte containing 

different concentration of AA, 5 mM glucose in 0.1 M PBS ; b) SEM image of AuNP -TiND surface .

Acknowledgements 

This work has been financed by National Center for Research and Development under the LIDER 

program (LIDER/2/0003/L -8/16/NCBR/2017). 

References 

[1] Hwang, Dae -Woong, et al. "Recent advances in electrochemical non -enzymatic glucose sensors –a

review." Analy tica chimica acta 1033 (2018): 1 -34. 

[2] Olejnik, Adrian, et al. "A Flexible Nafion Coated Enzyme ‐free Glucose Sensor Based on Au ‐dimpled 

Ti Structures." Electroanalysis 32.2 (2020): 323 -332. Scanning electrochemical microscopy at battery electrodes 

# intermitt ent to charging -discharging steps at realistic current densities 

Gunther Wittstock ,a Ba stian Krueger, a Luis Balboa, a Jan Frederik Dohman n,b Martin Winter, b,c 

Peter Bieker b,d  

> a

Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Department of Chemistry, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany;  

> b

MEET - Münster Electrochem ical Energy Technology, Corren sstr. 46 , 48149 Münster, Germany ; 

> c

Helmholtz Institute Münster IEK -2, Research Center Jülich, Corren sstr. 46 , 48149 Münster, Germany ; 

> d

University of Münster, Institute of Physical Chemistry Corrensstr. 28/30 , 48149 Münster, Germany 

wittstock@uol.de 

The formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on negative electrodes is a key requirement for the 

long -term durability and safety of Li -ion and Li metal batteries . The chemical composition of the SEI has 

been analyzed by several ex -situ techniques [1,2] . However, the complicated composition of the SEI may 

be altered during sample transfer procedures ( rinsing, exposure to vacuum, mechanical changes due to 

bending or touching the delicate layer, unavoidable contact to even trace amounts of H 2O, CO 2 etc.) [3,4]. 

Therefore, in -situ electrochemical techniques such as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) have 

widely been used to diagnose the development of interphases in battery cells [5] . Those techniques provide 

signals that are integrated over the entire electrode surface. Among a variety of scanning probe techniques, 

scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) has been applied to probe the local protective properties of 

the SEI against electron transfers from the negative electrode to electrolyte components [6,7] . However, 

these studies have been conducted either in a post mortem scheme or under current densities much lower 

than used in real cells. This allows for instance the observation of incipient formation of SEI on silicon 

electrodes [8] .

Here we propose a new cell des ign for SECM cell in a thin layer configuration that allows charging and 

discharging of battery electrodes under realistic current densities immediately followed by SECM imaging 

or approach curves without manipulation of the sample under study nor the elec trolyte used. Finite element 

simulation of the secondary current density distribution proved that the current distribution deviates only 

slightly in the area of the opening provided that the SECM microelectrode is retracted during the charging -

discharging cycles. 

As an example, l ithium metal electrodes were cycled in 1 M LiClO 4 in propylene carbonate with different 

current densities. The local protecting properties of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) were probed by 

SECM in the feedback mode directly within the cell in between charging -discharging cycles. The 

development of lithium deposits was observed by SECM and can be linked to the used charging -discharging 

protocol. At higher current densities protruding Li deposits are formed. Approach curves pro ve that the Li 

metal of protruding deposits is significantly more active for electron transfer to the mediator than the 

remaining parts of the surface . The developed hardware and methodology can be directly applied to other 

electrolytes or other battery el ectrodes forming protective films. 

Financial support of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Funding numbers 

03XP0125C (G.W., B.K.), 03XP0125A (P.B., J.F.D.)) are gratefully acknowledged. 

[1] P. Niehoff, S. Passerini, M. Winter, Langmu ir 29 (2013) 5806 –5816. 

[2] P. Verma, P. Maire, P. Novák, Electrochim. Acta 55 (2010) 6332 –6341. 

[3] S. Malmgren, K. Ciosek, R. Lindblad, S. Plogmaker, J. Kuhn, H. Rensmo, K. Edstroem, M. Hahlin, 

Electrochim. Acta 105 (2013) 83 –91. 

[4] H. Bülter, P. Schwag er, D. Fenske, G. Wittstock, Electrochim. Acta 199 (2016) 366 –379. 

[5] Q. Xu, Y. Yang, H. Shao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17 (2015) 20398 –20406. 

[6] P. Schwager, H. Bülter, I. Plettenberg, G. Wittstock, Energy Technol. 4 (2016) 1472 –1485. 

[7] L. Danis, S.M. Gateman, C. Kuss, S.B. Schougaard, J. Mauzeroll, ChemElectroChem 4 (2017) 6 –19. 

[8] E. dos Santos Sardinha, M. Sternad, H.M. R. Wilkening, G. Wittstock, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2 

(2019) 1388 –1392. The effect of naphthalene derivatives and ENSA on tin 

# electrodeposition on gold 

Diana Aranzales 1, Inandha Bri liani 1, Jacques Wijenberg 2, Marc Koper 1

> 1

Catalysis and Surface Chemistry, LIC , Leiden University , 2Tata Steel, Research & Development 

> 1

Leiden Univ ersity, 2 333 CC, Leiden, the Netherlands . 2Tata Steel, 1970 CA IJmuiden, the Netherlands 

d.m.aranzales.ochoa@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

Tin electrodeposition is a common electroplating process used in multiple applications: corrosion 

protection, electronics fabri cation, p ackaging industry, and many others 1; the process require s the a ddition 

of different compounds in order to have the desired chemical and phy sical properties of the deposit .

Aromatic compounds are broadly used in tin electrodeposition and an extensive effort to un derstand their 

role during the initial stages and in the overall process has been done 2, 3. Nonetheless, the chemical 

structure of the common additives is quite diverse and complex, which make s their understanding 

difficult .

In this work, we study the adsorption behavior of naphthalene derivatives: naphthalene (NPT) ,

naphthalenesulf onate (NPTS) and hydroxynaphthalenesulfonate (HNPTS) on gold electrodes and their 

effect on the tin electrodeposition process, by means of in situ and ex situ surface analysis techniques. 

Experiments shown t in electrodeposition is strongly affected by the presence of NPT, NPTS and HNPTS 

films; t in bulk electrodeposition is inhibited in the presence of NPT and NPTS , but promoted in the 

presence of HNPTS . The t in deposit morphology is also remarkably modified by the presence of 

naphthalene derivatives . Tin de posits grown in the presence of NPT and NPTS seem to have the same 

morphology, but tin deposit grown in the presence of HNPTS exhibits markedly different features. 

Chemical composition studies revealed sulfur is incorporated in the deposit as a result of the reductive 

desulphonation of NPTS and HNPTS on the gold electrode. 

Finally, the effect of ethoxlylatenapthalenesulfonic acid (ENSA ), a commonly used additive in the tin 

electroplating industry , was studied on tin electrodeposition process. In good ag reement with what has 

been shown , ENSA exhibited a similar behavior to NPT, NPTS and HNPTS during the tin deposition 

process in terms of the voltammetry . Nonetheless, SEM imaging shows that ENSA severely inhibits the 

tin bulk deposition. 

Figure 1. SEM micrographs of tin deposits morphology in the absence (center) and the presence of ENSA, NPT, 

> NPTS and HNPTS.

References 

1. Walsh, F. C. & Low , C. T. J. A review o f devel op ments in the electrodeposition of tin. Surf. 

Coatings Technol. 288 , 79 –94 (2016). 

2. Sekar, R., Eagammai, C. & Jayakrishnan, S. Effect of additives on electrodeposition of tin and its 

structural and corrosion behaviour. J. App l. Electrochem. 40 , 4 9–57 (2 01 0). 

3. Nakamura, Y., Kaneko, N. & Nezu, H. Surface morphology and crystal orientation of 

electrodeposited tin from acid stannous sulphate solutions containing various additives. J. Appl. 

Electrochem. 24 , 569 –574 (1994). Clarify ing the Working M echanism of Mg 2+ Complexing Agents as 

# Electrolyte A dditives for Aqueous Mg -Air B attery 

Linqian Wang 1a , Darya Snihirova 1b , Min Deng 1c , Bahram Vaghefinazari 1d , Sviatlana V. Lamaka 1e , Daniel 

Höche 1f, Mikhail L. Zheludkevich 1, 2 g

1 MagIC —Magnesium Innovation Centre, Helmholtz -Zentrum Geesthacht (HZG), 21502 Geesthacht, 

Germany 

2 Institute of Materials Science, Faculty of Engineering, Kiel University, 24143 Kiel, Germany 

> a

linqian.wang@hzg.de, bdarya.snihirova@hzg.de, cmin.deng@hzg.de, dbahram.vaghefinazari@hzg.de, 

> e

sviatlana.lamaka@hzg.de, fdaniel.hoeche@hzg.de, gmikhail.zheludkevich@hzg.de 

Aqueous primary Mg -air batteries have attracted much attention as promising alternative energy st orage 

and conversion devices thanks to their high theoretical energy de nsity, long shelf life and safety . Mg is a

promising anode material. H owever , several drawbacks low er practical discharge potential and utilization 

efficiency of Mg anode . Low practical discharge potential is caused by the formation of insoluble discharge 

products (MgO and Mg(OH) 2), which reduce the active electrode surface. The low corrosion resistance of 

Mg anode leads to losses in utilization efficiency. One of the wa ys to improve the anode performance is to 

use the electrolyte additives that hinder formation of insoluble discharge products and keep the electrode 

surface clean . It has been already shown that complexing agents enhance the practical discharge 

performance o f aqueous primary Mg -air batteries through changing the surface condition of Mg anode [1, 

2] . The development of advanced Mg anode material also enhance s the discharge performance of Mg -air 

battery. Low impurity content increase the corrosion resistance and suitable a lloying elements improve the 

discharge activity of the Mg anodes , such as, Mg -Ca anode, Mg -Li anode, and Mg -Al anode [3 -5] .

In this work , we evaluate the ability of several Mg 2+ complexing agents to improve the utilization efficiency 

and discharge performance by hinder ing the formation of insoluble discharge products and induc ing 

uniform dissolution of Mg -Ca anode. The losses caused by chunk effect might be significant [6] . The 

reduction of the chunk effect by additives was also observed . The effect of the Mg 2+ complexing agents as 

electrolyte additives on the discharge performance of Mg -air battery wa s determined via full cell discharge 

test . The results show that one of the Mg 2+ complexing agent s, 2,6 -dihydroxybenzonate, simultaneously 

improve s the utilization efficiency and discharge activity of Mg anode at a current density of 5 mA cm -2.

For a better understanding of the working mechanism of the Mg 2+ complexing agents, the surface condition 

of the Mg anode in electrolyte was estimated by thermodynamic calculations to show the competition 

between soluble complex and insoluble Mg(OH) 2. Electrochemical impedance spec troscopy (EIS) 

measurements were performed to evaluate the surface film on Mg and to follow its evolution with time. 

The thickness of surface film and the resistance of discharge products were calculated based on the 

impedance data. Mg 2+ complexing agents efficiently enhance the discharge performance of Mg -air battery 

via hindering the growth of surface film. 

[1] D. Höche, S.V. Lamaka, B. Vaghefinazari, T. Braun, R.P. Petrauskas, M. Fichtner, M.L. 

Zheludkevich, Sci Rep, 8 (2018) 7578.  http://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018 -25789 -8.

[2] B. Va ghefinazari, D. Höche, S.V. Lamaka, D. Snihirova, M.L. Zheludkevich, Journal of Power 

Sources, 453 (2020) 227880.  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.227880 .

[3] M. Deng, D. Höche, S.V. Lamak a, D. Snihirova, M.L. Zheludkevich, Journal of Power Sources, 396 

(2018) 109 -118.  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.05.090 .

[4] T. Zheng, Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, S. Yang, F. Pan, Materials & Desig n, 137 (2018) 245 -255. 

http://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2017.10.031 .

[5] N. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Feng, W. Xiong, J. Zhang, M. Deng, Corrosion Science, 112 (2016) 13 -24. 

http://doi.org/10.1016/j.corsci.2016.07.002 .

[6] M. Deng, L. Wang, D. Höche, S.V. Lamaka, D. Snihirova, B. Vaghefinazari, M.L. Zheludkevich, 

Journal of Power Sources, 441 (2019) 227201.  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227201 .Comparing doping synthesis st ages of Mg -doped LiCoO 2 materials 

Katja Lahtinen a, Ekaterina Fedorovskaya a, Samuli Räsänen b, Tanja Kallio a 

> a

Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, School of Chemical Engineering, Aalt o University, 

P.O. Box 16100, FI -00076, AALTO, Finland  

> b

Freeport Cobalt, B.O. Box 286, FI -67101 Kokkola, Finland 

E-mail: katja.lahtinen@aalto.fi 

Since the commercialization of Li -ion batteries in 1991, lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO 2, LCO) has been used 

as positive electrode material in them. Now, a few decades later, LCO is still one of the most used materials 

in Li -ion batteries for portable applications as it exhibits high operating potential, low self -discharge and 

high reversibil ity. As the result of three decades of investigation, several procedures to improve the 

performance of LCO have been proposed. These include e.g. different synthesis methods, particle 

morphology variation, doping and over -lithiation [1,2,3]. Several differ ent dopants, such as Ti, Zr, Al, and 

Mg, have been reported to enhance the LCO performance . In addition, the synthesis methods and stages 

for adding the doping have been varied . However, it has not been investigated how the stage of doping 

affects the material properties . Therefore, i n this work, the effect of the Mg addition at two different stages 

of synthesis on the electrochemical properties of Mg -doped LCO is investigated. In addition, the effect of 

Li/Co ratio of these materials on the electrochemical properties is repor ted as well. 

The LCOs were synthesized via solid -state synthesis using Co 3O4 and Li 2CO 3 as precursors. The Mg -

doping wa s added either during the oxide precursor synthesis or during the lithiation i.e. mixing and heat -

treating Co 3O4 and Li 2CO 3. In addition, t he investigated LCO s were synthesized with two different Li/Co 

ratios , 1.005 and 1.050. 

The particle size and morphology of the LCO materials i s investigated with scanning electron microscopy 

(SEM). Other structural characterization methods include X -ray diffraction (XRD), X -ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy (XPS) and X -ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The electrochemical characterizati on of the 

materials is done with galvanostatic rate capability measurements in half cells and long -term cycling in 

LCO/graphite pouch cells. In addition, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) measurement s are done to furt her investigate the electrochemical properties. 

Reference s:

[1] J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 195 (2010) 939 -954. 

[2] S. Levasseur, M. Menetrier, E. Suard, and C. Delmas, Solid State Ionics, 128 (2000) 11 -24. 

[3] N. Imanishi, Solid State Ionics, 140 (2001) 45 -53. The Importance of Nanoconfinement to Electroc atalytic Performance 

Johanna Wordsworth A, Tania M. Benedetti A, Ali Alinezhad A, Richard D. Tilley A,B , M artin A. Edwards C,

Wol fgang Schuh mann D, J. Justin Gooding A,E 

> A

School of Chemistry and Australian Centre for NanoMedicine, UNSW, Sydney 2052, Australia; 

> B

Electron Microscope Unit, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, UNSW, Sydney 2052, Au stralia; 

> C

Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, United States; 

> D

Analytical Chemistry - Center f or Electrochemical Sciences (CES), Faculty of Chemistry and 

Biochemistry, Ruhr -Universit ät Bochum, Universitatsstr. 150, D -447 80 Bochum, Germany ;

> E

Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio -Nano Science and Technology, 

UNSW, Sydney 2052, Australia. 

j.wordsworth@unsw.edu.au 

One of the main mechanisms by which enzymes achieve their high catalytic efficiency and selectivity is 

through the isolation of their reactive centre from the bulk solution in which the substrate is found . This 

result s in a solution environment adjacent to the active site that is chemically different from the bulk 

solution . When we exploit this nano confinement and molecular level control in fa radaic electrochemi cal 

systems , reactant spec ies are spatially constrain ed resulting in high conc entrations near the active 

electrode surface for extended per io ds of time . We explore how the features of the nanoconfined substrate 

chan nel that enzymes exploit (constraining the reactants, altering the solution environment and ac tively 

transporting species in the substrat e channel ) can be tra nslated into electrochem ical reactions to give 

dramatically increased reactio n rates and selectivities .

Previously, we have designed a “nanozyme” , which is a nanoparticle that mimic s the thre e-dimensional 

geometry of en zymes for elect rocatalysis as a way to increase specific activity for the oxygen reductio n

reaction (ORR ). This is achieved by forming isolated substrat e channels that penetrate into the centre of 

the nanoparticle with the exter ior surface electrochemically passivated by a surfactant .1 The 

electrochemical reaction is then restricted to occur within a nano -confined substrate channel allowing 

contr ol over the solution environment . Kinetic c urrent density is 3.3 times higher inside the nanochannels 

than at the surface outside and is among the highest specific activity reporte d for Pt -Ni nanoparticles. 

In this work , ORR activity was measured for nano zymes with different substrate channel diam eters with 

Koutec ký -Levich plots being used to calculate kinetic current density over a range of potentials in the 

mixed kinetic -diffusion region. Our results s howed that n arrow channels are more active at low 

ove rpotentials (ca. 0.95 V (RHE)), while wider channels exh ibit higher activity at higher overpotentials. 2

Physi cochemical modelling of the electrocatalytic system was then employed to help explai n these 

results. Proton and oxygen concentration profiles insi de isolated channels showed that nanoconfin ement 

is an unfor eseen double -edged sword. Proton concentration is higher within narrower channels, leading to 

high activity at low overpotentials. This high proton c oncentration is not depleted as overpotential i s

increased, likely from proton migration i nto the channel due to elec trical double layer overlapping . As 

overpotential is increased, higher oxygen depletion within the small er channels is detrimental to activity, 

resulting in t he larger channel nanozymes becoming more active by comparison. 

Elect rocatalytic nanoconfinement has the potential to greatly enhance activity by controlling reactant 

mass transport. This can lead to greater reaction selectivity by controlling the chemi stry inside substrate 

channel s. Greater experimental contro l over parame ter s such as channel depth and width , c ou pl ed with 

molecul ar simulation m odelling, will allow us to pro be this phenomenon with more d etail , and hence 

extend this concept to other reactions where entrapment and exc lusion of species in sol ution is vital. 

Re ferences 

1. Benedetti, T. M.; An dronescu , C.; Cheong, S.; Wilde, P.; Wordsworth, J.; Kientz, M.; Tilley, R. D.; 

Schuhmann, W.; Gooding, J. J. (2018). Electrocatalytic nanoparticles that mimic the three -dimensional 

geometric architecture of enzymes: Nanozym es. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 140, 13449 -13455. 

2. Wordsworth, J.;  Benedetti, T. M.; Alinezhad , A. ; Tilley , R. D.; Edwards , M. A.; Schuh mann , W.; 

Gooding, J. J . (2020). The importanc e of nanosc ale confi nement to electroc atalytic performan ce. Chem. 

Sci. , 11, 1233 -1240. Studying fuel cell catalyst degradation in gas diffusion electrode setups 

Johanna Schröder 1, Jonathan Quinson 2, Shima Alinejad 1, Matthias Arenz 1

> 1

University of Bern, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freiestrasse 3, 3012 Bern, Switzerland 

> 2

Univer sity of Copenhagen, Department of Chemistry, Universitetsparken 5 , 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark 

johanna.schroeder@dcb.unibe.ch 

Proton exchange me mbrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are a promising alternative technology for the 

replacement of combustion engines . The focus on the optimization of the catalyst activity in the past lead 

to the development of s everal types of highly active catalysts [1]. However, for practical applications the 

catalyst stability is equally importan t.

This work focuses on the investiga tion of the stability of different Pt -based catalysts to gain a better 

insight into the degradation mechanism of Pt nanoparticle catalysts u nder electrochemical conditions. [2] 

For this, accelerated stress tests (ASTs) are performed in a gas diffusion set -up to establishing conditions 

close to those in PEMFCs [3]. The applied AST protocol [4] is based on the load -cycles for an automobile 

propo sed by the Fuel Cell Commercialization Conference of Japan (FCCJ) [5]. Applying small -angle X -

ray scattering, the ob served loss in active surface area upon application of the AST is correlated to 

different degradation mechanisms such as metal dissolution, particle detachment, Ostwald ripening or 

coalescence [6].

References: 

[1] Han, B. , Carlton, C. E. , Kongkanand, A. , Ku kreja, R. S. , Theobald, B. R. , Gan, L. , O'Malley, R. ,

Strasser, P. , Wagner, F. T. , Shao -Horn, Y. , Energy. Environ. Sci. 2015 , 8, 258 -266. 

[2] Sc hröder, J. , Quinson, J., Kirkensgaard, J. J. K ., Alinejad, S., Mints, V. A., J ensen, K. M. Ø., Arenz, 

M., under revi ew .

[3] Inaba, M. , Westergaard Jensen, M. , Sievers, G. W. , Escudero -Escribano, M. , Zana, A. , Arenz, M. ,

Energy and Environmental Science 2018 , 11 , 988 -994. 

[4] Alinejad, S. , Inaba, M. , Schröder, J. , Du, J. , Quinson, J. , Zana, A. , Arenz, M. , J. Phys. Energy 2020, 

2, 024003. 

[5] Ohma, A. , Shinohara, K. , Iiyama, A. , Yoshida, T. , Daimaru, A. , ECS Transactions 2001 , 41 , 775 -

784. 

[6] Meier, J. C. , Galeano, C. , Katsounaros, I. , Topalov, A. A. , Kostka, A. , Schueth, F. , Mayrhofer, K. J. 

J. , ACS Catalysis 2012 , 2, 832 -843. Nanocrystalline CuGaS 2-based Photoelectrodes for 

# Photoelectrocatalytic Reduction of CO 2

Juliana Ferreira de Brito a, Marcos Antonio Santana Andrade Jr a, Maria Valnice Boldrin Zanoni b, Lucia 

Helena Mascaro a 

> a

Department of Chemistry, Federal University of São Carlos, Rod.  Washington Luiz, Km 235, CEP 

13565 -905, São Carlos -SP, Brazil  

> b

Univ. Estadual Paulista - Institute of Chemistry - Araraquara, UNESP, Rua Francisco Degni, 55, 

Bairro Quitandinha, 14800 -900 Ar araquara, SP, Brazil 

jfbrito@ymail.com 

The chemical recycling of CO 2 minimizes the harmful environmental effect of excess greenhouse gases in 

the atmosphere and can be an interesting route for renewable fuel obtaining 1. In that sense, CuGaS 2-based 

photocatalysts were studied for CO 2 reduction under photoelectrocatalysis (PEC) technique. The CuGaS 2

was modified with small amounts of In or Bi to analyze the interference of these metals in the product s

generation. The doped and non -doped CuGaS 2 were deposited by spray coating on Mo using inks comprised 

by the respective salts of each cations, and thiourea as the source of sulfur. A CdS and TiO 2 thin films were 

deposited by a chemical bath deposition me thod on the spray -coated CuGaS 2 films. The photoelectrodes 

were characterized by XRD, Raman, SEM, EDS, Diffuse Reflectance and XPS. The photoelectrocatalytic 

reductions of CO 2 were performed in a one -compartment glass reactor (50 mL) equipped with quartz 

window, at 20 oC, with three electrodes: Pt foil as a counter electrode, Ag/AgCl (KCl sat) as reference 

electrode, and the semiconductors as working electrode. The working electrode was immersed in 0.1 mol 

L-1 Na 2SO 4 saturated with CO 2, irradiated by a 150 W commercial solar simulator lamp (Newport 66902) 

and submitted to a controlled potential (potentiostat/galvanostat - Autolab model PGSTAT 302, Metrohm) 

for the experiments. Aliquots of the solution were taken at controlled times and products evaluated CG -

FID 2. The photoactivity of the semiconductors were evaluated along the potential applied in the cathodic 

region by linear sweep photovoltammogram. Comparing the photocurrent generated for the three 

semiconduct ors, the CuGaS 2 and Cu (Ga ,Bi) S2 semiconductors presented photoactivity quite similar, while 

Cu (In, Ga )S2 presented smaller photocurrent along the applied potentials. Once the three electrodes 

presented photocurrent response under the potential of -0.7 V, a chronoamperometry under transient light 

was performed at this potential in order to evaluate the stability of the semiconductors. The higher 

photocurrent is obtained with the Cu (Ga ,Bi) S2 electrode (0.012 mA cm -2), nevertheless its photocurrent 

decreases ar ound 33% after 300 s, presenting at the end a photocurrent similar to CuGaS 2 semiconductor. 

The CuGaS 2 and Cu (In, Ga )S2 electrodes presented a more stable photocurrent along the time analyzed, 

indicating a better stability of the material compared to Cu(Ga, Bi)S 2 electrode. The CO 2 reduction was 

performed under -0.7 V and light incidence (one sun) with the three electrodes. Comparing the amount of 

methanol (the main product for all the electrodes), this was higher employ ing Cu(In,Ga)S 2 electrode than 

under Cu GaS 2 and Cu(Ga,Bi)S 2. However, the formation of other products that require a higher number of 

electrons and protons (ethanol and acetone) was higher under the CuGaS 2 catalyst. In addition, the stability 

and, consequently, repeatability of the products concentration formed using CuGaS 2 for consecutive 

reactions of CO 2 reduction is better than the observed for the catalysts modified with In or Bi. In fact, the 

Bi presen ce did not improve the CuGaS 2 activity for CO 2 reduction. After 240 min of CO 2 reduction using 

CuGaS 2 semiconductor under -0.7 V and light incidence (one sun) were quantified 1.30 mmol L -1 methanol, 

0.45 mmol L -1 ethanol and 0.25 mmol L -1 acetone. So, desp ite the improvement for methanol production 

obtained in the first 4h of reaction with the addition of In in the semiconductor surface, the results obtained 

under CuGaS 2 electrode without further modification showed to be superior for CO 2 reduction using PE C

technique. 

References 

1. X. Chang, T. Wang, and J. Gong, Energy Environ.  Sci. , 9, 2177 –2196 (2016). 

2. A. Aranda -aguirre et al., J. CO2 Util. , 39 , 101154 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2020.101154. 

Acknowledgment 

The authors are grateful to FAPESP and GSK for the financial support (grant s #2018/16401 -8, 

#2018/02950 -0, #2013/07296 -2, #2014/50249 -8 and #2017/11986 -5). Preparation of porous iron oxy -hydr oxide layers via galvanic 

# displacement reactions 

Marco Musiani, Lidia Armelao, S andro Cattarin, Nicola Comisso, Stefano Fasolin, Luca Mattarozzi, 

Marzio Rancan, Lourdes Vázquez -Gómez, E nrico Verlato 

ICMATE CNR, 4 Corso Stati Uniti, 35127 Padova, Italy 

marco.musiani@cnr.it 

In the frame of a project aim ed at the preparation of porous layers consisting of various (mixed) oxides 

potentially useful in electrocatalysis or energy storage, we have studied the g alvanic displace ment 

reactions between PbO 2 and Fe 2+ ions. Following a well -established procedure developed in recent years, 

we have used oxygen bubble assisted anodic deposition to prepare porous PbO 2 sacrificial layers [1]. 

Then, we have exposed those layers to deaerate d acetate buffer solutions containing 0.025 M Fe(ClO 4)2,

kept at 75°C, for variable reaction times (t ge ). The samples thus obtained have been submitted to SEM -

EDS, XPS and XRD analyses , revealing a behavior significantly different from those of other previ ously 

described systems [2 , 3 ].2 4 6 8 10 12   

> 020 40 60 80 100
> pH 3.6 pH 4.1 pH 4.6
> Fe  / at% tge 1/2 /min 1/2

SEM images recorded after different reaction times (from a to c , 10, 45 and 120 min, respectively ) show 

distinct growth centers which progressively increase in size to comple tely cover the sacrificial oxide. 

However, the cross sectional SEM image (d) reveals that below the seemingly crystalline agglomerates, 

there is a continuous layer, ca. 100 nm thick, strongly adhering to PbO 2.

XPS analyses show that , at the surface of the secondary layer, iron is present as Fe(III), and that the 

oxygen peak is accurately fitted by two contributions with comparable intensity due to  oxide and 

hydroxide environment s, respectively.  XRD analyses  show  the presence of crystalline -FeOOH (and 

min or amounts of α -FeOOH ), in addition to the mixture of α -PbO 2 and β -PbO 2 already observed [1]. 

Th us, XPS and XRD data converge to suggest FeOOH to be the main component of the secondary layer ,

not excluding the presence of other amorphous compounds.  As repo rted for secondary oxides of other 

metals [2,3], XPS reveals the presence of Pb, at variable percentage depending on the reaction duration. 

In the initial stages (t ge ≤ 10 min) , corresponding to the formation of the continuous layer, the secondary 

oxide co ntains 5.5 at% Pb; for t ge = 1 h, when the sample is covered by the crystalline material, the Pb 

content drops to 1.5 at%. 

EDS analyses, as long as their sampling depth is larger than the secondary layer thickness, give 

qualitative information on the growt h rate, although they are unable to provide the exact composition of 

the latter . The time dependence of Fe percentage shows that the growth rate is higher at higher pH value. 

It also shows different growth regimes which one m ight tentatively associate with the change in 

morphology shown in SEM images and with the variable Pb content in the secondary oxide layer .

[1] N. Comisso, S. Cattarin, P. Guerriero, L. Mattaro zzi, M. Musiani, E. Verlato, Electrochem. Comm. 60 

(2015) 144 -147 .

[2] N. Comisso, L. Armelao, S. Cattarin, P. Guerriero, L. Mattarozzi, M. Musiani, M. Rancan, L. 

Vázquez -Gómez, E. Verlato, Electrochim. Acta 253 (2017) 11. 

[3] N . Comisso, M . Rancan, L . Armelao, S . Barison, S . Cattarin, P . Guerriero, L . Mattarozzi, M . Mu siani, 

L. Vázquez -Gómez, E . Verlato, Electrochim. Acta , 341 (2020) 136056 .Testing Corrosion Stability of ZrO 2 coating on sample AA 7075 

Branimir Stamenković 1, Ljiljana S. Živković 2, Annamaria Miko 3, Jelena Bajat 1

> 1

Faculty of Technology an d Metallurgy, University of Belgrade , Karnegijeva 4, Belgrade 11000 ; 2TheVinča 

Institute o f Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, PO Box 552, 11001 Belgrade, Serbia; 3Department of 

Chemistr y, Koc University, Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450, Sariyer, Istanbul, Turkey 

bane9884@gmail.com 

Zirconium -based coat ings are one among many attempts to replace coatings based on chromium(VI) 

compounds, which have been proven to cause bad effects on human’s health and their surroundings, as 

less harmful and ecologically accepted alternatives [1 ,2 ]. On the other side, mec hanisms for corrosion 

inhibition and suppression are subjected to myriad discussion of both academic and industrial researches. 

This research was carried out on an aluminum sample AA 7075 and the corrosion stability of zirconia 

(ZrO 2) as an inhibitor of co rrosion was tested [3]. In order to prevent agglomeration of nanoparticles the 

stable colloidal dispersions  (sols)  of zircon ia were used as a source for deposition of nanoparticles. 

Zircon ia sols were synthesized by forced hydrolysis of aqueous solution of zirconium salt ( ZrO Cl 2),

resulting in well dispersed particles with uniform size. Two sols were synthesized , diluted (0.4 wt.% 

solid phase content) and concentrated (0.8 wt.%). The particles size distribution (hydrodynamic 

diameters ) was in the range 30 -120 nm for both sols , with average particle size of about 60 nm . Zirconi a

na noparticles were deposited on a  metal surface by immersion in both diluted and concentrated ZrO 2 sol. 

Throughout the research , multiple methods were combined: scanning electron mic roscopy (SEM), 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open circuit potential (OCP). The OCP monitoring 

indicated a t hree -step process of zirconia deposition: initial short dissolution of Zn intermetallic particles 

from AA 7075, followed with nati ve oxide layer dissolution and subsequent zirconia film deposition and 

thickening. It was shown that t he inhibition effect of zirconi a coatings depends on its two general 

characteristics: thickness and porosity. With the information collected by scanning electron microscope , it 

was established that the zirconia particles coated homogeneously the underlying surface and assembled 

into a porous deposit. The results indicated that the zirconia la yers formed from the concentrated sol had 

pores penetrating deeper inwa rds the substrate , as compare d to the one deposited from the diluted sol .

This was confirmed by the EIS data in 0.05 mol dm -3 NaCl. 

The total impedance o f layer obtained from dilutted sol increased with time of immersion in NaCl 

solution and EIS resp onse was characterized with two time constants. T he resistance of coating deposited 

from concentrated sol was considerably smaller th an of that deposited from diluted sol. Furthermore, the 

coating deposited from concentrated sol resembled the AA 7075 respo nse, while the one obtained in 

diluted sol offered longer protection of the aluminum substrate. 

References 

[1] F. Andreatta, A. Turco, I. De Graeve, H. Terryn, J. H. W. De Wit, and L. Fedrizzi, Surf. Coat. 

Technol., 201, 7668 (2007). 

[2] J. Cerezo, I. Vandendael, R. Posner, K. Lill, J.H.W. de Wit, J.M.C. Mol, H. Terryn, Surf. Coat. 

Technol. 236 (2013) 284 -289. 

[3] I. Milosev, G. S. Frankel, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 165 (3) C127 -C144 (2018). Investigations of Reversible Voltage Losses and their Recovery after 

# Dry Operation in PEMFCs: Some Mechanistic Insights 

Fengmin Du 1,2*, Tuan Anh Dao 1, Andreas Bauer 1, Kathrin Preuss 1, Alex Martinez Bonastre 3, Jonathan 

Sharman 3, Geoffrey Spikes 3, Mark us Perchthaler 1, Thomas Justus Schmidt 2, Alin Orfanidi 1

> 1

BMW Group, 80788 Munich, Germany 

> 2

Laboratory for Physical Chemistry, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 

> 3

Johnson Matthey Technology Centre, Blount’s Co urt, Sonning Common, RG4 9NH, United Kingdom 

*Corresponding author: fengmin.du@bmw.de 

Over the last years, fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) have been experiencing rapid development and are 

regarded as promising alternatives for battery electric vehicles with regar d to their long driving range and 

low refueling time . However, cost and durability of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) 

stacks remain the main obstacle for successful commercialization of FCEVs. Over the lifetime of a PEMFC 

in an FCEV, certain duration of dry operation and/or dry -wet cycling is hardly preventable. It is known that 

significant reversible voltage losses (several hundred mV) tak e place under these conditions [1] .

In order to keep the cell performance high and prevent reversible losses from developing into irreversible 

ones [2] , the standard approach is to apply proper recovery step s of certain frequency . In the literature, 

various recovery procedures could be found , such as increasing inlet gas humidity, lowering cell potential 

and switch ing cathode gas to nitrogen [1]. There are also reports about using air as cathode gas during 

recoveries [ 3]. One other possible way of mitigating or preventing the reversible voltage losses under these 

conditions is to develop catalyst layer s that are less prone to the degradation phenomenon. For this purpose, 

a detailed understanding of the degradation mechanism is essential. In the literature, the reversible losses 

after dry operation are explained either by adsorption of ionomer sulfonic gr oups to the Pt surface and 

poisoning of the latter [1 -2, 4], or by degradation of Pt/ionomer interface in the catalyst layer [1]. 

In this work, we tackle the problem of reversible degradation by first evaluating the effectiveness of various 

recovery proto col s found in the literature [ 1,3 ] or designed in -house. Comparing the mass activity regain 

after recovery steps, w e conclude that the application of diluted air might be of significant advantage by 

showing its superior water management and relative ly low cathode potential , both known to favor recovery 

from dry operations [1] . We then use the found recovery protocol and investigate whether catalyst 

components influence the reversi bl e losses. Hereby, we focus on the effect of carbon surface modification 

[5-6] and the change in ionomer content in the catalyst layer . With electrochemical characterization 

methods (polarization curve, mass activity measurement, CO stripping, limiting current and 

electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) under H 2/air and H 2/N 2) appl ied at various stages of degradation 

and recovery, we demonstrate some additional possible mechanisms of the losses after dry operation, 

including ionomer reconstruction and decrease in catalyst layer proton conductivity. These findings serve 

as input for future operation strategies as well as catalyst layer development to reduce the adverse effects 

of those reversible degradations during PEMFC lifetime to a minimum. 

References 

[1] Jomori, Shinji, et al. "An experimental study of the effects of operationa l history on activity changes in 

a PEMFC." Journal of the Electrochemical Society 160.9 (2013): F1067. 

[2] Isegawa , Kazuhisa, et al. "In situ SK XANES study of polymer electrolyte fuel cells: changes in the 

chemical states of sulfonic groups depending on humidity." Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 18.36 

(2016): 25183 -25190. 

[3] Harzer, Gregor S., et al. "Cathode lo ading impact on voltage cycling induced PEMFC degradation: a 

voltage loss analysis." Journal of the Electrochemical Society 165.6 (2018): F3118 -F3131. 

[4] Kodama, Kensaku, et al. "Increase in adsorptivity of sulfonate anions on Pt (111) surface with dryin g

of ionomer." Electrochemistry communications 36 (2013): 26 -28. 

[5] Dowlapalli, Madhusudhana R., et al. "Electrochemical oxidation resistance of carbonaceous materials." 

ECS Transactions 1.8 (2006): 41 -50. 

[6] Orfanidi, A., et al. "The key to high perform ance low Pt loaded electrodes." Journal of the 

Electrochemical Society 164.4 (2017): F418 -F426. Thermal Investigation of Innovative E lectrolytes for High Voltage 

# Electroche mical C apacitors 

Annika Bothe , Andrea Balducci 

Institute for Technical Chemistry and Environmental Chemistry and  Center for Energy and 

Environmental Chemistry (CEEC ), Friedrich -Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, 

Germany 

annika.bothe@uni -jena.de 

The development of innovative electrolytes is considered of key importance for the realization of 

Electrical Double Layer Capacitor s (EDLCs) with higher energy than t he state -of -the -art devices. [1 -3] For 

this reason, several studies have been dedicated to novel solvents and conducting salt s in the last years ,

including ionic liquids, suitable for the realizatio n of EDLCs with op erative voltage s higher than 3 V. The 

conductivit y, viscosit y and electrochemical stability of these electrolytes have been investigated in 

detail .[1, 4 -6] On the other h and, only few studies address ed the ther mal s tability of these electrolytic 

solutions . These kinds of studies , however, appe ar of importance to understand the temperature range of 

use of the devices .

In this study , we are reporting a de tailed investigation on the thermal stability of four electrol yte s based 

on the solvents propylene carbonate (PC), adiponitrile (ADN ), butylene carbonate (BC), 3-

cyanopropionic acid methyl ester (C PAME ) and on the salt 1-butyl -1-methylpyrrolidinium 

tetrafl uoroborate (Pyr 14 BF 4). In all electrolytes, the salt concentra tio n was set to 1 M. All these 

electrolytes are suitable for the realization of EDLCs with operative voltage higher than 3 V. [1, 4 -5] The 

thermal behavio r of these electrolytes during thermal ramp and i sothermal exp eri ments have been 

investigated. Furthermore, the effect of the confinement of these electrolytes on activated carbon has been 

addressed (see figure 1) . Finally, the impact of the thermal stabil ity of the electrolytes on the stability of 

EDLCs during float te st s carried out at 60°C has been considered. 0 100 200 300 400 500   

> 020 40 60 80 100
> weight loss /  %
> temperatuer / °C
> carbon+electrolyte pure electrolyte_1M Pyr 14 BF 4in PC

Figure 1 : Thermogravimetric analysis in ramp mode of pure electrolyte (1 M Pyr 14 BF 4 in PC) and carbon 

wetted with el ectrolyte. (scan rate 10°C min -1). 

Referenc es :

[1] C. Schütter, T. Husch, V. Viswanathan, S. Passerini, A. Balducci, M. Korth, J. Power Sources 

2016 , 326 , 541 -548. 

[2] A. Balducci, J. Power Sources 2016 , 326 , 534 -540. 

[3] Z. Lin, E. G oikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P. L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yu sh in, P. Simon, 

Mater. Today 2018 , 21 , 419 -436. 

[4] A. Brandt, P. Isken, A. Lex -Balducci, A. Balducci, J. Power Sources 2012 , 204 , 213 -219. 

[5] L. H. Hess, A. Balducci, Electrochimica Acta 2018 , 281 , 437 -444. 

[6] A. Eftekhari, Energy Stor age Mater. 2017 , 9, 47 -69. Investigation of the electrochemical performance of h igh voltage 

# lithium -ion capacitor contain in g liquid and gel -polymer electrolytes 

B. Babu , C. Neumann, M . Enke, A. Lex -Balducci, A. Turchanin, U.S. Schubert, A. Balducci 

Friedrich -Schiller -University Je na,Center for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena), 

Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany 

*E -mail: binson.babu@uni -jena.de 

Hybrid ion capacitors have made a tremendous impact in rising the energy density of high power energy 

storage devic es, by integrating the battery and supercapacitor within a single device. 1-2 Amatucci et al. 3-4

first introduced the idea of combining a Li 4Ti 5O12 (LTO) based electrode with an activated carbon (AC) 

based electrodes. After this pioneering work, several investigation s focused on the replacement of LTO 

with graphite electrode , and nowadays devices based on graphite and AC are commercially available. 

These devices are indicated a s lithium -ion capacitors (LICs) 5-6

In this work we report an investigation about the electrochemical behavior of high voltage LICs, having 

an operative voltage of 4.5V, containing liquid as well as gel polymer ele ctrolytes. We investigated the 

impact of the pre -lit hiation of graphite electrode on the performance of these devices , and the influence of 

the SEI layer on the ir cycling stability . Furthermore, we analyzed in details the behavior of these high 

voltage LIC s during float test at 4.5V and, also, their self -discharge. These two latter investigations, 

although are of high importance for high power devices, have not been systematically carried out in the 

past for this kind of devices, and especially for systems containing gel -polymer electrolytes. The results 

of these investigations are giving interesting and novel information about the operative limits of high 

voltage LICs and, also, about the adva ntages and limits related to the use of gel polymer electrolytes in 

th ese high power devices. 

Figure 1: (a) Capacitive retention and (b) self - discharge profile of LIC at different floated hours. 

## References 

1. Ding, J.; Hu, W.; Paek, E.; Mitlin, D., Review of Hybrid I on Capacitors: From Aqueous to Lithium to 

Sodium. Chem. Rev., 2018, 118 (14), 6457 -6498. 

2. Naoi, K.; Ishimoto, S.; Miyamoto, J. -i.; Naoi, W., Second generation 'nanohybrid supercapacitor': 

Evolution of capacitive energy storage devices. Energy Environ.Sci . 2012, 5 (11), 9363 -9373. 

3. Amatucci, G. G.; Badway, F.; Du Pasquier, A.; Zheng, T., An Asymmetric Hybrid Nonaqueous Energy 

Storage Cell. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 148 (8), A930 -A939. 

4. Pasquier, A. D.; Plitz, I.; Gural, J.; Menocal, S.; Amatucci, G., Characteristics and performance of 500 F 

asymmetric hybrid advanced supercapacitor prototypes. J. Power Sources 2003, 113 (1), 62 -71. 

5. Aida, T.; Yamada, K.; Morita, M., An Advanced Hybrid Electrochemical Capacitor That Uses a Wide 

Potential Range at the Positive Electrode. Electrochem. Solid -State Lett. 2006, 9 (12), A534 -A536. 

6. Aida, T.; Murayama, I.; Yamada, K.; Morita, M., Improvement in Cycle Performance of a High -Voltage 

Hybrid Electrochemical Capacitor. Electrochem. Solid -State Lett. 2007, 10 (4), A93. Aluminium Electrodeposition in EMImCl -AlCl 3 Ionogels for Improved 

# Aluminium Batteries 

Oi Man Leung a, Carlos Ponce de Leon b, Theresa Schoetz a, Themis Prodromakis a

> a

Centre for Electronics Frontiers, University of Southampton, Southampton . SO17 1BJ , UK. 

> b

Electrochemical Engineering, University of Southampton, Southampton , SO17 1BJ , UK. 

o.m.leung@soton.ac.uk 

Aluminium batteries are promising candidates for the next -generation of energy storage devices , given the natural 

occurrence of aluminium (third most abundant element) and the intrinsic safety characteristics of the electrolytes 

used. The specific capacity of an aluminium negative electrode (2980 mAh g -1) is comparable to that of lithium 

(3860 mAh g -1), while its volumetric capa city of 8040 mAh cm -3 far exceeds that of lithium (2060 mAh cm -3), due 

to its ability to transfer three electrons 1. Most non -aqueou s aluminium batteries utilise electrolytes including 

inorganic molten salts, deep eutectic solvents, organic solvents and ionic liquids , and operate by the reversible 

deposition/dissolution of aluminium at the negative electrode and the intercalation of th e chloroaluminate ions at 

the positive electrode. 

This work studied the electro deposition of aluminium from the 1-ethyl -3-methyl -imidazolium 

tetrachloroaluminate (EMImCl -AlCl 3) ionic liquid and its gel form - the ionogel . Ionogels have previously been 

show n improve thermal 2 and moisture stability 3; here, the ionogel was introduced to widen the potential stability 

window and enable aluminium deposition from lightweight AlCl 4- anions in Lewis neutral ionogels. Generally, 

aluminium is deposited by the r eduction of heavy Al 2Cl 7- ions present only in Lewis acidic ionic liquids , which is 

generally not possible in neutral and basic compositions a s the reduction of the organic cation and subsequent 

ionic liquid decomposition occurs at a higher potential than the reduction of AlCl 4-.

Lewis acidic and neutral ionogels of varying degrees of gelation were synthesised with polyethylene oxide and 

EMImCl -AlCl 3. The electrochemical behaviour of the electrolytes w as investigated by cyclic voltammetry, and 

aluminium deposits from the Lewis neutral ionogel were confirmed by scanning electron microscopy and energy 

dispersive X -ray spectroscopy. The deposition of aluminium from a Lewis neutral EMImCl -AlCl 3 ionogel was 

demonst rated for th e first time (Fig. 1) 4, serving as a basis for further investigation into the role of polymer 

additive s in developing improved ionogel and semi -solid state electrolytes for aluminium batteries. 

Fig. 1. Scanning electron micrographs of aluminium deposits on vitreous carbon obtained from a Lewis neutral 

EMImCl -AlCl 3 ionogel by applying a constant potential of -1.9 V vs. Al|Al(III) at 25ºC .

References 

1 Elia, G. A. et al. An Overview and Future Perspectives of Aluminum Batteries. Adv . Mater . 28 , 7564 -

7579, (2016). 

2 Noor, S. A. M., Bayley, P. M., Forsyth, M. & MacFarlane, D. R. Ionogels based on ionic liquids as 

potential highly conductive solid state electrolytes. Electro chim . Acta 91 , 219 -226, (2013). 

3 Sun, X. G. et al. Polymer gel electrolytes for application in aluminum deposition and rechargeable 

aluminum ion batteries. Chem . Commun . 52 , 292 -295, (2016). 

4 Schoetz, T., Leung, O., de Leon, C. P., Zaleski, C. & Efimov, I. Aluminium Deposition in EMImCl -

AlCl3 Ionic Liquid and Ionogel for Improved Aluminium Batteries. J. Electrochem . Soc . 167 , (2020). 

> 10 μm
> Aluminium deposits
> Vitreous carbon substrate
> 100 μm

# Enhanced Cycling and Thermal Stability of Li[Ni 0.8 Co 0.1 Mn 0.1 ]O 2 Cathode s via 

# Functional Organic Coating s                     

> Zhen Chen ,a,b * Huu -Dat Nguyen, cMaider Zarrabeitia, a,b Hai peng Liang, a,b Jae -Kwang Kim, dDorin Geiger, eUte
> Kaiser, eCristina Iojoiu, c,f Stefano Passerini a,b and Dominic Bresser a,b
> aHelmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), 89081 Ulm, Germany
> bKarlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
> cUniv. Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, Grenoble INP , LEPMI, 38000 Grenoble, France
> dDepartment of Solar & Energy Engineering, Cheongju University, Cheongju, Chungbuk 28503, Republic of Korea
> eCentral Facility of Electron Microscopy, Ulm University, 89081, Ulm, Germany
> fRéseau sur le Stockage Electrochimique de l’Energie (RS2E), CNRS, FR3459, 80039 Amiens Cedex, France

*Email:  chen.zhen@kit.edu 

## The use of Ni -rich Li[Ni 0.8 Co 0.1 Mn 0.1 ]O2 (NCM 811 ) as cathode active material is considered the 

## next big step towards advanced lithium batteries with even greater energy density 1. However, its 

## wide exploration in practical applications still requires to overcome several challenges , including 

## improvable cycling performance due to parasitic side reactions with the electrolyte , structural 

## degradation at the particle surface, very hi gh sensitivity towards moisture , and poor thermal 

## stability 2,3. The application of coatings is an effective approach to stabilize the surface of sensitive 

## cathode material particles and to suppress detrimental side reactions at the interface with the 

## electrolyte and/ or moist air thanks to the physically prevent ed contact 4.

## Here, we propose a novel functional organic coating which acts as protective layer to prevent the 

## NCM 811 from detrimen tal side reactions with moist air and/or the electrolyte, especially at elevated 

## temperatures. As a result, t he surface -modified NCM 811 –based cathode s reveal ed enhanced 

## cycling performance and thermal stability. Moreover, t his surface coating strategy could be 

## extended to other cathod e materials, highlighting its great potential for the development of high -

## performance cathode s for next -generation lithium batteries .

## References 

1. H. -H. Ryu, K. -J. Park, C. S. Yoon and Y. -K. Sun, Chem. Mater. , 2018, 30 , 1155 -1163. 

2. C. S. Yoon, K. -J. Park, U. -H. Kim, K. H. Kang, H. -H. Ryu and Y. -K. Sun, Che m. Mater. , 2017, 

29 , 10436 -10445. 

3. S. Neudeck, F. Walther, T. Bergfeldt, C. Suchomski, M. Rohnk e, P. Hartmann, J. Janek and 

T. Brezesinski, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2018, 10 , 20487 -20498. 

4. Z. Chen, D. Chao, J. Lin and Z. Shen, Mater. Res. Bull. , 2017, 96 , 491 -502. Selective p artial covering of nanoporous gold surface with lead and 

# evaluat ion of the electrochemical methanol oxidation reaction 

Alex Ricardo Silva Olaya 1, Birthe Zanderson 2 Jörg Weissmüller 2,3 , Gunt her Wittstock 1.

> 1

Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Institute of Chemistry, Oldenburg, Germany; 2Hamburg 

University of Technology, Institute of Materials Physics and Technology, Hamburg, Germany; 

> 3

Helmholtz -Zentrum Geesthacht, Institute of Materials Research, Gees thacht, Germany 

alex.r.silva@uol.de 

Nanoporous gold (NPG) has emerged as interesting material in electrochemistry due to its interesting 

properties, such as high surface area, [1] electrocatalytic activity, [2] tunability of surface structure, [3] among 

others. Previous studies have shown that NPG acts as a good electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation 

(MOR) ,[2,4] but how this reaction take place on the surface is not very well understood yet . One of the main 

limitations to achieve systematic studies is the necessity of a new sample for each experiment introducing 

variability in the surface composition and surface structure. Electrochemical studies in electrodes with a 

high surface area represents a challenge due to mass transport limitations in the pore space of the material 

and distors ion of voltammograms due to the IR drop. In order t o overcome th ese limitation s, a small amount 

of powdered NPG within a cavity microelectrode was used as working electrode. [5] This allows the 

preparation of multiple samples from one NPG monolith, reduces the overall current and thus the IR drop 

and enhances the mass transport by hemispherical diffusion to the microelectrode. By means of under -

potential deposition of lead ions in alkaline media, the NPG surface was characterized. Clear signals of 

basal planes are obtained. The surface undergoes restructuring when it is cycled in acidic media , whereas 

no or less restructuring was observed in alkaline media . More interesting, contr olling the bulk concentration 

of Pb ion s, it is possible to achieve a partial cover age of the NPG surface . The energetically most favorable 

places are occupied first . This allows to selectively block certain sites and observe their contribution to 

electroc atalytic reactions such as methanol oxidation in a potentiodynamic experiments (cyclic 

voltammetry). This finding allow ed the evaluat ion of the different facets of the surface towards methanol 

oxidation, showing that the reaction is mainly performed on the {111} terraces, contrary to the stablished 

notion that claim the high -energy defects are the most reactive spots. In conclusion, using cavity 

microelectrodes and under -potential deposition as a tool, it was possible to characterize the structure of the 

su rface structure of internal surfaces in NPG and the reactivity of the different facets, taking advantage of 

the partial cover age of the surface achieved by controlling the bulk concentration of the lead. 

[1] A. Wittstock, A. Wichmann, M. Bäumer, ACS Catal. 2012 , 2, 2199. 

[2] C. Yu, F. Jia, Z. Ai, L. Zhang, Chem.  Mater. 2007 , 19 , 6065. 

[3] Z. Wang, S. Ning, P. Liu, Y. Ding, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, M. Chen, Adv . Mater. 2017 , 29 , 1703601/1 -

7. 

[4] a) J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Ma, Y. Ding, J. Phys. Chem. C 2007 , 111 , 10382; b) M. Graf, M. Haensch, J. 

Carstens, G. Wittstock, J. Weissmüller, Nanoscale 2017 , 9, 17839. 

[5] C. Cachet -Vivier, M. Keddam, V. Vivier, L. T. Yu, J. Electroanal.  Chem. 2013 , 688 , 12. Hollow titania nanopillars as a flexible platform for encapsulation 

Jakub Wawrzyniak , Piotr Kupracz, Jakub Karczewski, 

Emerson Coy, Katarzyna Grochowska, Katarzyna Siuzdak 

The Szewalski Institute of Fluid -Flow Machinery, Polish Academy of Sciences 

Fiszera 14 st, 80 -231 Gdańsk, Poland 

jwawrzyniak@imp.gda.pl 

The titania nanostructures are primarily known for their potential as photoactive materials, due to 

their stability, corrosion resistance and flexibility of their morphologies. Their mai n drawback, however, is 

the wide electron bandgap, which greatly limits their immediate usability in the light -driven processes. 

Therefore, various methods of their modification have been explored, focusing on improving their overall 

absorption and carrier separation. For example, doping with foreign atoms  [1] , creating defects and 

vacancies  [2] , and introducing rib -like photonic structures  [3]  have all shown promise in regards to 

improving photoactivity of the titania nanotubes. 

Today, we present an alternative method of modification of laterally spaced titania nanotubes via 

laser irradiation. The p resented approach allows for a fast and scalable encapsulation of the nanotubes, 

trapping any material previously embedded within their interior. The c reated tightly -sealed nanostructure 

can be used either as a way to separate and protect sensitive material from the harsh environment, or to 

enhance absorption through the introduction of an extra scattering medium, like plasmonic metal 

nanoparticles. Moreover, the distinct separation between nanopillars, enables them to be detached from the 

surface independently, allowing them to be used as self -standing capsules, rather than nanopillar arrays if 

the application calls for it. 

The newly developed hollow titania nanostructures can find success not only in convention ally 

research applications but also, through the versatility and biocompatibility of the titania, in biomedical 

applications. 

This work has been supported by the National Science Centre of Poland under grant no 

2017/26/E/ST5/00416 .

[1] S. Piskunov, O. Lisovski, J. Begens, D. Bocharov, Y.F. Zhukovskii, M. Wessel, E. Spoh r, 

J. Phys. Chem. C. 119 (2015) 18686 –18696. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b03691. 

[2] Z. Zhang, X. Yang, M.N. Hedhili, E. Ahmed, L. Shi, P. Wang, 

ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 6 (2014) 691 –696. https://doi.org/10.1021/am404848n. 

[3] G.L. Chiarello, A. Zuliani, D. Ceresoli, R. Martinazzo, E. Selli, 

ACS Catal. 6 (2016) 1345 –1353. https:// doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.5b02817. Fast Electron Transfer K inet ics in Deep E utect ic S olvents: Effect of 

# Water Addition 

Fangchen Zhen ,1 Corinne Lagrost, 1 Jia -Wei Yan 2, Bing -Wei Mao ,2 Philippe Hapiot 1

> 1

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISCR -UMR 6226  Campus de Beaulieu, Bat 10C, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France 

> 2

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and Department of Chemistry, College of 

Chemistry and Chemical Engineering , Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 

fangchen.zhen@univ -rennes1.fr 

Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) are an emerging cl ass of solvents, which is considered as sustainable and 

cheap alternative s to ionic liquids. (1) DESs generally consist of mixtures of salts and hydrogen bond 

donors producing eutectics at optimized ratio that are liquid at ambient temperature and have unus ual 

solvent properties. Hydrogen bonding between hydrogen -donor and hydrogen -acceptor is supposed to 

cause the strong decrease in the melting point of the eutectics. Water amoun t in DESs strong ly affect s its 

physicochemical properties from de nsity, vis cosi ty , melting point , surface tension to conductivity ,(2) 

while being part of DESs composition. Recent results from literature have show n that DESs ’

nanostructure is varied according to the amount of water present in DES .(3) It is known that DESs 

spontaneousl y absorb water when exp osing in the air , to a certain extent depending on the hygroscopicity 

of its components . It is therefore interesting to analyze effects of water concentration on electron transfer 

kinetic rate constant s. T his point is not only a conc ern for fundamental molecular electrochemistry but is 

also meaningful for practical utility. 

In a recent publication, we demonstrate that electron transfer kinetics rate constants involved in two 

classical oxidation reactions of ferrocene and ferrocyanide in ethaline were remarkably larger than those 

in ionic liquids while being co mparable to values obtained in molecular solvents. (4) In this work, we will 

study the kinetics of oxidation of ferrocene and ferrocyanide in five DESs, including Ethaline, Reline, 

Glyceline, choline chloride (ChCl) -lactic acid and ChCl -malonic acid by varying the water amounts from 

0.5 wt% to 10 wt% with a particular consideration of ohmic drop compensation . T he extracted data in 

DESs shows that kinetic rate constants values consid erably increase with the addition of water in DESs. 

Electron transfer kinetics increase s much faster for the ferrocene/ferroc en ium redox couple than for 

ferrocyanide/ferricyanide redox couple with the addition of water amount in all the five DESs. 

Cyclic volta mmo gram and ΔEp -log(v) curve of ferrocene in Ethaline for different water additions. 

Reference s

(1) Abbott, A. P. ; Boothby, D.; Capper G.; Davies D. L. ; and Rasheed R. K. D eep E ut ectic Solvents 

Formed Between Choline Chloride and C arboxy lic Acids: Vers atile Alternatives to Ionic L iquids . J. 

Am. Chem. Soc. 2004 , 126 , 9142 -9147. 

(2) Protsenko, V. S.; Kityk, A. A.; Shaiderov, D. A.; Danilov, F. I. Effect of Water Content on 

Physicochemical Properties and Electrochemical Behavior of Ionic Liquids Containing Chol ine 

Chloride, Ethylene Glycol and Hydrated nickel Chloride. Journal of Molecular Liquids 2015 , 212 ,

716 -722. 

(3) Hammond, O. S.; Bowron, D. T.; Edler, K. J. The Effect of Water upon Deep Eutectic Solvent 

Nanostructure: An Unusual Transition from Ionic Mixture to Aqueous Solution . Angew. Chem. Int. 

Ed. 2017 , 56 , 9782 -9785. 

(4) Zhen, F.; Percevault, L.; Paquin, L.; Limanto n, E; Lagrost, C.; Hapiot, P. Electron Transfer Kinetics 

in a Deep eutectic Solvent. J. Phys. Chem. B 2020 , 124 , 6, 1025 -1032. Electrodeposition of compact Ag -Ni alloys and their performances 

# as cathode towards nitrate reduction 

Luca Mattarozzi , Sandro Cattarin, Nicola Comisso, Naida El Habra, 

Paolo Guerriero, Marco Musiani, Lourdes Vázquez -Gómez 

ICMATE -CNR , Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127, Padova, Italy 

luca.mattarozzi@cnr.it 

Bimetallic alloys are attracting much interest for the production of efficient and cheap materials, 

applicable to many areas . In this context, Ag -Ni alloys are promising for appl ications in electric /magnetic 

devices and (electro)catalysis [1]. Ag and Ni have both face -centered cubic (fcc) structure, however due 

to large difference in atomic radii, they do not ex hibit solubility at equilibrium in the solid state. 

Electrodeposi ti on may generate materials of str ucture or composition far from thermodynamic 

equilibrium , made stable by their (very) slow rearrangement at room temperature [ 2]. However, t he 

deposition of Ag -Ni films is complicated by a fairly large difference in standard reduction potentials ,

respectiv ely 0.799 V for Ag an d -0.25 V for Ni (vs NHE). Cyanide baths were used i n the past to deposit 

Ag and Ag -based allo ys, for their strong complexing action of Ag + ions, leading to deposition of compact 

films, but nowadays less dangerous solution s are preferr ed , both for safety and environmental concern s.

Ag -Ni thin films were already ele ctrodeposited from baths containing thiou rea as complexing agent ,

ob taining quite compact films but also undesired sul fur inclusion s up to 20% [3 ]. 

We propose here the electro deposition of Ag -Ni alloys from concentrated ch loride baths , already 

used i n the past for deposition of Ag -Pt and Ag -Pd alloys [4]. Concentrated chloride media may dissolve 

various metal ions and, in the specific case, the Ag -chloride complex es [Ag(Cl) n](1-n)- are more stable than 

the Ni one s, bringing closer the reduction pote ntials and promoting co -ele ctrodeposition. 

Linear sweep voltammetries of Ag -Ni electrodeposition performed in 10 M chloride baths 

indicate that alloy formation occurs under transport -limited reduction of silver complexes , so that films of 

desired composition may be obtained by regulating the deposition current jdep . The obt ain ed films have 

good compactness, with globular morphology (Fig.1, left) ; moreover, microanalysis indicates that they 

are free from foreig n species. XRD spectra indicate the presence of two crystalline phases, one Ag - rich 

and the other Ni -rich (only for Ni >50 at%) with minimal inclusion s (few atoms %) of the minorit y

species . Tests of nitrate reduction , based on li near sweep voltammetries (Fig. 1, right) and constant 

potential electrolyses, we re performed on an alloy of approximate composition Ag 30 Ni 70 , with a

significant yet limited Ag content . The main observations from these tests are : a) lower overvoltages for 

nitrate reduction with respect to pure Ni; b) marked increase of reduction current with respect to both Ag 

and Ni, i n a broad potential region; c) better select ivity to NH 3 production and lower H 2 evolution .

Fig. 1 : SEM images of Ag an d Ag 32 Ni 68 sam ples from conc. chloride medium (left), and 

LSV of NO 3- reduction on Ag, Ni and Ag 32 Ni 68 cathode s in 1 M NaOH (right). 

References 

[1 ] B. Vanrenterghem et al., Electrochim. Acta 196 (2016) 756 -768. 

[2 ] S.M. Hwang et al., J. Electrochem. Soc. 158 (2011) D307 -D31 6. 

[3] D. Liang et al., Electrochim.  Acta 82 (2012) 82 -89. 

[4] U. Cohen et al., J. Electrochem.  Soc. 131 (1984) 2489 -2495 .Effects of Melamine Adsorption on Activity of Pt/Pd/C Core -Shell 

# Catalyst 

Minoru Ina ba ,1 Hideo Daimon, 1 Masafumi Asahi, 2 Shin -ichi Yamazaki, 2 Tsutomu Ioroi 2

> 1

Dept . Molecular Chemistry and Biochemistry, Doshisha Unive rsity, Kyotanabe, Kyoto 610 -0321, Japa n

> 2

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Ikeda, Osaka 563 -8577, Japan 

minaba@m ail.doshisha.ac.jp 

In a NEDO project “Advanced Technologies for Reduction in Pt Usage (FY2015 -19), we have developed 

highly active catalys ts b ased on the core -shell te chni que. We have so far developed a new preparation 

method ( the direct displacement (DD) method ), which is su itable for mass production of Pt/Pd/C core 

shell catalysts as well as an activation method ( the H 2-O2 gas -swit ching metho d) and polyd opamine 

coating fo r improving the durability [1 -4] .

One of the pro blems in the DD method is the parasitic formation of large Pd particles , which spoils the 

activity of the resulting Pt/Pd /C [4] . We overcame this problem by the use of an impr oved Pd core 

particles (Ishifuku Metal Industr y) that ha ve much less fine Pd particles , and obtained a very high mass 

activity (1,685A/g -Pt , 775A/g -PGM ) after activation using high activation protocol (HAP, rectangular 

wave , 0.05 V ( 300 sec )-1.0 V (300 sec ), 80 C, 50 cycles) . Furthermore, we increased the Pd core loading 

from 30 to 46 wt% using Ketjenblack EC -600JD (1600 m 2/g) , and obtained good MEA performance (0.1 

mg -Pt/cm 2, 80 C) shown in Fig. 1 . T he performance at 1.0 A/cm 2 was 3.7 times higher than t hat of Pt/C 

catalyst ; that is , it is comparable to the performance of Pt/C at a loading of 0.37 mg/cm 2. The 

performance at high current densit ies are significantly imp roved (2.0 A/cm 2 at 0.6 V ) as well. 

We developed a novel activation method , in which Pt surface is mo dified with N-containing organic 

comp ound s [5 -7] . One e xample is shown in F ig. 2, where melamine molecules [5] were adsor bed on the 

surface of Pt/Pd/C. Without melamine adsorption , the mass ac tivity was 1,460 A/g -Pt. After melamine 

was adso rbed, it increa sed to 3,625 A/g -Pt (x 11 of Pt/C, 1,673 A/g -PGM ). Water adsorption on Pt(111) 

is a stron g inhibitor for the activity for ORR . Melamine is weakly adsorbed on Pt surface, and suppresses 

the adsorption of water, which resulti ng in the high ORR activity sho wn in Fig. 2. 

References 

[1] N. Aoki et al. , Electrocatalysis, 9, 125 -138 (2018). DOI 10.1007/s12678 -017 -0399 -1

[2] N. Aok i e t al. , Electrochim. Acta, 244, 146 -153 (2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2017.05.054 

[3] N. Aoki et al. , J. Electroc hem. Soc., 165 (10) F737 -F747 (2018). DOI: 10.1149/2.0131810jes 

[4] N. Aoki et al. , J. Electrochem. Soc., 167(4), 044513 (2020/2). DOI: 10.1149/1945 -7111/ab743e 

[5] M. Asahi et al. , J . Electrochem . Soc ., 166 (8) F498 -F505 (2019). DOI : 10.1149/2.0641908jes 

[6] S. Yamazak i et al. , Electrochim. Acta, 297, 725 -734 (2019). DOI : 10.1016/j.electacta.2018.11.165 

[7] S. Yamazaki et al. J. Electroanal. Chem, 848, 113321 (2019). DOI : 10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.113321 

Acknowledgments: This work has been supp orted by N EDO. MEA tests were performed by Dr . T. 

Mikami and Dr. A. Daimaru at Yamanashi Prefectural Industrial Technology Center .

Fig. 1. MEA performance of Pt/Pd/C (0.1 

mg/cm 2) and Pt /C (0.1 mg/cm 2) at 80 C.

Fig. 2. Linear sweep v oltammogram at Pt/Pd/C 

with and without melamine adsorption after 

HAP in 0.1 M H ClO 4 at 25 C. Effect s of Ti 3C2Tx Nanosheets (MXenes) in the Electrocatalytic Activity 

# of SnO 2/Ti Anodes for the Degradation of Methyl Red 

S. González -Poggini , Andreas Rosenkranz, M. Colet -Lagrille 

Department of Chemical Engineering, Biotechnology and Materials, Faculty of Physical and 

Mathematical Sciences, Universidad de Chile 

Beauchef 851, Santiago, Chile 

sergio.gonzalez.p@ug.uchile.cl 

In recent years, electrocatalytic advanced oxidation processes have received growing attention for 

wastewater treatment. In this context, various metal oxide -coated anodes have been studied for anodic 

oxidation of pollutants in wastewater exhibiting excellent electrocatalytic activity. Among them, SnO 2-

coated anodes have shown a high electrocatalytic ac tivity for the generation of hydroxyl radicals ( •OH) and 

ease of fabrication [1]. 

In addition, Ti 3C2Tx nanosheets (MXenes) are a two -dimensional material which application seems 

promising in batteries, supercapacitors and catalysis due to their high surfa ce area and metallic conductivity 

[2, 3]. 

The present work aims to fabricate stable MXenes -SnO 2 electrodes by spin coating of a precursor s solution 

on Ti substrates and to study the effects of the MXenes and cerium incorporation on the electrodes 

microstr ucture, electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen evolution reaction and the catalytic activity for the 

electro -oxidation of methyl red. The precursors solution contains  MXenes particles, SnCl 2, CeCl 3, c itric 

acid and ethylene glycol and after spin coating the electrodes are thermal ly treat ed in the presence of a ir .

The obtained electrodes are characterized in terms of morphology, chemical composition and crystallinity 

by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy -dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), Raman 

spectroscopy and x -ray diffraction (XRD). The electrochemical behaviour and electrocatalytic activity are 

characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electro -oxidation of methyl red (MR) experiments. 

Electrodes characterization indicate s the formation of a SnO 2-TiO 2 film when MXenes nano -sheets were 

added to the precursor solution (MXenes -SnO 2/Ti electrode) and a Ce -doped SnO 2-TiO 2 film with 

additional cerium incorporation (MXenes -SnO 2-Ce/Ti electrode). Furthermore, the addition of MXenes 

nano -sheets led to the incorporation of Ti 4+ ions into the lattice of SnO 2 crystals. CV curves demonstrated 

that the oxygen evolution reaction is restrained in the MXenes -SnO 2/Ti and MXenes -SnO 2-Ce/Ti 

electrodes. The maximum MR degradation rate was achiev ed using MXenes -SnO 2/Ti electrode s, whereas 

the minimum was obtained for the MXenes -SnO 2-Ce/Ti electrode s. The enhanced catalytic activity verified 

for the MXenes -SnO 2/Ti electrode s can be attributed to the generation of oxygen vacancies in the crystal 

lat tice, which act as charge carrie rs and increase the electrical conductivity of SnO 2.

References. 

[1] Li. Zhengyang  et al. , Materials Science and Engineering B, 191, 33 –40, 2015. 

[2] L. Renyuan et al , ACS Nano , 11, 3752 -3759, 2017 .

[3] S. Joon et al. , ACS Nano , 12, 986, 2018. Long -term Stability of Anion Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell s

# Studied on Membrane Electrode Assemblies 

J. Lorenz 1, L. Mues 1, C. E. Diesendruck 2,3 , D. R. Dekel 3,4 , C. Harms 1, A. Dyck 1 

> 1

DLR Institute of Networked Energy Systems, Carl -von -Ossietzky -Str. 15, 

26129 Oldenburg, Germany  

> 2

Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, 

Haifa 3200003, Israel  

> 3

The Nancy & Stephan Grand Technion Energy Program (GTEP), Technion – Israel Institute of 

Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel  

> 4

The Wolfson Department of Chemical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, 

Haifa 3200003, Israel 

julian.lorenz@dlr.de 

The anion exchange membrane fuel cell (AEMFC) is an attractive alternative to its acidic counterpart, the 

proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) , and has recently received increasing attention. In 

principle, they allow the use of non -precious metal catalysts thanks to the high pH of the electrol yte, 

which reduce s significantly the cost in fuel cell systems. Through the development of new materials the 

performance of AEMFC has increased substantially enabling competition with PEMFC regarding begin 

of life performance. However, the long -term stabil ity of AEMFC is one of the remaining challenges for 

this technology. [1-2]

The improvable stability under fuel cell operation is mainly related to the degradation of the anion 

exchange membrane (AEM) and the anion exchange ionomer (AEI) , which were identified as c rucial 

components in AEMFC . They are composed of nanostructured polymer backbones with positively 

charged functional groups, typically based on quaternary ammonium functionalities , distributed al ong the 

polymer chain. While their hydroxide (OH -) conductivity has reached satisfying values, the most critical 

issue is that the molecular structure of the membrane itself decomposes due to the presence of the highly 

nucleophilic OH -.[3] The nucleophilic attack is enhanced at low content of water coordinating the 

hydroxide ion which occur at high current density operation of AEMFCs. [4-5] These findings highlight the 

need of more stable polymer materials, characterisation techniques that enable stability s tudies under 

conditions simulating AEMFCs in operation and investigations of the long -term stability at single cell 

level. 

In this contribution , the voltage decay over the o peration time was investigated at the single cell level 

allowing the evaluation of the performance stability under fuel cell conditions. Membrane electrode 

assemblies (MEA) were prepared using different membrane materials and characterized by the 

application of developed test protocols. The degradation of polymer components was accelerated by the 

distinct application of harsh conditions. Possible degradation pathways of the M EA dependent on the 

applied parameter s were enlightened by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and widespread 

ex situ testing at end of test condition s. Morphological changes were determined with μ -computed 

tomography and atomic force microscopy . Degradation products of the AEM and AEI were detected by 

ion chromatography of the exhaust water. Spectroscopic techniques were applied to investigate structural 

changes of the membrane. This combination of measurements under AEMFCs condition and 

disting uished analytical tools contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of AEMFC long -term 

stability. 

[1] S. Gottesfeld, D. R. Dekel, M. Page, C. Bae, Y. Yan, P. Zelenay, Y. S. Kim, J. Power Sources 

2018 , 375 , 170 -184. 

[2] D. R. Dekel, J. Power Sources 2018 , 375 , 158 -169. 

[3] J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. 

Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu, L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci. 2014 ,

7, 3135 -3191. 

[4] D. R. Dekel, S. Willdorf, U. As h, M. Amar, S. Pusara, S. Dhara, S. Srebnik, C. E. Diesendruck, 

J. Power Sources 2018 , 375 , 351 -360. 

[5] D. R. Dekel, I. G. Rasin, S. Brandon, J. Power Sources 2019 , 420 , 118 -123. Low -temperature synthesis of nanocrystalline , halogen -doped 

# BaZr 0.8 Y0.2 O2.9 -δ proton conductor by the sol -gel method. 

Ángel Triviño -Peláez , Glenn C. Mather, Mario Aparicio, Jadra Mosa 

Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain 

a.trivino@icv.csic.es 

Yttrium -doped barium zirconate (BZY) is one of the most promising materials for electrolyte s in protonic 

ceramic fuel cells (PCFCs) in the intermediate temperature range (400 -700ºC) due to its high proton 

conductivity in humid atmospheres and its good chemical stability against acid gases such as CO 2 in 

typical PCFC operation conditions. However , chemical stability may be further enhanced on 

incorporation of halogens, reducing the basicity of the perovskite -lattice. Employing conventional 

sintering techniques and powders, temperatures around 1700°C are required to obtain ceramic pellets with 

sufficient densific ation (> 95% relative density) . Alternative methods s uch as sol -gel synthesis allow the 

preparation of the yttrium -doped barium zirconate powder at low temperature (700ºC) with higher 

reactivity . In this study, the BaZr 0.8 Y0.2 O2.9 -x/2 -δMx series (M = Cl, F and x = 0, 0.1) were prepared by a

modified sol -gel method based on alkoxide routes in order to study the influence of the halogen dopant o n

both microstructural and electrical properties. Pellets and thin -films were obtained by a combination of 

dip -coating and so l-gel synthesis by low -temperature thermal annealing at 1000ºC, and single BZY phase 

without barium carbonate was obtained. The combination of sol -gel a nd dip -coating method s may be a 

promising alternative for the fabrication of BZY proton conductors .Controlled electrodeposition of n anoscale n-Si/metal Schottky 

# junction s for water dissociation 

Kiseok Oh ,1 Olivier . de Sagazan, 2 Gabriel Loget 1

> 1

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes) -UMR6226, F -35000 Rennes, 

France  

> 2

Univ R ennes, IETR (Institute of Electronics and Telecommunications of Rennes) - UMR CNRS 6164, 

35042 RENNES Cedex, France 

kiseok.oh@univ -rennes1.fr 

Silicon (Si) is an attractive electrode material for manufacturin g photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) 

because it has a small bandgap, it is very abundant and widely used in the photovoltaic industry. 

Nevertheless, using Si as a photoanode for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is highly challenging as Si 

surface is particul arly prone to deactivation by spontaneous oxidation and chemical etching. In order to 

solve this matter, conformal surface protection methods have been applied by several processes (e.g. 

chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, sputtering or eva poration [2] ). 

Recently, ou rselves and others have reported that transition metals (Ni [1 a,b] , Fe[2] and Co [3]), 

electrodeposited on n -type Si from aqueous solutions . In the form of isolated nanoparticle s (NPs) to 

create nanoscale Schottky contacts enable to perform OER for several hour s under sim ulated sunlight at 

pH 14. Actual knowledge suggest that these surfaces behave a ccording to the pinch -off model , which 

predicts a strong dependence of the NP s size and their respective spacings on the photoelectrode 

property [4][5]. However, the typical elect rodeposition procedures that were used so far led to randomly -

dispersed arrays of metal NP onto n -Si . Using this me thods, the geometrical parameters of individual 

Schottky junction s and their respective spacing cannot be accurately control led .

Th e lithog raphically patterned nanowire electrodeposition (LPNE) method combines basic 

photo lithography steps with electrodep osition . It allows to fabricate high aspect -ratio nanowires vertically 

aligned on a substrate [6]. In this work, we adapted this pro cess to n -Si wafers in order to create a series of 

photoanodes with controlled nan oscale n-Si/metal co ntacts. In this presentation , we will present this 

method and discuss our last results which aim to provide a better general understanding of these 

outsta nding junctions .

[1] a) G. Loget, B. Fabre , S. Fryars, C. M ériadec, S. Ababou -Girard, ACS Energy Lett. 2017 , 2, 569. 

b) K. Oh, C. M ériadec, B. Lassalle -Kaiser, V. Dorcet, B. Fabre, S. Ababou -Girard, L. Joanny, F. 

Gouttefangeas, G. Loget, Energy Environ. Sci. 2018 , 11 , 2590. 

[2] K. Oh, V. Dorcet, B . Fabre, G. Loget, Adv. Energy Mater. 2019 , 1902963 , 1. 

[3] J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers, J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater. 2015 , 14 , 1150. 

[4] F. A. L. Laskowski, S. Z. Oener, M. R. Nellist, A. M. Gordon, D. C. Bain, J. L. Fehrs, S. W. 

Boettcher, Nat. Mater. 2019 , DOI 10.1038/s41563 -019 -0488 -z. 

[5] R. T. Tung, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 2001 , 35 , 1. 

[6] E. J. Menke, M. A. Thompson, C. Xiang, L. C. Yang, R. M. Penner, Nat. Mater. 2006 , 5, 914. Preventing Thermal Runaway in Lithium -Ion Batteries through 

# Functionalisation of Passive Materials and Components 

Min Zhang a, Andrew L. Hector a, Nuria Garcia -Araez a, Denis Kramer b, John R. Owen a 

> a

Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton SO 17 1BJ, United Kingdom  

> b

Engineering, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom 

mz1e18@soton.ac.uk 

Lithium -ion batteries are widely used in portable electronic devices, electric vehicles and distributed 

energy storage systems due to their high energy density, high power density and light weight. 1-3 The 

safety concern is the main obstacle that hinders the large -scale applications of lithium -ion batteries in 

electric vehicles and energy storage systems. The cascading thermal runaway is the most catastrophic 

safety failure of lithium -ion batteries. Thermal runaway can occur due to the electrical abuse such as short 

circuit and overcharge/over -discharge, thermal abuse like exposure to excessive temperatures, and 

mechanical abuse like crus h or penetration of the battery pack. It can release toxic and flammable gases, 

generate heat, cause fire and even explosion. For large -scale applications of lithium -ion batteries, the 

thermal runaway of one failed battery can cause a thermal cascade throu ghout the battery pack. 

To prevent the thermal runaway in lithium -ion batteries, we functionalised the passive materials and 

components instead of the active materials to maintain the full choice of active materials and obtain 

enhanced safety and lifetime without compromising on power density, energy density or cost. The 

positive temperature coefficient of resistivity (PTCR) additives were introduced into battery electrodes to 

replace the conductivity additive (e.g. carbon black) or as coatings on the acti ve materials. PTCR material 

exhibits a raised electrical resistance as the temperature increases. When the electrode temperature passes 

a threshold value, the PTCR embedded electrodes become non -conducting to interrupt electron pathways, 

suppress all elect rochemical reactions and impede further temperature increases, thus preventing thermal 

runaway in lithium -ion batteries. 

References: 

1 M. Zhang, N. Garcia -Araez, A. L. Hector and J. R. Owen, J. Mater. Chem. A , 2017, 5, 2251 -2260. 

2 M. Zhang, N. Garcia -Ar aez and A. L. Hector, J. Mater. Chem. A , 2018, 6, 14483 -14517. 

3 M. Zhang, N. Garcia -Araez, A. L. Hector, J. R. Owen, R. G. Palgrave, M. G. Palmer and S. Soulé, RSC 

Adv. , 2019, 9, 740 -752. Magnetron sputtered NiO thin films for sodium ion battery electrodes 

Jadra Mosa ,a Mario Aparicio, a Francisco José García -García, b,c and Agustín R. González -Elipe b 

> a

Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (CSIC), Kelsen 5, Madrid, Spain  

> b

Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla (CSIC -Universidad de Sevilla), Avda.  Américo Vespucio 

49, Sevilla, Spain  

> c

Escuela Técnica Superior De Ingeniería . Universidad de Sevilla . Camino de los Descubrimientos, s/n. 

Sevilla (Spain) 

jm osa@icv.csic.es 

NiO thin film electrodes were successfully prepared by magnetron sputtering (MS) deposition under an 

oblique angle configuration (OAD). Intercalation of Na ions in the nickel oxide layers has been studied 

using electrochemical techniques (cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic discharge -charge cycles and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy). Sample characterization before and after sodium intercalation 

has been carried out by SEM, micro -Raman, XPS, RBS and XRD measurements. The porous struct ure of 

the films is confirmed by electron microscopy evaluation. The increasing of the cycle’s number leads to a 

continuous reduction of the discharge capacities due to some amount of Ni 0 and Na 2O produced during 

the discharge process remains in the electr ode and does not participate in the charge process. Sodium half 

cells have shown a discharge capacity of 465 mAh g -1 after 16 cycles at 400 mA g -1 between 0.01 and 

3.00 V (vs. Na +/Na). High -Efficient Cathode Catalysts of Li -CO 2/O 2 Batter ies 

Peng -Fang Zhang 1, Jun -Tao Li 1, Shi -Gang Sun *1,2

> 1

College of Energy and 2College of Chemi stry and Chemical Engineering, 

Xiamen Un iversity, Xiamen 361005, China 

e-mail address : sgsun@xmu.edu.cn 

Li -O2 battery and Li -CO 2 batter ies hold high energy densit y of 3 500 and 1876 Wh kg -1, respectively ,

and are promising new gen eration of ene rgy storage systems [1] . For the Li -O2 battery , trace of CO 2 in air 

(environment ) will result in inevitabl y the formation o f side product Li 2CO 3, which lead s to severe 

degradation of batteries and limits the cycleability . While the discharge prod ucts of Li -CO2 battery are 

Li 2CO 3 an d C [2] . Therefore , investigat ion of the properties of the Li 2CO 3 based on the Li -CO 2/O 2 batteries 

is sign ificant for the rational design of cathode catalysts to enhance the cyclicity performanc e of of Li -

CO 2 and Li -O2 batteries. In this work, 3 different catalysts, Ru/NC ，Ru /NiO@ Ni/CNT and Pt/CNT were 

prepar ed based on consideration of the uniform distrib ution , the synergetic effect and the high activity of 

catalytic sites. The results demonstrated th at the designed and prepared catalysts exhibit high activity for 

the de composition of Li 2CO 3 and have signi ficantly improved the cycleability .

Figure 1 The performance of Li -CO 2/O 2 batteries with (a) Ru/NC, (b) Ru /NiO@ Ni/CNT , Ru/NC, 

NiO@ Ni/CNT , CNT and (c) Pt/CNT catalysts. 

(1) Ru /N-doped carbon n anotube (Ru/NC) catalyst . It wa s prepared by sol vothermal method . The Ru 

nanoparticles are uniformly distributed on the surface of NC (Figure 1a) . The Li -CO 2/O 2 batter y with this 

catalyst operated with VCO2 :V O2 = 4:1 presents an overpotential of 1.06 V and could be cycled smoothly 

for 18 4 cycles at 500 mAh g -1. XRD a nd SEM characteriz ations reveal that the as -generated Li 2CO 3 can 

be effectively decomposed by the Ru/NC catalyst . Besides, with Ru/NC catalyst, the Li -CO 2/O 2 battery 

operate with different VCO2 :V O2 ratios (VCO2 :V O2 = 0:1, 2:1 and 1:0) also show enhanced cycling s tability 

of 200, 190 and 150 cycles, r espectively .

(2) Carbon nanotube supported Ru /NiO@ Ni catalyst (Ru/NiO@Ni/CNT) . It wa s synthesized with 

Ru nanoparticles ( 2.5 nm) anchored on the surfa ce of core -shell structure Ni O@Ni nanoparticle s (17 

nm). The Li -CO 2/O 2 (V:V =4:1) batteries with Ru /N iO@ Ni/CNT catalyst has delivered a long cycling life 

of 105 cycles at a cut -off capacity 1000 mAh g -1 with overpotential as low as 1.01 V , de monstrating a 

strong synergetic effect between the Ru and NiO speci es in electrocatal ytic decomposition of Li 2CO 3

(Figure 1b) . Density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicates that the formation O2 is the rate 

determining step in RuO2 promoted electrochemical deco mposition of Li2CO 3. Furthermore, the 

formation and decomposition process of Li 2CO 3 on Ru/ NiO@N i/CNT catalyst was illuminated at a 

molecule level by in -situ FTIR s spectroscopy .

(3) Pt/CNT catalyst . It w as prepared by deposition of 2.5 nm Pt nanoparticles uniformly on CNT .

DFT analysis indicates that the f ormation of O -O bo nd in Li -CO 2/O 2 batter y and the generation of C -O

bond in Li -CO 2 battery during Li 2CO 3 decomposition are the rate determining steps, respectively. When 

using Pt/CNT catal yst as cathode in th e Li -CO 2/O 2 batter y with 2% O 2 content , the ever lowest 

overpotential of 0.3 V and stability of 128 cycles at 1000 mAh g -1 have be en achi ev ed (Figure 1c) . The 

formation (2.5 V) and decomposition (3.2 V) of Li 2CO 3 have been s tudi ed at molecular leve l usin g in-situ 

FTIR spectroscopy .

This study if of significance in developme nt of highly efficient cathode catalysts of Li -O2 batteries. 

Acknowledgement : Financially support s from NSFC ( 21621091 , 21875197 , 21703182 and 21903001 ). 

References: 

[1] Yao, X .; Dong, Q.; Cheng, Q.; Wang, D . Angew. C hem. Int. , Ed. , 2016, 55; 11344 -11353. 

[2] Xie, Z.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Z. ; Zhou, Z. Adv . Mate r. , 2017; 1605891. 

[3] Zhang, P. -F. ; et al. Chem . Eng . J., 2019, 363 ; 224 -233 .Novel single -ion conducting polymer electrolyte for 

# lithium -metal batteries 

Xu Dong , Zhen Chen, Xinpei Gao, Alexander Mayer, Haipeng Liang, Dominic Bresser, Stefano Pass erini 

Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany 

Karlsruh e Institute of Technology (KIT), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany 

Email:  xu.dong@kit.edu 

Lithium -based batteries are now increasingly employed in portable electronic devices, (hybrid) electric 

vehicles (EVs) and stationary energy storage . This rapidly expanding list of potential applications and the 

consequent rise in number of battery cells needed demand s for more e fficien t, safe and environmentally 

friendly battery systems. Among different battery technologi es, p olymer electrolytes are being intensively 

studied for use in solid -state lithium -metal batteries to power electronic devices , including EVs .1-3

In this work, the design of a new single -ion conducting polymer electrolyte is presented. The very facile 

synthesis is environmental -friendly and cost -eff icient, involving only a very limited number of steps . The 

polymer electrolyte is based on a (commercial) p olysulfone backbone with covalently tethered fluorinated 

side chains bearing the ionic function. The resulting single -ion conductor is blended with ethylene 

carbonate (EC) . The chemical structure was confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance ( 1H-NMR and 19 F-

NMR) spectroscopy. Following a comprehensive physicochemical and electrochemical characterization, 

re vealing inter alia an electrochemical stability window of ca. 4.75 V and an ionic conductivity of 

1.5 *10 -4 S cm -1 and 2.4 *10 -4 S cm -1 at 30 °C and 40 °C, respectively, the applicability of this electrolyte 

for high -energy Li/NMC 622 cells was evaluated. The cells provide a specific capacity of more than 

160 mAh g -1 at C/20 and stable cycling at C /5, indicating that this new electrolyte may serve the 

realization of intrinsically safer, high -performance lithium -metal batteries .2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 1E-6 1E-5 1E-4 0.001            

> Conductivity (s cm -1 )
> 1000/T (K -1 )
> 20 C to 80 C80 C to -20 C-20 C to 20 C
> 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0-10 -20
> Temperature ( C)

Fig. 1. Ionic conductivity of the single -ion conducting polymer electrolyte comprising 37.5 wt % of EC as 

a function of temperature .

References 

[1] Z. Tu, P. Nath, Y. Lu, M. D. Tikekar and L. A. Archer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2947 –2956. 

[2] Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Ener gy, 2016, 1, 16071. 

[3] D. T. Hallinan and N. P. Balsara, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2013, 43, 503 –525. New models for t he Electrochemical Double Layer of the Pt(111) -

# Aqueous Electrolyte Interface 

Kasinath Ojha * and Marc T.M. Koper 

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. 

* email:  kasi_chemistry@yahoo.com 

Atomic /molecular level u nderstanding of the double layer, interfacial water structure such as organization 

and orientation, H -bonding network at the metal -electrolyte interface is of utmost importance for 

fundamental electrochemistry as well as for technological applications 1–3. The interfacial water structure at 

the metal -electrolyte interface is the most important part of the double layer structure which governs all 

kind of interfacial physio -chemical properties and processes . Pt is the most studied and applied metal in 

energy conversion , electro catalysis, and 

electroanalytical sensing . The double 

layer structure o f Pt is still incompletely 

understood although it has been 

investigated for more than 50 years .

Recently , we discovered the minimum of 

the Gouy -Chapman capacitance on Pt 

(111) for the first time and directly 

identify the potential of zero charge of 

Pt(111) 4, which is an important intrinsic 

propert y of an electrode material . Similar 

experiments were demonstrated to 

observe the GC capacitance and pzc of 

Au(111) which is in good agreement with 

the literature 5. The inner layer and diffuse 

layer capacitance of Pt(111) are significantly higher than that of Au(111) and mercury . By comparing the 

diffuse layer capacitance of Pt(111), Au(111), Ag(111) and Hg, we understand that Pt(111) is better 

screened by the ions (electrolyte) at the interface (outer Helmholtz layer) . This is due to the interfacial 

water -ion interactions follow ing reverse Hofmeister seri es which is investigated by using non -specific ally 

adsorbing anions (e.g. perchlorate, fluoride, methanesulfonate) and their concentration contributing to the 

double layer capacitance of Pt(111) 6. The presentation will discuss these new data in detail and will suggest 

a new model of the Pt(111) -electrolyte interface. 

References 

1 I. Ledezma -Yanez, W. D. Z. Wallace, P. Sebastián -Pascua l, V. Climent, J. M. Feliu and M. T. M. 

Koper, Nat. Energy , 2017, 2, 1 –7. 

2 C. Y. Li, J. B. Le, Y. H. Wang, S. Chen, Z. L. Yang, J. F. Li, J. Cheng and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. 

Mater. , 2019, 18 , 697 –701. 

3 O. M. Magnussen and A. Groß, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 2019, 141 , 4777 –4790. 

4 K. Ojha, N. Arulmozhi, D. Aranzales and M. T. M. Koper, Angew.  Chemie Int. Ed. , 2020, 59 ,

711 –715. 

5 D. M. Kolb, Prog. Surf. Sci. , 1996, 51 , 109 –173. 

6 K. Ojha and M. T. M. Koper, Under Prep.       

> Figure 1.(a) Capacitance curve sof Pt(111) in HClO 4electrolyte (pH
> = 4) showin g GC capacitance minimum at PZC (b) schematic of
> Anion -water (interfacial) interactions on Pt(111).

# Voltammetry of cobalt(II) complexes with naturally present organic 

# ligands in seawater 

Anđela Bačinić and Marina Mlakar 

Rudjer Boskovic Institute 

Bijenička 54, 10 000 Zagreb 

abacinic@irb.hr 

Cobalt (II) as an essential element and important for biochemical processes in the marine environment, is 

bioavailable in its dissolved form. At present it is known that cobalt in seawater is partially, but strongly 

complexed to natural organic ligands (binding place for cobalt is very possible a nitrogen -con taining 

functional group ). Dissolved cobalt(II) is biologically important element for marine organisms (for their 

biochemical and physiological functioning). Despite its abudance in oceans , dissolved Co 2+ is present in 

low concentrations, <10 -9 mol L-1, mostly as soluble organic complex. [1,2 ] Electrochemical 

characterization of cobalt (II) complexes in model aqueous solution (0.55 mol dm -3 NaCl) was performed 

using squ are wave and cyclic voltammetry on mercury drop electrode. 

Results on complexation and electrochemical reaction mechanisms of cobalt (II) complexes with 4 -

nitrocatechol, humic acid, glutathione and 1,10 -phenant hroline, as ligands appearing in the marine 

system, will be presented. All used ligands are biologically important molecules. Cat echolates, ortho -

dihydroxybenzene and 4 -nitro -dihydroxybenzene are present as a structural part of complex marine 

ligands (humic acid, siderophores, etc.). Humic substances as heterogeneous biomolecules are a 

characteristic component of the dissolved orga nic carbon (DOC) pool important for phytoplankto n

communities in seawater. [3] Glutathione is present in eukaryotes and some prokaryotes (cyanobacteri a

and purple bacteri a) and makes up > 90 % of non -protein t hiols in plants and algae [4] , while 1 ,10 -

phenant hroline is an inhibitor of metallopeptidases. [5] 

All of these Co(II) complexes are electroactive and give a reduction response on a voltammograms 

(square wave and cyclic) from Ep = -0.9 to -1.1 V. 

Mechanism s and stability constants of complexe s were determined. While reduction reactions with 4 -

nitrocatechol and humic acid were irreversible, reduction reactions with glutathione and 1,10 -

phenanthroline showed reversible /quasireversible behavior. Using CLE/ACSV method were calculated 

stability constant s for Co(II)4NC and Co(II) HA 2 complexes , (log K Co(II) (4NC)2 = 21.86 (pH = 8.2), log K Co(II)  

> (4NC) 2

= 21.11 (pH )= 6.5), log K Co(II) (HA)2 = 11.32 (pH = 8.2)) . For other complexes calculations are in 

process. 

[1] M.J. Ellwood, C.M.G. van den Berg, Determination of organic complexation of cobalt in seawater by 

cathodic stripping voltammetry, Marine Chemistry 75(2001), 33 –47. 

[2] M. Vega, C.M.G. van den Berg, Determination of Cobalt in Seawater by Catalytic 

Adsorpti ve Cathodic Stripping Voltammetry, Anal. Chem. 69(1997), 874 -881. 

[3]  E.M. Thurman, Aquatic humic substances, in: E.M. Thurman (Ed.), Organic  Geochemistry of Natural 

Waters, vol. 1, Springer, Dordrecht, 1985, p. 273. Ch. 3.

[4] M. Fernanda C. Leal and Constant M.G. Van Den Berg, ‘Evidence for Strong Copper(I) 

Complexation by Organic Ligands in Seawater’, Aquatic Geochemistry, 4.1 (1998), 49 –75. 

[5] Warren W. Brandt, Francis P. Dwyer, and El eanora C. Gyarfas, ‘Chelate Complexes of 1,10 -

Phenanthroline and Related Compounds’, Chemical Reviews , 54.6 (1954), 959 –101. Environmentally Friendly Treatment of Textile Using 

# Electrochemically Generated O 3-water with UV Irradiation 

Tsuyoshi Ochiai ,1,2 Kyohei Miyano 3, Yosuke Ishikawa 3, Toshinari Nagura 3, Noritaka Kimura 4

> 1

Materials Analysis Group, Kawasaki Technical Support De partment, Local Ind ependent Administrative 

Agency Kanagawa Institute of industrial Science and TEChnology (KISTEC) , Japan 

> 2

Photocatalysis International Research Center, Tokyo University of Sci ence, Japan 

> 3

Business Strategy Department , N isshinbo Textile Inc ., Japan 

> 4

Departmen t of Bioengineering , Nagaoka University of Technology , Japan 

e-mail address : ochiai.tsuyoshi@gmail.com 

Recently, application of advance d oxidation technologies (AOTs) for environmental p urification have 

re ceiv ed growing attention [1]. Especially electrolysis with boron -doped diamond (BDD) electrodes make 

it possible to generate various highly active oxidants such as O3 which can oxidiz e aqueous contaminants 

[2]. In this study, we introduc e recent studies ab out environment -friendly “AOT -treatments ” of textile by 

using of O3-water with UV irrad iation instead of conventional treatment s (scouring and bleaching ) with 

environment ally persistent reagents . Fig. 1 shows the photographs of cotton bl eaching by AOT. Cot ton 

fabrics were treated by O3-water (1.0 ppm, 1.5 L/min , continuously generated from tap water ) with UV 

irrad iation (170 mW /cm 2 @310 -38 0 nm ). After treatments, the fabrics were dried under room 

temperature and analyzed by refl ection spe ctr a. Fig. 2 left shows the reflection spectra and photographs of 

cotton fabrics . After 60 min of AOT, the spectrum and whiteness of the cotton are almost the same with 

conventional chemical -bleach ed one. But the 

only problem is “color reversion ” by i ronin g

(heating around 200 °C). Heat ing of oxidize d

cellulose generates conjugated system s and 

yellow color (Fig. 2 right , green line ). However, 

we found that reduction of oxidized cellulose by 

rongalite can prevent color reversion (Fig. 2 

right , red line ). The refor e, AOT -treatment is

attrac tive to reduce energy consumption and cut 

waste in the fabric processing. 

Acknowledgements : Travel expenses for the attend ing 71 st Annual Meeting of ISE in Belgrade , Serbia ,

were supported by The Tokyo Ohk a Foundation for The Promotion of Science and Technology .

[1] T. Ochiai and A. Fujishima, Jo urnal of Photochemistry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews 

2012, 13 , 247. 

[2] T. Och iai, S. Tago, M. Hayashi, K. Hirota , T. Kondo, K. Satomura, A. Fujishi ma, Electrochem. 

Commun. 2016 , 68, 49. 

Fig. 2. Reflection spectra and p hotog raphs of cotton fabrics. (left ) Comparison of AOT and conventiona l

chemical bleaching. (right) Effects of rongalite -reduction for preventing of color -reversion by heating. 0     

> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> 250 350 450 550 650 750
> % Reflectance
> Wavelength / nm

AOT 

60 min 

45 

30 

15               

> before
> bleaching conventional
> bleaching AOT 60 min 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> 250 350 450 550 650 750
> % Reflectance
> Wavelength / nm 200 ℃1 min after 0.5 wt% Rongalite
> solution ( pH4, 100 ℃) for 1 h
> ①
> ②
> ③
> AOT ironing
> @200 ℃1 min
> after treatment
> by Rongalite
> ironing
> @200 ℃1 min

Fig . 1. Cotton bleaching by  O3-water treatment (lef t)

and  O3-water with UV irrad iation (AOT , right ). Spatiotemporal Confinement of Redox Reactivity at the Silicon –Electrolyte 

# Interface by a Light Stimulus 

Yan B. Vogel, Simone Ciampi 

School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin Institute of Functional Molecules and Interfaces, Curtin 

University, Bentley, Western Australia 6102, Australia. 

yanboris.vogel@curtin.edu.au 

Chemical reactivity is often discussed and studied in the context of mixing bulk reactants in a homogeneous 

media. Ho wever, specific applications require confining a chemical reaction, or a cascade of reactions, at a precise 

location and at a certain moment. For instance, localizing chemical reactivity is required to maintain life – a state 

of low entropy or high organiz ation – and all biological systems rely on chemical triggers that are accurately 

addressed and confined in space and time. Mimicking such natural processes by triggering or stopping chemical 

reactions in precisely selected areas have answered everlasting q uestions of molecular and cell biology. 1 The 

spatiotemporal control of chemical reactions is also a central feature to man -made systems; many current 

technologies, ranging from biomedicine to photolithography pivots around means of spatiotemporally control ling 

chemical reactivity. 2 However, triggering transient chemical changes at a specific microscopic site over a 

macroscopic substrate remains challenging. 

Focusing mainly on heterogeneous redox chemistry, we have shown that 

chemical reactions can be ad dressed with spatiotemporal control on a 

semiconductor surface without the need of physical probes or 

photochemical reactions. 3 For this, we take advantage of the property of 

semiconductors to generate charge carriers upon illumination. Driven by an 

electr ic field, the photogenerated charge carriers are transferred to redox 

species in the solution in contact with the semiconductor surface. A focused 

light stimulus is used to generate localized transient fluxes of charge 

carriers, hence triggering a chemical change in the species near the interface 

with spatiotemporal resolution. We developed an optical/electrochemical 

system to localize the light stimulus and hence the chemical reactivity. 4

We demonstrate the versatility of this “light addressable” principle first by 

assembling patterns of nanoparticles with adjustable morphology and interparticle spacing over space. 5

Nanoparticle arrays are formed in a single -step, within seconds, with a resolution of few microns, and without the 

need of physical masks or te mplates. Furthermore, shining light on a semiconductor to localize a redox reaction 

was used to interrogate its surface activity. 4 The photocurrent recorded is linked to the local surface activity, and 

was used to construct redox chemical microscopy images . Driving and reading redox reactions over space using 

light was also explored in the context of chemical analysis. Analytical models were developed to interpret the 

photocurrent – voltage data acquired in photoelectrochemical systems. 6-7

Our latest resea rch focuses on the spatiotemporal control of chemiluminescent reactions. U nlike fluorescence, 

spatiotemporal control of chemiluminescence is an unmet challenge . As a result, fluorescence remains the 

dominant microscopy technique. However, major drawbacks o f fluorescence are absent in chemiluminescence, 

potentially giving it a significant advantage over fluorescence in the field of microscopy. By means of a focused 

light stimulus delivered to the sample from the opposite side under analysis we provide a strategy for removing 

interference between excitation and emission lights, light -induced sample damages, photobleaching and 

autofluorescence, all commonly encountered in fluorescence microscopy. 

(1) Levskaya, A.; Weiner, O. D.; Lim, W. A.; Voigt, C. A. Nature 2009, 461 , 997 -1001. 

(2) Aubert, S.; Bezagu, M.; Spivey, A. C.; Arseniyadis, S. Nature Reviews Chemistry 2019, 3, 706 -722. 

(3) Vogel, Y. B.; Gooding, J. J.; Ciampi, S. Chemical Society Revi ews 2019, 48 , 3723 -3739. 

(4) Vogel, Y. B.; Gonçales, V. R.; Gooding, J. J.; Ciampi, S. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018, 165 , H3085 -H3092. 

(5) Vogel, Y. B.; Gonçales, V. R.; Al -Obaidi, L.; Gooding, J. J.; Darwish, N.; Ciampi, S. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 

28 , 18 04791. 

(6) Vogel, Y. B.; Zhang, L.; Darwish, N.; Gonçales, V. R.; Le Brun, A.; Gooding, J. J.; Molina, A.; Wallace, G. 

G.; Coote, M. L.; Gonzalez, J.; Ciampi, S. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 2066. 

(7) Vogel, Y. B.; Molina, A.; Gonzalez, J.; Ciampi, S. Analytical Chemistry 2019, 91 , 5929 -5937. Evidences of the Space Charge Layer Formation in Li -Conducting 

# Solid Electrolytes 

Leon Katzenmeier 1,2 , Simon Helmer 2, Aliaksandr Bandarenka 2

> 1

Bavarian Center for Applied Energy Research (ZAE Bayern), 

Magdalene -Schoch -Str. 3, 97074 W�rzburg, Germany 

> 2

ECS, Physics Department, Technical University Munich, 

James -Franck -Straße 1, 85748 Garching, Germany 

leon.katze nmeier@tum.de 

The traditional Lithium Ion battery (LiB) technology has approached its maximum in energy and power 

density in the last years . Se veral emerging new generation material systems and technologies such as All -

Solid -State Batteries (ASSB) have been proposed recently . The traditional liquid electrolytes of LiB are 

flammable, as they are based on organic solvents and do not provide mechani cal strength to inhibit the 

growth of Lithium metal dendrites, which is the most important reason why the holy grail of battery 

technology, namely lithium metal anodes, have not been implemented in commercial systems. Pure lithium 

metal anodes have the hig hest theoretical energy density (3860mAh/g) and the lowest negative 

electrochemical potential of 3.04V (versus standard hydrogen electrode ). 

While stand -alone solid electrolytes, such as LATP and LAGP are stable in air, even with humidity and 

against met allic lithium a series of challenges are posed by the interface towards electrode materials . While 

highly planar interfaces of polished LAGTP glasses suffer from void formation upon cycling 1 and chemical 

decomposition is observed for sulfide solid electro lytes 2, a more underlying phenomena the so -called space 

charge layers have been theoretically predicted but not observed to date. A thermodynamic model 3,

although neglecting direct coulomb interaction, suggest charge layers with a thickness of several hundred 

nanometers , while an electrochemical model 4 predicts a thickness of single nanometers. In this work, we 

present evidence of space charge layers in Ohara Glass 5 upon polarization in blocking conditions using 

Impedance Spectroscopy. A n elab orated equivalent circuit, including two different charge accumulation 

(pseudo) capacitances , is used to fit impedance spectra to obtain the capacitances, and thus dielectric 

properties and thicknesses can be calculated. The space charge layer thickness is approx. 60nm leading to 

a non -negligible interface resistance . 

> 1

Lewis, J. A., Tippens, J., Cortes, F. J. Q. & McDowell, M. T. Trends Chem. 1–14 (2019).  

> 2

Wenzel, S., et al . & Janek, J. Solid State Ionics 318, 102 –112 (2018).  

> 3

Braun, S., Yada, C. & Latz, A. J. Phys.  Chem. C 119, 22281 –22288 (2015).  

> 4

de Klerk, N. J. J. & Wagemaker, M. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. (2018).  

> 5

Ohara Glass Inc. https://www.oharacorp.com/lic -gc.html. (Accessed: 27 th February 20 20 )

Fig 1:  A)  Impedance spectr a for 

Au /LICGC 5/Au  cell under potential 

variation  B) Space charge 

capacitances in the order of several 

dozens of microfarad.  C) Double 

layer pseud o-capacitance  with  bias 

dependency.  Right) Physical and 

Electrical Modell for a Solid 

Electrolyte  showing the 

contributions of double (DL), 

accumulation (AL) and space charge 

layer (SCL) to the impedance 

equivalent circuit. Electro photo sensitive smart nanobiocomposit based on DNA super 

# coil /metal /aptamer spiral lattice for early detection of CTC 

Aboulfazl Mirzapoor 1

> 1

Department of Nanobiotechnology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, P.O. 

Box 141 15 -175, Tehran, Iran 

a.mirzapour@modares.ac.ir 

Early detection of breast cancer is so much important to treatment of patient. Nano device with multiple 

application and special molecular properties have crucial role in developing of nanotechnology and nano 

biosensors. In this study, a new effective and conducive DNA super coil/metal/aptamer nanostructure and 

nanodevices designed and fabricated. DNA based nano spiral lattice fabricated with DNA super coil 

hybridized with Ag nanoparticles. T his nano substrate i mmobilized with specific aptamer by non -cova lent 

and covalent interaction. These self -assembled hybrid nanostructure could be used in nanowire, 

nanocapacitor and nanobiosensor fabrication. Hybrid and self -assembled nanostructure fabricated by 

region select ive covalent combined between aptamer and DNA super coil/metal Nano structure . These 

hybrid nanostructures have different electrochemical properties compare of alone DNA super coil/metal 

and DNA super coil/metal/aptamer and also hierarchical DNA super coil /metal/aptamer /CTC. 

Electrochemical behavior of hierarchical hybrid DNA/ nanostructures are studied by cyclic voltammetry 

and impedance spectroscopy technique. DNA super coil/metal/aptamer wire shaped nanostructure utilized 

for bio sensing of breast cancer CTC . Results showed DNA super coil/metal/aptamer hierarchical and 

self -assembled nanostructure is good candidate for biosensor fabrication. Exactly, DNA super 

coil/metal/aptamer wire shaped nanostructure used for BC CTC molecular biosensor. 

Keywords: DNA based nanodevices, CTC biosensor, and DNA super coil/metal/aptamer .Assessment of Electrochemical Reactors for the Removal of Sulphur 

# Dioxide and Production of Sulphur from Synthetic E ffluents 

A. N. Colli , C. C. Contigiani, J. P. Fornés, O. González Pérez, J. M. Bisang 

Universidad Nacional del Litoral, CONICET 

Programa de Electroquímica Aplicada e Ingeniería Electroquímica (PRELINE) 

Facultad de Ingeniería Química, Santiago del Estero 2829, S3000AOM Santa Fe, Argentina 

e-mail address : ancolli@gmail.com 

The combustion of fossil fuels for energy production and also several m anufacturing processes 

produce sulphur dioxide as a gaseous effluent, which represents a deleterious agent for the environment 

requiring its treatment. Electrochemistry represents an interesting alternative for the abatement of the 

contaminant, 1 being desirable its transformation into useful species with commercial value. This concept 

can be achieved by electrochemical reduction of sulphur dioxide to colloidal sulphur, which is required 

for the fertilizer production and also in cosmetics, photographic, soap and dye industries. Additionally, 

the reduction of sulphur dioxide can also gen erate secondary compounds such as the polythionates, which 

present also practical applications. 

The main issue for the electrochemical sulphur production is the passivation of the cathode due 

to its surface is covered with an insulating layer of sulphur which restricts the flow of current. Accounting 

that the reduction of sulphur dioxide in an acidic solution is mass -transfer controlled working under 

limiting current conditions in a narrow range of potentials ,2 it is inferred that the electrochemical reactor 

must have two -dimensional electrodes with good mass -transfer conditions. The reactors considered here 

are: r otating cylinder electrode, RCE, rotating cylinder electrode with ultrasound assistance, RCEUA, 

parallel -plate electrochemical reactor with a double convergent flow, PPER, modified hydrocyclone, 

MHC, and electrochemical reactor with decaying swirling flow, SF. The figure on the left -hand side 

compares parameters that characteris e the 

performance of these reactors for the production 

of colloidal sulphur given by the mean values of: 

current efficiency, β, space time yield, ρ, cell 

potential difference, U, and specific energy 

consumption, Es. One of the most relevant figures 

of merit is the space time yield showing the best 

value for the PPER. However, this reactor presents 

as a relevant problem the remov al of the insulating 

layer of sulph ur from the cathode surface. The 

rotating cylinder electrode shows a lower value of 

space time yield and the passivation can be 

avoided with application of ultrasound, improving 

the reactor performance. Reactors based on the 

modified hydrocyclone or swirling flow concepts 

present similar values of space time yield and 

specific energy consumption without cathode 

passivation in both cases due to the impingement 

effect of the helical flow. In the reactor SF it was 

used a large interelectrode gap, 24.15 mm, which 

contrasts with that for the MHC, 7.25 mm. In the 

design of the reactor with swirling flow, it has been privileged at the inlet an expansion swirl flow in 

order to improve the mass -transfer conditions. Ho wever, in counterpart the large interelectrode gap 

increases the reactor volume decreasing the space time yield and at the same time enlarges both the ohmic 

drop in the electrolyte and the cell potential difference, U, increasing the specific energy consum ption. 

Thus, for the SF case the interelectrode gap can be further optimised for industrial applications. Then, i t is 

concluded that the equipment with swirling flow represents the best option. 

1. Ü. Bakir Öğütveren, in "Encyclopedia o f Applied Electrochemistry" (G. Kreysa, K. -i. Ota and R . F. 

Savinell, Editors.), p. 543 . Springer, New York, 2014. 

2. J. P. Fornés, G. A. González, and J. M. Bisang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. , 91 , 219 (2016). 0510 20 30 40 50 60 cH2SO4 = 0.1 M           

> ESCE =-0.5 V
> cSO2 = 1 g/dm 3
> SF MHC RCEUA PPER
> b(%),
> r(kg/m 3/h), U(V), Es(kWh/kg)
> Figure of merit

## Reactor type           

> RCE
> Working cond itions: single phase flow, 5 g/dm 3SO 2in
> 0.5 mol/dm 3H2SO 4.ESCE =-0.7 V. T= 30ºC. Unless
> otherwise is stated in the figure.

# Novel cell design for operando pressure measurements 

# of Li -ion battery materials 

Niamh Ryall,  J. Padmanabhan Vivek, Ben Rowden, Liam Lu and Nuria Garcia -Araez 

University of Southampton 

Highfield Campus, SO17 1BJ, Southampton, United Kingdom 

n.garcia -ar aez@soton.ac.uk 

Operando pressure monitoring of Li -ion batteries has been identified as one of the most important 

predictors of the cycle life of the batter y [1,2 ]. This is because the formation of very small amounts of 

gases during the operation of Li -io n batteries , or irreversible changes in electrode volume , can have very 

detrimental effects in the battery performance. Unfortunately, highly sensitive monitoring of pressure 

changes in Li -ion batteries is only available for commercial or pouch cell config urations, which are not 

available in many research laboratories and require large amounts of materials to produce large electrode 

sheets for their fabrication. 

Here, we present a novel cell design (Figure 1) that is cheap and readily available to any lab oratory, and 

requires very small amount s of materials to fabricate the electrodes. The cell is simple and uses standard 

Swagelok parts that are commercially available, thus providing an advantage with respect to previous 

approaches [3,4]. The cell also pro vides unprecedented sensitivity for operando pressure measurements, 

which is achieved by minimizing the gas headspace volume. W e illustrate the application of this novel 

cell design for the operando pressure measurements of LiFePO 4 and graphite in Li half -cell 

confi gurations, and we show that the results reveal the reversible changes in electrode volume associated 

to Li -ion insertion/extraction processes, as well as the amount of gases evolved during the formation of an 

SEI on graphite . Due to its simplicit y and high sensitivity, w e believe that this new cell design is ideally 

suited for screening novel materials/formulations for Li -ion battery applications. 

Figure 1. Sketch of novel and simple cell 

design for operando pressure measurements of 

Li -ion battery materials. By minimizing the 

connections between the cell and the pressure 

sensor, the gas headspace volume is kept at a 

minimum (1.9 ml in a one -inch diameter 

Swagelok cell). 

References: 

1. A. J.  Louli, L.D. Ellis, J. R. Dahn. Joule 3, 745 –761 (2019). 

2. K. Hancock, J. Becherer, M. Hagen, M. Joos, M. Abert, D. Müller, P. Fanz, S. Straach, J. Tübke . J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 165 , A6091 –A6106 (2018). 

3.  A. Schiele, T . Hatsukade, B . B. Berkes, P . Hartmann, T . Brezesinski, J. Janek . Anal. Chem. 89 , 8122 –

8128 (2017) .

4. F. Lepoivre, F A. Grimaud, D. Larcher, J.M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc. 163 , A923 –A929 (2016).            

> Nut
> Current collector
> Nylon ferrules
> Internal surface
> Insulating film Electrode
> Separators
> 1/8 th inch and
> parallel gauge
> conn ections
> Pressure sensor Fig. 2 Cell voltage (solid li nes ), and current
> efficien cy (dashed lines) as a function of
> current density for x=0 ( 〇,●), and x=10 (◇)
> and x=3 (◆)shape cathode with each anode.

# Dot -shap ed cathode catalyst layer for improvement of mass transfer in 

# toluene direct electro -hydrogenation 

Yuya Sugita ,1 Kensaku Nagasawa ,2 Yoshiyuki Kuroda, 1 and Shigenori Mitsushima 1,2 

> 1

Graduate School of Engineering Science , Yokoh ama Nati onal Universit y, 79 -5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya -

ku, Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

> 2

Institute of Advanced Sciences, Yokohama National University, 79 -5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya -ku, 

Yokohama 240 -8501, Japan 

cel@ml.ynu.ac.jp 

Introduction 

Recently, the large -scale st orage a nd transportati on of h ydrogen as secondary energy has been required 

for effective utilization of fluctuated and uneven distributed renewable energy . Toluene (TL)/ 

methylcyclohexane (MCH) organic hydride system is one of the candidates of hydrogen en ergy ca rrier .

To impro ve the energy conversion efficiency for TL hydrogenation , we have studied direct hydrogenation 

of TL with water decomposition electrolyzer using proton exchange membrane. 1 To reduce th e cell 

voltage and inc rease the current efficiency, we applied fine mesh an ode based on ca 1.2 mm of s trand 

width expanded metal . Th e ultrafine mesh anode based on sintered titanium fiber porous plate drastically 

reduced cell voltage . How ever, it decreased Faraday efficiency at the same tine . Uniform MCH layer ,

which was prod uced in the cathode catalyst layer with uniform structure of the anode , might bloc k TL 

mass trans fer into the catalyst layer.  In this study, to improve  TL mass trans fer into the catalyst layer , the 

catalyst layer stacked for the dot shape and the unifo rm su rfa ce coating had been investigat ed .

Experimental 

Figure 1 shows the structure of catalyst layer. The dot shape catalys t

layer was formed on a proton exchange membrane (Nafion®117, 

DuPont) , and uniform surface catalyst layer was formed on carbon 

pa pe r (35B C, SGL carbon ltd.) usi ng PtRu/C (TEC61E54, Tanaka 

Kikinzoku Kogyo) . Catalyst metal loading was 0 .75 mg cm -2 for the 

layered po si tion . Thicknes s ratio of dot and uniform layers was 

indicated as x: (10 -x). The anode was ultrafine mesh DS E® (De No ra 

Perme lec , Ltd.) . As a comparison, conventional fine mesh type DS E®

was used.  The a node and cathode compartments were circulated 1 mol 

dm -3 H2SO 4 and 10 % TL /MCH , respectively . The electrochemical 

measurements were conducted for the linear sweep vol tammetry , the 

ele ctrochemical impedance spectroscopy , t he chronoamperomet ry to 

determine current efficiency at  60 oC.

Results and discussion 

Fig ure 2 shows  the cell voltag e and current ef ficiency as a function 

of current density for various cathode struct ure . The low cell voltage s

with the ul trafine mesh anode are almost the same with var ious 

cathode catalyst layer str ucture compare d with the cell voltage us ing 

the fi ne mesh an ode . At this moment , t he c urrent eff iciency improved 

with the dot layer str ucture , and 3:7 sho wed the highest in these 

str uctures . Cathode potential of 3: 7 at a constant current efficiency 

was the low est  in these str uctures . From these results, the selectivity 

of hydrogenation should not be controlled by kinetics of charge 

transfer of the catalyst, bu t strongly affected by mass transfer process 

of TL in the catalyst layer.  In this study , the opti mized shape catalyst 

layer wa s 3:7. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Toyota Mobility Foundation , Core 

Research for Evolutional Science an d Te chn ology (CREST) 

“innovative reaction” (Funding agency: JST ) and ENEOS 

Corporation . Anode was supplied by De Nora Per melec Ltd. We appreciate the person concerned them. 

References 

1. K. Nagasawa, K. Tanimoto, J. Koi ke, K. Ikegami, S. Mitsushima, J. Power Sour ces , 439, 227070 ,

(2019 )  

> Fig. 1 The stru cture of cathode catalyst layer .

# Bifunctional H-Bonding Cross -Linked Polymeric Binders for Silicon 

# Anodes of Lithium -ion Batter ies 

Wen -Feng Ren 1, Jun -Tao Li 2, Yao Zhou 2, Li ng Huang 1, Shi -Gang Sun *1, 2  

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Coll ege of Chemistry an d Chemical 

Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China  

> 2

College of Energy, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 

E-mail: sgsun@xmu.edu.cn, web site: http://www.sungroup.ac/ 

Bin ders play a crucial role in the cohesion of active materials and con ductive additives together onto 

the current collector .[1] The traditional PVDF binder with weak Van der Waals force could not maint ain 

the electrod e integrity of Si -based anodes. Therefore , strongly a dhesive polymeric binders are required for 

enduring the severe mechanical stress derived from the large volume change. Basically, the optimal 

binder for Si -based anodes should have exc ellent bulk property, such as high chemical and 

electroche mical stabi lity, suitable adhesiveness, strong ion/electron conductivi ty, functional group for 

self -healing, cost -effectiveness, and environmental friendliness .[1,2 ] Recent reports mainl y focus on the 

bulk properties of binders to improve the mech anical character s and ele ctrical conductivity of Si -based 

anodes . Nevertheless , the adhesion ability and functional mechanism of binders with Si active materials 

as well as with current collector are also important to maintain the electrode inte grity and avoid the 

electric contact loss, whereas this problem is rarely inv estigated .

In the pres ent study, we designed the H-bonding cross -linked polymeric bind ers (CMC -co -SN) ,

through a consider ation of the binders that should have excellent bonding interaction with Si active 

materials and copper (Cu ) current collector while the preparation route is simple and low -cost . The 

preparation of the CMC -co -SN binders was carried out by in -situ thermopolymerization of chain -typed 

carboxymethylcellulose sodium (CMC) with sulfur -containing polymer (SN) during the drying processes 

of Si-based electrode disks. Th e obtained CMC -co -SN binders posse ss the bifunctional role (Fig . 1a ) with 

Cu current colle ctor and Si active materials through covalent bonding ( -S-Cu -) and multi -hydrogen -

bonding ( -OH, -C=O, =S) forces, respectively. When serv ed as binders to mi cro (1 -5 μm) (M -Si) a nd 

nano (~50 nm) (N -Si) Si particles (Fig. 1b ), the Si anodes exhibited high initial coulomb effici ency ,

91.5% for M -Si and 83.3% for N -Si , and good cycle life , 1121 mAh g -1 for M -Si after 1 40 cycles and 

10 83 mAh g -1 for N -Si afte r 300 cycles , re spectively . CMC -co -SN binders c oul d be expanded to SiO and 

Si/C electrode materials , which also exhibite d good electro chemical perfo rmance . The results 

demonstrated that the H-bonding cross -linked polymeric binders provide a novel strategy to improve th e

electrochemical performan ce of Si -based anodes through the bonding force of binders with active 

materials and current collecto r t o maintain the electr ode integrity and avoid t he electric contact loss. 

Fig. 1 (a) Schematic visualization of H-bonding cross -linked polymeric binders for Si anode s during 

cycling and the d ifunctional bonding effects with Si a ctiv e materials and Cu cu rre nt colle ctor , (b) the 

corresponding cyc ling property and coulombic efficiency of M-Si an d N-Si anodes .

Acknowledgement: The study was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation 

(2018M632575) , National Natural Scienc e Foundation of China (218751 97 , 21621091 ), and National 

Key R esearch and Dev elopment of China (2016YFB0100202) 

References :

1. WF Ren , Y Zhou , J T Li , L Huang and SG Sun . Current Opinion in Electrochemistry , 2019, 18: 46 -54 .

2. J Liu, Q Zhang, T Zhang, J T Li, L Huang, S G Sun, Advanced Functional Materials , 2015 , 25 : 3599 -

3605 .Oxygen Reduction Reaction on Te -modified Pt(111) Electrodes: 

# Enhanced Electrocatalysis and Surface Charge Effects 

Valentín Briega -Martos ,1 Ana M . Gómez -Marín, 2 Juan M. Feliu 1

> 1

Instituto de Electroquímica, U niversidad de Alicante, Apdo. 99, E-03080, Alicante, Spain 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Division of Fundamental Sciences (IEF), Technological Institute of 

Aeronautics (ITA), São José dos Campos CEP: 12228 -900, SP, Brazil 

valentin.briega@ua.es 

Chemical modification of electrode surfaces can strongly influence their electrocatalytic activity and the 

charge -transfer processes at electrified interfaces, and therefore it is one of the most common methods for 

the design of new electrocatalysts for different applications. In relation t o the oxygen reduction reaction 

(ORR ), an approach based on molecular patterning of platinum surfaces with cyanide adsorbates that can 

efficiently block the sites for adsorption of spectator anions with the ORR remaining unhindered was used 

for the rationa l design of cathode electrocatalysts with potential use in any environments containing 

strongly adsorbing anions [1]. In this work, it has been observed for the first time a similar enhancing effect 

towards the ORR by Pt(111) surfaces modified with different coverages of Te adatoms. In addit ion, the 

surface charge modification by the Te adlayer and its effect on the ORR electrocatalytic behavior can 

provide useful information about the mechanism of this reaction. 

The ORR on Te -modified Pt(111) electrodes has been studied in HClO 4, H 2SO 4 and H 3PO 4 acidic solutions 

by using hanging meniscus rotating disc electrode configuration. Te was irreversibly adsorbed on Pt(111) 

[2]. While adsorption of Te -adatoms on Pt(111) progressively shifts towards less positive values the ORR 

reaction onset for 0 < θTe < 0.25 in 0.1 M HClO 4 solution (Fig. 1A) , in 0.05 M H 3PO 4 and 0.05 M H 2SO 4

solutions a positive catalytic effect has been pointed out (Fig. 1B) , interpreted in terms of a competitive 

adsorption -desorption mechanism involving replacement of adsorbed sulfate or phosphate species by Te 

adatoms. In addition, a displacement towards m ore positive values of the inhibition potential of the ORR is 

observed when increasing Te coverage (Fig. 1A) , which is related to the modification of the surface charge 

and suggest s that H 2O2 intermediate is participating in the mechanism [3]. Measurements at higher pH 

values supply more information about the O RR bifurcation mechanism. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1  

> 0
> j/mA cm -2
> Evs. RHE/V
> Te
> Pt(111)/Te 0.1 M HClO 4

A) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1                    

> 0
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
> 0
> Evs. RHE / V
> j / mA cm -2
> Evs. RHE / V
> 0.05 M H 3PO 4
> 0.05 M H 2SO 4
> j / mA cm -2
> Evs. RHE / V
> Evs. RHE / V
> Pt(111) Pt(111)/Te

B)

Figure 1: (A) Cyclic voltammetry profiles for the ORR in 0.05 M H 3PO 4 (top) and 0.05 M H 2SO 4 (bottom) 

on unmodified and Te -modified Pt(111) surface. (B) Cyclic voltammetry profiles for the ORR in 0.1 M 

HClO 4 on Pt(111) with increasing coverages of Te. Scan rate: 50 mV s -1. Rotation rate: 2500 rpm. 

References 

[1] D. Strmcnik, M . Escudero -Escribano, K. Kodama, V.R. Stamenkovic, A. Cuesta, N.M. Marković, 

Enhanced electrocatalysis of the oxygen reduction reaction based on patterning of platinum surfaces with 

cyanide, Nat. Chem., 2 (2010) 880 -885. 

[2] J.M. Feliu, M.J. Llorca, R. Góm ez, A. Aldaz, Electrochemical -behavior of irreversibly adsorbed 

tellurium dosed from solution on Pt(h, k, l) single -crystal electrodes in sulfuric and perchloric -acid media, 

Surf. Sci., 297 (1993) 209 -222. 

[3] V. Briega -Martos, E. Herrero, J.M. Feliu, The inhibition of hydrogen peroxide reduction at low 

potentials on Pt(111): Hydrogen adsorption or interfacial charge?, Electrochem. Commun., 85 (2017) 32 -

35. Electrochemical Activation of Expanded Mesocarbon Microbeads 

# Using Polyurethane -Crosslinked Polyacrylic Acid as a Binder for 

# High -Voltage Symmetric Supercapacitors 

Chi -Chang Hu *, Tien -Yu Yi, Jeng -An Wang, Chen -Chi M. Ma 

Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University 

101, Sec. 2, Kuang -Fu Rd., Hsin -Chu city, 30013, Taiwan 

*e-mail address : cchu@che.nthu.edu.tw 

The expanded mesocarbon microbead (EMCMB ) is successfully made from MCMB through a 

combination of oxidation and thermos -expansion treatments, which shows excellent capacitive 

performance in the TEABF 4/PC solution after the electrochemical activation in the positive and negative 

potential regions. The purpose of the acidic oxidation process is to generate various oxygen -containing 

fun ctional groups attached onto carbon atoms in the graphene layers. These groups were able to be 

removed in the gaseous form (i.e., CO and CO 2) during the thermal expansion process, which were 

expected to conquer the van der Waals force between graphene laye rs. Consequently, this effect leads to 

expanded/exfoliated graphene layers . MCMB, an artificial graphite, shows a very strong peak of facet 

(002), which refers to a d002 interlayer spacing of 0.335 nm, same as the typical interlayer spacing of 

graphite. By the Scherer’s equation, the Lc and La values of MCMB are calculated to be 74.73 and 65.01 

nm, respectively. After the oxidation and thermal expansion processes, the crystallinity of the expanded 

MCMB (EMCMB) decreases dramatically. The d spacing between g raphene layer within EMCMB is 

distributed from 0.335 to 0.37 nm. In addition, the La value of EMCMB was estimated to be 8.77 nm, 

indicating that the crystal size of graphite has been cut down after the oxidation -expansion treatments. 

To increase the energ y of supercapacitors (SCs), the EMCMB is chosen to be electrochemically 

activated in 1 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate in propylene carbonate (TEABF 4/PC). The 

electrochemically activated EMCMB is able to be charged and discharged reversibly in a wid e potential 

range between -2.6 and 1.4 V (vs. Ag/AgNO 3). Consequently, a 4 V and symmetric SC with good 

capacitive performances in 1 M TEABF 4/PC is constructed by such electrochemically activated 

EMCMBs, greatly enhancing the energy density to 77 Wh kg -1 on the basis of the total mass of EMCMB 

on both electrodes. 

The electrochemical activation is a common technique enhancing the capacitive performances of 

carbons in high -voltage supercapacitors while volume expansion during the activation process often 

ma kes the active materials detachment, dropping the capacitance. In this work, the KOH -neutralized 

polyurethane -crosslinked -polyacrylic acid (PUPAH 10 -xKx) polymers are proposed to replace the 

polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as a binder for expanded mesocarbon microbead (EMCMB) electrodes to 

buffer the volume expansion. The effects of binder rheology, morphology and neutralization degree on 

the capacitive performance of EMCMB are investigated. Introducing PUPAH 6K4 with moderate 

viscoelasticity to EMCMB forms an expansion -buffering electrode and promotes the electrochemical 

activation process. In addition to a shorter activation time, EMCMB -PUPAH 6K4 presents a maximal 

specific capacitance than others. The above results indicate that the specific capacitance of ac tivated 

EMCMB electrodes is not directly proportional to the electrochemical activation time. Therefore, PUPAH 

neutralized with KOH changes the binder properties, affecting the charge storage characteristics of the 

resultant EMCMB coatings [1] .

Reference: 

1. T.-Y. Yi, Z .-F. He, J .-A. Wang, C .-C.M. Ma, C .-C. Hu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 166 (2019 ) A1668 -

A1670. Understanding pH and charge effects in the HER/HOR on platinum 

# single crystal ele ct rodes. 

Enrique Herrero 1, Valentín Briega -Martos 1, Adolfo Ferre -Vilaplana 2, Juan. M . Feliu 1.

> 1

Inst ituto de Electroquímica, Universidad de Alicante. Apdo. 99, E -03080 Alican te , Spain. 

> 2

Instituto Tecnológico de Informát ica, E -46022 Valencia, Spain, and Departamento de Sistemas 

Informáticos y Computación, EPS de Alcoy, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia.  E-03801 Alcoy, Spain 

*e -mail address:  herrero@ua.es 

An adequate description of an electrochemical process requires to understand how the different 

parameters that are governing the reactivity of the electrodes affect a given electrochemical reaction. For 

this reason, numerous studies are d ev oted to investigating the effects on the electrochemical reacti vity of 

the surface structure and composition of the electrode as well as the nature of the solution. However, 

other parameters such us surface charge, which also can play a significant role, are often overlooked. In 

this commu nication , the eff ect of surface charge and the solution pH on the hydrogen evolution and 

oxidation reactions (HER/HOR) on platinum will be investigated . Platinum is probably the most active 

pure metal for the se reactions . T his is espe cially true in acidic solutions. However , the activ ity of the 

HOR on platinum decreases two orders of magnitude in alkaline media. In order to understand thes e

differences, the HER and the HOR were studied under near neutral pH conditions in the absence of anion 

specific adsorption . The selected buffered solutions allow establish ing reliable trend s in the activity from 

acidic to alkaline solutions from which conclusion s can be obta ined. Sing le crystal electrodes , namely, 

Pt(111), Pt(100) and P t(110) , have b een used in the electrochemical measurements and DFT calculations .

For the HER , it was found that the effect of pH is almost negligible in the studied pH range (figure 1, left 

panel s). These resu lts indicate that the ionic composition and pH of the solution has not a significant 

effect on the HER . Thus, the concentration of protons , which is the reactant for the HER, does not limit 

this reaction under near neutral pH conditions. By contrast, the HOR was found to be pH sensitive mainly 

on Pt(11 1) and Pt(100) (figure 1, right pan els) . The major difference in the experimental conditio ns at 

which these reaction s take place are the electrode charge . As the sol ution pH increases, the potential 

region at which the HER/HOR reactions takes places shift to more negative poten tials in the SHE. Thu s, 

the electrode char ge becom es increasingly more negati ve. With the aid of density functional theory 

calculations, the effect of the increasing negative surface charge on b oth reactions is untangled. -0.2 -0.1 0.0 -0.2 -0.1 0.0                         

> -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0
> -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 -0.2 -0.1 0.0
> Pt(110)
> j |j lim |-1
> j |j lim |-1
> Pt(100)
> j |j lim |-1
> j |j lim |-1
> Evs. RHE / V
> j |j lim |-1
> Evs. RHE / V
> j |j lim |-1
> pH = 3.0 pH = 4.0 pH = 5.4
> Pt(111) 012345012345
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 012345012345
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 012345012345
> Pt(100)
> j / mA cm -2
> j / mA cm -2
> Pt(111)
> pH = 3.0 pH = 4.0 pH = 5.4
> j / mA cm -2
> Evs. RHE / V
> j / mA cm -2
> Pt(110)
> j / mA cm -2
> j / mA cm -2
> Evs. RHE / V

Figure 1. Effect of the solution pH in the activity of the HER (left pane ls) and HOR (right p anels) for the 

different single crystal electrode s.Surface charge and interfacial acid -base properties. 

Juan M. Feliu , Ricardo Martinez -Hincapie, Victor Climent, Antonio Rodes 

Institute of Electrochemistry, University of Alicante 

Apartado 99, E -03080 Alicante. Spain 

juan.feliu@ua.es 

It is well documente d that Pt(111) electrodes in contact with 0.1 M perchloric acid solutions saturated 

with CO 2 show spectroelectrochemical signals associated to adsorbed bicarbonate and carbonate anions 

1]. The relative intensities of the absorption peaks at different pH an d applied potential can be used to 

determine the interfacial pK 2 of carbonic acid, which results considerably smaller than in solution phase ,

irrespectively of the assumptions made in the analysis of data [1, 2] . The study on the Pt(111) electrode 

benefits from the fact that CO 2 is not reduce d to adsorbed CO on this surface , thus enabl ing to determine 

the necessary coefficients related to the adsorbed carbonate and bicarbonate species through a simple 

interfacial mass balance which involve s the consumption of dissolved CO 2.

On other Pt(hkl) structures, the reduction of CO 2 to CO will disturb this mass balance and complicate the 

band analysis and the subsequent calculation of the corresponding surface pKs. However, it is still 

possible to gain this informat ion under appropriate experimental conditions, i.e. adjusting the lower 

potential limit to avoid the reduction to CO by adsorbed hydrogen . In addition, assuming that the 

absorption coefficients are those determined for Pt(111), the corresponding surface pK s can be estimated .

In this study the stepped surfaces vicinal to the Pt(111) pole have been examined . As shown in the figure 

below, for the Pt(110) limiting case, the surface pK 2 is lower tha n that of Pt(111) , at the corresponding 

potentials of zero free charge. This means that the more open surface behaves as being more alkaline than 

the closest packed one and thus adsorbed bicarbonate dissociates more easily to adsorbed carbonate. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 -100 -50 050 100 150                          

> Blank up to 0.70 V Blank up to 1.20 V Pt(110) sat CO 2
> Pt(110) Low potential region Pt(110) sat CO 2up to 1.20 V
> j/Acm -2
> E/V vs RHE
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -100 -50 050 100
> j/Acm -2
> E/ V vs RHE 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200
> wavenumber/cm -1
> 450
> 500
> 550
> 600
> 650
> 750
> 800
> 850
> Pt(110) pH 1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 246810 12
> pH@Log( CO3 /HCO3 )=0
> E/V vs SHE
> Value Standard Error
> Intercept 4.2168 0.64983
> Slope -4.44545 1.22803

Figure . From left to right: voltammetry of Pt(110) in 0.1 M perchloric acid saturated with CO 2; spectra 

form this solution taken at different potentials: the bicarbonate band is observed (≈1400 cm -1) and the 

carbonate band appears later (≈1500 cm -1); plot of the surface pK 2 values at different potentials. 

References 

[1] R. Martinez -Hincapie, A. Berna, A . Rodes, V. Climent, J.M. Feliu, Surface acid -base properties of 

anion -adsorbed species at Pt(111) electrode surfaces in contact with CO2 -contain ing perchloric acid 

solutions.  J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (2016) 16191 -16199. 

[2] H. Mantelli, R. Martinez -Hincapie, J.M. Feliu, D. Scherson, Potential -induced acid -base chemistry of 

adsorbed species. Electrochim Acta 324 (2019) 134793. Electrodeposition of Zn -Mn/Al 2O3 Composite C oatings 

Marija Riđošić 1,2 , Milorad Tomić 2, Miomir G. Pavlović 2, Mihael Bučko 3, Jelena B. Bajat 1

> 1

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, P.O.Box 3503, 11120 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

University of East Sarajevo, Faculty of Technology ,75400 Zvornik, Republic of Srpska, Bosnia and 

Herzegovina 

> 3

University of Defense, Military Academy, 33 Pavla Juriši �a Šturma St, 11000 Belgrade, Serbi a

mridjosic@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

Zinc and zinc alloy coatings containin g micro - and nano -Al 2O3 particles offer a wide range of potential 

applications in various fields, due to promising economic benefits and their excellent properties such as 

wear and corrosion resistance [1]. Despite several reports that deal with plating of Zn -Ni composites 

containing Al 2O3 particles, the electrodeposition of Zn -Mn -Al 2O3 composite has not been reported yet. 

This type of coating could offer excellent corrosion protection, because the Zn -Mn alloy has been known 

to show the highest corrosion re sistance among all Zn alloys, in chloride rich environment [2]. 

In this study, co -deposition of Zn, Mn, and Al 2O3 particles via electrodeposition method was studied. 

Composite coatings were produced on steel substrate, using different deposition parameter s such as 

current density and metal ion content of the bath solution. The electrodeposition bath was the simple 

chloride electrolyte commonly used for Zn -Mn electrodeposition, consisting of KCl, H 3BO 3, ZnCl 2 and 

MnCl 2, with added Al 2O3 powder. Microstructu ral properties of the coatings were characterized by 

scanning electron microscopy, while the chemical composition was measured with electron dispersive 

spectroscopy. The corrosion behavior of the coatings in 3.5 mass.% NaCl aqueous solution was evaluated 

by using Tafel extrapolating method (determination of corrosion potential and corrosion current density )

and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 

It was found that co -deposition of alumina particles with Zn and Mn metal s was successfully achieved via 

electrodeposition method , without aggl omeration of ceramic particles . The electrodeposition conditions 

that enable the formation of non -porous coatings, where Al 2O3 particles are distributed homogenously, 

were determined. The analysis of the chemical compos ition showed that the Mn content was low, i.e. up 

to 1.0 wt .%, while the Al content ranged between 0.1 0 and 7. 0 wt .%. The increase in deposition current 

density from 10 to 40 mA cm -2, results in decrease in alumina content of the coatings. 

The measured co rrosion current densities of Zn -Mn/Al 2O3 coatings vary between 4.5 and 13.5 μA cm -2,

which is the typical corrosion rate of Zn alloy coatings in chloride environment. No correlation between 

Al 2O3 content and the corrosion performance of the coatings was fo und. Therefore it is concluded that the 

alumina particles may be incorporated in Zn -Mn alloy coating, in order to enhance its mechanical 

properties, and without deteriorating its corrosion behaviour. 

References: 

1. S. A. Ataie, A . Zakeri , RSM optimization of pulse electrodeposition of Zn -Ni -Al 2O3 nanocomposites 

under ultrasound irradiation , Surf. Coat. Technol . 359 (2019) 206 –215 

2. M. Bu čko , V. Miš kovi ć-Stankovi ć, J. Rogan, J.B. Bajat , The protective properties of epoxy coating 

electrode posited on Zn –Mn alloy substrate, Prog. Org . Coat . 79 (2015) 8 –16 Electrochemical and mechanical study of electrodes used in solid -state 

# lithium batteries: a combined experimental -modeling approach 

Marta Cazorla Soult 1, Xinhua Zhu 1, Philippe Vereecken 2, Annick Hubin 1

> 1

Surface and Electrochemistry Research G roup (SURF),  Department of Materials and Chemist ry, Vrije 

Universiteit Brussel . Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Ixelles, Brussels, Belgium 

> 2

IMEC, Kapeldreef 75, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 

Marta.Cazorla.Soult@vub.be 

Lithium -ion batteries have become a key technology in our everyday lives, an d great interest has grown 

during the past decade towards new materials and new configurations of the cells. Solid state lithium 

batteries (SSB) allow having higher energy density without compromising power and capacity, while 

assuring high safety at var ia ble temperatures and good cycle stability. However, during the charge and 

discharge of these batteries, there are significant volume changes in the electrodes that produce stress and 

strain effects on the solid materials. These effects can make layers se pa rate and cracks to form in the 

battery materials, which reduces the potentially improved performance of these batteries. Furthermore, 

these mechanical depredating effects are more several in cobalt -free materials (Ni -Mn -based oxide 

electrodes ), which are an ethical alternative for mater ials in battery systems but present structural 

weakness that are subject of study. 

Our main goal is to investigate structural stability of cobalt -free battery ele ctrodes (LMO, LMNO) and to 

develop a tool that allows to dete rmine under which operation conditions a solid -state battery can operate 

without suffering relevant mechanical stress . The approach used combines In -situ Spectroscopic 

Ellipsom etry, AF M techniques and Finite Element Modelling. First r esults show evident de gradation of 

the electrodes and thickness changes at different states of lithiation. 

References 

[1] Yu, C., Ganapathy, S., Eck, E.R.H.V., Wang, H., Basak, S., Li, Z., and Wagemaker, M. (2017). 

Accessing the b ottleneck in all -solid state batteries, lithiu m-ion transport over the solid -electrolyte -

electrode interface.  Nature Communications 8(1), 1086. 

[2] Zargouni, Y., Deheryan, S., Radisic, A., Cott, D. J., Rochan, S., Alouani, K., ...  Vereecken, P. M. 

(2014). Electrodeposition and Characterization of Man ganese Dioxide Thin Films on Silicon Pillar Arrays 

for 3D Thin -Film Lithium -Ion Batteries. ECS Transactions, 61(9), 29 –41. 

[3] Zhu, X., Fern �ndez Mac �a, L., Jaguemont, J., de Hoog, J., Nikolian, A., Omar, N. , & Hubin, A. 

(2018).  Electrochemical impedance study of commercial LiNi0.80Co0.15Al0.05O2 electrodes as a 

function of state of charge and aging. Electrochimica Acta, 287 , 10 -20. Electrodeless Photo -assisted Etching of Gallium Nitride with 

# Potassium Peroxomonosulfate Oxidants 

Kang Shi, * Sai Guo , Hui -Qing Hu 

Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, 

Siming South road 422, 361005, X iamen, P.R China 

kshi@xmu.edu.cn 

While GaN has been widely used in field s of electronics and optoelectronic s, its super stabil e

characteristic makes conventional chemical wet -etching methods inefficient . The p hotoelectrochemical 

etching is the only effici ent approach because the photogenerated holes can activate GaN . For fabricating 

the GaN -based devices, t he current mass manufacturing technology is the electrodeless photo -assisted 

etching that uses Ti/ Pt nanofilm as electrochemical cathode and photo -mask to prepare the GaN pattern .

However, this technology is still unable to prepare the flat and smooth GaN surface s so far [1] . To 

improve this technology, we employed KSO 5 as oxidants . The electrochemical and photochemical 

responses of KSO 5 on Pt, Ru , and gl assy carbon electrode were systematically investigated. Experimental 

results indicate that KSO 5 has a higher oxidation potential than K 2S2O8. The latter is the most frequently 

used oxidant in the currently electrodeless photo -assisted etching technology [2 ]. The use of KSO 5

enables the photoelectrochemical etching of GaN at a high potential . Thus, the roughening effect of 

electron -hole recombination , which preferentially occurs at dislocations in GaN film , can be avoided .

However, it was found that a slight change in the pH of the GaN surface might cause a r emarkab le 

difference in the etching rate , which would lead to a rough GaN surface as well . To keep the pH of the 

whole GaN surface consistent during the etching process , a spin -etching method was develope d. Results 

show that a flat and smooth GaN surface with a surface roughness Ra of 6 nm can be prepared at an

etching rate of 18 nm/min .

References: 

[1] Zhuang D, Edgar J H. Wet etching of GaN, AlN, and SiC: a review. Mate . Sci .& Engin R: Reports, 

2005, 48(1):1 -46. 

[2] D. H. van Dorp. Photoetching Mechanisms of GaN in Alkaline S 2O82- Solution. J. Electro chem. Soc ., 

2009,156 10 D371 -D376. 

Acknowledgments: 

Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21972120 , 91523102 , 21273183). Development of continuous processes for the Electrochemical 

# Reduction of CO 2 to Formate: evolution with electrodes of different 

# nature and configuration 

Manuel Alvarez -Guerra , Guillermo Díaz -Sainz , Angel Irabien 

University of Cantabria, Department of Chem ical and Biomolecular Engineering 

ETSIIT, Avda. Los Castros, s/n. 39005, Santander, Spain. 

alvarezgm@unican.es 

The historic Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which aims at holding global temperature rise to well 

below 2ºC, represents a call for further action and for investment towards a low carbon, resilient and 

sustainable future. In order to mitigate excess anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions (approx. 

4GtC yr -1) and achieve the 2ºC target, a portfolio of strategies and technologies need to b e implemented 

together, where Carbon Capture U tilisation and Storage (CCUS) can play an important role . The 

utilization of captured CO 2 as a useful raw material , and particularly, the electrochemical conversion of 

CO 2 into products with value added has gai ned renewed and increasing attention over the last years [1 -2] .

Formate, or formic acid depending on pH, is a product of great interest, because , apart from its industrial 

applications , it is currently considered as one of the most promising compounds for hydrogen storage and 

as a promising candidate fuel to be used in fuel cells. 

This lecture will summar ise some of the results obtained by the DePRO research group of the University 

of Cantabria on the development of continuous processes for CO 2 electrored uction to formate in a flow 

reactor, with a single pass of the reactants through the reactor, in which the performance has been 

progressively improved by using e lect rodes not just of different nature (Pb, Sn, Bi ), but also of different 

configuration s: e.g. plate electrodes, particulate electrodes made of nanoparticles deposited on porous 

supports, or “Gas Diffusion Electrodes ” (GDEs). Special attention will also be paid to discuss the results 

obtained with the configuration of “Catalyst Coated Membrane Elec trodes” (CCMEs), in which catalyst 

nanoparticles are directly sprayed over a Nafion membrane. The CCME configuration allows avoiding 

the use of a liquid catholyte, so that the input feed to the reactor is simply a mixture of CO 2 and vapour, 

making it possi ble to achieve higher formate concentration (of up to 26 g·L -1) with an energy 

consumption 50% lower than using the same catalysts in GDE configuration. 

The results obtained so far are promising and they suggest a great future potential of these approach es .

However, much more research is needed to overcome the current limitations of these processes so that 

they are able to combine, simultane ously, high Faradaic efficiency , high rates of formation of the product 

(measured by the current density at which th e process can be operated), high concentration of the product 

obtained (to avoid the economic and environmental penalty of subsequent purification), and low 

overpotentials to allow an energy efficient process, necessary to explore their scale -up. 

Acknowle dge ments 

Financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the project 

CTQ20 16 -76231 -C2 -1-R (AEI/FEDER, UE), is gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

[1] Irabien, A., Alvarez -Guerra, M., Albo, J., Dominguez -Ramos, A. Electr ochemical conversion of CO 2

to value -added products, in: C.A. Martínez -Huitle, M.A. Rodrigo, O. Scialdone (Eds.), Electrochem. 

Water Wastewater Treat. Elsevier (2018) pp. 29 –59. 

[2] Malkhandi, S., Yeo, B.S. Electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide to h igh value chemicals. 

Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 26 ( 2019 ), 112 –121 .Corrosion of Zn -Ni coated reinforcing steel i n simulated concrete pore 

# solutions 

Mihael Bučko 1, Jelena B. Bajat 2

> 1

University of Defense, Military Academy, 33 Pavla Juriši �a Šturma St, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia 

> 2

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, Univer sity of Belgrade, P.O.Box 3503, 11120 Belgrade, Serbia 

mbucko@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

Zinc coating produced by the hot -dip galvanizing process is often used as a preventive corrosion measure 

in reinforced concrete structures exposed to carbonation or mild contaminat ion with chlorides, because 

Zn forms a passive film of sufficient thickness [ 1]. However, during a prolonged exposure to the chloride -

rich environment after the concrete carbonation, galvanized steel quickly corrodes once the threshold 

concentration of chl oride ions is reac hed . Alloying with Ni is a common technique employed to increase 

Zn protective properties and hardness, and the market for corrosion resistant Zn –Ni coatings is large, 

primarily including coatings for automobile steel bodies and electroni cs industry . With this background 

knowledge, the present work is intended to study whether an electroplated Zn -Ni coating of a sufficient 

thickness may provide better long -term corrosion resistance to the reinforcing steel in concrete, in 

comparison to pur e Zn coating . The Zn -Ni coatings were 40 μm thick and contained ~13 mass.% Ni. 

There is no single electrolyte which may be used in a laboratory to simulate universal conditions in 

concrete, because in real concrete, many factors change with time, such as pH value and the concentration 

of corrosive species. Yet, based on previous studies [ 2], our work uses three different simulating 

electrolytes, to predict and compare Zn and Zn -Ni behavior in three environments: fresh concrete, 

concrete with CO 2 absorbed , and finally concrete with Cl - ions. In order to compare their corrosion 

behavior, the pure Zn and Zn –Ni alloy coated steel samples were successively exposed to three different 

solutions . In corrosion testing, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) an d scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) were used. 

Impedance spectroscopy showed that both Zn and Zn -Ni were passivated in an alkaline solution 

(simulating fresh concrete) and carbonated solution, which simulated CO 2 ingress into concrete , but in the 

third, i.e. chloride rich solution, the deterioration of the passive layer on top of the coatings occurred , as 

expected . Nevertheless, the corrosion pattern is quite different for the two coatings : Zn –Ni surface was 

flat and black during the total immersion perio d in chloride solution, while Zn was covered with a white, 

chloride rich product that was constantly increasing in volume and peeling off the sample . The EIS 

measurements show significantly slower dissolution of Zn -Ni coating in the chloride environment, a s

compared to Zn. Therefore, i t may be concluded that Zn -Ni could be a reasonable alternative to pure Zn 

for the protection of steel in concrete where a high chloride penetration is expected. 

References: 

1. S.B. Farina, G.S. Duffo, Corrosion of zinc in si mulated carbonated concrete pore solutions, 

Electrochim. Acta 52 (2007) 5131 –5139. 

2. M. Moreno, W. Morris, M.G. Alvarez, G.S. Duffo, Corrosion of reinforcing steel in simulated concrete 

pore solutions. Effect of carbonation and chloride content, Corr. Sci . 46 (2004) 2681 –2699. Gold Nanoparticles Functionalized with Calix[4]arenes as Selective 

# Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) 

Quentin Lenne 1, Yann R. Leroux 1, Corinne Lagrost 1

> 1

Univ Rennes, CNRS, ISCR - UMR 6226 

Université Rennes 1, France 

quentin.lenne@ univ -rennes1.f r

In the race of new technologies keen to obtain new sources of low -cost and sustainable energy, activation 

of abundant small fuel molecules (such as O 2, H 2O, CO 2 and H 2) is now widely studied to convert their 

chemical energy into an electric one 1. Howeve r, the multi -electronic processes commanding these 

activations are not yet fully understood and controlled, but they have been observed to be efficiently 

catalyzed in nature through the action of metalloenzymes, in which a catalytic site is buried inside a n

organized molecular environment governing the reactivity. 

Herein, we propose a strategy inspired from metalloenzymes to control the interfacial reactivity at the 

molecular level . This approach is based on the functionalization of metallic nanoparticles through the 

reductive grafting of calix[4]arene -tetradiazonium salts. The gold nanoparticles is then chemically 

modified with a well -organized monolayer of calix[4]arenes that are covalently bound to the surface. 2

These grafted nanocavities mimick an organ ized molecular environment that is likely to impact the 

orientation and approach of O 2 while ensuring strong stability of the electrocatalysts , thanks to multiple 

anchoring . T he various functional groups at the calix[4]arenes small rim will modulate the in teractions at 

the interface between the metal surface and the electrolyte/reactants due to their different hydrophilic and 

oxophilic natures. Herein, we will present the synthesis and electrochemical properties of these systems 

along with very promising re sults for obtaining stable and selective catalytic system for oxygen reduction 

reaction ( ORR ).

Figure 1. Grafting of calix[4]arenes with various functional groups on gold NPs modifying O 2

adsorption phenomena and their influence on the ORR performance s

[1]  Mistry H., Varela A., Khül S., Strasser P. and Cuennya B.R., Nature Reviews Materials. 2016 , 1, 1 -

15. 

[2] Troian -Gautier L., Valkenier H., Mattiuzzi A., Jabin I., Van den Brande N., Van Mele B., Hubert J., Reniers 

F., Bruylants G., Lagrost C. and Leroux Y., Chem. Commun . 2016 , 52, 10493 -10496. Fig ure 1 (a) SEM image of an iNFS -CL and s chematic diagram of the cross -section of the ionomer 

nanofiber covered with the catalyst particles . (b) Humidity dependence of current density at 0.5 V (IR -

corrected) of p olarization curves in the anodic scan (10 mV s -1). 

# Introducing Ionomer Nanofiber Scaffold ing into the Cathode of 

# Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells for Improving Robustness Against 

# Humidity Changes 

Shuhei Yoshino , Akihiro Shinohara, Kensaku Kodama, Yu Morimoto 

Toyota Central R&D Labs ., Fuel Cell Lab . 1 

41 -1, Yokomichi, Nagakute, Aichi 480 -1192, Japan 

s-yoshino@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp 

For improving the power density of polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs), the transport resistances of the 

reactants (oxygen and proton) and product (H 2O) in the cathode catalyst layer (CL) need to be reduced. For 

simultaneously reducing these resistances, a CL containing a non -woven mat of ionomer nanofibers formed 

by electrospinning has been found to be promising owing to the presence of continuous proton pathways 

and pores [1] . The robustness of the cell performance against the humidity and optimal structure of the CL 

are, however, yet to be clarified. In the present study, we fabricated CLs with ionomer nanofiber 

scaffoldings (iNFS -CL) where the ionomer loading and distribution between the mat and Pt/C region were 

systematically changed, and the cell performances were analyzed on the basis of the elemental 

characteristics, including the mass transport properties (proton, water, oxygen) under different hum idity 

conditions. 

A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of an iNFS -CL fabricated by one cycle of the 

electrospinning and electrospraying is shown in Fig. 1 a, and indicates that Nafion nanofibers are uniformly 

covered with the catalyst particles. The cell performances with the gas supplies of H 2/air (21 kPa O 2) were 

evaluated at the cell temperature of 80 ºC in the humidity range of 30%RH - 165%RH. Fig ure 1b shows 

the current densities at 0.5 V (IR -corrected with high frequency resistances) for the iN FS -CLs with different 

overall ionomer/carbon weight ratios (I/C) with the local I/C of 0.4 in the Pt/C region and for conventional 

CLs (Conv.). The three iNFS -CLs (overall I/C = 0.8, 1.0, and 3.0) show higher current densities than Conv. -

1.0 (I/C = 1.0) ov er the humidity range of 30%RH - 165%RH. The Conv. -0.8 (I/C = 0.8) shows comparable 

performances above 50%RH but inferior performances below 50%RH to the iNFS -CLs. The results 

indicate that iNFS -CLs ha ve higher robustness against humidity changes than for conventional CLs. In the 

meeting, the results on analyses of their elemental characteristics will be presented and the origin s of the 

higher robustness for the iNFS -CLs will be discussed. 

References 

[1] M. Hwang and Y. A. Elabd, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 44, 6245 (2019). Atomically Dispersed Fe/N -Codoped Nanocarbon for Bifunctional 

# Oxygen Electrocatalyst Synthesi zed by Self -Template and Polypyrrole 

# Encapsulation Method 

Shuhu Yin, Gen Li, Yan -Xia Jiang , Chun -Hua Zhen, Shi -Gang Sun 

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistr y of Solid Surfaces, Department of Chemistry, College of 

Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University 

Xiamen 361005, (P. R. China) 

yxjiang@xmu.edu.cn 

High performance and durable bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts are of great importance for t he 

commercial application of environmentally friendly and sustainable energy through electrochemical 

devices such as rechargeable Zn –air batteries and fuel cells. Highly distributed catalysts with maximum 

atomic utilization are considered to be a promising alternative for current noble -metal -based catalysts. 

Herein, a high performance and durable bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst for both ORR and OER is 

synthesized by a facile self -template and polypyrrole encapsulation method. The super performance AD -

Fe /N -C-900 catalyst has a special open porous double shell hollow structure which is beneficial to 

exposure of more Fe -Nx active sites for ORR and OER, and improve s mass transfer, resulting in a 

fabulous bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalytic activity ( 

△ E =0. 655 V), which is better than the 

commercial Pt/C ( 

△E =1.035 V) and the commercial IrO 2 (

△E =0.93 V), along with remark durability 

and long -term stability for the ORR in alkaline medium. Based on our results and analysis, the 

remarkable electrocatalytic act ivity of AD -Fe/N -C-900 might be attributed to the high content of 

mesopore, high density of Fe -Nx active sites, and robust double shell hollow structure. The novel design 

of the atomically dispersed Fe/N -codoped porous double shell hollow nanocarbon enable boosted oxygen 

catalyst by a facile method has certain enlightening effect on the design and development of other 

bifunctional electrocatalysts in the next generation reversible energy conversion systems. Our work 

provides a design idea for the synthesis of high activity and stability bifunctional atom -level distributed 

catalysts. .     

> Figure 1. Synthetic route of AD -Fe/N -C catalyst.
> Figure 2.(a) Bifunctional Oxygen Electrocatalyst; (b) Bar plots of overpotential at the current densit y of 10 mA cm -2
> and current density at 1.7 V of catalysts ; (c) polarization curves of catalysts tested in the full OER/ORR region in O 2-
> saturated 0.1 M NaOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s -1 at 900 rpm

This work was supported by National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21773198 and U1705253 ).The investigation of heterogeneous oxygen consumption on a single 

# Caenorhabditis elegans animal by scanning electrochemical microscopy. 

Carla Santana Santos [a] , Felipe Macedo dos Santos [b] , Fernanda Marques da Cunha [b] , Alicia 

Kowaltowski [c], Mauro Bertotti [a] , Gabriel Negr ão Meloni [d]        

> [a] Department of Fundamental Chemistry, [c] Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of Sao Paulo, Av. Professor Lineu Prestes,
> 748, 05513 -970, Sã o Paulo, Brazil.
> [b] Departamento de Bioquímica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Três de maio, 100, 04044 -020, São Paulo, Brazil.
> [d] Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, CV4 7AL, Conventry, United Kingdom.

## Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) was employed to investigate the respira tion 

## metabolism of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , an animal widely used as a model for 

## aging and caloric restriction studies due to its metabolism , physiology, as well as easy handling 

## and short -lifespan [1] . Drug effects and contribution of differen t diets on the animal’s 

## metabolism are commonly evaluated by accessing the respiration activity by measuring the 

## oxygen concentration in a solution containing a large number of worms, as the oxidative 

## phosphorylation is the last stage of the majority of metabolic 

## processes. This is done by monitoring changes in the oxygen 

## consumption rate (OCR), measured by co mmercial 

## equipment (e.g.: Clark electrodes). The known advantages 

## of SECM that allow gain ing localized information by 

## performing space -resolved electrochemical measurements 

## were used here for investigat ing the local OCR at different 

## parts of a single animal . A platinised platinum 

## microelectrode working as an SECM tip in re dox 

## competition mode [2] (electrode/sensor and animal 

## consumed the same species, oxygen) was employed as a tool 

## for mapping the oxygen consumption at the vicinity of a

## single C. elegans . The local oxygen consumption rate 

## (OCR) was determined by fitting a series of measurements 

## performed in different regions of the animal to the 

## calculated SECM tip response using Finite Element Method 

## (FEM – COMSOL Multiphysics) (Scheme 1) . The results 

## indicated that the main contribution for the total oxygen 

## consumption of the animal is the reproductive system 

## (gonad) in the adult hermaphrodite C. elegans . F or understanding the role of the reproductive 

## system, we have compared the local OCRs in the wild (N2 Bristol) and mutant animals ( glp -1), 

## which has no development of the reproductive system . We also made use of fluorodeoxyuridine 

## (FUdR) to interrupt egg development in the wild animal , allowing us to investigate the 

## contribution of egg development in the reproductive system metabolism . This is the first time 

## that s uch information is reported and may contribute to a better understanding of the animal’s 

## metabolism and help in the proper interpretation of bulk OCR measurements (large number of 

## worms). 

## Acknowl edgments: The authors are grateful to CNPq and FAPESP for the financial support. Grants 

#2014/22396 -6, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) . Also, to the  European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 

and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska -Curie gra nt agreement No. 790615 (FUNNANO) 

## References: 

[1] W. Luyten, P. Antal, B.P. Braeckman, et al., Biogerontology 17 (2016), pp. 771 –782. 

[2] C.S. Santos, A.J. Kowaltowski, M. Bertotti, Sci. Rep., 7 (2017), 11428. 

Scheme 1. Schematic representation of 

the experiment performed to 

determinate the local OCR in a single C. 

elegans .Carbon -free Cathodes for Li -O2 Batteries based on Transition Metal 

# Oxynitrides -Nitrides 

Mario Aparicio , Jadra Mosa 

Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (CSIC) 

Kelsen 5, 28049 Madrid, Spain 

maparicio@icv.csic.es 

Oxynitrides -nitrides of several transition metal s were synthesized by sol -gel using alkoxides and 

chlorates . Interconnected porosity was incorporated through phase separation of hydrophilic and 

hydrophobic blocks, and elimination of organic components with a thermal treatment. Partial substitution 

of ox ygen by nitrogen was accomplished using thermal treatment in NH 3 atmosphere and incorporation of 

urea during the synthesis procedure. Powder characterization includes surface area (BET), scanning 

electron microscopy (SEM), X -ray diffraction (XRD) and cycli c voltammetry (CV). The results show 

surface area s higher than 150 m2/g , and the catalytic activity depend on the combination of oxides, 

nitrides and oxy nitrides. Fabrication and Characterization of Electrospun PVAM/TEOS Based 

# Gel Polymer E lectrolyte 

A. Mentbayeva a,b , N. Kassenova a,b , S. Kalybekkyzy b,c , M.V. Kahraman c, Z. Bakenov a,b  

> a

Department of Chemical and Material Engineering, School of Engineering and Digita l Sciences, 

Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, 010000, Kazakhstan. 

> b

National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, 010000, Kazakhstan; 

> c

Department of Chemistry, Marmara University, Istanbul, 34722, Turkey. 

E-mail:  almagul.mentbayeva@ nu.edu.kz 

Gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) is a promising alternative for the toxic and flammable liquid electrolyte in 

lithium ion batteries because of leak proof, longer shelf life and safety concerns. GPE consists of a porous 

polymer host and liquid electrolyte saturated within and combines the advantages of both the liquid and 

solid components [1]. 

In this study, a novel three -dimensional network GPE based on poly(vinyl alcohol)/maleic 

anhydride/tetraethyl orthosilica te (PVA/MA/TEOS) with polymer fibers were developed. Crosslinked 

nanofibrous polymer membranes for GPE of various composition were fabricated by UV -electrospinning 

method. The dual crosslink polymer membranes were obtained after heat treatment of as -prepar ed 

polymer nanofibers, due to the condensation of hydrolyzed TEOS. The morphology of the electrospun 

membranes was studied using scanning electron microscopy as shown in Figure 1. The uniform and well 

cross -linked nanofibers were formed with addition of 5 and 10% of TEOS .

Figure 1. SEM image of PVA/MA/TEOS fibers with (a) 5% and (b) 10% TEOS 

The excellent thermal properties of the membranes were proven using thermal gravimetric analysis. The 

membranes have an improved porosity and exhibit high uptake when activated with the liquid electrolyte 

of lithium salt in a mixture of organic solvents, and also show high liquid retention properties. 

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and linear sweep voltammetry testes showed a high 

conductivity and vide rang e (up to 5.5 V) electrochemical stability of prepared GPE. Electrochemical 

performance of the polymer gel electrolyte is evaluated in Li/polymer electrolyte/LiFePO 4 coin cell with 

various current density and showed promising results. 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by Faculty -development competitive research grant “ Development of 

composite anion exchange membranes with improved chemical and mechanical stability ” from 

Nazarbayev University. 

Reference s:

[1] M. Zhu, J. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Song, L. Long, S.H. Siyal, X. Yang, G. Sui, Journal of Energy 

Chemistry 37 (2019) 126 -142. Capacity limiting effects for freestanding, monolithic TiO 2 nan otube 

# electrodes with high mass loadings 

Charlotte Ihrfors , Wei Wei, Fredrik Björefors and Leif Nyholm 

The Ångström Advanced Battery Center, Department of Chemistry -Ångström , Uppsala University 

Box 538, SE – 751 21 Uppsala, Sweden 

charlotte.ihrfors@kemi.uu.se 

TiO 2 nanostructures ha ve been extensively studied as alternative electrode material for l ithium -ion batteries 

specifically for applications where high power is needed [1] . The high operation potential, 1.8 V, makes 

TiO 2 a safer alternative compared to graphite but also increases the demand for positive electrode materials 

with high potential s to yield a battery with a descent cell voltage [1] . The theoretical capacity of TiO 2 is 

335 mAh/g but in practice lithiation degree s corresponding to around Li 0.5 TiO 2 are reported [2, 3] . The 

electrical conductivity of TiO 2 is comparably low and this has been reported as a problem for bulk electrode 

materials, although nanostructuring of the electrode materials can be used to decrease this problem 

significantly. TiO 2 nan otubes can be synthesized in a two -step anodization process with a f luoride 

containing electrolyte resulting in freestanding TiO 2 nanotubes on a titanium substrate [4] .

In the present work, t he capacity limiting factors are studied for TiO 2 nanotubes with mass loadings up to 

10.5 mg/cm 2, corresponding to tube lengths from 4.5 μm to 40.5 μm . The results show that higher capacities 

are obtained for cyclic voltammetry compared to galvanostatic cycling. A diffusion controlled decrease in 

capacity is seen for the nanotube electrodes as the cycling rate is increased and a maximum average 

lithiation degree corresponding Li 0.55 TiO 2 is obtained . This effect stems from the decrease in the diffusion 

rate as the concentration of Li xTiO 2 increases in the electrode. The results also indicate the presence of a 

lithium -ion trapping in the electrode during cyc ling with a similar behavior as that previously seen [5] for 

lithium -alloy forming electrode materials. 

[1] X. Yan et al. , “TiO 2 Nanomaterials as Anode Materials for Lithium -Ion Rechargeable Batteries,” 

Energy Technol. , vol. 3, pp. 801 –814, 2015. 

[2] S. Goriparti et al. , “Review on recent progress of nanostructured anode materials for Li -ion 

batteries,” J. Power Sources , vol. 257, pp. 421 –443, 2014. 

[3] L. Kavan et al. , “Lithium insertion into TiO 2 (anata se): Electrochemistry, Raman spectroscopy, 

and isotope labeling,” J. Solid State Electrochem. , vol. 18, pp. 2297 –2306, 2014. 

[4] W. Wei et al ., “High energy and power density TiO 2 nanotube electrodes for 3D Li -ion 

microbatteries,” J. Mater. Chem. A , vol. 1 , p. 8160, 2013. 

[5] D. Rehnlund et al. , ”Lithium Trapping in Alloy forming Electrodes and Current Collectors for 

Lithium -based Batteries ”, Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 10, pp 1350 -1357, 2017 .Activity Enhancement of thin -film Pd catalysts by Bi adatoms towards 

# alcohol electrooxidation in alkaline media 

Jelena Lović , Sanja Stevanović 

ICTM Department of Electrochemistry, University of Belgrade 

Njegoševa 12, 11001 Belgrade, Serbia 

jelena.lovic@ ihtm.bg.ac.rs 

Thin -film  Pd catalysts with low metal loadings (55 and 110 μg cm -2) were obtained by electrodeposition 

on CG electrode from a surfactant -free green electrolyte. Surface of Pd electrode was modified by 

irreversibly adsorbed Bi as fast and eas y to do method. The catalysts were characterized by AFM 

technique and demonstrated  that  the nanoparticle clusters was formed from the agglomeration of single 

crystal particles.  The catalytic activity and durability of Bi -modified Pd electrodes on methanol and 

ethanol elec tro -oxidation in alkaline media was investigated. The participating roles of Pd and Bi was 

examined from the aspect of different Pd metal loadings and Bi surface coverages.  The presented 

electrochemical tests shown that the modification wit h the appropriate amount of Bi on  thin -film 

Pd catalysts  enhance activity toward MOR and EOR up to about 2 -3 times compared to unmodified 

catalysts. Besides surface Bi coverage (Ɵ Bi ) of 0.6 increase durability and provides more poisoning 

tolerant Pd/GC electrode in both studied reactions as it is presented in Fig. 1 .

Fig. 1 The ratio of the forward peak current density (jpf ) and the backward peak current density ( jpb ), as 

the parameter of the poisoning tolerance to the carbonaceous species for Pd catalysts in methanol and 

ethanol oxidation reaction in alkaline media. 

It was concluded that the combination of third body and bifunctional effect is responsible for the 

electrocatalytic improvement of thin -film Pd catalysts modified with Bi in examined reactions of alcoho l

oxidation in alkaline media . Electroc hemical investigations of such modified electrodes signify how to 

direct research in order to develop an efficient catalyst. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the 

Republic of Serbia. Creating Precise Dual -molecule Junctions to Probe Intermolecular 

# Crosstalk 

Jingxian Yu ,1 Xiao -Hui Wu, 2 Fang Chen, 3 Feng Yan, 2 Lin -Qi Pei, 2 Rong Hou, 2 John R Horsley, 1 Andrew 

D. Abell, 1 Xiao -Shun Zhou, 3 Dong -Feng Li, 2 Shan Jin, 2 and Bing -Wei Mao 4 

> 1

ARC Cen tre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP), Institute for Photonics and Advanced 

Sensing, Department of Chemistry, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia  

> 2

Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, 

Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China  

> 3

Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Reactive Chemistry on Solid Surfaces, Institute of Physical Chemistry, 

Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321004, China  

> 4

State Key Laborator y of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and Department of Chemistry, iChEM, 

College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 

E-mail address : jingxian.yu@adelaide.edu.au 

Understanding and controlling charge transport across multiple parallel molecules is fundamental to the 

creation of innovative functional electronic components, 1 as future molecular devices will likely be multi -

molecular. 2 The smallest possible molecular ensemble to address this challenge is a dual -molecule 

junction device, which has potential to unravel the effects of intermolecular crosstalk on electronic 

transport at the molecular level that cannot be elucidated using either conventional single -molecule or 

self -assembled monolayer (SAM) techniques. Herein, we demonstrate the successful fabrication of an 

STM dual -molecule junction d evice, which utilizes noncovalent interactions and allows for direct 

comparison to the conventional STM single -molecule device. STM -BJ measurements reveal a decrease in 

conductance of 10% per molecule from the dual -molecule to the single -molecule junction device. 

Quantum transport simulations confirm this decrease is attributable to direct intermolecular crosstalk (i.e. 

intermolecular π-π interactions), with contributions from substrate -mediated coupling (i.e. molecule -

electrode). This study provides the first experimental evidence to interpret intermolecular crosstalk in 

electronic transport at the STM -BJ level, and translates the expe rimental observations into meaningful 

molecular information to enhance our fundamental knowledge of this subject matter. This approach is 

pertinent to the design and development of future multi -molecular electronic components, and also to 

other dual -molecu lar systems where such crosstalk is mediated by various noncovalent intermolecular 

interactions (e.g. electrostatic and hydrogen bonding). 

Scheme 1. Schematic steps to construct the dual -

molecule STM -BJ junction device. 

Figure 1. Single -molecule (left), supramolecular 

(middle), and dual -molecule (right) junction 

devices comprising 15 -crown -5 derivati zed 

oligo(phenyleneethynylene) (OPE) wire 1, and 

their measured conductance values .

1. Gryn'ova, G.; Corminboeuf, C., Noncovale nt molecular electronics. Journal of Physical 

Chemistry Letters 2018, 9 (9), 2298 -2304. 

2. van der Molen, S. J.; Naaman, R.; Scheer, E.; Neaton, J. B.; Nitzan, A.; Natelson, D.; Tao, N. J.; 

van der Zant, H.; Mayor, M.; Ruben, M.; Reed, M.; Calame, M., Visions for a molecular future. Nature 

Nanotechnology 2013, 8 (6), 385 -389. Surfactant addition to the electrolyte solution to increase capacitance 

# of metal oxide -based supercapacitor electrodes 

Y. Ge 1, J. Roscher 1, and Rudolf Holze 1,2,3 

> 1

Technische Universität Chemnitz, Institut für Chemie, AG Elektrochemie, D -09107 Chemnitz, Ge rmany 

> 2

Saint Petersburg State University, Institute of Chemistry, St. Petersburg, 199034, Russia 

> 3

State Key Laboratory of Materials -oriented Chemical Engineering, School of Energy Science and Engi -

neering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, Jiangsu Province, China 

rudolf.holze@chemie.tu -chemnitz.de 

Electrode materials employed in supercapacitor electrodes are always highly porous with large specific 

surface area residing inside pores of the material. This applies in particular to carbon -based mater ials used 

in currently commercially available electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLC), it is also true for re -

dox active materials (e.g. metal oxides [ 1], mixed metal oxides [ 2], intrinsically conducting polymers or 

composites of these materials [ 3]). With increasing porosity yielding the requested large surface area 

needed for charge storage in particular with EDLC the challenge of complete utilization of the surface 

area as measured e.g. with porosimetry or BET -method as contact area between the el ectronically con -

ducting electrode material and the ionically conducting electrolyte solution grows. In addition some of the 

surface of these materials might not be as hydrophilic as would be preferable for complete wetting. 

Addition of surfactants (non -io nic, cationic as well as anionic [ 4]) has been suggested and examined 

mostly with carbon -based materials [ 5]. We have examined this concept with a representative metal 

hydrox ide Ni(OH) 2 and a mixed metal oxide MgCo 2O4 electrode material. 

Fig. 1 : CVs of ( a) the as -prepared 

“α -Ni(OH) 2“-coated electrode in 

an aqu eous solution of 1.0 M

KOH; (b) with added 10 μM Tri -

ton X -100; (c) with added 10 μM 

SDS. 

Addition of the non -ionic sur -

factant Triton X -100 resulted 

in a significant increase of 

peak current den sity, peak 

separation decreased in addi -

tion indicating enhanced elec -

trode kinetics. With anionic 

SDS the effects were less pro -

nounced. Galvanostatic charge 

-dis charge measure ments con -

firmed these obser va tions, they 

also showed higher capaci tan -

ce retention with increas ing 

cur rent density. Within the limited timespan of our preliminary experiments, stability of the performance 

was improved by surfactant addi tion. Coulombic efficiency closely related to self -dis charge was 

improved with SDS addition, with Triton X -100 e fficiency was poorer at low current densi ties. The 

mixed metal oxide did not show any improve ment, possibly related to surface reactions of this material 

elsewhere used in heterogeneous catalysis with the added surfactants. 

1 D.P. Dubal, R. Holze, Synthe sis, properties, and performance of nanostructured metal oxides for supercapac itors, 

Pure Appl. Chem. 86 (2014) 611 -632; 

R. Wang, J. Wu in: Metal Oxides in Supercapacitors (D.P. Dubal, P. Gomez -Romero Eds.) Elsevier, Amste rdam 

2017, p. 99 -132. 

2 A.I. Volk ov, D.P. Dubal, R. Holze, and Y. Wu, Mixed metal chalcogenides as active masses for supercapacitor 

elec trodes – A review, submitted to Adv. Funct. Mater. 

3 L. Fu, Q. Qu, R. Holze, V.V. Kondratiev, Y. Wu, Composites of metal oxides and intrinsically conduc ting p oly -

mers as supercapacitor electrode materials: The best of both worlds?, J. Mater. Chem. A 7 (2019) 14937 -149 70. 

4 M.J. Rosen: Surfactants and interfacial phenomena, 3 rd ed., WILEY -INTERSCIENCE, Hoboken 2004 

5 Y. Ge, J. Roscher, and R. Holze, Increa sed capacitance of metal oxide -based supercapacitor electrodes caused by 

sur factant addition to the electrolyte solution, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., in press -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15              

> I/mA
> ESCE /V
> 5 mV·s -1
> 10 mV·s -1
> 20 mV·s -1
> (b) -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 (a)
> I/mA
> ESCE /V
> 5 mV·s -1
> 10 mV·s -1
> 20 mV·s -1 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
> I/mA
> ESCE /V
> 5 mV·s -1
> 10 mV·s -1
> 20 mV·s -1
> (c)

# Organic Polymers as Electrodes for Structural Energy Storage 

Adriana M. Navarro -Suárez a, Milo S.P. Shaffer a,b  

> a

Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London  

> b

Department of Materials, Imperial College London 

London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom 

a.navarro -suarez@imperial.ac.uk 

Volume and/or weight savings in mobile devices, electric/hybrid ground transport and aircraft are critical 

design drivers. One approach to improve the system level specific energy is by adding electrical energy 

storing capa bility to structural components, making multifunctional materials. 1,2 However, 

commercialized batteries and supercapacitors, traditional energy storage devices, are typically rigid and 

heavy due to the currently used fabrication techniques based on the slu rry -casting method and traditional 

configuration. 3

The application of organic redox -active polymers as electrode materials ha s attracted remarkable attention 

owing to their flexibility, low cost, recyclab ility , fast response (<10 1–3 s), capacity (>10 2 mAh g −1 ), and 

capability for tuning the redox potential. 4 In this study, we hybridize two aromatic carbonyl derivative 

polymers with carbon -based materials to improve the efficiency of energy storage devices by 

compensating for the low polymer conductivity , contributing electrical double -layer capacitance, and 

improving the mechanical properties of the electrodes . These materials are discussed in terms of their 

physico -chemical , mechanical and electrochemical properties (Figure 1) , before being used as elec trodes 

in aqueous batteries . The aqueous electrolyte provides greater safety, much lower cost, higher power 

density, and much faster recharge rate due to more efficient ion transport. The hybrid cathode provides 4 

times higher gravimetric capacity than the unmodified carbon -based material. 

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

programme under the Marie Sklodowska -Curie grant agreement No 838892. -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -4 -2   

> 024Unhybridized electrode Hybridized electrode
> Specific current  / A.g -1
> Potential vs Ag/AgCl / V

Figure 1: Voltammetry (1 0 mV s-1) in 1 M H 2SO 4 of single -walled carbon nanotube bucky paper before 

and after hybridization with an aromatic carbonyl derivative polymer .

References 

1. T.J. Adam, G. Liao, J. Petersen, S. Geier, B. Finke, P. Wierach, A. Kwade, M Wiedemann, Energies ,

2008 , 11 , 335. 

2. L.E. Asp, E.S. Greenhalgh, Composites Science and Technology , 2014 , 101 , 41 -61. 

3. L. Lin, H. Ning, S. Song, C. Xua, N. Hu, Composites Sc ience and Technology , 2020 , doi: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2020.108102 

4. K. Hatakeyama‐Sato , H. Wakamatsu , R. Katagiri , K. Oyaizu , H. Nishide , Adv. Mater. , 2018 , 30 ,

1800900 In-situ XAS Investigation of the Copper Oxidation State During the 

# Electrochemical Conversion of CO 2 on Nanostructured Copper 

# Titanates 

Matthew J. Lawrence, 1 Veronica Celorrio, 2 Haoliang Huang ,3 Elizabeth Sargeant, 1 Andrea E. Russell 3

and Paramaconi Rodr iguez *1

> 1

School of Chemistry, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom 

> 2

Diamond Light Source Ltd, Harwell Campus, Didcot OX11 0DE, United Kingdom 

> 3

School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1B J, United Kingdom 

> 4

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, 

Shenzhen, 518055, China 

p.b.rodriguez@bham.ac.uk 

The impacts of climate change and global war ming have become a topical subject in both the political and 

scientific landscapes in recent times. The significant increase of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO 2) in 

the atmosphere through the widespread use of fossil fuels to produce energy to meet the ev er -increasing 

global demand and consumption of energy is of great concern. The capture and recycling of atmospheric 

CO 2 is a promising pathway to address this global challenge. In particular, the electrochemical conversion 

of CO 2 to useful, value -added che micals is the subject of significant research effort because this avenue 

affords an opportunity to take advantage of electrical energy generated by renewable sources such as 

wind, water and solar. 

The specific chemical and physical properties of the CO 2 re duction reaction (CO 2RR) catalyst plays a 

significant role in the catalytic process. Elemental composition, surface geometry, oxidation state, particle 

size and morphology impact the selectivity and efficiency of CO 2RR. [1,2,3] Copper and copper oxide -

deriv ed surfaces are the only catalysts that can electrochemically convert CO 2 to high value and energy -

dense C2 and C3 products.[ 2,4]

Herein, we present time -resolved in -situ XAS monitoring of the Cu oxidation state during CO 2RR in a 

neutral aqueous media for a series of Cu -titanate nanoparticles. Electrochemical characterization 

combined with O n-line Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry (O LEMS ) provides insight into the impact of 

Cu oxidation state on product selectivity. 

Figure 1.  (a) 9 wt.% Cu:NTO and (b) 10 wt.% CuO@NTO catalyst s in CO 2-saturated 0.1 M K 2HPO 4 /

KH 2PO 4 buffer solution (pH 6.5 ) utilising a RDE ;  = 50 mV s -1; rotation = 1200 rpm. The annotated 

arrows indicat e the potentials applied during in -situ XAS measurements . Normalised in -situ Cu K -edge 

XANES spectra of ( c) 9 wt.%  Cu:NTO  and ( d) 10 wt.%  CuO@NTO  recorded in CO 2-saturated 0.1 M 

K2HPO 4 / KH 2PO 4 buffer (pH 6.5) at various applied potentials .

References 

1. R.M. Arán -Ais, D.Gao, B. Roldan Cuenya.  Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 , 2906 -2917 

2. C. S. Le Duff, M. J. Lawrence and P. Rodriguez , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2017, 56 , 12919 -12924 .

3. R. Kas, R. Kortlever, A. Milbrat, M. T. M. Koper, G. Mul and J. Baltrusaitis, Phys. Chem. Chem. 

4. K. P. K uhl, E.R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2012, 5, 7050 -7059 .1

# p- and e - type Silver functionalized Dense Titanium Dioxide 

# Semiconductor Layer for Efficient Perovskite photovoltaics (SOLAR) 

Natasha Ross a, Kevin Tambwe a, Priscilla Baker a

> a

University of the Western Cape , Bellville, South -Africa. 

e-mail: nross@uwc.ac.za 

Perovskite solar cells (PSC) have an advantage over conventional silicon solar cells in its simplicity of 

processing and notable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ~ 22%. However , their performance is 

limited by the recombination of charge carriers occurring at the TiO 2/P SC interface [1] . This work controls 

recombination at the Electron transport layer (ETL) (c-TiO 2+mp -TiO 2)/Perovskite interface through 

elimination of pinhole defects followed by Silver - functionali zation (dense -TiO 2/mesoporous -Ag -TiO 2) to 

enhance the electrochemical surface and photo -absorptivity . An innovative method was used to construct a

compact  Ag functionalized a -TiO 2 film consisting of a mixture of ethanol,  titanium(IV) isopropoxide , and 

silver nitrate spin coated on a fluorine -doped tin -oxide substrate  in the absence of ZnO as supportive 

photoanode [2]. The performance of PSC /Ag –TiO 2 and TiO 2 films were probed using sc anning electron 

microscopy (HRSEM), x -ray diffraction (XRD), UV -visible spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) . The uniformly distributed Ag -nanoparticles attached to the 

mesoporous TiO 2 matrix fashion ed a TiO 2 compact layer with excellent blocking capability and improved 

electron mobility as observed in Fig.1 . Particular Ag  doping percentage of ~ 0.9%  altered the electrical 

conductivity of the TiO 2 film , reduc ing the recombination process occurring at the ETL/PSC interface [3].

From IV -measurements , the PSC developed via two steps, yielded satisfactory effiencies. The dense -

TiO 2/mesoporous -Ag -TiO 2 UV -Vis results revealed an induced red shift and band gap of 3.29 e V;

indicative of enhanced luminescent properties . Hence, the synergy of dense TiO 2 and  the surface plasmon 

resonance effect of metallic Ag nanoparticles successfully  enhanced the optical absorption in the visible 

light region as well the power conversion efficiency compared to the pristine TiO 2 perovskite solar cell. 

Fig.1. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and UV -Absorbance spectra of dense -TiO 2/mesoporous -Ag -TiO 2

References 

1. Li, X. Bi, D.Q. Yi, C.Y. Decoppet, J.D. Luo, J.S. Zakeeruddin, S.M. Hagfeldt, M. Science . 2016 , 353, 6294. 

2. Akhavan, O. solar light irradiation, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 336 (2009) 117 –124. 

3. He, J. Ichinose, I. Fujikawa, S. Kunitake, T. Nakao, A. Chem.Commun . 2002, 8, 1910. 

Acknowledgements : This work was funded by  the National Research Foundation Thuthuka Research grant, 

South African. Nickel Hydroxide Anodes for Decoupled Water Splitting in an 

# Electrochemical – Chemical Cycle 

Avigail Landman , Hen Dotan, Avner Rot hschild, Gideon Grader 

Technion – Israel Institute of Technolo gy 

Haifa, 3200003 

slan dman@technion.ac.il 

As the human popula tion grows, a transition towards clean and renewable energy sources becomes 

critical in curbing the negative effects of fossil fuel combustion. To facilitate this transition, renewable 

sources must be combined with energy storage and transporta tion infrast ructures. 

Hydrogen production by water splitting has long been considered a promising solution to mitigating the 

intermittency issues of renewable energy, while also providing a high energy fuel for transportation. 

However, water splitting technologies st ill face challenges to improve their performance, efficiency , and 

cost, especially when combined with renewable power sources [1] . In conventional electrolyzer 

technologies, hydrogen and oxygen are evolved simultaneously in the sa me cell, and a membrane or 

diaphragm is essential for product separation (Figure 1a) . Nevertheless, dangerous H2/O2 mixtures may 

still form under partial load conditions, which are inherent to renewable power source. Such H2/O2

mixtures lead to accelerated membrane degradation , in addition to posing a safety haz ard. Furthermore, 

the four -electron oxygen evolution reaction (OER) that takes place at the anode requires large 

overpotentials of over 400 mV, resulting in significant energy efficiency losses. 

In this work, we present a st rategy for high -efficiency decoupled water splitting, wherein hydrogen and 

oxygen ar e produced in two separate steps in an electrochemical – thermally -activated chemical (E -TAC) 

cycle [2] . The conventional OER catalyst anode is replaced by a cobalt -doped n ickel hydroxide [N i(OH) 2]

anode; in the first step, hydrogen is produced at the cath ode while the anode is oxidized to nickel 

oxyhydroxide [NiOOH] in an efficient one -electron reaction , having a signific antly lower overpotential 

compared to the OER (Figure 1b , left ). In the second step, the oxidized N iOOH anode is disconnected 

fro m the electrical circuit and heated, inducing its spontaneous chemical reduction react ion, which 

restore s its initial composition while oxidizing water and releasing oxygen (Figure 1b, right ). This E -TAC 

process enables hydrogen production at low voltages in a simple, cyclic process with high efficiency, 

robustness, safety, and scale -up potential .

Figure 1: Sch em atic of alkaline water electrolysis (a) and the E -TAC water splitting process (b). 

References: 

[1] M. R. Shaner, H. A., Atwater, N. S. Lewis, and E. W. McFarland, Energy & Environmental Science 

2016, 23 54 -2371. 

[2] H. Dotan, A. Landman, S. W. Sheehan, K. D. Malviya … A . Rothschild, and G. Grader, Nature 

Energy 2019, 786 -795. Preparation of ZnSe/MoO 3 Co-modified TiO 2 Nanotube Composite 

# Film for Photoelectrochemical Cathodic Protection 

Ha ipeng Wang, Piao J in, Zi chao Guan, Rong gui Du *

Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University 

Xiame n 361005, P. R. China 

e-mail : rgdu@xmu.edu.cn 

TiO 2 semiconductor s can provide photoelectrochemical cathodic protection for metals due to t heir 

special photoelectrochemical properties . However, pure TiO 2 semiconducto rs cannot sustain 

photoelectrochemical cathodic protection in the dark, which may limit their practical applications. 

Therefore, i n this wor k we f abricat ed a ZnSe/MoO 3 co-modified TiO 2 nanotube composite film with 

charge storage ability and investigated it s photoelectrochemical cathodic protection effect on 403 

stainless steel. 

A TiO 2 nanotube array film was prepared on a Ti foil in a two -electrode cell by anodic oxidation , then 

MoO 3 and ZnSe particles were deposited onto the film by cyclic voltammetry and pulse electrodeposition, 

respec tively . Finally , a ZnSe/MoO 3/TiO 2 nanotube composite film with a cascade band structure was 

fabricat ed . The prepared film s were characterized by scan ning electron microscopy (SEM), energy 

dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), X-ray diffraction (XRD) , X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 

UV -Vis spectroscopy , and photoluminescence measurements . The photoelectrochemical cathodic 

protection effect s of the prepared film s were investigated by photoelectrochemical measurements. 

Th e results showed that the TiO 2 film consisted of ordered nanotubes with an average inner diameter of 

about 100 nm and wall thickness of about 15 nm. This nan otube structure remained intact after MoO 3 and 

ZnSe particle deposition on the film. EDS , XRD , and XPS analyses indicated that the prepared nanotube 

composite film was composed of ZnSe, MoO 3 and TiO 2. The photoresponse of the ZnSe/MoO 3/TiO 2

composite film was extended to the visible light region , and the photo -induced electron -hole pair 

recombination wa s reduced. The photocurrent intensity of the composite film in a 0.5 M KOH solu tion 

was two -fold higher than that of the pure TiO 2 film. Under white light illumination, the ZnSe/MoO 3/TiO 2

composite film as a photoanode decreased the potential of the couple d 403 stainless steel in a 0.5 M NaCl 

solution by 470 mV relative to its corrosion potential , showing an effective photoelectrochemical 

cathodic protection effect. After the illumination was stopped , the composite film could continuously 

provide cathodic p rotection for 22.5 h resulting from it s charge storage capability . The electrochemical 

impedance spectroscopy results also indicated that the composite film had the photoelectrochemical 

cathodic protection effect on 403 stainless steel .

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(Nos. 21573182, 51731008, and 51671163 ). Electrochemical Deposition of Tin from Deep Eutectic Solvents 

A.E. Bolzán a, L.A. Azpeitia a, C. A. Gervasi a,b 

> a

Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquímicas Teóricas y Aplicadas (INIFTA), Sucursal 4., Casilla de 

Correo 16, (1900) La Plata; b Facultad de Ingeniería, UNLP, 1 y 47, (1900) La Plata, Argentina. 

aebolzan@inifta.unlp.edu.ar 

The electro deposition of Sn from deep eutectic solvents (DES) on copper substrates was studied in the 

temperature rang e 303 -- 353 K using the mixtures of choline chloride with either ethylene glycol (ethaline) 

or urea (reline) in the ratio 1:2 . For the characterisation of the electroche mical process, v oltammograms 

were run between -0.25 and -1.0 V (vs. Ag wire quasireversible reference electrode) . For both DES, the 

negative -going potential scans s how first an underpotential deposition process, which is immediately 

followed by an overpote ntial electrodeposition process . The former is, however, considerably less 

distinguishable in DES compared with that obtained in aqueous acid solutions . Some significant differences 

were observed between the voltammetric profiles recorded in et haline and reline. First , the current densities 

are much lower in reline, at all temperatures, probably related to the much higher viscosity and much lower 

conductivity of reline. Secondly , in ethaline the voltammogram presents a ma in single cathodic current 

peak while in reline, depending on the temperature, two or three electroreduction current peaks can be 

recorded. By means of a rotating disc electrode , Levich plots were obtained from which the diffusion 

coefficient of Sn(II) io ns was determined at different temperatures within the studied range . Moreover ,

while a limiting current plateau is recorded bellow -0.4 V during the electrodeposition of tin from etaline ,

in reline the limiting current is preceded by a series of three small cathodic peaks. From the corresponding 

Arrhenius plots, the activation energ y for the diffusion process w as determined and compared to data f rom 

acid aqueous solutions. Both, voltammet ric and chronoamperometric measurements provided evidence of 

a nucleation and growth process. Non -dimensional plots derived from c hronoamperometric experiments at 

different electroreduction potentials were consistent with the occurence of a 3D instantaneou s nucleation 

and growth process under diffusion control during the overpotential deposition . Impedance data recorded 

between 60kHz and 10 mHz showed the presence of two capacitive time constants in the potential range 

related to the underpotential deposit ion process and a single capacitive time constant at potentials related 

to the overpotential electrodeposition of Sn ions. SEM images obtained for the deposits formed in both 

DES show the presence of different morphologies according to both, the nature of the electrolyte and the 

electrodeposition routine employed. 

Left: Voltammograms recorded at 0.01 V s -1 for a Cu electrode in ethaline (a) and reline(b) + 0.01 M SnSO 4

at different temp eratures . Right: RDE linear sweeps obtained at 333 K in reline at different rotation speeds 

and the corresponding Levich plots. Exciton Dynamics of Conjugated Polymer Films Studied by in situ 

# Fluorescence S pectroscopy 

Francisco Montilla 1, Juan Bueno -Ferrer 1, Francisco Huerta 2, Emilia Morallón 1, César Quijada 2

> 1

Instituto Universitario de Materiales de Alicante. Universidad de Alicante. Ctra. de San Vicente s/n 

Alicante. Spain 03690. 2 Dep. Ingeniería Textil y Papelera, Universitat Politècnica de València. Pza. 

Ferrándiz y Carbonell. Alcoy (Alicante). Spain (03801 )

francisco.montilla@ua.es 

The operation of most organic optoelectronic devices based on conjugated polymers, namely organic light -

emitting diode s, organic photovoltaic cells or luminescent electrochemical cells is determined by the 

interaction of photoexcited states (i.e. excitons) and charged species (i.e. polarons) of polymer films .

The measurement of exciton diffusion is a key aspect to design efficient devices. This is usually performed 

by means of spectroscopic techniques, which measure the efficiency of radiated photons in the presence of 

quenchers. The photoluminescence (PL) of thin films is usually measured in the absence and in the presence 

of a quenching site and the exciton diffusion length is derived from the PL quotient. In these studies, a 

statistically si gnificant number of experiments are required to obtain consistent results and therefore many 

samples must be prepared . Electrochemical methods allow 

a reversible and controlled charge injection in conjugated 

polymer s, leading to the formation of charged st ates, such 

as polarons which serve as quenching sites for excitons. 

The use of electrochemical instrumentation allows fine and 

precise control of the quencher concentration , thus 

permitting a simultaneous analysis of exciton dynamics 

within a single sample of conjugated polymer. The 

electrochemical in situ fluorescence spectroscopy (also 

known as electrofluorochromism) is a relatively novel tool 

that has been applied to the characterization of luminescent 

molecular systems and to the development of novel 

op toelectronic devices [1,2] . In the present work, a

combination of electrochemical in situ steady -state 

fluorescence spectroscopy and UV -vis spectroscopy has 

been employed for the first time to determine the diffusion 

coefficient of excitons. The material selected for this study 

is MEH -PPV, poly[2 -methoxy -5-(2 -ethylhexyloxy) -1,4 -phenylenevinyle ne] , an orange -red emitter widely 

employed in OLEDs and bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells. In these systems , an annihilation process 

can occur when a photogenerated singlet exciton (S 1) finds a quencher (p) :

𝑆 1 + 𝑝 𝑘 𝑞 

→ 𝑆 0 + 𝑝 + 𝑝 ℎ𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑠 

being kq the annihilation polaron -exciton rate constant. This bimolecular process competes with the 

monomolecular intrinsic de -excitation of excitons. T he quenching process observed upon electrochemical 

doping ( figure 1) follows a Stern -Volmer mechanism at low do ping levels, with a time -independent rate 

constant typical of diffusion -controlled annihilation processes [3] . From both the Stern -Volmer rate 

constant and the exciton -polaron critical distance , an exciton diffusion coefficient can be derived [4] . These 

results support the suitability of spectroelectrochemical techniques as fast and powerful alternative tool s

for the reliable determination of exciton diffusion coefficients in conjugated polymers. 

1. Čížková, M.; Cattiaux, L.; Mallet, J.M.; Labbé, E.; Buriez, O. Electrochemical switching 

fluorescence emission in rhodamine derivatives. Electrochim. Acta 2018 , 260 , 589 –597. 

2. Audebert, P.; Miomandre, F. Electrofluorochromism: from molecular systems to set -up and 

display. Chem. Sci. 2013 , 4, 575 –584. 

3. Montilla, F.; Ruseckas, A.; Samuel, I.D.W. Exciton -Polaron Interactions in Polyfluorene Films 

with β -Phase. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018 , 122 .

4. Montilla, F.; Huerta, F. Electrochemically Monitored Photoluminescence of Conjugated 

Polymers. In Luminescence in Electrochemistry ; Springer International Publishing 2017; pp. 105 –

137. 540 570 600 630 660 690 720 750    

> 0.0 5.0x10 5
> 1.0x10 6
> 1.5x10 6
> 2.0x10 6
> 2.5x10 6
> 3.0x10 6570 600 630
> 0.3 0.6 0.9
> 0.30 V 0.27 V 0.15 V
> 0.27 V 0.32 V 0.21 V 0.15 V 0.09 V
> Emission intesity / cps Wavelength / nm
> 0 V

a

Figure 1: Evolution of the PL emission 

sp ectrum during the p -doping of a MEH -

PPV film (λexc = 500 nm) On the Elec trochemical Exfoliation of Graphite to Graphene 

Duhong Chen, Dongping Zhan *

State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces (PCOSS), Collaborative Innovation Center 

of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChem), Engineering Reseach Cen ter of Electrochemical 

Technologies of Ministry of Education, and Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and 

Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 

422 Siming South Road, Xiamen 361005, China 

e-mail address : dpzhan@xmu.edu.cn 

Shortly after the birth of graphene, electrochemical exfoliation has been adopted to prepare graphene 

from various raw materials of graphite. In general, there are mainly three processes, ion 

intercalation/deinte rcalation, surface tailoring and bubbling dispersion, during the electrochemical 

exfoliation of grahite. We propose programed potential modulation strategies to balance these processes 

and obtained high -quality graphene with high crystallinity, low oxidati on degree, uniform size 

distribution and few layers. 

Another important issue is to functionalize the graphene simultaneously in the electrochemical exfoliation 

of graphite. GO plays important roles in the sustainable development of energy and the environ ment, 

taking the advantages of oxygen -containing functional groups for good dispersibility and assembly. 

Compared with Hummers’ method, electrochemical exfoliation of graphite is considered facile and green, 

although the oxidation is pretty low. To synthes ize GO with better crystallinity and higher oxidation 

degree, we present a photo -synergetic electrochemical method. By using oxalate anions as the 

intercalation ions and coreactant , the interfacial concentration of hydroxyl radicals generated during 

electr ochemical exfoliation was promot ed , and the oxidation degree was comparable with that of GO 

prepared by Hummers’ method. In addition, the crystallinity was improved with fewer layers and larger 

size. Moreover, the aniline co -assembled GO membrane was selec tively permeable to water molecules by 

the hydrogen -bond interaction, but it was impermeable to Na +, K + and Mg 2+ , due to the electrostatic 

interactions. Thus, it has a prospective application to water desalination and purification. T his work opens 

a n ovel approach to the direct functionalization of graphene during the electro -exfoliation processes and 

to the subsequent assembly of the functionalized graphene. 

Fig. 1 the high -quality graphene produced by programmed potential modulations by balancing the ion 

intercalation/deintercalation, surface tailoring and bubbling dispersion processes in the electrochemical 

exfoliation of graphite. 

Reference: 

(1) D. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Li, W. -W. Wang, T. -X. Huang, J. -F. Li, K. S. Novoselov, Z. -Q. Tian, D. Zhan, 

Programmed electrochemical exfoliation of graphite to high quality graphene, Chem. Commun. , 2019, 

55, 3379. Bipolar electrochemistry for site -selective multifunctional modification 

# of conducting objects 

Paul Chassagne , Alexander Kuhn 

Univ.  Bordeaux, CN RS, ISM, UMR 5255, Bordeaux INP 

16 av . Pey Berland, 33600 Pessac, France. 

paul.chassagne@enscbp.fr 

Bipolar el ectrochemistry is a powerful technique for the asymmetric modification of conducting particles 

in the bulk . When placing a conducting object in an electric field produced by a pair of feeder electrodes, 

the potential distribution along the object polarizes it. If the potential difference between the extremities 

of the object is large enough, cathodic and anodic poles are created on which electrochemical reactions 

can occur and break the symmetry of the system. This “wireless” technique has been used for the bulk 

synthesis of Janus particles [1]. This method has also been used for the synthesis of ringed particles [2]

and for the bifunctional modification of particles [3].

In this contri bution, we present a method for the multifunctional modification of conducting particles 

using bipolar electrochemistry. Using AC potential s, it is possible to iteratively electro deposit several 

metallic patches of different composition s on a conductive pa rticle in a site -selective manner (Fig. 1) .

This method allows for the bulk synthesis of sophisticated asymmetric particles. The final objective of the 

work is the use of this symmetry -breaking concept to deposit four different patches in a tetrahedral 

geo metry , which is impossible with any other deposition approach. This results in particles with a chiral 

character , analog ous to an asymmetric carbon atom with four different substituents . Such objects could 

have numerous applications ranging from catalysis to chiroptics. 

Figure 1 EDX mapp ing of a glassy carbon particle functionalized with three different metallic patches: 

gold ( yellow, left ), platinum ( pink , bottom) and palladium (green, right ). 

References: 

[1] Loget, G.; Roche, J.; Kuhn, A. True Bulk Synthesis of Janus Objects by Bipolar Electrochemistry. 

Adv. Mater. 2012 , 24 (37), 5111 –5116. 

[2] Roche, J.; Loget, G.; Zigah, D.; Fattah, Z.; Goudeau, B.; Arbault, S.; Bouffie r, L.; Kuhn, A. 

Straight -Forward Synthesis of Ringed Particles. Chem. Sci. 2014 , 5 (5), 1961. 

[3] Koizumi, Y.; Shida, N.; Tomita, I.; Inagi, S. Bifunctional Modification of Conductive Particles by 

Iterative Bipolar Electrodeposition of Metals. Chem. Lett. 2014 , 43 (8), 1 245 –1247. 

The work has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 

Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program (grant agreement no. 7412 51, ERC Advanced grant 

ELECTRA). Porphyrin Trio -Pendant Fullerene Guest as an In Situ Universal Probe 

# of High ECL Efficiency for Sensitive miRNA Detection 

Ya qi Huang ,2 Kai Kang, 1 Meng Yang, 1 Ying Wan ,2* Shengyuan Deng 1*

> 1

School of Environmental and Biological Engineering 

, 2School of Mech ani cal Engineerin g

Nanjing University of Science and Technology , Nanjing 210094, P. R. China 

wanying@n just.edu.cn , sydeng@njust.edu.cn 

Herein,  pyrrolid yl C 60 derivative was recruited as a n unadulterated and congruent nano -hub to converge 

three zinc porph yrins on its monopole . Such peculiar assembly was convinced via micro -imaging and 

spectrophotometry. Making the best of fullerenyl proficiency in catalytic single t O 2 generation and 

excited -state preservation , a multiplied electrochemiluminescence (ECL) em ission bursted out from the 

porphyrin tri nity in a synergistic manner. Without any prebio -conjugation, t his orderly ECL -active 

individual turned to anchor in the toroid of a peripheral ly modified gamma -cyclodextrin in a good shape 

match. From the facile di rect mounting of the latter derives a universal bio -probing technique based up on 

such host -guest inclusion. Its binding pattern and the concomitant effect s on interfacial properties were 

revealed by systematic process characterizations. Taking advantages o f this uniform ensemble in both 

size and stoichiometry, an in situ terminal labelling strategy during the recognition -induced allosteric 

event came into being , which man aged a neat signal enhancement for the detection of model miRNA 

marker. Even in real sa mples, the developed sensing approach could achieve high precision, comparable 

sensitivity and satisfactory selectivity. Th e adaptation of macrocyclic chemistry for refined biotransducer s

and efficient ECL amplifier s would offer a generic and poten t altern ative to the analyte -specifi ed ECL 

indicator -receptor build in bioa ssays .

Scheme 1. (A) Synthe tic route of C 60 (ZnTPP) 3 the guest with precursor and intermediate models, and its 

inclusion in γCD −SH the host self -assembled on GCE/ AuNPs . (B) Simplified miRNA assay workflow 

ended in in situ labelling with the signal indicator C60 (ZnTPP) 3@γCD. Tracking CO 2 reduction products in real time 

Mario L oe ffler, Peyman Khanipour, Andreas M. Reichert, Ioannis Katsounaros 

Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Helmholtz -Institut Erlangen -Nürnberg (HI ERN) 

Egerlandstr. 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 

i.katsounaros@fz -juelich.de 

Time -resolved ch aracterization methods provide fundamental insights into electrode processes by 

capturing events that occur at short time scales . We recently developed the electrochemical real -time 

mass spectrometry (EC -RTMS) to determine gaseous and liquid products of electrochemical reactions 

shortly after their formation, with resolution in the order of few second s [1]. After describing its basic 

components, I will present some representative examples of using EC -RTMS to monitor the products of 

CO 2 reduction under dynamic conditions , on various copper electrodes. 

References 

1. P. Khanipour et al. ; Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58 (2019) 7273 -7277. Graphene supported metal phthalocyanine as an efficient noble metal 

# free electrocatalyst for tetraelectronic oxygen reduction reaction 

Abhishek KUMAR 1*, Josué M. GONÇALVES 2, Koiti ARAKI 2, Mauro BERTOTTI 2, Rita 

MEUNIER -PREST 1, Marcel BOUVET 1

> 1

Institut de Chimie Moléculaire de l'Université de Bourgogne, UMR CNRS 6302, 

Univ ersité Bourgogne Franche -Comté, Dijon, France 

> 2

Department of Fundamental Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu 

Prestes, 748, 05508 -000 São Paulo, SP, Brazi l

*Abhishek.Kumar@u -bourgogne.fr 

Development of a noble metal free, efficient and durable electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction 

(ORR) is a key requirement for a broader outreach of clean energy technologies like fuel cells, which also 

get utmost relevance in the present scenario of global warming. In this direction, nanocomposites of M -N-

C molecular macrocycles and carbon nanomaterials has attracted tremendous attention because of simple 

and low cost synthesis methods and competitive ORR characteristics as compared to conventional platinum 

based catalysts [1]. In our ongoing studies, a nanocomposite based on cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc) 

supported on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has been synthesized by non -covalent functionalization 

followed by electrochemical reduction and its electrocatalytic properties towards ORR has been 

investigated. Through an extensive structural , topographic and morphological characterizations of the 

resultant CoPc/rGO composite, it was confirmed that electrochemical processing step was the key factor in 

synergi cally enhancing the ORR properties by simultaneously breaking the bigger aggregates of CoPc and 

reducing the oxygenated groups in GO, thereby improving the dispersion of CoPc nanoclusters on planar 

graphene support (Fig. 1a) [2] . Theref ore, electrochemical reduction facilitates the improved exposure of 

ORR sites (metal center in CoPc) , strengthens the π -π stacking in the composite and enhanced the 

conductivity of the catalytic materials. The ORR activity of the catalytic mater ials coated on a glassy carbon 

electrode were evaluated by voltammetric studies performed in a rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) se t

up , which revealed a synergic ORR catalysis at the nano composite surface highlighted by larger current 

densities, 300 mV positive shift of the onset potential, and negligible generation of H 2O2 as compared to 

CoPc and GO (Fig. 1b) . Moreover, CoPc/rGO mat erial has shown longer ORR catalytic lifetime than Pt 

based catalysts and resistance to methanol poisoning, making it an appropriate alternative of conventional 

ORR catalysts in methanol fuel cell. 

Fig. 1: Schematic of electrochemically assisted dispersion of CoPc on graphene support and its ORR 

activity (a). Comparison of voltammograms of different catalytic materials in oxygen saturated 0.1 M 

KNO3 solution (b). 

References 

1. Jiang, Y.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Chen, W., Enhanced Catalytic Performance of Pt -Free Iron Phthalocyanine 

by Graphene Support for Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reaction. ACS Catalysis 2013 , 3, 1263 .

2. Kumar, A.; Gonçalves, J. M.; Lima, A. R.; Matias, T. A.; Nakamura, M.; Bernardes, J. S.; Araki, K.; 

Bertotti, M., Efficient and methanol resistant noble metal free electrocatalyst for tetraelectronic oxygen 

reduction reaction. Electrochimica Acta 2019 , 326 , 134984. Surface functionalization by e lectr ografting of aryls to tune the 

# electrical characteristics of organic electronics devices 

Abhishek KUMAR *, Mickael MATEOS, Rita MEUNIER -PREST, Marcel BOUVET 

Institut de Chimie Moléculaire de l'Université de Bourgogne, UMR CNRS 6302, 

Univ ersité Bourgogne Franche -Comté, Dijon, France 

*Abhishek.Kumar@u -bourgogne.fr 

Electrochemical grafting of aryl molecules on the electrode surfaces is a facile, well -controlled and 

extremely useful surface functionalization stra tegy to modulate the electrical characteristics of organic 

electronics devices. One of the preferred approach to realize such electrografting is via in situ diazonium 

formation from substituted aniline [1] to attach substituted benzenes on the conducting surfaces . Our 

endeavor in this direction is to functionalize Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) surfaces with benzene molecules 

bearing electron donating or accepting ligands to tune the electrical characteristics of t he devices fabricated 

thereafter using such electrochemically processed ITO electrodes. Accordingly, Fig. 1 exhibits the cyclic 

voltammograms (CV) associated with electrografting of trifluoroethoxybenzene (TFEB) from the 

electroreduction of trifluoroethoxybenzene diazonium generated in situ from trifluoroethoxyaniline (TFEA )

in an acidic medium. The progress of the electrodeposition is highlighted by the decrease in the reduction 

current with increasing CV cycles as a consequence of electrode conducting surface blockage by the 

relatively less conducting TFEB films . A simple schematic depicting grafting of TFEB molecules from 

TFEA precursor on the ITO surface during electrochemical processing has been shown in the in set of Fig. 

1a. An optimization of this electrochemical step can result in the coating of a monolayer or a multilayer of 

such molecules on the electrode surface . The implications of such electrochemic al grafting on the electrical 

prop erties of organic electronics devices like a Lutetium bis -phthalocyanine (LuPc 2) resistor can be 

profound . As a result of electrografting of TFEB film , the current -voltage (I -V) characteristics of the LuPc 2

resistor changed from an Ohmic to S chottky behavior (Fig. 1b ), which can be attributed to the formation of 

an orga nic heterojunction interface because of electrografting [2] . Nature of these organic heterojuncti on 

interfaces and the built -in interfacial potential barrier so developed can be effecti vely tuned by the 

appropriate selection of substituents in the aryl molecules to be electrogrtaed at the electrode surface. 

Modulation of the interfacial potential barrier by electrografting in such organic heterojunction based 

devices and their applications in the development of conductometric gas sensors microsystem is the main 

scope of our ongoing work .

Fig. 1: Cyclic voltammograms of ITO electrode in 2 mM trifluoroethoxybenzene diazonium in 1 M HClO 4

at a scan rate of 40 mVs -1 and schematic of electrografting of TFEB from TFEA on the ITO substrate in 

the inset (a). I -V characteristics of LuPc 2 resistor without and with electrografting of TFE B (c) .

References 

1. Mateos , M.; Meunier -Prest , R.; Suisse , J-M.; Bouvet , M. ; Modulation of the organic heterojunction 

behavior, from electrografting to enhanced sensing properties , Sens. Actuators B, 2019 299 126968. 

2. Mateos, M.; Meunier -Prest, R.; Heintz, O.; Herb st, H.; Suisse, J -M.; Bouvet, M; Comprehensive study 

of poly(2,3,5,6 -tetrafluoroaniline): from electrosynthesis to heterojunctions and ammonia sensing , ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces , 2018 10 (23) 19974. Tuning the Water Reduction Through Controlled Nanoconfinement 

# Within an Organic Liquid M atrix 

Nicolas DUBOUIS ,1,2 Alessandra SERVA, 2,3 Roxanne BERTHIN, 2,3 Guillaume JEANMAIRET, 2,3 

Benjamin PORCHERON, 2,4 Elodie SALAGER, 2,4 Mathieu SALANNE, 2,3 Alexis GR IMAUD 1,2 

1. Chimie du Solide et de l’Énergie, Collège de France , Paris 

2. RS2E, French Research Network on Energy Storage 

3. Sorbonne Université, CNRS, P HENIX , Paris, France 

4. CNRS -CEMHTI, UPR3079, Université d’Orléans, Orléans 

nicolas.dubouis@college -de -france.fr 

The production of hydrogen through water splitting appears as an attractive way to face the intermittency 

of renewable energy power sources. In acidic media, the hydrogen evolution reac tion exhibits very good 

kinetics on platinum electrocatalysts . However, in alkaline media , the HER exhibits relatively poor 

kinetics. After years of research efforts, a consensus has emerged at recognizing that the sole change in 

the energy of the surface intermediates cannot explain these different behaviors. Indeed, the structure of 

the interfacial water has been highlighted as a major parameter that controls the interfacial charge 

transfer, and thus the HER kinetics .[1 -6]

Figure 1. Snapshots of molecular dynamics simulations of water in acetonitrile for different water/salt ratios that 

illustrate the formation of aqueous nanoreactors .

To gain a deeper understanding on how these weak interactions affect the water reactivity, we have 

successfully explored a strategy consisting in confin ing water in an organic inert and liquid matrix 

(acetonitrile) . Doing so, aqueous nanoreactors with controlled size and chemical compositions can be 

prepared. Hence, by playing on the water concentr ation, and/ or on the supporting salt nature and/or 

concentration, the short and long -range environment of water molecules can be tuned , as we 

demonstrated by the combine use of classical molecular dynamics simulations, small -angle X-Ray 

scattering and NMR spectroscopy. Indeed, we show that water molecules can be isolated to independently 

study the influence of the water -cation interaction . Furthermore, by varying the size of the aqueous 

nanodomains , the amount of H-bonds formed between water molecules can b e controlled , as illustrated in 

the Figure 1 . Comparing this structural information with the measured activity for the water reduction on 

a platinum electrode , we can draw a picture of how the cation -water and water -water interactions 

compete , and how they govern the water reactivity at negatively charged electrodes. Overall, our results 

confirm the critical role of the transport of hydronium/hydroxides ions through the electrical double -layer 

on the water electrochemical reactivity. We believe that this si mple chemical approach provide s valuable 

information at the atomic level on the effect of water structure; these information were hardly attainable 

so far since it require s the use of complex experimental (temperature -jump, XAS, etc. ) or computational 

tec hniques . Furthermore, developing such strategy to control the short - and long -range interactions in 

aqueous electrolytes will certainly prove very useful for studying other electrocatalytic reactions (OER, 

CO2RR, etc.).                           

> [1] Subbaraman, R.; Tripkovic, D.; S trmcnik, D.; Chang, K. -C.; Uchimura, M.; Paulikas, A. P.; S tamenkovic, V.; Markovic, N. M.,
> Science 2011 ,334 (6060), 1256 –1260
> [2] Ledezma -Yanez, I.; Wallace, W. D. Z.; Sebastián -Pascual, P.; Climent, V.; Feliu, J. M.; Koper, M. T. M. Nature Energy 2017 ,2
> (4), 17031.
> [3] Dubouis, N.; Yang, C.; Beer, R.; Ries, L.; Voiry, D.; Grimaud, A. Interfacial. ACS Catal. 2018 ,8(2), 828 –836.
> [4] Dubouis, N.; Lemaire, P.; Mirvaux, B.; Salager, E.; Deschamps, M.; Grimaud, A. Energy & Environmental Science 2018 ,11
> (12), 3491 –3499.
> [5] Dubouis, N.; Serva, A.; Salager, E.; Deschamps, M.; Salanne, M.; Grimaud, A. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018 ,9(23), 6683 –6688.
> [6] Dubouis, N and Grimaud, A, Chemical Science 2019 ,10, 9165 -9181

# Synthetic Models of Hydrogenases as Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen 

# Energy - from Molecules to Materials 

Budnikova Y.H. , Khrizanforov a V.V.

A.E.Arbuzov Institute of Organic and Physical Chemistry, KSC of RAS, Kazan, Russia 

420088, Kazan, Arbuzov str., 8 

yu lia@iopc.ru 

Replacing platinum in hydrogen fuel cells with earth abundant metals will be a crucial step toward the 

viable use of H 2 as a solar fuel. Understanding the factors that control the binding and heterolysis of H 2 to 

these metals can play a key ro le in improving H 2 activation/production. The [FeFe] - and [NiFe] -

hydrogenases easily catalyze reversible interconversion between dihydrogen gas and protons and 

electrons at mild conditions. The structures of hydrogenase active sites have provided attractiv e targets 

for synthetic chemists to advance our understanding of the electronic structure and reactivity of these 

unique enzyme active sites. These efforts contribute to the synthesis of new Fe, Co and Ni catalysts for 

hydrogen oxidation or production that could have significant impacts on alternative and renewable energy 

solutions.  In recent times, highly active widespread numerous electrocatalysts, both homogeneous or 

heterogeneous (immobilized on the electrode), such as transition metal complexes, hetero atom - or metal -

doped nanocarbons, metal -organic frameworks, and other metal derivatives (calix[4]resorcinols, pectates, 

etc.), which are, to one extent or another, structural or functional analogs of hydrogenases, have been 

extensively studied as alternati ves for Pt -based catalysts, demonstrating prospects for the development of 

a "hydrogen economy".  The development of new biomimetic catalytic systems mimicking the action of 

metalloenzymes and biological nanoreactors is based on cage structures, which conta in P, N and S donor 

atoms coordinated to metal atoms and form cavities composed of macrocycles. The maximum TOFs of 

hydrogen evolution from the best Ni catalysts reach 15200 s -1, which exceeds the values for most 

synthetic electrocatalysts known in the lit erature and is comparable with the activity of natural 

hydrogenases. In recent years new materials have been created for fuel cells based on organometallic 

hydrogenase models, which have shown their effectiveness. So, the diaza -diphosphacyclooctane 

nickel( II) complex [Ni(P Py 2Np-Tol 2)2]2+ 2 on Vulcan XC -72(C) functions as both the cathode and anode 

catalysts in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell with the cathode the power density of 14.66 mWcm -2,

which is the highest power density of the none -noble organo metallic analogs. Membrane -electrode 

assemblies with a cathode catalyst made of a nickel sodium pectate complex PG -NaNi with maximum 

current density of 59 mAcm −2 and power density of 5.9 mWcm −2 have been successfully created. These 

results permit the devel opment of environmentally friendly and stable catalysts for PEMFCs made of a 

available biological raw material. The main advances in the development of synthetic analogues of 

natural metal -containing hydrogenases and materials based on them are analyzed an d summarized. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by  RFBR  (grant №  № 19 -03 -00084 and 18 -29 -04004 ). 

References: Chem . - A Europ. J., 2014, 20(11), 3169; J.Or ganomet.Chem., 2015, 789, 14; Russ. Chem. 

Rev., 2017, 86(4), 298; Energy Technol. 2018, 6, 1088; Inorg.Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 780 ; Dalton Trans., 

2019, 48 , 36 01 ; Dalton Trans. , 2020, DOI: 10.1039/C9DT04834K Metalla -electrocatalyzed C −H Activation. Mechanistic Pathways 

# Through Radical or High -valent Organometallic Intermediates 

Budnikova Y.H. , Dudkina Y.B., Gryaznova T.V., Khrizanforov M.N. 

A.E.Arbuzov Institute of Organic and Physical Chemistry, KSC of RAS, Kazan, Russia 

420088, Kazan, Arbuzov str., 8 

yulia@iopc.ru 

The transition -metal -catalyzed reactions are among the most valuable transformations in organic 

synthesis and are generally rests on catalytic cycle involving transition metal complexes at various 

oxidation states. In this context, electrochemistry provides advantageous methods both for synthetic 

purposes and for mechanistic investigation. Electrosynthesis is useful in transition metal catalysis to 

generate the active catalyst form without speciall y added reducing or oxidizing agents. Performed in mild 

conditions it offers more environmentally non -polluting alternatives to traditional organic synthesis. 

Electrochemical methods should be used in combination with spectroscopy techniques to provide det ailed 

characterization of the intermediate species. The merger of metal catalysis and electrosynthesis, metalla -

electrocatalysis, has been identified as a powerful strategy towards sustainable synthesis, which was 

substantiated by electrochemical metal -cat alyzed C -H functionalizations in recent years. We propose a 

"green" one -step catalytic method for introduction of fluorine -, phosphorus - or nitrogen -containing 

functional groups to different compounds with C(sp 2)-H bonds assisted by electrochemical reducti on or 

oxidation of metal complexes under mild conditions. The catalytically active form of metal complexes in 

high oxidation state (Ni III or Pd III , Fe II , Ag I etc.) is generated and regenerated on the electrode without 

specially added oxidants . Key organome tallic intermediates are isolated and characterized. The patterns 

of these reactions have been established . High -valent cobalt IV -bpy and other complex es stabilized in silica 

matrix w ere detected as catalytically active form and intermediate in cobalt -media ted oxidative C -H/NH 

cross -coupling reaction. Radical reaction pathways were found in some cases. Advantages of directed 

metal -induced aromatic C -H-fluoroalkylation, phosphorylation or amination are demonstrated. 

Acknowledgemen ts 

This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation (grant № 19 -13 -00016). 

References: ChemCat Chem, 2019, 11, 5615; Organometallics, 2019, 38, 3617; Pure & App. Chem., 

2019, 91, 17; Organometallics , 2019 , 38 , 1254; Topics in Catalysis, 2018, 61, 1949; Dalton Trans. , 2018, 

47 , 9608; New J. Chem., 2018,42, 930; Dalton Trans. , 2018, 47, 190; Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2012 , 2114, etc. Oxygen Electrocatalysis by Transition Metal Spinel Oxides 

Zhichuan J. Xu  

> 1

School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.  

> 2

Solar Fuels Laboratory, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.  

> 3

Energy Research Institute@NTU, ERI@N, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. 

xuzc@ntu.edu.sg 

Exploring efficient and low -cost oxygen electrocatalysts for ORR and OER is critical for developing 

renewable energy technologies like fuel cells, me tal -air batteries, and water electrolyzers. This 

presentation will present a systematic study on oxygen electrocatalysis (ORR and OER) of transition 

metal spinel oxides. Starting with a mode l system of Mn -Co spinel, the presentation will introduce the 

corr elation of oxygen catalytic activities of these oxides and their intrinsic chemical properties. The 

catalytic activity was measured by rotating disk technique and the intrinsic chemical prop erties were 

probed by synchrotron X -ray absorption techniques. It was found that molecular orbital theory is able to 

well -explain their activities. The attention was further extended from cubic Mn -Co spinels to tetragonal 

Mn -Co spinels and it was found tha t the molecular theory is again dominant in determining the cataly tic 

activi ti es. This mechanistic principle is further applied to explain the ORR/OER activities of other spinels 

containing other transition metals (Fe, Ni, Zn, Li, etc. ). The talk further gives insight on surface 

reconstruction on spinel oxides and how th e bulk properties affect such reconstruction during OER. In 

addition, the talk will also discuss the possibility of the spin -selected charge transfer during oxygen 

electrocatalysis throug h t ransition metal oxides. Dual -cathode Pulsed Current Electro -Fenton System : Enhancement 

# for H2O2 Generation and Fe 3+ Reduction 

Fengxia DENG a, Shan QIU a

a State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resources Centre, School of Environment, Harbin Institute of 

Technology, Harbin, 150090, P.R. China 

dengfx@hit.edu.cn 

Abst ract : In conventional electro -Fenton (EF), high H 2O2 generation and fast Fe 3+ reduction rate are hard 

to simultaneously achieve on single cathode (Liang et al., 2018 ; Deng et al., 2019 ; Xia et al., 2020 ).

Then a dual -cathode pulsed current EF is offered, where constant current imposes on gas diffusion 

cathode (GDE) and carbon felt alternately. In this system, GDE is mainly for H2O2 accumulation, while 

carbon felt is primarily for Fe 3+ reduction. Optimal current density for H2O2 formation on GDE is 10 mA 

cm -2, while it is 2.5 mA cm -2 for Fe 3+ reduction on carbon felt. Sw itching time of 20 s is alternatively 

applied on each cathode (Fig .1 ). Under optimal conditions, H2O2 reaches 1400 μM, which is higher than 

the sum of H2O2 generation (1289.86 μM) on GDE and carbon felt in the conventional one. In addition, 

its energy consumption experiences the lowest level as 31.16 W h/mol H2O2. Mo reover, a higher Fe 3+ 

reduction rate (93.8%) is observed than the conventional single carbon felt system (71%). And total iron 

keeps stable since iron precipitation near -cathode vicinity is alleviated. A 98.5% sulfamerazine decay 

coupled with 85.6% mineral ization confirms the superiority of the system, where a higher concentration 

•OH is detected compared to the conventional one. In conclusion, the proposed system coordinates H2O2

formation and Fe 3+ redu ction. 2D Graph 2                             

> X Data
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Y Data
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Current density (mA cm -2 )
> 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
> H2O2 (μM)
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Current efficiency (%)
> 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> 30 min 60 min Current efficiency Current mode
> Constant 5s/5s 10s/10s 15s/15s 20s/20s 25s/25s 30s/30s
> H2O2 (μM)
> 0200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
> Current efficiency (%)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 30 min 60 min Current efficiency
> (b) Dissolved
> oxygen
> Coxygen
> Cathode
> H2O2
> The bul kDiffusion layer
> d
> 2-5Å
> Double layer
> Electron transfer
> Oxygen mass transfer
> l
> 10 -100Å
> δ
> 10 5-10 6Å
> 2e -
> Anode
> DC power
> Dissolved oxygen
> Distance
> from the
> cathode
> O2, bulk O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, bulk
> O2, gas (c)

Fig. 1. (a) Effect of current density on H 2O2 accumulation and related current efficiency (CE) at GED 

cathode, (b) influence of current mode on H 2O2 accumulation and current efficiency (CE) , (c) the whole 

process for two -electron ORR. Conditions: pH=3, [Na 2SO 4] =50 mM, [oxygen flow rate] =300 mL min -1,

BDD sheet anode and GDE cathode (1 cm ×2 cm ). 

# References: 

Deng, F., Li, S., Zhou, M., Zhu, Y., Qiu, S., Li, K., Ma, F., Jiang, J., 2019 . Applied Catalysis B: 

Environmental 256, 117796. 

Liang, J., Zhang, Y., So ng, C., Tang, D., Sun, J., 2018 . ELECTROCHEM COMMUN 94, 55 -58. 

Xia, C., Back, S., Ringe, S., Jiang, K., Chen, F., Sun, X., Siahrostami, S., Chan, K., Wang, H., 2020 .

Nature Catalysis. Flexible Sensors For Biomarker Determination In Sweat 

Ricardo J. B. Leote 1,2 , Anca Alde a2,3 , Victor C. Diculescu 2, Alexandru Evanghelidis 2

Elena Matei 2, Ionut Enculescu 2

> 1

University of Bucharest, Mihail Kogălniceanu 36, Bucharest, 05010, Romania. 

> 2

Natio nal Institute of Materials Physics: Str. Atomistilor nr. 405A 077125 Magurele, Romania 

> 3

Politehnica University of Bucharest, Applied Chemistry and Material Science Faculty, 

Gheorghe Polizu 1 -7, 011061 Bucharest, Romania 

ricardo.leote@infim.ro 

Biomarkers real time monitoring of biological fluids plays an important in preventive medicine [1]. 

Generally, bod il y fluids serve as carriers for biologically active compounds and as medium in which 

biochemical reactions take place , therefore , a large range of infor mation can be obtained by monitoring 

alterations to their composition in real time, or as response to external stimulus [2]. The most common 

example is the d etermination of glucose in blood. Particularly, sweat contains a large amo unt of small 

molecules an d ions with biochemical interest, being an accessible biological fluid, continuous monitoring 

biomarker concentration in sweat represents an alternative to traditional methods avoiding discomfort to 

patients . To achieve this, wearable devices are designed for direct contact with the epidermis. The goal of 

of this work was to obtain flexible electrodes that allow direct contact with the skin by producing 

microscopic fibers of poly -methyl methacrylate (PMMA) by electrospinning [ 3]. Consequently, the 

microscop ic fiber networks were metalized by thermal evaporation and magnetron sputtering with metals 

such as Au, Ag and Pd, [4], conductive and highly porous networks were obtained , which were then 

transferred onto polyethylene terephthalate flexible supports (PET ).

Fig. 1. A) Cyclic voltamograms of Pd /PMMA/PET electrode at different scan rates and B) amperometric 

response at -0.20 V after consecutive injections of 1 mM H 2O2 in 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH 7.0, at 

Au/PMMA/PET electrode 

Metalized flexible electrode s were applied for the detection of enzymatic products/coproducts like 

hydrogen peroxide by fixed potential amperometry . Optimum operational conditions were assed and 

analytical parameters were calculated for H 2O2. PMMA metalized fibers were modified with different 

ionophores [5], in order to obtained sensor s for target analytes such as Ca 2+ , H +, NH 4+ and Cl -. Ionophores 

immobilization procedure was optimized in order to improve sensitivity to analyte presence. T he obtained 

interface was characterized by sc anning electron microscopy with energy -dispersive X -ray spectroscopy, 

cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 

References 

[1] K. N. Mikhelson, M. A. Peshkova, Russ. Chem. Rev . 2015 , 84, 555 

[2] S. An et al., Chem. Eng. J. 327, 201 7, 336 

[3] V. C. Diculescu et al , Sci . Rep . 2019, 9, 8902 

[4] J.W. Huh et al., Cur. Appl. Phys ., 2017 , 17, 1401 

[5] M. Cuartero, G. A. Crespo, E. Bakker, Anal. Chem . 2016 , 88, 165 4The impact of nanowire geometry over the electric properties of ZnO 

# nanowires based devices 

Melania Loredana ONEA 1,2 , Elena MATEI 1, Monica ENCULESCU 1, Ionut ENCULESCU 1

1. National Institute of Materials Physics, Atomistilor 405A, 077125, Magurele Romania 

2. University of Bucharest, Faculty of Physics, Atomistilor 405, 077125, Magurele Romania 

melania.onea@infim.ro 

Fabrication of nanostructur es with controlled morphology is extremely practical when it comes to 

applications like sensing devices. One of the most versatile nanostructures are semiconductor nanowires 

because they allow a control of key parameters such as chemical composition, diameter, length, dopping, 

electronic properties. Having been used in energy production, photocathalysis, light emitting devices, 

sensors or logic circuits, zinc oxide is one of the best candidates to build field effect transistors. This 

material is interesting due to its intrinsic physical properties, to its high occurrence/low cost and 

nontoxicity. [1, 2, 3, 4 ] Using a mat erial which properties have been intensely studied makes it easier 

when one wants to observe the geometrical effect of ZnO nanowires ove r the electric response of a fi eld

effect transistor. 

With the use of two types of polycarbonate me mbranes which have cylindrical pores (with the diameter 

of 200nm and 100n m), ZnO has been electrodeposited at two different deposition potential s. This resulted 

in four types of ZnO nanowires having different diameters (leading to a change of the surface/volume 

ratio) and ha vin g different concentration of Zn (leading to a change of the majority charge carriers). 

Electron beam lithography (EBL) followed by sputtering techniques were employed in order to contact 

the nanowires to the electrodes. To understand how the size of t he channels influences the properties of 

the final device , for each of the four types of nanowires used, two different channel lengths were made 

using EBL .

Scanning electron microscopy, energy -dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, reflection and X-ray diffractio n

were use d to characterize the nanowires and the field effect transistors obtained. Thus we were able to 

analyze the morphology, the composition, the structure and the value of the bang gap in order to have a 

better understanding over the electrical measu rements that have been made at different temperatures . The 

goal of this study is to functionalize the field effect transistor with electrodeposited ZnO nanowire 

channel in order to obtain a device which is sensitive to organic compounds such as biotin. 

References: 

[1] C. Florica, E. Matei, A. Costas, M. E. Toimil Molares, I. Enculescu, Field Effect Transistor with 

Electrodeposited ZnO Nanowire Channel, Electrochimica Acta, doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2014.05.124. 

[2] E. Matei, A. Costas, C. Florica, M. Encul escu, I. Pintilie, L. Pintilie, I. Enculescu, Electrical properties 

of templateless electrodeposited ZnO nanowires, Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, doi: 

10.1016/j.mssp.2015.11.007. 

[3] C Florica, A Costas, A Kuncser, N Preda, I Enculescu , Hi gh performance FETs based on ZnO 

nanowires synthesized by low cost methods , Nanotechnology , doi: 10.1088/0957 -4484/27/47/475303 .

[4] C. Tazlaoanu, L. Ion, I. Enculescu, M. Sima, M. Enculescu, E. Matei, R. Neumann, R. Bazavan, D. 

Bazavan, S. Antohe, Transpo rt properties of electrodeposited ZnO nanowires, Physica E: Low -

dimensional Systems and Nanostructures, doi: 10.1016/j.physe.2007.07.013. Influence of superimposed magnetic field on Co -Fe alloy 1D nanocone 

# array electrodeposited in AAO template. 

K. Skibinska , K. Kolczyk -Siedlecka, D. Kutyla, A. Kwiecinska, R. Kowalik, P. Zabinski 

University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Non -Ferrous M etals, Mickiewicza 30, 30 -059, Krakow, 

Poland 

kskib@agh.edu.pl 

One -dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanotubes, nanopores, nanodots and nanocones are 

fabricated using porous anodic alumina oxide (AAO) template produced in two -step anodization . Due t o

their large active surface area and small geometrical size these materials are characterised by better 

catalytic properties than bulk material [1]. Alternating cycles of the anodization in oxalic acid and pore 

widening process in phosphoric acid led to o btain conical nanopores templates. To obtain free standing 

nanocones the Al 2O3 template has to be chemically etched. 

Co -Fe alloy nanocones were electrodeposited in AAO templates. The magnetic field with different 

intensity has been superimposed during elec trodeposition. The hydrodynamic conditions during 

electrochemical process are changed by t he magnetic field . This cause the modification of composition 

and morphology of Co -Fe nanocones. The active surface area of samples were calculated from SEM 

photos. The electrocatalytic properties of fabricated nanostructures were measured in 1M NaOH and 

compared with bulk materials. 

References 

[1] Kurowska E., Brzozka A., Jarosz M., Sulka G. D., Jaskula M., “Silver nanowire array sensor for 

sensitive and rapid detec tion of H2O2,” Electrochimica Acta, 104, pp. 439 –447 (2013) 

Acknowledgement 

This work was financially supported by Polish National Science Center (NCN) under grant UMO -

2016/23/G/ST5/04058. Determination of bisphenol S, simultaneously to bisphenol A in 

# different water matrices or solely in electrolyzed solutions, using a 

# cathodically pretreated boron -doped diamond electrode 

Jhonys Machado Freitas , Naihara Wachter, Romeu C. Rocha -Filho 

Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de São Carlos 

C.P. 676,13560 -970 São Carlos, SP, Brazil 

jhonysmf@gmail.com 

As the hazardous effects of bisphenol A (BPA) are being revealed, alternative “BPA -free” products are 

coming out. Bisphenol S (BPS) is one of the most widely used substitutes for BPA. However, it has been 

shown by recent studies that BPS could be unsafe similarly to its  analog  BPA 1. The widespread use of BPS 

and BPA and their persistence in the environment make them arise as worrisome pollutants. In this context ,

analytical methods capable of simultaneously determining BPS and BPA in different environments liable 

to contamination, l ike waterbodies, are required. In this work, a simple, accurate and environmentally 

friendly method for the simultaneous determination of BPS and BPA was developed and validated. The 

determination was performed by square -wave voltammetry (SWV) using a cath odically pretreated boron -

doped diamond (BDD) as the working electrode , with 0.1 mol L −1 H2SO 4 as the supporting electrolyte .

Under optimized conditions , a wide linear working range  (R 2 = 0.999)  from  0.20 to 80.0 mg L −1 (8.0 × 10 −7 

to 3.20 ×10 −4 mol L −1) with a limit of detection ( S/N = 3) of 0.06 0 mg L −1 (2.4 ×10 −7 mol L −1 ) was attained 

for BPS. For BPA, a linear correlation (R 2 = 0.992) from 0.10 to 50 .0 mg L −1 (4.4 × 10 −7 to 2. 19 ×10 −4 mol 

L−1) was attained, with a limit of detection of 0.03 0 mg L −1 (1.3 ×10 −7 mol L −1). Figure 1 presents the 

baseline -corrected square -wave voltammograms for both concentrations being varied simultaneously (Fig. 

1A), and t he Ip vs . [BPS] or [BPA] plots (Fig. 1B) for the lower concentration s of the linear work ing ranges .

Fig. 1. (A) Baseline -corrected square -wave voltammograms at the cathodically pretreated boron -doped 

diamond electrode for the simultaneous addition of increasing concentrations of BPS and BPA in 0.1 mol 

L−1 H2SO 4. (B) Respective calibration curves for BPS (black) and BPA (blue) obtained from the 

simultaneous addition data. SWV parameters: amplitude : 50 mV , frequency : 60 Hz , step potential: 6 mV 

As can be seen in Fi gure 1, independent increases of the oxidation current peaks were observed with a

linear behavior (R 2 ≥ 0.994) . Thus, it can be concluded that the simultaneous determination of BPS and 

BPA is feasible in the given conditions . The method was applied to the simultaneous determination of BPS 

and BPA in real water samples, with minimum sample preparation processes ( only dilution and 

acidification). Excellent recovery values were achieved, ranging from 94.9 to 98.8% . Additionally, the 

method was applied to the monitoring of the electrochemical degr adation (anodic oxidation) of BPS  using 

a recirculating flow system fitted with a BDD anode. The decay of [BPS] with time was also checked by 

an HPLC method, with results statistically similar to those obtained by the proposed electroanalytical 

method. Hen ce, the proposed method is a reliable, greener and low -cost alternative to monitor 

simultaneously BPS and BPA in aquatic matrices or only BPS in waste water treatment processes.  

> 1

D. Chen, K. Kannan, H. Tan, Z. Zheng, Y. -L. Feng, Y. Wu, M. Widelka . Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (2016) 

5438 –5453. Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction on Ni -based materials: influence of the 

# surface state of Ni vs electronic effect of a second metal 

A.G . Oshchepkov 1,* , A.N. Kuznetsov 1, P.A. Simonov 1, A. Bonnefont 2, O.V. Cherstiouk 1, R.R. 

Na zmutdinov 3, R.I. Kvon 1, V.I. Zaikovs kii 1, E.R. Savinova 4 

> 1

Boreskov Institute of Catalysis SB RAS, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia  

> 2

IC UMR 7177 CNRS -Université de Strasbourg, 67000 Strasbourg, France  

> 3

Kazan National Research Technological University, 420015 Kazan, Russia  

> 4

ICPEES UMR 7515 -CNRS -Université de Strasbourg, 67087 Strasbourg, France 

* oshchepkov@catalysis.ru 

Recent years have witnessed significant increase in the interest towards H 2-O2 (air) anion exchange 

membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs), l argely stimulated by the development of AEMs and platinum group 

metal (PGM) free catalysts for the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) [1 -7]. The latter are typically 

based on nickel, benefiting from its low cost and high corrosion stability in alkaline medi a. Since pure 

metallic Ni demonstrates rather poor performance in the HOR, various means have been suggested for its 

‘activation ’. Alloying of Ni with a second metal is one of the most popular approaches [ 1-3]. The activity 

enhancement is usually attribute d to an electronic effect of the second metal , while the exact physical 

origin of this ‘electronic’ effect has not been fully understood yet. Meanwhile, such an understanding is 

of paramount importance for the development of efficient anode catalysts for A EMFC s.

In this work, we prepare a series of monometallic Ni/C and bimetallic NiM o/C and NiCu/C catalysts 

using an incipient wetness impregnation. The ir HOR activities are compatible with the best reported 

PGM -free catalysts [3 -6]. By complementing electroc hemical studies with a thorough physicochemical 

analysis (HR -(S)TEM, EDS, XRD, XPS) of the prepared catalysts before and after their reductive 

treatment , by performing Monte Carlo simulations of bimetallic nanoparticles we demonstrate several 

important fin dings. First, we show that the surface state of monometallic Ni/C catalysts is a determinant 

factor for their specific activity in the HOR independent of the synthetic procedure (electrodeposition or 

chemical deposition) . Second , more importantly, by compa ring HOR activity of mono - and bimetallic 

(NiMo/C and NiCu/C ) catalysts either taken from air or subjected to thermal reduction by H 2 right before 

the electrocatalytic measurements we discover that the state of the Ni surface (metallic vs partially 

oxidize d) has stronger influence on the HOR than the presence of the second component (Fig. 1) . At the 

same time, the second metal might help to maintain (up to some extent) the desired state of Ni surface in 

the resulting catalyst thus affecting its stability in the HOR .

Figure 1. HOR polarization curves (0.1 M NaOH, 25 °C, 5 mV/s, 1600 rpm) and the corresponding 

surface - and mass -normalized HOR exchange current densities (insets) for Ni /KB (a), Ni 20 Cu 1/KB (b) ,

Ni 10 Mo 1/KB (c) catalysts either taken from air (1 ) or subjected to thermal reduction by H 2 (2). 

References 

[1] Oshchepkov et al. J. Power Sources 2018 , 402 , 447 –452 ; [2] Yang et al. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 

2019 , 58 , 14179 –14183 ; [3] Kabir et al. J. Mater. Chem. A 2017 , 5, 24433 –24443 ; [4] Ni et al. Ang ew. 

Chemie - Int. Ed. 2019 , 58 , 7445 –7449 ; [5] Zhuang et al. Nat. Commun. 2016 , 7, 10141 ; [6] Yang et al. J. 

Mater. Chem. A 2019 , 7, 10936 –10941 ; [7] Arges, Le Zhang. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2018 1 (7) , 2991 -

3012 Formation and Reactivity of Phosphorous Acid on Platinum at Conditions 

# Relevant to HT PEM Fuel Cell 

M. Prokop , T. Bystron, M. Paidar, K. Bouzek 

University of Chemistry and Technology , Prague 

Technicka 5, Prague 6 166 28, Czech Republic 

prokopm@vscht.cz 

Proton -conductive membranes, based on doping of polymers with H 3PO 4, are often utilised in fuel cells operating 

above the temperature of 120 °C. The main advantage of operating at elevated temperatures is feasible heat 

recuperation and ab sence of demanding water regime. Particularly, high temperature fuel cell with proton -conductive 

membrane (HT PEM FC) , operating in temperature range of 120 to 180 °C, is one of promising types. It utilizes Pt 

nanoparticles as a catalyst on both electrodes , hydrogen as a fuel and oxygen as an oxidant. In membrane, H 3PO 4 is 

used as a dopant with high proton -conductivity and, supposedly, high stability. However, the stability has been 

questioned in recent years, as electrochemical reduction of H 3PO 4 on a Pt s urface can lead to formation of H 3PO 3 and 

other phosphorus compounds like Pt -P. 

One of the profound problems related to HT PEM FC is degradation of Pt catalyst on the cathode and, consequently, 

diminishing of Pt surface area during the operation. The degradation of Pt nanoparticles proceeds via Ostwald ripening 

mechanism, with Pt dissolution as rate -determining step [1] . To avoid de terioration of cathodic Pt surface area, general 

recommendation is to avoid voltage cycling [2] , induced by the start -up and shut -down procedure. At this point, it is 

important to stress that at such conditions, reduction of H 3PO 4 following by the oxidatio n of reduction products, takes 

place on the cathode [3] . The effect of this process on the catalyst is still undescribed, also due to lack of data on 

electrochemical behaviour of H3PO 3 and Pt -P on a Pt surface. What is confirmed, however, is chemical behav iour of 

H3PO 3 in terms of its reducing and adsorbing properties [4] . Therefore, the impact of H 3PO 3 on a degradation of Pt 

nanoparticle catalyst is potentially significant. 

The goal of this study was the description of H 3PO 3 formation and electrochemical behaviour on bulk Pt electrode in 

concentrated H 3PO 4 electrolyte at temperatures above 120 °C . Experiments were performed in three -electrode 

arrangement, using voltammetric methods. Important features of H 3PO 3 behaviour were evaluated, including its 

oxidat ion kinetics and adsorption isotherms on a Pt electrode surface and interaction with oxidised Pt surface. Results 

proved that H 3PO 3 presence in Pt/H 3PO 4 system at elevated temperatures has, indeed, high impact on Pt surface 

reactions dynamics. In the next step, experimental data will be verified using gas -diffusion electrode in half -cell 

arrangement. 

Th is study was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic under project No. 19 -02964J. 

[1] M. Prokop, R. Kodym, T. Bystron, M. Drakselova, M. Paidar, K. Bouzek, Degradation kinetics of Pt during high -

temperature PEM fuel cell operation part II: Dissolution kinetics of Pt incorporated in a catalyst layer of a gas -diffusion 

electrode, Electrochimica Acta, 333 (2020). 

[2] M. Prokop, R. Kodym, T. Bystron, M. Paidar, K. Bouzek, Degradation kinetics of Pt during high -temperature 

PEM fuel cell operation part I: Kinetics of Pt surface oxidation and dissolution in concentrated H 3PO 4 electrolyte at 

elevated temperatures, Electrochimica Acta, 313 (2019) 352 -366. 

[3] M. Prokop, T. Bystron, K. Bouzek, Electrochemistry of Phosphorous and Hypophosphorous Acid on a Pt electrode, 

Electrochimica Acta, 160 (2015) 214 -218. 

[4] M. Prokop, T. Bystron, M. Paidar, K. Bouzek, H 3PO 3 electrochemical behaviour on a bulk Pt electrode: adsorption 

and oxidation kinetics, Electrochimica Acta, 212 (2016) 465 -472. Adsorption of Guanine on Au(111) Electrodes Studied by in situ Surface-Enhanced Infrared Spectroscopy 

Julia Alvarez-Malmagro, a Francisco Prieto, a Manuela Rueda. a

> a

University of Seville.  c/Profesor García González, 41012 Seville, Spain 

jalvarez21@us.es 

DNA-based biosensors attract an enormous interest due to their potential applications , such as detection of DNA base damage in clinical diagnosis or evaluation of DNA-drug interaction mechanisms . 1Understanding the  adsorption of individual DNA bases on solid substrates  is of fundamental interest since different structural conformations adopted by DNA can lead to different interactions, changes the accessibility of drugs to the DNA grooves, or promote different rates of hybridization. 1 These conformational changes in DNA can beinduced by changes in the acid-base or tautomeric equilibria of the bases, originated either by the interaction with the substrate or by the application of an external electric field. Guanine is one of the DNA bases that undergoes two acid/base equilibria, pKa values 4.2 and 9.5, (Figure 1) and may present several tautomeric forms in aqueous solutions. 2   

> NH NNHHNONH 2NH NNHNONH 2NNNHNONH 2

## pk a1 =4.2 H+pk a2 =9.5 H+7986 12345

Figure 1. Acid-base equilibria of guanine 

In the presentwork, we report a spectroelectrochemi cal study by in situ Surface -Enhanced Infrared Absorption Spectroscopy in the Attenuated Total Reflection mode (ATR-SEIRAS) to understand and characterize the guanine adsorption on gold thin-film electrodes from solutions at two pH values under the first pK a using H 2O and D 2O as solvents. The spectra are interpreted on the basis of DFT calculations over different acid-base and tautomeric forms of the molecule. 

[1] Oliveira Brett; A.M, & Chiorcea A.M. Langmuir 2003 , 19, 3830-3839. 

[2] Shishkin, O. V., Sukhanov, O. S., Gorb, L., & Leszczynski, J. (2002). The interaction of the most stable guanine tautomers with water. The structure and prope rties of monohydrates. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys . 2002 , 4, 5359-5364. Electrode Processes in Lithium -Mediated Electrochemical Nitrogen 

# Reduction 

Viktor  Čoli ća,b, Suzanne  Z. Andersen a, Sungeun  Yang a,c, Kasper  Enemark -Rasmussen d, Ifan  E.L. 

Stephens e, Peter  C.K. Vesborg a, Jakob  Kibsgaard a, Ib  Chorkendorff a 

> a

Section for Surfac e Physics and Catalysis, Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, 

Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 

> b

Max -Planck -Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion, Mülheim an der Ruhr , Germany  

> c

Korea Institute of Science and Technology KIST, Center for Energy Materials Research , South Korea  

> d

Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark  

> e

Department of Materials, Imperial College London, Royal School of Mines, London, United Kingdom 

viktor.colic@cec.mpg.de 

Ammonia is one of the most important industrial chemical s, with ca 1 % of the world’s energy being 

used for its production. It is mainly used to produce artificial fertilisers, which are essential for the 

sustenance of the gr owing global population. Even though molecular nitrogen is readily available, the N 2

molecule is notoriously inert and its reduction to NH 3 is challenging. NH 3 is currently produced in the 

energy intensive Haber -Bosch process, which requires high temperatu re and pressure in order to activate 

N2. This necessitat es production in large, centralised plants. Considering this, there is a certain interest in 

the development of alternatives which could be implemented in a more decentralised manner. The 

electrochemi cal re duction of ammonia would be an attractive option , as electrochemical potential could 

be used to drive the reaction, enabling on -site production using electricity from renewable energy sources. 

This prompted widespread scientific interest for the inve stigation of this reaction.  The field of 

electrochemical nitrogen reduction (N 2RR) was , and to a large degree still is , struggling with numerous 

issues regarding reliable NH 3 detection, signal -to -noise ratio, contamination and reproducibility .

Nonetheless, Li -mediated N 2RR in non -aqueous electrolytes has been shown to be a viable method to 

reduce molecular nitrogen to ammonia 1, at least on the laboratory s cale . It is generally assumed that in the 

process the electrodeposited Li reacts with dissolved nitroge n forming Li 3N, which subsequently receives 

proton s from a proton carrier, such as an alcohol, forming NH 3 and an al koxide , Figure 1A . The 

implementation of an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) allows the direct 

measurement of the depositi on on the electrode , which coupled with isotope labelling experiments , can 

shed light on these processes . The monitoring of mass deposition on the electrode surface during the 

potential scan using an EQCM , Figure 1B, can give indications about the SEI form ation, possible side 

reactions , and information about the Li deposition process and subsequent reactions 2. While nitrogen 

reduction in ambient conditions is an interesting prospect , this electrochemical system does have certain 

limitations: only modest Far adaic efficiencies were achieved , it requires oxygen - and water -free 

conditions, non -green solvents are usually used, and the proton carriers are irreversibly lost in the 

reaction . The prospects of overcoming these and other issues will be discussed , and p ossible direction s for 

future research will be laid out. 

Figure 1: (A) The proposed reaction scheme (B) Mas s deposition, current and charge passed during 

potential scan as detected by EQCM   

> [1]S. Z. Andersen*, V. Čolić*, S.Yang*, J.A. Schwalbe, A.C. Nielander, J.M. McEnaney, K. Enemark -Rasmussen,
> J.G. Baker, A.R. Singh, B.A. Rohr, M.J. Statt, S.J. Blair, S. Mezzavilla, J. Kibsgaard, P.C.K. Vesborg, M. Cargnello,
> S.F. Bent, T.F. Jaramillo, I. E.L. Stephens, J.K. Nørskov, I. Chorkendorff, Nature , 2019, 570, 504 –508.
> *these authors contributed equally

[2] To be determined . I n preparation .CO 2 Reduction R eaction on Cu 2O Electrodes: 

# High Alcohol Selectivity at Low Overpotential 

# Accompanied by Current Oscillations 

André H. B. Dourado , Katharina Krischer 

Nonequilibrium Chemical Physics - Technical University of Munich 

James -Franck -Str. 1, 8 5748 Garching, Germany 

e-mail: andre.dourado@tum.de 

The electrochemical reduction of CO 2 (CO2RR) provides an attractive means to synthesize fuels and 

feedstock chemicals in a sustainable way. However, a large -scale utilization is still hampered by the low 

selectivity of most catalysts for many of the potential products as well as high overpotentials. So -called 

Cu oxide -derived Cu (Cu -OD) has been identified as promising electrode material, overcoming in part 

these limitations. The catalytically active Cu -OD electrode is obtained operando from Cu 2O primary 

material at CO2RR electrode potentials and exhibit s a high selectivity for C 2 products, in particular for 

ethylene . On the other side, it has been believed to be inactive towards alcohol formation [1]. In this paper 

we present a modified protocol for the generation of Cu -OD electrodes that is highly selective for alcohol 

formation and yields current densities as high as 300 mA /cm 2 geometrical area at overpotentials as low as 

-0. 7 VRHE .

The Cu -OD catalyst w as electrochemically synthesized by sequential depositions , leading to a high 

surface area Cu 2O (with a roughness factor r = 35.2 for the electrochemical surface area ).

Characterization of the material and the Cu -OD surface by XPS, showed that the catalyti cally active 

surface has an unusual large number of oxygen vacancies .

The CO 2RR was measured in a CO 2-saturated, 0.5 M K2CO 3 electrolyte . CO 2RR current densities 

obtained were in the order of 10 mA cm -2ECSA , i.e. 350 mA cm -2geometrical , at -0.70 V RHE , on e of the highest 

activit ies ever reported at this overpotential [1,2] . Thi s high current value is observed together with 

another feature , so far not observed during CO 2RR , namely current oscillations , manifesting that for this 

set of conditions CO 2RR presents non -linear behavior. Liquid products analysis was performed by 

nuclea r magnetic resonance (NMR) after keeping the electrode for 1h under oscillatory conditions. 

Ethanol (EtOH) and methanol (MeOH) were the main products, with farad aic efficiencies of 33.1 (EtOH) 

and 31.7 (MeOH) % . This amounts to activities of -3.35 ( EtOH ) a nd -3.20 ( MeOH ) mA cm -2ECSA or -

119.26 (EtOH) and -114.18 (MeOH) mA cm -2geom (see table I) . Only when the reaction rate exhibited 

oscillations were these high activities observed. XPS data suggested that under these highly active and 

oscillatory conditions the density of oxygen vacancies had increased compared to less negative potentials, 

pointing to a close relation between oscillatory conditions, alcohol selectivity and degree of oxygen 

evacuation. 

Table 1. Faradic efficiencies (FE) and activities (as f unction of geometrical area and ECSA) for alcohols 

obtained during CO 2RR at 0.70 V RHE .

Product  FE / %  Activity / mA cm -2 geom  Activity / mA cm -2 ECSA 

MeOH  31.7  -114.18  -3.20 

EtOH  33.1  -119.26  -3.35 

[1] S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, et al. , Progress and Perspectives of Electrochemical CO 2 Reduction 

on Copper in Aqueous Electrolyte, Chem. Rev. 119 (2019) 7610 –7672. 

doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00705. 

[2] Y.Y. Birdja, et al. , Advances and challenges in understandi ng the electrocatalytic conversion of 

carbon dioxide to fuels, Nat. Energy. 4 (2019) 732 –745. doi:10.1038/s41560 -019 -0450 -y. Pore Network Modelling of Invasion Processes in Electrochemistry 

H. Altaf 1, N. Vorhauer 1, T. Vidakovic -Koch 2, E. Tsotsas 1

> 1

Otto von Guericke University, Institute of Process Engineering, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany 

> 2

Max Planck Institute (Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems), 39106 Magdeburg, Germany 

*haashir.altaf@ovgu.de 

Flow in porous media has widespread importance in various fields of science. For the understanding of 

transport phenomena within a porous medium, at a meso - or micro scale, Pore Network Modelling (PNM) 

ha s been of great use. PNM has been prevalent in geo -material and drying applications for a long time . In 

the recent time, PNM has found its way in to electrochemistry ; precisely in analyzing the two -phase 

transport within the p orous components of fuel cells , electroly zers or batteries . The efficiency of these 

systems depends significantly on the transport kinetics and the evolving dynamic distributions of gas and 

liquid e.g. inside the catalyst layer, where the electrochemical r eactions occur. For example, in the case of 

electrolysers, the oxygen gas produced at the anode must be removed so that the water supply adequately 

persists. The oxygen coverage of the catalyst layer obstructs the water supply towards the reaction zone 1.

This can lead to a decrease in the rate of reaction. On the contrary, in fuel cells, water produced as the result 

of the electrochemical reaction must be removed efficiently 2. For these systems , to be more marketable and 

serve as a viable option for future energy problems, they must be optimized in terms of performance. The 

mass transfer through the se diffusion and transport layers thus becomes an importan t issue to be 

investigated for a better understanding of the transport limitations , as they play a major role in defining the 

performance of these systems. This requires a deep understanding of the pore scale distribution of gas and 

liquid phase at different operating conditions. 

PNM s conceptually represent the porous media . Micro computed tomography is used to extract the required 

information about e.g. pore size distribution , pore connectivity, pore shape etc . The model uses this 

information to ge nerate an interconnected network of pores. This network of pores portrays the voids of the 

porous medi um through which the phase transport occurs. Relevant two -phase flow physics are used to 

study the transport limitations at microscale . Compared to existi ng macroscopic models; PNM is suitable 

for low capillary numbers, takes wetting characteristics into account and resolves the invasion process on 

the pore scale. It can be shown by PNM that the tortuosity of the gas/liquid paths and permeabilities 

essentia lly depend on the pore structure, local temperature and wettability of the porous medi um as well as 

local pressure differences. Use of PNM for imbibition and drainage phenomena allows the study of the 

correlation between material properties and operation c onditions and the relevant effective transport 

parameters, and it can also be used to parameterize the macroscopic continuum models. Thus, PNM can 

also facilitate optimiz ation of the structural parameters of these materials that are required for an efficie nt 

operation. 

1. Ito H, et al. Electrochimica Acta. 2013;100:242 -248 

2. Zhang FY, et al. Journal of Power Sources. 2006;153:A225 Nanoporous gold -palladium: A binary alloy with high catalytic activity 

# for the electro -oxidation of ethanol 

Sang Hoon Kim 1, Keon -U Lee 1,2 , Ji Young Byun 1, Hyung -Joon Shin 2

> 1

Material Architecturing Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technolog y (KIST), Seoul 

02792, Republic of Korea  

> 2

Department of Material Science and Engineering and Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, 

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea 

kim_sh@kist.re.kr 

Nanoporous gold (NP -Au) is a promising versatile material that can be used in many fields, a result of its 

high conductivity, large surface area, and excellent stability. NP -Au is commonly functionalized in 

combination with o ther materials; however, difficult syntheses are obstacles to catalyst development. In 

this presentation, a simple method for the fabrication of binary nanoporous gold -palladium (NP -AuPd) 

with a tunable Au/Pd ratio is developed [1] . Ternary alloy films of Au -Pd -Mg are prepared by sputter 

deposition and Mg is dissolved from the alloy to make nanoporous structures. The Au and Pd in NP -

AuPd are evenly distributed over the entire structure. The electro -catalytic activity of the developed NP -

AuPd is evaluated by oxidizing ethanol in alkaline media. The optimized NP -AuPd shows remarkable 

electro -catalytic activity and excellent stability. The nanoporous structure not only increases the number 

of reaction sites and mass transfer, but it also enhances the durability of the catalyst. The developed 

method can be extended to the preparation of binary nanoporous thin films with controlled compositions 

and desired catalytic activities. 

[1] K. -U. Lee, J. Y. Byun, H. -J Shin, S. H. Kim (submitted) Metal Air Battery using Expand ed Natural Graphite Sheet 

# as Cathode at the emergency 

Hiroshi Okano 1, Takashi Inoue 2, Toshihiro Hosokawa 2, Akiyoshi Takeda 2

National Institute of Technology, Kagawa college 1, Toyo Tanso Co., Ltd. 2

355 Chokushi -cho, Takamatsu , Kagawa 761 -8058, Japan 1

218 -2 Nakahime, Ohnohara -cho, Kanonji, Kagawa 769 -1612, Japan 2

okano@t.kagawa -nct.ac.jp 

Metal air battery is superior to lithium secondary ion bat tery because of none danger of ignition and 

possibility of keeping for a long time . We think that i t has many problems for de velopment of secondary 

battery. However, we reported that metal air battery using expa nded natural graphite sheet as ca thode and 

galvanized plate as anode is promising device for primary battery for backup power su pply and 

emergency one [1] . Discharge capacity of this battery is 2.1 mAh /cm 2 which value is about three times 

than that of Bincho charcoal metal air battery which have been used science tea ching material . We hope 

that this battery can be used a lot of appl ications, such as a light -emitting and smart phone charging and 

so on at the emergency , because DC 12 V output can be obtained in 15 cells connected in series. 

Maine parts of this battery are ex panded natural graphite sheet for cathode , galvanized plate f or anode 

and electrolyte. Expanded natural graphite sheets have been using for gasket and heat radiation materials 

because of high thermal conductivity, high electric conductivity, physical and chemical stabil ity, 

work ability and so on. We can easily and c heaply get the large size with the wide of 1.3m and long of 

more than 100m. Galvanized plate is very cheap and physical and chemical stability , too. These materials 

can be kept for a long time without particular environment . We only need to prepare the ele ctrolyte due to 

fabricate this battery at the emergency. 

In this paper , characteristi cs of metal air batteries using expan ded natural graphite sheet as cat hode and 

galvanized plate as anode with vari ous electrolyte has been investigated for a power units at the 

emergency. The standard electrolyte was used 10 % sodium chloride water solution absorbed to the filter 

paper with thickness of 0.7 mm as a separato r. We attempt to use various liquid, which we can easily get 

at the emergency, as an electrolyte, suc h as normal water, sports drink, and so on. The separators, such as 

glass wool and various paper, were selected with the same thinking for electrolyte . The cell size was 

square of 25cm 2. The standard properties of the primary battery, such as discharge ca pacity, voltage and 

internal resistance, were measured. 

Figure 1 show s the standard single cell structure and its apparatus . The oxygen gas as the activation 

material for the cathode can be get from side edge of expa nded natural graphite sheet. Figure 2 show s t he 

discharge properties of metal air batteries using electrolytes of 10 % sodium chloride water solution , tap 

water, sports drink, and so on , with separ ato rs of filter pap ers . When sports drink are use d for electrolytes ,

discharge capacities are larg er than that of using 10 % sodium chloride water solution that is standard 

electrolyte. Furthermore, it was found that metal air battery using electrolyte of the other solution could 

be working for LED light emitting. 

We hope that this battery can be us ed at the emergency, because DC 12 V output can be obtained in 15 

cells connected in series and we can easily get all battery parts at the emergency .

[1] H.Okano , M.Yoda , T.Tsujioka , T.Hosokawa , N.Misaki : Positive electrode for air battery, and air 

battery using the positive electrode , U.S. Patent No.10276877 , 2019 Fig.1 Standard single cell of metal air battery.   

> Anode (Galvanized plate)
> Cathode ( Graphite Sheet)
> Elect rolyte (NaCl aq.)
> Current Corrector (Galvanized Plate)

Structure Apparatus 0      

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> 1.2
> 00.5 11.5 22.5 3
> Voltage (V)

Discharge Capacity (mAh/cm 2)

> Tap Water
> Water in the Pond
> Japanese Tea
> Milk Beverage
> Carbonated Beverage
> Sports Drink
> 10% Sodium Chloride Solution

Fig.2 Discharge capacity of metal air battery 

using various electrolyte. Defective Graphene Overlayers on Pt(111) Enhance Hydrogen 

# Evolution Reaction (HER) in Aqueous H2SO 4

Arthur J. Shih 1* , Nakkiran Arulmozhi 1* , Marc T.M. Koper 1

*equal contribution 

> 1

Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University 

Einsteinweg 55 , 2333 CC Leiden , The Netherlands 

m.koper@lic.leidenuniv.nl 

The production of hydrogen through water electrolysis using renewable electricity is a promising carbon -

neutral technology. We present insights into the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in aqueous H 2SO 4

(0.005 to 0.5 M) on Pt(111) on Graphene/Pt(111) under ambient temperatures and pressures. Graphene 

was grown on Pt(111) using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of hydrocarbons and characterized using 

scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectroscopy [1]. 

Cyclic voltammogram s (CV) and HER currents of Pt(111) in H 2SO 4 were quantitatively benchmarked to 

literature to ensure reproducibility and comparability of kinetic measurements [1 -3]. CV sweeps (0.005 to 

0.5 M, 23°C, 0.1 to 0.8 V RHE ) indicate that graphene overlayer s are selectively permeable to H + ions in 

the electrolyte, allowing H + ions into the confined layer between Pt(111) and graphene while excluding 

SO 42- and other anions [2] . The extent of defects in graphene was quantified by integrating t he a nion 

adsorption region from CV s. The anion adsorption coverage on e lectrochemically pre -treated 

Graphene/Pt(111) (250 cycles between 0.1 to 1.2 VRHE in 0.005 M H 2SO 4) increases with HER reaction 

time at a rate of ~ 3*10 -6 while untreated Graphene/Pt(111) exhibits a slower 

increase of ~ 5*10 -7 . Though the defect generation rate is slow er on untreated 

Graphene/Pt(111), a sudden order -of -magnitude increase in anion coverage is observed between 9 to 12 

hours of HER . In contrast, no sudden increase in the anion capacity is observed on electrochemically pre -

treated Graphene/Pt(111) for up to 15 hours of HER. 

Initial HER currents on both pre -treated and un -treated Graphene/Pt(111) are slower than Pt(111) by 1 to 

2 orders of magnitude (0.005 to 0.5 M, 23°C, -0.08 V RHE ). HER currents on both pre -treated and un -

treated Graphene/Pt(111) increase with HER reaction time to values equal to or higher than that of 

Pt(111) , concurrent with increasing graphene defects as probe d using CV and SEM. Unchanged HER 

Tafel slopes and [H +] reaction orders suggest the same HER mechanism between Pt(111) and 

Graphene/Pt(111 ). We postulate that untreated graphene is mass transfer limited and HER currents 

transition from mass transfer limite d to kinetics limited with increasing graphene defects . Li et al. 

computes that a graphene overlayer would weaken the hydrogen binding energy to Pt(111) , shift the 

reaction closer to the peak of the HER volcano plot, and thus increase HER currents [6, 7]. Though our 

results agree with prediction , we cannot negate o ther possible explanations for the observed increase in 

HER rate. These results demonstrate the promise of overlayer and confinement modifications in 

designing catalysts with properties closer to achieving optimum currents. 

References 

[1] Ferrari, A. C., et al., Physical review letters 97.18 (2006): 187401. 

[2] Fu, Y., et al., Angewandte Chemie International Edition 56.42 (2017): 12883 -12887. 

[3] Marković, N. M., et al., Journal of Physical Chemistry B 101 (1997): 5405 -5413. 

[4] Gómez, R., et al., The Journal of Physical Chemistry 97.18 (1993): 4769 -4776. 

[5] Kita, H., et al., Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 334.1 -2 (1992): 351 -357. 

[6] Li, H., et al., Proceedings of the National Acade my of Sciences 114.23 (2017): 5930 -5934. 

[7] Greeley, J., et al., Nature materials 5.11 (2006): 909 -913. Electrochemical characterization of fiberglass membranes modified 

# with polyelectrolytes used as the support for the electrified 

# liquid -liquid interface. 

Paulina Borgul, Sławomira Skrzypek, Łukasz Półtorak 

University of Lodz, Faculty of Chemistry, Departm ent of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry 

Tamka 12, 91 -403 Lodz, Poland 

paulina.borgul@chemia.uni.lodz.pl 

The interface between two immiscible electrolyte solutions (ITIES) is a system which allows t he control 

of a potential difference between two adjacent liquid phases. It can be used to explain the charge transfer 

reactions happening at this soft junction. The example of ITIES, also used in this work, could be an 

interface formed between the aqueou s solution of sodium chloride (water phase) and a solution of highly 

hydrophobic salt (bis -(triphenylphosphoranylidene) -ammonium tetrakis -(4 -chlorophenyl) -borate) 

dissolved in 1,2 -dichloroethane (organic phase). Systems based on ITIES found a very few appl ications in 

e.g. sensing [1] , redox catalysis [2] , fundamental studies [3] among many other [4] .

In our work, we have us ed three polyelectrolytes: polyethyleneimine (PEI), poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) 

and polyhexamethylene guanidine (PHMG) to create the thin polymer multilayer on a surface of 

fiberglass membranes. In first, the interfacial behavior of polyelectrolytes alon e was studied at the 

unmodified liquid – liquid interface. Next, the fiberglass membrane was activated in 1M NaOH in order 

to assure the negative charge at its surface. Following that, the first polyelectrolyte layer – branched PEI –

was deposited by simpl y immersing the membrane into PEI solution. The negatively charged PSS and the 

positively charged PHMG were then alternatively added using layer -by -layer (LBL) technique. When 

such membrane was used as a support for the ITIES, interesting current patterns – typical for miniaturized 

junctions – were recorded. AFM and SEM revealed the membrane surface morphology. Finally, the 

membrane sieving properties were examined. In this respect we have used a series of model quaternary 

ammonium cations (tetramethylammon ium, tetraethylammonium, tetrapropylammonium, 

tetrabutylammonium). In future, our platform can find applications in liquid – liquid interface 

miniaturization, molecular separation and sensing. 

Acknowledgement: This work was financially support ed by the National Science Center (NCN) in 

Cracow, Poland (Grant SONATA 15 no. 2018/31/D/ST4/03259) 

________________________________________ 

[1] L. Poltorak, I. Eggink, M. Hoitink, M. De Puit, E.J.R.E.J.R. Sud holter, M. De Puit, Electrified 

soft interface as a selective sensor for cocaine detection in street samples, Anal. Chem. 90 (2018) 8 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00916. 

[2] E. Smirnov, P. Peljo, M.D. Scanlon, H.H. Girault, Interfacial Redox Catalysis on Gold 

Nanofilms at Soft Interfaces, ACS Nano. 9 (2015) 6565 –6575. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b02547. 

[3] L. Poltorak, N. Van Der Meijden, S. Oonk, E.J.R. Sudhölter, M. De Puit, Acid phosphatase 

behaviour at an electri fi ed soft junction and its interfacial co -deposition with silica, Electrochem. 

Commun. 94 (2018) 27 –30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2018.07.022. 

[4] L. Poltorak, A. Gamero -Quijano, G. Herzog, A. Walcarius, Decorating soft electrified interfaces: 

Fr om molecular assemblies to nano -objects, Appl. Mater. Today. 9 (2017) 533 –550. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2017.10.001. Novel I ridium Based Catalysts on Ti 2AlC S upport as Cost Effective 

# Solution for Green Energy P roduction by Water Electrolysis 

Nevenka R. Elezovic 1, Mila N. Krstajic Pajic 2, Goran Brankovic 1, Piotr Zabinski 3, Mateusz M. Marzec 4,

Vladimir D. Jovic 1

> 1

Center of Excellence for Green Technologies, Institute for Multidisciplinary Research University of 

Belgrade, 11030 Belgrade, P.O.Box 33, Serbia , nelezovic@tmf.bg.ac.rs 

> 2

Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy University of Belgrade, Karnegijeva 4, 11000 Belgrad e, Serbia 

> 3

AGH University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Non -Ferrous Metals, 

Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30 -059 Krakow, Poland 

> 4

AGH University of Science and Technology, Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology, 

Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30 -059 Kra kow, Poland 

Ultra -thin iridium layers were deposited on Ti 2AlC substrate from the solution containing K 3IrCl 6 and 

Na 2SO 4 (pH 6.2) at 70 oC by using cyclic voltammetry. These novel materials were tested as the catalysts 

for hydrogen production – well known as an environmental friendly, green energy fuel. Namely, the 

hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) was investigated both in acid and alkaline electrolytes - 0.5 mol dm -3

H2SO 4 and 1 mol dm -3 KOH. A variety of different thickness samples were characterized by p hysical -

chemical characterization, as well as by electrochemical technique s.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy -dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) 

confirmed that the nucleation of Ir was not fast , indicati ng practically epitaxial growth of the deposit on 

Ti 2AlC substrate. The presence of cracks was detected in the thickest Ir layer (~ 260 nm) probably caused 

by increase of tensile strength . Metallic iridium was detected by X -ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 

at the surface of all samples, indicating complete reduction of iridium ions to zero valence state. 

The HER was investigated by polarization and electrochemical impedance spectrosco py (EIS) 

measurements. Polarization curves were characterized with the low Tafel slopes of (between -10 and -20 

mV dec -1) up to about -0.1 A cm -2, while at higher current densities the Tafel slopes increased up to ~ 60 

mV dec -1. The overpotential at the cu rrent density at j = -0.01 A cm -2 varied from 25 mV to 36 mV in acid 

solution, while being a slightly higher in alkaline electrolyte. These novel catalysts exhibited excellent 

activity, especially under industrial operating conditions of hydrogen evolution (j = -0.3 A cm -2) - the 

overpotentials for the best samples were ~ 70 mV only. The facts that electrodeposition is considered as 

cost effective synthesis way , as well as low cost and well e stablished Ti 2AlC support pr eparation , these 

novel catalysts could be promising for commercial hydrogen production by water electrolysis .

Fig1. HER p olarization curves for representative Ir/Ti 2AlC samples in acid and alkaline electrolytes 

(ML -monolayer of iridium )

Acknowledgements: This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and 

Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Project No. 172054). Authors are indebted to Prof. 

M. Radovic from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College 

Station, TX 77843, USA for preparation of Ti 2AlC substrates. Water Structure in the Sub -Membrane Region of a Floating Lipid 

# Bilayer - the Effect of an Ion -Channel Formation and the Channel 

# Blocker 

Jacek Lipkowski 1,* ZhangFei Su, 1 Joanna Juhaniewicz -Debinska, 2 Slawomir Sek, 1,2,*  

> 1.

Department of Chemistry, Uni versity of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada  

> 2.

Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, �wirki i 

Wigury 101, 02 -089 Warsaw, Poland 

The structure of water in the sub -membrane region of the bilayer of DPhPC floating (fBLM) on a 

monolayer of  1-thio -β-D-glucose ( β-Tg) modified  gold nanoparticle film was studied by the surface 

enhanced  infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS). SEIRAS employs surface enhancement of the 

mean square electric field of the photon which is acting on a few molecular layers above the film of gold 

nanoparticl es. Therefore, it is uniquely suited to probe water molecules in the sub -membrane region and 

provides unique information concerning the structure of the hydrogen bond network of water surrounding 

the lipid bilayer. The IR spectra indicated that water with a strong hydrogen network is separating the 

membrane from the gold surface. This water is more ordered than water in the bulk. When alamethicin, a 

peptide forming ion channels is inserted into the membrane the network is only slightly loosened. The 

additio n of amiloride -an ion channel blocker results in a significant decrease in the amount of water in the 

sub -membrane region. The remaining water has a significantly distorted hydrogen bonds network. This 

study provides unique information about the effect of the ion channel on water transport across the 

bilayer. The electrode potential has a relatively small effect on water structure in the sub -membrane 

region. However, the IR studies demonstrated that water is less ordered at positive transmembrane 

potentials . The present results provide significant insight into the nature of hydration of floating lipid 

bilayer on the gold electrode surface. 

ZhangFei Su, Joanna Juhaniewicz -Debinska, Slawomir Sek and Jacek Lipkowski, 

“Water structure in the sub -membrane region of a floating lipid bilayer without and with an ion -channel 

and an ion channel blocker”, Langmuir, 2020, 36 ,404 -418. Figure 1. Galvanostatic cycling of Al -doped LLZO at 4 mA cm -2.    

> Al -doped LLZO sample exhibited stable DC cycling behav ior for
> 18 h during 320 cycles .

# Interface Design for High Current Density Cycling 

# of Solid State Batteries 

Sanja Tepavcevic , Yisi Zhu, Justin G. Connell, Peter Zapol and Nenad M. Markovic 

Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory 

9700 S Cass Ave., Lemont, IL 60439 (USA) 

sanja@anl.gov 

Solid -state batteries with Li metal anodes are emerging as a promising technology in the field of 

electrochemical energy storage, offering improved safety and high energy densities capable of meeting 

the demands of next -generation electric v ehicles. Solid electrolytes based on doped, cubic Li 7La 3Zr 2O12 

(LLZO) garnets are a particularly promising class of materials for all -solid -state -batteries due to their 

wide electrochemical stability window and high Li -ion conductivities of ~1.0 mS cm−1 at 25ºC [1]. To 

realize their potential, tremendous efforts have been dedicated to improving the Li/garnet interface and 

increasing the critical current density at which failure takes place. With existing understanding of the 

surface chemistry of garnet pell ets, specifically, the formation of Li2CO3 leading to increases in the 

Li/garnet interfacial impedance, various approaches have been developed to reduce, if not completely 

remove, the surface Li 2CO 3 layer [2]. In addition, maintaining uniform contact betwe en Li metal and the 

solid electrolyte has also been shown to enable efficient, long -term plating and stripping of Li, as contact 

losses associated with morphological instabilities (e.g., vacancy accumulation and pore formation) are 

commonly found to be res ponsible for an 

increase in interfacial impedance and 

eventual cell failure [3 ]. Applied strategies 

have only managed to increase the cycle life 

of symmetric cells, and, until very recently, 

current densities above 1 mA cm -2 at 25ºC 

have remained inacces si ble for planar LLZO 

membranes. 

Through the systematic application of our 

interfacial design strategy, we have 

demonstrated how deep understanding of the 

relationship between electrochemical 

performance of the anode -solid electrolyte 

interface and its st ru ctural and chemical 

properties can yield significant 

improvements in solid -state battery performance. Symmetric Li -Li coin cells were made using dense Al -

and Ta -doped LLZO pellets prepared via our interface design strategy, which enabled cycling at curr en t

densities as high as 4 mA cm -2 without failure for >300 cycles with 0.5 μm Li plated/stripped per cycle. 

The significant improvements in performance demonstrated for both Ta - and Al -doped LLZO can be 

rationalized based on the combination of a conformal Li layer formed by vacuum deposition and 

complete formation of the ODI in the absence of any extrinsic oxide/carbonate impurities at the Li -LLZO 

interface. The presence of these features likely leads to a more homogeneous distribution of current 

density, in hibiting the nucleation of Li dendrites at so -called “hot spots,” as well as the formation of a 

complete, self -limited reaction layer at the Li -LLZO interface. These results open up new opportunities to 

increase current densities in Li metal/solid electr ol yte systems and approach performance limits that are 

dictated only by intrinsic materials properties. 

References: 

[1] Schmuch, R.; Wagner, R.; Hörpel, G.; Placke, T.; Winter, M., Performance and cost of materials for 

lithium -based rechargeable automoti ve batteries. Nature Energy 3 (4) (2018) 267 -278. 

[2] Zhu, Y.; Connell, J. G.; Tepavcevic, S.; Zapol, P.; Garcia -Mendez, R.; Taylor, N. J.; Sakamoto, J.; 

Ingram, B. J.; Curtiss, L. A.; Freeland, J. W.; Fong, D. D.; Markovic, N. M., Dopant -Dependent Stabili ty 

of Garnet Solid Electrolyte Interfaces with Lithium Metal. Advanced Energy Materials 9 (12) (2019) 

[3]Krauskopf, T.; Dippel, R.; Hartmann, H.; Peppler, K.; Mogwitz, B.; Ri chter, F. H.; Zeier, W. G.; 

Janek, J., Lithium -Metal Growth Kinetics on LLZO Garnet -Type Solid Electrolytes. Joule 3 (8) (2019) 

2030 -2049. Copper (II) oxide Nanostructures Prepared by Dip Coating for 

# Hydrogen Production via Photocataly tic Water Splitting 

Pannan I. Kyesmen 1, Nolwazi Nombona 2 and Mmantsae Diale 1

> 1

Department of Physics, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield 0028, Sou th Africa 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield 0028, South Africa 

pannan.kyesmen@up.ac.za ; mmantsae .diale@up.ac.za 

Abstract 

Copper (II) oxide (CuO) nanostructures were pr epared on FTO using the sol -gel dip coating method. Two 

(2) , four (4) , six (6) , eight (8) and ten (10) layers of dip coated films were prepared by drying each layer 

using a two -step method; at 110 °C and 250 °C for 10 and 5 min respectively. The films prepar ed were 

annealed at 55 0°C for 1 hr and allowed to cool down naturally to room temperature . The propert ies and 

photocatalytic performance of the films when applied towards hydrogen production were investigated .

The XRD pattern of the films confirmed the ten ori te phase of pure CuO . Raman spectroscopy only 

revealed the 1A g and 2B g phonon modes of CuO further confirming the purity of films produced . The 

photocatalytic performance of CuO films consisting of 6 layers produced the best results yielding 

photocurren t of -2.0 mA/cm 2 at -0. 55 V vs Ag/AgCl while films with 2 layers recorded the least value of -

1.1 mA/cm 2 at the same reference potential. Films prepared with 6 layers appeared to be more porous 

compared to other s as revealed by FE -SEM studies, allowing for easier charge separation of 

photogenerated charge carriers, leading to the improved photocurrent observed. EIS analysis revealed the 

least charge transfer resistance at the CuO /electrolyte interface for films consisting of 6 layers while those 

with 2 yiel ded the highest values correlating with their photocataly tic performance . The two -step drying 

method for preparing CuO nanostructures have been optimize d in this work, showing great promise for 

photocatalytic water splitting. 

Keywords: Copper (II) oxid e, dip coating, hydrogen production, photocatalysis 

Figure 1 . Photocurrent densities of nanostructured CuO films prepared by dip coating technique .
