Title: 20230201CryptoNewsletter_February

URL Source: https://iiitl.ac.in/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/20230201CryptoNewsletter_Feb-2023.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 19 Nov 2023 06:15:17 GMT

Markdown Content:
Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# Crypto New s

Compiled by Dhananjoy Dey, Indian Institute of Information Technology, 

Lucknow, U. P. - 226 002, India,  ddey@iiitl.ac.i n

## February 01, 2023 !

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  1Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# TABLES OF CONTENT S

1. CHINESE SCIENTISTS MAKE QUANTUM LEAP WITH FIRST PRACTICAL USE COMPUT -

ER

5

2. RSA’S DEMISE FROM QUANTUM ATTACKS IS VERY MUCH EXAGGERATED, EXPERT SAY S

6

3. WASHINGTON STATE SEEKING TO BE THE NEXT QUANTUM TECHNOLOGY CLUS -

TE R

9

4. WHAT THE QUANTUM COMPUTING CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS ACT MEANS FOR 

NATIONAL SECURIT Y

10 

5. QUANTUM SAFE CRYPTOGRAPHY – A QUANTUM LEAP NEEDED NO W

12 

6. QUANTUM COMPUTING IS COMING, AND IT’S REINVENTING THE TECH INDUSTR Y

13 

7. FRENCH STARTUP RAISES $5M TO MAKE QUANTUM INTERNET DREAM COME TRU E

15 

8. PENTAGON MUST ACT NOW ON QUANTUM COMPUTING OR BE ECLIPSED BY RIVAL S

16 

9. TACKLING QUANTUM COMPUTING ATTACKS WITH POST-QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY AND 

CONFIDENTIAL COMPUTIN G

18 

10. QUANTUM COMPUTING: EXAMINING THE QUANTUM COMPUTING CYBERSECURITY PRE -

PAREDNESS AC T

20 

11. IBM: QUANTUM COMPUTING POSES AN ‘EXISTENTIAL THREAT’ TO DATA ENCRYPTIO N

22 

12. GETTING AMERICA’S SKIES QUANTUM READ Y

23 

13. POST-QUANTUM CYBERSECURITY THREATS LOOM LARG E

25 

14. COMPUTERS NEED TO MAKE A QUANTUM LEAP BEFORE THEY CAN CRACK ENCRYPTED 

MESSAGE S

27 

15. VULNERABILITIES IN CRYPTOGRAPHIC LIBRARIES FOUND THROUGH MODERN FUZZIN G

28 

16. WHAT’S HAPPENING WITH QUANTUM-SAFE CRYPTOGRAPHY ?

30 

17. A 30-YEAR-OLD CRYPTOGRAPHIC CHALLENGE IS ABOUT TO BE SOLVE D

31 

18. THE OPTICAL FIBER THAT KEEPS DATA SAFE EVEN AFTER BEING TWISTED OR BEN T

33 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  2Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

19. DO NOT MISS QUANTUM COMPUTING WAVE IN 202 3

35 

20. CYBERSECURITY TRENDS FOR 2023: HOW TO PROTECT YOUR ORGANIZATION FROM AT -

TACKERS IN A RECESSIVE ECONOM Y

36 

21. WILL QUANTUM COMPUTERS BREAK RSA ENCRYPTION IN 2023 ?

39 

22. CHINESE RESEARCHERS' CLAIMED QUANTUM ENCRYPTION CRACK LOOKS UNLIKEL Y

41 

23. HAVE CHINESE SCIENTISTS REALLY CRACKED RSA ENCRYPTION WITH A QUANTUM 

COMPUTER ?

42 

24. WHO ARE THE EARLY ADOPTERS OF NEW QUANTUM-SECURE CRYPTOGRAPHY ?

45 

25. QUSECURE’S LEADING POST-QUANTUM CYBERSECURITY SOLUTION WINS 2022 CYBER -

SECURED AWARD FOR QUANTUM COMPUTIN G

47 

26. TAU ENGINEERS LAUNCHING FIRST ISRAELI NANOSATELLITE FOR COMMUNICATING 

FROM SPAC E

48 

27. 2023 WILL SEE RENEWED FOCUS ON QUANTUM COMPUTIN G

50 

28. QUANTUM COMPUTING TO BECOME MORE ACCESSIBL E

52 

29. CHINESE RESEARCHERS CLAIM TO HAVE BROKEN RSA WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER. 

EXPERTS AREN’T SO SURE .

53 

30. QUANTUM'S PROMIS E

54 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  3Cloud Security Alliance 

> Crypto News
> February 01, 2023

# Editorial 

Happy February! Let’s dive right in and change it up this month by starting with an arti -

cle in the middle of our newsletter. If you’re in Cybersecurity leadership you’re going to 

want to read it. With the upcoming recession and tighter Cybersecurity budgets, how 

are you going to properly protect your organization from attackers? Go to article 20 to 

gain insight from industry experts about their Cybersecurity predictions for 2023 as 

well as their recommendations for success. 

Next, you’ll want to scroll to the end of the newsletter to article 29 which reports alarm -

ing news in the world of quantum computing. China claims that they have  fi gured out 

how to break RSA public-key encryption using a quantum computer. However, industry 

experts, including yours truly, are skeptical. The paper released is not peer reviewed 

and the researchers do not have access to a quantum computer with nearly enough 

qubits to prove their theory. It seems for now that we have averted this crisis, but 

breaking RSA encryption as well as other alarming side-e ff ects of quantum computing 

are inevitable. This is why you’ll want to prepare now for a post-quantum world. Arti -

cles 8 and 19 are perfect examples of industry experts warning governments and or -

ganizations alike to act on quantum computing before it’s too late. Are you and your 

organization going to heed this warning or will you act when it’s already too late? 

Make sure to take some time and read the other exciting articles in this edition of Cryp -

toNews! I promise, you’re going to “love” them (was that a subtle enough Valentine’s 

Day reference?)! 

The Crypto News editorial is authored by  Mehak Kalsi, CISSP, CISA, CMMC-RP  and it 

is compiled by  Dhananjoy Dey . Both are active members of the  Cloud Security 

Alliance  (CSA)  Quantum-Safe Security Working Group  (QSS WG). The guiding principle 

of the QSS WG is to address key generation and transmission methods and to help the 

industry understand quantum-safe methods for protecting their networks and their 

data. 

Disclaimer. The QSS WG does not express an opinion on the validity of the ideas and 

the claims presented in the articles in this newsletter.  

> Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved. 4

Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# 1. Chinese Scientists Make Quantum Leap 

# With First Practical Use Compute r

by Zhang Tong 

https://www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/3208568/chinese-scientists-make-quantum-leap-

fi rst-practical-use-computer 

China has become the third country – after Canada and the US – capable of delivering a complete com -

puter system using game changing  quantum technology , according to a state media report on Monday. 

The country’s  fi rst practical quantum computer – the 24-qubit Wuyuan, based on  superconducting chip 

technology  – was delivered to an unnamed user more than a year ago, the science ministry’s newspaper 

Science and Technology Daily said. 

It was the  fi rst o ffi cial con fi rmation that this  disruptive technology  – which uses elemental particles called 

qubits to replace the 0 and 1 used in traditional computing – has been used in a real-life application in 

China. No details were given of the user or the computer’s potential applications. 

The report said Origin Quantum, a company founded in 2017 by Guo Guoping and Guo Guangcan – 

leading quantum physicists with the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) – had devel -

oped several computers since delivering the Wuyuan in 2021. 

The unparalleled computing power of quantum technology is expected to transform many areas, but its 

numerous technical challenges have led some scientists to believe that a practical machine is still years, 

if not decades away. 

Previous quantum processors – Google’s Sycamore and the photonic quantum computer Jiuzhang, built 

by  Pan Jianwei  at the USTC in Hefei, Anhui province – have proven their ability to surpass classical 

computers in solving speci fi c mathematical questions. 

But, they have not directly corresponded to any problems arising in actual production or life situations. 

n an interview published by Shanghai-based news website The Paper on Monday, Origin Quantum co-

founder Guo Guoping said the technology would produce visible bene fi ts in daily life within the next 

three to  fi ve years. 

“Quantum computers can act as accelerators. For example, a problem might take 10 traditional super -

computers a month to calculate. If a quantum computer is added to the computing group, the calcula -

tion time may be reduced to three to seven days,” he said. 

Quantum computers also have intrinsic advantages in the development of new materials and medicines, 

which are built using the atomic-scale calculations described by quantum mechanics. 

“Using the tools that follow quantum mechanics to study the quantum world is more e ffi cient than tradi -

tional computers,” Guo said. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  5Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The company’s quantum computers were built using two very di ff erent technical routes, he told The Pa -

per. The superconducting version can more easily use quantum phenomena, such as superposition and 

entanglement, but needs to operate in extremely cold temperatures. 

In contrast, semiconductor quantum computers share the same chip technology used in classical com -

puting and the equipment and skills needed are also highly consistent. “But scienti fi cally speaking, no -

body knows which path is the right one,” he said. 

Over the past 20 years, Guo has witnessed the birth and development of China’s quantum technology. 

When he was a graduate student, the  fi eld of semiconductor quantum computing in China was a blank 

slate, he said. 

Today, Chinese quantum computing has moved beyond purely scienti fi c research to a stage where engi -

neering technology is also emphasised, Guo said. 

For its Wuyuan computer, Origin Quantum established a quantum ecological chain with an operating 

system, software and a computing cloud platform. The company also developed a range of supercon -

ducting quantum chips. 

A more powerful quantum computer, named Wukong after the legendary Monkey King, will be available 

“soon”, according to Guo. 

Despite the dawn of quantum computing products and applications, the company has yet to make a 

pro fi t. In an interview last year with China Science Daily, Guo said the cost of research – 100 to 200 mil -

lion yuan (US$14.8 to US$29.6 million) per year – meant Origin Quantum was living beyond its means. 

“The company may not be pro fi table for the next 10 years,” he said. 

But the goal is clear: to develop an engineered quantum computer that can be used interactively by 

users, so that China has independent and controllable quantum computing capabilities. 

# 2. RSA’s Demise From Quantum Attacks Is 

# Very Much Exaggerated, Expert Say s

by Dan Goodin 

https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/01/fear-not-rsa-encryption-wont-fall-to-quan -

tum-computing-anytime-soon/ 

Three weeks ago, panic swept across some corners of the security world after researchers discovered a 

breakthrough that, at long last, put the cracking of the widely used  RSA encryption  scheme within reach 

by using quantum computing. 

Scientists and cryptographers have known for two decades that a factorization method known as Shor’s 

algorithm makes it theoretically possible for a quantum computer with su ffi cient resources to break RSA. 

That’s because the secret prime numbers that underpin the security of an RSA key are easy to calculate 

using Shor’s algorithm. Computing the same primes using classical computing takes billions of years. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  6Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The only thing holding back this doomsday scenario is the massive amount of computing resources re -

quired for Shor’s algorithm to break RSA keys of su ffi cient size. The current estimate is that breaking a 

1,024-bit or 2,048-bit RSA key requires a quantum computer with vast resources. Speci fi cally, those re -

sources are about 20 million qubits and about eight hours of them running in superposition. (A qubit is a 

basic unit of quantum computing, analogous to the binary bit in classical computing. But whereas a 

classic binary bit can represent only a single binary value such as a 0 or 1, a qubit is represented by a 

superposition of multiple possible states.) 

The  paper , published three weeks ago by a team of researchers in China, reported  fi nding a factorization 

method that could break a 2,048-bit RSA key using a quantum system with just 372 qubits when it oper -

ated using thousands of operation steps. The  fi nding, if true, would have meant that the fall of RSA en -

cryption to quantum computing could come much sooner than most people believed. 

RSA’s demise is greatly exaggerated 

At the Enigma 2023 Conference in Santa Clara, California, on Tuesday, computer scientist and security 

and privacy expert Simson Gar fi nkel assured researchers that the demise of RSA was greatly exaggerat -

ed. For the time being, he said, quantum computing has few, if any, practical applications. 

“In the near term, quantum computers are good for one thing, and that is getting papers published in 

prestigious journals,” Gar fi nkel, co-author with Chris Hoofnagle of the 2021 book Law and Policy for the 

Quantum Age , told the audience. “The second thing they are reasonably good at, but we don’t know for 

how much longer, is they’re reasonably good at getting funding.” 

Even when quantum computing becomes advanced enough to provide useful applications, the ap -

plications are likely for simulating physics and chemistry, and performing computer optimizations that 

don’t work well with classical computing. Gar fi nkel said that the dearth of useful applications in the fore -

seeable future might bring on a “quantum winter,” similar to the multiple rounds of arti fi cial intelligence 

winters before AI  fi nally took o ff .

The problem with the paper published earlier this month was its reliance on Schnorr's algorithm (not to 

be confused with Shor’s algorithm), which was developed in 1994. Schnorr’s algorithm is a classical 

computation based on lattices, which are mathematical structures that have many applications in con -

structive cryptography and cryptanalysis. The authors who devised Schnorr’s algorithm said it could en -

hance the use of the heuristic quantum optimization method called  QAOA .

Within short order, a host of researchers pointed out  fatal  fl aws  in Schnorr’s algorithm that have all but 

debunked it. Speci fi cally, critics said there was no evidence supporting the authors’ claims of Schnorr’s 

algorithm achieving polynomial time, as opposed to the exponential time achieved with classical algo -

rithms. 

The research paper from three weeks ago seemed to take Shor’s algorithm at face value. Even when it’s 

supposedly enhanced using QAOA—something there’s currently no support for—it’s questionable 

whether it provides any performance boost. 

“All told, this is one of the most actively misleading quantum computing papers I’ve seen in 25 years, 

and I’ve seen … many,” Scott Aaronson, a computer scientist at the University of Texas at Austin and 

director of its Quantum Information Center,  wrote . “Having said that, this actually isn’t the  fi rst time I’ve 

encountered the strange idea that the exponential quantum speedup for factoring integers, which we 

know about from Shor’s algorithm, should somehow ‘rub o ff ’ onto quantum optimization heuristics that 

embody none of the actual insights of Shor’s algorithm, as if by sympathetic magic.” 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  7Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

In geological time, yes; in our lifetime, no 

On Tuesday, Japanese technology company Fujitsu published a  press release  that provided further reas -

surance that the cryptocalypse isn't nigh. Fujitsu researchers, the press release claimed, found that 

cracking an RSA key would require a fault-tolerant quantum computer with a scale of roughly 10,000 

qubits and 2.23 trillion quantum gates, and even then, the computation would require about 104 days. 

Attempts to obtain the research weren’t immediately successful, and Fujitsu researchers weren’t avail -

able by this story's publication. That makes it impossible for fellow researchers to know precisely what 

the  fi ndings are or how signi fi cant they are. 

“For example, when [the Fujitsu researchers] say 10,000 qubits in the press release, do they mean logi -

cal or physical qubits?” Samuel Jaques, a doctoral student at the University of Cambridge, wrote in an 

email. “In my view, the best estimate for quantum factoring is still  [Craig] Gidney and [Martin] Ekerå from 

2020 , who estimate that factoring RSA-2048 would need 20 million physical qubits and 8 hours. If Fujit -

su's result drops the physical qubit count from 20 million to 10,000, that's a huge breakthrough; if in -

stead they need 10,000 logical qubits, then that's much more than Gidney and Ekerå so I would need to 

check carefully to see why.” 

Update: In an email sent after this post went live, one of the Fujitsu researchers, Tetsuya Izu, senior di -

rector of data & security research, wrote: 

During the trials, we used a Shor’s algorithm and created a program to generate quantum circuits. As a 

next step, we used this program to generate quantum circuits for composite numbers of 9 bits and 

smaller, and checked actual operations (integer factorization). We then evaluated the necessary computa -

tional resources of the above mentioned quantum circuits and made estimations for the case of integer 

factorization of 2,048 bits composite numbers. For this reason, our estimation also uses logical qubits. 

We are still  fi nalizing the research paper and unfortunately cannot provide it today. We will share the pa -

per with you as soon as it is available. 

That leads us back to the Enigma Conference and Gar fi nkel, who, like Jaques, said the Gidney and Ek -

erå  fi ndings are the best-known estimate for the breaking of RSA. Asked to respond to the oft-repeated 

statement that humanity is at the precipice of a large quantum computer, Gar fi nkel responded: 

“If by large-scale you mean something that’s big enough to crack an RSA key, what do you mean hu -

manity is on the precipice? In geological time we certainly are. In terms of the duration of the republic, 

sure. But in our lifetimes?” 

Even when the day comes that there’s a quantum computer with the power envisioned by Gidney and 

Ekerå, the notion that RSA will fall in one stroke is misleading. That’s because it would take this 20 mil -

lion-qubit quantum system eight hours in constant superposition to crack a single encryption key. That 

would certainly be catastrophic since someone might be able to use the capability to cryptographically 

sign malicious updates with a Microsoft or Apple key and distribute them to millions of people. 

But even then, the scenario that nation-states are storing all encrypted communications in a database 

and will decrypt them all in bulk once a quantum computer becomes available is unrealistic, given the 

number of keys and the resources required to crack them all. 

Over the past  fi ve years, the National Institute of Standards and Technology has run a  search  for new 

cryptographic algorithms that aren’t vulnerable to Shor’s algorithm. The process is far from  fi nished. Last 

year, a candidate that had made it to the fourth round was taken out of the running after it  fell to an at -

tack  that used only classical computing. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  8Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Once a post-quantum replacement is named, Gar fi nkel warned, “There’s going to be this mad rush to 

sell new things to the government so the government can immediately adopt these new algorithms. 

There’s just so much money to be made selling things to the government.” 

Despite his insistence that the world is still decades away from being able to crack an RSA key, Gar fi nkel 

left himself wiggle room. At the same time, he said too many people focus on the risk posed by Shor’s 

algorithm without considering the possibility that RSA could just as easily fall from other factorization 

attacks posed by classical computers. 

“If I was at CISA [Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency], I wouldn’t feel the need to say, 

‘Don’t worry, it’s decades away’ only to risk the entire security of the United States,” he said. “But maybe 

we shouldn’t be moving to just post-quantum algorithms. Maybe we should be using the post-quantum 

algorithms and RSA in parallel because there might be a problem with the post-quantum algorithms. 

# 3. Washington State Seeking To Be The 

# Next Quantum Technology Cluste r

https://quantumcomputingreport.com/washington-state-seeking-to-be-the-next-quantum-technology-

cluster/ 

Several di ff erent locations in the United States are vying to be the next “Silicon Valley” where there is a 

concentration of companies and academic institutions that have a critical mass of expertise in a particu -

lar technology. Some of the locations that would like to achieve this in quantum tech include the Virginia/ 

Maryland/DC area, Chicago, Colorado, New York state and others. And now the  Washington Technology 

Industry Association (WTIA)  is making a play to include the Paci fi c Northwest in the list. 

The WTIA commissioned a study to look at the competitive situation along with the areas strengths and 

weaknesses for attracting more quantum activity in the region. The study points several of the area’s 

strengths including a substantial software and manufacturing technology presence in the Paci fi c North -

west including companies specializing in quantum optics and devices, a substantial base of local in -

vestors, and a good talent pool coming from the University of Washington and other schools. In addition, 

two big players in quantum, Microsoft and Amazon, have corporate headquarters in the Seattle area, 

although some of Microsoft’s research is performed in Santa Barbara near the University of California 

Santa Barbara and the center of Amazon’s quantum research is performed in Pasadena near Caltech. 

The latest company to announce they are establishing facilities in the area is  IonQ which announced last 

week they will be opening a 65,000 square foot manufacturing facility  in Bothell, Washington, a suburb 

of Seattle. Several organizations in the area have formed a  Northwest Quantum Nexus  group and recent -

ly held a  Northwest Quantum Nexus Summit and Hackathon .

The report that WTIA issued made an interesting observation that Washington state is producing more 

quantum professionals at local universities than can be employed locally. To grow the industry are sug -

gesting a need to focus on sectors where Washington state has strengths including health tech, agricul -

ture tech, and cybersecurity. They would like to increase the level of cooperation with other clusters and 

consortiums, as well as implement programs to attract investment and retain talent. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  9Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# 4. What The Quantum Computing Cyberse -

# curity Preparedness Act Means For Na -

# tional Securit y

by Skip Sanzeri 

https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/01/25/what-the-quantum-computing-cybersecu -

rity-preparedness-act-means-for-national-security/?sh=5240856c368a 

On December 21, 2022, President Biden signed into law H.R.7535,  the Quantum Computing Cybersecu -

rity Preparedness Act , which encourages “federal government agencies to adopt technology that will 

protect against quantum computing attacks.” 

This marks a major milestone in the global e ff ort to develop and deploy quantum-resilient cybersecurity. 

It’s important that the U.S. moves quickly against the coming quantum computing threat since it takes 

signi fi cant e ff ort and years to upgrade existing federal and commercial technology and cryptography. 

Meanwhile, quantum computers are rapidly developing, with some adversarial nation-states putting tens 

of billions of dollars toward programs to create these very powerful machines which will break the en -

cryption we use today. 

The Act. 

H.R.7535 requires federal agencies to “migrate systems to post-quantum cryptography, which is resilient 

against attacks from quantum computers and standard computers.” To illustrate the bullish progress our 

federal representatives have made, H.R.7535 follows three major initiatives from earlier last year outlining 

how we should create a quantum-resilient U.S. 

1.  On January 19, 2022, the  State Department issued a key initiative  called the “Memorandum on 

Improving the Cybersecurity of National Security, Department of Defense, and Intelligence Com -

munity Systems,” stating that “Within 180 days of the date of this memorandum, agencies shall 

identify any instances of encryption not in compliance with NSA-approved Quantum Resistant 

Algorithms.” 

2.  On May 4, 2022, the State Department published a follow-on memo called the  National Security 

Memorandum 10 (NSM-10),  “Promoting United States Leadership in Quantum Computing While 

Mitigating Risks to Vulnerable Cryptographic Systems.” 

3.  On November 18, 2022,  M-23-02 was issued from Shalanda D. Young , the Director of the O ffi ce of 

Management and Budget. This memorandum describes steps for federal agencies to take as they 

transition to Post-Quantum Cybersecurity (PQC) by building a prioritized inventory of their crypto -

graphic systems. 

H.R.7535 now codi fi es that within six months, federal agencies must develop a strategy for migrating to 

post-quantum cryptography. In addition, it compels federal agencies to address the risk posed by weak -

ened encryption due to the capability of a quantum computer to breach that encryption. Within 180 days 

of the memo (by May of 2023), the law outlines a requirement for “each agency to establish and maintain 

a current inventory of information technology in use by the agency that is vulnerable to decryption by 

quantum computers.” 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  10 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Most importantly, this new law has funding attached as it requires each agency to submit an estimate of 

the amount of money it will take for the move to quantum-safe systems. 

What are quantum computers? 

Quantum computers are very powerful machines that operate di ff erently than the standard computers 

we use today. Standard computers struggle with certain sets of problems, one of which happens to be 

the base of the current cryptography that currently protects our data. The data that makes up this article 

and the internet it traveled across uses encryption protected by a mathematical equation using large 

numbers and the factors that go into those numbers. Also called prime factorization, this math problem 

is unbelievably di ffi cult for classical computers to solve. 

Quantum computers operate di ff erently. Using a subatomic property called superposition, quantum 

computers can process problems like prime factorization and multivariate problems due to how they 

process data and the way they can be programmed. Unlike our classical computers, where the base el -

ements must be zero or one, superposition allows quantum computers to take advantage of a base ele -

ment being zero, one and anything in between, all at the same time. 

Why do we need to act now? 

It is widely understood that adversarial nation-states are building quantum computers to use as 

weapons. To put it as clearly as possible, the  fi rst nefarious nation-state that brings a quantum computer 

online with enough power to crack encryption could have unprecedented global control at its  fi ngertips. 

All the private and secret information traveling over the internet will be available to anyone who has this 

power. This includes national secrets, healthcare data,  fi nancial and banking information, as well as ac -

cess to infrastructure like energy grids, satellite communications and water supplies. 

Worse yet, it is heavily documented that  some nations are stealing vast amounts of data  that is currently 

encrypted but will be decrypted when a quantum computer with enough power is available. Sometimes 

called “Steal Now, Decrypt Later” (SNDL), this describes stealing and storing data for a future date when 

there are systems that can decrypt, view and operationalize that data. 

Most of these data sets need to remain secret for 25 to 75 years and would be valuable if cracked soon -

er. But if stolen now and decrypted within a few years by a quantum computer, an adversary would then 

have the capability to operationalize that data to disrupt society, steal intellectual property, gain  fi nancial -

ly or increase the chances of winning a war. 

What can be done? 

Most government agencies and commercial enterprises will need to take three main steps to prepare 

their digital infrastructure for quantum-resilient cybersecurity. 

1. Start by evaluating and documenting current cryptography, which is vulnerable to quantum at -

tacks. 

2. Develop a plan to add quantum-safe cryptography where appropriate in your network, including 

servers, edge devices and IoT. 

3. Test a quantum-safe, cryptographically agile solution in your IT infrastructure. 

Selecting suitable cryptographic algorithms can be done quickly with help from a quali fi ed consultant or 

vendor. However, deploying a quantum-safe security solution will take longer, depending on the size and 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  11 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

complexity of your enterprise network. 

According to  Congressman Ro Khanna , who sponsored H.R.7535, “As quantum computing continues to 

progress, we must take steps now to protect America’s national security and economy…we have to plan 

ahead for potential vulnerabilities it may create.” 

It is imperative that we continue this rapid progress toward a quantum-resilient technology in the U.S. as 

outlined by H.R.7535 so that when (not if) a bad actor has access to su ffi cient quantum computing pow -

er, our data, communications, systems and future will be protected. 

# 5. Quantum Safe Cryptography – A Quan -

# tum Leap Needed No w

by Francis Sideco 

https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/tiriasresearch/2023/01/25/quantum-safe-cryptography--a-quantum-leap-

needed-now/?sh=6398e5e749ea 

Whether we realize it or not, cryptography is the fundamental building block on which our digital lives are 

based. Without su ffi cient cryptography and the inherent trust that it engenders, every aspect of the digi -

tal human condition we know and rely on today would never have come to fruition much less continue to 

evolve at its current staggering pace. The internet, digital signatures, critical infrastructure,  fi nancial sys -

tems and even the remote work that helped the world limp along during the recent global pandemic all 

rely on one critical assumption – that the current encryption employed today is unbreakable by even the 

most powerful computers in existence. But what if that assumption was not only challenged but realisti -

cally compromised? 

This is exactly what happened when Peter Shor proposed his algorithm in 1995, dubbed Shor’s Algo -

rithm. The key to unlocking the encryption on which today’s digital security relies is in  fi nding the prime 

factors of large integers. While factoring is relatively simple with small integers that have only a few dig -

its, factoring integers that have thousands of digits or more is another matter altogether. Shor proposed 

a polynomial-time quantum algorithm to solve this factoring problem. I’ll leave it to the more quali fi ed 

mathematicians to explain the theory behind this algorithm but su ffi ce it to say that when coupled with a 

quantum computer, Shor’s Algorithm drastically reduces the time it would take to factor these larger in -

tegers by multiple orders of magnitude. 

Prior to Shor’s Algorithm, for example, the most powerful computer today would take millions of years to 

fi nd the prime factors of a 2048-bit composite integer. Without Shor’s algorithm, even quantum comput -

ers would take such an inordinate amount of time to accomplish the task as to render it unusable by bad 

actors. With Shor’s Algorithm, this same factoring can potentially be accomplished in a matter of hours. 

That being said, even with this breakthrough algorithm, it still requires a quantum computer to compro -

mise today’s encryption. This begs the question, why do we as an industry need to address this issue 

now, before we have practical quantum computers? First and foremost, this eventuality is not a potential 

but an inevitable consequence of the current progress of quantum computing. According to Dr. Michele 

Mosca of the Institute of Quantum Computing at the University of Waterloo, “There is a 1 in 7 chance 

that fundamental public-key crypto will be broken by quantum by 2026 and a 1 in 2 chance of the same 

by 2031.” These timeframes and the ability to store current sensitive data gives rise to the second rea -

son – a concept called “Harvest Now, Decrypt Later.” A materially signi fi cant percentage of sensitive 

data will still be relevant in this time frame – and that is data that is not currently protected against quan -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  12 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

tum-based decryption techniques. This concept allows bad actors to “harvest” the data now and act 

upon it later when technology has matured to make the decryption of that data practical and viable. 

As such, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has been leading the charge since 

2016 for the standardization of quantum safe cryptography. After multiple rounds of algorithm submis -

sions, four  fi nalists were selected in July of 2022 with three of those four algorithms being created by 

IBM along with their industry and academic partners. This is not entirely surprising given that aside from 

their work on quantum safe encryption, IBM is also a driving force in quantum computing and plans to 

introduce a new 4k qubit system by 2025 and is even working on solving the technical issues to eventu -

ally get to a 1 million qubit system. Between these four algorithms, public-key encryption and key estab -

lishment as well as digital signatures are addressed. 

These quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms could not have come at a better time. Digital in -

frastructure such as passports, vehicles, critical infrastructure and public transportation take a long time 

to upgrade, with some time periods spanning 10-50 years. Use of that digital infrastructure is already 

pervasive and will only continue to exponentially increase as new use cases and applications are intro -

duced. The more we rely upon digital infrastructure and the more sensitive data we store in that digital 

infrastructure, the larger the motivation for bad actors to compromise the encryption that protects that 

data. The industry is poised to take a quantum leap in both cryptography and computing. The time is 

now to take that leap. 

# 6. Quantum Computing Is Coming, And It’s 

# Reinventing The Tech Industr y

https://www.forbes.com/sites/qai/2023/01/24/quantum-computing-is-coming-and-its-reinventing-the-

tech-industry/?sh=5ebd543214de 

Quantum computing is an idea that has long been in the realm of science  fi ction. However, recent devel -

opments have made it seem more and more like a reality. 

The rise of easily accessible quantum computing has signi fi cant implications for the tech industry and 

the world as a whole. With potential impacts in things like cybersecurity, simulations and more, investors 

are watching this industry closely (and  getting invested ). 

What is quantum computing? 

Quantum computing relies on quantum mechanics, a fundamental theory of physics that describes how 

the world works at the level of the atom and subatomic particles, to solve problems that traditional com -

puters  fi nd too complex. 

Most quantum computers rely on the “quantum bit” or qubit. Unlike traditional bits in a computer, which 

are set to 0 or 1, qubits can be set to zero, one or a superposition of 0 and 1. Though the mechanics 

behind this is highly complex, qubits allow quantum computers to process information in a fraction of 

the time a traditional computer could. 

To o ff er an idea of the scale, 500 qubits can represent the same information as 2^500 normal bits. While 

a typical computer would need millions of years to  fi nd all the prime factors of a 2,048-bit number (a 

number with 617 digits), a quantum computer can do the job in minutes. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  13 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Modern quantum theory was developed in the 1920s. Computers appeared shortly after that, and both 

technologies played a role in World War II. Over time, physicists began to merge the two  fi elds of quan -

tum theory and computing to create the  fi eld of quantum computing. 

1998 saw the development of a two-bit quantum computer, which serves as a proof of concept for the 

technology. Further developments have increased the bit count and reduced the rate of errors. 

Researchers believe that problems currently too large to be solved by traditional computers can be 

solved using quantum computers. 

Recent developments 

Given the substantial improvements that quantum computing can provide to computing power, research 

into quantum computers has been going on for decades. However, important breakthroughs have been 

seen in recent years. 

Last week, Australian engineers announced the discovery of a way to control electrons within quantum 

dots that run logic gates without the need for a large, bulky system. This could help with building quan -

tum computers that are reasonably sized. 

Also, researchers at MIT recently developed an architecture for quantum computers that will allow for 

high-fi delity communication between quantum processors, allowing for the interconnection of multiple 

processors. 

This allows for “modular implementations of larger-scale machines built from smaller individual compo -

nents,” according to Bharath Kanna, a co-lead author of the research paper describing this break -

through. 

“The ability to communicate between smaller subsystems will enable a modular architecture for quantum 

processors, and this may be a simpler way of scaling to larger system sizes compared to the brute-force 

approach of using a single large and complicated chip.” 

Furthermore, a Maryland-based company IonQ recently announced a 65,000-square-foot facility that it 

will use for manufacturing and production. The factory will be located in Bothell, WA and is the  fi rst dedi -

cated quantum computer manufacturing facility in the United States. 

How will it impact the tech industry? 

Quantum computing could have massive impacts on the tech industry and the world. 

One of the biggest impacts will be in the world of  cybersecurity . The Department of Homeland Security 

believes that a quantum computer could be able to break current encryption methods as soon as 2030. 

Without major developments in cryptography or a slowdown in quantum computing technology ad -

vances, we could be less than a decade away from malicious actors being able to view everything from 

people’s personal information to government and military secrets. 

Some groups are already participating in “Store Now, Decrypt Later” attacks, which steal encrypted data 

and store it with the expectation that they’ll be able to crack the encryption at a later date. 

Quantum computing could also have major e ff ects on the medical industry. For example, quantum ma -

chines could be used to model molecular processes. This could assist with breakthroughs in disease 

research and speed up the  development of life-saving drugs .

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  14 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

These simulations could have similar impacts in industries that rely on materials science, such as battery 

making. Even the  fi nancial sector  could bene fi t from the technology, using simulations to perform  risk 

analysis  more accurately and optimize investment portfolios. 

Given its world-changing capabilities, it’s no surprise that governments have made major investments in 

the technology, with more than $30 billion going into research programs across the globe. 

What it means for investors 

Quantum computing has the potential to impact almost every industry across the globe. Beyond impact -

ing the tech industry, it could create shockwaves in the medical and  fi nancial industry while leading to 

the development of new products or materials that become a part of everyday life. 

Given the relative youth of the technology, it can be challenging for investors to  fi nd ways to invest di -

rectly in quantum computing. Instead, they may look for investments in businesses that have an interest 

in quantum computers and that are poised to bene fi t from their development, such as pharmaceutical 

companies. 

The bottom line 

The rise of quantum computing could mean that the world will look very di ff erent just a few years from 

now. Investors will be looking for ways to pro fi t from this game-changing technology, and the opportuni -

ties will be plentiful. 

# 7. French Startup Raises $5M To Make 

# Quantum Internet Dream Come Tru e

by Editorial Team 

https:/ /techfundingnews.com/french-startup-raises-5m-to-make-quantum-internet-dream-come-true/ 

Welinq , a Paris-based startup that operates on quantum memory technology to scale up quantum com -

puting and enable quantum internet deployment, has raised €5M funding. 

Quantonation, the  fi rst venture capital fund dedicated to quantum technologies, led the pre-seed round, 

with participation from Luxembourg-based Runa Capital and support from the Paris Region, the French 

National Quantum Initiative, the French Banque Publique d’Investissement (BPI), and the European 

Commission. 

With the money raised, the team intends to commercially launch its  fi rst product, a highly e ff ective quan -

tum memory, in infrastructures for quantum computing and quantum communication. Basically, the 

French quantum tech wants to deploy the world’s most e ffi cient quantum memories at industrial stan -

dards in  quantum computing  and quantum communication infrastructures. 

Welinq’s quantum memories allow for the on-demand storage and release of quantum information with -

out changing its fundamental characteristics. The team has demonstrated with 90% the world record in 

storage-and-retrieval e ffi ciency (a parameter indicating how much of the information is retained through 

the process without being lost on the way) with a qubit  fi delity above 99% by using laser-cooled neutral-

atom technology. The group is currently working on its  fi rst product, a highly e ff ective quantum memory 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  15 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

that will be deployable, transportable, and integrated into infrastructures for quantum computing and 

quantum communication. 

The Laboratoire d’Informatique de Sorbonne Université (LIP6), a synergistic, multidisciplinary research 

centre and France’s largest laboratory in computer science, and the Laboratoire Kastler Brossel (LKB), a 

leading actor in fundamental physics of quantum systems, are the two prestigious French laboratories 

that gave rise to the Welinq technologies. Together, they have won three Nobel prizes and  fi ve CNRS 

Gold Medals. 

“Quantum memories have been identi fi ed today as the key missing hardware for the scale-up of quan -

tum technologies. Not only must these devices be deployed on the market at the earliest, but they also 

need to show extremely high performance and robustness if we want them to truly impact industry and 

society. We are happy to be joined in this project by investors with strong expertise in quantum tech -

nologies and who are sharing our ambitions for the future of quantum technologies,” says Tom Darras, 

CEO and co-founder of Welinq. 

“At Quantonation, we believe that the development of e ffi cient quantum interconnects is a pillar for the 

whole quantum infrastructure and a path to accelerate real-world applications. The founding team has 

groundbreaking expertise and a clear path to be impactful. We are excited to start this journey with 

Welinq,” says Christophe Jurczak, partner at Quantonation 

Dmitry Galperin, a Berlin-based General Partner at Runa Capital adds, “When I  fi rst met Welinq’s team I 

was very impressed by their unique technology and the major impact that it can have on quantum com -

puting scale-up. We are happy to stand with this founding team that gathers diverse backgrounds and a 

common strong ambition for the future of quantum interconnects.” 

Welinq, a company established in 2022, makes it easier to connect quantum computers remotely while 

maintaining their distinctive characteristics. This might make it possible for researchers to build much 

bigger quantum systems without any problems. 

To address the scaling-up of quantum computing, Tom, Julien Laurat, Eleni Diamanti, and Jean Lautier-

Gaud—who had previously collaborated in their academic careers—decided to join forces and found 

Welinq. Their understanding of interconnects as the central component of long-distance quantum infor -

mation networks and a privileged way to scale up quantum computing beyond the thousands of qubits 

range quickly became crystal clear. 

The Welinq CEO Tom Darras received his PhD in quantum physics from Sorbonne Université after earn -

ing an engineering degree in Physics at ESPCI Paris. He worked on quantum teleportation protocols for 

quantum interconnects. Following his PhD, he moved from academia to entrepreneurship, co-founding 

Welinq in 2022. As a young physicist and entrepreneur, he thrives on taking on ambitious technological 

challenges in order to turn proof-of-concept laboratory experiments into real-world solutions that will 

have a signi fi cant impact on science and industry. He was named Grand-Prix of the French Innovation i-

Lab competition in 2022. 

The team currently consists of 8 members (2 women and 6 men) of four di ff erent nationalities (French, 

Italian, Greek and Indian). 

# 8. Pentagon Must Act Now On Quantum 

# Computing Or Be Eclipsed By Rival s

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  16 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

by Freddie Hudson 

https:/ /www.c4isrnet.com/thought-leadership/2023/01/20/pentagon-must-act-now-on-quantum-comput -

ing-or-be-eclipsed-by-rivals/ 

As quantum computers continue to advance and become more powerful, they present a signi fi cant 

threat to the Department of Defense’s cybersecurity assurance. 

When former Pentagon’s Chief Data O ffi cer, David Spirk, left his post in March 2022, he did so with 

a warning : “I don’t think that there are enough senior leaders getting their heads around the [cybersecu -

rity] implications of quantum… I think that’s a new wave of computers that, when it arrives, is going to be 

a pretty shocking moment to industry and government alike.” 

Quantum computers have the ability to process information much faster than classical computers, mak -

ing them capable of cracking the secure encryption algorithms relied on to protect information today. 

This could allow adversaries to access sensitive military intelligence, disrupt communication networks, 

and even disable military systems. 

In late 2021, the head of the NSA’s Cybersecurity Directorate  signaled  that developing next-generation 

cryptologic systems to secure weapon systems from foreign adversaries was a top priority. In a fact 

sheet published that year, the NSA  stated  that “the impact of adversarial use of a quantum computer 

could be devastating to  National Security Systems .” 

The battle for quantum supremacy is already under way, and is set to fundamentally change the defense 

sector as the technology edges towards maturation. 

The quantum threat is closer than you think 

Many experts, including Spirk, believe that military applications for quantum computing could be less 

than 10 years away. 

Case in point: according to the Pentagon’s  annual report  on Chinese military power, China recently de -

signed and fabricated a quantum computer capable of outperforming a classical high-performance 

computer for a speci fi c problem. 

This is also why DARPA announced the ‘Underexplored Systems for Utility-Scale Quantum 

Computing ’ (US2QC) program to explore potentially overlooked methods by which quantum computers 

could achieve practical levels of utilization much faster than current predictions suggest. 

The White House recently signed the  Quantum Computing Cybersecurity Preparedness Act  into law, 

signaling that it regards quantum as a serious issue. The act addresses the migration of executive agen -

cies’ IT systems to post-quantum cryptography (PQC) - encryption which is secure from attacks by 

quantum computers because of the advanced mathematics underpinning it. 

As major powers like China, under its  Digital Silk Road initiative , continue to accelerate investment into 

advanced technologies like AI and quantum computing, the US risks being left behind if it does not pay 

equal attention to the quantum opportunity - and to the quantum threat. 

The need for action is all the more urgent because of the looming threat of ‘harvest now, decrypt later’ 

attacks, by which adversaries can gather sensitive data today to decrypt as soon as they have their 

hands on a su ffi ciently powerful quantum computer. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  17 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Time is running out for the DoD 

The defense sector needs to take the threat of quantum computers seriously because they have the po -

tential to greatly impact national security. 

Encryption is a crucial tool for protecting sensitive military information, and if quantum computers are 

able to break current encryption algorithms, this could compromise the security of classi fi ed documents, 

strategic plans, and even communication networks. This could potentially give adversaries an advantage 

in military con fl icts and put US military personnel at risk. 

In addition to the potential impact on national security, the defense sector also has a responsibility to 

protect the personal information of military personnel and civilians. Quantum computers could potentially 

be used to steal sensitive personal information, such as social security numbers, as well as medical and 

fi nancial information. 

As DoD moves from network-centric operations to data-centric operations, PQC implementation be -

comes even more relevant, regardless of whether the data comes from the cloud or any other source. 

DoD’s Joint All Domain Command and Control ( JADC2 ) and Joint Cloud Computing concepts, network 

modernization etc. will all require post-quantum cryptography for cybersecurity assurance. 

Quantum computers also have the ability to perform complex calculations at a much faster rate than 

classical computers, which could allow them to disable or manipulate military systems. This could po -

tentially disrupt communication networks, navigation systems, and even weapons systems, leading to 

potential loss of lives and damage to military assets. 

First-mover advantage 

In July last year, the National Institute of Standards and Technology  announced  a major milestone in its 

eff orts to standardize post-quantum cryptography algorithms. 

New draft standards are a welcome arrival and will hopefully dispel any hesitation about putting concrete 

transition roadmaps in place. But the bigger picture is that encryption standards are going through their 

biggest change in decades, and post-quantum cryptography will soon be essential for all businesses 

hoping to work with the US government. Up to $3 billion of federal quantum projects are now either in 

operation or planned, including a $1.2 billion  National Quantum Initiative .

The advent of quantum technology converges with the race for global tech supremacy as well as a peri -

od of turbulent geopolitics. The longer the government and businesses wait to act, the greater the po -

tential harm. 

# 9. Tackling Quantum Computing Attacks 

# With Post-Quantum Cryptography And 

# Con fi dential Computin g

by Avishai Sharlin 

https:/ /venturebeat.com/security/ibm-quantum-computing/ 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  18 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The Fast Mode spoke to Avishai Sharlin, Division President at Amdocs Technology on new encryption 

technologies and their impact on today's networks. Avishai joins us in a series of discussions with lead -

ing vendors in the tra ffi c management, service assurance, tra ffi c monitoring, analytics, policy control and 

network security space, assessing various attributes of encryption, its bene fi ts as well as the challenges 

it poses, speci fi cally loss of visibility that makes networking increasingly complex. 

Tara: How important is encryption for today’s applications? 

Avishai: In an era when data is the world’s most valuable and vulnerable currency, encryption has never 

been more important – particularly given the ever-evolving nature of the threats to application security. 

For example, it is feared that recent advancements in quantum computing can seriously risk the encryp -

tion standards we have today, and that in the next one to two years quantum computing will be powerful 

enough to break almost all existing security cryptography algorithms. Indeed, it has already been widely 

reported that hackers are purposefully stealing highly encrypted data that they cannot decrypt today and 

storing it as they will be able to decrypt it in the next year and beyond using new quantum computing 

techniques. When you take a step back, that’s an alarming prospect for the industry and society at large. 

In fact, the risk of quantum computing is already here: a Chinese research group recently released a pa -

per claiming that if it had access to a Western quantum computer today (such as IBM Osprey), they have 

devised a method whereby they can brute-force attack and decrypt the widely-used RSA 2048bit en -

cryption. 

Application use creates output, which we store and call data. Applications also ingest existing data such 

as sensitive customer information (PII data) for processing and enabling services. Encryption is a key 

operational task we must execute to ensure that our application data will not be read by a third party via 

theft, leak, or a breach. The move to the public cloud, a shared infrastructure, further emphasizes the 

importance of guarding and protecting data. In public cloud environments, servers are shared between 

multiple customers and data is stored on storage systems that are also shared between many cus -

tomers. Although dedicated infrastructure is possible in the public cloud it’s extremely expensive. 

Hence, to protect data on the public cloud and even on-premise, encryption is a mandatory operation 

and process that must be executed for all data in transit (over the wire, via HTTPS application wise), and 

at rest (when the data is stored to disk). This also relates to low-code applications: there is no exception 

here. The way we develop an app (low code) must not impact our ability to ensure the data the app gen -

erates is secure and encrypted. It’s important to remember that on public clouds there is a shared re -

sponsibility model – the public cloud provider provides the infrastructure and required services to run an 

app, but the application security and its data is not within its hands. 

Tara: The evolution of encryption technologies – where are we headed? 

Avishai: To  fi ght o ff  quantum computing brute-force attacks, new algorithms for encryption are required. 

Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC), where new chosen algorithms by NIST, will replace existing encryp -

tion algorithms so data remains protected in the quantum computing era. This will have a serious impact 

industry-wide, as code change is required for this to happen at the application level (if the application 

uses crypto libraries and encrypts data on its own). For example, Java-based apps will require an updat -

ed OpenJDK and new Crypto library/APIs to support these new algorithms, and the application must 

update its code base to use these new Crypto APIs. 

To enable encryption and secrets (passwords), encryption keys must be guarded and never stored in the 

open on servers or disks next to the application or where it is stored for execution. As public cloud 

adoption progresses, services and applications are protecting their keys in managed services such as 

key management systems in the public cloud. The application interacts with the system to fetch the en -

cryption keys over the wire on a secure link for encryption operation. Key management systems can also 

be used to execute the encryption process, allowing the application developer to o ffl oad it. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  19 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Last, public clouds allow applications to utilize hardware security modules (HSMs) via APIs. These su -

per-hardened encryption servers are similar to key management systems but also have the required 

computing power to encrypt data on behalf of the application. Applications interact with the module for 

all cryptographic operations, and the encryption keys never leave the HSM. A dedicated HSM provides 

the most secure way to encrypt and protect data in the cloud. 

Con fi dential computing is an evolution of o ff erings we have in public clouds and on premise. New ad -

vanced processors and chipsets provide built-in memory encryption capabilities of the server memory 

where we host our applications. New processors from AMD and Intel allow encryption of the entire 

memory of a server or speci fi c VMs used in shared infrastructure such as the public cloud or virtualiza -

tion platforms, in real time without any performance degradation. This ensures that the application 

memory running in that VM is fully encrypted. 

Con fi dential computing also provides new ways for applications to store sensitive data inside the secure 

enclave in modern CPUs. This is a highly secure and restricted area in the CPU, to which only the CPU 

can have access. An encryption key can be stored in the processor secure enclave and only the proces -

sor and the app can access it. 

We are seeing a call from the industry for organizations to start adopting this technique to better protect 

their data. This means we will likely see the widespread adoption of new algorithms and ciphers to safe -

guard data in ways that cannot be broken by the quantum computing power we have today and in the 

future. 

# 10. Quantum Computing: Examining The 

# Quantum Computing Cybersecurity Pre -

# paredness Ac t

by Jacob W. S. Schneider 

https:/ /www.hklaw.com/en/insights/publications/2023/01/quantum-computing-examining-the-quantum-

computing-cybersecurity 

In the waning days of 2022 and the 117th Congress, President Biden signed  H.R.7535, the Quantum 

Computing Cybersecurity Preparedness Act , into law. The law recognizes  the future threat that quantum 

decryption poses to federal administrative agencies  and orders an examination of the agencies' data 

cryptography to prepare for a time, perhaps many years from today, when quantum computing is capa -

ble of decrypting that data. This post examines the new law as well as what motivated Congress to act. 

Why Prepare Cybersecurity for Quantum Computing? 

Nearly everything sensitive that is transmitted or stored on computers is encrypted. For example, en -

cryption protects our bank accounts, health records and app-based messaging. Encryption takes a 

block of readable data and makes it unreadable to everyone but those users who hold a cryptographic 

key and can decrypt it. As with a physical bike lock, encryption schemes can be decrypted even without 

the key. Also like a physical bike lock, as an encryption scheme becomes more and more complex, the 

likelihood that anyone could realistically decrypt it goes down. 

Certain types of  quantum computers  are likely to be excellent encryption "lock–pickers" in the future. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  20 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The math tells us that if such computers were ever built to scale – an event that is di ffi cult to predict but 

could be over a decade away –  then they would be e ffi cient at decrypting the most widely used encryp -

tion schemes that exist today . In e ff ect, using the most popular, modern encryption schemes is like buy -

ing an expensive bike lock with the understanding that, at some unknown point in the future, it will be 

worthless against thieves. 

Developing Post-Quantum Cryptography / Quantum-Safe Algorithms 

Quantum computers are chess grandmasters who cannot tie their shoes and forget where they put their 

wallets: They are very good at a certain class of problems, but lousy at others. (A quantum computer 

would have a hard time, for example, doing something as basic as rendering this webpage.) As a result, 

there is math that quantum computers are no better at than classical computers, and encryption 

schemes that rely on that math are more resilient to a quantum decryption attack. 

In 2016, the  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  began  a lengthy public competition to 

develop these "post-quantum" cryptographic schemes , which are a subset of "quantum-safe 

algorithms." NIST described the quantum decryption problem as its motivation for the project: 

In recent years, there has been a substantial amount of research on quantum computers – machines 

that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena to solve mathematical problems that are di ffi cult or in -

tractable for conventional computers. If large-scale quantum computers are ever built, they will be 

able to break many of the public-key cryptosystems currently in use. This would seriously compromise 

the con fi dentiality and integrity of digital communications on the Internet and elsewhere. 

NIST's stated goal was "to develop cryptographic systems that are secure against both quantum and 

classical computers, and can interoperate with existing communications protocols and networks.” 

In 2022, the ongoing project  identi fi ed several promising candidate algorithms , including  CRYSTALS-Ky -

ber  (for key establishment) and  CRYSTALS-Dilithium  (for digital signatures). NIST is currently working to 

standardize these algorithms for wide-scale use. 

The Quantum Computing Cybersecurity Preparedness Act 

Quantum decryption could also compromise government secrets. So, with quantum decryption on the 

horizon, Congress passed, and the President signed into law, the  Quantum Computing Cybersecurity 

Preparedness Act  to mitigate the looming threat. 

The Act acknowledges the threat that quantum computing raises for national security: 

(1) Cryptography is essential for the national security of the United States and the functioning of the 

economy of the United States. 

(2) The most widespread encryption protocols today rely on computational limits of classical comput -

ers to provide cybersecurity. 

(3) Quantum computers might one day have the ability to push computational boundaries, allowing 

us to solve problems that have been intractable thus far, such as integer factorization, which is 

important for encryption. 

(4) The rapid progress of quantum computing suggests the potential for adversaries of the United 

States to steal sensitive encrypted data today using classical computers, and wait until su ffi ciently 

powerful quantum systems are available to decrypt it. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  21 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Sections 2(a), 3(d)(9) (de fi ning a "quantum computer" as "a computer that uses the collective properties 

of quantum states, such as superposition, interference, and entanglement, to perform calculations”). 

The Act requires that the Director of the O ffi ce and Management and Budget (OMB) develop and issue 

guidance for administrative agencies "on the migration of information technology to post-quantum cryp -

tography." Section 4(a). This guidance must include "a requirement for each agency to establish and 

maintain a current inventory of information technology in use by the agency that is vulnerable to decryp -

tion by quantum computers." Section 4(a)(1). 

Following that guidance, agencies will then report back to the OMB with their inventory of IT vulnerable 

to quantum decryption. Section 4(b). One year after NIST issues its post-quantum cryptography stan -

dards, OMB will issue further guidance to prepare agencies for the migration of their data to the new, 

quantum-resilient standards. Section 4(c). Throughout this period, and for the following  fi ve years, OMB 

will report back to Congress on the migration's progress. Section 4(e). This lengthy period acknowledges 

the di ffi culty that agencies, many of which still rely on older, legacy systems, will have in overhauling 

their encryption schemes. 

The Act exempts all national security systems. Section 5.  Migrating these systems to post-quantum 

cryptography, however, is already underway .

While the Act will go a long way toward strengthening agency data against a quantum attack, in some 

respects,  the cat  is already out of the bag. Today's hackers can obtain encrypted data and store it for 

years, knowing that a future quantum computer will be able to decrypt it. This technique is sometimes 

called "harvest now, decrypt later," and the Act cannot protect already compromised data from later de -

cryption. Still, the government's acknowledgement and mitigation of future threats is an important step 

toward protecting its data in the future. 

# 11. IBM: Quantum Computing Poses An 

# ‘Existential Threat’ To Data Encryption 

by Tim Keary 

https:/ /venturebeat.com/security/ibm-quantum-computing/ 

For years, encryption has played a core role in securing enterprise data. However, as  quantum comput -

ers  become more advanced, traditional encryption solutions and public-key cryptography (PKC) stan -

dards, which enterprise and consumer vendors rely on to secure their products, are at serious risk of 

decryption. 

Today,  IBM Institute for Business Value  issued a new  report  titled Security in the Quantum Era, examin -

ing the reality of  quantum risk  and the need for enterprise adoption of quantum-safe capabilities to safe -

guard the integrity of critical applications and infrastructure as the risk of decryption increases. 

The report argues that quantum computing poses an “existential risk” to classical computer encryption 

protocols, and notes that cybercriminals are potentially already ex fi ltrating encrypted data with the inten -

tion of decrypting it once quantum computers advance as part of “harvest now, decrypt layer attacks.” 

The problem with traditional encryption and quantum computing 

One of the central limitations of traditional cryptographic protocols like RSA is that they’re reliant on 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  22 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

mathematical problems like the factorization of large numbers, which are simple enough for a quantum 

computer to solve with brute force. 

With a quantum computer, cryptographic protocols “can in theory be solved — and solved within a few 

hours — with the help of Shor’s algorithm,” the report said. “This makes protocols like RSA an insu ffi -

cient cryptographic scheme in a future where quantum computers have reached their full potential.” 

While this process hasn’t taken place just yet, more and more organizations are taking the risk of this 

decryption seriously. In December 2022, President Biden signed the  Quantum Computing Cybersecurity 

Preparedness Act  encouraging government agencies to adopt technology that’s resistant to post-quan -

tum decryption. 

Likewise, last year  NIST  concluded its search to identify quantum-resistant algorithms that had been 

ongoing since 2016, choosing four algorithms as  fi nalists, and selecting  CRYSTALS-Kyber , a public-key 

encryption algorithm and  CRYSTALS-Dilithium  a digital signature algorithm, as its top two chosen stan -

dards. 

Investing in quantum security is now becoming a necessity for enterprises. From our point of view at 

IBM, it’s important for CISOs and security leaders to understand quantum-safe cryptography,” said Dr 

Vadim Lyubashevsky, cryptography research at IBM Research. 

“They need to understand their risk and be able to answer the question: what should they prioritize for 

migration to quantum-safe cryptography? The answer is often critical systems and data that need to be 

kept for the long term; for example, healthcare, telco, and government-required records,” Lyubashevsky 

said. 

IBM’s lattice-based approach to quantum-safe encryption 

With the global quantum cryptography  market  expected to grow from $89 million in 2020 to $214 million 

by 2025, IBM has been active in establishing itself as a leader within the space alongside other providers 

like  Intel , which has helped contribute to NIST’s  post-quantum cryptography  standards. 

Just last year, IBM launched  IBM z16 , a quantum-safe, AI-driven data inference-optimization solution 

designed for processing mission-critical data. The company had also contributed to three of the four 

post-quantum algorithms chosen by NIST. 

Part of IBM’s quantum-safe strategy is to use lattice-based cryptography, a method for constructing se -

curity primitives that’s based on the geometry of numbers, which can be used to construct encryption 

protocols that are harder for quantum computers to crack than those that rely on factorization. 

IBM notes that this approach  fi rst emerged in the 1990s out of two research papers, Brown 

University’s  NTRU: A new high speed public key cryptosystem  by Je ff rey Ho ff stein, Jill Pipher and 

Joseph Silverman; and IBM scientist Miklos Ajtai’s  Generating Hard Instances of Lattice Problems .

# 12. Getting America’s Skies Quantum 

# Read y

by Arthur Herman 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/arthurherman/2023/01/17/getting-americas-skies-quantum-ready/? 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  23 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

sh=5a2783953302 

The air tra ffi c shutdown last week, the worst since 9/11, represents a salutary warning to government as 

well as private industry. If you thought our air tra ffi c infrastructure is vulnerable to hackers, you’re right. 

Between outdated computer systems and inadequate cybersecurity, the world of air travel o ff ers multiple 

points of entry for the current hacker or a future quantum computer attack. Closing those points, and 

getting serious about making our skies cyber and eventually quantum-safe should be a major priority for 

a Secretary of Transportation—far more, frankly, than any climate change agenda. 

The truth is, those malicious attacks have been going on for a while. 

On May 7, 2009, hackers got into the FAA computer system, and stole the personal of some 

45,000 employees. 

In 2013 a malicious phishing scam targeted 75 US airports. 

On February 23, 2021, NASA and FAA were both hacked by Solar Wind. 

On October 10, 2022, Russian hackers knocked key U.S. airports o ffl ine, including LAX and La 

Guardia, O’Hare and Midway airports in Chicago. 

That’s what can happen if someone targets more stationary targets. Airliners themselves are particularly 

vulnerable, a ccording to Neucrom Security Labs research , thanks to their WiFi services. By cracking 

open access to the thousands of accounts using WiFi in the air, or hacking into airline terminals on the 

ground, hackers will have a gold mine rich with what they are looking for, namely mountains of data, 

both proprietary and personal. It’s not just a U.S. problem. The European Organisation for the Safety of 

Air Navigation, or Eurocontrol,  published a report  in July 2021, “Airlines under attack: Faced with a rising 

tide of cybercrime, is our industry resilient enough to cope?” 

But the threat of quantum computer attack goes far beyond stolen identities, cancelled  fl ights, or even 

airport shutdowns. An extended quantum threat can disrupt air travel for protracted periods, and gener -

ate aerial chaos on a global scale. It could mean downed planes, endless routing chaos, and collisions 

between commercial  fl ights and mission-critical military aircraft in a time of war or national emergency. 

For example, the system that went down a week ago was the Notice to Air Missions (NOTAM). It sends 

alerts to pilots to let them know of conditions that could a ff ect the safety of their  fl ights. It is separate 

from the air tra ffi c control system that keeps planes a safe distance from each other, but a critical part of 

guaranteeing air safety. 

Imagine a quantum hack that sends false notices to pilots that send them and their passengers on a 

deadly journey, all based on false data or weather information, and all using the same system that’s de -

signed to keep airliners in the sky, instead of crashing them to earth. 

The heart of America’s air travel infrastructure, the Air Tra ffi c Control system itself (ATC), is kept o ffl ine to 

avoid the threat of malicious attack by state or non-state actors. But some components do communi -

cate via the Net, for example for system maintenance, while ATC’s  Next-Gen modernization program  will 

rely on IP-based networks in order to communicate, which opens another portal to malicious intrusion, 

especially by a future quantum computer that can punch through any existing encryption. 

Fortunately, this White House has gotten serious about the quantum computer threat.  So has Congress .

Now the Transportation Department needs to take the lead in adopting the zero trust cybersecurity stan -

dards required by executive order, including adopting quantum-safe protocols. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  24 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

What can the Transportation Secretary and his cybersecurity sta ff  do? 

First , post an accelerated timeline for migration of all air travel-related communication and com -

puter systems to post-quantum cryptography, i.e. the large quantum-resistant algorithms recently 

standardized by NIST, which can also protect against current hackers. 

Second , issue a Request For Information (RFI) to cybersecurity companies familiar with the quan -

tum threat, on how to use those NIST standards to map out a strategy for guarding against future 

quantum hackers in the event of national emergency or time of war. 

Third , meet with those quantum cybersecurity companies who can provide the right  fl exibility and 

resilience that a full-court press post-quantum cyber regime will need, including regular upgrading 

of key existing systems and installing of quantum-safe encryption for future ones. 

Fourth , make sure other parts of the US transportation grid—rails, subways, highways—are mi -

grating toward post-quantum solutions, as well; including where—as with industrial systems and 

the power grid—using quantum cryptography may be the better answer than PQC. 

Our Transportation Secretary, and his counterparts in relevant committees in the Senate and the House, 

need to be constantly thinking about how keep our skies safe from malicious cyberattack. The advent of 

encryption-breaking quantum computers will make that task all but impossible, unless we take steps 

now to match the quantum-safe tools we already today, to the systems that will need them tomorrow. 

# 13. Post-Quantum Cybersecurity Threats 

# Loom Larg e

by Help Net Security 

https:/ /www.helpnetsecurity.com/2023/01/16/post-quantum-cybersecurity-threats/ 

A new Zapata Computing report reveals a deepening commitment from enterprises that points to a ma -

turing industry with widespread, global interest and increased urgency regarding post-quantum cyberse -

curity threats. 

The growing interest in quantum is translating into spending, demonstrated by 71% of quantum-adopt -

ing enterprises surveyed having current quantum computing budgets of more than $1 million. This  fi nd -

ing represents a 2.5X increase over 2021, where only 28% of quantum-adopting respondents indicated 

that they had a quantum computing budget of more than $1 million. 

Considering this net-positive shift in budgets, it’s no surprise that 74% of enterprise leaders have adopt -

ed or are planning to adopt quantum computing. Interestingly, nearly 30% of respondents that have 

adopted or plan to adopt quantum computing expect to see a competitive advantage due to quantum 

computing within the next 12 months. 

This represents more than a sevenfold increase year-over-year from 2021 (4%) and highlights the grow -

ing commitment to near-term quantum computing initiatives as the technology continues to mature. 

“We’re getting a unique glimpse into the quantum adoption mindset of global enterprise executives, 

which mirrors what we’re seeing in our customer base,” said  Christopher Savoie , CEO of Zapata Com -

puting. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  25 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

“These  fi ndings become more interesting when compared to the data we saw last year. Over the past 12 

months, we’ve seen signi fi cant new developments in technology, particularly generative AI, and near-

term advantages from quantum-inspired technologies that are fueling the momentum for quantum com -

puting planning and adoption. As a result, more enterprises are exploring what’s possible with the hybrid 

quantum classical compute capabilities of today and how the potential of quantum computing may im -

pact their competitive position — and ultimately their business results,” Savoie continued. 

Machine learning and data analytics continue to be the leading quantum use cas -

es 

Beyond one-o ff  experiments, enterprises are focused on well-de fi ned use cases and problems, with 

71% of quantum-adopters indicating they were focused on machine learning/data analytics problems, 

up from 55% in 2021. 

Vendor lock-in concerns are nearly universal 

91% respondents indicate they are concerned about vendor lock-in, which becomes a concern when a 

technology is on the verge of being used to address real-world, commercial-grade challenges. It’s too 

early to tell which hardware architecture will prevail, and adopters are wary of implementing a paradigm 

that may not be the best for their needs in the long term. 

Post-quantum cybersecurity threats 

In addition to being the biggest challenge to quantum adoption cited by respondents, 65% of respon -

dents are extremely or very concerned about post-quantum cryptography (PQC), and 63% of respon -

dents are actively working with a vendor to prepare. The concerns re fl ect both the magnitude of the 

threat posed by  quantum computers  and the absence of clearly reliable solutions. 

Integration challenges remain an obstacle to adoption 

The complexity of integrating quantum computing with existing IT stacks fell just behind security con -

cerns as the top hurdle to quantum adoption. The persistence of this challenge was also re fl ected by the 

top considerations for selecting quantum vendors, with 51% prioritizing easy-to-use solutions and 50% 

prioritizing easy integration with existing IT. 

Expectations of better business results drive quantum adoption 

The top motivation for exploring quantum computing is driving better performance and business results, 

with 70% of quantum-adopting respondents citing this motivation, up from 60% in 2021. 

Enterprises get tactical about quantum adoption 

Enterprises are taking tactical steps to make quantum computing a reality, with respondents noting that 

they are building new applications (48%), running experiments on quantum hardware or simulators 

(62%), and experimenting and building proofs of concept (51%). 

Each of these steps saw increased activity by enterprises in 2022 compared with the previous year. The 

biggest shift was towards running experiments on quantum hardware, which grew from 48% of enter -

prises in 2021 to 62% in this year’s study. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  26 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Quantum adoption outpaces AI adoption 

Enterprise leaders say they are adopting quantum technology more quickly than they did arti fi cial intelli -

gence. 49% of respondents say they are deploying quantum more quickly than they did with AI, with 

only 17% indicating they’re taking a slower pace. 

# 14. Computers Need To Make A Quantum 

# Leap Before They Can Crack Encrypted 

# Message s

by John Naughton 

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/jan/14/computers-need-to-make-a-quantum-leap-

before-they-can-crack-encrypted-messages 

Security in a digital world requires that our communications are safe from digital eavesdroppers. The 

way we do that is to encrypt our messages using mathematical tools. The most powerful of these 

use  trapdoor functions  – that is, ones that work easily in one direction (making encryption easy) but not 

in the other (making decryption di ffi cult). 

Trapdoor functions utilise a property of multiplication – its asymmetry. It’s simple to multiply two num -

bers together, for example, 971 and 1,249, to get 1,212,779, but it’s quite hard to start with 1,212,779 

and work out which two prime numbers (its factors) have to be multiplied to produce it. And the task be -

comes exponentially harder the bigger the original numbers are. Which is why, up to now, computer sci -

entists believe that it’s impossible  in practice  for a conventional computer, no matter how powerful, to 

factorise any number that’s longer than 2,048 bits. Why so? Because it would take it 300tn years, or 

about  22,000 times longer than the age of the universe  (to use just one of the popular analogies), for the 

machine to crack the problem. 

This explains why the 2,048-bit limit is the basis for the most commonly used form of asymmetric en -

cryption today, the  RSA system , which relies on the di ffi culty of factoring the product of two large prime 

numbers, namely, numbers that are divisible only by themselves and 1. That doesn’t mean that RSA en -

cryption is unbreakable (mathematicians never say never) – just that it won’t be broken in the near future 

and so the world can rest assured that it’ll be good for, say, the next 25 years. 

Being an alert reader, you will already have spotted the critical  fl y in this soothing ointment – the as -

sumption that the computers we will be using in 25 years’ time will be similar to the ones we use today. 

Since the early 1980s, physicists and computer scientists such as Richard Feynman, Paul Benio ff , Yuri 

Manin (who died last weekend at the age of 85) and Britain’s  David Deutsch  have been thinking about  a

di ff erent idea  – using some ideas from subatomic physics to design a new and very distinct kind of 

computing engine – a  quantum computer . In 1985, Deutsch published  a proposal  for one. And in recent 

times, companies such as  Google  and  IBM  have begun building them. 

Why is that relevant? Basically because quantum computers are potentially much more powerful than 

conventional ones, which are based on digital bits – entities that have only two possible states, on and 

off  (or 1 and zero). Quantum machines are built around  qubits , or quantum bits, which can  simultaneous -

ly  be in two di ff erent states. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  27 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

At this point, you may be anxiously checking for the nearest exit. Before doing so, remember that to un -

derstand subatomic physics you need  fi rst of all to divest yourself of everything you think you know 

about the physical world we ordinary mortals inhabit. We may sometimes be rude about people who be -

lieve in fairies, but particle physicists fervently believe in the  neutrino , a subatomic particle that can pass 

right through the Earth without stopping and we take these scientists seriously. 

Way back in 1994,  the mathematician Peter Shor  showed why we might be right to do so. Any entity 

equipped with a powerful enough quantum computer, he argued, could potentially break most common -

ly used cryptographic codes, including RSA. The problem was that the dream machine would need a 

billion qubits to do the job reliably. Other researchers  recently calculated that it would need “just” 20m 

qubits  but could do the requisite calculation in about eight hours. 

However, a  new paper  by a group of Chinese researchers claiming that they can break 2,048-bit RSA 

has caused a brief  fl urry in cryptographic circles. It was rapidly debunked by a couple of experts, includ -

ing US computer scientist Scott Aaronson,  who described it  as “one of the most actively misleading 

quantum computing papers I’ve seen in 25 years and I’ve seen… many”. 

There will be more where that came from. So it’s time for a reality check. Quantum computers are inter -

esting, but experience so far suggests they are exceedingly tricky to build and even harder to scale up. 

There are now about  50 working machines , most of them minuscule in terms of qubits. The biggest is 

one of IBM’s, which has – wait for it – 433 qubits, which means scaling up to 20m qubits might, er, take 

a while. This will lead realists to conclude that RSA encryption is safe for the time being and critics to 

say that it’s like nuclear fusion and  arti fi cial general intelligence  – always 50 years in the future. That 

doubtless will not prevent Rishi Sunak from declaring his intention to make the UK “a world leader in 

quantum” but my money is on RSA being secure for my lifetime – and possibly even Sunak’s. 

# 15. Vulnerabilities In Cryptographic Li -

# braries Found Through Modern Fuzzin g

by Zeljka Zorz 

https:/ /www.helpnetsecurity.com/2023/01/13/fuzzing-cryptographic-libraries/ 

Recently patched vulnerabilities in  MatrixSSL  and  wolfSSL , two open-source TLS/SSL implementations / 

libraries for embedded environments, have emphasized the great potential of using fuzzing to uncover 

security holes in implementations of cryptographic protocols. 

CVE-2022-43974 and CVE-2022-42905 

CVE-2022-43974 is a  bu ff er over fl ow  vulnerability found in MatrixSSL versions 4.5.1-4.0.0 that could 

allow information disclosure and remote code execution. 

It was discovered and reported by Robert Hörr and Alissar Ibrahim, security evaluators with Deutsche 

Telekom’s IT Security Evaluation Facility, and has been patched in version 4.6.0,  released  in December 

2022. 

CVE-2022-42905 is a  bu ff er over-read  vulnerability found in wolfSSL versions 5.5.1 and earlier, and 

could result in exploitable crashes (but only if callback functions are enabled). 

It was discovered and reported by Lucca Hirschi and Steve Kremer from LORIA, Inria (the French Insti -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  28 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

tute for Research in Digital Science and Technology) and Max Ammann, a security engineer interning 

with Trail of Bits. It has been patched in wolfSSL version 5.5.2,  released  in October 2022. 

Fuzzing cryptographic libraries to  fl ag security  fl aws 

In both cases, the researchers used  fuzzing  to  fi nd the  fl aws. 

“Computer software is becoming more complex. So, it is almost impossible to perform a complete 

source code review with reasonable coverage. For this reason, modern fuzzing methods are used to dis -

cover vulnerabilities,” Deutsche Telekom’s security evaluators explained. 

They fuzzed the MatrixSSL library with code coverage-guided fuzzers  AFL  and  libFuzzer , and the vulner -

ability was found with  AddressSanitizer , a tool for detecting memory errors. (Using those same tools, 

several years ago Hörr  unearthed  another bu ff er over fl ow in wolfSSL. He also  developed  the Fast Auto -

mated Software Testing framework for TLS libraries, combining the strengths of various fuzzing tools.) 

“Code coverage based fuzzing combined with the AddressSanitizer is a powerful method to discover 

e.g., bu ff er over fl ows. With increasingly complex source codes, it is a resource-e ffi cient alternative to 

source code reviews, because this fuzzing approach can be done mainly automatically. As there exist 

many approaches for fuzzing, it is the art of fuzzing to  fi nd the best approach,” Hörr and Ibrahim noted. 

Ammann and his fellow researchers used a new protocol fuzzer called  tlspu ffi n to automatically discover 

CVE-2022-42905 and three other vulnerabilities. 

“Tlspu ffi n is a fuzzer inspired by formal protocol veri fi cation. Initially developed as part of my internship 

at LORIA, INRIA, France, it is especially targeted against cryptographic protocols like TLS or SSH,” he 

explained. 

They used the fuzzer not only to discover new vulnerabilities in wolfSSL, but also to rediscover previous -

ly  fl agged logical vulnerabilities (e.g.,  FREAK ) as a way to prove that tlspu ffi n works. 

In an  excellent write-up , Ammann went more in-depth about some of the discovered vulnerabilities and 

how the fuzzer found “weird states” and allowed them to  fi nd their source. 

“It is challenging to fuzz implementations of cryptographic protocols. Unlike traditional fuzzing of  fi le 

formats, cryptographic protocols require a speci fi c fl ow of cryptographic and mutually dependent mes -

sages to reach deep protocol states,” he explained. 

“Additionally, detecting logical bugs is a challenge on its own. The AddressSanitizer enables security 

researchers to reliably  fi nd memory-related issues. For logical bugs like authentication bypasses or loss 

of con fi dentiality no automated detectors exist.” 

That’s why they created tlspu ffi n. Employing the decades-old  Dolev–Yao model , which can be used for 

testing cryptographic protocols, it includes speci fi c modi fi cations so they could successfully fuzz con -

crete implementations of cryptographic protocols. Tlspu ffi n’s structure is also based on 

the  LibAFL  fuzzer. 

“Before my internship at Trail of Bits, tlspu ffi n already supported fuzzing several versions of OpenSSL 

(including the version 1.0.1, which is vulnerable to Heartbleed) and LibreSSL,” Ammann noted. Since 

then, they have: 

Designed an interface that added the capability to fuzz arbitrary protocol libraries and added sup -

port for fuzzing wolfSSL 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  29 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Added support for fuzzing the SSH protocol, as well as  libssh 

Added a security violations oracle that allows for the detection of security issues that do not lead 

to program crashes (e.g., authentication bypasses or protocol downgrades) 

Made changes that allowed them to more easily validate  fi ndings 

Tlspu ffi n can now be used for testing the TLS and SSH protocols, and that integrating a new protocol 

into tlspu ffi n is possible, but “takes signi fi cant e ff ort and requires an in-depth understanding of the pro -

tocol.” It can also be used by developers to write test suites. 

# 16. What’s Happening With Quantum-Safe 

# Cryptography ?

by Cliff Saran 

https:/ /www.computerweekly.com/news/252529003/Whats-happening-with-quantum-safe-cryptography 

Just weeks after US president Joe Biden signed into law the Quantum Computing Cybersecurity Pre -

paredness Act, there are reports that Chinese researchers have cracked  RSA 2048 bit encryption .

Given that quantum computers o ff er the ability to push computational boundaries, such as solving in -

tractable problems such as integer factorisation, which is used for public key encryption, the US gov -

ernment aims to encourage the migration of Federal Government IT systems to quantum-resistant cryp -

tography. 

However, last week, a number of news outlets picked up a Financial Times story which reported that 

Chinese researchers claim they can break RSA 2048 encryption using quantum computing. 

The researchers published a paper , Factoring integers with sublinear resources on a superconducting 

quantum processor , in which they stated: “We estimate that a quantum circuit with 372 physical qubits 

and a depth of thousands is necessary to challenge RSA-2048 using our algorithm. Our study shows 

great promise in expediting the application of current noisy quantum computers, and paves the way to 

factor large integers of realistic cryptographic signi fi cance.” 

They concluded that the pace of development of NISQ devices means they would be able to scale 

quickly to meet the challenge of cracking RSA 2048 encryption. 

In his blog, commenting on the news reports, American cryptographer  Bruce Schneier  wrote: “I don’t 

think this will break RSA. Several times a year, the cryptography community received “breakthroughs” 

from people outside the community. That’s why we created the RSA Factoring Challenge: to force peo -

ple to provide proof of their claims. In general, the smart bet is on the new techniques not working. But 

someday, that bet will be wrong. Is it today? Probably not. But it could be. We’re in the worst possible 

position right now: we don’t have the facts to know. Someone needs to implement the quantum algo -

rithm and see.” 

Other security experts have dismissed the claim, describing it as “Chinese propaganda”. 

Since 2016, the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), has been looking to develop a 

new standard for post quantum cryptography (PQC). In October last year, it announced that the PQC 

standardisation process would be continuing with a fourth round of submissions. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  30 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Discussing the evolution of quantum computers and the potential for them to reach a point where they 

would be able to crack public key encryption, Daniel Shiu, chief cryptographer at Arqit, said that in the 

short term, quantum computers will remain inadequate. But, he said: “When you start talking longer 

term, it’s a question of risk appetite.” 

For instance, if there is a 1% chance in the next three years that a public key cracking quantum comput -

ing would exist, then that will in fl uence organisations’ risk exposure. Given that NIST began its quest for 

PQC way back in 2016, and seven years on, it is still looking for submissions, Shiu said the industry is 

starting to feel jumpy. 

“The whole process has taken longer than everybody was hoping,” he said. “There are big maturity and 

migration concerns, and another part of NIST, the  Cyber Centre of Excellence , is doing a migration study 

where the experts are talking about decades that might be needed to fully update internet public key 

cryptography.” 

Quantum-safe systems 

The industry has also been focused on developing quantum-safe systems. Last year,  IBM claimed that 

its newly introduced z16 system  was the industry’s  fi rst of that description. It said the z16 is able to pro -

tect data against future threats that could evolve with advances in quantum computing, and that it uses 

“lattice-based cryptography”, an approach for constructing security primitives that helps protect data 

and systems against current and future threats. 

The  fi rm said the new hardware provides secure boot, which, when combined with quantum-safe cryp -

tography, can help businesses tackle threats such as “harvest now, decrypt later” attacks, which lead to 

extortion, loss of intellectual property and disclosure of other sensitive data. 

For Shiu, public key encryption, like RSA, represents a pre-internet way to verify the authenticity of a 

user, and provides public key certi fi cates to support o ffl ine validation of credentials. 

“We should be moving to a time when we can have much more actively managed trust,” he said. For 

instance, Kerberos o ff ers a di ff erent way to mediate trust based on what Shiu describes as “purely 

symmetric primitives”. This means it requires a centralised key management server that everybody uses 

for trust. 

But changing a fundamental approach to internet encryption is not something that can easily be rolled 

out, which is why so much attention is being given to quantum-safe encryption. 

# 17. A 30-Year-Old Cryptographic Challenge 

# Is About To Be Solve d

by The Physics arXiv Blog 

https:/ /www.discovermagazine.com/technology/a-30-year-old-cryptographic-challenge-is-about-to-be-

solved 

In 1991, the cybersecurity company, RSA Laboratories in Bedford, Massachusetts published a list of 54 

increasingly large numbers that it had created by multiplying two prime numbers together. It then chal -

lenged the computer science community to factorize them — to  fi nd the original prime numbers in each 

case. The company even o ff ered cash prizes for some of the solutions. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  31 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The challenge was designed to assess state-of-the-art capabilities for factoring numbers. That’s impor -

tant because factoring — or more precisely its di ffi culty— secures various public key cryptosystems. So 

advanced factoring capabilities make these cryptosystems less secure. 

The challenge ended in 2007  but even today 31 of these  RSA numbers  remain unfactored. The largest is 

RSA-2048, so-called because of the number of bits required to represent it. 

It would be easy to think that progress in factoring numbers must have stalled. But behind the scenes a 

revolution has been brewing in the form of increasingly capable quantum computers, which are much 

better at factoring than conventional machines. 

For the moment, these machines are not powerful enough to outperform the most powerful conventional 

computers. And that raises the question of when they will be. 

Quantum Algorithm 

Today we get an answer thanks to the work of Bao Yan at the State Key Laboratory of Mathematical En -

gineering and Advanced Computing in China and colleagues who have developed a way to dramatically 

boost the power of quantum algorithms capable of factoring numbers. 

They use their approach to increase the size of the largest number ever factored by a quantum comput -

er. And they say their work paves the way for quantum computers to become capable of cracking codes 

of “cryptographic signi fi cance”, such as RSA-2048. 

The security of public key cryptosystems depends on the mathematical process of factoring, the reverse 

of multiplication. The interesting feature of multiplication and factoring is that even though they are 

closely related, they are vastly di ff erent to perform. 

Multiplying two prime numbers together to get a bigger number is easy. But starting with the bigger 

number and working out which primes are factors is hard. In fact, the di ffi culty increases exponentially 

with the size of the number, and it is straightforward to make a number so big that a classical computer 

would need the lifetime of the universe to  fi nd its factors. 

That’s what makes public key cryptosystems so secure — they’re not perfect but a conventional com -

puter would need the lifetime of the universe to crack them. 

This thinking changed in 1994, when the American mathematician Peter Shor came up with a quantum 

algorithm that could factor numbers much more quickly than a conventional algorithm. In one foul 

swoop, Shor’s work raised the prospect that any public key cryptosystem could be cracked by a quan -

tum computer in future. 

The promise of Shor’s algorithm has been a major driving force in the development of quantum comput -

ers. But implementing it has turned out to be tricky because it requires quantum computers signi fi cantly 

more powerful than any that are available. 

The largest number factored by a quantum computer using Shor’s algorithm is just 21. Other approaches 

have been more successful but nowhere near powerful enough to tackle the RSA numbers. “The largest 

integer factored by a general method in a real physical system is 249919,” say Bao and co. 

This a number that can be described in 18-bits. However, modern public key cryptosystems depend on 

signi fi cantly bigger numbers that can be described in 2048 bits or more. That's why these cryptosystems 

look safe from this kind of attack, but an important question is how long it will be before quantum com -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  32 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

puters can tackle them too. 

Quantum-Classical Hybrid 

The breakthrough that Bao and co have made is to speed up an alternative approach to Shor’s algo -

rithm, called Schnorr’s algorithm (sic). This is a classical algorithm consisting of several steps that each 

take time to solve. 

Bao and co’s approach is to use a quantum optimization algorithm to speed up the most time-consum -

ing step. This quantum-classical hybrid approach has the e ff ect of dramatically speeding up the factor -

ing process but with a less powerful quantum computer than is necessary for Shor’s algorithm. 

The results are impressive. Bao and co have used their approach to factor the 48-bit number 

261980999226229 using a superconducting quantum computer with just ten qubits. This is “the largest 

integer factored by a general method in a real quantum device,” say Bao and co. 

All this means the prospects for factoring even larger numbers are good. Bao and co calculate that their 

approach could factor RSA-2048 using a quantum computer with 372 qubits. 

“Such a scale of quantum resources is most likely to be achieved in the near future,” they say. Indeed, 

IBM recently unveiled  a quantum computer with 433 qubits .

There is an important caveat, however. It's not just the number of qubits that determines the capability of 

a quantum computer but it's error rate and at the moment, quantum computers are too error prone to 

make larger calculations pro fi table. 

Nevertheless, Bao and co's is interesting work suggesting that the RSA numbers are likely to fall like ten 

pins in the near future. It’s taken more than 30 years, but the RSA Factoring Challenge could  fi nally be 

close to being solved. 

The implications are obvious for the security of public key encryption systems, which are still widely 

used. Cryptographers have had plenty of time since Shor’s announcement to come up with more secure 

ways to send messages. Whether they have succeeded should shortly be revealed. 

# 18. The Optical Fiber That Keeps Data Safe 

# Even After Being Twisted Or Ben t

by University of Bath 

https:/ /www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2023/01/230110150806.htm 

Optical  fi bres are the backbone of our modern information networks. From long-range communication 

over the internet to high-speed information transfer within data centres and stock exchanges, optical 

fi bre remains critical in our globalised world. 

Fibre networks are not, however, structurally perfect, and information transfer can be compromised 

when things go wrong. Tßo address this problem, physicists at the University of Bath in the UK have de -

veloped a new kind of  fi bre designed to enhance the robustness of networks. This robustness could 

prove to be especially important in the coming age of quantum networks. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  33 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The team has fabricated optical  fi bres (the  fl exible glass channels through which information is sent) that 

can protect light (the medium through which data is transmitted) using the mathematics of topology. 

Best of all, these modi fi ed  fi bres are easily scalable, meaning the structure of each  fi bre can be pre -

served over thousands of kilometres. 

The Bath study is published in the  latest issue  of  Science Advances .

Protecting light against disorder 

At its simplest, optical  fi bre, which typically has a diameter of 125 μm (similar to a thick strand of hair) 

comprises a core of solid glass surrounded by cladding. Light travels through the core, where it bounces 

along as though re fl ecting o ff  a mirror. 

However, the pathway taken by an optical  fi bre as it crisscrosses the landscape is rarely straight and 

undisturbed: turns, loops, and bends are the norm. Distortions in the  fi bre can cause information to de -

grade as it moves between sender and receiver. "The challenge was to build a network that takes ro -

bustness into account," said Physics PhD student Nathan Roberts, who led the research. 

"Whenever you fabricate a  fi bre-optic cable, small variations in the physical structure of the  fi bre are in -

evitably present. When deployed in a network, the  fi bre can also get twisted and bent. One way to 

counter these variations and defects is to ensure the  fi bre design process includes a real focus on ro -

bustness. This is where we found the ideas of topology useful.” 

To design this new  fi bre, the Bath team used topology, which is the mathematical study of quantities that 

remain unchanged despite continuous distortions to the geometry. Its principles are already applied to 

many areas of physics research. By connecting physical phenomena to unchanging numbers, the de -

structive e ff ects of a disordered environment can be avoided. 

The  fi bre designed by the Bath team deploys topological ideas by including several light-guiding cores in 

a fi bre, linked together in a spiral. Light can hop between these cores but becomes trapped within the 

edge thanks to the topological design. These edge states are protected against disorder in the structure. 

Bath physicist Dr Anton Souslov, who co-authored the study as theory lead, said: "Using our  fi bre, light 

is less in fl uenced by environmental disorder than it would be in an equivalent system lacking topological 

design. 

"By adopting optical  fi bres with topological design, researchers will have the tools to pre-empt and fore -

stall signal-degrading e ff ects by building inherently robust photonic systems.” 

Theory meets practical expertise 

Bath physicist Dr Peter Mosley, who co-authored the study as experimental lead, said: "Previously, sci -

entists have applied the complex mathematics of topology to light, but here at the University of Bath we 

have lots of experience physically making optical  fi bres, so we put the mathematics together with our 

expertise to create topological  fi bre.” 

The team, which also includes PhD student Guido Baardink and Dr Josh Nunn from the Department of 

Physics, are now looking for industry partners to develop their concept further. 

"We are really keen to help people build robust communication networks and we are ready for the next 

phase of this work," said Dr Souslov. 

Mr Roberts added: "We have shown that you can make kilometres of topological  fi bre wound around a 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  34 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

spool. We envision a quantum internet where information will be transmitted robustly across continents 

using topological principles.” 

He also pointed out that this research has implications that go beyond communications networks. He 

said: "Fibre development is not only a technological challenge, but also an exciting scienti fi c fi eld in its 

own right. 

"Understanding how to engineer optical  fi bre has led to light sources from bright 'supercontinuum' that 

spans the entire visible spectrum right down to quantum light sources that produce individual photons --

single particles of light.” 

The future is quantum 

Quantum networks are widely expected to play an important technological role in years to come. Quan -

tum technologies have the capacity to store and process information in more powerful ways than 'clas -

sical' computers can today, as well as sending messages securely across global networks without any 

chance of eavesdropping. 

But the quantum states of light that transmit information are easily impacted by their environment and 

fi nding a way to protect them is a major challenge. This work may be a step towards maintaining quan -

tum information in  fi bre optics using topological design. 

# 19. Do Not Miss Quantum Computing Wave 

# In 202 3

by Nancy Liu 

https://www.sdxcentral.com/articles/inter view/dell-cto-do-not-miss-quantum-computing-wave-

in-2023/2023/01/ 

Quantum computing  is one of the long-term trends that CIOs should take action on in 2023, otherwise 

“you will miss this technology wave,” Dell Technologies Global CTO John Roese argued. 

Roese saw patterns forming this year “where we’re starting to see some very long trends culminating 

with something that needs to be done.” For CIOs and IT decision-makers, “it’s not okay to just be aware 

anymore, there are certain things that you actually have to act on,” he told SDxCentral. 

And quantum computing is a good example. This year, organizations should invest in quantum talent, 

simulations, and  security .

Roese noted industrial quantum computing use cases started to emerge two years ago, including bat -

tery development, material science, drug discovery, and seismic research. “We have hundreds of exam -

ples where people have done the early work to  fi gure out how they would apply quantum mathematics 

to solve some really hard problems that would make speci fi c industries better.” 

Additionally, quantum computing tools are available for users to explore the technology and start to learn 

the necessary  programming  languages and logic. 

To this end, Dell released  a hybrid classical-quantum computing package  that o ff ers a quantum emula -

tion platform and  access to IonQ’s quantum computers  that can enable both on-premise and cloud-

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  35 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

based quantum acceleration last November. 

“In almost every industry, we can  fi nd examples where people know what they’re going to use a quan -

tum computer for, and then if they can apply it to these problems, mostly optimization problems, they 

would get an advantage and they’re starting to experiment,” Roese said. 

That’s why he recommends organizations build a team or identify a point person for quantum computing 

implementation. 

“It turns out that 2023 is the year that for the  fi rst time, most enterprises are going to be able to start to 

deploy quantum-shaped protocols,” Roese said. 

“Investing in quantum simulation and enabling your data science and  arti fi cial intelligence (AI)  teams to 

learn the new languages and capability of quantum is critical in 2023,” he wrote in a  post .

Determine Quantum-Safe Crypto Risks 

To earn a better position for quantum computing, organizations should also draw a clear picture for post-

quantum cryptography, Roese noted. 

“With the rise of quantum computing comes the need to better understand post-quantum cryptography, 

the development of cryptographic systems for classical computers that are able to prevent attacks 

launched by quantum computers,” he warned. “Bad actors globally are actively trying to capture and 

archive  encrypted  tra ffi c on the assumption that su ffi ciently powerful quantum computers will eventually 

be able to decrypt that data.” 

To mitigate those risks, organizations can identify their cryptography inventory and catalog 

their  crypto  assets, and then assess their high-risk public interfaces including identifying which encrypt -

ed data is most exposed to the public  networks  — especially those in the hybrid and  multi-cloud  envi -

ronments, according to Roese. 

Last year, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) selected  the  fi rst few viable post-

quantum algorithms , “and in 2023 these tools will start to emerge,” he noted. “Over time they will be 

needed everywhere, but in 2023, knowing where to use them  fi rst is a critical step.” 

# 20. Cybersecurity Trends For 2023: How To 

# Protect Your Organization From Attackers 

# In A Recessive Econom y

by Megha Kalsi, Nate Morin, David Stanton 

https://insights.alixpartners.com/post/102i4qz/cybersecurity-trends-for-2023-how-to-protect-your-

organization-from-attackers-in 

Doing More With Less: It's The New Shift For Cybersecurity. Driven By A Looming Recession And In -

creased Management Scrutiny Around Expenses. 

But What Does This Look Like In Practice? How Do Cybersecurity Teams Keep Pace With Threats 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  36 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

And Attackers Even As Spending Flatlines? Here Is A Look At 2022 Trends, Some 2023 Predictions, And 

Recommendations On How Organizations Can Still Protect Themselves While Maintaining Flat Security 

Budgets. 2022 

Cybersecurity Trends Recap 

In 2022, Several Key Cybersecurity Trends Were Top-Of-Mind For Organizations. The Increased Preva -

lence Of Ransomware Attacks, Leveraging Supply Chain Weaknesses And Miscon fi gurations In Cloud 

Environments, Remained Popular And E ff ective With Attackers. As In Previous Years, The Challenge For 

Defenders Remains Increasing The Attackers’ Cost Of Exploitation While Limiting The Blast Radius Of 

A Successful Compromise. If Your Defenses Raise The Level Of E ff ort Or Cost Required To Successfully 

Compromise Your Assets Beyond The Expected Value Of The Compromise The Attacker Hopes To 

Achieve Through The Attack, It’s Likely They’ll Move On To Other, More Lucrative Targets. 

Again In 2022, Challenges In Hiring Top Security Talent Remained Top Of Mind For Security 

Leadership, And The Concerns Over Data Privacy Continued To Increase, As Did The Record Data Pri -

v a c y F i n e s . O v e r A B i l l i o n D o l l a r s I n G d p r F i n e s We r e L e v i e d I n 2 0 2 2 , W i t h 

Some Individual Companies Facing Fines Of Hundreds Of Millions Of Dollars Each. 

2023 Cyber Security Predictions 

What Is On The Horizon For 2023? Here Are Eight Up-And-Coming Trends To Watch: 

1. Malicious Use Of Arti fi cial Intelligence In Cybersecurity 

With The Accelerating Levels Of Maturity In Ai-Fueled Tools, It Is Looking Increasingly Like When 

And Not If Ai Capabilities Will Be Weaponized By Cybercriminals Looking To Lower The Cost And 

Increase The E ff ectiveness Of Their Attacks. Look For An Arms Race In The Coming Years As Ai-

Powered Off ensive And Defensive Tools Are Increasingly Leveraged By Both Sides. 

2. Ongoing Focus On Ciso Accountability And Insightful Reporting 

A R e c e n t S t u d y N o t e d T h a t 7 0 % O f C - S u i t e E x e c u t i v e s I n t e r v i e w e d 

Agreed That Cybersecurity Should Be A Part Of Every Board Meeting. Thus, Chief Information Se -

curity Offi cers (Cisos) Should Expect An Increased Emphasis On Visibility And Accountability. In 

Practice, Cisos Should Expect Growing Cybersecurity Awareness And The Requirement 

To Demonstrate The Impact Of Security Tools And Technologies In Defending Critical Assets Or 

Avoiding Potential Threats. Boards Expect Accountability And Clear Metrics With Near Real-

Time Information On Cyber Threats, Risks To The Business, The Likelihood Of Successful Attacks, 

And Vulnerability Remediation Progress. 

3. Focus On Clearly De fi ned Risk Categorization And Risk Tolerances 

Cisos Will Also Be Expected To Clearly De fi ne Acceptable Cyber Risk Levels And The Metrics As -

sociated With These Levels. Moreover, They Will Be The “Go-To” C-Suite Members Leading The 

Move From Current Processes To New Operations. 

4. Establishing Justi fi ed Cybersecurity Budgets 

As Budgets Come Under Greater Scrutiny, Security Leaders Will Need To Provide Demonstrable 

Proof That Current Spending Is Clearly Linked To Reduced Security Risk. In Practice, This Could 

Include Data Around The Number Of Detected Incidents Versus The Number Of Successful 

Breaches And, In Turn, The Time, E ff ort, And Money Saved. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  37 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

5. Positioning Of Cybersecurity As A Business Enabler 

Collaboration Across The Organization Will Be Critical As Companies Look To Move Toward Envi -

ronments Where Security Is A Business Enabler Rather Than Simply Corporate 

Compliance Or It Risk Management. Clear Intentions Should Be Made To Achieve Positive Busi -

ness Outcomes Through Increased Cybersecurity Solution Modernization. 

6. Growing Cyber Security Focus In Automotive And Energy Sectors 

With Electric Vehicles (Evs) Increasingly Going Mainstream, Automakers And Energy 

Companies Will Be Under Greater Threat From Nation-State Actors To Obtain Intellectual 

Property, New Vehicle Features And Layouts, And Other Data That Gives An Automotive Or Energy 

Company A Competitive Edge. As A Result, There's A Growing Focus On Adaptable And Intelli -

gent Cybersecurity In These Sectors. 

7. Weaponization Of Social Media Platforms 

Social Media Security Issues Are On Their Way Up In 2023. According To A Study Conducted By 

Vmware In 2022, 60% Of Security Professionals Said They Spotted The Use Of "Deepfakes" — 

Legitimate-Looking Images Often Lifted From Social Media Pro fi les That Help Malicious Actors 

Carry Out Fraud Via Social Engineering. 

8. Una ff ordable And Low Payout Cyber Insurance 

Cyber Insurance Is Getting More Expensive Even As The Probability Of Having A Pay Out In The 

Event Of An Incident Is Decreasing. As Noted By Dark Reading, For Example, Cyber Insurance 

Providers Such As Lloyd's Of London Recently Announced That Their Policies Would Exclude 

Coverage For State-Sponsored Cyberattacks. 

Recommendations For Cybersecurity Success In 2023 

With Budgets Flatlining As The Visibility Of Cyber Issues And Expectations Increase, Where Does This 

Leave Security Teams? While There's No Silver Bullet To Solve Cybersecurity Issues At The Lowest Cost 

Possible, There Are Opportunities For Organizations To Minimize The Risk To Their Systems And Data 

While Also Optimizing Their Security Spend. 

Begin The New Year With A Fresh Look At Your Security Risk Tolerance. Does The Current Model Still 

Accurately Re fl ect The Top Security Risks To The Business, And Is Your Security Program Still Focused 

On Mitigating And Measuring Any Remaining Risks? If Gaps Are Found, Are Your Security Program Pri -

orities And Spending For 2023 Targeted Toward Those Gaps, And If Not, Why Not? 

Security Leaders Should Also Revisit Their Security Program Organizational Structure To Reassess Each 

Team’s Function And The Responsibilities Of All The Roles Across Their Organization. Reevaluate 

Whether The Current Structure Is Sustainable And Can Address Risk Tolerance Needs, Tackle Upcoming 

Projects, Address Security Ad-Hoc Requests, And Perform Daily Operations On A Reduced Budget Or 

The Current Budget. Further, Consider The Usage Of Managed Security Service Providers (Mssp) Or 

Third-Party Contracts To O ff set Costs Or Provide Expert Insights On Areas Lacking Security Maturity 

(E.G., Data Security, Endpoint Security, Network Security, Cloud Security, Etc.). 

Today, It Is More Critical Than Ever To Keep Breaking Down Silos. While This Has Been A Priority For 

Many Companies Over The Past Few Years, Companies Can't Aff ord To Take Their Foot O ff  The Gas 

Now. By Implementing Businesswide, Cloud-Based Policies And Procedures, It's Possible To Create A 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  38 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Security-By-Design Framework That Embeds Protections Into Key Functions. 

Finally, It's Worth Evaluating Where You Could Save Money On Cyber Security Without Compromising 

Overall Protection. Potential Areas For Improved Cost Management Include: 

1. Streamlining Security Tools 

The Fewer Security Tools You Use, The Lower The Overall Cost And The Smaller The Risk Of 

Something Slipping Through The Cracks. More Tools Sometimes Result In Too Much Data Or Even 

Con fl icting Data That Needs To Be Rationalized. Ensure Any New Tools Fill A Speci fi c Need That 

Maps To Gaps In Your Coverage Model From Whatever Frameworks You’ve Chosen To Support 

Your Risk Tolerance. 

2. Examining Current Mssp (Managed Security Service Provider) Capabilities 

With More Than 10,000 Mssps In Operation, It Is Worth Comparing Current Provider Capabilities 

And Costs To Other Market Options. Partnering With An Mssp Isn’t An All-Or-Nothing Decision. It 

Could Be As Simple As Receiving Sta ff  Augmentation To Provide 24X7 Coverage Of Critical 

Events Or As Broad As Fully Outsourcing The Speci fi c Security Product Choice, Deployment, And 

Operations As Many Are Considering In The Endpoint Detection And Response (Edr) Space. 

3. Working Backward To Move Forward 

As Attack Vectors Evolve, New Security Tools Will Be Required. To Keep Spending Under Control, 

Start From What You Have And Work Backward To Pinpoint Areas Where Current Tools Do 

Not Cover Critical Gaps. Invest The Savings In Further Modernizing, Standardizing, And Securing 

Your Cloud-Based Workloads. Greater Degrees Of Solution Standardization And 

Automation Can Drastically Reduce Con fi guration Errors And Vulnerabilities And, Over Time, Re -

duce Operational Costs And Risk. 

4. Re-Evaluating Cybersecurity Insurance Policies 

Organizations Need To Constantly Evaluate Their Cyber Insurance's Effi cacy And Cost To 

Ensure It Is Filling A Critical Need And O ff ers Substantial Value. If You Are Paying Tens Of Thou -

sands Per Month For Coverage With A Low Likelihood Of A Payout In The Event Of A Covered 

Attack, It May Be Time To Rethink Your Current Policy Or Provider. Some Organizations Are Even 

Considering Reducing The Amount Of Cyber Insurance Coverage They Purchase Or Self-Insuring, 

Given The Changes In The Insurance Market. 

What Is The Bottom Line? Budgets Aren't Getting Bigger, But Business Leaders 

Expect Cybersecurity To Increasingly Become A Business Enabler In 2023. To Do More With Less, 

Teams Need To Focus On The Basics, Evaluate Their Insurance, Break Down Silos And Look For Ways 

To Reduce Spending Without Sacri fi cing Security. 

# 21. Will Quantum Computers Break RSA 

# Encryption In 2023 ?

by Stan Kaminsky 

https:/ /www.kaspersky.com/blog/quantum-computers-and-rsa-2023/46733/ 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  39 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

In the  fi nal days of 2022, the IT community was rather stirred by a  study  presented by a group of Chi -

nese scientists. It claimed that in the nearest future it will be possible to crack the RSA crypto algorithm 

with a key length of 2048 bits – which is fundamental for the operation of internet protocols – by skillfully 

combining classical and quantum computing. So how real is this threat? Let’s  fi gure it out. 

Quantum basics 

The theoretical ability of a quantum computer to perform ultra-fast factorization of giant integers and 

thus match keys for a number of asymmetric crypto-algorithms – including RSA encryption – has long 

been known. Our  blog post  explains in detail what a quantum computer is, how it works, and why it’s so 

di ffi cult to build. So far, all experts have agreed that a quantum computer large enough to crack RSA 

would probably be built no sooner than around a few dozen decades. To factorize an integer 2048 bits 

long, which is usually used as an RSA key, the Shor algorithm needs to be run on a quantum computer 

with millions of qubits (quantum bits). That is, it’s not a matter of the nearest future, since the best quan -

tum computers today work at 300-400 qubits — and this is after decades of research. 

But the future problem has already been actively thought about, and security experts are already calling 

for  adoption of post-quantum cryptography ; that is, algorithms that are resistant to hacking with a quan -

tum computer. There seemed to be a decade or more for a smooth transition, so the news that 

RSA-2048 might fall as early as in 2023 came as a bolt from the blue. 

News from China 

Chinese researchers have been able to factor a 48-bit key on a 10-qubit quantum computer. And they 

calculated that it’s possible to scale their algorithm for use with 2048-bit keys using a quantum computer 

with only 372 qubits. But such a computer already exists today, at  IBM  for example, so the need to one 

day replace crypto-systems throughout the internet suddenly ceased being something so far in the fu -

ture that it wasn’t really thought about seriously. A breakthrough has been promised by combining 

the  Schnorr algorithm  (not to be confused with the aforementioned Shor algorithm) with an additional 

quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) step. 

Schnorr’s algorithm is used for supposedly more e ffi cient factorization of integers using classical compu -

tation. The Chinese group proposes to apply quantum optimization at the most computationally inten -

sive stage of its work. 

Open questions 

Schnorr’s algorithm was met by the mathematical community with certain skepticism. The author’s claim 

that “this will destroy the RSA cryptosystem” in the description of the study was subjected to scrutiny 

and didn’t stand up. For example, famous cryptographer Bruce Schneier said that it “works well with 

smaller moduli — around the same order as ones the Chinese group has tested — but falls apart at larg -

er sizes.” And no one has succeeded in proving that this algorithm is scalable in practice. 

Applying quantum optimization to the “heaviest” part of the algorithm seems like a good idea, but quan -

tum computing experts  doubt  that QAOA optimization will be e ff ective in solving this computational 

problem. It’s possible to use a quantum computer here, but it will unlikely lead to time savings. The au -

thors of the work themselves carefully mention this dubious moment at the very end of their report, in the 

conclusion: 

It should be pointed out that the quantum speedup of the algorithm is unclear due to the ambigu -

ous convergence of QAOA. 

…

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  40 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Besides, the quantum speedup is unknown, it is still a long way to break RSA quantumly. 

Thus, it looks like even if you implement this hybrid algorithm on a classical + quantum system, it will 

take as long to guess RSA keys as with a regular computer. 

The icing on the cake is that in addition to the number of qubits there are other important parameters of 

a quantum computer, like levels of interference and errors, and the number of gates. Judging by the 

combination of required parameters, even the most promising computers of 2023-2024 are probably not 

suitable for running the Chinese algorithm on the needed scale. 

Practical takeaways 

While the crypto revolution is once again being delayed, the buzz around this study highlights two secu -

rity-related challenges. First, when choosing a quantum-resistant algorithm among numerous proposals 

for a “post-quantum standard”, new algebraic approaches – such as the aforementioned Schnorr’s algo -

rithm – should be studied scrupulously. Second, we de fi nitely need to raise the priority of projects for the 

transition to  post-quantum cryptography . It will seem like a non-urgent matter only until it’s too late… 

# 22. Chinese Researchers' Claimed Quantum 

# Encryption Crack Looks Unlikel y

by Thomas Claburn 

https:/ /www.theregister.com/2023/01/07/chinese_researchers_claimed_quantum_encryption/ 

Brie fl y this week, it appeared that quantum computers might  fi nally be ready to break 2048-bit RSA en -

cryption, but that moment has passed. 

The occasion was the publication of an academic paper by no less than two dozen authors a ffi liated with 

seven di ff erent research institutions in China. 

The paper , titled " Factoring integers with sublinear resources on a superconducting quantum processor ," 

suggests that the application of Claus Peter Schnorr's  recent factoring algorithm , in conjunction with a 

quantum approximate optimization algorithm ( QAOA ), can break asymmetric RSA-2048 encryption using 

a non-fault tolerant ( NISQ , or noisy intermediate scale quantum) quantum computer with only 372 physi -

cal quantum bits or qubits. 

If true, this would be a signi fi cant development because there are already quantum computers that ex -

ceed that speci fi cation, like IBM's  433-qubit Osprey .

The speculation has been that  orders of magnitude more qubits , in conjunction with robust error correc -

tion at scale, may allow future quantum computers to run  Peter Schor's algorithm  – not to be confused 

with the similarly named Schnorr – quickly, on very large numbers, thereby breaking RSA encryption. 

In 2019, researchers published  a paper  [PDF] claiming that 2048-bit RSA integers could be factored in 

about eight hours … given a quantum computer with 20 million noisy qubits (meaning without the over -

head of error correction and the like). 

That's a future the National Security Agency has been planning for since 2015, when it started public 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  41 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

work on developing  quantum-resistant encryption algorithms .

No one is quite sure when,  or whether , that day will arrive. When we considered quantum crypto-crack -

ing in 2019, University of Chicago computer science professor Diana Franklin  suggested , "It is possible 

that Shor's algorithm could be implemented in the next 15 years," while allowing predictions of this sort 

are notoriously di ffi cult to get right. 

Nonetheless,  the quantum gold rush is on . The US and China, along with Europe, the UK, and other 

countries in Asia are all working to lead the nascent quantum computing industry and to avoid being 

caught  fl at-footed if a breakthrough occurs. 

Let's look at the facts 

Public (asymmetric) key cryptography secures the  fi nancial system via digital signatures and certi fi cates. 

Being able to forge those with a su ffi ciently capable quantum system would be problematic to say the 

least. Symmetric cryptographic algorithms, like AES-256, are considered to be more resistant to quan -

tum computers, so the application of  Grover's algorithm  [PDF] in a quantum system isn't expected to 

alter the cryptographic landscape. 

The paper from 24 researchers in China might have remained a matter for those well-versed in advanced 

mathematics, cryptography, and quantum computing – a fairly small set of people – but for the fact that 

it got  noticed by cryptographer Bruce Schneier .

"This is something to take seriously," he wrote in his blog on January 3rd, 2023. "It might not be correct, 

but it’s not obviously wrong.” 

Schneier did not take a position on the paper, but the following day The Financial Times took notice in  an 

article  titled, "Chinese researchers claim to  fi nd way to break encryption using quantum computers.” 

Evidently they haven’t. 

Late that day, on January 4, Scott Aaronson, chair of computer science at The University of Texas at 

Austin, and director of its  Quantum Information Center , o ff ered a rebuttal with a succinct three word re -

view of the paper: " No. Just No. "

Aaronson, among the more credible voices on such matters, hangs the researchers with their own 

caveat: "It should be pointed out that the quantum speedup of the algorithm is unclear due to the am -

biguous convergence of QAOA," they wrote in their paper. 

That's a vast understatement, Aarsonson argues, because it has yet to be demonstrated that Schnorr’s 

algorithm, even with QAOA, will work faster on a quantum device than a classical computer. And if a cur -

rent laptop could break RSA, doing so on a quantum computer would be unnecessary. 

"All told, this is one of the most actively misleading quantum computing papers I’ve seen in 25 years, 

and I’ve seen … many," he wrote. 

# 23. Have Chinese Scientists Really Cracked 

# RSA Encryption With A Quantum Comput -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  42 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# er ?

by Ryan Morrison 

https:/ /techmonitor.ai/hardware/quantum-encryption-rsa-cryptography 

Chinese researchers have surprised the security community by claiming to have cracked low-level RSA 

encryption – the standard encryption method used for secure data transmissions around the world – us -

ing a hybrid of a  quantum  and classical computer. The scientists say their method could be used to de -

feat advanced 2048-bit RSA encryption using a 372-qubit quantum computer, something which would 

have major security implications. 

Such a breakthrough, which could potentially leave corporate networks – and the entire internet – at the 

mercy of cybercriminals, was thought to be years away, and post-quantum cryptography experts are 

sceptical about the signi fi cance of the claims. They told Tech Monitor the methods described “won’t 

scale as expected” and that public-key cryptography is secure “for now”. 

The quantum computing threat to encryption 

There is a race against both time – and the rapidly developing  quantum computing industry  – to replace 

RSA and other standard cryptography solutions with post-quantum cryptography which could withstand 

attacks from such machines. These have the potential to be much more powerful than their classical 

counterparts, meaning they could break existing encryption methods in a matter of hours or days. 

The assumption that quantum computers will eventually break RSA encryption stems from an algorithm 

published by mathematician Peter Shor in 1994 that has the potential to break most current crypto -

graphic systems, including RSA, in a short amount of time. But it requires a large, stable quantum com -

puter with millions of qubits [the unit of quantum compute power] to work, something which is likely a 

decade or more away from being a reality. The most advanced machine currently is IBM’s Osprey, which 

is due to come online later this year and will have 433 qubits. 

So the new pre-print paper from researchers at the State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering 

and Advanced Computing in Zhengzhou, China, has raised eyebrows. It proposes a di ff erent algorithm 

that could crack 2048-bit RSA with a low-level quantum computer. 

It is based on a solution proposed by German mathematician Claus-Peter Schnorr, who wrote in 2022 

that you could factor large numbers in a more e ffi cient way, breaking the RSA code and doing so with a 

classical computer. 

Classical quantum hybrid used to crack RSA encryption 

Schnorr’s technique couldn’t be scaled to work with a regular computer, but the new paper claims to  fi ll 

in the gap by using a  quantum machine  to take over part of the calculation, handing the rest to a classi -

cal computer. The team say they cracked 48-bit RSA using a 10-qubit quantum computer-based hybrid 

system and could do the same for 2048-bit if they had access to a quantum computer with at least 372 

qubits. 

The work re fl ects a greater drive towards hybrid quantum/classical solutions that includes work by the 

Riken Institute in Japan to connect a quantum computer to its own  supercomputer, Fugaku .

Despite the claims in the paper holding a lot of promise, and hybrid solutions likely representing the 

short-term future of quantum computing, Ali Kaafarani, CEO and founder of post-quantum cryptography 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  43 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

leader PQShield, said the Chinese team “failed to deliver on the promise” of its research. 

“Unfortunately, both the classical and the quantum subroutines of the proposed algorithm have serious 

scalability issues, and in addition, the paper only focuses on the number of qubits – totally ignoring the 

running time of the proposed algorithm,” he says. 

IBM's combined quantum computing power growth is accelerating 

IBM quantum computing chips, existing or in the pipeline (2019-2025) 

*Values for the Flamingo (2024) and Kookaburra (2025) chips are lower-end estimates 

At the end of the paper, the team warns that “quantum speed-up of the algorithm is unclear due to the 

ambiguous convergence of QAOA”, which is the quantum subroutine used to solve the prime numbers 

and crack RSA. This suggests there is little evidence it will actually scale as predicted, Kaafarani ex -

plains. 

“Note that this work is unrelated to Shor’s algorithm,” he says. “That is known to break RSA in polyno -

mial time, and is the main reason for switching to post-quantum cryptography.” 

Polynomial time refers to the amount of time it takes for an algorithm to solve a problem, and is generally 

considered to be good running time for a given algorithm, meaning it can scale to large input sizes with -

out taking an impractically long time to complete. Want to crack RSA encryption? You might need mil -

lions of years 

Speaking to the FT , Shor said that the paper failed to address how fast the algorithm would run to crack 

2048-bit RSA, leaving open the prospect it would not be able to complete the work in any reasonable 

time, and suggesting it “could still take millions of years” as it would with a classical computer. 

“In the absence of any analysis showing that it will be faster, I suspect that the most likely scenario is 

that it’s not much of an improvement,” he said. 

Bruce Schneier, security research and technologist,  wrote a blog post  on the  fi ndings, warning that even 

if this doesn't scale "it is something to take seriously" and that "in general, the smart bet is on the new 

techniques not working. But someday, that bet will be wrong. Is it today? Probably not. But it could be.” 

“We’re in the worst possible position right now: we don’t have the facts to know," Schneier added. 

"Someone needs to implement the quantum algorithm and see.” 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  44 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

The moment a quantum computer breaks RSA and other cryptography solutions is known as Q-Day 

among researchers, and it could be anything from a few years to decades away. The signi fi cant advan -

tage this would give to a government was cited by some experts as a reason to doubt the Chinese re -

searchers, arguing that if they really had cracked 2048-bit RSA, the Chinese government would have 

classi fi ed the research. 

Tim Callan, chief experience o ffi cer at security company Sectigo, says it is worth considering the risk of 

"harvest now decrypt later" as a method that could break RSA-encrypted data in a matter of months or 

even a few years, as despite not being as rapid as Shor's algorithm, it would open many sensitive se -

crets to potential exposure. "Think about things like state secrets or manufacturing processes as the 

information to worry about," Callan says. 

"To prepare for RSA decryption, whether it occurs in the short or the long term, organisations must begin 

researching how hybrid certi fi cates will eventually enable their agility to transition between RSA and ei -

ther ECC (elliptic-curve cryptography) or quantum-safe algorithms, depending on the circumstances.” 

He adds: "In the event that quantum decryption becomes possible, implementing hybrid certi fi cates pro -

vides a much-needed bridge for organisations to switch hard-coded systems from one encryption algo -

rithm to another.” 

# 24. Who Are The Early Adopters Of New 

# Quantum-Secure Cryptography ?

by Ali El Kaafarani 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/01/06/who-are-the-early-adopters-of-new-

quantum-secure-cryptography/?sh=2816b83b791f 

From seatbelts to GDPR, any time new standards are introduced, their adoption naturally comes with a 

certain amount of industry upheaval—and that’s exactly what we’re now seeing with post-quantum cryp -

tography (PQC). 

In July 2022, the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) published  draft 

standards  for PQC, meaning those that want to upgrade their cryptography to manage a new generation 

of quantum threats need to start doing so. 

The U.S. government  has requested  that all of its departments and partners must transition to the new 

PQC standards by 2035. Where the U.S. government leads, others inevitably follow. Smart businesses 

should be setting out their transition pipelines now or risk leaving themselves exposed to cyber, regula -

tory and commercial risk. Given the scale of the challenge ahead, this is now a boardroom issue—not 

just a specialist concern for a handful of security professionals. 

Already, a few early adopters are leading the pack, but who are they, and why are they taking the quan -

tum threat so seriously? 

1. Companies Designing Connected Products With Long Lifecycles 

With new cryptography standards due to be implemented by the end of 2023, any designers 

working on a secure product with a shelf life of  fi ve years or more should be asking vendors about 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  45 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

how to incorporate post-quantum cryptography. Otherwise, they are designed for obsolescence. 

Connected vehicles are a good example. The cars being designed today are more complex than 

ever, with software controlling everything from airbags to new features like autonomous driving. 

New vehicles rolling o ff  the assembly line in 2023 will still be on our roads in 15 to 20 years time, 

which means they will be vulnerable to quantum attack unless manufacturers build in post-quan -

tum cryptography. 

Forward-thinking product designers are already mapping their exposure to the quantum threat. 

This process starts by assessing the encryption embedded in their hardware, as this is typically 

more costly and time-consuming than overhauling the encryption protecting their software. 

2. Components Manufacturers 

For those who sit high in the supply chain, providing quantum-safe products is becoming ever 

more of a competitive advantage. As we’ve already seen, quantum security plays well with com -

panies designing for the long term or who want their product to stand out from the pack. 

We have already seen semiconductor manufacturers like  Microchip  assessing quantum encryption 

and companies like  IBM  developing quantum-secure HSMs. A growing number of wired and wire -

less networking businesses are also part of the wave of suppliers getting ahead of this trend. 

Over time, components manufacturers will play an important and strategic role in facilitating the 

global transition to quantum security. It’s, therefore, reassuring to see them among the earliest 

adopters of PQC. 

3. Highly Regulated Businesses 

Sectors like  fi nance and healthcare are already under strict requirements when it comes to secur -

ing con fi dential data, storing it safely and protecting it in transit. As a result, it’s natural that this 

sector includes a number of early PQC adopters. 

Mastercard , for example, recently announced a new credit card protected by post-quantum cryp -

tography—one of the  fi rst of its kind and a great example for the industry. 

Of course, much more is needed before true quantum security is achieved here. In a single trans -

action, data is vulnerable whenever it passes between systems and devices, so protecting a credit 

card alone is like changing the lock on a house that has no walls. To defend against the quantum 

threat, every touchpoint must be protected. Financial institutions need to be mapping their expo -

sure and building coherent plans to upgrade their encryption across the board. 

Healthcare, meanwhile, is already a signi fi cant target for threat actors looking to harvest sensitive 

information. Providers in this sector are also acutely aware of the moral and reputational responsi -

bility involved in safeguarding personally identifying patient data, so where they can, they are al -

ready thinking about taking steps to explore PQC solutions. 

For national health systems like the U.K.’s NHS, this is a slow and complex undertaking that re -

quires input from multiple departments and suppliers. But for the most innovative healthcare play -

ers, there are signi fi cant incentives for taking PQC seriously. 

4. Defense, Critical Infrastructure And Highly Secure Businesses 

Recent U.S. government instructions are clear: If your business plans to hold government con -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  46 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

tracts, then you must secure your digital assets from the emerging quantum threat. 

In response, the defense industry is one of the most obvious sectors where PQC will be strategi -

cally essential and is already starting to be rolled out. Companies operating in this sector routinely 

handle high-value strategic assets and interact with sensitive systems, making data security mis -

sion-critical. Quantum security is a critical part of their value proposition. 

Telecoms and utilities companies have also been spurred into action by the White House. In their 

case, quantum computers threaten to expose critical infrastructure to an attack, with potentially 

devastating consequences. That’s why companies like  Vodafone  are convening post-quantum 

taskforces, working on solutions to the quantum threat and planning a route to quantum security. 

Secure communications apps are also vulnerable. These are often used by journalists, whistle -

blowers and political parties to exchange sensitive information, so the data exchanged via these 

apps can be particularly damaging in the hands of bad actors. PQShield recently shared guidance 

with the Signal Foundation for how to address this and bring end-to-end encrypted messaging 

into the PQC era. These recommendations, along with wider e ff orts by telecommunications net -

works to protect their infrastructure, will be crucial to protecting our data in transit. 

The Journey Ahead 

We are in a window where o ff ering PQC solutions can bring a competitive advantage, but this will close 

quickly. Cryptographic standards are changing, and the reality is that, sooner or later, all businesses will 

need to adopt post-quantum cryptography. 

For now, though, early adopters are playing an important role in drawing attention to the quantum threat, 

pushing PQC research and implementation forward and setting the bar for everyone else. 

# 25. QuSecure’s Leading Post-Quantum Cy -

# bersecurity Solution Wins 2022 Cyberse -

# cured Award For Quantum Computin g

by Dan Spalding 

https:/ /www.businesswire.com/news/home/20230105005421/en/ 

QuSecure, a leader in  post-quantum cybersecurity  (PQC), today announced that its industry-leading 

PQC solution  QuProtect ™ won the 2022 CyberSecured Award, as announced in December 2022 by 

1105 Media’s  Security Today  brand, the leading industry media brand providing technology, education 

and solutions for security professionals. QuProtect, the industry’s  fi rst and only end-to-end PQC soft -

ware-based solution uniquely designed to protect encrypted communications and data with quantum-

resilience using quantum secure channels, won in the Quantum Computing awards category. 

“2023 is going to be a very important year for securing the nation’s networks with post-quantum cyber -

security protections, and we are pleased to be recognized as the leading solution with this quantum 

computing award,” said  Skip Sanzeri , QuSecure Founder and COO . “Our QuProtect solution enables 

organizations to protect their communications and secure private information as the world accelerates 

toward a quantum future, including quantum computing’s ability to break our current encryption. QuPro -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  47 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

tect uniquely combines QuSecure’s post-quantum technologies providing secure, interoperable cyber -

security to protect networks from today’s classical threats and future quantum threats.” 

Launched in 2020 by 1105 Media’s security group, this program focuses on the network and other cy -

bersecurity initiatives. The CyberSecured Awards honor the outstanding product development achieve -

ments of manufacturers and suppliers whose products or services are considered particularly notewor -

thy in the transformation of cybersecurity. Winners of this independently judged contest will be featured 

on the security industry leading website,  securitytoday.com , and will be recognized in CyberSecured e-

news. 

“Our Security Today CyberSecured Awards are closely aligned with the readership of CyberSecured 

eNews, a monthly digital publication,” said Ralph C. Jensen, editor-in-chief of Security Today magazine, 

and CyberSecured eNews. “We are so pleased that many cybersecurity professionals join us to show -

case new products and advanced technology. We are aware of the importance that cybersecurity plays 

in today’s society and have updated our website to include more case studies and thought leadership 

articles. We’re excited to be part of this burgeoning industry and plan to broaden our knowledge base to 

serve our readership by tapping into the vast experience of professionals and organizations.” 

QuProtect software enables organizations to leverage quantum resilient technology for the  fi rst time to 

help prevent today’s cyberattacks, while future-proo fi ng networks and preparing for post-quantum cy -

berthreats. It provides quantum-resilient cryptography, anytime, anywhere and on any device. QuProtect 

software uses an end-to-end quantum-security-as-a-service (QSaaS) architecture that addresses the 

digital ecosystem’s most vulnerable aspects, uniquely combining zero-trust, next-generation post-quan -

tum-cryptography, quantum-strength keys, high availability, easy deployment, and active defense into a 

comprehensive and interoperable cybersecurity suite. The end-to-end approach is designed to protect 

the entire information lifecycle as data is communicated, used and stored. 

The QuProtect solution is the industry’s most advanced PQC solution providing quantum-resilience for 

many of today’s critical use cases, including national security, network, IoT, edge devices, and even 

satellite communications. QuProtect software can be hosted on-premises or via the cloud delivering the 

most compatible solution to the post-quantum problem, solving today’s complex compliance chal -

lenges, such as bring-your-own-device (BYOD) and work-from-home policies. An organization can im -

plement PQC across all devices on the network with minimal disruption to existing systems, protecting 

against current classical and future quantum attacks which could irreparably disrupt industries and infra -

structures across government and commercial sectors. 

# 26. TAU Engineers Launching First Israeli 

# Nanosatellite For Communicating From 

# Spac e

by Judy Siegel-Itzkovich 

https:/ /www.jpost.com/science/article-726654 

A nanosatellite that was launched into space by a Tel Aviv University team of engineers on Tuesday will 

pave the way toward  quantum  communication, a  fi eld of applied  quantum physics  closely related to 

quantum information processing and transferring data from place to place. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  48 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Its most interesting application is protecting information channels against eavesdropping by means of 

quantum cryptography. This is the  fi rst optical ground station in Israel, and one of very few worldwide 

that can lock onto, track and collect data from a  nanosatellite .

This satellite, which comes after the development of two others in less than two years by TAU, repre -

sents a “scienti fi c breakthrough, paving the way toward demonstration of optical and quantum commu -

nication from space via nanosatellites,” according to the researchers at the Center for Nanosatellites at 

TAU’s Fleischman Faculty of Engineering. 

“TAU leads Israel’s e ff ort to create satellite communication channels based on optical and quantum 

technologies,” according to the researchers, led by the center’s Prof. Meir Ariel. “To implement long-dis -

tance quantum communication over hundreds of kilometers or more, we need to go into space. TAU-

SAT3 is designed to pave the way toward demonstrating quantum communication via a quantum 

nanosatellite, to be built in the future at TAU.” 

The university’s  fi rst two nanosatellites were designed to measure cosmic radiation around the Earth and 

test various means of protecting the electronic systems installed on satellites from this radiation , he said. 

“To this end, the nanosatellites carried special payloads built in collaboration with various scienti fi c insti -

tutions, including the SOREQ Nuclear Research Center. 

“The third satellite, TAU-SAT3, was the  fi rst to be fully designed, developed and built at TAU,” Ariel said. 

Faculty dean Prof. Noam Eliaz said that “The Faculty of Engineering is proud of the TAUSAT3 nanosatel -

lite’s successful launching. The launch is a result of research and development executed by the 

Nanosatellites Center in collaboration with the  QuanTAU Center .

“This nanosatellite forges a number of milestones on our way to achieve quantum communication from 

space by means of a quantum nanosatellite, which will be built at TAU in the future,” he said. 

“Recently, we were the sole winners of a tender by Israel’s Innovation, Science and Technology Ministry 

to build and launch a  fl eet of satellites while making the  fi eld of ‘New Space’ and building nanosatellites 

accessible to students in the periphery. As of today, our faculty is the leader in this  fi eld in Israel and is a 

focal point for students, schoolchildren, research centers and industry in this  fi eld.” 

Launched to an altitude of 550 km., TAU-SAT3 is expected to orbit the Earth for about  fi ve years and 

carry out several scienti fi c tasks. For the  fi rst time, it carries on board batteries made by the Israeli com -

pany Epsilor that will provide it with energy for its entire life in orbit. Its main mission will be to communi -

cate with the new optical ground station set up on the roof of the Shenkar Physics Building on the TAU 

campus. 

This is the  fi rst optical ground station in Israel, and one of very few worldwide, that can lock onto, track 

and collect data from a nanosatellite which – when viewed from Earth – is smaller than a single 

pixel. According to the researchers, this means that it will be technologically possible in the future to 

build and launch nanosatellites for optical communication at a much lower cost than large satellites. 

The satellite will also conduct experiments in satellite communication at very high bit rates and in sce -

narios where satellite communication channels have been disrupted. 

“TAU-SAT3 is a 20-cm. nanosatellite carrying an optical device that is only a few centimeters long,” Ariel 

said. “When the satellite passes over Israel, the device will emit light at various wavelengths, and the 

telescope of the optical ground station will identify the tiny  fl ash, lock onto it and track it. The nanosatel -

lite will simultaneously send both optical and radio signals back to Earth. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  49 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

“However, when the optical device turns toward the optical ground station, the antenna will face in a dif -

ferent direction,” he said. “As a result, a signi fi cant portion of the data might be lost. The novelty in this 

project is the ability of the communication systems installed in both the nanosatellite and the ground sta -

tion to reconstruct the lost data in real time using smart signal processing algorithms developed at TAU.” 

PROF. YARON OZ, head of TAU’s Center for Quantum Science and Technology and a former TAU rector, 

said that “the principles of quantum mechanics enable an unconditionally secure encryption method. 

Whenever a hostile entity tries to intercept a transmitted message, the message immediately dissipates. 

Moreover, the interception attempt is detected – unlike current encryption methods, in which intercep -

tions remain undetectable. 

“Consequently, eavesdropping-proof quantum communication is today at the forefront of scienti fi c re -

search,” he said. “Governments and giant organizations around the world are involved in a race for 

quantum encryption capabilities – especially since quantum computers are expected to crack today’s 

encryption algorithms. It’s an enormous e ff ort – in terms of science, technology and budgets. 

“Beyond the encryption of security data, once current encryption methods are cracked by quantum 

computing, all data will be exposed – including personal medical and  fi nancial records, email and What -

sApp messages. This makes quantum encryption highly relevant to protecting everyone’s privacy,” he 

said. 

“Quantum communication is very sensitive to the medium through which it is transmitted, such as opti -

cal  fi bers or the atmosphere. We hope that TAU-SAT3 will for the  fi rst time enable communication be -

tween an optical ground station and a satellite, taking us a signi fi cant step forward with regard to 

demonstrating reliable quantum communication.” 

# 27. 2023 Will See Renewed Focus On 

# Quantum Computin g

by Dark Reading Staff 

https:/ /www.darkreading.com/tech-trends/2023-will-see-more-focus-on-quantum-computing 

2022 was a big year for quantum computing. Over the summer, the National Institute of Standards and 

Technology (NIST) unveiled four quantum computing algorithms that eventually will be turned into a  fi nal 

quantum computing standard, and governments around the world boosted investments in quantum 

computing. 2023 may be the year when quantum  fi nally steps into the limelight, with organizations pre -

paring to begin the process of implementing quantum computing technologies into existing systems. It 

will also be the year to start paying attention to quantum computing-based attacks. 

"In 2023, we'll see both the private and public sector's increased awareness around the challenges as -

sociated with quantum resilience, and we'll see e ff orts begin to take hold more signi fi cantly to prepare 

for quantum computing," says CISO (ISC)2 Jon France. 

McKinsey  recently noted the amount of money di ff erent countries have allocated for quantum computing 

to date. China leads the pack with $15.3 billion in public funds in quantum computing investments. The 

European Union governments combined have invested $7.2 billion, which dwarfs the US with $1.9 bil -

lion. 

That doesn't mean the US has been standing still. A key e ff ort — the list of  four NIST-approved algo -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  50 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

rithms  (CRYSTALS-Kyber , CRYSTALS-Dilithium , FALCON , and  SPHINCS+ ) — will help organizations fu -

ture-proof current data security measures against  harvest-now/decrypt-later (HNDL) attacks . These at -

tacks refer to adversaries hanging on to encrypted items until a time when quantum computing technol -

ogy that can decrypt them become available. And last month, US president Joe Biden signed the  Quan -

tum Computing Cybersecurity Preparedness Act  (HR 7535) into law to give the O ffi ce of Management 

and Budget authority to begin implementing  NIST-approved quantum algorithms  throughout the execu -

tive branch. 

The new law highlights the importance of  implementing quantum computing technologies  into existing 

systems now, but it doesn't address the necessity of monitoring for threats, says Yudong Cao, co-

founder and CTO of Zapata Computing. "We should be actively monitoring the threat by sponsoring cy -

bersecurity research activities into various methods, exact or heuristic, for compromising the current en -

cryption schemes," Cao says. 

There is also a lot of investment activity in the private sector, with startups focused on quantum tech -

nologies collecting $1.4 billion in funding in 2021 alone, according to McKinsey. Nearly half (49%) of 

those private investments are in companies in the United States, compared to just 6% in China, the ana -

lysts noted. 

"Building cyber resilience in preparation for quantum technology should have been an e ff ort started a 

decade ago ... but now is the second best time," France says. However, for both private and public-sec -

tor organizations, the process of making infrastructure "quantum-resilient" will be a di ffi cult and slow 

one. 

"Much of the encryption infrastructure in communication networks that keeps information safe now is 

deeply embedded, i.e., certi fi cates, and will take years to transition to quantum resilient algorithms, pos -

ing a timeline issue for changeover before the general availability of quantum computing," France says. 

In a recent survey by Deloitte, enterprises said that without external pressure — such as regulatory and 

compliance requirements —  they won't be prioritizing quantum security initiatives .

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  51 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

# 28. Quantum Computing To Become More 

# Accessibl e

by CXOtoday News Desk 

https:/ /www.cxotoday.com/news-analysis/quantum-computing-to-become-more-accessible/ 

Imagine what it would be to use quantum computing and do so using that desktop that one uses for 

regular tasks? Well, this ain’t science  fi ction anymore as Quantum Computing Inc (QCI) is all set to man -

ufacture QC optical chips with encryption and authentication at a commercial level that would make the 

power of quantum computing available to more people. 

A report published in SDxCentral quotes QCI chairman and CEO Robert Liscouski as saying that his 

company’s goal and larger roadmap is to add the power of a desktop quantum computer and all its ca -

pabilities into a microchip that can get plugged on to a normal PC that quickly goes hybrid and does so 

pretty quickly and at an a ff ordable price. 

Shifting over to commercial usage 

The o ffi cial said QCI would manufacture quantum computing optical chips with encryption, authentica -

tion and quantum entanglement distribution capabilities at a commercial level. And the company would 

then distribute these chips across the board to create a signi fi cant uptick in the marketplace for quantum 

computing. 

And that’s not all. The company is also seeking out a platform approach for encryption, authentication 

and quantum entanglement capabilities in order to secure communications, computing and authentica -

tion. This would help take on layer encryption with authentication and entanglement distribution. This 

ensures security of the transport layer and the ability to do peer-to-peer authentication and encryption as 

well, says Liscouski. 

Moving from small scale to large scale 

It is not that QCI does not provide these capabilities today. However, this is at a very small scale to be 

eff ective in enhancing demand. What the company is now hoping for is to utilize government funding to 

commercialize these technology capabilities and ramp up manufacturing processes to make the prod -

ucts viable at a lower cost but spread wider. 

Last year, QCI had announced plans to construct and operate a quantum nanophotonics tech manufac -

turing and research center to expand its chip development capabilities. The company is reportedly work -

ing on several o ff ers of funding from the federal government, states and even regional-level capital infu -

sion to help  fi nance the project. 

In a statement, the company had expressed hope of raising $30 million from incentives that include the 

CHIPS and Science Act of 2022 which aims to provide over $200 billion over the next decade to fund 

domestic research and semiconductor manufacture as part of the US government’s e ff orts to compete 

with Chinese companies. 

According to Liscouski, the CHIPS Act o ff ers enough cash for research and development, which is the 

area that QCI operates in with its photonic quantum chip. Though the company hasn’t yet received any 

funding, they’re working with states to put together a package that could potentially present a better 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  52 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

funding option. 

# 29. Chinese Researchers Claim To Have 

# Broken RSA With A Quantum Computer. 

# Experts Aren’t So Sure .

by Alexander Martin 

https:/ /therecord.media/chinese-researchers-claim-to-have-broken-rsa-with-a-quantum-computer-ex -

perts-arent-so-sure/ 

Researchers in China claim to have reached a breakthrough in quantum computing,  fi guring out how 

they can break the RSA public-key encryption system using a quantum computer of around the power 

that will soon be publicly available. 

Breaking 2048-bit RSA — in other words  fi nding a method to consistently and quickly discover the se -

cret prime numbers underpinning the algorithm — would be extremely signi fi cant. Although the RSA al -

gorithm itself has largely been replaced in consumer-facing protocols, such as Transport Layer Security, 

it is still widely used in older enterprise and operational technology software and in many code-signing 

certi fi cates. 

If a malicious adversary were able to generate these signing keys or decrypt the messages protected by 

RSA then that adversary would be able to snoop on internet tra ffi c as well as potentially pass o ff  mali -

cious code as if it were a legitimate software update, potentially enabling them to seize control of third-

party devices. 

These issues are a key part of the threat that quantum computing poses to traditional cryptography. In  a

white paper  published by the U.K.’s National Cyber Security Centre in November 2020, experts warned 

that because almost all of today’s widely-used public-key cryptography systems depend for their securi -

ty on the di ffi culty of factoring very large numbers, they would be easy to crack with a large-enough 

general purpose quantum computer. 

The Chinese researchers’ paper, titled “ Factoring integers with sublinear resources on a superconducting 

quantum processor ,” features one of the  fi rst claims that this can now be practically achieved. They ar -

gue that they can break the 2048-bit algorithm using a 372-qubit quantum computer. There are some 

caveats, however. They only had access to a 10-qubit device to practice on and were unable to demon -

strate their hypothesis on anything larger than 48-bits. 

Many experts are questioning their  fi ndings. The paper itself has been shared through the preprint ser -

vice arXiv without any meaningful peer-review, something which would generally be considered a neces -

sary minimum standard to weigh the scienti fi c value of a research paper. 

A discussion about the paper on  Google Groups  challenges whether the paper claims that its method for 

factoring 2048-bit integers is actually any faster than classical methods. Both that discussion, 

and  analysis  by cryptography expert Bruce Schneier, warns that the researchers’ algorithm relies on a 

controversial paper by the German mathematician Peter Schnorr which, while proving an ability to fac -

torize numbers on the scale of the 10-qubit computer used by the researchers, “falls apart at larger 

sizes.” 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  53 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

Schneier wrote that after the criticism of the paper’s dependence on Schorr’s algorithm was raised with 

him he was “much less worried that this technique will work now.” 

According to the arXiv publication, the authors are a ffi liated with some of China’s most prestigious uni -

versities, including several State Key Laboratories which receive direct funding and support from Beijing. 

Security experts who have spoken to The Record said they expected that a scienti fi c breakthrough with 

such a signi fi cant security impact would be classi fi ed by the Chinese authorities. 

Historically there have been examples of such information leaking out against the wishes of the min -

istries in Beijing. Alibaba Cloud was reportedly sanctioned by the Ministry of Industry and Information 

Technology after a worker there was credited with disclosing the Log4J vulnerability to the Apache Soft -

ware Foundation instead of to the Chinese government. 

The Cyberspace Administration of China  had introduced stricter rules  a few months before, in July 2021, 

around disclosing vulnerabilities for companies operating within its borders. For its part, Microsoft last 

November accused state-backed hackers in China of  abusing these vulnerability disclosure require -

ments  in an e ff ort to discover and develop their own zero-day exploits. 

# 30. Quantum's Promis e

by Andrew Singer 

https:/ /www.gfmag.com/magazine/january-2023/quantum-computing-promise 

Early in October, US President Joe Biden traveled to Poughkeepsie, New York, and stood shoulder to 

shoulder with IBM executives as they announced that the company would be spending $20 billion on 

production of semiconductors and development of advanced technology like arti fi cial intelligence (AI) 

and quantum computing (QC) research. 

Both AI and QC will be critical for corporate e ff ectiveness and national security in coming years. Linking 

AI and QC in the same news cycle was understandable too, given that QC represents to some degree 

the logical extension of AI. 

AI is often used in automating tedious tasks. Many of its achievements, such as facial recognition, are 

simply the result of raw computing power. Quantum tech expands computing power exponentially. 

Some believe it will eventually help doctors identify cancers earlier, pharmaceutical companies bring 

drugs to market faster, extend the life of batteries and more. 

It may not take decades before real-world solutions emerge, either. “If publicly available vendor road 

maps hold, it is entirely possible to have quantum-enabled AI use cases in  fi ve years,” says Scott Buch -

holz, emerging technology research director and CTO for Government and Public Services at Deloitte 

Consulting. 

Indeed, some believe corporate and government leaders should begin laying out quantum-computing 

strategies now, “especially in industries, such as pharmaceuticals, that may reap the early bene fi ts of 

commercial quantum computing,” says consulting  fi rm McKinsey. While most activity is still in research 

or pilot phase, a few startups like Paris-based QC  fi rm Pasqal are getting close to rollout. Pasqal already 

has a customer list that includes Johnson & Johnson, LG Electronics, Airbus, BMW, EDF, Thales, MBDA 

and Credit Agricole CIB. 

Quantum computing is based on “qubits” (quantum bits), which are the smallest units of quantum infor -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  54 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

mation, analogous to the regular computer bit. Qubits, IBM explains, “harness quantum mechanical 

phenomena ... to solve problems that are fundamentally intractable for classical computers.” 

The sheer power of QC is mind boggling. A 2017 article in Scienti fi c American claimed that “in principle, 

a 300-qubit quantum computer could perform more calculations at once than there are atoms in the ob -

servable universe.” That statement is now oft-repeated industry lore. Pasqal’s processors have already 

reached 100 qubits—close to the 127 qubits of IBM’s ground-breaking Eagle—and Pasqal expects to 

bring a 1,000-qubit processor to market by the end of 2023. Meanwhile, companies like IBM, Microsoft, 

Google and Honeywell have been investing heavily to expand the technology. In November, IBM un -

veiled its 433-qubit quantum processor called “Osprey.” 

“Quantum computing has the potential to ultimately be game changing in a number of ways,” says 

Charles Toups, vice president and general manager for Boeing Disruptive Computing and Networks. It 

could enable the aerospace giant to model complex materials more accurately and also “faster than we 

are able to complete small-scale, lower  fi delity models today,” he says. Boeing sees promise, too, in us -

ing QC to model detailed chemical reactions “that will help us devise longer lasting protections for cor -

rosion and ultraviolet exposure.” 

The  fi rst areas likely to receive a QC boost are optimization, machine learning (ML—an essential compo -

nent of AI, the terms are often used interchangeably) and predictive modeling, where  fi nding solutions is 

“fi endishly di ffi cult” but can be easier with quantum computers, given their “ability to handle data that 

has high degrees of ‘optionality,’” or dimensionality, Buchholz adds 

“This is the quantum decade,” says Konstantinos Karagiannis, director, Quantum Computing Services at 

Silicon Valley consultant Protiviti. “The uses aren’t as far away as most people think.” 

One type of proto-quantum computer already in use is the “quantum annealer.” Annealers work hand in 

hand with classical computers to solve optimization problems like routing trucks or assembling factories. 

But this is just a taste of things to come, especially when gate-based “universal” QC machines pio -

neered by IBM, IonQ and others reach the market. “Those are the ones that have the potential one day 

to crack encryption and do some of those bad things,” Karagiannis adds, “but also to change the world, 

because quantum machine learning will run better on them.” 

Protiviti is now employing a gate-based quantum computer for fraud detection, a typical ML classi fi ca -

tion use case. “There are only a handful of machines on the cloud that are powerful enough to do it. You 

have to wait for your turn to run it,” says Karagiannis. 

Possible Eco Bene fi ts 

The  fi eld appears to be well funded. Venture capital  fi rms alone invested more than $1 billion into the 

sector in 2021, according to Deloitte, which says the industries likely to gain  fi rst from the technology 

include pharmaceuticals, chemicals (catalysts, more eco-friendly feedstocks), automotive (optimized 

factory-robot motions) and  fi nance (investment portfolio optimization). 

QC o ff ers potential ecological bene fi ts too: Quantum computers using “quality” qubits (still not common -

ly available) could make high-level computing dramatically more energy e ffi cient, according to Interesting 

Engineering. “There are tasks for which the quantum computer could spend one hundred times less en -

ergy than the best current supercomputers.” 

Quantum-enabled AI also has a national security aspect. Some believe China has gotten the jump on the 

US and other Western nations in the AI race, and Bloomberg reported in mid-October that the US may 

soon place export controls on AI and QC technologies. Others worry that QC could one day break the 

algorithm used for the public-key encryption that allows secure transmission of email and much of mod -

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  55 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

ern communications. 

Quantum-Enabled AI 

While use cases involving universal QC are still rare, more companies announced AI/QC initiatives in the 

past year. LG Electronics is exploring QC for big data, IoT, AI, robotics and other applications that, LG 

notes, all require processing a large amount of data. Meanwhile, HSBC is also looking at QC for invest -

ment portfolio optimization, risk mitigation and fraud detection, which typically use ML algorithms to 

process large amounts of data. 

This is the  fi rst technology that is truly exponential, says Karagiannis. Many people today are familiar 

with Moore’s Law, which roughly states that computer power doubles every two years. But Moore’s Law 

pales beside QC’s projected growth curve, where a system’s power doubles every time a single qubit is 

added. “[If] someone has a 100-qubit machine and then someone else has a 200-qubit machine, that’s 

many, many orders of magnitude more powerful, not just double,” Karagiannis explains. 

Building on the success of its 127-qubit Eagle, IBM in 2023 will deliver the Condor, “the world’s  fi rst uni -

versal quantum processor with over 1,000 qubits,” according to the company, and a 4,000+ qubit pro -

cessor by 2025. 

Not surprisingly, obstacles remain before these science  fi ction-like capabilities can be realized. A quan -

tum computer is not just a scaled-up version of today’s supercomputers. “It’s something very di ff erent,” 

says Deloitte’s Buchholz. “We are attempting to constrain individual atoms and particles to behave in a 

regimented fashion, which is not their natural state.” They need to be interconnected, contained and 

constrained, something “unthinkable” a decade ago. 

“Some approaches to quantum machine learning introduce completely novel ways to do machine learn -

ing that do not have a classical analogue,” says Vedran Dunjko, associate professor at the Netherlands’ 

Leiden University. But many of these “novel” uses are many years away—and may never be realized. In 

terms of  fi rst applications, Dunjko anticipates use cases close to quantum technologies, as in the devel -

opment of exotic materials. 

German conglomerate Bosch also believes that quantum computers may soon o ff er “a signi fi cant ad -

vantage over conventional computers in discovering and designing new materials” for products like fuel 

cells, batteries, electric engines or advanced sensors. “Classical computers are not able to calculate the 

properties of these materials with su ffi cient accuracy,” the company commented recently in announcing 

its new partnership with IBM to develop quantum algorithms for industrial applications. 

Aerospace  fi rms are watching developments closely too. “Harnessing quantum technologies for the 

aerospace industry is one of the great challenges we face in the coming years,” commented Greg Hys -

lop, Boeing’s chief engineer and executive vice president of engineering, testing and technology, in dis -

cussing Boeing’s $5 million gift for faculty research in quantum science. 

“The emergence of some small-scale prototypes of QC has already propelled the development of post-

quantum cryptography,” says Takaya Miyano, a professor of mechanical engineering at Japan’s Rit -

sumeikan University. He expects to see the  fi rst practical uses of QC for cryptography and the military as 

well as pharmaceuticals. 

The US-China Rivalry 

“AI and quantum computing are among the most important technologies for the next decade and be -

yond,” Jonathan Paniko ff , senior fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Geoeconomics Center and director of its 

Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative, tells Global Finance. AI and QC are also “very likely to underlie 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  56 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

portions of US-China competition for the coming decades as well.” 

Admittedly, it may take time before this all plays out. Devices like China’s powerful 66-qubit Zuchongzhi 

processor “are not capable of universal quantum computation and cannot play a role in such geopolitical 

struggles,” Marek Narozniak, a physicist and member of a quantum research group at New York Univer -

sity, tells Global Finance. 

Still, in one study, Chinese researchers found that Zuchongzhi was able to complete a sampling task in 

1.2 hours that they estimated would have required a 2019 classical supercomputer 8.2 years to com -

plete. But even study co-author Chao-Yang Lu acknowledged that the sample task completed had no 

practical value, adding that “the computational problems that can truly bene fi t from quantum computing 

are still quite limited,” as quoted in Physics World. 

Governments are paying attention too. In May, a US National Security Memorandum  fl agged the poten -

tial “risks of quantum computers to the nation’s cyber, economic and national security,” and directed US 

agencies to begin a “multiyear process of migrating vulnerable computer systems to quantum-resistant 

cryptography.” 

That White House memo “accurately captured the challenges quantum computing could pose to West -

ern interests across the economy,  fi nance, infrastructure and national security sectors,” Paniko ff  com -

ments, while adding that “quantum computing and its uses, including for nefarious purposes, is still in its 

infancy and developing.” 

Much Fanfare, Little Utility 

What about critics like Oxford University physicist Nikita Gourianov, who recently wrote in the Financial 

Times that “the quantum computing industry has yet to demonstrate any practical utility, despite the fan -

fare”? 

“There have not yet been any clear demonstrations of practical utility,” answers Boeing’s Toups. The crit -

ics have a point. “However, based on our investigations, we see great promise to eventually be able to 

use quantum computers to make practical improvements that will dramatically improve our products and 

services.” 

“Those quotes always ba ffl e me,” comments Karagiannis “There are about 140 companies that are cur -

rently using D-Wave [quantum annealers] in real business applications daily.” 

In a test run, Volkswagen used live access to a D-Wave quantum processor to optimize the painting 

process in one of its factories. 

“For example,” a case report by D-Wave Systems explains, “if a small subset of minivans was slated to 

be painted black rather than white, the algorithm would speci fi cally assign those paint jobs to minivans 

falling within stretches of the production run where other vehicles are already being painted black.” 

Volkswagen later reported, “We managed to reduce the color switches in the entire sequence signi fi cant -

ly.” 

Still, as noted, D-Wave machines, which debuted in 2011, are basically analog computers, “meaning 

they only tackle one speci fi c problem,” Samuel Mugel, CTO at Multiverse Computing, a quantum soft -

ware development company, tells Global Finance. “They are not equivalent to universal quantum com -

puters, which can tackle any problem.” And regarding the latter, the technology isn’t ready for main -

stream industrial use, as even Karagiannis acknowledges. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  57 Cloud Security Alliance 

Crypto News 

February 01, 2023 

“Right now, we’re in the ‘noisy’ intermediate-scale quantum era,” Karagiannis says. “The qubits interfere 

with each other. The support circuitry interferes. It’s really hard … It’s hard to get these machines to stay 

in a behaving state.” 

But the buzz is rising. “It’s almost inevitable that there will be under- and overselling as we transition 

from research to engineering to application,” adds Deloitte’s Buchholz. 

“It is easy to be a naysayer and negative these days,” says Dunjko. He prefers to focus on how far QC 

has evolved since he began working in this area in 2010. “Even if technology continues just linearly, we 

will have tremendous devices.” 

Technology does not advance linearly, of course. Progress is more a stop-and-start a ff air. “Creative new 

ideas cause disruptive jumps,” Dunjko adds, so when projecting the long-term impact of quantum-en -

abled AI, some intellectual humility may be in order. 

“In the same way that it was impossible to understand the impact of digitalization in the 1960s or the 

internet in the 1990s, we have only the barest inklings today of what might be possible,” Buchholz says. 

Copyright 2023, Cloud Security Alliance. All rights reserved.  58
