Title: S.C. Gov. Nikki Haley sounds optimistic tone in GOP address

URL Source: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2016/01/12/haley-sounds-optimistic-tone-gop-address/78693506/

Published Time: 2016-01-13T00:36:12Z

Markdown Content:
WASHINGTON — South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, drawing on her personal biography as the daughter of Indian immigrants, urged Americans to resist the "angriest voices" of the political season in her speech Tuesday night following President Obama's State of the Union address.

"I am the proud daughter of Indian immigrants who reminded my brothers, my sister and me every day how blessed we were to live in this country," Haley said. "Immigrants have been coming to our shores for generations to live the dream that is America."

Haley, speaking to a national audience from the first floor of the governor's residence in Columbia, presented a stark contrast to the heated rhetoric of the presidential campaign — where some GOP candidates are calling for mass deportations and a rejection of all Muslims over fears of terrorism and crime.

"During anxious times, it can be tempting to follow the siren call of the angriest voices.We must resist that temptation," Haley said, without specifically mentioning current GOP front-runner Donald Trump. "No one who is willing to work hard, abide by our laws, and love our traditions should ever feel unwelcome in this country."

Full text: Gov. Nikki Haley's GOP response to the State of the Union

While calling for a more respectful tone in the immigration debate, she did not soften her stance against accepting Syrian refugees or stopping illegal immigration.

"We cannot continue to allow immigrants to come here illegally. And in this age of terrorism, we must not let in refugees whose intentions cannot be determined," Haley said.

Haley delivered the GOP response to Obama's final State of the Union address at the request of Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.

Haley, who turns 44 next week,is the first female and first minority governor of South Carolina, which made her a compelling choice for a Republican Party eager to reach more voters of color.

She's also a potential contender to be a vice presidential running mate to the Republican nominee, and her speech included a heavy dose of criticism of the Obama record.

"As he enters his final year in office, many Americans are still feeling the squeeze of an economy too weak to raise income levels. We’re feeling a crushing national debt, a health care plan that has made insurance less affordable and doctors less available, and chaotic unrest in many of our cities," Haley said. "Even worse, we are facing the most dangerous terrorist threat our nation has seen since Sept.11th, and this president appears either unwilling or unable to deal with it."

Like Obama, however, Haley devoted much of her address to giving an optimistic view of the future.

“We have big decisions to make. Our country is being tested. But we’ve been tested in the past, and our people have always risen to the challenge," she said. "We have all the guidance we need to be safe and successful. Our forefathers paved the way for us.Let’s take their values, and their strengths, and rededicate ourselves to doing whatever it takes to keep America the greatest country in the history of man.”

Haley also argued the case for electing a Republican in November to succeed Obama.

​“If we held the White House, taxes would be lower for working families, and we’d put the brakes on runaway spending and debt," she said. "We would make international agreements that were celebrated in Israel and protested in Iran, not the other way around. And rather than just thanking our brave men and women in uniform, we would actually strengthen our military, so both our friends and our enemies would know that America seeks peace, but when we fight wars we win them.”

She and her staff wrote the speech without input from national GOP leadership, Haley said recently. She called it an address, not a response, to the president.

“I certainly am not one to compete against the president or try to imply that I could be," she said last week.

During Obama’s presidency, Republicans have used the high-profile event to showcase up-and-coming conservatives, including Ryan in 2011. One year later, GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney chose Ryan as his running mate.

Haley's selection to give Tuesday's address has heightened speculation she could be asked to be on the GOP ticket this year, especially as the party struggles to attract minority voters.South Carolina hosts the first presidential primary in the South on Feb. 20, and her endorsement is highly sought after.

Her speech also drew lessons from recent tragic events in South Carolina.

Haley last year successfully called for removal of the Confederate flag from the state Capitol grounds in response to a mass shooting at a prominent black church in Charleston in June. In April, a police shooting of an unarmed black man in North Charleston brought swift action by law enforcement to fire the officer and charge him with murder, which helped South Carolina avoid the violent protests that played out in other states after police shootings.

“Our state was struck with shock, pain, and fear. But our people would not allow hate to win. We didn’t have violence, we had vigils. We didn’t have riots, we had hugs," Haley said.“We didn’t turn against each other’s race or religion. We turned toward God, and to the values that have long made our country the freest and greatest in the world."

“We removed a symbol that was being used to divide us, and we found a strength that united us against a domestic terrorist and the hate that filled him."

Haley is among those Republican governors, many from the South, who have opposed Obama on several major policy fronts. Haley has asked the federal government not to relocate Syrian refugees in South Carolina; she has not expanded Medicaid health coverage for lower-income Americans as allowed under the Affordable Care Act;and she opposes closing the military prison at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.

Yet even at the White House, the choice of Haley to give the GOP response drew favorable reviews.

White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough said Tuesday, before Haley's speech, that while he disagreed with some of Haley's policy positions, he commended her response to the shootings in Charleston.

"I have admired what I’ve seen in critical moments from Governor Haley," McDonough said in response to a question from The Greenville News. "There's a lot of things that I think she should do differently or better, but I would not be be fully honest with you if I wasn’t saying there were moments where I think she has demonstrated some strong leadership that I admire."

White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest gave Haley credit for "taking a risk" on a speech that has tripped up other Republicans, such as former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, whose 2009 speech was widely criticized.

"You've got to to admire somebody to take on that kind of risk where others have not succeeded," Earnest said.

Haley blamed both political parties for an increasingly frustrated electorate.

“We need to be honest with each other, and with ourselves: While Democrats in Washington bear much responsibility for the problems facing America today, they do not bear it alone. There is more than enough blame to go around," she said. "We as Republicans need to own that truth. We need to recognize our contributions to the erosion of the public trust in America’s leadership. We need to accept that we’ve played a role in how and why our government is broken.And then we need to fix it."

Tuesday night was far from Haley's first time in the Washington spotlight. She often addresses the national media on behalf of the Republican Governors Association when it meets in Washington, and in September she spoke at the National Press Club.

Her selection to deliver Tuesday's speech, however, increases scrutiny of her record.

South Carolina’s child welfare agency has been unable to manage its child abuse and neglect cases, and dozens of children have died as a result. In 2012, Haley reimbursed the state about $10,000 for using the state plane improperly. And there remain pockets of persistent poverty and high unemployment in the state, according to state Democratic officials. They also have criticized her refusal to expand the state’s Medicaid program using federal funds, which would increase access to affordable health care for many South Carolina residents.

“This is not a record that should be heralded or modeled,” said Jaime Harrison, chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party.
