Title: Ben Carson: What Happened to Blacks During Slavery is Why I am Pro-Life on Abortion Today - LifeNews.com

URL Source: https://www.lifenews.com/2015/08/28/ben-carson-what-happened-to-blacks-during-slavery-is-why-i-am-pro-life-on-abortion-today

Published Time: 2015-08-28T21:38:34+00:00

Markdown Content:
On August 23 rd, presidential hopeful and former pediatric neurosurgeon Ben Carson did an interview with CNN’s “State of the Union” and said he became pro-life after thinking about how Blacks were treated during slavery. He explained, “I began to think if abolitionists a long time ago began to think that ‘I don’t believe in slavery, but anybody else can do it if they want to,’ where would we be today? So that changed my opinion of a lot of things.”

Prior to 1992, Carson believed abortion was wrong but did not want to stop a woman from making her decision. He said the following in a previous interview with CNN’s Jim Acosta: “I make no bones about the fact that I used to be a Democrat. I used to be a pretty left-wing Democrat, in fact. Over the course of time, you know, my views have changed very dramatically. I personally was against abortion, but I was not for causing anybody else to do anything, I was pro-choice, in that region [of Maryland].”

As LifeNews previously reported, in a video from 2012, Carson elaborated on his thoughts about slavery and abortion. He said, “The slave owners felt that they should be able to do whatever they wanted to do. And there were some people who were not slave owners who said, ‘You can do what you want to do, but I don’t.”

However, Carson later realized that being personally against abortion is not enough, and abortion isn’t justifiable because the baby is growing inside its mother. Carson asked, “Does that convey the right to terminate it? It doesn’t convey that right anymore than a slave owner had the right to terminate a slave.”

Additionally, i n 2013, Carson shared what he believes about the supposed “war on women” at the Voters Value Summit. He said, “You know, there are those of us in this society who have told women that there’s a war on them because that cute little baby inside of them, they may want to get rid of it and there are people that are keeping you from doing that,” Carson continued. “And women say, ‘No, no, they’re not doing that to me! No!’ And they get all riled up.”

“There is no war on them, the war is on their babies, Babies that cannot defend themselves. Over the past few decades, we have destroyed 55 million of them. And we have the nerve to call other societies of the past heathen. What we need to do is re-educate the women to understand that they are the defenders of these babies.”

_**Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter.**_

In July, Carson was one of the first presidential candidates to call on Congress to de-fund Planned Parenthood after undercover videos were released exposing their scandalous organ harvesting business. In fact, Carson launched an online petition urging Congress to halt funding immediately. His petition reads, “I, like many of you, was sickened when I saw the video of Dr. Deborah Nucatola of Planned Parenthood secretly video taped discussing selling aborted babyparts. I was more than sickened, I was enraged. Congress must act NOW! Please sign my petition to Congress demanding that they stop all public funds to Planned Parenthood. I spent my whole life caring for children. What I see in this video is barbaric. Congress must ACT!”

Click here to watch Carson’s interview on CNN.
