Title: Steve Jobs' dad was Syrian migrant, worked in Verdi

URL Source: https://www.rgj.com/story/news/2015/11/17/steve-jobs-dad-syrian-migrant-worked-verdi/75934486/

Published Time: 2015-11-17T18:46:51Z

Markdown Content:
Steve Jobs' biological father was a Syrian migrant,worked at Boomtown in Verdi and taught at UNR.

That fact has not been lost on the Twittersphere, especially in the wake of the Syrian refugee crisis and now the horrific massacre in Paris.

Some are wondering on Twitter if there would have been a Steve Jobs or Apple if the most restrictive "keep-them-out"policies were in place.

“Those who propose sweeping bans on refugees might want to consider this: Steve Jobs was the son of a Syrian migrant,” tweeted _The Nation_ writer John Nichols@NicholsUprising.

"Worthy reminder: Steve Jobs biological father was also a #SyrianRefugee," tweeted Hanna Norberg, a Swedish trade economist.

Steve Jobs’ biological father, Abdulfattah “John”Jandali, was born in 1931 to a prominent Syrian family, the youngest of nine children. He grew up in Homs, Syria, a city since ravaged by the nation’s civil war.

Jandali ended up in Nevada, working in the restaurant business. That's where he apparently met his son by happenstance, though he didn't know it at the time.

He was hired in 1999 as the food and beverage manager at Boomtown Hotel Casino in Verdi and was promoted to general manager in 2010.

He eventually became the casino’s vice president and retired three years ago, according to the Boomtown Hotel Casino.

Jandali was also a former professor at the University of Nevada, Reno, who taught political science in the late 1960s.

According to the authorized biography "Steve Jobs,"by Walter Isaacson, in the early 1950s, Jandali went to study at the American University in Beirut, and eventually on to the University of Wisconsin. There,he met the woman who would become Steve Jobs’ biological mother, Joanne Schieble.

Jandali and Schieble would eventually marry, but not until they put the future co-founder of Apple up for adoption when he was born in 1955. The couple later had a daughter, the writer Mona Simpson.

In the Jobs biography, Isaacson writes that they initially decided not to get married because Schieble’s father, who was dying at the time, “threatened to disown her if she wed Abdulfattah.”

Years later, Jobs would “bristle whenever anyone referred to Paul and Clara Jobs as his 'adoptive'parents or implied that they were not his `real’ parents,” Isaacson wrote. Jobs, who died in 2011, instead referred to his biological parents as “my sperm and egg bank.”

Jobs told Issacson that he didn’t have any interest in meeting his biological father, though Simpson eventually tracked him down. And one of the most fascinating reveals in the Isaacson book comes in an episode in where Jandali tells Simpson that “he wished she could have seen him when he was managing a Mediterranean restaurant north of San Jose. `That was a wonderful place,’ he said. “All of the successful technology people used to come there._Even Steve Jobs_.’ “

When Jobs died in August 2011 from pancreatic cancer, Jandali declined to comment on his son’s passing and told the Reno Gazette-Journal that he would not publicly discuss his son again. The comment came after Jandali told the London tabloid The Sun he wanted to meet Jobs.

"I live in hope that before it is too late he will reach out to me," Jandali told the newspaper. "Even to have just one coffee with him just once would make me a very happy man."

Jobs did not respond to Jandali’s public request.

Jandali later said that the interview with The Sun was a “mistake.”

In a 2011 interview published by the Lebanese site,_Ya Libnan_, Jandali talked about his kids. “Steve is my biological son, but I didn’t bring him up, and he has a family that adopted him. So if it’s said that I’m the ‘father of invention’, then that’s because my biological son is a genius and my daughter a brilliant writer. I thank God for my success in life, but I’m no inventor….I’m proud of my son and his accomplishments, and of my work. Of course I made mistakes, and if I could go back in time I would have put some things right. I would have been closer to my son, but all’s well that ends well. Steve Jobs is one of the most successful people in America, and Mona is a successful academic and novelist.”

Attempts by the Reno Gazette-Journal at reaching Jandali were unsuccessful on Tuesday.

_RGJ staff contributed to his report._
