Title: KT 31- 3-2016_Layout 1

URL Source: https://kuwaittimes.com/uploads/imported_images/pdf/2016/mar/31/kt.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 20 Oct 2023 11:14:23 GMT

Markdown Content:
DUBAI: The emirate of Dubai, whose air-port is the world’s busiest for internation-al passengers, announced yesterday it was introducing a tax on travelers to help finance expansion, as Gulf governments grapple with plummeting revenues. The 35-dirham ($9.50) fee will apply to all passengers, including those transiting in Dubai, on all flights from June 30, accord-ing to a statement carried by WAM state news agency. It is the first time Dubai has announced a passenger tax, which is imposed in many airports worldwide. More than 78 million passengers passed through Dubai International in 2015, keeping its place as the world’s busiest for international passengers since over-taking London Heathrow in 2014. Last month, Dubai Airports increased the capacity of its main airport to 90 million passengers with the opening of con-course D, at a cost of $1.2 billion. Dubai has a smaller second airport, Al-Maktoum International, which opened in 2013 and will receive 120 million passen-gers a year once completed. The receipts of the new tax will be channeled into funding the expansion of Dubai airports, the statement said. Although part of the oil-rich United Arab Emirates, Dubai has dwindling oil wealth, and its revenues are diversified com-pared to its oil-dependent Gulf peers. But the whole region is struggling to cope with a sharp drop in oil revenues since crude prices nosedived. Situated on transcontinental air routes, Dubai is one of several Gulf-based airports to experience prodigious growth in recent years. Around 100 airlines fly to more than 240 destinations from the interna-tional hub, which is also home to carrier Emirates. — AFP 

# 3 7 13 19 

> SUBSCRIPTION

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 JAMADA ALTHANI 22, 1437 AH www.kuwaittimes.net 

Min 14º 

Max 27º 

High Tide 

05:22 & 15:53 

Low Tide 

10:22 & 23:29 

> 40 PAGES  NO: 16830  150 FILS

## Sawaber tenants fume; evacuation ultimatum expires 

## From Senegal to Libya: An African student joins IS 

## Germany beat Italy; 1st time in over 20 years 

## Suspect remanded as hijacking sparks social media buzz 

KUWAIT: Kuwait yesterday inked a $2.93 billion contract with three South Korean firms for the construction of the largest Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) import facility in the oil-rich country. The project, to be built at the Al-Zour refinery near the border with Saudi Arabia, was awarded to Hyundai Engineering Co, Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co and Korea Gas Corporation. CEO of national refiner Kuwait National Petroleum Co Mohammad Al-Mutairi, who signed the contract, said the project is slated to be completed in the first quarter of 2021. OPEC member Kuwait is rich with crude oil but its natural gas production is too small to meet its needs. Every year it imports large LNG quantities to supply power plants, especially during the summer, and for use in the petrochemicals industry. The facility will be part of a huge complex being built in Al-Zour, south of Kuwait City, which will also houses a state-of-the-art 615,000 barrel-per-day refin-ery and a petrochemicals plant. Mutairi said the cost of the complex is expected to reach $30 billion. In October, Kuwait awarded contracts worth $13.2 billion to 10 international firms to build the refinery, which is set to come on stream in late 2019. In 2014, the State gave out contracts for a $12 billion project to upgrade two of its three existing refineries. Kuwait sits on 101.5 billion barrels of crude reserves-equivalent to around 7.0 percent of the world’s proven reserves, according to the latest OPEC figures-and pumps around 3.0 million barrels per day. 

Continued on Page 13 

# Kuwait and Korean firms seal $2.9 billion LNG deal KPC, BP to explore opportunities in oil, gas, petrochemicals Dubai introduces ‘passenger tax’ $9.50 airport tax per traveler 

DUBAI: An Emirati looks at classic cars displayed in downtown Dubai. Dubai, whose airport is the world’s busiest for international passengers, announced yesterday it will introduce a tax on travelers to help finance expansion, as Gulf governments grapple with plummeting revenues. — AFP 

# News i n b r i e f 

Civil ID fee raised from ‘KD 2 to KD 5’ By A Saleh KUWAIT: The Public Authority of Civil Information (PACI)’s director Musaed Al-Assoussi said that the new civil ID fees would be in effect from Sunday and that the fee would be KD 5 instead of KD 2. Al-Assoussi added that the decision includes increasing the fees re-issue in cases of loss or damage from KD 10 to 20. The civil ID fees could be paid online at the PACI’s website. 

Saudi executes two citizens for murder RIYADH: Saudi Arabia executed two citizens con-victed of murder yesterday, raising to 81 the num-ber of death sentences carried out in the ultra-con-servative kingdom this year. Dhafer and Hussein al-Mutliq were found guilty of killing fellow Saudis Azeb and Mahdi Al-Moamer in a dispute between the two families, the interior ministry said. They were both executed in Najran, in the south, a min-istry statement carried by the official SPA news agency said. Most people put to death in Saudi Arabia are beheaded with a sword. The executions so far this year include 47 for “terrorism” carried out in a single day on January 2. In 2015, Saudi Arabia executed 153 people, most of them for drug traf-ficking or murder, according to an AFP count. 

Yemeni troops push Qaeda back in Aden ADEN: Loyalist forces pushed Al-Qaeda out of parts of Aden yesterday in a new drive against the jihadists in Yemen’s second city where the interna-tionally recognized government is based, military sources said. Troops and militia retook the central prison and deployed on main roads across the Mansura residential district after a three-hour gun-battle with the jihadists, the sources said. There was no immediate word on casualties. 

NZ men charged over red-hot chilli assault WELLINGTON: Two men who allegedly forced a teenager to eat red-hot bongo chillies have been charged with assault in New Zealand. Police did not detail the alleged crimes but the victim, an 18-year-old who cannot be named for legal reasons, recounted his ordeal to Fairfax New Zealand earlier this month. He claimed a group of men assaulted him in a basement after an argument over a prank telephone call, punch-ing him and forcing him to eat bongo chilli peppers. The chillies, cultivated in Fiji, reportedly measure 100,000-350,000 Scoville heat units, compared to 3,500-8,000 for a jalapeno. 

KUWAIT: The Minister of Social Affairs and Labor and Minister of State for Planning and Development Affairs Hind Al-Subaih (center) is pictured with some Kuwait MPs during the parliamentary session yesterday. — Photo by Yasser Al-Zayyat KUWAIT: Head of the National Assembly Financial and Economic Affairs Committee MP Faisal A-Shaye said yesterday the panel received a government draft law stipulat-ing increases to electricity charges. Shaye said the committee will meet on Sunday to study the bill but expected that major changes will be made to the bill to reduce the proposed increases to electricity and water charges. The draft law, which was approved by the cabinet on Monday, stip-ulates to raise electricity charges on the basis of consumption by several folds. It divides the proposed charges for expatri-ates and citizens. For private houses (normally inhabited by Kuwaitis), the bill proposes to raise cur-rent electricity charges of 2 fils per kilowatt to as follows: For consumption of up to 3,000 kilowatts - 5 fils per kilowatt; For consumption of between 3,000 - 6,000 - 8 fils per kilowatt; For consumption between 6,000-9,000 - 10 fils per kilowatt; For consumption above 9,000 - 15 fils per kilowatt; As for apartments (normally refers to expatriate), the new proposed rates are as follow; For consumption of up to 1,000 kilowatt - 5 fils per kilowatt; For consumption between 1,000-2,000 - 10 fils per kilowatt; For consumption above 2,000 kilowatt - 15 fils per kilowatt. The bill also proposes smaller increases to water charges. 

Continued on Page 13 

# Assembly panel to discuss power rates next Sunday MPs debate KIA report 

WASHINGTON: The specter of the Islamic State group obtaining a “dirty bomb” will loom over a top-level nuclear security summit hosted by President Barack Obama in Washington today and tomorrow. Obama wel-comes several leaders from countries as diverse as China and Nigeria, as well as representatives from nearly 50 other nations, for the summit aimed at ele-vating the problem of shaky safe-guards from the desks of technocrats to the highest corridors of power. The meeting comes just days after 32 people were killed and 340 were injured in bombings at Brussels air-port and the Belgian capital’s metro. The attacks featured conventional explosives, but two of the suicide bombers-Ibrahim and Khalid El Bakraoui-have been linked to possible efforts by the Islamic State (IS) group to secure fissile material. Late last year, Belgian police investigating the November 13 Paris terror attacks found 10 hours of video surveillance detailing the comings and goings of a senior Belgian nuclear official. Belgian media have since reported that the brothers were linked to the surveillance. The incident has only heightened existing concerns about IS efforts to get nuclear material. “Having a portion of the discussion that is focused on counter-ISIL is a decision that was made in January,” said Laura Holgate, the National Security Council’s senior director for weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and threat reduction. “But it turns out that it is obviously very timely, unfortunately. 

Continued on Page 13 

# Islamic State threat raises stakes for US nuke summit 

KUWAIT: Representatives of the Kuwait National Petroleum Company (KNPC) and South Korean repre-sentatives of the Hyundai Engineering and Construction (HDEC) pose for a family photo after signing an agreement as part of a Liquefied Natural Gas import project yesterday at the KNPC headquarters in Al-Ahmadi. — Photo by Yasser Al-Zayyat BRUSSELS: People hang a flag of Kuwait on the Place de la Bourse (Beursplein) in central Brussels, days after a triple bomb attack hit Brussels’ air-port and the Maalbeek subway station, killing 32 people and wounding 300 others. — AFP L O C A L THURSDAY, MARCH3 1, 2016 

KUWAIT: His Highness the Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah received yester-day a written message from the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, the Monarch of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, inviting His Highness to the Summit due to group Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) leaders with the President of the United States of America, Barack Obama, in Riyadh, next month. The invitation was handed over by Saudi Ambassador to Kuwait Abdulaziz Bin Ibrahim Al-Fayez, during a reception attended by Deputy Minister of Amiri Diwan Affairs Sheikh Ali Jarrah Al-Sabah. Meanwhile, His Highness the Amir received a message from the President of the Swiss Confederation Johann Schneider-Ammann dealing with bilateral relations and means of boosting cooperation in various fields as well as issues of mutual interest. The message was delivered by Swiss Confederation Ambassador to Kuwait Aldo de Luca to Sheikh Ali Jarrah Al-Sabah. 

Allegiance 

Also yesterday, His Highness the Amir received Kawthar Al-Jowan, Anissa Jaafar, Laila Al-Othman and Siham Al-Qabandi, who presented a document of allegiance from the institute of women for development and peace. His Highness also received chairperson of the Kuwaiti Association for Learning Differences Amal Al-Sayer and head of the ‘teach me right’ committee Hanadi Al-Duaij and committee members, who presented to His Highness a national document on educa-tional services for special needs students. Earlier, His Highness the Amir received His Highness the Crown Prince Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, National Assembly Speaker Marzouq Ali Al-Ghanem, His Highness the Prime Minister Sheikh Jaber Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah and Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Sheikh Sabah Al-Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah. 

New officials 

Separately, His Highness the Crown Prince received Ghanem, His Highness Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak, Sheikh Sabah Al-Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Sheikh Mohammad Al-Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah and Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense Sheikh Khaled Al-Jarrah Al-Sabah. Moreover, His Highness received Minister of Justice and Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs Yaqoub Al-Sana who presented the newly-appointed chairman of the Public Anti-Corruption Authority (PACA) Advisor Abdulrahman Al-Namash, deputy chairman Advisor Riyadh Al-Hajeri and members Mishari Al-Mutairi, Dawoud Al-Jarrah, Mohammad Al-Subaie, Abdulwahab Al-Muzaini and Louai Al-Saleh. His Highness the Prime Minister also received minister Sane and the newly-appointed officials. — KUNA 

RIYADH: The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) has achieved much over the years and its resolutions reflect the joint efforts of the member states to further advance and develop their societies, said a Kuwait official yesterday. In a statement at the conclusion of the 15th GCC Ministerial Committee meeting tasked with following up on implementa-tion of resolutions related to inter-GCC cooperation, Kuwaiti Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Jarallah, who attended the meeting, said that all but very few reso-lutions by the committee have been satis-factorily implemented. He commended the perceptive vision of Saudi King Salman Bin Abdul-Aziz, adopted by the 36th GCC sum-mit in Riyadh last December, regarding the imperative to further develop the GCC con-struct. Jarallah expressed optimism as to the future of the GCC, noting that the meeting here in Riyadh carried a highly positive tone reflective of the wish of the leaders and peoples of the GCC for more joint work and close integration. Moreover, he empha-sized that the committee was expediting the implementation of major resolutions dealing with high-profile concerns such as a common GCC market and a joint customs and tariffs union. 

Joint action 

Addressing the meeting, Saudi Minister of State and Cabinet’s Member for Shura Council Affairs Mohammad Abu Saq stressed the importance of such meetings as they serve the joint Gulf action through promoting means of integration, coopera-tion and coordination. He added that there are more than 140 decisions which are implemented year after year in GCC mem-ber states. Meanwhile, GCC Secretary General Abdul-Latif Al-Zayani affirmed during a similar speech keenness of GCC leaders on enhancing the march of joint action, indi-cating that the 36th Gulf summit held in Riyadh last December materialized the vision of Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz on the joint action. The vision aims to establish the concept of promoting real cooperation among GCC member states in security, military, social, political and economic fields, and raise the level of cooperation and cohesion among them in all domains as well, he added. It also seeks to boost role of GCC coun-tries on Arab, Islamic and international lev-els so as to serve issues that interest the Gulf countries and their nations, and meet their aspirations as well as support Arab and Islamic issues, he made clear. Zayani lauded sincere efforts exerted by the ministerial committee’s members that contributed to taking executive and legisla-tive steps of many decisions on the joint action. He stressed the importance of con-tinued action in order to implement all decisions to implement directives of GCC leaders, and meet hopes and aspirations of the Gulf nations. The ministerial committee was formed by a decree issued by the Gulf summit in 2008, with the aim of following up the implementation of all decisions per-taining to the joint Gulf action. — KUNA 

# Amir receives invitation to GCC-US Summit 

RIYADH: Kuwait’s Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Jarallah attends the 15th GCC Ministerial Committee meeting yesterday. — KUNA 

# GCC chalks up momentous achievements: Official KUWAIT: His Highness the Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah receives a letter from King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, delivered by Saudi Ambassador to Kuwait Abdulaziz Bin Ibrahim Al-Fayez.— Amiri Diwan photo His Highness the Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah receives a document of allegiance from the institute of women for development and peace, presented by Kawthar Al-Jowan (second from left), Laila Al-Othman (left), Anissa Jaafar (fourth from left) and Siham Al-Qabandi (right). L O C A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

KUWAIT: Damages are seen at a mosque under construction in Qairawan after the roof collapsed yesterday, leaving four workers injured. 

The scene at a house’s basement in Sabah Al-Nasser after fighters tackled a blaze there. By A Saleh and Agencies KUWAIT: As the ultimatum to evacuate the Sawaber Residential Complex expires today, and in light of the government’s looming plans to demolish the key estate in down-town Kuwait City, the issue could be heading towards further complication as a number of residents still refuse to cooperate with evacu-ation calls and plan to seek legal action to keep hold on what they say is rightfully theirs. The Ministry of Finance said yesterday that an announcement for a tender to demolish the Sawaber complex will be published in the next issue of the state’s official gazette ‘Kuwait Al-Youm.’ The ministry explained that the bidding conditions would be set soon and that the company offering the highest bid would be authorized to pull down the complex provided all safety and security measures are followed. 

Sit-in 

This comes amid reports indicating that around a hundred citizens who still refuse to evacuate their apartments in the complex, shedding uncertainty about their fate as of today. Last week, the government announced that public services, including electricity and water would be cut from the complex after the deadline. Al-Qabas yesterday quoted a statement by 24 apartment owne who he stressed that they would not yield to any threats or intimi-dation attempts, adding that they do possess proper lawful ownership deeds that prove their rights. Citizen Faisal Ali, one of the owners, criti-cized what he described as lawmakers’ silence about practices of the finance min-istry and its state property department, including ‘threats’ to disconnect power. “The notices we received from the department are inhumane though we live in the Center of Humanity,” he underlined, referring to a term Kuwait has been coined with by the United Nations in 2014. He further urged National Assembly Speaker Marzouq Al-Ghanem to ‘undo the injustice’ they had been suffering form. The owners also threatened to go on an ‘open strike’ and sue the concerned state authorities if those threats were put into practice. Notably, the state property department at the finance ministry had given a grace period to 24 citizens living at the complex to evict their apartments by March 31, 2016 and to get clearances from the Ministry of Electricity and Water (MEW) to finish their transactions. 

‘Unfair pay’ 

In a related issue, Bader Al-Weqayyan, Director of the Public Authority for Housing Welfare (PAHW) ordered paying the Sawaber complex eviction committee members KD 30 each for their efforts though they had worked for three months trying to convince tenants evict their apartments, Al-Anbaa reported yesterday quoting sources. Most members received this news with frustration, the sources said, noting that they have been using their own vehicles, going to the complex on almost daily basis, and had to deal with rejection from many tenants because they did not have judicial powers. “The PAHW has previously rewarded Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Electricity and Water with a KD 1,000 reward each for taking part in other eviction operations,” the sources argued. 

# Sawaber evacuation ultimatum expires today, tenants threaten legal action 

KUWAIT: This file photo shows flames and smoke emitting from a building at the Sawaber Residential Complex in Kuwait City on June 15, 2010. Lingering problems surrounding the 35-year-old complex led the government to evacuate it and proceed with a plan to demol-ish it. —KUNA 

# Four injured in mosque roof collapse 

By Hanan Al-Saadoun KUWAIT: Four workers were injured when the roof of a mosque under construction collapsed yesterday. Firefighters arrived to the scene located in Qairawan shortly after the incident was reported. They rescued the workers and handed them over to para-medics who transported them to the near-est medical facility. An investigation was opened. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs stressed that the mosque was still under construction, that it was being built by a donor and that it was not yet handed over to it. Ahmed Al-Qarawi, the Awqaf ministry ’s official spokesperson and director of its media department, said on that regard that the ministry was following up the latest news about the mosque and that the engineer-ing affairs department at the mosques’ sec-tor was asked to prepare a detailed report about the incident to determine the cause of the collapse. 

Fugitives caught 

Weapons detectives launched a cam-paign in Kabd area that resulted in the arrest of a citizen and a bedoon for posses-sion of drugs and paraphernalia. Meanwhile, a citizen was arrested with pos-session of an unlicensed 9mm pistol and ammunition. Meanwhile, police arrested a Syrian national wanted for defaulting on a KD 46,000 payment. Police arrested anoth-er Syrian national wanted to serve an 11 years in prison sentence over bad cheques. Furthermore, police found a hyena in an animal’s pen that was searched during the campaign. The animal was secured and transported to Kuwait Zoo, while orders were given to summon the pen’s owner for questioning. In another case, Jahra police arrested three fugitives, bedoons, and found a shotgun with one of them. 

No injuries in fire 

A fire broke out in a Sabah Al-Nasser house yesterday. Firefighters from two dif-ferent fire stations headed to the scene after the fire was reported. They discovered that there was a child and a domestic helper trapped behind flames in a base-ment where the fire started. They evacuat-ed the two before putting out the fire. No injuries were reported. 

KUWAIT: Plans to open a satellite campus for the University of Massachusetts-Lowell in Kuwait have been shelved until at least 2017. Lowell Chancellor Jacqueline Moloney said that university, which is opening the campus in Kuwait in collaboration with GUST and US weapons manufacturer Raytheon, are now shooting for a September 2017 opening. The chancellor has blamed the delay “changes with the authorities in Kuwait,” though she did not provide specifics, accord-ing to a local newspaper report. The $50 million, seven-year plan would establish five undergraduate and 11-graduate degree programs, and supply Raytheon with a pipeline of talent. About 1,200 students are expected to earn degrees in business, educa-tion, engineering and science. The coopera-tion aims to eventually allow Kuwaiti students to study at the UMass campus and alterna-tively to bring students and faculty from the US to Kuwait. The agreement helps Raytheon fulfill its contractual obligation to invest in Kuwait, one of its customers. In return, the country has purchased Raytheon’s high-tech weapons. — from The Lowell Sun 

# Delay in plans for US satellite campus Bedoons in Calais 

FRANCE: Al Jazeera has reported that there are approximately 300 stateless Arabs from Kuwait’s bedoon population who are living in the illegal Calais camp in France. The men and at least one child reportedly traveled using forged documents via Iraq through Turkey and then across Europe to reach Calais. Thousands of illegal immigrants from Syria, Iraq, countries in Africa and else-where have made their way to Calais in the hopes of finding a means of sneak-ing illegally into the United Kingdom. 

By Meshaal Al-Enezi and A Saleh KUWAIT: The appeal court yester-day adjourned hearing the Abdaly case until April 13. The court also decided to hold the next hearing, where two state security officers and detectives would testify, behind closed doors restricting those attending to lawyers only. Addressing the court, chairman of the Egyptian lawyers syndicate and chairman of the Arab lawyers union, the defendants’ lawyer, Sameh Ashour stressed that the wireless communication devices seized with his clients were nothing but toys sold in local markets. The criminal court had sentenced the first and the 23rd (Iranian) of the 25 defen-dants to death, the sixth to lifetime imprisonment, 15 defendants to 15 years in prison, three defendants to five years in prison and one defen-dant to 10 years with labor while it acquitted the first defendant’s brother over charges of espionage and communicating with Iran and Hezbollah as well as possessing an arsenal of explosives and weapons. 

Court orders 

In other news, the appeals court yesterday sentenced two brothers to ten years in prison each over charges of funding and fighting with the Islamic State (IS) in Syria. The two suspects had been sen-tenced to seven years in prison by the criminal court. The court also acquitted ten expatriate and Kuwaiti doctors of causing the death of a patient by medical errors. The court proved that the patient had died of causes other than the procedures of the surgery he under-went. Meanwhile, the misdemeanor court set April 13 to make its ruling in a case in which blogger Sara Al-Derais is accused of blasphemy. 

Students offended 

Minister of Education and Higher Education Dr Bader Al-Essa prom-ised to investigate an issue pertain-ing with an educator who reported-ly offended Kuwaiti students inside a public school. Photos taken from Snapchat have went viral recently on social media allegedly showing students in a Farwaniya school with captions that read slanderous remarks targeting the students. The footage were said to be uploaded by an Arab trainee who had been visiting the school on field training. These information could not imme-diately be verified. 

New CMA headquarters 

Chairman of the capital commit-tee at the municipal council Dr Hassan Kamal said that the commit-tee yesterday approved a request made to allocate a site to build a headquarters for CMA. The com-mittee also approved a request made by MSAL to allocate an area of 435 square meters to build a whole-sale and supplies branch at Daiya. Kamal added that other topics on the meeting’s agenda, such as a pro-posal to build a financial district, were postponed. Kamal also stressed that the committee post-poned removing violations in public property (unlicensed cafes and cab-ins) pending summoning the municipality ’ emergency team leader. 

Salwa streets asphalt 

Chairman of the Hawally commit-tee at the municipal council, Yousif Al-Ghareeb urged relevant state authorities to immediately re-asphalt a number of streets in Salwa area because the asphalt layer had been damaged by rain. He added that so many citizens have been complain-ing about the streets condition not-ing that this had caused consider-able damage to their vehicles. 

# Abdali appeal case adjourned to April 13 

# Minister investigates students ‘slandering’ L O C A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

DODOMA: Director General of the General of Civil Aviation Yousef Al-Fouzan and Tanzanian Minister of Works, Transport and Communication Makame Mbwrawa sign the agreement. — KUNA GENEVA: UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon hailed Kuwait’s efforts to provide financial support for Syrian refugees, in cooperation with Germany and the UK. In a speech at the UN’s first conference for the resettlement of Syrian refugees held in Geneva yesterday, Ki-moon noted that Syria-neighboring countries are facing difficulties in receiving the rising numbers of refugees. All countries must cooperate to face the growing needs of Syrians living in severe conditions, he added. The UN chief also said that the interna-tional organization is exerting huge efforts to provide the Syrian refugees with decent liv-ing conditions and grant them proper educa-tion to achieve their dreams of a bright future. The recent donors conference for Syria held in London last February came with an important decision to provide refugee-host-ing countries with funds to enable them to meet the needs of refugees, he said. The con-ference also stressed on resettling Syrians in other countries away from those neighboring Syria. Ki-moon further noted that countries have pledged to provide 187,000 resettlement opportunity, hoping the number would increase to receive 480,000 Syrian refugees (ten percent) currently living in Syria-neigh-boring countries. 

Mankind solidarity 

Meanwhile, Kuwait hailed the freshly-launched international conference aimed at settling Syrian refugees as an event that depicts mankind solidarity, free from political, religious or racial considerations. Objectives of this international gathering are in harmony with basic goals of the State of Kuwait’s foreign policy, bases of which had been placed by His Highness the Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, said the permanent Kuwaiti envoy at the UN, ambas-sador Jamal Al-Ghneim, addressing the con-vention, organized by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The State of Kuwait, since break-out of the Syrian crisis, has placed all available resources at the disposal of rallying international sup-port for humanitarian operations, where its diplomacy has resulted in several successful initiatives for relieving the Syrian people, namely by hosting three international con-ventions for raising donations, in addition to the fourth such gathering hosted by London on February 4th-co-chaired by Kuwait, Germany, Norway and Britain. These four conventions resulted with pledges to allocate $7 billion for the refugees. Kuwait has so far paid $1.6 billion-with the lion’s share shifting to the UNHCR, taking $1.5 billion which benefited 3.5 million refugees. Kuwait through the Arab Fund for Arab Economic Development (KAFED) con-tributed with financial allotments for relief plans in Syria’s neighboring countries, he said, noting that Kuwait covered all of these projects. In the third conference for pledging aid for the Syrians, Kuwait contributed with $500 million, mostly addressed to the UN agencies operating in Syria, including $100 million for refugees in countries around the country. 

Hosting countries 

Ambassador Ghneim said $20 million had been earmarked for Jordan for development projects in regions hosting the refugees. An identical sum was allotted for Egypt for the same purpose. KFAED, he added, would grant Turkey $20 million to minimize social and economic impact caused by hosting the refugees. Moreover, KFAED teams are current-ly present in Turkey, Egypt, Lebanon and Jordan to discuss plans for securing health services, education and water for the refugees. — KUNA 

# Kuwait pioneer in aiding Syrian refugees: Ki-moon 

UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon 

By Ben Garcia KUWAIT: Filipinos in Kuwait, including Pinoys from other countries, may vote for their new country’s leader starting April 9. The presiden-tial election in the Philippines is slated for May 9, but Overseas Filipinos are given a one month grace period to cast their votes at their embassy’s missions. Overseas voters are allowed to elect presi-dent, vice president, senators and a party list representative. To ensure the success, clean and orderly Overseas Absentee Voting (OAV) in the region, Philippine Commission on Elections (Comelec) Chairman Andres Bautista, super-vised a three-day training/seminar for the offi-cers/members who will oversee the voting process in the Middle East. The event was host-ed by Kuwait, with the attendance of some offi-cers/members from other countries including Lebanon and the United Arab Emirates, and with the participation of Philippine Ambassador to Kuwait Renato Pedro Villa, Philippine Ambassador to Bahrain Alfonso Ver and Philippine Ambassador to Qatar Wildredo Santos. The three-day event is held at the Costa Del Sol Hotel, in Al-Shaab. “I thanked the ambassadors of the Philippines to the Middle East for arranging this seminar for the Comelec. We are doing this to familiarize the special board of election inspec-tors and canvassers, in preparation for 9 April to 9 May Overseas Absentee Voting. The overseas voters are ahead for about one month, provid-ed for by law. We would like to encourage Filipinos to come out and take advantage of the privileges to select, let their voices be heard in the upcoming elections. We are happy that OFWs have a vital role in the Philippine econo-my and we are grateful for that. The reason why I am here is that because we want to ensure clean and orderly elections,” he said. Asked if the Comelec is ready for this year’s conduct of OAV, Baustita stressed under his leadership, he will do his best and that the proof will be revealed after the elections. “The recent Supreme Court decision in the printing of the voters’ receipts delayed some of our prepara-tions, we shall overcome. We are hopeful, that with our partnership with the Department of Foreign Affairs, we would be able to conduct credible elections in the foreign posts,” he said. He noted that all election materials are ready and many of them has been distributed to for-eign posts. “Because of the fact that overseas voters will be one month ahead of our elections period in Manila, the thermal paper which we have in the stock room of the Comelec were already sent to foreign posts. As a matter of fact, we have them here ready,” he reiterated. 

The day of valor 

Every year, April 9 is remembered as the Day of Valor (Araw ng Kagitingan) and traditionally, it is an official holiday in the Philippines, will there be some changes in the election date? “No, we stick to election dates overseas. As a matter of fact, it is somehow providential because the date falls on April 9, the start of choosing our government officials, we should really choose the next official with honor and pride. In foreign post, it is agreed that the embassy will be opened to voters from April 9 including weekends and holidays until May 9,” he announced. With regards to the sanctity and safety of ballots of overseas absentee voters, Baustita explained the voting machine is fully secured with additional safety features. “As provided by law Republic Act 8436, as amended by Republic Act 9369, all the safeguard features written in the law will be implemented by Comelec for this year’s elections. We insure that all the stan-dard operating procedures on OAV will be fol-lowed, that is exactly the reasons why we are conducting this seminar here in Kuwait right now, for them to be aware of the features and to protect the integrity and sanctity of election ballots. We are also looking at the electronic transfer of results, similar to what we are already implementing in the Philippines for quicker transmission of results, we are still working on that,” he noted. 

Hacking of website 

In response to queries about defacing of Comelec website about three days ago by a certain hacker calling itself ‘Anonymous Philippines’, Bautista pointed out that it was an unfortunate incident. “Hacking activities by certain groups can happen to whichever web-sites, may it be from the CIA, or a certain com-panies in New York and it happen to private and some government agencies in the Philippine and in some countries too. Comelec website is a public website, the message sent by the hacker to us was clear, they want to make sure that we have an honest and credible elections, and that all safeguards necessary for the elections will be implemented. That of course we vouched that everything mentioned in the law will be followed. But I want you to know that website that we are going to use during Election Day will be different from the public website already in the Comelec right now. Different website and different security features will be used during Election Day,” he added. Philippine Ambassador to Kuwait Renato Pedro Villa reminded the Filipino public that the canvassing of vote, (on May 9) will be opened to poll watchers/representatives of political parties at the embassy. “We want to show the transparency of the embassy on May 9, we will canvas the vote publicly. In Kuwait we have 49,000 registered voters. Our challenge in our post is to be able to encour-age at least 30-40 percent of the voters. We want to ask the support of employers to allow their Filipino workers, if they are registered, to come out and vote for their government offi-cials,” he said. 

# Filipino overseas vote starts April 9 

# Election head ensures credible ‘OAV’s’ for Filipinos 

KUWAIT: Philippine Commission on Elections Head Andres Bautista (second from left) addresses the media yesterday at Costa Del Sol Hotel during 3-day training/seminar for OAV. With him are Philippine Ambassador to Kuwait Renato Pedro Villa, Philippine Ambassador to Bahrain Alfonso Ver and Philippine Ambassador to Qatar Wildredo Santos. — Photo by Joseph Shagra 

AMMAN: The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) honored Kuwait in recognition of its international humanitari-an and development efforts and its prominent role in aiding Syrian refugees. In a ceremony held late Tuesday to celebrate the program’s 50 anniversary in Amman, Kuwaiti Ambassador to Jordan Hamad Al-Duaij received an honorary shield. Duaij expressed his keenness to receive the award, noting Kuwait’s developmental and humanitarian projects around the world. Speaking at the event, Jordanian Prime Minister Abdullah Ensour said that UNDP plays a huge role in supporting coun-tries to face crisis and achieve development. Meanwhile, UNDP Resident Representative in Jordan Edward Kallon said that the program aims to achieve sustainable development in 170 countries. UNDP has been supporting projects in Jordan for 40 years and is exerting massive efforts to ease the suffer-ing of Syrian refugees, he added. 

Generous support 

UNDP officials meanwhile applauded the partnership with Kuwait in the humanitarian and developmental work field, and hailed the “generous” support offered by Kuwait to boost developmental plans in developing countries. Furthermore, they applauded the wise instructions of His Highness the Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah for relieving people in need and offering aid to developing countries all over the world. Kallon described the Kuwaiti support as a “basic pillar” in continuing to host the Syrian refugees in the Syria’s neighbor-ing counties. The partnership between Kuwait and the UNDP is “promising” as the program is keen on cooperating with Kuwait on that matter, especially regarding the issue of Syrian refugees in the region. UNDP will soon focus on rehabilitating the infrastructure of areas hosting the Syrian refugees, and offering the appropriate environment to youth and society segments prone to marginalization, besides boosting efforts to prevent spread of terrorism and violence, he said. Jordan itself hosts more than 1.4 million Syrians, including 630,000 refugees, from which 107,000 live in camps, while the others reside in residential areas, he added. This requires a group work between governmental and non-governmental organizations to alleviate the negative impact of the Syrian crisis on the hosting countries, he affirmed. 

Remarkable partnership 

UNDP country Director Zena Ahmed said “success and achievements” by the UNDP could not have seen light with-out the “generous support” from the donors, namely the State of Kuwait. She expressed pride of the strong ties and remark-able partnership with Kuwait in serving the cause of Syrian refugees and alleviating their suffering. UNDP Program Manager Majida Al-Assaf said this celebra-tion is shedding light on the UNDP achievements made in cooperation with its major partners including Kuwait. Cooperation with UNDP partners resulted in many projects which contributed to supporting Jordan in hosting the Syrian refugees since outbreak of the Syrian crisis before around six years, she said. — KUNA 

# UNDP honors Kuwait 

DODOMA: Kuwait and Tanzania yes-terday signed an agreement on avia-tion services to simplify air travel between both countries. The agree-ment was signed by Director General of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) Yousef Al-Fouzan and Tanzanian Minister of Works, Transpor t and Communication Makame Mbwrawa, Kuwait’s embassy in the East African nation said in a statement. Fouzan and Mbwrawa held a press conference after the signing, in which both officials described the agree-ment as a launch pad for fur ther cooperation. “Increased air travel would pave the way for more Gulf tourists and investors to visit Tanzania,” Mbwrawa noted. Moreover, Fouzan said that the agreement also aims to strengthen the commerce industr y in both countries, as he underscored Kuwait’s historic ties with Tanzania. The DGCA Director General also announced that Kuwait Air ways would soon be launching direct flights between Kuwait and Tanzania. First Secretar y at the Kuwaiti embassy in Tanzania Mohammad Al-Omairy, Diplomatic Attaché Meshaal Al-Humaidi and a DGCA delegation attended the proceedings. — KUNA 

# Kuwait, Tanzania sign aviation services agreement F r o m t h e A r a b i c p r e s s THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# News i n b r i e f 

38 expat municipality employees terminated KUWAIT: Thirty eight expatriate employees at Kuwait Municipality were informed by phone not to report to work starting at the end of this month, as they were relieved of their duties. The employ-ees were hired under the ‘services assistance’ cate-gory which allows state departments to hire extra workers outside of their annual payroll budget. The employees were told that they were released because there was ‘no extra budget to cover their salaries.’ According to a sources familiar with the situation, the employees expressed disappoint-ment towards the way their contracts were termi-nated without being given a period to adjust their status. —Al-Rai 

Ministry to track medical errors in private hospitals KUWAIT: The Ministry of Health approved new regulations that would allow it to have ‘strict supervision’ to prevent medical errors in private hospitals and clinics, sources said. They did not provide much details, but indi-cated that the ministry informed private med-ical facilities that they are required to report back any case in which a patient is sent to a public hospital, which might indicate that negligence was involved. This would allow investigations to take place and determine whether or not medical errors took place, the sources explained. —Al-Anbaa 

Kuwaiti women to be hired as school guards KUWAIT: The Ministry of Education is preparing four contracts to appoint Kuwaiti women as guards in public schools for girls next year. The guards will officially be referred to as ‘security offi-cers’ and will officially be hired on July 1, 2016, Assistant Undersecretary for Financial Affairs Yousuf Al-Najjar said. Kuwaiti women wishing to apply for this job will be hired through private companies in coordination with the Manpower and Government Restructuring Program (MGRP), Najjar said. Each employee will receive a starting salary of KD 260 a month, added to it the govern-ment’s monthly labor support allowance, he indi-cated. —Al-Rai 

# Crime R e p o r t 

# Man accuses woman of killing dog 

KUWAIT: Rumaithiya police detained an Asian domestic helper whose sponsor accused her of deliberately killing his pet dog. The citizen arrived at the police station in a hysterical state, along with an Asian woman he accused of killing his rare-breed dog. The man claimed that she did it on purpose to take revenge, adding that she admitted this to him. He insisted that she be charged with “premeditated murder,” based on the animal protection law. He said if police did not take action, then he would, so the woman was kept at the police station for her own protection. 

Citizen arrested with machine gun 

A citizen was arrested by weapons detectives in his Adan home with an unlicensed machine gun along with ammunition. Detectives were informed that the citizen owns several unli-censed weapons, so they confirmed the details and discovered that the man works for an oil company, and lives in an Adan area house. A war-rant was obtained and the houses raided where the weapons were found. He was sent to the public prosecution for further legal action. 

Strange hugging and caressing 

A police officer cadet accused a classmate of his of hugging and caressing him in a strange way. When the classmate repeated the actions, the cadet com-plained to Saad Al-Abdalah Academy administration, but no action was taken. The first year student said he was surprised when another student in the non-com-missioned officers institute harassed him with unwanted physical contact. The administration ques-tioned the student who denied the accusation. He admitted to hugging the cadet but said he did so because he was an orphan and wanted some affec-tion. A source said the college did not take any further action. But then the man repeated the advances and even chased the cadet into the toilet at night, keeping others from entering, and insulted him with indecen-cies. The student told a relative of his what was going on and the relative took the cadet to the Abdallah Al-Mubarak police station and lodged a complaint. The source said the accused student was sent to the prose-cution, and he was detained in central prison for 10 days as the case will go to court.— Al-Rai 

> Al-Jarida

# In a nice article written by Meshaal Al-Sedairi, he told in detail the story of what once happened to an Algerian friend of his at a 33,000 feet altitude aboard an Algerian flight heading from Algeria to Paris. The friend said that when the plane was flying over Marseilles, he heard shouts and noises of a fight near the captain’s cabin. “Well, the story started when the captain had to go to the toilet, leaving his co-pilot, an Algerian woman, to take over flying the plane,” said the Algerian passenger. “The co-pilot apparently asked a flight attendant for something which she did not bring, and therefore, the co-pilot left her seat to scold her. The hostess talked back so rudely and loudly, which started the fight. Hearing the noise while get-ting out of the toilet, the pilot decided to close the cockpit’s door in order not to disturb his co-pilot, thinking that she was inside, and went to check out on what was going on. To his surprise, he found the co-pilot fighting instead of being inside the cabin. He rushed like a madman to the cockpit’s door trying to open it with no use because, after 9/11, all cockpit doors were designed only to open from the inside to prevent hijacking. The pilot and crew members reached to an emergency ax and used it in an attempt to break open the fortified door. At that time, the plane had been flying alone without a pilot and flight control had been calling with no response, which made French authorities opt to standard secu-rity measures and send military fighters to escort the plane thinking it was hijacked by a suicide bomber. “The fighters were authorized to bomb the plane down if it reached Paris,” “Shouts got louder and all passengers panicked,” he said. “Seeing the pilot and a few crew members trying to break open the cockpit’s door, we thought they were terrorists dressed in crew uniform and thus attacked them, starting a fierce fight. One of us man-aged to snatch the ax and run towards the tail, but the crew chased him and got it back by force. When I tried to take it from them, I received a blow to my face and started bleeding. I immediately charged at the pilot knocking him down to the ground while he was shouting ‘I am the pilot, I am the pilot!’. ‘You are a ter-rorist, a criminal’, I shouted back and bit his arm so hard that he started screaming in pain. Someone hit me on the back of my head and I fainted. They man-aged to get the ax and open the door just in time to get the pilot back in his seat, control the plane and contact the traffic control to tell them what hap-pened.” “We later on learnt that had the pilot not opened the cockpit in time, we had only ten more minutes before French fighters shot the plane down as ordered,” he continued. “All this happened because of a silly fight between two women.” —Translated by Kuwait Times 

# Silly fight above the clouds 

Al-Anbaa By Abdulmohsen Al-Meshari 

KUWAIT: Kuwait has been buzzing with questions since the cabinet announced Monday approving a proposal to increase electricity and water fees, which would increase the cost four fold for consumers accord-ing to the indications of ordinary consumption. Fur thermore, it is widely expec ted that the fees’ increase will automatically and unwillingly reflect on other fields, starting with apartment rents, and includes fac tories that produce national products and every facility that uses energy. The proposal would increase elec-tricity fees as follows: for private houses (normally inhabited by Kuwaitis), the bill proposes to raise current electricity charges of 2 fils per kilowatt to as follows: For con-sumption of up to 3,000 kilowatts - 5 fils per kilowatt; For consumption of between 3,000 - 6,000 - 8 fils per kilowatt; For consumption between 6,000-9,000 - 10 fils per kilowatt; For consumption above 9,000 - 15 fils per k ilowatt. As for apar tments (mostly inhabited by expatriate), the new proposed rates are as follow; For consumption of up to 1,000 kilo-watt - 5 fils per kilowatt; For con-sumption between 1,000-2,000 - 10 fils per kilowatt; For consumption above 2,000 kilowatt - 15 fils per k ilowatt. The bill also proposes smaller increases to water charges. 

Third category 

According to sources, most citi-zens would be classified in the third category, and would pay 10 fils per kilowatt according to current con-sumption rates. The sources ques-tioned the government’s argument that the bill encourages saving ener-gy, saying that the majority of con-sumption goes to power air condi-tioning “that cannot be replaced” during Kuwait’s long and extremely hot summer. “How can rationalization reduce an invoice valued at KD 100 if air conditioning consumes nearly 70 percent of the bill?” the sources won-dered. Specialists meanwhile warned that real estate owners will be left with no other choice but to increase rents to compensate for the increase in energy bills. 

Houses 

Ministry of Electricity and Water (MEW) statistics show that the aver-age consumption of power in private residences (houses) of an area between 300 to 1,000 square meters reaches 7,500 kilowatts, which is equal to an invoice of KD 15 accord-ing to the old tariff, while it will reach KD 54 according to the new price. This means that the annual bill would increase from KD 180 to KD 648. The average consumption of water in these residences is 30,000 imperial gallons, for a value that will reach KD 60 according to the new tariff, from the current KD 24. 

Apartments 

As for residential apar tments, where the average consumption of a two room flat is 2,700 kilowatts, the bill will increase fivefold from KD 5 to KD 25 a month. Four bedroom apart-ments with an area exceeding 400 square meters will go up to KD 75 per month, from KD 12 only. 

Industrial sector 

The industrial sector will proba-bly be the most affected. With an average monthly consumption of 400,000 kilowatts, the monthly bill would jump from KD 800 to KD 4,000, since the tariff under the pro-posed plan increases from 2 to 10 fills per kilowatt. This would obvi-ously lead to increasing the prices of products that these facilities pro-vide. —Al-Rai 

# Energy bill increase to hike rents, prices THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Rousseff clinging to power as Brazil coalition collapses 

Page 9 

# Tears flow as Myanmar swears in ‘first president’ 

Page 12 

LARNACA: The man accused of hijacking an Egyptian plane with a fake suicide belt and diverting it to Cyprus was remanded into cus-tody yesterday, as social media buzzed with ridicule about the bizarre incident. A judge in Larnaca on the island’s southern coast ordered 58-year-old Egyptian Seif Al-Din Mohamed Mostafa held for eight days as he made his first court appearance after Tuesday’s hijack-ing. Mostafa is accused of forcing the Alexandria-to-Cairo flight to divert to Cyprus, where he demanded to see his Cypriot ex-wife, with whom he has children. Police told the court that Mostafa-described by officials as “psychologically unstable”-faces possible charges of hijacking, kidnapping, reckless and threatening behav-ior, and breaches of the anti-terror law. Police prosecutor Andreas Lambrianou said witness-es saw the suspect wearing a belt around his waist stuffed with cylindrical objects connect-ed by wires to what appeared to be a hand-held detonator button. At one point, the sus-pect had threatened to detonate the belt if his demands weren’t met, he alleged. Mostafa will not face any formal charges until a later hear-ing and only at that point will he be expected to enter a plea. He flashed journalists the victory sign as he was driven away by police from the court-house, which is less than a kilometer from Larnaca airport where a six-hour standoff unfolded after the hijacking. Most of the 55 passengers on the EgyptAir flight were quickly released after it landed in Larnaca but it took hours of negotiations, including a conversa-tion with his ex-wife, before Mostafa surren-dered to police. “What’s someone supposed to do when he hasn’t seen his wife and children in 24 years and the Egyptian government won’t let you?” the police prosecutor quoted him as telling officers after his arrest. Some passengers and crew escaped only minutes before the standoff ended, including one uniformed man who was seen clambering out of a cockpit window and dropping to the ground. Among them was a 26-year-old British man, Ben Innes, who asked crew to snap a photograph of him standing beside Mostafa that has been widely shared on social media. The image features a grinning Innes standing next to Mostafa, with what appears to be a rudimentary suicide vest strapped to his chest. “I figured if his bomb was real I’d nothing to lose anyway, so took a chance to get a closer look at it,” Innes, a health and safety auditor from Leeds, told Britain’s The Sun newspaper. “So I stood by him and smiled for the cam-era while a stewardess did the snap. It has to be the best selfie ever,” he said. As it became clear on Tuesday that the hijacker was trying to contact his ex-wife and was likely not a real danger, Egyptians also took to social media to poke fun at the incident, many using the Twitter hashtag #loveisintheair. “This is what happens when you block your ex,” one person wrote on Twitter, while another opined: “Some may wonder why the hijacker didn’t just email his wife. They don’t realise how terrible Egypt’s Internet is.” 

‘Non-prohibited’ items 

HA Hellyer, an Arab affairs specialist at the Royal United Services Institute in London, tweeted: “My wife just told me: ‘You don’t love me enough. You haven’t hijacked a plane to talk to me. Sort it out’” After several hours in Larnaca, passengers on the flight were flown to Cairo late on Tuesday. “Fifteen minutes after departure we saw on the screens that the plane was not going to Cairo and it was cross-ing the sea,” passenger Noha Saleh said on arrival in the Egyptian capital. “They said it was a technical problem and they needed to go to Cyprus or Greece to fix it... they were profes-sional and their attitude was normal,” she said. Concerns were raised about security at Egyptian airports after a Russian airliner was downed on October 31 over the Sinai Peninsula, killing all 224 people on board. The Islamic State group claimed to have smuggled a bomb on board. The police prosecutor said Cypriot authori-ties would seek the help of Interpol to discover how the fake suicide belt passed through air-port security in Alexandria. But Egypt’s interior ministry said in a statement that all security measures had been applied. The accused hijacker and his luggage were scanned, it said, and he had used “non-prohibited belongings” in his handbag “to imply that he was wearing an explosive belt and to threaten the crew and passengers.” — AFP 

ANCHORAGE: A village not far from an erupting Alaska volcano urged residents to stay indoors after the mountain rained down ash, coating ground areas and turn-ing some rooftops and car windows black. The volcano kept pumping out new ash Tuesday that could threaten aircraft, but it came in smaller amounts at lower heights, according to the Alaska Volcano Observatory. Pavlof Volcano, 625 miles southwest of Anchorage on the Alaska Peninsula, erupted Sunday. The initial eruption con-tinued for about 17 hours and put out an ash cloud that reached 37,000 feet. US Geological Survey geologist Kristi Wallace said there were reports of a significant ash fall in Nelson Lagoon, a village of 39 peo-ple about 55 miles northeast of the vol-cano. Residents reported one-eighth to two-thirds of an inch of ash. Cpl Barrett Taylor, a village public safety officer in Nelson Lagoon, saw ash falling early Monday. “It was raining ash for a little bit,” Taylor said. “It turned everything black, the rooftops, the fuel tanks, homes.” The ash was worse Tuesday, he said, because wind coming in off the ocean was whipping it around. Officials say ash can be hazardous to eyes, skin and breathing passages. The community has put out a health advisory to stay inside until today. Taylor is hoping strong wind or rain will sweep some of the ash away. “I actually saw an eagle land on the grass today, and as he landed, a big pile of ash came up and flew away,” he said. The plume blew northeast and by Tuesday had reached Canada, but Dave Schneider, a USGS geophysicist at the observatory, said activity had calmed from the continu-ous eruptive phase. “Over the last six to eight hours the activity is more intermittent,” he said Tuesday. “There are short duration, small explosive events that are occurring, as opposed to sort of a continuous plume.” The original ash cloud crossed Bristol Bay, spread into interior Alaska, and stretched into northern Canada, said Don Moore, meteorologist in charge of the National Weather Service Alaska Aviation Weather Unit. “The extent of the plume is certainly greater but the concentration of the ash is becoming less,” Moore said. “The plume is becoming thinner over time.” Volcanic ash is angular and sharp and can cause a jet engine to shut down. Alaska Airlines canceled 41 flights within the state Monday, and 28 more Tuesday. Sherry Keever has lived in Healy, Alaska, for only a year and was trying to get home from a vacation in California when ash from the volcano prompted the cancella-tion of her flight. “I’m kind of new, and I wasn’t even aware there were volcanoes that could affect the flight patterns, and I’m OK with it,” she said while sitting in a waiting area of Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, waiting to see if she could get her flight to Fairbanks on Tuesday. The volcano in the 8,261-foot mountain is one of Alaska’s most active. It has had 40 known eruptions. Pavlof eruptions in the past 20 years have not been as intense, but the current eruption is not unprecedented for the vol-cano, Schneider said. The length of the eruption was a major factor in the size of the ash cloud, Schneider said. So were the winds and possibly the smaller size of the ash, which takes longer to fall out of the atmosphere. Pat Walsh, a wildlife biologist for the Togiak National Wildlife Refuge, saw ash 25 miles west of Dillingham as a gray haze as he tracked wolves from the air in the refuge. He could also see traces of ash in fresh wolf tracks and in the snow. Tisha Christensen, a health aide at the clinic in Port Heiden, said gray ash mixed with snow fell Monday night in the com-munity on the Bering Sea side of the Alaska Peninsula. It affected her 8-year-old son, who has asthma but tried going to school Tuesday. “He didn’t even make it a half-hour and had to come home and have a nebulizer treatment,” she said. Only trace amounts of ash had been reported from Pavlof eruptions since 1996. In the past, the vol-cano has erupted intermittently over months or shut off abruptly. — AP 

# Egyptian remanded as hijacking sparks online buzz 

# Cyprus detains hijacker who wanted to see ex-wife 

LARNACA: Seif Al-Din Mohamed Mostafa, an Egyptian man who hijacked an EgyptAir passenger plane and forced it to divert to Cyprus demanding to see his ex-wife, flashes the ‘V’ for victory sign as he leaves the court in Larnaca in a police car yesterday. — AFP 

# Ash coats village areas near erupting volcano in Alaska 

WASHINGTON: President Barack Obama hosts an international summit in Washington today and tomorrow aimed at ensuring that nuclear material in the world’s roughly 1,000 atomic facilities is secured. Here is a breakdown of what’s at stake: 

Large stockpiles 

Obama convened the first Nuclear Security Summit in 2010, followed by similar gatherings in Seoul in 2012 and The Hague in 2014. The meetings focus on preventing criminals from accessing stockpiles of radioactive materials, reducing highly enriched uranium and separated plutonium, enhancing the detection of smuggling, and cybersecu-rity. Considerable progress has been made, with several countries reducing or eliminating their stockpiles of nuclear material. For example, Japan this month is returning to the United States enough plutonium to make 50 nuclear bombs. But despite these advances, a January report by the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), a leading US nonproliferation watchdog, found basic weaknesses per-sist in securing the world’s fissile materi-als. And according to a 2015 study by the International Panel on Fissile Materials, enough plutonium and highly enriched uranium stockpiles remain to make the equivalent of 200,000 weapons of the magnitude that leveled Hiroshima in 1945. 

Narrow scope? 

The fissile materials in question do not include state -owned nuclear weapons, leading critics to say the sum-mits are not broad enough in scope. “This is an important mission, but it’s beneath the pay grade of the 50 or 60 heads of state that are going to convene in Washington,” said Bruce Blair, co-founder of anti-nuclear group Global Zero. “We should have an agenda ... that would cover all fissile materials, civilian and military.” 

New dangers 

Since the summits began, 14 nations have eliminated their fissile material stockpiles, and other countries have stepped up efforts to secure theirs. But at the same time, other nations are ramping up their nuclear capabilities. Countries like Pakistan, India and North Korea have built new bombs, and experts warn these fall behind in safety standards aimed at preventing acciden-tal detonation. The Islamic State group has already used chemical weapons, and experts fear the jihadists are trying to secure fis-sile material to make a “dirty bomb.” Such a device is a regular bomb, but would explode radioactive material across an area. Highlighting the risks, Belgian police investigating the November 13 Paris terror attacks found 10 hours of video of the comings and goings of a senior Belgian nuclear offi-cial. One agenda item at the summit will see leaders discussing a hypothetical nuclear security crisis. 

Possible outcomes 

Sharon Squassoni, director and sen-ior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies’ proliferation pre-vention program, said the latest summit aims to consolidate progress made so far, such as seeing countries that com-mitted to certain actions implement these. The 2014 summit saw 35 coun-tries sign up to various pledges-but key players including China, India, Russia and Pakistan did not join in. “It would be really important for those countries to sign on,” Squassoni said. —AFP 

# Nuclear summit: What’s at stake I N T E R N AT I O N A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

MOSCOW: When Vladimir Putin announced the withdrawal of most of Russia’s military contingent from Syria there was an expectation that the Yauza, a Russian naval icebreaker and one of the mission’s main supply vessels, would return home to its Arctic Ocean port. Instead, three days after Putin’s March 14 declaration, the Yauza, part of the “Syrian Express”, the nickname given to the ships that have kept Russian forces supplied, left the Russian Black Sea port of Novorossiysk for Tartous, Russia’s naval facility in Syria. Whatever it was carrying was heavy; it sat so low in the water that its load line was barely visible. Its movements and those of other Russian ships in the two weeks since Putin’s announcement of a partial with-drawal suggest Moscow has in fact shipped more equipment and supplies to Syria than it has brought back in the same period, a Reuters analysis shows. It is not known what the ships were carry-ing or how much equipment has been flown out in giant cargo planes accom-panying returning war planes. But the movements - while only a partial snap-shot - suggest Russia is working inten-sively to maintain its military infrastruc-ture in Syria and to supply the Syrian army so that it can scale up again swiftly if need be. Putin has not detailed what would prompt such a move, but any perceived threat to Russia’s bases in Syria or any sign that President Bashar Al-Assad, Moscow’s closest Middle East ally, was in peril would be likely to trigger a powerful return. Russia operates an air base in Hmeymim and a naval facility at Tartous. Putin has said Russia will keep both and that they will need to be well protected. “Since the main part of the force de facto stayed there, there is no reason to reduce the traffic,” said Mikhail Barabanov, a sen-ior research fellow at the Moscow-based CAST military think tank. “Supplies for the Syrian army remain significant as well.” Moscow has not revealed the size of its force in Syria, nor has it given details of its partial withdrawal. Reuters has cal-culated that around half of Russia’s fixed-wing strike force based in Syria flew out of the country in the days after the par-tial draw down was made public. The precise number of planes Russia had was secret, but analysis suggested it had about 36 fixed-wing military jets there. On Monday, state T V showed three heavy attack helicopters being flown out of Syria along with some support staff. 

Naval firepower 

But an examination of shipping data, official information, tips from maritime security sources and photographs from bloggers of Russian ships passing the Bosphorus strait en route from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, shows no signs that the “Syrian Express” is being wound down. A Reuters analysis of the same data shows Russia is also likely to have reinforced its naval force in the Mediterranean and now appears to have more war ships near the Syrian coast than at the time of Putin’s declaration. Their role is to protect cargo ships. Their presence also gives Moscow the option of firing cruise missiles from the sea. Russia appears to have more than a dozen military vessels in the Mediterranean, including the Zeleniy Dol warship equipped with terrain-hugging Kalibr cruise missiles which are accurate to within three metres, according to Russian state media and the database of Bosphorus Naval News, a Turkish online project. Moscow is likely to maintain that strength, said CAST’s Barabanov. “Russia doesn’t have too many ships that it can keep in the Mediterranean. The role of the force was to ensure the activity of the ‘Syrian Express’ and to demonstrate it to the West and, later, to Turkey.” The Russian defense ministry did not reply to questions about what the Russian navy was doing in the Mediterranean or whether there were plans to reduce its presence. Russia’s mili-tary ships and most auxiliary vessels are not shown in publicly available databas-es. But most of its ships are seen and photographed when they pass the Bosphorus on their way from Russia to the Mediterranean or vice versa. In most cases it is impossible to track military shipments to destination ports however, meaning data is only partial. 

Low in the water 

Since Moscow began to scale back in Syria, Russia has sent two landing ships, which are typically used to transport troops and armor - the Caesar Kunikov and the Saratov - to the Mediterranean along with the Yauza, an auxiliary cargo vessel. The Saratov looked loaded when it passed the strait on Thursday going south towards Syria. Its load line was visi-bly lower than on March 14 when it was photographed going the other way, towards Russia. At the same time, two warships - the Alexander Otrakovsky and the Minsk - and the Dvinitsa-50, an auxil-iary vessel, were photographed by Turkish bloggers passing the Bosphorus en route back to Russia. At least two of the returning ships, the Alexander Otrakovsky and the Dvinitsa-50, looked unloaded on their way back. Photographs show that the Otrakovsky, a large landing ship, sat high-er in the water on its return to Russia compared to March 2 when it crossed the strait in the other direction. It was not clear if it carried troops or equipment. The load line of the Dvinitsa-50 was also high above the water when it was pho-tographed in the Bosphorus on March 20 on its way back to Russia. It seems unlike-ly that Russian troops or equipment were on board any of the returning ships. None of them looked like they had heavy cargo onboard. The Minsk has already headed back towards Syria. On Tuesday, it was photographed passing the Bosphorus. Its bow sat deep in the water; its cargo could not be discerned. Non-military cargo traf-fic between Russia and Syria also shows no signs of flagging. Four cargo ships involved in the supply operation called at Syria in the two weeks before Putin announced the draw down. — Reuters 

BEIRUT: Syrian refugee Mohammed Al-Shareef, 20, who fled with his family from Damascus, Syria, performs a breakdance on the Mediterranean waterfront promenade in Beirut. — AP MOSCOW: President Bashar Al-Assad said yesterday that any transitional government in Syria should include both the regime and opposition, as UN chief Ban Ki-moon urged greater efforts to tackle the coun-try’s refugee crisis. In an interview pub-lished Wednesday, Assad told Russia’s RIA Novosti state news agency it would be “logical for there to be independent forces, opposition forces and forces loyal to the government represented” in any transition-al body. Assad did not specify which oppo-sition groups should be included in the government but the statement comes as Damascus faces international pressure to compromise at UN-mediated talks aimed at ending the five-year conflict that has killed some 270,000 people. In a sign of how high the stakes are, the UN chief exhorted a conference in Geneva “to address the biggest refugee and dis-placement crisis of our time” which has seen an estimated 4.8 million Syrians flee-ing their homeland. “There is no alterna-tive to negotiating a political transition that will lead to a new Syria,” Ban said. Talks led by Ban’s Syria envoy Staffan de Mistura paused last week, but the sides remained deadlocked over the fate of Assad, whom the opposition insists must leave power before a transitional government is agreed. In the interview, Assad did not touch on his own future, saying only that the make-up of the transitional government should be agreed upon at the negotiations in Switzerland. “There are many questions that need to be discussed in Geneva, but there are not difficult questions,” Assad said. “I don’t consider them difficult, they can all be resolved.” 

Draft constitution 

The US and Russia are pushing for a transi-tional government and draft constitution to be established by August, according to a plan agreed by world powers last year. Assad said a preliminary draft version of the constitution could be drawn up “within a few weeks” but insisted that the country would only adopt a new constitution “after the Syrian people vote on it”. Assad has been buoyed after his forces recaptured the ancient city of Palmyra from Islamic State (IS) jihadists over the weekend, in an advanced backed by Russian air strikes and special forces on the ground. Soldiers yesterday were locked in heavy fighting with IS fighters in central Syria as they pressed their offensive following the seizure of the UNESCO world heritage site. A ceasefire between Damascus and non-jihadist opposition forces has broadly held since February 27, prompting a glim-mer of hope that a political solution might be on the horizon. But the fighting has left vast swathes of the country in ruin and Assad estimated that economic and infra-structure damage to the country “exceeds $200 billion”. 

10 percent 

The aim of the Geneva conference is to secure relocation pledges within three years for 10 percent of Syria’s refugees, or 480,000 people, whom the UN wants moved outside of Syria’s immediate neigh-bors who are currently absorbing an enor-mous human burden. Ban said the 480,000 figure was “a relatively small number,” com-pared with those being hosted by Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. The Geneva meet follows a conference in London in February where nations pledged $11 billion (9.7 billion euros) to help manage one of the largest displacements of people since World War II.More than one million migrants-about half of them Syrians-reached Europe via the Mediterranean last year, a rate of arrivals that has continued through the first three months of 2016. Thousands have died making the harrow-ing journey, often on rickety boats run by people smugglers. Some European states have temporarily shut borders and called for tough measures to stem the movement of people through the continent. The British charity Oxfam on Tuesday noted that wealthy countries had so far only resettled 67,100 Syrian refugees-a mere 1.39 percent of those forced to flee. — AFP 

# Transitional govt must include Syrian regime, opposition: Assad 

Economic, infrastructure damage ‘exceeds $200 billion’ 

# Russia, ship more to Syria than removing 

# A draw down? 

BAGHDAD: Despite intense US pres-sure to act to keep Iraq’s largest dam from collapsing, Baghdad has done lit-tle to prepare Iraqis for the possibility of a burst that could unleash a flood reaching the capital and killing hun-dreds of thousands of people. The gov-ernment signed a $296-million con-tract with Italy’s Trevi Group last month to reinforce northern Iraq’s fragile Mosul Dam, but it has not announced any specific plans to try to rescue peo-ple in the event of a breach or instruct-ed them in detail how to react safely. Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi’s most significant public statement on the dam, which was not widely distrib-uted, advised millions of people living in the path of a potential flood that they should move to higher ground, but provided few specifics. US officials have said Washington feels Baghdad has failed to take the threat seriously enough. A US govern-ment briefing paper released in late February said the 500,000 to 1.47 mil-lion Iraqis living in the highest-risk areas along the Tigris River “probably would not survive” the impact of a flood’s impact unless they evacuated. Swept hundreds of miles along in the waters would be unexploded ord-nance, chemicals, bodies and build-ings. A senior official at the US Agency for International Development (USAID) said the most lives could be saved by advising people in advance of what to do in the event of a breach of the struc-ture, once known as Saddam Dam and opened in the mid 1980s. “You want to make sure when you have a major haz-ard risk that the population that is going to be potentially affected is aware of that, that they know what to do about it when it happens, and they understand how they’re going to be alerted to it,” the official said. Instead, Iraqi authorities have downplayed the threat. The water minister estimated last month there was only a one in 1,000 chance of fail-ure, a “risk level present in all the world’s dams”. On Jan 21, US Secretary of State John Kerry met with Abadi in Davos, Switzerland, and handed him a confidential note from President Barack Obama pleading for urgent action. The president’s personal inter-vention indicated how the dam’s fragility has moved to the forefront of US concerns over Iraq, reflecting fears its failure would also undermine US efforts to stabilize Abadi’s government and complicate the war against Islamic State. Iraqi forces launched a new offensive last week in Makhmour, 60 km south of Mosul, as the beginning of a broader campaign to clear areas around the city but so far progress has been slow. — Reuters 

## Iraqis kept in the dark about Mosul Dam emergency plans I N T E R N A T I O N A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

BRASILIA: Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff was left scrambling for votes to save her presidency in a loom-ing impeachment showdown after her main coalition partner walked out of the government Tuesday. The PMDB, the country’s largest party, voted to immediately end its alliance with Rousseff’s leftist Workers’ Party, or PT, and go into opposition. “From today, at this historic meeting of the PMDB, the PMDB withdraws from the government of President Rousseff,” said Senator Romero Juca, the party vice president. The meeting, broadcast live on national television, was the culmina-tion of a long divorce with Rousseff, leaving Brazil’s first female president grasping at straws as she tries to stay in power. The vote and announcement took no more than three minutes and was accompanied by singing of the national anthem and shouts of “PT out!”The split plunges Rousseff’s government into fresh crisis mode and, more seriously, greatly reduces her chances of mustering the one third of votes in the lower house of Congress that she needs to defeat a first impeachment vote, expected in April. “If you look at the numbers, that’s basically it,” said Everaldo Moraes, a political sci-ence professor at Brasilia National University. Rousseff cancelled a trip to Washington for a nuclear safety sum-mit on Thursday and Friday, the state news agency said. A government spokesman said that in “the current political context,” it was not advisable. 

Last nail in coffin? 

If the lower house votes in favor, an impeachment trial would start in the Senate, where a two-thirds vote would force Rousseff from office. PMDB head Michel Temer-who remains vice president under Rousseff despite the break-up would take over as interim presi-dent. Eliseu Padilha, a high-ranking PMDB member who served as minister of civil aviation in Rousseff’s government, predicted that Rousseff had only weeks left. “In less than three months we’ll have a new gov-ernment-in two months,” he told AFP. Senator Aecio Neves, who heads the PSDB opposition party and who narrowly lost to Rousseff when she won re-election in 2014, said: “The exit of the PMDB is the last nail in the coffin.” The PMDB has 69 of the 513 lower house seats and 60 of these deputies will vote for impeachment, Padilha said. Analysts say that the PMDB’s exit could also encourage minor coalition partners to quit. Lawmakers from the center-right Progressive Party, which has 49 deputies, and the center-left Social Democratic Party, which has 32, said their parties would meet this week on a possible split. However, Workers’ Party loyalists are negotiating intensely with individual deputies, trying to persuade them to vote against the grain. “We can’t give an exact evaluation, but they are exaggerating the support for impeachment among PMDB deputies,” said Alfonso Florence, from the Workers’ Party, who represents the government in the lower house. Echoing Rousseff, Florence said the opposition was effectively mounting “a coup.” The impeachment case alleges that Rousseff illegally borrowed money to boost public spending and mask the severity of the recession from voters dur-ing her re-election. The Brazilian bar association filed a new impeachment petition Monday, seeking to expand the accusations to include allegations of involvement by Rousseff in the multibillion-dollar cor-ruption scandal centered on state oil company Petrobras. 

Lula controversy 

Although still vice president, Temer, 75, increasingly resembles a politician preparing for power. . The growing instability has spilled onto the streets with millions of Brazilians marching against Rousseff and smaller, but still vigorous, rallies held in her defense. Another round of pro-Rousseff protests was planned for this Thursday. Rousseff has called on her mentor, former president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, to become chief of staff so that he could stiffen resolve in the ranks and put his negotiating skills to use. But the move prompted a swift backlash from opponents who see the appointment as a bid to give Lula ministerial immunity and protect him from cor-ruption allegations related to the Petrobras probe. —AFP 

# Brazil coalition collapses 

# Rousseff left clinging to power 

BRASILIA: Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff (right) and World Trade Organization (WTO) Director-General Roberto Azevedo meet at Planalto Palace in Brasilia. —AFP SAO PAULO: When Brazil Vice President Michel Temer complained to embattled President Dilma Rousseff that he didn’t like being a “decorative” figure, he was being serious. Now he could be about to take her job. Temer and Rousseff always made an awkward couple. As head of the PMDB centrist party, Temer represented the biggest force in leftist Rousseff’s shaky coalition. For years, the PMDB has played that kingmaker role and it worked. But on Tuesday, the party voted to quit the government and go into opposition, sup-porting an ever stronger push to impeach Rousseff. And if she is removed from office, the outwardly dour Temer becomes interim president. The 75-year-old lawyer has a low profile for someone in such a lynch-pin position at the top of Latin America’s biggest country and economy. If anything, the constitutional scholar is perhaps best known to voters for having a 32-year-old former beauty contestant as a wife. But now, with his boss sliding toward political oblivion, Temer appears hungry to take himself and his party out of the shadows. 

Preparing for big job 

Temer, seen as a master operator in the snakepit of Brasilia’s Congressional politics, played his cards cau-tiously. For months he has been making his displeasure at Rousseff known, including sending a letter in December where he complained of feeling underval-ued as “a decorative vice president.” But he was careful to stay on the fence, even as other PMDB members openly attacked Rousseff and pushed ahead the impeachment momentum. Occasionally, he let the mask slip, publishing a doc-ument in October called “A bridge to the future” in which he criticized the “excesses” in government poli-cies. But while lower-level supporters liked to refer to him as “President Temer,” he insisted he had no ambi-tions, except perhaps at the next scheduled elections in 2018. Then over the last few days the party publicly dis-cussed governing plans in the event of a Rousseff exit. And on Monday, Temer came out into the open, calling on the PMDB to abandon the government and go into opposition-making good on that threat Tuesday. —AFP 

# Temer: The man who would be Brazil’s next president 

ATLANTA: Two Republican governors. Two proposals at the heart of LGBT rights. One rejection. One new law. Georgia’s Gov Nathan Deal said he was preventing discrimination and protecting commerce when he announced his veto of a measure that would have allowed certain individuals, businesses and faith organizations to deny services based on “sincerely held religious beliefs.” In North Carolina, Gov Pat McCrory said he was protect-ing his citizens’ privacy and using “common sense” when he signed into law a bill that, among other things, prohibits local anti-dis-crimination ordinances and obligates trans-gender people to use restrooms matching the gender on their birth certificates. Their moves highlight a familiar GOP fault line between business conservatives, led by large corporations that have embraced LGBT rights, and social conservatives, who have ramped up their calls for their own legal pro-tections since the US Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage last year. The tussle is par-ticularly fierce in statehouses like those in Atlanta and Raleigh, where the GOP holds overwhelmingly majorities. “There was no escape hatch,” former Deal aide Brian Robinson said. “He was getting torn between two factions ... both of which have supported him strongly for years.” 

Political reality 

Yet there’s a stark political reality in the governors’ different conclusions: Deal is a 74-year-old in his second term, unable to a seek a third consecutive term and almost certain never to face Georgia voters again; McCrory is a 59-year-old running for re-election, with a newfound general election issue smoldering in his lap. So Deal was free to wax eloquent Monday about constitutional freedoms, large-ly avoiding explicit commentary on same-sex marriage and LGBT rights as he explained his decision. “If indeed our religious liberty is con-ferred by God and not by man-made govern-ment, we should heed the ‘hands-off’ admoni-tion of the First Amendment to our Constitution,” he said. The veto disappointed some religious conservatives and enraged others, all of them promising to press the mat-ter again. But Deal stood his ground, alluding to his own lifelong Southern Baptist affiliation. “I do not think we have to discriminate against anyone,” he said, “to pro-tect the faith-based community.” Conversely, McCrory now must try to frame the new North Carolina law in his favor, while his Democratic general election opponent, North Carolina Attorney General Roy Cooper, does the same. The challenge for both men is to placate their respective party bases - gay-rights supporting liberals for Cooper, social conservatives for McCrory - while appealing to independents who hold sway in the closely divided state. 

Multistall bathrooms 

McCrory and his aides focus on provisions that require people to use multistall bathrooms of the sex matching their birth certificates at state agencies, schools and universities. The law was the product of a special session Republicans called essentially to override a city of Charlotte ordinance allowing transgender individuals to use the bathroom assigned to their gender identity. Chris LaCivita, McCrory’s chief campaign strategist, said it’s a simple question: “Can a male use a female bathroom and a female locker room?” LaCivita said McCrory “has always maintained that this is a case about reasonable expectations of privacy.” Opponents of an anti-discrimination ordinance in Houston successfully used the same argu-ments in a 2015 referendum. Cooper answered Tuesday that the North Carolina law is a “national embarrassment,” and he said he would not defend it as attorney gen-eral against a pending federal lawsuit. He and other Democrats also tried to define the bill by more than transgender bathroom access. The law blocks workers from suing in state courts over workplace discrimination based on race, religion, color, national origin, age, sex or hand-icap; and it bars local anti-discrimination meas-ures to protect people on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, while separately preventing local governments from setting their own minimum wage or requiring busi-nesses to provide paid sick leave. All that “will set North Carolina’s economy back if we don’t repeal it,” Cooper said, echo-ing the argument business leaders made in pressuring Deal for a veto in Georgia. More than 500 companies joined a coalition led by Coca-Cola and other big-name Georgia firms. The Walt Disney Co, Marvel Studios and Salesforce.com threatened to take business elsewhere. The NFL suggested Atlanta could lose its bids for the 2019 or 2020 Super Bowl. McCrory heeded such arguments last year when he vetoed a “religious freedom” bill that was more limited than what Deal nixed. (The Legislature overrode McCrory’s veto.) On Monday, McCrory doubled down, say-ing he’d “not had one corporation tell me that they’re threatening to leave,” though the NBA has now suggested it could move profession-al basketball’s 2017 All-Star game from Charlotte. Georgia Republican consultant Chip Lake said those arguments are what ulti-mately drive the issue, regardless of specific and often complicated provisions that McCrory, Cooper, Deal and others try to parse. “We get caught up in arguments of what’s right and what’s wrong, but this becomes an issue where we just have to ask, ‘Are the economic consequences real or per-ceived?’” Lake said. “You can call it economic extortion. We can talk about ‘that’s unfair,’ but that’s the reality.” —AP 

# Two Republican governors, two different calculations MADRID: Spain’s Socialist party said yesterday it is closer to forming a gov-ernment and averting fresh elections following its meeting with the far-left Podemos party. The Socialists, who won 90 seats in the 350-seat parlia-ment in inconclusive Dec. 20 elections, are struggling to win support to form a government and end the four-year stint in power of the conser vative Popular Party. They have already made a deal with the business-friendly Ciudadanos par-ty, which won 40 seats, but also need the backing of Podemos, which con-trols 69 seats. Socialist leader Pedro Sanchez said t h a t i n h i s t wo - h o u r t a l k w i t h Podemos leader Pablo Iglesias both agreed they want to avoid fresh elec-tions but also oust the Popular Party government of acting Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy. Rajoy’s party won the most seats - 123 - but failed to retain its 2011-2015 parliamentary majority and cannot find anyone to back its bid to stay in office. To date, Podemos has refused to back Sanchez unless he breaks with Ciudadanos, which it views as being too far right. But Sanchez said Iglesias had dropped that demand. S o far, Ciudadanos has rejected deals includ-ing Podemos. —AP 

# Spain closer to new govt than fresh elections 

# I N T E R N A T I O N A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

WASHINGTON: After her beloved son, a French soldier, was murdered by an Islamist gunman, Latifa Ibn Ziaten formed a group to prevent radicalization and promote dialogue. “No more Merahs,” she declared, after the troubled petty criminal turned jihadist Mohamed Merah cut down her boy. But since that day in 2012, extremist attacks in Europe have only grown in scale, and Ibn Ziaten admits she has much more work to do, refusing to “sur-render to fear.” On Tuesday, the US gov-ernment named her one of 14 “International Women of Courage” and invited her to explain her anti-radicaliza-tion message in American cities. “If we’re afraid, we’ll make no progress, and that’s what the terrorists want. If we cede to fear, it is they who gain ground,” she told AFP after the ceremony. 

The ghettos 

France was hit by two bloody jihadist attacks last year, and neighboring Belgium last week, but Ibn Ziaten has not abandoned her message of dialogue and compassion. “We need to open up the housing projects, the ghettos. We need to promote diversity in schools, equality of opportunity,” she explained. “We need to listen to those young people who, when they speak at all, say ‘the republic has forgotten us’,” she said. “That’s where the malaise lies.” On March 11, Ibn Ziaten’s son Imad had an appointment to view a motor scooter that Merah had advertised. The young extremist pulled out a gun, but Imad, a sergeant in France’s 1st Parachute Regiment, refused to lie on the ground. He was shot dead at point blank range. Imad was Merah’s first vic-tim, but not the last. Before he was killed by police 11 days later, the gunman would kill two more off-duty soldiers, then a rabbi and three young children in an attack on a Jewish school. Latifa Ibn Ziaten did not leave the matter there. She formed an association in memory of her son and began to tour prisons and schools to preach inter-faith respect. “I dissuaded three young men from leaving for Syria,” she said. “I work with young women who have converted. I work with a lot of parents who are hav-ing difficulty coping.” In one of her biggest operations, Ibn Ziaten took more than a dozen young people from a Paris suburb to Israel and the Palestinian territories as “peace ambassadors.” In another, she opened a center in Paris’ underprivileged immi-grant suburbs from where many radicals emerged to listen to the concerns of young people and their families. 

‘I forgave’ 

The goal is to identify early signs of violent extremism. “Today, some parents say: ‘We didn’t pay attention. We didn’t notice’,” she warned. “A child left alone, living in his own head, this is what hap-pens. That’s why I forgave Mohamed Merah,” she said. “When I looked at his journey and I saw that he grew up in a vacuum, with-out love, affection, that he knew pain, prison, drugs-that’s what made him, made him a monster. “I forgave him for what he was but not for what he had done.” Ibn Ziaten found the inspiration for her quest at the scene of Merah’s last stand, cut down in a hail of police bullets after the siege of his apartment. Heading into his neighbor-hood she asked herself: “Who was he? Why so much hate?” She fell upon a group of young people who were speak-ing about the slain jihadist as a martyr, as a hero. “It was as if they had killed my son a second time,” she said. “They were the cause of my suffering. But I felt I had to reach out my hand, to help them.” Already a recipient of France’s highest award, the Legion of Honor, the wronged mother said the US award would only encourage her in her mission. But, as she begins a tour of US cities with the 13 other activists, lawyers and reformers to win the award she will encounter some angry American attitudes. The US presidential campaign has only heightened the angry debate about Islam’s role in western society. “You can’t mix religion and citizenship,” she insisted. “When you’re a citizen, religion should remain personal.” —AFP 

# US award for French mother courage battling hate 

BANGUI: Central African Republic’s Prime Minister Faustin Archange Touadera looking on as he takes part in a march for peace in Bangui. —AFP PARIS: French President Francois Hollande said yesterday he was scrapping contested constitutional reforms proposed after the Paris attacks, in an embarrassing U-turn for his already beleaguered govern-ment. The reforms included a plan to strip convicted terrorists of their French nationality which led to howls of protests from the left flank of his Socialist party. Hollande also wanted to enshrine in the constitution a state of emergency adopted after the November 13 Paris attacks, in which suicide bombers and gunmen from the Islamic State group killed 130 people. But after four months of fierce debate, the lower house National Assembly and opposition-dominated Senate failed to agree on the text. “A compromise appears out of reach on the stripping of terror-ists’ nationality,” Hollande said. “I also note that a section of the opposition is hostile to any constitutional revi-sion. I deeply regret this attitude,” the president said in a brief televised statement. “I have decided to close the con-stitutional debate (but) I will not deviate from the commitments I have taken... to ensure the security of our country.” Hollande’s move to drop the reform comes as authorities in Europe face increasing criticism over laxism and security failings in the face of the spread of radical Islam. Links have emerged between the IS cell which attacked Paris and the suicide bombers who struck Brussels last week, killing 32 people. “The threat remains higher than ever,” said Hollande. “Islamist terrorism has declared war against us, against France, Europe, the entire world.” 

‘Sad spectacle’ 

The decision to abandon the constitutional reform comes as a massive blow to Hollande who is hoping to run for re-election in presidential polls next year. Hollande was France’s most unpop-ular leader in modern history when Paris suffered its first terror attack of 2015, when gunmen killed 17 people at the offices of Charlie Hebdo magazine and at a Jewish supermarket in January. His popularity briefly rose over his handling of the attacks, but not for long, and the constitutional debate as well as fierce opposition from the street to proposed labor reforms have further eroded his support. The leader of the far-right National Front (FN) Marine Le Pen said Hollande’s decision to scrap the constitutional reform was “a his-torical failure”. “Francois Hollande fails to have his own words taken seriously. He and his government are the only ones responsible for this failure,” Le Pen said. However Hollande’s Socialist party said the right-wing opposition was responsible for the “sad spectacle”. “We apologise to the French people. We were not able to con-vince the right in general ... to rein-force our law in the fight against terrorism,” said party leader Jean-Christophe Cambadelis. “This withdrawal does not call into question the fight against ter-rorism and the effectiveness of the state and its services. But it does not reinforce our legal defence against terrorists,” said Cambadelis. —AFP 

# Hollande scraps reforms to strip terrorists of nationality 

# Embarrassing U-turn for govt after howls of protests 

PARIS: French President Francois Hollande (2ndR) and Mauritius President Ameenah Gurib-Fakim (2ndL) during their meeting yesterday at the Elysee Presidential Palace in Paris. —AFP BANGUI, Central African Republic: The new president of the Central African Republic Faustin-Archange Touadera, dubbed the “People’s candidate” is a for-mer maths teacher now tasked with restor-ing stability to a dirt-poor country wracked by sectarian violence. The 58-year-old, who was sworn in yes-terday, was the last prime minister under Francois Bozize, whose overthrow in 2013 plunged the country into violent chaos. Touadera, a former rector of the University of Bangui, stood as an independent candi-date and took almost 20 percent of the votes in the first round of a contest among 30 contenders. The second round on February 14 pitted him against Anicet Georges Dologuele, a banker and former prime minister who was seen as the likely victor until Touadera surprisingly won the vote with a comfortable 62.7 percent. In the country’s west with regions that had been strongholds of loyalists to Bozize-a general who took power in a 2003 coup-Touadera was dubbed “the candidate of the people”, though Bozize’s party had urged people to vote for his rival. Observers noted that Bozize’s last prime minister (2008-2013) was highly regarded for ending decades of repeated delays in paying the wages of state employees, which plunged many deep into debt. “He’ll remain known as the one who paid the civil servants and he is much appreciated for that,” a diplomatic source in Bangui said. Dologuele, sometimes dubbed “Mr Clean” for his firm manage-ment of the government under President Ange-Felix Patasse in 1999-2001, levelled allegations of “organised fraud” and “intimi-dation by leaders of armed militias” after he lost the election. A key challenge facing Touadera is tack-ling the militias, undisciplined soldiers and other armed bands active in parts of the country. Aboout one million people in a population of 4.8 million fled villages and urban homes because of the atrocities per-petrated by mainly Muslim rebels who ousted Bozize and the ruthless vengeance of Christian vigilantes. 

‘A vast construction site’ 

As prime minister, Touadera was suc-cessful in bringing about talks between the authorities, the political opposition, rebel movements and civil society, which led to the signing of several peace agree-ments. However no pacts could prevent renewed violence, which saw about 12,000 troops and police deployed in the CAR by the United Nations, alongside French sol-diers and an African Union military force that was incorporated into the UN mission. Without questioning Touadera’s integri-ty, some wonder whether he can deal with unruly armed bands prone to attacking civilians and illegally exploiting the coun-try’s gold production. “Nothing entitles us to say today that he has the clout to stand up to these soldiers who sowed terror and hatred under Bozize to the point of plung-ing the country into crisis. The same men are surrounding him and making them-selves his personal guard,” Bangui University student Euloge Ngate Linzonzo said. While Touadera has yet to prove his mettle, many traditional supporters of Bozize’s KNK party threw their weight behind him and he is renowned for hard work. Even while he was prime minister, he went on taking classes at the university. As a pure mathematician, the new leader faces a complex equation in restor-ing the wrecked economy of a mostly rural country where the administration has van-ished in entire regions roamed by armed groups. —AFP 

# Touadera: The maths professor now taking on C Africa chaos 

MOSCOW: Four months after President Vladimir Putin accused Ankara of a “stab in the back”, Turkish business executives in Russia are getting used to saying hasty goodbyes. “Every week another friend calls to say he’s leaving,” one Turkish businessman based in Moscow told Reuters. “It’s become very dif-ficult for Turks to do business here.” The row erupted in November when Turkish mil-itary jets shot down a Russian warplane near the Syrian border, and is still weighing on what had been a close economic relationship. Putin has imposed sanctions on Turkey and trade between the two countries - which back opposing sides in the five-year Syrian conflict - has dived due to the combined effects of the measures and the collapse in global oil prices. In interviews with Reuters, expatriate members of the Turkish business community accused Russian authorities of creating obstacles for their firms that go beyond the measures set out in the official sanc-tions. This, along with economic crisis in Russia, was why increasing numbers of Turks are heading back home, they said. Before the plane was brought down, about 1,500 Turkish firms operated in Russia in businesses ranging from construction and tourism to imports of Turkish fruit, vegetables and textiles. While no numbers are available, one of the expatriates estimated that around 200 Turkish firms have since left. Many Turkish executives say they have experienced difficulties in getting Russian visas, and some have had to rearrange their affairs. Of the four businessmen interviewed in Moscow, two said they had registered their compa-nies in the names of Russian relatives or trusted Russian friends to try to avoid additional checks from law enforcement officers. All said it was diffi-cult to stay as their country was demonised in Russian media. The Komsomolskaya Pravda mass-market tabloid ran a report earlier this month head-lined “Turkey never was and never will be a friend of Russia”. The businessmen requested that their names and those of their firms not be published, citing fears that public comments could result in further pressure from Russian officials. Russia’s Interior Ministry did not respond to a Reuters request for comment. The Economy Ministry said the problems outlined by Turkish busi-nessmen did not fall within its remit. 

FIRST SHOCKWAVE 

Ikbal Durre, a Moscow-based commentator on Russian-Turkish affairs, expressed hope that the row would eventually blow over. “The situation is mov-ing towards stabilisation, just not particularly quick-ly. The first shockwave has passed,” he said. But the cost has been high. Turkish exports to Russia fell to around $108 million in January, according to the Turkish statistics service, down two-thirds on the previous year. Russian exports to Turkey, mainly of energy, were 30 percent lower at $1.3 billion, reflecting weak oil prices. The sanctions include a ban on Russian firms importing a range of Turkish foodstuffs as well as cancelling a visa-free regime and restricting Turkish firms from working in certain Russian business sec-tors including tourism. Turkish firms had stood to gain from an earlier set of Russian sanctions - restric-tions on Western food imports imposed in retalia-tion for US and European Union sanctions over the Ukraine crisis. Now Turkish businessmen say that over-zealous Russian officials are subjecting their goods to additional checks at customs and have conducted impromptu searches at their premises. Dagir Khasavov, managing partner of Moscow-based legal firm Drakonta which has Turkish clients, described the attitude of Russian law enforcement agencies towards Turkish citizens since the down-ing of the plane as “hostile”. 

FEELING LIKE A THIEF 

One Turkish businessman said he had registered his firm, which serves Russia’s metals industry, in the name of a Russian friend to try to avoid prob-lems. “I used to own 100 percent of my firm. Now I feel like a thief of my own goods,” he said. The first businessman cited in this article said shipments of Turkish textiles were sometimes held up for as much as 20 days at the Russian border, longer than previously. A Turkish diplomatic source said it was too early to say the two sides had found a way to resolve the dispute. “We hope that a compromise can be found, but we haven’t seen any big shifts so far,” the source said. Around 80,000 Turkish citizens live in Russia, although not all are involved in busi-ness. 

NO CERTAINTY 

Earlier in March a small group of Turkish busi-nessmen based in Moscow returned home to share their concerns with economic policymakers there, one of the businessmen said. They explained that if the exodus of their com-patriots from Russia continues, it will be difficult for Turkish business to regain its former standing in Russia. “Investment is a sensitive thing, and at the moment there’s no certainty,” one businessman said. The diplomatic spat has also cast a pall over Turkey’s tourism sector as Russians cut back on trips there. One potential bright spot is that a Turkish firm, Renaissance Construction, won a tender this month to build a terminal and tunnel at Moscow ’s Sheremetyevo Airport. However, Renaissance Construction submitted its bid via its Russian subsidiary and the airport operator had no choice on the nationality of its contractor - the only other bidder was another Turkish firm, Limak. A Russian employee at a Russian-Turkish business group in Moscow said all joint investment projects had been frozen in line with a Russian government order. “For the moment there is a lock-down,” he said. “Informal contacts continue, but it looks like projects will be frozen for this year at least.” —Reuters 

# Turkish companies struggle in Russia amid diplomatic row 

WASHINGTON: French recipient of the 2016 International Women of Courage Award, Latifa Ibn Ziaten (left), shakes hands with US Secretary of State John Kerry at the State Department in Washington. —AFP I N T E R N AT I O N A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

NEW DELHI: Flamboyant Indian businessman Vijay Mallya, who is accused of fleeing to London this month owing more than a billion dollars to Indian banks, told India’s top court yesterday that he would repay over 40 percent of his debts by September, one of his lawyers said. Mallya, who has failed to appear for questioning by authori-ties, made the offer to the Supreme Court and gave documents to the Indian lenders, said the lawyer, C.S. Vaidyanathan. The Press Trust of India news agency reported that the court gave the banks a week to respond to Mallya’s proposal. If they decline to accept it, then he will face prosecution. Mallya has failed to appear for questioning by India’s Enforcement Directorate, which has been investigating his massive debt liability since he left for London ear-lier this month. On March 9, the Supreme Court had sought Mallya’s response within two weeks to pleas by the State Bank of India and other lenders seeking cancellation of his passport and his presence in the court. The opposition Congress party has accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government of letting Mallya fly out of India on March 2 while he was being pursued by the banks over mas-sive debts amounting to 9 billion rupees ($1.3 billion). India’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, defended Mallya’s exit, saying the banks had not initiated the legal process to prevent him from leaving the country by the time he board-ed a flight out of India. Mallya was once hailed as India’s version of Richard Branson for his investments in a brewing and liquor company, an airline, a Formula One team and an Indian Premier League cricket club. His downfall was triggered by the failure of Kingfisher Airlines, which he launched in 2005. The Indian government in 2012 suspended the license of the airline after it failed to pay pilots and engineers for months. Mallya ceded manage-ment control of his flagship United Spirits Limited to global spirits company Diageo. Diageo’s agree-ment last month to pay $75 million in exchange for resigning as chairman of USL prompted the latest legal push by competing creditors, who say they should have the first claim to that money. Mallya is famous for his flashy lifestyle and lavish parties attended by fashion models, Bollywood movie stars and cricket players. — AP 

ISLAMABAD: Islamist protesters gathered in the Pakistani capital said yesterday they would not end their days-long sit-in and were “willing to die”, as armed security forces readied to clear the camp. The stand-off, which comes as Pakistan mourns more than 70 people killed in a Taleban suicide bombing targeting Christians celebrating Easter Sunday in Lahore, underscores deep religious divi-sions fuelling the Muslim country’s long battle with extremism. The protesters-who numbered some 25,000 at their peak-had gathered Sunday in support of Mumtaz Qadri, who was hanged in late February five years after he assassinated a liberal Punjab governor over his calls to reform the country’s blasphemy laws. They clashed with security forces in Islamabad before setting up camp outside key government buildings along the capi-tal’s main Constitution Avenue. The govern-ment gave the demonstrators an ultima-tum to leave late Tuesday, but it went unheeded, prompting authorities to issue a second call saying security forces would begin an operation to clear the area Wednesday morning. That deadline, too, passed. Protesters were calm yesterday as leaders said they were holding talks that stretched into the afternoon with authorities. “We won’t move from this place until and unless all 10 demands are accepted,” said protest leader Ashraf Asif Jalali. “Our workers are willing to die. If the government takes action they will not run away but face the bullets. They are not armed with guns but with clubs.” A police source said more than 7,000 security forces were poised to clear the sit-in, including the paramilitary Rangers and Frontier Corps with reinforcements from the Punjab police. Army troops were already standing guard at government buildings. Analyst Hasan Askari said authorities were hesitant to act due to “both indecisiveness and cau-tion”, saying the government “does not want to offend religious circles due to polit-ical considerations”. 

Qadri’s legacy 

Hailed as a hero by right-wing religious groups when he murdered Punjab gover-nor Salmaan Taseer, the demonstrators have demanded that Qadri be named a “martyr” and called for the execution of Asia Bibi, a Christian mother of five convict-ed of blasphemy. Pakistan has 17 people on death row for blasphemy including Bibi, but has not executed anyone yet. The pro-testers have also demanded the imposition of Sharia law. The government has so far rejected their demands. Qadri’s hanging, hailed as a “key moment” by analysts in Pakistan’s war on religious extremism, has become a flash-point for the deep divisions in the conser-vative Muslim country. His funeral earlier this month drew tens of thousands in an extremist show of force that alarmed mod-erate Muslims, while the call to hang Bibi along with the Easter attack in Lahore has underscored a growing sense of insecurity for Pakistan’s minorities. Yesterday the death toll from the Lahore bombing climbed again to 74. Dozens more remain in hospital, seven of them crit-ical, medical staff told AFP. “It’s a sense of great grief, sorrow and fear,” Shamoon Gill, spokesman for the All Pakistan Minorities Alliance, said. —AFP 

# Pakistan protesters refuse to end Islamabad sit-in 

ISLAMABAD: Pakistani supporters of convicted murderer Mumtaz Qadri gather dur-ing an anti-government protest in front of the parliament building in Islamabad yesterday. — AFP 

# Mallya makes offer to clear massive debts 

# Businessman to repay 40% of debts by September 

NEW DELHI: Indian business tycoon and owner of Kingfisher Airlines Vijay Mallya gets into his car outside the Parliament in New Delhi. Mallya told India’s top court yesterday he would repay over 40 percent of his debts by September, one of his lawyers said. — AP 

KANDAHAR, Afghanistan: A late night gunbat-tle with the Taleban killed at least 15 members of the Afghan security forces in the volatile south-ern Uruzgan province, an official said yesterday. The fighting took place late Tuesday during an operation to reopen an important highway in the province, said Mohammad Nabi Niazo, the Dihrawud district police chief. Taliban gunmen had blocked the highway between Dihrawud and the provincial capital, Tarin Kot, for almost four days, he said. Following the deadly firefight, Afghan forces have retaken control of the road, Niazo said. Eight members of the security forces were wounded dur-ing the operation. However, Taleban spokesman Qari Yousaf Ahmadi told The Associated Press that the battle for control of the highway is still going on. The insurgents often exaggerate their battle-field prowess. Niazo had no information of any insurgent casualties during the battle. The Taleban have in recent months stepped up their attacks in Uruzgan and neighboring provinces in the south, including the Taleban heartland of Helmand where much of the world’s illicit opium is produced. The crop, along with other contraband, funds the insur-gency, now in its fifteenth year. In Zabul province yesterday, two children were killed in an explosion behind the police headquarters in Qalat, the provin-cial capital, said Asadullah Kakar, a member of the provincial council. Another civilian was wounded in the blast, he said, adding that the target was unclear and the incident is under investigation. No group immediately claimed responsibility for the attack. Roadside bombs, planted by insurgents, are a major threat for both Afghan security forces and civilians across the country. In northern Balkh province, fighting yesterday killed two police officers and eight militants in Charhar Bolak district, on the western border of the province, said Gen. Abdul Razaq Qaderi, Balkh’s deputy police chief. “Around 100 Taleban insur-gents, including foreign fighters, attacked police check points,” Qaderi said. “The Taleban were pushed back after reinforcements arrived and right now the battle is going on in neighboring Jawzjan province.” The Taleban did not immediately com-ment on the Balkh report. 

US F-16 crashes 

A US F-16 warplane crashed Tuesday while tak-ing off from Bagram airfield in Afghanistan, an offi-cial said. The pilot ejected safely. Pentagon press secretary Peter Cook said the fighter from the 455th Air Expeditionary Wing crashed around 8:30 pm (1630 GMT). “Coalition forces are securing the crash site. The cause of this accident will be investigated,” Cook said. The Taleban said their fighters shot down the jet, claiming that all on board had been killed. The insurgent group is well known for exaggerating battlefield claims. — Agencies 

# Fight with Taleban kills 15 security troops I N T E R N AT I O N A L THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

MANILA: The Philippines may invest in its first-ever submarine fleet to help protect its territory in the disputed South China Sea, President Benigno Aquino said yesterday. The impoverished nation, which has never before operated submarines and until now relied largely on US surplus ships, has been ramping up defence spending in response to China’s military expansion in the region. China claims almost all of the South China Sea despite conflicting claims from the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Taiwan and Brunei. Aquino said the Philippines could lose control of its entire west coast should China succeed in enforcing its claims. “We’ve had to accelerate the mod-ernization of our armed forces for self-defence needs,” he told reporters. “We are a natural transit point into the Pacific and we are now studying whether or not we do need a submarine force,” he said. Beijing has reclaimed more than 2,900 acres (1,174 hectares) from the South China Sea in less than two years in an intensive island-build-ing campaign, and has deployed surface-to-air missiles on a disputed island there, according to Taipei and Washington. China’s military dwarfs that of the Philippines, despite Aquino’s efforts to raise defence spending to record levels and the acquisition of new warships and fighter jets. This year China’s proposed defense spending of 954 billion yuan ($147 billion) is about 59 times that of the Philippines. The Philippines has turned to its longtime ally the United States and former wartime foe Japan to bolster its military hardware. It has also asked a United Nations-backed arbitration panel to declare China’s sea claims illegal, with a ruling expected later this year. China boycotted the arbitra-tion hearings at The Hague. 

‘Be realistic’ 

However, buying submarines would not solve the disputes as the Philippines could not match China’s military might, said Benito Lim, a political science professor at the Ateneo de Manila University. “Aquino should be realistic. He needs force to counter force,” Lim told AFP, adding the Philippines should reopen dialogue with China. “A submarine will be a very expensive investment, and it may not address the problem in the most reasonable way,” he said. Aquino said the South China Sea dispute concerns every country since it could disrupt trade in ship-ping lanes through which about a third of the world’s oil passes. “The uncertainty breeds instability. Instability does not pro-mote prosperity,” he said. But while the Philippines is fortifying its defenses, Aquino-who will step down in June when his single six-year term ends-said that as an impover-ished nation the government would priori-tize “butter rather than guns”. “We have no illusions of ever trying to match, trying to engage anybody in an arms race or in a military build-up,” he said. In a separate development a defense department official confirmed that the Philippines had sealed an agreement to acquire two anti-submarine helicopters. The Anglo-Italian AW159 helicopters will be delivered in a little over a year, said defense undersecretary Fernando Manalo, adding they would be the nation’s first. He did not disclose the cost. — AFP 

# Philippines mulls submarines as China row simmers 

MANILA: Filipino boys play on floaters beside their creekside homes in Manila yesterday. The government continues to clear garbage and shanties along the creeks to avoid flooding in parts of the city. — AP 

NAYPYITAW, Myanmar: Myanmar’s slow transi-tion to democracy took a momentous step yes-terday as a trusted aide to ruling-party leader Aung San Suu Kyi took over as the country’s pres-ident, officially ending more than 50 years of the military’s control over government. In a day full of ceremony and symbolism, Htin Kyaw was sworn in along with his two vice presi-dents and 18 Cabinet ministers. Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace laureate and face of Myanmar’s pro-democracy movement, takes on a prominent role as the country’s new foreign minister and the head of three other ministries - education, energy and the presidential office. “The Union Parliament has elected me as president, which is a historic moment for this country,” Htin Kyaw, 70, said in a speech after being sworn in. He pledged to work toward national reconciliation, strive for peace with warring ethnic rebels and improving the lives of Myanmar’s 54 million people. While it was a historic day for the impover-ished Southeast Asian country, democracy remains incomplete. The military retains consid-erable power in the government and parliament, and the president himself will play second fiddle to Suu Kyi. She cannot be president because of a constitutional manipulation engineered by the military, and has repeatedly said she will run the country from behind the scenes. “I am very happy that we have a president who represents people,” said Mar Thin, a 50-year-old street cleaner. She said she used to own 70 acres (28 hectares) of land that she and her sister inherited from their father before the military kicked them out and appropriated the land for the defense ministry. “I hope that the new government can solve the land confiscation problem and let us own our land as farmers. All we want is enough food, and to live without fear. I hope that President Htin Kyaw will do that for us because Daw Suu prom-ised us a lot of things, and we love her too,” Mar Thin said, using an affectionate term for Suu Kyi. US President Barack Obama noted the continu-ing challenges for Myanmar, also known as Burma, in a statement in which he called Htin Kyaw’s election “a historic milestone in the coun-try’s transition to a democratically elected, civil-ian-led government.” 

Challenges 

“Burma will face significant challenges going forward, including achieving broad-based eco-nomic development, advancing national recon-ciliation, and promoting the rights and freedoms of all its people,” Obama said. “The United States looks forward to being a friend and partner of the new government and the people of Burma as they make progress toward building a more inclusive, peaceful, and prosperous future.” Htin Kyaw’s swearing-in was held in an aus-tere hall of parliament, with lawmakers dressed in traditional costume. A few hours later, outgo-ing President Thein Sein shook hands with his successor and handed him a letter and a golden sash, officially transferring power. It was Suu Kyi who led her National League for Democracy party to a landslide win in November elections, ushering in Myanmar’s first civilian government after 54 years of direct and indirect military rule. Suu Kyi endured decades of house arrest and harassment by military rulers without ever giving up on her nonviolent campaign to unseat them. The constitutional clause that denied her the presidency excludes anyone from the position who has a foreign spouse or child. Suu Kyi’s two sons are British, as was her late husband. The clause is widely seen as having been written by the military with Suu Kyi in mind. She has repeat-edly made it clear that she will run the govern-ment from behind the scenes, and in his speech yesterday, Htin Kyaw paid obeisance to Suu Kyi. “The new parliament and new government are formed in accord with the policies of the National League for Democracy led by Aung San Suu Kyi,” he said, and referred to the party’s goal to amend the constitution. “I have the obligation to work toward achieving a constitution that has demo-cratic norms and is suitable for the nation,” Htin Kyaw said. “I want to tell the new government, we must constantly try to fulfill the hope and will of the people of this country. I wish all citizens of this country a successful and peaceful life.” The consti-tution, drafted under the former junta, reserves 25 percent of the seats in parliament for military offi-cers, guaranteeing that no government can amend the constitution without the army’s approval. The military also heads the Home Ministry, the Border Affairs Ministry and the Defense Ministry, which gives it control over the corrections department, ensuring that the release of political prisoners is its decision to make. The military also ensured that one of Htin Kyaw’s two vice presidents is a former general, Myint Swe, a close ally of former junta leader Than Shwe. Myint Swe remains on a U.S. Treasury Department blacklist that bars American compa-nies from doing business with several tycoons and senior military figures connected with the former junta. As Htin Kyaw was sworn in, Suu Kyi sat in the front row watching. The same pledge was simul-taneously read by First Vice President Myint Swe and Second Vice President Henry Van Tio. After a 20-minute tea break, the 18 members of Htin Kyaw’s Cabinet, including Suu Kyi, took a joint oath of office read out by the speaker. Suu Kyi’s leadership of four ministries is unusual, and the lack of public criticism of her wide power is likely a sign of her continuing broad support. Despite her inability to become president, Suu Kyi’s entry into the government is a remarkable turn of fortune not only for her, but also for the country, which had been under iron-fisted mili-tary rule for decades beginning in 1962. The junta kept Myanmar in isolation and economic stagna-tion while refusing to listen to international coun-sel or homegrown demands for democracy. Suu Kyi came to prominence in 1988, when popular protests were building up. The junta crushed the protests, which had turned into anti-government riots, killing thousands of people and placing Suu Kyi under house arrest in 1989. The junta called elections in 1990, but refused to hand over power when Suu Kyi’s party won over-whelmingly. She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize a year later while under house arrest. The junta finally started loosening its grip on power in 2010, allowing elections that were won by a military-allied party after Suu Kyi’s party boy-cotted the polls as unfair. Thein Sein, a former general, was installed as president for a five-year term that started March 30, 2011, and ended yes-terday.— AP 

# Myanmar takes historic step with new president 

## Suu Kyi aide Kyaw takes over in transition to democracy 

New Myanmar President Htin Kyaw (centre left) and outgoing president Thein Sein (centre right) arrive for the handover ceremony at the presidential palace in Naypyidaw yesterday. — AFP 

NAYPDYIDAW: Myanmar Foreign Minister Aung San Suu Kyi (left) speaks with Vice President Henry Van Thio as they attend the handover ceremony from outgoing President Thein Sein to new Myanmar President Htin Kyaw at the presidential palace in Naypyidaw yesterday. — AFP BEIJING: A former deputy governor of China’s southern province of Hainan has been sen-tenced to 12 years in prison for corruption, the official Xinhua news agency said yesterday. Ji Wenlin was a one -time ally of Zhou Yongkang, the country ’s once -power ful domestic security boss, who was felled by President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption cam-paign. Xi has warned that rampant corruption threatens the survival of the ruling Communist Party and has waged a campaign against graft in the past three years that has swept up scores of senior officials in the party, the government, the military and state-owned companies. Investigators began looking into Ji’s activi-ties as early as 2014, Xinhua said, adding that he used his position to seek benefits, including investments for several companies, illegally obtaining 20.4 million yuan ($3.2 million) in assets and bribes. Ji’s official biography says he worked under Zhou when the latter was the party boss of the southwestern Sichuan province and the public security minister, among other posts. Zhou was jailed for life last June. Several key Zhou allies have been ensnared in the anti-graft cam-paign, including Jiang Jiemin, the former top regulator of state-owned assets. In another report, Xinhua said the trial of a former senior official who had vigorously backed Xi’s anti-graft campaign had begun. Wang Min, the one-time Communist Party boss of Jinan city, about 300 km (185 miles) south of the capital, Beijing, is suspected of procuring property and other favours for com-panies, and of taking bribes. — Reuters 

## Ally of disgraced China security chief gets 12 years in jail 

BANGKOK: Thai soldiers march while changing positions with fellow soldiers on a street in Bangkok. — AFP BANGKOK: Thailand’s junta chief has given the military broad new police-like powers to arrest and detain criminal suspects, in an unannounced move that rights groups criti-cized yesterday as a recipe for human rights violations. The decree Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha issued late Tuesday night comes amid a wider crackdown on civil liberties. Authorities the same day charged a woman with sedition for posting a Facebook photo of herself holding a red plastic bowl that was deemed too politically charged. The order, published in Thailand’s Royal Gazette under the title “Suppression of wrongdoings that could threaten Thai econ-omy and society,” gives soldiers in the army, navy and air force who are ranked sub-lieu-tenant and higher the power to summon, arrest and detain suspects in a wide range of crimes for up to seven days. The soldiers can act against people suspected in 27 dif-ferent types of crime, including extortion, human trafficking, robbery, fraud, forgery, defamation, debt collection, gambling, child protection, prostitution, loan sharking and tour guide services. It says the soldiers are appointed “crime prevention and sup-pression officers” and anyone ranked below sub-lieutenant can act as their assistants. Prayuth, the former army chief, invoked the powers under a law he enacted after leading a May 2014 coup that gives him as junta chief near-absolute authority without any accountability. The law, known as Article 44, allows Prayuth to take any meas-ures deemed necessary to promote public order and unity. Rights groups say Article 44 is essentially martial law in all but name. “There are people whose behavior and wrongdoings are considered crimes. They threaten the country’s economy and socie-ty,” the order says. Deputy Prime Minister Prawit Wongsuwan was quoted by The Bangkok Post as saying that soldiers would also act as interrogators and were taking on the new role because there were not enough police to tackle crime. Brad Adams, the Asia director of Human Rights Watch, called the move “a recipe for abuse, not greater peace and order.” “By erasing the line between the military and the police, Prime Minister Prayuth has fur-ther reinforced his dictatorship and guaran-teed more blatant human rights abuses, increased numbers of civilians being tried in military courts, and further impunity for sol-diers to do whatever they want whenever they want,” he said. Since toppling an elected government in the 2014 coup, Prayuth has restricted free-dom of speech, barred public protests and relentlessly pursued critics by detaining journalists, academics and other perceived dissidents at military bases for so-called “attitude adjustment.” The junta says criticism could destabilize the nation, which it says needs unity after almost a decade of sometimes violent polit-ical conflict. On Tuesday, a 57-year-old woman in northern Thailand was arrested and charged with sedition for posting a photo of herself holding a red plastic bowl inscribed with a New Year’s greeting from two former prime ministers, siblings Yingluck and Thaksin Shinawatra, according to Human Rights Watch. A military court in Chiang Mai released her on 100,000 baht ($2,800) bail pending a military trial. —AP 

# Thai junta chief gives military broad new police-like powers 

WASHINGTON: A senior US diplomat said yesterday he hopes China will accept an offer for a technical briefing on a new mis-sile defense system the United States wants to deploy in South Korea, a prospect Beijing sees as a threat to its national secu-rity. US Deputy Secretary of State Anthony Blinken said the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system was neces-sary for the United States to protect itself and regional allies from North Korean mis-sile attacks. “We realize China may not believe us and also proposed to go through the tech-nology and specifications with them ... and prepared to explain to what the technolo-gy does and what it doesn’t do and hope-fully they will take us up on that proposal,” Blinken told Washington’s Brookings Institution. Blinken spoke ahead of a visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping to Washington for a nuclear security summit that will have concerns about North Korea high on the agenda. The United States and South Korea agreed to begin talks on possible THAAD deployment last month after North Korea tested its fourth nuclear bomb on Jan. 6 and launched a long-range rocket on Feb 7. China backed tough new sanctions on North Korea following the tests but has voiced opposition to THAAD as its radar has a range that would extend far beyond the Korean peninsula and into China. Asked whether China would accept a US briefing on THAAD, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei would not directly reply, repeating China did not view the matter “as simply a technical one”. “The THAAD system exceeds the normal defensive needs of the Korean peninsula, threatens China’s reasonable national secu-rity interests and damages regional strate-gic stability,” Hong told a news briefing in Beijing yesterday. South Korea’s military said on Tuesday that North Korea test fired a short-range missile on its east coast in the latest of a string of launches that Pyongyang has characterized as a response to the sanctions. US President Barack Obama will meet South Korean President Park Geun-hye and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Thursday to discuss North Korea’s nuclear program, ahead of a bilateral meeting between Obama and Xi later that day. Blinken said THAAD deployment was a nec-essary step until Pyongyang’s behavior changed. “None of these steps are directed against China but we have also been very clear that as long as this persists ... we will have to take steps,” he said. Obama’s deputy national security adviser, Ben Rhodes, said China had stepped up pressure on North Korea, but this had to be shown to change Pyongyang’s calculus. “We’ve had good support from China, but we clearly believe that there’s more that will continue to have to be done, including on enforcing the sanctions we have put into place,” Rhodes told reporters. — Reuters 

# US: China will talk about S Korea missile defense N E W S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Continued from Page 1 

In another development, BP and Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC) have signed a framework agreement to explore possible joint opportunities for investment and cooperation in future oil, gas, trading and petro-chemicals ventures. Kuwait Petroleum Corporation CEO Nizar Mohammad Al-Adsani signed the agreement with visiting BP CEO Bob Dudley. The framework paves the way for both companies to jointly invest and cooperate in oil and gas projects in Kuwait and globally. “BP’s commitment to Kuwait dates back to our partici-pation in the discovery of the giant Burgan oil field in the 1930s and we are there today extending the life of the field,” Dudley said. “We look forward to working with KPC to help the people of Kuwait realize the full poten-tial of their nation’s oil and gas resources and exploring new opportunities globally.” In addition to enhancing oil and gas recovery from Kuwait’s existing resource base, the agreement also includes the intention to study opportunities for joint investment in future oil and gas exploration both inside Kuwait and globally. Other elements of the agreement cover possible future oil and gas trading deals including LNG trading and related ventures. Opportunities for cooperation and investment in midstream and petro-chemical projects globally will also be considered under the agreement, including potentially deploying BP’s pro-prietary paraxylene technology as part of KPC’s petro-chemicals projects. — Agencies 

# Kuwait and Korean firms seal $2.9 billion... 

Continued from Page 1 

Shaye said the bill is the government viewpoint and the committee will change the rates to keep consumption of up to 6,000 kilowatts unchanged, adding that the idea of the bill should be to rationalize consumption and not to collect funds. He said MPs will present a substitute proposal that includes major cuts to government proposed rates. Shaye expected the committee to complete studying the govern-ment bill on Sunday and is likely to hold a meeting on next Wednesday to approve the government-sponsored eco-nomic reforms. It was not clear if the committee’s planned cuts would also include apartments. In the Assembly session yesterday, the Assembly debated in a secret session two investigation reports about Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA), the first about its offices in London and elsewhere and the second about an Audit Bureau report on KIA controversial sale of real estate abroad. Following the debate, Speaker Marzouk Al-Ghanem said the Assembly decided to refer the two reports to the government by a slim majority of 21 out of 41 members present. The recommendations attached to the two reports call to refer top officials at KIA to the Public Prosecution for a possible legal action. Finance Minister Anas Al-Saleh, who demanded the two reports be discussed in a closed session, said he saw no aggression on public funds in the two reports. He added the government will study the report, and if it finds any violation, it will form a neutral probe com-mittee. The probe in KIA offices abroad was launched after accusations of violations and mismanagement. The Assembly yesterday refused to approve amend-ments to the key tender law and instead returned the report to the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee to review the law once again to include all required amendments. MPs particularly objected to a provision in the law giving the right to listed contracting firms to bid in contracts worth above KD 20 million. They insisted that all companies, including foreign firms, should be allowed to bid. The com-mittee was given two months to study the amendments. 

# Assembly panel to discuss power rates next... 

Continued from Page 1 

“The video footage is of concern,” she said, adding, with regard to the Belgian case, that the United States does not “have any information that a broader plot exists.” But groups like the Islamic State have long shown their interest in obtaining nuclear material. “We’ve seen over the years that different terrorist organizations have ambitions related to acquiring nuclear materials,” said Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes. “We’ve seen that in their public statements, we’ve seen that in some cases in their monitoring of nuclear facilities,” he added. “That’s why the summit process is so important, because different countries have different levels of security at their facilities or in terms of how they are handling nuclear materials.” 

Dirty bomb 

Obama personally launched the first head of govern-ment-level nuclear security summit in Washington in 2010, after describing nuclear terrorism as the “most immediate and extreme threat to global security.” Subsequent meetings in South Korea and the Netherlands have focused on securing stockpiles, reducing highly enriched uranium and separated pluto-nium, smuggling detection and cybersecurity. Few believe IS could develop an atomic bomb, but many fear it could acquire uranium or plutonium and construct a “dirty bomb.” Such a device would not trig-ger a nuclear explosion but would scatter radioactive material-with potentially devastating physiological, medical and economic effects. Nuclear material can be found in small quantities at universities, hospitals and other facilities the world over, often not well secured. Since the mid-1990s, almost 2,800 incidents of illicit trafficking, “unauthorized possession” or loss of nuclear materials have been recorded in an International Atomic Energy Agency database. A US government audit late last year found that Obama’s goal of improv-ing the physical protection of more than 43 sensitive buildings and making 34 foreign reactors more “prolifer-ation-resistant” had fallen short. The International Panel on Fissile Materials, an independent group of arms-con-trol experts, estimated that the global stockpile of high-ly enriched uranium stood at around 1370 tonnes at the end of 2014. Most was held in Russia. 

Lame duck? 

More than fifty heads of state have been invited to attend the summit, but the absence of leaders from Russia, North Korea, Iran and Belarus virtually ensures gaps in the united front. Rhodes said Russia’s decision not to attend at the highest level was a missed opportu-nity for Moscow, which itself faces significant threats of its own. Obama leaves office in less than a year, raising questions about whether the initiative will continue without his personal involvement. “World leaders face a stark choice at the final nuclear security summit later this month: Will they commit to continuous improve-ment, or will nuclear security efforts stall and potentially decline?” said experts at the respected Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University. “Their answer will shape the chances that terrorist groups, including the Islamic State, could get their hands on the materials they need to build a crude nuclear bomb.” White House spokesman Josh Earnest said the administration hopes Obama’s successor will take up the mantle. “I certainly hope that the incoming president would understand that safeguarding loose nuclear materials around the globe is a top national security priority of the United States,” he said. — AFP 

# Islamic State threat raises stakes for US... 

ZIGUINCHOR: When Sadio Gassama decided to go into medicine, he started by giving free check-ups at his mosque in Senegal’s poor southern region of Casamance. Now, the 25-year-old medical student says he is treating Islamic State fighters in Libya. Until recently, many thought the peaceful, tolerant Sufi brotherhoods in countries such as Senegal could prevent more conserva-tive and radical versions of Islam from taking hold in poorer parts of West Africa, like Mali and Niger. But security experts say Gassama’s story shows how the penetration of hardline Islamic Salafism, coupled with Gulf money and militant propaganda, is aiding recruitment, even from stable and democratic Senegal. In particular, in their appeals to Africans, Islamic State pro-pagandists are calling on doctors to make “hijrah”, or pil-grimage, to their African stronghold of Sirte in Libya. Pictures posted on Gassama’s Facebook page before he joined Islamic State show him hugging his young niece. Now, he is brandishing a machine gun, his name stitched on to his military uniform. Friends and family say Gassama’s decision to join thousands of militants in Libya in December during the fifth year of his medical studies was sudden and unex-pected. His shocked father described him as a ‘humanist’ motivated by a desire to help others. A former professor called him a “brilliant student, incapable of hurting any-one”. But an interview with Gassama showed a darker side. Speaking from Sirte, he said he had been planning an attack in Dakar. “Senegal is lucky. I was planning to commit an attack there in the name of the Islamic State before one of their contacts helped me go to Libya,” he said last month via the internet. He could not be reached subsequently. Friends said he took trucks to Libya via Mali and Niger, accompanied by another Senegalese man and paying his way with his student grant. “I left Senegal a year after embracing the ideology of the Islamic State,” Gassama said. “Joining ISIS in Libya was relatively easy and accessi-ble. I wanted to contribute to the establishment of a caliphate in Libya.” Asked what he was doing there, he replied: “I am a jihadist doctor.” Islamic State propaganda and security sources confirm fighters from countries including Chad, Ghana, Senegal and Nigeria are already in Libya, where the group is consolidating its presence. The number of sub-Saharan Africans is not known but they are thought to represent a minority of the 3,000-6,000 Islamic State fighters there, with most from North Africa and the Middle East. However, there are concerns more will travel there along the same desert routes migrants use to reach Europe, as Gassama did. “Libya is closer and easier to reach for some African fighters than Syria, and the political disarray there opens space for fighters to enter and operate,” said Andrew Lebovich, a visiting fellow with the European Council on Foreign Relations who focuses on North Africa and the Sahel. 

Gulf donations 

Across Africa’s arid Sahel region, Western diplomats note an increase in conservatism, alongside tens of mil-lions of dollars a year in charity donations from Gulf states. In Niger, some religious leaders are calling for a “re-Islamisation” against the secularism imposed by for-mer colonial power France. This is already underway in the capital, Niamey, where some women wear the full veil and pay higher fares to avoid sharing taxis with men. Gulf-financed bodies deny links to radical groups and say their money is for charity, but local sources say it can go astray. “Contributions are intended for the poor and to build mosques but are often diverted in the wrong direc-tion,” said Bakary Sambe, director of the Timbuktu Institute and a coordinator for the Observatory on Religious Radicalism and Conflicts in Africa. This foreign money and the migration of Senegal’s youth to the cities has undermined the country’s Mouride brotherhood, an old-established Islamic Sufi order which preaches tolerance. In Gassama’s home town of Ziguinchor, the mosque he attended in the HLM neigh-borhood is funded by a Kuwaiti NGO called Africa Muslims Agency. AMA director Almany Badji said it was one of more than 100 mosques it has financed in Casamance. The mosque Gassama attended at Dakar’s Cheikh Anta Diop University also has Salafist leanings, Sambe said. Gassama did not say who helped him join Islamic State more than a year ago, referring only to ‘guidance’ in Senegal. “Through meetings with local scholars it became clear that jihad was my Muslim duty,” he said. His friends and family said the only change they noticed before he left was to a more Salafist dress code. “His pants were shorter and did not reach all the way to the floor,” said his father, Boucar Gassama, a retired civil servant, surrounded by Gassama’s siblings in the shady courtyard of his house. “But I could not know he had been radicalized.” 

Calls for reform 

There is growing concern in West Africa about recruit-ment into Islamic State and other militant groups after attacks in Mali, Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast. Modou Faye, Gassama’s professor, says students need more guidance in reading the Koran, which is often rote-learnt at reli-gious schools similar to one Gassama attended. Mauritania has closed several Quranic schools for security reasons, officials said. In Mali, where an Islamist insur-gency is intensifying, some are calling for checks on mosques and NGOs. “We must take stock of the potential risks of collusion between civil society and terrorists, better monitor places where radicalization occurs, keep tabs on all sus-pect individuals like radical preachers and trace their funds,” former Prime Minister Moussa Mara said. But oth-ers say labeling peaceful Islamic groups as jihadists is risky. Depriving poor communities of services such as orphanages and free study trips to Saudi Arabia could provoke a backlash. “A politician who attempts to regu-late this risks losing his electorate,” said Moulaye Hassane, researcher at the Institute of Research and Human Sciences and Niger’s former ambassador to Saudi Arabia. “I think they are afraid.” — Reuters 

# From Senegal to Libya: An African student joins IS 

## Politicians demand checks on aid money from Gulf 

KAIJADO: A ranger of Kenya Wildflife Service (KWS) shoots a lion after the feline ran away from the Amboseli National Park in Kaijado yesterday. — AFP A N A L Y S I S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

By Alastair Macdonald When Brussels police caught Salah Abdeslam, suspected sole sur-vivor of November ’s suicide assault on Paris, they knew they were in a race against time to stop a new Islamic State attack. It was the afternoon of Friday, March 18, and one of Prime Minister Charles Michel’s cabinet ministers tweeted “We got him!” after Europe’s most wanted man was seized at a house in the capital’s Molenbeek neighborhood. But Michel was worried, according to a government official who was present at the time. The premier raced to his crisis command centre from a European summit nearby. Security forces had orders to increase vigilance but lacked intelligence to justify a citywide lockdown such as Michel imposed after the Paris attacks. “Our first thought was that ... this will set off a ferocious response,” the aide told Reuters, speaking on condition that he not be named. Those fears were well found-ed. The suicide bombings of Brussels air-port and a metro train that killed 28 bystanders laid bare the inability of the Belgian authorities to counter Islamic State militants, no matter how high the level of alert. Missed connections, leads not fol-lowed and suspects let slip have exposed deficiencies in security services. They have also shown how Europe’s Syrian-trained Islamist cells can react with deadly speed to events such as Abdeslam’s arrest. “It was a race against time,” said Vincent Gilles, head of Belgium’s main police trade union SLFP. But with the intelligence service under-staffed - by some estimates by about half the level for other rich European states - it was a race the authorities could not win. 

Year on alert 

Belgium is, for its size, the biggest European supplier of foreign fighters in Syria. Islamic State has appealed to an alienated generation descended from mostly Moroccan immigrants of the 1960s. Belgian authorities stepped up their searches for activists after January 2015. That month, days after the bloodshed at Paris magazine Charlie Hebdo, Belgian police foiled a plot in the town of Verviers that revealed an Islamic State campaign to send some of the 300 or more young Belgians who have fought in Syria back to Europe to strike on their native soil. In Ver viers, police killed two men who returned from Syria with Abdelhamid Abaaoud. Killed in a shootout in Paris days after the attacks there, he emerged as “the spider in the web”, in the words of a Belgian minister, of an extensive network. Yet though Belgian authorities questioned numerous contacts of Abaaoud, notably from his old Molenbeek neighborhood, the trail went cold. Among those interro-gated and released were Salah Abdeslam and his brother Brahim. In the first half of 2015, Belgian courts convicted dozens of radical preachers and their followers for recruiting for Syria. But new cells were forming elsewhere. Last summer, the Abdeslams, petty drug dealers who ran a Molenbeek bar, put together what Salah has since told interrogators was a logistical plan to prepare for the attacks on Paris. Salah drove across Europe more than once and appears to have transported quanti-ties of guns, explosives and people. It was with shock, after 130 people died on a Friday evening in the French capital and trails led back to Brussels, that Michel’s government realized it had an urgent problem. He locked down transport and public spaces for days as he was near “100 percent certain” of a threat. At the centre of those fears was Salah Abdeslam, whose brother had blown himself up at a Paris cafe. Abdeslam had slipped back across the Belgian border ahead of a French drag-net. The morning after Paris, he went to ground in Brussels. 

New resources, too late 

Michel pledged cash and legal reforms to beef up a security system that officials accepted was understaffed. An intelligence service of about 700 staff for a country of 11 million struggled to cope, as did a police force that is about 20 percent below full strength. Police and security services have also struggled with a lack of commu-nication and coordination across a multi-plicity of departments that cross Belgium’s Dutch-French language divide. Two of Tuesday’s suicide bombers -Najim Laachraoui and Khalid El Bakraoui -were on counter-terrorism watchlists. The former was a suspected bombmaker for the Paris attacks; the latter rented a safe house for the Paris cell and the flat where police picked up Abdeslam’s trail. Bakraoui’s brother Brahim, was a convict-ed armed robber in breach of his parole who was expelled last July from Turkey. Ankara warned Belgium he had been caught trying to reach Syria. In December, police in the town of Mechelen had a tip about a family sheltering Abdeslam. The tip included the address where he was eventually apprehended. But officials acknowledge the tip was never passed on to Brussels colleagues. The revelation has led to criticism -strongly denied - that Mechelen’s town hall might prefer to suppress a tip to avoid irritating local Muslims, a key elec-toral constituency. In their four-month search for Abdeslam, police pulled in dozens of people, holding 10 by last month. Dozens of homes were raided to no avail. Police reject suggestions it was chance that led them to a house in the Brussels borough of Forest on March 15. Four officers were wounded in a shootout before one gunman was killed. The apart-ment, rented under a false name by Khalid El Bakraoui, the Brussels metro bomber, yielded a fingerprint belonging to Salah Abdeslam. Police homed in on a cellphone he was using, leading to his capture three days later. 

Three days of fear 

Over the three and half days following that arrest, the government considered locking down Brussels but decided against it because they had no clear clues that an attack was in the offing, the government official said. When the bombers struck at the morning rush hour on Tuesday, the authorities tried to moved fast. A taxi driv-er who took the bombers to the airport led police to the apartment where he had picked them up. That produced a evidence including chemicals and another bomb. One report said the bombers left it behind after a confused taxi dispatcher sent a smaller cab than they ordered. It also pro-duced a witness who, investigators say, has since identified a third man seen on airport cameras with the two bombers. Police have been rolling up contacts and acquaintances of those identified, including another suspected plotter in Paris. Michel’s government is also cracking down on fake documents which seem to have allowed the likes of Laachraoui and Abaaoud, to slip across Europe from Syria. The government has sought new legal powers over, and in cooperation with, Internet and telecoms firms to track sus-pects. But officials caution that it could take years to fill the gaps in the security structures of a country that is host to the European Union and NATO. So it was with a note of resignation that Belgium’s leaders reacted to the worst bloodshed in their countr y since World War Two: Michel declared simply: “What we feared, has hap-pened.” —Reuters 

THE LEADING INDEPENDENT DAILY IN THE ARABIAN GULF ESTABLISHED 1961 

Founder and Publisher 

YOUSUF S. AL-ALYAN 

Editor-in-Chief 

ABD AL-RAHMAN AL-ALYAN 

EDITORIAL : 24833199-24833358-24833432 ADVERTISING : 24835616/7 FAX : 24835620/1 CIRCULATION : 24833199 Extn. 163 ACCOUNTS : 24835619 COMMERCIAL : 24835618 P.O.Box 1301 Safat,13014 Kuwait. E MAIL :info@kuwaittimes.net Website: www.kuwaittimes.net 

All articles appearing on these pages are the personal opinion of the writers. Kuwait Times takes no responsibility for views expressed therein. Kuwait Times invites read-ers to voice their opinions. Please send submissions via email to: opin-ion@kuwaittimes.net or via snail mail to PO Box 1301 Safat, Kuwait. The editor reserves the right to edit any submission as necessary. 

# When he became Myanmar’s leader five years ago Thein Sein was dismissed as a junta stooge-but as he prepares to hand power to Aung San Suu Kyi’s government, the taciturn ex-general can also claim credit for steering a peaceful political transition that has stunned the world. President Thein Sein, who spent almost half a century climbing the mili-tary’s ranks, will make way on Wednesday for Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy and her proxy president Htin Kyaw. They will form the Southeast Asian nation’s first elected civilian government in generations, marking an extraordinary new chapter for a society suffocated for decades by military rule. Bespectacled, balding and unobtrusive, Thein Sein’s quasi-civilian regime presided over sweeping reforms that pushed further than many in the country of 51 million people had dared to dream possible. But the 70-year-old’s record is far from pristine in a nation where the military maintains significant political and economic power and grievances run deep. Historic elections last year were the first chance in decades for Myanmar’s long-suffering population to choose their own rulers-and Suu Kyi’s party won in a landslide. Yet Myanmar’s people remain cautious. “People hoped for more changes, but they (the army) just changed their uniforms,” said Yi Yi, a 59-year-old legal advocate in Yangon. 

Unlikely reformer 

Seen as absolutely loyal to junta senior general Than Shwe, little dramatic change was expected from Thein Sein when he was named president in March 2011. Independent analyst Richard Horsey said he was “a little bit grey” to begin with and many just assumed he was a yes man for the former strongman. “I think people were very surprised when that wasn’t necessarily the case,” he said. As reformers and hardliners tussled for position in his government, senior figures approached Thein Sein and urged real change, convincing him “to come off the fence,” Horsey added. Within months Thein Sein broke with the old mili-tary approach, holding his first meeting with Suu Kyi and abruptly suspending a multi-billion dollar Chinese-backed dam in northern Kachin state-a rare push back against the influential neighbor. His government freed hundreds of political prisoners, lifted stifling censor-ship, and launched a dialogue with multiple armed eth-nic groups who have spent years fighting for greater autonomy. Reforms were rewarded with the lifting of most Western sanctions, sparking a flood of foreign invest-ment to the poor nation. The secretive men in green have never publicly revealed the exact motivation for the dramatic changes. But observers say the junta rec-ognized the country’s beleaguered position compared to its neighbors, its over-reliance on China and the mili-tary’s precipitous fall in the estimations of Myanmar’s people after several mass uprisings. 

Old habits 

A son of farmers, born in a small village in the south-ern Irrawaddy Delta, Thein Sein attended a prestigious military academy and eventually climbed to the top echelons of the junta. Thein Sein never fully stepped outside the military that moulded him. He emerged as a crucial force behind Myanmar’s roadmap for “disciplined democracy” and a constitution that gifts the army a quarter of parliament’s seats and control over three key security ministries. The charter also blocks Suu Kyi from the presidency because her sons are British. There have been other pointers that Thein Sein’s administration was unwilling to abandon the repressive, acquisitive instincts of the junta years. Scores of protesters have been arrested under his watch, while those in power have been accused of overseeing a rise in Buddhist nationalism. Many close to the military have been the first in line to rake in benefits from reforms. In its last days in power the outgoing government has been accused of rushing through opaque business deals. His legacy may be imperfect, but Thein Sein will be remembered for a cen-tral role in the country’s gradual emergence from its dark dictatorial past. The onus is now on Suu Kyi and her government, which has inherited big issues-including civil wars, religious tensions and eviscerated public services-as well as soaring expectations of change. “It’s not just impatience among the people, I think the coun-try needs results pretty fast otherwise things could unravel,” Khin Zaw Win, a political analyst said. —AFP 

Issues 

# Thein Sein: quiet junta insider who opened Myanmar 

By Phyo Hein Kyaw, Kelly Macnamara 

# The race against time that Belgium lost 

By Antonio Rodriguez The spectre of high debt is raising its head again in Africa, analysts say, as sub-Saharan nations that borrowed cheaply on global markets are now squeezed by a com-modities crash. The return of debt troubles in Africa has caught some by surprise, they say, 20 years after a global cam-paign was mounted to offer debt relief to the world’s most impoverished nations. “It is clearly a source of concern. People did not see it coming,” said Julien Marcilly, chief economist at French group Coface, which offers worldwide insurance to protect firms from the risk of clients defaulting. An IMF-World Bank program launched in 1996 has to date approved $76 bil-lion (68 billion euros) in external debt relief for 36 of the world’s heavily indebted poor nations, of which 30 are in Africa. For some of those countries, however, debt levels are rising again to worrying levels. Relieved of their debt burdens by the international program, countries enjoyed the budget-ary freedom to boost economic growth, which was further propelled by soaring commodity prices. “Over the past few years, sub-Saharan African sovereigns have enjoyed unusually favorable financing conditions,” Standard & Poor’s said in a recent report. Many of them issued bonds for the first time to raise money on financial markets as borrowing costs slumped to record lows in mid-2014, the New York-based credit rating agency said. “The tide has turned,” it warned, however, predicting that most of these countries would have to spend more and more over the next three years to service their debt. Many of those sub-Saharan countries will face a difficult choice between cut-ting spending or being obliged to pay higher debt and inter-est payments in the future, Standard & Poor’s said. And this time, a large part of the debt is held by private creditors, rather than institutions such as the IMF or World Bank. “The depreciation of local currencies, often related to the recent commodity price decline, has inflated foreign currency debt for several sub-Saharan African sovereigns,” Standard & Poor’s added. 

‘Debt trap’ 

A study by the French Treasury said the IMF-World Bank initiative had slashed the average external public debt of the 30 African countries from the equivalent of 119 percent of annual economic output to just 33 percent between 2000 and 2014. Yet some are now sliding deeper into debt at a “very sustained pace”, the Treasury said. Of the 30 African countries that had previously secured international debt relief, 13 have pushed up their debt levels by the equivalent of 10 percent-age points of annual gross domestic product (GDP) in the past five years, it said. The Republic of Congo led the list, with its external debt rising by 25 percentage points as a proportion of annual GDP, followed by Niger, up 23 percentage points, and Malawi, up 19 percentage points. There is no short-term risk of a new debt crisis for the great majority of African coun-tries, the French Treasury said. But “a small number of them have seen a period of very sustained debt growth”, it said, warning that they could soon return close to the levels of external debt that reigned before the global debt relief initiative. Seven countries faced the risk of elevated debt levels at the end of 2015, the Treasury said: Burundi; Cameroon; Central African Republic; Chad; Ghana; Mauritania; and Sao Tome and Principe. “We must ensure we do not fall again into the debt trap,” African Development Bank president Akinwumi Adesina warned at a conference of business leaders in Abidjan this month. Despite a recent rise in debt levels, African countries remain less indebted than many advanced economies. “The total public debt of Africa amounted to 38 percent of conti-nental GDP in 2014 compared with 111 percent for OECD nations,” said Carlos Lopes, executive secretary of the UN Economic Commission for Africa. “Debt levels will deteriorate in countries with a weak level of budgetary discipline and those that have borrowed excessively,” Lopes said. He urged countries to strengthen debt management capacity and to report on how they are using their borrowed funds. —AFP 

# Debt demon looms again over Africa 

Picture shows a makeshift memorial for the victims of last week’s suicide bombing. A total of 32 people were killed in Belgium’s worst-ever attacks. —AFP BERLIN: Despite his goal-scoring performance in Germany’s thumping win over Italy, Mario Goetze was left fuming by stinging criticism over his fitness and form from an ex-international on live television. The 23-year-old Goetze scored Germany’s second goal against Italy in Munich on Tuesday to brush off a frustrating injury-riddled season on the bench at Bayern Munich, where he has only made four league starts under Pep Guardiola this season. His goal in Munich capped an impressive all-round display in the 4-1 win as die Mannschaft bounced back from throwing away a two-goal lead in Saturday’s 3-2 defeat to England. But Goetze was left fuming when German TV pundit Mehmet Scholl said Goetze needs “a helping hand to nudge him along” and “must work much, much harder” on his fitness after five months out with a groin strain. “He said that? How did he come to that conclu-sion? Does he come to (Bayern’s) training? Or did he just say that?” fumed Goetze. “If he sees it that way, I will take it to heart. I believe that I train enough.” Scholl’s comments that Goetze needs a ‘helping hand’ is a thinly-veiled reference to reports that Liverpool are set to swoop to reunite the disgrun-tled — AFP 

# S P O R T S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

SYDNEY: Left-arm fast bowler Mitchell Starc was included yesterday in Australia’s one-day international tri-series squad to face the West Indies and South Africa in the Caribbean in June, while bit-hitting Travis Head also earned a call-up. Starc, 26, has been out of action since fracturing his foot in last November’s historic day-night Test in Adelaide against New Zealand and undergoing ankle surgery. But he has now regained fitness and leads an impressive pace attack which also features Josh Hazlewood, Nathan Coulter-Nile and John Hastings. “Mitchell has progressed very well in his rehab and the medical staff are confident he will be fit to play in this series,” chairman of selectors Rod Marsh said. “It is extreme-ly pleasing to have a bowler of his calibre back in the side.” Test off-spinner Nathan Lyon, overlooked for the World T20, has been given another chance to shine in the limited-overs format after being included alongside leg-spinner Adam Zampa.— AFP 

## Australia’s Starc back for upcoming series 

VALENCIA: Gary Neville has been sacked as coach of Valencia after just over four months in charge, the struggling Spanish club confirmed yesterday. “Valencia Football Club have today parted company with Gary Neville as Head Coach,” Valencia said in a statement published in English on their website. “After careful consideration, the Club have decided to make a change with the best interests of the Valencia CF moving forward this season. We thank Gary for his work at Valencia and wish him the best in the future.” Pako Ayestaran, previously an assistant coach at the Mestalla, has been appointed as Neville’s replacement until the end of the season, Valencia added. “I would like to thank Valencia Football Club, the fans, staff and the players,” Neville said in a statement. “I would have liked to have continued the work I started but understand that we are in a results business and in the 28 games (W10, D7, L11) they have not been to my standards or to those which are required by this club.” Neville, who had been combining the job with his role as part of the England coaching team, leaves with Valencia lan-guishing in 14th place in La Liga, six points clear of the rele-gation zone with eight games remaining.—AFP 

## Gary Neville sacked as Valencia coach Goetze fuming over pundit’s criticism 

By Abdellatif Sharaa KUWAIT: Alsalam mentally challenged basketball team was crowned champions after beating Al-Ittihad 23-13 in the final match Tuesday evening during the second local handicapped champi-onship. Al-Taawon finished in third place after defeating Shuhada 23-19. Abdallah Al-Haddan won first place in the epee fencing competition, followed by Faisal Al-Kandary in second and Atel Al-Dousaryy in third. Meanwhile in the junior category, Fahad Al-Bastaki came first, defeating Suleiman Al-Tamimi and Sanad Al-Bouloushi. Al-Haddad continued his winning streak by taking first place in the flores fencing while Mousa Al-Ajmi was second and Faisal Al-Kandari third. Meanwhile the junior category for the same weapon category saw Suleiman Al-Tamimi crowned champion while Sanad Al-Beloushi and Abdallh Al-Duraie came in second and third respectively. The bocce games saw Mohammad Al-Mutairi crowned champion in the BC1 catego-ry, defeating Shareefa Muhareb while Fahad Al-Babtain ended in third place while the BC2 cate-gory was won by Emad Al-Najdi with Shireen Al-Shaheen second and Hani Hussein third. Ayesha Al-Hashash won the BC3 category followed by Athari Al-Muthairi. In the NC4 Amani Isamil was first, Mashael Al-Ajmi second and Tahani Ismail third. Kuwait Handicapped Sports Club Honorary President Al-Sheikha Sheikha Al-Abdallah Al-Sabah lauded the high technical level of the sec-ond championship, and the fantastic skills of ath-letes in the three competitions. She said that these tournaments have a role in improving the players’ levels in all departments. She called upon fans to go to the club and encourage athletes in the upcoming tournaments. Meanwhile, Chairman of the Board of KHSC Shafi Al-Hajiri said the tournament is the best way to prepare athletes for foreign champi-onships the club plans to attend. Al-Hajiri appre-ciated the role of Information Minister, State Minister for Youth Affairs Salman Sabah Al-Salem Al-Humoud Al-Sabah and PSA Director Genreal Sheikh Ahmad Al-Mansour for their support. 

# Alsalam crowned local handicapped champions S P O R T S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

By Abdellatif Sharaa KUWAIT: Kuwait’s double trap team won the gold medal, while Hamad Al-Afasi won the individual double trap competition during the 12th Arab Shooting Championship being held in Cairo. Egypt’s minister of youth and sports Eng Khalid Abdelaziz opened the championship earlier in the week. President of the Arab and Kuwait Shooting Federations Eng Duaij Khalaf Al-Otaibi, President of Egypt Olympic Committee Hisham Hatab, President of the African and Egypt Shooting Federations Maj General Hazimi Hosni and other guests attended the ceremo-ny, along with shooters and ambassa-dors of the participating countries. Maj Gen Hazim Hosni said 422 shooters from 17 Arab countries are participat-ing in the championship that will con-tinue until April 4th. He wished them great success and a pleasant stay in Egypt. Meanwhile, Egypt’s Minister of Youth and Sports lauded the Arab shooting and its President Eng Duaij, Khalaf Al-Otaibi, as well as the signifi-cant development it made across the Arab world. He also lauded the sup-porting role of Kuwait in Arab shooting. He also thanked the Arab Shooting Federation and Egypt’s Federation for Organizing the championship in Egypt. 

# Kuwait trap team wins gold at Arab Shooting Championship 

MONTREAL: Goaltender Mike Condon #39 of the Montreal Canadiens makes a pad save while teammate Nathan Beaulieu #28 defends against Kyle Quincey #27 of the Detroit Red Wings during the NHL game at the Bell Centre. — AFP DETROIT: Riley Sheahan was not born the last time the Detroit Red Wings failed to make the playoffs in 1990. In fact, the 24-year-old forward is one of nine players on the Red Wings’ roster that wasn’t alive back then. Sheahan, and his teammates, young and old, desperately hope to fare well enough in the final five games of the regular season to avoid the dubious distinction of being a part of a streak-busting team. “We’ve talked a few times about not wanting to be on that roster that doesn’t make the play-offs,” Sheahan said. Detroit took a step back in its quest to extend the franchise’s postseason streak to 25 on Tuesday night, losing a third-peri-od lead in a 4-3 setback at Montreal. The Red Wings are a point behind the Boston Bruins for the third and final guaranteed spot from the Atlantic Division. Detroit is tied with Philadelphia for the second wild card in the Eastern Conference, but the Flyers have two more game to earn up to four more points. The Red Wings’ run is the tied for the fourth longest in NHL history, one shy of St Louis’ streak from 1980 to 2004. It is longer than the combined active streaks Pittsburgh (nine), Chicago (seven) and the New York Rangers (five) had entering the season. The San Antonio Spurs have clinched a spot in a 19th straight postseason, the longest active streak in the NBA. New England and Green Bay have the best active playoff streaks in the NFL at seven years each. In baseball, the St. Louis Cardinals have been in the postseason the previ-ous five years for the longest current run. Buffalo Sabres coach Dan Bylsma, who is from Michigan, has watched the Red Wings’ run close-ly. He was playing hockey for Bowling Green as it began and he coached Pittsburgh against the Red Wings in the 2009 Stanley Cup Finals when they was a win away from winning it all for a fifth time during the streak. 

On the verge 

“It seems like they’ve been a contending team my whole life,” Bylsma said Monday night. “It’s hard to wrap my head around it to provide context, knowing the second-longest streak in the league is going on 10 years.” Red Wings gen-eral manager Ken Holland, who has led the front office since 1997 and been a part of the organi-zation for 33 seasons, said the storied franchise has maintained the streak even after it had to retool during the salary cap because of one key reason. “ We’ve had a lot of great players,” Holland said. Steve Yzerman was arguably in the prime of his Hall of Fame career when the streak started in 1991, and future Hall of Famer Sergei Fedorov was a rookie, beginning his 13-season run with the franchise. Hall of Famer Nicklas Lidstrom, one of the top defenseman in league history, started his 20-season run with the team a season later. Four years after retirement, he can reflect on the streak much more than he did as a player. “When you look at other teams over that span, a lot of them have been going through rebuilding processes and have a chance to start over so to speak,” Lidstrom wrote in an e-mail earlier this week. “But the Wings have been able to find new talent and still make the playoffs every year.” One of those new talents has been 19-year-old rookie Dylan Larkin, the team’s only All-Star this season. Growing up in Michigan, he has no idea what it’s like to see the Red Wings end their year when the regular season ends. “I think everyone is aware of the streak and everyone in the league knows about it, so there’s no hiding from it,” Larkin said. “But it’s not going to help us right now. We’ve got to earn it. It would be nice to be part of the streak. In my first year, I’ve realized how tough it is to earn a spot and it’s going to be a dog fight until the end.” — AP 

# Red Wings on the bubble to extend postseason streak 

MIAMI: World number one Novak Djokovic was struggling to play his best, but held firm when pressed to the brink Tuesday and battled into the ATP and WTA Miami Open quarter-finals. The two-time defending champion outdueled Austrian 14th seed Dominic Thiem 6-3, 6-4, stretching his Miami win streak to 13 matches to book a last-eight date Wednesday against Czech seventh seed Tomas Berdych. “Straight set win but far from easy. It was a tough match,” Djokovic said. “I kept my serves. But I made a lot of dou-ble faults and he had me under a lot of pressure.” Djokovic, a five-time Miami winner overall, rescued 13 of 14 break points, four of them in the last game of the first set and four more in a dramatic 14-minute final game before hitting a forehand winner on his fourth match-point opportunity. “I had some luck in that last game where he missed a couple of easy fore-hands to get the break back and get into the match,” Djokovic said. “I stayed tough when it was most needed. The important moments I tried to make him play, make him run.” Djokovic won his 11th Grand Slam title two months ago at the Australian Open and has also lifted Doha and Indian Wells trophies this year while Thiem captured titles last month at Acapulco and Buenos Aires. The 28-year-old Serbian made eight double faults and 29 unforced errors against only two aces and eight winners. “The second serve was not working that well. That was due to the pressure he was imposing. I just didn’t have the rhythm,” Djokovic said. “Generally I don’t get to face that many break points. I’ll try not to get myself in those positions as much.” 

‘Felt great’ 

Berdych outlasted French 10th seed Richard Gasquet 6-4, 3-6, 7-5, but has won only two of 24 meetings with Djokovic, having lost their past nine matches since a 2013 Rome quarter-final victory. They are the only top-10 men still playing except for Japanese sixth seed Kei Nishikori, who downed Spanish 17th seed Roberto Bautista Agut 6-2, 6-4. “I played really well,” Nishikori said. “I felt great out there.” Up next for Nishikori, who won his fourth consecutive Memphis crown last month, is French 16th seed Gael Monfils, who rallied past Bulgarian 26th seed Grigor Dimitrov 6-7 (5/7), 6-3, 6-3. “He is playing really well,” Nishikori said. “He is a fun player to play against and we will have a good match.” Nishikori won their only prior meeting in 2014 on Halle grass. “Kei is a good player, very consistent, and he has a win over me,” Monfils said. “It will be a great match.” Only one of the world’s top 12 women, second-ranked Angelique Kerber, is still playing after Romanian fifth seed Simona Halep was ousted 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 by 19th-ranked Swiss Timea Bacsinszky. “To beat someone who fights as hard as she does, it’s something amazing,” Bacsinszky said. “I’m happy with it.” The 2015 French Open semi-finalist will play for a berth in the final against Russian 15th seed Svetlana Kuznetsova, the 30-year-old two-time Grand Slam winner who ousted top-ranked defending champion Serena Williams in the third round. Kuznetsova, the 2006 Miami champion, beat Russian 30th seed Ekaterina Makarova 6-7 (3/7), 6-4, 6-3. “Just kept fighting,” Kuznetsova said. “I was feeling low in energy but I tried to hang in there.” 

Kyrgios to face Raonic 

Australian 24th seed Nick Kyrgios, the youngest top-30 ATP player at age 20, reached the quarter-finals with a 7-6 (7/3), 6-3 victory over Russia’s 51st-ranked Andrey Kuznetsov. The Aussie never trailed in the tie-breaker and took the only break of the second set when Kuznetsov double faulted away the fourth game. Kyrgios, off to a career-best 13-3 start that includes his first ATP title last month at Marseille, next plays Canadian 12th seed Milos Raonic, who ripped Bosnian Damir Dzumhur 6-0, 6-3. Raonic owns a 2-1 rivalry edge but this will be their first match outside the Grand Slams. He won in 2014 at the French Open and Wimbledon but lost to Kyrgios last year at Wimbledon. —AFP 

# Top-ranked Djokovic struggles to reach Miami open quarters 

MIAMI: Novak Djokovic, of Serbia, returns to Dominic Thiem during their match at the Miami Open tennis tournament. — AP FORT MYERS: Byung Ho Park sat at his locker in the Minnesota Twins’ spring training club-house, sipping a cup of iced coffee, oiling a first baseman’s glove and interacting with teammates. He’s relaxed. There’s no hint of anxiety, which would be natural considering the challenge he faces. Instead, the Korean slugger is excited about making the transition from his native home-land to the major leagues. His goal is to make noise with his bat while quietly going about his business off the field and getting acclimat-ed to life more than 7,500 miles from Seoul. He likes the warm Florida weather that greeted him at his first big league camp this spring. He hasn’t given much thought to how cold it can get in Minnesota in the middle of winter, though that reality is coming. The Twins hired a full-time translator to help the two-time Korean Baseball Organization MVP deal with a language barrier that Park is diligently working to overcome. The 29-year-old’s English is far from perfect -but he is making strides communicating with teammates, coaches and manager Paul Molitor and felt comfortable enough to conduct his first interview in English without translator JD Kim. Hand gestures had to be used at times to communicate with Park, who sometimes had to be paraphrased but was able to express himself well with short responses. “I’m very excited,” Park told The Associated Press, a smile spreading across his face. “Everybody’s nice. Teammates, coaches make time to help me.” The infielder/designated hit-ter is not a typical rookie. Park turns 30 on July 10 and comes to the majors after spending nine seasons in the KBO, most of the past five with the Nexen Heroes. He hit 105 home runs in his final two years, including a career-best 53 with a league-record 146 RBI’s in 2015. He also posted personal highs in games (140), at bats (528), runs (129), hits (181), doubles (35), batting average (.343) and slugging percent-age (.714). Minnesota, hoping to add some power to the middle of the lineup, envisions Park as a DH and backup first baseman behind Joe Mauer. The Twins paid Nexen $12.83 mil-lion for negotiating rights and signed the slug-ger to a four-year, $12 million contract in December. “He’s fit in really well. He’s had a good camp,” Molitor said. “We’re seeing a guy who’s been around. He’s played a lot of base-ball, and the confidence he had as a Korean player, we’ve seen it begin to transfer over here. Every day is kind of a learning experience for him right now.” 

On and off the field 

Park’s wife, Ji Yoon Yi, and son, Seung Ri Park, will move to the U.S. after the regular season begins. But outside of acknowledging those plans, the slugger - a national hero and instantly recognizable back home in South Korea - is reluctant to talk much about what he likes to do when he leaves the ball park. “My family will come to Minnesota,” Park began before politely cutting the answer short. “I want privacy. Understand? ... Sorry.” Park is joining the majors a year after for-mer Nexen teammate Jung Ho Kang made his big league debut for the Pittsburgh Pirates, hitting .287 with 15 homers and 58 RBIs. While the two of them remain close, Park said he hasn’t relied on Kang - still recovering from a knee injury suffered while turning a double play against the Chicago Cubs last September - to be a mentor.—AP 

# Korean slugger Byung Ho settles into a majors life S P O R T S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

MUMBAI: Chris Gayle is determined to grab the World Twenty20 limelight back from in-form Virat Kohli when the West Indies and India clash in a mouthwatering semi-final in Mumbai today. The destructive opener smashed an unbeaten century, which included 11 sixes, in the West Indies’ opening win against England but has only batted once since, making just four. Kohli has been the star of the tournament so far, expert-ly guiding India through the group stages with a half-cen-tury against Pakistan and 82 not out in a crunch win over Australia. With the flat wicket at Mumbai’s Wankhede Stadium a dream for batsmen, the last-four showdown between the hosts and 2012 champions is set to be a bat-tle of the big-hitters. “I am looking to show what Chris Gayle is,” Gayle warned ominously on Tuesday. “I have only batted twice but this (semi-final) is a perfect opportunity to actually start the tournament and try and pick up where I left off, get a big one for the team and put them in a winning position,” he added. The 36-year-old described Kohli, who is the top run-scorer left in the tournament with 184, as a “world beater” but insisted neither he nor the West Indies were concerned about individual players. “Chris Gayle will always be positive. It does not matter which bowler is bowling against Chris Gayle,” he said. “Chris Gayle would attack. That’s the nature of T20 cricket. And that’s the nature of Chris Gayle. “No names, just cricket ball, beat it as hard as possible,” Gayle added. India’s coach Ravi Shastri said his bowlers were aware of the danger posed by Gayle but were determined to tame him. “Bring it on. All our bowlers will target him,” said Shastri in his eve-of-match press conference. 

The hard yards 

The former Indian allrounder meanwhile said that Kohli was on his way to proving himself as one of the greats of the game after a lull in form. “You have to give him the credit for really believing that he can be right up there with the best and for putting in the hard yards because let me tell you know one trains harder than Virat,” said Shastri. “Credit must be given to him for putting in that much of hard work and believing in his own ability.” India are looking to take another step on their quest to become the first team to win the World T20 twice, after their triumph in the inaugural 2007 edition, and the first on home soil. They are also bidding to give inspirational 34-year-old captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni-who is thought to be close to announcing his retirement-the chance to out on a high. India were stunned by New Zealand in their first match but picked up three straight wins to qualify second from Group Two. By contrast, the Windies won their opening three games to top Group One before being shocked by minnows Afghanistan. Gayle believes India have the momentum but warned that “anything was possible”. “India are the favorites. It is always going to be diffi-cult to beat them here. But the West Indies are ready for an upset,” he said. The Windies preparations were dealt a blow with the announcement that Andre Fletcher, whose unbeaten 84 fired his team to victory over Sri Lanka, had been ruled out the rest of the tournament with a hamstring injury. Fletcher has been replaced by Lendl Simmons, who gets a second chance to take part having been originally named in the squad but having to withdraw on the eve of the tournament with a bad back. — AFP 

# Clash of titans: Kohli vs Gayle in T20 semis 

MUMBAI: India’s Virat Kohli plays a shot during a train-ing session at The Wankhede Cricket Stadium. —AP 

MOHALI: This file photograph taken on March 27, 2016, shows India’s Yuvraj Singh as he grimaces in pain during the World T20 cricket tournament match between India and Australia at The Punjab Cricket Stadium Association Stadium.— AFP ISLAMABAD: Pakistan’s under-fire captain Shahid Afridi yesterday issued a video message to supporters apologiz-ing for his team’s early exit from the World Twenty20, but remained silent on his future following calls for him to retire. Afridi, nicknamed “Boom Boom” for his fierce hitting, has suffered a drop in form over the past two years and he was unable to steer Pakistan through the group stages of the tournament in India. The 36-year-old has been expect-ed to make an announcement on his future this week, but instead he took to Facebook and Twitter to issue a one-minute apology to the cricket-mad country. Pointing to the star on his Pakistan jersey, he said: “For this star, and these colors, when I come to a ground, I carry the weight of my people’s hopes with me. “Today, I, Shahid Afridi, apologize to the whole nation for not being able to fulfill the hopes of myself and my team.” The 2009 champi-ons have been widely criticized by fans for a lackluster per-formance at the World T20 with just one victory, against underperforming Bangladesh, and big losses to India, New Zealand and Australia. Like Afridi, head coach Waqar Younis is also under intense scrutiny and he offered to resign while offering his own apology at a press conference on Tuesday. Afridi’s video met with a mostly positive response by fans posting on his Facebook page. “Great cricketer Boom boom Afridi ..I am Indian ..but I like Afridi as sportsman..come on guys support them be with your team,” said user Narayan Kawade. Afridi has been a fan favorite since he burst on the scene in 1996, striking a 37-ball century against Sri Lanka in only his second match to set a world record that was unbeaten for 17 years. He became known as a bowling all-rounder in the second half of his career and was instrumental in Pakistan’s early suc-cesses in Twenty20, including their 2009 victory. — AFP 

# Captain Afridi issues video apology for T20 failures 

MOHALI: Pakistan’s captain Shahid Afridi walks from the field after being dismissed during the World T20 cricket tournament match between Australia and Pakistan at The Punjab Cricket Stadium Association Stadium. — AFP 

MUMBAI: World Twenty20 hosts India will be missing Yuvraj Singh for the rest of the tournament after the all-rounder was ruled out with an ankle injury and replaced by middle order batsman Manish Pandey yesterday. Yuvraj, who played a crucial role in India’s triumph in the inaugural edition of the tournament in 2007, twisted his ankle while batting during Sunday’s six-wicket victory over Australia that secured India’s place in the last four. “It will have an impact, because he has had his moments,” India team director Ravi Shastri said of Yuvraj, who also won the player of the tournament award in the team’s 2011 50-overs World Cup success at home. “I thought his three overs were brilliant in the last game, that put the check and brakes on the scoring and allowed us to come back into the contest. “Unfortunately, it is an injury that happened during the game, when he was taking off and did his ankle a bit and I believe it is a minor tear. We will miss him.” Pandey, 26, will fancy his chances of playing when India take on 2012 champions West Indies in the second semi-final at the Wankhede Stadium on Thursday, although Ajinkya Rahane will also stake his claim for a place in the starting side. Pandey, the first batsman from his country to smash a century in the Indian Premier League (IPL) Twenty20 competition, has played only four one-day inter-nationals and a couple of T20 internationals. “We have not decided yet, Manish has just joined the party yesterday,” Shastri said, adding that they will also have to consider Yuvraj’s bowling duties. “We will take a look at everything in the nets and then see what will be out best options for tomorrow.” —Reuters 

# Injured Yuvraj replaced with batsman Pandey 

NEW DELHI: Captain Meg Lanning’s aggressive half century helped hold-ers Australia reach their fourth con-secutive women’s World Twenty20 final yesterday after beating tradition-al rivals England by five runs in the first semi-final. Put in to bat on a hot sunny after-noon in New Delhi, Australia posted a competitive 132 for six after Lanning’s 50-ball 55 before their bowlers then restricted England to 127 for seven. Openers Alyssa Healy and Elyse Villani laid a decent platform for Lanning to build on as England bowlers found it hard to contain the steady flow of boundaries. Healy (25) and Villani (19) played useful cameos but their departure slowed the Aussie charge at the Feroz Shah Kotla stadium. Lanning then took control, starting off cautiously and then changing gear to give the England bowlers a hard time. Lanning, who led Australia to World T20 glory in 2014, registered her eighth T20 fifty as she hit six boundaries. England tried to claw their way back into the game with some sharp fielding, including two run-outs from direct hits in the outfield. Natalie Sciver had Alex Blackwell trudging back to the dugout after hitting the stumps from deep midwicket, while another direct hit from long-on saw the back of Lanning. England’s reply got off to a healthy start as skipper Charlotte Edwards and Tammy Beaumont put on a 67-run opening stand. Australia however kept their cool, and made the break-through when leg-spinner Kristen Beams took the prized wicket of Edwards (31). Beaumont (32) hung around for a while before falling to medium-pacer Megan Schutt in the 14th overs as the wheels started to come off the England chase. Wicktkeeper-batswoman Sarah Taylor did try to inject life into the chase but her depar-ture for 21 was a major blow to England’s chances of repeating their 2009 title-winning performance. Down the order, Katherine Brunt did hit a boundary and a six to raise some hopes but Schutt got her cleaned up to shut the doors on England. Australia will meet the winner of the second semi-final between West Indies and New Zealand in the title showdown in Kolkata on Sunday. — AFP 

# Lanning leads Aussies into Women T20 final 

NEW DELHI: England’s wicket keeper Sarah Taylor watches Australia’s Meg Lanning (R) play a shot during the World T20 women cricket tournament semi-final match between Australia and England at Feroz Shah Kotla crick-et ground. — AFP 

# Women seek World T20 boost in equality battle 

NEW DELHI: From poor pay to lack of training grounds and media coverage, and even sexual harassment, women crick-eters have long faced inequality in a multi-billion dollar sport dominated by men. Australia beat England in the Women’s World Twenty20 semi-finals in Delhi yesterday, and New Zealand play the West Indies in Mumbai today. With both semi-finals and Sunday’s final in Kolkata immedi-ately preceding the men’s equivalents at the same grounds, players are hoping that success in the tournament-and in front of a global TV audience-can inch them further towards parity. “We are hoping to win and hoping that will kick start more interest in the women’s team. So watch this space,” said New Zealand captain Suzie Bates who has racked up 171 runs at the tournament in cricket-mad India. “It’s about changing peo-ple’s attitudes and getting the message across,” the veteran of World T20s said of the struggles facing the women. Cricketers say the sport has come a long way since the 1970s when women started playing professionally, and they have fought hard to have access to decent grounds on which to practise, funds for equipment and qualified coaches. The International Cricket Council’s 2005 order for men’s and women’s national governing bodies to merge was hailed by many in the sport as a chance for the women to flourish. But in India they were left to languish, with the all-power-ful Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) reluctant to pro-mote or develop their game or organize frequent internation-al tours, according to Indian sports journalist Neeru Bhatia. “It was really pathetic at one point,” Bhatia, The Week magazine’s correspondent, said, adding the BCCI started making amends, including introducing contracts, after a recent change in lead-ership. In New Zealand and neighboring Australia, Bates said she has noticed a shift in attitudes in recent years towards “what the men get the women get too”. 

Sexual harassment 

For the first time at this tournament, for example, the White Ferns have single rooms, rather than sharing with teammates to save costs. But their request for business-class seats was refused for their 17-hour flight from New Zealand to Dubai, a luxury given to the men. In Sri Lanka, the team are trying to put a sexual harassment scandal behind them that skipper Shashikala Siriwardena conceded had damaged their interna-tional image. Sri Lankan cricket sacked three officials last year following allegations that women from the national team were being asked to perform sexual favours to keep their places. “Step by step, they (the cricket board) have solved it. It’s a good start for women’s cricket,” Siriwardena said. “Lots of officials are new after those problems we had in the last two years. Other countries were asking about it. It was damaging for our image.” In Pakistan, women reportedly raised similar allegations about selectors from a city club two years ago, prompting an investigation by the national cricket board. For many, playing professional cricket is tough financially, compared to the men who can earn six figures signing up for glitzy tournaments such as the Indian Premier League. Bates tells of women being forced to choose between their jobs and cricket with New Zealand paying a NZ$12,000 (8,000 US dollars) annual retainer for its top players. 

‘Difficult to stomach’ 

She said she was appalled by the Indian Wells tennis chief’s comments this month that women players owed their success to men, which ignited a furious gender row in the sport. “I found that difficult to stomach, as I think many women would,” she said, saying women would shine brighter if they were giv-en the same opportunities as men. But she points to the huge success of the recent inaugural Big Bash T20 league, played in Australia prior to the men’s tournament of the same name, as evidence of progress. The lucrative competition, featuring the world’s top players, attracted solid television audiences and match attendances. And a similar Women’s Cricket Super League is set to take off in England later this year. “I think women’s cricket is definitely building and I think it’s come so long (far) in such a short amount of time,” Australian pace bowler Holly Ferling said. Bangladesh captain Jahanara Alam said TV coverage of her side’s matches would boost public support and perhaps attract much-needed sponsors in her impoverished country, whose male players, in comparison, are feted like rock stars. “Even though, we have a good side we are not getting the kind of support we deserve. We are not complaining but it’s not enough,” Alam said. “(But) I’m sure the day will come, it’s not very far, when we will be treated equally.” —AFP 

MUMBAI: West Indies’ cricketer Chris Gayle bats during a practice session ahead of their ICC Twenty20 2016 Cricket World Cup semi-final match against India. —AP S P O R T S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

JOHANNESBURG: New Morocco coach Herve Renard hailed his team yesterday after they became the first qualifiers for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon. The 47-year-old who guided Zambia and the Ivory Coast to the most prized African football trophy was speaking after a 2-0 home win over Cape Verde sealed first place in Group F. “I was amazed by the determination they displayed,” he said after a second-half brace from Youssef El Arabi secured victory in Marrakech. “It is important that we maintain in future games the same mindset that was shown when we beat the No 1-ranked African team twice with-in four days. “What we achieved was con-siderable, but we must remain calm and begin preparing for the finals,” he told reporters. Renard replaced Badou Zaki as coach of underperforming Morocco a month ago and made a winning debut last Saturday with a 1-0 success in Cape Verde. The coach, who believes wearing a white shirt on match days brings luck, sprang to prominence in 2012 when he steered Zambia to Africa Cup glory. Pre-tournament no-hopers, the Chipolopolo (Copper Bullets) beat Didier Drogba-captained Ivory Coast on penal-ties in a Libreville final after 120 goalless minutes. Perennial underachievers Ivory Coast were next to benefit from Renard, winning the 2015 final against Ghana in Equatorial Guinea on penalties after another goalless decider. 

Perfect record 

Morocco have set the Frenchman, once a garbage collector and night-time cleaning contractor in Paris, the stiff tar-gets of reaching the 2017 Cup of Nations semi-finals and qualifying for the 2018 World Cup. The Atlas Lions went into back-to-back qualifiers against Cape Verde trailing on goal difference, but now have an unassailable six-point advantage. They meet third-place Libya away in June and host minnows Sao Tome e Principe in September, and will finish top on head-to-head records even if they lose both games. A more probable scenario, however, is two Moroccan victories and a perfect 2017 qualifying record that only Group K leaders Senegal could match. Moroccan stars include El Arabi, scorer of 10 La Liga goals for Granada this sea-son, and Bayern Munich centre-back Mehdi Benatia. Renard chose nine players based in France and five in Spain for his first squad. Moroccans with clubs in Germany, Italy, Netherlands, England and Belgium also made the cut. Two locals, goalkeeper Abdelali M’Hamdi of Renaissance Berkane and defender Mohamed Oulhaj of Raja Casablanca, also got the nod. While El Arabi scored all three goals in Praia and Marrakech to raise his quali-fying total to four, one less than leader Fiston Abdul Razak of Burundi, Benatia missed the Cape Verde games. Morocco won the Africa Cup for the only time 40 years ago in Ethiopia, finishing one point ahead of Guinea in the lone tour-nament decided by a mini-league. The closest they came to matching that feat was in 2004 when a Zaki-coached team finished runners-up to hosts Tunisia. In six subsequent Cup of Nations, they made four first-round exits, failed to qualify once and were disqualified in 2015 after a late, Ebola virus-linked with-drawal as hosts. — AFP 

# First Africa Cup qualifiers Morocco praised by coach 

HONG KONG: China joined Asian heavyweights Australia and Japan in the next round of World Cup qualifying after stunning Qatar 2-0 in their last Group C match in Xi’an on Tuesday. China were helped in their cause by the Philippines’ 3-2 upset of North Korea in Manila. North Korea appeared to be heading for victory and into the next round when they led 2-1, but conceded two goals in the final six minutes to crash out of contention. China have only qualified for the World Cup once, in 2002, but President Xi Jinping is spear-heading a drive to turn the giant Asian country into a footballing power. Their chances of reach-ing Russia 2018 took an upturn in the 57th minute, when midfielder Huang Bowen buried a shot from outside the penalty box into the cor-ner after a goalmouth scramble. This was followed by a close-range strike in the 88th minute by Wu Lei, who had come close twice before. Qatar, who will host the 2022 World Cup, were lackluster and showed little threat despite their perfect record in their other qualifying games. China brought greater organi-zation and energy, boosted by a raucous home crowd in the ancient capital of Xi’an. “My luck was good, it was a team effort,” Huang told state broadcaster CCTV, before adding: “Chinese football is gradually improving.” Qualification for the next phase was a major turn-around for China, who sacked French coach Alain Perrin after a disappointing 0-0 draw with Hong Kong in November left their campaign hanging by a thread. Earlier, veteran striker Tim Cahill scored twice as Australia eased past Harry Redknapp’s Jordan 5-1, while Borussia Dortmund’s Shinji Kagawa also netted a double in Japan’s 5-0 win over Syria. In Sydney, Cahill, now 36 and playing for China’s Hangzhou Greentown, struck twice in the first half against Jordan to stretch his record Australian tally to 47 goals in 89 games. Australia’s other scorers were home-based midfielder Aaron Mooy, Celtic’s Tom Rogic and QPR youngster Massimo Luongo, while Bayer Leverkusen’s Robbie Kruse added three assists. Redknapp, in only his second game with Jordan after being hired to steer them into the next phase, said Asian Cup-holders Australia were a “different class”. “They had a bit too much quality and they looked a lot fitter than us, they were sharper... there was a big gulf in class tonight,” he told reporters. 

Late flurry 

Meanwhile, war-torn Syria made it through as one of the best second-placed teams despite the late flurry of goals which consigned them to a 5-0 defeat in Saitama. A freak own goal from Hamdi Al Masri after 17 minutes put Japan in front, before Kagawa’s double alongside late strikes from Keisuke Honda and Genki Haraguchi gave the score line gloss. Japan ended the second round of qualifiers with 27 goals scored and none conceded from their eight games, but Honda warned the Blue Samurai would face tougher challenges ahead. “It was a goal to go through qualifying with no goals against so that was satisfying,” AC Milan’s Honda told Japan’s NHK Television. “But there are still some things we need to work on. We got caught on the counter several times and stronger opponents will make us pay, so we need to be wary of that.” South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Uzbekistan, UAE, Iraq and Thailand are also through to the next phase. UAE held Saudi Arabia 1-1 in Group A to finish second thanks to a 52nd minute equalizer from Omar Abdulrahman after Taisir Al-Jassim had put the visitors ahead in Abu Dhabi. The draw helped the Emiratis join the Saudis, who topped the group, in the next round. Iran, who played at the World Cup in Brazil, beat Oman 2-0 in Tehran thanks to a Sardar Azmoun brace, while Uzbekistan advanced from Group H after Sardor Rashidov gave them a 1-0 win over Bahrain. Iraq qualified after beating Vietnam 1-0 in Group F, with Mohannad Abdulraheem netting in first-half injury time. —AFP 

# China, Syria advance in World Cup qualifying 

SHAANXI PROVINCE: In this Tuesday, March 29, 2016 photo, China’s Wu Lei, left, fights for the ball against Qatar’s Abdulaziz Hatem, right during a soccer match at the 2018 World Cup Preliminary Qualification Round 2. — AP 

CORDOBA: Argentina’s Lionel Messi celebrates after scoring against Bolivia during their Russia 2018 FIFA World Cup South American Qualifiers’ football match. —AFP C”RDOBA: Lionel Messi scored his 50th international goal as Argentina defeated Bolivia 2-0 to advance their 2018 World Cup qualification campaign on Tuesday. Barcelona superstar Messi emphatically netted a 30th-minute penalty at the Estadio Mario Kempes in Cordoba as Argentina wrapped up their third consecu-tive qualifying victory. Messi’s spot-kick followed defender Gabriel Mercado putting Argentina ahead after 20 minutes with his second goal in as many games. The victory cements Argentina’s place in the automatic qualifi-cation berths of South America’s round-robin competition with 11 points from six games. Messi’s penalty makes him only the second player in Argentinian history to reach a half century of goals for the two-time World Cup winners. The 28-year-old striker is now closing in on legendary scorer Gabriel Batistuta’s record of 56 goals set between 1991 and 2002. Messi now also needs only one more goal to reach 500 goals for club and coun-try-raising the prospect that he could achieve that milestone with Barcelona this weekend when the Spanish giants take on Real Madrid in the Clasico. Messi, meanwhile, was satisfied with yet another Argentina win, which suggests their troubled start to qualifying-which began with a shock 2-0 home defeat to Ecuador-is firmly in the rear view mirror. “Beating Bolivia and Chile is what we want-ed,” said Messi, referring to last week’s hard-fought win over the Chileans in Santiago. “We’ve come from a low position in the standings to a high one but there is still a long way to go,” Messi added. Messi, meanwhile, said Argentina’s game had been hampered by the poor condition of the sur face at the Mario Kempes stadium, which has hosted rock concerts recently. “We tried to play our game but the surface didn’t help, although that’s not an excuse,” he said. Argentina coach Gerardo Martino-who had faced calls to quit after last year ’s Copa America defeat-said his team would embark on their remaining qualifiers with confidence. “A third straight victory gives us tranquility. We are in a good position now,” Martino said. —AFP 

# Messi brings up his 50 as Argentina down Bolivia 

ASUNCION: Barcelona star Dani Alves scored deep into injury time as Brazil came from behind to draw 2-2 with Paraguay in a pulsating 2018 World Cup qualification bat-tle here Tuesday. Brazil-desperate to bounce back after a demoralizing 2-2 draw with Uruguay on Friday when they squan-dered a two-goal lead-appeared to be heading to defeat after Dario Lezcano and Edgar Benitez put Paraguay 2-0 up. But Ricardo Oliveira gave Brazil hope with a right-footed strike to make it 2-1 on 79 minutes and, sensing opportunity, the visitors swarmed forward in search of an equalizer. Two minutes into stoppage time, Chelsea forward Willian advanced down the right flank and fed Alves, who darted into the penalty area purposefully. Paraguay’s defense stood off fatally and the Brazilian fullback curled his shot beyond the fingertips of veteran goalkeep-er Justo Villar. Brazil might even have snatched a remarkable victory after the late equalizer. Once again Alves was involved, thumping a dipping shot goalwards which Villar could only parry away. Filipe Luis fol-lowed up but was just unable to direct the ball into the net for Brazil in a nerve-jan-gling scramble inside the six-yard box with just seconds left. Brazil now stands in sixth place in the standings with nine points from six games, just behind fifth-placed Colombia and fourth place Chile, who have 10 points. Argentina are in third place with 11 points, two behind leaders Uruguay and Ecuador. — AFP 

ASUNCION: Miranda of Brazil, left, fights for the ball with Dario Lezcano of Paraguay, during a World Cup qualifying match. — AP 

# Alves rescues Brazil in Paraguay thriller 

COLUMBUS: American soccer fans fretted for four days: If the United States lost to Guatemala once again, the US would have little chance to qualify for the 2018 World Cup. Their worries quickly vanished Tuesday night. Clint Dempsey scored 12 minutes in, Geoff Cameron, Graham Zusi and Jozy Altidore added goals and the US routed Guatemala 4-0 to get back on track. “I thought we showed a lot of heart,” Dempsey said. “We showed a lot of character by dealing with a pressure situation.” Following a dismal 2-0 loss at Guatemala City on Friday night in which Jurgen Klinsmann deployed several players out of their most com-fortable positions, the US coach made five line-up changes and shifted two others into their more usual spots. The Americans responded and improved to 27-0-2 at home in qualifying since 2001, including 7-0-2 at Mapfre Stadium. “Columbus has bailed us out on several occa-sions,” US captain Michael Bradley said. Cameron doubled the lead in the 35th and Zusi, added to the roster on Sunday, made it 3-0 just 18 sec-onds into the second half. Jozy Altidore capped the scoring in the 89th. “The attitude tonight was outstanding,” Klinsmann said. “We were in sync with the wonderful crowd that pushed them from the first second. There was wonderful energy.” 

‘Showed our pride’ 

Trinidad and Tobago (3-0-1) won 6-0 at home against St Vincent and the Grenadines and leads Group C with 10 points, three ahead of the U.S. (2-1-1). Guatemala (2-2) has six points, and St Vincent (0-4) has been eliminated. Seeking its eighth straight World Cup berth, the US travels to St Vincent on Sept. 2, then finishes the round four days later against Trinidad at Jacksonville, Florida. “ We showed our pride,” Dempsey said. “You’ve got to do that if want to make it to the World Cup. You’ve got to show that you want it, and we showed that we wanted it.” Dempsey scored his 49th international goal, eight behind Landon Donovan’s American record, after Cameron looped a pass just inside the center cir-cle to just inside the penalty area. A streaking Gyasi Zardes, flanked by Moises Hernandez and Rafael Morales, used the side of his head to knock the ball down. Dempsey ran onto the ball after two bounces and first-timed a 14-yard right-footed shot past goalkeeper Paulo Motta. Dempsey has six goals in 10 games against Guatemala and a US-record 14 in World Cup qualifying, one more than Donovan. Cameron doubled the lead after Bobby Wood was fouled by Cristian Jimenez, Bradley took the free kick, and Cameron got in front of Carlos Castrillo for an 8-yard header, his fourth international goal. At the start of the second half, Yedlin played the ball to Zardes, who allowed it to bounce off him. Zusi ran in and got off a quick shot for his fourth US goal, his first since October 2013 in a qualifier at Panama. A giveway by Rodrigo Saravia of the hometown Columbus Crew led to Dempsey feeding Altidore for his 34th US goal. Klinsmann shifted Cameron to central defense from right back and moved DeAndre Yedlin to right back from midfield. Defender Steve Birnbaum, midfielders Kyle Beckerman and Zusi, and Zardes were inserted into the line-up along with goalkeeper Brad Guzan, who had been scheduled to rotate with Tim Howard. Dropped were the central defense pairing of Omar Gonzalez and Michael Orozco, and mid-fielders Mix Diskerud and Alejandro Bedoya, who has a sore ankle. “Every team needs leader-ship from its veteran players,” Klinsmann said. Midfielder Christian Pulisic, also added to the roster Sunday, made his national team debut in the 81st minute. At 17 years, 193 days, Pulisic became the youngest American in a qualifier. By appearing in the game, Pulisic became ineligible to play for Croatia, the nation of his grandfather. “It’s exactly what I expected; very, very physical,” he said. “It was a good game. It gives me confi-dence. I’m going to try and stay grounded and keep doing what I’m doing and become the best player I can.” — AP 

# US back on track in qualifying with 4-0 win over Guatemala 

OHIO: United States players celebrate a goal against Guatemala during the second half of a World Cup qualifying soccer match.—AP S P O R T S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

MUNICH: Germany’s Shkodran Mustafi, left, and Italy’s Simone Zaza challenge for the ball during a friendly soccer match between Germany and Italy at the Allianz Arena.—AP MUNICH: Mario Goetze scored on his interna-tional comeback to help Germany beat Italy for the first time in more than 20 years, a 4-1 drubbing in their friendly on Tuesday. Goetze, who had only played 53 minutes for Bayern Munich since a groin injury sustained against Ireland on Oct. 8, headed Germany’s second goal before the break after Toni Kroos opened the scoring. Goetze was also involved in the third before the hour-mark, setting Julian Draxler free to cross for Jonas Hector’s first interna-tional goal. “I’m so happy. For me it was simply important to be able to play again after such a long injury, simply to be able to do what’s fun for me. Then to score as well,” Goetze said. Mesut Ozil made it 4-0 in the 75th with a penalty conceded by Italy goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon. Substitute Stephan El Shaarawy scored Italy’s consolation goal in the 83rd with a strike from distance. It was Germany’s first win over Italy at the eighth attempt since a 2-0 victory on June 21, 1995. “We did it well. All the players fulfilled their duties well, played with a lot of discipline,” Germany coach Joachim Loew said. Following the 3-2 defeat to England in Berlin on Saturday - Germany’s second con-secutive loss after losing to France in November - Loew opted for a back-three of Mats Hummels, Antonio Ruediger and Shkodran Mustafi, with Hector and Sebastian Rudy supporting on either flank. “We trained with the formation a little bit yesterday,” Kroos said. “We wanted to come out of a more compact defense. This was a game that we wanted to win, in which we perhaps wanted to make up for something.” Thomas Mueller captained the side for the first time on his 70th appearance. Regular captain Bastian Schweinsteiger suffered a par-tial ligament tear in his knee in training last week and faces a race against time to be fit for the European Championship. 

Disappointing Azzuri 

Italy rarely threatened reserve goalkeeper Marc-Andre ter Stegen though he looked jit-tery on the rare occasions he was called into action. Ter Stegen was filling in for Manuel Neuer, who had complained of a stomach bug a day after his 30th birthday celebrations on Sunday. Just as he did against England, Kroos broke the deadlock by slotting a precise effort inside the post, his 24th-minute strike giving Buffon little chance. With the fans sending a Mexican wave around the stadium, Mueller crossed for Goetze to direct the ball inside the right post, leaving Buffon rooted to the spot. “It’s always worth supporting Mario Goetze because he can do things that others can’t,” Loew had said in the buildup. Goetze said Loew’s confidence had given him a huge boost. Riccardo Montolivo went close after the break as Italy emerged with new intent but any hopes of a comeback were dashed in the 59th, when Goetze set Draxler free and the Wolfsburg playmaker pulled the ball back for Hector to score on his 12th appearance. Simone Zaza shot over in response but then Buffon brought down Rudy and Ozil ended the contest. “It’s no fun to lose this way. That’s the first thing. But we said we wanted to be better and to measure the gap between us and Germany. Some players paid the price for the physical effort against Spain,” Italy coach Antonio Conte said, referring to last Thursday’s 1-1 draw in Udine, Italy with the European cham-pions. “Germany are world champions. I think they deserved it today, without a doubt,” Conte said. “When they got their chances they used them. We had a few chances but we were inexperienced.” Conte said there was no need for panic or for wholesale changes ahead of Euro 2016. “I can’t accuse the guys of anything. They tried everything, gave everything... I don’t know what I can change six weeks before naming the squad,” said Conte, who is stepping down after the tournament. Leonardo Bonucci was stretchered off after Hector’s goal and Conte said the Juventus defender had a “muscle problem.” Loew names his initial squad for Euro 2016 on May 17. Security was tight ahead of the game with around 800 police officers on duty. Sniffer dogs checked around the stadium for explosives, bags were searched and body-checks were conducted. The defeat to England was Germany’s first since the 2-0 loss to France in Paris on Nov 13, when attacks outside the stadium and across the city killed 130 people. The game against the Netherlands in Hannover four days later was called off due to the threat of an attack. — AP 

# Germany wins 4-1, beats Italy, for 1st time in over 20 years 

LONDON: The debate about Wayne Rooney’s place in the England team will rumble on for the next 10 weeks, right through to the start of the European Championship in France. But that’s not the only serious dilemma England manager Roy Hodgson will be wrestling with as he plots an unlikely end to the country’s 50-year drought at major soccer tournaments. Central defense used to be England’s strong suit. Only 10 years ago, Sven-Goran Eriksson was in the enviable position of tak-ing Rio Ferdinand, Jamie Carragher, John Terry and Sol Campbell - four greats of the Premier League - as his center-back options to the 2006 World Cup. Now, there’s just a soft center in England’s defense. And it’s threatening to hamper the blossoming of Hodgson’s new breed. Since England exited the group stage of the World Cup in Brazil in 2014, the team has played 14 games and Hodgson has played a different back four each time. For the last six matches, culminating in the 2-1 loss to the Netherlands on Tuesday, he has had a different central defense. Defenses, especially the center backs, develop as a unit and a lack of consistency of selection can’t help. Indeed, it highlights the concerns he has in that area. While Chris Smalling now appears a sure starter after a solid season at Manchester United, Hodgson has to choose between John Stones, Gary Cahill and - as an outsider -Phil Jagielka as the other center back. Stones is the future, the 21-year-old heir apparent to Ferdinand with his calmness in possession, vision, deceptive pace and reading of the game. But after starting the season superbly with Everton - proving why Chelsea made three attempts to sign him last offseason - Stones’ errors have piled up and he has even been dropped by his club. 

Microcosm of season 

The game against the Netherlands was a microcosm of Stones’ season. One minute looking so assured and at ease on the ball, the next taking too long over a clearance or slipping over to set in motion a chain of events that led to the Dutch equalizer by Vincent Janssen. By the end, Stones’ game appeared ragged. “I don’t think I’ll think about selecting him or not selecting him on the fact he slipped over on that occasion,” Hodgson said, before going on to praise Stones’ “assurance” and “comfort” in possession. England’s captain for the night, James Milner, is also impressed by Stones, who has been linked with a summer move to Manchester City despite his dip in form. “He’s put himself on a pedestal and people are interested in him,” Milner said. “Obviously he had the transfer thing early in the season and when you are playing well, you are up there to be shot down. He’s a top-class player.” Cahill would be the oth-er, safer option alongside Smalling - it was England’s most common partnership in Euro 2016 qualifying - but he has only regained his place in the Chelsea team since a serious injury to Kurt Zouma in early February. And Cahill has found himself exposed by top-class forwards in recent years, including Luis Suarez at the 2014 World Cup. With Terry no longer an option, England lacks leaders and a dominating force at center back. Having the defensively minded Eric Dier as an out-and-out holding midfielder should give England more pro-tection in France but it’s an area that oppo-nents will look to exploit. And it doesn’t get easier elsewhere in defense. Hodgson is still seemingly unsure whether to go with Nathaniel Clyne or Kyle Walker at right back, and has chosen Ryan Bertrand, Kieran Gibbs and Danny Rose at left back in recent games while still talking positively about Luke Shaw, who could yet return from a broken leg in time for Euro 2016. In Dele Alli, Harry Kane, Jamie Vardy and returning captain Wayne Rooney, new-look England’s options in attack suddenly look healthy for France. Hodgson must now get his defense in shape if England is to be a genuine contender. —AP 

# England’s soft defense a concern for Euro 2016 

PARIS: France’s Ngolo Kante, right, celebrates his goal with France’s Andre-Pierre Gignac, during the international friendly soccer match between France and Russia.—AP LONDON: Jamie Vardy believes his goal-scoring exploits with England will provide the ideal confidence boost as he returns to the task of firing Leicester to the Premier League title. After terrorizing Premier League defenders throughout a remark-able breakthrough season, Vardy trans-ferred his talents to the international stage with his first two goals for England against Germany and the Netherlands. The 29-year-old striker’s impressive dis-plays likely cemented his place in Roy Hodgson’s squad for Euro 2016 and Vardy can now turn his attention to the final weeks of Leicester’s astonishing bid to win their first top-flight title. Claudio Ranieri’s team are five points clear of second placed Tottenham with sev-en games remaining and, with his confi-dence sky-high, Vardy, who has 21 goals for club and country this term, can’t wait to take on Southampton at the King Power Stadium on Sunday. “I feel brilliant personally. The goals can only be good for my confidence,” Vardy said. “Going back to training this week off the back of scoring two goals, hopefully I’ll be scoring at the weekend.” Vardy’s influen-tial cameo and impudent flicked finish in England’s 3-2 friendly win over Germany added to the former non-league player’s incredible rise to prominence, but he is determined not to let the increased atten-tion distract him. “I’ve not seen the goal that many times to be honest with you. “I don’t really look at my goals after I’ve scored,” Vardy said. “The missus messaged me to say it was all over Twitter but I like to stay relaxed if possible.” Vardy admitted he was frustrated that his close-range opener in Tuesday’s friendly against the Netherlands didn’t prove the springboard to victory as the Dutch hit back to win 2-1 at Wembley. But he remains convinced Hodgson’s men are capable of a good run at the European Championships in France. 

Reality check 

“We had a massive high at the weekend (against Germany) and losing without put-ting in the same tempo is very disappoint-ing,” he said. “But there are still positive things for us to take from the international week. “Hopefully we will work on that to put it into action at the Euros.” While Vardy’s place in the squad looks assured, he still has to elbow his way past Harry Kane, Wayne Rooney, Danny Welbeck and Daniel Sturridge for a coveted spot in the starting line-up against Russia in the Euro opener on June 11. “There’s massive competition and that is only good for us. It means everyone is going to be trying that extra two or three percent, which is always important in games,” Vardy added. James Milner, who captained England on Tuesday in the absence of the injured Wayne Rooney, told his team-mates their defeat to the Netherlands, who failed to qualify for the Euros, should serve as a warning they still have much work to do before they can make an impact in France. “We will have learnt a lot as a group moving forward. It shows the consistency needed if we are going to do well in the tournament,” Milner said. “We didn’t play with the same intensity we did the other day. We had most of the ball and we didn’t move it quick enough. “It’s a reality check. We have shown we can beat anyone with the result against Germany. But we need to be more consistent and do it game in and game out.” —AFP 

# Vardy hopes goal spree helps Leicester title bid 

LONDON: England’s Jamie Vardy, center, celebrates scoring his side’s first goal during the international friendly soccer match between The Netherlands and England at Wembley stadium. —AP PARIS: N’Golo Kante celebrated his birth-day with a goal on his first international start to set France up for a 4-2 friendly win against Russia on an emotional return to the Stade de France on Tuesday. Kante opened the scoring just eight minutes into his full debut for Les Bleus and Andre-Pierre Gignac doubled the lead before Alexander Kokorin headed in for Russia in the second half. Dimitri Payet then demonstrated how important he can be to the French side with a stunning free-kick just after the hour mark, and Kingsley Coman netted in equal-ly spectacular fashion after Yuri Zhirkov added another goal for the Russians in an entertaining contest. Despite the goals conceded, it was a very encouraging win for the Euro 2016 hosts on the night international football came back to the Stade de France just over four months on from the terror attacks that took place just outside the ground and elsewhere in Paris. “There were lots of good things. Not everything was perfect but this is a team that likes to get forward. The players link up well and we have lots of pace,” said France coach Didier Deschamps, whose side had recorded a 3-2 victory in the Netherlands on Friday. “They are only friendly matches but we need to win them. It’s good for con-fidence, for our serenity, but the truth will come in June.” 

Tight security 

With November’s events still fresh in the memory, security was extremely tight for a game played in front of a crowd of around 65,000, including French president Francois Hollande, at the stadium that will host the European Championship final in July. And fortunately this time the football took cen-tre stage as Deschamps’s team displayed why they must be considered among the favorites to win the title on home soil. Leicester City sensation Kante had made his France debut from the bench against the Netherlands and was handed a first start here as Deschamps made six changes to his line-up. On his 25th birthday, he needed barely eight minutes to get his first international goal, arriving late in the penalty box and coolly finishing past Igor Akinfeev at the end of an excellent move that featured Paul Pogba, Gignac and Antoine Griezmann. The second goal arrived nine minutes before half-time, with Gignac-now playing his club football in Mexico-putting forward his case for a berth in the France squad as he met Griezmann’s free-kick from the left with a fine diving header at the near post. 

Payet free-kick 

A strong Russia side made up largely of players from leading clubs CSKA Moscow and Zenit St Petersburg were disappointing in the first half but they got a goal back 11 minutes into the second period when Kokorin escaped his marker to head in an Alan Dzagoev free-kick. Just before that, France had seen substi-tute Jeremy Mathieu hobble off only eight minutes after his introduction, but two oth-er replacements had a far more positive impact on the game. West Ham United star Payet, like Kante one of the players of the season in the English Premier League, curled in a brilliant free-kick only moments after coming off the bench. Bayern Munich’s teenage winger Coman, also on from the bench, had won the free-kick that led to that goal and he got his name on the scoresheet with a stunning finish from a tight angle after rounding substitute goalkeeper Yuri Lodygin. In between those two strikes, Zhirkov netted from an Oleg Shatov cutback but the goals conceded were a rare black mark on a positive night for France in their final match before Deschamps names his 23-man squad for the Euros in May. —AFP 

# Kante sparks impressive France in friendly victory 18 Messi brings up his 50 as Argentina down Bolivia 

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# 19 England’s defense a concern for Euro 

# Clash of titans: Kohli v Gayle in T20 semis Page 17 

NEW DELHI: England’s Jason Roy (L) plays a shot past New Zealand’s wicketkeeper Luke Ronchi during the World T20 cricket tournament semi-final match between England and New Zealand at The Feroz Shah Kotla Cricket Ground. — AFP NEW DELHI: Opener Jason Roy’s 78 helped England sail into cricket’s World Twenty20 final with a crushing seven-wicket win over New Zealand in the last four in New Delhi yesterday. Chasing 154 for victory, England rode on a brisk 82-run part-nership between Roy and Alex Hales to canter home in 17.1 overs after the bowlers had restricted a much-fancied New Zealand to 153 for eight. Roy rose to the occasion, smashing four boundaries in the very first over against Corey Anderson to set the tone for what turned out to be a perfect chase for the 2010 champions. New Zealand’s bowlers, who shone in the team’s unbeaten run to the semis, were at the receiving end of some brutal hitting that kept the packed house at Feroz Shah Kotla entertained. The introduction of spin after six overs of powerplay did lit-tle to improve the situation but Mitchell Santner gave the Kiwis their first breakthrough when he got Hales (20) out. Leg-spinner Ish Sodhi also tried to bring some drama back into the game after picking the wickets of Roy and Eoin Morgan (0) to leave himself on a hat-trick, but England made sure they stayed on course. Jos Buttler (32), who denied Sodhi his hat-trick, and a com-posed Joe Root (27) then drove England to their second World T20 final, with Buttler hitting a four and two sixes against Sodhi to finish things off in style. Earlier, England’s bowlers responded well to their captain’s decision to field first to restrict New Zealand after a poor start. New Zealand lost opener Martin Guptill early but Kane Williamson and Colin Munro counter-attacked with a 74-run partnership to lay a solid foundation before the Kiwis faltered late on. Munro (46) and Williamson (32) proved too hot to handle for England’s pacers as the duo took a special liking to Liam Plunkett and Stokes in the opening stages, both of whom came back well in their second spells. Left-hander Munro smacked Plunkett for three straight boundaries in the sixth over of the innings to set the pace and his reverse-hit for a six against Adil Rashid brought the house down. But Morgan then juggled his bowlers around and off-spinner Moeen Ali’s introduction in the 11th over soon saw the back of Williamson. Plunkett did well in his second spell to deny the dangerous Munro, whose 32-ball knock included seven boundaries and a six. He was denied his fifty when a wild slice went straight into the safe hands of Ali at third man. England’s fielders continued to pouch their catches and Morgan dived beautifully at extra cover to get rid of Ross Taylor off Chris Jordan. The wickets quickly tumbled and New Zealand’s run-rate, which had started impressively, plummeted. Stokes was going for a hat-trick near the end after sending back Luke Ronchi for three and the hard-hitting Anderson for 28. The impressive all-rounder ended with figures of 3-26 as New Zealand lost five wickets for 35 runs in the final 30 deliveries of their innings. — AFP 

# Roy steers England into World T20 final 

New Zealand: 

M. Guptill c Buttler b Willey 15 K. Williamson c and b Ali 32 C. Munro c Ali b Plunkett 46 C. Anderson c Jordan b Stokes 28 R. Taylor c Morgan b Jordan 6L. Ronchi c Willey b Stokes 3G. Elliott not out 4M. Santner c Jordan b Stokes 7M. McClenaghan run out 1Extras (b1, lb4, w6) 11 Total (for 8 wickets, 20 overs) 153 Did not bat: A. Milne, I. Sodhi Fall of wickets: 1-17 (Guptill), 2-91 (Williamson), 3-107 (Munro), 4-134 ( Taylor), 5-139 (Ronchi), 6-139 (Anderson), 7-150 (Santner), 8-153 (McClenaghan) Bowling: Willey 2-0-17-1, Jordan 4-0-24-1, Plunkett 4-0-38-1, Rashid 4-0-33-0, Stokes 4-0-26-3, Ali 2-0-10-1 

England: 

J. Roy b Sodhi 78 A. Hales c Munro b Santner 20 J. Root not out 27 E. Morgan lbw Sodhi 0J. Buttler not out 32 Extras (lb 1, w1) 2Total (for 3 wickets, 17.1 overs) 159 Did not bat: B. Stokes, M. Ali, C. Jordan, A. Rashid, D. Willey, L. Plunkett Fall of wickets: 1-82 (Hales), 2-110 (Roy), 3-110 (Morgan) Bowling: Anderson 1-0-16-0, Milne 3-0-27-0, McClenaghan 3-0-24-0, Santner 3.1-0-28-1, Sodhi 4-0-42-2, Elliott 3-0-21-0 England won by seven wickets. 

## SCOREBOARD NEW DELHI: Scoreboard of the World Twenty20 semi-final match between England and New Zealand at New Delhi’s Feroz Shah Kotla stadium yesterday: 

OAKLAND: Stephen Curry knocked down six 3-pointers on the way to 26 points, and the Golden State Warriors beat the Washington Wizards 102-94 on Tuesday night to stay on pace for the all-time wins record. Klay Thompson followed back-to-back 40-point games with 16 as Golden State (67-7) stayed a game ahead of the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls’ pace during their 72-10 season. The Warriors must go 6-2 over their final eight games for the record. Draymond Green had 15 points, 16 rebounds and nine assists to just miss back-to-back triple-dou-bles in the Warriors’ 54th straight regular-season home win and 36th consecutive this season. Bradley Beal scored 17 for the Wizards, who lost their fourth straight to Golden State. 

ROCKETS 106, CAVALIERS 100 

James Harden scored 27 points and Houston rallied from a 20-point deficit to beat Cleveland, which rested LeBron James. Harden scored 18 points in the fourth quar-ter and Houston outscored Cleveland 35-16 in the period. Dwight Howard’s free throw with 2:13 left put Houston ahead 95-94. Harden’s 3-pointer made it 98-94 before Kyrie Irving hit a 3-pointer with 1:30 left, making it a one-point game. Both teams missed shots on their next possession, but Trevor Ariza’s 3-pointer from the corner with 17 seconds left gave Houston a 101-97 lead. Irving scored 31 points for Cleveland, which fell to 1-3 this season and 4-13 over the last two when James doesn’t play. 

BULLS 98, PACERS 96 

Jimmy Butler made a tiebreaking jumper with 3.7 seconds left, and Chicago beat Indiana to snap a four-game losing streak. Nikola Mirotic scored 28 points as Chicago (37-37) got back to .500 and pulled within two games of Indiana for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. Mirotic made seven 3 -pointers, his final one tying it at 96 with 2:19 remaining. The Pacers missed five shots in the final 2 minutes that would have given them the lead before the Bulls rebounded Pau Gasol’s miss with 20 seconds remaining and got the ball to Butler for his 17-footer from the right wing. CJ Miles missed a 3-pointer that would have won it as time expired. Paul George had 20 points and nine rebounds for the Pacers, while Ian Mahinmi had 18 points and seven boards. Butler finished with 14 points, and Gasol added 10 points and 11 rebounds. 

PISTONS 88, THUNDER 82 

Marcus Morris scored 24 points, and Detroit took advantage of Kevin Durant’s absence in a victory over Oklahoma City. The Thunder rested Durant and Serge Ibaka, and Oklahoma City was held to only nine points in the third period en route to its lowest-scoring game of the season. The Thunder rallied from a 15-point deficit, closing the gap to just one in the fourth, but Detroit was able to hold on late for another victory in its push for a playoff spot. The Thunder had their eight-game winning streak snapped. Russell Westbrook led Oklahoma City with 24 points on 8-of-28 shooting. Andre Drummond had 13 points and 15 rebounds for the Pistons, and Tobias Harris added 17 points. 

HORNETS 100, 76ERS 85 

Nicolas Batum had 19 points, 12 rebounds and 12 assists for his second triple -double of the season, leading Charlotte over Philadelphia. Cody Zeller added 18 points and 11 boards for Charlotte, which set a franchise record for wins in a month with its 13th victory in March. The Hornets, who entered the game in sixth place in the Eastern Conference, also inched closer to clinching their first playoff spot in two years and just second postseason berth in the last 13 years. Charlotte hasn’t won a playoff series, though, since 2002. The teams both have off until Friday, when they will play again in Charlotte for the fourth and final meeting of the season. Short-handed Philadelphia, which dressed just 10 players, lost its 10th straight game and 23rd in the last 24. Robert Covington had 18 points. 

MAGIC 139, NETS 105 

Aaron Gordon had 20 points and Elfrid Payton had 11 points and 12 assists as the Magic scored a season high in defeating Brooklyn. Victor Oladipo and Evan Fournier had their moments and backup center Dewayne Dedmon, playing in place of injured Nikola Vucevic, scored 15 points The Magic had eight players in double fig-ures, including backups Andrew Nicholson with 24 and Jason Smith with 14. The Nets were led by reserve forward Thomas Robinson, who scored 18 points, after being inserted into the starting lineup in place of Thaddeus Young. Brook Lopez scored just five points in the first half and did not play in the second half. — AP 

OAKLAND: JJ Hickson Golden State Warriors’ Stephen Curry (30) scores past Washington Wizards’ Ramon Sessions, right, Marcus Thornton (15) and JJ Hickson, left, during the second half of an NBA bas-ketball game. — AP 

# Warriors move closer to season wins record B usiness THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Low oil prices challenge liquidity conditions of GCC banks: Moody’s 

Page 25 

Ooredoo Kuwait to purchase 99% of FASTtelco’s shares 

Page 26 NBK increases its capital by 6.5% 

Page 23 

# Global reports KD16.4 million revenues in 2015 Page 22 

KUWAIT: KIPCO’s Vice Chairman (Executive) Faisal Al-Ayyar speaks at the annual Shafafiyah (transparency) Investors’ Forum yesterday. KUWAIT: At its annual Investors’ Forum, KIP-CO - the Kuwait Projects Company - said that while 2016’s difficult trading conditions are expected to result in revenue growth in the high single digits for KIPCO, the compa-ny remains on track to double its 2014 prof-its by 2018. This is driven by the continued growth of the company’s core businesses, which are forecast to generally deliver rev-enue growth in the two digits in 2016. At the company’s annual Shafafiyah (transparency) Investors’ Forum, KIPCO pre-sented a review of 2015 and its outlook for 2016 to 2018 to an audience of sharehold-ers, financial analysts and institutional investors. The forum followed the company ’s General Assembly meeting where KIPCO’s shareholders approved a cash dividend of 25 per cent (25 fils per share). As part of its review, KIPCO said that it has maintained its exemplary track record and that 2015 was its twenty-fourth consecutive year of prof-itability. It also highlighted the company’s strengthened funding profile after raising $500 million under KIPCO’s Euro Medium Term Note (EMTN) Program and extending the average debt maturity to 3.6 years. This will result in an annual interest saving of $ 20 million from 2017 onwards. KIPCO’s net profit in 2015 increased 15 per cent to KD 53.03 million ($175 million), compared to KD 46.1 million ($152 million) in 2014. The company’s total revenue from continuing operations increased 4 per cent in 2015 to stand at KD 621 million ($2.1 bil-lion), compared to the KD 598 million ($2 billion) reported in 2014. Also as part of its 2015 review, KIPCO said that Burgan Bank - one of the company’s largest revenue makers - continues to grow robustly. As a result of efficient capital man-agement under Basel III, the bank’s capital adequacy is expected to be at around 16.5 percent by the end of March 2016. During 2015, the bank received an A+ rating from Fitch and opened a representative office in the UAE. For OSN, the pay-tv company secured a $ 400 million syndicated loan, reflecting investor confidence in its business model. The company’s subscriber base and revenue increased 2.6 and 2.5 times respectively from 2010 to 2015, and 2015 also saw the payment of $ 100 million in dividends to OSN’s shareholders. A mega real estate development was announced in 2015 and construction will begin in 2016 on prime land in the area of Daiya, at the heart of Kuwait City. The proj-ect, which will cost close to $ 2.5 billion when completed, will have a leasable area of around 400,000 sq.m. and comprise mostly of residential units, alongside restau-rants, health clubs, clinics, retail units and a hotel. For SADAFCO, the dairy company has increased its total shareholder return by 2.3 times over the past five years, standing at over 20 per cent in return on equity in 2015. This success is driven by the company’s leading market position, large distribution network and strong operational perform-ance. In its outlook for 2016, KIPCO said it expects that its portfolio of core companies - which includes Burgan Bank, OSN, Gulf Insurance Group, United Real Estate and KAMCO - will continue to deliver revenue growth over the next year, generally in the double digits. KIPCO’s Vice Chairman (Executive), Faisal Al-Ayyar said: “Over the past two years, we have seen a consistent double digit finan-cial growth trend for KIPCO’s core business-es. In last year’s Shafafiyah Investors’ Forum, we promised to double our 2014 profit by 2018, and our companies are on track to deliver this. Revenue for Burgan Bank increased 12 percent in 2015, while that of both OSN and Gulf Insurance Group was up 11 percent, and United Real Estate raised its revenue by 17 percent. These results are a strong indication that our core companies will continue to deliver growth in the dou-ble digits.” Commenting on the outlook for 2016, Al-Ayyar said: “We enter this year with the expectation that it will continue to bring difficult trading conditions. While KIPCO is moving forward confidently along the track of doubling its 2014 profit by 2018, we expect these global market circumstances to result in revenue growth in the high sin-gle digit for KIPCO in 2016.” 

# KIPCO on track to double its profit by 2018 

# ‘We will move forward confidently despite 2016’s difficult conditions’ 

KIPCO’s Vice Chairman (Executive) Faisal Al-Ayyar (right). KUWAIT: KIPCO shareholders, financial analysts and institutional investors attend the company’s annual Shafafiyah Investors’ Forum yesterday. WASHINGTON: Sluggish global growth threatens to keep governments around the world from being able to pay pen-sions and bondholders, the chief economist of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said yesterday. The OECD, representing mostly advanced economies, has lowered its forecast for worldwide economic growth to 3 percent this year from the 3.3 percent it estimated in November. When growth is weak, governments collect less revenue and struggle to pay pensioners and meet all their debt payments. “These kinds of numbers mean we are not going to make good on these commitments,” Catherine Mann, the group’s chief economist, told reporters. She said that to jump-start growth, countries need contin-ued stimulus from central banks, government spending and tax policies that encourage expansion and economic reforms, such as making regulations more consistent from country to country. Since the financial crisis, the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and OECD have repeatedly over-estimated the strength of the global economic recovery. Mann suggested that the economy no longer works the way most economists were taught: Low unemployment in the United States and other countries has not triggered strong pay growth, for example. Low interest rates have not encour-aged businesses to invest. And easy-money policies by the world’s central banks have not ignited inflation. “The relationships are broken,” she said. Mann asked her team to consider the new economic realities when it issued its lower economic growth forecast in February. She said she is confident the OECD won’t have to downgrade its estimates when it releases its next forecast in June.—AP 

NEW YORK: US aerospace giant Boeing will trim about 4,000 jobs in its commercial airplanes division as it seeks to cut costs and boost produc-tivity, a company spokesman told AFP yesterday. Staffing reductions through mid-year, including hun-dreds of executives and managers, will be done through attrition and voluntary layoffs, leaving open jobs unfilled, spokesman Doug Alder said in an email. “We’ll only use involuntary layoffs as a last resort,” he said. The payroll reduction is part of a streamlining announced last month that includes non-labor cost savings and supply-chain savings, he noted. At the end of February, Boeing’s commercial air-planes division had 82,310 employ-ees. The Chicago-based company, which includes defense and space divisions, among others, employed 159,250 people. Shares in Dow member Boeing dipped 0.3 percent to 130.50 in morning trade. Boeing, facing stiff competition from European aircraft maker Airbus, is in the process of transitioning aircraft production, such as the 737, its best-selling jet, as it introduces the new 737 MAX and its long-range 777 to the new 777X. Boeing had a record 762 commercial aircraft deliveries in 2015, topping Airbus, but its rival had a substantial edge in net orders last year, at 1,080 versus 768 for Boeing. As of March 22, Boeing had 107 net airplane orders this year amid a robust air travel industry that is see-ing strong demand for planes. The job cuts reflect the company’s posi-tioning even as orders roll in, anoth-er Boeing spokesman said. “It’s all part of year-over-year growth in pro-ductivity and driving costs down. That sort of effort never stops. Just because we’re building more doesn’t mean we shouldn’t always become more productive,” spokesman Bernard Choi told AFP. In January, Boeing forecast deliveries would decline this year for the first time since 2010, to between 740 and 745. It also predicted flat to slightly lower 2016 revenues and core earn-ings per share. — AFP 

# OECD: Weak global economy to threaten govt finances Boeing to cut 4,000 jobs in commercial airplanes division 

JAKARTA: Motorists travel on their way to downtown Jakarta yesterday. Indonesia’s economy has lagged for some time as demand, especially from China, for key commodity exports has waned. —AFP B U S I N E S S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# EXCHANGE RATES 

Bahrain Exchange Company Al-Muzaini Exchange Co. Dollarco Exchange Co. Ltd 

CURRENCY BUY SELL ASIAN COUNTRIES 

Japanese Yen 2.692 Indian Rupees 4.586 Pakistani Rupees 2.889 Srilankan Rupees 2.041 Nepali Rupees 2.848 Singapore Dollar 224.220 Hongkong Dollar 39.037 Bangladesh Taka 3.859 Philippine Peso 6.566 Thai Baht 8.605 

GCC COUNTRIES 

Saudi Riyal 80.763 Qatari Riyal 83.194 Omani Riyal 786.642 Bahraini Dinar 804.300 UAE Dirham 82.457 

ARAB COUNTRIES 

Egyptian Pound - Cash 34.440 Egyptian Pound - Transfer 34.479 Yemen Riyal/for 1000 1.413 Tunisian Dinar 151.730 Jordanian Dinar 426.730 Lebanese Lira/for 1000 2.018 Syrian Lira 2.158 Morocco Dirham 31.696 

EUROPEAN & AMERICAN COUNTRIES 

US Dollar Transfer 302.700 Euro 344.020 Sterling Pound 437.400 Canadian dollar 232.490 Turkish lira 107.150 Swiss Franc 314.980 Australian Dollar 232.170 US Dollar Buying 301.500 

CURRENCY BUY SELL Europe 

British Pound 0.428306 0.437306 Czech Korune 0.004611 0.016611 Danish Krone 0.041773 0.046773 Euro 0.336290 0.344290 Norwegian Krone 0.032028 0.037228 Romanian Leu 0.076415 0.076415 Slovakia 0.009020 0.019020 Swedish Krona 0.032864 0.037864 Swiss Franc 0.306371 0.316571 Turkish Lira 0.100914 0.111214 

Australasia 

Australian Dollar 0.222426 0.233926 New Zealand Dollar 0.200930 0.210430 

America 

Canadian Dollar 0.226010 0.234510 US Dollars 0.298600 0.303100 US Dollars Mint 0.299100 0.303100 

Asia 

Bangladesh Taka 0.003441 0.004015 Chinese Yuan 0.045177 0.048677 Hong Kong Dollar 0.036945 0.039695 Indian Rupee 0.004290 0.004680 Indonesian Rupiah 0.000019 0.000025 Japanese Yen 0.002609 0.002789 Kenyan Shilling 0.002975 0.002975 Korean Won 0.000252 0.000267 Malaysian Ringgit 0.072650 0.078650 Nepalese Rupee 0.002869 0.003039 Pakistan Rupee 0.002684 0.002964 Philippine Peso 0.006459 0.006739 Sierra Leone 0.000073 0.000079 Singapore Dollar 0.219993 0.225993 South African Rand 0.013878 0.022378 Sri Lankan Rupee 0.001696 0.002276 Taiwan 0.009235 0.009315 Thai Baht 0.008275 0.008825 

Arab 

Bahraini Dinar 0.796349 0.804349 Egyptian Pound 0.030698 0.035816 Iranian Riyal 0.000084 0.000085 Iraqi Dinar 0.000192 0.000252 Jordanian Dinar 0.422934 0.430434 Kuwaiti Dinar 1.000000 1.000000 Lebanese Pound 0.000150 0.000250 Moroccan Dirhams 0.020649 0.044649 Nigerian Naira 0.001248 0.001883 Omani Riyal 0.779814 0.785494 Qatar Riyal 0.082433 0.083643 Saudi Riyal 0.079833 0.080783 Syrian Pound 0.001283 0.001503 Tunisian Dinar 0.147333 0.155333 Turkish Lira 0.100914 0.111214 UAE Dirhams 0.081433 0.082582 Yemeni Riyal 0.001368 0.001448 

UAE Exchange Centre WLL 

CURRENCIES TELEX TRANSFER PER 1000 

Australian Dollar 201.91 Canadian Dollar 219.82 Swiss Franc 306.95 Euro 336.85 US Dollar 299.90 Sterling Pound 431.04 Japanese Yen 2.67 Bangladesh Taka 3.817 Indian Rupee 4.375 Sri Lankan Rupee 2.083 Nepali Rupee 2.732 Pakistani Rupee 2.860 UAE Dirhams 0.08161 Bahraini Dinar 0.7970 Egyptian Pound 0.03819 Jordanian Dinar 0.4265 Omani Riyal 0.7788 Qatari Riyal 0.08269 Saudi Riyal 0.07994 

Rate for Transfer Selling Rate 

US Dollar 303.250 Canadian Dollar 230.325 Sterling Pound 429.535 Euro 339.765 Swiss Frank 297.075 Bahrain Dinar 802.260 UAE Dirhams 82.805 Qatari Riyals 84.020 Saudi Riyals 81.545 Jordanian Dinar 427.185 Egyptian Pound 34.053 Sri Lankan Rupees 2.063 Indian Rupees 4.538 Pakistani Rupees 2.891 Bangladesh Taka 3.857 Philippines Pesso 6.540 Cyprus pound 577.595 Japanese Yen 3.675 Syrian Pound 2.375 Nepalese Rupees 3.835 Malaysian Ringgit 76.000 Chinese Yuan Renminbi 46.930 Thai Bhat 9.565 Turkish Lira 105.085 

GOLD 

20 Gram 246.640 10 Gram 126.240 5 Gram 63.970 

KUWAIT: Global Investment House (“Global” or the “Company”), a region-al asset management & investment banking firm headquartered in Kuwait, with offices in major capital markets in the MENA region, yester-day announced its financial results for the year ended 31 December 2015 reporting a net profit of KD6.6 million ($21.7 million) and earnings per share of 8 Kuwaiti fils. 

Key points of the results:  

> l

2015 net profit of KD6.6 million ($21.7 million), a marginal increase over 2014 net profit of KD6.5 million ($21.4 million) despite adverse market conditions.  

> l

2015 revenues of KD16.4 million ($54.0 million); 75 percent are gener-ated from fee-based businesses.  

> l

Fee -based businesses (asset management, investment banking and brokerage) generated revenues of KD12.3 million ($40.6 million).  

> l

Global board proposes 5 percent cash dividend (5 Kuwaiti fils per share), subject to shareholders’ and regulatory approvals. During 2015, the Asset Management business remained resilient with KD1.1 billion of assets under management. Our asset man-agement teams remained focused on launching products and services best suited to our clients’ investment needs offering recurring income / yield accompanied with low volatility. During the year, the Company raised approximately $160 million of new money in various strategies, including income-yielding UK real estate, cash management, listed equities and spe-cial situations assets. Several funds managed by the Company outper-formed their respective benchmark indices and peers. In addition, our Special Situations Asset Management team signed a portfolio management agreement with one of the Kuwaiti banks to manage its portfolio of spe-cial situation assets worth $34 million. During 2015, the Investment Banking team generated revenues from 11 different mandates, ranging from advisory to M&A mandates, 4 of which were successfully closed during the year. The team is currently work-ing on several mandates and has an interesting pipeline of M&A and equi-ty capital markets mandates. On the brokerage front, Global made focused efforts to grow the institutional brokerage business lead-ing to gains in Kuwait market share. However, due to decline in the market turnover in most key markets where Global operates, the brokerage rev-enues declined. Regional operations continue to contribute to the Company’s business by enhancing our client base, raising new money and deal sourcing. Early 2015, Global inaugurated its Dubai International Financial Centre (“DIFC”) operations to strengthen its presence in one of the major capital markets in the region. Global Saudi, with assets under management of $169 million, remains one of the largest non-bank asset managers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its flagship fund continued to outperform its bench-mark. The Company’s continuous efforts to control and rationalize its cost base resulted in reducing our operating cost base from KD14.8mn ($48.6 mil-lion) in 2014 to KD13.3 million ($43.9 million) in 2015. Global has a healthy capital structure, conser vatively deployed primarily in liquid and oper-ating assets with no external debt and a capital base of KD90.5 million ($297.8 million). The board proposes a 5 percent cash dividend (5 Kuwaiti fils per share), subject to shareholders’ and regulatory approvals, amounting to KD3.9 million ($12.9 million). Commenting on the results, Ibrahim Saad, Chairman of the Board, said: “Global has achieved significant growth in net profit for the third con-secutive year, thanks to its manage-ment’s efforts in implementing the Company’s strategy of growing its core businesses while minimizing risk. We are delighted by these excellent financial results, which were generat-ed during difficult times for the capital markets and the investment services industry. Good operating perform-ance and an excellent capital struc-ture have facilitated the Board’s deci-sion to recommend a distribution of a cash dividend to shareholders at lev-els consistent with the previous year.” Maha Al-Ghunaim, Vice Chairman & Group CEO, said: “Despite the extremely volatile and challenging times, we successfully widened our client base, enhanced our product offering, signed new mandates, raised new money and maintained our profitability momentum. Furthermore, we reduced our operat-ing costs by 10 percent in spite of expanded business activities. Being a MENA player, Global cannot be isolat-ed from the regional headwinds; however, we remain committed to continue creating value to all our stakeholders, through our resilient and robust fee-based business mod-el, innovative strategies and execu-tion capabilities.” 

# Global reports KD16.4 million revenues in 2015 

# Company posts KD6.6 million net profit, proposes 5% cash dividend 

Maha K Al-Ghunaim 

TEHRAN: Iran’s Ministry of Finance has issued 5 trillion rials ($145 million at the free market exchange rate) of lease-based Islamic bonds, expanding the range of the government’s fund-ing tools and providing a much-needed pricing benchmark for corporate issuers. The deal is the first time that Iran’s government has issued sukuk using an ijara format, selling them through the country’s over-the-counter securi-ties market, known as Fara Bourse. The four-year sukuk were listed on March 16 and pay a nominal rate of 18 percent, according to Fara Bourse data. The proceeds will be used to settle debts owed by the government to Ayandesaz Pension Fund and Mahan Air, accord-ing to Novin Investment Bank, which arranged the transaction. The government would usually issue sukuk based on its own assets, but in this case the transaction was based on the creditors’ assets, Fatemeh Khanahmadi, computational finance and risk manager at Novin Investment Bank, told Reuters. “The creditors accepted it as the govern-ment is still guarantor to pay the principal and the interest to investors.” While officials have said foreigners are per-mitted to buy Iranian bonds, foreign portfolio investment in Iran is still very small, so all or almost all of this month’s sukuk issue is likely to be held by domestic investors. In the wake of the lifting of economic sanctions against Iran in January, authorities are rolling out a series of ini-tiatives to develop the country’s capital markets and reduce local firms’ reliance on loans from a debt-laden banking sector. The government has announced plans to issue 60 trillion rials worth of Islamic Treasury bills this year, after a maiden sale in September. Iran’s capital markets have developed differ-ently from those in the rest of the Gulf after years of isolation, and only a handful of sukuk structures are available. The municipality of Tehran issued the coun-try’s first sukuk in 1994 based on an investment partnership format known as musharaka, which has remained the main structure in use. Six years ago, the capital market regulator introduced ijara and murabaha structures - the latter is a cost-plus-profit format - but they have been slow to catch on, even though they are widely used elsewhere in the Gulf. —Reuters 

# Iran paves way for corporates with lease-based Islamic bonds KUWAIT: The price of Kuwaiti oil went down on Tuesday by $1.03 to settle at $32.73 pb, compared to $33.76 pb the day before, said Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC) yesterday. In international markets, the American crude oil dropped $1.11 to settle at $38.28 pb, as well as the Brent Blend which fell $1.13 to $39.14 pb. Meanwhile, the exchange rate of the US dollar against the Kuwaiti dinar went down to KD 0.301, while the euro went up at KD 0.341 compared to the exchange rates for Tuesday, said a statement by the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) yesterday. According to the CBK, the exchange rate of the Sterling pound was up to KD 0.433 as well as the Swiss franc to KD 0.312. Exchange rate of the Japanese Yen remained the same at KD 0.002. The dollar was down compared to the major currencies, reaching its lowest levels during a week. This came after the announcements of president of a Federal Reserve Bank Janet Yellen which reduced the chances of any increase in interest rates. —KUNA 

SINGAPORE: DME Oman crude’s premium to Dubai swaps jumped to above 50 cents a barrel yester-day, as traders bought to cover positions a day ahead of the con-tract’s expiry. Cash Dubai went the other way and is set to end the month weak-er, as its discount to swaps widened 13 cents to $1.38 a barrel. Asian refiners have completed their purchases of May-loading cargoes, with the exception of Iraqi crude. Basra’s premiums are set to stay firm above $1 as Japex has sold a May-loading Basra Heavy cargo to GS Caltex at a premium above $1.60 a barrel to its OSP, a trader said. More cargoes will trade once Iraq fixes its loading program for May by mid-April. Kuwait has agreed with neighbour Saudi Arabia to resume oil production at the jointly operated Khafji field, the OPEC member state’s acting oil minister said on Tuesday, weeks before oil producers are expected to agree a global output freeze. “In theory, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait could offset higher NZ (Neutral Zone) production by a reduction in output elsewhere,” JBC Energy analysts said in a note. “However, no details of this have been specified, nor is there a timeline as to how quickly produc-tion will be ramped up.” “Any indi-cations that total Saudi/Kuwaiti production could in fact be higher than anticipated has the potential to keep the expected upside to oil prices in check,” the analysts said. India’s crude imports rose in February with Reliance importing 13.7 percent more oil than in January. Essar Oil, the top Indian buyer of Iranian crude, raised imports from Tehran by about two-thirds in February compared with the previous month. Japan’s commercial crude stocks fell 1.12 million barrels to 89.78 million barrels in the week to March 26, data released by the Petroleum Association of Japan (PAJ) showed. Latin American oil producers Ecuador, Venezuela, Colombia and Mexico may meet on April 8 to prepare an output freeze proposal for an April 17 meeting of OPEC and non-OPEC countries, Ecuador’s oil minister said on Tuesday. Nigeria is in talks with oil majors Chevron, France’s Total and Italy’s ENI to get help revamping the ail-ing refineries in Africa’s top crude producer, its oil minister said on Tuesday. Rosneft is set to lower oil out-put, Russian Natural Resources Minister Sergei Donskoi said on Tuesday, ahead of a meeting of leading global oil producers in Doha on April 17 to discuss an out-put freeze to support weak oil prices. For crude prices, oil product cracks and refining margins, please click on the RICs below. —Reuters 

# DME Oman spikes ahead of expiry Kuwait oil price down to $32.73 pb: KPC 

LONDON: Oil futures edged up yesterday near $40 per barrel as a weaker dollar spurred inter-est in riskier assets and the International Energy Agency said expectations for a deluge of oil from Iran were misplaced. Brent futures climbed 46 cents to $39.60 a barrel as of 1000 GMT after settling down $1.13 in the previous session. US crude rose 61 cents to $38.89 a barrel after ending Tuesday down $1.11. The dollar index fell, after slipping to an eight-day low in the previous session on dovish comments by US Fed Chair Janet Yellen about possible inter-est rate rises. A weaker dollar makes greenback-denominated commodities cheaper for holders of other currencies. “One of the main reasons for Yellen’s dovish stance is the low oil price and she made a direct reference to it,” said Olivier Jakob from Petromatrix consultancy. “For Yellen, low oil prices are not only con-tributing to low inflation expectations but they are a threat to global economic growth due to the financial stress they are imposing on oil-pro-ducing economies,” Jakob said. Oil prices fell about 3 percent in the previous session after Kuwait and Saudi Arabia said they would resume production at the jointly operated 300,000-barrels-per-day Khafji field even as major oil producers consider an output freeze. The freeze idea emerged after prices fell below $30 a barrel in January from as high as $115 in June 2014 on global oversupply spurred by US production growth and rising output from oil exporter group OPEC. The International Energy Agency, which oversees energy policies of industrialized nations, forecasts the global stock build to continue this year. But it said yesterday Iran was not adding as many barrels into the market as expected despite the easing of international sanctions against Tehran in January. “It was misleading to believe that there would be a huge amount of new Iranian crude and natural gas production entering the mar-ket in the short term,” Fatih Birol, the IEA’s exec-utive director, told Reuters. OPEC member Iran is expected to attend an oil producers meeting in Doha on April 17 to discuss the proposed freeze, although it may not take part in the talks. —Reuters 

# Oil prices rise with riskier assets on weak dollar B U S I N E S S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

KUWAIT: National Bank of Kuwait’s (NBK) board of directors has agreed to increase the bank’s capital through a 6.5 percent rights issue. The bank will issue 343.96 million shares at 400 fils per share. The issuance price includes an issuance pre-mium of 300 fils per share on top of the par value of 100 fils per share. Following the capital increase, NBK’s issued and paid-in capital will reach KD 563.57 million distributed over 5,635.66 million shares. The capital increase will take place following final approvals of all regulatory authorities. The rights issue will be offered to the shareholders registered in the bank’s records one day prior to the date of calling the capital increase. Earlier, NBK received all necessary approvals from regulatory authorities as well as its general assembly to increase the bank’s authorized capital to KD 600 million. This step is in line with the bank’s plans to maintain healthy capitalization ratios following the implementation of Basel 3 and the regulations of the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) in this regards. Also, this increase will allow the bank to contin-ue capturing growth opportunities, espe-cially in Kuwait as the government’s capi-tal spending plan remains intact and as NBK continues to be the market leader in the project finance segment. It is worth mentioning that in 2015, NBK issued $ 700 million in additional Tier 1 securities and KD 125 million in Tier 2 subordinated bonds. The bank’s capital adequacy ratio stood at 16.8 percent as of end-December 2015, comfortably above regulatory requirements. NBK continues to enjoy collectively the highest ratings among all banks in the Middle East from the three international rating agencies Moody’s, Fitch Ratings and Standard and Poor’s. The Bank’s ratings are supported by its high capitalization, pru-dent lending policies, and its disciplined approach to risk management, in addition to its highly recognized and very stable management team. NBK was also named among Global Finance’s list of the 50 safest banks in the world for the tenth consecu-tive time. NBK enjoys the widest banking presence with a local and international network reaching 4 continents. NBK’s international presence spans many of the world’s leading financial centers including New York, Europe, GCC, Middle East, Singapore as well as China (Shanghai). NBK was founded in 1952 as the first indigenous bank and the first joint stock company in Kuwait and the Gulf Region. NBK reported profits of $ 929.7 million (KD 282.2 million) for 2015 which was among the highest in the Arab region. NBK’s total assets were $77.8 billion (KD 23.6 billion) at the end of 2015, while shareholder equity stood at $ 8.6 billion (KD 2.6 billion). NBK is the largest financial institution in Kuwait with effective market domi-nance in the commercial banking market and has been consistently awarded the highest credit rating of all banks in the region from Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, and Fitch Ratings. NBK also stands out in terms of its local and international net-work, which includes branches, sub-sidiaries and representative offices in China, Geneva, London, Paris, New York, and Singapore alongside its regional pres-ence in Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Turkey, and the UAE. 

# NBK increases its capital by 6.5% 

# Bank to maintain healthy capitalization on Basel 3 rules 

LONDON/MUMBAI: India’s Tata Steel is seeking to sell Britain’s biggest steelmaking business, putting thousands of jobs at risk in an industry that once dominated Britain but has been brought low by falling prices, high costs and Chinese competition. After a marathon board meeting in Mumbai, Tata said it would draw a line under its almost decade-long foray into Britain’s steel industry, exiting the country entirely. The move could have an impact on Britain’s closely fought vote in three months over whether to stay in the European Union. Britain’s traditionally anti-EU media have blamed Brussels for preventing London from taking greater steps to protect the industry, although supporters of membership say EU policy is not responsible for the industry’s plight. Tata, which employs about 15,000 people in Britain at sites including the giant Port Talbot plant in Wales, said its financial performance in Britain had deteriorated sharply in recent months and it wanted to exit as quickly as possi-ble. The British government and the Welsh authorities said they were looking at all viable options to protect the steel industry, which has already shed thousands of jobs in just the last year. “We are, and have, and continue to look at all options, and I mean all options. But what we first want to achieve from Tata is this period of time to allow a proper sale process,” Anna Soubry, a minister for business, told BBC radio. She said she could not rule out the possibility of the government buying the plants until a new owner could be found. The sale ramps up pres-sure on Prime Minister David Cameron’s right-leaning Conservative government, which has sought to cultivate closer ties with China. Cameron’s fate hangs in the balance when Britain votes on whether to stay in the EU in May, and his government has sought to avoid contro-versies during the runup to the vote. The Conservatives are resented in Britain’s industrial heartlands for the demise of mining and manu-facturing under former prime minister Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s. The government has said it is taking measures to help the steel sector but the fundamental problem remained the halving of steel prices in the past year, caused by overca-pacity in China. Once a driver of the economy through the 19th and 20th centuries, many of Britain’s former steel towns have been decimated by the indus-try’s decline since its peak in the 1970s. The leader of the opposition Labour party, Jeremy Corbyn, called on the government to take a pub-lic stake in the industry which he called “the cor-nerstone of our manufacturing sector”. Tata Steel bought Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007 and has since struggled to turn the giant around. Port Talbot, though far from its 1960s peak, still employs about 4,000 people, and Tata is one of the most significant private companies in Wales. Unions welcomed the decision not to shut-ter the plants but called on Tata to be a “responsible seller” and on the government to play its role. “We don’t just want more warm words. We want a detailed plan of action to find buyers and build confidence in potential investors in UK steel,” Roy Rickhuss, general sec-retary of steelworkers’ trade union Community, said. Steelmakers in Britain pay some of the highest energy costs and green taxes in the world and are also struggling to compete with record Chinese steel imports, which they say have been unfairly subsidised by Beijing. 

TATA’S TROUBLES 

Most steel companies, including top pro-ducer ArcelorMittal , have been hit by plunging prices due to overcapacity in China, the world’s biggest steel market, making Tata’s task of find-ing a buyer all the more difficult. Tata Steel is the second-largest steel producer in Europe with a diversified presence across the conti-nent. It has a crude steel production capacity of over 18 million tonnes per annum in Europe, but only 14 mtpa is operational. Two of its three main European units, Port Talbot and Scunthorpe, are in Britain, with the remaining operations in the Netherlands. Its share price has halved in the past five years, a period in which it recorded asset impairment of more than $2.88 billion related to the UK business. The stock opened about 2 percent higher in Mumbai yesterday, as investors welcomed the decision to shed a burden on its Indian opera-tion. For the year ending March 2015, the com-pany took a write-down of a little over a billion dollars in its consolidated numbers. However, the tide seems to be turning for the India oper-ations. Tata also said it was still in talks with investment firm Greybull Capital over the sale of its British long products unit, which makes steel for use in construction. — Reuters 

# India’s Tata Steel seeks British exit 

# Thousands of jobs at stake 

PORT TALBOT: A picture shows the Tata Steel steel plant at Port Talbot, South Wales yesterday. Indian steel giant Tata Steel yesterday put its British business up for sale, placing thousands of jobs at risk and striking a heavy blow to the crisis-hit steel industry. — AFP 

BEIJING: Huge industrial overcapacity in China will drag on both the country’s and the region’s growth this year, the Asian Development Bank said yester-day, cutting its forecast for the world’s second-largest economy. China’s GDP growth is expected to slow to 6.5 percent in 2016, the ADB said in its flagship Asian Development Outlook, lowering its December forecast of 6.7 percent. With China casting its shadow over the conti-nent, the bank also reduced its prediction for Asia’s growth to 5.7 percent, down from 6.0 percent and slower than last year’s actual 5.9 percent expan-sion. China’s “growth moderation and uneven glob-al recovery are weighing down overall growth in Asia”, said the ADB’s chief economist Shang-Jin Wei. The document comes at a time of global uncer-tainty about Beijing’s ability to make much-needed cuts to its steel, coal, and cement sectors and man-age a tough economic transition to a more con-sumer-led model. China’s economy grew at its slowest pace for a quarter-century last year, and concerns have been mounting it could soften further after Beijing set a 6.5-7 percent target for 2016. “Weak external demand and excess capacity in some sectors, on top of a shrinking labour force and rising wages, continue to induce a gradual decline in the PRC’s growth rate,” Wei said. A “sharp slowdown” in Chinese real-estate investment will be a “drag” on the economy, the bank added, although it would be partly offset by consumption and green investment. The ADB’s China economics head Jurgen Conrad said the government “urgently needed” to accelerate cuts to excess capacity in real-estate and manufacturing, and cited high corporate debt as another challenge. “Supply-side reform is what China needs and what Asia needs,” he said, adding that Beijing would not use “shock therapy” to make changes. Elsewhere across the continent the prospects were brighter, however, according to the Manila-based bank. The ADB predicted growth in India, the fastest-expanding large economy in the world, would slow to 7.4 percent, from 7.6 percent in 2015, but would accelerate again to 7.8 percent in 2017. “India is growing faster now than China... and is likely to remain so in the near future,” Wei said, saying struc-tural reforms and improvements to labour market regulations would help boost activity. Indonesia will lead Southeast Asia as Jakarta ploughs cash into infrastructure and encourages private investment, the ADB added, predicting GDP would grow 5.2 percent this year, up from 4.8 percent in 2015. China’s heavy industries, many of them state-owned, have provided mass employment for tens of millions of people but are increasingly loss-mak-ing and debt-ridden. Shutting inefficient companies could cause further problems, the bank said, poten-tially leading to 3.6 million job losses and drying up tax revenues for local governments. —AFP 

# China overcapacity darkens Asia’s growth prospects: ADB 

BEIJING: A woman walks through a residential complex in Beijing yesterday. Huge industrial overcapacity in China will drag on both the country’s and the region’s growth this year, the Asian Development Bank said yesterday, cutting its forecast for the world’s second-largest economy. —AFP 

HONG KONG: Pedestrians cross a road in the Central district of Hong Kong yesterday. —AFP AL-AHSA: Saudi Aramco was continuing to work on both its upstream and downstream projects without any cancellations, with its Khurais scheme expected to come online in 2018, the chief executive of the state-owned oil giant said yesterday. Global oil majors and Saudi Arabia have been paring back investments to cope with the continuing lower oil price environment. The kingdom is the world’s largest exporter of crude oil. “Until now, our projects are con-tinuing in downstream, upstream, there are no projects that have been cancelled from our programs,” Amin Nasser told reporters on the sidelines of an finance event. Asked if there will be any delay in explo-ration activities, Nasser said: “Exploration activities are continuing. We have one rig in the Red Sea in the shallow water.” He added work on the clean fuels project in Ras Tanura is ongoing, while the completion of the Khurais oil field expansion would be in 2018. Aramco revived bidding for the clean-er fuels project at its biggest oil refinery, sources familiar with the plan told Reuters last month, following speculation that low-er oil prices would force the project’s can-cellation. — Reuters 

# Aramco CEO says no projects cancelled, Khurais ready in 2018 

FRANKFURT: The German central bank, or Bundesbank, is worried that private savers may soon face negative interest rates on their bank accounts, board mem-ber Andreas Dombret warned in a maga-zine interview yesterday. “The banks and savings banks I speak to want to do everything to avoid that,” Dombret told Der Spiegel news magazine in its online edition. “But the longer the current interest rate environment lasts, the higher the possibility that they might pass on the negative rates” to customers, Dombret said. “As the supervisory authori-ty, we don’t tell the banks what to do. Every bank and savings bank must decide for itself.” In a bid to push up chronically low inflation in the euro area, the European Central Bank slashed its main refi refinancing rate down to zero this month and lowered its deposit rate to minus 0.40 percent. The Bundesbank has made no secret of its opposition to the ECB’s decision to bring its key rates down so low for such a long period. Bundesbank president Jens Weidmann said he was not convinced by the ECB’s latest policy moves. With low interest rates offering little incentive to savers and weighing on banks’ profitability, board member Dombret noted that “lots of banks have increased their fees to cus-tomers or are thinking about increasing them.” This could be in the area of cash withdrawals, cheque card issue or other services, he said. As savers look for alternative returns on their money, the Bundesbank board member suggested that low interest rates could eventually lead to the emergence of a real estate bubble. “Real estate prices have risen sharply in metropolitan areas in recent years,” he said. “That’s why I have more reservations than in previous years,” Dombret said, urging banks to “be very cautious and weigh up their real estate credit decisions very carefully.” — AFP 

# Bundesbank concerned about negative interest rates 

TOKYO: Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe set yesterday an ambitious target to double the number of foreign visitors and the amount of money they spend in the country by 2020 to breathe life into a flag-ging economy. Since taking office in late 2012, Abe’s administration has relaxed visa requirements for several Asian countries, which has notably led to an influx of Chinese visitors. An ensuing boom in tourism has been one of the few bright spots of his structural reform agenda. Abe is looking to reap further benefits from inbound tourism as Tokyo prepares to host the Olympics in 2020. Luring more tourists could also help ease concerns about consistently weak domestic con-sumption and Japan’s declining population. “Today we have decided a new vision for tourism,” Abe said after a meeting with gov-ernment ministers. “Tourism is an important part of our eco-nomic growth strategy, of revitalising local economies and of our goal to raise gross domestic product to 600 trillion yen.” Abe aims to attract 40 million visitors to Japan, which would be about twice as much as the number of tourists who entered Japan last year, a statement showed. In 2015, tourists spent 3.5 trillion yen ($31.2 billion) in Japan, and Abe wants to more than double that amount to 8 trillion yen by 2020 by relaxing visa requirements further and improving flight access, the statement showed. Abe will also try to promote more of the country’s national treasures and public parks to guests from overseas. The government is also targeting 60 mil-lion visitors and 15 trillion yen in tourist spending by 2030, the statement showed. The number of inbound tourists has been hitting record levels since the government began relaxing visa requirements. The benefit was initially seen at depart-ment stores in Tokyo, where Chinese tourists bought electronics and clothes in bulk to re-sell in their home country. The boost to retail sales is now starting to spread to regional economies as more tourists visit temples and shrines in rural areas. — Reuters 

# Japan’s Abe aims to double tourist visits by 2020 B U S I N E S S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

## MIDEAST STOCK MARKETS 

LONDON: Stock markets around the world powered higher yesterday after Federal Reserve boss Janet Yellen hinted that the US central bank would not lift interest rates any time soon. US stocks rose early joining most global bourses in rallying after her that pledged a cautious approach to hiking interest rates. About 30 min-utes into trade, the Dow Jones Industrial Average stood at 17,765.84, up 132.73 points (0.75 percent). The broad-based S&P 500 rose 13.89 (0.68 percent) to 2,068.90, while the tech-rich Nasdaq Composite Index gained 45.02 (0.93 percent) at 4,891.64. Yellen’s remarks Tuesday emphasized the need for a gradual approach to lifting rates in light of global economic uncertainty. The speech was “viewed as unequivocally dovish,” said Briefing.com analyst Patrick O’Hare. Stock markets in London, Frankfurt and Paris were up 1.7 percent or more. Sentiment was also boosted by data from payroll firm ADP showing US companies added a solid 200,000 jobs in March. Apple led the Dow with a gain of 2.3 percent. All but four companies in the 30-member index were positive. Dow member Boeing rose 0.2 percent on news it was eliminating 4,000 posi-tions in its commercial aircraft division as part of a cost-cutting push. Carnival advanced 3.4 percent as first-quarter net income nearly tripled to $142 mil-lion. The cruise company lifted its 2016 forecast based on stronger booking trends compared with last year. Yoga-attire maker Lululemon Athletica surged 9.4 percent as fourth-quarter earnings climbed 5.9 percent to $117.4 million on a five percent rise in comparable store sales. Petroleum-linked stocks pushed higher as oil prices gained. Dow mem-ber Chevron rose 1.3 percent, ConocoPhillips 1.8 percent and drilling firm Nabors Industries 1.1 per-cent. Acadia Pharmaceuticals surged 12.0 percent on news a US Food and Drug Administration panel voted in favor of its Nuplazid medication for the treatment of psychosis associated with Parkinson’s disease. The news sent Hong Kong and Shanghai equities soaring yesterday, but Tokyo fell on the back of a stronger yen which hurts exporters. The largely positive mood spilled over into Europe where major stock mar-kets gained up to 2 percent in after-noon deals. Wall Street gained further at the opening bell yesterday. “European equities are trading higher... on the back of a late rally in US stocks in the aftermath of a speech by US Fed chief Janet Yellen,” said ana-lyst Markus Huber at City of London Markets. Yellen promised a cautious approach to future US interest rate hikes, saying the central bank has to pay heed to “broader concerns about global financial developments”, including oil prices and the overall pace of growth. A better-than-expected reading on US growth and other improved data recently had raised hopes that the global turmoil at the start of the year may have ended, and fuelled talk that the central bank might consider a fur-ther tightening of borrowing costs. However, while Yellen pointed out that the world’s top economy had “proven remarkably resilient” in the face of a global slowdown-particularly in China and plunging oil prices, she took a dovish stance on monetary policy this year. With the prospect of US rates remaining low for some time, traders moved out of the dollar, sending it tumbling against the yen, which in turn hit Japanese exporters and Tokyo’s Nikkei stocks index. 

Mining sector forges higher 

The weaker greenback boosted many dollar-denominated commodi-ties, which become cheaper for buy-ers using stronger currencies. In turn, that gave a shot in the arm to Europe’s metals and mining sector yesterday. “Leading the way is the materials sec-tor as commodities received a boost on the back of the weaker dollar,” said analyst Brenda Kelly at traders London Capital Group. Mining giant Anglo American surged 11.8 percent to 535.80 pence, Glencore won 8.0 percent to 155.35 pence and BHP Billiton added 6.2 per-cent to 796.70 pence. Yellen added Tuesday that job creation remains strong and other signs of growth firm, even as the US manufacturing indus-try has been hit by the strong dollar and the sharp contraction in the oil and gas industry. But she said that even if the US maintains a moderate growth rate, the Fed must heed “broader concerns about global financial developments”, including oil prices and the overall pace of growth. She also rejected arguments, including from some Fed officials, that inflation has increased to the point that policymakers must raise rates sooner rather than later. “Despite some of her colleagues having expressed rather hawkish views of late especially as inflation has started to go up, Yellen made it very clear... that the downside risks to the economy are by far outweighing concerns about inflation possibly moving up in the months ahead,” added Huber. “This not only means that another interest hike is not on the cards any time soon but also that rates are likely to rise less this year than markets have already discounted.” —Agencies 

# Yellen drives global stock markets rally 

MANILA: San Miguel Corporation President Ramon Ang speaks in front of a giant electronic board at the Philippine Stock Exchange during the listing of San Miguel in Manila’s financial district yesterday. —AFP DUBAI: Middle East stock markets were mixed yesterday as money flowed into bourses in the United Arab Emirates but many markets dropped in shrinking volumes, suggesting some investors were pulling out. Given the UAE’s diversified economy, its markets are widely seen as relatively well-placed to ride out a looming economic slowdown in the Gulf this year prompted by low oil prices. Dubai’s index climbed 1.5 percent to 3,325 points, bouncing from near technical support on its mid-March low of 3,253 points. GFH Financial rose 3.0 percent after saying it had signed a 100 million pound ($144 million) deal to become an anchor partner in a central London property development. It said this would reflect positively on its financial results in the first or second quar-ters of this year, but did not elaborate. Shuaa Capital, the most heavily traded stock, jumped its 15 percent daily limit. It has been rebounding from a record low hit earlier this year and has seen unusually heavy volumes this week. Abu Dhabi’s index gained 1.8 percent as Abu Dhabi National Energy (TAQA), the most active stock, jumped 12.2 percent before the release of its fourth-quarter earnings, expected early on Thursday. One market source said an Abu Dhabi institutional investor was buying the stock actively. Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank rose 2.7 percent to 6.57 dirhams after Citigroup raised its target price for the stock to 8.2 dirhams from 7.5 dirhams. Elsewhere in the Gulf, however, the mood was less positive. The Saudi index rose 0.6 percent but falling trading volume indicated that after the bourse jumped earlier this month in response to the rebound of oil prices to near $40 a barrel, some investors believe the uptrend is ending. Much of the index’s gain was due to heavyweight Saudi Basic Industries, which rose 1.7 percent. Hospital operator Middle East Healthcare, which listed on Tuesday, jumped its 10 percent daily limit for a second straight day. Many Saudi stocks are priced cheaply in their ini-tial public offers and rise by their daily limits for several days after listing. Qatar edged down 0.04 percent as Gulf Warehousing retreated 2.3 percent, after soaring last week when the Qatar Central Securities Depository said it had raised the maximum for-eign ownership percentage for its shares to 49 percent of capital. Egypt’s index fell 1.1 percent as real estate firm Talaat Mostafa dropped 3.7 percent after declaring cash dividends worth a combined 0.145 Egyptian pound per share. But Telecom Egypt jumped 4.5 percent after a ministry of communications source told Reuters that Vodafone Egypt owed Telecom Egypt 4.5 billion Egyptian pounds ($506.8 mil-lion) in deferred profit payments; payment would be made in two instalments, with the first in April. —Reuters 

# Markets mixed, money flows to UAE 

LONDON: Gold fell yesterday as a rally in assets seen as higher risk, such as equities, prompted some investors to cash in gains sparked the pre-vious day by Fed chair Janet Yellen’s cautious tone on further rate hikes. Yellen’s signal that interest rates will likely rise only gradually reas-sured gold investors, as higher rates boost the opportunity cost of holding non-yielding assets like bullion. The metal remains on track for its best quar-ter in nearly 30 years, up 16.4 percent, after prices rallied sharply earlier in the year as wor-ries about economic growth, particularly in China, shook up stock markets. Consequent demand for safe havens, combined with reced-ing expectations for further US Federal Reserve rate hikes, have driven gold up more than 16 percent since January, making this its strongest quarter so far since the third quarter of 1986. Spot gold was at $1,232.63 an ounce at 1330 GMT, down 0.7 percent, having risen 1.7 percent on Tuesday after Yellen’s speech. US gold futures for April delivery were down $2.40 an ounce at $1,235.10. “There was quite a big move yester-day from $1,220 to $1,240, which was really in line with what Yellen said. You had dollar weak-ness, but the gold move was stronger, which suggests some genuine interest in gold,” Julius Baer analyst Carsten Menke said. “But overall, the strength in gold has also been driven by global growth fears, and this is slowly ebbing as market participants get less afraid about the global economy. In the equity market today, prices are up again. The weakness in gold we’re seeing today is a mirror image of the positive mood in financial markets overall.” World stocks climbed near the highest levels this year yesterday as investors rolled back expectations for how fast and how far US inter-est rates might rise. Holdings of the world’s biggest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, SPDR Gold Shares, declined for the first day in two weeks on Tuesday, by 3.3 tons. Focus is now shifting to the main US jobs data later this week. “Though the rally looks intact it can be dented by a good employment number in the non-farm payrolls release for March scheduled for Friday,” HSBC said in a note. “A number above 200,000 new net jobs could wear on gold and clip recent gains.” Among oth-er precious metals, silver was flat at $15.34 an ounce, platinum was up 0.7 percent at $974.17 an ounce and palladium was down 0.3 percent at $571.39 an ounce. —Reuters 

# Gold retreats to $1,240 after post-Yellen rally 

YANGON: A Myanmar vendor sells vegetables at a market in Yangon yesterday. —AFP B U S I N E S S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

KUWAIT: The new BMW 7 Series is an outstanding example of technical innova-tion of the highest level coupled with contemporary luxury. Created through the concept of ‘Technological Poetry’ one sees the perfect marriage between advanced technology and its interpreta-tion into design. Dynamic proportions, precise lines and sculptured surfaces: The BMW 7 Series shows typical BMW design in its most elegant form. Be it in the for-ward-surging front, the extended side view or powerful rear, the BMW 7 Series radiates its natural and authoritative pres-ence from every angle. “If you ever wanted quality craftsman-ship at a supreme level then this is the car for you. Evidence of this is the Floating Design Mirror: The side mirrors appear to grow organically out of the window out-line. Modern and elegant in their effect, the aerodynamics are also enhanced,” said Yousef Al-Qatami, General Manager of Ali Alghanim & Sons Automotive. “Other examples of genuine detail refine-ments are the Sky Lounge, a panorama glass roof welcoming passengers to enjoy the day or star-filled night sky, as illumi-nated light patterns provide a luxurious interior light ambience in six colours,” he added. Active air stream kidney grille with ver-tical slats in Chrome, the high-precision and powerfully distinctive appearance of the wheel design and the seamlessly incorporated Hofmeister kink makes this new model distinctive. Looking inside, high-quality materials such as chrome with interior trims in Poplar Grain Grey fine-wood finish and seats with uphol-stery such as exclusive ‘Nappa’ leather in Ivory White create a harmonious combi-nation. Also displaying a high level of handicraft is the instrument panel deco-rated by a continuous seam. Nothing beats the new BMW 7 Series for comfort and luxury. A host of new BMW ConnectedDrive driver assistance features include the intuitive Touch Command: a 7-inch tablet positioned in the rear of the vehicle, offers passengers a completely new experience in controlling multiple in-car functions. Through Touch Command, rear passengers are able to control in-car infotainment and comfort features, such as the new BMW 7 Series Vitality Program, which offers luxurious in-seat massage options. A unique Gesture Control function, which offers those inside the vehicle with the option to increase the volume of the radio only by gesturing at the screen, is also one of the new technology features. Whichever seat you occupy in the BMW 7 Series, you feel the contemporary and future-orientated atmosphere of lux-urious wellbeing. A virtuosic composition of material, light, shape, colour and inno-vative technologies to accompany people who wish to move things - be it from the rear or from the driver’s seat. The search for pioneering innovations is the driving force for the BMW engineers. With func-tions such as BMW Gesture Control, BMW Laserlight or Remote Control Parking, they are setting further future-orientated standards in the BMW 7 Series. In laser high beam mode, BMW Laserlight illumi-nates a range of up to 600 metres nearly twice as far as that of conventional head-lights. With the use of this new headlight technology, BMW Laserlight improves safety with better night time visibility. In addition, the BMW Touch Command is a tablet with 7” display that is integrat-ed into the centre armrest in the rear for the first time. It is connected to the car’s systems and offers comprehensive opera-tion and setting options. Using the tablet, the rear seats and front passenger seat can be adjusted. Air conditioning, ventilation and seat heating in the rear can also be operated, as well as the interior lighting with Ambient light, the blinds for the glass sunroof and the roller sunblinds. The entertainment functions can also be con-trolled. The portable BMW Touch Command can be conveniently charged from the Snap-in adapter. “The all-new 7 Series has certainly raised the level of automobile engineer-ing, innovation and design. The new model exemplifies the highest level of precision coupled with the ultimate in luxury and comfort. We have no doubt that it will surpass our customers’ expec-tations,” Al-Qatami concluded. 

KUWAIT: In this report, we survey the extent to which the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) banks have been affected by low oil prices and highlight relative vulnerabilities of individual banking systems. The pressures highlighted in this report, combined with those generated by the strong sovereign linkages in the region. Low Oil Price Challenge Banks’ Resilience’) were among the factors that underpinned our recent action to downgrade some banks in Oman and Bahrain while placing the ratings of 31 banks on review for downgrade in all six GCC countries. Low oil prices have pressured operating conditions for banks across the GCC countries, with real non-oil economic growth halving to an average of around 3 percent over 2016 from around 6 percent in 2014. Reduced oil revenues for regional govern-ments have already led to a more challenging funding environment, with annual deposit growth slowing significantly, from around 10 percent during 2014 to around 3 percent during 2015 and we expect liquidity to remain tight over 2016. Also, while banks’ asset quality per-formance and capital buffers have been broadly maintained so far, we note that pressure on loan growth and asset quality could increase if GCC governments become more fiscally selective and let the non-oil economy slow down further. As such, we will continue to monitor the broad economic performance of the individual sys-tems and the key risk transmission channels for pressures, in particular government spending policies as well as investor and consumer confi-dence, liquidity, and asset quality (direct and indirect exposures). The widening gap between oil prices and fiscal break even oil prices across GCC gov-ernments has resulted in a significant increase in some of these governments’ deficits, which has weakened their own cred-itworthiness, as highlighted by the recent rat-ing actions taken on the government of major oil-exporting countries. In turn, these developments also highlight the reduced capacity (or possibly willingness) of these governments to support both the broad economy and the banks in times of stress, if needed. We will continue to assess for any changes in the GCC governments’ capacity or willingness to provide such support. 

FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Bahrain’s banking system is under pressure, linked directly to the government’s weakening fiscal position and capacity to provide support to the fairly large Bahraini banking sector (230 percent of GDP). Public sector borrowings grew by around 15 percent in the first six months of 2015, which has helped sustain the domestic economy but poses risks for 2016, as it is unclear how the government will be able to maintain the current levels of spending. Over the same period, the level of government deposits declined by around 4 percent, reduc-ing local liquidity for the banks from a relative-ly strong base. In this context, we expect loan performance to weaken in the second half of 2016, while capital should remain solid. Oman’s banking system also continues to remain vulnerable. We expect the operating environment to weaken further as indicated by declining business volumes, investment, liquidity and reduced consumer confidence. We expect these developments to impact Oman banks’ funding, profitability and ulti-mately asset quality in 2016. At the same time, the government’s fiscal pressures mean the capacity and willingness to support the bank-ing system is declining as well. In Saudi Arabia, banks face the dual pressure of weakening operating conditions and fiscal pressures sig-naling a potential reduction of the govern-ment’s capacity to provide support. While we expect new asset quality pressures, profitabili-ty and capital buffers are expected to remain resilient. Government borrowing will continue to increase, helping to sustain domestic credit growth. Lower overall deposit inflows, the growth rate of which declined to around 1 percent during 2015 from 12 percent during 2014, will commensurately reduce banking system liquidity. Although increases in sover-eign borrowing are positive for the domestic banks’ profitability, these trends may ultimate-ly impact sovereign creditworthiness and, con-sequently, the deposit ratings of banks that currently benefit from government support. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) banking sector remains moderately exposed to a pro-longed period of low oil prices. Despite chal-lenges in operating conditions, the UAE’s more diversified economy and the macro prudential initiatives in real estate and banking regula-tions since the global financial crisis in 2008 will support the solvency profiles of the banks. Nevertheless, deposit growth is expected to slow significantly to around 3 percent from the 10 percent levels of 2012-14. While sovereign buffers remain large, the highest bank deposit ratings in the UAE (mostly for Abu Dhabi based banks) are vulnerable given their prox-imity to the government’s rating and some of the significant rating uplift levels incorporated in the banks’ ratings, based on our current assessment of a very high probability of gov-ernment support. Qatar is still expected to deliver solid non-oil economic growth in the 8 percent range driven by continued infrastructure invest-ments that provide stable growth prospects for 2016. However, the banks have experienced a sig-nificant slowdown in overall deposit growth, to 6 percent over 2015 from above 20 percent during 2012-13, and we expect credit growth to fall to a more moderate 8 percent over the next 12 months from 15 percent levels previ-ously. The resultant funding gap is already pressuring system liquidity and driving banks to compete for deposits and, at the same time, seek longer-term, but costlier, market funding. Kuwait is expected to be the least affected system. Credit growth in the country has been consistently the lowest in the GCC since the global financial crisis, driven by very limited government spending and as such, leaving room for increases in 2016 that will be benefi-cial for the banks. Deposit growth too is expected to be stable given the limited public-sector balances held at local Kuwaiti banks (around 15 percent of total system deposits). Nevertheless, the low fiscal break-even oil prices of Kuwait and Qatar, coupled with large reserve buffers will support elevated public spending for an extended period for these sys-tems, moderating the downside risks to the operating environments and, consequently, the respective banking sector fundamentals. Nevertheless, like the UAE, the highest deposit ratings in these two systems are also vulnera-ble given their proximity to the government ratings, which are currently facing some pres-sure. 

GCC CENTRAL BANKS 

Overall yearly deposit growth at banks in Oman and Bahrain has slowed to around 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively, but their governments have consciously kept their level of deposits in the system stable at around 32 percent and 11 percent, respectively, to help maintain liquidity. As a result, loans-to-deposits ratios for these systems have been broadly stable at 98 percent and 77 percent, respectively, unlike some of the other GCC sys-tems. Liquid asset buffers remain solid in the 30 percent-35 percent range for the two sys-tems. Going forward, a key question will be whether these governments will take stronger measures to protect their own fiscal position and whether this could have an effect on the systems’ deposit levels. In Saudi Arabia, deposit growth has slowed more significantly to around 1 percent during 2015 from 12 percent for 2014. This slowdown is driven by modest declines in government deposits (overall government deposits fell by around 2 percent during 2015, while time and savings deposits fell by 5.7 percent), which is a reversal from the positive trend observed in prior years. As a result, loan-to-deposit ratios have started to increase and the regulator has increased the limit for this metric to 90 per-cent from 85 percent to provide headroom for more lending. Liquid asset levels remain stable at around 32 percent of total assets for the sys-tem. We expect liquidity to tighten further as inflows from government continue to decrease. Although overall deposit growth is down in Kuwait as well, it remains least affected by pressures from the low oil price as the decline has been fairly modest - to 3 percent in 2015 from around 4 percent in 2014. Also, unlike the other GCC systems where the level of govern-ment deposits has declined, in Kuwait it has actually increased by around 11 percent dur-ing 2015 to reach around 15 percent of total deposits, however, the increase was primarily driven by re-classification of deposits from a government related entity which was reported as market funds until 2014 but now customer deposits. Banking system indicators of loan-to-deposits and liquid assets to total assets are expected to remain broadly stable at their cur-rent levels of 85 percent and 30 percent, respectively, over 2016. A key driver of the favorable conditions that have long supported GCC banks is the reallocation of high oil revenues into the broad domestic economy through direct pub-lic spending, which has helped soften the overall economic slowdown, with total real GDP declining only to 2 percent in 2015 from 3 percent in 2014 (see appendix 1 for more information on linkages between oil revenues and public spending). 

# All-new BMW 7 Series takes design, engineering innovation to new level 

# GCC Banks - Moody’s Investor Service Report 

# Low oil prices challenge liquidity conditions B U S I N E S S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

KUWAIT: Abdulmohsen Abdulaziz Al-Babtain Co (AABC), the authorised distributor of Infiniti in the State of Kuwait, conducted the 2015 Infiniti National Sales Competition. The competition pitted the skills and knowledge of AABC’s top three Infiniti Sales Ambassadors focussing on various sales skills that included product knowledge, general automotive information, sales processes and technology. The day’s program commenced with a written examination, product walk-around presentation and a question and answer session that tested the contestants’ knowledge of Infiniti brand, products and technology. First place was awarded to Yasser Abed who received a total cash prize valued at AED 3,000 presented from Nissan Gulf (NGF) and a token of appreciation. As the champion, he will be competing on behalf of AABC in an attempt to win the prestigious regional con-test trophy and a cash award up to AED 15,000 (Approximately $4,080). The regional competi-tions will be held in the beautiful Sofitel Dubai, the Palm Resort and Spa in early April. The awarding ceremony was attended by a number of guests from the regional offices headed by Ms. Fatma Zenagui, Senior Dealer Process, Training & CRM Manager at Nissan Gulf and Mr. Rami Al-Salih, Assistant Sales & Marketing Manager at Nissan Gulf. Also pres-ent were members of Al Babtain top manage-ment headed by Mr. Abdulmohsen Abdulaziz Al Babtain - Al-Babtain Group Human Resources General Manager. Commenting on the event, Abdulmohsen said “At Al-Babtain there is a deep commit-ment to continuously enhancing the skills and knowledge of staff with the aim of delivering unparalleled service to our customers and prospects.” He further added, “Such competi-tions are a chance for the staff to showcase their talents in a competitive environment and prove their hard work and dedication to the organisation and brand. Our objective is not only to choose the undisputed champion, but endeavour to improve and advance skills of all the participat-ing members and giving them motivation. Keeping knowledge and skills up to date enables our staff to deliver high quality service that meets the expectations of our customers and safeguards the reputation of our organiza-tion. Al-Babtain owes its success to quality cus-tomer service and a dedicated workforce.” 

# Infiniti Al-Babtain conducts Infiniti Kuwait national sales competition 

NEW YORK: Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen said yesterday that the Fed still envisions only a gradual pace of interest rate increases in light of global pressures that could affect the US econo-my. Yellen didn’t specify a timetable for further hikes to follow the Fed’s rate increase in December from record lows. She said risks to the United States appear limited but cautioned that that assessment is subject to “considerable uncertainty.” Speaking to the Economic Club of New York, Yellen said the central bank is monitoring a glob-al economic slump, sharply lower oil prices and stock market turbulence, which she said have hurt some US consumers and key sectors such as manufacturing. Singling out China - the world’s second-largest economy, after the United States - Yellen noted widespread uncer-tainty over how well Beijing will manage a deli-cate slowdown in coming years. She said that because foreign economic growth seems to have further weakened this year, the Fed will “proceed cautiously” in raising rates. In light of her comments, most economists expect no hike at the Fed’s next policy meeting -April 26-27 - despite remarks last week from oth-er Fed officials that had raised the possibility of a rate increase then. “Despite a growing chorus of calls from even centrist-leaning officials to resume raising policy rates, Chair Yellen stuck to the dovish script of the March meeting state-ment,” when the Fed expressed concerns about the global economy and kept rates unchanged, said Sal Guatieri, senior economist at BMO Capital Markets. Investors welcomed Yellen’s message that the Fed would move slowly in rais-ing rates. Major US stock indexes turned higher after she began her remarks, reversing an early loss, and bond yields dipped. Yellen noted that the US job market and housing recovery have lifted the economy close to full health despite the risks that remain. She observed that the economy has benefited from low long-term US borrowing rates. Those rates have been held down by money flowing into US bonds from investors, who have scaled back their expectations for the number of Fed rate hikes this year from four to two at most. The Fed chair said that while stock prices have rebounded to roughly where they were when 2016 began, “in other respects economic and financial conditions remain less favorable than they did” in December, when the Fed raised its key rate modestly after keeping it near zero since 2008, when the financial crisis erupted. Yellen cautioned that the Fed’s expectations for rates remain subject to revision to reflect any significant changes in the US or international economic outlook. “I anticipate that the overall fallout for the US economy from global market developments since the start of the year will most likely be lim-ited, although this assessment is subject to con-siderable uncertainty,” she said. She said she still thought inflation will rise gradually over the next two to three years to the Fed’s target of 2 per-cent annual increases in prices. Inflation has been running below this level for nearly four years. But Yellen warned that if oil prices began falling again, it could have “adverse spillover effects to the rest of the global economy.” 

Risk concerns 

Such expressions of concern about risks, which were sprinkled throughout her speech, help explain why Yellen seems inclined to keep rates unchanged in the near future. Responding to a question after her speech, Yellen said the Fed foresees US worker productiv-ity, which has been historically low in recent years, eventually rising but says that assessment is “a source of huge uncertainty.” Productivity -the average output produced per hour of work -is needed to boost living standards. When the Fed met two weeks ago, it signaled the likelihood of just two rate increases this year - half the num-ber that Fed officials had envisioned in December. As a result, most economists conclud-ed that no rate increase would likely occur before June. But comments last week from several of the Fed’s regional bank presidents had raised the possibility that the central bank would decide to raise rates in April. One of them, Dennis Lockhart of the Fed’s Atlanta regional bank, said in a speech that he thought the strength of the most recent US economic data could justify a rate increase as early as April. The views expressed by Lockhart, who is regarded as a centrist in his approach to interest rates, was echoed by some other Fed regional bank presidents. Whatever decision the Fed does make in April will hinge on its view of the economy’s durabili-ty. In the past week, some reports have pro-duced weaker-than-expected readings, includ-ing a sharp drop in orders for long-lasting manu-factured goods and tepid consumer spending. Those reports have led some economists to downgrade their forecasts for growth in the cur-rent January-March quarter from a 2 percent annual rate to a lackluster 1 percent. The consumer spending report also showed that the Fed’s preferred inflation gauge is still signaling that inflation remains well below its target level. For the 12 months that ended in February, inflation rose just 1 percent. “Core” inflation, which excludes the volatile items of food and energy, increased 1.7 percent. — AP 

# Fed sees gradual pace of rate hikes: Yellen 

NEW YORK: Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen addresses an Economic Club of New York lunch-eon, on Tuesday. — AFP 

KUWAIT: Ooredoo Kuwait (National Mobile Telecommunications Co KSC) has entered into an agreement to purchase 99 percent of Internet Service Provider FASTtelco’s shares for a total considera-tion of KD 11 million. The transaction is subject to the approval from the relevant regulatory and governmental authorities. This transaction is an important step for both Ooredoo and FASTtelco as well as for the industry. It shows Ooredoo’s strong commitment to deliver best in class services and enhance people’s lives. It will allow both companies to offer full scope of fixed broadband and mobile services and open the doors to new rev-enue opportunities. Following this trans-action, Ooredoo and FASTtelco will con-tinue to co-exist as separate entities in the foreseeable future. Ooredoo CEO Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdullah Al-Thani said: “This is a major milestone for Ooredoo showing strong commitment to enhance people’s lives. All stakeholders will benefit from this complimentary transaction, especially our business and residential customers, who will have access to the full scope of our advanced mobile and fixed broad-band services. We will invest to provide the best end-to-end customer experi-ence across both companies and boost both Ooredoo’s and FASTtelco’s growth profiles.” FASTtelco CEO Talal Jassim Al-Bahar said: “This transaction is a testament to the outstanding employees that we have at FASTtelco, the strength of the business we have created and the advanced solu-tions and capabilities we have offered to the market. Going forward, we see Ooredoo as the best partner for FASTtelco and therefore are excited about the potential this transaction unlocks for both companies and their employees in the years to come.” 

# Ooredoo Kuwait to purchase 99% of FASTtelco’s shares 

LONDON: Emerging markets may well appear cheap again after years of attrition, but there’s considerable trepidation about venturing back out to the developing world until the financial and political storms have finally lifted. Global investors have tiptoed back into emerging assets over the past six weeks at least partly on hopes that the gut-wrenching New Year shake-out may have been a final capitulation after three years of downdrafts and disappointments. According to the Institute for International Finance, foreigners ploughed some $36.8 billion back into emerging stocks and bonds in March -the highest inflow in nearly two years and well above monthly averages of the past four years. And yet these are baby steps. To put it in con-text, that portfolio pop compares with a total net capital outflow from emerging economies in 2015 of some $730 billion. For the coast to clear, three clouds have to evaporate. First is a lingering fear of higher US interest rates and dollar appreciation that squeezes hard-currency borrowers in emerging economies, stresses local currencies and forces credit to be far tighter than needed to buoy weakening economies. The second is China’s economic slowdown and its slipstream effect on commodity prices and emerging markets at large. And third is a spike in political risks in many countries such as Brazil, Turkey and South Africa - pressures mag-nified by recessions and rising joblessness but which, in turn, compound the economic malaise and policy paralysis on the ground. Neither of the first two global issues have been resolved. The world markets fillip of the past month has been rooted in the US Federal Reserve’s hesitation in adding to December’s first interest rate rise in almost a decade and the resultant dollar recoil. But rekindled Fed hawk-ishness as the quarter ends puts a potential relapse on the dashboard - particularly if the rebound in emerging assets is little more than a re-balancing of portfolios from extreme aver-sion and if you believe that cycles of dollar appreciation historically last far longer than this. JPMorgan strategists remain optimistic about emerging markets outperforming over the next three months - not least because funds are starved of income in developed economies. But they acknowledge that there’s no outright improvement in the economic picture and that price moves are built solely on re-positioning. “Given the almost five years of emerging markets equity and FX underperformance - and recent conversations with investors - it could take at least a few months before the average investor is again neutral,” they told clients. 

STAYING WELL AWAY 

So the move may have some legs, but it’s highly vulnerable if the global climate turns inclement again. For a start, JPMorgan’s rosier view hinges somewhat on the fading of ‘China tail risk’ involving messy yuan devaluation. And while Beijing has been forceful on the issue, few investors can muster much convic-tion about China’s markets. Christophe Donay, head of asset allocation at Swiss firm Pictet’s Wealth Management unit, said that China may hold the line for now but that there was a high risk over the next three years of a ‘Minsky moment’ - a sudden collapse of asset prices due to credit and currency pressure named after economist Hyman Minsky. “We are staying well away from emerging market assets because of that and hold very limited EM exposure,” he said. With such skepti-cism about the international environment, the return to markets riven by a host of disparate but highly disruptive domestic political risks seems brave at least. Mired in a deep recession, Brazil’s political strife has yet to reach a crescen-do. Dilma Rousseff is struggling to save her presidency and fighting an impeachment process amid a widening graft investigation into state oil firm Petrobras. While markets have rallied on the prospect of a new government, it could still take several more weeks or even months for a clear out-come. Turkey’s economy and government too are under strain given the war in neighbouring Syria, the resultant refugee crisis, internal con-flict with Kurdish separatists, a clampdown on local media and a diplomatic showdown with Russia. The struggling South African economy and its buckling infrastructure are compounded by pressure on President Jacob Zuma, his finance minister Pravin Gordhan and the ruling African National Congress amid a variety of accusations and probes about undue political interference and graft. More authoritarian governments in China and Russia may seem less vulnerable than their democratic counterparts, but slowdown and recession heighten the political risks there, too. An oil hit and foreign sanctions continue to hamper oversees refinancing by Moscow and its major companies. While the picture in Brazil may mask a brighter hue in Mexico or the slowdown in China hide the resilience in India, a still sizeable slice of the emerging universe remains in foment. China, Brazil, Russia, South Africa and Turkey together make up more than 42 percent of the market capitalization of MSCI’s bench-mark emerging market equities index. Asset manager Blackrock’s sovereign risk indices measuring the likelihood of defaults across the world contain a political risk sub-set called ‘willingness to pay’. This remained the biggest negative for the countries recording the biggest overall index declines in 2015 - Brazil, Russia, Peru and Colombia. —Reuters 

FRANKFURT: German retail giant Metro said yesterday it will spin off its businesses into two separately listed units, sending its shares sharply higher. “The management board of Metro is preparing the creation of two independent and sector-focused companies through a demerger of the group,” Metro said in a statement. Metro shares were the strongest performer on the mid-cap MDAX index of the Frankfurt stock exchange yesterday, shooting up 7.73 per-cent to 26.47 euros in a generally firmer market. A wholesale and food specialist group would be created comprising the group’s Metro, Makro and Real brands, as well as a consumer electron-ics products and services group centred around its Media and Saturn retail chains. Since there is little operational overlap between the two businesses and limited synergy effects, management felt “very strongly that a split into two independent and focused busi-nesses would be in the best interest of all stake-holders, as it would facilitate a significant oppor-tunity for faster and more profitable growth,” said supervisory board chief Juergen Steinemann. “Both entities would become individually stock-listed, with their own distinct profile, man-agement and supervisory boards,” Metro said. The aim would be to give each of the compa-nies and their respective management full con-trol over their corporate strategies. “This will fur-ther increase customer focus, accelerate growth of the businesses, simplify structures and improve time-to-market and operational excel-lence,” it argued. Moreover, both entities would be able to independently pursue acquisition and partnership strategies, enabling them to define their own expansion strategies. Metro said its management and supervisory boards “will make a decision on the contemplat-ed demerger of Metro group after a period of intensive consultation and review.” Should the boards and shareholders be in favour, “implementation of the demerger is aimed for mid-2017,” Metro said. “Over the past years, we have successfully revitalized our core businesses while significantly strengthening our group balance sheet,” said chief executive Olaf Koch. “Both our wholesale and food specialist business as well as our consumer electronics business have continued to commercially improve, are on a steady successful path and are best-equipped for an independent future,” Koch said. “Our shareholders would effectively own two well positioned market leaders, both of whom are increasingly focusing on their respec-tive business areas and are generating more val-ue for customers, employees and business part-ners.” — AFP 

# Investors tiptoe back into emerging markets as storm clouds linger Metro shares fly off the shelf as retail giant splits businesses 

DUESSELDORF: CEO of Metro Group, Olaf Koch, speaks in Duesseldor f, Germany yesterday. — AP t e c h n o l o g y THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

SAN FRANCISCO: Apple’s legal standoff with the FBI ended Monday, but experts say the issues behind it will come up again, as more tech companies take measures to guard their customers’ mes-sages, photos, business records and oth-er files. After weeks of heated debate, in which Apple had resisted the FBI’s demand for help, authorities say they found their own way to get the data from an encrypted iPhone used by one of the San Bernardino mass shooters. If you’re confused by all the back-and-forth in this high-stakes dispute, here’s a simplified breakdown:-

What was the fight about? 

At the Justice Department’s request, a federal judge ordered Apple Inc. last month to help the FBI unlock an encrypted iPhone used by Syed Farook, who along with his wife, Tashfeen Malik, killed 14 people in December. Specifically, the government wanted Apple to create software that would override an “auto-wipe” feature which is designed to kick in after anyone makes 10 wrong attempts at guessing the iPhone’s passcode. Once that feature is activated, it renders all the data on the phone permanently unreadable. Apple said it could create the soft-ware the government wanted, but it argued vehemently that doing so would be a bad idea. CEO Tim Cook said the order would set a precedent for more government demands, both in the United States and around the world. Apple also said the software could be stolen by hackers and used against other iPhones. Federal authorities insisted they were only asking for Apple’s help in a single case, although prosecutors nationwide have said they wanted similar assistance in oth-er cases where iPhones have been seized. While it’s unclear if any useful information was stored on the iPhone, FBI Director James Comey said authorities owed it to the San Bernardino victims to leave no stone unturned in their investigation. 

Why was it such a big deal? 

The case crystallized some long-sim-mering frustrations and conflict between the tech industry and law enforcement authorities. Apple and other tech compa-nies have been steadily increasing their use of encryption and other safeguards to protect their customers’ data, follow-ing a wave of recent hacking attacks and revelations about government data-col-lection by the former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden. Law enforcement officials, including Comey, have complained that encryp-tion and other data safeguards are help-ing dangerous people hide their activi-ties, while interfering with the govern-ment’s ability to investigate crimes. In the San Bernardino case, Apple drew support from other leading tech companies, computer security experts and civil liberties groups. They filed court briefs arguing the government was going too far in trying to force a compa-ny to create software that threatened its own customers’ security. Meanwhile, top officials in the Obama administration, including US Attorney General Loretta Lynch, denounced Apple’s stance and accused the company of trying to rewrite the rules for government investigations. 

What did the judge decide? 

The judge didn’t have to rule. Cook had said he was prepared to take the case to the US Supreme Court. But last week, just one day before Magistrate Sheri Pym had planned to hold a hearing on the dispute, the Justice Department asked for a delay. Authorities said an unnamed “outside party” had come for-ward with a technical solution to unlock-ing the phone, which the FBI needed time to test out. Then on Monday of this week, the government reported that it had suc-cessfully accessed the iPhone’s files and no longer needed Apple’s help. For that reason, the Justice Department asked the magistrate to withdraw the order she issued in February. 

So who won? 

Each side can claim a victory: Authorities say they achieved their goal of getting into the iPhone, while Apple successfully resisted a court order that it contends would be harmful to its cus-tomers. Even so, the FBI may have lost some credibility. After repeatedly insist-ing that only Apple had the means to help authorities unlock the phone, it turned out there was another way. —AP 

# Apple vs the FBI: What happened? 

LOS ANGELES: SoundCloud is entering paid music streaming, hoping to turn its huge community of cover singers, dub-step remixers and wannabe stars into a bigger source of revenue. Since its launch in 2007, the Berlin-based online music service has allowed pretty much any audio to be uploaded to its cloud - from Kanye West outtakes to teenagers singing over canned music. It has slowly intro-duced tools to earn revenue, introducing paid services for artists in 2008 and ad rev-enue sharing for invited musicians in 2014. But after signing deals with major labels, including holdout Sony Music this month, SoundCloud is adding a subscrip-tion plan for consumers, giving them ad-free listening and a whole range of music from mainstream artists that had shunned the service because it only gave tracks away for free, including top acts like Taylor Swift. SoundCloud, privately held and with tech investors like Union Square Ventures and Kleiner Perkins, will have a staggering 125 million tracks available when the paid tier, SoundCloud Go, launches Tuesday. That’s about four times other paid services. The fast-growing field of paid music sub-scription services is already crowded, led by companies like Spotify, with 30 million pay-ing subscribers, and Apple, which jumped to 10 million after launching last year. 

Massive variety 

SoundCloud hopes to distinguish itself with its massive variety and huge audi-ence of 175 million monthly listeners. “We’re at the very early days of streaming,” said Eric Wahlforss, the co-founder and chief technology officer, in an interview. “The pie is going to be very large over time.” SoundCloud Go will cost $10 a month and offer ad-free offline playback on mobile devices. It’ll also allow artists to choose whether to give away tracks for free or reserve them for paying customers - an option not allowed by Spotify, which depends on having quality free music to draw in prospective paying customers. Wahlforss said a key selling point for con-sumers is the many tracks on SoundCloud you won’t find elsewhere. “You’re going to be able to listen to a Rihanna next to an emerging artist, next to a DJ set, next to a mashup in the same playlist,” said Wahlforss. “It’s new for us, it’s new for the world.” For example, on SoundCloud you can find gems like a John Legend’s cover of the Adele hit, “Rolling in the Deep.” Or a 4-minute version of “30 Hours,” a shortened take of one of the songs from Kanye West’s latest album, “The Life of Pablo.” The album version is exclusively streaming on competing music service Tidal. SoundCloud’s reputation for hosting music that is off the beaten path is what drew DJ Kaskade to the platform. Without saying whether he’ll put music behind the pay wall, Kaskade’s manager Stephanie LaFera said it has long been a place for the DJ to connect with fans looking to dig deeper than a standard release. “We feel like we’re speaking to an audience that’s already with us, fans that are open to experimentation, sub-genres and all the quirks that come with the world of elec-tronic music,” she said. —AP 

# SoundCloud expands with new paid streaming plan 

BEIJING: A woman uses her mobile smartphone near an advertisement for a Chinese news web portal. —AP WASHINGTON: The FBI’s announcement that it mysteriously hacked into an iPhone is a public setback for Apple Inc, as consumers learned that they can’t keep the government out of even an encrypted device that US officials had claimed was impossible to crack. Apple, mean-while, remains in the dark about how to restore the security of its flagship product. The government said it was able to break into an iPhone used by a gunman in a mass shooting in California, but it didn’t say how. That puzzled Apple software engineers - and outside experts - about how the FBI broke the digital locks on the phone without Apple’s help. It also complicated Apple’s job repairing flaws that jeopardize its software. The Justice Department’s announcement that it was dropping a legal fight to compel Apple to help it access the phone also took away any obvious legal avenues Apple might have used to learn how the FBI did it. Magistrate Judge Sheri Pym on Tuesday vacated her Feb. 16 order, which compelled Apple to assist the FBI in hacking their phone. The Justice Department declined through a spokeswoman to comment Tuesday. 

Clues emerge 

A few clues have emerged. A senior law enforcement official told The Associated Press that the FBI managed to defeat an Apple securi-ty feature that threatened to delete the phone’s contents if the FBI failed to enter the correct passcode combination after 10 tries. That allowed the government to repeatedly and con-tinuously test passcodes in what’s known as a brute-force attack until the right code is entered and the phone is unlocked. It wasn’t clear how the FBI dealt with a relat-ed Apple security feature that introduces increasing time delays between guesses. The official spoke on condition of anonymity because this person was not authorized to dis-cuss the technique publicly. FBI Director James Comey has said with those features removed, the FBI could break into the phone in 26 min-utes. The FBI hacked into the iPhone used by gun-man Syed Farook, who died with his wife in a gun battle with police after they killed 14 peo-ple in December in San Bernardino. The iPhone, issued to Farook by his employer, the county health department, was found in a vehicle the day after the shooting. The FBI is reviewing information from the iPhone, and it is unclear whether anything useful can be found. Apple said that the legal case to force its cooperation “should never have been brought,” and it promised to increase the security of its products. CEO Tim Cook has said the Cupertino-based company is constantly trying to improve security for its users. The company declined to comment more Tuesday. The FBI’s announcement - even without revealing precise details - that it had hacked the iPhone was at odds with the government’s firm recommendations for nearly two decades that security researchers always work cooperatively and confidentially with software manufacturers before revealing that a product might be sus-ceptible to hackers. The aim is to ensure that American consumers stay as safe online as pos-sible and prevent premature disclosures that might damage a US company or the economy. 

Confidential discoveries 

As far back as 2002, the Homeland Security Department ran a working group that included leading technology industry executives to advise the president on how to keep confiden-tial discoveries by independent researchers that a company’s software could be hacked until it was already fixed. Even now, the Commerce Department has been trying to fine-tune those rules. The next meeting of a conference on the subject is April 8 in Chicago and it’s unclear how the FBI’s behavior in the current case might influence the government’s fragile relationship with technology companies or researchers. The industry’s rules are not legally binding, but the government’s top intelligence agency said in 2014 that such vulnerabilities should be reported to companies and the Obama adminis-tration put forward an interagency process to do so. “When federal agencies discover a new vul-nerability in commercial and open source soft-ware - a so-called ‘zero day ’ vulnerability because the developers of the vulnerable soft-ware have had zero days to fix it - it is in the national interest to responsibly disclose the vul-nerability rather than to hold it for an investiga-tive or intelligence purpose,” the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said in a state-ment in April 2014. The statement recommend-ed generally divulging such flaws to manufac-turers “unless there is a clear national security or law enforcement need.” Last week a team from Johns Hopkins University said it had found a security bug in Apple’s iMessage service that would allow hack-ers under certain circumstances to decrypt some text messages. The team reported its find-ings to Apple in November and published an academic paper after Apple fixed it. “That’s the way the research community han-dles the situation. And that’s appropriate,” said Susan Landau, professor of cybersecurity policy at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. She said it was acceptable for the government to find a way to unlock the phone but said it should reveal its method to Apple. Mobile phones are frequently used to improve cybersecurity, for example, as a place to send a backup code to access a website or authenticate a user. The chief technologist at the Center for Democracy and Technology, Joseph Lorenzo Hall, said keeping details secret about a flaw affecting millions of iPhone users “is exactly opposite the disclosure practices of the security research community. The FBI and Apple have a common goal here: to keep people safe and secure. This is the FBI prioritizing an investiga-tion over the interests of hundreds of millions of people worldwide.” —AP 

# Apple still clueless on how FBI hacked iPhone without help 

# Complicates Apple’s job repairing software flaws 

WASHINGTON: In this Feb 17, 2016 file photo, an iPhone is seen. —AP BEIJING: China is consolidating its ability to censor the Internet by drafting new rules requiring businesses that ser ve domestic Internet users to register their Web addresses inside the country, a move seen as targeting Chinese companies but that has raised concerns among foreign businesses. In its most draconian interpretation, the proposed requirements could also further limit access within the Chinese network, analysts said. That appears to be the latest step by the ruling Communist Party to erect cyber barriers in the name of what some officials call “Internet sovereignty.” “This expands control over domestic Internet operators and contributes to the gradual buildup of the capability under-pinning Internet sovereignty,” said Rogier Creemers, an expert on Chinese media pol-icy at the University of Oxford. Under the draft regulations released this week by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, any firm that pro-vides services to Chinese users must regis-ter its domain, or Web address, with a Chinese provider. The rules are found in Article 37 of the ministry ’s proposed update to a set of decade-old Internet laws. 

Flow of information 

Analysts said the main targets appear to be Chinese Internet companies that store their content domestically but keep their Web address registered overseas with rep-utable, international firms for security pur-poses. Requiring them to shift their regis-tration to a domestic provider under Chinese government control would allow censors to react more quickly in blocking access to certain sites, said Long Weilian, an IT consultant based in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen who has blogged extensively on the issue. “Before, they had to contact the server, get the address, talk to the manager and then ask them to censor something,” Long said. “If the domains are all domestic, they can directly stop traffic going to your domain with a command.” Jacob Parker, vice president for China operations with the US-China Business Council, which lob-bies the Chinese government on trade pol-icy, said his group was concerned that the rules would block the free flow of informa-tion. “Any kind of restrictions would under-mine China’s broader economic develop-ment goals,” Parker said. Concerned that a borderless, US-led global Internet could weaken its political control, China’s government has repeated-ly issued cyber regulations that have drawn criticism from Western trade groups. Following pushback from the White House last year, China dropped a provision in a cybersecurity law that would require companies to keep Chinese user data at facilities in China, allowing the gov-ernment access to personal information. Questions remain about the new rules’ true purpose and how strictly they would be enforced. The ministry is currently solic-iting feedback on the proposed registra-tion regulations, and Chinese laws are often softened during the revision process. Fang Xingdong, the director of a top Chinese technology think tank, said he believes Chinese leaders are seeking to enhance their control, but not to wall China off from the rest of the world. “Under the current wording, all this is doing is integrating large Chinese Web service providers under a more rigorous supervision framework, while most small businesses won’t be affected,” said Fang, whose organization regularly submits opinions to the government on Internet issues. Any attempt to seal off the Chinese Internet “would hurt China as much as America,” he said. —AP 

# China proposes new Web rules that could enhance censorship 

LOS ANGELES: In this March 22, 2016, photo, Eric Wahlforss, the co-founder and chief technology officer of Soundcloud, talks during an interview. —AP LOS ANGELES: The first consumer-ready Oculus Rift virtual-reality headset was delivered to a real person over the week-end, and reviewers got their first taste. The initial feedback: It’s a beautiful, wonderful device that immerses you, yet it still has a ways to go. Oculus founder Palmer Luckey hand-delivered the first Rift to software developer Ross Martin in Anchorage, Alaska, on Saturday, kicking off a new era in virtual reality by putting the most powerful VR device yet into a consumer’s hands. Martin, who had never tried VR before, spent a few hours on the Rift Monday morning. He watched a short movie, played a game and explored a virtual environment that included an up-close encounter with a Tyrannosaurus Rex. “I couldn’t stop saying, ‘Wow,’” Martin, a 33-year-old Web developer, said in an inter-view. But he said that he felt a touch of nausea at times and that the resolution could be better. “If you’re a gamer, this is right up your alley,” he said. “You’re going to be able to forgive that.” Oculus has said it’s sending the Rift to its first Kickstarter backers first, followed by those who ordered one in January for $600, or at least $1,500 with a high-end personal computer included. Oculus, which began crowd-funding through Kickstarter in August 2012, was acquired by Facebook for $2 billion in 2014 and has shipped two developer versions so far. 

Mixed reviews 

Expectations for a consumer version have been high. There’s a backlog of orders and if you order now, you can expect deliv-ery in July. It’s not clear, though, how many units Oculus made for the first round - and whether there will ultimately be much demand beyond gamers and hard-core technologists. Early reviews by journalists have been mixed. Steven Tweedie of Business Insider was glowingly positive in his review of the Rift, relishing the greater presence he felt in both games and narrative stories. “Everything feels like it means more: there’s a height-ened connection to characters, both in games and short films, and the action car-ries weight,” he wrote. But he noted its hefty price tag “is undoubtedly the biggest thing keeping more people from getting the chance to try virtual reality.” —AP 

# Oculus Rift begins shipping; Reviews suggest waiting H E A L T H & S C I E N C E THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

HONOLULU: Hawaii lawmakers are asking how much marijuana a driver can safely consume before getting behind the wheel of a car. It’s an issue they want to tack-le now that Hawaii is setting up medical marijuana dis-pensaries. So Rep Cindy Evans and 15 other lawmakers introduced a resolution asking the state Department of Health to study whether a person can safely drive while under the influence. Marijuana is the illicit drug most frequently found in the blood of drivers who have been involved in acci-dents, including fatal ones, but the role marijuana plays in those accidents is often unclear because it can remain in the bloodstream for days and it’s often combined with alcohol, according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration says marijuana use impairs cognitive functions, lane tracking and other driving-related skills. “I think that it’s really important that we do this now,” Evans said. “Hopefully this is the beginning of the discus-sion.” For drunk driving, there’s a nationally recognized level of impairment, which is a blood alcohol concentra-tion of 0.08 grams per milliliter. But there’s no federal rule or widespread consensus on what’s an acceptable limit for driving under the influence of drugs. Hawaii law bans people from driving under the influ-ence of a drug that impairs their ability to drive, but there isn’t a set threshold for how much marijuana -medically prescribed or not - is acceptable in the blood stream. Several states have passed laws specifying how much marijuana in the blood stream is acceptable while driving, but set different limits for how much THC - the main psychoactive ingredient of cannibus - in the blood would be considered driving under the influence of drugs. According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, Colorado, Montana and Washington set the limit at 5 nanograms per millileter of blood, while Nevada and Ohio went with the lower 2 nanograms. Other states provide an exemption for medical marijuana patients. The state Department of Health opposed the resolu-tion, saying the department doesn’t have the capacity to study the complicated question, especially because the resolution didn’t include funding. The department’s director, Virginia Pressler, said in written testimony that The National Institute on Drug Abuse has been studying this issue for many years and hasn’t been able to estab-lish a recommended level for driving. Despite the oppo-sition, the House Committee on Transportation passed the resolution Monday, sending it to the Committee on Health to keep the discussion going, Committee Chairman Rep. Henry Aquino said. “It’s here, so we just wanted to make sure that we have some sort of scientific, some sort of data-driven study to being done to address this,” Aquino said.—AP 

# How much marijuana is OK while driving? 

TONAWANDA, New York: For Kim Vaillancourt, pregnant while staving off aggressive brain cancer, it comes down to this: “The baby saved me. Now it’s my turn to save him.” Vaillancourt was diagnosed with glioblastoma after going to the hospital for headaches and nausea that came on over Christmas. Were it not for concern for the boy she’s carrying, she and her husband, Phil, said it was a life-saving trip she would not have made. They believe the unexpected pregnancy was heaven-sent. Now, to give the baby they’ve named Wyatt Eli the same chance he gave her, Kim is postponing the chemotherapy and radiation that are her best hope against the cancer but would threaten her devel-oping child. “She’s going to do what she can to save the baby’s life and give it the healthiest life possible,” Phil Vaillancourt said. It had already been an eventful time in the Vaillancourt home in the Buffalo suburb of Tonawanda. The couple and their 11- and 12-year-old children had spent Dec 23 in Erie County Family Court for an adoption ceremony that made three sisters- ages 6, 7 and 10 - the couple had been fostering permanent members of their family. 

Devastating diagnosis 

With five kids on break from school, Kim wouldn’t normally have made a fuss about feeling ill. “I would have just thought I had a headache and the flu and I would have laid in bed,” the 36-year-old mother said. But she worried that being unable to keep food down was keeping the baby from getting the nourishment he needed and headed to the hospital to be checked. Soon she would be rushed into surgery to remove two tumors that doctors said could have killed her. One had grown on the front of her brain. The other was dangerously close to her brain stem in the back. Holding hands on the couch in their sub-urban Buffalo living room, Kim and Phil lean on each other as they describe with calm acceptance the abrupt turn their life took between the joyful Dec 23 adoption and the devastating diagnosis on Dec 27. Gliobastoma, they learned, is characterized by fast-growing tumors known to reappear within eight to 12 weeks. With April 25 the target delivery date, Kim has been undergoing MRIs every two weeks to check for any signs of new activity. “We’re praying a lot and trusting God through these next few weeks to keep these scans clean,” Phil Vaillancourt said. It’s some-thing the health-conscious Kim, with her focus on vitamins and nutrition, would never have imagined. She laughs while describ-ing her longstanding practice of texting as far away from her body as her arms will allow to avoid cancer risks. She doesn’t even want to take a chance with microwaves and has kept hers in the garage for the last 10 years. “When we need it, we press it and close the door real fast, and we use it like once a year,” she said. It’s strange, she said, to now look for healing in chemicals and radiation. Unwilling to risk the baby’s health, the plan is to begin treatment about two weeks after his birth, hoping all the while the tumors don’t re-appear before then. In the meantime, they will start interviewing nannies to help care for the newborn and the rest of the chil-dren, among them 7-year-old Josie, who was born without arms and legs. Phil’s leave from his maintenance job with the town of Tonawanda is coming to an end. 

Aggressive treatment 

“Just taking one day at a time,” Phil said. “Even looking too far into the future, you just get caught up in what it can look like. Why even do that?” Though relatively rare, glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive form of brain cancer. It affects about 17,000 adults in the United States every year, but is uncommon during pregnancy, said Dr Robert Fenstermaker, chair of neurosurgery at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo. Early in a pregnancy, a woman might be advised to end the pregnancy in favor of aggressive treatment, he said. Women fur-ther along have undergone chemotherapy but not without risk to the baby. “It’s a tough cancer,” said Fenstermaker, who has developed a vaccine therapy for glioblastoma that is now in clin-ical trials. The Vaillancourts have found strength from their big and close families and in the prayers that have flowed in as word of the family’s fight has spread. “People have wrapped their hearts around this family,” childhood friend Jenna Koch said, describing a GoFundMe campaign and a host of benefits and fundraisers planned over the next few weeks. With treatment, doctors say patients with the serious grade of glioblastoma afflicting Kim have a median survival rate of about 14 months. But the Vaillancourts are holding onto their Christian faith. “I hope to fight this off for years and years to come,” Kim said. “I hope to be sitting here in 30 years saying how I beat this.” Said Phil: “We definitely believe in miracles.”— AP 

HONOLULU: Hawaii Rep Cindy Evans, Majority Floor Leader, talks about the need for information on how much marijuana a driver can safely consume before getting behind the wheel of a car. — AP 

# Mom delays cancer care to protect baby she says saved her 

NEW YORK: Kim and Phil Vaillancourt are interviewed at their home in Tonawanda. — AP photos NEW YORK: Phil Vaillancourt holds photos of his wife, Kim and their children at their home in Tonawanda. NEW YORK: A cyberattack that para-lyzed the hospital chain MedStar this week is serving as a fresh reminder of vulnerabilities that exist in systems that protect sensitive patient information. That attack came a month after a Los Angeles hospital paid hackers $17,000 to regain control of its computer system and more than a year after intruders broke into a database containing the records of nearly 80 million people maintained by the health insurer Anthem. In Anthem’s case, only a single password stood between hackers with a stolen employee ID and a chance to plunder the Blue Cross-Blue Shield car-rier’s database, according to a federal lawsuit filed by customers over the breach. Cyber criminals also have staged high-profile attacks in recent years against the federal government, retail chains and the adultery website Ashley Madison, among many other targets. But security experts say health care companies make especially inviting tar-gets for a number of reasons. The infor-mation they protect is more valuable on the black market than a credit card number stored by a retailer. Health care cybersecurity also can lag behind meas-ures taken in other sectors like banking. This can stem in part from a busi-ness emphasis on tight budgets and convenience over security. Health care companies also have to deal with an additional headache: Multiple entry points into a system, with security quali-ty varying among clinics, labs, hospitals that may have access. Cybersecurity experts note that government guide-lines for health care data protection also are light on details and standards. The federal law known as HIPPA tells health care companies when they can disclose a person’s records and to whom. It also requires them to protect the informa-tion. 

Under investigation 

But it doesn’t come with a lot of spe-cific mandates for that protection, said Lee Kim, director of privacy and security for the nonprofit Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. Intruders cracked Anthem’s database sometime between the end of 2014 and the start of 2015 in a hack that is still under investigation. They gained access to Social Security num-bers, birthdates and employment details for customers as far back as 2004, all key ingredients for stealing someone’s identity. Anthem, the nation’s second-largest health insurer, has said that hackers staged a sophisticated attack that evad-ed multiple layers of security to reach its database. But a lawsuit filed last year by customers who say they were affected by the breach paints Anthem as a ripe target. It says the insurer allowed wide employee access to its database and didn’t train employees how to handle “phishing” emails, which can bait a recipient into revealing a password. Investigators have said they think hackers may have used a phishing scheme to compromise the credentials of several workers. A partially redact complaint filed in the litigation also said the company failed to employ common defenses like encryption, which can scramble data and make it useless. “Stealing this much data takes time, and there were numerous steps along the way when any company following standard IT security practices would have foiled the hackers,” the complaint states. An Anthem spokeswoman said the details in the federal lawsuit were merely allegations, and the company could not comment on pending litiga-tion. “At Anthem, securing our member, provider and client data is a top priority,” spokeswoman Jill Becher said in an email. Hackers cracked Anthem’s data-base by stealing the credentials of an employee whose job didn’t require access to the database, according to the complaint, which was based in part on a security assessment Anthem commis-sioned after the breach. A failure to restrict access to sensitive information is one of the biggest security weaknesses hackers exploit, said Michael Zweiback, an attorney and former federal prosecu-tor. Allowing widespread access gives hackers many chances to try to trick a worker into divulging a password. 

Restrict access 

“This is something that happens in hospitals, it happens in Fortune 500 companies right now, every day,” he said. Companies hesitate to restrict access because they want to make it easy for employees to move from net-work to network and do their jobs, Zweiback said. “When security becomes the emphasis, employees start to com-plain because maybe they don’t get access as quickly,” he said. The lawsuit also states that Anthem only required a single password for those who wanted to get into its data-base from a remote location. Experts say two-factor authentication is the more common practice. This basically involves an employee entering a user name and password and then a sepa-rate password or identification number that can change. Only about 10 percent of health insurers use two-factor authentication and encryption to pro-tect data, said Avivah Litan, a cyberse-curity analyst for the information tech-nology adviser Gartner. Litan works as a consultant in several sectors, including health care. Anthem has said it normally encrypts data it exports, but that prac-tice would not have helped because the hacker used high-level security cre-dentials to get into its system. Experts say encryption can be tuned so that even authorized users can view only one person’s account or a portion of a record at a time. Litan and other con-sultants say health care companies have started showing more interest in cybersecurity, and top executives of these companies have begun to pay closer attention to it. But Litan hasn’t seen the actual investment from these companies yet. “I’m sure Anthem has made some changes, but the other ones are waiting until they get budgets, and they won’t get budgets until they get breached,” she said. “That’s just the way it works.” Anthem has said in regu-latory filings that it quickly fixed a secu-rity vulnerability it discovered after its breach and has continued to improve security since then.—AP 

# Don’t screen all kids for developmental delays, Canadians say 

NEW YORK: Don’t test children for developmental delays if they’re not showing any signs of problems, a government-backed panel of Canadian experts advises. The recommendation from the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care largely mirrors US recommen-dations regarding screenings for speech and language delays and autism spectrum disorders. The advice applies to children ages one to four who have no signs or symptoms of developmental delays, said Dr Brett Thombs, who is a member of the Task Force. “If parents think their child is behind on some of their important milestones, this doesn’t apply to those kids,” said Thombs, who is affiliated with McGill University in Montreal. Developmental delays can include, for example, problems with motor skills, speech, language, thinking, social skills and activities of daily life. The Task Force writes in CMAJ that when these delays persist, children are at higher risk of learning dif-ficulties, behavioral problems and functional impair-ments later in life. For the new recommendation, the Task Force commissioned a review of existing evidence to see if the benefits of screening for developmental delays in all children ages one to four, regardless of whether they showed signs of problems, would out-weigh the potential harms. The screening tools are usually questionnaires that add up to a certain number of points, said Thombs. “Those points would determine if the physicians should act or be more concerned,” he said. Overall two relevant randomized controlled studies were found, but the Task Force found that the screening tools did not ultimately improve health outcomes among children. Instead, the screening tools had very high rates of false positives, said Thombs. Those false positives would lead to many children with normal development being referred for more testing, he added. Those refer-rals may take health resources away from children who would actually benefit from the services. “We don’t rec-ommend parents get their kids tested unless they have any specific concerns,” said Thombs. In February, the US Preventive Services Task Force said it did not find enough evidence to recommend universal autism spectrum disorder screening for tod-dlers between 18 and 30 months of age. Likewise, in 2015, the US. Task Force said there’s not enough evi-dence to recommend universal screening for speech and language delay and disorders in children under age five. “We’re not suggesting parents and physicians don’t keep ongoing surveillance,” said Thombs. “If they have any concerns at all, they should have their physi-cians check it out.”— AP 

# Hospital cyberattack highlights health care vulnerabilities HONG KONG: Hong Kong is to limit the number of non-resident children getting vaccinations at government clinics, after an illegal vaccine scandal in mainland China raised fears some families would come to the city for inoculations and put pressure on supplies. From April 1, Hong Kong’s Maternal and Child Health Centres will only accept 120 new non-resident children a month. Non-resident children will only be able to book an appointment when there is spare capacity and will have to pay a higher fee. “The government’s policy is to accord priority to local children,” Hong Kong’s Assistant Director of Health for Family and Elderly Health Services, Teresa Li, said in a statement. “We will closely monitor the utilization of services by (non-resident children) and may adjust the quota or withhold new case bookings.” Mainland Chinese authorities said this month a mother and daughter had illegally traded nearly $90 million worth of vaccines and sold them on to hundreds of re-sellers around the country, prompting an outcry from parents and political leaders. The vaccines, which police said were made by licensed producers, were not kept refrig-erated, meaning they could be ineffective. Hong Kong would order additional vac-cine supplies if needed, another spokes-woman there said. The Macau government said in a statement on Tuesday that only Macau residents were entitled to free vacci-nations and government-procured routine vaccinations would not be given to visitors. Hong Kong, a free-wheeling financial hub and former British colony, returned to Chinese rule in 1997 with wide-ranging autonomy. — Reuters 

# After China vaccine scare, Hong Kong to limit inoculations for non-resident children 

# ‘Just taking one day at a time’ 

WASHINGTON: Federal health experts have endorsed an experimental drug intended to treat psychotic delusions and behaviors that often afflict patients with Parkinson’s disease, the debilitating movement disorder. The panel of Food and Drug Administration advisers voted 12-2 Tuesday that the benefits of the drug from Acadia Pharmaceuticals outweigh the risks. That vote - considered a recommendation for approval - is non-binding, though the FDA often follows the advice of its panelists. San Diego-based Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc. has asked the FDA to approve pimavanserin to treat hallucinations, delusions and irrational behavior associated with Parkinson’s disease, a neurode-generative disease that primarily causes tremors and other movement problems. Approximately half of all Parkinson’s patients suffer from the psychotic problems, according to the FDA. There are no FDA-approved drugs currently available for the condition. Parkinson’s is the second-most common neurodegenera-tive disease in the US, after Alzheimer’s. While Acadia’s drug had only modest benefits in most patients and was linked to serious safety issues, most panelists ultimately said it would fill an important need. “We all want the effect size to be larger but it’s certainly convincing in the sense that it is here and meaningful,” said Dr Tobias Gerhard of the Rutgers University, who voted in favor of the drug. During a public hearing session at Tuesday’s meeting, patients and doctors detailed harrowing stories of Parkinson’s patients lashing out at family members due to paranoia and delusions. Medical experts still disagree on whether such problems are caused by the underlying Parkinson’s disease itself or the drugs used to manage it. FDA sci-entists presented a complex, mixed review of pimavanserin’s performance and whether its benefits outweighed significant, hard-to-define risks. On a questionnaire measuring hal-lucinations and other symptoms, patients tak-ing the drug showed a 23 percent improve-ment over patients taking a fake pill. —AP 

# Govt panel backs drug for delusions in Parkinson’s patients 

WASHINGTON: A woman walks out of the MedStar Georgetown University Hospital. — AP H E A L T H & S C I E N C E THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

SEATTLE: The killer whales that spend time in the inland waters of Washington state already are tagged and tracked, photographed and measured. Researchers follow them by drone and by sea, ana-lyzing their waste and their exhaled breath. Now, experts want to add another layer to the exhaustive studies: individual health records for each endangered whale. The records would take exist-ing research on the creatures and combine it in one place. The idea is to use them to monitor the orcas’ health trends individually and as a population. It’s similar to people having one medical record as they move from one doctor to the next or between spe-cialists. Eighty-four orcas typically appear in Puget Sound from spring to fall. “The goal is to really start getting a lot of data and pull them together in a way that permits easier analysis,” said Joe Gaydos, a wildlife veterinarian at the University of California, Davis, and chief scientist with the SeaDoc Society, which is part of the university’s School of Veterinary Medicine. “Ultimately, the real benefit of any health record is to help make (management) decisions,” he added. For example, if an orca appears emaciated or is in bad shape during certain times of the year, wildlife managers can access the animal’s health history to see what’s going on and what they could do about it, he said. Understanding the factors that affect an orca’s health will ultimately help pinpoint the key threats and how to reduce them, experts say. “It will be really powerful to rule out things that aren’t important and focus in on what’s really impor-tant,” said Lynne Barre with NOAA Fisheries. She said that will help inform research and management decisions in the long run. The project aims to pull together data on behavior, reproductive suc-cess, skin diseases and other study areas to allow for integrated analysis, she said. 

Initial database 

Scientists have enough data that they can now connect the dots to get meaningful answers, said Brad Hanson, an NOAA Fisheries wildlife biologist. More than two dozen wildlife experts met in Seattle on Tuesday to develop plans for health records for the orcas. The meeting was sponsored by SeaDoc Society, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries and the National Marine Mammal Foundation. Many details are still being worked out, including who will maintain the data and how people will access it. But an initial database would be launched this summer using readily available information, such as sex, age, gender and other details, Gaydos said. Other information would be added next year. Elsewhere, scientists have studied individual animals to moni-tor their health, including North Atlantic right whales. Using a database of hundreds of thousands of photographs taken over decades, researchers at the New England Aquarium and others have studied the body and skin conditions of about 400 individual right whales to assess their health. Individual Puget Sound orcas are identified by unique black and white markings or variations in their fin shapes, and each whale is given a number and a name. The Center for Whale Research on San Juan Island keeps the fed-eral government’s annual census on the population. The three families - the J, K, and L pods - are genetically and behaviorally distinct from other killer whales. They use unique calls to communicate with one another and eat salmon rather than marine mammals. Their numbers have fluctuated in recent decades as they have faced threats from pollution, lack of prey and disturbance from boats. They were listed as endangered in 2005. — AP 

Women with an excess growth of uterine lining tissue may also be at higher risk of coronary heart disease, according to a new study. The condition, called endometriosis, affects up to five million women in the US Uterine tissue can grow on the ovaries, behind the uterus or on the bowels or bladder and can cause pain, infertility and very heavy periods. “Many girls and women do not realize that distressing menstrual cramps and pelvic pain can be due to endometriosis,” said senior study author Stacey A. Missmer, director of Epidemiologic Research in Reproductive Medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. “Girls and women can be treated through surgery that removes the endometriosis lesions or by hormon-al medications including oral contraceptives,” but there is no outright cure, Missmer told Reuters Health by email. The researchers used data on more than 116,000 women in the Nurses’ Health Study II, which ran from 1989 to 2009 - including about 5,200 women with surgically confirmed endometriosis. Those with endometriosis were more likely than others to suffer a heart attack, to have coronary bypass or stent surgery, or to have angina, the chest pain that can be a sign of coronary artery disease. The increased risk for these conditions was highest for women up to age 40, who were about three times as likely to have any combina-tion of the heart disease end points as those without endometriosis. The difference in heart disease risk shrank at older ages. As has been seen in the past, women who had their uterus or ovaries removed were also at higher risk for coronary artery disease end-points than others, the authors reported in Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. Systemic chronic inflammation, heightened oxida-tive stress and higher cholesterol levels associated with endometriosis may explain the link between the condition and heart disease risk, Missmer said. “Additionally, endometriosis and coronary heart dis-ease may share common genetic susceptibilities,” she said. “From our study, we can conclude that surgical and hormonal treatments following endometriosis diagnosis may impact the risk of cardiovascular dis-ease, but they did not negate the risk entirely,” Missmer said. “It is important for women with endometriosis- even young women-to adopt heart-healthy lifestyle habits, be screened by their doctors for heart disease, and be familiar with symptoms because heart disease remains the primary cause of death in women.”—Reuters 

# Endangered Puget Sound orcas to get personal health records 

WASHIGNTON: Women already know they need to cut back on coffee during pregnan-cy, if not sooner, to lower the risk of miscar-riages. But a new study suggests the men in their lives need to limit caffeine too. Pregnant women who had more than two caffeinated drinks a day while trying to con-ceive had a 74 percent higher risk of miscar-riage than their peers who drank less coffee, tea, soda and energy drinks, the study found. When their husbands and boyfriends had more than two caffeinated drinks a day dur-ing the baby-making phase, however, these pregnant women ended up with almost the same increased risk of miscarriage they would get from drinking coffee or soda themselves. “We are not saying to stop drinking caf-feinated beverages,” said lead study author Germaine Buck Louis of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Rockville, Maryland. “Rather, our data suggest that men and women, should they continue to drink caf-feinated beverages, might be advised to keep the amount to less than three daily drinks,” Louis added by email. “We did not find drinking one to two daily caffeinated beverages to increase the risk of miscarriage.” Scientists aren’t sure how caffeine con-tributes to miscarriages, but it’s possible it affects egg or sperm production, implanta-tion of the fertilized egg, or the ability of the embryo to grow in the uterus. To assess how lifestyle choices may influ-ence miscarriage risk, Louis and colleagues followed 344 couples in Texas and Michigan through the first seven weeks of pregnancy. All of the couples recorded their daily use of cigarettes, caffeinated and alcoholic bever-ages, and multivitamins. 

Daily multivitamins 

Overall, 98 women, or 28 percent, expe-rienced a miscarriage during the study, as reported in the journal Fertility and Sterility. Women 35 or older had nearly double the miscarriage risk of younger women, the study found. When women took daily multi-vitamins, their miscarriage risk was 55 per-cent lower than for their peers who didn’t do this. The study wasn’t designed to prove that excessive caffeine consumption causes mis-carriages, or that vitamins prevent pregnan-cy loss, the authors note. It’s possible that women who cut back on caffeine did so because they were experiencing food aver-sions and vomiting - both signs of a healthy pregnancy - and this might explain some of the connection between miscarriages and caffeine, the researchers point out. One surprise in the study is that researchers didn’t find an increased miscar-riage risk associated with smoking or alco-hol, however. This doesn’t mesh with previ-ous research, noted Dr Jeffrey Goldberg, a reproductive health researcher at Cleveland Clinic in Ohio who wasn’t involved in the study. “This study did not address the fact that both smoking and alcohol use can reduce pregnancy rates and increase the risk of adverse effects on fetal development,” Goldberg said by email. Doctors currently advise couples trying to conceive to avoid delays, especially when they’re over 35, and counsel women to lim-it caffeine and take multivitamins, Goldberg noted. Now, it seems men have something new to add to their to-do list. “We would now have to recommend that the male partners also reduce their caffeine intake,” Goldberg said. — Reuters 

SEATTLE: A female orca leaps from the water while breach-ing in Puget Sound west of Seattle. SEATTLE: File photo shows endangered orcas from the J pod swim in Puget Sound west of Seattle, as seen from a federal research vessel that has been tracking the whales. — AP photos 

# Even men need to cut back on coffee before pregnancy Painful uterus condition may boost risk for heart disease 

## ‘Girls and women can be treated through surgery’ 

MIAMI: Many Americans are unclear on key facts about the mosquito-borne Zika virus, which has been linked to birth defects and is of particular concern to pregnant women, US researchers said Tuesday, warning of a race against time. The find-ings were contained in a nationally representative poll of 1,275 adults conducted by the Harvard University TH Chan School of Public Health in early March. The survey included 105 households in which a woman was pregnant or was considering becoming pregnant in the next year. In those households, nearly one in four (23 percent) were not aware of the association between Zika and the birth defect, microcephaly, in which infants are born with unusually small heads. Thousands of children in Brazil have been born with the condition, sparking alarm about a virus that today remains poorly understood by global scientists. One in five of these households said they believed a vaccine exists to prevent Zika, even though one does not and experts say such a vac-cine will take years to develop. More than four in 10 (42 percent) did not realize Zika virus can be sexual-ly transmitted. Furthermore, one quarter mistaken-ly believed symptoms were likely to be apparent, when in fact most of those who are infected show no signs of illness. “We have a key window before the mosquito season gears up in communities within the United States mainland to correct misperceptions about Zika virus so that pregnant women and their part-ners may take appropriate measures to protect their families,” said Gillian SteelFisher, director of the poll and research scientist at Harvard. Among the general public, misconceptions about Zika were also common, the poll found. Four in 10 said they thought Zika could be a danger to future pregnancies, while the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says Zika is believed to be a threat only to current pregnancies. Significant misunderstandings about how Zika is transmitted were also found. “These mispercep-tions about Zika virus transmission could lead peo-ple to take unnecessary or inappropriate precau-tions, as we have seen in other kinds of outbreaks,” warned SteelFisher. One in five (22 percent) did not know Zika could spread from a pregnant mother to her fetus, and more than a quarter (29 percent) were unaware it can be transmitted through blood transfusions.—AFP 

# Many in US ignorant of key facts on Zika virus W H AT ’ S O N THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# Middle East retail major LULU Group which is on a vast expansion mode underscored its commitment to Bahrain by opening its 6th Hypermarket in New Zinj’s Galleria Mall. The new Hypermarket which is also the 124th store of the Lulu Group globally, was officially inaugurated by Shaikh Khaled bin Abdulla Al Khalifa, Deputy Prime Minister of Bahrain in the presence of Bahraini Minister for Industry and Commerce Zayed Al-Zayani, Labour Minister Jamil Humaidan, British Ambassador Simon Martin CMG, US Ambassador William Roebuck, Indian Ambassador Alok Kumar Sinha, Lulu Group Chairman Yusuffali M A, prominent business-man Mohammed Dadabhai, Lulu Group CEO Saifee Rupawala, Executive Director Ashraf Ali MA, Bahrain Regional Director Juzer Rupawala and other top officials. Located next to the Al-Ahli Sports Club and adjacent to the US Embassy, the new hypermarket will serve residents of Salmaniya and Zinj and offers easy access to Tubli and Isa Town residents as well. As always Lulu hypermarket provides the widest range of quality and value-for-money prod-ucts all under one roof. The outlet has also introduced inaugural offers and deals for a range of products at attractive prices. “The opening of the 124th Lulu Hypermarket in the Kingdom of Bahrain and the 6th in the country is a moment of great pride for the LULU Group,” said Chairman Yusuffali M A after the inauguration. As announced earlier, this new hypermarket is part of our committed BD 100 million invest-ment plan for Bahrain, commented Yusuffali. The group will open 2 more hypermarkets by the end of 2017 at Saar and Busaidi in Bahrain added Yusuffali. “Our growth in Bahrain is powered by the vision of the leadership, the business-friend-ly economic environment and the ability of our Bahraini employees to absorb and fit into the Lulu service model which puts cus-tomers above all. We thank His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, Prince Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa, the Prime Minister and Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, the Crown Prince and First Deputy Premier and the peo-ple of this great country for encouraging us in all our expansion strategies and efforts in Bahrain. On providing training and employment opportunity to the educated Baharaini youth, Yusuffali said “it is also our endeavor to nurture the local talent and a proof of this is our strong Bahraini work force that form the nucleus of our operations here in Bahrain. Currently Lulu provides best quality training to absorb them in various manageri-al and specialized sections to Bahrainis. There are more than 1200 Bahrainis who work with us not only here but in other GCC countries also and we will continue to sup-port Governments’ Bahranization plan by giving employment to more Bahrainis in our new projects. 

# Lulu further expands in Bahrain; opens 6th Hypermarket in Zinj 

# The new office bearers of Malayali Media Forum Kuwait met Sunil Jain the Indian Ambassador to Kuwait on March 28, 2016 and dis-cussed various topics faced by the expatriate Indian Community in Kuwait. Issues related to Indian Community School, problems faced by Nurses recruitment agencies, Reopening of canteen in Indian Embassy premises etc. were discussed. In an emergency situation the Indian embassy will involve in Indian Community School as part of the Indian community since it is residing over here, Sunil Jain said to MMF lead-ers in the meeting. But as per the school constitution, Indian embassy cannot involve in the community school daily business. He added, Indian Embassy will inform to the school director board to do the neces-sary amendment in the school consti-tution. Regarding the MOH nurses recruit-ment concerns next month, MOH dele-gates are visiting Kerala state, the Ambassador informed. He also stated that the functioning of canteen in the embassy premises positively will be considered. The representative of MMF briefed about their function of Malayali Media Forum in Kuwait. Sam Pynummoodu, Ismayil Payyoli, Nixon George, Thomas Mathew Kadavil and Regi Bhaskar were the attendees for the meeting. Indian embassy community welfare secretary K K Tahel also witnessed the meeting. 

To whom it may concern 

This is an appeal on behalf of Marshal Byiers, a Scottish gentleman who lived in Kuwait during the 1980s. While here, he lived with his family in Fahaheel city, more specifi-cally, in a building owned by Khalif Al-Fulaij. Marshall worked for a company called EW Sable, and was trapped in Kuwait during the Iraqi invasion. He was held hostage by the Iraqi forces for a brief period of time. He was eventually put in contact with members of the Kuwait Resistance by Larry Banks at the British Embassy. While Mr Byiers never met the resistance fighters in per-son, they spoke over the phone and they provided him with food, cigarettes, and a small radio at great personal risk to them self. The men who knew him would likely be in their 50s now. His personal friend was a Kuwaiti gentle-man names Sami Al Dabbous, who we’re having trouble locating. After the war, Marshall returned to Scotland. We are a group of filmmakers who are currently working on a docu-mentary that narrates Marshall’s story, and, after 26 years, we are flying him back to Kuwait for the first time, for what will probably be quite an emotional closure to his journey. Marshall would really like to meet the person that helped him during the Iraqi occupation. Marshall is due to arrive to Kuwait on April 4-9. The documentary tells his sto-ry and we would like the opportunity to tell the story from the side of the man who helped him. If you or anybody else has any personal history with this story or anybody involved in it, please contact us at the following email Hamadaam@vcu.edu or phone number (965) 6668-0061. 

# Members of Kuwait Toastmasters Club achieved heartening results at Area 14 (Division I) Annual Speech Contest 2016, held at American University of Kuwait on March 25, 2016. Prolific speakers from Kuwait Toastmasters and other four clubs of Area 14 participated in the contests in four categories, namely, Impromptu speaking known as Table Topics, Speech Evaluations in which speakers evaluate a target speaker and suggest improvements, Humorous speech where speakers take up a theme to entertain the audience and finally International Speech through which motivational and inspirational stories and mes-sages are conveyed. Kuwait Toastmasters was repre-sented by Toastmasters Santosh Kumar and Satish Kumar, both emi-nent speakers who have traveled a path of self-learning and learning through feedback from other mem-bers to improve their communica-tion skills. TM Satish Kumar, collected three trophies, winning the Humorous speech contest with his speech “Laugh - the world will laugh with you”, placed as first runner-up in the Table Topics contest and second run-ner-up in Evaluation contest. TM Santosh Kumar won the first runner-up trophy in the International Speech category with his speech “Rehmatulla” that touched the hearts and soul of the audience. TM Satish Kumar and TM Santhosh Kumar will now represent Kuwait Toastmasters Club at the Annual Division I Speech Contests to be held on May 6, 2016 at Australian College of Kuwait. The victories by Toastmasters Santhosh and Satish has added few more feathers to Kuwait Toastmasters’ cap. In 2015, TM Deepak Bindal of the club represent-ed Kuwait in humorous speech con-test finals at the District Level (DTAC 2015) in Dubai, competing with the best of the humorous speakers from seven countries, bringing laurels to Kuwait. When asked, TM Santosh said, “joining Toastmasters has helped me in organizing and expressing my thoughts better and has also aided me to improve my listening skills. The self-phased and feedback ori-ented training has helped me at the work place to communicate better during presentations and official interactions.” TM Satish, reflected back on his Toastmasters journey and said, “Toastmasters is a great self and team learning forum for developing communication and leadership skills very essential in the modern world. I am immensely helped by Toastmasters in being able to speak in an organized manner, putting across my view points in a crisp and concise way.” 

# Kuwait Toastmasters’ impressive show in Area 14 contests 

# MMF leaders meet Indian Ambassador Appeal for Information about Kuwaiti Resistance Fighters W H AT ’ S O N THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

DUBAI: OSN, the leading pay-TV network in Middle East and North Africa (MENA), increas-es the breadth of content for OSN Pinoy sub-scribers with the roll out of six new channels taking the overall number of OSN Pinoy chan-nels to 15. The channels offer the best shows, program and movies directly from the Philippines to the GCC’s large and vibrant Filipino community. The additional channels make OSN the pay-TV platform with the largest number of Filipino channels outside of the Philippines, and the only platform in the region with the biggest networks in one package. The six new channels come from three of the biggest names in entertainment in the Philippines, ABS-CBN, Viva Entertainment and GMA Network. GMA offer three channels, fur-ther strengthening its presence in the MENA region by providing Filipinos wider access to their favourite Kapuso program on its flagship international channel, GMA Pinoy TV the Filipino lifestyle channel; GMA Life TV; and the international news channel, GMA News TV International. Select Kapuso program are also available online through any internet-enabled device via OSN Play. Offering unmatched variety, the three other channels include the ABS-CBN operated Lifestyle Network Channel; action film channel CineMo; plus Viva Entertainment’s flagship movie channel Pinoy Box Office (PBO) which offers the best in Filipino blockbusters and classic films, will also be available to live stream on OSN Play. Arnie Garcia, ABS-CBN Middle East Managing Director said: “We are pleased to offer two new channels, Lifestyle Network and CineMo, to cater to the varied TV entertain-ment needs of Filipinos in the region. The addition of these two new world-class chan-nels strengthens the existing channel line-up of TFC on OSN giving viewers the widest choice of Filipino content in the region.” Gilberto R Duavit, Jr, GMA Network President and COO, said that through the renewed partnership, GMA program will become even more widely available across the MENA region. “We look forward to becom-ing more accessible to our kababayan in the Middle East. If you look at the other channels that we will be offered with, it is a very unique opportunity and position. OSN is the defini-tive destination for the Filipino community, who get additional value through the excep-tional bouquet of HD channels that we have on our network,” he said. Emad Morcos, Senior VP - Media Partners, Affiliate Channels and Digital, OSN, said: “The addition of the six new channels further strengthens the choice that we offer the Filipino community in the region, making OSN the best network for premium and exclusive content. This builds on the introduction of sev-eral new channels on OSN this year, adding to the diversity of world-class programming that we offer to our subscribers. We will endeavour to ensure our offering remains as extensive as possible which means pushing boundaries to deliver for all our customers.” 

The six new channels are: CineMo (Channel 711) 

CineMo features the best Filipino block-buster action and comedy films while offering subscribers top-level Asian kung-fu movies that will keep viewers enthralled. The channel showcases films of Pinoy action hero Fernando Poe, Jr. (FPJ) and come-dy king Dolphy as well as movie hits of Robin Padilla, Bong Revilla, TVJ, Steven Seagal, Jean-Claude Van Damme and Jackie Chan. 

Lifestyle Network (Channel 712) 

Owned and operated by ABS-CBN, Lifestyle Network offers both localised and international topics, covering a range of pro-gramming blocks that include home, food, travel and entertainment. Popular shows include F.A.S.H. (Fashion And Style Hub), Sabrina’s Kitchen, Philippine Realty TV, and Chefscapades. 

GMA Pinoy TV (Channel 713) 

GMA Pinoy TV delivers an outstanding range of shows including Eat Bulaga, the longest running variety show in the Philippines. Viewers can also enjoy Wowowin, hosted by Willie Revillame, one of the most watched game shows from the Philippines, also Lip Sync Battle, the Filipino version of the worldwide TV hit, and 24 Oras the channel’s flagship news programme. 

GMA Life TV (Channel 714) 

The second international channel of GMA Network, GMA Life TV, offers a premium mix of programming. The channel is home to a diverse array of programme genres, from movies and sports, to news, reality, and lifestyle, delivered in English and Filipino. 

GMA News TV (Channel 715) 

The most awarded news organisation in the Philippines is also coming to OSN, provid-ing customers with news program, public affairs shows including local and international entertainment, news, sports program and unrivalled entertainment. 

PBO (live streaming channel on OSN Play) 

PBO (Pinoy Box Office) offers the most extensive Filipino film library with blockbuster offerings. Produced by Viva Entertainment, PBO assures subscribers great movies and classics. It showcases a winning mix of indie flicks, as well as mini-series produced exclu-sively for the channel. OSN subscribers can access all 15 OSN Pinoy channels including the six new chan-nels and 42 Western channels by upgrading to the ‘OSN Pinoy Plus Extra’ package. Other OSN Pinoy packages are also available for cus-tomers to choose from. For more information, visit www.osn.com/en/packages. 

# OSN adds six new Filipino channels to its platform 

(From left) Chuck Silva, Director, OSN Pinoy, Emad Morcos, SVP - OSN, Media Partners, Affiliate Channels and Digital, Gilberto Duavit, Jr, GMA, President and COO, Joseph Francia, GMA International, First Vice President and Willie Revillame, Host of GMA Pinoy TV’s Wowowin. 

# Mona Al-Loughani, Director of the Admission and Registration Department at the Arab Open University (AOU) emphasized that AOU is keen on taking care of its students and providing them with all means and appropriate conditions for meeting their needs and requirements and enabling them to academically suc-ceed, in turn, this would be beneficial to them and open the doors for finding excellent employment opportunities as well as pursuing their higher education studies, This came in the first workshop for Admission, Registration and Examination Department, organized by the Academic Sector at the AOU Headquarters in Kuwait. All heads of Admission and Registration units of the eight AOU branches operating in a number of Arab countries participated in this workshop. Prof Marwan Al-Akaidi, Vice President for Academic Affairs, welcomed all and lauded all efforts that serve the public interest of the University and its students, stressing on the importance of the teamwork in creating a suitable atmosphere among the different work sectors and the students. He also valued the University’s achievement and its commitment to keep abreast of development and employ all capabilities and experiences that power it to compete and offer high quali-ty services to its students. Loughani said this workshop came to enhance the rela-tionship of the Department of Admission, Registration and Examination at the AOU-HQ with all units of Admission and Registration at all AOU branches. It also aimed to exchange ideas and experiences in addition to discuss all matters related to the department, added Loughani. She said, “AOU takes care of its students as they are the core of the educa-tional process”. The workshop included various themes such as Bachelor’s Degree Regulation, Equivalence, Student Behavior Regulation, Exams, Branch Transference and Academic Calendar. Loughani expressed her gratitude for all who contributed to make this workshop successful. 

# Kuwait University (KU) yesterday signed a memorandum of under-stating (MoU) for academic exchange with South Korean Hanyang University, as part of efforts to boost cooperation between both universities. KU President Hussain Al-Ansari signed the MoU with Deputy President of Hanyang Dr. Yang Lee, in the presence of a number of KU officials. The MoU encompasses numerous initiatives, including joint academic conferences, lectures and workshops, the KU said in a press statement. The agreement would also facilitate academic exchange between both schools, the statement added. — KUNA 

A delegation from Kuwait University’s College of Administrative Sciences visited the Sabah Al-Salem University City project’s site recently to inspect the new college building and the process of work there. 

# AOU Admission, Registration, Examination Dept organize workshop KU, Hanyang University sign academic exchange agreement 12:00 Chopped 13:00 Guy’s Big Bite 13:30 Guy’s Big Bite 14:00 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 14:30 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 15:00 Man Fire Food 15:30 Man Fire Food 16:00 Chopped 17:00 The Kitchen 18:00 The Pioneer Woman 18:30 The Pioneer Woman 19:00 Chopped 20:00 Iron Chef America 21:00 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 21:30 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 22:00 Man v Food 

# T V P R O G R A M S THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

THE FIRST TIME ON OSN MOVIES HD COMEDY 

TRACERS ON OSN MOVIES HD THE BOURNE LEGACY ON OSN MOVIES HD ACTION 

00:00 Role Models 02:00 The First Time 04:00 The Trip To Italy 06:00 The Misadventures Of The Dunderheads 08:00 Rush Hour 2 10:00 The Trip To Italy 12:00 Grudge Match 14:00 50 First Dates 16:00 Rush Hour 2 17:45 Mystery Men 20:00 Identity Thief 22:00 What We Do In The Shadows 

02:00 A Civil Action 04:00 The Savages 06:00 Great Expectations 08:30 What Dreams May Come 10:30 The Alamo 12:45 Won’t Back Down 14:45 The Apostle 17:00 What Dreams May Come 19:00 At Any Price 21:00 Siberian Education 23:00 Dallas Buyers Club 

01:15 Project Almanac 03:15 Boychoir 05:00 Pompeii 07:00 Step Up All In 09:00 Boychoir 11:00 Life Of A King 13:00 Big Eyes 15:00 Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2 17:00 Odd Thomas 19:00 The Maze Runner 21:00 Tracers 23:00 Son Of A Gun 00:20 Parked 01:55 Desperately Seeking Susan 03:40 Monkey Shines: An Experiment In Fear 05:30 Race For The Yankee Zephyr 07:20 The Return Of Sabata 09:05 Mannequin 10:35 The Aviator 12:10 The Beautiful Country 14:10 Beauty Shop 15:55 Death Rides A Horse 17:50 One More Kiss 19:30 Saved! 00:45 I Escaped Jaws 2 01:40 From WAGs To Riches 02:35 Tanked 03:25 Echo And The Elephants Of Amboseli 03:50 Echo And The Elephants Of Amboseli 04:15 Gator Boys 05:02 Treehouse Masters 05:49 From WAGs To Riches 06:36 Meet The Sloths 07:00 Meet The Sloths 07:25 America’s Cutest Pets 08:15 From WAGs To Riches 09:10 Treehouse Masters 10:05 Tanked 11:00 America’s Cutest Pets 11:55 Dr. Dee: Alaska Vet 12:50 From WAGs To Riches 13:45 Gator Boys 14:40 Treehouse Masters 15:35 Tanked 16:30 Echo And The Elephants Of Amboseli 17:00 Echo And The Elephants Of Amboseli 17:25 River Monsters (Best Of Series 1-5) 18:20 Gator Boys 19:15 Tanked 20:10 Into The Pride 21:05 Treehouse Masters 22:00 Gator Boys 22:55 Gator Boys 23:50 River Monsters (Best Of Series 1-5) 00:00 Devil May Call 02:00 Jersey Shore Shark Attack 04:00 Age Of Dinosaurs 06:00 The League Of Extraordinary Gentlemen 08:00 Turbulence 10:00 The X Files 12:00 Justice League: Throne Of Atlantis 13:45 Fast & Furious 6 16:00 The League Of Extraordinary Gentlemen 18:00 Turbulence 19:45 The Bourne Legacy 22:00 300: Rise Of An Empire 

06:00 Boyster 06:10 Super Matrak 06:35 Super Matrak 07:00 Star vs The Forces Of Evil 07:25 K.C. Undercover 07:50 Supa Strikas 08:15 Annedroids 08:40 Lab Rats 09:10 Kirby Buckets 09:35 Guardians Of The Galaxy 10:00 Lab Rats: Bionic Island 10:25 Lab Rats: Bionic Island 10:50 K.C. Undercover 11:20 K.C. Undercover 11:45 Supa Strikas 12:10 Supa Strikas 12:35 Gamers Guide To Pretty Much Everything 13:00 Annedroids 13:30 Mighty Med 13:55 Mighty Med 14:20 Kickin’ It 14:45 Kickin’ It 15:10 Guardians Of The Galaxy 15:15 Rocket Monkeys 15:40 Guardians Of The Galaxy 16:05 Star vs The Forces Of Evil 16:30 Kirby Buckets 16:55 Gamers Guide To Pretty Much Everything 17:25 K.C. Undercover 17:50 Supa Strikas 18:15 Lab Rats 18:40 Mighty Med 19:10 Annedroids 19:35 Phineas And Ferb 20:00 Kirby Buckets 20:25 Gamers Guide To Pretty Much Everything 20:55 K.C. Undercover 21:20 Pickle And Peanut 21:45 Lab Rats 22:10 Mighty Med 22:40 Disney Mickey Mouse 

00:35 Prey 01:30 Happy Valley 02:25 Happy Valley 03:20 Casualty 04:20 Stella 05:10 Father Brown 06:00 Eastenders 06:30 Casualty 07:30 Stella 08:20 Call The Midwife 09:15 Doctor Who 10:05 Casualty 11:05 Father Brown 11:55 Stella 12:45 Call The Midwife 13:45 Doctor Who 14:35 Casualty 15:30 Stella 16:15 Call The Midwife 17:10 Doctor Who 18:00 Doctors 18:35 Doctors 19:05 Father Brown 20:00 Ripper Street 21:00 Ripper Street 21:55 Silent Witness 22:50 Father Brown 23:40 Doctors 

00:00 Charlie Rose 01:00 First Up With Angie Lau 02:00 First Up With Angie Lau 03:00 Trending Business 04:00 Trending Business 05:00 Asia Edge 06:00 Bloomberg West 07:00 Charlie Rose 

00:00 News Update 00:30 Dialogue 01:00 News Update 01:15 China 24 02:00 The Heat 02:30 News Update 03:00 Global Business 04:00 News Update 05:00 News Update 06:30 Dialogue 07:00 News Hour 08:00 Global Business 09:00 News Update 10:30 Sports Scene 11:00 Global Business 12:00 News Update 12:30 Culture Express 13:00 Africa Live 14:00 News Update 

00:00 Inside China 00:30 Managing Asia 01:00 U.S. Squawk Alley 02:00 Asia Squawk Box 04:00 Asia Street Signs 06:00 Fast Money: Half Time Report 07:00 Capital Connection 08:00 Squawk Box Europe 11:00 Europe Street Signs 12:00 Worldwide Exchange 13:00 U.S. Squawk Box 16:00 Squawk On The Street 18:00 U.S. Squawk Alley 19:00 Fast Money: Half Time Report 20:00 U.S. Power Lunch 22:00 U.S. Closing BellΩ 

00:00 The Killer Speaks 01:00 Britain’s Darkest Taboos 02:00 Evil Up Close 03:00 The First 48 04:00 The Killer Speaks 05:00 Gangsters: America’s Most Evil 06:00 The FBI Files 07:00 The FBI Files 08:00 Homicide Hunter 09:00 Beyond Scared Straight 10:00 Private Crimes 10:30 Private Crimes 11:00 Crimes That Shook Britain 12:00 Nightmare In Suburbia 13:00 The First 48 14:00 Homicide Hunter 15:00 Private Crimes 15:30 Private Crimes 16:00 The FBI Files 17:00 Crimes That Shook Britain 18:00 Nightmare In Suburbia 19:00 The First 48 20:00 Homicide Hunter 21:00 Private Crimes 21:30 Private Crimes 22:00 Ms. Homicide 23:00 Killer Kids 

00:20 Fast N’ Loud 01:10 Gold Rush 02:00 Diamond River Hunters 02:50 Alaska: Battle On The Bay 03:40 Extreme Collectors 04:05 The Liquidator 04:30 Garage Gold 05:00 How Do They Do It? 05:30 Chasing Classic Cars 06:00 Outback Truckers 06:50 Wheeler Dealers 07:40 Fast N’ Loud 08:30 Extreme Collectors 08:55 The Liquidator 09:20 Garage Gold 09:45 How Do They Do It? 10:10 Chasing Classic Cars 10:35 Gold Rush 11:25 Diamond River Hunters 12:15 Alaska: Battle On The Bay 13:05 Extreme Collectors 13:30 The Liquidator 13:55 Garage Gold 00:05 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 00:30 The Haunted 01:20 Ghost Lab 02:10 Swamp Murders 03:00 True Nightmares 03:45 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 04:10 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 04:30 The Haunted 05:20 Fatal Encounters 06:10 On The Case With Paula Zahn 07:00 Dr G: Medical Examiner 07:50 On The Case With Paula Zahn 08:40 Fatal Encounters 09:30 Murder Shift 10:20 Deadly Affairs 11:10 True Crime With Aphrodite Jones 12:00 The Will 12:50 I Almost Got Away With It 13:40 California Investigator 14:05 Dr G: Medical Examiner 

00:20 How It’s Made 00:44 How It’s Made 01:08 You Have Been Warned 01:55 Stephen Hawking’s Grand Design 02:42 Sci-Fi Science 03:04 Sci-Fi Science 03:29 Penn & Teller Tell A Lie 04:16 You Have Been Warned 05:03 Stephen Hawking’s Grand Design 05:50 Building The Biggest 06:37 How Do They Do It? 07:00 How Do They Do It? 07:23 Penn & Teller Tell A Lie 08:08 Sci-Fi Science 08:30 Sci-Fi Science 08:53 Building The Biggest 09:38 How It’s Made 10:00 How It’s Made 10:23 Mega Builders 11:08 Stephen Hawking’s Grand Design 11:53 Building The Biggest 12:38 Penn & Teller Tell A Lie 13:23 How It’s Made 13:46 How It’s Made 14:10 Sci-Fi Science 14:32 Sci-Fi Science 14:57 Mega Builders 15:44 Stephen Hawking’s Grand Design 16:31 Building The Biggest 17:18 Sci-Fi Science 17:40 Sci-Fi Science 18:05 Penn & Teller Tell A Lie 18:50 Food Factory 19:15 Food Factory 19:40 Stephen Hawking’s Grand Design 20:25 How It’s Made 00:30 Crashes That Changed Flying 01:20 Origins 01:40 Chasing Classic Cars 02:05 Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations 02:50 Tattoo Hunter 03:35 Disaster On K2 04:20 Extreme Engineering 05:05 Gunslingers 05:50 Modern Sniper 06:35 Origins 07:00 Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations 07:50 Bush Pilots 08:40 Extreme Engineering 09:30 Gunslingers 10:20 Origins 10:45 Chasing Classic Cars 11:10 Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations 12:00 Bush Pilots 12:50 Extreme Engineering 13:40 Gunslingers 14:30 Origins 14:55 Chasing Classic Cars 15:20 Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations 16:10 Bush Pilots 17:00 Extreme Engineering 17:50 Gunslingers 18:40 Origins 19:05 Chasing Classic Cars 19:30 Origins 19:55 Origins 20:20 Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations 21:10 Extreme Engineering 22:00 Origins 12:20 Miraculous Tales Of Ladybug & Cat Noir 12:45 Fish Hooks 13:10 Austin & Ally 13:35 Austin & Ally 14:00 Liv And Maddie 14:25 Descendants Wicked World 14:30 Liv And Maddie 14:55 Dog With A Blog 15:20 Dog With A Blog 15:45 Miraculous Tales Of Ladybug & Cat Noir 16:10 Violetta 17:00 The Next Step 17:25 Austin & Ally 17:50 Dog With A Blog 18:15 Mako Mermaids 18:40 Gravity Falls 19:05 Miraculous Tales Of Ladybug & Cat Noir 19:30 Violetta 20:20 The Next Step 20:45 Good Luck Charlie 21:10 Good Luck Charlie 21:35 H2O 22:00 Binny And The Ghost 22:25 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 22:50 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 23:10 Hank Zipzer 23:35 Binny And The Ghost 14:30 Dialogue 15:00 News Update 15:15 China 24 16:00 News Update 16:15 Global Business 17:00 News Update 17:15 World InSight 18:00 Asia Today 18:30 Culture Express 19:00 News Update 19:30 The Heat 20:00 Africa Live 21:00 Global Business 21:30 Dialogue 22:00 News Update 22:15 China 24 23:00 News Update 23:15 World InSight 00:00 Hollywood Medium With Tyler Henry 00:55 The Grace Helbig Show 01:25 Keeping Up With The Kardashians 02:20 E! News 03:15 Hollywood Cycle 04:10 The E! True Hollywood Story 05:05 E! Entertainment Special 06:00 Kourtney And Kim Take Miami 06:55 Kourtney And Kim Take Miami 07:50 Style Star 08:20 E! News 09:15 Giuliana & Bill 10:15 Giuliana & Bill 11:10 #RichKids Of Beverly Hills 11:35 #RichKids Of Beverly Hills 12:05 E! News 13:05 House Of DVF 14:05 Fashion Bloggers 14:30 Fashion Bloggers 15:00 Keeping Up With The Kardashians 16:00 Keeping Up With The Kardashians 17:00 Giuliana & Bill 18:00 Fashion Police 19:00 WAGs 20:00 Christina Milian Turned Up 21:00 Keeping Up With The Kardashians 22:00 E! News 

00:00 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 00:30 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 01:00 Amazing Wedding Cakes 02:00 Mystery Diners 02:30 Mystery Diners 03:00 Man Fire Food 03:30 Man Fire Food 04:00 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 04:30 Diners, Drive-Ins And Dives 05:00 Iron Chef America 06:00 Chopped 07:00 Man Fire Food 07:30 Man Fire Food 08:00 Chopped 09:00 Barefoot Contessa: Back To Basics 09:30 Barefoot Contessa: Back To Basics 10:00 The Kitchen 11:00 The Pioneer Woman 11:30 The Pioneer Woman 

03:00 Premier League Darts 06:30 Top 14 Highlights 07:00 Golfing World 08:00 AFL Season Preview 09:00 Inside The PGA Tour 09:30 European Tour Weekly 10:00 Trans World Sport 11:00 Live AFL Premiership 14:00 NRL Full Time 14:30 The PGA Tour Champions Highlights 15:30 Golfing World 16:30 Inside The PGA Tour 17:00 European Tour Weekly 17:30 Live PGA Tour 20:30 Inside The PGA Tour 21:00 Live World Golf Championships 

00:00 Community 00:30 Playing House 01:00 The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore 01:30 Married 02:00 South Park 02:30 The League 03:00 Your Family Or Mine 03:30 The Goldbergs 04:00 Two And A Half Men 04:30 The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon 05:30 The Last Man On Earth 06:00 Mad Love 06:30 Community 07:00 Late Night With Seth Meyers 08:00 Two And A Half Men 08:30 Breaking In 09:00 Your Family Or Mine 09:30 The Grinder 10:00 Brooklyn Nine-Nine 10:30 Community 11:00 The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon 12:00 The Bernie Mac Show 12:30 Two And A Half Men 13:00 My Name Is Earl 13:30 Community 14:00 The Goldbergs 14:30 The Grinder 15:00 Brooklyn Nine-Nine 15:30 Playing House 16:00 The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore 16:30 The Bernie Mac Show 17:00 Late Night With Seth Meyers 18:00 Your Family Or Mine 18:30 Living With Fran 19:00 Modern Family 

00:00 Bates Motel 01:00 Quantico 02:00 Rosewood 03:00 Allegiance 04:00 Good Morning America 06:00 The Ellen DeGeneres Show 07:00 Covert Affairs 08:00 Heroes Reborn 09:00 The Ellen DeGeneres Show 10:00 Quantico 11:00 Covert Affairs 12:00 Coronation Street 12:30 Coronation Street 13:00 The Ellen DeGeneres Show 14:00 Live Good Morning America 16:00 Heroes Reborn 17:00 The Ellen DeGeneres Show 18:00 Heroes Reborn 19:00 The Voice 21:00 Castle 22:00 Supergirl 23:00 Better Call Saul 

00:00 Trans World Sport 01:00 Super Rugby 03:00 PGA European Tour Highlights 04:00 The PGA Tour Champions Highlights 05:00 Super League 07:00 NRL Premiership 09:00 World Golf Championships 15:30 WWE Vintage 16:30 WWE Raw 19:00 WWE NXT 20:00 WWE Smackdown 22:00 Live Premier League Darts 

00:00 NRL Full Time 00:30 Gillette World Sport 01:00 NRL Premiership 03:00 NRL Premiership 05:00 Inside The PGA Tour 05:30 European Tour Weekly 06:00 The World Sailing Show 06:30 NRL Full Time 07:00 Super Rugby 09:00 Premier League Darts 12:30 Gillette World Sport 13:00 Europro Tour 15:00 The Weber Cup 16:00 Super Rugby 18:00 AFL Premiership 20:30 Golfing World 21:30 Trans World Sport 22:30 Gillette World Sport 22:58 Live Super League 

00:00 Violetta 00:45 The Hive 00:50 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 01:15 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 01:40 Hank Zipzer 02:05 Binny And The Ghost 02:30 Violetta 03:15 The Hive 03:20 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 03:45 Sabrina Secrets Of A Teenage Witch 04:10 Hank Zipzer 04:35 Binny And The Ghost 05:00 Violetta 05:45 The Hive 05:50 Mouk 06:00 Lolirock 06:25 Sofia The First 06:50 Gravity Falls 07:15 Miraculous Tales Of Ladybug & Cat Noir 07:40 Jessie 08:05 Shake It Up 08:30 Shake It Up 08:55 That’s So Raven 09:20 That’s So Raven 09:45 Girl Meets World 10:10 Girl Meets World 10:35 Mulan 2 12:15 Cars Toons 

00:05 Art Attack 00:30 Henry Hugglemonster 00:45 Calimero 01:00 Zou 01:15 Loopdidoo 01:30 Art Attack 01:55 Henry Hugglemonster 02:05 Calimero 02:20 Zou 02:30 Loopdidoo 02:45 Art Attack 03:10 Henry Hugglemonster 03:20 Calimero 03:35 Zou 03:45 Loopdidoo 04:00 Art Attack 04:25 Henry Hugglemonster 04:35 Calimero 04:50 Zou 05:00 Loopdidoo 05:15 Art Attack 05:35 Henry Hugglemonster 05:50 Calimero 06:00 Zou 06:20 Loopdidoo 06:35 Art Attack 07:00 Calimero 07:10 Zou 07:25 Loopdidoo 07:40 Mickey Mouse Clubhouse 08:05 Sofia The First 08:30 Goldie & Bear 08:45 Jake And The Never Land Pirates 09:10 Sheriff Callie’s Wild West 09:35 Doc McStuffins 10:00 Sofia The First 10:30 The Lion Guard: Return Of The Roar 11:25 Winnie The Pooh: Springtime With Roo 12:45 Doc McStuffins 13:00 Sofia The First 13:25 Miles From Tomorrow 13:50 Jake And The Never Land Pirates 14:15 Sheriff Callie’s Wild West 14:40 Mickey Mouse Clubhouse 15:10 Miles From Tomorrow 15:35 Jake And The Never Land Pirates 16:00 Sofia The First 16:25 Jungle Cubs 16:50 Aladdin 17:15 Gummi Bears 17:40 Goldie & Bear 18:05 Miles From Tomorrow 18:30 Sofia The First 18:55 Doc McStuffins 19:10 Jake And The Never Land Pirates 19:35 The Lion Guard: Return Of The Roar 20:30 Sofia The First 21:00 Winnie The Pooh: Springtime With Roo 22:20 Lilo And Stitch 22:50 Zou 23:05 Henry Hugglemonster 23:20 Calimero 23:35 Zou 23:50 Loopdidoo 00S0H0000C0108:00 Countdown 09:00 Countdown 09:30 On The Move 10:00 On The Move 11:00 The Pulse 12:00 Bloomberg Surveillance 13:00 Bloomberg Surveillance 14:00 Bloomberg Go 15:00 Bloomberg Go 16:00 Bloomberg Go 17:00 Bloomberg Markets 18:00 Bloomberg Markets: European Close 19:00 Bloomberg Markets 20:00 Bloomberg Markets 21:00 Bloomberg Markets 22:00 Bloomberg Markets 23:00 What’d You Miss? 14:20 Outback Truckers 15:10 Wheeler Dealers 16:00 Fast N’ Loud 16:50 Chasing Classic Cars 17:15 How Do They Do It? 17:40 The Island With Bear Grylls 18:30 Men, Women, Wild 19:20 Dynamo: Revealed 20:10 The Liquidator 20:35 Garage Gold 21:00 The Island With Bear Grylls 21:50 Men, Women, Wild 22:40 So You Think You’d 14:55 Fatal Encounters 15:45 On The Case With Paula Zahn 16:35 Murder Shift 17:25 I Almost Got Away With It 18:15 The Will 19:05 Deadly Affairs 19:55 True Crime With Aphrodite Jones 20:45 California Investigator 21:10 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 21:35 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 22:00 Surviving Evil 22:50 Deadly Women 23:40 Who On Earth Did I Marry? 

00:20 Aussie Pickers 01:10 Storage Wars: New York 01:35 Storage Wars: New York 02:00 Duck Dynasty 02:25 Duck Dynasty 02:50 American Pickers 03:40 Shipping Wars 04:05 Shipping Wars 04:30 Pawn Stars 05:00 The Curse Of Oak Island 06:00 Ice Road Truckers 06:50 Counting Cars 07:15 Counting Cars 07:40 Search For The Lost Giants 08:30 Storage Wars 08:55 Hoard Hunters 09:45 Lost In Transmission 10:35 American Pickers 11:25 The Curse Of Oak Island 12:15 Pawn Stars 12:40 Pawn Stars 13:05 Shipping Wars 13:30 Shipping Wars 13:55 Storage Wars 14:20 Storage Wars 14:45 Aussie Pickers 15:35 Storage Wars 16:00 American Pickers 16:50 Big Rig Bounty Hunters 17:15 Big Rig Bounty Hunters 17:40 Counting Cars 18:05 Counting Cars 18:30 The Curse Of Oak Island 19:20 Duck Dynasty 19:45 Duck Dynasty 20:10 Pawn Stars 20:35 Pawn Stars 

00:10 Eat Street 00:35 Eat Street 01:00 David Rocco’s Dolce India 01:25 David Rocco’s Dolce India 01:50 Tales From The Bush Larder 02:15 Eat Street 02:40 Eat Street 03:05 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 03:30 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 03:55 A Marriage Of Flavours 04:20 Confucius Was A Foodie 05:10 Eat Street 05:35 Eat Street 06:00 The Best Job In The World 06:25 Wineroads 06:50 David Rocco’s Dolce India 07:15 David Rocco’s Dolce India 07:40 Tales From The Bush Larder 08:05 Eat Street 08:30 Eat Street 08:55 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 09:20 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 09:45 A Marriage Of Flavours 10:10 Confucius Was A Foodie 11:00 Eat Street 11:25 Eat Street 11:50 The Best Job In The World 12:15 Wineroads 12:40 David Rocco’s Dolce India 13:05 David Rocco’s Dolce India 13:35 Tales From The Bush Larder 14:00 Eat Street 14:30 Eat Street 14:55 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 15:25 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 15:50 A Marriage Of Flavours 16:20 Confucius Was A Foodie 17:15 Eat Street 17:40 Eat Street 18:10 Ariana’s Persian Kitchen 18:35 Ariana’s Persian Kitchen 19:05 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 19:30 Lyndey Milan - Taste Of Australia 19:30 I Hate My Teenage Daughter 20:00 The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon 21:00 Playing House 21:30 The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore 22:00 Married 22:30 The Brink 23:00 The League 23:30 Late Night With Seth Meyers 

00:10 The Chase 01:05 Emmerdale 01:30 Eggheads 02:00 Coronation Street 02:30 Big Star’s Little Star 03:25 Tracey Ullman’s Show 03:55 Raised By Wolves 04:20 The Doctor Blake Mysteries 05:15 Come Dine With Me Couples 06:10 Who’s Doing The Dishes? 07:00 Eggheads 07:30 Tracey Ullman’s Show 08:00 Raised By Wolves 08:25 The Doctor Blake Mysteries 09:20 Big Star’s Little Star 10:15 The Chase 11:05 Eggheads 11:35 Come Dine With Me Couples 12:30 Who’s Doing The Dishes? 13:25 Emmerdale 13:50 Eggheads 14:20 Coronation Street 14:45 Big Star’s Little Star 15:35 Come Dine With Me Couples 16:30 Remember Me 17:25 Hiding 18:20 Emmerdale 18:45 Coach Trip 19:10 Coronation Street 19:35 Come Dine With Me Couples 20:30 Remember Me 21:25 Hiding 22:20 Coronation Street 

22:25 Origins 22:50 Gunslingers 23:40 Modern Sniper 

p32.qxp_Layout 1 3/30/16 8:45 PM Page 1 Classifieds THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Kuwait Directorate General of Civil Aviation Home Page (www.kuwait-airport.com.kw) DIAL161 FOR AIRPORT INFORMATION 

Arrival Flights on Thursday 31/3/2016 Airlines Flt Route Time 

THY 772 Istanbul 00:10 MSC 415 Sohag 00:10 JZR 267 Beirut 00:30 FDB 069 Dubai 00:55 KKK 6506 Istanbul 00:55 DLH 635 Doha 01:00 QTR 1086 Doha 01:15 JZR 539 Cairo 01:20 SAI 441 Lahore 01:30 PGT 858 Istanbul 01:40 RJA 642 Amman 01:45 ETH 620 Addis Ababa 01:45 JZR 552 Alexandria 01:50 GFA 211 Bahrain 02:15 UAE 853 Dubai 02:25 OMA 643 Muscat 03:05 FDB 067 Dubai 03:15 MSR 612 Cairo 03:15 ETD 305 Abu Dhabi 03:15 QTR 1076 Doha 03:25 KAC 544 Cairo 03:40 LMU 510 Cairo 04:00 QTR 8511 Doha 04:30 DHX 170 Bahrain 05:10 THY 770 Istanbul 05:15 JZR 529 Asyut 06:00 KAC 412 Manila/Bangkok 06:15 PAL 668 Manila/Dubai 06:25 BAW 157 London 06:40 IRA 673 Ahwaz 07:15 FDB 5061 Dubai 07:15 JZR 503 Luxor 07:25 KAC 382 Delhi 07:30 KAC 346 Ahmedabad 07:35 KAC 204 Lahore 07:40 KAC 206 Islamabad 07:45 KAC 302 Mumbai 07:50 SVA 512 Riyadh 07:50 FDB 053 Dubai 07:50 KAC 344 Chennai 08:15 KAC 332 Trivandrum 08:15 KAC 362 Colombo 08:20 KAC 352 Kochi 08:20 UAE 855 Dubai 08:25 KAC 284 Dhaka 09:00 ETD 301 Abu Dhabi 09:05 ABY 125 Sharjah 09:05 IRA 667 Esfahan 09:05 QTR 1070 Doha 09:30 FDB 055 Dubai 09:40 SYR 341 Damascus 10:30 GFA 213 Bahrain 10:40 UAE 873 Dubai 10:40 MEA 404 Beirut 11:00 JZR 561 Sohag 11:25 RBG 553 Alexandria 11:30 JZR 165 Dubai 11:50 NIA 151 Cairo 12:20 FDB 075 Dubai 12:25 JZR 241 Amman 12:30 UAE 871 Dubai 12:45 MSR 610 Cairo 13:00 KAC 620 Doha 13:10 THY 766 Istanbul 13:10 KAC 672 Dubai 14:05 JZR 779 Jeddah 14:05 QTR 1078 Doha 14:05 KNE 231 Riyadh 14:10 AXB 393 Kozhikode 14:10 FDB 057 Dubai 14:20 GFA 221 Bahrain 14:20 SVA 500 Jeddah 14:30 KAC 742 Dammam 14:55 KNE 529 Jeddah 14:55 KAC 788 Jeddah 15:00 ETD 303 Abu Dhabi 15:10 OMA 645 Muscat 15:10 ABY 127 Sharjah 15:35 UAE 857 Dubai 15:45 RJA 640 Amman 16:00 KNE 531 Jeddah 16:05 FDB 051 Dubai 16:10 QTR 1072 Doha 16:15 JZR 535 Cairo 16:20 KAC 118 New York 16:30 NIA 251 Alexandria 16:50 KAC 562 Amman 16:55 SVA 510 Riyadh 17:15 GFA 215 Bahrain 17:30 JZR 177 Dubai 17:45 KAC 678 Muscat/Abu Dhabi 17:50 JZR 777 Jeddah 17:50 QTR 1080 Doha 17:55 KAC 176 Geneva/Frankfurt 18:20 JZR 483 Istanbul 18:20 MSR 620 Cairo 18:30 KAC 774 Riyadh 18:35 KAC 502 Beirut 18:35 KAC 786 Jeddah 18:35 KAC 618 Doha 18:55 KAC 542 Cairo 18:55 KAC 104 London 19:00 UAE 875 Dubai 19:05 GFA 217 Bahrain 19:05 KAC 614 Bahrain 19:10 FDB 063 Dubai 19:10 ABY 123 Sharjah 19:15 JAI 572 Mumbai 19:35 KAC 674 Dubai 19:45 KAC 154 Istanbul 19:45 FDB 059 Dubai 19:50 DLH 634 Frankfurt 20:05 KNE 382 Taif 20:10 ABY 121 Sharjah 20:10 MEA 402 Beirut 20:15 OMA 647 Muscat 20:20 JZR 189 Dubai 20:25 MSR 618 Alexandria 20:30 QTR 1088 Doha 20:35 FDB 5053 Dubai 20:55 ETD 307 Abu Dhabi 21:05 UAE 859 Dubai 21:15 ALK 229 Colombo 21:20 KLM 417 Amsterdam 21:25 KAC 676 Dubai 21:35 QTR 1082 Doha 21:55 GFA 219 Bahrain 22:00 ETD 309 Abu Dhabi 22:10 JZR 125 Bahrain 22:15 AIC 981 Chennai/Ahmedabad 22:25 MSC 501 Alexandria 22:30 JZR 185 Dubai 22:55 THY 764 Istanbul 22:55 MSC 403 Asyut 23:00 JAI 574 Mumbai 23:20 MSR 614 Cairo 23:30 FDB 071 Dubai 23:35 PIA 205 Lahore 23:40 

Arrival Flights on Thursday 31/3/2016 Airlines Flt Route Time 

AIC 976 Goa/Chennai 00:05 BBC 044 Dhaka 00:10 JAI 574 Mumbai 00:25 MSR 615 Cairo 00:30 FDB 072 Dubai 00:30 MSC 404 Asyut 00:55 KLM 411 Amsterdam 00:55 MSC 416 Sohag 01:05 JZR 502 Luxor 01:15 THY 773 Istanbul 01:40 DLH 635 Frankfurt 02:00 SAI 442 Lahore 02:30 THY 765 Istanbul 02:45 ETH 621 Addis Ababa 02:45 PGT 859 Istanbul 02:55 UAE 854 Dubai 03:45 OMA 644 Muscat 04:00 KKK 6505 Istanbul 04:05 FDB 068 Dubai 04:05 ETD 306 Abu Dhabi 04:10 MSR 613 Cairo 04:15 QTR 1077 Doha 04:35 LMU 511 Cairo 05:00 JZR 560 Sohag 05:00 QTR 8512 Doha 06:00 RJA 643 Amman 06:25 QTR 1087 Doha 06:30 THY 771 Istanbul 06:45 GFA 212 Bahrain 06:50 JZR 240 Amman 06:55 FDB 070 Dubai 07:05 JZR 164 Dubai 07:15 FDB 5062 Dubai 07:55 IRA 672 Ahwaz 08:15 BAW 156 London 08:25 FDB 054 Dubai 08:30 JZR 778 Jeddah 08:30 SVA 513 Riyadh 08:50 JZR 534 Cairo 09:25 KAC 671 Dubai 09:30 KAC 787 Jeddah 09:30 KAC 619 Doha 09:30 ABY 126 Sharjah 09:45 JZR 482 Istanbul 09:45 UAE 856 Dubai 09:50 ETD 302 Abu Dhabi 10:00 KAC 101 London/New York 10:00 IRA 668 Mashhad 10:05 FDB 056 Dubai 10:40 QTR 1071 Doha 10:45 KAC 677 Muscat/Abu Dhabi 10:50 KAC 501 Beirut 11:00 KAC 153 Istanbul 11:00 KAC 561 Amman 11:20 KAC 165 Rome/Paris 11:25 SYR 342 Damascus 11:30 GFA 214 Bahrain 11:35 KAC 741 Dammam 11:35 MEA 405 Beirut 12:00 KAC 541 Cairo 12:05 UAE 874 Dubai 12:10 RBG 554 Alexandria 12:10 JZR 776 Jeddah 12:15 KAC 785 Jeddah 13:00 FDB 076 Dubai 13:10 JZR 176 Dubai 13:10 NIA 152 Cairo 13:20 MSR 611 Cairo 14:00 THY 767 Istanbul 14:10 UAE 872 Dubai 14:15 PAL 669 Manila 14:45 KAC 773 Riyadh 15:00 GFA 222 Bahrain 15:05 FDB 058 Dubai 15:05 KAC 673 Dubai 15:05 AXB 394 Kozhikode 15:10 KNE 381 Taif 15:10 QTR 1079 Doha 15:15 KAC 617 Doha 15:15 JZR 188 Dubai 15:50 KNE 530 Jeddah 15:55 SVA 505 Jeddah 16:00 KAC 613 Bahrain 16:00 OMA 646 Muscat 16:10 ABY 128 Sharjah 16:15 ETD 304 Abu Dhabi 16:20 RJA 641 Amman 16:55 KNE 532 Jeddah 16:55 FDB 052 Dubai 17:00 KAC 675 Dubai 17:00 JZR 266 Beirut 17:10 QTR 1073 Doha 17:25 UAE 858 Dubai 17:40 NIA 252 Alexandria 17:50 SVA 511 Riyadh 18:15 JZR 184 Dubai 18:20 GFA 216 Bahrain 18:20 JZR 538 Cairo 18:30 JZR 554 Alexandria 18:50 KAC 563 Amman 19:00 QTR 1081 Doha 19:05 JZR 238 Amman 19:15 JZR 124 Bahrain 19:20 MSR 621 Cairo 19:30 GFA 218 Bahrain 19:50 FDB 064 Dubai 19:50 ABY 124 Sharjah 19:55 KAC 283 Dhaka 20:30 FDB 060 Dubai 20:30 UAE 876 Dubai 20:35 JAI 571 Mumbai 20:35 KAC 331 Trivandrum 20:45 DLH 634 Doha 20:50 ABY 122 Sharjah 20:50 KAC 353 BLR 20:55 KAC 343 Chennai 20:55 KAC 351 Kochi 21:00 KAC 543 Cairo 21:00 KNE 234 Riyadh 21:10 MEA 403 Beirut 21:15 OMA 648 Muscat 21:15 MSR 619 Alexandria 21:30 QTR 1089 Doha 21:45 DHX 171 Bahrain 21:50 FDB 5054 Dubai 21:55 ETD 308 Abu Dhabi 21:55 ALK 230 Colombo 22:20 KAC 381 Delhi 22:25 UAE 860 Dubai 22:25 KLM 417 Dammam/Amsterdam 22:25 KAC 301 Mumbai 22:30 KAC 205 Islamabad 23:00 GFA 220 Bahrain 23:00 ETD 310 Abu Dhabi 23:05 QTR 1083 Doha 23:20 KAC 411 Bangkok/Manila 23:25 MSC 502 Alexandria 23:30 

# KNCC PROGRAMME FROM THURSDAY TO WEDNESDAY (31/03/2016 TO 06/04/2016) 

## 112 

Fajr: 04:20 Shorook 05:40 Duhr: 11:52 Asr: 15:23 Maghrib: 18:05 Isha: 19:23 

PRAYER TIMINGS 

SHARQIA-1 

BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 12:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 3:00 PM NO FRI+SAT KUNG FU PANDA 3 3:00 PM FRI+SAT KUNG FU PANDA 3 5:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 7:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 9:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 11:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:00 AM 

SHARQIA-2 

10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 1:15 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 3:30 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 5:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 8:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 11:45 PM 

SHARQIA-3 

HIGH-RISE 12:30 PM HIGH-RISE 3:00 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 5:15 PM HIGH-RISE 7:30 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 9:45 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 12:45 AM 

MUHALAB-1 

HIGH-RISE 1:15 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:30 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 3:30 PM HIGH-RISE 5:30 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 7:45 PM HIGH-RISE 9:45 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 12:05 AM 

MUHALAB-2 

10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 11:30 AM KUNG FU PANDA 3 1:45 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 1:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 4:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 6:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 8:00 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 11:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:15 AM 

MUHALAB-3 

BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 12:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 3:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 6:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 9:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 12:15 AM 

FANAR-1 

HIGH-RISE 12:45 PM HIGH-RISE 3:00 PM HIGH-RISE 5:30 PM HIGH-RISE 8:00 PM HIGH-RISE 10:30 PM HIGH-RISE 12:45 AM 

FANAR-2 

EDDIE THE EAGLE 1:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 1:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 3:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 5:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 7:45 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 9:45 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 12:15 AM 

FANAR-3 

JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 11:45 AM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 3:45 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 6:45 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 8:45 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 10:45 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 (JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 12:45 AM 

MARINA-1 

JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 3:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 5:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 7:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 9:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 11:00 PM JU ON: THE GRUDGE 3 JU-ON: THE BEGINNING OF THE END) 1:00 AM 

MARINA-2 

BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 12:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 3:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 6:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 9:15 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 12:15 AM 

MARINA-3 

10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 1:15 PM NO FRI+SAT KUNG FU PANDA 3 1:30 PM FRI+SAT HIGH-RISE 3:30 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 5:45 PM HIGH-RISE 8:00 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 10:15 PM HIGH-RISE 12:30 AM 

AVENUES-1 

KUNG FU PANDA 3 11:30 AM KUNG FU PANDA 3 1:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 4:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 6:15 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 8:30 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 10:45 PM 

AVENUES-2 

EDDIE THE EAGLE 1:30 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 3:45 PM LONDON HAS FALLEN 6:00 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 8:15 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 10:30 PM EDDIE THE EAGLE 12:45 AM 

AVENUES-3 

10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 12:15 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 2:30 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 4:45 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 7:00 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 9:15 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 11:30 PM 

AVENUES-4 

10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 1:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 3:15 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 5:30 PM Special Show “KUNG FU PANDA 3” 5:30 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 7:30 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 9:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 12:05 AM 

AVENUES-5 

BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 1:00 PM Special Show “BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE” 1:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 2:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE -3D 4:00 PM Special Show “KUNG FU PANDA 3” 5:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 7:00 PM Special Show “BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE” 7:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 10:00 PM 10 CLOVERFIELD LANE 1:00 AM 

360º- 1 

BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE -3D 1:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 2:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE -3D 4:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 7:00 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE -3D 10:00 PM HIGH-RISE 1:00 AM 

360º- 2 

MY LITTLE PONY: EQUESTRIA GIRLS - FRIENDSHIP GAMES 12:30 PM MY LITTLE PONY: EQUESTRIA GIRLS - FRIENDSHIP GAMES 2:15 PM MY LITTLE PONY: EQUESTRIA GIRLS - FRIENDSHIP GAMES 4:15 PM MY LITTLE PONY: EQUESTRIA GIRLS - FRIENDSHIP GAMES 6:00 PM VETTAH- Malayalam 7:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 7:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: DAWN OF JUSTICE 10:45 PM 

360º 3 

KUNG FU PANDA 3 12:45 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 3:00 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 5:15 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 7:30 PM KUNG FU PANDA 3 9:45 PM BATMAN V SUPERMAN: AWN OF JUSTICE 12:15 AM 

CHANGE OF NAME Rashida holder of Indian Passport No. Z1845012 293, Saheli Nagar, Zainab Villa, Udaipur, Rajasthan, hereby change my name to Rashida Shoyab Hussain. 

(C 5154) 28-3-2016 THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Try again for those goals of yours; a mentor or teacher is available to you today. Long-and short-term goals are attainable. Finances improve and you will be wise to put some of these improvements into funds for investing and saving. While in business group meetings today, you find much inspiration. Expect positive results con-cerning some recent work you have been doing; there are rewards. Travel and other con-tacts with faraway people and places will play a big role for you now and in the future. Such things bring love and gain in one way or another. Good things are happening in your life. New friends coming into your life now will encourage and empower you. Allow your-self to grow and change. 

Aries (March 21-April 19) 

STAR TRACK 

There is a yearning for the stimulation of new ideas and ideals. Since you will not have yet reached your long-term goals this year, it might be fun to create some short-term goals. When you accomplish the short-term goals, the successes encourage you to move forward. When you have completed this workday you will feel good about your accomplishments. This afternoon’s refreshment and some interesting conversation with a loved one brings about new and fun ideas for family outings. You encourage bonding and bring up a few fun memories. A few of you will enjoy camping, to learn some survival techniques or perhaps as a pathway to a new hobby. This is a good time to discuss the idea of the family volunteering in some charity that teaches. 

Taurus (April 20-May 20) 

Allow your creative side to blossom by categorizing your activities. The more you increase this creative side, the easier you will find problem-solving situations end. You have an exciting time ahead of you now as you discover ways in which to increase your sense of abundance and personal prosperity. Quick answers, great wit and a surplus of insights and solutions are at hand from which you can choose. This is a good time to write and communicate with real originality. Inventions and breakthroughs are possible. A domestic challenge can be ended later today and will free you for a more enjoyable home life. Your tact is improving. In learning more about your real self, you learn more about humanity. Enjoy some creative activity this evening. 

Gemini (May 21-June 20) 

Understanding and clarity are easy to come by just now. Any confusing issues can be cleared away. Your activity level is high and your expressiveness works in your favor. You can make your goals materialize through the sheer determination of your will. Reward yourself for progress rather than punish yourself for any imperfections. This afternoon, choose an activity that you consider fun and soothing, like going to an amuse-ment park, bicycling, skating, etc. You may be able to help someone with a sensitive area by just being you. You answer what seems to be a silly question, but you will be setting an example. Communicating kindly and clearly is important to you, and you do it well. Your timing is be perfect. You are most positive. 

Cancer (June 21-July 22 )

Your mind is ready to attend to any situation that may occur today. Schedule more than enough time to get to and from your destination. Do everything you can to eliminate the unnecessary items on your to-do list so that you are not under such a tight time schedule. If you cannot adjust your work hours, so that you are not driving at stressful times, get a book on tape or some incentive recording and listen while you drive. If you are ready to grab those books and head for the nearest university, now is the time. If this is something you feel you need to do in order to widen your scope of knowledge, start making your plans. You could find out about applying for the May or June class. Your loved one shows you attention this evening. 

Leo (July 23-August 22) 

Sometimes people may cut you off from speaking or make it difficult for you to express yourself. You could find that you lack some ability to move or communicate with others. A business class could be considered but get some good advice from the uni-versity or junior college before you sign-up for the class; an acting class may be all you need. Your ideas may need special tweaking. Most of the time, you reign as the most obvi-ous one to go to when someone needs help with creative things. Today, you may want to do some meditation on your goals and gain a focus for you. There is also an interest in some spiritual development. This time can be the beginning phase of sublime spiritual development, to be sure. Tonight is perfect for soft and lovely things. 

Virgo (August 23-September 22) 

Others value you for your unique qualities. There are new ways to view people and new ways of understanding the things that are occurring in your life now-behind the illusions. Co-workers enjoy teaming up with you because you listen and are helpful. You can take command of your life now and proceed with full speed ahead in any area you wish. In the workplace there is an opportunity to take a chance on a long shot-nothing ventured, nothing gained. This could be anything from inviting a new friend to lunch to asking for a raise. This afternoon you can enjoy some much deserved downtime. Be consistent in your message to young people this evening. This will help them to know what to expect from you and you will gain respect. 

Libra (September 23-October 22) 

This is your lucky day! Schedule that conference, give that party and plan for the future. Whatever you do today, your ability to make things run smoothly should pro-duce excellent results. Teamwork and understanding are your best guarantee for peaceful negotiations at work and at home. Some idea running around in your head has an oppor-tunity to actually be verbalized and perhaps viewed by others. You will be pleased at the response from higher-ups regarding your ideas. There is not only financial growth now, but also increased intimacy in your personal relationships. You will want to be showing your gratitude and appreciation for others who share your life. Young people have your attention this evening. 

Scorpio (October 23-November 21) 

Some unique and wonderful ideas are passed around among your peers and associates. Listen carefully-don’t try to over-impress an innocent bystander. The financial aspects of a business deal lacks clarity-go back to the drawing board. You are particularly witty and can be wonderful company for someone after work. You enjoy relaxing with your friends. A surprise gift will come to you today from an admir-er. Study the gift box and you will know the sender. This evening is an excellent time for rest and relaxation. Close associates are more positive and confirming of one another; this is encouraging. You may be feeling more like sharing some time with your lover or with close friends this evening; perhaps a party or event is in the making. 

Sagittarius (November 22-December 21) 

Eliminate the elements in your life that slow you and keep you from accom-plishing your goals. You are to be congratulated for your ability to rise above difficult situa-tions so use these talents in your everyday situation. Communal activities that take place now should be well-attended and successful. The need for emotional security is accented now, though you should not pressure a partner into doing things just to please you. Your creativity is strong, as usual. With your love of antiques, you could take a class in refinishing furniture. This or any creative hobby will help you to get a better focus on your emotional progress and will most certainly balance any frustrating energies. Perhaps a friend will join you in this class. 

Capricorn (December 22-January 19) 

Avoid burnout by scheduling time out for a little exercise each day, even if it means a couple of walks up and down stairs. Make it a point to tell only one joke or give one positive insight today, for your own enjoyment! You will help lighten the atmosphere and create a balance in your life for a good emotional health. You face tremendous responsibilities in your relationships with loved ones this afternoon and may find it difficult to express your own wants and desires. You should try to loosen up and enjoy your companions without being afraid to voice your true feelings. You are compas-sionate and giving to all around you. Your devotion and selflessness will reap unexpected rewards. Being appreciated and admired is a powerful need. 

Pisces (February 19-March 20) 

Someone unexpected may test your ability to remain calm. This is a great opportunity to check out your patience. You may not appreciate this person’s very differ-ent perspective but everyone has the right to an opinion. With patience you will have your turn to be expressive. Your own confidence is good and you accept other people’s differ-ences. Teaching through example may have you teaching the importance of looking for the good in all things-negative situations will dissipate. Other people tend to be lucky for you today. You may be able to enjoy and value your own life situation or feel especially kind toward a friend or loved one. Someone may compliment you on your belongings. Harmony with loved ones makes this a happy time. 

Aquarius (January 20- February 18) 

## CROSSWORD 1212 

ACROSS 

1. The law enforcement agency in the Justice Department. 4. Filled or impregnated with perfume. 12. A device for creating a current of air by movement of a surface or surfaces. 15. A plant hormone promoting elongation of stems and roots. 16. A person who pleads for a cause or pro-pounds an idea. 17. An agency of the United Nations affiliat-ed with the World Bank. 18. A city in south central California in the San Joaquin Valley. 20. The posterior part of the mandible that is more or less vertical. 21. The Tibeto-Burman language spoken in the Dali region of Yunnan. 22. A member of the Siouan people former-ly living in the Missouri river valley in NE Nebraska. 24. Destruction of heart tissue resulting from obstruction of the blood supply to the heart muscle. 26. A rare silvery (usually trivalent) metallic element. 27. Of or relating to a seizure or convulsion. 31. A native or inhabitant of Bahrain. 34. Relating to or accompanying birth. 36. A new embodiment of a familiar idea. 37. A unit of information equal to one mil-lion (1,048,576) bytes. 39. A town in northwestern New Mexico near the Arizona border. 42. Filled or abounding with fog or mist. 43. A French abbot. 45. Wild or domesticated South American cud-chewing animal related to camels but smaller and lacking a hump. 46. A constellation in the southern hemi-sphere near Telescopium and Norma. 48. The lean flesh of a fish similar to cod. 51. Minor or subordinate. 52. A bar of sand. 54. The sense organ for hearing and equi-librium. 57. Before noon. 58. Slanting diagonally across the grain of a fabric. 64. Minute blackish gregarious flies destructive to mushrooms and seedlings. 70. A military officer appointed from enlist-ed personnel. 71. An ordered reference standard. 73. Aircraft landing in bad weather in which the pilot is talked down by ground con-trol using precision approach radar. 74. A flat wing-shaped process or winglike part of an organism. 75. A skeletal muscle arising from the tibia. 77. A member of a Mayan people of south-western Guatemala. 78. United States liquid unit equal to 4 quarts or 3.785 liters. 79. The art of making and decorating pot-tery. 80. A loose sleeveless outer garment made from aba cloth. 

DOWN 

1. Inventory accounting in which the oldest items (those first acquired) are assumed to be the first sold. 2. A commercial leavening agent contain-ing yeast cells. 3. The United Nations agency concerned with atomic energy. 4. Hypothetical remedy for all ills or dis-eases. 5. The capital and largest city of Japan. 6. A motorized wheeled vehicle used for camping or other recreational activities. 7. The front limb (or homologous structure in other animals such as a flipper or wing). 8. Fiddler crabs. 9. Wealth regarded as an evil influence. 10. Small ornamental ladies' bag for small articles. 11. A potent estrogen used in medicine and in feed for livestock and poultry. 12. A trivial lie. 13. A condensed but memorable saying embodying some important fact of experience that is taken as true by many people. 14. Submerged aquatic plant having nar-row leaves and small flowers. 19. (British informal) Ill-tempered or annoyed. 23. A decree that prohibits something. 25. Be going to. 28. The capital and largest city of Albania in the center of the country. 29. Showing deterioration from age. 30. Leaf or strip from a leaf of the talipot palm used in India for writing paper. 32. Evergreen Indian shrub with vivid yel-low flowers whose bark is used in tan-ning. 33. The official of a synagogue who con-ducts the liturgical part of the service and sings or chants the prayers intend-ed to be performed as solos. 35. A soft white precious univalent metallic element having the highest electrical and thermal conductivity of any metal. 38. Cut the head of. 40. Flat-topped or rounded inflorescence characteristic of the family Umbelliferae in which the individual flower stalks arise from about the same point. 41. A person to whom money is paid. 44. Found along western Atlantic coast. 47. The blood group whose red cells carry both the A and B antigens. 49. An associate degree in applied science. 50. A colorless element that is one of the six inert gasses. 53. English theoretical physicist who applied relativity theory to quantum mechanics and predicted the existence of antimatter and the positron (1902-1984). 55. Norwegian mathematician (1802-1829). 56. Preaching the gospel of Christ in the manner of the early church. 59. Deciduous round-headed Asiatic tree widely grown in mild climates as an ornamental for its heart-shaped leaves and fragrant yellow-green flowers fol-lowed by hanging clusters of fleshy orange-red berries. 60. Devoid of any feeling of awe or rever-ence. 61. Occurring at or forming an end or ter-mination. 62. Tall perennial herb of tropical Asia with dark green leaves. 63. The dialect of Ancient Greek spoken in Thessaly and Boeotia and Aeolis. 65. Large genus of African trees bearing kola nuts. 66. A training program to prepare college students to be commissioned officers. 67. A landlocked republic in northwestern Africa. 68. Someone who works (or provides work-ers) during a strike. 69. God of love and erotic desire. 72. A rotating disk shaped to convert circu-lar into linear motion. 76. A nonmetallic largely pentavalent heavy volatile corrosive dark brown liq-uid element belonging to the halogens. 

## Yesterday’s Solution 

Yesterday’s Solution 

Word Search 

# 34 stars 

Daily SuDoku Yesterday Solution 

p34_p34 stars 3/30/16 8:48 PM Page 1 i n f o r m at i o n THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

Ahmadi Sama Safwan Fahaeel Makka St 23915883 Abu Halaifa Abu Halaifa-Coastal Rd 23715414 Danat Al-Sultan Mahboula Block 1, Coastal Rd 23726558 Jahra Modern Jahra Jahra-Block 3 Lot 1 24575518 Madina Munawara Jahra-Block 92 24566622 Capital Ahlam Fahad Al-Salem St 22436184 Khaldiya Coop Khaldiya Coop 24833967 Farwaniya New Shifa Farwaniya Block 40 24734000 Ferdous Coop Ferdous Coop 24881201 Modern Safwan Old Kheitan Block 11 24726638 Hawally Tariq Salmiya-Hamad Mubarak St 25726265 Hana Salmiya-Amman St 25647075 Ikhlas Hawally-Beirut St 22625999 Hawally & Rawdha Hawally & Rawdha Coop 22564549 Ghadeer Jabriya-Block 1A 25340559 Kindy Jabriya-Block 3B 25326554 Ibn Al-Nafis Salmiya-Hamad Mubarak St 25721264 Mishrif Coop Mishrif Coop 25380581 Salwa Coop Salwa Coop 25628241 

Ophthalmologists Dr. Abidallah Al-Mansoor 25622444 Dr. Samy Al-Rabeea 25752222 Dr. Masoma Habeeb 25321171 Dr. Mubarak Al-Ajmy 25739999 Dr. Mohsen Abel 25757700 Dr Adnan Hasan Alwayl 25732223 Dr. Abdallah Al-Baghly 25732223 Ear, Nose & Throat (ENT) Dr. Ahmed Fouad Mouner 24555050 Ext 510 Dr. Abdallah Al-Ali 25644660 Dr. Abd Al-Hameed Al-Taweel 25646478 Dr. Sanad Al-Fathalah 25311996 Dr. Mohammad Al-Daaory 25731988 Dr. Ismail Al-Fodary 22620166 Dr. Mahmoud Al-Booz 25651426 General Practitioners Dr. Mohamme Y Majidi 24555050 Ext 123 Dr. Yousef Al-Omar 24719312 Dr. Tarek Al-Mikhazeem 23926920 Dr. Kathem Maarafi 25730465 Dr. Abdallah Ahmad Eyadah 25655528 Dr. Nabeel Al-Ayoobi 24577781 Dr. Dina Abidallah Al-Refae 25333501 Urologists Dr. Ali Naser Al-Serfy 22641534 Dr. Fawzi Taher Abul 22639955 Dr. Khaleel Abidallah Al-Awadi 22616660 Dr. Adel Al-Hunayan FRCS (C) 25313120 Dr. Leons Joseph 66703427 

For labor-related inquiries and complaints: 

Call MSAL hotline 128 

Sabah Hospital 24812000 Amiri Hospital 22450005 Maternity Hospital 24843100 Mubarak Al-Kabir Hospital 25312700 Chest Hospital 24849400 Farwaniya Hospital 24892010 Adan Hospital 23940620 Ibn Sina Hospital 24840300 Al-Razi Hospital 24846000 Physiotherapy Hospital 24874330/9 Kaizen center 25716707 Rawda 22517733 Adaliya 22517144 Khaldiya 24848075 Kaifan 24849807 Shamiya 24848913 Shuwaikh 24814507 Abdullah Salem 22549134 Nuzha 22526804 Industrial Shuwaikh 24814764 Qadsiya 22515088 Dasmah 22532265 Bneid Al-Gar 22531908 Shaab 22518752 Qibla 22459381 Ayoun Al-Qibla 22451082 Mirqab 22456536 Sharq 22465401 Salmiya 25746401 Jabriya 25316254 Maidan Hawally 25623444 Bayan 25388462 Mishref 25381200 W Hawally 22630786 Sabah 24810221 Jahra 24770319 New Jahra 24575755 West Jahra 24772608 South Jahra 24775066 North Jahra 24775992 North Jleeb 24311795 Ardhiya 24884079 Firdous 24892674 Omariya 24719048 N Khaitan 24710044 Fintas 23900322 GOVERNORATE PHARMACY ADDRESS PHONE Plastic Surgeons Dr. Mohammad Al-Khalaf 22547272 Dr. Abdal-Redha Lari 22617700 Dr. Abdel Quttainah 25625030/60 Family Doctor Dr Divya Damodar 23729596/23729581 Psychiatrists Dr. Esam Al-Ansari 22635047 Dr Eisa M. Al-Balhan 22613623/0 Gynaecologists & Obstetricians DrAdrian arbe 23729596/23729581 Dr. Verginia s.Marin 2572-6666 ext 8321 Dr. Fozeya Ali Al-Qatan 22655539 Dr. Majeda Khalefa Aliytami 25343406 Dr. Ahmad Al-Khooly 25739272 Dr. Salem soso 22618787 General Surgeons Dr. Amer Zawaz Al-Amer 22610044 Dr. Mohammad Yousef Basher 25327148 Internists, Chest & Heart Dr. Adnan Ebil 22639939 Dr. Mousa Khadada 22666300 Dr. Latefa Al-Duweisan 25728004 Dr. Nadem Al-Ghabra 25355515 Dr. Mobarak Aldoub 24726446 Dr Nasser Behbehani 25654300/3 Paediatricians Dr. Khaled Hamadi 25665898 Dr. Abd Al-Aziz Al-Rashed 25340300 Dr. Zahra Qabazard 25710444 Dr. Sohail Qamar 22621099 Dr. Snaa Maaroof 25713514 Dr. Pradip Gujare 23713100 Dr. Zacharias Mathew 24334282 Dermatology Dr. Mohammed Salam Bern University 23845955 Dentists Dr Anil Thomas 3729596/3729581 Dr. Shamah Al-Matar 22641071/2 Dr. Anesah Al-Rasheed 22562226 Dr. Abidallah Al-Amer 22561444 Dr. Faysal Al-Fozan 22619557 Dr. Abdallateef Al-Katrash 22525888 Dr. Abidallah Al-Duweisan 25653755 Dr. Bader Al-Ansari 25620111 Neurologists Dr. Sohal Najem Al-Shemeri 25633324 Dr. Jasem Mola Hassan 25345875 Gastrologists Dr. Sami Aman 22636464 Dr. Mohammad Al-Shamaly 25322030 Dr. Foad Abidallah Al-Ali 22633135 Endocrinologist Dr. Abd Al-Naser Al-Othman 25339330 Dr. Ahmad Al-Ansari 25658888 Dr. Kamal Al-Shomr 25329924 Physiotherapists & VD Dr. Deyaa Shehab 25722291 Dr. Musaed Faraj Khamees 22666288 Rheumatologists: Dr. Adel Al-Awadi 25330060 Dr. Khaled Al-Jarallah 25722290 Internist, Chest & Heart DR.Mohammes Akkad 24555050 Ext 210 Dr. Mohammad Zubaid MB, ChB, FRCPC, PACC Assistant Professor Of Medicine Head, Division of Cardiology Mubarak Al-Kabeer Hospital 25339667 Consultant Cardiologist Dr. Farida Al-Habib 2611555-2622555 MD, PH.D, FACC Inaya German Medical Center Te: 2575077 Fax: 25723123 Soor Center Tel: 2290-1677 Fax: 2290 1688 info@soorcenter.com www.soorcenter.com Psychologists /Psychotherapists PRIVATE CLINICS William Schuilenberg, RPC 2290-1677 Zaina Al Zabin, M.Sc. 2290-1677 Kaizen center 25716707 Noor Clinic 23845955 

INTERNATIONAL 

CALLS 

Afghanistan 0093 Albania 00355 Algeria 00213 Andorra 00376 Angola 00244 Anguilla 001264 Antiga 001268 Argentina 0054 Armenia 00374 Australia 0061 Austria 0043 Azerbaijan 00994 Bahamas 001242 Bahrain 00973 Bangladesh 00880 Barbados 001246 Belarus 00375 Belgium 0032 Belize 00501 Benin 00229 Bermuda 001441 Bhutan 00975 Bolivia 00591 Bosnia 00387 Botswana 00267 Brazil 0055 Brunei 00673 Bulgaria 00359 Burkina 00226 Burundi 00257 Cambodia 00855 Cameroon 00237 Canada 001 Cape Verde 00238 Cayman Islands 001345 Central African 00236 Chad 00235 Chile 0056 China 0086 Colombia 0057 Comoros 00269 Congo 00242 Cook Islands 00682 Costa Rica 00506 Croatia 00385 Cuba 0053 Cyprus 00357 Cyprus (Northern) 0090392 Czech Republic 00420 Denmark 0045 Diego Garcia 00246 Djibouti 00253 Dominica 001767 Dominican Republic 001809 Ecuador 00593 Egypt 0020 El Salvador 00503 England (UK) 0044 Equatorial Guinea 00240 Eritrea 00291 Estonia 00372 Ethiopia 00251 Falkland Islands 00500 Faroe Islands 00298 Fiji 00679 Finland 00358 France 0033 French Guiana 00594 French Polynesia 00689 Gabon 00241 Gambia 00220 Georgia 00995 Germany 0049 Ghana 00233 Gibraltar 00350 Greece 0030 Greenland 00299 Grenada 001473 Guadeloupe 00590 Guam 001671 Guatemala 00502 Guinea 00224 Guyana 00592 Haiti 00509 Holland (Netherlands) 0031 Honduras 00504 Hong Kong 00852 Hungary 0036 Ibiza (Spain) 0034 Iceland 00354 India 0091 Indian Ocean 00873 Indonesia 0062 Iran 0098 Iraq 00964 Ireland 00353 Italy 0039 Ivory Coast 00225 Jamaica 001876 Japan 0081 Jordan 00962 Kazakhstan 007 Kenya 00254 Kiribati 00686 Kuwait 00965 Kyrgyzstan 00996 Laos 00856 Latvia 00371 Lebanon 00961 Liberia 00231 Libya 00218 Lesotho 00266 Lithuania 00370 Luxembourg 00352 Macau 00853 Macedonia 00389 Madagascar 00261 Majorca 0034 Malawi 00265 Malaysia 0060 Maldives 00960 Mali 00223 Malta 00356 Marshall Islands 00692 Martinique 00596 Mauritania 00222 Mauritius 00230 Mayotte 00269 Mexico 0052 Micronesia 00691 Moldova 00373 Monaco 00377 Mongolia 00976 Montserrat 001664 Morocco 00212 Mozambique 00258 Myanmar (Burma) 0095 Namibia 00264 Nepal 00977 Netherlands 0031 Netherlands Antilles 00599 New Caledonia 00687 New Zealand 0064 Nicaragua 00505 Nigar 00227 Nigeria 00234 Niue 00683 Norfolk Island 00672 N. Ireland (UK) 0044 North Korea 00850 Norway 0047 Oman 00968 Pakistan 0092 Palau 00680 Panama 00507 Papua New Guinea 00675 Paraguay 00595 Peru 0051 Philippines 0063 Poland 0048 Portugal 00351 Puerto Rico 001787 Qatar 00974 Romania 0040 Russian Federation 007 Rwanda 00250 Saint Helena 00290 Saint Kitts 001869 Saint Lucia 001758 Saint Pierre 00508 Saint Vincent 001784 Samoa US 00684 Samoa West 00685 San Marino 00378 Sao Tone 00239 Saudi Arabia 00966 Scotland (UK) 0044 Senegal 00221 Seychelles 00284 Sierra Leone 00232 Singapore 0065 Slovakia 00421 Slovenia 00386 Solomon Islands 00677 Somalia 00252 South Africa 0027 South Korea 0082 Spain 0034 Sri Lanka 0094 Sudan 00249 Suriname 00597 Swaziland 00268 Sweden 0046 Switzerland 0041 Syria 00963 Serbia 00381 Taiwan 00886 Tanzania 00255 Thailand 0066 Togo 00228 Tonga 00676 Tokelau 00690 Trinidad 001868 Tunisia 00216 Turkey 0090 Tuvalu 00688 Uganda 00256 Ukraine 00380 United Arab Emirates 00976 United Kingdom 0044 Uruguay 00598 USA 001 Uzbekistan 00998 Vanuatu 00678 Venezuela 00582 Vietnam 0084 Virgin Islands UK 001284 Virgin Islands US 001340 Wales (UK) 0044 Yemen 00967 Yugoslavia 00381 Zambia 00260 Zimbabwe 00263 M u s i c & M o v i e s 

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# l i f e s t y l e 

# Willie Nile is loud and proud. While other rockers merely strut around leathered and weathered, Nile takes one giant leap for mankind: glorifying the aging process with the party-hearty song “Grandpa Rocks” (its featured character depicted in a Clash T-shirt and dirty com-bat boots). Soul mates, seekers - even seductive sociopaths -populate the storytelling in Nile’s robust new album, “World War Willie,” co-produced with Grammy winner Stewart Lerman. As the journey begins, the 67-year-old firecracker and his rock-solid band reincarnate their early rebel in “Forever Wild” (“16 and crazy - we were ragged and free...”) “Let’s All Come Together” is an amped-up social anthem -think danceable Pete Seeger. Listeners can’t resist hollering the stress-busting refrain in the track “Hell Yeah.” In fact, there’s quite a bit that’s irresistible in this diverse album -including Nile’s self-deprecating humor. Fans fist-pumping to his new-golden-oldie song will hear this grandpa - who’s apparently chugged the entire Fountain of Youth - playfully rolling in the Stone(s) Age. “Where’s my cane?!” snarls the cool rockin’ granddaddy. “Who are these people?!... “Get offa my cloud!!!”—AP 

# Cool rockin’ granddaddy Willie Nile glorifies untamed aging 

# An Australian artist behind a larger-than-life mural of American rap star Kanye West embracing him-self has offered to paint over it-for a siz-able fee. The 20-foot (6.1-metres) paint-ing dubbed ‘Kanye Loves Kanye’ features a black-suited image of the singer kissing another version of himself wearing a glit-tering pantsuit. Artist Scott Marsh said he decided to paint the image after a friend did a mural of a nude Kim Kardashian selfie at one end of the wall and he want-ed to create an artistic “link”. He said he was inspired by the inter-net meme which followed the infamous red carpet photograph of Kanye embrac-ing Kim Kardashian in which the rapper’s head was superimposed on his wife’s body. “It was pretty light-hearted,” he told AFP of the mural made on March 19. “I suspect when you paint something big on a wall people tend to take notice of it.” He said he was contacted by someone via email claiming to represent West, ask-ing him to remove the image, although he was not convinced it was genuine. Marsh, who has been painting on the wall in the Sydney suburb of Chippendale for several years, said he was open to whitewashing the mural for US$100,000. Whoever pays the fee will receive a one -off large print of the amorous embrace, in which the image is mostly whited out, an offer Marsh said was open to anyone but may appeal to the global superstar. “If you pay that I will also paint over the wall,” he said. The mural on Wednesday drew a number of onlookers to the quiet lane, with 22-year-old Stephanie Brown saying she took a short detour to snap the image she said was “a reflection of society”. Quintin Fawcett, a 20-year-old axe and saw maker visiting Australia from New Zealand, said he too was aware of the mural and thought “I might as well come and have a look”. “It highlights how crazy people are for the cult of celebrity that I can paint a 20-foot mural in Chippendale and it’s global news,” said Marsh. — AFP 

# “M iles Ahead,” an ambitious, experimen-tal biopic about jazz legend Miles Davis, actually states its mission twice over the course of the movie. Basically: “If you’re going to tell a story, come with some attitude. Don’t make it all corny.” The person saying it is Miles Davis, played by Don Cheadle, who also co-wrote and directed. In the context of the film, he’s speak-ing to a fictional music writer named Dave Braden (Ewan McGregor), who has conned, charmed and strong-armed his way into Miles’ orbit for a few days in hopes of writing a comeback story that would end the eccentric musician’s half decade of dormancy. While a little on the nose to be repeated, it’s a good line, and an even better goal in the murky and generally unrewarding territory of the dreaded biopic - especially for someone as elusive, multifac-eted and just downright giant as Miles Davis was. As Cheadle’s Miles cheekily says to Dave in that whispered rasp, “I was born, I moved to New York, met some cats, made some music, did some dope, made some more music, then you showed up at my house.” Knowing well how a tell-it-all approach can be duller than a Wikipedia page, Cheadle eschews the cradle to grave approach and instead focuses in on two moments - a crazy few days in Davis’ “Howard Hughes of jazz” phase and much earlier during the romantic beginnings and fraught endings of his relationship with the dancer Frances Taylor (Emayatzy Corinealdi). The story jumps from the past to the present very suddenly, employing an interesting visual technique that links the two moments in time through a character, let’s say, falling in the present and another continuing the motion in the past. It’s a unique take on the fluidity and imprecision of memory, but, more precisely it’s indicative of Cheadle’s ambitions to make the film feel as unpre-dictable and freestyle as Miles’ jazz. Cheadle as an actor is not afraid to show Miles Davis for all his contradictions - his genius, his charm, his ego and his mania. His bold, studied and fully lived-in por-trayal has attitude to spare too. 

Record company 

The “present” part shows a hyper-active Davis, hopped up on painkillers and hobbling with a deteriorating hip trying to collect a payment from the record company that he’s long since stopped producing for. It’s sort of a kitchen sink approach to the escalating events story that takes Dave and Miles everywhere from a college dorm room to score some cocaine to a high-speed shoot out. It’s particularly odd then that this portion is duller than the more traditional portrait of the past. That section plays more like a languid, melancholy bal-lad as we peer into his courtship of Frances and the insanity, danger and obsessiveness that drove her away. Cheadle and Corinealdi’s palpable chemistry is an undeniable force here, and is a striking con-trast to the occasional awkwardness of many of Cheadle and McGregor’s interactions in the pres-ent. In theory, it’s probably meant to be another evocation of jazz stylings, but in execution, it feels more like dead air. Cheadle has an interesting vision here and his ambitions pay off on a number of levels - especially in his performance - but it doesn’t really come together as a coherent composition. Unlike in jazz, the disparate moments, sounds and styles struggle to coalesce in service of a whole that’s bigger than its parts. “Miles Ahead,” a Sony Pictures Classic release, is rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America for “strong language throughout, drug use, some sexuality/nudity and brief violence.” Running time: 100 minutes. Two and a half stars out of four. — AP 

# Sydney embraces 

# Kanye loving mural 

Don Cheadle, left, the star, director and co-screenwriter of ‘Miles Ahead,’ poses with cast members Emayatzy Corinealdi, center, and Ewan McGregor at the premiere of the film at the Writers Guild Theatre. — AP photos Don Cheadle, right, the star, director and co-screenwriter of ‘Miles Ahead,’ poses with Frances Davis, ex-wife of leg-endary jazz trumpeter Miles Davis, at the premiere of the film at the Writers Guild Theatre in Beverly Hills, Calif. 

# Cheadle’s ‘Miles Ahead’ 

# stylishly evokes jazz legend 

Review Actress and singer Patty Duke, who won an Oscar at age 16 for her portrayal of deaf-blind political activist Helen Keller in “The Miracle Worker,” died Tuesday. She was 69. Duke, whose real name was Anna Pearce, had developed sepsis from a ruptured intestine, her manager Mitchell Stubbs said in a statement. “ This morning, our beloved wife, mother, grandmother, matriarch and the exquisite artist, humanitarian, and champion for mental health Anna Patty Duke Pearce closed her eyes, quieted her pain and ascended to a beautiful place,” said her son, the actor and director Sean Astin. Astin, who played hobbit Samwise Gamgee in Peter Jackson’s “The Lord of the Rings” trilogy, said the family were celebrating the “infinite love and compassion she shared through her work and throughout her life.” Duke, who lived in New York, shot to fame with a best supporting actress Academy Award for her role as Keller in Arthur Penn’s 1962 biopic “ The Miracle Worker.” She built on her suc-cess by playing “identical cousins” in her own sitcom, “ The Patty Duke Show,” which ran for more than 100 episodes in the mid-1960s. She went on to take film roles, including in Mark Robson’s 1967 dra-ma “Valley of the Dolls,” embarked on a successful singing career and served as president of the Screen Actors Guild from 1985 to 1988. She won three Emmy Awards, including for the miniseries “Captains and Kings” and television movie “My Sweet Charlie,” which both aired in the 1970s. In her 1987 autobiography, she revealed that she had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, then known as manic depression, five years earlier, and she went on to become a vocal advocate for people with mental health issues. 

‘Brave humanitarian’ 

Duke apologized to fans earlier in March for having kept a low profile recently. “I have been absent, but not far, believe me. I love and miss you all. Hopefully back more soon and often,” tweeted the star, who celebrated 30 years of marriage to her fourth hus-band, drill sergeant Mike Pearce, two weeks ago. “My mother’s life touched tens of millions of people. Her groundbreaking portrayal of iconic American legend Helen Keller launched a career that would span six decades,” said Astin. “First on Broadway and then on the silver screen, Patty Duke’s characteri-zation of the extraordinary develop-ment of the blind-deaf child brought global attention to the plight of peo-ple living with those challenges.” Astin said Duke had talked about setting up a “Patty Duke Mental Health Initiative” as she struggled with illness. Her death triggered an outpouring of trib-utes from Hollywood, led by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences which posted a picture of Duke as a grinning teen, proudly bran-dishing her Oscar. West Wing star Marlee Matlin, who won a best actress Oscar for “Children of a Lesser God,” described Duke as “brave, outspoken and humanitarian” while “Star Trek” and “TJ Hooker” actor William Shatner said she was “a won-derful friend.” “21 Jump Street” actress Holly Robinson Peete, soap star Alyssa Milano, pro wrestler Jerry Lawler and US radio host Tammy Bruce all took to Twitter to offer their condolences. “She was so cool she had a disco dance named after her in my hood in 70s NYC,” said legendary New York musician and producer Nile Rodgers. Flowers were being readied to be placed on Duke’s Walk of Fame star on Hollywood Boulevard. — AFP 

# Oscar-winning actress 

# Patty Duke dies at 69 

Awarded winners of the Saudi Film Festival pose for a group photo on March 28, 2016 at the Saudi Cultural Center in Dammam, some 400 km eastern of the capital Riyadh. Although public cinemas are not allowed in Saudi Arabia there is a growing interest in cinema and filmmaking, as reflected in the re-emergence of the Saudi Film Festival last year after a seven-year absence. — AFP photos An awarded winner of the Saudi Film Festival walks with her award on the stage. Country icon Merle Haggard has can-celed his April concert dates as he recovers from a recurring bout of double pneumonia. “I want to thank my fans for their prayers and well wishes. I hope to be back on the road in May, but I’m taking it one day at a time,” the singer said in a statement from his publicist on Tuesday. The 78-year-old singer of hits like “Okie From Muskogee,” “Mama Tried” and “Workin’ Man Blues” had also cancelled dates in February and March. He had a battle with lung cancer in 2008 but still keeps up an ambitious touring schedule. — AP 

# Country icon Merle Haggard 

# cancels April concerts 

File photo shows singer-songwriter Merle Haggard performs at the 2015 Big Barrel Country Music Festival in Dover, Del. — AP This file photo taken on March 23, 2010 shows actress Patty Duke speaking dur-ing the Social Security Administration Reunites the cast of ‘The Patty Duke Show’ press conference. — AFP THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

F e a t u r e s 

# l i f e s t y l e 

By Athoob Al-Shuaibi Their motto is “Inspire, Connect and Educate”, but in fact, they do more than that. The photographers annual forum, Fototalks 2016, is bringing together again ama-teurs and professionals from Kuwait and the Gulf region in a free from formalities atmosphere to network and strengthen their relations. It turned the theater of the Gulf University (GUST) into a platform where they show off their photograph-ic talents in addition to taking advantage of both technical expertise and talking about challenges and successes in their field. The idea behind this event started five years ago by photographer Khaled Al-Abdulghafour. “I’ve never imagined that Fototalks would last for another year when I first started. However, when I saw 50 to 70 photographers came asking about when is the next one, I knew by then that it’s going to become a greater responsibility for me to maintain a higher level each year of these four elements, inspiration, education, network-ing and entertainment,” Al-Abdulghafour said. Despite the technical faults that occurred during the seminars, the team overcame them smoothly. The event was characterized by the presenter, photographer Dr. Mohammed Ali Al-Kandari, who was adept at melting the ice with the audience with his great sense of humor. This year, the guest speakers were from Kuwait, Qatar, UAE, KSA, Oman and Bahrain. The first part of the event began with Ramzan Al-Nuaimi, the creative director at Al-Jazeera Network who talked about how to become your own brand. Secondly, photographer Basma Al-Qartas told us about her successful transition from being a school teacher for blind children to establishing her newborn photography busi-ness, followed by the photographers challenge when two photographers had only twenty min-utes to take a picture and edit it. In this chal-lenge, Fototalks surprised the audience when they invited one of the most famous singers in the Arab world, Nabeel Shuail, to pose as a mod-el for this challenge. Another one, too was a live competition between two photographers in the food photography category. Prior to the food photography challenge, the award winning Emirati photographer Khalid Al-Hammadi presented his exciting and risky expe-rience in photographing the fog over the city of Abu Dhabi for the last three years. The photog-rapher’s work has been recently selected to be published in the National Geographic Magazine for travel. The Fototalk forum 2016 will continue until the third of April in morning and evening ses-sions. The event requires previous registration, free of charge, except the workshops. This event is organized by photolender.com with the Kuwait Finance House as a strategic partner. This year’s event is sponsored by LUMEN photogra-phy, Canon, Albumi.com, Love cafe, Joe’s, and Choco Queen, hosted by the Gulf University of Science and Technology (GUST ) and the Professional Advancement & Continuing Education Centre (PACE). 

(From left) Photo shows Khaled Al-Abdulghafour, Ramzan Al-Naimi, Creative Director of Jazeera Network, and Dr Mohammed Al-Kandari at Fototalks forum. Photo shows Kuwaiti photographer Basma Al-Qartas. (From left) Photo shows famous Kuwaiti singers Nabeel Shuail and Hmoud Al-Khudhor. — Photos by Khalid Al-Ali 

# Forum for photographers from across the GCC 

# Fototalks 2016: ‘Inspiring, Educating and Entertaining’ 

(From left) Photo shows photographers Abdulaziz Al-Duwaisan and Abdulaziz Al-Shayji during the discussion. Photo shows Emirati photographer Khalid Al-Malki. Avisit to the island of Molokai offers a window on a unique and tragic chapter of Hawaiian history. For about a century beginning in 1866, some 8,000 individ-uals afflicted with leprosy were quarantined to live out their lives on the remote Kalaupapa Peninsula on Molokai’s north-ern shores. Their stories are told at Kalaupapa National Historical Park. About 100 people still live in the community, mostly government workers along with a few patients who chose to stay after the quarantine policy officially ended in 1969. Unless you’re invited by a resident, you can only visit the park on a guided tour with a permit. There are several options for getting there. My wife Yukako and I booked a package with Makani Kai Charter Tours that included a flight from Honolulu to the main airport at Molokai, a bus tour of the park plus lunch, and a return flight from a tiny open-air airport inside the park. We also planned a hike down Kalaupapa’s steep sea cliffs before our park tour. We headed to the trailhead from Molokai’s mountaintop airport, sharing a 15-minute taxi ride with two people who’d been on our flight. Our fellow passen-gers were heading to the cliffs for mule rides. We were told to start ahead of the mules as the trail narrows in some spots and the mules make it tougher to navigate. (We planned our flight home from the park airport so we wouldn’t have to hike back up.) 

Colorful plants 

At 1,664 feet up, the mountaintop offered an incredible view of the Kalaupapa Peninsula - though it would have been even more spectacular if there hadn’t been storm clouds and vog (what locals call volcanic smog). As we began the roughly 3-mile hike, we were immersed in a loud chorus of tropical birds. We also caught a few glimpses of the ocean rumbling below at spots where the thick foliage thinned out. As we made our way down, I spotted huge spider webs above in the trees and Yukako found tiny flowers and moss-covered rocks. Colorful plants abounded along with guava, noni and Brazilian pepper trees heavy with red bundles of peppercorns. Farther along, a wild goat ignored us while quietly munching on the noni fruit, also known as Indian mulberry. The uneven concrete and boulder steps began to jolt our knees so we took a break every few switchbacks. Needless to say, there’s no cell service here, and hikers must bring their own snacks and water. As mules use the trail daily, mule drop-pings are found at every turn. That aside, the hike was peace-ful with hardly anyone else on the trail. Storm clouds broke an hour into our hike. The rain was brief but heavy, turning the trail into a slippery mud bath. Footholds filled with water and water spilled in streams off the concrete steps. We’d packed raincoats but got soaked to the bone anyway. Yukako took a small stumble and I had a few close calls, ending up with muddy hands from catching myself on the rocks. We tried to dry ourselves off but with no sun and a strong breeze, we were chilled for the rest of the hike. 

Ironwood trees 

About three-fourths of the way down, the mules caught up with us, passing us on a wide switchback. Near the bottom, the trail opened up to a view of the stormy Pacific. Rough seas slammed onto shores lined with boulders, palm trees and ironwood trees. The hike took about two hours total, but would have gone faster if the rain hadn’t slowed us down. We met our tour near the beachside mule corral, joining a few other hikers, a group of retirees and the mule riders who’d passed us, including our fellow taxi passengers, who looked just as wet and worn as we did. An old yellow school bus transported us to the national park. We visited structures built in the late 1800s by St Damien, the Belgian priest who devoted himself to the colony and was eventually canonized, and also saw the gravesite of St Marianne, the nun who cared for female patients of the colony and who also was made a saint. Our guide pointed out an ancient Hawaiian altar called a heiau, and we visited two turn-of-the-20th century churches still in use. Some of St Damien’s remains are interred at St Philomena Church. Along the way there were deer, wild pigs and dozens of feral but friendly cats who were accustomed to being fed by the bus driver. We pic-nicked on a blustery field overlooking the peninsula’s cold, rough waters before being taken to the airport for our flight out. It was sobering to consider that ships once anchored here to unload passengers who would never leave. — AP 

# Hawaii: Exploring the sea cliffs and sad stories of Molokai 

A wild goat appears along the trail leading to Molokai’s Kalaupapa Peninsula. A hiker makes her way down a trail leading towards the Molokai’s Kalaupapa Peninsula near Kualapuu, Hawaii. A view of the trail leading to Molokai’s Kalaupapa Peninsula in Kualapuu, Hawaii. — AP photos Flowers grow around an abandoned structure that was once part of al leper colony in Molokai in Kalaupapa. Hikers overlook a bluff on the Kalaupapa Peninsula. THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# l i f e s t y l e 

F a s h i o n 

# Former fashion mogul Pierre Berge lashed out yesterday at designers creating Islamic clothing and headscarves, accusing them of taking part in the “enslavement of women”. The French businessman, partner of the late fashion legend Yves Saint Laurent, took aim at the wave of big fashion chains that have followed the Italian designers Dolce & Gabbana in catering specifically to the Muslim market. “I am scandalized,” he told Europe 1 French radio. “Creators should have nothing to do with Islamic fashion. Designers are there to make women more beautiful, to give them their freedom, not to collaborate with this dictatorship which imposes this abominable thing by which we hide women and make them live a hidden life.” “Renounce the mon-ey and have some principles,” he declared, lashing the new fashion for “modest” Muslim-friendly lines. His comments came as the French families minister, Laurence Rossignol, sparked outrage on social media as she compared women who fol-lowed this trend with “negroes who supported slavery”. Her office later told AFP she had not intented to cause offence but was referring to an abolitionist tract by the French philosopher Montesquieu, “De l’esclavage des nËgres” (“On the Enslavement of Negroes”). Earlier this year Dolce & Gabbana became the first major western brand to openly aim at captur-ing a corner of the Islamic fashion market-estimated to be worth $260 billion (230 billion euros) — with its Abaya range. It included 14 abayas or ankle-length dresses, which it matched with embroidered headscarves and hijabs. 

‘Burqinis’ 

The Swedish giant H&M followed their lead, using a veiled Muslim women in its advertising campaign, with the Japanese brand Uniqlo earlier this month announcing it would begin selling hijabs in its London stores. The British brand Marks & Spencer has also put its toe in the water, marketing full-body “burqini” swimming costumes in its online store. Last year Zara, Tommy Hilfiger, Oscar de la Renta and Mango all launched varyingly “modest” collections to coincide with the holy Muslim month of Ramadan, picking up on the success of a small DKNY line the previous year. But Berge, 85, who ran the Yves Saint Laurent fashion house for four decades, decried their “opportunism”. “These creators who are taking part in the enslavement of women should ask themselves some questions,” he added. “In one way they are complicit, and all this to make money. Principles should come before money,” Berge argued. “In life you have to choose the side of freedom,” he said. Rather than covering women up, “we must teach (Muslim) women to revolt, to take their clothes off, to learn to live like most of the women in the rest of the world. “It’s absolutely inadmissible. It is not tolerable,” he told the radio station. Berge-who spends most of his time in Muslim-majority Morocco-said: “I am definitely not an Islamophobe. Women have a right to wear headscarves, but I do not see why we are going towards this religion, these practices and mores that are absolutely incompatible with our western freedoms.” — AFP 

# Fashion mogul accuses designers of 

# ‘enslaving women’ with Islamic styles 

Pierre Berge Models parade creations from the XINSHEN LINEN and Sun Lin Collection designed by Sun Lin at China Fashion Week in Beijing yesterday. — AP/AFP photos Models parade creations from the J Queen & Little Queen Xie Jiaqi Collection designed by Xie Jiaqi. THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

# l i f e s t y l e 

F e a t u r e s 

# Gaining confidence has been a rather sensitive and essential issue that almost every girl deals with and some suffer from it. We live in a world now where everything is available, and the understanding of beauty has changed. In some aspects, it has changed to the better and in other aspects it has changed to the worse. Confidence is how you see yourself, whether it was physi-cally, mentally or emotionally, and it’s also how you carry yourself in a crowd. Many women and young ladies compare themselves to others, which is a huge mistake because that’s where the insecurities come in and play a huge damaging role. Sometimes people can get really nasty with each other and manipulative to put you down or make you feel bad about yourself, and only people who are weak and suffer from low-self-esteem would want people to feel as bad as they feel about themselves. Building confidence takes a while, and only when you do good for others will you feel better about yourself, help-ing others and making them happy in any way will make you feel better automatically. Keep in mind helping others can be as simple as cheering them up when they’re down to as important as charity work and donating to the people in need. Surround yourself with people who want to see you do better and who will also guide you whenever you’re at crossroads, feeling that love and care from others will also build trust between you and the people who matter to you the most. The more you believe in yourself and push your-self to achieve your goals the more your confidence grows with you. You need to love yourself first in order to love others, there’s nothing wrong with pampering yourself and not settling for anything less than what you deserve. Of course being overconfident isn’t an attractive charac-teristic, it will definitely cause you to loose opportunities in life such as a job offer or a career and so on, people who are overconfident tend to be more delusional or might come off as snobby to others. It also isn’t healthy mentally to think you are superior or deserve more than everyone else because sometimes when you set the bar really high, no one will be there to satisfy or support you. The right amount of confidence is extremely attractive, it makes others want to meet you and hear your story and it also helps you believe in yourself to always do better, it also encourages you to solve any problems you encounter in your way, whether it was at work, at home or in a rela-tionship. Confidence always comes from within first, then is boosted with what you achieve and who you help, howev-er always be realistic and try to inspire others to be as giv-ing, caring and considerate of others. It is always beautiful to see young girls and even older women support each other and just be satisfied with who they are and what they have, because if you think about it, there will always be better people, more beautiful, more successful and so on, but if you are confident and grateful then that shouldn’t matter at all to you, and you should always wish the best for everyone around you. 

# Confidence is attractive 

Models parading creations from J BY HO & WOW-IN HaoJia Cross-border Collection designed by Hao Jia. Models parading creations from Fei Gallery & Boutique Sun Xuefei Collection designed by Sun Xuefei. 38 

## Fashion mogul accuses designers of ‘enslaving women’ with Islamic styles 

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2016 

File photo shows people show off their Easter finery as they walk down Fifth Avenue in New York during the annual Easter Parade and Easter Bonnet Festival. — AFP 

# Philippines puts Marcos jewel images online to teach about graft 

# Philippine authorities are staging an online exhibition of jew-elry owned by late dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his family to try to educate a new generation about the corruption of that era. The postings on Facebook and Twitter by the Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG) come as the family tries to extend its political comeback in elections in May. “The PCGG will be posting selected jewelry items to show and remind the present generation of the excesses and extravagance of the Marcoses in their two-decade dictatorship,” the anti-corruption agency said on its website. “The Virtual Jewelry Exhibit” began in mid-March with regular postings showcasing valuables recovered after the dictator was oust-ed by a military-backed popular uprising in 1986. Aside from pictures of the jewels uploaded regularly, there are postings explaining what they cost the country. A picture of a diamond tiara comes with the caption: “can fund... the treatment of 12,052 cases of tuberculosis.” The PCGG, which plans eventually to auction off the Marcos jew-els, has previously said that international auction houses have appraised their total value at more than a billion pesos ($21 million). Marcos and his jet-setting wife Imelda were accused of massively enriching themselves during their years in power while the country sank deeper into poverty. Imelda was known for her extravagance, amassing jewelry, art masterpieces and a huge collection of shoes. Although the family fled abroad during the 1986 revolt, they were allowed to return home after the former dictator died in exile in 1989. Since then the Marcoses have made a startling resurgence, with members not only evading criminal charges but winning election to prominent positions. Ferdinand Marcos Jnr, previously elected to the powerful Senate, is now running for vice-president. Widow Imelda Marcos is seeking re-election to Congress and her eldest daughter Imee is running for another term as governor of the family bailiwick in the north.— AFP 

# Montreal puts the sizzle on its status as a cycling and cultural beehive with a bike festival May 29-June 5. It’s anchored by a bicycle tour of the city-island that rivals New York’s Five Boro cycling extravaganza in size, adds a distinctive French twist and shows Americans how very far their dollar can go in Canada these days. Tour de l’lle de MontrÈal is the iconic event for a bicy-cle-mad city that Joelle Sevigny of Velo Quebec, the province’s bicycle association and festival organizer, calls “little Copenhagen in North America.” The festival is far from little. The Sunday tour on closed-off streets, June 5, typically draws 25,000 people, and fol-lows a Friday night ride that brings together 15,000 in good weather. The classic Sunday ride is 30 miles (50 kilo-meters), with an “express” option for fast cyclists to leave before the mob. Shorter hops are part of the mix, as is a 60-mile (100-kilometer) ride that ventures beyond streets closed to traffic. Tour la nuit, on the Friday night, takes cyclists 14 miles (23 kilometers) and invariably brings out plenty of bikers and spectators in goofy costumes with some wild homemade illumination on the bikes. Tour de l’lle de MontrÈal began in 1985 with 3,500 peo-ple and mushroomed as the cycling ethic took hold. Cycling is a year-round form of commuting and recreation despite the bitter winters in a province that is home to Route Verte, the vast bike network that made Quebec the world’s top cycling destination, according to National Geographic. The Go Bike Montreal Festival opens May 29 with “metropolitan challenge” rides in the countryside. The main Sunday ride costs $30.50 to $41 Canadian dollars for an adult, depending when booked. The exchange rate, about even a few years ago, has tilted heavily in favor of the US dollar, meaning discounts of one-third or more for Americans in Canada in recent months. — AP 

This file photo shows an official from the Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG) holding a diamond-studded piece of jewelry seized by the Philippine government from former first lady Imelda Marcos, at the Central Bank head-quarters in Manila. — AFP 

Lebanese models dressed as Batman and Superman (right) play on the rooftop of a building during a photoshoot in the capital Beirut on March 23, 2016. — AFP 

# In Montreal, a French-flavored festival on bicycles 

This image provided shows bicyclists touring Montreal, Canada.— AP photos This image provided shows bicyclists touring Montreal, Canada, as part of a bike festival that typically brings out 15,000 people for a night ride and 25,000 for the main event a few days later.
