Title: Task Force on Antisemitism Report #2

URL Source: https://president.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/Announcements/Report-2-Task-Force-on-Antisemitism.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 04 Sep 2024 02:39:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 91

Markdown Content:
REPORT #2 

# COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY STUDENT 

# EXPERIENCES OF ANTISEMITISM 

# AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

# PROMOTING SHARED VALUES 

# AND INCLUSION 

# TASK FORCE ON 

# ANTISEMITISM 

# AUGUST 2024 1

# Report #2: Columbia University Student Experiences of Antisemitism and 

# Recommendations for Promoting Shared Values and Inclusion 

# Task Force on Antisemitism 1

# August 30 , 2024  

> 1

This report reflects the research, analysis and drafting of members of the Task Force’s policy working group: Ester 

Fuchs (Co -Chair, SIPA and Political Science), Clémence Boulouque (Department of Religion) , Jeremy A. Dauber 

(Department of Germanic Languages), Rebecca Kobrin (Department of History) , and Deborah Valenze (Affiliate 

Co -Chair, Barnard College). Extensive analysis and input also was provided by the other members of the Task 

Force: Nicholas Lemann (Co -Chair, Journalism School), David M. Schizer (Co -Chair, Law School), Peter Coleman 

(Affiliate C o-Chair, Teachers College), R. Glenn Hubbard (Business School), Magda Schaler -Haynes (Mailman 

School of Public Health), Nir Uriel (Columbia University Irving Medical Center), Matthew C. Waxman (Law 

School), and Gil Zussman (Fu Foundation School of Engineer ing and Applied Science). 2

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary 4

Introduction 8

I.  Antisemitism on Campus: Student Experiences and Testimonies 11

A.  Introduction 11

B.  Student Experiences in Day -to -Day Encounters (Including Dorm Life and Social Media) 13

C.  Student Experiences in Clubs 18

D.  Student Experiences in the Classroom and with the Curriculum 22

E.  Student Experiences During Protests and the Encampment 29

F.  Israeli Students’ Unique Experiences  26 

G.  What We Learned from the Listening Sessions and Reports 32 

II.  Recommendations for Promoting Shared Values and Inclusion: 

Improving the Campus Environment 39

A.  Introduction 39 

B.  Anti -bias and Antisemitism Trainings, Workshops, and Informational Websites 42 

1.  Recommendations for Who Should Receive Trainings and Workshops 43

2.  Recommendations for How Trainings and Workshops Should Be Implemented and What 

Content to Consider 43

3.  A Working Definition of Antisemitism  45

4.  Training and Workshops Recommended for Students and All Members of the University 

Community Who Engage with Students 47 

5. Proposals for Speakers, Convenings , and Panel Discussions Specifically on Antisemitism 48

6. Customizing Trainings, Workshops, and Resources for Different University Constituencies 

and Schools 49

7. Recommendations for Evaluating the Effectiveness of Training 55

C.  Reporting Experiences of Exclusion, Harassment, Bias, and Discrimination and 

Mediation Procedures for Resolving Incident Reports that Don’t Involve Title VI  56

1.  Current Process and Recommendations for Filing a Report 56

2.  Current Process and Recommendations for Mediating and Resolving Disputes 59

3.  Consistency and Coordination between Diversity Equity and Inclusion ( DEI ) and Deans of 

Students Offices 60 

D.  Recommendations for Student Groups and Clubs 62 

1.  Why Change University Policy? 64

2.  Recommendations for Promoting Pluralism and Avoiding Discrimination 74

E.  Inclusion in the Classroom 75

Conclusion 773

What We Need from the University 78

Appendices 80 

A.  Listening Session Outreach 80 

B.  Columbia Student Op -Eds with Allegations of Antisemitism 85 

C. Examples of Incidents Experienced by Many Jewish and Israeli Students as Antisemitism 86

D.  Sources: Trainings, Websites, and Scholarship on Antisemitism 89 

1.  Additional Suggestions for Trainings 89 

2.  The Institute for Israel and Jewish Studies 90 

3.  Selected Scholarship on Antisemitism 90 

4.  Selected Training Resources on Antisemitism 92 4

Executive Summary 

The demonstrations that roiled our campuses during the past academic year uncovered deep 

disagreements about the mission of our University. During those months, consensus around the 

University’s  formal rules and informal norms of behavior broke down , interfering with our 

charge to educate students and engage in research .

In addition, the testimonies of hundreds of Jewish and Israeli students have made clear that the 

University community has not treat ed them with the standards of civility, respect, and fairness it 

promises to all its students .

After October 7, many Jewish and Israeli students began to report multiple instances of 

harassment , verbal abuse and ostracism , and in some cases physical violence . Given the volume 

of these reports, the Task Force invited all students —not just Jewish and Israeli students —to tell 

us their stories. Over the course of the spring, nearly five hundred students offered testimonials ,

at over 20 listening sessions, which provid ed invaluable insights into the campus climate during 

these troubled times. These studen t stories are heartbreaking , and make clear that the University 

has an obligation to act .

This report re counts student experiences in a wide variety of venues —day -to -day encounters, 

including dorm life and social media; clubs; and the classroom. Unfortunately, some members of 

the Columbia community have been unwilling to acknowledg e the antisemitism many students 

have experienc ed —the way repeated violations of University policy and norms have affected 

them, and the compliance issues this climate has created with respect to federal, state, and local 

anti -discrimination law. Many of the events reported in the testimo nials took place well before 

the establishment of the encampments and the takeover of Hamilton Hall; the experiences 

reported during that period were even more extreme. 

We heard about troubling incidents from a diverse group of Jewish students from across the 

political spectrum; and, even more pronouncedly, from Israeli students, whose national origin 

both make them members of a specifically protected class under federal law and frequently has 

caused them to be singled out for particularly terrible treatment. 

Students also reported that their efforts to seek redress from the University for the hostility and 

bigotry they were encountering were often unsuccessful. Many students did not understand how 

to report these incidents . Although some faculty and staff responded with compassion and 

determination, others minimized the concerns of these students, reacting sluggishly and 

ineffectively even to the most clear -cut violations. Even students who had successfully report ed 

an incident spoke of a recurring lack of enforcement of existing University rules and policies .

The experiences of these students demonstrated that there is an urgent need to reshape everyday 

social norm s across the campuses of Columbia University. We need to promote a richer ethic of 5

pluralism, which would encourage greater tolerance of and respect for differences in religion, 

culture, and national origin. If we were really to succeed in promoting tolerance , students would 

come to understand and value these differences. 

But we are a long way from there. The problems we found are serious and pervasive . We 

recognize that t he University is not monolithic, and the environment at some schools is 

especially challenging. A wide range of responses is needed —indeed, a broader range than we 

discuss in this report (which focuses on training, defining antisemitism, reporting, and rules for 

student groups) and in our last report (which focused on the rules governing protests). We do not 

want to give the im pression that the recommendati ons here are all that is required. We will 

address other issues in future reports. 

In this report we draw on the many accou nts shared with us over the past several months to 

produce a working definition of antisemitism. Instead of relying on an existing definition, we 

crafted a working definition that is rooted in recent experiences at Columbia: 

Antisemitism is prejudice, discrimination, hate, or violence directed at Jews, including 

Jewish Israelis. Antisemitism can manifest in a range of ways, including as ethnic slurs, 

epithets , and caricatures; stereotypes; antisemitic tropes and symbols; Holocaust denial; 

targeting Jews or Israelis for violence or celebrating violence against them; exclusion or 

discrimination based on Jewish identity or ancestry or real or perceived ties to Isr ael; and 

certain double standards applied to Israel. 

This working definition draws on experiences of many Jewish and Israeli students, who were on 

the receiving end of ethnic slurs, stereotypes about supposedly dangerous Israeli veterans, 

antisemitic tropes about Jewish wealth and hidden power, threats and physical assaults, exclusion 

of Zionists from student groups, and inconsistent standards. We propose this definition for use in 

training and education, not for discipline or as a means for limiting free speech or academic 

freedom .

This report also identif ies significant problems in university policy and practice and make s

recommendations for fix ing flawed administrative systems, improving campus climate, and 

building consensus for a more inclusive and pluralistic university . Specifically, we recommend 

anti -bias and inclusion trainings for students, resident advisers, resident assistants, teaching 

as sistants, student -facing staff, and faculty . In a community dedicated to freedom of speech and 

pluralism, we must prepare students with different views and backgrou nds to engage with each 

other . We must encourag e mutual respect, tolerance, civility, and an open learning environment. 

We also recommend in -person workshops about antisemitism and Islamophobia, as well as a 

range of optional training and workshops for others in our community, including on implicit bias 

and stereotypes, bystander interventions, and having difficult conversa tions. 6

Given the urgent need to train administrators who play critical roles in responding to student 

needs, we also suggest a range of trainings in dispute resolution. 

As part of this effort , w e recommend that the Interim President and Provost establish a Cross -

School Committee that includes all schools at Columbia , along with Barnard College and 

Teachers College , to share information and establish a baseline standard for trainings, 

workshops, and website information for all schools. The Committee should aim to overcome the 

problem of decentralization within Columbia, which is a barrier to maintaining common 

objectives across the many spaces shared by undergraduate and graduate students. 

We also recommend that the University establish a repository for best practices in anti -bias and 

inclusion trainings and that it develop a plan for evaluati ng these programs. 

Customized trainings aimed at specific constituencies are particularly important , includ ing first 

year orientation and new student orientation for graduate programs —a recent area of focus for 

University Life —and new faculty orientation at all Columbia schools, including affiliate schools, 

Barnard College , and Teachers College. We recognize that University Life has been working to 

update and improve its training for student orientation. 

We call attention to the need to train teaching a ssistants (TAs) in sensitivity to bias, exclusion, 

and antisemitism. Currently, the online course required for all Columbia TAs, available through 

the Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (EOAA) website, lacks guidelines on diversity, 

inclusion, and bias. TAs need guidance on how to respond to classroom scenarios t hat stray into 

discrimination and bias; currently, they are told that no single best practice exists. We 

recommend giving attention to topics related to race, religion, and national origin in all their 

complexity. We point to several excellent models offered by other universities in guiding TAs 

and first -time instructors. 

Resident assistants and advisers (RAs) are another group in need of customized training; we 

offer suggestions for how RAs can foster better attention to inclusion, identification of bias, and 

elimination of harmful behavior signaling derision and hatred. RAs must fully understand their 

role as leaders in inclusion: they need to be prepared to listen with respect and to mediate 

conflict s.

In place of the confusing multiplicity of reporting structures that currently exist, we suggest ways 

of revamping procedures so that students are not discouraged from speaking with advisors and 

administrators about prejudicial treatment. Transparency and consistency in how we handle 

student reports of bias and exclusion are of the utmost importance if we want students to share 

their experiences. Our aim is for students to engage with faculty or staff who can resolve 

conflicts before situat ions rise to the l evel of legal violations. Antisemitism complaints deserve 

careful attention from deans and administrators, alongside all forms of bigotry and 

discrimination. 7

We also recommend ways to ensure that student groups contribute to the University’s pluralist 

mission and comply with anti -discrimination law. Unfortunately, we have heard from many 

Jewish and Israeli students who have been excluded from student groups because of their Zionist 

beliefs . This is not acceptable. S tudent groups must be inclusive , with membership limited only 

for reasons connected to their mission. Student groups generally should not issue statements 

unrelated to their missions , so they can welcome students with diverse views and 

backgrounds. Groups also should have a robust consultation process before issuing statements or 

joining coalitions. To be clear, there should not be any limits on the free speech rights of a 

group’s  members . They must be free to speak about any issue as long as they are speak ing  for 

themselves , not for the group. 8

Introduction 

The Antisemitism Task Force has heard the testimonies of hundreds of Jewish and Israeli 

students and it is clear that the University community has not treated them with the standards of 

civility, respect, and fairness it promises to all its students. As we reflect on the antisemitism 

revealed by their experiences, we realize that these interactions have affected the entire 

University community. The larger social compact is broken. University policy and individual 

practice must change if we are to fix the situation. Our research and the many testimonies of 

students point to a crucial need to alter the current cam pus climate .2 That is the purpose of this 

Second Report of the Antisemitism Task Force. 

We have gathered information according to the mandate we were given by  Columbia’s  then -

president , Minouche Shafik , Barnard’s president Laura Rosenbury , and Teachers College 

president Thomas Bailey .3 We are offering recommendations based upon the extensive work we 

have done to date and we fully expect our Interim President Katrina Armstrong to lead a robust 

discussion on the broader problem of campus climate. We found that administrative structures 

intended to ensure that  all  members of our community respect each other, engage in civil 

discourse, and receive fair treatment in a dispute resolution process are not working effectively 

for Jewish students (or do not exist at all ).

Some of our recommendations are focused on the specific problems facing Jewish students. 

Other recommendations, especially those concerning training, process , and procedure, suggest 

more general improvements on behalf of all students, any of whom may, during their years on 

this campus, face bias, discrimination, exclusion, or intimidation. Certain recommendations are 

straightforward and should be implemented quickly; others will require more extensive 

consultation and discussion. We have clearly identified those proposals which call for the 

creation of a broadly representative faculty , student , and staff committee aimed at developing 

consistent, clear , and trans parent procedures and policies supported by the entire Columbia 

community, including Barnard College and Teachers College .

Listening sessions, r eports to the Task Force, and messages to individual Task Force members 

provided us with important information about where students are experiencing discriminat ion ,

intimidation , harassment , exclusion , targeting , isolation , and fear of violent rhetoric. Equally 

important, we learned that students may not know how to report these problems —and often they 

want a less formal channel where they can receive advice about where and how to express 

concerns that may not rise to the level of a legal complaint. In some cases, they may be interested 

in an unbiased mediation process.       

> 2See Peter Coleman, The Great Reset (Medium, 2024).
> 3Announcing Task Force on Antisemitism .https://president.columbia.edu/news/announcing -task -force -
> antisemitism 9

In principle, the offices of the Deans of Students , the Ombuds, or the DEI offices should be the 

right place s to go. But students reported uneven experiences when they went to these offices. 

Some administrators were uncertain about how to assign responsibility. Students were unsure of 

where to turn , and some felt that their concerns were not taken seriously. Indeed, we have heard 

that students have been referred to counseling and psychological services —which they correctly 

understood as implying that they just need to learn to accept and cope with antisemitic 

experiences .

In addition, if a student’s complaint is about bias in a club or in the classroom, the student might 

feel uncomfortable pursuing the issue, especially if key players in the process (e.g., student 

activity boards, department chairs, deans of students, professors, teaching assistants, etc.) have 

taken public positions at odds with those of students who otherwise would complain . We 

recognize the complexity of these issues and we understand the imperative to protect academic 

freedom ; but  harassment that takes place in the classroom is still harassment. Students’ efforts to 

defend themselves should not be handle d differently in such settings. They should be mediated in 

processes that are free from bias. Moreover, w hen it comes to the matter of impartiality and 

fairness, we need to ensure that publicly expressed positions by a faculty advisor, program 

director, teaching assistant , or resident adviser do not obstruct the mediation or conflict 

resolution process. In our First Repor t4, we focused on the legal obligations of the University to 

prevent discrimination and harassment under Title VI , as well as state and local anti -

discrimination law . It is important that all parties understand the law and the legal protections 

afforded students. But reliance on the law  would suggest that the University is failing to create 

an inclusive campus environment. 

This report provides recommendations to the Interim President for improving policy and practice 

in accordance with our mandate. T hese recommendations draw directly from the research we 

have done on existing policies and practices in schools across the University and consult ations 

with many administrators, faculty, and students. We ha ve been encouraged by the fact that the 

administration is already making some changes in university policy and procedures to achieve 

the same goals as the Task Force. 

The recommendations in this report focus on training and workshops; a definition of 

antisemitism for these educational programs; reporting mechanisms; and the rules governing 

student groups . As we noted above, the recommendations here and in our prior report, which 

analyzed the rules governing protests, are not intended to be comprehensive. We will address 

other issues in future reports.  

> 4https://president.columbia.edu/content/report -1-task -force -antisemitism 10

It is our contention that we can improve campus climate by (1) addressing what our students are 

actually experiencing; (2) improving our understanding of where these experiences are 

happening; ( 3) addressing the adequacy of our procedures for reporting experiences of bias and 

exclusion that do not rise to the level of a legal violation ; ( 4) improving our intra -judicial 

mediation and fair conflict resolution processes; ( 5) staying true to the University’s pluralist 

values and encouraging interactions (and hopefully friendship) among people who disagree; (6) 

protecting all students from discrimination; (7) ensuring that student groups are governed in 

ways that are consistent with these aspirations; and (8) designing anti -bias trainings and 

procedures through a process that develops broad consensus among all members of the 

community, including students, faculty , and student -facing staff .11 

I. Antisemitism on Campus: Student Experiences and Testimonies 

A. Introduction 

After October 7, Jewish students began to report instances of harassment and verbal abuse, as 

well as incidents of physical violence. Given the volume of such reports, the Task Force thought 

it important to create opportunities for students to tell their stories, and for faculty members and 

administrators to hear what those students had to say. Beginning in February 2024, Task Force 

members reached out to the Deans of every school and through their offices we invited all 

students from every Columbia school, as well as Teachers College and Barnard College, to 

formal listening sessions. We also held three listening sessions at the Kraft Center for Jewish 

Life. ( Appendix A  includes the texts of invitations to the sessions, a general description of the 

session process, and a list of sessions with dates and listening session protocols.) 

The response we received from nearly five hundred students was extraordinary . W e heard from 

college first -years, anxious seniors, graduate students in the arts and sciences and in pre -

professional programs, and postdoctoral researchers. Some of those who attended were older 

than the usual run of students: mature mid -career professionals who have returned to campus to 

take their career in different di rections and students who are already parents. Students came to 

share their stories from a variety of religio us, geographical, ideological, national, racial, ethnic, 

and political backgrounds. We heard from Zionists, and anti -Zionists, and those whose opinions 

are not easily categorized . Additionally, we received individual reports sent to our Task Force .

Although we can share only a fraction of what w e heard, we have attempted to represent this 

wide range of opinio n.

These student testimonials provide a fuller understanding of how hundreds of students 

experienced the campus climate during these troubled times. Not having had the benefit of the 

listening sessions , some members of the Columbia community have expressed skepticism that 

students are experiencing discrimination. To the degree that they are, the skeptics say, such 

experiences are rare or not serious.  Many wish to challenge the identification of these incidents 

as antisemitic. Our intention is to report these incidents as they were reported to us and to share 

evidence, provided here by our students, of Jews being singled out in ways that would be 

considered intolerable in any other context. 

Targeting any group for exclusion or derision is unacceptable within the university setting . This 

report documents a pattern of behavior toward Jewish and Israeli students that is troubling and 

violat es norms of behavior and speech that are central to the values of our university . Particular 

aspersions cast upon Jewish and Israeli students resonate with the history of antisemitism and, 

given what we know about the past, such representations can lead to further acts of aggression 

and exclusion. That such act s and words are being inadequately addressed suggests that the 12 

University has failed to set standards of civil behavior. We think these student experiences 

constitute evidence of a broken social compact, a failure to provide all students with equal 

respect and access to the vibrant, pluralistic community that Columbia promises to all its 

members. 

Many of the incidents are contrary to University policy , and sufficiently so that we think it 

imperative to recommend University policy changes informed by these documented experiences. 

We hope this evidence will assist the University’s central administration and every school, 

undergraduate and graduate, in crafting helpful changes in policy governing academic and social 

life so that all students feel  safe and welcome. Some, though not all, suggest violations of federal 

and state law. In such cases, Columbia should provide follow -up, investigation, and rigor in 

dealing with inappropriate behavior toward targeted groups, as we have already recommended in 

Antise mitism Taskforce ( ASTF ) Report #1 . The frequent failures to do so, documented here, 

point to the troubling use of inconsistent standard s which reinforc e the need for significant 

change. 

Voices have been drawn from nearly every Columbia University school. In specific places, we 

may refer to single schools, such as Barnard College or Columbia College; but it is not our 

purpose to characterize the climate of any single school. Although some problems are more 

serious in some schools than in others —variations that are not surprising in such a large and 

complex institution —no school is completely self -contained. For example , within the 

undergraduate population, students experience college life a cross the entire University .

Particularly in extracurricular activities, students from various schools join together as members 

of the University as an all -embracing institution. 

We have divided the material by settings ( e.g. , daily encounters, clubs, the classroom) with the 

understanding that boundaries between these environments may be blurred at times. The material 

included here is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive; much of it, however, was 

corroborated by multiple sources. We are not adjudicating individual complaints —this is not our 

role —but we listened and found patterns in student testimony. Because students at the sessions 

were promised anonymity, we could not investigate the details of the incidents reported to us or 

seek the perspective of others involved, although in many cases we were given (or were able to 

find) confirmation. To preserve anonymity, students are not identified . The material below tries 

to preserve the sense of their words , and we have selected precise quotations whenever possible. 

We have attempted to present salient material as it was told to us, aiming not to impose our 

personal definitions of antisemitism on attendees’ experiences, but, rather, allowing students to 

share and define their own experiences and their own narratives. We did so by asking two simple 

questions —“What are you experiencing?” and “How have you felt on campus in the past six 

months?” —and then we listened. 13 

This is some of what we heard. 

B. Student Experiences in Day -to -Day Encounters (Including Dorm Life and Social 

Media) 

One of the essential obligations of a university is to provide a feeling of safety, in the most basic 

sense of the word: the feeling of being safe in one’s room, on one’s way to class or to study. 

After October 7, numerous students reported that they no longer felt safe . One student who had 

moved into her dorm room in September, told us she placed a  mezuzah  on her doorway as 

required by ritual law, as traditional Jews have done for centuries. In October, people began 

banging on her door at all hours of the night, demanding she explain Israel’s actions. She was 

forced to move ou t of the dorm. 

Visibly observant students, like ones who wear traditional head coverings, have been frequently 

met with extreme hostility.  “On campus, my friends have been spit on, been called like terrible, 

terrible names, a very close friend of mine was called, a lover of genocide and then a lover of 

baby killing. This was only a couple of days after October seventh .” A student told us she had 

been chased off campus with her brother one night .5 In many cases, episodes like these have led 

to effort s to hide markers of Jewish identity: while some students felt that they could previously 

“wear our Jewish identity,”  now they  don’t want their peers to know that they are Jewish. The 

fear of consequences permeated the atmosphere of campus during these months. One student put 

it this way: “If I walk on campus right now with my star out or kippah or say ‘am Yisrael chai’ 

[“the peop le of Israel live ,” a traditional song], I could start World War III.”  Many Jewish 

students said they now avoid walking alone on campus .6

Students have reported having necklaces ripped off their necks and being pinned against walls ,

while walking back to their dorms on Friday afternoon and when they were on their way to 

synagogue. There were also multiple reports of visibly Jewish individuals simply walking past 

116th Street who have been followed, stalked, and subjected to ethnic slurs and hateful 

statements , like “go back to Poland ” and “I hope you guys suffer. You guys think it’s okay to kill 

innocent babies and bomb hospitals. Yes, Habibi, I’m talking to you ,” and, when the hecklers 

saw that the student was filming them, one said to send the video “to all your Israelis. ” Students      

> 5Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April
> 21, 2024.
> 6Columbia College Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024 ;Law School Listening Session, April 9, 2024;
> Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024.

14 

also recounted finding jokes about Hitler written on communal dormitory whiteboards. Many 

students described walking down hallways as a painful daily routine .7

Students worried about the long -term impact of tension and conflict on campus. One student 

worried that students feeling total exhaustion due to lack of rest, stress from finals and, above all, 

feeling totally unprotected on campus, repeatedly targeted by bullying , was likely to snap 

because they could only endure so much. More than once, students asked if someone had to be 

stabbed or shot for the University to do something.  Another said, “All of the things we ’ve shared 

are very well documented .…And so, the  emotional exhaustion that all of us feel from doing this 

over and over again is very  profound.” And another: “I am exhausted having to defend Israel’s 

right to exist.” 8 It should be said that many of these listening sessions occurred well before the 

events of mid -April . A s students headed into finals, a period of high stress, we heard about even 

more extreme symptoms: anxiety and sleeplessness , which were made worse on the Morningside 

campus by the protests outside of regular time restrictions. One student reported her mental 

health has been declining every single week, and she was not alone .9

A student told us that “Since October, most people on campus have felt apprehension. Then this 

Thursday we were walking onto campus. We weren ’t wearing any symbols of Judaism. We were 

shouted at,  ‘We don’t want no Zionists here .’  They were wearing keffiyehs and shoving us. No 

one is doing anything .…They were mocking us that ‘we think that we are going to be safe. ’”10 

That phrase — “We don’t want no Zionists here” —echoed the remarks of various students that 

called attention to the slippage —a slippage that sometimes felt intentional —between “Zionist” 

and “Jew.” One student heard another tell someone they were trying to avoid Hewitt Dining Hall 

as that was where the kosher dining hall was, and as such it was where “all the Zionists are.” 

Another student argued that the term “Zionism ” was increasingly deployed to signify hateful 

sentiments toward  all  Jewish people .11 

Anti -Zionism is a term carrying manifold and blurred dimensions; yet to advocate for the active 

dissolution of the world’s only Jewish state is quite different from even the bitterest critique of 

its policies. Given the absence of such a position in relati on to virtually any other political state            

> 7Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024 ; Personal conversation with David Schizer ,
> November 2023 and Video materials, Kobrin Post -Oct 7 Collection, IIJS Papers, Columbia University Archives,
> RBML, https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oilU6CNsmdv_t4ARYSIgjkaMgghYoF1L/view?usp=sharing .
> 8Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024; Arts & Sciences Listening Session, March 1,
> 2024; School of Engineering Listening Session, Feb ruary 22, 2024.
> 9Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024.
> 10 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024.
> 11 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb. 20, 2024; School of Engineering Listening Session, Feb. 22,
> 2024.

15 

in the world, anti -Zionism, as it has been expressed in campus demonstrations during the past 

academic year , hews far more closely to antisemitism than to a simple critique of Israel .12 

Indeed, some critiques of Zionism on campus in recent months have incorporated traditional 

antisemitic tropes about secretive power, money, global conspiracies, bloodthirstiness, and 

comparisons of Zionists to Nazis or rodents.  Purported University “org charts” singling out 

Jewish trustees, cartoons comparing Israelis to skunks, and posters telling “Zionist donors to 

keep your hands off our  university” echo traditional canards that are all too familiar to many 

Jews and Israelis. 

This hateful rhetoric has often been accompanied by an unwillingness on the part of listeners to 

engage with Jewish and Israeli students in a wide variety of encounters that are held to be the 

bedrock of a university community: discussion, empathy, intellectual nuance, argument. Some 

Jewish students found that whatever they said, their words were distorted . Some students were 

made to feel as though their support of Israel, or empathy for Israelis, was inseparable from 

support for  the actions being carried out by the Israeli government. A student said, “There’s a lot 

of times where Jewish students are made to justify the actions of Israel, for good and for bad. 

When you assume that someone’s religious beliefs mean they want a group of people dead, that 

is hurtful.”  Another recounted feeling un able to criticize what’s going on Israel for fear that such 

discussion would be associated with support for the destruction of the state. Others feared that 

the assum ption that all Jewish students were aligned politically was particularly dangerous for 

Jews of color, and they were especially concerned about the heightened presence of police on 

campus. Still students spoke of what they perceive as the  University’s  failure to distinguish 

between different Jewish denominations, mindsets, and beliefs . Several students argued that the 

administration was only supportive of Zionist Jews. Others expressed their firm belief in the 

inextricable connection between Zionism and Jewish identity .13 

Given the virtual world all of us now spend much of our lives in, it is worth pointing out that not 

all the encounters described by students took place face -to -face; some occurred on social media. 

Many students reported that Side chat, an anonymous online platform accessible only to 

Columbia students, is suffused with hatred toward Jews and Zionists. In one instance, a user 

posted,  “All you Zionists out there? You are the modern day Hitler .” In another instance a user 

posted , “If you support Israel, you are piece of filth not even worthy of being called human… I 

wish you enormous pain and suffering .” 14  Another posted, “I sincerely hope any IDF veterans          

> 12 See Appendix D on selected scholarship on the evolving relationship between antisemitism, anti -Zionism and
> anti -Israel rhetoric.
> 13 “In Our Name: A Message from Jewish Students at Columbia University ”is a letter written and signed by
> Columbia and Barnard students to articulate their experiences living as Jews on the Columbia campus since Oct ober
> of 2024.
> 14 Screenshot of Sidechat posting in Sidechat folder: Kobrin Post October 7 Collection, RBML .

16 

here (and this includes [student X], currently ‘proudly’ serving) die a slow death.” 15  By targeting 

Israelis, these threats and stereotypes can constitute discrimination based on national origin 

under Title VI. Discrimination against military veterans also violates Columbia ’s rules . Military 

service is mandatory for most Israelis. The claim that someone who has served in the Israel 

Defense Forces ( IDF ) is by definition threatening , a sentiment that was openly expressed by both 

faculty and students this spring, ma kes the campus a hostile place for virtually all Israelis .

One student captured more than 750 antisemitic online posts written by Columbia students and 

organizations ,16  although many of these do not rise to the level of legal violation, they are 

nevertheless deeply troubling, and would be attracting universal opprobrium if directed against 

other group s or countr ies . A student at the School of General Studies recounted having seen a 

message claiming that Israel was “a fake country filled with racists, pedophiles , and colonizers.” 

Beyond the hate and misinformation being spread this way, students also pointed out that social 

media had been used to organize and coordinate on -campus events and demonstrations that had 

not yet been approved by the administration, and in some cases were in violation of Univer sity 

rules .17 

It is the opinion of this Task Force that it generally is not the place of the administration to 

intervene in the social dynamics of students, unless those dynamics are violations of University 

policy or city, state , or federal law. And yet —as the University does so in many other ways —it 

must make its expectations clear, universal, transparent, and plain. If these norms are 

unacceptable, then the University must say so, and the consequences for violating University 

policy should be clear as well. 

Students expressed anxiety not just in the listening sessions, but about them as well. Several said 

they were refraining from voicing their opinions for fear of being identified and doxed. This was 

true not only of Zionist students . Students who self -identified as non -Jewish and non/anti -

Zionists and/or pro -Palestine, reported being singled out or verbally attacked . One student 

described an altercation in which a woman was verbally attacked because she was holding a sign 

saying she was both Jewish and anti -Zionist. A Jewish student who had been on the pro -Palestine 

side of protests was called “Judenrat,” “token Jew,” “self -hating Jew ,” “disgrace ,” and more. 

Another recounted seeing a female student wearing both a star of David and a keffiyeh being 

verbally assaulted .18  It is vital that  all  these students’ stories be heard by the  University and that 

that all exclusion, discrimination , intimidation, stalking , and violence is investigated .19             

> 15 Screenshot of Sidechat posting in Sidechat folder: Kobrin Post October 7 Collection, RBML.
> 16 School of Engineering Listening Session, Feb. 22, 2024.
> 17 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024.
> 18 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024; Barnard, April 1, 2024.
> 19 Columbia and Barnard have already taken a clear stand against targeting and doxing when they announced the
> Doxing Resource Group on Nov ember 1, 2023 and Resources to Assist After Online Targeting/Doxing. 17

Perhaps just as powerful as fear is hurt and despair. We heard that students felt  ostracized and 

reject ed by many of  Columbia’s multiple communities , on a day -to -day basis . T his sense of 

being shunned was among the most pronounced contributors to the declin e of well -being among 

Jewish students on campus. Less grave, but nonetheless unpleasant, is the withering of 

friendships due to perceived differences in  students’ r elationship to Israel. One student said,  “I 

used to have friends in my program and would have them to my home. Now  they won’t talk to 

me and I sit alone at lunch.” 20  In the majority of the cases, this attitudinal shift did not result 

from a student’s open support for Israel’s policies.  Any expression of a connection to Israel  —

friends or relatives there, time spent in the country was enough to damage relationships with 

other students .

As one student put it: 

One of the reasons I chose Columbia was because it ’s supposed to be so accepting and I 

wrote about that in my admissions essays. I talked about that with the people who are 

recommending me and they were, like, yeah this is gonna be [this] really great accepting 

place. And for like three months it was. I ’m part of the queer community as well and 

they ’ve been super welcoming. Except when they realize that I ’m Jewish and that is 

uniquely painful. Because it feels like a group that is designed to be accepting o f everyone 

is rejecting me .21 

All this has led to a drastic  reduction in students’ willingnes s to express their J ewish identity on 

campus. One student explained that they were hesitant to attend Shabbat dinner lest t heir peers 

assume that they are Zionists who may  “believe in genocide .” Another student said, “I am scared 

of wearing my star of David.” Another  said,  “they are going for segregation of the Jewish 

students. We are being excluded. It is to make us not heard in the collective, and [it] is to make it 

so Jewish students won’t come here.” 22 

The singling out of Jewish students occurred for Jewish students with varying views on Israel .

As we discussed, Jewish students actively engaged in support ing the rights of Palestinians came 

to many of the listening sessions and expressed their feelings of pressure to conform to positions 

they did not wish to take. Regardless of their views , flattening individuals to a single political 

position , whether expressed or ascribed , is an example of one -dimensional thinking that is a 

classic feature of prejudice .     

> 20 Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024.
> 21 Columbia College Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024.
> 22 Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21,
> 2024; Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation and Climate School Listening Sessions, Feb ruary
> 26, 2024. 18

This can be seen by expanding our perspective from individual encounters to something more 

institutional. 

C. Student Experiences in Clubs 

Many students who professed any positive relationship with Israel reported that they felt 

excluded from student affinity groups or clubs. 

Many of t hese organizations had nothing to do with Israel, Palestine, or the Middle East, yet 

nevertheless called for such a litmus test. Perhaps the most notorious incident discussed by 

students was the LionLez incident in the fall 2023 semester. The founder of an LGBT Q+ group 

sought to exclude Zionists from the group’s events in a flier that read “It’s FREE PALESTINE 

over here. Zionists aren’t invited.” The founder defended this stance in an email  that evinced the 

slippage between anti -Zionism and antisemitism: “white  Jewish people are today and always 

have been the oppressors of all brown people,” and “the Holocaust wasn’t special.” 23  We heard 

from students who worried that t he re had no t been adequate consequences for this behavior. As 

students lamented, “She was bragging about how she was still going to graduate and walked 

around with her degree and that the school didn ’t do anything about it .. .” 

More generally, students complained about the apparent unwillingness of many administrators to 

intervene. They also recounted having witnessed other forms of exclusion and discrimination in 

student groups and clubs. One of them recounted having been censored by senior student 

members of a STEM club on campus. Others described having been denied membership or being 

forced to quit student groups that were supposed to be non -political. A student shared they had 

been “de -facto kicked  out” of student organizations based on the polarizing messaging these 

organizations displayed, and another said there was a feeling of having t o “constantly qualify 

who we are” in order to participate in organizations .24 

On January 23, 2024, the Law School Student Senate voted against the official recognition of a 

proposed student group called Law Students Against Antisemitism. According to its constitution, 

the group planned on organizing educational events, encouraging d ialogue about antisemitism at 

the Law School, and providing resources and opportunities for students both to learn about 

antisemitism and find support, should they be targeted by antisemitic acts. Of the nine student 

groups and clubs that requested approva l this past year, Law Students Against Antisemitism was 

the only one  that was denied. As one of the senators who voted to approve the organization said,           

> 23 Isabella Ramirez and Rebecca Massel, “LionLez President Comes Under Fire for Viral E mail, ”Columbia
> Spectator , Oct ober 27, 2024.
> 24 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 20, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session,
> Feb ruary 21, 2024; Law School Listening Session, March 5, 2024.

19 

“the Student Senate should have stood in support of all organizations that are founded to tackle 

systems of hate.” 25  The decision was eventually reversed by the Student Senate .26 

Students reported avoiding or ending membership in the 116 faculty -advised and tuition -

supported student organizations that are members of the Columbia University Apartheid Divest 

(CUAD) coalition. CUAD demands, among other things, that Columbia institute an academic 

boycott to “sever academic ties with Israeli universities, includin g the Global Center in Tel Aviv, 

the Dual Degree Program with Tel Aviv University, and all study -abroad programs, fellowships, 

and research collaborations with Israeli academic institutions.” 27  Student groups that are 

members of the CUAD include those focused on a diverse range of areas including the Vagelos 

College of Physicians & Surgeons Equity and Justice Fellowship, Columbia Law Parole 

Advocacy Project, the Mariachi Leones de Columbia, Colu mbia’s mariachi band, and the 

Barnard Garden Club .28 

Non -Jewish, Israeli, or Zionist students who tried to maintain a neutral stance were equally shut 

down or bullied into silence. For instance, a Barnard student from Sewa, a Sikh student group at 

Columbia , stated that she was ousted from her role as co -president because of her supposed 

support for Israel, when she actually tried to maintain a neutral position. Speaking as a guest on 

the student -led podcast  The Uproar , she said her attempts to keep the group politically neutral at 

a time when several members wished to publicly support Columbia University Apartheid Divest 

(CUAD) led to backlash from her peers. Other members of the group did not support  CUAD’s 

demands, but ultimately, she said , she was pressured to step down from her position .29 

A Barnard student provided a detailed account of her experience with a dance team: 

I felt the brunt of the dehumanization on campus through my exclusion from campus 

activities. Since my freshman year, I have been part of a Columbia dance team. This was 

one of my most cherished campus involvements, even taking up a board position during 

my sophomore year. I have been dancing for over fifteen years and this team was the way I 

was able to continue this commitment through college. After no support or care from the 

team members following October seventh , I was sent a group text late last semes ter asking 

members of the team to fill out a form [asking] if they were uncomfortable with us signing 

onto CUAD. Not only is that an odd way to phrase the question, instead of asking people to 

vote on it, but as the only Jew and Israeli on the team it was clear to me that I would be the                    

> 25 Rebecca Massel, “Law School Student Senate Denies App roval of Law Students Against Antisemitism group, ”
> Columbia Spectator , Feb ruary 1, 2024.
> 26 Talia Barnes, “Victory: Columbia University Student Senate Grants Recognition to Law Students Against
> Antisemitism,” February 12, 2024
> 27 Columbia University Apartheid Divest
> 28 Columbia University Apartheid Divest: Our Coalition
> 29 Michael Duke, “Barnard Student T ries to Keep Sikh Group Neutral, Gets Forced Ou t by Anti -Israel Extremists
> Anyway ,”Campus Reform , Feb ruary 28, 2024. 20

only one filling out this form. After not hearing back for about a month I asked the VP for 

an update. She said they were probably going to sign on because a majority agreed, and 

again I thought this was strange as we never actually held a vote. She then s ent this 

message to the e -board on my behalf: 

“First and foremost , I do not see the need for a dance team to take a political stance that is 

completely unrelated to the team and its purpose. The team is meant to be a creative space 

and supportive community where people can come together to dance. There are many 

other pol itical and world issues that we do not discuss or take stances on as it is not 

necessary. To clarify, I am Jewish and half Israeli and half my family lives in Israel so this 

is an extremely personal matter and one that has obviously bee n so my entire life, not just 

the last two months. Before getting into the CUAD signing aspect, just from a personal 

and support aspect I have been extremely disappointed with the team. [X] is the only 

person on the entire team to even ask me over the past two months if I am okay and if my 

friends and family are alive and safe. 

As far as I know, I am not only the only Jewish member on the team but the only one with 

Israeli or Palestinian background. To consider a majority vote to be a fair representation 

when this topic transcends politics for me and is extremely personal makes t his vote 

unfair. I also would have appreciated being cued into the conversations from the start, due 

to my direct involvement. 

If the team signs onto CUAD it will completely ostracize me from a community I have 

been a part of for 3.5 years now. I have been extremely committed to this team, attending 

performances on Friday nights without a phone as I run between performing and Shabbat 

dinner for example, and I would hate to have to end on this note. It will force me into a

choice between being in an environment that has singled me out and made me completely 

uncomfortable or stopping dancing altogether.” 

To which they responded, “We do not care to have a conversation and we will sign on 

anyway” (paraphrased). A few weeks later they sent out an email saying they had signed 

onto CUAD and a few weeks after that I was removed from the team group chat with 

ZERO communication of why or even that [now] I was off the team . 30 

These were hardly the only examples. We heard from performers who concealed their support 

for Israel in order to be cast in theater productions, and writers who were dismissed from 

publications. Jewish students have also quit community service activities focused on vulnerable 

populations in New York because the groups issued statements blaming Israel for Hamas’s brutal          

> 30 Barnard College student ,Correspondence to David Schizer ,April ,28, 2024, Antisemitism Taskforce Library of
> Sources .21

attacks on October 7. In many cases the atmosphere was so uncomfortable that Zionist students 

chose to leave ,31  but in some cases Zionist students were dismissed from the group. 

All of these examples raise the question of inconsistent standards. We might wonder whether 

there is any other identity group or nationality singled out in this manner by campus 

organizations —which receive some financial and institutional support from the University or at 

least some form of recognition —and what the response would be if they did. 

One might say,  perhaps, that these cases should —or could —be accounted for by the fact that 

those  involved are, at least, in many cases, fellow students. (Which raises the question of 

whether inconsistent standards might apply in the application of disciplinary procedures.) 

However, because of the administration’s emphasis on inclusion and belonging, which extends to 

student groups, “Experiencing a sense of inclusion & belonging can affect every aspect of t he 

Columbia experience —from extracurricular activities to academic performance, making these 

important values for our community to uphold,” 32  such incidents should receive the utmost 

attention. This is a delicate balance . The administration should not micromanage student groups, 

but  should ensure that individual students are not associated with a group’s statements  without 

authoriz ation; that groups do not violate the  University’s  core values, norms, and policies or 

discrimination law ; and that proper reporting mechanisms are in place. 

Unfortunately, n ot all of the complaints alluded to were in response to the actions of other 

students. Some were responding to the actions of University faculty and staff. 

D. Student Experiences in the Classroom and with the Curriculum 

In March 2005, an Ad Hoc Grievance Committee of Columbia University delivered a report on 

irregular incidents occurring in classrooms on the Columbia campus. That report, along with its 

findings, shows that the University has, in the past, made effort s to address behavior target ing or 

silenc ing students for their views or identities. Citing an AAUP Report of 1940, the Ad Hoc 

Committee of 2005 pointed out that  “membership in the academic community imposes on 

students, faculty, administrators, and trustees an obligation to respect the dignity of others, to 

acknowledge their right to express different opinions, and to foster and defend intellectual 

honesty, freedom of inquiry and instruction, and free expression on and off campus .” The 

Grievance Committee report states that  “students are entitled to an atmosphere conducive to 

learning and to even -handed treatment in all aspects of the teacher -student relationship. ”33        

> 31 See also Massel, “Where Does aJew Belong?” (“Two students said they left student groups —one a political
> activist club and one a performing arts group —they once felt part of after those clubs decided to join the Columbia
> University Apartheid Divest coalition.”).
> 32 Inclusion and Belonging Initiative ,University Life.
> 33 Ad Hoc Grievance Committee Report ,March 28, 2005. 22

Sometimes statements or discussions that one student finds intimidating motivate s others to 

public argument,  a positive outcome that may outweigh the student’s shame or  embarrassment. 

But when a student is ridiculed, threatened , or dismissed for holding views contrary or inimical 

to those of the instructor , that may constitute serious breach of academic norms. We wish to 

distinguish ridicule or threats from rhetorically combative , but respectful modes of classroom 

interaction. 

Reports by Jewish students of threat, ridicule and exclusion in the classroom, identified nearly 

twenty years ago by an investigation on this campus, is once again a subject of our concern .34 

We will address these academic issues in a later report. 

Th re e sessions of the 2023  Core Curriculum in Columbia’s  Mailman School of Public Health 

provide an instructive case.  According to the School, “ The Core curriculum, taken by all 

incoming students in their first semester […] provide[s] a broad, interlocking foundation of 

knowledge essential for a career in public health .” Approximately 450 first -year graduate 

students are taught the core content during their first semester at Columbia. Public health 

curricula focus on topics including policy, epidemiology, e quity, economics, healthcare delivery 

in conflict zones, forced migration, health disparities , and refugee health.  In the first month of 

classes, the students were just beginning to learn this foundational public health material. 

Some students reported that in the human rights sessions of the Core curriculum, during the first 

week of the year’s Masters of Public Health program, a faculty member presented concerning 

content. In the first session, the professor extensively discussed , by name , Jewish donors to 

Columbia University, one for whom the school is named and another for whom one of the 

school’s buildings is named; the faculty member  called  these Jewish men “wealthy white 

capitalists” who “laundered” “dirty money” and “blood mo ney” at Columbia. In a second pair of 

lectures, students were required to engage in a case study in which they played the role of the 

executive director of a fictionalized new health and human rights nonprofit. Their job was to 

conceptualize and lead the organization’s first human rights mis sion. The prompt instructed 

students to fund a project in one of three sites: the Palestinian Aida Refugee Camp; Ukraine/ 

Mariupol; or the Navajo nation. The professor instructed students that their funding decisions 

sho uld  consider that some “are eager to support your efforts, but your development team is 

concerned that working in Palestine could turn off wealthy U.S. donors that support Israel.” In 

the third session, the professor invited a panel of guest speakers who intr oduced the idea of 

“settler -colonial determinants of health” referr ed  to “so -called Israel”  and used  “Israel -Palestine ”

as the primary example of a state in which a “right to health” can never be realized. One of the 

> 34 Ibid.

23 

guest lecturers suggested to students that it’s best not to engage in debate with people who reject 

the settler -colonial frame .35 

One might well, again, raise the question of the inconsistent standard s with regard to these 

various examples: would any other religious group or nation —or, for that matter, any other 

legally protected identity group —be treated similarly? At the time of this writing, The School of 

Public Health has not communicated to the over 400 students exposed to this content that there 

was anything problematic about it. For these rising second year graduate students, the content 

described remains part of the mandatory material they were taught at Columbia. 

We heard from students that on Friday , April 19, 2024, FSJP@Columbia Barnard & Teachers 

College  (whose Instagram account “fsjp_cbt ” describes itself as “a collective of Columbia 

University, Barnard College and Teachers College faculty, staff, and graduate workers dedicated 

to Palestinian freedom”) issued a message calling on all faculty to hold classes, office hours, and 

meetings on the Columbia lawns , meaning on or near the encampments . This amounts to 

encouraging students to break the University's rules in the name of ideology; it also discriminates 

against those who don't want to enter the encampments because they don't wish to end orse their 

political message. Students who decline to enter encampments when their professors request it 

are being forced against their will to make a political statement, that is, to publicly disagree with 

their professor. They are also being denied acces s to educational opportunity. 

Similarly, the Task Force heard a great deal about the graduate student union . Some graduate 

students refus ed to grade papers . Some graduate students receiv ed texts from their union (the 

source of their health care and other benefits) telling them to join protests, or calling for 

“Zionists off our campus.”  Students report ed that some faculty ma de accommodations for 

participation in the encampment but fail ed to make accommodations for students who do not feel 

comfortable in classes (or accommodat ed them in a way that stigmatized them , as when a Jewish 

student was the lone Zoom box on screen.  Students felt uncomfortable about action s conducted 

during classes, such as a walkout for Palestine or chanting . W hen they told the professor about 

their discomfort with such messages, one professor’s response was simply that they did not need 

to come to class .36 

Students reported that a dmission to a major could lead to discomfort because of the overt 

affiliation of certain departments with pro -Palestinian activism, indicated on department websites 

and signaled by student -run journals affiliated with those subjects. Students perceived this as an            

> 35 Mailman School of Public Health Fall 2023 PUBH P6020 Mandatory Core Curriculum, lectures from Sept ember
> 8, 2023, Sept ember 15, 2023, and Sept ember 21, 2023. Video of lectures on file. See also Douglas Belkin, Some
> Columba Professors Accused of Pro -Palestinian Indoctrination,” The Wall Street Journal , March 8, 2024.
> https://www.wsj.com/us -news/education/some -columbia -professors -accused -of -pro -palestinian -indoctrination -
> 002013fc
> 36 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024. 24

implicit demand for support and felt it would lead, inevitably, to the same battle -lines and attacks 

seen across campus; they reported such incidents to the Task Force. Sometimes faculty would 

voice opinions that students were powerless to contradict. As a result, students report avoiding 

particular majors and faculty . A student who was writing a thesis on Israeli artists reported that 

each time that student made a presentation in their senior thesis seminar , the thesis seminar 

leader would say, “I hate Isr ael.” This student  said , “I wish I had chosen a different topic for my 

thesis.” 37 

In some schools, students reported that discussions of “justice” in their classes and in their 

programs did not welcome Jewish perspectives . There was, said a graduate student,  “an 

overarching view that Zionism cannot be compatible with other forms of advocacy. If you are 

Zionist and look Jewish you are grouped into this idea that you cannot be supportive of the 

LBGTQ community, black community and fight for equal rights for mar ginalized communities.” 

Another graduate student noted: “If you’re Jewish, you m ay or may not be welcome. We have a 

lot of class[es] discussing discrimination which is great. But if it comes time to share, and you 

are Jewish, you don’t feel comfortable talking about your experience of discrimination. It’s made 

clear to us that it’s no t ok ay  for Jews to do that.” One student relayed, “When I did share, there 

were a lot of people that stopped speaking to me. There is some view in these classes today and 

in this generation that you cannot be a Jewish Zionist and also an advocate for other s.” When one 

student participating in a discussion about America and the Holocaust brought up her 

grandmother, a refugee turned American citizen, her professor said: “I think you ’re going to have 

to sit on that.” 38 

These minimizations, examples of double standard s, of norm and policy violations, all take their 

toll. “I would like to mention,” one student writes, “that  [the] Columbia nursing [school] is not a 

place for Jews”: 

The misinformation that has been spread by my fellow midwives and colleagues from the 

Masters Direct Entry Prog ram is disturbing .…It makes me feel as if I do not belong in my 

career choice. While others have claimed that they are not antisemitic because they claim 

not to be. Yet, they won’t let me define what antisemitism truly is .… Many of my friends 

in the pediatric and psych nurse practitioner program have felt a similar sentiment .39 

“Now I don’t really feel like I have a place where I belong,” said one student. “I’ve silently 

retreated from my program,” said one doctoral student. “I feel like I’m experiencing a loss of 

passion.” 40       

> 37 Rebecca Kobrin Student Meeting , Nov ember 27, 2023.
> 38 Mailman School of Public Health Listening Session, March 20, 2024; School of Social Work Listening Session,
> April 4, 2024.
> 39 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024.
> 40 Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024. 25

The majority of these experiences were reported before the establishment of the encampments in 

April. A t that point, things got worse. 

E. Student Experiences During Protests and the Encampment 

Jewish students heard from one of the protesters  right outside Columbia’s gates , “October 

seventh  [2024] is going to be every day for you.” Students reported being told “Kill your fucking 

self. And I’ll fucking kill you.” One student said, “I have a friend who went to the anti -Israel 

protests to try to debate with people. She was told ‘I don’t talk to White people’ and ‘I don’t 

want to normalize [having these debates] .’” 41 

Students described events in the encampment that they felt targeted both Jewish and/or Zionist 

students, including vigils and teach -ins. More specifically, students expressed concerns regarding 

some of the topics discussed, language used, and materials distributed at the encampments , and 

speakers (some unaffiliated with Columbia) invited to address the protesters . One student said: 

The first thing that I would like to bring up is student organizations hosting “Vigils ,”

labeled as “Glory to our Martyrs .” Some of the things said during these  events are directly 

linked to Hamas verbiage, and I do not believe these are actual vigils. That language is not 

reflective of a vigil and it is violent. It feels like the promotion of death and hate .…I notice 

people are wearing masks and hiding their identities. I think they know that they are saying 

things that are not acceptable, but they continue to say them anyway while hiding their 

identity.…I never heard people say that they care about both side s, all deaths, all 

life .…There is no sympathy or compass ion for Jews affected by the conflict .42 

Students witnessed and sometimes experienced threats of violence or actual violence in these 

settings. Several recalled being assaulted while holding Israeli flags, which in at least one case 

protesters attempted to burn. One recounted having seen a student holding up a sign reading “Al -

Qassam Brigade’s next target”  standing in front of a Jewish student peacefully singing the Israeli 

National anthem. Students told us about chants s uch as,  “Al -Qassam you make us proud, kill 

another soldier now ,” “Yes Hamas, we love you, we support your rockets too ,” or “We say 

justice you sa y how, burn Tel Aviv to the ground.” Another talked about fearing for their safety 

when, during Passover, they did not have a phone: “I don’t know how I will get around without 

my phone, without a video, without the ability to call the police.” 43       

> 41 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 20, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April
> 21, 2024.
> 42 Mailman School of Public Health Listening Session, March 20, 2024.
> 43 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April
> 21, 2024. 26

Many students criticized what they thought was an excessively lax policy regarding the presence 

of non -Columbia affiliates on campus ; students were confused as to what extent the Columbia 

campus could be considered private property and closed to outsiders ; students felt it was 

important to reiterate that the issue did not only stem from “outsiders .” A law school student 

said: 

I don’t want to see it like the university is trying to play it like this is all coming from the 

outside. It is not only coming from outside. To be clear: CUAD [Columbia University 

Apartheid Divest] is a coalition of over a hundred student organizations. They are getting 

these people onto campus. They are doing the chants. These are student organizations 

enabling [this]. It is not all external .44 

Some felt as though the University preferred to blam e the tensions on campus on the presence of 

non -approved individuals, rather than acknowledg e that the conflict was generated primarily by 

the students. 

Students pointed out a crucial fact exacerbating these tensions: a majority of students d o not 

know the University’s  guidelines surrounding protesting on campus. One student discussed the 

dangers of gatherings being held without students knowing “what kind of rules they are 

breaking.”  Some s tudents felt that the administration was slow to provide students with a clear 

reminder of what was and  wasn’t allowed when protesting on campus. Many students objected to 

face masking, though they interpreted masking in different ways . Some believed it was directly 

related to the University’s failure to identify what hate speech is. O thers saw it as proof that the 

protesters knew they were violating rules and wanted to be insulated from discipline and other 

consequences. A student said: “[...] you can draw the line when it's terrorism, except on this 

campus that isn’t called out. I think you need to define what is and isn't acceptable to say…at 

these rallies, this is the baseline. We shouldn't need a listening session for basic morality .45 

Some events during Commencement week showed an insensitivity to the reactions of many 

Jewish and Israeli students and their families, which stands in contrast to Columbia's usual 

attention to the importance of making the entire community feel valued on the se ceremonial 

occasions .46  The Mailman School of Public Health Class Day featured a single student speaker, 

whose speech promoted the Columbia University Apartheid Divest (CUAD) platform, including 

the demand for  “the university to divest from all partnerships with Israeli entities” . One Jewish 

graduate described her experience at the ceremony:         

> 44 Columbia/ Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024.
> 45 Business School Listening Session, April 18, 2024.
> 46 One Israeli student from Columbia Journalism School wrote an article for The Forward describing her fear of
> bringing her parents to graduation ,https://forward.com/opinion/609871/israeli -columbia -graduation -pro -palestinian -
> protests/

27 

The speaker received resounding cheers and chants of “Free Palestine,” while I sat 

wondering when we were going to celebrate our public health achievements. I sat, 

wearing a stole on which a yellow ribbon and “Bring Them Home” were embroidered, 

wondering i f I would be booed walking across the stage to receive my diploma simply 

because I want my family and friends to be safe and because I have a Jewish name. My 

family, who traveled cross -country to attend a special event shook with rage as they 

listened to s omeone spew propaganda that was welcomed by my peers and faculty. My 

best friend, who is Israeli, came to support me, and instead was met with jeers about 

eliminating her family. If we had known we were not welcome, we would not have 

attended. That Columbi a’s administration did nothing to stop this speaker is appalling .47 

After the speech, a dean applauded the speech from the podium and thanked the student for “an 

inspiring message” and a  third dean congratulated the student speaker with an embrace. There 

was no recognition of the pain and discomfort her words were causing many Jewish students and 

their families. 

Finally, students captured on video many of the troubling experiences that took place in the 

vicinity of protests and the encampments . 48 

F.  Israeli Students’ Unique Experiences 

Among the many students who reported experienc ing discrimination and exclusion this past 

academic year, Israeli students and research scientists reported experiences that were unique to 

them .

It is estimated that there are several hundred Israeli students at Columbia, Barnard , and T eachers 

College , including about 170 Israeli undergraduates in the Columbia School of General Studies 

(GS) .49  In 2020, GS established a dual degree program with Tel Aviv University which admits 

30 to 40 students every year . 50  In addition, there are dozens of Israeli graduate students and 

post doctoral research scientists in GSAS, SEAS, SIPA, GSB, and CUIMC. Significantly, most                    

> 47 Recent Mailman School of Public Health graduate ,Corre spondence to Antisemitism Taskforce , June 12, 2024;
> also see May 14, 2024 video of graduation speech, Antisemitism Taskforce Library of Sources.
> 48 Video materials, Kobrin Post -Oct 7 Collection, IIJS Papers, Columbia University Archives, RBML ,
> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oilU6CNsmdv_t4ARYSIgjkaMgghYoF1L/view?usp=sharing .
> 49 Beginning in 1947, Columbia created GS for men and women returning from military service after WWII . The
> program evolved over the decades to be the premier Ivy League college for veterans and other non -traditional
> students. Aside from US veterans, there are veterans from all over the world, including South Korea, Israel ,and
> Singapore, countries with mandatory military service.
> 50 The dual degree program is not exclusively for Israeli students, but students spend part the first two years of their
> academic experience on campus in Tel Aviv and the second two years at Columbia University in New York.

28 

Israeli students and researchers served mandatory service in the IDF . New York State Human 

Rights Law prohibits discrimination based upon military status .51 

In general, we found that the anti -Israel rhetoric on campus did not distinguish between 

the country and its citizens. Israelis were targeted for being Israeli. As one student noted, “I 

actually haven’t ever described myself as a Zionist, but I  cannot help that I was born in Israel. 

And therefore, I am an Israeli citizen.” An Israeli student reported, “The situation for Israelis on 

campus is horrific .…We live there, our parents live there, our siblings live there, we were born 

there, we served in the army there, and a disproportionate amount of hatred is being directed at 

us.” Another student said , “There is a palpable sense of fear because people can somehow sense 

that you ’re Israeli, and there is a visceral hatred toward Israelis on this campus .…Unfortunately, 

it ’s something that has become normalized and accepted on this campus.” 52 

The hatred toward Israelis has reached alarming levels o n campus . While hanging signs with 

pictures of hostage s captured on October 7, an Israeli student was physically attacked .53 

Following the attack , he had to deal with a false complaint that was submitted about him to 

Columbia (and was eventually dismissed) .54  False complaints targeting Israeli students increased 

during the spring of 2024 .55 

A student described the situation following Oct ober 7: “People that you sat in class with, you had 

drinks with, you had lunch and dinner with, the next day they say they hope your entire family 

dies .…I have had people spit at me, I have had people yell at me. I think they just don’t know. 

Some of them think that it’s genocide, and it’s legitimate to call for the erasure of  [the] Israeli 

state. If I can put it in one word, it is heartbreaking. And it breaks your heart even more than 

people [not want ing] to h ave a discussion.” 56 

Some Israeli students also have experienced stereotyping, including unfounded claims about the 

danger Israeli veterans pose to others on campus . 57  This allegation is a way of targeting virtually                                   

> 51 The Division of Human Rights of New York State d efines military status as “a person’s participation in the
> military service of the United States or the military service of another state. ”
> https://dhr.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2024/04/nysdhr -military -
> status.pdf#:~:text=If%20you%20believe%20you%20have,of%20the%20most%20recent%20act.
> 52 Judy Maltz, “Columbia Used to Be a Dream School for Israelis. Now They’re Campus Pariahs ,”Haaretz , May 3,
> 2023.
> 53 Olga Benacerraf, “‘Don’t Feel Safe’: Jewish Columbia Student Says He Was Attacked byPro -Palestinian
> Activist ,”The Daily Wire , Oct ober 12, 2023.
> 54 Firsthand account shared with Gil Zussman, January 16, 2024.
> 55 Firsthand accounts were shared with Gil Zussman, April –May, 2024.
> 56 Dean Moses, “Columbia University Student from Israel Recounts Encountering Hate Bef ore and During
> Encampment : ‘I Have Had People Sp it at Me ,’”amNY , April 25, 2024.
> 57 For example, a faculty member gave an interview in January to Democracy Now in which she said: “[I] t’s
> something that many of us were concerned about, because so many of those Israeli students, who then come to the

29 

all Israeli students and faculty at Columbia since, as noted above, military service is mandatory 

for most Jewish Israelis . Israeli students reported hearing many others repeat this accusation 

during the academic year.  A student noted , “They say they don ’t want Zionists on campus and 

they don ’t want Israeli army vets on campus. It makes me feel personally targeted. ”58  Another 

Israeli veteran who is a father of a toddler said , “There is a sense of personal threat, and we keep 

looking over our shoulders. We ’re careful where we speak Hebrew on campus. We are 

remaining cautious. Since the beginning of this whole thing, it ’s been really scary. ”59 

An Israeli female student who served in the IDF was harassed in the classroom by a faculty 

member teaching a class that included material about the conflict. According to the student ,

conversations were consistently one -sided and often included inaccuracies . T he IDF was 

portrayed as an “army of murderers.” The faculty member  reportedly told the student that as a 

former IDF member, she too should be considered a murderer .60  Following Oct ober 7, students 

in other classes refused to collaborate on group projects with Israeli students. As one Israeli 

student indicated, “She [a peer student] told our professor that she doesn ’t want to be in the same 

room with me.” 61 

Students in Columbia’s dual degree program with Tel Aviv University faced persistent demands 

by organizations and protestors to abolish their program .62  A first -year student who is still in Tel 

Aviv indicated , “It’s one of the main conversations we are having as students right now: Is it our 

job to go there and to fight and be a part, or to stay in Tel Aviv? Everyone is very concerned.” 

She added “There is one student who came back to Tel Aviv, saying Columbia  was too much for 

him, too much antisemitism around campus.” 63 

Israeli students found the pervasive hostility made it difficult to access necessary services, such 

as healthcare. One Israeli student reported that when she went to health services in July, no one 

came in to see her and she over heard a discussion between two healthcare professionals in 

another room in which one said they would not treat her because she was Israeli. She sat in the 

room for another ten minutes until someone finally came to address her health needs .64                         

> Columbia campus, are coming right out of their military service. And they’ve been known to harass Palestinian and
> other students on our campus.” “Professors Slam Columbia’s Response to Chemical Skunk Attack on Students at
> Pro -Palestine Protest ,”Democracy Now , Jan uary 25, 2024 .
> 58 Judy Maltz, “Columbia Used to Be a Dream School for Israelis. Now They’re Campus Pariahs .”
> 59 103FM via Maariv Online, “ Israeli student at Columbia University: ‘They broke into the building and smashed
> windows ,’”Jerusalem Post , May 2, 2024.
> 60 Firsthand account shared with Gil Zussman, July 26, 2024 .
> 61 Judy Maltz, “Columbia Used to Be a Dream School for Israelis. Now They ’re Campus Pariahs .”
> 62 General Studies Listening Session, February 29, 2024
> 63 Gavriel Fiske, “ Students in Tel Aviv and New York Feel H eat as Columbia Protests Tar get TAU Program ,” The
> Times of Israel , May 7, 2024.
> 64 Firsthand account of July 17, 2024 event shared with Gil Zussman, July 27, 2024.

30 

Campus demonstrations targeted Israeli students. Throughout the fall and spring, student 

demonstrators chanted phrases such  as “ Say it loud, say it clear, we don’t want no Zionists here ,” 

They h eld up signs that read “IOF [Israeli Occupation Forces] off campus” and chanted “NYPD, 

KKK —the IOF, they’re all the same.” 65  Especially troubling to students was the fact that faculty 

(including some with leadership roles in the College and in A&S), were present and gave 

speeches at some of these unapproved protests. Outside of campus, during protests co -organized 

by Columbia s tudent organizations (particularly CUAD), slogans such as  “Israel is the new Nazi 

Germany” and “Israel steals Palestinian organs”  appeared on trucks. 

Protesters called for violence against Israel . “There is no safe place, death to the Zionist state ,” 

“From the River to the Sea Palestine will be Arab ” (in Arabic), and “ We don’t want two states, 

we want all of it .”  As another example, an Israeli student encountered a demonstrator who 

showed her a phone adorned with a Hamas flag  and indicated “we will follow you to Israel and 

burn your family.” 66 

When f aculty moved their classes or office hours to the encampment, Israeli students knew they 

were not welcome. A Columbia English professor who belongs to  Columbia’s chapter of Faculty 

and Staff for Justice in Palestine brought one of his classes to the tents as part of a course 

studying atrocities. “[O]ne of the things that faculty who supported the encampment did,” he 

said, “was take their classes inside the encampment.” He  told the  New York Times  that two of his 

Israeli students , who he believed were f ormer members of the Israeli military, did not show up 

for such a class.  “I think the feeling in the class was not running in their favor, ” he  said , “and that 

may be why they didn’t show up .”  67 

Overall, t hese Israeli student experiences underscore a feeling of having been abandon ed by the 

University administration . They see the University’s failure to enforce rules , as well as the 

University’s  negotiations with leaders who call ed for the death of Zionists and the destruction of 

Israel as legitimizing the h atred directed at Israeli students. As one student respondent in a 

survey of Israeli students noted, Columbia “not only failed to keep its students safe, it allowed 

discrimination from both students and faculty.” Another Israeli student wondered why some 

Columbia faculty would consider calls for violence and terror as a free speech right, allowing 

this speech on campus and inside academic buildings. “Globalize the intifada,” “all IDF soldiers 

deserve to die,” “Glory to the Hamas militants,” “Death to  Zionists ,” “F** the Jews,”  are                                

> 65 Jackie Hajdenberg, “ ‘I’m Ready to Leave This Ca mpus’: Jewish Students at Columbia Feel Disc omfort and
> Isolation Follow ing Thursday’s Unrest ,”Jewish Telegraphic Agency , April 19, 2024.
> 66 Hagar Amger, “Israeli Student At tacked at Columbia Speaks ,”N12 News , In Hebrew, Apr il 23, 2024; Jackie
> Hajdenberg, “ ‘I’m Ready to Leave This Campu s’: Jewish Students at Columbia feel Discomfort and Isolation
> Following Thursday’s Unrest .”
> 67 Anemona Hartocollis, “ Taking Cues from Students, U.C.L.A. Faculty Members Join the Protests ,”New York
> Times , May 6, 2024 31

examples of the hate speech that Israeli students reported. As one student in the survey sadly 

concluded, “Israeli students’ dreams of attending Columbia, a rigorous educational institution 

devoted to debate and discovery, have been shattered, as we feel the administration has 

normalized antisemitism and anti -Israel sentiment.” 68 

G. What We Learned from the Listening Sessions and Reports 

The listening sessions and reports obtained from other sources tell a story about student 

experience that is antithetical to University values and norms. We heard about crushing 

encounters that have crippled  students’  academic achievement . We heard about students being 

avoided and avoiding others, about exclusion from clubs and activities, isolation and even 

intimidation in classrooms, bullying, threats, stereotyping, ethnic slurs, disqualification from 

opportunities, fear of retaliation, and community erosion. 

Almost as troubling were the responses that students received when they attempted to complain 

about these incidents. Students consistently reported a failure to listen on the part of 

administrators as well as students or a quick dismissal deployed in the service of closing down 

the possibility of discussion or argument. We often heard in the listening sessions about student s

being told, when they pushed back against a claim they suggested was antisemitic, that “that isn’t 

our intent, and the way it is impac ting you is wrong.” We heard anecdotes  about students saying 

they don’t mean “all Jews,” in an effort to downplay accusations of antisemitic generalizations. 

Other students said, “People are justifying antisemitism by saying that it’s okay as part of a 

larger movement.” 69 

Recent events on campus have underscored that , in some cases, high -level administrators are 

minimiz ing the pain of the Jewish and Israeli Columbia community . 70  With other groups, faculty 

and administrators often defer to the group’s  definition of what is painful and hateful. But with 

Jews and Israelis, there has been no such deference. Instead, others have tried to dictate what 

does and does not constitute antisemitism. 

The listening sessions were marked by frustration with the administration. The majority of 

students who came to the sessions felt that the administrations of their various schools were late 

to respond, if they responded at all, and did so in an inconsistent way. To be clear, these students 

were not asking for protection from ideas or arguments. Many of the incidents that students 

reported involved being verbally attacked and spit on walking on Broadway because they were 

wearing kippahs . One student who reported this to the Office of Diversity was told, in response,           

> 68 Quotes obtained from an anonymous survey of Israelis students at Columbia University conducted by Rebecca
> Kobrin/Gal Kedem between April 3 and May 23, 2024.
> 69 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 20, 2024.
> 70 Sharon Otterman, “3 Columbia University Deans Who Sent Insulting Texts Have Resigned,” New York Times ,
> Aug. 8, 2024 .32

that there was no reason to feel unsafe; and that if the student was feeling unsafe, perhaps they 

should leave campus. In another case, a program director refused to meet with a student after 

they made their complaint. 

In some cases, students relayed that when they complained about antisemitism, some school 

administrators tried to steer them to mental health counseling . One student reported, “ I tried to 

reach out to the school but they made me meet with the school social worker before I could meet 

with the Dean of Student Affairs.”  While mental health services should be available to anyone 

who wants or needs them, administrators should not medicalize a student experience of 

discrimination in lieu of addressing it . One student  report ed that the school administration 

dismissed their concerns, saying , “There is not an antisemitism problem, it is an anti -civility 

problem.” Another student reported that when trying to discuss concerns  about Jewish 

discrimination with an administrator, they were told they were the only student who had repo rted 

concerns about antisemitism, and were referred for therap y. As it happens, a second  student in 

the same program said they were  also  told that they were the only Jewish student to make the 

same report. Another student was told to file a bias report but, upon following up , found that the 

form lacked  any language for antisemitism. 

In deed , the reporting process is a source of remarkable confusion and distress , followed by 

skepticism that anything will happen. One student recounted having seen someone wearing a 

hoodie with a swastika and a star of David on it, and not reporting it because they did not know 

where to go or whom to talk to. Some students chose not to report be cause they feared the 

incident in question was not “blatant enough” to warrant reporting .71 

One student felt that reporting was a hassle and a tedious process that led to nothing. Others were 

frustrated that the people expected to respond to their queries were not educated on Jewish 

harassment issues . Many others recounted having reported incidents and never hearing back 

from the administration. As one said, “Does it go in a black hole?” 72 

Many students thought that the main a ddress for these complaints was the offices of Diversity, 

Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) . However, DEI offices, which are decentralized across the schools, 

have generally not engaged Jewish student complaints. In our survey of the various websites, 

programs, and discussions offered by each of the DEI offices (which vary widely in robustness 

from unit to unit and school to school ), we found only one that mentioned antisemitism . It is 

possible that some trainings mention antisemitism. This omission fed into a perception of bias in 

which Jews figured as oppressors in an oppressor/o ppressed binary whose power meant they       

> 71 Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation Listening Session and Climate School Listening
> Session, Feb ruary 26, 2024; Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024.
> 72 School of General Studies Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024.

33 

could not be discriminated against ; for others, the omission merely indicted a notable absence of 

concern for Jewish students. 

For many students, the University’s shortcomings with accountability are  inseparable from its 

reluctance to discipline various forms of hatred and enforce its own rules . Students feel that the 

University simply d oes  not take antisemitism seriously. One student said they felt as though “the 

threshold for [reprimanding] antisemitism was higher [than for other forms of hate].”  We also 

heard the sentiment that the University failed to discipline anti -Israel hate . One student said they 

had seen communications regarding anti -Palestine hate, antisemitism, and I slamophobia, but no 

menti on of anti -Israel hatred .73  Anti -Zionist students who attended the listening sessions also felt 

that the University had failed to discipline what they considered discriminatory or harassing 

speech .74 

It should be said that the University’s slow responses were in part due to the difficulty 

identifying perpetrators. Many protesters used face coverings such as surgical masks, sunglasses, 

keffiyehs, and bandanas to avoid being identified. This made it extremely difficult to identify 

individuals committing acts of aggression or track recidivism rates . One student said, “Trying to 

cross to go to Temple on a Friday .…You don’t know exactly who pushed you. You don’t, people 

are wearing masks .…I just think it’s a very intimidating thing.” Another, “This is unacceptable. 

You have a bunch of students [and] you don ’t know who they are. No one knows who they are, 

not affiliates, affiliates. You just don ’t know who they are, and they can do whatever .”75  A

student said :

I think the way the campus has been trying to make us feel safe has been having the 

opposite effect. The arrests have made things worse. The sense of community comes 

from a sense of safety. If the University wants to focus on making students feel safe, they 

need to focus on students who are an actual threat .…The  University needs to take a more 

targeted approach .76 

Students observ ed that the early failure to act on some of the worst incidents, which in their view 

were straightforward violations of University policy, empowered antagonistic students to 

become more aggressive. Many zeroed in on what they felt was the administration’s insufficient 

definition of safety . T he University , they said, simply wasn ’t being clear  enough: “General           

> 73 School of General Studies Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024; Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session,
> Feb ruary 21, 2024.
> 74 See for example, Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, February 21, 2024; Arts & Sciences Listening
> Session, March 1, 2024.
> 75 Arts & Sciences Listening Session, March 1, 2024.
> 76 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024. 34

emails saying , ‘We don’t support antisemitism, there’s a zero -tolerance policy…’ are completely 

meaningless to this group at this point.” 77 

A sense of community flows from a sense of safety; one cannot exist without the other. As 

tensions on campus reached a high point, the administration offered students minimal 

information and few updates. This led to crippling anxiety among students who felt targeted. One 

said: 

I don’t know how to continue on this campus. I got texts [on] my personal phone from 

the union meant to represent me for purposes of my health insurance [that were] sending 

messages to join the protests on Sundial to call for the end of my family and death to my 

family. They call for Zionists off our campus. Many of the faculty who are less aware 

only know that police were on campus; they don’t know what is going on.  They have to 

know what is going on, [but] they don’t. Please make clear what is actually go ing 

on.…None of us deserve to be unsafe on campus. We have a difference of views and that 

is fine .78 

Students worried about the insufficiency of security protocols such as screening for weapons and 

monitoring the entry of non -Columbia affiliates who are brought onto campus by students, 

faculty , and staff. 

Many students , across the political spectrum, felt that Columbia had failed to make the right 

decisions when it came to crisis management and de -escalation. One student said: 

I don’t feel like I can support the people who are there to keep us safe. I have problems 

with the way the University has handled this. I’m to the left o n a lot of things. I don’t 

think I can support the way the campus is trying to keep us safe. I don’t like seeing them 

drag my friends from campus. I don’t like how the  University  has handled this. I’ve heard 

from my most left and most right friends that no one feels like Public Safety can keep 

them safe .79 

The absence of clarity about what constitutes discrimination and how to report may well affect 

all groups, not just Jews. Essential questions in the treatment of antisemitism —continues to beg 

for an answer: would we, as a community, accept this environment in relation to any other 

group? Would we handwave it away by referring to our negligible responsibility if events 

happened directly outside the campus gates? Wou ld we feel comfortable with the minimization 

of such claims, or would we dismiss it as gaslighting? As students became increasingly        

> 77 Arts & Sciences Listening Session, March 1, 2024.
> 78 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024.
> 79 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, April 21, 2024. 35

disheartened with the administration’s delayed and vague responses, many of them turned to 

their community for both support and information. One student in the School of Social Work 

said: 

We are a very close -knit Jewish community here to protect ourselves. We give each other 

information about what happened this semester, we’re identifying professors that will 

protect us that are Jewish .… We ’re being separated. Jewish students who are the victims 

of antisemitism are being removed from the situation, rather than the perpetrators being 

removed from the situation, which is so against social work values. I can ’t even fathom 

who thought that was a good idea .80 

While this is a powerful example of students building solidarity in times of crisis, students 

should not be the sole source of support and updates. 

We were gratified to see a rich, nuanced conversation taking place in the listening sessions. Yet 

many students reminded us that to express such nuance and complexity in their daily lives was 

difficult —that they felt that they would not be accepted anywhere unless they picked a side. 

Students worried that new norms were being established by the months of conflict on campus. 

One student s aid,  “We ’re seeing on campus intimidation, active exclusion, assault, conspiracies 

of blood libel and media and financial control, historical erasure, and calls for violence. And 

even as the active discussion of these ideas may subside, they will already have started to settle 

subconsciously as the norm amongst the majority of the non -Jewish student body .” “Why should 

I, as a Jew in America, feel vulnerable?” was one doctoral student’s question.  Whether Jews feel 

vulnerable in America is an open question; but they feel vulnerable at Columbia. And its 

reputation as a place that tolerates antisemitism is spreading . W e have heard reports of Jewish 

students declining offers of admission to Columbia, in some cases making such decisions after 

experiencing hostility at an admitted students’ day event on campus .81 

There is a deep breach of trust and belonging at this university. The University  doesn’t 

want me here and I don’t want to be here. I have a visibly Israeli  name; can I stay at 

Teachers College? Do I want to finish my PhD program here? I get my daily 

“Morningside Campus  closed”  [message]. I want the university to reach out to me and 

tell me how to transfer to another school and to change their housing contract.  I want 

out .82     

> 80 School of Social Work Listening Session, April 4, 2024.
> 81 Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024; Teachers College, March 26, 2024.
> 82 Columbia/Barnard Hillel Listening Session, Feb ruary 21, 2024.

36 

As for admitted students , one said,  “I don’t get congratulations for being at Columbia anymore. 

All I get are calls to ask if I’m ok ay .” Another said,  “I want to be proud of where I went to 

school. Now I’m just wanting to know when I get my expensive piece of paper and get out of 

here .”83  We do not have data on student transfers out of Columbia and Barnard, nor do we know 

how many Jewish students have declined admission to the colleges and graduate programs . We 

do know that Ramaz, a prestigious Jewish high school in New York City, will not be sending any 

graduates to Columbia College this fall, for the first time in over twenty years .84 

At the same time, many students despite unpleasant experiences , retain their faith in the power of 

education to confront the impasse in which the university has found itself. 

Students demonstrated an awareness of the importance of programs that bring diverse voices and 

different points of view together . Students generally continued to hope that multiple points of 

view could be accommodated in safe space s, even though they are also aware that such spaces 

are becoming  rare on campus. One student said, “When I was doing orientation there were 

programs on sexual  respect, DEI, lots of programs in these areas. Something I don’t remember 

seeing was how to engage in respectful dialogue with people you disagree with. ” “If there was a 

program that put people who support Israel and Palestine [in the same room], that would feel like 

a miracle at this point,” another remarked .85 

This point, we think, is central to understanding these events: the clashes between students, 

protesters, faculty, and the administration have led to a significant decrease in real dialogue. One 

student said, “People who have an Israeli or Palestinian flag don’t talk to each other .… They 

don’t even view each other as human beings.” And another, “Students are not engaging in 

respectful discourse and don’t make an honest attempt to even hear the other side.”  Adding to the 

difficulty of having thoughtful conversations is what many students regard as m isinformation, 

disinformation, and confusion about the Israeli -Palestinian conflict . One student said, “There is 

too much discourse happenin g. Anytime there is a dialogue, there are students and a moderator 

but very little defining or factual information.”  As one student put it, education plus 

misinformation can often lead to antisemitism. To this effect, another student felt that student 

orientation should include education on antisemitic tropes.  Another student suggested “adjusting 

the syllabus for Contemporary Civilization to include a unit on the Holocaust and the rise of 

European antisemitism .86          

> 83 Irving Medical Center Listening Session, April 8, 2024.
> 84 Carl Campanile, “Every graduate of elite NYC Jewish high school avoids Columbia for first time in decades ,”
> New York Post , August 18, 2024.
> 85 School of General Studies Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024.
> 86 School of General Studies Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024; Law School Listening Session, April 9, 2024;
> College and Core Listening Session, Feb ruary 29, 2024. 37

To be clear: the students d o not believe that a simple commitment to dialogue, a refreshing of 

pieties about conversation and argument, is close to sufficient at this point. Nor do they want the 

University to issue statements about where they side. They believ e that the University has a 

responsibility to establish structures to educate students on the difference between free speech 

and discriminatory or harassing speech , as well as acceptable and unacceptable action . They 

consider the University bound by duty and by law to ensure students are able to learn and live in 

a neutral environment in which discrimination is not tolerated, without fear for their safety. 

What  we heard make s clear that hundreds of Jewish and Israeli students did not have this 

experience at Columbia University in the academic year 2023 -2024 .38 

II. Recommendations for Promoting Shared Values and Inclusion: Improving the 

Campus Environment 

A. Introduction 

On December 20, 2023 , then -President Shafik announced a series of programs and policies 

signaling a reinvestment in Columbia’s core values. “Our differences should be a source of 

strength,”  she  observed. We “build community and encourage vigorous debate” among students 

who  come “from different backgrounds and have different ways of looking at the world. ”87 

Columbia offers students the invaluable opportunity to engage in the classroom,  in student clubs ,

and all types of co -curricular activities  with peers who  grew up in very different circumstances. 

Students arrive from cities, suburbs, and rural areas, and from continents thousands of miles 

apart. They speak different languages, celebrate different faiths, and are of different races and 

ethnicities. They have different sexual orientations and gender identities. Some come from 

comfortable or wealthy backgrounds, while others come from families who have struggled 

economically. Columbia students may be first -generation immigrants or “Dreamers” or their 

ancestors may go back to the American Revolution. Some are the first in their families to go to 

college, while others are the children or grandchildren of Columbia graduates. 

Columbia offers our students a unique opportunity to form lifelong friendships with people 

different from themselves. Over the years, this has been a hallmark of a Columbia education. We 

hear this from graduates again and again. They met many of their closest friends at Columbia ;

these are people they might never otherwise have met if Columbia had not introduced them to 

each other. 

In encouraging these ties, Columbia provides our students with skills to build bridges and to 

value pluralism, both of which are essential in an increasingly polarized world. Societies cannot 

thrive when they are composed of warring camps. Individuals need to approach disagreements 

with tolerance and respect and recogniz e the many goals and values they still share. Universities 

should be places where these skills are modeled and taught. 

The student testimony in the previous section makes clear that the University has failed to meet 

the expectations of Jewish students that they will be treated with the same standards of civility, 

respect, and fairness as other students. The social compact is broken. University policy and 

individual practice must change if we are to fix it. 

There are a broad range of challenges. We started by addressing the rules governing protests in 

our first report. The rest of this report focuses on training and workshops, defining antisemitism  

> 87 Columbia Launches a Reinvestment in Its Values and Mission .39

for those programs, issues in reporting, and the rules governing student groups. We will address 

other important issues in future reports. 

The recommendations in this report are based upon student testimony, the research we have done 

on how other universities are dealing with similar problems, conversations with numerous 

administrators and faculty, and a careful review of current practices and procedures across the 

Columbia campus es. 

We found that administrative structures intended to ensure that all members of our community 

respect each other, engage in civil discourse , and receive fair treatment in a dispute -resolution 

process are not working effectively for Jewish students.  The University’s ethos of concern for 

belonging and inclusion  hasn’t  applied to Jews (at least not those identifies as  “Zionist” or 

Israelis ). All students should f eel that they belong. We expect Interim President Armstrong to 

lead a robust discussion on how to im prove the campus climate, building on her statements. 

While some of our recommendations are specifically focused on Jewish and Israeli students, 

developments have impacted the entire University community. We believe that our 

recommendations concerning training, process , and procedure should be implemented to 

improve the experience of  all  students who face bias, discrimination, exclusion, or intimidation. 

Some of our recommendations are straightforward and should be implemented quickly; others 

will require more extensive consultation and discussion , including the creation of a broadly 

representative faculty and staff committee . We urge the involvement of faculty members so that 

real change grows directly out of community engagement. 

Our recommendations have been informed by the following findings: 

● Columbia’s administrative decentralization has made it difficult for the  University to 

respond quickly and effectively to a crisis. Every school has a different approach to 

handling student reports of discrimination and disruption of academic events . As a result, 

responses to antisemitism have been uneven. For the University to respond to crises 

effectively (especially ones as threatening and prone to escalation as the ones we saw this 

past academic year), it has to make sure all schools are aligned on anti -discrimination 

policy and procedures. This is beginning to happen, as University Life facilitat es Title VI 

orientation training for the Students Affairs staff. 

● Even under ordinary conditions, systemic problems related to oversight, transparency, 

and accountability stand in the way of uniformly implementi ng policies that support 

inclusion .

● Existing operational infrastructure aimed at building consensus over points of contention 

on campus is inadequate. Faculty and administrators operate in separate silos in times of 

crisis. 40 

We begin by addressing the need to improv e the experience of all students who face bias, 

discrimination, exclusion, or intimidation, including antisemitism. We think much can be 

accomplished through expanded and improved trainings, workshops , and informational websites ,

as well as improved reporting procedures. 

Successful trainings require willing participation by all community members and an ongoing 

commitment to apply new knowledge. Trainings only work when they are part of an ongoing 

effort, so we advise building upon these sessions with additional programming throughout the 

academic year . The next part focuses on practical issues of implementation, including who 

should design and assume responsibility for trainings. We offer recommendations for what 

should be covered: education , th rough trainings and workshops , on how to mediate difficult 

conversations, dealing with divisive topics, implicit bias and stereotype training, and allyship 

training. Further, we discuss the need for an educational focus on antisemitism, suggesting 

mandates for training in cultural competency. We also make recommendations for how the 

University can build consensus across the community by raising awareness and engendering 

knowledge in a consistent, compreh ensive, and accessible way. Finally, we recommend that all 

trainings and workshops b e periodically evaluated for their effectiveness —what works, what 

doesn’t —and updated to reflect the changing needs of the University community. 

The second part of this general discussion identif ies weaknesses in the existing system of 

reporting at the University , given that shortcomings have been at the heart of the testimonies we 

heard in our listening sessions. We explain current procedures for report/grievance -filing and 

dispute resolution. We then provide recommendations for improving both. In addition to the 

formal processes that are in place and administered centrally, we believe that students would 

benefit from being able to use informal pro cedures for reporting and for mediating complaints, 

but the availability of these informal dispute resolution opportunities, which are generally 

offered by Deans of Students, is uneven across the various schools. 

In the third part we address a specific site of exclusion: student clubs. We recommend that 

student groups engage in a robust consultation process before issuing statements or joining 

coalitions; that student groups be inclusive and membership be limited only for reasons 

connected to the club’s mission; and  that student groups generally should not issue statements 

unrelated to their missions. In making this recommendation, we emphasize that there should be 

no limits on the free speech rights of a group’s members when they speak for themselves, instead 

of for the group. 

The f inal part of this section acknowledge s another important place where students experience 

antisemitism: the classroom. The Task Force will be providing specific recommendations for 

addressing anti -bias and inclusion in the classroom in a future report. 

B. Anti -bias and Antisemitism Trainings, Workshops , and Informational Websites 41 

A singular advantage of Columbia University is that students come from every part of American 

society and from around the world , which presents students with a form of diversity that most 

have never before encountered. Mutual respect grows out of greater knowledge of the makeup of 

this broad community and how to protect the rights of all members. Students must learn how to 

share the spaces afforded by campus life, not just when it comes to classroom activities, but also 

in day -to -day interactions. They should be cognizant of behavior that enhances group life and 

they need to know what forms of speech and actions may make other s feel threat ened or 

uncomfortable. Faculty and student -facing staff should model respectful behavior in all their 

interactions with each other and with students. Such basic acknowledgment constitutes the 

bedrock of trust necessary for university life. 

Training sessions and educational workshops have been an established part of the University 

practice for many years, and they remain essential to ensure that we follow through on our 

promise of accommodating the demands of diversity. It is clear from our research that we have 

not kept up with the evolving needs of our University community. 

The student testimonies in our listening sessions highlight the need for r equired training in 

antisemitism at student orientations and for all student -facing staff , just like the existing 

programs that address race, gender, and social issues such as sexual conduct. We also wish to 

call attention to the needs of Muslim , Arab , and Asian students. Our values call for equal 

treatment for all, supported by legal obligations under Federal , State , and local civil rights laws. 

Training is an especially good fit for a university because it is a form of education. The goal is 

not to ban or require particular speech, but to help all people within the community, especially 

new members, gain a better understanding of how words and ac tions may be perceived and can 

cause harm. If students must rely only on legal remedies to address problems of biased treatment 

and exclusion, we have failed as an educational institution and as a community. 

On July 8, 2024, the University announced that in the fall of 2024 it would begin mandating that 

Columbia students, faculty , and staff undergo anti -discrimination training (including a focus on 

antisemitism) .88  This is an important first step. However, at this point, it is unclear whether this 

initiative will be for all, or exclusively for incoming students, faculty , and staff. It is also unclear 

whether this is a standardized University -wide initiative, or if each school will be responsible for 

creating its own curriculum. We expect the University to recognize the rise in antisemitism on 

campus, as we document in Section I of this report, and we recommend that the University 

respond by adding specific guidance on how to identify and address antisemitism in its anti -

discrimination training, workshops , and websites. 

Our review of current practices and specific recommendations for improvement follow.  

> 88 https://president.columbia.edu/news/messages -president -shafik -and -provost -olinto 42

1. Recommendations for Who Should Receive Tra inings and Workshops 

If we are to change the campus climate so that all students , faculty , and staff feel included, we 

need all members of the University community who engage with students to receive training that 

reinforces our shared values. 

We recommend all students, teaching assistants, residence assistants, faculty, senior 

administrators , and student - facing staff receive required training .

2. Recommendations for How Trainings and Workshops Should Be Imple mented and 

What Content to Cons ider 

Columbia’s Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action  (EOAA ) website provides a suggested 

syllabus highlighting ways to make students feel included and safe, such as encouraging them to 

share their pronouns, to reach out to the  University’s  disability office, and teaching them what 

the duty to report means. It is unclear whom this syllabus is geared toward, or how it is enforced. 

We have identified more than ten different courses being offered by different schools across the 

University that focus on anti -bias and exclusion . This multiplicity poses several challenges, 

especially with regard to consistency. 

We recommend that the provost establish a Cross -School Committee that includes Barnard 

College and Teachers College in order to standardize basic aspects of training, workshops , and 

website information for all schools. 

A working group within the Cross -School Committee should be setup immediately with 

responsibility for vetting trainings and ensur ing consistency in values and procedures for these 

trainings across the University. 

Training should focus on all par ts of university life where students experienc e bias and feel 

excluded. These include the classroom; dorms; student organizations and groups (clubs); day -to -

day encounters; protests; and social media . This can be accomplished by affording every 

constituency that is receiving training the opportunity to share their own experiences with the 

Cross -School Committee and to relate what behavior they find to be discriminatory, harassing, or 

insensitive .

Some aspects of training will require adaptation to the needs of particular schools, but baseline 

values, expectations, and procedures must be consistent across campus. Simply put, we must be 

telling students, student -facing staff, new faculty, teaching assistants, and resident assistants the 

same thing in all schools and programs across the University . The decentralized structure of 

Columbia is an obvious problem for ensuring consistency in values and procedures across the 

University and must be mitigated in the Cross -School Committee.  Training material and 

procedures must be uniform, accessible , and transparent. 

We recommend that the central administration set up a repository for best practices so that 

offices responsible for different University constituencies can share information and coordinate 43 

procedures.  This  resource bank  would be a first step in achieving consistency, accessibility, and 

transparency. 

The University central administration should collect and provide basic material that all schools 

use for student orientation, new faculty orientation, training for teaching assistants, and training 

for resident advisers and resident assistants , as well as material for new staff. 

Each school should make available to the public, online , as much shared and consistent 

information as possible. We understand that some content may have to be communicated 

internally to faculty and staff or communicated via email directly to involved parties. Ultimately, 

all schools and affiliates of the University must, in good faith, show complete transparency in 

their approach to anti -bias training. Mi tigating antisemitism and all other forms of bias requires a 

multifaceted plan that incorporates various means of sensitizing and educating community 

members. 

The Cross -School Committee should consider how training should be delivered and how often. 

Almost every school at Columbia has sections on its website dedicated to its efforts to foster 

inclusion and diversity, and most offer optional programs and resources related to anti -bias and 

inclusion issues. However, few actually require that students t ake a live training course. The 

current mix of online and in -person training and workshops, as well as interactive and static 

content online, must be evaluated. Simpl y offering training and courses online, which many 

schools do, carries the risk of generating too little student involvement and interest. Without 

opportunities for questions and dialogue, students may well find it difficult to engage in a 

genuine way with the issues. Faculty - and student -facing staff may also experience cha llenges 

with online training.  We recommend careful consideration and evaluation of how training is 

offered and we encourage in -person training, especially for incoming students and new faculty. 

The Cross -School Committee should also examine the design features that go into effective anti -

bias and inclusion training.  Research indicates the greatest success is associated with sustained 

and continuous effort, rather than one -time sessions. Long -term programs help by building skills 

gradually, which in turn prompts behavioral and organizational changes .89 

3. A Working Definition of Antisemitism 

The Task Force supports former  President Shafik and Provost Olinto’s July 8, 2024 

announcement  that the provost’s office will launch new anti -discrimination training that includes 

antisemitism training for faculty and staff this fall. University Life is also developing related 

training for students.        

> 89 There is a vast research literature on how to evaluate the effectiveness of trainings . A useful place to begin is
> T.N. Garavan, et al. (2020). The Current State of Research on Training Effectiveness. In: Learning and
> Development Effectiveness in Organisations . Palgrave Macmillan

44 

In order for trainings or workshops to be effective in combating antisemitism, the University 

needs a working definition of antisemitism based on the experiences of students, faculty, and 

staff in recent months . This definition must offer guidance about the most common 

manifestations of antisemitism at Columbia. Without a working definition, it would be 

impossible to offer examples of antisemitism in practice that are useful for staff who directly 

engage students , and in the design and evaluat ion of new tra inings and programs. 

Instead of starting our work by adopting an existing definition of antisemitism , we followed the 

“inductive approach” recommended by Sergio Della Pergola ,90  formulating guidance based on 

the reported experiences of Jews and Israelis at Columbia. We call this definition a “working” 

definition because it is likely to evolve based on further research and changing circumstances .91 

The Task Force recommends the following  working definition of antisemitism  for pedagogy and 

training purposes only. It is not intended to be used in disciplin ary pr ocedures :

Antisemitism is prejudice, discrimination, hate, or violence directed at Jews, including 

Jewish Israelis. Antisemitism can manifest in a range of ways, including as ethnic slurs, 

epithets , and caricatures; stereotypes; antisemitic tropes and symbols; Holocaust denial; 

targeting Jews or Israelis for violence or celebrating violence against them; exclusion or 

discrimination based on Jewish identity or ancestry or real or perceived ties to Isr ael; 

and certain double standards applied to Israel. 

We have developed this guidance solely for educational purposes and not to limit speech. 

Trainings and workshops should draw on it to educate members of our community about what 

many Jewish and Israeli people find offensive, just as existing programs provi de guidance about 

other forms of bigotry and hate.  

> 90

See Sergio Della Pergola,  “How Best to Define Antisemitism? A Structural Approach, ” Antisemitism Studies  4,

no. 8  (2024) (recommending “bottom -up rather than top -down” approach that “consider[s] empirical real -world 

Jewish perceptions and experiences of antisemitism —the experiences of the people who are directly and personally 

affected by antisemitism”); see also Ser gio Della Pergola,  “Antisemitism: National or Transnational Constellation? ”

in  Confronting Antisemitism From Perspectives of Philosophy and Social Sciences  21 (2021) (exploring 

fundamentals of contemporary antisemitism using quantitative data techniques). This follows a shift in the 

scholarship on antisemitism, which engages previous attempts to define the term that prodded leading historian 

David Engel to s uggest moving away from the term altogether. See Yehuda Bauer, “In Search of a Definition of 

Antisemitism,” in Michael Brown, ed.,  Approaches to Antisemitism: Context and Curriculum  (New York: American 

Jewish Committee, 1994), 10 –23; David Engel, “Away From a Definition of Antisemitism: An Essay in the 

Semantics of Historical Description,” in Jeremy Cohen and Moshe Rosman, eds.,  Rethinking European Jewish 

History  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 30 –53; David Nirenberg,  Anti -Judaism: The Western Tradition 

(New York: Norton, 2013); Dan Michman, “The Jews as a Problem for Modern European Political Logic” in Armin 

Lange, Kerstin Mayerhofer, Dina Porat, and Lawrence H. Schiffman, eds.,  An End to Antisemitism Vol. 3, 

Comprehending Antisemitism Through the Ages: A Historical Perspective  (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2021), 27 –43.  

> 91

The definition might also evolve over time to take into account the way that the Department of Education and the 

courts interpret and apply Title VI, as well as any new federal or state legislation. 45 

To be clear, we do not think that a statement should be impermissible just because it qualifies as 

antisemitic under this definition. Offensive statements generally are protected under the 

University’s  rules, so the University can encourage vibrant debate.  The purpose of this definition 

is to educate, not to ban.  We expect that when some people learn that a statement is offensive to 

their colleagues, they will  choose  to make their point in a different way. But this definition 

should not be used to impose di scipline. 

This is not to say that “anything goes.” The University’s rules do limit speech to comply with 

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and other federal, state , and local civil rights law .92 

Notably, these statutes —and, thus, the University’s rules —do not ban “antisemitism,” but a

“hostile environment” and “discriminatory harassment.” The reason why these concepts are more 

general is that they apply not only to Jews, but to all protected classes. 

In fact, Title VI requires all protected classes to receive the same treatment. The statute does not 

permit a university to offer some protected classes more protection than others. Rather, the 

statute guarantees them the same rights. As a result, any limi ts on speech rooted in anti -

discrimination law must be general, applying the same way to all protected classes, including all 

religious minorities, as well as Black, Latino, Asian, Arab, female, and LGBTQ+ members of 

our community. This is why our first re port, which focused on rules and discipline, did not 

include a definition of  “antisemitism ,” and focused instead on “discriminatory harassment” and 

“hostile environment .93  This report, however, discusses training and workshops, so we offer a 

definition for that purpose. 

To lend further clarity to this definition, Appendix C offers examples of incidents experienced by 

many Jewish and Israeli students as antisemitism , drawn from student experiences, which 

include ethnic slurs (e.g., “F*** the Jews ”), antisemitic tropes (e.g., “Zionist trustees and donors 

keep your hands off our university”), stereotypes (e.g., alleged threats from Israeli veterans), 

calls to violence (e.g., “Al -Qassam Brigade’s next target”), exclusion (e.g., of Zionists from 

student groups), and double standards applied to Israel (e.g., c alls for divestment solely from 

Israel).        

> 92 In some cases, the University can comply by condemning speech, instead of limiting it.
> 93 The law already offers guidance on what constitutes discrimination against Jews under Title VI . Executive Order
> 13899 provides that “In enforcing Title VI, and identifying evidence of discrimination based on race, color, or
> national origin, all executive departments and agencies charged with enforcing Title VI shall consider” the IHRA’s
> “non –legally binding working definition of anti -Semitism,” as well as the IHRA’s “Contemporary Examples of
> Anti -Semitism” … to the extent that any examples might be useful as evidence of discriminatory intent.” The
> Executive Order also provides that in considering the IHRA definition and examples, “agencies shall not diminish or
> infringe upon any right protected under Federal law or under the First Amendment” and that “the inquiry into
> whether a particular act constitutes discrimination prohibited by Title VI will require a detailed analysis of the
> allegations.” 46

4. Training and Workshops Recommended for Students and All Members of the University 

Community Who Engage with Students 

The University should consider offering a variety of elective and mandatory trainings and 

workshops to all members of the University community who engage with students. Examples 

include: 

● How to Have Difficult Conversations on Divisive Topics Training  provides students, 

student -facing staff , and faculty with basic information on how to have difficult 

conversations. Professor Peter Coleman runs a conflict resolution Lab at Columbia 

Teachers College . He is also a member of this Task Force . Professor Coleman and his 

Lab have produced an extremely helpful document,  How to have Constructive 

Conversations on Divisive Topics ,94  which could be shared with the entire University 

community. In March of 2024, the School of Professional Studies at Columbia posted a 

guide on their website to help faculty navigate difficult conversations in the classroom. 

We would encourage the University to create a similar guide and for schools to ad d

specific material when needed for their communities. Unfortunately, an online guide 

alone is not sufficient to address some of the problems identified by students in the 

classroom. We think all faculty would benefit from mandated training on how to media te 

sensitive conversations in the classroom. Beyond reiterating and clarifying what 

constitutes hate speech, these training sessions should present faculty with varied 

scenarios for them to evaluate. Among the anti -bias and inclusion topics presented in 

th ese scenarios , there should be specific ones about antisemitism. 

● Implicit bias and stereotype training  help s participants uncover and address unconscious 

biases and stereotypes that contribute to antisemitic attitudes. This type of training can 

use tools like the Implicit Association Test (IAT) to reveal hidden biases. Stereotype 

deconstruction can be used to id entify and challenge common stereotypes about Jewish 

people and Jewish history. This training can promote behavioral change strategies, which 

help students to develop skills to counteract biased thinking and actio ns. 

● Bystander intervention training  empower s individuals to recognize and effectively 

respond to bias incidents. This type of training would be especially helpful in teaching 

faculty, students , and staff to recognize antisemitism by learning how to identify 

antisemitic behavior and language. This training can include simple intervention 

techniques that teach practical methods to intervene and support victims safely. Students’ 

testimony has made it clear that they know little about how to report incidents or acc ess 

resources for assistance. This training would be one opportunity to provide students with 

those resources, both for themselves and should they need to share it with others.   

> 94 Peter Coleman, “ How to have Constructive Conversations on Divisive Topics .”https://icccr.tc.columbia.edu/resources/how -
> to -have -constructive -conversations -on -divisive -topics/ 47

In Appendix D we have also compiled a list of suggestions for trainings and wo rkshops, along 

with selected scholarship on antisemitism, anti -Zionism , and anti -Israel rhetoric, which should be 

useful as the University expands its resources for students, faculty and student -facing staff. We 

were especially impressed with the work of Zach Schaffer at  Project Shema  and Iboo Patel at 

Interfaith America .

5. Proposals for Speakers, Convenings , and Panel discussions Specifically on Antisemitism 

Recognizing that trainings are only one way to chang e campus culture, the n-President Shafik 

and Provost Olinto have also committed to scheduling talks, workshops, and retreats. They go on 

to say, “The urgent aim is to build an inclusive and welcoming environment for every member of 

our community.” 95  The Task Force endorses this important statement and we expect that the 

recommendations in our reports will support such an effort. 

Throughout the University , we found notably few ongoing programs that focus on antisemitism. 

Although different schools and departments have hosted workshops on the topic, we could not 

find any substantial examples of mandatory or permanent guidelines relating to antisemitism or 

Islamophobia. The training and workshops we propose specifically focus on antisemitism but 

should be considered for other forms of hate and discrimination, including anti -Arab bias and 

Islamophobia. 

University Life offers resources and initiatives specifically aimed at combating antisemitism and 

Islamophobia on its Promoting Inclusion & Belonging at Columbia webpage. Their site includes 

educational materials and support for addressing these issues and we have been informed that 

these support services are being updated.  The Task Force  supports University Life’s efforts to 

update its informational resources and services for students experiencing antisemitism and all 

forms of hate and expand its lectures and convenings. 

During this past academic year Columbia College seems to have scheduled only one event in 

wh ich students could engage with faculty on the issue of antisemitism,  Community Discussion: 

Racism, Antisemitism, and Islamophobia , on November 28, 2023. 

Two promising initiatives: Campus Conversations and Dialogue Across Difference. 

In December of 2023, as tensions on campus were building up, former President Shafik 

announced that the University would be launching a series of initiatives aimed at “reinvest[ing] 

in Columbia’s values and mission.” Among these initiatives were the  Task Force on 

Antisemitism and the  Dialogue Across Difference  (DxD), “designed to foster a resilient and 

inclusive community of learners among students, faculty , and staff to engage with different   

> 95 Then President Shafik and Provost Olinto’s July 8, 2024 announcement .48

perspectives and navigate challenging conversations.” After a combined  19 events were hosted 

between January and February 2024, only six were hosted between March and April. We 

understand that this downturn may be in part related to the semester coming to a close, but we 

nonetheless were surprised to see only one event being hosted in April, at a time when tensions 

were at an all -time high, and students may have benefited from both guidance and learning 

opportunities. Beyond the obvious need for the administration to focus on the active crisis on 

campus, exacerbated by the illegal encampments, it is our understanding that several student 

organiza tions and faculty were actively promoting a boycott of this program, so it was difficult to 

continue scheduling speakers. This further demonstrates the need for the University both to 

mandate more comprehensive anti -bias and inclusion training for all, and to organize events and 

learning opportunities more consistently that are promoted with and across all the schools. 

The central administration should work with the Cross -School Committee to reboot the Dialogue 

Across Difference Program (DxD) and encourage the schools and departments to identify 

speakers and promote this important educational opportunity. 

6. Customizing Trainings, Workshops , and Resources for Different University 

Constituencies and Schools 

We recognize that training, workshops, and resources also need to be customized for different 

constituencies and schools. Our conversations with administrators, faculty , and students have 

made it clear that the University needs consistency and transparency when it comes to training 

and reporting procedures. It is critical that customization not result in confusion and 

contradiction .

The Cross -School Committee should ensure that when schools or administrative offices create 

their own training s and resources, they should build on a baseline training that is consistent with 

existing University -wide policies and procedures .

Columbia’s administrative decentralization has not only created confusion for students and 

faculty and contradictions in policies and practice, but it also creates inefficiencies.  When 

schools or administrative offices customize training s or resources their work should be made 

available to others in the University involved in these activities through the resource bank. 

In this section, we suggest ways in which different schools and administrative units may decide 

to customize their training resources. 

● Customizing Trainings and Workshops for Students 

Orientation creates a special opportunity to introduce students to University values and norms 

and to set expectations about behavior. It is also an opportunity to educate students about 49 

diversity, pluralism, and tolerance. University Life has been working to update and improve its 

student training for orientation. The Task Force has had the opportunity to confer with their 

office and offer our suggestions. We are very supportive of its work and we recognize that these 

trainings will be evaluated and changed during the next academic year. University Life has its 

Inclusion and Belonging Initiative . It provides a choice of programs including trainings, 

independent projects , and tutorials. Their overarching goal is “to foster an inclusive community 

that supports all students and their sense of belonging.” We encourage University Life to 

evaluate these offerings and compare their impacts on students who went through different 

orientation experiences. 

Examples of ways in which the office has been working to modernize the student orientation 

training material include more in -depth training on Title VI ; an improved and more extensive list 

of resources students can access to learn about religious discrimination and bias ; more 

opportunities to learn about university policies ; what may constitute an infringement ; and where 

and how students may report grievances. Reporting and training are inseparable, and the 

modernization of training and workshops will funda mentally help with the modernization of 

reporting mechanisms . (Please see the following subsections for recommendations on training 

and reporting .)

The most successful training should provide students with a shared experience that builds 

consensus. We do not expect agreement on contentious issues, but students need to learn how to 

have respectful conversations in social settings and in the classroom. 

We know that introducing anti -bias and inclusive teaching frameworks early in a student’s 

university experience can contribute to fostering a campus culture that values diversity and 

inclusion. Reiterating, redefining, and clarifying what constitutes discr iminatory behavior can 

give students clear guidelines on what  is  and  is not  tolerated at Columbia, and ultimately can 

help set the tone University -wide. 

While it is expected that every school tailor its orientation programs to its specific 

constituencies, we recommend the following for all student orientations :

● That both first year students and their orientation leaders across the University follow the same 

anti -bias, diversity , and inclusion training. 

● That orientation leaders are not responsible for dispensing the training alone, and that the 

University ensures they are both trained and accompanied by professionals, whether from within 

or outside of the University .

● That the University promotes pluralis m by inviting speakers who specialize in topics related to 

anti -bias and inclusion. 50 

● That some of these programs focus on antisemitism , Islamophobia, anti -Arab , and anti -Asian 

prejudice, from learning how to identify these forms of discrimination to learning how to address 

them. 

Students would benefit from having Leadership and Allyship workshops made available 

specifically for them.  The purpose of this type of workshop is to cultivate leaders and allies who 

advocate for and support Jewish students in the Columbia community. Students would learn 

advocacy skills —specifically how to advocate effectively for anti -discrimination measures. They 

would also learn allyship practices in order to become an active and supportive ally to Jewish 

students, especially those experiencing exclusion. 

● Customizing Faculty Training 

The only required training we recommend for faculty (other than teaching assistants and new 

faculty) is the training that the University has already announced , but additional optional training 

should also be available. In our listening sessions, we heard many students request that faculty be 

offered training in classroom facilitation, specifically as it relates to political and controversial 

content, navigating difficult discourse, and fostering and responding to multiple perspectives. As 

mentioned earlier, the Task Force agrees. Before we make further recommendations for faculty ,

we briefly review current policies and trainings. 

Currently, faculty at Columbia (especially new and junior faculty) are encouraged to enroll in the 

online Office of the Provost Faculty Orientation. Th is training is supposed to complement each 

individual school’s orientation programs, and focuses on supporting teaching and scholarship at 

Columbia. This training is not mandatory for all new faculty. 

There are many modules in the online Office of the Provost Faculty Orientation , but none of 

them introduces religion in depth. The  Guide for Inclusive Teaching at Columbia  (last updated in 

2020) , created by the Center for Teaching and Learning (CTL), mentions religion several times, 

but it lacks specificity as to how faculty should identify and address discrimination on the basis 

of religion. The program  Columbia’s Inclusive Teaching: Supporting All Students in the College 

Classroom , is an online course that has a fee . There is a free version, but it provides limited 

access to course material. 

At Columbia, many schools have opted to provide their faculty with additional orientation 

programming (beyond general faculty orientation). Given the decentralized structure of the 

University, this is not surprising, but is it effective? We examined orient ation programs for four 

of the  University’s  largest units (based on 2022 enrollment data): Columbia College, SEAS, the 

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences (GSAS), and the School of Professional Studies (SPS). 51 

We could not find any additional Columbia College customized faculty training. For SEAS and 

Barnard College , new faculty orientation takes place in person in the form of a three -hour 

presentation. Diversity and inclusion are discussed during the program, but we could not find any 

information that specifically focused on identifying and dealing with religious dis crimination or 

bias. We could not find any additional GSAS customized faculty training. We could not find any 

additional SPS customized faculty trai ning. 

If any of the schools choose to develop a customized faculty training, we recommend the 

approaches taken by the school of Engineering and Barnard which conduct the training in 

person at a faculty orientation. 

● Customizing Trainings for Teaching Assistants 

All teaching assistants (TAs) at the University are required to take a course called Columbia TA 

Guide: Essential Resources Rules and Guidance, made available electronically through 

Columbia’s  Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (EO AA) website. The purpose of the 

training, according to the website is to cover  “requirements and best practices on a variety of 

topics including academic integrity, student mental health, challenges, discrimination, 

harassment, sexual misconduct, reporting obligations , and other issues.” The website also 

provides a guide with tools and resources for TAs to identify and respond to problems related to 

challenging classroom discussions and discrimination .

This program appears to be the only one available University -wide and schools do not seem to be 

offering their own versions. The TA guidelines and handbooks made available by specific 

schools do not provide much more information regarding anti -discrimination training. Take, for 

instance, the Graduate School of Arts and Science (GSAS) website. It indicates that 

“departments must train and supervise graduate students who teach in the department” and that 

such training should be “set up as a course that preced es or accompanies the teaching.” It also 

states that there should be a “clear understanding among all concerned about what constitutes 

unacceptable performance .” No additional information is given regarding the suggested safety 

parameters TAs should adopt  or what guidelines can be used to identify “unacceptable 

performance.” Of the six guides and handbooks  that the School of International and Public 

Affairs (SIPA ) provides on its website for student officers, none include guidelines on diversity, 

inclusion , and bias . SIPA’s website  like GSAS ’s , offers detailed information regarding 

academic, professional, and administrative duties, but nothing on anti -bias and inclusion. 

In its online training,  “Columbia TA Guide: Essential Resources Rules and Guidance ” asks that 

prospective TAs choose among different answers in response to classroom scenarios dealing 

with discrimination and bias. For some of these scenarios, the University’s response is that “there 

is not a single best practice.” Advising TAs that there is no clear -cut approach to dealing with 52 

these issues is not a best practice and may have contribute d to some of the problems Jewish 

students have experienced with TAs. 

New TAs need clear guidelines for what constitutes inappropriate behavior in the classroom and 

how they might go about addressing incidents and disagreements in the moment. Recommending 

that TAs refer to the EO AA or the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards is 

impractical and insufficient . Discussions of topics like race and religion are complex and 

delicate, and it is fundamental that TAs be given more guidance in ways that are uniform across 

the University . This is one way to ensure that both TAs and students work and learn in safe 

environments conducive to respectful learning. 

The Columbia TA guide discusses many essential topics such as gender discrimination, sexual 

abuse and assault, mental health, disability accommodations, pregnancy, immigration status, and, 

to some limited extent, implicit bias. However, it lacks content on other crucial issues such as 

discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, and religion. Beyond its scenario of a student 

uncomfortable with a classroom discussion on these matters, the guide does not adequately 

explain how to handle such topics in the classroom, how to mediate these conversations, and 

what exactly constitutes discrimination based on race, ethnicity , or religion. The rise in 

antisemitism , Islamophobia and anti -Arab prejudice at the University reinforces just how 

important in -depth training on these topics is. 

We recommend that the Cross -School Committee immediately reassess not only the quality of the 

content displayed in the TA guide, but also the diversity of content made available, and that it 

include s scenarios and guidance on racial, ethnic , and religious discrimination in the classroom .

We reviewed approaches used by several North American universities in the area of TA anti -bias 

and inclusion training and found  Berkeley’s Graduate Student Instructor Teaching Guide 

particularly deep and comprehensive. Before they can begin their work as TAs, first -time 

Graduate Student Instructors must complete a Professional Standards and Ethics Online Course. 

The course is structured in five modules: responsibilities and ethics; c reating inclusive 

classrooms; teaching students with disabilities; fosterin g academic integrity; and creating an 

education al environment free of sexual harassment. 

● Customizing Training for Resident Assistants and Advisers 

The University must ensure that resident halls are inclusive environments for all students. What 

could be more alienating than feeling excluded and experiencing bias in the place where you 

live? Resident advisers and resident assistants (RAs) have a critical role to play in maintaining an 

inclusive environment in residence halls . They should ensure that students who do experience 53 

harassment have a person they trust to help them deal with it and should connect them to the 

right University office for reporting serious violations , should such a step be warranted .

In its list of requirements for prospective RAs , the Columbia College and Columbia SEAS 

website states that prospective RAs must have taken the following training courses: Under1Roof, 

Title IX , and Bystander Intervention. Title IX and Bystander Intervention focus on sexual 

harassment, sexual abuse, and sexual violence, as well as other essential themes such as consent, 

navigating different forms of masculinity, addressing stereotypes about femin ism, learning how 

to become an advocate, and compassion. Two ot her programs are offered: CU Safe Zone, which 

provides students with foundational knowledge on how to support LGBTQ+ communities at 

Columbia, and ROOTED (Respecting Ourselves and Others Through Empathy and Dialogue), 

which focuses on creating spaces of sol idarity, empathy , and learning in the Columbia 

community to explore identity, power , and privilege. It is unclear whether these two are required. 

Under1Roof delves into diversity, but it does not have content on fundamental discrimination 

patterns like antisemitism. Additionally, the three trainings that are required of incoming students 

(Under1Roof, Title IX , and Bystander Intervention) must be taken by all incoming students 

during New Student Orientation Program (NSOP), meaning that at the time RAs begin their jobs, 

it has already been at least a year since they took the courses. 

An RA has a duty to foster  community and safety. As students’ first points of contact in their 

residences, they play a crucial role in fostering a physically and emotionally safe living 

environment for all students —many of whom are living away from home for the first time in 

their lives . RAs are also often tasked with mediating conflicts. Because they play such a critical 

role in students’ lives as well as their living situations, it is fundamental that RAs be adequately 

trained on the issues that affect  students’ feeling of safety . Critical among these are 

discrimination and exclusion. At a time when antisemitism and Islamophobia on campus are on 

the rise, it is crucial that these trainings provide educational material on religion -based 

discrimination. 

Creating compelling and efficient training curricula is neither a straightforward nor easy task. In 

her study on “Communicative Social Justice Training for Resident Advisors,” Jessica Zhivotosky 

demonstrates that RAs often feel that putting training into p ractice is challenging .96  Simply 

telling RAs that “they need to be more inclusive” is pointless. Unless they are given the 

necessary resources and tools to understand what inclusivity means and how to foster it, things 

will not change.   

> 96 Jessica Zhivotosky, “Communicative Social Justice Training for Resident Advisors: RAs Experiences and Uses of Training ”
> (Spring 2016) .54

We recommend that RAs be provided mandatory comprehensive training, so they can understand 

and identify antisemitism and Islamophobia . This should include real -life incidences of 

antisemitism and Islamophobia as experienced by students, rather than cookie -cutter scenarios, 

as well as ba sic education in Judaism and Isla m. F or instance, they might learn what fasting is 

and how it impact s students, or why some students follow religious dietary restrictions. We 

understand that everybody observes religion differently, but providing RAs with a basic 

understanding of religious practice would be helpful. 

RAs should also be required to participate in How to Have Difficult Conversations on Divisive 

Topics trainings  mentioned earlier in this section. Residence halls should provide spaces and 

formal opportunities where constructive and healing conversations can take place.  RA training 

must be customized so RAs develop the skills to lead these discussions . An interesting initiative 

that should be considered was developed by Jewish on Campus (JOC), a student -run 

organization fighting to eliminate antisemitism on campus. Their ambassador program for 

students facilitates student discussions of their experiences with hate on campus. Designing a 

similar program in wh ich frequent listening sessions are held with diverse students and RAs as 

moderators would be beneficial to the Jewish and Muslim students living in University residence 

halls. 

7. Recommendations for Evaluating the Effectiveness of Training 

Training s should not be developed and left in place without evaluation of their effectiveness. It is 

clear from the work of our Task Force and the r eport of the Ad hoc Grievance Committee , issued 

in 2005, that many of the conditions that contributed to the explosion of antisemitism on our 

campus were developing before this academic year. Consequently, the University should 

periodically reconsider existing needs that may result from changes occurring on the campus. 

We recommend that the University evaluate all training and workshops to determine whether 

they are achieving their intended purpose. 

The University should also conduct regular assessments of the campus climate to identify and 

address emerging issues related to antisemitism and other forms of exclusion, discrimination ,

and bias. 

C. Reporting Experiences of Exclusion, Harassment, Bias , and Discrimination and 

Mediation Procedures for Resolving Incident Repor ts that  Don’ t Involve Title VI 

This section primarily focuses on how the University can improve procedures and create 

transparency for students who wish to report experiences of discrimination, harassment , and 55 

exclusion that may be antithetical to University rules and norms, but may not rise to the level of 

a legal violation under federal, state, or local anti -discrimination law .

The University has already done considerable work on improving reporting procedures required 

for legal compliance  for students experiencing discrimination. Columbia’s Center for Student 

Success and In tervention (CSSI) office is responsible for these complaints .97  This work will be 

moving to the new Office of Institutional Equity (formerly EOAA). 

Students frequently told us that it is difficult to figure out where to complain; when they reported 

an incident it was often not taken seriously; and finally, the burden was often placed on the 

student to resolve the problem. 

1. Current Process and Recommendations for Filing a Report 

The EOAA, CSSI, the Dean of Students office in each school, and University Life are all 

identified as places where students can report experiences of discrimination, harassment , and 

exclusion. 

Reporting discrimination, exclusion, or bias can be difficult for several reasons. Some may fear 

their grievances lack hard evidence or they simply feel powerless. Others are reluctant to share 

their experiences because they distrust the system or believe the individuals in charge will not be 

fair or will ignore their grievance. Students in our listening sessions shared all these frustrations 

and concerns, which need to be addressed in changes to the current system for reporting 

grievances . We think the ideal reporting process would be impartial, transparent, and supportive. 

It would also follow uniform procedures.  Also needed is an easily accessible online tool that 

informs students of these procedures and offers a standardized form for reporting. 

The current procedures for reporting discrimination, harassment , and exclusion are available on 

the  University Life  website, where students will find the following confusing and long text: 

Discrimination, including Antisemitism, Anti -Arab or Anti -Muslim Discrimination, Form 

may be used to report an incident of discrimination or harassment. (Incidents involving 

faculty/staff are routed directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative 

Action (EOAA). For gender -based incidents, please use the next form on the list.) 

This form may be used to report discrimination or harassment incidents, including but not 

limited to the following: Age; Anti -Arab; Anti -Muslim; Antisemitism; 

Citizenship/Alienage; Disability; National Origin; Race/Color; Religion/Creed   

> 97 See ASTF Report #1 .56

On the same University Life website on the page for specifically  supporting Jewish Communit ies 

it states under “Reporting Bias”: 

All students can report incidents of bias to their Dean of Students .

● Students may also report incidents [to  https://universitylife.columbia.edu/columbias -

bias -response -faqs ].

● Columbia College and SEAS undergraduate students, please report incidents to the 

Columbia College and Columbia Engineering Bias Response Team 

In a  training for students the slide “How to File a Concern” explains the procedures as follows: 

● Complete an online report .

● Community members may file an incident report electronically through the sites listed on 

this webpage ( universitylife.columbia.edu/report ). 

● Community members across Columbia campuses, including students, may also make 

reports in person at the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (EOAA), 

and students may go to the Center for Student Success and Intervention (CSSI) 

● Students may also contact University Life or their Dean of Students and their respective 

offices for assistance with filing reports. 

● These options, above, provide a window into the decisions students face in taking steps to 

report an incident. 

These instructions offer the opportunity for in person assistance , but these procedures are 

labyrinthine and should be clarified. A significant number of those who attended listening 

sessions or wrote to the Task Force were stymied by reporting procedures. 

Recommendations for Reporting 

The reporting system is being reviewed by University Life and EOAA with the goal to simplify. 

The Task Force has been actively engaged with University Life and supports this long overdue 

overhaul of reporting procedures and the website. 

We recommend that University Life develop, in collaboration with EOAA, Deans of Students and 

DEI Offices, and the Ombuds Office, one set of guidelines and standard information together 

with a universal tool for reporting. This information and tool should be made available to 

students through the Deans of Students Offices and DEI offices in every school. The reporting 

tool should off er two options: one for those seeking legal reporting, and one for those seeking 

informal dispute resolution/im partial conversa tion. 

We recommend addressing the following questions as a revised, streamlined , and clear system 

for reporting is developed: 57 

● How does a student decide whether they should report through University Life or their 

Dean of Students office or seek the assistance of the Ombuds? 

● How soon should students report to the bias response team and will waiting make a 

difference? 

● Will different offices respond differently to reporting? 

● Are the reporting forms the same, regardless of where you report? 

● Is the process of dispute resolution the same, regardless of where you report? 

● Does the type of experience affect where a student should report? 

● Should a student file more than one report for the same incident if they are not sure 

where to report? 

By answering the above questions and incorporating that information in new guidelines, the 

administration will achieve greater transparency, a key to increasing trust in the process 

throughout the University community. If this approach to reporting is to s ucceed, students must 

also receive support in better understanding which of the two reporting option s—legal report or 

request for informal dispute resolution —is more appropriate to their situation. Students should 

also be made aware of the timeline for the ir complaints to be processed and addressed, as 

uncertainty as to the length of the processing of a case can be daunting. 

We also have an obligation to ensure that all students can bring their grievances, in person, to 

impartial faculty and staff who will be informed of our procedures.  All student -facing staff and 

faculty must be trained in the new procedures through an online workshop. We recommend that 

faculty and staff involved in informal dispute resolution participate in mandatory training 

programs that are in person on  “How to  Have Difficult Conversations”  and in mediation. 

2. Current Process and Recommendations for Mediating and Resolving Dispute s

When students report complaints of bias or exclusion that they hope can be resolved through a n

informal dispute resolution proces s—instead of through CSSI or EOAA —they usually reach out 

directly to faculty, Department Chairs , or Deans of Students staff. Students can also bring 

disputes to the Columbia Ombuds Office. We found a very compelling process outlined on its 

website. The Ombuds Office first meets with the disputing parties, then all parties meet and have 

an opportunity to share their perspective on the issue. The Ombuds Office helps the parties in a 

dispute find common ground to achieve a settlement. Barnard has its own Ombuds Office which 

offers similar services. Additionally, Columbia Law School has a mediation clinic, which 

provides the Columbia community with free and confidential dispute resolution. At a minimum ,

students need to be made aware of all these confidential mediation services. Since all these 

mediation offices are confidential , grievances cannot be tracked. We do not recommend 

expanding this process, but it could be explained and integrated better into the University’s 

options for conflict resolution. 58 

We are encouraged that the University is working to improve its systems for reporting 

experiences of exclusion and bias and for informal conflict resolution . We understand that the 

University has a legal obligation to protect students from discrimination, but legal remedies may 

not be a preferred option when they have a grievance 

Recommendations for Informal Dispute Resolution 

Ensure that at least one member of all Deans of Students offices is skilled in dispute resolution 

and can advise on other resources that are available. The University office designated to review 

and address discrimination concerns should also be fully staffed . It should be the designated 

resource to conduct mediations and facilitated dialogue with students about issues that may not 

warrant an investigation but still need (or would benefit from) discussion. With this approach ,

we could ensure that students and others in our community can opt for a different process, while 

still allowing the University to track the volume of con cerns and ensure that we are taking 

appropriate steps to address them in a timely way. 

3. Consistency and Coordination between Diversity Equity and Inclusion ( DEI ) and Deans 

of Students Offices 

We are including a discussion of DEI offices in our report because their mandate is to address 

issues of diversity, equity, and inclusion that affect students at the University. We believe that 

DEI offices could play an important role in helping all studen ts deal with the experiences of 

exclusion and bias on campus, if their mandate is modified .

While diversity is valued on campus today , historically, minority groups were expected to adopt 

the norms and perspectives of the majority. Over time, multiculturalism c ame to the fore as a 

core value at universities. A multicultural university is one in which people with strong cultural, 

religious, ethnic, and political identities may keep th ose identities while participat ing fully in the 

life of the university. In other words, tho se identities should not be grounds for exclusion. 

Unfortunately, many students are experiencing exclusion at Columbia —not just feelings of 

exclusion, but actual exclusion from extracurricular, curricular, and dorm spaces. Many of the 

students we heard from have chosen to maintain a strong and often visibl e Jewish identity, which 

often entails being more religiously observant than is typical among Columbia students, being 

active in Jewish organizations, and being strongly connected to Israel as an essential aspect of 

who they are. In theory, in a university strongly committed to multiculturalism and diversity, 

students’ choices should be honored and respected. In practice, as we show in this report, that is 

often not the case. 59 

Group identity is the way most of us think of and organize ourselves, but identities are complex: 

people can belong to multiple groups, and relations between groups change constantly. In an 

institution as diverse and as complex as Columbia, it is neither e mpirically accurate nor desirable 

to divide identity groups into two master categories, marginalized and privileged, and to restrict 

the  University’s  multicultural embrace to members of the former category. In this typology, Jews 

are considered privileged, no matter what circumstances they come from or what their 

experiences have been. This kind of thinking , often supported by DEI offices, makes it difficult 

to acknowledge our students’ experience of antisemitism, even when it’s happening on our own 

campus. 

DEI at Columbia should be committed to pluralism, an ethos of ongoing, peaceful, respectful 

interactions among a wide variety of groups, identities, and viewpoints, carried out according to 

an agreed -upon set of rules. As our colleagues at the Stanford Antisemitism Task Force wrote in 

their recent report: “A pluralistic framework does not call for ignoring identity. Rather, it 

provides a framework where identity is construed broadly and understood as the source of 

creative scholarship and education rather t han the basis for exclusion and fragmentation.” Their 

report quotes political philosopher Danielle Allen, a member of Harvard’s Antisemitism and 

Islamophobia Task Forces, who recently wrote: “Pluralism is important because it can avoid the 

binaries of anti -racism and achieve a broader vision of understanding that considers the 

heterogeneity of our culture and the emergence of excellence within it.” 

Elsewhere in her work, Professor Danielle Allen offers “social connectedness,” with constant, 

productive interactions between groups, as an ideal. That is appealing, but, frankly, it has seemed 

out of reach at Columbia in recent months. Pluralism ought to come first, as a precondition for 

social connectedness. Unilateral moral condemnations, like the condemnations of Zionism we 

have seen by some at Columbia, violate a pluralist spirit in their denial of respect to a group’s 

core beliefs and in their convict ion that one cause is so overwhelmingly urgent that it negates the 

need to abide by the rules of the community. 

All schools and Columbia affiliates have their own DEI offices and websites. The Office of the 

Provost and University Life ha ve made an important effort to coordinate these offices, but they 

remain administratively decentralized. We think that better coordination of DEI offices across all 

Columbia schools and a clarification of their mandate would help improve the campus climate. 

After reviewing the mission statements, programs, and capacity of the 18 DEI offices at all 

Columbia schools and affiliates, we d etermined that their active role in framing larger issues of 

inclusion across the University needs to be better defined. 

DEI offices should play a direct role in assisting all students to report or deal with experiences of 

bias or exclusion.  However, our review of all the DEI websites found that most DEI offices only 

address matters relatin g to diversity when “diversity” is defined in terms of race, gender , and 

sexual identity.  Some Jewish and Israeli students have assumed that they could find information 60 

and assistance in DEI offices when experiencing bias or exclusion . The y were very disappointed 

when they were told that their experiences fell outside the purview of DEI. 

DEI offices should support a robust vision of pluralism. This means avoiding blunt 

classifications of “privileged” and “marginalized.” 98  The goal should be to celebrate differences 

and to encourage interactions that promote understanding, collegiality, and friendship across 

differences. We consider the rich diversity of our campus to be, as Danielle Allen has observed, 

“an opportunity —a ch ance to achieve a higher level of excellence powered by intense 

engagements across a vast range of viewpoints.” 99 

DEI offices should include all forms of diversity in their programming, including antisemitism 

and other forms of discrimination against faith -based identity groups (e.g., Jews, Muslims, 

Evangelical Christians, Hindus , Sikhs ), as well as disability and age discrimination. This should 

also be explicit in their mission statements as a strong signal of their commitment to a truly 

inclusive campus. Some standardization of these newly expanded DEI parameters should be 

developed in the Provost’s Cross -School Committee in consultation with DEI officers and 

supported by central administration. 

As we suggested earlier, DEI staff have a role to play in developing trainings and workshops and 

should be part of the Cross -School Committee that standardizes trainings and workshops for all 

schools. They should also be part of the University’s overall ef fort to improve procedures and 

processes for reporting and mediating student experiences of bias and exclusion. 

DEI Offices are generally small, so we are not recommending that they engage in dispute 

resolution. Rather, their staff should have the knowledge and capacity to assist students, and the 

new reporting tool should be available on their websites. 

D. Recommendations for Student Groups and Clubs 

As noted above, i n our listening sessions and in other conversations with Jewish and Israeli 

students, we heard that many of them have been excluded from student groups because of their 

ties to Israel. They  have been shocked and offended that “Zionist” has become a disparaging 

term in some student groups, even though these students consider Zionism —the idea that Israel 

has a right to exist —to be a core part of their Jewish identity .100                

> 98 We found this formulation in the Mission Statement of School of Social Work Office of DEI .“We view this as a
> guiding principle for our community –using a power, race, oppression and privilege (PROP) framework across our
> curriculum, administrative practices, operations and personal interactions.”
> 99 Danielle Allen, “We’ve Lost Our Way on Campus. Here’s How We Can Find Our Way Back, ”Washington Post,
> Dec ember 10, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/12/10/antisemitism -campus -culture -harvard -
> penn -mit -hearing -path -forward/.
> 100 Rebecca Massel, “Where Does A Jew Belong?: Over 20 Pro -Israel Jewish Students Report Feeling Ostracized
> On Campus,” Columbia Spectator , Apr il 1, 2024 .

61 

Although this is not true of every Jew at Columbia —we also have heard from Jewish students 

and faculty who passionately oppose Zionism —the evidence about the American Jewish 

community as a whole, and the Jewish community worldwide, shows that the overwhelming 

majority are Zionists: according to recent polls, 80 percent of American Jews consider Israel to 

be “an essential or important part” of their Jewish identity .101 

Th e exclusion of Zionist Jewish students is unacceptable, just as it would be unacceptable to 

exclude students who believe in core tenets of other religions. Not only is this exclusion 

fundamentally at odds with the University’s pluralist values, but it also c an violate anti -

discrimination law. 

These Jewish and Israeli students were not excluded for supporting specific policies of the Israeli 

government —indeed, many are critical of the current government —but for embracing the core 

tenet of Zionism , which is that Jews should have a national homeland in Israel. A number of 

student groups issued statements or joined coalitions contending that the state of Israel is 

illegitimate and should not exist, even though these positions were far removed from the 

missions of th ese groups. In many cases, these steps made many Jewish and Israeli students so 

uncomfortable that they chose to leave. In some cases, Zionist students were explicitly kicked 

out. 

To be clear , th e experience of being excluded because of one’s beliefs  is not limited to students 

who are Jewish and Zionist. We also heard from anti -Zionist Jewish students who reported that 

they no longer feel comfortable in some Jewish groups and communal activities. This is wrong .

We urge Jewish organizations on campus to be inclusive and welcoming to all, including Anti -

Zionist Jews , in all ways that are consistent with their mission, including at religious services, 

Shabbat meals, etc. 

In addition, we have heard from non -Jewish students who have been criticized or even ostracized 

for defending Jewish and Israeli students or for being insufficiently supportive of pro -Palestinian 

positions. 

These incidents are all the more discomfiting because the University regularly emphasizes the 

importance of inclusion and belonging, including in student groups .102  Columbia has a rich array 

of student activities. They include groups dedicated to community service, athletics, writing,              

> 101 See, e.g., “Pew Research Center: Jewish Americans in 2020: U.S. Jews’ Connections with and Attitudes Towa rd
> Israel ,”May 11, 2021, https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2021/05/11/u -s-jews -connections -with -and -attitudes -
> toward -israel (“ Eight -in -ten U.S. Jews say caring about Israel is an essential or important part of what being Jewish
> means to them.”) .
> 102 For example, in requiring all new students to participate in an Inclusion and Belonging Initiative , University
> Life’s website provides: “Experiencing a sense of inclusion & belonging can affect every aspect of the Columbia
> experience —from extracurricular activities to academic performance, making these important values for our
> community to uphold.” https://universitylife.columbia.edu/inclusion -initiative 62

politics and public policy, the arts, religious faith, identity, and advocacy. In the eloquent words 

of  Columbia’s undergraduate admissions website :

You’ll tap into the energy and ideas inspired by more than  five hundred student clubs and 

organizations ranging from intramural athletics and philosophy journals to investment 

clubs and culinary societies. Whatever you love to do, you can do it at Columbia. And 

wherever your passions take you, you’ll find friends to enjoy them with —creating the 

kinds of adventures, memories, and moments of delight that New York City’s best stories 

are made of .103 

The problem of exclusion from student groups was clearly identified in our listening sessions as 

reported in Section I. Our recommendations are based on those students’ experiences and 

numerous conversations with different stakeholders, including deans, re presentatives of 

University Life, the University’s legal staff and advisors, deans of students from several schools, 

leaders of student groups, members of student activities boards, and many Jewish and Israeli 

students. 

Although many members of the campus community share our concerns, others deny that there is 

any issue. Some say they have not received many complaints, while others downplay incidents as 

voluntary departures over political disagreements. We are concerned t hat proposals shared with 

us so far to address this problem are not sufficient. Therefore, before making policy 

recommendations about student groups, we explain why changes are urgently needed. 

1. Why Change University Policy? 

Importance of Student Groups.  In structuring policies for student groups, the University should 

consider their important contribution to our intellectual community. Their  educational benefits 

are obvious. Student groups and clubs enable students to pursue mutual interests, celebrate 

shared values and identities, acquire new skills and knowledge, learn to lead and to work as a 

team, and earn valuable professional credentials. 

Student groups also forge communities that support each group’s mission. To advance this goal, 

student groups generally should be free to limit membership to those who value the mission and 

can help advance it  but they should not engag e in discrimination. For example, it makes sense 

for the College Democrats to be open only to Democrats, not Republicans. S imilarly, s tudent 

statements are most appropriate when they are closely tied to the group’s mission. For example, 

a group that is organized to oppose fossil fuel development should be free to criticize fracking, 

while a group that is committed to US energy independen ce should be free to advocate for 

fracking . 

> 103 https://undergrad.admissions.columbia.edu/life/here/clubs

63 

The University also has reason not to micromanage student groups. One of the functions of 

student groups is to offer students opportunities to hone leadership skills. So in most situations, 

the University should defer to students, even when they make mista kes. But deference cannot be 

unlimited. 

There are three important reasons for the University to give guidance to student groups, which 

we discuss in turn: first, to protect students from being associated with statements they oppose or 

were not involved in  issuing; second, to prevent practices that infringe on the University’s 

pluralist values; and third, to ensure that groups comply with anti -discrimination laws. 

Consultation and Notice.  All members should have a voice in deciding whether a group makes 

statements or joins coalitions . Conversely, they should be given an opportunity to signal their 

opposition. This is necessary because otherwise the full group will be associated with the 

decision, with reputational consequences for everyone. This problem arose when leaders of some 

groups joined statements after October 7 without consulting their members broadly .104  We have 

heard from members who were upset about being criticized for a decision they did not make, as 

well as about the lack of a mechanism to express their disagreement. 

To mitigate these problems, groups need the right processes.  When a group decides to make a 

statement there generally should be some combination of broad consultation, a clear decision 

rule (e.g., unanimity, a supermajority, etc.), and a mechanism for dissenters to be publicly 

identified. The University should consu lt with student groups in developing options for these 

sorts of processes.  We understand that some student group boards have already begun 

considering this issue. 

Pluralism and the Importance of Inclusiveness in Student Groups.  Another key limit on the 

deference to student groups is  the University’s mission to forge a pluralistic community. Our 

commitment to pluralism is critical not just for Jewish and Israeli students, but for everyone. 

In healthy societies, individuals join shifting coalitions, depending on the issue. They do not 

fragment into warring camps that dislike, compete with, and avoid each other. In a practical 

sense, pluralism reinforces inclusion and works when people with di fferent views are able to find 

common ground and work together. In society, support for the value of inclusion has thus 

become inextricably linked to our ability to tackle the complex problems confronting us. To 

avoid polarization, problem -solvers and demo cracy advocates opt for inclusion and pluralism.      

> 104 See, e.g., “Joint Statement from Palestine Solidarity Groups at Columbia University regarding the recent events
> in Palestine/Israel: Oppression Breeds, ”Oct ober 9, 2023 (“The weight of responsibility for the war and casualties
> undeniably lies with the Israeli extremist government and other Western governments, including the U.S.
> government, which fund and staunchly support Israeli aggression, apartheid and settle r-colonization.”),
> https://docs.google.com/document/u/1/d/1RcXX5DEO3yfJ9R4ksURnzpIPCyVxo575 -Y-
> SoC_vZFk/mobilebasic?urp=gmail_link .

64 

Just as this is the right path for society at large, it is the right path for Columbia. Our students 

should engage with each other, learn from each other, and befriend each other, even when they 

disagree —however passionately —on particular issues .105  Columbia is “a place for received 

wisdom and firmly held views to be tested, and tested again,” the Rules of University Conduct 

state , “so that members of the University community can listen, challenge each other, and be 

challenged in return.” As our  18  deans recently emphasized, “[t]he right of members of our 

university to share views that may be unpopular or deemed offensive is protected and 

fundamental to an academic community that depends on the free exchange of views and 

ideas.” 106  We want our students to learn from each other, even when —indeed, especially when —

they disagree or come from different backgrounds. 

If the Columbia campus fragments, we fail to achieve a core element of our mission. Our 

campus, our graduates, and society at large lose future leaders and citizens who have learned to 

disagree with civility, still respect each other, and join forces on ot her issues. Instead, as our 

Deans have emphasized, the Columbia ideal is “true listening” that exemplifies “our 

commitment to mutual respect and community.” 107 

This mission -critical goal has an important implication for student groups: they should be as 

inclusive as possible, consistent with their individual mission. Indeed, a key reason why the 

University supports student groups with funding, space, and the righ t to use the Columbia name 

is to forge a pluralistic community. Student groups can build bridges, enabling students who 

disagree on some issues to discover common interests, learn to work with people with different 

backgrounds and views, and form friendshi ps. But this cannot happen if people with specific 

backgrounds or views are either explicitly excluded or are made to feel unwelcome. 

This is not to say that there should be no membership criteria or that student groups should never 

make statements. As noted above, it is appropriate for the College Democrats to be open only to 

Democrats. Likewise, a soup kitchen can be open only to those who are committed to aiding 

local community members in need. These membership criteria are appropriate because they have 

an obvious —indeed, a definitional —connection to the group’s mission (and, of course, they 

don’t violate  anti -discrimination rules, as discussed below) .108 

A group can take positions and make statements about its mission. For example, a group focused 

on Middle East policy can issue statements on Zionism, Hamas, the atrocities on October 7, the           

> 105 See, e.g., Danielle Allen, “Toward a Connected Society, ”in Nancy Cantor & Earl Lewis, ed., Our Compelling
> Interests: The Value of Diversity for Democracy and a Prosperous Society (Princeton University Press ,2016) (“To
> build a connected society, then, we need to identify the capacities, skills, and bodies of knowledge that constitute an
> ‘art of bridging,’ an art of forming productive social relationships across boundaries of difference.”).
> 106 https://ourvalues.columbia.edu/content/deans -message -columbia -and -community .
> 107 Id.
> 108 Even if a student group’s mission is to celebrate or promote a religion, identity, or background, it cannot exclude
> members of other religions, identities, or backgrounds under Columbia policy or under antidiscrimination law. See,
> e.g., N.Y. Exec. L. § 29 6(4); N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 8 -107(4)(a)(1)(a).

65 

humanitarian tragedy in Gaza, and any other issues about the region. These can be endorsements, 

condemnations, or anything in between. The topic is closely connected to the group’s mission, so 

the group should be free to address it (after consulting its me mbers, as noted above). 

Likewise, the College Democrats can endorse a Democratic policy priority —even if this would 

make Republican members feel unwelcome —since this is the mission of the group. Similarly, a 

soup kitchen should be free to issue statements about food security. 

But membership criteria and statements that are not directly related to the group’s mission are 

potentially problematic. A soup kitchen should not be open only to Democrats or make 

statements on abortion or gun control. These steps can undercut a core func tion of student 

groups: creating opportunities for people with different views and backgrounds to interact, learn 

from each other. Instead of promoting pluralism, student groups would contribute to polarization. 

Since this problem arises only with criteria and statements  outside  the group’s mission, a 

reasonable judgment is required about the scope of the mission. It should not be defined so 

broadly as to cover virtually any political statement . 109 

Protecting Student Speech.  In making this recommendation, we emphasize that we are  not 

suggesting —and do not support —limits on free speech rights of a group’s  members . The 

question is not whether Columbia students can express views on any issue, no matter how 

contentious. Of course , they can. Rather, the question is whether they can do so  through a 

specific student group .

For example, although a soup kitchen generally should not issue a statement on gun control —a

topic outside its mission —an individual officer or volunteer at the soup kitchen, obviously, can 

still write an op -ed or post on social media in her own name. Another option is that she can join 

with others from the soup kitchen to sign a “members’ letter” on gun control, which say s that 

they speak only for themselves, not the group. Or she can join (or form) another group whose 

mission includes this topic, such as  “the Columbia Gun Control Forum,” which can issue a 

statement. 

The idea of a subject -specific forum —which invites speech only on specified topics —is well 

established under the First Amendment . For example, if a board of education calls a meeting to 

discuss the science curriculum, it can prevent speakers from addressing athletics. There is no 

right to use a forum created for one topic to address another .110  Likewise, certain types of non -    

> 109 For example, a soup kitchen might try to justify statements on gun control or abortion by defining its mission —
> not as “providing food to vulnerable populations ”—but as “combating injustice and oppression.” Erring in the
> direction of a more precise definition encourages more interactions among people with different views and is less
> likely to exclude people.
> 110 See Perry Education Association v. Perry Local Educators ’Association, 460 U.S. 37 (1983); Cornelius v.
> NAACP, 473 U.S. 788 (1985); Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, 515 U.S. 819 (1995); Christian Legal Society

66 

profits cannot endorse a political candidate, but their professionals and volunteers can do so in 

their individual capacity .111  In the same way, the University should distinguish between a student 

group (which generally should make statements only on its mission) and the group’s members 

(who can make statements in their own names about anything). 

Discrimination Under Federal, State, and Local Anti -discrimination Laws.  In addition to 

safeguarding Columbia’s pluralist mission, there is another critical reason to give guidance on a 

student group’s eligibility requirements and statements. 

A commitment to inclusivity is grounded not just in our values, but also in the law. Although 

there generally is no legal bar on discrimination based on political viewpoint —so, for instance, 

Republicans and Democrats are not “protected classes” 112 —the law does not allow universities to 

tolerate discrimination based on race, color, or national origin. This sort of bigotry is illegal 

under federal, state, and local law. 

Discrimination based on religion is also illegal. Under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 

religion is protected to the extent that it reflects shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics. “These 

protections extend to students and school community mem bers who are or are perceived because 

of their shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics,” the Department of Education recently 

observed, “to be Jewish, Israeli, Muslim, Arab, Sikh, South Asian, Hindu, Palestinian, or any 

other faith or ancestry.” 113  New York law also bars discrimination based on religion and creed .114 

This means that groups generally cannot exclude students who are Israelis, Jews, Palestinians, or 

Muslims, just as they cannot exclude students who are Black, Asian, or Latino. Universities 

cannot allow a hostile environment that “limits or denies a studen t’s ability to participate in or 

benefit from the school’s program or activity.” 115  So a student group cannot have a “no Israelis 

v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661 (2010) (“Our limited -public -forum precedents adequately respect both CLS’s speech and 

expressive -association rights, and fairly balance those rights against Hastings’ interests as property owner and 

educational institution.”)  

> 111

Specifically, a non -profit organized under Section 501(c)(3) cannot do so. As a result, a University policy 

enacted in 1970 limits the participation of student groups in political campaigns. See Partisan Political Campaign 

Activities on Campus or at Campus Facilities,  https://universitypolicies.columbia.edu/content/partisan -political -

campaign -activities -campus -or -campus -facilities . 

> 112

An exception is N.Y. Labor Law Sec. 201(d), which prevents employers from refusing to hire or dismissing 

employees based on their political activities outside of work.  

> 113

Office of Civil Rights, Department of Education,  “Dear Colleague Letter, ” May 7, 2024, at 1.  

> 114

The NYSHRL prohibits “an educational institution to deny the use of its facilities to any person otherwise 

qualified, or to permit the harassment of any student …by reason of …religion.” N.Y. Exec. L. § 296(4). Similarly, 

the NYCHRL prohibits a provider of public accommodation, including a privately operated educational institution, 

to “withhold from or deny to [any] person the full and equal enjoyment, on equal terms and condi tions,” of any 

service or program, “[b]ecause of …creed.” N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 8 -107(4)(a)(1)(a).  

> 115

“Dear Colleague Letter ” at 5. The Department of Education considers student groups as part of the analysis. See 

example 3 (interfering with student group’s ability to invite an Israeli speaker and with ability of Jewish members to 

enter building housing organization would give O CR reason to open an investigation); example 7 (“calling the 

students who attended the meeting [of an Arab student group] terrorists, blocking students’ ability to leave the area, 

and shoving students” would give OCR reason to open an investigation). 67 

allowed” policy, since this would be discrimination based on national origin. Likewise, a group 

cannot have a “no Jews allowed” policy, since this would be discrimination based on shared 

ancestry or ethnic characteristics. As a safeguard, various Columbia policies governing student 

groups include explicit bans on discrimination that are broader than what Title VI prohibits .116 

Just as a “no Jews allowed” policy violates  anti -discrimination laws, the same can also be true of 

a “no Zionists allowed” policy. Targeting a characteristic that  closely correlates  with a protected 

class can be an indirect way of targeting the protected class. So , in the same way that a group 

cannot say “we don’t accept members who eat only kosher food,” it cannot say “we don’t accept 

members who are Zionists.” 

At Columbia, an open letter signed by over six hundred students emphasized the link between 

Judaism and Zionism, “We proudly believe in the Jewish People’s right to self -determination in 

our historic homeland as a fundamental tenet of our Jewish identity. Contrary to what many have 

tried to sell you —no, Judais m cannot be separated from Israel. Zionism is, simply put, the 

manifestation of that belief.” 117 

Faculty and staff signed a similar letter .118  This is the view of an overwhelming majority of Jews. 

As noted at the beginning of this section, 80 percent of American Jews consider Israel to be “an 

essential or important part” of their Jewish identity. 

This is not surprising. The Old Testament, the holiest of books in the Jewish faith, chronicles 

Abraham’s journey to Israel, his descendants’ departure during a famine, their descendants’ 

struggle to escape slavery in Egypt, the journey through the desert back to Israel, the rule of the 

prophets and kings, the tr auma of exile, and the enduring yearning for Zion. The New Testament 

also describes Jewish life in Israel during the time of Jesus. References to Israel and Jerusalem 

are pervasive in Jewish rituals and prayers .119  The Jewish connection to Israel is grounded not 

only in faith, but also in security. Centuries of violence and discrimination in Europe and the 

Middle East —culminating in the horrors of the Holocaust —reinforce the determination of most            

> 116 For example, the constitution of the undergraduate Student Governing Board or “SGB” provides that to be a
> member of SGB, student groups must commit: “To uphold SGB guiding principles of community self -governance,
> social responsibility, and inclusion in acc ordance with Title VII.” SGB Constitution Article VI Sec. 1.j. Likewise,
> the constitution of the Interschool Governing Board requires groups to: “Be open to all members of the Columbia
> community regardless of race, ethnicity, national origin, religion, sex ual orientation, gender, veteran’s status, or
> physical ability.” IGB Constitution, Art. V Sec 2.i.
> 117 Sharon Otterman, “ In Letter, 540 Jewish Columbia Students Defend Zionism, Condemn Protests, ”The New York
> Times , May 9, 2024. Since this article was published, the number of students who signed the letter has increased to
> over 600.
> 118 “Columbia’s Pain and its Protests: The Heated Debate Among Jewish Faculty, ”NY Daily News , Apr il 28, 2024,
> https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/04/28/columbias -pain -its -protests -the -heated -debate -among -jewish -faculty /.
> 119 For example, the Passover seder ends with “Next Year in Jerusalem.” Many Jews light candles on Hanukkah to
> celebrate a successful Jewish rebellion against the Greeks that liberated the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem, and a glass
> is broken at Jewish weddings t o mourn the destruction of this Temple.

68 

Jews to support Jewish self -determination, if only so Jews across the globe have a refuge from 

the persecution that, tragically, has been a recurring feature of Jewish life across the centuries. 

Just as excluding Zionists can be a proxy for excluding Jews, it also can be a proxy for excluding 

Israelis. A lthough some Israelis are not Zionists, the vast majority believe that their country does, 

in fact, have the right to exist. This is true of nearly all Israeli Jews (whether they are secular or 

religious), and also of many Israeli Arabs .120  The idea that Israel should exist as a nation finds 

support on the Israeli left, center, and right. Even as Israelis disagree vehemently about many 

issues, there is a broad consensus that the country is legitimate and has the right to defend itself. 

In ot her words, “Zionist” closely correlates with “Israeli,” so excluding “Zionists” can be 

discrimination against Israelis, which violates Title VI as discrimination based on national origin. 

Is Excluding Zionism Just Exclusion Based on Viewpoint ? Obviously, not every Jew or Israeli is 

a Zionist. As noted above, we have heard from faculty and students at Columbia who are Jewish 

but oppose Zionism (or defend anti -Zionism) .121  Some suggest that the very existence of Jews 

who oppose Zionism proves that the exclusion of Zionists is not about Judaism, but about 

politics .122  They defend the exclusion of Zionists as based on political views, not race or religion. 

As indicated above, our view is that exclusion based on political views usually should not be 

allowed, even though it generally is legal. Excluding Republicans or Democrats undercuts the 

University’s efforts to forge a pluralistic community, as noted above. However, we also disagree 

that the exclusion of Zionists is merely legal discrimination based on poli tical views, as opposed 

to illegal discrimination under Title VI. Although Zionism is not a part of the Jewish identity of 

some  Jews, it is still part of the Jewish identity of  many other  Jews. Anti -Zionist Jews cannot 

validate the exclusion of Zionists by , in effect, saying, “this is not important to us, so therefore it 

must not be important to them.” Anti -Zionist Jews are entitled to their view, but so are the vast                      

> 120 Jaimie Sarkonak, “The Druze Arabs Who Fight With Steadfast Loyalty to Israel, ”National Post , Dec ember 8,
> 2023 (“ Druze men serve the IDF at a greater rate than Jewish youth.”), https://nationalpost.com/opinion/the -druze -
> arabs -who -fight -with -steadfast -loyalty -to -israel.
> 121 See Debbie Becher, Helen Benedict, Nina Berman, Susan Bernofsky, Elizabeth Bernstein, Amy Chazkel, Yinon
> Cohen, Keith Gessen, Nora Gross, Jack Halberstam, Sarah Haley, Michael Harris, Jennifer S. Hirsch, Marianne
> Hirsch, Joe Howley, David Lurie, Nara Mila nich, D. Max Moerman, Manijeh Moradian, Sheldon Pollock, Bruce
> Robbins, James Schamus, and Alisa Solomon, “Jewish Faculty Reject Weaponization of Antisemitism, ”Columbia
> Spectator , Apr il 10, 2024, https://www.columbiaspectator.com/opinion/2024/04/10/jewish -faculty -reject -the -
> weaponization -of -antisemitism/ .
> 122 Ethan Fraenkel, Noam Chen -Zion, Caitlin Liss, and Charlie Steinman, “Task Force On Antisemitism, Can You
> Hear Us Now ?” Columbia Spectator , June 11, 2024 (“Zionism is a political ideology —not an ethnic or religious
> identity …a political ideology is not an unchanging part of one’s identity, and it is not a protected class. ”),
> https://www.columbiaspectator.com/opinion/2024/06/11/task -force -on -antisemitism -can -you -hear -us -now /.

69 

majority of Jews who feel quite differently ;123  for the latter, excluding Zionists has the effect of 

excluding Jews .124 

To be clear, our point is not to assess whose version of Jewish identity is more authentic. All 

Jews are entitled to be Jewish in their own way. Rather, the point is that some views and 

characteristics do correlate closely with being Jewish, even if the co rrelation is not perfect. So, as 

we noted above, we think it would clearly be discriminatory to say, “we have nothing against 

Jews, but our group doesn’t permit people who keep kosher.” This policy would not exclude  all 

Jews —many don’t keep kosher —but this  doesn’t make it any less discriminatory for those who 

do . Would anyone seriously argue that this was merely exclusion based on “culinary 

preference”? 

To test whether a situation violates the law, lawyers often reason by analogy. For example, what 

if the chess club decided to exclude feminists? Would this really just be a political litmus test, 

which is not discriminatory? We doubt it, given the correlat ion between this membership 

criterion and the protected status of gender. Granted, not all women are feminists and, of course, 

not all feminists are women. Yet there is enough of a correlation that “no feminists” violates 

anti -discrimination laws .125  In the same way, not all Jews are Zionists (and not all Zionists are 

Jews), but the relationship is close enough that excluding Zionists is discriminatory .126 

It is well -established that eligibility criteria that are nominally based on beliefs can have a 

discriminatory impact. As Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg put it, a student organization might 

“cloa[k] prohibited status exclusion in belief -based garb”: 

If a hypothetical Male -Superiority Club barred a female student from running for its 

presidency, for example, how could the Law School tell whether the group rejected her 

bid because of her sex or because, by seeking to lead the club, she manifested a lack of 

belief in its fundamental philosophy? 127             

> 123 See Elisha Baker, “On Tokenism and the Denial of Antisemitism, ”Columbia Spectator , June 22, 2024,
> https://www.columbiaspectator.com/opinion/2024/06/22/on -tokenism -and -the -denial -of -antisemitism /.
> 124 NYU came to the same conclusio n in their Guidance and Expectations on Student Conduct (“ Using code words,
> like “Zionist,” does not eliminate the possibility that your speech violates the NDAH Policy. For many Jewish
> people, Zionism is a part of their Jewish identity. ”). https://www.nyu.edu/students/student -information -and -
> resources/student -community -standards/nyu -guidance -expectations -student -
> conduct.html#:~:text=Using%20code%20words%2C%20like%20%E2%80%9CZionist,NDAH%20if%20directed%
> 20toward%20Zionists.
> 125 In principle, it might be permissible for a student group that focused on related policy issues, so that this criterion
> was core to the mission.
> 126 Again, this eligibility requirement might be acceptable if it was relevant to the student group’s mission, as might
> be the case with a group devoted to analyzing Middle East policy and politics.
> 127 Christian Legal Soc. Chapter v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661, 688 (2010).

70 

To avoid the “daunting labor” of deciding whether a belief -based eligibility requirement was 

discriminatory, the Supreme Court upheld a requirement that student groups had to be open to all 

students .128 

A “Different Treatment” Problem Under Title VI.  Finally, there is still another problem with 

asking Jews and Israelis to disavow Zionism as the price of acceptance 129  at student 

organizations with unrelated missions : as far as we know, other protected classes generally are 

not encountering this sort of barrier. If Israelis and Jews  are essentially alone in being singled out 

in this way, this different treatment can create an issue under Title VI, which requires the same 

treatment for all protected classes .130 

Alternatively, if Jews and Israelis actually are not alone —and students from other protected 

classes also are regularly facing this sort of challenge —the problem is even more pervasive than 

we think. Either way, a solution is urgently needed. 

What Counts as Exclusion?  Excluding students from student groups based on their viewpoint 

clashes with our values, while excluding them based on their race, religion, or national origin (or 

a proxy for those characteristics) violates anti -discrimination laws. But what does it mean to 

exclude students from a group? 

Obviously, students are excluded when the leaders or other members of a student group 

explicitly kick them out or tell them that they (or Jews, Israelis , or Zionists generally) are not 

welcome. Unfortunately, we are aware of some cases where this has happened. In other cases, 

the group made statements (such as joining a statement blaming Israel for Hamas’s atrocities of 

October 7) or took positions (such a s joining Columbia University Apartheid Divest), sponsored 

events, or circulated materials that were so offensive to Jewish and Israeli students that in good 

conscience many of these students felt that they could no longer remain in the group. These 

students were hurt at not being included in these decisions or at having their concerns ignored 

(often in a s ummary and dismissive manner). They worried about the reputational costs of being 

associated with initiatives they found offensive and, more fundamentally, they felt that their 

peers did not value them and, in some cases, were deliberately putting them in an untenable 

position. 

Some suggest that in situations where a student was not explicitly disinvited or dismissed, there 

was no exclusion; rather, Jewish and Israeli students merely chose to leave. It was up to them           

> 128 Id.
> 129 See Massel, “Where Does a Jew Belong ?”(reporting on exclusion of Zionist students and noting that most
> “expressed their desire to participate actively in the campus community. Yet, none of them are willing to hide or
> compromise their Jewish and pro -Israel identity to be accepted”).
> 130 “Dear Colleague Letter, ”example 9 (finding a problem under different treatment analysis where a high school
> history teacher, in “ask[ing] the class to discuss the Israel -Hamas conflict …, asks the only Jewish student in the
> class, who he assumes is Jewish based on her last name, to explain her position on the conflict.”). 71

whether to continue to associate with people who don’t agree with them, and they made a choice. 

But discrimination can still manifest in a seemingly voluntary departure. For example, if a 

woman chooses to leave a job because her co -workers constantly tell off -color jokes and display 

sexist or pornographic material, the fact that her departure was (nominally) voluntary is not a 

defense. Nor does it matter whether her co -workers were deliberately trying to force her out. 

This is a classic case of a hostile en vironment, which is not permissible under Title IX of the 

Civil Rights Act. Likewise, a hostile environment for Jews and Israelis is not permissible under 

Title VI. 

To sum up, the University has a key stake in ensuring that student groups promote pluralism 

instead of polarization, and that they do not contribute to a hostile environment under Title VI. 

The University should respond with policies governing the groups i t recognizes and supports. In 

crafting these policies, the University should consider two choices, which are highlighted in th e

part s of this section : first, who should make these decisions; and, second, what decisions they 

should make. 

Potential Decisionmakers and Mechanisms for Providing Guidance.  Although there is 

pedagogical value in deferring to student groups —including in letting them learn from 

mistakes —complete deference is not appropriate for issues that are central to the University’s 

mission or can expose it to liability. As emphasized above, eligibility requirements and 

statements outside a group’s mission can pose unacceptable risks. First, they can  keep students 

with different views and backgrounds from learning from and befr iending each other. Second, 

excluding members of our community is unfair and, when this exclusion is based on protected 

status, it can violate anti -discrimination laws. So, in our view, although student input on these 

issues is important, the University cannot rely solely on students to shape these policies. 

For the same reasons, enforcement of the relevant policies should not be left to student boards. 

These boards can offer advisory opinions or have concurrent jurisdiction, but the University 

needs its own enforcement mechanism to ensure an inclusive and wel coming environment in all 

student groups. 

Deans of Students, University Life, and other student services professionals have an important 

role to play in supervising student groups. For example, as some of them have suggested to us, 

they can work with students to provide training (e.g., on rules an d best practices), create 

checklists for student group policies, conduct periodic audits to ensure compliance, mediate and 

resolve disputes, and step in to reform noncompliant organizations. 

To ensure a welcoming environment in student groups across the University, the University 

should not rely solely on individual schools to address these issues. Some University -level 

guidance is needed. This is necessary not only to ensure that every school complies with the law, 

but also to address the reality that some student organizations include members from different 72 

schools , including many organizations that serve undergraduates. This guidance from the 

University can be implemented in various ways. On some issues, it can be mandatory. On other 

issues, the University can offer a menu of approved options. On still other issues, the University 

can recommend but not require best practi ces. 

This guidance should be developed in a collaborative process. The resulting policies should 

reflect input from students, administrators, and faculty, including from Deans, University Life, 

Deans of Students, the University Senate, the Office of the General Counsel, student activities 

boards, and student governments. 

2. Recommendations for Promoting Pluralism and Avoiding Discrimination 

We recommend five steps to address exclusion from student groups: 

First, student groups generally should be open to all students. Eligibility can be based on 

criteria closely connected to the mission (e.g., College Democrats can be open only to 

Democrats), but otherwise no one should be excluded based on their viewpoint. In addition, 

obviously no one should be excluded based on actual or perceived membership in, or association 

with, a protected class, including based on race, national origin, religion, gen der, sexual 

orientation, or any other protected status under  Columbia University’s Non -Discrimination 

Statement and Policy .131 

Second, student groups need policies to determine how they decide whether to make statements 

and join coalitions that advocate particular positions. At a minimum, there should be clarity 

about how this decision is made, and this process should be noted in whatever statement is 

issued. In addition, we recommend a broadly consultative process, so the leader or a small 

group cannot do this on their own. We also recommend allowing members who do not agree 

with the decision to be given the opportunity to issue a counterstatement or to be listed as 

dissenters, so they are not in the awkward position of having others assume that they supported 

the relevant statement or position. 

Third, the University should encourage student groups not to issue statements or to join 

coalitions on issues outside their mission, and should consider limits on the ability of groups to 

do so. For these purposes, we recommend defining the mission precise ly, not expansively (e.g., 

“a soup kitchen  that  feeds vulnerable populations” not “a soup kitchen  that combats 

oppression”). This guidance could take the form of best practices or requirements. 

Fourth, issuing statements and joining coalitions must not be permitted when such actions have 

a discriminatory effec t.  

> 131 https://facultyhandbook.columbia.edu/content/columbia -universitys -non -discrimination -statement -and -policy 73

Fifth,  the consequences, penalties, and punishments for infractions of these respective rules, 

guidelines, and policies must be made clear and transparent by the University, and 

administrative responsibility for enforcement of these rules and guidelines must be clearly 

assigned and transparent to students. 

E. Inclusion in the Classroom 

The listening sessions and student reports reveal serious concerns about bias and exclusion in the 

classroom. Quite apart from issues of political difference, students have witnessed behavior of 

some faculty and TAs that they have experienced as antisemiti c. In both our first report and these 

pages, we have discussed how to improve reporting procedures for such incidents, but more 

work needs to be done. When a significant number of students feel the need to report experiences 

of exclusion or bias of any kin d in the classroom, it is clear that policies and procedures are 

failing to speak to this moment in our history as an institution. 

A separate report on academic issue s related to exclusion in the classroom and bias in 

curriculum will be issued by the Task Force in the coming months. 74 

Conclusion 

As we have shown throughout this report, the surge in violent antisemitic and xenophobic 

rhetoric that shook our campus this past academic year has revealed that the consensus around 

our norms and values no longer exists , and that the rules and procedures we thought we were 

operating under are not working or are insufficient to address our current problems. This report is 

the product of months of engagement, research, observation, and reflection. It also follows a 

collecti ve reckoning within our community pointing to an obvious reality: the ways in which the 

University has been dealing with the important objectives of diversity and inclusion need to be 

reevaluated, rethought, and revamped. 

Columbia has prided itself on the diversity of its students, faculty, and staff. As we discussed in 

the introduction to this report, diversity is integral to the richness of academic life, as well as the 

social experience at Columbia. In fact, many students choose to attend Columbia in order to 

engage with and learn from others who do not share their heritage, culture, or life experiences. 

We come together with an expectation that we will treat each other civilly and with respect. In 

many ways, Columbia ref lects what Mayor Dinkins (the  city’s  first Black mayor and a Professor 

at SIPA for decades) liked to call the “gorgeous mosaic” of New York City. Mayor Dinkins 

recognized the value and beauty of the city’s extraordinary diversity, but he intentionally chose 

the mosaic for his metaphor, recogn izing that each distinct piece within a mosaic must somehow 

cohere to make a larger picture. We, too, recognize the beauty and value in every individual on 

our campus and we do not expect anyone to give up their views o r their identity. At the same 

time, for the University community to thrive, we need to come together in agreement about the 

basic goals and values that we share. 

For our University to be a successful community, we must maintain an atmosphere of mutual 

respect and tolerance, one in which a wide range of people can feel safe, and also challenged to 

grow in intellectual and emotional ways. Everyone must feel that they are valued as full 

members of the community, that they truly belong. No one should feel excluded, marginalized, 

disrespected, or unheard. The University aims to do a significantly better job at this than the 

world outside its gates does. This inclusive atmosphere is necessa ry not only to honor the 

University’s  core values, but also to comply with the law. 

In this report we have documented Jewish and Israeli students’ experiences at Columbia during 

this past academic year and found the University to be failing at its basic mission. 

Most of the testimonies we heard were difficult to listen to. Students described being shoved, 

pushed to the ground, berated for showing support for Zionist causes, and watching Israeli flags 

burned. They recounted seeing drawings of swastikas in their dorms, s tudents yelling pro -Hamas 

chants, and being denied access to public spaces and opportunities simply because they were 

Jewish or Israeli. We heard from students who had been chased off campus, called horrific and 75 

deeply antisemitic slurs, and heard others minimize or silence claims of antisemitism. The 

majority of the incidents they recounted took place between students. But some were between 

students and faculty or staff. Several students told us stories of facult y members antagonizing the 

Israeli community, refusing to take students’ concerns and fears seriously, or even expressing 

openly antisemitic views. Some students were pressured to adhere to political positions they 

didn’t hold; others were silenced or expo sed and humiliated in classrooms. All these accounts are 

only a few of the ones that were shared with us. 

Students voiced demands for the University to remedy these lamentable situations. We were 

humbled by their deep understanding of the ways in which systemic oppression and silencing can 

manifest themselves, and by the constructive nature of their appeals. Many believed the hate they 

had witnessed on campus stemmed in large part from ignorance, and urged the University to take 

steps to ensure access to knowledge of religious discrimination and the histor ical experiences of 

Jews, including the Holocaust. Many also expressed frustration with the slow pace at which their 

grievances were addressed, and with what they perceived as a lack of consideration for their 

lived experiences. A considerable number of them asked that the University rethink its whole 

approach to fighting discrimination and exclusion. 

What We Need from the University 

Based on our own observations of the events that have unfolded at the University this past 

academic year, our students’ testimonies and demands, and consultations with other 

administrators and faculty, we have provided several recommendations for the University to 

improve institutional polic ies and practices , with more still to come . Many of th is report’s 

recommendations are specific to antisemitism, and some are focused on discrimination, bias, and 

exclusion more broadly. Uniformity in training s, reporting procedures, and policies across all 

schools is key if we want to improve campus culture and the experiences of all at the University .

We divided our recommendations into several sections, with the first dedicated to diversity and 

inclusion education on campus. We highlighted the need to expand and improve training s,

workshops , and websites, some for students, some for faculty, some for staff, and many for all. 

Examples include Title VI, allyship training, and Holocaust education. We also discussed the 

need to develop mechanisms to implement and periodically review the effective ness of these 

training s. If we want these changes to work, we must take the process of implementing them 

seriously, from conception to evaluation. 

One of the listening sessions’ central topics was reporting. Many students feel that the current 

processes are lengthy, inaccessible, and often emotionally draining. Too few students know 

where and to whom to turn when they encounter discrimination, and the uncertainties involved 

have made the process taxing and arduous. It should not fall on students to have to remedy the 76 

issue of discrimination on campus. As such, we asked that the University take action to 

centralize and standardize reporting procedures so that DEI and Deans of Students offices c an 

effectively assist students , and for students to be made aware of the several options available to 

them when they need help with reporting or conflict resolution .

In the listening sessions, many students discussed challenges in the classroom. We will analyze 

these issue s in a later report. 

Finally, another theme in the listening sessions was the exclusion of many Jewish and Israeli 

students from student groups because of their ties to Israel, even when the mission of these 

groups has nothing to do with Israel. This is unacceptable, and we re commend various ways to 

address this urgent issue. 

We believe that mutual respect among students across our campuses will follow from a confident 

assertion of academic space as a welcoming space, bound by common interests and rules 

governing the open exchange of ideas. Our educational mission, provided at great cost to 

students during their few years on this campus , is critically important . We urge administrators 

and faculty to reaffirm their commitment to providing a rigorous educational environment 

embedded in principles of tolera nce, inclusion , and pluralism. A campus that is more reliant on 

the courts than universal agreement on its mission is a community at risk. We urge every 

member of the University to consider their place in u pholding that compact by fostering greater 

respect as an aspect of our diversity. 77 

Appendices 

Appendix A: Listening Session Outreach 

1. ASTF Listening Session Deans Outreach 2024 

School  Title  Name 

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences  Dean  Carlos J. Alonso 

Executive Vice President for Health and 

Biomedical Sciences and Dean of the 

Faculties of Health Sciences and the 

Vagelos College of Physicians and 

Surgeons; CEO of CUIMC  Dean  Katrina Armstrong 

School of the Arts 

Interim 

Dean  Sarah Cole 

School of Social Work  Dean  Melissa D. Begg 

Engineering  Dean  Shih -Fu Chang 

Journalism  Dean  Jelani Cobb 

Climate School 

Interim 

Dean  Jeffrey Shaman 

Nursing  Dean  Lorraine Frazier 

Mailman School of Public Health  Dean  Linda P. Fried 

Executive Vice President for Arts and 

Sciences and Dean of the Faculty of Arts 

and Sciences  Dean  Amy Hungerford 

Architecture  Dean  Andrés Jaque 

Law  Dean  Gillian Lester 

Business  Dean  Costis Maglaras 

General Studies  Dean  Lisa Rosen -Metsch 

College  Dean  Josef Sorett 

SIPA  Dean  Keren Yarhi -Milo 

GSAPP  Dean  Andrés Jaque 

Barnard  President  Laura Rosenburyy 

TC  President  Tom Bailey 78 

2. ASTF Student Listening Session Schedule 

Date  School  Time  TF member 1 

TF member 

2

Notetaker/ 

Recorded  Room 

Feb. 

20  Hillel 1  4:30 –5:30  David Schizer 

Nick 

Lemann 

Staff Notetaker 

Kraft Center 

Feb.2 

1 Hillel 2  12:30 –1:30  Ester Fuchs 

Staff Notetaker 

Kraft Center 

Feb. 

22  Engineering  12:30 –1:30  Gil Zussman 

Staff Notetaker 

Mudd 1300 

Feb. 

26 

GSAAP + Climate 

School  6:30 –7:30  Ester Fuchs 

Staff Notetaker 

Fayerweather 209 

Feb. 

26 

Journalism + School 

Arts  6:10 –7:10  Nick Lemann 

Peter 

Coleman 

Faculty 

Notetaker  Pulitzer Hall 601B 

Feb 

29  General Studies  6:10 –7:10  Gil Zussman 

Notetaker  Baer Conference 

Room, 408 

Lewisohn Hall 

Feb.2 

9 College and Core  12:30 –1:30 

Rebecca 

Kobrin 

Jeremy 

Dauber 

Recorded 

401 Lerner Hall 

Feb. 

29  SIPA  12:30 –1:30  Ester Fuchs 

Clemence 

Boulouque 

Notetaker 

IAB 324 

Mar. 1  Arts & Sciences  12:30 –2:00 

Rebecca 

Kobrin  Ester Fuchs 

Recorded  Philosophy Hall 

302 

Mar. 

20  Public Health  6:10 –7:10 

Magda 

Schaler -

Haynes  Nir Uriel 

Notetaker  Allan Rosenfield 

Building (ARB) 

Student Lounge 

Mar. 

26  TC  6:00 –7:00 

Peter 

Coleman  Ester Fuchs 

Notetaker  TC Zankel Hall 

Rm 408 

April 1  Barnard  5:00 –6:00 

Deborah 

Valenze  Ester Fuchs 

Notetaker 

Milbank 202 

Apr. 4  Social Work  12:30 –1:30  Ester Fuchs 

Clemence 

Boulouque 

Notetaker 

SW 1109 

Apr. 9  Law  12:10 –1:10  David Schizer 

Matt 

Waxman 

Notetaker 

WJW 209 

April 8 

CUIMC + Nursing + 

Dental  5:00 –6:00 

Magda 

Schaler -

Haynes 

Nick 

Lemann 

Notetaker 

VEC 1402/1403 

April 

18  Business  12:30 –1:30 

Glenn 

Hubbard  Ester Fuchs 

Recorded 

Kravis 820 

Apr. 

21  Hillel 3  5:00 –7:30 

Ester Fuchs; 

Magda 

Shayler -

Hanes; 

Lisa Rosen -

Metsch 

David 

Schizer; 

Peter 

Coleman; 

Nick 

Lehman 

Faculty 

notetaker/ 

Recorded 

Kraft Center 79 

3. Outreach Letter to Deans 

Dear Dean [XXX] 

We are writing to you in our capacity as co -chairs of the Antisemitism Task Force. As you 

know, we are working with our faculty Task Force to provide recommendations directly to the 

University president. We have heard from many students over the last month s concerning 

what has transpired on campus since October 7, 2023. In the next few weeks, we are inviting 

students from every school on campus to listening sessions. We are strongly committed to the 

well -being of not only Jewish students on campus  but to al l students  on campus. We would 

appreciate your assistance in sharing the attached invitation with all students in your school. It 

is important that we hear directly from students. We want to hear about their experiences, we 

want to better understand their fears and concerns, and we want their advice about what 

changes they would like to see in University policy. 

Two faculty members of the Taskforce and a notetaker * will be at the session. We will be 

serving a light meal. These sessions are for registered students only. We would like to hold 

the session for your school in a convenient location, so would appreciate assistance in 

booking a room in your building for Dat e [XXX] at time [XXX]. Please let us know if you can 

assist with the room booking. If there is no space, we will locate another space. 

Please share the attached invitation with your students. Please reach out directly to me if you 

have any questions. 

Thank you for your assistance. 

Best, 

Ester Fuchs, Nicholas Lemann , and David Schizer , Co -Chairs 

Members of the Antisemitism Task Force 

* There were several sessions where we did not have a notetaker and recorded the session (See 2. ASTF Listening   

> Session Schedule .) In all sessions we recorded, students were informed at the beginning of the session.

80 

4. Outreach Letter to Students 

Dear students, 

We are writing to you in our capacity as co -chairs of the Antisemitism Task Force. We are 

working with our faculty Task Force to provide recommendations directly to the University 

president. We have heard from many of you over the last months concerning wh at has 

transpired on campus since October 7, 2023. In the next few weeks, we are inviting students 

from every school on campus to listening sessions. We are strongly committed to the well -

being of not only Jewish students on campus  but to all students  on c ampus. It is important 

that we hear directly from you. We want to hear about your experiences, we want to better 

understand your fears and concerns, and we want your advice about what changes you would 

like to see in University policy. 

We are holding the session at [SPECIFIC LOCATION FOR EACH SCHOOL]. We will be 

serving a light meal. These sessions are for registered students only. Please use the following 

link to sign up. 

We look forward to seeing you. 

Best, 

Ester Fuchs, Nicholas Lemann , and David Schizer , Co -Chairs 

Members of the Antisemitism Task Force 81 

5. Guidelines for Listening Sessions 

Guidelines for CU Antisemitism Task Force Listening Sessions 

February 19, 2024 

Goals for the sessions 

I.  The primary purpose of our listening sessions is to offer students a chance to be heard 

by representatives of the University who are members of the Task Force on Anti -

Semitism .

II.  These sessions are  not  organized to find facts or to adjudicate disputes, but can help 

us learn about matters to be pursued later (exploratory research). 

III.  They can also provide task force members with a fuller sense of the current state of 

our community. 

Guidelines for the sessions 

A.  The facilitators begin by welcoming participants and articulating the primary goals of 

the session. 

B.  Mention that there is a notetaker present, but students are not permitted to record. If 

there isn’t a notetaker present mention to students that you will be recording the 

session. 

C.  Next, the facilitators offer the following guidelines and norms for the session: 

a.  Please speak honestly about issues from your personal experience. Do 

not question or interrogate other speakers. Speak only from your own 

experiences 

b.  Try to keep your comments to 5 minutes or less. Please allow each 

speaker the time to share their stories and experiences. 

c.  Please remain respectful of others in attendance. Try to avoid blaming, 

attacking , or insulting language. 

D.  Then ask for agreement with the norms (if people later violate a norm, remind them of 

our agreement). 

E.  The facilitators should allow for the sharing of stories but be prepared to step in and 

redirect the conversation if necessary. 82 

Appendix B:  Columbia Student Op -Eds with Allegations of Antisemitism 

Between October 2023 and July 2024 there have been 31 pieces written by at least 38 authors, 

with some pieces written by multiple authors and others attributed to student groups and one 

2019 alumnus .

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: Complicity will not protect you  (BC/CU Jewish 

Voices for Peace, 7/19) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Letter to the Editor: Accusing Israel of foreign 

interference at Columbia is disingenuous and ironic  (Elisha Baker, 7/19) 

• Forward:  Opinion: I’m grateful Columbia deans were disciplined for their antisemitic 

texts, but it’s far from enough  (Eleanor H. Reich, 7/12) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: President Shafik, save Columbia’s soul  (Elisha 

Baker, Eliana Goldin and Eden Yadegar, 7/12) 

• The Wall Street Journal:  Opinion: Can a Federal Court Stop Antisemitism at Columbia? 

(Michael Gross, 7/11) 

• Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: On tokenism and the denial of antisemitism  (Elisha 

Baker, 6/22) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: Task Force on Antisemitism, can you hear us 

now?  (Ethan Fraenkel, Noam Chen -Zion, Caitlin Liss and Charlie Steinman, 6/11) 

• The Jerusalem Post:  Opinion: Campus protests were a missed opportunity  (Jonathan 

Harounoff and Jessica Schwalb, 5/19) 

• National Review:  Opinion: My Columbia Education Is Not What I Expected  (Jessica 

Schwalb, 5/16) 

• The Jerusalem Post:  Opinion: 'Freshman fear': How Antisemitism tainted my first year at 

Columbia University  (Sophie Kasson, 5/14) 

• The Washington Post:  Opinion: Four Columbia students reflect on campus life in the 

midst of protest  (Ethan Zachary Chua, Ekaterina Venkina, Julian Heiss and Jacob 

Schmeltz, 5/5) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Our Campus. Our Crisis. Inside the encampments and 

crackdowns that shook American politics. A report by the student journalists of the 

Columbia Daily Spectator.  (Isabella Ramírez, Amira McKee, Rebecca Massel, Emily 

Forgash, Noah Bernstein, Sabrina Ticer -Wurr, and Apurva Chakravarthy, 5/4) 

• Forward:  Opinion: I’m an Israeli Columbia student. I never thought I’d be afraid to invite 

my parents to my graduation  (Eleanor H. Reich, 5/4) 

• The Jerusalem Post:  Opinion: Jewish Columbia student calls for empathy in the face of 

campus antisemitism  (Becca Baitel, 4/29) 

• Haaretz:  Opinion: Jewish students are no longer safe at Columbia University  (Noah 

Lederman , 4/25) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: On the ‘un -Jews’ of Columbia  (Shay Lev, 4/16) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: Why do Jews tend to support Zionism?  (Nick 

Baum, 4/2) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: Do not indulge the exclusionary BDS referenda 

on campus  (Students Supporting Israel and Columbia Aryeh, 3/26) 

• The Columbia Daily Spectator:  Opinion: On bigotry in the classroom  (Elisha Baker, 3/19) 

• New York Post:  Opinion: Why I joined the lawsuit against Columbia over its antisemitism 

(Valerie Gerstein, 3/10) 83                                                                    

> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Opinion: Antizionist Jews aren’t cosplaying Judaism —
> you are (Milene Klein, 3/8)
> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Opinion: Why I counterprotest SJP rallies (David Lederer,
> 3/8)
> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Opinion: Columbia students’ disturbing justification of
> sexual violence against Jewish -Israeli women following the October 7 attacks (Saphira
> Samuels, 2/20)
> •The Jerusalem Post: Opinion: News about antisemitism on campus is scary, but doesn't
> draw the full picture (Tamar Weiss, 1/4)
> •Newsweek: Opinion: I'm a Jewish Student at Columbia. Campus After October 7 Is
> Disturbing (Sonya Poznansky , 12/8)
> •Forward: Opinion: Calling for genocide is antisemitic. Why couldn’t the president of my
> alma mater say so? (Eva Ingber, 12/8)
> •The Times of Israel: Opinion: You Can’t Cancel Joy (Talia Bodner, 12/7)
> •Jewish News Syndicate: Opinion: The pandemic of academic antisemitism (Jonathan
> Harounoff, 12/6)
> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Opinion: If you hate Zionist Jews, you hate most Jews
> (Daniel Konstantinovsky, 11/29)
> •The Jerusalem Post: Opinion: To be Jewish on a college campus where students
> support Hamas (Mynda Barenholtz, 10/19)
> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Opinion: Columbia, you are failing your Palestinian,
> Muslim, Arab, Black, Brown, and Jewish student activists (Jewish Voice for Peace and
> Students for Justice in Palestine, 10/17)
> •The Columbia Daily Spectator: Letter to the Editor: Don’t downplay the violence in Israel
> (Eliana Goldin, 10/10)

Appendix C : Examples of Incidents Experienced by Many Jewish and Israeli Students as 

Antisemitism 

Our working definition is based on experiences of Jewish and Israeli students, faculty and staff, 

including those reported in Section I of this report. 

Slurs and Tropes.  Unfortunately, ethnic slurs have been used on campus (e.g., “F*** the Jews”), 

along with the caricature that American Jews are not “real Americans” (e.g., “go back to 

Poland”), various stereotypes (e.g., Israeli veterans are dangerous, American Jews are ag ents of 

the Israeli government, etc.), and antisemitic tropes about Jewish money and power (e.g., 

“Zionist trustees and donors keep your hands of f our university”). 

Calls for Violence Against Jews and Israelis.  Jewish and Israeli students also have been targeted 

with violence (e.g., a student pinned against a wall) and threats (e.g., a sign pointed at Israeli and 

Jewish students that said “Al Qassam’s next targets”). Likewise, the increasing use of Hamas 

symbols and slogans on campus feels like a threat of violence to many Jews and Israelis, since 

Hamas’s leaders and founding documents urge the murder of Jews and the destruction of Israel. 

“The Day of Judgment will not come about until Moslems fight Jews and kill them,” Article 7 of 

the Charter states. “Then, the Jews will hide behind rocks and trees, and the rocks and trees will 

cry out:  ‘O Moslem, there is a Jew hiding behind me, come and kill him.’ ” Horribly, Hamas did, 84 

indeed, murder Israeli civilians who were trying to hide from them on October 7. Although 

Hamas issued a new charter in 2017 that claims its quarrel is with “Zionists,” not “Jews,” it did 

not formally revoke or repudiate the original charter. 

Exclusion.  Exclusion has also become a lonely reality for many Jewish and Israeli students, 

including the exclusion of Zionists from student groups. As noted above, although Zionism is not 

a part of the Jewish identity of  all  Jews, it is still part of the Jewish identity of  the vast majority .

Targeting a characteristic that  closely correlates  with a group can be an indirect or coded way of 

targeting the group .132 

Double Standards Applied to Israel.  Many Jewish and Israeli students experience the application 

of double standards to Israel as antisemitic. For instance, some on campus regularly call to sever 

ties with Israel, but not other countries. What is the justification for targeting Israel, but not 

China 133  or Turkey 134 —let alone Iran, Syria, or North Korea? Similarly, some on campus 

question the legitimacy of Jewish nationalism and of a nation state for Jews — that is, of 

Zionism —but lodge no similar objection to nation states for other peoples. Why are national 

aspirations legitimate for Tibetans, Ukrainians , Kosovars and, for that matter, Palestinians, but 

not for Jews? Likewise, many Jewish and Israeli students have been shocked by the double 

standard applied to sexual violence against Israeli women in the current conflict. Some who are 

usually adamant that rape claims must be taken seriously nevertheless seem to have adopted a 

skeptical stance about whether Hamas actually engage d in mass rape on October 7. 

At the same time, the Jews and Israelis we’ve heard from at Columbia are adamant that many 

criticisms of Israel are not antisemitic (and, indeed, that they themselves often criticize Israel). 

After all, Israel is a democracy whose citizens constantly criti cize their government, as do Jews 

across the globe. Nor did we hear anyone say th ey  consider it antisemitic to champion the rights 

or national aspirations of Palestinians. Many Jews and Israelis at Columbia share this view, 

hoping for a two -state solution that accommodates Palestinian self -determination and Israeli 

security. We also heard a recognition  that  a focus on Israel can be a sign —not of hate —but of            

> 132 See supra Part II.D.1
> 133 Determination of the Secretary of State on Atrocities in Xinjiang, U.S. State Dep artment , Jan uary 19, 2021
> (“ After careful examination of the available facts, I have determined that since at least March 2017, the People’s
> Republic of China (PRC), under the direction and control of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), has committed
> crimes against humanity against th e predominantly Muslim Uyghurs and other members of ethnic and religious
> minority groups in Xinjiang.”), https://2017 -2021.state.gov/determination -of -the -secretary -of -state -on -atrocities -in -
> xinjiang/ .
> 134 Ayça Alemdaroğlu and Fatma Müge Göçek, “Kurds in Dark Times: New Perspectives on Violence and
> Resistance in Turkey, ”Stanford Center on Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law, Jan uary 6, 2023 (“The
> history of the Kurds in Turkey is marked by state violence against them and decades of conflict between the Turkish
> military and Kurdish fighters.”), https://cddrl.fsi.stanford.edu/publication/kurds -dark -times -new -perspectives -
> violence -and -resistance -turkey .85

concern, support, or even admiration (e.g., among Americans who consider  Israel a close ally 

and know that it receives significant foreign aid). 

As a result, judgments about when double standards are antisemitic require sensitivity and 

nuance. Again, in offering this working definition, our focus is not on discipline, but on training 

and orientations. Our goal is not to punish or ban speech, but to raise awareness about the 

sensitivities of many Jews and Israelis at Columbia. 86 

Appendix D: Additional Suggestions and Sources for Trainings, Websites , and Scholarship 

on Antisemitism 

1. Additional Suggestions for Trainings 

Awareness and Sensitivity Training  is designed to educate individuals about the history and 

impact of antisemitism. Best practices include modules on the historical context and modern 

manifestations of antisemitism, including its impact on Jewish communities. Teaching the 

history of antisem itism includes expulsions, migration, pogroms, the Holocaust, and systemic 

discrimination of the past. In modules on modern manifestations of antisemitism participants 

should learn to identify and understand contemporary forms of antisemitism. There should also 

be a focus on how antisemitism impacts Jewish individuals and communities today, 

including college campuses. 

Cultural Competency Training  is designed to foster respect and understanding. Research has 

demonstrated that teaching cultural understanding and appreciation for diversity is effective in 

reducing bias and promotes tolerance. This should be applied to trainings that educate members 

of the University community about the diversity of Jewish culture, traditions, practices/customs ,

and beliefs. It is especially important to recognize the diversity within Jewish communities, 

including differences in denominations, cultures, and nationalities. Effective cultural competency 

training generally includes interfaith dialogues that promote understanding and collaboration 

between different religious and cultural groups. 

Legal and Policy Training  educates all members of our community about Title VI and other laws 

and policies related to antisemitism and discrimination. The training should explain legal 

definitions and protections against antisemitism. T he t raining, as a basic objective, must help 

participants recognize what constitutes a hate crime and understand the legal consequences. The 

University’s interest in improving the campus climate and reducing bias and discrimination 

requires us also to understa nd antisemitic a ttitudes and behavior that might not rise to the level of 

a legal violation. Many students in our listening sessions discussed the need for a specific and 

“user -friendly” definition of antisemitism. Indeed, distinguishing antisemitism and  anti -Zionism, 

together with understanding the distinction between antisemitism and opposing policies of the 

current Israeli government, are key to reducing harmful misinformation that may lead to 

antisemitic behavior. T he t raining needs to provide specific scenarios for me mbers of the 

Columbia community impacted by bias and exclusion, with instruction on how to recognize 

harmful behavior. A final module in this workshop should discuss Columbia’s policies that 

combat antisemitism, how people can report an experience of antisemitism, and how 

enforcement works. 

Media Literacy and Critical Thinking Training  equips individuals with skills to critically analyze 

and respond to antisemitic content online and in media. The training includes disinformation 87 

awaren ess which could be useful in teaching faculty, students and staff to recognize and debunk 

antisemitic myths and conspiracy theories. It generally teaches participants to be critical 

consumers offering techniques for how to evaluate sources for credibility and bias. 

2. The Institute for Israel and Jewish Studies 

The Institute for Israel and Jewish Studies  (IIJS) is the academic center for the study of Israel 

and Jewish civilization at Columbia University. It is the leading place on campus and in the 

United States to engage in cutting -edge research and debate concerning Israel and Jewish history. 

Founded by historian Salo Baron in 1950, IIJS is committed to interdisciplinary study. Its 

affiliated faculty teach courses spanning from antiquity to contemporary culture, in departments 

as diverse as History, German, Sociology, Music and Religion. The Institute of fers courses in 

Israel studies, the arts (Jewish music, Israeli and Jewish film) and the study of antisemitism. IIJS 

also hosts postdoctoral scholars who teach a wide variety of courses. They offer a minor for 

Columbia and GS undergraduates and an MA progr am in Jewish Studies. At its center on 

campus, the Institute organizes public events, scholarly conferences, and a University Seminar. It 

maintains a full calendar of offerings for students, faculty , and the public to engage in questions 

and research concerning Israel, the Jewish past, Jewish literature and antisemitism. The IIJS has 

been an important resource for the work of this Task Force .

3. Selected Scholarship on Antisemitism 

Steven Beller , “When Does It Make Sense to Call Hostility Towards Jews Antisemitism and 

When Does it Not? A Historical Perspective on Contemporary Debates,”  Antisemitism Studies  6, 

no. 1 (Spring 2022), 115 –132. 

Steven Beller,  Antisemitism: A Very Short Introduction  (Oxford University Press, 2015). 

Jovan Byford, “Conspiracy Theory and Antisemitism ,” in  Conspiracy Theories: A Critical 

Introduction , ed . Jovan Byford (London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2011) , 95 –119. 

William Brustein,  Roots of Hate: Anti -Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust  (Cambridge 

University Press, 2003). 

Leonard Dinnerstein,  Anti -Semitism in America  (Oxford University Press, 1994). 

David Engel, “Away from a Definition of Antisemitism: An Essay in the Semantics of Historical 

Description,” in  Rethinking European Jewish History , ed. Jeremy Cohen and Moshe Rosman 

(Liverpool University Press, 2009), 30 –53. 88 

Phyllis Goldstein,  A Convenient Hatred: The History of Anti -Semitism  (Facing History and 

Ourselves, 2012). 

Jeffrey C. Herf (ed).  Antisemitism and Anti -Zionism in Historical Perspectives: Convergence 

and Divergence  (Routledge, 2007). 

Jonathan Karp, “Anti -Israelism,”  Jewish Review of Books , Winter 2024. 

Walter Lacqueur,  The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times to the Present Day 

(Oxford University Press,  2006 ). 

Geoffrey Levin,  Our Palestine Question: Israel and American Jewish Dissent, 1948 –1978  (Yale 

University Press, 2023). 

Deborah Lipstadt,  Antisemitism Here and Now  (Schocken Books, 2019) 

Deborah Lipstadt,  Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory  (Penguin, 

1993). 

James Loeffler, “Anti -Zionism,”  Key Concepts in the Study of Antisemitism , eds. Sol Goldberg, 

Scott Ury, and Kalman Weiser (Palgrave, 2021). 

Kenneth L. Marcus, “Anti -Zionism as Racism: Campus Anti -Semitism and the Civil Rights Act 

of 1964,”  William and Mary Bill of Rights Journal  15, no. 3 (February 2007), 837 –892. 

David Nirenberg,  Anti -Judaism: The Western Tradition  (Norton Books, 2014). 

Derek J. Penslar,  Zionism: An Emotional State  (Rutgers University Press, 2023). 

Derek Penslar, “Who’s Afraid of Defining Antisemitism?”  Antisemitism Studies  6, no. 1 (2022), 

133 –145. 

Leon Poliakov , De l ’antisionisme à l ’antisémitisme  (Calmann -Lévy, 1969 ).

Timothy Snyder,  Black Earth: The Holocaust as History and Warning  (Crown, 2015). 

Kenne th S. Stern,  Anti -Semitism Today: How It Is The Same, How It Is Different, and How to 

Fight It  (American Jewish Committee, 2006). 

Magda Teter,  Christian Supremacy: Reckoning with the Roots of Antisemitism and Racism 

(Princeton University Press, 2023) .89 

Scott Ury,  “Strange Bedfellows? Anti -Semitism, Zionism, and the Fate of  ‘the Jews ’”  American 

Historical Review  123, no. 4 (October 2018): 1151 –1171. 

Eric Ward, “Skin in the Game: How Antisemitism Animates White Nationalism,” 

https://politicalresearch.org/2017/06/29/skin -in -the -game -how -antisemitism -animateswhite -

nationalism .

Dov Waxman, David Schraub, and Adam Hosein , “Arguing about Antisemitism: Why We 

Disagree about Antisemitism, and What We Can Do about It,”  Ethnic and Racial Studies  45, no. 

9, 2022: 1803 –24. 

Dov Waxman, “Antisemitism isn’t just ‘Jew -hatred’ —it’s anti -Jewish Racism ,”  The 

Conversation , https://theconversation.com/antisemitism -isnt -just -jew -hatred -its -antijewish -

racism -193614 .

4. Selected Training Resources on Antisemitism 

For Campuses 

● Berkeley Center for Jewish Studies , training video,  Antisemitism in our Past and Present ,

https://jewishstudies.berkeley.edu/antisemitism -education/antisemitism -training -

film#film  (Highly Recommended) .

● Workshop exercise on AEN video ,

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1VyqGFRc35uKEXa9p0pT1bLUcrIeNorLM/view 

● AEN  Presentation on Jewish Identity ,

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NeIbefZGwYXoeqICcgxkmTnA2JMOixKT/view .

● Hillel training (currently being updated) , https://www.hillel.org/three -part -video -series -

on -antisemitism/ 

● Yad Vashem training (https://www.yadvashem.org/education/online -

courses/antisemitism.html )

For the Workplace 

● ADL Training Module: Antisemitism 101 for the Workplace ,

https://www.adl.org/sites/default/files/workplace/mini -course/antisemitism/story.html .

● ADL : Creating a Jewish ERG , https://www.adl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/2022 -

06/2668_ADL_ERG%20Toolkit.pdf 

Resources for Progressive and Pluralistic Communities 

● A Very Brief Guide to Antisemitism , https://truah.org/antisemitism /, Truah, the Rabbinic 

Call for Human Rights .90 

● Dismantling Antisemitism , https://dismantlingantisemitism.org /, July 2024 - a message 

guide for progressive communities .

● Project Shema , https://www.projectshema.org /, Co -founder Zach Schaffer, Resources, 

Trainings, Workshops ( Highly Recommended ). 

○ Rapid Response to October 7th Resources , https://www.projectshema.org/rapid -

response .

○ Talking about Colonialism ,

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1EE_2ufouKxv3qXNxhxluV8nmYcgFfGFW/view 

, Resource Guide .

○ Talking about Genocide , https://drive.google.com/file/d/1g -

gfn87F7UGD_AsDGoztZsr56VctzDS3/view , Resource Guide .

● Interfaith America , https://www.interfaithamerica.org/sectors/higher -education /, founder 

Iboo Patel, Resources, Trainings, Workshops ( Highly Recommended ).

● Jewish on Campus , https://www.jewishoncampus.org / (Recommended ).
