Title: 

URL Source: https://transport.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-05/Drone_Leaders_Group_Report_2022-04-26.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 02 May 2022 09:18:51 GMT

Markdown Content:
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

> DIRECTORATE -GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT

# Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group 

# in support of the preparation of 

# ‘A Drone Strategy 2.0 for a Smart and 

# Sustainable 

# Unmanned Aircraft Eco -System in Europe’ 

26 April 2022 

The information and views set out in this report are those of the Drone Leaders’ 

Group and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the Commission. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 2 / 25 

# Table of Contents 

1. Preamble ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 3

2. The Drone Leaders’ Group composition and mandate: ................................ ................................ 5

3. A High -Level Vision for drones in 2030 ................................ ................................ .......................... 6

4. SMART Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 7

5. From Vision to Reality ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 8

6. Specific Recommendations ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 9

6.1. Drones value chains, business models and creating opportunities (including funding) ...................... 9

6.2. Regulatory framework ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 11 

6.3. Technology building blocks, including harmonisation and standardisation, and Civil -

Defence drone industry synergies ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 14 

6.4. System resilience and non -cooperative drones ................................ ................................ ................. 15 

6.5. Developing airspace capabilities (U -space development and integration with Air Traffic 

Management) ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 16 

6.6. Developing Urban Air Mobility and Regional Air Mobility; including ground 

infrastructure ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 18 

6.7. Societal acceptance and dealing with externalities ................................ ................................ ........... 20 

6.8. Developing knowledge, training staff, and building competence ................................ ..................... 22 

7. Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 23 

Annex A Membership ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 24 

Annex B Hearings and Drone Leaders’ Group Plenary meetings ................................ ............. 25 Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 3 / 25 

1. PREAMBLE 

Europe has the ambition to lead the transition to a healthy planet and a new digital world. 

Two objectives deserve to be highlighted in this r espect : first, the EU has set itself the 

clear climate objective of becoming the first carbon -neutral continent by 2050 .

Secondly, the digitalisation of the economy in order to strengthen its competitiveness 

and to empower people with a new generation of technologies . Achieving these twin 

goals will depend on the transport sector entirely playing its part, including the emerging 

drone sector. These two priorities are embedded in the Commission’s Sustainable and 

Smart Mobility Strategy 1 adopt ed in December 2020. In addition, the European 

Commission has shown its willingness to reinforce the EU’s role as a geopolitical 

actor , a position clearly endorsed by the Strategic Compass adopted in March 2022, with 

a clear objective to build a stronger a nd more capable EU in security and defence .

In the wake of the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy, the Commission announced 

the preparation of ‘A Drone Strategy 2.0 for a smart and sustainable unmanned 

aircraft eco -system in Europe’ to be adopted by the end of 2022. This Drone Strategy 

should contribute to the objective s set out in the Strategy, but also to the ‘Action plan on 

synergies between civil, defence and space industries’ 2 which was adopted in February 

2020, and which includes a ‘ EU Drones T echnologies Flagship ’ project .

The drone services market is constantly increasing in terms of companies and volume of 

operations . H owever, large segments of the market are not yet mature and there are 

several conditions that still need to be addressed for drone applications to be fully 

operational , safe and competitive. 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems have been actively used in the defence sector for the last 

30 years , but the European military market for drones remains less mature than in other 

continents, whil st the key contribution of military drones to future European Strategic 

autonomy is widely recognised. 

On the civilian side, Innovative Aerial Services (IAS) 3 are quickly developing. They 

include aerial operations (surveillance, inspection, imaging, …), as well as a whole new 

emerging market called Innovative Air Mobility (IAM) 4 (international, regional and                 

> 1Communication for a “Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy –putting European transport on track
> for the future”, adopted in December 2020 including drone initiatives under flagship 7 (Innovation, data
> and artificial intelligence for smarter mobility) .
> 2Communication for an “Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and space industries”, adopted
> in February 2021 includi ng a “Drones Technologies” Flagship .
> 3According to EASA, IAS correspond to the set of operations and/or services that are of benefit to
> citizens and to the aviation market and that are enabled by new airborne technologies –the operations
> and/or services include both the transportation of passengers and/or cargo and aerial operations (e.g.
> surveillance, inspections, mapping, telecommunication networking).
> 4The concept of Innovative Air Mobility (‘IAM’) is to accommodate operations with novel aircraft
> de signs (that do not automatically fall under one of the known categories, but which have VTOL
> capabilities for take -off and landing, specific (distributed) propulsion features, can be operated in
> unmanned configuration, etc.), that are conceived to offer a new air mobility of people and cargo, in
> particular in congested (urban) areas, based on an integrated air and ground -based infrastructure. IAM
> describes a diverse array of aircraft types (such as manned and unmanned), whose designs are enabled
> by ongoing innovations particularly in the areas of hybrid and electrification of propulsion systems,
> energy storage, lightweight materials, digitalisation and automation. These innovations have made Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 4/25

urban air mobility ). These new vehicles represent a m ajor development for the transport 

of freight and people , particularly within or out of urban environments that can contribute 

to reduce emissions and increase road safety , while providing new services to all 

communities. 

Figure 1 Innovative Aerial Services 

For further reference in the following text, the term ‘drones’ will be used to cover all 

vehicles involved in Innovative Aerial Services including manned eVTOL, as well as 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems used in the defence sector .

The EU legislator, the Commission, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency 

(EASA) and the Member States all have an institutional responsibility to safeguard the 

safety, security and efficiency of drone operations. Developing new EU wide rules for 

drones is all the more important as there were very few regulatory frameworks in place in 

the EU Member States, as well as at the global level . Unlike in other sectors, where the 

EU regulatory harmonisation process started after the adoption at national level of 

sometimes longstanding and diverging regulations, here, it has been possible to start from 

the outset wi th a truly common set of rules. This is a quite unique opportunity that cannot 

be missed. 

The EU is playing a key role in developing the right drone regulatory framework for its 

27 Member States to unleash the development of this promising sector. DG MOVE has 

worked intensively since 2014 on building the foundations of a comprehensive EU policy 

in the field of drones . A first Communication setting out the foundations of this policy 

was adopted in 2014 5, followed by several major steps, such as the ‘ Aviati on strategy 

for Europe ’ of 2015 6 and several landmark Declarations endorsed at High Level drone 

conferences held in Riga, Warsaw, Helsinki, and Amsterdam 7.

There have been many significant technological, regulatory, and commercial 

developments during th is period. The action plan contained in the 2015 Aviation Strategy 

has been largely completed and now it is time to chart a n updated course for the EU         

> possible an array of novel designs spanning multi -rotor, tilt wing, tilt -rotor, powered wing, offering
> short take -off and landing (STOL) through to vertical take -off and landing (VTOL) capabilities.
> 5Communication for “A new era for aviation Opening the aviation market to the civil use of remotely
> piloted aircraft syste ms in a safe and sustainable manner” (2014)
> 6Communication for “an Aviation Strategy for Europe” (2015)
> 7High Level Drone Conferences in Riga (2015), Warsaw (2016), Helsinki (2017), Amsterdam (2018,
> 2019) Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 5/25

policy on drones. Building on these achievements and in line with the Sustainable and 

Smart Mobility Stra tegy , the Commission wants to renew its strategic vision for the 

development of the drone sector in a new Drone Strategy 2.0. Greening mobility is the 

new licence for the transport sector to grow, and drones have a role to play here. 

The Drone Strategy 2.0 should set out a High -Level Vision and an ambitious pathway, 

with concrete objectives , for the development of civil and defence drone platforms and 

services , in order to place Europe at a competitive world level. 

2. THE DRONE LEADERS ’ GROUP COMPOSITION AND MANDATE :

In addition to DG MOVE’s regular channel s of consultations , such as the Drone Informal 

Experts Group, it was considered useful that the Commission should be assisted by a 

Group which could give a high -level steer to the devel opment of the Drone Strategy 2.0 

and provide recommendations for its drafting. 

The Drone Leaders’ Group (‘the Group’) was set up in September 2021 (see composition 

in annex 8.a) and held four plenary meetings between 20 October 2021 and 26 April 

2022 . Three hearings were organised in February -March 2022 , to which the members of 

the Informal Drone Experts Group were invited (see timetable in annex 8.b). 

The se three hearing s respe ctively addressed the following topics: 

• Urban Air Mobility (cargo/passengers) and U -space 

• Enhancing UAS services including the SME dimension 

• Developing Military/Civil synergies and technology building blocks 

Each of t he se hearings was chaired by two mem bers of the Group and the conclusions of 

these hearings were presented to a plenary meeting of the Group and largely supported 

by its members. These conclusions are integrated in this final report. 

Based on this work, the Group formulate s the following Rep ort, consisting of a h igh -

Level vision and recommendations to assist the European Commission in the drafting of 

the Drone Strategy 2.0. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 6 / 25 

3. A HIGH -LEVEL VISION FOR DRONES IN 2030 

The Group consider s that any future EU Drone Strategy needs to be based on a clear 

vision of how success will look like in 2030. For this purpose, the Group agree s on the 

following High -Level Vision for a European drone eco -system in 2030: 

By 2030 drones and their required eco -system will have become an integral part of the 

life of EU citizens and Member States. 

They will be used to provide numerous services to the benefits of diversified civilian and 

defence end -users, including EU citizens, organi sations, States, and indus try. These 

aerial operations will include emergency services, inspections, and surveillance, using 

drones as flying Internet of Things ( IoT ) platforms to gather data, as well as for the 

delivery of goods. 

IAM services will also have started to provide regu lar people transport services in 

various European cities and for some regional connections, initially using aircraft with a 

pilot on board but with the aim to fully automate their operations . Urban Air Mobility 

will have started to become an integral part of the future urban multimodal intelligent 

mobility ecosystem and the infrastructure enabling these services will be fully deployed 

and integrated .

The current U -space regulatory framework will have been completely rolled out in a 

seamless EU market. Addit ional advanced U -space services will support large scale 

highly automated and digitally connected affordable, safe, secure, and environmentally 

friendly unmanned aircraft operations in several Member States. The integration 

between manned and unmanned traf fic in the same airspace will have been initiated, 

inside and outside U -space airspace. 

The EU drone industry will become viable , and accessible to EU citizens and businesses 

with an active participation of actors of all sizes, including a variety of dive rsified 

SME’s, fostering collaboration between all actors, and broadening the spectrum 

significantly beyond the limited number of global multinational stakeholders. 

Civil -defence industry synergies will be systematically identified and exploited. They will 

benefit both sectors. They will improve the competitiveness of European industry and 

strengthen Europe's strategic autonomy, by allowing Member States to rely on 

competitive UAS technology of European origin. 

All drone services will be provided in a manner that ensures safety, security , privacy, 

and affordability, in line with citizens’ expectations and addressing their concerns. 

Drones used for the transport of people and goods will be particularly oriented to the 

achievement of public ly accessible services, thus creating benefits for citizens and local 

communitie s. 

Drone services will effectively integrate or complement existing transportation systems 

and contribute to the decarbonisation of the transport system, while minimising their 

impact on the environment throughout their life cycle. 

The drone eco -system t hus created will provide jobs, promote, and protect European 

technological know -how and allow for growth opportunities for the EU economy as a 

whole, enabling European companies, including new SMEs to grow and flourish as 

global leaders. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 7 / 25 

4. SMART OBJECTIVES 

The Group considers that it is necessary to formulate a set of SMART (Specific 

Measurable Achievable Reasonable Time -bound) objectives to be used to measure 

progress on achieving the Vision and the targets to be reached by 2030 . In this regard, the 

Group ag rees on the following set of objectives :

• Number of cities/regions that will be served by IAM regular commercial services 

(Target for 2030: at least 45 in the EU and at least one per Member State )

• Number of Member States where emergency health services (medical samples, 

defibrillators, air ambulances) will be provided using drones (Target: services used 

in at least 20 Member States) 

• Use of European U-spaces Airspace by commercial drone flight opera tions (Target: 

at least 10 0.000 a day) 

• Number of EU Member States where advanced U-space Services (additional to 

those defined in the current regulatory framework ) are operational in at least one U -

space. ( Target: at least 6 Member States) 

• Number of USSPs designated in each U-space airspace (Target: at least 2) 

• Safety level achieved (Target: the ratio between the number of accidents vs the 

number of drone flights is as low as required for manned aviation) 

• Aerodromes falling under the EASA Basic Regul ation, cities with over 100.000 

inhabitants, and critical infrastructures will have assessed the security risk related to 

drone incidents and put in place procedures and measures that will protect them 

from such incidents proactively and reactively (Target : 100%) 

• Number of assessments run by the EIB “European Drone Investment - Advisory 

Platform” and number of loan agreements granted by European Investment Bank 

(EIB) to drone sector stakeholders (Target: increased percentage respectively of 

10%, year on yea r) 

• Carbon emissions of urban and regional IAM operations (Target: 0%) 

• The civil and military drone technology used in Europe will be designed and/or 

produced in Europe (Target: at least 50% of total value of drones used in Europe) 

• Number of Universities / Technical Schools that offer drones subjects or 

specialisations ( Target: at least 40 in the EU and one per Member States ). 

• Turnover in the overall drone eco -system and its contribution to EU GDP (Target: 

at least € 15 billion )Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 8 / 25 

5. FROM VISION TO REALITY 

The drone technology ecosystem is an emerging and complex system of regulatory 

measures, enabling technologies and services provided to customers. The value chains 

and business models associated with U -space, Innovative Aerial Services including 

Innovative Air Mobility have not yet been fully implemented and to a large extent are 

still to be rolled out. Building on the approach taken in the 2015 Aviation Strategy, the 

Group is of the view that with the evolution of the sector, this renewed Drone Strategy 

should be further built on the risk -based operation -centric approach that has 

underpinned the development of the regulatory framework up to now. 

Indeed, a wide spectrum of distinct types of drones and use cases have emerged in the 

past few years will coexist in the future , ranging from the use of small drones for 

inspection , Medium Altitude Long Endurance drones for defence and security operations ,

to the use of large eVTOL aircraft that will be used for the transport of people (and that 

will init ially be operated by a pilot on -board). The Drone Strategy 2.0 should therefore 

recognise the differences and comm onalities between these different scenarios and avoid 

taking a one -size fits all approach to all issues. In this respect, a drone taxonomy , i. e., a

scheme of classification, in which the different possible UAS/IAM vehicles and 

operations are organi sed into distinct groups or types , would be helpful .

To deliver the Vision, the Group has identified 8 thematic area s that should be 

addressed in the Drone Strategy 2.0 and made specific recommendations for each of 

them , with several measures aiming to address existing obstacles to the development of 

drone applications and transport services and to the competitiveness of this industry. In 

addition, the Group also proposes several concrete objectives aiming to measure 

progress towards the achievement of the main elements of this Vision in 2030. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 9 / 25 

6. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS 

6.1. Drones value chains, business models and creating op portunities 

(including funding) 

The B2B IAS value chain is composed of several segments which are all interlinked: 

• Drone operators (service provider) performing Innovative Aerial Services; 

• IAM operators offering innovative transport services; 

• Drone manufac turers which produce the hardware. This activity may also include 

the assembly of some components produced by third parties; 

• Producers of other payloads to be integrated to the drone s, e.g., for filming, 

inspection, cargo, monitoring or measuring purposes; 

• Technology providers for the platform who develop equipment and software 

systems whether for communication, control of the flight, situational awareness, or 

to enable specific or autonomous operations) ;

• Distributors selling or renting finished UAS to thi rd companies; 

• Ground infrastructure operators such as vertiports and airports; 

• Air traffic management suppliers (e.g. ANSPs, U -space service providers, Common 

Information Service Providers );

• Telecommunication infrastructure providers, as well as navigation and surveillance 

infrastructure providers. 

Figure 2 Drone value chain 

Each individual link of the value chain needs in principle to be competitive to allow 

access by all industries potentially benefitting from drone operations and services, as well 

as final customers, and ultimately to provide societal value. The Group consi ders that the 

Drone Strategy should ensure that competitive forces in the drone services market as 

introduced by the existing rules will effectively make the use of drones affordable for 

final customers. 

The U-space service market provides enabling service s for automated and scalable 

drone operations and drone services, in urban environment, including for long distances. 

This enabler should be as cost -effective as possible, while providing equitable access to 

airspace for a diversity of drone operators from across the EU and enabling military and 

State manned and unmanned aircraft operations in a safe and efficient manner . The 

Group therefore considers it important that U -space services be provided by several U -Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 10 / 25 

space Service Providers (USSPs) in competition. At the same time, clear rules are needed 

as regards the pricing of the Common Information Services (CIS) but also for the Air 

Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs) when they provide data to the U -space providers. 

In the absence of such rules, SMEs would be particularly affected which are a major 

actor for the development of the economic fabric encompassing U -space and private 

investments would stifled overall. 

The markets for specific drone operations and services are relatively immature and 

currently large ly relying on research, innovation and testing activities . Most of the 

funding for these activities has been and should continue to be provided by private 

entities, based on a clear business perspective. However, EU support for research in the 

drone sector is also being substantial in the past and critical for an early deployment. 320 

projects relating to the drone sector were conducted under Horizon 2020 , with a total 

budget of almost 980 million euros invested in the development or use of drones for 

innov ative applications. The Group considers it important that such support is intensified, 

better flagged, and extended to promote cross -sectoral collaboration under the new 

Horizon Europe programme .

The ecosystem of companies operating in the civilian drone s ector is mainly made up of 

small or very small companies. The provision of specific financing schemes, intended 

for new business involving EU companies, including SMEs, to support their research 

and innovation activities is particularly important. Collabor ations with SME, supporting 

their development, may boost cross -cutting innovation. However, there are significant 

obstacles for SMEs to compete in the drone sector, especially as regards the transition 

from research and development to large -scale developme nt and deployment. The need to 

foster more software development expertise and transfer of "invention to innovation" 

from academia/R&D into industry ( e.g., academic tools need to become industrial tools) 

should be reflected in the Drone Strategy, so that in dustry can benefit from state of the art 

in Computer Science research design assurance and cyber security sandboxes. 

Access to EU funding options and aid should be facilitated for SMEs. The Group 

recommends the implementation of measures aimed at simplifyi ng the processes, 

ensuring easily and affordable access to information and allowing objective pre -

qualifying criteria, to facilitate SMEs’ participation to funded projects. Furthermore, in 

EU research funding applications process, a positive evaluation cou ld be given to the 

incorporation of SMEs in consortium with larger companies. The R&D/admin costs 

should not be an entry barrier to engagement in EU funding programs. 

To demonstrate technological progress and , gain practical experience s and support 

collabo rative deployment efforts overcoming “first mover disadvantages”, the Group 

considers that EU wide demonstration programmes would be essential . If European 

champions are to emerge, it is essential that they can grow beyond national boundaries 

and operate in multiple member states. UAS operators must be unhindered by technical 

or regulatory differences between Member States. EU wide demonstrations are a key tool 

to encouraging consistent implementations. They also allow best practice to be identifie d

and deployed. These demonstrations also help to increase the information of stakeholders 

not familiar with drones and facilitate their introduction. For example, c ities might be 

interested in using drone technologies to solve daily problems with inspecti ons and 

surveillance services, but there might be a lack of knowledge and experience to Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 11 / 25 

implement them. It would be helpful to create a good best -practices data base for all 

stakeholders, including dedicated support tools for public authorities at national and local 

levels .

6.2. Regulatory framework 

Under the new EASA Basic Regulation 8 adopted in 2018, all drones, irrespective of their 

weight are subject to EU harmonised safety rules . Deriving from those safety essential 

requirements and following the same ris k-based operation -centric approach 

embedded in the Regulation, the Commission adopted in 2019 Implementing and 

Delegated regulations 9 setting out common technical and operational requirements 

for drones . These implementing rules are the corner stone of th e new drone regulatory 

framework, which facilitate the development of the drone industry and market . To ensure 

the scalability and safety of drone operations, the Commission adopted in 2020, three 

Implementing Regulations on U-space 10 .

This set of EU dron e regulations have contributed to clarify the conditions of operations 

for all drones. However, f lying a drone not only implies compliance with relevant 

regulations applicable to safety, but also with rules on privacy and security .

Furthermore, as the drone regulatory framework is still relatively new, many aspects of it 

are still in the process of being implemented at European and national levels .

Taking these aspects into account, the Group considers that there are some challenging 

aspects of the existing regulations and following regulatory gaps to be addressed. The 

Group also identifies some potential measures, including new regulations that are 

required to complete the drone regulatory framework. 

With regard to future regulatory tasks , the Grou p consider s that the European and 

national regulators should first identify the far -reaching objectives of the regulation, 

establish a consensus , whilst always focusing on future flexibility, given the rapid degree 

of innovation in this area and define a s tepped approach towards achieving these goals. 

The timeline should be set correctly and be kept as it gives visibility to the investors. 

The EU should start the process of revising the rules of the air to ensure a smooth 

integration between manned and unm anned traffic , as well as between IAM and regular 

air traffic , allowing operators of manned and unmanned aircraft as well as State, 

including military, manned and unmanned aircraft to freely and safely operate within the 

same or transit between all require d airspaces . The Group supports the definition of a

consistent legal framework of responsibilities for future fully autonomous distributed 

UAM/UAS services which is one of the conditions to enable scalable traffic .

The Group emphasises the need to roll out the rules for the ‘certified category ’, which 

involves common rules for the certification of aircraft, of operators and remote pilots .

This also includes developing a regulatory framework for vertiports and other ground 

infrastructure. When developing rules for vertiports, proper attention should be brought           

> 8Regulation (EU) 1139/2018
> 9Regulation (EU) 945/2019, Regulation (EU) 947/2019
> 10 Regulation (EU) 664/2021, Regulation (EU) 665/2021, Regulation (EU) 666/2021 Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 12 /25

to interface with aerodromes, interoperability , and open access of equipment to ground 

infrastructures by UAS/IAM operators. In this regard, the regulatory fram ework should 

ensure that those ground infrastructures do not become proprietary and follow the same 

open model as airports and heliports. 

The Group supports the adoption of new European standard Scenarios and pre -

defined risk assessments which are aimed t o facilitate some low to medium risk use 

cases in the ‘ specific category ’. Insofar as the operational authorisation process can be 

facilitated by these specific requirements, this regulatory framework will also support 

SMEs’ inclusion in the drone operatio ns market. 

The Group considers that in some cases, the ‘specific category’ is too restrictive . The 

SORA mitigation requirements to reach Specific Assurance and Integrity Levels ( SAIL )

category 3, even on proven / reliable systems, are difficult to reach w ithout an UAS 

redesign and should be reviewed .

Furthermore, when relevant, the EU regulatory framework, including the U-space 

regulations, should be promoted bilaterally and at the level of ICAO , as a basis for a 

future global drone regulatory framework to ensure consistent approaches with other 

Region s and at the global level. Such cooperation should also cover the review of ICAO 

Annex 2 (rules of the air) to cover drone operations’ specificities. 

The question of market access should also be addressed with due regard to the situation 

of the drone sect or. Currently, the economic and financial conditions to obtain a 

Community Air Carrier operating licence are set out in Regulation (EC) 1008/2008. This 

Regulation covers the transport of passengers, cargo and mail and is therefore also 

potentially applicab le to drone operators. However, these rules, which were originally 

designed to cover large Commercial Air Transport undertakings , might be 

disproportionate in the context of the drone sector and should more adequately cover the 

drone operators. The Group would support a review of this Regulation in order to ensure 

fair market access and establish common requirements which are more suited to the 

economic and financial situation of drone undertakings. On the issue of “ Ownership and 

Control ”, instead of imposi ng strict legal requirements which could hinder the 

development of IAM and limit access to venture capital, the Group recommends using 

the investment screening instrument, which is more flexible and adequately protects the 

strategic autonomy of the EU when necessary. 

The regulatory framework should facilitate real -world flight testing /trials in o rd er to 

prompt the introduction of innovative technologies. A facilitating project/experimental 

framework, allowing research and demonstrator projects to perform th eir test without the 

burden of having to comply with all regulatory requirements applicable to normal 

operations in a geographical area would support both innovative technologies and SMEs. 

The Group considers that there is a risk of shortage of domain experts at both local 

and national level . This is one more reason why drones’ rules should be as user -friendly 

as possible and not be too cumbersome on both the drone operators and the National 

Aviation Authorities (NAAs). Nonetheless, the NAAs should be supported to gain the 

competences that reflect the highly digital and automated nature of the technologies 

underpinning drone operations and U -space services provision. Beyond the technical 

comp etence, NAAs will have to adapt to the changing environment and should be put in 

the position to smoothly manage Specific Operations Risk Assessment (SORA) Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 13 / 25 

approvals, U -space airspace establishment and certification & compliance monitoring of 

UAS operators , Common Information Services and U -space service providers. 

In addition , drone regulations are not always easy to grasp by local authorities (cities, 

metropolitan areas, communities, etc.) , which lack basic knowledge about the aviation 

ecosystem. Hence, capacity -building actions should be taken to improve the 

understanding and practice of local administrations of the rules in place in order to 

support operations approval, certification and safety oversight. The Group would 

encourage national competent au thorities to avail themselves with adequate resources 

and training capacities for its staff to swiftly approve the launch and deployment of drone 

operations at national and local levels. 

Another concern which has emerged is the lack of coordination/harmon isation 

between competent authorities in implementing drone rules whenever EU rules leave 

room for interpretation . The flexibility provided for in the EU drone regulatory 

framework could lead to different interpretations and approaches by Member States, 

ultimately affecting harmonisation . Finding the right balance between flexibility and 

harmonised conditions should also contribute to ensure a level playing field between 

Member States/Regions and facilitate cross border operations . More coordinati on should 

help to avoid the risk of de -harmoni sed national implementations of EU rule s. For 

example, despite the fact that Implementing Regulation 2019/947 required Member 

States to provide “UAS Geographical Zones” data by 1 January 2022, as of today, the 

data needed for the development of the geo -awar eness requirement of the Open Category 

is not fully available and , when available , not always in the same format . The Regulation 

should impose a generic format in order to make sure that the requirements laid down in 

Implementing Regulation 2019/947 are effectively applied. 

The Group notes with concern that some standards still need to be developed and that 

the process is slow. The drone sector is very dynamic, and this feature collides with the 

usual long deadlines involved in developing standards. The drone and U-Space 

technologies are a mixture of ATM, IT and telecom technologies. The traditional 

approach should be widened - including making room for standards developed on the 

basis of open -source software development. In ATM, EUROCAE's standards are 

generally a good starting point. The standardisation process should be as efficient as 

possible, for exampl e by already preparing standardisation material during research, 

development, and demonstration activities, as indeed SESAR JU is doing. Such process 

must be accelerated and, in order to do so, EUROCAE and EUSCG activities should be 

coordinated and promote the "agile" development of standards that take into account the 

needs and the high speed of technological advances in the drone sector. 

At the same time, the Group recognises that the EU has a unique chance to define reliable 

global standards for cybers ecurity , without impairing efficiency. In this regard, the 

Group supports the d evelop ment of concrete regulations and definitions for cybersecurity 

protection mechanisms and ensuring protection of technologies , such as cloud -based 

distributed systems or ov er -the -air updates of vehicle software. The definition of a clear 

pathway to certification for “system of systems”, including cloud -based safety related 

technologies would enhance the attractiveness of EU drone technologies and guarantee 

its strategic auto nomy. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 14 / 25 

The EU rules on data protection are in place and fully applicable to drone operations. 

However, there is some uncertainty in the sector and the general public on how to ensure 

compliance with privacy and data protection rules. The Group would support the 

development of specific and user -friendly guidelines or checklists explaining to drone 

operators on how to comply with data protection and privacy requirements .

6.3. Technology building blocks, including harmonisation and 

standardisation, and Civil -Defence drone industry synergies 

The Group welcomes and fully supports the objective of the “Action Plan on synergies 

between civil, defence and space industries” to reap synergies between the civil and 

defence use of drones and related technologies, including co unter -drones’ solutions. The 

recently adopted “Versailles Declaration” 11 emphasised further the need to foster these 

synergies and invest in critical and emerging technologies. 

The availability of the required components, vehicles and systems in Europe is a core 

condition for developing a competitive and autonomous European drone services sector. 

It is necessary to ensure that the drone manufacturing industry will have a reliable supply 

of essential parts and financial and technical resources to develop an d manufacture state -

of -the -art products. 

Drones, drone operations and drone traffic management are a complex ecosystem of 

components and information exchange platforms, requiring highly optimised, safe, and 

secure elements such as flight control systems, cyber -secure datalinks and connectivity, 

resilient navigation, Detect & Avoid, electrical and hybrid propulsion, batteries and 

power management, autonomous flight and mission management systems. In turn, these 

are dependent on many enabling technologies su ch as Artificial Intelligence, robotics, 

semi -conductors, and cloud technologies. 

In this respect, the Group recommends that the Commission should develop a strategic 

Drone Technology Roadmap for critical drone technologies and dual -use drone 

systems. The roadmap should identify and prioritise the future critical drone technology 

needs. The Commission should seek the support of the EU Observatory of the Critical 

technologies in executing this task, with the input of all stakeholders. 

A lot has been already done to support critical technologies. For example, the 

Commission has set up a European Battery Alliance 12 , which aims to ensure that the 

EU can depend on a domestic battery value chain, which should then also be available 

for the drone industry. The Gro up emphasises the importance to ensure that the needs of 

the European drone sector are well covered within this and similar initiatives. 

Furthermore, some intangible resources, such as radio frequencies , are a limited 

commodity. Close coordination with ot her relevant actors and organisations ( e.g., ICAO, 

ITU) is needed to safeguard that the drone sector has sufficient frequencies and protected 

spectrum available for safe operations. The Group points out that a lack of access to 

frequencies could hamper the development of long range BVLOS operations in the       

> 11 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press -releases/2022/03/11/the -versailles -declaration -10 -11 -
> 03 -2022
> 12 https://www.eba250.com Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 15 /25

‘specific category’ and called for an assessment of the drone industry needs in this 

regard. 

Standardisation and interoperability of the enabling technological building blocks is a 

key enabler for faster development cycles. All relevant actors should work together to 

develop standards, including those for dual use . It is necessary to encourage industry 

participation in standards development. The Group recommend s a funding initi ative to 

support SMEs in standardisation activities as well as effective procedures to develop 

standards in a faster way to ensure that the innovative pace of the drone industry can be 

met. 

As regards certification, the Group considers that, while conside ring military specificities 

and existing military certification standards, the harmonisation of certification 

requirements for civil and military applications towards those set by EASA would 

facilitate the development of dual -use applications. . In additio n, it called for the further 

development of standard scenarios for the specific category for operations that could 

have both civil and military applications. 

On EU funding , the Group considers that the different EU funding instruments for 

supporting drone complementary, providing financial support, including to start -ups, 

throughout the entire development cycle from research to market , promoting cross -

sectoral collaboration and alignment and ensuring that promising projects funded at an 

early phase are not starved of funding before they are deployed . The current separation of 

civil and defence funding programmes does not facilitate the development of dual -use 

technologies due to gaps when moving a project from civil research to military 

implementation or vic e versa. A dedicated funding pathway for dual -use technologies 

by design could be created to better recognise spin -offs and spin -ins while ensuring that 

the sectorial funding mechanisms remain in place 

Ultimately, a dedicated PPP/Joint Undertaking could be set up to support the 

development of dual -use drones and UAM. Such a JU could concentrate on developing a 

large -scale flagship project, for example a civil -military cargo drone. 

Finally, the Group proposes the creation of a network of the existing Drone dual -use 

centres of excellence at EU -level, where both civil and military drones could be jointly 

tested, based on a simple “test & share” principle. Such flying -safe space would allow 

gaining flight hour experience to prove safety under a “fly -before -cert ify” approach. This 

could also facilitate the development of networks of incubators connected to these 

centres. These incubators would serve also as information hubs on financing, training and 

regulatory requirements related to drone research, services, an d operations. As already 

mentioned, harmonising the requirements and processes to obtain flight authorisations 

would facilitate cross -border testing and flight demonstrations. 

6.4. System resilience and non -cooperative drones 

Drones are a new, fast -growing, and affordable technology, which is highly digital. 

While bringing benefits, they can also pose security risks and be a major public concern 

due to potential unsafe operation, damage to people and property on ground. 

Unautho ri sed drone flights remain a problem , especially around commercial airports, 

and critical infrastructures. Clueless, Careless or Criminal drone operators can endanger Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 16 / 25 

passengers, other drones and aircraft crews and lead to short -term disruptions of air 

tra ffic, closures of entire airspaces or airports, and even to the total loss of an aircraft, in 

addition to economic losses. 

Ensuring a high level of security is essential not only for drone operations but to ensure 

the trust of the public and societal accep tance. Therefore, it is necessary to develop and 

share security criteria to counter UAV and ensure cybersecurity compliance. 

The EU should focus on developing state -of -the -art drones with high security. With this 

in mind, the Group recommends the developm ent of a “European Trusted Drone” 

label for cybersecurity approved drones in the ‘ open’ and ‘specific’ categories. The label 

should be issued by a relevant Authority after a manufacturer has provided evidence that 

a specific drone fulfils a set of agreed r equirements, in relation to, e.g., the provision of a 

secured communication link, secure identification and use of open -source code . Th is 

would make it possible for any end -user in Europe to purchase such trusted drones in 

confidence. This label would bene fit not only drone operators but also all entities 

responsible for the monitoring the use of airspace. The use of “European trusted drones” 

could be required for all operations in a restricted airspace, helping to separate legally 

operated drones from ille gal ones. 

In a longer term, the Group recommends adopting a “ European Drone s Act ” which 

would require that public entities only procure and use drones which have obtained the 

European Trusted Drone label .

Most of the Member States, if not all, have already taken steps on establishing counter -

drone measures. However, the Group considers that more needs to be done in terms of 

critical infrastructure protection . There are al ready some good guidelines, for example 

by EASA, on how to manage drone incidents at ai rports. However, there is no uniform 

EU counter -drones legislation and hence Member States rely on their existing national 

legal frameworks, and the reporting systems on incidents are also divergent between 

Member State s.

The Group recommend s that the Comm ission provides more EU level guidance and 

sharing of information for public authorities on national and regional level on how to 

detect, track, identify, neutralise, and mitigate threats from non -cooperative drones and 

defining the roles and responsibilities in terms of detecting. Furthermore, the 

Commission should develop unified performance measures to be used across the EU to 

ensure that the counter -dro ne systems are indeed efficient , and if it becomes necessary, 

propose new measures to improve their performance. 

Finally , the Group points out that the Member States should ensure sufficient training 

for relevant personnel , including local authorities, to increase their preparedness to 

id entify and respond to non -cooperative drone threats. 

6.5. Developing airspace capabilities (U -space development and integration 

with Air Traffic Management) 

U-space is the bespoke, fully digital, and automated traffic management system that 

has been designed to enable the safe, efficient, and affordable scaling up of drone 

services. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 17 / 25 

U-space development was initiated in 2017 with the SESAR U -space Blueprint 13 and is 

the subject of ongoing research and innovation, and an initial regulator y framework has 

already been adopted to harmonise the pioneer implementation projects blossoming 

across the European Union 14 . This initial framework is based on the provision of four 

services to UAS operators and allows the accommodation of routine flights in designated 

pieces of airspace. However, at this stage it does not achieve full integration of U -space 

and Air Traffic Management (ATM), nor does it enable the provision of U -space services 

to manned aircraft. 

To realise the High -level Vision, the Group therefore recommends several initiatives 

related to U-space development and ATM integration, including civil / military 

interoperability. 

In the short to medium term, to facilitate the roll -out of the initial framework, Air 

Navigation Service Providers an d U-space service providers should agree on the 

necessary protocols to exchange information , including with military entities in charge 

of security and defence activities, on relevant traffic or on dynamic airspace 

restructuring, and the role and exchange of information with Common Information 

Service provider should be better defined. Development of the related standards should 

consequently be prioritised. 

In particular, U -space service providers should be able to capitalise on existing mobile 

telecommunic ation technologies and standards , such as those resulting from the Aerial 

Connectivity Joint Activity . The use of U -space solutions and operational concept for a 

more automated ATM should also be considered. 

There would also be a need to support large scale demonstration and validation 

activities and harmonise efforts to validate prototyping implementation s and draft 

standards on full -scale realistic test beds. 

Necessary Communication Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) infrastructure and 

performance requirements and characteristics should also be further studied to 

strengthen the harmonisation of U-space per formance requirements and the 

interoperability of operations. 

To further support the implementation of the initial framework, there needs to be more 

communication and information on the b enefits of U-space as an enabler of operations, 

and the role of local authorities in U-space implementation. As U-space will be an 

integral part of the city, aviation should better understand the urban environment , and 

conversely local authorities should have a closer relationship with not just the U -space 

ecosystem but als o ATM .

To enable a tighter integration with ATM , the consideration of military aviation, and 

the incorporation of Innovative Air Mobility, facilitate the transition from manned 

piloted eVTOL through automated to autonomous operations, U -space R&D, combined 

with innovative operational procedures, should look at advanced U -space services, as 

well as the possibilities to provide U -space services to manned aircraft.       

> 13 https://www.sesarju.eu/u -space -blueprint
> 14 https://www.eurocontrol.int/product/european -network -u-space -demo nstrators Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 18 /25

Demonstrators should benefit from regulatory sandboxes , concrete frameworks which, 

by providing a structured context for experimentation, enable where appropriate in a real -

world environment the testing of innovative U-space technologies, services, or 

approaches , under the regulatory supervision of competent authorities and EASA. 

U-space innovation h ubs and living labs should also be encouraged to provide a wider 

scheme, via which stakeholders (including citizens, local authorities, and urban planners) 

can engage with the authorities to raise questions and seek clarifications or non -binding 

guidance about issues in the context of compliance with the U-space regulatory 

framework and its interfaces with sustainable urban mobility plans (SUMPs). 

Finally, U-space and ATM should evolve towards a seamless integration , and potential 

synergies should be exploited so that the future Digital European Sky would be the 

safest, most efficient, and environmentally friendly in the world. Efforts cannot be made 

only on U -space, but U-space should be used to support ATM digitali sation .

Further to the existing network of U-space stakeholders, a demonstrator network 

establishing an initial critical mass of early movers on breakthrough innovations for the 

U-space and ATM integration would be key to gain trust and support an accelerated 

ma rket deployment of innovative solutions. The demonstrators should be closely 

connected to the standardisation and regulatory activities. This would help create buy -in 

from the supervisory authorities and operational staff, providing tangible evidence of th e

performance benefits in terms of environment, capacity, safety, security, and 

affordability. 

The Group recognises the need to ensure that affordable electronic conspicuity 

solutions should be applied to all airspace users not covered by the current Europ ean 

ADS -B mandate, including recreational (gliders, paragliders, etc.) or ultra -light aircraft. 

Such ‘light’ conspicuity solutions should ensure their safe integration along with other 

airspace users and allow their free movement in the EU airspace. The ne eds and 

specificities of all airspace users should be considered when designing future global 

technology solutions. 

The aviation sector is still in the process of understanding what it will take to transition to 

the Digital European Sky, and one should be looking at what ATM/U -space convergence 

would look like in practice over the short, medium, and long term, eventually delivering 

an ATM/U -space development and convergence , and future full integration , roadmap .

Such roadmap should be elaborated in coordina tion with all affected civil and military 

airspace users and associated stakeholders, including technology providers. It should also 

be harmonised with international partners to avoid diverging aircraft equipage 

requirements in different regions. 

6.6. Developin g Urban Air Mobility and Regional Air Mobility; including 

ground infrastructure 

Air taxis using eVTOL aircraft and smaller UAS used for cargo delivery operations are 

the core of Innovative Air Mobility ( IAM ). 

Although first air taxi operations are expected to be conducted with manned eVTOL 

capable aircraft, such operations will likely be in the future performed on the similar Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 19 / 25 

platforms but remotely piloted and then fully autonomous. Therefore, it is necessary to 

support the transitioning phase and ensure a smooth integration of these new operational 

concepts in the current aviation domain as well as the future multimodal transportation 

system. 

To address those challenges and facilitate the development of IAM, the Group presents 

several recommendations .

Until such times as more citizens get to experience real IAM operations, efforts will be 

needed to counter misapprehensions about their potential impact (noise, visual pollution, 

etc.). There is a need to better define and communicate on I AM opportunities , and 

create a modus operandi to ensure collaboration between European, national, and local 

authorities to manage societal and environmental impacts. The societal impact of IAM 

operations must be recognised and should be tackled upfront wit h a set of EU -developed 

instruments. IAM services should be promoted on the basis of inclusivity and 

sustainability, and not be restricted to upper -class services. Indeed, multiple eVTOL 

developers are targeting passenger operations built on economic effic iencies of electric 

power, nodal networks, and scalability to achieve competitive pricing and provide more 

sustainable alternatives to existing travel services. Furthermore, a market study could be 

launched to capture the needs of IAM in the health domain and evaluate the market for 

such services in Europe , and hence the best use of research funding .

There is also a need to learn the lessons from the unexpected, grassroots success of 

micro mobility services (free -floating e -scooters in particular) in terms of benefits but 

also public perception and management of externalities, to avoid similar conflicts in the 

deployment of IAM. 

IAM should systematically be considered as part of sustainable urban mobility pla ns 

(SUMP s)15 , and should contribute to address it s objectives: 

• Ensure all citizens are offered transport options that enable access to key 

destinations and services; 

• Improve safety and security; 

• Reduce air and noise pollution, greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption; 

• Improve the efficiency and cost -effectiveness of the transportation of persons and 

goods; 

• Contribute to enhancing the attractiveness and quality of the urban environment and 

urban design for the benefits of citizens, the economy and society as a whole. 

Competition wit hin the IAM market and with other modes of transport requires a strong 

framework to deal with external costs and will make IAM operations affordable to a 

wide range of service providers: 

• The logic of the pragmatic, operation -centric policy should systemati cally be applied 

to keep safety requirements proportionate to the risk. 

• The roll -out of IAM will need public policy support and adequate private 

investment s.       

> 15 Asbeing discussed with the European Parliament which welcomes the inclusion of air transport and
> UAM solutions in the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
> Guidelines for the development of the trans -Europea n transport network 2021/0420(COD) Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 20 /25

• Public R&D funding should support projects that are geared towards further 

automation and sustaina bility .

• Infrastructure associated with U -space and IAM implementation, including the 

landing site and charging infrastructure , should be considered for eligibility 

within traditional EU infrastructure funding pathways. Funding should also focus on 

multi -mode infrastructures where aviation could benefit from energy and 

telecom cross -fertilisation .

• Eligibility requirements for pub lic funding should be adapted to the new competitive 

market framework and should include a robust business plan .

The siting of vertiports, which will enable eVTOLs and autonomous parcel delivery 

drones to operate from sites that are physically close to cit izens, must be a holistic 

process that includes stakeholders beyond the traditional aviation community. Not all 

vertiports will need to be new sites but may reuse existing helipads or airports (including 

small aerodromes). The location of the required new enabling infrastructure (e.g., 

vertiports , telecommunication and energy distribution equipment ) in the urban 

environment should be systematically analysed , finding a balance between location 

requirements, affordability and other aspects such as nuisance to neighbours and visual 

pollution to avoid jeopardising social acceptance. Connectivity to local airports and 

other modal hubs , including with public means of transport , should be prioritised .

Further research could be conducted on operations limiting factors , which may hinder 

IAM development, such as battery technology development. Once more, regulatory 

sandboxes and living labs would enable highly visible, commercially viable 

demonstrator s, which would provide the public with a first -hand experience o f real -life 

operations. Such sandboxes would offer a tightly controlled environment that 

underscores the safety of operations, as well as enabling test scenarios with the potential 

of becoming revenue generating operations. This would create exchange platf orms 

between industry and neighbourhood associations and give industry operational 

experience and opportunity to develop technologies and testing methodology to evaluate 

noise in an urban operating environment , as well as give regulators valuable feedback on 

the adequacy of rules. 

Finally, a harmoni sed and synchroni sed roadmap should be established at European 

level for the development and deployment of IAM . Such a roadmap should set out the 

objectives, tasks and responsibilities of the multiple actors invo lved, as well as a timeline 

for its development. It would improve the investment climate , as well as , societal 

acceptance, particularly if essential aspects of urban transport decarboni sation in urban 

areas are included. 

6.7. Societal acceptance and dealing wit h externalities 

Although drones are sometimes negatively perceived , a recent study by EASA on the 

social acceptability of UAM 16 highlighted an overall positive attitude of the public.      

> 16 https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom -and -events/press -releases/easa -publishes -results -first -eu -
> study -citizens -acceptance -urban Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 21 /25

However, there are still significant concerns related to safety, environ ment, and security 

in particular. 

Recommendations related to societal acceptance of IAM were already included in the 

previous section, but the Group provides the following further guidance .

When speaking about public acceptance towards 'drones', a differentiation is needed 

between cargo/delivery UAS eVTOL systems used for passenger transport, which can be 

manned (with pilot on board) or unmanned and military drones. Those different aircrafts 

and use cases have different operational characteristics and safety standards. The value 

and criticality of the mission conducted should also be considered when assessing the 

complementarity, impact, cost benefit and value of IAM /UAS to the society . Drones 

should be promoted as a mean to enable the continuity of public services , protection 

and life -saving missions as well as services to remote and difficult -to -access area s of the 

Union. 

National studies on social acceptance sho uld be considered by the Membe r States ,

broadening the effort already made by EASA, followed by a Working Group with 

participants from all countries to jointly evaluate possible solutions and common 

messages. 

Local administrations should be involved and treated as a key partner for soc ial 

acceptance . Guidelines, and handbooks and training opportunities should be 

developed for local authorities to help them implement IAM and address externalities as 

part of their sustainable mobility planning activities. Local authorities should convey a 

message of certainty and transparency to society about what, how, when and where 

IAM will be deployed .

Citizen participation in the regulatory sandboxes , living labs and demonstrations should 

be encouraged to include local /regional aspects. 

Stronger communication is needed to distinguish commercial drones from toys and 

highlight the good progress achieved in establishing an effective safety regulatory 

framework . More educational and promotional activities are needed. That s hould be one 

of the main tasks of living labs. 

Societal acceptance will be increased by demonstrating that d rone/IAM operations can 

make a significant contribution to the decarbonisation of transport and to the reduction 

of air pollution, especially in urb an areas , by having zero n et carbon emissions, taking the 

full vehicle lifecycle, energy production, storage and modal shift into account . This 

requires a f ocus on investing in generating the large amounts of renewable energy needed 

to charge batteries .

No ise mitigation measures to limit the impact on over -flown citizens should be fully 

taken into consideration when designing routes, procedures, and other operational 

practices. The impact on business performance, should routes be extended to mitigate 

noise/visual pollution needs to be balanced against the overall risk of rejection of IAM 

operations by local communities . An unbiased and inclusive approach should be 

developed in order to measur e and monitor innovative mobility indicators on various 

aspects including performances and impacts, involving citizens, authorities, and industry 

stakeholders alike. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 22 / 25 

Guidelines should be developed on aspects related to the implementation of relevant 

privac y, liability, and insurance legislative requirements. 

As discussed before, cybersecurity to prevent drone hi -jack ing , spoofing etc. is vital, and 

aut horities should be able to verify that the system is strictly following cyber -protection 

requirements. 

6.8. Deve loping knowledge, training staff, and building competence 

The development of drones and the introduction of drone services will have an impact on 

the required knowledge, skills, and competences in a range of fields, such as drone 

operations, IT, data and automation related competences, and competences to deal wit h

technological and regulatory evolution. Therefore, the Group recommends that Member 

States, industry, and the social partners should prepare a roadmap for the development 

of drone service knowledge, skills and competences , based on an assessment of need s

. As indicated above, training should also be made available for the public sector since 

proper staffing is also an issue for regulators. 

UAS operations will require operators to be responsible for multiple tasks covering 

navigation, flight control, com munication, system monitoring, and mission management. 

To address this, the Group recommends that specific training procedures for UAS 

operators should be considered. Due to the innovative nature of IAM operations and 

design, on the basis of the existing a viation training concepts and requirements for 

traditional commercial pilots, performance -based pilot training could be adjusted and 

facilitated. This will also create additional jobs as the entry barriers for becoming an 

eVTOL pilot can be lowered and att ract more EU citizens. 

Large scale demonstrators could provide an effective solution for addressing diverse 

types of training needs. Furthermore, development of virtual reality simulators for 

operations could provide safe ways to gain experience. 

The Gro up recommends the setting up of education and training programmes specific 

to drone technologies, regulatory frameworks and integration to SUMPs activities in all 

Member States. Such academic programmes across Europe would foster the competences 

and techno logical progress but also increase the public awareness and acceptance of 

drone utility. Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 23 / 25 

7. CONCLUSION 

The Drone Leaders’ Group welcomes the work of the Commission in the preparation of 

the Drone Strategy 2.0, notably the inclusive nature of its approach an d the attempts to 

reach out to all stakeholders. The extensive Commission consultation process, the 

organisation of hearings, and the Group discussions all contributed to shape this report. 

The outcome of these discussions is reflected in this report for w hich the Drone Leaders’ 

Group took a holistic approach in order to cover all aspects of drone policy. 

The Drone Leaders’ Group invites the Commission to take note of this report and the 

recommendations contained therein when finalising the Drone Strategy 2.0. The 

members of the Group stand ready to provide support to the Commission, if needed, for 

the implementation of its recommendations. 

Brussels, 26 April 2022 Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 24 / 25 

# Annex A Membership 

Henrik Hololei DG MOVE, Chair 

Andrea Anesini European Air Sports 

Sebastian Babiarz Global UTM Association 

Cristiano Baldoni d-Flight 

Pierre Becquart Régie Au tonome des Transports Parisiens 

Eamonn Brennan EUROCONTROL 

Giancarlo Buono International Air Transport Association 

Raul Medina Caballero ES Dirección General de Avi ación Civil 

Vincent De Vroey AeroSpace and Defence Industries Association 

Nathalie Errard Airbus 

Richard Frizon SESAR JU 

Eduardo Garcia Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation 

Saskia Horsch Lilium GmbH 

Patrick Ky European Union Aviation Safety Agency 

Elisabeth Landrichter AT Federal Ministry for Climate Action, Environment, 

Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology 

Manuel Le Bail Parrot 

Marian -Jan Marinescu Member of the European Parliament 

Kyle Martin General Aviation Manufacturers Associatio n

Marco Pellegrino Aeroporti di Roma 

Christof Raab Alliance for New Mobility Europe 

Olivier Reichert SAFRAN 

Oliver Reinhardt Volocopter GmbH 

François -Xavier Rivoisy Aéroport de Paris 

Jiří Šedivý European Defence Agency 

Laurent Sissmann LEONARDO 

Jacek Woźnikowski  UAM Initiative Cities Community ( UIC²) Report of the Drone Leaders’ Group Page 25 / 25 

# Annex B Hearings and Drone Leaders’ Group 

# Plenary meetings 

Plenary 

Meeting #1 

20/10/21  • Tour de Table: presentation of Drone Leaders’ Group 

members’ priorities by DG MOVE and discussion 

• Presentation of the Roadmap of Drone Leaders’ Group 

work 

Plenary 

Meeting #2 

10/02/22  • Review of comments to the Open Public Consultation 

• Recommendations on several areas 

• Follow -up: preparation of 3 Hearings 

Hearing #1  18/02/22  • Urban Air Mobility (cargo/passengers) and U -spa ce 

Hearing #2  25/02/22  • Enhancing UAS services, including the SME dimension 

Hearing #3  08/03/22  • Develop Military/Civil synergies and technology building 

blocks 

Plenary 

Meeting #3 

15/03/22  • Report of hearings by Co -rapporteurs and discussion 

• Presentation of the structure of the draft final report 

Plenary 

Meeting #4 

26/04/22  • Discussion and endorsement of the Final report containing 

recommendations for the Drone Strategy 2.0
