Title: 2016 Iowa Caucuses Results : CSPAN : February 1, 2016 9:30pm-1:01am EST : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN_20160202_023000_2016_Iowa_Caucuses_Results

Markdown Content:
9:30 pm

have. look what i ready?

9:31 pm

okay. want to start with four? >> we can start with four, that's fine. do them, could you or just name the precinct that i should type in. gladly. four.s is boone precinct

9:32 pm

2669918 precinct code. fourth ward. >> do we have a total. total precincts. they're 174. jeb bush, 0. carson, 14.

9:33 pm

six. christie, ted cruz, 56. , 0.y fiorina jim gilmore, 0. huckabee, ten. kasich, one. rand paul, 12. 29.o rubio santorum, five. donald trump 41. there are no others. >> bush was 0. 14.on was hristie was six and cruz was s six and huckabee ten, kasich

9:34 pm

one. rand paul 12. 29.io 41.tore yum five and trump yep. double-check. >> i got 174.

9:35 pm

maybe they didn't think there would be that many people. oh, there you are. thank you. you, thank you. > this is fourth ward, right >> this is fourth ward. one now. do the next done that.ccessfully three? bout

9:36 pm

is 3952102. ready? >> what's the total? >> 170. >> okay. five.sh

9:37 pm

ben carson 15. chris christie nine. 48.cruz carly fiorina one. gilmore 0. five.huckabee john kasich nine. eight.ul is marco rubio is 42. one. santorum is jo on the rump is 27 and 0 others. >> five is bush. 15 is carson. christie is nine. cruz is 48. rena is one. gilmore 0. huckabee is five. is nine. paul is eight. rubio is 42.

9:38 pm

one and trump is 27. >> that is correct. for a total of 170.

9:39 pm

9:40 pm

jeb bush four. 13.carson chris christie four. ted cruz 58. carly fiorina 0. jim gilmore 0. mike huckabee six. four.kasich rand paul nine. 31.co rubio rick santorum one. donald trump 29. 0 for others. is four. fiorina and gilmore 0.

9:41 pm

kasich is four. rand paul is nine. marco rubio is 31. is 29.m is one and trump

9:42 pm

done three and we have three to go. doing boone two.

9:43 pm

9:44 pm

six.b bush ben carson 20. chris christie nine. ted cruz 44. fiorina 0. 0. gilmore mike huckabee six. kasich four. five.aul 26.co rubio rick santorum one. 42.ld trump others 0. so we got bush six. 20.son christie nine. 44.

9:45 pm

gilmore 0. huckabee six. four. paul five. marco rubio 26. one.rum >> that was for boone two.

9:46 pm

three.bush ben carson 22. chris christie four. 50.cruz fiorina two. 0. huckabee two. one. kasich rand paul two. rubio 19.

9:47 pm

rick santorum one. 13.ld trump 3, 22, 4, fifty, 2, 0, 2, 1, 2, 19, 1, thirteen. last hat we have here.

9:48 pm

9:49 pm

one. 112 was the total. jeb bush four. ben carson eight. chris christie two. ted cruz 36. fiorina 0. jim gilmore 0. mike huckabee six. 0.hn kasich rand paul four. rubio 15. rick santorum one. and donald trump 36.

9:50 pm

4, 8, 2, 36, 0, 0, 6, 0, 4, fifteen, 1, thirty-six. >> that is correct. we'll be posting in just a few minutes, folks.

9:51 pm

9:52 pm

3, 2, hristie, thirty-six, 0, 0, 6, 0, 4, fifteen, 1, thirty-six. should we put a total down at so we get them all right? could, i suppose. to stand back a little bit. we will be posting these, okay? these. be posting

9:53 pm

please let us do our work. outside e posted right the gym. okay?

9:54 pm

just stay a little quiet. with ard for us to hear everybody chatting. just stay a little quieter so we up.finish this

9:55 pm

thank you. >> thanks. >> 6, 4, nine, thirty-one, 1, twenty-nine.

9:56 pm

3, 5, fifteen, nine, forty-eight, 1, 0, 5, nine, 8, 42, 1, 27.

9:57 pm

let's do four. 6, 56, 0, 0, 10, 1, 12, 2 nine, 5, 41. now we got to do the total page. let you do the calculating. almost, folks. so close.

9:58 pm

i want to do it this way. for put their names down page, see, like this. and then i'll run right through them. >> oh, okay. that.n do >> okay.

9:59 pm

2, 19, 4, 50, 2, 0, 2, 1, 1, 13. next four. 0, 4, 15, 6, 0, 0, 6,

10:00 pm

1, 36. 6, 20, nine, 24, 0, 0, 6, 4, 5, 26, 1, 42. 0, 6, 4, 931, 0, 9, 21.

10:01 pm

>> 5, fifteen, nine, 48, 1, 0, 27.9, 8, 42, 1, 0, 14, 6, 96, 0, 0, 10, 1, 12, 2 nine, 9, 41. and i 't you add them up add them up. how's that? >> exciting. watching paint dry, isn't it? >> alrighty. are from any central committee members out there? i do need some help on something. but, okay. see what you got.

10:02 pm

up. need tape to get these

10:03 pm

nailed it. matching.ep it's amazing. >> i could whistle this, you know. >> oh, okay. next. 18, 20, 35; 14, 20, 35. actually i can still add, can't i? can.ou >> 9, 18, 19. >> uh-huh. thank you very much. do you think that's okay to use on the windows or the masking tape? two rolls of masking tape. kay.

10:04 pm

she'll find it. okay. we're at rand. the olympics must have a different scoring system because goes faster, doesn't it? we're doing it as fast as we can. nailed it again. >> yeah, we need some music here. >> i know. that's all right.

10:05 pm

a minute. 0. right. all 19, 40, 162.

10:06 pm

10, 188. >> okay. let's walk them down and put them up. tape.u want to take the knew it would be those three. >> oh, yeah yeah, yeah, i know now.you're saying i do. to grab the tape? >> got it. you've been watching live coverage of the republican sepbcinct in iowa. democrats are still at it in the caucus we're covering on that side of the aisle.

10:07 pm

you're interested in watching it it's streaming live on our website and also on c-span two. to ben c-span we're going looking at results. candidatestching the for their speeches that they're making and reaction to tonight's results. can tweet in your comments to us about what you've seen the @ c-span e address and we'll make some of tweets on the air. i'm going to give you the telephone numbers so you can get comment in thean two caucuses we've been televising live. participants if you'd like 202-748-8492.the 8920 and represent rp cans 8921.

10:08 pm

and welcome your calls and also the night o them as progresses. 18 consecutive days dr. carson needs to go home and get a fresh set of clothes. departing later tonight to avoid the snow storm and be back on the trail on wednesday. look toward to tonight's caucus results. democrats.

10:09 pm

my colleague bill has been watching the results and we'll update from him. >> susan, the results have been quickly given y by all reports it's been a very, very busy night across the state of iowa. take a quick look at the des moines register. has gone esults page down and may be a reflection of how busy things are. ago, 62.3% of 228.2% and at donald trump 42.9 and marco rubio 21.8%. to bring that map up. we have a similar map for democrats as well. here's a look at that. iowa democratic was 79% reporting let's look. on the y, very close democratic side. hillary clinton with 50.4%.

10:10 pm

bernie sanders 49% and for our iewers of radio i apologize this is a map that is quilt of red or maroon and gold here. if you take a quick look at a couple of those strong spots for clinton here in clinton ounty in eastern iowa, she is winning that precinct -- winning that county rather. and so they're nearly done on the democratic side. 79%&hillary clinton with 50.4% of the note and bernie sanders 49%. martin o'malley, we heard the reporting early. .9%.n o'malley at a come of tweets reporting on closeness, the turnout. record turnout being reported at democratic and republican calk jennifer jacobs tweets ago, a short while

10:11 pm

projected turnout for republicans 173,000 and that would be a record. as you've been reporting and you saw on the screen cnn and others martin o'malley is to suspend his campaign tonight in des moines. here. we hopest to get that republican side up and take a county by county look later on.it still very close, within three points on the republican side on the democratic side. susan. >> thanks, phil and next up, with some of the caucus goers at the g.o.p. caucus in iowa. let's listen in. >> you can see that the des community college of the m has emptied 1,000 plus people who were here for the caucus. ns are e of the nice iowa here. we're speaking with professor irwin. caucuses in several

10:12 pm

the past. how does this one compare? >> i think it's probably as big as i've seen. great opportunity here. what a great day for iowa and for america right here for to come and participate in the direct democracy right here iowa.one, i remember the last time we had -- well we had well over a people and democrats had as many in their caucus as well. i don't know whether the last in we had that many people boone all together at one event. really take pride in our opportunity to see these candidates and have them in our us.s to come and see > well, you were in precinct two. your precinct seems to mirror the state's results. trump, rubio, carson. yeah. 44 for cruz. 42 for trump. 26 for rubio and 20 for carson. pretty close to the polls.

10:13 pm

how did you vote? >> how did i vote? [laughter] >> actual you i voted for kasich. >> why? >> because i felt then that he probably had the leadership and temperament to do a good job of leading our country. > you attended democratic caucuses as well. >> yes, i have. i'm more of an independent. the last couple of times i caucusesthe democratic so this time i wanted to experience the republicans. also want to talk with greta irvin who we talked to executive is director of the federation and wife of charles irwin. before and you hadn't made up your mind. how did you vote? voting for chris christie. in ked he decisions he made his own state and balancing the budget and reducing the debt and getting the house fiscally in order and i think that's important for the country. as a mother of three children

10:14 pm

are teenagers, i wanted to know that we have a government hat can balance their budget because i expect my kids to do the same. greta irvin what if donald trump or ted cruz become the nominees. more of k we'll see these issues starting to come out. they started talking about these ssues, but i think that is reason why maybe i didn't vote for them and voted for christie is because by doing that early on, i'm sending those messages of what we think is important. with politics things change in the focus and based on nge as well the primaries go and interviews what people this is want to see happen. i think we have a good opportunity in the republican ace as we start to hone in on the issues that need to be line in our country. caucus. is our first will you do it again in four years. just that opportunity come out and see our neighbors. t's iowa and it's winter and

10:15 pm

starting to snow. school has already been it's fun tomorrow and to get together and get the opportunity to talk with each what are ideas and that's this country is about. greta irwin, thank you for your time. we'll have more later. >> we also want to hear from our national audience. let's talk with aspen in tulsa, oklahoma. you're on the air. right now, it's a 3-way race and the republican party looks like with 75% of the 25% for 28 for cruz, trump and 22% for marco rubio. do you think about that? > well, i think that it's a tough race. lot of up ands downs,

10:16 pm

actuality it's a tight race. >> who do you support? supporting trump. >> tell our audience why? well, i support trump because military be see our more stronger. america is e that great again. just the all around stuff he has said. all ust a firm believer on the things that he's actually put out there for our military. a very strong ve for the united states citizens. > we're looking at a live picture from the donald trump rally. gathering at the sheridan there. we'll have cameras and watch gathers and rowd keep our eye out from the statements from the candidates.

10:17 pm

next is tom from colorado who is a democrat. you're on the air. evening.: good >> your comment on what you have seen tonight. kind of : i'm just keeping up on things here and it's a close race. supporting? ou clinton or bernie sanders. caller: mostly she's going after the pharmaceutical companies as well. big fan of that. i appreciate that. she's how do you think done tonight? caller: well, pretty good. close race. it's a nail biter. hat's why i'm really watching here. >> thank you for being with us for part of that time. and she's in xt irvindale, iowa. tonight?o to a caucus >> yes, i did. >> who?

10:18 pm

caucused for donald j.trump again.e america great >> how crowded was it? >> there was about 350 people there. and the reason -- i'm sorry is 350 big compared to past years that you have? usually it's like 50 people. was the experience like? >> it was good. >> how do you think mr. trump is tonight? so far he's in second place to ted cruz. in first he was because we live -- since i live donald trump supports renewable fuels and ted peopleesn't i think more should look at that when they give their support to cruz today. but i definitely back donald to build use he wants the wall and have mexico pay for illegals out and he wants to stop common core and

10:19 pm

american jobs and he and to repeal obamacare life.s pro he wants to make america great again and he's not bought and for. >> thank you for calling in for donald trump. going to give us an update on how the candidates are doing on the g.o.p. side overall. susan, there's probably 80% 82% of the vote counted in the democratic side of things. of 16083 s 1300 precincts counted and 1% hillary e between clinton and bernie sanders. martin o martin o'malley who is sending his campaign this evening. a very close race there. republican side of things, the latest on the republican side.

quote

10:20 pm

this is from the des moines register. of slow down in the reporting. 81% with ted ng cruz at 27.7 and donald trump marco rubio who gained throughout the night at 22.9 and 10% at nine and it drops off from there. jeb bush at and and john kasich 1.9% and karly fiorina with 1.3% of the vote. couple of tweets. mentioned the number, 170,000 from the turnout. the previous record says anna des moines om the register is 121,000. so that's a big jump. ere's the story from iowa politics now. not being able to break out of single digits. artin o'malley ends his campaign. that's it.  we'll keep an eye on that close raises. couple of people have said this is a classic definition of too

10:21 pm

shades call and maybe of 2012 in the closeness of the romney race. > in advance of the importance of it, marco rubio has picked up the endorsement of tim scott the senator from that state and eter is there with more participants. peter. >> in boone county about an hour des moines, three more caucusgoers here. two porter and , asia savannah day and we'll start with you. what brought you out? > my dad was actually working the caucus and he told me where it was so i came out to cast my vote. was there an issue that got you out here? for ll, the person i voted i know wasn't getting a lot of attention

 and i wanted to cast y vote to make sure that they did. >> who did you vote for? >> karly fiorina. 

10:22 pm

>> she did not even have a tonight.ere >> no, she didn't. i was really sad. ands considering getting up peaking but i don't know a lot about her issues i just know a few things that i like about her. i should have but i didn't. here?t do you do >> i grew up here in boone county and i actually work in now. right but i went to school here and i was in 4-h here and lived here whole life. >> did you grow up on a farm? >> i grew up in town. it was really nice. that's asia porter and now savannah day is next. for?did you vote >> rand paul. >> why? >> because i think that if we eturn our country back to our constitution that we stand a lot better chance of letting the other problems to work themselves out. first time attending a caucus. would you come back? >> yes. why? >> because i think it's important to get out and let iowa standsow where on everything. i think it's important to show

10:23 pm

sit and who re we they need to throw their support to. commitmentd of a big to take a whole evening, isn't it? >> yes. especially i have four kids, so definitely a bit of a commitment for me. day, get home to those kids. jason, his father is gary is the chairman of the boone county party.can you got politics in your blood. >> i do. do. i came here not just because my parents are involved but i want change in this country. the country has a lot of for trump.d i voted don't agree with all the things he stands for but i like him because he's able to speak his mind and he's not taking from donors. he says what he wants and not politically

10:24 pm

correct, but brings fresh ideas not a normal politician. he's going to stand up for what he believes in and what he going to be best for your country and we need that right now. did a lot of -- were you able to go to a lot of the candidate last s throughout the year? >> i visited a few of them. went to the state fair and went and saw marco rubio over at the iowa state saturday. few of them and been getting plenty of phone from all he evening the participants that are helping out the candidates. goingetty aware of what's on with all the candidates. but it was a good event tonight though. how did your parents vote? >> you know, they didn't tell me. i don't know. i'll find out, but yeah, they didn't say who they were voting for. your time.u for >> thank you. peter we join john ho is at the democratic caucus

10:25 pm

at roosevelt high school outside of des moines. roosevelt high school the final vote total votes and nton 232 224.e sanders cindy peterson was with the hillary clinton campaign. closer than you expected? >> it was very close. we had a neck in neck run and we serious voters here in this district and it was a great night. >> you were involved in a lot of scrums there and trying to pitch candidates. what did you find to be the most effective pitch to get over to the come camp.ry clinton >> all the candidates on both sides she's the most experienced policy andon foreign she has fought for children and women her entire life. you want to see a female president the time is now. i ask everyone who had daughters sisters and whatever, if they believe that a female to be

10:26 pm

white house. that seemed to resonate with a lot of people. >> how many caucusgoers do you you were responsible for to bring over? >> i couldn't count. i kept moving. moving.t it was a good night. >> david hoffman is in the camp throughout the process. this is your second caucus. the id this compare to first time around? >> it was certainly larger. as chaotic. just 2008 time i caucused was for obama and sort of has the kind of building momentum 2008.bama had in it felt like a surge and i went gut.my ertainly has -- sanders has a populist appeal and nothing per se, just y kind of -- like i said, just

10:27 pm

gut.of went with my >> what did your candidate take rom what happened here in precinct 43. >> i think it's a sign that momentum building for sure. i was actually kind of surprised at the turnout for bernie tonight. knew hillary has been in the area long enough now there is a lot of name she has a pretty stand on everything. for bernie to come in sort of as of an underdog is remarkable, i think. clinton illary supporter when you hear people saying that for bernie sanders that he can take momentum away what would you say? >> i think that's the whole process. i think that's the beauty of iowa takess and we in this very seriously and that's why you such record number

10:28 pm

turnouts. we he end of the day democrats will pull together and no matter who the candidate is at the end. do.that's what we i think it was great. >> our viewers who are watching milli miller a rick martin o'malley supporter ended up in the bernie sanders camp. tell us the process by which you came to that. all, o'malley wasn't viable so we had to split up our o'malley people. i really didn't think it was fair to tell people where to go. their idea who their second choice was and they made of the 25 i'm guessing approximately ten went to bernie 15 went to clinton. that's how it split out of the in.w that i was how did i come to go to bernie, between all three candidates as far as the issues go. was trying to -- originally i

10:29 pm

supported o'malley because he was even to the left of bernie and hillary. really like martin's appeal. he was young, energetic and kind kennedy.g robert and that's what i really liked about him. e would get up on stage and roll up his sleeves and he would go for it. was not viable to go to bernie sanders. >> i planned ahead of time to do that. reason.s a once again, they are so close nd i'm going to vote for whatever candidate comes out of this. don't have any animosity toward either of the candidates at all. but, there were certain things ultimately that kind of brought me to bernie. one was the young people's vote. and ted to support them early it was his pride ns to allow gay marches in burlington, vermont

10:30 pm

and those s in 1983 kinds of things effect my life. hillary is great but she came to late.ally bernie was there very early. 'malley is even great on transgender issues which neither are but her candidates i'll still vote democratic. suspending malley his campaign your thoughts on that. >> it's sad because i think he's but he had a n terrible time with name recognition. he was from iowans d, i don't think new him well. i think they knew him better in the end. coming re still people up to me asking, he's the maryland governor. ah, yes. there is a long ways to go. >> rick miller and david hoffman peterson, thank you thank you.me here.

10:31 pm

>> we saw a lot of people talking back and forth and on twit here son says the democratic caucus eemed confusing and the republican caucus seemed more ballots.d with the let's look at the results democratic h the side. hillary clinton and bernie 81% ers very close with reporting. 52.2% and bernie sanders 49.2 and martin o'malley at .6. the broadcastside and cable networks declared ted and you can see 31.4% was 73% and he's at

10:32 pm

to donald trump's 24.2 and dr. carson 9.9% and rand paul and mike huckabee who has nnounced he is suspending his campaign at 3.9%. and we are waiting for rand in iowa and we'll bringing that to you when he to talk o the podium with his supporters. until then we'll take your calls andi'll look at your tweets continue to watch the results as they come in. let's hear from bradley in texas is a republican. bradley who are you supporting campaign. >> i am actually supporting i wanted to because make america great again. saw iname in as you just about a ten point difference between ted cruz and himself. positions think that him going forward?

10:33 pm

73% voting andgot i know that you are going off of numbers, but i think that everybody needs to wake up and let's -- you know, eight years ago it was all about age and let's hange this and change that. i don't think trump can be bought and i do believe that not going to be bought. going to be able to around lob lob kwreufts and i think he's going to make this country great again and the one who can beat hillary and that is where i stand and i want this country great again. ow, there are a lot of people out there that do not see his he is with the

10:34 pm

political correctness and this do that and the other, but i believe that he is going after need to that we do change. and that's why i'm trump strong is why i do want donald j.trump to be the president of the united states. bradley from sanger, texas. folks in iowa tweets, love he% of a caucus, how a few thousand people form the beginnings of an election. is watching usho in dorothy, new jersey. -- i'm go to a caucus sorry you're an understand. are you? w >> who are you support something do you have a candidate? trump. supporting donald >> what do you think about his second place results tonight? second place, first place. it's his energy i think that's americans.a lot of >> are there issues that you

10:35 pm

on?ticularly agree with him >> first of all, i want to say the veterans because i am a myself. i served in iraq and a lot of aat he has already started is great thing. he's got the ball rolling. in kay, thanks for calling tonight. frank from new jersey. iowan next and andrew is watching us in carroll, iowa. caucus tonight? >> yes, ma'am. i did. >> who did you caucus for? >> donald trump. and how did he do in the caucus that you were in? know, we had a good turnout. the town of carroll did their job. won carroll for the most part. i'm a military guy and i witnessed the down grade of our military. served under bush and obama and i saw politicians come in and make promises to our leaders back on them. and i'm tired of that.

10:36 pm

respects thene who deal and their word and need someone who respects military leadership. thank you very much for reporting in from carroll, iowa donald u caucused for trump. don, you're on. >> hello. don, i'm going to interrupt you. marco rubio right now live. >> thank you! thank you! chants "marco") >> so this is the moment they said would never happen. applause] we or months they told us had no chance. for months they told us because in ffered too much optimism the time of anger we had no chance. for months they told us because we didn't have the right or the right political connections, we had no

10:37 pm

chance. we have no that chance because my hair wasn't boots were and my too high. they told me i needed to wait my turn. line.ded to wait in but tonight, tonight here in people of this great state sent a very clear message. fter seven years of barack obama we are not waiting any longer to take our country back! this is not a time for waiting. for everything that makes this now hangs in the balance. this is a time where we need a resident that will truly preserve and protect and defend the constitution of the united states. that undermines attacks and ignores the constitution of

10:38 pm

the united states. presidente time for a who will defend our second not a president who undermines them. this is a time for a president u.s. ill rebuild the military because the world is a safer and a better place when has the most tes world.ul military in the this is no ordinary election. a choice t just between two political parties. referendum. it is a referendum on our dentity as a nation and as a people. and america, there are only two ways forward for us now. greater than be we've ever been or be a great nation in decline. if bernie sanders or hillary elected --

10:39 pm

(crowd boos) win we'll ey were to be a great nation in decline. becomes in obamacare permanent. did they win these under onstitutional orders from this president become permanent. f they win, our military continues to decline. and if they win, the balance of our supreme court will be liberal justices for over a decade or longer. they cannot win. hillary clinton is disqualified the president of the united states. stored classified and and sensitive information on her e-mail server because she's above the law and she can never in chief.er because anyone who lies to the eople of families who lost their lives in the service of

10:40 pm

this country can never be commander in chief! applause] >> and so tonight i thank you here in iowa. we ank you because tonight have taken the first step, but n important step, towards winning this election. if i am a nominee and i will be what you have done in state, when i am our nominee we are going to unify party and we are going to movement.conservative when i'm our nominee we are grow the conservative movement and and take our message to the people who are paycheck to paycheck and to the students who are burden of r the student loans and families struggling. we'll take our message to them bring them to our side.

10:41 pm

i'm our nominee we'll defeat hillary clinton or bernie sanders or who ever they nominate. want to thank an all powerful and mighty god for the chance us to be a given part of this endeavor here in iowa. it's been a phenomenal experience. want to thank my wife and my family. applause] >> i want to congratulate my ted cruz.nator he worked really hard here in his victory arned tonight. i want to thank another good riend of mine, governor mike huckabee for his service to the

10:42 pm

country and state of arkansas. he's suspended his campaign. we have tremendous admiration or governor huckabee and we done. him for all he's two centuries ago an extraordinary generation living one time here in colonists declared their independence from the most powerful empire in the world. with a powerful words and principal that our rights come from our creator. from our t come government. centuryrest, it's a two history of the most extraordinary nation in the history of mankind. america is special because i was raised buyer eople who knew what life was like outside of america. came raised by people who to this country with nothing and barely spoke english at the time money. no my father stopped going to school when he was nine.

10:43 pm

he had to go work. he would never go back to school. he would work for the next 70 years of his life. arrived in this country, they struggled. they were discouraged. they persevered. less than a decade after they nothing, my with father a bartender on miami beach, they owned a home. a mansion. but a safe and stable home. in a safe and stable neighborhood. decades later they would retire with dignity and security. nd the most important thing of all for them, they left all four of their children with a life own.r than their this was the purpose of my parents' life. o give their kids, us, the chance to do all the things they never could. that's not just my story. that's our story. that's america's story. story of your parents. you know the stories of your sacrificed and gave up so much so you could be what

10:44 pm

they could not. t's the storyies of those parents today who are doing the same for their children. makes america special. and it is this what we fight now to preserve. this is the kind of country that i want to leave for my children. youris the kind of country children deserve to inherit as we must this is what decide whether we'll remain that kind of country or whether we generation to st lose it. and oneimportant choice that each generation before us has had to make. special ca is not a country by accident. america is a great nation generation before us did their part. each generation before us sacrificed. confronted their challenges and they embraced their opportunities and for over two each generation has left the next better off than themselves. for us to e has come do the same.

10:45 pm

now the moment has arrived for to generation of americans rise up to the calling of our heritage. now the time has come for to us our place and do what we must. and when i'm elected president states, wereat united will do our part! applause] i -- n applause] elected president, when we together achieve this victory, we will embrace all the principals that made america great and apply them to the of the new enges century. when our work is done, here's of this ory will say generation. it will say that we lived in the

10:46 pm

new century f this in an uncertain and difficult time. but we remembered who we were. we rose up to the challenge of our time. we confronted our problems and them.ved and because we did, the american dream didn't just survive, it more people and changed more lives than ever before. our children and our grandchildren grew up to be most eest and the prosperous americans ever lived because we did what needed to be done. the 21st century just wasn't as getter.the 20th, it was it was a new american century. applause] task before us. i thank my lord and savior jesus for t and i thank god allowing me the opportunity to

10:47 pm

come this far with each of you. am grateful to you, iowa. you believed in me when others night would beis possible. when perhaps we were lost in the daily narrative, when some suggested that perhaps it was time to step aside, you believed in me. you walked with us. you made the calls and knocked on doors. huge difference tonight. to be back. i will be back here in october september of this year.ecause i said next i'll be back next year but i'll be back in october and september this year because when i'm our nominee we are going to win iowa and we are going to win election for this country! (cheers and applause)

10:48 pm

so iowa, thank you so much. you.ill never forget we will see you soon again. and, new hampshire, we will see morning!he thank you and god bless you! applause]

10:49 pm

rubio in des moines with his supporters after his with place finish in iowa iowa of the votes and in it's also about meeting expectations is what he just did tonight. hence you see the celebratory mood of his speech. take you to rand paul as he talks to his crowd. introduced by one of his supporters and then we'll stay with the senator with his remarks. finish in iowa, fifth place 5% of all the delegates.l the

10:50 pm

donald trump is now greeting his supporters. let's listen in. >> you believable. saying, i tart by absolutely love the people of iowa. unbelievable. unbelievable. on june 16th, when we started this journey, there were candidates. i was told by everybody, do not go to iowa. could never finish even in the top ten. and i said, but i have friends a lot of d i know people in iowa. i think they'll really like me. let's give it a shot. it. said don't do and i said i have to do it. finished second and i

10:51 pm

want to tell you something, i'm just honored. i'm really honored. want to congratulate ted nd i want to congratulate all of the incredible candidates, including mike huckabee who has a really good friend of mine. congratulations to everybody. [applause] >> congratulations. to thank all the folks that worked with us. we had a great team and we will a great team.ve we're just so happy with the way everything worked out. have to importantly, i thank my wife and laura and and don. they went out and they were doing speeches and in fact, don erika i think you did about six speeches today. i just want to thank my family. so amazing and so supportive. applause] >> we've had every indication we're going now on we have a 28 points ahead, okay. new hampshire we love new

10:52 pm

hampshire. south carolina. and we're leaving tonight and afternoon we'll be in new hampshire. and that will be something special. t's going to be a great weekend. we'll be up here next weekend. i think we're going to be 56t victory i hope. don't know who will win between bernie and hillary. i don't know what will happen with hillary. she's got other problems maybe bigger than the problems she's nomination. of but we've had so many different indications and polls that we and we beat her easily and we will go on to get the nomination and we will go on to easily beat or whoever theie hell they throw up there. iowa, we love you. thank you. you're special. we will be back many, many times. in fact, i think i might come here and buy a farm.

10:53 pm

i love it. okay? you.k thank you everybody. thank you. thank you very much. applause] trump thanking iowans after his second place showing iowa caucuses with 23%. t's neck and neck still on the democratic side. there is only .2% difference candidates two lead and as you heard martin o'malley has suspended his campaign. to him now. >> looking for new possibilities and a way to ship heal our divisions and move us forward and you guys have been with me every step of the way i cannot thank you enough. i have come to love iowa. beauty of your landscape. of your people.

10:54 pm

and iowa's been a second home or me this past year from college campuses to family farms, i have had the privilege know iowans whose assion for our democracy is well-known and reknown. story.to share one brief i as in burlington, iowa and collected so many stories from decent, ur street from compass nature people. met a woman ton i who sons served two tours of duty in iraq. knew there was an upcoming democratic deb bait. governor, when all you candidates are on stage ogether, i want you to please tell the other candidates not to refer to my son as a pair of

10:55 pm

boots on the ground. she said, my son is an american son.er and he is my and i was so proud to be able to that request of hers. in essence that's what these caucuses is all b it's voice being rson's he herd. katy and the kids and i decided hat it would be an extreme poverty in deed if the two ratic party only had candidates to choose from. we made this fight. and i cannot thank you enough giving me an opportunity to be a part of writing this story future.ountry's i want to thank everyone who came out to our events and lent ear and everyone who

10:56 pm

went out to caucus for me tonight. applause] and i want to give you my deepest gratitude. getting tweets from people in caucus locations. on by the way.s we're getting other tweets saying, they're here. tell the we're holding strong. y parents taught the six of us that the only -- the politics is actually a noble service to others. and that the only thing wrong with it is that not enough good try.e bothered to each of us has the power and the responsibility to hold strong nd point our country to a

10:57 pm

better future. our economy isn't money. people. it's all of our people. and no one who works hard for a should ever have to raise their children in poverty. it was their cause that we made toughuse and part of this fight. and we have to hold strong for that fight and continue the to make the minimum wage, every g wage so, that family can work hard and get and and pay overtime pay and women.or men and we also have to hold strong principalses and the that unite us. we have to be unafraid to face our challenges. to be able to look at climate change and see it's the opportunity toss come to the united states of in 100 years. and i was honored to be the first candidate to put forward a

10:58 pm

us to 100% clean andtric energy grid by 2050 create 9 million jobs along the way. applause] >> we are a great nation. and we are a good and we are generous ate and a people and we have to hold strong to the values that make us americans. too, is what this tough fight was about. ur diversity is our strength and we need comprehensive 11 million reform to of our neighbors. and f the shadow economy into the full light of an american economy. with so many people across our country. ramirez h a family the family in texas. two parents undocumented, two of older daughters covered by president obama's executive 13-year-old eir girl abigail, born in the u.s.a., american citizen, and

10:59 pm

school tle girl goes to every single day wandering in day when she goes home the doors of her home will be kicked open and her parents will be deported. we are a better people than that. continue to hold strong to the truth that the nduring symbol of the united states of america is not wire fence. it is the statue of liberty. applause] and two of the most incredible people, the most nspiring people i met in the course of the campaign were phillips.loni they lost their daughter jesse shooting in tex texas. transform the grief f all of those who have lost

11:00 pm

loved ones to guns and gun violence. t was because of our campaign we drove this issue and we'll common sense gun safety legislation in the united states america. so, look, this cause continues. this fight continues. and i have never been more proud of the people that have been campaign. with this i've never worked with better roup of young american patriotic men and woman than the ones i worked with on this campaign. this, look, no man ever had a stronger or more a tough s family and .ight than i've had katy o'malley thank you for standing by me every step of the way and being the love of my shield.y sword and my

11:01 pm

without you we never would have been able to help as many people we have. grace thank you. william, the clos closer. i think one of the proudest moments of this campaign was and i tuned into msnbc wearing very clearly without any anger and without racist andll out the fascist rhetoric of donald trump and say very firmly he's looking forward to the fall because his father's going to hit donald train and i freight just fight. so look gang, in conclusion, is no conclusion.

11:02 pm

this fight continues. but look, we fought very, very hard in order to give the people a choice. and the people have made their choice tonight. hard to get over the threshold here. i know that those numbers don't reflect all work that you did, this debate riven and so tonight i have to tell suspending this presidential bid, but i am not ending this fight. the fight that you and i are engaged in is a tough fight toughnesseve that the of the fight is way that god fighting for e something worth saving. our country's worth saving and the american dream is worth planet is worth saving. so as we march forward to the let us all resolve together that the love, the generosity, the compassion and commitment of this campaign will continue to point our country forward.

11:03 pm

must hold strong for that third grade kid who is only third grade once. we must hold strong for that worked itizen who has her whole life and finding her self having to choose between medicine.nd let us hold strong for that mom and dad who are working three to between them in order make ends meet and sweating over cutting up the bills over the table after the kids are in bed. look, we are a great country. people becauseod of our generosity because of our compassion and because of the dignity share and the of every person. our own responsibility to our ce the common good and understanding that, yes, in fact we are all in this together. all of us. new americans. merican muslims, gay and lesbian, transgender americans, all americans, we are one. cause is one. and we must help each other if

11:04 pm

we are to succeed. bless you guys and god bless the united states of america! allowing me toor make this offering out of love. thank you. > martin o'malley the former maryland governor suspending his .6% at the th caucuses tonight. let's look at the results. milli clinton 49.8 to bernie sanders with 49.9 and on the

11:05 pm

side a victory for ted cruz with a ground operation making, 32.2% the and donald trump in second place and marco rubio who polls.d 18% in the en carson at 10.1 and mike huckabee at 3.8% and chris 2.3 and jeb bush 1.8% nd john kasich who didn't campaign 1.1. .4 and jim gilmore .1%. we'll be taking your telephone get your bit to reaction to all of this. but first bill has little more on what's happening in the democratic side. first, that 5.9% good enough race.ay in the

11:06 pm

bernie sanders is winning much city and west and caucus.t in the iowa still rural precincts out. look at scott county, bernie sanders winning in the lower right part of your screen as that tweet mentioned, a number of rural counties still latest, 48.9 -- 49.9 hillary clinton and 49.9 for bernie sanders and the two martin es we heard from o'malley and of course mike huckabee that he is suspending his campaign. you, bill. we'll listen to what rand paul had to say to his supporters little while ago.

11:07 pm

>> thank you. alive and well in iowa! since we're thanking people, i want to thank my wife for me do this for the last two years. i want to thank my brothers and nieces and nephews and for all coming up to speak at the precincts. and most of all, i want to thank guys. everyone of you for making those day in lls and working and day out because you believe a government so small you can barely see it. iberty, they say, requires eternal vigilance. to have eternal vigilance it

11:08 pm

a new generation. every generation has to renew liberty.lance of there will always be people who and there sy way out will always be people who say, give me power and i'll take care you. give me your liberty and i'll take care of you. remnant, it's the few shall it's those who will stand up and say, we're not our liberty, not now, not ever. hell no, we're not trading our liberty! applause] against all odds, against a here and of bias there, tonight the liberty beat four sitting

11:09 pm

governors from the establishment. [applause] hugo wrote that ideas are stronger than armies. of liberty idea lives on in you, in us. fight. continue to tonight is the beginning. liberty will live on and we fight on. your you for all of support. applause] >> rand paul as he continues his results in er his 5%.iowa caucus with with the very close, too close democrat side results, we expect it will be quite a

11:10 pm

hear from e we secreta we'll bring all of it to you happens.t it's time to hear some of your reaction to tonight's iowa caucus results. in clearwater, florida. >> who are you support something supporting donald trump all the way. for him for eight years. the man's powerful. has he sees something that o get done, he don't go halfway. he goes 100% all the way. way, ebody gets in his look out. the man's fair. when i heard him behind the cried.s, i almost but it was a true tear.

11:11 pm

he's all the way for these it's about time. and, man, let me tell you was right about one thing. it's not our war over there, it's their war, not ours. >> bobbie, what did you do for trump. >> i drove donald trump for eight years. man is a jewel. his wife is a jewel. his kids are tremendous. >> you mean his drove his car? his car many in times taking him there. >> so you had a chance to see unscripted situations? >> oh, yeah. ut i would never tell what i heard because that's the rule of thumb. no driver never divulges what they hear. >> thank you for your call tonight. next up is johnny in tyler, texas. johnny, you're an independent. which way are you going? >> with bernie sanders.

11:12 pm

edge ofss you're on the your seat tonight, huh? believe it. better i'm glued to the t.v. i'm so excited. politics nowlowing for about 12 years and this is the first time i truly believe a candidate that is truly by the people and for the people. exciting thing to watch. bernie doesray that become our candidate. person that he's the one that would best represent the value,states and what we compassion, generosity in the ense that he truly would have power in the sense that -- how o i put this -- all the other the dates are put there by elite -- kim: i'll interrupt you because is at the stage right now.

11:13 pm

i'm sorry i apologize that was not a live picture. return to bill who has more about the g.o.p. and tonight.lts in iowa >> susan, before the results commentsn, the twitter were all about the turnout and turns out to be an exceptionally large turnout. here's the latest. the des moines register with his tweet on the chairman of the party in iowa. tweets that the g.o.p. turnout 180,000, exceeds previous record by almost 60,000 votes. looking at this very close race between hillary linton and bernie sanders, 50.1% for millihillary clinton bernie sanders. if we look at boone county, just arthwest of des moines, still couple of precincts, three yet reported. the orange are for bernie

11:14 pm

sanders and the darker red are clinton. there are precincts still counting votes. very, very tight race. kim: l look at the scene the ted cruz event. you can see people are gathered there. waiting for their candidate to come out and we're watching.keep we expect him soon because he is on this.inner as we're waiting for all of that, let's listen next to ben is in chicago. democrat. >> caller: hello. >> hi, ben what do you think the results so far on your side of the aisle? >> caller. i'm a little bit nervous but exciting. >> who do you support? caller: i support bernie sanders. i support him for many reasons. he's taking the least money of he's not as hough

11:15 pm

perfect. but still, he's not in favor of change and hillary really and nowd job with libya he wants to oust assad who is fighting isis. if we want perpetual war hillary be an excellent choice. and i think that's unfortunate democratic side because there is -- i think heal as a ds to destroying ot keep toer people's countries, but bring peace about. issue t is an important military t and it's a decision as well as a peace decision. >> thank you very much for your call. we're watching that ted cruz

11:16 pm

rally. hear from f we can dick in illinois. go ahead., >> how are you? >> doing fine and who is your candidate? caller: cruz right now is who supporting. my concern is more the process i sit here and iowa national t.v. showing results. what, there t -- voters.,000 republican >> that's a record. >> they'll make the nationwide which percent.y small >> so, are you suggesting that caucus's process should be changed in the future? national election process should be changed.

11:17 pm

>> how would you like to see it work? i would like to see it go to a one day election with all the ballot.n about d in england for four years and saw one election limit the where they mount of campaign contributions, limbit the amoun of time that the campaign goes and it's the whole process nationally is done in the same p process. thank you. for a national primary. take a call next from taylor in chicago, a democrat. yes, hello. >> good evening. caller: good evening. this now and hing i have to say that i'm a hillary

11:18 pm

because i really -- i njoy the fact that she's a can dad and i know we're watching ted cruz now. > are you surprised at the closeness of the race? caller: i am as a matter of fact unfair of me to say because i appreciate both -- as you can see senator cruz is on stage. thank you for calling in. we'll go to the cruz event now.

11:19 pm

11:20 pm

great z: god bless the state of iowa. et me first of all say to god be the glory. tonight is a victory for the grassroots. is a victory for

11:21 pm

courageous conservatives across all across this great nation. the state of iowa has spoken. the has sent notice that republican nominee and the next resident of the united states will not be chosen by the media. the not be chosen by , will on establishment chosen by the lobbyists, will be chosen by the most

11:22 pm

where ble powerful force all sovereignty resides in our people, the the american people. incrediblenks to the ard work of everyone gathered here of courageous conservatives the state, we together 48,608 iowans.of in perspective your incredible victory that you have on tonight that is the most votes ever cast for any republican primary winner.

11:23 pm

crowd chants "ted") ted cruz: tonight is a victory for millions of americas who shouldered the burden of seven years of washington deals run amuck. onight is a victory for every american whose watched in dismay in areer politicians washington in both parties refuse to listen and too often commitments their to the people. every is a victory for american who understands that after we survived eight long obama presidency, one personality can right the wrongs done by washington. the millions who understand that it is a commitment to the to our shared

11:24 pm

insistence that we rise and higher standard, the very standard that gave birth to he greatest nation that the world has ever known. to the revolutionary men and ding that all all women are created equal. that our rights do not come from party or the republican party or even from the tea party. our rights come from our creator. and the federal government's ole, the federal government's responsibility is to defend those fundamental rights to defend us. will ile americans

11:25 pm

continue to suffer under a president who set an agenda that millions to hurt across this country, i want to emind you of the promise of scripture. a night ay endure for but joy cometh in the morning. iowa has proclaimed to coming.d morning is morning is coming. day one this campaign has been a movement from millions of americans across this country to organize, to rally and come together, whatever washington says, it cannot keep the people down.

11:26 pm

and tonight is a testament to commitments to ther eaurnings to get back to core commitment, free market rincipals and constitutional liberties and the udeo-christian values that built this great nation. washington lobbyist wreufts set /* /- settled on other candidates and the media in one voice said a conservative annot win, nationwide over 800,000 contributions poured in tedcruz.org as courageous con we e actives said, "yes can"! 800,000 contributions at

11:27 pm

average rg with an contribution of $67. power of the grass roots. that.t's more than it's 12,000 volunteers here in the state of iowa. it's over 200,000 volunteers all across this great nation. of know, during the course this campaign, people have asked heidi and me, are you tired. it is 16-18 mit hours a day, 6, 7 days a week,

11:28 pm

tired at all. [applause] ted cruz: to the contrary, we are inspired by each and every one of you. out of bed every morning amazed that at a time when our crisis, everyone of us has the opportunity to stand and lead that we have put a place of leadership for such a time as this. by the stories of eroism that i see every day, working men like jerry dunleavy columbus, ohio. entire month off his job to come to iowa to live and to volunteer

11:29 pm

full-time. refused to loyer give him the time off, jerry quit his job and came anyway. love the great state of iowa. i'm inspired by people like hammer, zer and josh students at the university of chicago. break att their winter camp cruz. but they didn't stop there. weekend. back this they hit the phones and they hit the pavement campaigning so that across this country upon graduation rather than

11:30 pm

mountains of debt will instead have i am inspired by people like alexander ziegler -- a 13 euro 823r old who made volunteer calls. the men and women gathered here and lifting us up in prayer, lifting this country in prayer every single day. let me say our leadership team -- the iowa state chairman --

11:31 pm

learning extraordinary job. [applause] you have done organizing a grassroots army and let me say to the iowa state director brian english, what an amazing job brian has done. [applause] and to our national chairman, bob and steve king -- [applause] these men have become trusted friends. they are worriers, men of principle, they stand and send the truth. that if in their values and let me tell you these leaders, day after day, week after week they

11:32 pm

have been crawling under broken glass with knives between their teeth. i am grateful for their support, the early support of my friends, steve case. [applause] grateful for over 150 pastors across the state of iowa who are joining our team, energizing the team. [applause] grateful for state senators, state representatives, the volunteer leaders for each of the 99 counties that stood up and said we will be heard and this will be decided by the grassroots. and then i am so grateful to

11:33 pm

national leaders, people like dr. james. perkins. robertson. [applause] and governor rick perry. [applause] enn beck. [applause] led,rs, who have stood and bringing together the conservatives here in iowa at all across. do you want to know what scares the washington cartel? , i don't scare them the tiniest bit. with scares them is you.

11:34 pm

[applause] what scares them is the old reagan coalition is coming back together -- conservatives. we are saying conservative and evangelicals and libertarians and reagan democrats all coming together as one and that certifies washington, d.c. and so do the people of i will hiding, thank you for your hospitality, your love, thank you for welcoming us into your homes, living rooms, thank you for welcoming them my father from the pulpits of your churches.

11:35 pm

let me say to my parents -- mom, ,hank you for the incredible unconditional love that you have given me every day of my life. the knowledge that whatever i might do, whatever i might say, my mother loves me. [applause] to my cousin who is like a sister to me growing up -- a many dad

11:36 pm

,ho came from cuba with nothing with $100 in his underwear. he does not carry money in his underwear anymore. [laughter] a man who was imprisoned, tortured, who washed dishes making $.50 an hour. who has lived the american dream and a man who is sitting ed pastor traveling the country preaching to the gospel. my dad is 76 years old and he has the energy of a teenager and he has been my hero my whole life.

11:37 pm

i love him. when the sun rises tomorrow, this campaign will take the next step. campaign thenue to same way, sitting down person-to-person, leader to donuts returning to the great state of new hampshire. let me speak for a minute to the men and women of the state of ago,ampshire -- 36 years you welcomed to the granite state a candidate running for president who was also equally

11:38 pm

disliked by the washington establishment and the washington cartel. a candidate who was dismissed outright by the media, some called him 15 points to 20 tonts behind but you refused let the establishment and the cartel and the media do your thinking for you, you refused to let them how to vote. you wanted a candidate who did not adopt his positions because of the latest opinion poll. instead, because of a deep and underlying conservative philosophy the grounded him so he knew exactly what he believes, exactly what the principles were in this great nation. and so tonight, i want to say to the people of new hampshire, thank you for what you did 36 years ago, thank you for giving

11:39 pm

america and the world and yes, history itself, the 40th president of the united states ronald reagan. [applause] i asked the people of new hampshire and the people of south carolina and the people of nevada and the people of the 1,er tuesday state on march each of you do not listen to our words, do not listen to the rhetoric of campaigns would rather hold each and every one of us accountable, old me accountable and every other candidate accountable, to be a consistent conservative. if you want a candidate who will

11:40 pm

repeal obamacare, a former candidate has led the bike to repeal obamacare. if you want a president to stop amnesty to secure the borders and keep us safe, then support a candidate who is led the fight to stop amnesty to secure the border and to keep us safe. if you want a candidate who supports life and marriage and religious liberty, support a candidate who has spent decades of his life fighting to defend life and marriage and religious liberty. want a candidate to defend the second amendment --hts to keep to bear arms

11:41 pm

then ask every candidate where were you in 2013 when barack and chuckharry reid schumer try to undermine the second amendment right to bear arms. if you want a candidate who will stand on apologetic with the -- then support the candidate who is led the fight over and over again to stand by our friends and allies, the nation of israel. if you want the commander-in-chief who will fulfill the most solemn obligation of the presidency to give this nation safe, support a

11:42 pm

candidacy who has the mission the commitment, the judgment, the experience, the clarity to identify our enemy, to call it by its name -- radical islamic terrorism. and to utterly incomplete isis. if i am elected president, every militant the face of the planet will know if you go in joint on thef you wave jihad united states of america outcome if you attempt to murder innocent americans, you are signing your death warrants.

11:43 pm

[applause] i would so you this -- the other states across the country probably the good men and women of iowa and support this this,gn, then i tell you this july in cleveland, you will you hear these words spoken from the podium of the unified republican convention. tonight, i want to say to every member of the democratic party who believes in limited government and personal opportunity in the united face constitution and a safe and secure america, come along. to the reagan democrats, your

11:44 pm

party has left you. yourepublican party wants and welcomes you back. because together this year, republicans in the reagan --ocrats stand and economist unmistakable message -- and measures of a regular like plan that once and for role will thrive the liberal elites and the washington cartel incident the outs to see her never to be see a bed -- never to be seen again. together, we can bring back and a new era of military strength of international security and the future of hope that our children deserve. if we commit to do more than hope, if we aspire to govern by a higher standard, a standard

11:45 pm

that will span political party, race, gender and income and everybody. the president then divides us in a racial line, ethnic lines, ridges lines, gender lines, so she economic lines -- we will have a president that will once again speak to bring us together, unite us on our shade values of who we are as americans. the most solemn responsibility of the present is to keep this country safe. and we will stop with weakness and appeasement. we will stop making excuses for global bullies and terrorist and rhetoric lists simply do what it takes to appease them.

11:46 pm

i give you my solemn promise. we will finally, finally, finally secure the borders and and sanctuary cities. and i want to speak for a moment to the soldiers and sailors and airmen and marines -- on to speak to the moms and dads web a child serving overseas -- i will this be to the husbands and wives to wake up and died one drink at their loved one is still alive -- i want this week to little kids whether waiting months upon months upon months to talk to daddy. to all of our fighting men and women who have been sent into combat with their arms tied on their backs, rules of engagement that are wrong, that are immoral, that will end it in january 2017.

11:47 pm

you will have a commander-in-chief who finally has your back. and so the police officers and the firemen and the first responders, the heroes who brought into barney google's incentive out of burning buildings -- the last seven years of having a president, having an attorney general that demonizes you come of vilifies you, sides with the criminals and looters instead of the brave men and women of law enforcement 20,hat will end on january 2017. >> we would take you to senator bernie sanders.

11:48 pm

mr. sanders: thank you. iowa, thank you. , we had no money, no name recognition and we were taking on the most horrible political organization in the united states of america.

11:49 pm

tonight, as a result, it looks like we are in a virtual tie. [applause] and while -- bernie.e, bernie, sanders: it looks like we have half of the iowa delegates. [applause]

11:50 pm

mr. sanders: i want to take this opportunity to congratulate secretary clinton. [applause] sanders: and her organization for weighing a very rigorous campaign. i want to thank governor o'malley. it is never easy to lose, more than one campaign, but he should know be contributed a lot to the dialogue and an issue oriented campaign of the american people. if i think about what happened tonight, i think the people of i

11:51 pm

a profound message to the economic establishment and the media. [applause] that is, that is given the enormous crises facing our country -- it is too late to establishment politics and establishment economics. what the american people have , not justd by the way from progressives and conservatives or moderates -- that is, we can no longer continue to have a corrupt

11:52 pm

im aign finance system former chairman of the veterans committee. in that capacity, not only have i worked hard, but i had the privilege of so many men and women with the minds to defend us and protect our way of life. what they are protecting is an american democracy of one person, one vote -- not millionaires. im overwhelmed and i am moved by the fact that millions of people throughout this country have

11:53 pm

helped volunteer in campaign that the three-way have received in this campaign, 3.5 million individual contributions. [applause] went to bernie sanders.com and not the average contribution was twice. it was $27. [laughter] we do not represent the interests of the billionaire class, wall street or corporate america. we don't want their money. proud -- we are the only candidates of the democratic side without a super pac.

11:54 pm

[applause] reason that we have done so well here in iowa -- the reason why i think we was so do well in your answer other states is because the american people are saying no to a rate economy. rigged economy. we don't want to see an economy in which the average american works longer hours are lower low incomelmost all and wealth is going to the top. the american people understand this country was based and is based on standards.

11:55 pm

it does not bear the top 1/10 --cent owns almost always almost as much wealth as a obama -- 90%. the 20ot fair when wealthiest people in this country own more wealth than the bottom half of america. guys ready for the radical idea? well, so was america and that radical idea is the ongoing to creating an economy that works for working families, not just the millionaire class. yes, when millions of our people are working for starvation

11:56 pm

wages, we often raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour. yes, we are going to have equal pay for women. i've been all over this feudal state of iowa. half0 people and meeting -- i hear people they say bernie, i graduated from college and now i am 60, $80,000 in debt. that is crazy. that is crazy. they should not be punished financially because they want to get a decent education.

11:57 pm

and that is why i believe that in the year 2016 that public colleges and universities should be tuition free. my critics say great idea. how will you pay for it? i will tell you. we will impose a tax on wall street. the recklessness and the illegal behavior of wall street drove -- theonomy to its knees american people bailed out wall street and now it is wall street time to bail out the middle

11:58 pm

class. [applause] and when we talk about transforming america, we will have more people in jail than any other country. disproportionately african-american and latino's. do by job, going to jailtion -- not more incarceration. i will tell you something that has astounded me -- the energy committee -- i have talked to scientists all over the world. it is all about climate change.

11:59 pm

we have a more responsibility to work with countries throughout the world to transform our energy system away from also feels to energy efficiency and energy. and what amazes me is we have not one republican candidate for president prepared to come up and tell us and agree with what we all scientists agree with beer you know why they are not prepared? do,use the day that they the reality of changing. you know what happens when they lose? brothersign and their lose.

12:00 am

sen. sanders: so, i say to the republicans, stop worrying about your campaign funds from big oil or the koch brothers or the coal industry, worry about the planet you'll be leaving your children and your grandchildren. [applause] sen. sanders: now, i have been criticized during this campaign for many, many things. [laughter] sen. sanders: every single day. that is ok. that is ok. [applause] sen. sanders: but, let me repeat what i believe. i believe that at a time when

12:01 am

every major country on earth guarantees health care to all people as a right. i believe that we should do the same in the united states of america. [applause] so, for all of my critics out there, the wall street journal, the washington america, wherever you may be, let me tell you straight up -- yes, i believe that health care is a right, not a privilege. [applause] sen. sanders: and that is why i believe in a medicare for all, zynga hurray program which will not only guarantee health care to all, it will not only ends the pharmaceutical ripoff of the american people, but it will save the middle class family

12:02 am

thousands of dollars a year and health care costs. [applause] sen. sanders: let me conclude by saying what no other candidate for president will tell you. that is, that no president, not bernie sanders or anybody else, will be able to bring about the changes that the working families and the middle class of this country, that our children, that our seniors, desert. no one president can do it if the powers that be, wall street, whether in the supply of money, corporate america, the large campaign donors, are so powerful that no president can do what has to be done, alone. , when iowa has begun tonight is a political

12:03 am

revolution. [applause] sen. sanders: a political revolution that says, when millions of people come together, including those who have given up on the political ,rocess, they are so dismayed so frustrated with what goes on in washington, with young people who before had never been involved in the political process, young people and working people and seniors begin to stand up and say loudly and clearly, enough is enough. that our governments, the government of our great country belongs to all of us, and not just a handful of billionaires, when that happens we will transform this country.

12:04 am

thank you all very much. [applause] ♪ [applause] [chanting "bernie"] ♪

12:05 am

12:06 am

♪

12:07 am

>> senator bernie sanders leaving his convention headquarters. after getting the news that he is in a dead heat with secretary clinton. secretary clinton's remarks are made earlier tonight when we were in live coverage of the other candidates beach. a little bit later on, we will be bringing you those in their entirety.

12:08 am

minutes toor a few our supporters. it is just a few minutes past the hour of midnight here in, and we will take calls for a while and listen to our comments about the results from iowa. let's look at those results first of all. on the democratic side, a virtual dead heat between hillary clinton at 49.8 and she has been awarded 663 delegates to the state convention. this is with 94% reporting. bernie sanders at 49.6. he has been awarded 660 state delegates. martin o'malley suspended his campaign has zero with .6%. for the republicans, updated results with 98.5% reporting. some changes in the numbers without any change in the actual order of winners. ted cruz at 27.7%. donald trump at 24.3%. marco rubio i-20 3.1%.

12:09 am

continuing, ben carson at 9.3%. rand paul at 4.5%. jeb bush at 2.8%. as wasiorina was at 1.9% john kasich. and mike huckabee, who also disbanded his campaign was at 1.8%. 4s -- forre details us. ll: it's curious that the democratic vote seems stuck a little bit. 98% reported on the republican side. it is about 94% on the democratic side. the political writer for the des moines register, kevin hardy tweeted about this, the slowness of the votes and we are hearing this from several precincts regarding turning over the results a long time, yet showing as not yet reported. the -- he sea points is

12:10 am

focusing on paul county, that is where des moines is. it is showing that it is so far going for hillary clinton, but if we focusing, there are 155 of 177 precincts reported, so some 22 precincts are still left to go and paul county. northwest of paul county in boone county, still some precincts and reported. county5 reported in polk and the difference between bernie sanders and hillary clinton is still out about .2%. that could be a bit longer coming, but we will stay here for a while and take your calls. let's begin with toby from california. a republican. you are on c-span live, welcome to the conversation. who are you supporting in this race? trump. supporting donald

12:11 am

i'm a widow, a senior citizen, barely making it, and i don't know anyone that is willing to spend his own money on me, and my country. all of his speaking points are exactly what america needs. he is a man of great integrity, and i think that we can trust him to make america great. >> thank you for your call. someone from burlington, vermont. a democrat. i'm a supporter of hillary clinton, 100%. i think she has been through the storm. she has been tried and tested. am an extreme minority here in vermont, but i tell you, there's really not much of a difference from donald trump and bernie sanders. same, it iss the

12:12 am

different when you are a senator from a state like new york where you are representing a diverse constituency with diverse interests, it is a lot easier to represent a very progressive liberal state like vermont. >> have you voted for senator sanders in your state senate election? >> yes. i think he is good for the state of vermont, but you have to understand, for man's is a very white state. the progressive. a state without a very good --. it is the whitest state in the country. there is not really a lot of industry here. there is not a huge infrastructure. there are a lot of rural areas. that is different that when you are in a state like new york where secretary hillary had to represent wall street, different racing at the cities, the

12:13 am

financial capital of the world. the fact that you have seen senator sanders up close as your own senator, are you surprised how close the racist and i? -- how close the race is tonight? because i surprised think the strategy for hillary clinton and a strategy for bernie sanders, if you look at the state of iowa for example, these early primary states like new hampshire and iowa, you have a rural population there that i think are going to probably lean closer -- that is going to benefit bernie sanders. if you go to states where there is more diversity, where you have a larger black population or a larger population of people of color, i think you're going to see hillary clinton shine because i think that she is speaking a rhetoric that says that i understand the reality of people of color, not so --

12:14 am

>> thank you for your commentary tonight. george is up next in norwalk, connecticut. a republican. where you supporting his campaign? voting for donald trump. for me, i'm at the point, as a republican, since i was 18 years old, and 45. i am done with republicans. they make promises and nothing happens. as for ted cruz, i'm happy that he won, he is my second vote, and as a marco rubio, he could be my third book. >> so you're pretty happy with tonight's results? >> exactly. i cannot complain. i still want donald trump. but, more reportedly, people are getting tired of it. i think from the republican standpoint, i have a lot of my

12:15 am

family and in-laws where democrats and they are all for hillary clinton and it is just like, i don't get it. but whatever. >> think you george. next is april from tulsa, oklahoma. a democrat. who are you supporting this campaign april? >> and supporting bernie sanders all the way. surprisingly, i thought it would be hillary clinton, which i was in 2008, but i definitely feel that bernie sanders has some differences to offer. i'm a health care worker and a new mother. i like what he is wanting to work for, for the future. and i like the fact that he has grassroots and is not being bought through this campaign process. >> how are you interpreting tonight's results with this too close to call race? i think it shows that they

12:16 am

i was with hillary back in 2008, i think that they both have a lot to offer. and, when it comes down to just what i would like to see for our country going into the future, i think the choices and the --isions that he has made for one, not be part of a super grassroots, and being a health care worker, just wanted to make sure that everybody is taking care of. i feel that is representing a lot of what people want to do and take care of their community. i think hillary clinton is close to that, but i think bernie sanders is going to take it all the way. >> think if recall tonight, april, from tulsa.

12:17 am

>> we remember -- mentioned the republican party in iowa with 180,000 turning out, up from 120,000 in 2012. here are the early reported numbers for the democratic party. here is from the hillary clinton campaign. from the ted cruz campaign. from the iowa blog, the iowa starting line. and we will and we will end with some thoughts from jennifer jacobs of the des moines register.

12:18 am

there is more at twitter.com. to medford, oregon, a republican. who is your candidate? >> i am voting for ted cruz because he is a man of god and that is what this country needs. if we do not get back to god, we will be in a lot of trouble. i love bernie sanders, yes some great ideas, so i am challenging all christians around this great nation, that are true followers of jesus christ to start praying between now and election day. because, we need a godly person to run this country. who goes to the creator of this country to make his decisions. and that is what this country desperately needs. winning, that tonight, and iowa, i want to say think he to the state of iowa. and thank you to all of those who came out and voted, now we have to get all of these questions out there to vote. i know we have had a horrible

12:19 am

candidate in the last two years, and they were not even worth going out to vote because there was nobody to vote for, but now, we need to get this country back on track. ted cruz and bernie sanders, i hope are the two candidates that we look for. and then we need to see all of .heir -- what they stand for killing babies, not killing babies. all of that good stuff. welcoming people into the world. we are all people, no color, no race, we are god's creative people. and that is how the world needs to see it. this world is just rampant running then on the tvs, on the radius, everywhere. and unfortunately, even though you can be forgiven, this country better look out. they better start reading that bible if they do not believe, because that bible tells exactly what is going on in the world right now and it talks about our future. god holds our future and he is all-powerful.

12:20 am

>> thank you. eric is up next and he is in michigan. people who live here cannot pronounce it. i am supporting hillary clinton. bernie sanders sure seems to be a nice guy. i would like to see less look lopping. i think that donald trump -- susan: who do you see as a flip flopper? >> i think donald trump and ted cruz are best buddies one day and the next day they hate each other. , think they are working conspiring with each other. susan: what do you think of the results with this too close to call race in iowa? >> i think donald is running around right now filling up his buses with the rest of the

12:21 am

tallies. so we cannot get it done. but, i like it. it comes out this way. it was supposed to. it is too bad that we cannot put religion, like everybody says, back into place, because we cannot do it in schools, or member? susan: looks i you're really enjoying tonight and have good humor about the results. stanley in galveston, texas, a democrat. i am stanley phillips. i am supporting hillary clinton. i feel that she is doing very well in the caucus. , and i sendate her all of my thanks. susan: think you for your call. market paris, tennessee, a republican, who are you supporting? >> donald trump all the way.

12:22 am

susan: how do you think your man did tonight compared to expectations? >> i really wasn't very surprised, i'm happy that ted cruz got the attention that he got. he worked very, very hard. i'm actually looking forward to seeing marco rubio, hopefully, as vice president with donald trump for the next eight years and i would like to see him get his chance at the presidency. susan: thank you for the call. you'll be the last recover tonight. as a wrap up our live coverage of tonight's iowa caucuses, let me close for the record of putting the results on the screen. starting with the democrats, hillary clinton and bernie sanders rna too close to call race with 95% reporting. 49.9% for hillary clinton. votes. withe sanders at 49.6%, 663 votes. martin o'malley with a delegates

12:23 am

and .6%. and republicans, ted cruz is the winner. 90.5%, so there will still be 98.5%. ted cruz, 27.7. donald trump currently 4.3. microbial, 21.1. rand paul, 4.5. carly fiorina, 1.9. john kasich, 1.9. mike huckabee, 1.8%. tomorrow morning on the washington journal, at 7:00 a.m. eastern time we will continue our discussion of what happened in iowa and look forward to new hampshire. also, all of the candidate speeches and our caucus coverage are available on our website c-span.org, with over 200 plus hours a political video all there for you to search and watch. now we will bring you hillary clinton speech to her supporters tonight in des moines.

12:24 am

[applause] ♪ [applause]

12:25 am

sec. clinton: i love it. [applause] sec. clinton: thank you. thank you all so much. wow. what a night. and unbelievable night. what a great campaign. this has been. [applause] sec. clinton: this has been an incredible honor to campaign across iowa with so many of you, to make the case for the kind of future we want for the democratic party and for the united states of america. [applause] there is so much at stake in this election, i don't need to tell you, every single one of you who came out for me, who works so many hours

12:26 am

from my young organizers with energy and passion. [applause] sec. clinton: to the families and friends across this state. i am deeply grateful. [applause] sec. clinton: i love all of you. but here's what i want you to know. rare, it is rare that we have the opportunity we do now. to have a real contest of ideas. about whathink hard the democratic party stands for, and what we want the future of our country to look like if we do our part to build it. i am a progressive. who gets things done for people. [applause] i am honored to

12:27 am

stand in the long line of american reformers who make up our minds that the status quo is not good enough, that standing still is not an option. and it brings people together to find ways forward that will improve the lives of americans. i look back over the years of my involvement and that very first job i had at the children's defense fund. [applause] sec. clinton: i know what we are capable of doing. i know we can create more good paying jobs and raise income for hard-working americans again. i know that we can finish the job of universal health care coverage for every man, woman, and child. [applause] know that we can change and be the

12:28 am

clean energy superpower of the 21st century. [applause] sec. clinton: i know we can make our education system work for everybody, especially those who come with disadvantages. i know we can make college affordable and get student debt off the backs of young people. [applause] and i know that we can protect our rights, women's rights, gay rights, voting rights, immigrant rights, workers rights. too, we can stand up to the gun lobby and get commonsense gun safety measures. [applause] sec. clinton: and has we do that? by securing the nomination. by winning andit going into that white house as others before have. determined to push forward on

12:29 am

the great goals and values that unite us as americans. my esteemedte friends and opponents. i wish governor o'malley the very best, he is a great public servant has served maryland's and our country. [applause] excitednton: and i am about really getting into the debate with senator sanders about the best way forward to fight for us and america. [applause] sec. clinton: in the last few weeks, we finally began to have what i think is one of the most important substantive conversations that the democratic party could have. and i am thrilled at all of the people who are playing a part in that. i know that we may have

12:30 am

differences of opinion about how best to achieve our goals. but i believe we have a very clear idea that the democratic party and this campaign stands for what is best in america, and we have to be united. [applause] sec. clinton: when it is all said and done, we have to be united against a republican vision and candidates who would drive us apart and divide us. that is not who we are, my friends. i have followed their campaign very closely. i understand what they are appealing to, and i intend to stand against it. [applause] let clinton: i will not their divisiveness, their efforts to rip away the progress that we have made be successful.

12:31 am

because we cannot afford that. tonight,stand here breeding a big sigh of relief, thank you, iowa. [applause] i want you to know i will keep doing what i have done my entire life. i will keep standing up for you, i will keep fighting for you, i will always work to achieve the america that i believe in, where the promise of that dream that we hold out to our children and our grandchildren never fades, but inspires generations to come , join me, let's go with the nomination. thank you all, and god bless you. [applause] ♪

12:32 am

>> in iowa, former maryland governor martin o'malley finished in third place with about half a percent of the vote. he is announcing that he is chopping at the presidential race. he made the announcement from his campaign headquarters in des moines, this is 10 minutes. cannotmalley: words express how grateful i am to you

12:33 am

all, all of my friends, and raging this courageous battle. when i got into this a month ago, i had no doubt that it would be anything but a tough fight. and it is a tough fight. but i've always been drawn to a tough fight, and i felt when i got into this, as i looked down the road, i felt very firmly that our country was standing -- scanning to verizon looking for new possibilities and new leadership and a way to heal our divisions and move us forward. guys have been with me every step of the way and i cannot thank you enough. i've come to love iowa. [applause] the beauty of your landscapes. the warmth. of your people. [laughter] gov. o'malley: and iowa has been like a second home for me this past year. i'm college campuses to family farms, i have had the privilege of getting to know islands -- ans whose passion for our

12:34 am

democracy is well known and renowned. . want to share a brief story i was in burlington, iowa, and i collected some stories across restate, from really decent, caring, compassionate men and women who love our country, but i will never forget one of these. i told reporters earlier today, is the story will always carry with me. i met a woman whose son has served to tour is a duty in iraq , and she knew that there was andcoming democratic debate she came up to me and she said, governor, when all of you candidates are on stage together , i want you to please tell the other candidates not to refer to my son as a pair of boots on the ground. she said, my son is an american soldier, and he is my son. and i was so proud to be able to andr that request of hers

12:35 am

in essence, that is what these iowa caucuses are all about. it is about each person's voice being heard, each person story being heard. id katie and the kids and decided that it would be an extreme poverty and dated the democratic party only had two candidates to choose from. [applause] and so, we made this fight. i cannot thank you enough for giving me an opportunity to be a part of writing this story of our country's future. i want to thank everyone that came out to our events and lends me there year. everyone who went to caucus for me tonight. [applause] gov. o'malley: and i want to give you my deepest gratitude. peopleetting tweets from

12:36 am

and caucus locations, god bless denison, by the way. [applause] si se puede.:s we were getting tweets saying, we are here. tell the governor we are holding strong. [applause] gov. o'malley: my parents taught the six of us that the only -- politics is actually a noble service to others. and that the only thing wrong with it is that there are not enough good people who bother to try. each of us has the power and the responsibility to hold strong and pointer country to a better future. our economy is not money, it is people. it is all of our people. and nobody who works hard for a living should ever have to raise their children in poverty. it was their cause that we made our cause and was part of this tough fight.

12:37 am

we have to hold strong for that fight. we have to continue to fight, to make the minimum wage a living wage. so that every family can work hard and get ahead. [applause] gov. o'malley: to pay overtime pay for overtime work and equal pay for men and women. [applause] gov. o'malley: to move our country forward. and we also have to hold strong to the values and the principles that unite us. we have to be unafraid to face our challenges. we have to be able to look at climate change and see that it is the greatest business opportunity two guns the united states of america in 100 years. [applause] gov. o'malley: and i was honored to be the first candidate to put forward a plan to move us to 100% clean electric energy grid by 2050 and create 5 million jobs along the way. [applause] gov. o'malley: we are a great nation. and we are a good and compassionate and generous

12:38 am

people. we have to of strong to the values that make us americans. and that, too, is what this tough i was about. our diversity is our strength. and we need to comprehensive immigration reform to let 11 out of of our neighbors the shadow economy and into the full light of an american economy. i met with semi people across the country, i met with a family , the ramirez family in texas. two parents, undocumented, two of their older daughters were covered by president obama's executive action and her 13 girl usa, abigail, born in the american citizen, and this little girl goes to school every , wondering and hearing all day that when she goes home the doors of her home will be kept open and her parents will be deported. we are that are people than that. and we need to continue to hold

12:39 am

strong to the truth that the enduring symbol of the united states of america is not the barbed wire fence, it is the statue of liberty. [applause] gov. o'malley: and two of the most incredible people, the most inspiring people i met in the course of this campaign where sandy and lonnie phillips, who lost their daughter jessie and aurora.ter shooting and they use this campaign to transform their grief and helpede, we all transform the grief of all of those have lost loved ones to guns and gun violence. it was because of our campaign that we drove this issue and it is because of this campaign that we will restore commonsense gun safety legislation and the united states of america. [applause]

12:40 am

gov. o'malley: and so, look, this cause continues. this fight continues. proud ofver been more the people that have been associated with this campaign. i've never worked with a better group of young americans and patriotic men and women than the ones i worked with on this campaign. i also want to say this, no man ever had a stronger more courageous family and a terrified and i have had. [applause] and katieley: o'malley, thank you so much for standing by me every step of the way. and thank you for being the love of my life, my sort of my shield. without you, we would never have been able to help as many people as we have. grace, thank you. tara, jack, william. [applause] gov. o'malley: the closers.

12:41 am

i think one of the proudest moments of this campaign when i tuned into msnbc and i saw william -- [applause] gov. o'malley: very clearly, without any anger, without any fear, call the racist and fascist rhetoric of donald trump. [applause] and say very: firmly, that he is looking forward to the fall because his father is going to hit donald trump like a freight train. and i just might. [applause] so look, again, in conclusion, there is no conclusion. [applause] gov. o'malley: this fight continues. but look, we have five very, very hard, in order to give the people a choice. and the people have made their choice tonight. and it is hard to get over that threshold here, and i know that those numbers do not reflect all

12:42 am

of the hard work that you did, but, we have driven this debate and so tonight, i have to tell you, i am suspending this presidential bid, that i am not ending this fight because the fight that you and i are engaged in is a tough fight, and i believe that the toughness of the fight is the way god tells us we are fighting for something worth saving. our country is worth saving. the american dream is worth saving. and this planet is worth saving. so, as we march forward to the fall, let us always altogether -- resolved together that the love and generosity and compassion of this campaign will continue to pointer country forward. that we must hold strong for that third year, their great kid who is only going to be under great ones. we must hold strong for the senior citizen who has worked her whole life and now find yourself having to choose between her food and her medicine.

12:43 am

let us hold strong for that mom and dad who are working three jobs between them in order to make ends meet and sweating over cutting up the hills over the kitchen table while the kids are in bed. we are a great country and we are good people because of our generosity. because of our compassion. he goes of the believe we share and the dignity of every person. our own responsibility to advance the common good, and our understanding that yes, in fact, we are all in this together. all of us. new americans. american muslims. gay and lesbians and transgendered americans. all americans, we are one. our causes one. and we must help each other if we are to succeed. god bless you guys, and god bless the united states of america. and thank you for allowing me to make this offering out of love. thank you. [applause] ♪ a now that iowa has held

12:44 am

presidential caucuses, the focus of campaign 2016 mr. new hampshire which holds its prime -- its primary next tuesday. we have live roots the white house coverage from new hampshire of three republican candidate -- campaign events. at 12:30 p.m. eastern on c-span2, ted cruz is doing them, to answer. at six 1 p.m. on c-span3, we bring you marco rubio from exeter, to answer. and at 7:00 on c-span, it is donald trump in milford, and after. follow our coverage online by visiting www.c-span.org /campaign2016. if you are interested in the process, it all has to begin in iowa and then a new hampshire. >> we do not set the rules of who is first or second. we certainly have to cover the candidates where they are. are a lot of people interested in this election. every four years, the mayor people make a decision to say

12:45 am

who should be the leader of the free world. who should be the president. and so, for those who want to follow the process, and do it in a way that is completely unfiltered, we are the only place that does that. the other thing to keep in mind, as you look at this campaign and you look at these candidates, you are able to see how they are able to try to close the deal and during the final days of any campaign, there is lot of everyion on every nuance, news story, every speech, every ad. how is one candidate trying through but the other. and this day and age of social media and twitter, the new cycle is constant. so, we are the one place that can allow you to take a step back and watch it. you can get the analysis on other networks, you can surly here fewer calls and weigh in on the programming, but we are the one place that just allows you to see it as it happens and make up your decision. cruzxas senator ted

12:46 am

finished first among republican presence of candidates and the our caucuses, after the results came in, senator cruz thanked his supporters and talked about what is ahead for his presidential campaign. from headquarters in des moines, this is about half an hour. senator cruz: god bless the great state of iowa. let me first of all say, to god be the glory. [applause] senator cruz: tonight is a victory for the grassroots.

12:47 am

victory for courageous conservatives across iowa and all across this great nation. [applause] sen. cruz: tonight, the state of iowa has spoken. [applause] iowa has sent notice that the republican nominee and the next president of the united states will not be chosen by the media. [applause] sen. cruz: will not be chosen by the washington establishment. [applause] will not be chosen by the lobbyists. [applause] by. cruz: but will be chosen

12:48 am

the most incredible, powerful force, were all sovereignty resides in our nation, by we, the people, the american people. [applause] sen. cruz: tonight, thanks to the incredible hard work of ofryone gathered here, courageous conservatives across the state, we, together, earned abodes of 48,000 -- 48,608 islands. iowans. to put in perspective, your incredible victory that you have one tonight, that is the most votes ever cast for any republican primary winner. [applause]

12:49 am

[chanting "ted"] sen. cruz: tonight is a victory for millions of americans who have shouldered the burden of seven years of washington deals run amok. [booing] sen. cruz: tonight is a victory for every american who has watched in dismay while group politicians in washington failed to listen or keep their commitments to the people. tonight, is a victory for every american who understands that after we survive a long years of the obama presidency that no one personality can right the wrongs done by washington.

12:50 am

the million to understand that it is a commitment to the constitution, to our shared insistence that we rise and return to a higher standard, the very standard that gave birth to the greatest nation that the world has ever known. [applause] to the revolutionary understanding that all men and all women are created equal. that our rights do not come from the democratic party, or their publican, or even from the tea party, our rights come from our creator. [applause] sen. cruz: and the federal government's role, the federal government's responsibility is to defend those fundamental rights, to defend us.

12:51 am

and while americans will continue to suffer, under a president who has set an agenda that is causing millions to hurt across this country, i want to remind you of the promise of description. weeping, may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning. [applause] sen. cruz: tonight, iowa has proclaimed to the world, morning is coming. morning is coming. [applause] sen. cruz: from day one, this campaign has been a movement. from millions of americans across this country to organize, to rally, to come together,

12:52 am

whatever washington says, they cannot keep the people down. testament tos a the people's commitment to their yearning to get back to our core commitment, free market principles, constitutional liberties, and the judeo-christian values that built this great nation. [applause] sen. cruz: when the washington lobbyist settled on other candidates in this race, when the media in one voice said, a conservative cannot win, 800,000de, over contributions board in two ted cruz.org as courageous conservatives said yes, we can. [applause] 800,000 contributions

12:53 am

at ted cruz.org, with an average contribution of $67. that, is the power of the grassroots. [applause] sen. cruz: but, it is more than that. it is 12,000 volunteers here in the state of iowa. [applause] sen. cruz: it is over 200,000 volunteers all across this great nation. [applause] sen. cruz: you know, during the course of this campaign, people have asked heidi and me, are you tired? [laughter] it isruz: i will admit, 16-18 hours a day, 6-7 days a week.

12:54 am

we are not tired at all. [applause] sen. cruz: to the contrary, we are inspired by each and every one of you. [applause] bed cruz: i leap out of every morning, and amazed that at a time when our country is in crisis, every one of us has the ,pportunity to stand and lead that we have been put in a place of leadership, for such a time as this. i'm inspired by the stories of heroism that i see every day, workingmen, like jerry from columbus, ohio. [applause] sen. cruz: who requested an entire month off of his job to

12:55 am

come to iowa to live at camp cruz and to volunteer full-time. [applause] sen. cruz: when his employer refused to give him the time off, jerry quit his job and came anyway. [applause] sen. cruz: i love the great state of iowa. [applause] sen. cruz: i am inspired by people like elliott and josh, students at the university of chicago, who spent their winter break at camp cruz. they did not stop there, they came back this weekend and had the phones and hit the pavement, campaigning so that students

12:56 am

across this country, upon graduation, rather than having mountains of debt, will instead, high job offers any chance of the american dream. [applause] i'm inspired by people like alexandra. a 13-year-old girl from lubbock, texas. , at our campaign 823 volunteerade calls. [applause] sen. cruz: that has always been the strength of this campaign. hereen and women gathered in courageous conservatives standing up and speaking out and lifting us up and lifting us up

12:57 am

in prayer, lifting this country up in prayer, each and every day. leadershipsay, our -- are iowa state chairman, matt schultz, what an extraordinary job. [applause] you have done ,rganizing a grassroots army and let me say to her iowa state director, write english, what an amazing job brian has done. [applause] sen. cruz: and to our national cochairman, bob and steve king. [applause] sen. cruz: these men have become dear and trusted friends. they are warriors, they are men of principle, they stand and

12:58 am

speak the truth. they stand to defend their values, and let me tell you, these leaders, day after day, week after week, have been crawling on broken glass with knives between their teeth. [applause] i am grateful for the support, the early support of my friends, steve days. [applause] sen. cruz: we are grateful for the over 150 pastors across the state of iowa who joined our team to energize people of faith. [applause] sen. cruz: we are grateful to the state senators, to the state representatives, to the volunteer leaders in each of the 99 counties who stood up and said, we will be heard and this will be decided by the

12:59 am

grassroots. [applause] sen. cruz: and i'm so grateful to national leaders, people like dr. james dobson. [applause] sen. cruz: and tony perkins. and phil robertson. [applause] and governor rick perry. [applause] sen. cruz: and glenn beck. [applause] sen. cruz: leaders who have stood and led all across. do you want to know what scares the washington cartel?

1:00 am

actually, not remotely. i don't scare them in the tiniest bit. what scares that is you. -- scares them is you. [applause] them is that the old reagan coalition is coming back together, of conservatives. [applause] we are saying conservatives and evangelicals and libertarians and reagan democrats all coming together as one, and that terrifies washington, d.c. [applause] and so to the people of iowa. heidi and i say thank you to your incredible hospitality.

240 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on February 2, 2016
