Title: The Impact of Digital Platforms on         News and Journalistic Content

URL Source: https://www.accc.gov.au/system/files/ACCC+commissioned+report+-+The+impact+of+digital+platforms+on+news+and+journalistic+content,+Centre+for+Media+Transition+(2).pdf

Published Time: Fri, 03 Nov 2023 01:39:35 GMT

Markdown Content:
175 

# The Impact of Digital Platforms on 

# News and Journalistic Content 

> TS CRICOS PROVIDER CODE
> 0099F
> UTS CRICOS PROVIDER CODE 00099F

# Centre for 

# Media 

# Transition 

> UTS CRICOS PROVIDER CODE 00099F 2

Centre for Media Transition 

The Centre for Media Transition is an interdisciplinary research centre established jointly by the 

Faculty of Law and the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences at UTS. 

We investigate key areas of media evolu tion and transition , including : journalism and industry 

best practice; new business models; and regulatory adaptation. We work with industry, public 

and private institutions to explore the ongoing movements and pressures wrought by disruption. 

Emphasising the impact and promise of new technologies, we aim to understand how digital 

transition can be harnessed to develop local media and to enhance the role of journalism in 

democratic, civil society. 

The principal researchers on this report were Derek Wildin g, Peter Fray, Sacha Molitorisz and 

Elaine McKewon. The following researchers also contributed to the work for the report: 

Gabriel Yakub, Chrisanthi Giotis, Nik Dawson, Divya Murthy, Charlotte Grieve, Mai Duong. 

Rosa Alice provided administration and pro ject management support. 

Suggested citation: 

Wilding, D., Fray, P., Molitorisz, S. & McKewon, E. 2018, The Impact of Digital Platforms on 

News and Journalistic Content , University of Technology Sydney, NSW.  

> ©Copyright Centre for Media Transition 20 18
> UTS CRICOS PROVIDER CODE: 00099F
> Contact
> Centre for Media Transition
> Building 5, Block B, Level 4, Room 32
> UTS City Campus, Haymarket
> GPO Box 123, Broadway NSW 2007
> CMT@uts.edu.au 3

# Foreword 

This report was commissi oned by the Australian Competition and Consumer 

Commission (ACCC) as an input to the Digital Platforms Inquiry. 

The Centre was asked by the ACCC to research and report on aspects relating to news 

and journalistic content, one of several matters under the T erms of Reference for the 

inquiry issued by the Treasurer in December 2017. 

Specifically the Centre was asked to describe and analyse the impacts of digital 

platforms on choice and quality for Australian news consumers. The brief for the project 

recognised that plurality, diversity, choice and quality in the contemporary media 

environment are highly complex and contested issues, and the inquiry would benefit 

from an analytical framework through which these issues could be considered. 

The research addresses four broad themes of relevance to the inquiry, all of which 

relate specifically to news and journalistic content: 

 The characteristics of this content and its public function in democratic society 

 Choice, including production and distribution as well as di versity 

 Consumption, including access and specific practices such as customisation 

 Quality, including any changes in quality in the contemporary environment. 

We were asked to review relevant academic literature and other available resources, 

and specifica lly to consider any approache s to measurement of aspects such as 

diversity and quality that might assist in assessing the current environment. We were 

not asked for recommendations on regulatory intervention. 

The project is comprised entirely of desk -top r esearch, accessing local and 

international materials. These include academic texts and journal articles, policy 

reports, industry data and other available material. The project methodology excluded 

interviews and any other empirical research, as the Commis sion had itself embarked 

on an extensive consultation program. 

The arrangement of the material in the report reflects our progression from the general 

characteristics of news and journalistic content, through the international thinking on 

the impact of tec hnology, approaches to quality, and finally plurality. 

This work is our own and should not be taken as representing the views of the ACCC. 

Derek Wilding and Peter Fray 

Co -Directors, Centre for Media Transition, October 2018 4

# Executive Sum mary 

A report on the impact of digital platforms on choice and quality for Australian 

news consumers 

Chapter One . A contested landscape  

> 

Australians are consuming more news more often , preferring online 

access over offline.  

> 

Digital platforms have chang ed the news. The consumption, 

distribution and production of news have altered fundamentally. The 

platforms provide a point of access to news – a function formerly 

performed by media companies.  

> 

Journalism has multiple roles: it monitors and curbs power; it 

supports and creates public debate ; and it educates and entertains.  

> 

News is a public good — it serves a purpose beyond the immediate 

needs of advertisers and consumers — but it is difficult to monetis e

that ‘good’. Hence, it has traditional ly need ed a cr oss subsidy in the 

form of advertising or , in some case s, government support.  

> 

To attract audiences, news producers often have to make their 

content available to search engines and social media with little or no 

financial return. And t o satisfy the workings of d igital platforms ,

news producers create content that is more emotive and shareable. 

Chapter Two . The impacts of technology  

> 

Technology does not determine consumer behaviour; but it 

influenc es and shap es online behaviour by enabling and 

encouraging co nsumers to engage in certain ways, not in others.  

> 

In many cases, algorithms determine which content news 

consumers get to see. The workings of these algorithms are not 

transparent.  

> 

The evidence on filter bubbles and echo chambers, and on their 

impacts, is inconclusive.  

> 

Collaborat ions could be encouraged between digital platforms and 

news media to develop and refine technology that serves both 

parties’ interests, as well as the interests of consumers and citizens. 5

Chapter Three . Quality in news and jour nalistic content  

> 

Driven by a shared professional identity and journalistic values, t he 

news industry has maintained a range of accountability instruments 

including industry codes of ethics and journalistic norms and 

practices.  

> 

The contemporary media enviro nment has introduced new 

challenges to maintaining journalistic quality: the 24/7 news cycle ;

algorithms ; the blogosphere. For news consumers, this represents a 

new information asymmetry.  

> 

In response to escalating quality challenges , a number of online 

co mmunities have assumed the roles of news media ‘watchdog’, 

‘fact -checker’ and ‘critic’.  

> 

Indicators of journalistic quality can be grouped under three sets of 

criteria: content indicators; organisational indicators; and audience 

engagement indicators . 

> 

The current regulatory framework for the news media is fragmented. 

There are ways in which digital platforms, a s participants within the 

broader social framework for news media, could help maintain 

journalism’s accountability schemes .

Chapter Four . Choice and diversity  

> 

‘Choice’ in competition law has a close parallel in media regulation 

where ‘availability’ is a measure of media diversity; as a framework 

for assessing the digital media environment, media diversity can 

account for the public functions of journa lism . 

> 

Media regulation in Australia takes a narrow approach to diversity, 

based on availability of traditional media, while omitting all online 

news, pay TV and public media.  

> 

While Australian regulation only considers the supply aspect of 

availability, me asurement systems used in the EU and the UK also 

take account of consumption and impact; this offers a richer picture 

of choice.  

> 

Internationally there is no consensus on the most suitable term for 

regulation , but t he more targeted concept of ‘media plurali ty’ used in 

the UK is likely to be more suitable for application in Australia than 

the expansive concept of ‘media pluralism’ used in the EU.  

> 

Even these recent attempts at measuring plurality or pluralism have 

only limited success in accounting for the imp act of algorithmic 

delivery of news and the use of recommenders; this is now the 

focus of international research on diversity and pluralism. 6

Conclusion  

> 

There is conflicting evidence on the overall impact of digital 

platforms on news and journalistic conte nt.  

> 

It appears some negative effects – such as shorter , more emotive 

content – can be attributed to platforms ; others – like pressures of 

the 24/7 news cycle – are largely an aspect of digitisation.  

> 

Two aspects present specific future risks: sudden algor ithmic 

changes which can severely disrupt conditions under which news is 

produced; and the potential devaluation of journalism through 

extractive summaries . 

> 

Digital platforms can now be regarded as key participants within the 

broader framework for news me dia; they may not be publishers, but 

their role as distributors is increasingly hybrid in nature.  

> 

As participants within this news media framework, digital platforms 

have a responsibility not to harm the public benefit provided by 

news and journalistic con tent; there may also be ways to promote it. 7

# Contents 

Foreword 3

Executive Summary 4

Contents 7

Introduction 9

1 A contested landscape 11 

The certainty of uncertainty 12 

The hybrid role of platforms 12 

Definitions and functions 15 

Definitions 15 

Public benefits of journalism 18 

Is news found or made? 21 

Impact of digitisation 23 

Production, consumption and citizenship 24 

Today’s news consumer 24 

Making it pay 27 

Citizens and/or consumers 30 

Fake news and atomisation 31 

Fake news 31 

Engagement as practice 34 

The atomisation of news 37 

The values of journalism 39 

Bourdieu and Buzzfeed 39 

A clash of va lues 41 

Conclusion 43 

2 The impacts of technology 46 

The role of te chnology in shaping behaviour 47 

The impact of algorithms 49 

Personalisation and customisation 51 

Personalisation 51 

Customisation 56 

Filter bubbles and echo chambers 57 

Reduced diversity of news 58 

Compromised autonomy and constrained choice 61 

Transparency and a ccountability 62 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) 63 

Automated journalism 64 

Automatic Text Summarisation 65 

AI bias 67 

Further innovation and ‘affordances’ 68 

Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) 68 

First Click Free and Flexible Sampling 69 8

Instant Articles and Accelerat ed Mobile Pages 70 

Conclusion 71 

3 Quality in news and journalistic content 73 

Quality in the contemporary media landscape 74 

Professional standards and regulation 74 

The digital challenge 75 

Innovations in journalism 76 

Approaches to assessing quality 78 

Organisa tional quality indicators 80 

Audience engagement quality indicators 81 

Content quality indicators 83 

Quality and regulation in Australia 87 

Fragmentation: Fourteen separate codes of practice 87 

Rul emaking, complaints and enforcement 88 

Regulatory framework 88 

Code rules 90 

Complaints 93 

Upholding complaints about quality 94 

Conclusion 96 

4 Choice and diversity 98 

The Australian regulatory environment 99 

Overview of the regulatory environment 99 

Sector -specific rules 100 

Media ownership rules 101 

Assessing diversity within this framework 103 

The meaning of diversity, plurality and pluralism 104 

Multiple meanings 105 

‘Pluralism’ in the EU and ‘plurality’ in the UK 107 

Which term is most suitable for Australia? 108 

Me asurement 110 

EU: The Media Pluralism Monitor 111 

How the MPM works 112 

UK: The Ofcom framework 117 

Elements of the Measurement Framework 119 

The place of platforms 12 9

Influence of algorithms of public affairs 129 

The role of ownership and control 133 

Suitability of these schemes for Australia 134 

Applying the Ofcom metrics 135 

Accounting for platforms 136 

Additional comments 138 

Summary and observations on the role of regulation 145 

Conclusion 147 

Bibliography 152 9

# Introduction 

This report arrives at a fractious time in journalism. There is a paradox: at the same 

time as audiences face a world awash with content a nd information, the profession 

best skilled and most dedicated to help them make sense of the deluge — a craft 

steeped in notions of truth -seeking and serving the public interest — finds itself under 

intense pressure and attack on several fronts. These cha llenges are numerous and 

growing: unprecedented loss of revenue; technological disruption on a grand scale; the 

hamster -wheel impulses of the 24/7 news cycle; questions about journalism’s quality 

and authority . There is an uneasy sense that something once permanent and 

unassailable is now up for grabs. These issues are addressed in numerous guises in 

this report. But for now, we wish to collapse them down to one word: influence. 

A host of social, political, economic and technological actors have combined to chip 

away at — and raise urgent debate about — the influence and role of journalism. 

In understanding this, we need to recognise the opaque and changing elements in how 

journalism works, how news comes into being, how news organisations operate and 

see themselves and their audiences. But there is no hiding the outputs of those efforts 

and practices. By contrast, digital platforms are much younger. Their role and place are 

still becoming clear. There is a fluidity as to how they think about journalism — and 

how in turn, journalism and those who seek to protect it, should think about them. 

As The Economist (2018, p. 51) recently noted, seeking to achieve a particular 

outcome for content, such as a balanced news feed, may well present a ‘definitional 

quagmi re’. But that is not to give the digital platforms a free pass. How their practices 

and protocols impinge on what journalism does in the present — and might wish to do 

in the future — is worthy of prolonged scrutiny. 

In the following chapters we take on k ey elements of that challenging task. In Chapter 

One, we look at what journalism is, what it does and how , in a world where traditional 

models of revenue, content creation and reporter -audience relations are changing. In 

Chapter Two, we consider a key dete rminant in those changes: technology. In 

particular, we look at what impact the digital service platforms owned by the technology 

companies are having on production, distribution and consumption patterns — and the 

flow -on effect those factors are having on the content and diversity of news. We pay 

particular attention to the impact of social media, search and content aggregators and 

the dominance of Facebook, Twitter and Google as primary distributors of news 

content. This role, akin to being the news ‘brok er’ between journalism and its multiple 

audiences, drives our thinking when we tackle the complex questions that surround 

diversity and plurality in Chapter Four. Before we do so, in Chapter Three, we look at 

the vexed and multi -dimensional question of qua lity in journalism – how is it best 

understood and, as with the rest of this report, which parts are changing and which, if 

any, are immovable. 10 

This report is best described as a framework. In both the chapters on quality and 

plurality we offer some guid ance as to how literal frameworks are used to consider the 

overarching concerns of the ACCC’s Digital Platforms Inquiry. 

There is little doubt that the platforms will have an ongoing and profound impact on the 

supply of news and journalistic content. Much of this will be unambiguous. There is, for 

instance, no denying that Facebook and Google glean the lion’s share of digital 

advertising revenues. That is what they have been created to do and they have proved 

extremely effective at doing so. But much more ambiguous is the way in which the 

digital news agenda is being set by news companies, digital platforms and increasingly, 

the participatory public. This debate may, as we suggest above, still be in its infancy. 

Advertisers — and other funders of journalism — should be added to that loose troika. 

Advertisers were once locked into a model that rewarded scarcity and promised captive 

audiences. We now live in age of abundance — of attention and content seeking to 

monetise that attention. Some industry observers have characterised this as ‘peak 

content’: there is simply insufficient revenue around to support the amount of content 

being produced (Anderson 2016). It doesn’t necessarily follow that we have reached 

peak journalism. There is a high degree of ambiguity abroad in society and journalism 

is no exception. But we argue that journalism remains a special case. We hope our 

efforts may help clear away some of the ambiguity surrounding its multiple roles and 

relationships and point to where deeper dialogue and co nsideration of new ideas may 

create equitable and sustainable outcomes. 

We started this introduction noting some of the immediate challenges and threats faced 

by the news media industry. As a potential offset, there is considerable, well -placed 

and positi ve sentiment towards the industry, in particular its role in providing public 

interest journalism. This inquiry is evidence of that: six years on from the Finkelstein 

Inquiry, prompted by the illegal activities of some journalists in another country , we no w

have another inquiry which seeks to examine the potential threats to journalism. 

Much of the current debate has tapped into a hard vein of thought within the industry 

that what ails journalism is not journalism but those who feed off it. There may be a 

large dollop of truth and even bigger scoop of sentiment in such thinking. But is it 

where journalism needs to be to survive this fractious time? As this report shows, 

journalism and digital platforms are inextricably linked in the provision of news and 

content. The ties that bind them are now deeply set in the behaviours of their shared 

audiences. 11 

# 1 A contested landscape  

> 

Australians are consuming more news more often, preferring online 

access over offline.  

> 

Digital platforms have changed the news. Consu mption, distribution 

and production have altered fundamentally. For news producers, the 

pre -digital business model has crumbled . 

> 

Journalism has multiple roles: it monitors and curbs power; it 

supports and creates public debate ; and it educates and enterta ins.  

> 

News is a public good — it serves a purpose beyond the immediate 

needs of advertisers and consumers — but it is difficult to monetise 

that ‘good’. Hence, it has traditional ly need ed a cross subsidy in the 

form of advertising or , in some case s, governm ent support.  

> 

To attract audiences, news producers make their content available 

to search engines and social media with little or no financial return .

And t o satisfy the workings of digital platforms, news producers 

create content that is more emotive and s hareable .

In 1920, reporter and commentator Walter Lippmann argued for a public recognition of 

the dignity of a career in journalism, arguing that ‘the health of society depends upon 

the quality of the information it receives’ (1920, p. 48). For Lippmann, the provision of 

news did more than just inform people, it served to better humanity: ‘The chief purpose 

of the “news” is to enable mankind to live successfully toward the future’ (p. 52). These 

grand sentiments have proved highly influential. 

In response , however, detractors have argued that in practice journalism has regularly 

failed to meet such high hopes and ideals. Radio presenters accept cash for comment; 

reporters trample on the right to privacy; bias is rampant. Recently, these arguments 

have grow n louder. Over the past 50 years, public trust in journalism and news media 

has collapsed. While the theoretical value of journalism and news media remains 

widely acknowledged, its practice is increasingly challenged. 

In the digital platform era, journalis m and news media have come under intense 

scrutiny. With the advent of digital platforms – including Google in 1998, Facebook in 

2004 and Twitter in 2006 – questions about the role and value of the news loom large. 

What’s more, digital platforms have change d the news. The consumption, distribution 

and production of news have altered fundamentally: where once news producers also 

tended to be its distributors, now consumers and digital platforms have also taken on 

the role of distributors. In this way and many others, the relationship between news and 

its audience has become more complicated and layered, with far -reaching impacts for 

consumers and producers of news, and also for digital platforms. 12 

In this chapter, we address the nature and characteristics of ne ws and journalistic 

content in a contemporary media environment. Specifically, we investigate: the social 

and community impacts attributable to the production, distribution and consumption of 

news and journalistic content, which include supporting an infor med citizenry and 

effective democracy; the ‘public good’ characteristics of media content and services; 

and the extent to which digital platforms have amplified or diminished the benefits of 

news media, and altered the underlying economic characteristics o f news content. In 

other words, we will explore the role and value of journalism and news media in the 

context of digital platforms. 

As the research shows, the impacts of digital platforms on news are profound and 

unprecedented, presenting momentous opport unities and challenges. 

# The certainty of uncertainty 

For today’s producers, distributors and consumers of news, uncertainty is a given, 

disruption is the norm and change is a constant. The result is a confusion of effects: on 

the one hand, benefits and opp ortunities; on the other, harms and challenges. 

The benefits of recent changes are many. Digital platforms give news producers 

access to substantial audiences, while search engines and social media engage global 

audiences at unprecedented speed. This expl ains the success of internet news outlets 

such as Upworthy, Buzzfeed and Vox, which mastered the art of creating viral content 

(Foer 2017, p. 139) .1 As a result, news consumers have access to an unprecedented 

array of content. Indeed, consumers can now become producers, as seen by the 

emergence of terms such as ‘prosumer’ and ‘produser’ (Aitamurto 2 011, Bruns 2007). 

On digital platforms, the voiceless can express themselves and audiences can become 

empowered as citizens and creators. 

The harms are significant too, however. For news producers, the pre -digital business 

model has crumbled. Between 2011 and 2015, Australian newspaper and magazine 

publishers lost $1.5 billion and $349 million respectively in print advertising revenue, 

while gaining only $54 million and $44 million in digital (as noted by this inquiry’s Issues 

Paper). By 2016, three quarter s of the total Australian online advertising spend went to 

Google and Facebook. And s ince the US presidential election of 2016, the issue of 

fake news – and the ongoing dismissal by some public figures of unsympathetic 

coverage as ‘fake news’ – continues t o challenge the credibility of journalism and news 

media (Marwick 2018 ; see below ). 

The h ybrid role of platforms 

One of the biggest and most complex changes involves the ways in which the 

relationship between journalists and audience is shifting.   

> 1However, Upworthy is hardly an unqualifie d success story: in August 2018, it laid off 31 staff (Baldridge 2018) . See
> also ‘Engagement as practice’, below. 13

Admitted ly, the transaction between journalists and the public has never been entirely 

straightforward. Most commonly, the practice of journalism was funded by the sale of 

advertising, in a happy accident that regularly saw profit and the public interest coincide 

for news producers. In economic terms: traditional news media operated in a two -sided 

market with its audience and advertisers, where democratic exchange was a significant 

positive externality. In the era of digital platforms, however, that two -sided marke t has 

become a multi -sided market (see below, ‘The economics of journalism’). Digital 

platforms have entered the frame, to tremendous effect. 

In this way, the relationship between journalists and audience has become more 

crowded. This in itself is signific ant, because the relationship between news media and 

its public is crucial. As journalism scholar James Carey wrote in 1987, ‘the public’ is the 

‘god term of journalism’: 

Insofar as journalism is grounded, it is grounded in the public. Insofar as 

journalis m has a client, the client is the public. The press justifies itself in the 

name of the public: it exists – or so it is regularly said – to inform the public, to 

serve as the extended eyes and ears of the public, to protect the public’s right to 

know, to s erve the public (Carey 1987, p. 5). 

As noted above, one key aspect of the change in the journalist/audience relationship is 

in the way digital platforms have helped consuming audiences to become creating 

audiences (Meikle & Young 2012, p. 108). As Axel Bru ns writes: ‘The very idea of 

content production may need to be challenged: the description of a new hybrid form of 

simultaneous production and usage, or produsage, may provide a more workable 

model’ (Bruns 2007, p. 99). The new model has been described as ‘we media’ (Willis & 

Bowman 2003). Here, traditional journalism has been superseded by ‘participatory 

journalism’ (Lasica 2003; Singer et al. 2011, p. 2). Participatory journalism comprises 

citizen journalism, naturally, but also comments sections, discuss ion forums and the 

expanding universe of blogs, Twitter, 4chan and Reddit. In 2018, particularly thanks to 

social media, consumers are no longer passive; instead, they filter and discuss the 

content of the news, and help to create it. 2

As a result, the onl y way to understand the news media today is to take account of this 

dynamic, interactive environment. Bruns argues that our efforts to understand the: 

multifaceted and dynamic news environment within which we now operate will 

continue to be restricted if w e continue to apply categorical distinctions between 

industrial news production and individual news consumption, between 

professional and citizen journalism, between private and public engagement 

(Bruns 2018, p. 370). 

Thanks to digital platforms, the relat ionship between news producers and news 

consumers has become more fluid, and more interactive.  

> 2There is a caveat: not all consumers take advantage of the interactive possibilities of digital platforms. As we detail
> below, news consumption for some people is predominantly passi ve. They let the news come to them, often in the form
> of ‘incidental news exposure’ on social media. See ‘Today’s news consumer’. 14

In other ways, the relationship between journalists and audience has become less 

crowded. Sometimes journalists have been taken out of the picture altogether. Th is 

happens, for instance, when those involved in the news bypass the news media and go 

straight to their audience. On July 12, 2018, the Thai Navy posted a five -minute video 

to Facebook called ‘The operation the world never forgets’. It showed divers clean ing 

masks and checking gear, preparing to rescue 12 boys and their soccer coach, who 

had become trapped in the Tham Luang caves in northern Thailand. Instead of issuing 

press releases and offering spokespersons for interviews with television, radio and 

new spaper outlets, the Thai Navy published its footage straight to Facebook. Within a 

week, the video had been viewed 2.5 million times, had attracted 150,000 likes (and 

35,000 other reactions) and been shared 44,000 times . Traditional news outlets 

including Channel Nine News and The Sydney Morning Herald (among many others) 

then drew on the Thai Navy’s post in their own coverage (Prytz 2018). 

In many ways, digital platforms have become an access point, fulfilling a function 

formerly performed by media compani es. Indeed, one emerging impact of digital 

platforms is that the role of news producer is often separated out from the role of news 

distributor. In many cases, news producers make the news while digital platforms 

distribute it , as we detail below. This ena bles digital platforms such as Facebook and 

Google to sell advertising generated on the back of diverse content, including news 

content produced off site. 

For Robin Foster, there are four ways in which intermediaries work as gatekeepers, 

including control of distribution bottlenecks, but also what he describes as their 

‘editorial -like judgements’ about news content (2014, p. 29). Yet this control is hardly 

unchecked. Traditional media also retain powerful gatekeeping and agenda -setting 

roles. With the conti nuing power of ‘gatekeeping trust’, news organisations retain 

significant power over news selection and agenda setting , which creates :  

> … a shared dominance of digital agendas by a relatively small number of
> institutional megaphones, be they platform monop olies, aggregators, or major
> conventional news organizations (Schlosberg 2018, pp. 209, 213 -14).

Digital platforms do not typically produce news content. They do, however, play a key 

role in news distribution. They also shape the news agenda. As such, they are less 

than content producers, but more than mere intermediaries. They perform a hybrid role 

that involves, to some degree, both distribution and deciding what is and isn’t 

acceptable content. This is particularly evident with social media. As Tarleton Gillespie 

writes:      

> As soon as Facebook changed from delivering a reverse chronological list of
> materials that users posted on their walls to curating an algorithmically selected
> subset of those posts in order to generate a News Feed, it moved from
> deliveri ng information to producing a media commodity out of it. If that is a
> profitable move for Facebook, terrific, but its administrators must weigh that
> against the idea that the shift makes them more accountable, more liable, for
> the content they assemble —even though it is entirely composed out of the 15
> content of others (Gillespie 2018b, p. 33; we return to this argument in Chapter
> Four) .

The digital news agenda is now controlled both by news companies and the digital 

platforms that play a significant role in news distribution. And, increasingly, the 

participatory public helps set the agenda too. In this multi -sided market, news media 

transact with audiences, adverti sers and digital platforms. Disentangling this four -sided 

relationship, let alone its impacts, is challenging .

To proceed , it helps to define and discuss some key terms: ‘media’, ‘digital platforms’, 

‘news’ and ‘journalism’. 

# Defini tions and functions 

Defin itions 

Digital platforms 

In this report, we are concerned with the impacts of ‘digital platforms’ and ‘platform 

services’: digital search engines, social media platforms and content aggregators, as 

well as hybrids thereof. We are specifically concerned wit h the impact of digital 

platforms on news media and its consumers. 

‘Media’ stems from the Latin, ‘medium’, or middle (Chun, Fisher & Keenan 2006, p. 2). 

Traditionally, the news media’s role has been as mediator: to stand in the middle of 

newsmakers and the public, informing citizens by communicating items of news. Digital 

platforms have changed the way news is consumed, distributed and produced. The 

news is still mediated, but in many cases the nature of the mediation between 

consumers and the news has chan ged. One attempt to capture this new relationship is 

by describing digital platforms as ‘intermediaries’, including in the economic sense: as 

intermediaries in multi -sided markets, connecting two sets of users, such as advertisers 

and web users. Here, the commercial attractiveness of the offering to advertisers 

depends on the large number of potential customers (Dolata 2017, p. 6). 

Further, it is worth noting that the term ‘platform’ is also used by economists to refer to 

a product or service that brings to gether two or more groups. On this basis, Google and 

Facebook are platforms, but so too are traditional media organisations which bring 

together readers and advertisers .3 Both digital platforms and news media can be 

categorised as intermediaries, and they interact in ways that intersect and overlap 

(Evans & Wurster 2000, pp. 70 -72). Thanks to digital platforms, the reach and richness 

of the news have been transformed, as we will see. 

For the purposes of this report, we define ‘digital platforms ’ as: 

 Digital search engines, social media, content aggregators and hybrids thereof. 

In this definition, we thus include: Google search, Google News and YouTube;  

> 3See Bjorkroth & Gronlund 2015, p. 305. T hese arguments are addressed in more detail below, in ‘The economics of
> journalism’. 16

Facebook’s News Feed and Facebook platforms Instagram and WhatsApp; and 

Twitter, Apple News, Snapchat and L inkedIn. Among others, we also include 

Reddit, where content is shared, aggregated and rated, and Amazon’s Alexa 

voice assistant, which provides briefings in response to questions such as, 'Hey 

Alexa, what’s the news? ' As discussed in this chapter and Chap ter Four, 

however, we do not include platforms such as news.com.au or abc.net.au in 

this definition , even though they are sometimes referred to as digital platforms, 

including by economists .

News and journalism 

Few, if any, public activities attract as muc h definition and redefinition as journalism 

and news. Notions of journalism’s roles – its purposes, standing, impacts and future(s) 

– remain contested among its practitioners, its scholars and, increasingly, its publics. 

To understand the impact of platfor m service providers on the level of choice and 

quality of 'news and journalistic content ' – the focus of the current inquiry – for 

consumers, we must agree on what constitutes news and journalism. 

Tellingly, the law struggles to define news and journalism . This is evident in the many 

ways various legal protections and privileges afforded to journalists are enacted. They 

reveal considerable uncertainty over what should be protected and how to define 

terms, including what is news. It may be the act of newsga thering that is protected or 

the act of publication; protected content may be limited to news or it may extend to 

comment and opinion; the protection may be limited to professional journalists and 

news organisations, or it may extend to bloggers; in some c ases, commitment to media 

standards is required, in others it is not. 

For instance, there are differing ways various shield laws define who is a journalist. 

Under the Commonwealth Act, ‘journalist’ means ‘ a person who is engaged and active 

in the publicati on of news and who may be given information by an informant in the 

expectation that the information may be published in a news medium’ . But in NSW 

‘journalist’ means ‘ a person engaged in the profession or occupation of journalism in 

connection with the pub lication of information in a news medium’ . And in Victoria 

‘journalist’ means ‘a person engaged in the profession or occupation of journalism in 

connection with the publication of information, comment, opinion or analysis in a news 

medium’. 4 Similar defini tional distinctions exist in many other areas of the law . While 

there are multiple similarities, there are also significant differences, and there is 

certainly no unified elaboration of key concepts. 

If the law is unclear about the precise scope of news an d journalism, the same is true 

outside the law. One of the earliest semantic references was in 1551, when ‘newes’ 

was described as ‘novelties’ (cited in Lamble 2011, p. 34). This captures the self -

evident essence of the term: news is ‘that which is new’. B eyond this, definitions 

diverge widely, leading Stephen Lamble (2011) to suggest that news, like beauty, is in 

the eye of the beholder.            

> 4The relevant definition provisions for the shield laws are :s 126J, Evidence Act 1995 (Cth) ;s126J, Evidence Act 1995
> (NSW) ;and s 126J, Evidence Act 2008 (Vic). 17

Nonetheless, there have been many famous attempts at definition. These include the 

description of news and journalism as ‘the first rough draft of history’, a phrase dating 

from the 1940s and commonly attributed to The Washington Post publisher Philip 

Graham (Schafer 2010). The import of this phrase carries through to the notion of 

particular newspapers as ‘journals of reco rd’ (Hill 2016, p. 11) . It is significant that that 

phrase, with all its gravitas, has fallen out of use, including for The Sydne y Morning 

Herald (Prisk 2011) . By contrast, another definition of news – perhaps more aligned 

with a digital age – is, ‘A nyt hing that will make people talk’, from New York Sun editor 

Charles Dana (cited in Lamble 2011, p. 34). 

One commonly drawn distinction is between ‘hard news’ and ‘soft news’. Th e former is 

driven by the imperatives of objectivity, accuracy and timeliness, and concerns the 

reporting of newsworthy matters. For some, only ‘hard news’ can legitimately claim to 

earn its place in such company. This is typified by the quote, ‘News is wh at somebody 

somewhere wants to suppress; all the rest is advertising’ , which is attributed to early 

20 th century British press baron Lord Northcliffe, among others (Meikle 2009, p. 17) . It 

also finds voice in the newsroom motto, ‘If it bleeds, it leads’, a hardy trope attributed to 

journalist Eric Pooley (1989, p. 36). The hard news ethic underpins the practice of 

invest igative journalism. However, news can also be defined more broadly, also to 

encompass ‘soft’ news, such as feature articles, entertainment journalism and human 

interest stories. 

Apart from ‘hard news’ and ‘soft news’ , a further significant distinction exis ts between 

news and opinion. Traditionally, journalists have considered it good practice to keep 

the two distinct. That distinction remains, reflected in the way that news and opinion are 

subject to different standards within regulatory regimes. Both in pr int and online, 

however, and particularly on social media, there is increasingly a blurring of boundaries 

between the two: ‘ In social spaces, the traditional journalistic value of objectivity no 

longer makes sense: virtually every story is augmented with s omeone’s opinion ’

(Marwick 2018, p. 504). The internet, and digital platforms, have enabled a proliferation 

of opinion, and a blurring of opinion and news. We do not seek here to disentangle the 

two, as both news and opinion are within the scope of this re port. Similarly, there has 

traditionally been a clear distinction drawn between editorial and advertising. 

Increasingly, this distinction is also being blurred. We return to this point below. 

Given various contrasting conceptions, the definition of ‘news and journalistic content’ 

is open to debate. The current inquiry followed the 2017 Senate Select Committee on 

the Future of Public Interest Journalism. Defining the ‘public interest’ is difficult. For 

instance, does soft news fall within the public interest ? What about opinion? For the 

purposes of this report, we do not limit journalism to ‘public interest journalism ’. We 

define ‘news’ and ‘journalism’ neither extremely narrowly (as, say, investigative 

journalism only) nor extremely widely (so as to include personal status updates from 

friends). 

For the purp oses of this report, we define ‘ news ’ as: 

 A diverse range of informative content about matters of import. It can often be 

defined by characteristics including timeliness, exclusivity, conflict, proximity, 18 

prominence, relevance and scale (Schultz 2017, p. 168; Harcup & O’Neill 2017, 

p. 1482). Within this definition, we include political reports, sports results and 

celebrity updates; we do not, however, include social media posts by friends 

and family about p ersonal matters. This definition is deliberately elastic. As we 

discuss below ( ‘Is news found or made? ’), news is a shifting category that is, 

now more than ever, continually being recreated by news producers, 

distributors and consumers. 

And we define ‘jou rnalism ’ as: 

 The practice of producing  news by gathering information and using storytelling 

techniques. This includes, but is not limited to, fulfilling the watchdog role and 

the practice of  ‘public interest journalism ’ (see below) . In this definition, we  also 

include current affairs, comment and analysis that appear in news media. We 

accept that not all such content is produced by journalists, but note that this 

Inquiry explicitly  seeks  to  encompass  ‘journalistic content ’.

Hence we define ‘news and journa listic content’ as: 

 A diverse range of informative content about matters of import that can be 

defined by characteristics such as timeliness. This definition extends beyond 

the watchdog role and 'public interest journalism' and also encompasse s

current aff airs, comment and analysis . Deliberately elastic, it extends beyond 

content produced by journalists. However, this definition does not extend to 

social media posts about personal matters. 

One implication that follows from the identification of this categor y of ne ws and 

journalistic content is that the product is not always aligned with the producer. For 

instance, at times the practices and values of individual editors and journalists will differ 

from those of the organisations that may employ them. While on occasion we refer to 

‘news media’ in the collective sense of news -producing and/or news -distributing 

organisations – either traditional or born digital – we generally use the more specific 

terms ‘news producer’ to describe, say , Fairfax Media and ‘news di stributor’ to describe 

the platforms and others that supply news to consumers. We deal with this subject of 

distribution in some detail below. Further, we end this section with an outline of how 

some issues are applicable specifically to journalists as pra ctitioners. 

In the sections that follow, we expand on these definitions and distinctions , and further 

address both the function and value of news and journalistic content .

Public benefits of journalism 

Journalism, by origin, is the production of ‘factual accounts, and explanations of current 

or recent events’; it can be traced back many centuries, to a time before it became an 

industry and profession. Originally, journalism existed in the form of ‘pamphlets and 

broadsides (large sheets printed on only one side)’, ‘content of private letters, public 

announcements and also word of mouth reports’ (McQail 2013, pp. 2 -3; Marshall 2011, 

p. 4). Those who produced this content would not have identified as journalists. Rather, 19 

they would have aimed to: ‘make money, argue politics, provide a community service, 

and promote their faith’ (Marshall 2011, p. 4). 

Change arrived with the liberalism of John Stuart Mill. Previously, European monarchs 

had ‘restrictions on the number of printing presses that could function’, whi ch were also 

‘subject to pre -publication censors’. The emerging ‘capitalist class’ resisted these 

strictures, which had enabled those in power to protect their seats at the table, and 

champions began to emerge for the freedom of press. In the 19 th century, John Stuart 

Mill crystalised matters by proposing an argument that focused on the notion of the 

press as a ‘watchdog of the state’. This was a liberal understanding, involving ‘the 

provision of information; and the facilitation of the public sphere’. It m arked a significant 

departure from the spiritual and moral arguments that had previously been used to 

support the idea of the freedom of press (Errington & Miragliotta 2007, pp. 1 -8). 

The ‘watchdog of the state’ role exercised by journalists has affected s ocial structures 

and cultural mores. It has toppled governments and exposed injustice. It has, as is 

commonly acknowledged, advanced democracy. 

The modern archetype of the watchdog role is Watergate, and the investigative 

journalism of Bob Woodward and Ca rl Bernstein of The Washington Post . On June 12 

1972, police were called to investigate a break -in at the Democratic National 

Committee’s headquarters at the Watergate Hotel, Washington D.C. Using traditional 

journalistic methods, the young journalists une arthed a story that forced the resignation 

of US President Richard Nixon. Watergate had several effects. On the one hand, the 

episode demoralised the American public, promoting distrust and placing the public in a 

state ‘ready to believe the worst of their leaders’. However, Watergate also shifted the 

relationship between the government and the press, magnifying scrutiny of those in 

power, and revealing the significance of such scrutiny (Fisher 2012). 

In Australia, a recent example of this function of journ alism is the exposure of evidence 

of sexual abuse in the Catholic Church by journalist Joanne McCarthy at The 

Newcastle Herald , which sparked the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses 

to Child Sexual Abuse. For McCarthy, the story involved years of work and hundreds of 

stories: between 2006 and 2013, McCarthy wrote more than 350 articles on the sexual 

abuse of children by Catholic clergy in Newcastle and the Hunter Valley (Walkley 

2016). In recognition, then Prime Minister Julia Gillard wrote: ‘Than ks in very large 

measure to your persistence and courage, the NSW special commission of inquiry and 

the Federal Royal Commission will bring truth and healing to victims of horrendous 

abuse and betrayal.’ 

Another role played by investigative journalists com prises the way they can pursue and 

publish the claims of whistleblowers. The Royal Commission into Misconduct in the 

Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry was sparked after a former 

employee of the Commonwealth Bank, Jeff Morrison, spoke out about the misconduct 

of his former colleagues. Morrison had taken his claims to politicians, but only after 

journalist Adele Ferguson from Fairfax Media investigated the claims and published 

stories was a Royal Commission appointed to investigate Austr alia’s ‘big four’ banks 

(Ellis 2018). Investigative journalists can also come to the aid of the wrongfully 20 

accused: in 2007, The Australian 's Hedley Thomas won the Gold Walkley Award for 

revealing how Australian police had bungled in their arrest and deten tion of Indian 

doctor Mohamed Haneef for terrorism -related offences. In their work, i nvestigative 

journalists face many obstacles. Former ABC reporter Chris Masters has detailed 

receiving death threats, and also the ‘death by a thousand courts’ (Molitorisz 2008) by 

which his stories were stymied, via defamation suits and other actions. Similarly, 

Joanne McCarthy faced legal action from the Catholic Church, which has $30 billion of 

assets just in Australia (Bourke 2018). 

In some ways , digitisation (if not s pecifically digital platforms) has present ed 

investigative journalists with unprecedented opportunities. Most importantly, it has 

enabled data -sharing and collaboration on a global scale. Leading to the 2016 release 

of the ‘Panama Papers ’, more than 350 re porters speaking 25 language s collaborated 

in a secure virtual newsroom for more than a year. To expose corruption , the 

International Consortium of Investigative Journalists built a platform that included an 

encrypted communication system and a specially d esigned search engine (ICIJ 2017 ). 

Investigative journalism and the watchdog role are key components of what has come 

to be known as the ‘fourth estate’ function of journalism. In 1790, British 

parliamentarian Edmund Burke said: ‘There are three est ates in Parliament but in the 

reporter’s gallery yonder sits a fourth estate more powerful than they all .’ In this quote, 

Burke posits the journalist as independent and influential. He evokes journalists’ role as 

a watchdog on power, belonging to a fourth estate apart from clergy, aristocracy and 

commoners (or, as often conceived, separate from the parliament, the judiciary and the 

executive). Such thinking underpins contemporary journalistic practice. 

The watchdog role, variously described, appears in most  contemporary definitions of 

what constitutes journalism.  Typically, however, the watchdog role is included as 

merely one form of good journalism.  The philanthropically supported Civic Impact of 

Journalism project at Melbourne University, which in 2017 mad e a submission to the 

Senate Inquiry into Public Interest Journalism, cited  six key features of good journalistic 

practice  (CIJP 2017) :      

> to keep the public up to date with what is going on in the world;
> to provide the public with reliable information on whi ch they may base choices as
> participants in political, economic and social life;
> to provide a forum for the exchange of ideas and opinions;
> to be a watchdog on those in power;
> to help societies understand themselves;
> to provide the material upon which memb ers of a society can base a common
> conversation.

After reviewing the academic literature, McNair (2005, p. 28) identifies three core 

functions of news media:              

> A supplier of the information required for individuals and groups to monitor
> their social enviro nments; what Denis McQuail (1987) has characterised as a
> medium of surveillance. 21
> A resource for, support to and often participant in public life and political
> debate –in liberal -democratic societies particularly, the discursive foundation
> of what sociolog ist Jurgen Habermas (1989) famously called the public
> sphere.
> A medium of education, enlightenment and entertainment –what might be
> grouped together as its recreational or cultural functions.

Within these three core functions, there is a range of categori es of journalism that 

attempt to satisfy the information needs of different audiences: ‘prestige’ (or quality) 

journalism, tabloid journalism, local journalism, specialist journalism, ‘new’ (personal 

and committed) journalism, development journalism, inves tigative journalism, 

journalism of record, advocacy journalism, alternative journalism and gossip journalism 

(McQuail 2000, p. 340). We might now usefully add to this list representational 

journalism. This refers to interactive features of news media that enable citizens to 

express their opinions in their own words and is allied to the concepts of civic and 

public journalism, both of which turn journalism away from simply exposing problems 

towards assisting citizens and communities to solve them. 

Jay Rosen, one the key proponents of ‘public journalism ’, argues that this style of 

journalism seeks to ‘address people as citizens, potential participants in public affairs, 

rather than victims or spectators’. 

A further approach is to consider the  values  of journa lism. Objectivity is among the 

most important. The norm of objectivity can be traced back to the 18 th  and 19 th 

centuries, and spring s from the efforts of journalists to assert their independence from 

highly partisan press barons and employers and instead c onceive their role in society 

as servants of the public. The goals of balance and fairness were adopted to  articulate 

their ‘professional allegiance to the separation of facts and values’ (Schudson 2001, p. 

159). Adherence to the notion of objectivity as a  key marker of what makes journalists 

different to non -journalists remains an important part of the profession’s view of itself. 

But it isn’t all. In Deuze’s summary of key concepts, values and elements that define 

journalism’s ideology, objectivity is onl y one of five elements ( 2005, p. 447):      

> Public service: journalists provide a public service (as watchdogs or
> ‘newshounds’, active collectors and disseminators of information);
> Objectivity: journalists are impartial, neutral, objective, fair and (thus)
> cred ible;
> Autonomy: journalists must be autonomous, free and independent in their
> work;
> Immediacy: journalists have a sense of immediacy, actuality and speed
> (inherent in the concept of ‘news’);
> Ethics: journalists have a sense of ethics, validity and legitim acy.

Is news found or made? 

What exactly qualifies as news? And is news made, or found? 

In their landmark study, Galtung and Ruge (1965) examined coverage of foreign events 

in Norwegian newspapers with the aim of answering the question, ‘How do events 22 

beco me news?’ Their analysis provided a list of 12 news characteristics: frequency 

(daily events fared well, while long term social trends did not); threshold (high impact 

events were favoured); unambiguity (ability to clearly interpret events); 

meaningfulness (content needs to be contextualised within the familiar frames for 

local audiences); consonance (refers to the possibility of an impending event); 

unexpectedness (refers to the element of surprise or level of novelty); continuity 

(continuing coverage of a n event or issue); composition (has a strong resonance with 

the newspaper’s ideological agenda and target audience); reference to elite nations 

(whose actions are considered relatively consequential); reference to elite people 

(whose actions are considered relatively consequential); reference to persons 

(presenting events as the actions of named people rather than a result of social forces); 

and reference to something negative (element of conflict or drama, even surprise or 

shock). 

Drawing on this work, Har cup and O’Neill put these news values to the test empirically 

in two influential studies of the British press. In 2017, taking into account the role of 

search engines and social media, they drafted a revised and updated list of factors that 

determine ‘news worthiness’:  

> 

Exclusivity: Stories generated by, or available first to, the news 

organisation as a result of interviews, letters, investigations, surveys, polls 

and so on;  

> 

Bad news: Stories with particularly negative overtones such as death, 

injury, defea t and loss (of a job, for example);  

> 

Conflict: Stories concerning conflict such as controversies, arguments, 

splits, strikes, fights, insurrections and warfare;  

> 

Surprise: Stories that have an element of surprise, contrast and/or the 

unusual about them;  

> 

Audi o-visuals: Stories that have arresting photographs, video, audio and/or 

which can be illustrated with infographics;  

> 

Shareability: Stories that are thought likely to generate sharing and 

comments via Facebook, Twitter and other forms of social media;  

> 

Entert ainment: Soft stories concerning sex, show business, sport, lighter 

human interest, animals, or offering opportunities for humorous treatment, 

witty headlines or lists;  

> 

Drama: Stories concerning an unfolding drama such as escapes, 

accidents, searches, sieg es, rescues, battles or court cases;  

> 

Follow -up: Stories about subjects already in the news;  

> 

The power elite: Stories concerning powerful individuals, organisations, 

institutions or corporations;  

> 

Relevance: Stories about groups or nations perceived to be in fluential with, 

or culturally or historically familiar to, the audience;  

> 

Magnitude: Stories perceived as sufficiently significant in the large 

numbers of people involved or in potential impact, or involving a degree of 

extreme behaviour or extreme occurren ce;  

> 

Celebrity: Stories concerning people who are already famous; 23   

> Good news: Stories with particularly positive overtones such as recoveries,
> breakthroughs, cures, wins and celebrations; and
> News organisation’s agenda: Stories that set or fit the news organ isation’s
> own agenda, whether ideological commercial or as part of a specific
> campaign (Harcup & O’Neill 2017, p. 1482).

In this list, we can begin to see the contours of some of the impacts of digital platforms 

on news. Most obviously, as editors become c oncerned with shareability, their 

definition of what constitutes news may shift. Indeed, in various factors (surprise, 

entertainment, celebrity) we can see potential pressures on what qualifies as news. In 

the digital platform landscape, definitions of new s are becoming extremely broad, it 

seems, with extensive scope for the ‘softest’ of content. 

In this observation lies an acknowledgement that the selection of news is not a purely 

routine or neutral process. News coverage is strongly influenced by logistic s such as 

resource availability and time constraints as well as subjective factors such as: the 

combination of social, educational, ideological and cultural values of journalists; the 

organisational cultures of the news organisations for which they work an d their position 

in the organisational hierarchy; and the target audience for whom the content is being 

produced (Harcup & O’Neill 2017). 

All of these objective and subjective factors influence the selection of information that is 

considered newsworthy, as well as the manner in which these events and issues are 

reconstructed – or imagined – for consumption by news audiences. As Peter 

Vasterman wrote in 1995:  

> [N]ews is not out there, journalists do not report news, they produce news. They
> construct it, they construct facts, they construct statements and they construct a
> context in which these facts make sense. They reconstruct ‘a’ reality (quoted in
> Harcup & O’Neill 2001, p. 265).

In the era of fake news, it is necessary to question the notion of constructing facts .

Incontrovertibly, facts exist. On August 2 4, 2018, Scott Morrison became the Prime 

Minister of Australia. However, Vasterman’s point is significant: the particular way in 

which that fact is reported involves the presentation of specific, subjective perspectives 

on reality. There exists objective, verifiable truth, but reporters interpret that truth. In 

this way, we suggest, news is both found and made. And today, it is found and made 

not just by journalists and news media, but also by interactive co nsumers and digital 

platforms. 

Impact of digiti sation 

Given the far -reaching import of news and its contested definition, it is unsurprising that 

scholarly debate about journalism and news attracts its own interpretative communities. 

In this report, we pa y particular attention to those who see the news media through the 

prism of technology. The impacts of technology, including algorithms, will be addressed 

in detail in the next chapter. Here, however, we can ask a preliminary and overarching 

question. And that is, if we accept that digitisation and digital platforms have changed 24 

the revenue models for news producers, have they also changed the nature of news 

itself? 

Several answers have been given. One, heard as early as the first blush of the digital 

revol ution, sought to push journalists and journalism to the side, reflecting the view that 

they had to change or wither away. In his 2008 book, Here Comes Everybody: The 

Power of Organising without Organisations , Clay Shirky wrote that scholars and 

practitione rs alike are now seeing answers to the question, ‘What happens when the 

cost of reproduction and distribution go away?’ (2008, p. 60). He argues that ‘news’ has 

decisively moved away from the notion of newsworthiness and ‘events covered by the 

press’, to s tories that are produced and sustained by the actions of online users. In 

other words, the editorial practice of filtering information has been severely undermined 

and perhaps even made irrelevant (Shirky 2008, p. 640). 

Within the news industry, there rem ains a deep -set fear that the price of survival in a 

landscape dominated by non -journalistic platforms, citizen -journalists and journalists 

seeking the approval of citizens is a lowering of standards and a de -professionalisation 

of the industry. Reporter a nd author Nick Davies is often credited with inventing the 

pejorative term, ‘churnalism’ , denoting content that is produced quickly and without 

care , often recycled from other news content, or lifted straight from press releases . A 

decade ago, Davies argue d that ‘if truth is the object and checking is the function then 

the primary working asset of all journalists, always and everywhere, is time. Take away 

time and you take away truth’ (Davies 2008, p. 63). Davies cited research by Cardiff 

University to show that 80 per cent of the stories in the so called quality press were not 

original, and only 12 per cent were based on original material generated by journalists. 

Since 2008, there has been a renewed push to re -constitute journalism practice and 

toward conv incing consumers to acknowledge that if journalism is a service, it might 

well be worth paying for via online subscriptions. In the face of the digital onslaught, 

revenues in TV and radio have stood up relatively better than print/online. Standard 

Media In dex figures for 2017 revealed that advertising spend across newspapers was 

down 22.3 per cent and 20.8 per cent for magazines, while television avoided the 

landslide, slipping only 0.7 per cent across the calendar year (Redrup 2018) .

TV remains a leading way Australians receive news and current affairs. That TV news 

was sandwiched between reality stars, soap operas and quiz shows seemingly never 

negated its value in the past. Is it a problem that on social media the news is 

sandwiched between cats, Kardashians and status updates from friends? This brings 

us to the questi on: what interests consumers, and how do they access news about it? 

# Production, c onsum ption and citizenship 

Today’s news consumer 

In many ways, patterns of news consumption in Australia are unrecognisable from a 

generation ago. In other ways, little has ch anged. 25 

A first point is that Australians are consuming more news more often (Park et al .

2018, p. 8). Since 2016, the number of heavy news users – people accessing news 

more than once a day – has risen 15 per cent. More than 80 per cent of Australians 

acce ss news at least once a day, and 56 per cent of Australians access n ews multiple 

times per day (Park et al. 2018, p. 51). Young Australians (aged 18 to 24) remain the 

lightest consumers of news, but even among the young there was a 19 per cent rise in 

the number of heavy users ( Park et al. 2018, p. 51). 

The biggest change in consumption is the switch to online . More Australians now 

consume news online than offline. In 2018, 82 per cent of Australians accessed online 

news, compared with 79 per cent who acces sed traditional offline sources ( Park et al. 

2018, p. 10). This is reflected internationally. Digital media have now surpassed 

television as the most widely used source of news in many countries (Majo -Vazquez 

2018). The switch to online is partly explained by the rise of the mobile . In 2018, 59 per 

cent of Australian news consumers used smartphones for news. Further, more than a 

third of Australians access news mainly on mobile phones, a group that is growing 

rapidly ( Park et al. 2018, p. 10). 

However, trad itional media is not dead. In particular, television remains a highly 

significant component of the news media diet for most Australians. In fact, TV remains 

the main source of news for more Australians than any other source: in 2018, TV was 

the main source of news for 36 per cent of Australians, followed by online news (29 per 

cent) and social media (17 per cent, but gaining) ( Park et al. 2018, p. 51). Meanwhile, 

more than a third of Australians still access radio news on a weekly basis, and for 7 per 

cent of Australians radio remains their main source of news. Counter -intuitively, the 

number of users of television and radio has been growing. In 2018, 82 per cent 

accessed TV news on a weekly basis, compared with 79 per cent a year earlier. 

Meanwhile, printe d newspapers are fading from view. Globally, a series of mastheads 

have shut down or shed staff (Fenton 2011; Tani & Cartwright 2018). Only 6 per cent of 

Australians cited printed newspapers as their main source of news in 2018, down from 

8 per cent a year earlier ( Park et al. 2018, p. 51). Even for digital editions, the future 

may be cloudy, with younger generations abandoning newspapers, both in hard copy 

and on the internet (Wadbring 2015). 

Arguably the headline news about Australians’ news consumption i s the rise of social 

media . In 2018, more than half of Australians accessed the news via social media on a 

weekly basis, a 6 per cent rise on 2017, with one in six describing social media as their 

main news source ( Park et al. 2018, p. 51). The young are p articularly social, with 71 

per cent of 18 - to 24 -year -olds using social to access news, and 36 per cent citing 

social media as their main source of news ( Park et al. 2018, p. 51). That said, all 

demographics are embracing social, including those over 55. However, a gender divide 

is emerging: 22 per cent of women use social media as their main source of news, 

compared with 12 per cent of men ( Park et al. 2018, p. 52). 

Social media plays a markedly different role around the world. In 2018, 76 per cent of 

con sumers in Chile accessed social media for news, compared with only 29 per cent in 

Germany and Japan. However, there is a constant: between 2013 and 2017, the use of 26 

social media for news roughly doubled in all six countries surveyed by the Digital News 

Rep ort (the US, UK, Germany, France, Japan and Spain ) (Newman et al. & Fletcher 

2018, p. 134). And social media tends to mean Facebook. Across 36 countries, almost 

half of those surveyed accessed Facebook for news in 2017 (Newman & Fletcher 

2018, p. 135). In Australia, 41 per cent of those surveyed by the Digital News Report in 

2018 used Facebook for news, with Facebook’s Instagram and WhatsApp also on the 

rise ( Park et al. 2018, p. 55). 

Some indicators suggest social media use for news peaked in 2016 and has started to 

fall ( Park et al. 2018). In the UK, Facebook use for news has fallen (Ofcom 2018 b, p. 

51). In the US, the proportion of consumers who said they used social media for news 

in 2018 was 45 per cent, down from 51 per cent the previous year. News con sumption 

on Facebook fell further. From 2017 to 2018, news consumption via Facebook fell 9 

percentage points, and fell 20 percentage p oints among younger groups ( Park et al. 

2018.) This may be explained by scandals about ‘fake news’ and further falls may a lso 

result from Facebook prioritising friends and family posts above news content in 

January 2018 (Isaac & Ember 2016; see Chapter Two). 

However, US research published in September 2018 reveals that the number of 

Americans who get their news on social medi a remains steady. The Pew Research 

Center study showed two thirds of US adults (68 per cent) get news on social media in 

2018, compared with 67 per cent in 2017. Facebook is the most commonly used social 

media for news (43 per cent), followed by YouTube (2 1 per cent) and Twitter (12 per 

cent). However, Reddit is rising fast: it is now the social media site where the highest 

portion of users are exposed to the news: 73 per cent of Reddit users get news there, 

compared with 71 per cent of Twitter users, 67 pe r cent of Facebook users and, in 

fourth place, 38 per cent of YouTube users (Shearer & Matsa 2018) . And in Australia, 

Facebook use for news has been steady since 2016 ( Park et al. 2018, p. 60). 

In the past five years, however, while the use of social media for news has doubled, the 

use of search for news has not. In fact, the use of search engines , chiefly Google, for 

news has fal len in some countries : across the US, UK, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, 

Japan, Denmark, Finland and Brazil, weekly usage declined from 44 per cent in 2014 

to 38 per cent in 2017. This can partly be explained by the rise of social. However, it 

can also be explained by a proliferation of sources. Increasingly, news consumption 

patterns are becoming more diverse (Newman et al. 2018, p. 136). 

Among other trends, recent developments have included the rise of mobile aggregators 

and mobile alerts, and the rebirth of email in the form of newsletters. Podcasting has 

also emerged as a key way for people to access news (Lindgren 2016, p. 27). This is 

particularly true for the young: more than half of Australians under 35 now listen to at 

least one podcast per month ( Park et al. 2018, p. 59). Increasingly , users are 

consuming news that is on -demand, rather than live and scheduled. If current trends 

continue, live and scheduled news may be endangered (Sheller 2015, pp. 17 -18). 

Earlier, we noted that news consumption has become a more interactive process, 

enabling consumers to share, comment and create their own content. Alongside the 

(inter)active audience, however, there is also a large passive audience. This is 27 

captured in the phrase ‘incidental news consumption’, which denotes the way that 

users encounter news unintentionally. This occurs often on social media, particularly 

among young users, where news is consumed according to a different set of norms 

and parameters than on traditional top -down media (Ahmadi & Wohn 201 8, p. 2). 

(Although, of course, consumption can be passive on traditional media too.) 

One study reveals that incidental exposure to news is stronger on YouTube and Twitter 

than on Facebook, and concerns have been raised around the passive nature of such 

ne ws consumption (Fletcher & Nielsen 2017). Further, WhatsApp users are three times 

more likely to take part in a group discussion about a particular news topic (36 per 

cent) than Facebook users (11 per cent) ( Park et al. 2018). In other words, the 

consumpti on of news varies significantly from platform to platform, and many users are 

not active and interactive, but simply let the news find them. 

The rise of social can be partly explained by consumers’ desire for access and 

convenience (Newman et al. 2018, p. 141). For consumers, this access and 

convenience are a boon, particularly since so much news content is ‘free ’ (Rutt 2011, 

p. 26). In 2016, only 10 per cent of Australian respondents to the Digital News Report 

said they paid for online news. Admittedly, by 2018, the figure had doubled, with 20 per 

cent of news consumers saying they paid for online news ( Park et al. 2018, p. 72). 

Even so, this means that four out of five consumers are still not paying for online news. 

This deprives news producers of revenue, and also diminishes brand loyalty. As 

researcher Nic Newman notes: ‘One consequence of this high -choice environment has 

been reduced loyalty to any individual news brand, with the price of most content 

reduced to zero’ ( Watkins et al. 2016, p. 14). Resear chers are finding that consumers 

tend to give credit for news stories to platforms, not publishers, with consumers 

praising Facebook and Twitter for breaking some of the year’s biggest stories 

(Newman et al. 2018, p. 147). 

Making it pay 

With a majority of consumers accessing only ‘free ’ news, 5 a question arises: what is 

news worth, in dollar terms? What should consumers be paying? There is no easy 

answer. Both Doyle (2013, p. 13) and Flew and Cunningham (2015) raise the difficulty 

of characterising a unit o f media ‘content’: ‘This lack of clarity surrounding the unit of 

media content makes it difficult to determine the price of different media, since there 

are highly variable interpretations of what is being consumed’ (Flew & Cunningham, 

2015, p. 18). We exp lore this concept further in ‘The atomisation of news’ below. 

The business model for news has always been different to that for consumer goods 

such as appliances or cars because of inherent differences in how information is 

produced. These differences hel p explain how a key benefit of journalism – its function 

in advancing the public interest – is also a reason for the difficulties in developing a      

> 5Here and elsewhere in this report, by ‘free’ we mean there is no pay ment of a subscripti on, a one -off fee or some other
> form of explicit payment . We acknowledge there may be other, indirect forms of consideration, such as the provision of
> information about the consumer. 28

sound business model (Gabszwicz, Resende & Sonnac 2015, especially pp. 5 -8; Doyle 

2015, pp. 92 -99; Flew & Cunn ingham 2015, pp. 17 -27). 

First, there are very significant fixed costs that must be borne by a media organisation 

before news can be produced. For print media, this has involved printing facilities and 

equipment and distribution costs along with the emplo yment of professional journalists 

and other staff. In explaining the economies of scale that operate in print media, Robert 

G. Picard writes: ‘the first copy printed is said to bear all the fixed costs of production’ 

(Picard and Dal Zotto 2015, p. 152). Th is leads to a departure from the ways in which 

goods are generally priced, given that the price of more conventional goods is closely 

aligned to the cost of producing the subsequent units (setting price according to 

‘marginal costs’). To do so for news wou ld generate very little revenue. 

Second, the value of the news product increases exponentially the more that people 

access it. This is known as a ‘network effect’. It is clear how this applies to advertisers 

who have traditionally sought the exposure that comes from mass media, but also 

applies to consumers who benefit from the investment in journalism that can be made 

from the additional revenue. 

Third, information, and by extension news, is in most cases what economists refer to 

as a ‘public good’ in the sense that access and use by one consumer does not exhaust 

its supply for others and generally prices are not set to a level that means poorer 

consumers miss out. John Quiggin describes information as ‘an almost perfect 

example of a pure public good’ (201 3, p. 91). Government often has a leading role in 

the supply of public goods, and it does indeed have a strong presence in the form of 

public service media and, at least in relation to broadcasting, a public asset –

radiofrequency spectrum – which is used in the delivery of news (Kind & Moen, 2015, 

p. 354). 

Closely related to this ‘public good’ status is the fact that news (or at least journalism) 

serves some kind of public purpose beyond the immediate interests of advertisers and 

news consumers. As Doyle (2013) explains when discussing broadcasting in general, 

this kind of good or service may be the subject of government intervention in the way of 

subsidies or other regulation because: it has a greater social value; it is likely to be 

undersupplied if left to the market; and ‘the government takes the view that more of it 

should be produced than people would choose to consume if left to their own devices’. 

This is the ‘merit good’ aspect of news (2013, p. 95). 

While our report does not investigate the revenue model for news, this brief review of 

some key economic aspects helps us to identify the challenge for policy makers when 

considering the impacts of digital platforms. We may characterise the benefits of 

journalism in terms of its ‘fourth estate’ function, its ‘positive externalities’ or the ‘public 

interest’ in affording it certain statutory privileges and exemptions, but essentially the 

same underpinning concept is recognised by journalists, economists and legislators. 

For instance, as economists Hans Jar le Kind and Jarle Moen write regarding the 

positive impacts of journalism on the public sector: 29 

> Good journalism ensures the quality of many large and small decisions that civil
> servants and local government employees make on behalf of society every day.
> Al l citizens benefit from this, not only those who pay for and read newspapers
> (Kind & Moen 2015, p. 354) .

As a result of these and other distinguishing factors, many forms of news simply cannot 

be produced by the conventional market mechanism of payment for the good or service 

by consumers. Long before digitisation or the emergence of platforms, supply of news 

was, for the most part, characterised by cross -subsidisation in the form of advertising 

(in the case of commercial media) or direct or indirect govern ment support (in the case 

of public service broadcasting). While the loss of a huge slab of the advertising side in 

recent years has brought this cross -subsidy into focus, McChesney and Nichols (2010) 

have suggested there has always been a conflict between the social good and 

commercial aspects of journalism. 6

However, these and other non -conventional market factors have been exacerbated by 

digital technology and exploited (we use that term in a neutral sense) by the digital 

platforms that have arisen in r esponse. The two -sided market, as we have noted, has 

in many cases become a multi -sided market comprising news producers, consumers, 

advertisers and digital platforms, which frequently play the role of news distributors. 

On the digital technology side, the marginal cost problem has been compounded by 

digital production, which makes the cost of subsequent copies virtually zero. At the 

same time, the most lucrative form of advertising for print news organisations –

classifieds – has been decimated by online t ools for searching employment, real estate 

and motor vehicle listings. In addition, the ease of reproducing digital content without 

payment has heightened a longstanding feature of knowledge production (Picard 2011, 

p. 8; Kind & Moen 2015, p. 353; Quiggin 2013, p. 100). Ergas et al (2018) argue that 

the upside includes the significant cost reductions in both production and distribution. 

On the business side, in Australia at least, these lucrative classifieds services have 

shifted in large part to non -media , non -platform companies that have developed 

efficient online tools. Meanwhile the two -sided markets of the past have evolved into 

‘multi -sided’ markets of the platform model involving social networking, internet search, 

various forms of e -commerce etc. Bu t, as Picard and Dal Zotto (2015, p. 156) note ,

publishers themselves face significant hurdles in setting cover/subscription prices, 

generating audiences and pricing advertising in an environment where print is sold both 

separately and together with digita l versions (online, tablet, mobiles) and where some 

versions are made available for no payment, and where platforms have at times placed 

news producers in an invidious position where they have no real choice but to make 

their content available for search e ngines and social media, with little financial return. 

Given the disruption of traditional advertising and revenue models and ongoing 

financial pressures for many news media companies, the advent of native advertising is 

also noteworthy. Earlier, we descr ibed the way that news content has traditionally been 

distinguished from opinion and comment, but that in a digital media landscape the line    

> 6They then suggest that changes in technology and the circumstances of production and consumption present a
> compelling argument for separate, substantial public support of journalism .30

between the two is becoming increasingly blurred (see ‘Definitions and Functions’). 

Much the same can be said of th e distinction between editorial and advertising. 

Traditionally, news companies have made a point of keeping the two separate. Further, 

they have been eager to be seen to be actively enforcing this separation, as an 

indication of the independence and object ivity of their editorial. This is captured in the 

phrase ‘church and state’, which signified the way in which editorial and advertising 

were traditionally kept at arms -length (Conill 2016 , p. 904 ). 

Recently, however, researchers have examined the rise of n ative advertising, 

sponsored content and branded content, which have been described as ‘camouflaging 

church as state’ (Conill 2016). In 2013, the US Interactive Advertising Bureau identified 

six distinct types of native advertising, all designed to convinc e users that sponsored 

content belongs on the platform. These six are: in -feed ads; paid search units; 

recommendation widgets; promoted listings; in -ad with native element units; and 

custom (IAB 2013). In Australia, several digital -only newsrooms rely heav ily on native 

advertising and sponsored content : ‘For most digital newsrooms, the most important 

source of revenue is native advertising. This is paid ads that match the news outlet’s 

page content, overall design and is consistent with its platform behavio ur’ (Carson & 

Muller 2017 , p. 5 ). For instance, Junkee Media, a Sydney -based digital media company 

that creates content to appeal to young Australians, has said native ads are a ‘massive 

part of our revenue’ (Carson & Muller 2017 , pp 36 -37 ). In 2016, most of the advertising 

revenue attracted by arts media company The Daily Review came from native 

advertising, not banner advertising. This includes reviews sponsored by the company 

being reviewed, without any explicit acknowledgement that the review is sponsor ed 

(Carson & Muller 2017 , p. 37 ). Disclosure is a key issue for native advertising, branded 

content and sponsored content. The US Interactive Advertising Bureau argues that 

disclosure is crucial: ‘Regardless of native advertising unit type, the IAB advocat es that, 

for paid native ad units, clarity and prominence of the disclosure is paramount’ (IAB 

2013, p. 15). 

Citizens and/or consumers 

In the economic concepts discussed above and also in the other approaches we have 

considered, j ournalism is both a ‘publi c good ’ in the marketplace and a public good for 

society. 

This ties in with the distinction between ‘citizens’ and ‘consumers’. Legal scholar Cass 

Sunstein argues, ‘the role of citizen is very different from the role of consumer’ 

(Sunstein 20 17, p. 127). T he former role concerns, inter alia, people’s engagement with 

the democratic process and public life; the latter concerns their role in the marketplace, 

in regard to the goods and services they consume. This distinction is obvious in myriad 

ways: for insta nce, a person may vote for parties that seek stringent laws to protect the 

environment and create national parks, and yet they may litter and never visit those 

parks. ‘In their role as citizens, people might seek to implement their highest 

aspirations when they do not do so in private consumption … they might attempt to 

satisfy altruistic or other -regarding desires, which diverge from the self -interested 

preferences often characteristic of the behaviour of consumers in markets’ (Sunstein 31 

20 17, p. 128). Suns tein then argues that we ought to think through the citizenship lens, 

not merely the consumer lens, when seeking to assess and regulate the structures that 

inform our consumer choices: ‘we should evaluate communications technologies and 

social media by ask ing how they affect us as citizens, not only by asking how they 

affect us as consumers’ (Sunstein, 2017, p. 157). 

The tension between notions of citizen and consumer is evident in the scope of the 

current inquiry: while we are seeking to articulate how new s media plays a vital role in 

the way citizens engage in democracy and public life, at the same time we seek to 

investigate and reveal the impacts of digital platforms on news consumers .

One response has been to reposition journalism more clearly on the si de of the citizen. 

As journalism scholar Jay Rosen suggests, journalism ought to strive to work side by 

side with citizens, rather than seeking to service its audience primarily as consumers. 

The Dutch website, De Correspondent, has seemingly created such a model. It works 

with its 50,000 or so members to set the agenda of its reporting, often co -opting its 

‘citizens’ to report. It is member -funded and ad -free, and Rosen is ambassador for De 

Correspondent in English -language countries. He sees the site as a n example of 

‘optimi sing for trust’ and listening to the audience: ‘ Because the users of the product 

have more power, the makers of the product have to listen to them more. Increasingly 

the quality of your journalism will depend on the strength of your rel ationship with the 

people who use and value your work’ (Rosen 2018). 

Unfortunately, levels of trust in news media have been in free fall for 50 years. In 1978, 

68 per cent of people in the US trusted news media; by 2016 that figure had dropped to 

32 per ce nt  (Swift 2016) . These figures have been consistently confir med globally 

(McKewon 2018). In the past two years, however, there has been a rebound. I n May 

2018, the Digital News Report found that trust in news had risen to 50 per cent among 

Australians, up from 42 per cent a year earlier. Further, 55 per cent of Aus tralians (up 7 

per cent) said they trusted the news they use most of the time. By contrast, only 24 per 

cent of news consumers said they trusted the news they found on social media and 39 

per cent trusted the news they found via search engines  (Park et al. 2018) . Taken 

together, these trust levels  are concerning, because societies that trust have been 

shown to be societies that thrive. As Francis Fukuyama writes: ‘One of the most 

important lessons we can learn from an examination of economic life is that a nation’s 

well -being, as well as its abilit y to compete, is conditioned by a single, pervasive 

cultural characteristic: the level of trust inherent in society’ (Fukuyama 1995, p. 7). 

# Fake news and atomisation 

Fake news 

Trust in news media has been hit particularly hard by the rise of ‘fake news’ , a term 

which has expanded significantly in usage and scope since 2016 (Waisbord 2018, p. 

2). Scholars have long used the term to describe satirical sites, doctored photography, 

fabricated news, propaganda and more (Tandoc et al . 2017). This changed during the 

US election of 2016. Initially, it was used to describe the no -frills sites that parroted the 32 

conventions of online news, but contained sensationalised stories to attract advertising 

dollars (Silverman 2016). The term was then invoked in reference to h yper -partisan but 

not necessarily misleading news sites such as Breitbart; and it further expanded when 

presidential candidate Donald Trump used it to describe unsympathetic news 

coverage. In the first year of his presidency, Mr Trump used ‘fake news’ in 1 80 tweets 

(Hambrick & Marqardt 20 18). In 2018, the term remains ‘ both vague and value -laden ’

(Marwick, 2018: 476). As a result, scholars ha ve suggested instead the terms 

‘problematic information ’ (Jack 2017) and even ‘malinformation’ (Derakshan and 

Warkle 2017). 

Still, the term ‘fake news ’ is in wide currency, often in connection with digital platforms:  

> Regardless of what ‘fake news’ actually means, it is typically tied up with
> anxieties about the democratic ramifications of the shift from consuming news
> fr om broadcast television and newspapers to consuming news on social
> platforms … Thus, platforms including Facebook and Twitter have been heavily
> criticized for their role in spreading, facilitating, and even encouraging ‘fake
> news’ (Marwick, 2018: 478).

Fac ebook’s newsfeed algorithm has been accused of supercharging the spread of fake 

news (Pourghomi et al, 2017). So too Google’s YouTube, which ranks second (behind 

Facebook) in Australia for social media used to access news ( Park et al. 2018; Lewis, 

2018). C ertainly, fake news is perfectly suited to the fragmented news landscape ,

where ‘ clickbait ’ has been implicated in the rapid spread of misinformation online 

(Chen, Conroy, Rubin, 2015). What’s more, fake news content can crowd out real 

news. During the US presidential election of 2016, fake news stories received more 

engagement from Facebook users than the news stories of credible news 

organizations (Silverman in Brummette et. al., 2018 p. 501; Gillespie 2018, pp. 202 -3). 

During the final three months of the 2016 US presidential election, the 20 most widely 

circulated false election stories from discredited sites and hyperpartisan blogs 

generated more than 8.7 million shares, reactions and comments. These stories were 

shared with much greater frequency than were the top circulatin g stories from major 

news sites ( Clark & Marchi, 2017, p. 6). Similar trends were evident on Twitter 

(Schlitzer 2018, p. 38). In one extensive and recent study, researchers investigated all 

the verified true and false news stories distributed on Twitter from 2006 to 2017. This 

involved 126,000 stories tweeted by 3 million people more than 4.5 million times. They 

found:   

> falsehood diffused significantly farther, faster, deeper, and more broadly than
> the truth in all categories of information, and the effects were more pronounced
> for false political news than for false news about terrorism, natural disasters,
> science, urban legends, or financial information (Vosoughi, Roy &Aral 2018).

The researchers found that fake news was ‘more novel ’, and, unlike true news, inspired 

emotions o f fear, disgust and surprise. 

The intentions behind fake news vary, and are often unclear. In her research, Alice 

Marwick found that a lot of fake news is ‘polysemous ’. That is, it deliberately appeals to 33 

diverse people, such as both Democrats and Republic ans. The combination of fake 

news and an atomised news landscape (see below) has left consumers confused and 

disoriented, unable to distinguish between types of news, the credibility of individual 

news items and the relative importance of news items ( Brummette et. al., 2018; Clark & 

Marchi 2017, p. 6 -7; Sehl et. al., 2018, p. 29). 

Digital platforms, which stand to profit financially if fake news attracts audiences and 

advertisers, were initially slow to accept responsibility or take action. Two days after the 

US election, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg said: ‘I think the idea that fake news on 

Facebook —of which it’s a very small amount of the content —influenced the election in 

any way is a pretty crazy idea. ’ However, by April 2017 he had announced partnerships 

with fact -checkers and introduced tools to allow people to dispute the veracity of news 

items appearing on the site s (Hackett 2017) . Subsequently, there h ave been several 

anti -fake news collaborations, including the ‘coordinated project of journalism 

newsrooms, universities, nonprofits and tech companies to challenge rumors and 

fabrications in the 2017 French election, which appears to have gained widesprea d

support and increased media literacy by journa lists and members of the public’ 

(Tenove et al. 2018 , p. 38). 

Explicitly, fake news was the motivation behind changes in January 2018 to 

Facebook’s News Feed algorithm, which prioritised the posts of friends and family over 

news content (see Chapter Two). And in July 2018 , Yo uTube announced it is investing 

US$25 million to better support trusted news providers. The service will prom ote videos 

from vetted sources ‘ to make it easier to find quality news ’, and will create new features 

to help distribute loc al news. According to Y ouTube: ‘ We believe quality journalism 

requires sustainable revenue streams and that we have a responsibility to support 

innovation i n products and funding for news’ (cited in Hern 2018 b). In August 2018, 

Facebook, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, LinkedIn and Pin terest all banned or cracked 

down on InfoWars and host Alex Jones, who claims the Sandy Hook elementary school 

shooting was a hoax ( Fisher 2018 ). Twitter followed. Globally, several major initiatives 

are working to combat fake news and restore trust. Among them: News Guard is hiring 

journalists to rate news content by trustworthiness (newsguardtechnologies.com); The 

Trust Project is devising ‘ trust indicators ’ to increase transparency for users 

(thetrustproject.org); Trusting News is working with local US n ewsrooms to develop 

specific trust -building solutions (trustingnews.org); the News Integrity Initiative is 

supporting various projects ‘ to foster informed and engaged communities, combat 

media manipulation, and support inclusive, constructive, and respectf ul civic discourse ’

(journalism.cuny.edu); the Journalism Trust Initiative is a media self -regulatory initiative 

to combat disinformation online (rsf.org); Deepnews.ai is working to use AI and 

machine learning to surface higher quality content (deepnews.ai ); the ‘verified 

accounts’ initiative from Twitter (help.twitter.com) uses a blue badge to alert users ‘that 

an account of public interest is authentic’. 34 

Many of these initiatives are backed by digital platforms .7 The Trust Project is co -

funded by Google, and the project’s partners include Facebook, Twitter and Bing. The 

News Integrity Initiative is co -funded by Facebook. The Trust & News Initiative is co -

funded by the Facebook Journalism Project. And Deepnews.ai is partnered with the 

Trust Project. In Sept ember 2018, Facebook announced it would roll out its context 

button to help Australian users check the veracity of stories appearing in their News 

Feed. Previously launched in the US and UK, the feature enables users to see a 

publisher’s previous posts and further information, including its Wikipedia page 

(Wallbank 2018). 

Early research suggests some of these strategies are having a positive impact. In 

September 2018, researchers from NYU and Stanford found that Facebook’s efforts to 

combat fake news seem to be working, with the result that: 

… the overall magnitude of the misinformation problem may have declined, at 

least temporarily, and that efforts by Facebook following the 2016 election to 

limit the diffusion of misinformation may have had a meaningful response 

(Owen 2018). 

Concern has been expressed that fake news will become increasingly sophisticated 

with the advent of automated fake news, algo -journalism and ‘empathic media ’ (Bakir 

and MacStay, 2018). In this context, Alice Marwick argues that the c auses and effects 

of fake news are complex, but digital platforms bear some responsibility: 

We must understand ‘fake news’ as part of a larger media ecosystem. That 

does not mean that we should ignore platforms; we must scrutinise the ways in 

which algorit hms and ad systems promote or incentivise problematic content, 

and the frequency with which extremist content is surfaced (Marwick, 2018: 

510). 

Engagement as practice 

In an era of fake news and viral content, journalism has had to change. 

On one view, the advent of Web 2.0 technologies and the emergence of participatory 

journalism have changed the function of journalism from primarily being about 

providing information to being something much more contested, active and, perhaps, 

important. Clay Shirky et al. (2015) claim that the rise of citizen journalism and ‘free’ 

online content has transformed the news ecosystem from being a world of ‘limited 

information’ to one of ‘overwhelming, often unprocessed, information’. They claim that 

this places emphasis on the role of journalists and news organisations as creating an 

effective and reliable process that has the effect of transforming the information -scarce 

environment to one that is information -rich. One of the major dilemmas of amateur 

production becomes how to organise, rationalise and systematise production of news. 

In a market where it is easily achievable to set up a new news organisation, stabilising    

> 7In addition to the matters mentioned here, see Chapter Two for an account of changes to the Facebook algorithm
> which prioritised ‘meaningfu l’ content over news content, and also for specific collaborations between digital platforms
> and publishers, including Instant Articles and Accelerated Mobile Pages. In Chapter Four we mention some initiatives
> that relate to media diversity. 35

and maintaining momentum over a medium to long term is the challenge. Shirky et al. 

claim that creating an u nderstanding of how journalistic organisations stabilise 

themselves is the ‘missing link’ in creating a thriving digital news ecosystem that 

enables journalism to uphold its traditional functions. On this view, stability may be an 

essential new value for j ournalists and news media. 

A contrasting view is that news is, by definition, amorphous and unstable. As Matt 

Carlson writes, journalism is a ‘constructed and malleable cultural practice and 

therefore an adaptable one’. On this view, journalism is open to change and 

reconstruction. Evidence for this perspective can be found, for instance, in the way in 

which print media has responded to the digital environment by emphasising the visual 

and conversational nature of news content, adding video, audio, links an d tweets to tell 

stories and engage audiences. Rather than stability, then, the suggestion is that 

adaptability is a significant emerging news value. When some argue for stability, and 

others for adaptability, we can see the competing forces acting on jour nalism. 

Over time, either stability or adaptability  – or perhaps a hybrid of both  – may well 

establish itself as a core journalistic value. In the meantime, another value already has 

established itself, and is perhaps driving journalism more than any other . That value is 

engagement . In fact, it denotes more than a value. It serves as a measure of success 

(of a story, whether hard or soft, text, video or audio; of a day; of an organisation), a 

guide by which to service and connect with journalism’s publics,  and a way of using 

social media networks in the act of distribution. Sharing/engagement has created new 

newsroom practices and activities: comments, retweets, fans, friends, favourites and 

followers. They have also opened up a tool -driven approach that has  enabled all sorts 

of websites, some that look like news sites, some that don’t, to enter the journalism 

space. The lines between social media, news media and social platform are 

increasingly blurring. As journalism scholar Barbie Zelizer notes, ‘social me dia sites as 

varied as Reddit, LinkedIn, Medium and traditional news media platforms all use what 

they know about their communities to feed on their information needs’  (2017, p. 24) .

Most newsrooms employ social media editors whose job it is to take conten t produced 

by journalists, share it and monitor what is ‘going off’. These efforts may still respond to 

the perceived values of the masthead or publisher but they also speak to another 

dynamic: that a sharer’s ‘social circle takes on the role of news edito r, deciding whether 

a story, video or other piece of content is important, interesting or entertaining enough 

to recommend’  (Hermida et al.  2012) . Hal Crawford, a long -standing digital editor, 

argues there are two reasons to care about social networks if you care about news:      

> First, sharing on social networks has become a major distribution mechanism
> for news stories ... [and] the second reaso n hinges on the first. Like all
> distribution mechanisms, social networks influence the content they distribute …
> The stories change and with them the tone and flavour of the news -making
> process (Crawford, Hunter &Filipovic 2015, p. 5) .

The audience has in many cases become a primar y driver of what is reported, posted 

and published. As Kate de Brito, the editor -in -chief of the country’s most visited news 

website, news.com.au, writes, if no one clicks, ‘you may as well have just emailed it to 36 

your mum’  (Fray 2017) . Audience engagement  is now a key marker of journalistic 

authority, and is a core value.  As a result, there are changes happening to  the type and 

range of content being created and consumed.  Social media tends to reward content 

that is shorter, more visual and more emotive (e .g., Kalogeropoulos, Cherubini & 

Newman 2016 ; see next section ). Editors at large news organisations believe that 

social media platforms favour soft news over hard news (Hanusch 2017;  Lischka 2018; 

Rashidian et al. 2018, p. 36; Sehl, Cornia & Nielsen 2018 ). By contrast, search engine 

reliance tends to return near -identical popular stories that have been produced by 

various providers (Cag é, He rvé & Viaud 20 17). 

Digital tools have been developed to enable a cross -platform approach to news 

creation. These tools inform the news cycle in Australia and work by tracking and 

understanding what is ‘trending’ across a variety of platforms. They include: 

 NewsWhip : content discovery and analytics tools that give an overview of 

what audiences are interested in today across a variety of platforms; 

 BuzzSumo : a ‘research and monitoring’ tool that highlights the most shared 

content on specific platforms and finds ‘influencers’ who are related to 

particular topics; 

 Chartbeat : a ‘content intelligence’ company billed as an alternative to 

Google Analytics for real -time data; and 

 CrowdTangle : a ‘social monitoring platform’ for publishers and brands. 

These tools and others spot trends, measure audiences and, ultimately, assist news 

producers and distributors to optimise en gagement. 

The tools of social media, in particular, channel the production, distribution and 

consumption of news that will engage users. Often, this involves the cultivation of 

curiosity, a technique mastered by websites including Upworthy, Buzzfeed and Vo x.       

> Humans are comfortable with ignorance, but they hate feeling deprived of
> information. Upworthy designed headlines to make readers feel an almost
> primal hunger for information just outside their grasp. It pioneered a style –
> which it called the ‘curiosit y gap’ –that explicitly teased readers, withholding just
> enough information to titillate the reader into going further … The core insight of
> Upworthy, Buzzfeed, Vox, and the other emerging internet behemoths was that
> editorial success could be engineered –that if you listened to the data, it was
> possible to craft pieces that would win massive audiences (Foer 2017, p. 139) .

According to NewsWhip, in August 2018 the top English -language publisher on 

Facebook, measured by total likes, shares and comments, was ladbible.com, with 

unilad.co.uk in fourth position (Boland 2018). Stories featured on the web sites included, 

‘Big Brother Gets Tattoo Of Little Brother with Down’s Syndrome On Arm, He 

Absolutely Loves It’, which drove 2.5 million engagements. LADbible’s website 

explains: ‘Founded in 2012, LADbible Group is redefining entertainment and breaking 

new s for a social generation.’ Meanwhile, ‘content farms’, which specialise in producing 

‘questionable, low -quality content going ultra -viral’ are also proving successful, with 37 

three such websites in the NewsWhip top 25 (Boland 2018). The story, ‘A group of 

black bears caught a New Jersey family by surprise for having a wild pool party in the 

backyard’ drove 2.8 million engagements. 

Fabricated news is particularly adept at optimising engagement (Marwick 2018). As 

detailed above, false news spreads faster and f urther than true news. Both cognitive 

scientists and media scholars have found that the more people are exposed to 

untruths, the more likely it is those people will believe them (Hambrick, Marquandt, 

2018 ; Pennycook, Cannon & Rand 2018 cited in Marwick 201 8). The spread of false 

news – and the more slippery ‘fake news’ – has coincided with the rise of digital 

platforms. Several scholars, including Efrat Nechustai, draw a direct link: 

> [T]he new separation between news production and distribution, and the
> mig ration of news distribution to third -party platforms, enabled producers of
> false information (fake news) to make their product formally and functionally
> indistinguishable from professional journalism (Nechushtai 2017, p. 11).

Nechushtai argues that digital platforms provide news producers with much of their 

audience and potential for growth, and that digital platforms equip news organisations 

with tools for news production, provide data on the reach of stories, and offer analytics 

and insight tools. Nechush tai describes this as ‘infrastructural capture’. 

The atomisation of news 

Underpinning the rise of engagement as a core journalistic value is a new feature of the 

news landscape: the atomisation of news. In many cases, the news has been 

decoupled from its s ource. It has been broken down into its constituent parts, so that it 

is now distributed and consumed on a story -by -story basis, rather than as one among 

several. This is one effect of separating out the roles of producer and distributor, and in 

the same w ay that the music industry has seen albums replaced by individual tracks, 

so too an edition or news bulletin has been replaced by individual items of news. And 

just as the music industry has been disrupted, so too the news industry. 

In a modern (digital) n ewsroom, success is now gauged on a story level. What might 

have previously been a page, site, edition or show is now fragmented into discrete 

units, with each unit’s success measured in minutes and hours, not days and weeks. 

And, as we have noted, soft ne ws tends to flourish in this environment. However, the 

platforms differ  from one another . The  original architecture of Twitter did not include 

any algorithmic filtering based on user preferences, which made the platform suited to 

hard news. In August 2014,  for example, Twitter feeds were dominated by news of the 

Ferguson protests against the fatal shooting of Michael Brown by a white police officer. 

On Facebook, by contrast, the dominant news of  the  day was the charity ‘Ice Bucket 

Challenge’, promoting awar eness of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). On 

Facebook, the Ferguson riots were not very visible, arguably because the story was not 

‘like -able and even hard to comment on’ ( academic Zaynep  Tufekci , cited in Bell et al. 

2017, p. 67). 38 

Further studies sho w the distribution flows and content demands of social media create 

an increasingly ‘emotionalised’ media environment (Bakir & McStay 2018, p. 159). 

Today’s online news consumers are more likely to come across news that creates 

strong emotions, particularl y surprise (Lischka 2018), news that is more personal and 

affective (Hanusch 2017; Bouvier 2017; Bruns 2018, p.101) and news that is visually 

arresting (Harcup & O’Neill 2017). The content is also likely to be shorter in length 

(Hindman 2017, p.187; Barnar d 2018, p. 189). Both Hindman (2017) and Barnard 

(2018) note this issue of length is particularly important when it comes to investigative 

journalism:    

> Critical, investigative journalism is time -consuming and expensive, and is often
> reported in long form. Both factors, cost and length, pose challenges for news
> production in the age of mediatization, given that online platforms provide less
> profit per reader than traditional media. Also, the competition for audience
> attention, driven largely by social media platforms, makes it difficult to get, let
> alone keep, readers’ attention (Barnard 2018, p. 189).

To increase the ‘click through rate’ for individual stories, headlines are rewritten to 

emphasise sentimentality. The technique works at attracting eyeballs ( Kuiken et al. 

2017). These content effects are particularly pronounced for digital only newsrooms 

whose distribution system depends on atomised news delivered through social med ia 

and search (Petre 2015). Digital journalists are also more likely to accept 

commodification: the belief that every individual piece of writing is its own ‘stand -alone 

mini -profit centre … success measured in shares, likes or tweets or the direct income a

piece brings in’ (Cohen 2018, p. 13). 

The widespread use of digital platforms, and particularly social media, means that 

journalists’ content, and also their competitors’ content, is hypervisible online. This can 

have the effect of homogenising content, as journalists follow each other’s leads. As 

Axel Bruns writes, whether such tendencies toward groupthink have been caused by: 

> … journalists’ increasing mutual observability towards each other, or whether
> they existed previously and have merely been trans lated to social media
> environments, is hardly relevant in this context; the de -diversifying effects of
> such groupthink on the journalistic coverage of major events are likely to be the
> same in either case (2018, p. 208).

Hypervisibility also manifests insi de newsrooms, where keen attention is paid to the 

clicks and shares generated by each story. This has changed the competition 

dynamics of newsrooms, creating more internal competition between individual 

journalists – competition based on the popularity of the content, not the quality of the 

content. This can create incongruous situations. For example, Petre (2015) describes a 

writer on feminist topics who felt her stories were in direct competition with sports 

stories: ‘The leaderboards ranking stories and staffers don’t just harness employees’ 

competitive tendencies; they shape the very nature of competition in the media field, 

namely by turning it further inward’ (2015, p. 28). Increasingly, digital news media 

practitioners work at a frenetic pace in an en vironment of overwhelming workloads and 

constant competition, knowing that ‘online news consumers often visit news sites 39 

through links they find on other platforms like Google News, Facebook, and Twitter’ 

and can easily navigate away (Burggraaff & Trilling 2017, p. 4). The existence of 

readily available data heightens internal competition, encouraging employees to 

measure themselves by how their stories are performing (Petre 2018) . This increased 

visibili ty and internal competition can lead journalists to copy what has worked in the 

past (both their own work and that of others) and engage in a churn of articles that 

leaves little time for research (Petre 2015). Such practices run counter to the concept 

of the journalist as fiercely independent. 

However, the rise of engagement as a value and the atomisation of news have also 

benefited journalism in significant ways. Several successful newsrooms, including 

Buzzfeed, have used social media success to fund significant investigative jo urnalism 

(Tandoc 2018, p. 211). Social media is not just a distribution tool; it is also a content 

tool credited with helping to create diverse and quality journalism by putting journalists 

in touch with a wider range of sources and perspectives (Bruns 201 8; Barnard 2018; 

Malik & Pfeffer 2016, p. 960). Further, Twitter has had a positive impact in a global 

context as a check on the occasional hubris and assumptions of elite foreign 

correspondents (Bruns 2018, pp. 98 -100; Dewey 2013; Nyabola 2014). 

# The values of journalism 

Bourdieu and Buzzfeed 

At this stage in our review of t he functions , values and contemporary practice of 

journalism, it is useful to outline how this subject is approached through one of the 

most influential conceptual frameworks in the field of social sciences. Media scholars in 

particular often use the work of Pierre Bourdieu to unpack the norms and practices that 

make journalism valuable to society. We offer this account o f the influence of digital 

platforms not as the definitive way of understanding the phenomenon, but i n order to 

explain the conceptual fra mework through which at least some media and journalism 

scholars are likely to approach the issue. 

A sociologist and philosopher, Bourdieu was concerned with power, and with the 

concept of a social field, which indicates a semi -autonomous and distinct soci al sphere 

with its own logic (Bourdieu & Wacquant 1976). For Bourdieu, capital is an 

institutionalised resource of which there are three main species: economic capital 

(money and other financial assets); cultural capital (socially valued knowledge and 

cred entials); and social capital (access to social networks). Journalism is a culture -

producing institution (Carlson 2017). And cultural capital is the field’s institutionalised 

resource (Neveu & Benson 2005). Its foremost cultural product is quality journalis m, a 

socially valued public good that supports a well -informed citizenry and effective 

democracy. The pursuit of the truth distinguishes journalism from other informational 

products and provides the organising principle of the field’s ‘doxa’, or shared sys tem of 

values (Vehkoo 2010). Doxa drives the field’s ‘habitus’, or professional identity, which 

is centred on commitment to public service, objectivity, autonomy, immediacy and 

ethics (Deuze 2005, p. 447). The institutions established by the field uphold s tandards 40 

of integrity and quality: accuracy and clarity; fairness and balance; privacy and 

avoidance of harm; and integrity and transparency. 

Bourdieu identifies the defining conflict of modern industrial societies as the 

antagonism between economic capi tal and cultural capital (Swartz 1997). This is said 

to have been the source of long -standing tension in the commercial news industry, 

which straddles the media field and the economic field, the latter being driven by 

market forces and the pursuit of econo mic capital (Medvetz 2012). This conflict has 

been exacerbated by the growing dominance of digital platforms which, although they 

do not produce news or journalistic content, have heavily influenced their production, 

as we have been describing. First, the news industry’s business model, which has 

historically cross -subsidised the production of news and journalism with advertising 

revenue , has been disrupted. And second, the conflict between cultural and economic 

capital in the journalistic field has intensi fied with the introduction of web analytics, 

including ‘most read’, ‘trending’ and ‘top stories’. Many journalists view this as an 

assault on their professional autonomy and identity, as they are left to reconcile the 

opposing logics of the journalistic fi eld and the economic field:    

> [O]ne of the major consequences of this increased visibility of consumption
> preferences in daily editorial practice, in particular those who produce public
> affairs content [is that] it intensifies the pre -existing tension betwee n the logic of
> the occupation and the logic of the market … Thus, if the logic of the market
> prevailed over that of the occupation, it might decrease homogenization in a
> direction that would be pleasing to consumers and more competitive for
> organizations. However, this would have a detrimental effect on society in light
> of the function that robust public affairs reportage plays in a healthy functioning
> of the polity (Boczkowski 2010, pp. 147, 178).

In other words, the increasing dominance of digital platfor ms has pressured news 

producers to make concessions to market forces that serve to weaken the cultural 

products of the journalistic field – the very products that afford journalists their unique 

form of cultural authority as watchdogs, voices of the people and experts on current 

events. 

We can see the flip -side of this conflict emerging as digital native news organisations 

such as Buzzfeed and Vice, which have already achieved substantial market success 

by following the consumption demands of audiences, and seek to accumulate cultural 

capital via the journalistic field. Stringer’s (2018) analysis of this ‘hybrid approach’ sets 

out their strategy of hiring experienced journalists (who embody the doxa, habitus, 

norms and practices of the journalistic field) to produce high quality content they hope 

will translate into peer recognition. Stringer argues that this strategy enables them to 

accumulate two different forms of institutional resources from two fields with opposing 

logics: ongoing accumulation of econo mic capital, based on number of users, 

advertising sales and profits; and cultural capital based on the legitimacy, credibility 

and prestige cultivated by the values -driven cultural production of the journalistic field. 41 

A clash of values 

Moving beyond Bo urdieu, the professional identity of the journalist in a platform 

environment can still be seen as largely composed of a set of dispositions, motivations 

and shared values (or Bourdieu’s habitus ) that account for the more or less universal 

norms and practi ces that inform journalism in liberal democracies. Deuze (2005) calls 

this a ‘shared occupational ideology among news workers which functions to self -

legitimise their position in society’ (Deuze 2005, p. 446). In this final section of the 

chapter, we exami ne how digital platforms might influence the work of journalists 

themselves, as distinct from the news -producing organisation that (often) employ them. 

Journalists in the digital age have only become more committed to defending their 

autonomy, freedom and independence, writes Deuze:      

> Reporters across the globe feel that their work can only thrive and flourish in a
> society that protects its media from censorship; in a company that saves its
> journalists from the marketeers; in a newsroom where journalists are not merely
> the lackeys of their editors; and at a desk where a journalist is adequately
> supported through, for example, further training and education (Weaver 1998).
> Any kind of development from perceived extra -journalistic forces –be it public
> criticism , marketing or corporate ownership –tends to get filtered through this
> overriding concern to be autonomous to tell the stories you want to (p. 448).

Journalists and editors are reluctant to give up the idea that they and only they work to 

‘structure the w orld into coherent and believable news products’ (Carlson 2017). 

Journalism’s values and professional identity account for the continuity and regularity of 

practices, which include news gathering and analysis, fact -checking and packaging 

information, and t hen publishing news or journalistic content on one or more media 

formats or platforms. 

Digital platforms certainly fulfil the functions of ordering the world. Facebook does so 

largely via the feeds and the shares of friends and family. Google does so via t he 

precision and algorithmic power of search. They also preference truth and facts over 

untruths and lies, increasingly supporting verification and fact -checking. But their 

practice and habits are not those of journalism. Indeed, they explicitly renounce 

journalistic authority, which is a sort of authority that necessarily comes with high 

expectations:   

> We place many expectations on journalism. But if journalism is to be a
> watchdog working on our behalf, the fourth estate holding government
> accountable, a c ommunal glue, an enabler of deliberative democracy, a diffuser
> of new scientific and technical knowledge, a judge of the arts, if it is to provide
> an accounting of the day’s news, the first draft of history, an exchange of ideas,
> a space for disparate voic es, a place where society makes sense of itself, if it is
> to be any of these things, it must have authority (Carlson 2017, p. 7, emphasis
> in original).

The authority of journalism relies on a commitment to values that include accuracy, 

objectivity, and the service of the public interest. The values of digital platforms and 

Silicon Valley include innovation and connectivity. And it is when these values come 42 

together that problems arise, argues Franklin Foer, the former editor of political 

magazine The New Re public : 

> The problem isn’t just the media’s dependence on Silicon Valley companies. It’s
> the dependence on Silicon Valley values. Just like the tech companies,
> journalism has come to fetishize data. And this data has come to corrupt
> journalism … data is a P andora’s Box. Once journalists come to know what
> works, which stories yield traffic, they will pursue what works. This is the
> definition of pandering and it has horrific consequences … The profusion of
> data has changed the character of journalism. It has t urned it into a commodity,
> something to be marketed, tested, and calibrated. Perhaps media have always
> thought this way. But if that impulse existed, it was at least buffered (Foer 2017,
> p. 149)

On this view, the pursuit of truth has been compromised by the quest to go viral. The 

alternative view, however, is that such a negative account sells both journalism and 

digital platforms short. Both have flaws, certainly, but both have the capacity to adapt 

and improve themselves, one another and the wider world. 

Media scholar Barbie Zelizer writes that journalism is an act of imagination, in that 

journalis ts create ‘an imagined engagement of events beyond the public’s reach’ 

(Zelizer 2017, p. 2). That is what they do, even if the word is rarely used in relation to 

journalism. ‘What journalists know is valued precisely because no one else shares that 

knowled ge, rendering it necessarily the target of imagination.’ Zelizer argues that re -

aligning with journalism’s imaginative capacities – of what it could be — is a powerful 

way of tackling ‘journalism’s exhaustion’. She notes the term ‘journalist’ is now applie d

to ‘individuals with a range of skills’, including publishers, photographers, field 

producers, digital content providers, bystanders, fixers, citizen journalists and bloggers. 

While many practitioners would dispute such a broad brush approach, risking as it does 

the diminution of key roles, few, if any, still cling to the idea that nothing has changed. 

This is particularly evident in journalists ’ fast -evolving job description. More than ever, 

journalists require a broad array of skills. Jeff Jarvis descri bes the combination of new 

skills required as ‘journalistic superpowers’ (Jarvis 2016). The most desirable abilities 

for new recruits include (but are not limited to): coding, audience development, data -

driven storytelling and visual storytelling (Stencel & Perry 2016) .

Journalism professor Mitchell Stephens calls for an epistemological re -evaluation, such 

that the ‘journalism business must consequently become an ideas business’ — a

higher value business oppos ed to the low value activity of reporting the news. He calls 

this ‘wisdom journalism’. It calls on Enlightenment values, such as logic and reason, 

and harks back to Aristotle’s analytical philosophy pertaining to syllogistic logic and 

inductive argumentati on (Stephens 2014, p p. 26 -30). However, Stephens also 

suggests that wisdom journalism is not simply a logical endeavour; it is, as he 

describes by comparison, ‘wisdom literature’ and ‘wisdom philosophy’, a practice that 

encompasses ‘thoughtful advice, good judgement, insight and sagacity’ (Stephens 

2014, p. 9). In other words, it is a call for a practice of deliberation and care, with the 

public interest in mind. He seeks to replace the ‘five Ws’ of traditional news reporting —43 

who, what, where, when, why — with the ‘five Is’ of a new journalism: informed, 

intelligent, interesting, insightful and interpretive. He argues that journalists must stop 

spoon feeding readers with easy to understand chunks of easily verifiable facts and 

challenge them to work harder , with the journalist, to uncover ‘more stimulating, more 

challenging fare’ (Stephens 2014, p. 182). 

# Conclusion 

Fifteen years ago, media scholar Mark Deuze issued a warning about the changing 

nature of journalism in the online space. He nominated hypertex tuality, interactivity and 

multi -mediality as the key characteristics of a new journalistic order. He said journalism 

must change or face the consequences:   

> Connecting changes in journalism because of new technologies such as the
> internet to changing defini tions of different types of (possible) contemporary
> journalism shows us that a news medium considering or implementing new
> strategies has to enable its organisation to reflexively address the existing
> journalistic culture and rethink its location on the co ntinuum between content
> and connectivity. If not, it cannot be expected to fully grasp the consequences
> of these changes –and cannot be expected to succeed (Deuze 2003, p. 220).

With the rise of digital platforms, that warning rings even more true. To su rvive, the 

news media industry must find new models for content, product and business. Yet, at 

the same time, it is expected to fulfil the foundational roles of journalism that the ‘old’ 

practices and revenue streams supported. 

Coming to terms with the new dynamics and outlines of journalism appears to require 

constant attention. As journalism scholar Jeff Jarvis argues: 

> We must continue the search for what is possible today that was not possible
> before, to find new ways to serve the public, and to find ne w models to sustain
> that work (Jarvis 2014).

Journalism doesn’t stand still. It has been changing since before the advent of digital 

platforms. However, digital platforms have had significant impacts on the production of 

news, and journalism has had no cho ice but to adapt. Perhaps above all, journalists 

are embracing engagement as a core value, with both positive and negative effects. 

One effect is that content that is shorter and more emotive is proliferating. 

Digital platforms have also had significant im pacts on the consumption of news. 

Consumers increasingly access their news via social media. Faced with unprecedented 

choice and convenience, today’s consumers have become accustomed to receiving 

news for ‘free ’. And in many cases, consumers can become par t of the distribution and 

production process. They can share, react and comment. They can create content. 

Consumers are no longer just consumers. 

The distribution of news has been disrupted too. Before the advent of digital platforms, 

news producers tended also to be the dominant news distributors. Now producers 

share their distribution role with consumers, and also with the digital platforms. The 44 

result is an atomised news landscape, a multi -sided market where advertising revenue 

commonly goes to the digit al platforms that distribute news, as well as to the news 

media that produce content. Digital platforms extend the reach of news media, even as 

they capture much of the revenue news media needs to do its multiple jobs. 

It is through the digital platforms t hat audiences are to be found. As Rashidian et al. 

(2018) write: 

> The new standard is to be present on multiple platforms at all times, and to post
> tailored, native content on those platforms. We found that almost as many
> articles are published by news orga nisations directly to technology platform
> applications such as Instant Articles as link back to publisher sites (2018, p.
> 252).

As noted above, Nechushtai has described this phenomenon as ‘infrastructural 

capture’: 

> These companies offer innovative produc ts that open up new markets for
> journalism but in exchange for such opportunities, news outlets gradually
> relinquish the ownership and distribution of their product (Nechushtai 2017, p.
> 12).

As distributors, and as agenda -setters, digital platforms have ta ken on a key role in the 

news ecosystem. Increasingly, they may be news gatekeepers. Frank Michael Russell 

notes: ‘Silicon Valley platforms now hold an important gatekeeping role between 

journalists and news consumers’; and digital platforms, to some exten t, select and edit 

items so that the news published is ‘fit to print’ according to journalistic standards 

(2017, p. 15). This may overstate the argument, but digital platforms certainly employ 

algorithms to select content and invoke community standards to edit content. As 

Barnard writes, ‘gatekeeping has a latent function: it separates the news and views of 

those deemed legitimate from those that are not’ (Barnard 2018, p. 181). 

Meanwhile, digital platforms produce many benefits for news consumers. Philosop her 

Jurgen Habermas (1989) famously formulated the idea of the public sphere as a place 

that is equitable and available to all. The concept of the public sphere has been used 

and adapted by a succession of media scholars, including from the disciplines of law, 

media, journalism and associated research fields. It is therefore worth asking: do social 

platforms enhance the public sphere by creating more avenues for journalism to enter 

it? Newman et al. (2018) note: ‘Social networks like Facebook, for example, are 

considered to do a good job in alerting people to news stories that they might otherwise 

miss’ (Newman et al. 2018, p. 141). Consistently, consumers cite the convenience of 

finding multiple sources in the one place and the ability to discuss and debate the news 

with friends as key benefits. In Australia, recent research has included focus groups 

gauging participants’ engagement with public affairs. In building on Habermas’s work 

and advancing a concept of an expanded public sphere in a networked, global 

environment, the authors noted the importance in a democracy of competing views, 

especially in relation to public policy: 45 

A democracy is distinguished by the existence of real political choice. This 

requires diversity and plurality in the provision of in formation and its 

interpretation. Particularly important in this regard are the media of journalism ... 

Through the medium (and media) of the public sphere the private individual 

becomes part of a public opinion which can be measured and deployed to 

influe nce or legitimize the exercise of political power (McNair et al. 2017, pp. 19 -

20). 

Together, journalism and digital platforms are reshaping the public sphere. As we have 

seen, the impacts are mixed, and still emerging. However, the potential exists to 

chan nel that public sphere for the better, or for the worse. 

All of t hese shifts are dramatic, and the pace of change shows no sign of slowing. As 

the Reuters Institute concludes in its 2018 Digital News Report :

Nothing stands still for long: new technologies like voice -activated interfaces 

and artificial intelligence are on the way, offering new opportunities but also new 

challenges for audiences, regulators and media companies. The future of news 

remains uncertain … ( Newman et al. 2018 , p. 30). 

In this unce rtain news environment, journalism – to maximise its benefits – has a 

responsibility to adapt and change. And so too do digital platforms, given their 

increasingly complex and significant role. With this in mind, we turn now to the impacts 

of technology. 46 

# 2 The impacts of technology  

> 

Technology does not determine consumer behaviour; but it 

influenc es and shap es online behaviour by enabling and 

encouraging consumers to engage in certain ways, not in others.  

> 

In many cases, algorithms determine which content ne ws 

consumers get to see. The workings of these algorithms are not 

transparent.  

> 

The evidence on filter bubbles and echo chambers, and on their 

impacts, is inconclusive.  

> 

Collaborations could be encouraged between d igital platforms and 

news media to develop a nd refine technology that serves both 

parties’ interests, as well as the inter ests of consumers and citizens .

The online space is marked by radical innovation and technological change. In this 

chapter, we examine the impact of this change on news consumer s, distributors and 

producers. Our focus is on the innovation and technological change implemented by 

‘digital platforms ’: digital search engines, social media and other content aggregat ors .8

However, we also address the innovation and technological change implemented by 

news media companies. In part, this is in recognition of the fact that both digital 

platforms and news producers employ the same technologies, including algorithms, 

personalisation, recommender systems and artificial intelligence. It is als o in 

recognition of the fact that , for consumers, the distinction between digital platforms and 

news media often disappears, including when traditional news outlets are active on 

social media. Wherever possible, however, we specifically seek to identify th e impact of 

technologies implemented by digital platforms on news consumption, production and 

distribution. 

This chapter is divided into six sections. In the first, we examine the extent to which 

technology shapes user behaviour, as we address technologica l determinism, platform 

studies and ‘affordances ’. In the second, we turn to the impact of algorithms on news 

consumers, distributors and producers. We build on this in the third section, where we 

turn to customisation and personalisation, including the re commender systems 

employed by both digital platforms and traditional news media. This leads, in the fourth 

section, to a discussion of filter bubbles and echo chambers, and to a consideration of 

arguments that the content diversity of news is being diminis hed, that consumer 

autonomy is being inhibited and that there is an ongoing failure of transparency and 

accountability. Then, in section five, we turn to artificial intelligence, and thus to 

automated journalism, automatic text summarisation and AI bias. F inally, in section six,    

> 8Throughout thi s report, we use ‘digital platforms’, not ‘platform services’, to denote digital search engines, social media
> platforms and other digital content aggregation platforms , while acknowledging that some news media can also be
> categorised as digital platforms. This point is addressed in Chapter One. 47

we address further instances of innovation: Search Engine Optimisation; First Click 

Free and Flexible Sampling; and Instant Articles and Accelerated Mobile Pages. 

# The role of technology in shaping behaviour 

Any assessment of the imp act of technology must contend with a preliminary issue: 

how much responsibility for user behaviour should be ascribed to technology, and how 

much should be ascribed to users? 

The extreme positions in this debate can be categorised as ‘determinism ’ and 

‘in strumentalism ’. At one extreme, technological determinists propose that user 

behaviour is determined by technology, and that the internet and digital platforms 

technologise our lives in such a way that we have no choice but to behave in 

accordance with the ir dictates (see Smith & Marx 1994; Carr 2010). At the other 

extreme, instrumentalism suggests that users are 100 per cent free to choose if and 

how they engage online. Instrumentalists are:   

> The people who … downplay the power of technology, believing tool s to be
> neutral artefacts , entirely subservient to the conscious wishes of their users.
> Our instruments are the means we use to achieve our ends; they have no ends
> of their own (Carr 2010, p. 46) .

As Nicholas Carr writes, instrumentalism is the prevailing view, in part because it’s the 

view we want to be true: ‘The idea that we’re controlled by our tools is somehow 

anathema to most people ’ (Carr 2010, p. 46 ). 

Positioned between these extremes, the prevailing scholarly view holds that users are 

free, but only within the limits of the parameters and values that are embedded, or 

encoded, in technology (Lessig 2006; Spinello 2011). On this view, users and 

technology both impact each other. As sociologist Manuel Castells writes, there is a 

‘dialectical interaction between society and technology ’ (Castells 1996 , p. 5 fn.2). 

Hence technology bears some responsibil ity for user behaviour. Similarly, legal scholar 

Alice Marwick specifically acknowledges the effect of platform technology on 

behaviour. As Marwick writes: ‘Platforms do play a role: the material affordances of 

technology amplify or stifle certain types of human behaviour ’ (Marwick 2018 , p. 506). 

She notes, for example, that network television cleaves to dominant ideologies much 

more than YouTube ( Marwick 2018 , p. 490). 

The term ‘affordances ’, as used by Marwick, is common in an emerging field of media 

and communication research known as ‘platform studies ’ (Gillespie 2016; Just & Latzer 

2017; Montfort & Bogost 2009; Plantin et al . 201 6; Nielsen & Ganter 2018). The focus 

of this research is on the way in which the ‘affordances ’ of various digital technologies 

affect behaviour. An affordance, in this context, refers to what a technology allows its 

users to do (Bucher & Helmond 2017 , p. 3). For instance, in 2015 Twitter replaced the 

‘star ’ button with a ‘heart ’ button, and thereby changed the way users could eng age 

with and ‘favourite ’ content. Though this change might seem insignificant, some users 

publicly expressed their outrage . This shows the way that features such as the 

star/heart button create meanings :48 

A feature is clearly not just a feature. The symbols and the connotations they 

carry matter. Pressing a button means something; it mediates and 

communicates, or … relates to different affordances. While this platform change 

may seem trivial – a controversy in the heat of the moment – it also shows how 

featu res are objects of intense feelings ( Bucher & Helmond 2017, pp. 2 -3). 

Another example: Facebook has a ‘like ’ button, which was supplemented in 2016 with 

‘love ’, ‘ haha ’, ‘ wow ’, ‘ angry ’ and ‘sad ’, but no ‘hate ’ button. 

Some platform studies scholars take is sue with the term ‘platform’, argu ing it is not 

neutral. Gillespie (2010) notes that the term has been used by content providers such 

as YouTube as part of a strategy enabling them to position themselves for users, 

clients, advertisers and policymakers, bu t contends that it is deliberately vague. On the 

one hand, this vagueness empowers providers to seek protections for enabling user 

expression in their role as ‘curators of public discourse ’; on the other, it suggests they 

are not liable for content posted by users. In other words, the word ‘platform ’ can afford 

a type of linguistic cloak. 9 More recently, Gillespie (2016) and others have argued that 

the platform landscape is dominated by a few large and many small players acting self -

interestedly. As van Dij ck ( 2013 ) writes, platforms enable public expression, but while 

they claim the neutrality implied by the term ‘platform ’, they are in fact private firms with 

their own agendas. According to Nielsen and Ganter: ‘Platform studies remind us that 

these platfor m-builders are of course also actors with interests of their own, who 

engage directly with other actors ’ (2018 , p. 1605). This, it is argued, can be seen 

clearly in the platforms’ use of technology: ‘the intermediaries are in control and can 

and will chang e their product and strategy in line with what serves their own interests ’

(Nielsen & Ganter 2018, p. 1614). 

Legal scholar Lawrence Lessig also assesse d the impact of technology, or ‘code ’, on 

user behaviour. Lessig argues that there are four regulatory ‘modalities ’ that 

circumscribe people’s behaviour online: the law; social norms; the market; and the 

architecture embedded in the internet and its platforms (Lessig 2006 , pp. 121 -125). In 

other words, technology is merely one of the four regulatory constrain ts that limit 

people’s freedom to choose how to act online, and these four constraints sometimes 

work together, and sometimes in contradiction: ‘The constraints are distinct, yet they 

are plainly interdependent. Each can support or oppose the others ’ (Less ig 2006 , p. 

124). Like Marwick and others, Lessig thus argues that technology – in the form of 

‘code ’ – does play a key role in influencing and shaping online behaviour, even though 

other factors also come into play. 

In the discussion that follows, we exam ine the impact of specific technologies on news 

consumers, distributors and producers. We do so on the understanding that technology          

> 9A related discussion concerns whether or not digital platforms such as Google and Facebook are ‘publishers’, ‘media
> companies’ or ‘news companies’. T echnology companies have specifically argued against being define d as media
> organisations, let alone news organisations (Carlson 2018; Duguay 2018; Nielsen & Ganter 2018, p. 1605) . Facebook,
> for instance, has repeatedly insisted that it is no t a publisher, media company or news company (Constine 2016) . This is
> true even of Twitter, which has worked hard to cement and celebrate its role in the distribution of news (Bruns 2018, p.
> 10; Kantrowitz 2018; Shearer & Gottfried 2017, pp. 4 -5) .This debate is about more than semantics, given that
> publishers and journalists are granted certain rights and responsibilities, both ethical and legal, as a result of their
> status. 49

does not determine user behaviour, but does influence and shape it to a greater or 

lesser degree. 

# The impact of algorithms 

Algorithms are a set of specified rules and protocols enabling a system to act 

autonomously. Digital platforms employ various algorithmic methods to produce and 

curate news to optimise engagement (e .g., Ricci , Rokach & Shapira 2015). Indeed, 

digital platfo rms’ innovation includes periodical and often significant changes to 

algorithms. Such changes most obviously affect the distribution of news, but they also 

have significant effects on production and consumption (Caplan & boyd 2018, pp. 5 -6; 

Cohen 2018; Oremus 2018; Rashidian et al. 2018). 

For news consumers, algorithmic systems can provide signi ficant benefits. In 2016 it 

was said that a pproximately 90 per cent of data on the internet has been created in the 

past two years (IBM 2016) . The increase in the quantity of information ava ilable online 

has been unprecedented and dramatic. Methods to search, sort and filter information 

are becoming increasingly essential, and the capacities of algorithmic systems to filter 

the abundance of news content are immense. Without algorithmic system s, access to 

recent, relevant and important news content would be considerably more cumbersome 

(see ‘Personalisation ’, below). Algorithmic systems also provide benefits for news 

producers. They can help news producers to identify important stories on socia l media 

platforms and they can help news producers us e data sets to generate stories (Carlson 

2018a , p . 1762; see below). Meanwhile, digital first and public broadcasters are 

particularly reliant on social media algorithms. Digital first publishers, whose business 

model is built on atomisation, rely heavily on social media distribution for their 

audiences (Bruns 2018, p. 236; Chaykowski 2018; Oremus 2018) . And for public 

broadcasters, social media can help them fulf il their mandate by granting access to 

traditionally ‘hard -to -reach ’ news audiences (Sehl, Cornia & Nielsen 2018). 

Aside from these benefits, there are also harms. These include the ways in which news 

media companies are required to devote considerable re sources to accommodating the 

ongoing algorithmic changes made by digital platforms (Rashidian et al. 2018 , p. 28). 

Some algorithmic changes involve collaborations between digital platforms and news 

producers; however, these collaborations do not preclude f urther algorithmic changes 

(Hindman 2015 , p. 21). In 2016, Facebook began implementing a ‘pivot to video ’, in 

which the social network encouraged news publishers to produce more video content 

(Moore 2016). The stated intention was to help news publishers t o monetis e social 

media (Mullin 2016). For a time, Facebook paid news publishers to experiment with 

video so as to offset high production costs ( Rashidian et al. 2017, p. 35). However, the 

result was a rush of poorly produced content, in part due to contra ctual clauses 

imposed on publishers specifying the number of videos to be produced each month 

(Rein & Venturini 2018). And recently editors in Europe have lamented that Facebook 

has abolished ‘the carousel ’, which combined native video on Facebook with an 

accompanying article that directed traffic straight to the organisation’s news website. 

This change, they say, happened ‘overnight ’ (Sehl, Cornia & Nielsen 2018, p. 28). 50 

Following a series of changes, the pivot to video has been described by some 

commentat ors as ‘dead ’ (Banikarim 2017). However, in August 2018 Facebook 

announced it was rolling out Facebook Watch in Australia, a year after its US launch 

(Samios 2018 ). The video service, a potential rival to both Google’s YouTube and 

traditional TV broadcaste rs, will feature content created by partners who earn 55 per 

cent of advertising revenue, while Facebook earns 45 per cent ( Samios 2018 ). For 

news producers (such as free -to -air TV newsrooms), the impacts are hard to predict. 

Other changes have had a mix o f positive and negative effects. In January 2018, 

Facebook announced changes to its newsfeed algorithm that significantly affected 

news content. The changes involved prioritising ‘meaningful content ’ posted by friends 

and family over news, videos and posts from brands (Beckett 2018; Koebler 2018). As 

a result, the amount of news overall on the platform shrank from 5 per cent of the 

content on users’ n ewsfeeds to 4 per cent (Zuckerberg 2018). In the United States (but 

not yet Australia), recent changes also involved prioritising content that is ‘trustworthy ’

(Facebook 2018). To determine trustworthiness, Facebook now asks its US users, in 

the course of ongoing quality surveys, whether they are familiar with a source, and 

whether they trust that source ( Zucker berg 2018 ). Early industry observation suggests 

that larger organisations are being favoured by the se and other algorithm ic changes 

(Oremus 2018) . The changes have frustrated some journalists: ‘In Guatemala … some 

journalists reported readership halving overnight as a result of them disappearing from 

most social media feeds ’ (Hern 2018 a). 10 In February, the four -year -old publisher 

LittleThings shut down. The website, which employed 100 people and shared feel -good 

st ories and videos on Facebook, claimed it lost 75 per cent of its organic reach 

following the algorithmic changes (Moses 2018) . However, Facebook argues that the 

changes prioritise quality over quantity for news and reduces clickbait : ‘News media 

content generally represents less than 5 per cent of items in a pers on’s news feed … 

when people see news media content on Facebook that content is high quality, by 

prioritising content that is trusted, informative and local ’ (Facebook 2018). Other 

algorithmic changes have further given priority to local over international news. 

Some news producers have described playing a cat -and -mouse game as they try to 

balance their strategic autonomy with ongoing attempts to adapt to the algorithmic 

innovations of platforms (Sehl, Cornia & Nielsen 2018 , p. 28). The attempt to produce 

algorithm -satisfying content is sometimes referred to as ‘gaming the algorithm ’. To 

satisfy social media and search engine algorithms, for instance, journalists and 

publishers are increasingly trying to produce content with maximum ‘shareability ’

(Hanusch 2017; Petre 2015; Burggraaff & Trilling 2017, p. 3). At its best, gaming the 

algorithm can ensure high quality journalism receives the online distribution it deserves 

(Belair -Gagnon & Holton 2018; Cherubini & Nielsen 2016). However, it also means that 

man y news organisations are engaging heavily in story -by -story optimisation. This 

takes significant technical investment, which some smaller news organisations struggle 

to resource ( Schlesinger & Doyle 20 15 , p. 313; Hindman 2015).   

> 10 In August 2018, it was also reported that Facebook has been secretly giving users a trustworthiness score, based on
> users’ ability to flag a nd report inaccurate news. Facebook reportedly takes this into account when determining how to
> spread a user’s content, but does not tell users what their score is (Coen 2018) .51

A further key point is that the code of digital platforms’ algorithms tends to be kept 

secret (Bucher 2018 , p. 41). Google’s foundational PageRank algorithm, which assigns 

a score to each webpage signifying its importance, has be en described as the 

company’s ‘secret sauce ’ (Pasquale 2015) . As a computing journalist noted in 2007, 

people ‘would pay millions to crack the code for Google's PageRank algorithm – the 

elusive Holy Grail of online marketing ’ (Collett 2007). PageRank is still in use, but its 

composition and role have changed. It has been joined by other Google algorithms, 

and its rankings are no longer made public, but only used internally (Southern 2016). 

Partly due to the secrecy of their coding, the overall effects of algorithms are complex 

and difficult to determine. This is even more the case given that algorithms rarely stand 

still, but are constantly updated and refined. For news consumers, the effects of 

algorithms are significant and shifting, and include the benefits and harms that come 

with personalisation and customisation. 

# Pers onalisation and customisation 

The migration of news content to digital channels, and the attendant atomisation of 

news discussed in Chapter One , has caused a shift from mass communication to 

personalised and customised news consumption (Haim Graefe & Brosi us 2018). 

Personalisation, in this context, is a digital process that involves searching, sorting and 

recommending news content based on the explicit and/or implicit preferences of 

individual users (Thurman & Shifferes 2012). Customisation refers to the mo dification 

of sources, delivery and frequency of digital news content for individual consumption. 

Both personalisation and customisation help to filter the abundance of digital news and 

to present information tailored to the interests of the individual. 

Th e capacities to personalise and customise news consumption have been made 

possible by the growth of online news access. In Australia in 2018, news accessed via 

digital channels surpassed traditional channels, with social media, online news 

platforms and se arch engines playing a leading role ( Park et al. 2018 , p. 53, 57). As a 

large, and increasing, proportion of Australians rely on digital platforms for their news, 

Australians are increasingly dependent on algorithms ‘autonomously ’ to select the 

news conten t they consume. Such algorithms are used both by digital platforms and by 

traditional news media. 

Personalisation 

The purpose of algorithmic news personalisation is to optimise user engagement by 

increasing the consumption of news items per user (Pariser 2011; Ricci, Rokach & 

Shapira 2015) . This aligns with the nature of internet advertising, where granular 

details on user preferences are gathered to create comprehensive user profiles. These 

profiles allow digital platforms to sell targeted advertisements and to personalise news 

content that engages the user (Schneier 2015) .11 Digital profiles can include   

> 11 The impact of digital platforms on user privacy is a highly significant and related issue. In 2018, details emerged that
> data analytics company Cambridge Analytica had accessed the perso nal data of 87 million Facebook users in the lead -
> up to the 2016 US presidential election in order to target them with highly personalised pro -Trump content (Isaak & 52

preferences that are explicitly made by the user, such as ‘likes ’ and ‘shares ’ on 

Facebook; they can also include implicit preferences, such as comparing user 

behaviour on news websites and recommending news stories that have engaged 

similar profiles. 

Digital platforms and digital news producers rely on ‘recommender systems ’ to filter 

news content. Such systems prioritise and personalise news content based on 

recorded or inferred user prefere nces (Konstan & Riedl 2012). The ensuing 

recommendations are designed to assist the user ’s decision -making process in the 

consumption of news. Generally, recommender systems operate in a cyclical process, 

which involves:  

> 

Collecting information on the user: a system receives explicit and/or 

implicit feedback on user preferences to build a profile (or model) 

that is used for prediction;  

> 

Processing and learning: a system applies an algorithm to ‘learn ’

from the feedback data gathered about the user and adapts the 

profile (or model) of the user; and  

> 

Prediction or recommendation: a system then predicts or 

recommends news content that the user may prefer. This can either 

be predicted based on the user’s behaviour on the platform (through 

probabilistic inference, f or instance) or recommended based directly 

on a dataset of explicit feedback provided by the user (Isinkaye, 

Folajimi & Ojokoh 2015) .

Recommender systems 

Three major types of recommender systems are used for news content online .

Content -based filtering: Systems that learn to recommend content similar to items that 

the user has explicitly liked or engaged with in the past. Similarity is calculated ba sed 

on comparing features of content (Ricci, Rokach & Shapira 2015, pp. 73 -4) . For 

example, if a user positively rates a news story that belongs to particular topic, then the 

system learns to recommend other stories that are also associated with that topic area. 

As news cont ent can be associated with an array of features (including author, medium 

and political orientation), recommendations can become extremely precise. A 

significant problem with content -based filtering, however, is its dependence on 

metadata ; t hat is, rich de scriptions of contents’ features and well -organised user 

profiles are required before useful recommendations can be made (Isinkaye, Folajimi & 

Ojokoh 2015, p. 265) .

Collaborative filtering: Systems that learn to recommend content that other users with 

similar preferences have liked or engaged with in the past. Recommendations are 

calculated based on the similarities betwee n user profiles, such as user behaviour or 

> Hanna 2018) . The episode revealed the way in which pr ivacy breaches can threaten the democratic process,
> particularly when combined with highly targeted (and sometimes untrue) news content. An investigation of the impact of
> digital platforms on privacy and hence on news and democracy is beyond the scope of t his report. 53

ratings history (Ricci, Rokach & Shapira 2015, p. 12) . For example, a single white 

female aged 25 from Sydney and interested in Australian politics might engage with a 

news story that received high engagement from similar profiles. A sig nificant advantage 

of collaborative filtering is that it can perform well in domains where it is difficult to 

accurately label content (such as opinions). Collaborative filtering systems can also 

generate useful recommendations even when content is not exp licitly listed in a user’s 

profile (Schafer et al, 2007). Challenges can emerge, however, when inadequate 

information is known about the user or the content, which results in irrelevant 

predictions and can make collaborative systems difficult to scale (Park et al. 2012) .

Hybrid filtering: Systems that combine different recommendation techniques to util ise 

the advantages of one method and compensate for the weaknesses of another. This 

allows hybrid systems to base their recommendations on both content and similar 

profiles that have engaged with the item. There are many variations of hybrid systems, 

inclu ding the sophisticated system built by The New York Times .

The New York Times recommender system 

Digital platforms including Google, Facebook and Twitter are secretive about the 

details of the workings of their algorithms. Their algorithms have been descri bed as the 

‘black box ’, or ‘secret sauce ’, of their services (Pasquale 2015; Bucher 2018 , p. 41). 

The New York Times (NYT) , by contrast, has exhibited some transparency with its 

hybrid recommender system, which uses a combination of different algorithmic 

techniques. This hybrid system blends elements of content -based filtering with 

collaborative filtering to recommend news content (Spangher 2015) . The system relies 

on three main components:  

> 

Users: People who interact with digital systems. Each user may 

have a set of attributes to help construct an accurate representation 

(or model) of their profile, such as age, gender, topic interests, etc.  

> 

Preferences: These represent users’ likes and dislikes. Preferences 

can be both explicitly determined by the user (e.g., ‘sharing ’ a news 

sto ry) or implicitly inferred (similar profiles to other users).  

> 

Items: Content that a system chooses to recommend are referred to 

as ‘items ’. Each item may have a set of attributes or properties 

(such as meta tags) that help to describe the content and match it to 

users. E.g. content topic, author, and location (Ricci, Rokach & 

Shapira 2015, pp. 1 -3) .

The NYT recommender system is based on a technique known as Collaborative Topic 

Modeling, or CTM (Wang & Blei 2011, pp. 449 -50) . The CTM method works by 

mode lling content to determine its topic(s); adjusting the model by gathering signals 

from readers, such as clicks; mode lling reader preferences from interactions with the 

platform; and makin g recommendations based on the similarity b etween content and 

preferences. 54 

The process behind the NYT ’s recommender system consists of four main steps 

(Spangher 2015) :

1. Determining the topic of an article : The algorithm starts by analysing each 

article to understand what it is abo ut (content -based filtering). It achieves this 

using a Natural Language Processing, or NLP, technique called ‘Latent Dirichlet 

Allocation ’, or LDA, which counts the number of times a particular word appears 

in an article and compares this to other articles (Blei, Ng & Jordan 2003, pp. 

993 -4) . LDA enables the algorithm autonomously to determine the topic of the 

article. For example, words such as ‘sena tor ’ or ‘parliament ’ are likely to be 

associated with the topic of ‘Politics ’. LDA also helps to determine how much an 

article is devoted to a particular topic, whenever multiple topics are present in 

an article (referred to as ‘weightings ’). For instance, it might categorise an 

article as 20 per cent Politics, 30 per cent Environment and 50 per cent 

Business.   

> Figure 1: LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) helps algorithms to determine what content
> is about by categorising topics (Source: Ble i 2012)

Figure 1 provides a visual representation of this process. First, each document is 

characterised by a distribution of topics (histogram on the right). These topics are 

assigned a set of words that have higher probabilities of being associated with that 

topic (coloured coins). Then, the algorithm processes the text, allowing it to determine 

the different topic weightings present within the document (‘ Topics ’ categorisation, on 

the left). 55 

2. Cross -checking the model based on audience reading pat terns : Part of the problem 

with the LDA approach alone is that the ambiguity of language presents challenges. 

For example, the use of puns and metaphors in satirical articles can make it difficult for 

LDA systems correctly to categorise content. The NYT al gorithm offsets such topic 

errors by incorporating reading patterns to create a hybrid approach. This requires 

using collaborative filtering techniques to compare the profiles of users who are reading 

a particular article. For example, suppose the LDA tech nique identified an article to be 

30 per cent Environment and 70 per cent Business, but the profiles of the article’s 

readership are 95 per cent Environment. The algorithm would then adjust the topic 

categorisation of the article according to the two perce ntages (depending on their 

weighting specified in the algorithm). The NYT algorithm also prioritises other factors 

such as recent content, word length, specific words, and others. 

3. Understanding reader preferences : The NYT applies topic -modelling on the articles 

a user has read to establish a baseline of user preferences. This means that if a user 

reads 10 NYT articles within a week, the recommendations system would take an 

average of the topics present in those articles to determine the user’s preference s. 

‘Clicks ’, however, are not always indicative of preferences. Some clicked articles don’t 

engage users; and users miss some articles that they would have otherwise enjoyed. 

In response, the NYT uses a technique called the ‘back -off ’ approach. This assume s

that articles clicked mostly reflect a user’s preferences. For example, this might mean 

users ‘80 per cent like ’ the articles they clicked and ‘20 per cent like ’ the articles they 

didn’t. This provides a more conservative estimate of user preferences, bu t also 

exposes readers to more serendipitous recommendations. 

The NYT recommender system also incorporates more granular user information. 

Analytics are collected on reader behaviours such as scroll depth, article dwell time, 

social media sharing, and othe r indicators, enabling the NYT to construct a more 

complete model of user profiles to understand their preferences. To train the algorithm 

to account for these evolving preferences, a subset of the readership is selected, along 

with their labelled attribut es and preferences. Supervised Learning (a type of Machine 

Learning) techniques are then applied to help make predictions of what a user wants to 

read based on their recorded preferences. The algorithm then iteratively improves its 

classification and recom mendation abilities (or ‘learns ’) as it is trained on more data 

(both user preferences and news articles) and as its algorithmic weightings are 

tweaked. 

4. Making personalised recommendations : This process of modelling topic content and 

user preferences al lows the NYT to provide personalised news recommendations. It 

enables the abundance of online NYT news content to be filtered at an individual level, 

and to improve with greater user interaction. Hybrid recommender systems, such as 

the NYT recommendation e ngine, generally perform better than content -based and 

collaborative filtering alone, and are becoming more widespread throughout digital 

news platforms (Isinkaye, Folajimi & Ojokoh 2015, p. 269) .

Like the NYT , digital platforms including search engines, social media and content 

aggregators employ algorithms that use personalisation techniques (Diakopoulos &56 

Koliska 2017). Just as Google searches return personalised recommendations, Google 

News has a ‘For You ’ feature, in which content is tailored for users according to their 

search and other history. The Facebook ‘newsfeed ’ blends posts by friends, 

advertisers, companies an d others in ways that are personalised for each user. And 

news aggregators such as Pocket and Nuzzel, which enable users to customise their 

news feeds, employ algorithms to personalise that customised content. However, as 

previously noted, details of the a lgorithmic techniques used by these platforms are 

generally not made public. 

Customisation 

Related to the personalisation practised by digital platforms and news media is the 

capacity for consumers to customise their news feeds. Customisation, as previousl y

noted, refers to the modification of sources, delivery and frequency of digital news 

content for individual consumption. 

Customisation, like personalisation, is in part a response to the way in which digital 

media has expanded the possible channels by wh ich users can consume news 

content. That is, the proliferation of digital devices, in concert with the accelerated news 

cycle, has created an increasing range of options for news consumption. This had led 

some to argue that an abundance has been superseded by an overabundance of news 

options. In 2007, Martin Moore, the director of the Media Standards Trust in the UK, 

referred to a ‘bombarded and bewildered public ’ (Moore 2007). Similarly, in workshops 

held by the Centre for Media Transition in 2018, news co nsumers in Sydney and 

Tamworth consistently admitted to feeling ‘overwhelmed ’ and ‘bombarded ’ by the news 

media landscape (Fray, Molitorisz & Marshall 2018) .

Against this backdrop, greater capacities have been developed enabling the 

customisation of how, when and where news is consumed. In particular, social media is 

founded on a principle of customisation. For instance, users choose their friends on 

Facebook and who they follow on Twitter. The news encountered on Facebook and 

Twitter is thus largely determined by whatever is shared by those who have been 

befriended and followed. Among many other capacities, consumers can also: 

customise their settings on Google News; customise their settings on various news 

aggregators; and customise the news they consume on YouTub e by subscribing to 

specific channels that stream news coverage. News organisations including The New 

York Times , Axios.com and many Australian sources also enable users to receive 

email newsletters customised by topic. With the rise of social media, email newsletters 

were for a time regarded as ‘old technology ’, but they have recently experienced a 

surge in popularity ( Smith and Page 2015; Fagerlund 201 6; Park Et al. 2018). For 

many news producers and some consumers, one advantage is that newsletters are n ot 

subject to the algorithms of search engines and social media (Fagerlund 2016; S mith & 

Page 2015) .

Thanks to these and other expanding customisation capacities, individual consumers 

are now able make the sorts of curatorial decisions formerly reserved for editors of 

traditional news outlets. One potential caveat is that this shift to customised news 57 

consumption presumes certain levels of news literacy (Powers 2017) . That is, 

individuals are presumed to have the knowledge and abilities to make responsible 

news consumption decisions that are in t heir best interests. Given the lowered barriers 

of access to content for consumers, it is argued, news literacy becomes more important 

as users are increasingly required to check facts, monitor the reliability of sources and 

consume a diversity of sources. 

Thanks largely to technological innovation, the consumption of news is changing 

dramatically. Australians are consuming more news online than offline, they are 

increasingly accessing news via their mobile phones, and they are highly reliant on 

social medi a and search engines ( Park et al. 2018). The pathways to news are 

proliferating. However, amid all this abundance and proliferation, consumption patterns 

and habits remain ill understood. As Joelle Swart (2017) writes: 

The current news media landscape is c haracterized by an abundance of digital 

outlets and increased opportunities for users to navigate news themselves. Yet, 

it is still unclear how people negotiate this fluctuating environment to decide 

which news media to select or ignore, how they assemble distinctive cross -

media repertoires, and what makes these compositions meaningful (Swart 

2017). 

For today’s consumers, news is accessible, convenient and often ‘free ’. It is also often 

personalised and customised. The potential benefits and harms are subst antial , and 

not always well understood. 

# Filter bubbles and echo chambers 

There are two primary purposes for deploying algorithmic techniques for news 

consumers: (1) to sort through the abundance of news content; and (2) to recommend 

news content that users will consume to keep them engaged with the platform 

(Thurman & Schifferes 2012, p. 776) . As noted above, this is done by gathering 

information on users, selling that information to advertisers to generate revenue 12 , and 

then providing personalised news content via algorithmic methods to engage individual 

users. Greater user engagement logically leads to greater opportunities for advertising 

revenu e for digital platforms. The concern, however, is that the relentless pursuit of 

engagement does not always align with the fundamental ideals of news as the fourth 

estate and the public interest, as described in Chapter One . Scholars have argued, for 

insta nce, that it is in the interest of digital platforms to host news that attracts attention. 

The public interest is irrelevant. As legal scholar A lice Marwick writes: ‘YouTube and 

Facebook take no interest in what the content is about, whether it’s holocaust denial 

videos or makeup tutorials; they are simply interested in keeping their viewers on the 

platform ’ (Marwick 2018 , p. 506).        

> 12 Facebook says it does not sell user data. However, it does sell categories of users. As Mark Zuckerberg said in April:
> ‘What we allow is for advertisers to tell us who they want to reach, and then we do the placement. ’
> <https://motherboard.vi ce.com/en_us/article/8xkdz4/does -facebook -sell -data >. 58

To maximise engagement, it is argued, consumers are increasingly having their news 

content filtered to reflect narrow, personal ised interests (Pariser 2011) . As we have 

seen, consumers increasingly rely on algorithmic systems to provide them with news 

content that aligns with their preferences (Haim , Graefe & Brosius 2018 , p. 330). And 

when digital platforms are incentivised to show content that optimises engagement, 

consumers can find themselves in algorithmically constructed ‘filter bubbles ’ (Pa riser 

2011; Sunstein 2017). These filter bubbles are personalised according to user 

preferences, and then further reinforced by customisation. These cycles of 

personalisation and customisation, it is argued, exacerbate the tendency of people to 

consume new s that conforms to their existing worldviews, which thus creates ‘echo 

chambers ’ (Lezard & Mimms 2017 ). The potential implications include a constrained 

public discourse, a less informed citizenry and sharpened political polarisation (Pariser 

2011). 

In thi s section, we address three specific issues attending claims of ‘filter bubbles ’ and 

‘echo chambers ’. First, we consider the argument that the diversity of news content 

being consumed is being reduced by personalisation and customisation. Second, we 

ask wh ether the autonomy of news consumers is being inhibited by algorithms. And 

third, we consider whether there is a problematic lack of transparency and 

accountability attending the use of algorithms. 

Reduced diversity of news 

Diversity is often regarded as a fundamental principle of news quality, which helps to 

ensure a well -informed citizenry (McQuail 1992, p. 47; Strömbäck 2005, p. 332) . A 

balance of news can include a diversity of sources, content, and perspectives 

(McDonald & Dimmick 2003 , p. 63). 13 Algorithmic filtering methods, however, run the 

risk of constraining diversity, which may cause information blindness for consumers. 

This has led scholars to question whether algorithmic methods on digital platforms 

value and foster diversity as a key feature of news quality (Pasquale 2015, p. 88) .

Further implications of these filtering effects are that consumers c ould have their 

preferences and perspectives artificially reinforced (Guess et al. 2018) . These ‘echo 

chambers ’ can lead people to avoid important public is sues altogether or can polarise 

public discussion and thereby inhibit constructive debate (Pariser 2011) .

A point to no te here is that algorithms do not necessarily limit diversity. In fact, the 

reverse can be true: content diversity can be programmed into platforms’ algorithms. 

The effect of an algorithm on diversity depends on the specifics of that algorithm. We 

return t o this point below. In addition, studies on filter bubbles and echo chambers 

which consider diversity (Dubois and Blank 2018; Guess, et al. 2018; Haim, Graefe and 

Hans -Bernd 2018; Möller et al. 2018) do not establish conclusive evidence that 

algorithmic te chniques inhibit content diversity. 

However, one study that is directly on point examined whether news recommendation 

engines contribute to filter bubbles by asking 168 participants to search Google News  

> 13 We address the related issues of diversity and plurality in Chapter Four. 59

for news about Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton duri ng the 2016 election and report 

the first five recommended stories. The study found that users with different political 

leanings from different states were recommended very similar news: the top 

recommendations were consistently identical for conservatives and liberals. This 

challenged the notion that algorithms are encouraging echo chambers. However, the 

researchers also found a high degree of homogeneity: on average, 69 per cent of all 

recommendations were to five news organisations; and the most -recommen ded five 

publishers accounted for 49 per cent of links collected (Nechushtai & Lewis 2018) . It 

would be difficult to attempt an analogous study for a social media platform such as 

Facebook, where news items mingle with non -news items, and where user experiences 

are necessarily more individualised. 

Meanwhile, studies have certainly observed a dramatic increase in the qua ntity of news 

content. In part, this is driven by the rise of both social media and search platforms, 

which require that websites have a steady stream of new content to remain competitive 

(Petre 2015; Hindman 2007). There is also a growing amount of ‘robot ’-produced 

journalism content (Barnard 2018, pp.189 -90). However, many hard news stories are 

now written quickly, with little, if any, original reporting (Boczkowski 2010; Buhl, 

Günther & Quandt 2018; Smyrnaios, Mar ty & Rebillard 2010, p. 1258; Starkman 2010) .

Even before the rise of digital platforms, online news had moved towards becoming a 

‘generic ’ commodity, with news outlets differentiating their stories only by cosmetic 

differences in headlines and lead parag raphs (Boczkowski 2010; Ghersetti, cited in 

Hoffstetter & Schoenhagen 2017, p. 46 ). Further, some researchers are finding an 

increased quantity of news stories d oes not equate to increased content diversity. 

Research from The Netherlands examining more than 762,000 news stories found that 

online news articles are almost twice as likely to be ‘follow up ’ stories as print articles 

(Burggraaff & Trilling 2017, p. 15) . The authors do not attribute this to algorithms, but to 

the speed and churn of the online environment , given that follow up stories are easier 

and quicker to write than original content ( Burggraaff & Trilling 2017, p. 15). 

Algorithms can f ilter and prioritise news in much the same way as human editors 

(Weber & Kosterich 2018). Rather than replacing humans in news production, 

algorithms can thus be regarded as helping journalists to curate and communicate the 

news. This can work both ways: t o promote diversity, or to limit it. In their study of 59 

open source mobile news apps, Weber and Kosterich found that the coding for news 

flows is often closely linked to the content flows on social media. For 43 per cent of the 

news apps studied, a first step is to search the social media habits of the user (2018 , p. 

318). This common starting point suggests a limit on, rather than an expansion of, 

diversity in these apps. However, such limits can be designed out. Certainly, news 

recommender systems can b e designed to have diversity effects similar to human 

editors (Möller e t al . 2018). In other words: code and algorithms can be just as 

excellent as human editors, and just as lamentable. Recently, digital platforms have 

changed their algorithms in the wake of the outcry over fake news. As the 2018 Digital 

News Report found: ‘Notions of trust and quality are being incorporated into the 

algorithms of some tech platforms as they respond to political and consumer demands 60 

to fix the reliability of information in their systems .’ Similar changes could also be 

implemented to promote c ontent diversity. 

While there is some evidence supporting the notion that algorithmic techniques have 

tended to inhibit content diversity, there are also studies that dispute this suggestion 

(Del Vicario et al. 2016, pp. 2 -3) . Indeed, it has been argued that the problem of filter 

bubbles and echo chambers has been overstated (e.g., see D ubois & Blank 2018, pp. 

729 -30; Guess et al. 2018, p. 3; Haim, Graefe & Brosius 2018, pp. 338 -9) . As Möller et 

al . note in their study: ‘All of the recommendation logics under study proved to lead to a 

rather diverse set of recommendations that are on par with human editors ’ (2018). 

A further point here concerns a potential excess of choice. On the internet, news 

consumers have access to an abundance of information and sources. So much so, that 

many users describe being overwhelmed by an overabundance of news content (see 

'Customisation', above). This is potentially problematic, given that research has shown 

that when people are confronted with too many choices, they regularly make bad 

choices, or are paralysed into making no choice at all. What's more, th ey are often left 

feeling dissatisfied with those choices (Schwartz 2004). This has been described as the 

'paradox of choice': presenting more options can lead to worse choices and lower 

satisfaction (Schwartz 2004). This paradox has been confirmed for sea rch engine 

results: participants whose searches returned six results made better choices and were 

more satisfied than participants whose searches returned 24 results (Oulasvirta, 

Hukkinen & Schwartz 2009). 

It is unclear whether this paradox prevails for ne ws consumers. Barry Schwartz has 

argued that in the field of culture, the paradox of choice does not prevail. An enormous 

choice of novels, say, may not be overwhelming (Schwartz 2008). We have noted 

above that news users take unpredictable and idiosyncrat ic paths to get their news 

(see 'Customisation'). Certainly, they are not always satisfied with the news they 

consume. As Joelle Swart writes: news 'users do not always use what they prefer, nor 

do they prefer what they use' (Swart 2017). A detailed accoun t of this issue is beyond 

the scope of this report; however, given the vast range of news content available to 

consumers, the role played by customisation and personalisation is hard to overstate. 

Given this abundance, algorithms can determine whether cons umers make good or 

bad choices, including by means of the number of options presented to users. Hence 

recommender systems, for instance, become vital. As Ricci, Rokach and Shapira 

(2015, p. 2) write: ‘In recent years, RSs [Recommender Systems] have proven to be a 

valuable means of coping with the information overload problem.’ Just as the effects of 

algorithms on content diversity remain unclear, so too it is unclear whether algorithmic 

techniques are fostering a constrained public discourse, a less informe d citizenry and 

exacerbated political polarisation. This lack of clarity may be due to the relatively recent 

rise of algorithmic systems, the difficulties and methodological shortcomings of 

measuring their effects, or simply, that theories of filter bubble s and echo chambers are 

exaggerated. Further, these negative effects must be weighed against the benefits that 

algorithmic systems provide to news consumers, including the ability to search, sort 

and filter masses of online news content. What is clear is t hat the prevalence of 61 

algorithmic systems in digital news media is wide and growing, and that their effects on 

content diversity and public discourse warrant ongoing scrutiny. 

Compromised autonomy and constrained choice 

Ostensibly, digital platforms promo te autonomy when it comes to news consumption. 

The cross -platform availability of content seemingly affords users greater freedom to 

consume news media in ways that they choose (Napoli 2011). However, as more 

consumers access news via digital platforms, an d more digital platforms use 

algorithmic methods to personalise news consumption, it has been argued that user 

autonomy is being compromised, and that user choice is considerably more limited 

than it first appears (Pariser 2011; Sunstein 2017). This argume nt holds that 

algorithms, not autonomy, are guiding our actions and thoughts. As Eli Pariser writes, 

‘The algorithms that orchestrate our ads are starting to orchestrate our lives ’ (Pariser 

2011, p. 9). 

The value of individual autonomy is rarely questioned in applied ethics and legal 

philosophy (Mackenzie & Stoljar 2000 , p. 4). The concept is difficult to define, but is 

tied up in notions of self -determination, self -governance and self -authorisation 

(Mackenzie 2014 , pp. 15 -16). In simple terms, it is the ab ility to determine one’s own 

life and chart one’s own course. This is precisely what the algorithms of search engines 

and social media arguably compromise: that is, they compromise autonomy by limiting 

and channelling choice. For instance, as legal scholar James Grimmelman writes, 

‘Whoever controls search engines has enormous influence on us all. They can shape 

what we read, who we listen to, and who gets heard ’ (Grimmelman , 2008). 14 Evidence 

for social media’s adverse impact on autonomy emerged in 2014, whe n Facebook 

revealed it had manipulated the newsfeeds of nearly 700,000 users to see how adding 

negative or positive content affected the mood of users. The results of the controversial 

Facebook -backed study showed that ‘emotional states can be transferred to others via 

emotional contagion, leading people to experience the same emotions without their 

awareness ’ (Kramer, Guillory & Hancock 2014). 

For digital platforms, the underlying assumption is that the implicit preferences they 

attribute to individual con sumers will become more and more accurate, so that they 

perfectly align with the choices of consumers. This reasoning suggests that if the 

algorithms are good enough, they will not compromise autonomy, because they will 

perfectly align with users ’ choices and preferences. However, such alignment is 

difficult, perhaps impossible. As discussed in the previous section, algorithmic methods 

infer the implicit preferences of consumers. This means that news content can be 

personalised based on consumers’ historica l behaviours on the platform, similarities 

between consumer profiles and the profiles of others like them, and other inferred 

attributes. However, consumers might change their preferences over time, or they may 

in fact prefer content that diverges from the content received by people with similar 

profiles. A related issue concerns transparency: if users do not know how those   

> 14 Similarly, it has been argued that big data has the effect of compromising autonomy, and also privacy (Pan 2016) .62

algorithms affect them, including their consumption of news, then their autonomy would 

seem to be compromised. (The issue of transparen cy is addressed below.) 

The degree to which Facebook and Google dominate the social media and internet 

search markets – two increasingly significant news consumption channels – could also 

mean that this process of algorithmic personalisation falls dispropo rtionately into the 

hands of two companies. The more consumers use these platforms, the greater 

incentives for news content to be published on these platforms. There is potential for 

these ‘network effects ’ to constrain consumer choice and inhibit autonomy ; however, 

the evidence underlying this claim remains unclear. 

Transparency and accountability 

The algorithmic systems that digital news platforms depend upon are often proprietary 

methods that are withheld from public purview. In the interests of keeping trade 

secrets, the full scope of how these algorithmic systems personalise consumer news 

remains opaque and removed from public criticism. This raises concerns about a lack 

of transparency and poor accountability (Diakopoulos & Koliska 2017, p. 812) . The 

question is: how well do consumers understand the processes behind algorithms and 

filtering? 

While evidence to support the theories of ‘filter bubbles ’ and ‘echo chambers ’ remain s

inconclusive, consumers generally do not have a firm grasp on the application and 

extent of algorithmic personalisation in providing news content (Powers 2017) .

Consumers are largely unaware of how and whether digital news platforms trac k user 

preferences to make editorial decisions in the delivery of personalised news content 

(Powers 2017b) . This is due, in part, to the non -transparent nature of how algorithmic 

systems are developed and deployed (DeVito 2017) . Transparency of the way 

algorithmic systems produce, curate and disseminate news content is limited (Rader & 

Gray 2015, p. 178) . The tension between preserving trade secrets and disclosing 

algorithmic methods is an emerging issue. This is potentially problematic for companies 

that don’t identify themselves as ‘news organisations ’, yet increasingly host the 

publication of news content. In the transition to digital personalisat ion, accountability to 

dispense accurate, balanced and timely news is arguably compromised. 

‘Transparency ’ is the ability to view the truth and motives that underlie people’s actions 

as a means to strengthening accountability and trust (Balkin 1999; Bennis 2013) . This 

highlights an important distinc tion between algorithmic ‘transparency ’ and ‘explanation ’. 

Algorithmic ‘transparency ’ provides insight into the operations of autonomous systems, 

whereas ‘explanation ’ refers to how and whether certain input factors affect final 

decisions, outcomes, or rec ommendations (Doshi -Velez et al. 2017) . Both 

transparency and explanation allow consumers to access more information about how 

digital platforms and news outlets produce, curate and distribute content. Tellingly, 

transparency has evolved as a key ethica l principle of news journalism (Plaisance 

2007) . The growing use of proprietary and ever -changing algorithms, however, inhibit s

levels of transparency in the delivery of digital n ews content. 63 

Reduced transparency from the algorithmic delivery of news content has a number of 

implications. First, as discussed in the previous section, the autonomy of consumers 

can be constrained by the inability to fully evaluate consumption decisions (Powers 

2017b) . ‘If readers don’t know they are influencing content, they cannot make critical 

decisions about what they choose to [consume ]’ (Jolly 2014) . Research has shown that 

people are unaware or uncertain of how digital news content is being algorithmically 

personalised (Rader 2014) , particularly via social media channels (Eslami et al. 2015) .

Algorithmic methods that are reasonably transparent and intelligible (through 

understandable explanation) could equip consu mers to make appropriate news 

consumption decisions. 

Second, transparency is considered a route to accountability (Ward 2014) . It provides 

an avenue for public scrutiny and a means to building legitimacy with consumers (Allen 

2008) . The current lack of transparency contributes to a dynamic of self -regulation in 

accountability. It has b een argued that this process of self -regulation of accountability 

raises contradictory incentives: relentlessly pursuing engagement on the one hand; and 

upholding the values of the fourth estate and the public interest on the other (Fengler & 

Russ -Mohl 2014) . Greater transparency and explanation offers one approach towards 

more accountability of algorithmic sys tems on digital news platforms (Dörr 2016) .

Third, inhibited transparency can contribute to reduced trust in news media (Hayes, 

Singer & Ceppo s 2007) . In theory, greater access to information reduces uncertainty in 

social relations, which increases trust (Cotterrell 1999) . Research has shown that 

transparent explanations of how recommender systems arrived at speci fic 

recommendations enhanced user acceptance (Cramer et al. 2008) . Conversely, 

however, methods for improving transparency have had negative effects on the user 

experience (Schaffer et al. 2015) . This acts as a potential disincentive for digital 

platforms, includi ng digital news platforms, to become more transparent. It has been 

argued, however, that these user experience issues are surmountable (Lezard & 

Mimms 2017 ).

While imp roving transparency can help to foster autonomy, boost accountability and 

engender trust, it can also undermine competitive advantages or create costs that 

exceed social gains (Granados & Gupta 2013) . This suggests that a ny measures to 

improve algorithmic transparency, and the quality of explanations, might need to 

balance the established values and benefits of the fourth estate and the public interest 

with the proprietary rights of digital platforms. 

# Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

Artific ial Intelligence (AI) can be considered as a group of technologies capable of 

performing tasks autonomously, which, if performed by a human, would be considered 

to require intelligence (Crawford et al. 2016, p. 2; Scherer 2015, pp. 361 -2) . There are 

several subset technologies of AI, but four of the m ost relevant to digital platforms and 

digital news include: 64  

> 

Machine Learning (ML): Techniques that enable machines to learn 

autonomously and to improve from experience without being 

explicitly programmed (Jordan & Mitchell 2015, pp. 255 -56) , e .g. ,

news content recommendations on Facebook.  

> 

Deep Learning (DL)/Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs): Techniques ,

loosely inspired by how the brain works , that use an infrastructure of 

connected nodes and layered al gorithms to process masses of data 

to approximate representations. DL depends on advanced 

computational infrastructures and requires less input from humans 

in comparison to ML techniques , e .g. , DL can be applied to 

transcribe speech into text.  

> 

Natural Lang uage Processing and Natural Language Generation 

(NLP and NLG): Techniques that allow machines to automatically 

analyse, interpret, manipulate, and produce natural language, 

including speech and text , e .g. , Google Home and Amazon Alexa 

reading a summary of the daily news.  

> 

Computer Vision: The techniques that allow intelligent machines to 

‘see ’ the world around them. Tasks include acquiring, processing, 

analysing and understanding visually perceived information , e .g. ,

automatic captioning on YouTube videos. 

These techniques can be used both by news media and digital platforms to generate 

news content. 

Automated journalism 

The abundance of data and advances in AI have enabled significant steps in the 

automation of news production and distribution (Carlson 2015, p. 417) . Such 

techniques are widely used by both digital platforms and by news media. While AI 

applications in digital news are predominantly used for processing and reco mmending 

content (see above), automated news production is on the rise (Leppänen et al. 2017b, 

p. 188) . These systems are already deployed in prominent media outlets due t o the 

increasing content demands and shrinking resources of newsrooms (Leppänen et al. 

2017b, p. 189) . One form of automated information gathering is practised by the NSW 

Government at @NSWSharkSmart, which sends out automatically generated live 

tweets from tagged sharks, such as, ‘DPI Fisheries advise: tagged white shark 

detected by Bondi Beach, Sydney receiver at 04:50:00 AM (AEST) on 28 -Aug -2018 ’.

A fast growing method, but not yet widely deployed, is NLG that autonomously 

produces news text content (Linden 2017, p. 124) . Most NLG systems appear to rely 

on a combination of templates to structure a story: well -organised data sources, very 

clear algorithmic rules and usually some human input (such as names of locations) 

(Leppänen et al. 2017a, p. 189) . Due to the reliance on highly structured data, NLP 

applications are being applied to news domains such as weather forecasting (Sripada, 

Reiter & Davy 2003, p. 4) , weather updates (Chen & Huang 2014, pp. 746 -47) , finance 65 

(Nesterenko 2016, pp. 37 -8) , and sports (Bouayad -Agha et al. 2012, pp. 1 -3) . These 

methods, however, require considerable customisation to meet the content demands of 

different news outlets. Given that most are proprietary systems, details remain scarce. 

Such applications can also be used by digital platforms .

Automatic Text Summarisation 

The inundation of news text online creates problem s of ‘information overload ’ for 

consumers. Automatic Text Summarisation (Summarisation) techniques help to 

overcome this problem by creating short text summaries of the most important 

information from a document (that is, a text source). The use of AI tech niques, 

particularly Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), and Natural Language 

Processing (NLP), enables representative summaries of documents to be created 

autonomously. Summarisation is applied for various purposes, such as extracting news 

headline s, featuring relevant snippets from documents, and summarising news content. 

There are two main forms: Extractive Summarisation and Abstractive Summarisation 

(Gambhir & Gupta 2017, pp. 2 -4) .

Extractive Summarisation: This method extracts parts of the text that are considered to 

be most representative of the document according to a specified metric. For example, a 

popular measure is to assess the frequency of a word in a document and adjust this 

score based on how frequently the word appears in a corpus of documents. This 

measure is called ‘term frequency – inverse document frequency ’. It is designed to 

devalue common words, such as ‘the ’ and ‘of ’, and plac e greater value on more 

instructive (or rare) words, such as ‘politics ’, by comparing it to many other documents. 

This approach finds words in a text that are common, but not too common, which 

provides the basis for a text summary. For instance:          

> Original t ext : Last week, Prime Minister Turnbull and wife Lucy Turnbull
> made a visit to the Gallipoli War Memorial . He gave a speech welcoming
> people to the service, and met with ANZAC veterans and foreign leaders.
> Extractive summary : Prime Minister Turnbull and Lu cy Turnbull visit Gallipoli
> War Memorial. Met with ANZAC veterans.

The words in bold above were extracted from the original text and joined to form a 

summary. As seen above, a common issue with extractive techniques is that the output 

can be grammatically awkward. To overcome these issues and to summarise in natural 

language requires more abstract techniques. 

Abstractive Summarisation: This method builds a summary of the text, in the ways that 

a human would. That involves selecting ideas, building readable sentences in natural 

language and presenting them in a concise form. Abstractive Summarisation allows for 

rephrasing and does not place extractive constraints on the words that can be used. To 

continue the text example from above: 

> Abstractive summary : Prim e Minister Turnbull and Lucy Turnbull visited the
> Gallipoli War Memorial, where they met ANZAC veterans. 66

In this example, words and punctuation were adapted or added from the original text to 

make the summary more readable. Clearly, it is preferable to pre sent well -formed 

abstractive summaries, but this can be extremely difficult to achieve. Parsing language 

accurately and consistently is one of the biggest challenges for AI. Deep Learning, 

however, has contributed to significant advances in text summarisat ion. 

Deep Learning and Text Summarisation: Digital platforms, such as Google and 

Facebook, have been leading forces in the development and application of Deep 

Learning (DL) techniques to summarise text. DL models can be trained through a 

technique called ‘ sequence -to -sequence learning’, which converts sequences from one 

domain (for example, a long text document) to sequences in another (for example, a 

short text summary) (Sutskever, Vinyals & Le 2014, p. 3105) . The algorithms use a 

combination of ML techniques to iteratively improve, NLP to synthesise natural 

language data, and neural network infrastructure to strengthen computation. These DL 

models can then deliver accurate abstract summaries of longer form text. Google AI 

Research has provided examples of its DL summarisation model (Google 2016) :

Table 1: Google’s Deep Learning summarisation model .

Input: Article 1st sentence  Model -written headline           

> metro -goldwyn -mayer reported a third -quarter net
> loss of d ol lars 16 million due mainly to the effect of
> accountin g rules adopted this year
> MGM reports 16 million net loss on higher
> revenue
> starting from July 1, the island province of Hainan in
> southern china will implement strict market access
> control on all incoming livestock and animal
> products to prevent the poss ible spread of epidemic
> diseases
> Hainan to curb spread of diseases
> Australian wine exports hit a record 52.1 million
> litres worth 260 million dollars (143 million us) in
> September , the government statistics office
> reported on Monday
> Australian wine export s hit record high in
> September

While deep learning abstractive summaries continue to improve , they don’t yet always 

meet a standard comparable to human performance. For instance, a better version of 

the second example might be, ‘Hainan to control livest ock imports ’. This illustrates the 

difficulty of the challenge. The technique is also likely to change as ML techniques 

continue to improve and more training data becomes available. To date, summarisation 

has largely been confined to relatively short text documents, such as headlines for 

shorter news articles. Development, however, is underway to adapt and apply these AI 

methods to more difficult datasets, including summaries of long -form news features 

and books. 67 

There are obvious benefits to accurate summ arisation in its potential to assist 

consumers to digest news efficiently and to help producers to summarise their content. 

However, there are risks. First, there are risks that summarisation may not accurately 

reflect the content of a document, and might thus misrepresent facts or spread 

misinformation, among other adverse effects. These risks will inevitably decrease as AI 

applications continue to improve. Second, there are risks that digital platforms will take 

away online traffic from news content produ cers by providing consumers with short 

summaries that have been extracted from multiple sources. This could further reduce 

the capacity of digital news outlets to engage readers on their own platforms and 

subsequently weaken their economic viability. This is a significant risk, given that a 

summary that draws on several sources would arguably not infringe the intellectual 

property rights of the original content creators. And third, widespread summarisation 

raises concerns of reduced in -depth engagement with news content, which ultimately 

can affect production and quality. If consumers increasingly read summarised versions 

of news content, this may compromise the incentives for news outlets to produce in -

depth, quality content. Given the nascent stages of sum marisation techniques, these 

concerns are, for now, largely speculative. 

AI bias 

The application of AI systems also raises issues of bias. AI systems that exhibit 

statistical biases in their models or algorithms can result in actions that cause 

undesirable , unequal and/or unfair outcomes. AI systems typically undergo a process 

of ‘training ’ and ‘testing ’ in controlled environments before they are deployed in the real 

world. During these stages, AI developers attempt to specify the rules and 

requirements of an AI system, so that it can perform well and behave as intended. 

Biases in AI systems, however, emerge from ‘reality gaps ’, where the system’s 

specifications or training inputs differ from the requirements of its real -world 

environment (Amodei et al. 2016, p. 2) .

Biases in specification refer to scenarios where the biased judgements (conscious or 

unconscious) of human designers result in the incorrect specification of formal goals for 

an AI system (referred to as the ‘formal objective function ’). This fundamentally 

concerns how the AI system analyses the input data, perceives its environment and 

performs actions to achieve its goal. Wh ile AI systems may act autonomously once 

deployed, they still depend on human design, which is inherently exposed to the flaws 

of human judgement (Tversky & Kahneman 1974, pp. 1124 -7) . There fore, the 

complexities associated with correctly specifying AI systems are at risk of reflecting the 

biases of its human designers. For example, recommender systems that are designed 

to place greater weightings on ‘liberal ’ news stories, due to unconscious biases of the 

designers, may result in recommended news stories that are ideologically skewed. 

Biases in training , however, concern situations where the data used to ‘train ’ and 

inform AI systems are not representative of its operating environment. This could be a 

result of the training data being skewed, incomplete, or poorly labelled by humans 

(Hardt et al. 2016; Misra et al. 2016; Zook et al. 2017) . Such biases can subsequently 

be reflected in the behaviours of AI systems, which can cause unintended 68 

consequences. For example, in 2015, the image recognition AI in Google Photos 

classified an African American couple as ‘Gorillas ’ (Guynn 2015) . This systems error 

was attributed to poorly curated and biased training d ata during development. 

# Further innovation and ‘affordances ’

The innovation and technological change being implemented by digital platforms and 

news media is radical and ongoing. It is also vast in scope. As a result, this chapter has 

aimed to present a se lective account of key developments, including algorithms and AI. 

In this section, we focus on specific technological innovations by Google and Facebook 

that have impacted the consumption, distribution and production of news. These 

innovations are: Google’ s Search Engine Optimisation, First Click Free, Flexible 

Sampling and Accelerated Mobile Pages; and Facebook’s Instant Articles. This brief 

account shows how the relationship between digital platforms and news outlets is 

evolving, and that there is an ongo ing tension that is yet to resolve itself into a thriving 

and mutually beneficial partnership. 

Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) 

Google tasks itself with the mission of ‘organising the world’s information ’. It has 

become a crucial player in the news ecosyst em globally, with significant influence on 

news production, distribution and consumption. Most obviously, its news aggregator, 

Google News, is particularly influential. For instance, one study has shown that local 

Spanish news was consumed significantly le ss after the 2014 shutdown of Google 

News in Spain, in response to a law forcing Google to pay local publishers for 

aggregating their content (Athey, Mobius & Pál 2017) . After the shutdown, those who 

had been users of Google News were found to be reading less breaking news, hard 

news, and news not well covered by their favourite news publishers. The impacts of 

Google News continue to be studied. 

However, Google has many other platforms and technologies that affect the 

production, distribution and consumption of news. For news producers, Google’s 

Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) rankings are especially significant. As s earch is a n

important news consumption channel for Australians, how prominently news web 

pages are ranked in Google SEO influences the number of unique visitors who engage 

with content. While there are many factors that influence SEO rankings, and the 

Goog le algorithm is constantly evolving, content creation is a critical element (Google 

2018) ; that is, adding fresh and unique content regularly helps to improve SEO 

rankings. 

This deep appetite for content creation, driven partly by SEO rankings, comes at a time 

of diminishing resources for newsrooms (Carson & Muller 2017) . News outlets are 

therefore incentivised to develop automated news production systems, such as NLG 

methods, to maint ain or improve their SEO rankings. As discussed above, these 

systems can be difficult to build as they can require high levels of customisation in 

order meet the content demands of the news outlet. It is likely that only a small group of 

news outlets has the resources to invest in these systems. In this regard, the basis of 69 

competition shifts to the ability of news producers to process and generate information 

into consumable content, which is supported by AI techniques. 

These content generation systems are improving, but there are some concerns 

regarding quality and the ability to provide insight (Leppänen et al. 2017b, p. 194) .

While Google SEO does reward ‘easy -to -read ’ natural language (Google 2018) , a 

NLG -produced story can fulfil this criteria without providing useful analysis. For 

example, a sports story could include the score but miss controversial refereeing 

decisions that significantly affected the outcome. The quality of the system ultimately 

depends on the factor weightings of the Google algorithm, which remains ambiguous 

and non -transparent. 

First Click Free and Flexible Sampling 

In 2008, Google introduced ‘First Click Free ’ (FCF). According to its blog, Google 

aimed to ‘provide a better experience for Google users who may not have known that 

content existed ’, and ‘provide a promotion and discovery opportunity for publishers with 

restricted content ’ (Google 2008). Under the scheme, publishers who wanted to appear 

on Google were required to offer readers a prescribed number of ‘free ’ artic les per day 

before they hit a pay wall (Ruddick 2017). Initially, there was a daily limit of 10 ‘free ’

articles, but this was reduced to five in 2009, and further reduced to three in 2015, in 

part because publishers complained that users could use differen t browsers or clear 

their cache to increase their sampling limit (Google 2018; Google 2015; Evans 2018). 

To take part, publishers were required to allow ‘Googlebot ’ into their websites to collect 

information for indexing. Googlebot is a ‘web crawling bot ’ that indexes and updates 

websites every few seconds; however, it cannot breach sites that have pay walls , or 

require login details (Google 2018). 

While Google claimed that FCF was a way to ‘connect users to high quality news with 

minimum effort ’ (Google 20 15), European publisher Axel Springer publicly objected, 

and Robert Thomson of News Corp described it as a way of ‘disadvantaging premium 

content ’, because ‘if you don’t sign up for “first click free” , you virtually disappear from a 

search ’ (Ruddick 2017). Google’s FCF has been described as a way of ‘Google 

determining their [publishers’] business models ’ (Critchlow 2017). 

In 2017, the First Click Free model was abandoned and replaced by ‘Flexible 

Sampling ’, which affords publishers a range of options (Goo gle 2018). Google’s vice 

president of news, Richard Gingras, calls it a way for ‘publishers to best determine 

what level of free sampling works best for them ’. However, in its submission to the 

ACCC, News Corp says, ‘it is not yet clear how Flexible Sampli ng will impact overall 

search indexing for publishers with locked content, especially if a publisher does not 

provide content in the AMP (Accelerated Mobile Page) format ’. Clicking on an AMP link 

could lead users to a Google -determined site, and not the or iginal publisher’s webpage 

(News Corp 2018, p p. 70, 72; see below). 

Flexible Sampling is a significant shift from First Click Free. It allows publishers to 

decide how much content users can sample for ‘free ’. These options include ‘metering ’

and ‘lead -in ’. Metering refers to publisher’s ability to choose how many complete 70 

articles users can access before subscribing to their website. Lead -in, by contrast, 

allows publishers the ability to provide samples of a limited number of words per article 

to users. Goo gle advises against employing a lead -in approach, stating that ‘the 

interest in the product diminishes greatly ’. 

Instant Articles and Accelerated Mobile Pages 

In January 2018 , Facebook de -prioritised news, as discussed above. Previously, 

however, Facebook made changes to facilitate news consumption by introducing 

Instant Articles, which leverages the same technology that ensures photos display 

quickly in the Facebook app . Instant Articles, according to Facebook, is a mobile 

publishing format that loads and displays up to 10 times faster than the mobile web 

(ibid). Launched in 2015, it enables users to see a publisher’s article within Facebook’s 

app, even though its appearance resembles the publisher’s format. However, a study 

published in the Columbia Journa lism Review found that by 2018 ‘over half of 

Facebook’s launch partners for Instant Articles did not use the format ’. The study 

suggested that this may reflect the criticism by publishers that Instant Articles provide s

‘underwhelming monetisation, limited data usage and underwhelming options for 

subscription -based outlets ’. Though there has been an increase of 25 per cent in 

Instant Articles publishers, this may simply suggest that Facebook’s product is 

‘prioritising quantity over quality ’, given the amount of ‘high -profile publishers moving 

out of Instant ’ (Brown 2018). 

As a response to Facebook’s Instant Articles, Google’s Accelerated Mobile Pages 

(AMP) format is an open -source project designed to improve the mobile web by making 

pages load faster. Unveil ed in 2016, AMP aims to create a better user experience and 

decrease bounce rates . This is achieved by simplifying the regular mobile page code 

(feature -heavy JavaScript) to render instant page load times. 

Developers and news publishers, however, have argu ed that too much control is being 

given to Google (Lardinois 2018) . Specifically, AMP pa ges are optimised, indexed and 

shown especially for Google. Additionally, websites are required to use AMP in order to 

be featured on the Google News ‘Top Stories ’ carousel (Google 2018) . While the 

integration of AMP does not currently affect websites’ Search Engine Optimisation 

(SEO) rankings with Google Search, it does aff ect other metrics, such as clicks, 

impressions, and bounce rates, which impacts SEO. Additionally, Google’s investment 

in the area and the growing use of AMP indicate that it could play a role in SEO 

rankings in the future. 

The effect of AMPs on news is no t yet clear, but early figures suggest Google’s 

audiences for publishers have increased. For some websites, AMP traffic is boosting 

readership dramatically. In August 2018, Nielsen’s Digital Content Ratings released 

audience results for news sites which, f or the first time, included Google AMP data 

(Samios 2018). Supplemented by Google’s Accelerated Mobile Pages data, The 

Guardian Australia ’s unique audience number grew by more than one million, or 39 per 

cent. Big gains were also recorded by The Daily Tele graph , which saw a 10 per cent 

increase in its unique audience. The Australian saw its unique audience increase by 71 

more than 700,000 to 2.23 million; and Nine.com.au’s audience grew 8 per cent. The 

data only includes publishers who have opted in; Fairfax a nd the BBC are not among 

them (Samios 2018). 

In August 2018, Nieman Lab reported that Instant Articles has fallen out of use with 

many publishers, but that AMP ‘has contributed to Google overtaking Facebook as a 

traffic referral source ’ (Moses 2018). Howev er, it noted that publishers are expressing 

concern about the benefits of AMP. The concerns include: AMP delivers limited 

revenue because it does not support some ad formats; it limits publishers’ ability to use 

ambitious editorial formats; and it limits t he collection of data about reader behaviour 

(Moses 2018 ). While a minority of publishers are seeing clear benefits, it seems the 

majority are not. According to the first formal statistical analysis of the effects of AMP 

on website traffic, two thirds of p ublishers see no clear benefit in traffic from AMP 

(Breaux & Doll, Chartbeat 2018): 

> In sum, the prospect of AMP may not be positive for all publishers. Though the
> technology offers rightly lauded fast page loads, and potential opportunities in
> new products , with only 34 per cent of publishers seeing a clear boost in traffic
> and some facing substantial monetization challenges, implementing AMP may
> come at a high cost for publishers (ibid) .

All of the specific technologies described in this section have had b enefits for news 

consumers, distributors and producers, including in the way that unprecedented 

volumes of content have become accessible to consumers. The distribution channels 

for news have multiplied, and consumers have benefited. However, there have al so 

been clear harms, most obviously in the way publishers have been unable effectively to 

monetise the use of their content by search engines, aggregators and social media. 

# Conclusion 

The impact of technologies is complex. Indeed, with radical, ongoing ch anges to the 

media landscape, various distinctions are becoming blurred. These include the 

distinction between digital platforms and news media companies, the distinction 

between digital platforms and the internet generally, and also the distinction betwee n

news consumers, distributors and producers. Nonetheless , specific impacts on news 

consumers, distributors and producers can be identified, and can sometimes be clearly 

attributed to digital platforms. Some of these impacts are positive; some are negative ;

some are both at once. 

A preliminary point is that technology does not determine consumer behaviour, but 

does play a key role in influencing and shaping online behaviour. With its ‘affordances ’, 

it allows users to engage in certain ways, but not in other s. And the affordances of 

algorithms are particularly noteworthy. For both digital platforms and news media, 

algorithms are widely used and highly significant, but rarely transparent. In particular, 

the algorithms of social media, search engines and aggreg ators determine which 

content users encounter. Their effects on consumption and distribution of news are 

significant ; yet they also affect news producers. When social and search algorithms 72 

change, as they often do, news content can be made more or less vis ible. This can 

leave news producers vulnerable, incentivising them to ‘game the algorithm ’ by 

producing content that the algorithm will surface. 

Notably, algorithmic techniques are used to personalise content for consumers: they 

underpin the recommender sy stems that suggest news stories; they enable social 

media to tailor ‘newsfeeds ’ for each user; and they enable search engines to offer 

advertising and search returns specifically for each individual. As a result, the use of 

algorithmic techniques has raise d concerns about ‘filter bubbles ’ and ‘echo chambers ’. 

These concerns include arguments that consumers are being exposed to a diminished 

diversity of content, that consumer autonomy is being compromised and that a lack of 

transparency and accountability fo r the workings of these algorithms is fundamentally 

unfair. The evidence for diminished diversity is inconclusive, with some studies 

suggesting that fears about filter bubbles and echo chambers are significantly 

overblown. However, personalisation algorith ms can have negative impacts, including 

on autonomy, stemming in part from a lack of transparency and accountability about 

how they work. These negative impacts must be weighed up against positive impacts, 

which include the way algorithmic techniques help consumers navigate their way 

through a digital landscape that is sometimes overwhelming. The proprietary interests 

of the companies that develop the algorithmic techniques must also be considered , but 

this does not of itself appear to exclude high -level ex planation s of the workings of 

algorithms. 

Artificial Intelligence is also having a n impact. Automated journalism is still in its 

infancy, but the potential is great for both news producers, and also for digital platforms 

to produce meaningful content. Simi larly, automatic text summarisation has 

tremendous potential, and may enable digital platforms more easily to repurpose 

content from other sources. Again, such techniques potentially offer benefits for news 

consumers and distributors, but carry serious ris ks (and some potential benefits) for 

news producers. One emerging issue is that AI is susceptible to bias: systems are 

needed to minimise such bias. 

Finally, we turned to various specific technologies and innovations implemented by 

digital platforms that h ave impacted news consumers, distributors and producers. 

Specifically, we addressed Google’s Search Engine Optimisation, First Click Free, 

Flexible Sampling and Accelerated Mobile Pages and Facebook’s Instant Articles. The 

familiar pattern emerges: while o verall these technologies have had significant benefits 

for the consumption and distribution of news (and for digital platforms ), the same 

cannot be said for news production. A tension persists between digital platforms and 

news producers, who together hav e not yet developed a healthy and mutually 

beneficial relationship, despite significant, ongoing technological innovation and 

experimentation. 

Digital platforms are renowned for innovation. They are nimble and fleet, adjusting 

quickly to new challenges an d opportunities. Yet these technologies warrant detailed, 

dispassionate scrutiny, as their impacts on news consumption, distribution and 

production are often significant and hard to discern. 73 

# 3 Quality in news and journalistic 

# content 

 Driven by a shared pro fessional identity and journalistic values, the 

news industry has maintained a range of accountability instruments 

including industry codes of ethics and journalistic norms and 

practices .

 The contemporary media environment has introduced new 

challenges to journalistic quality: the 24/7 news cycle ; algorithms ;

the blogosphere. For consumers, this represents a new information 

asymmetry. 

 In response to escalating quality challenges , a number of online 

communities have assumed the roles of news media ‘watchdog ’, 

‘fact -checker’ and ‘critic’. 

 Indicators of journalistic quality can be grouped under three sets o f

criteria: content indicators ; organisational indicators; and audience 

engagement indicators .

 The current regulatory framework for the news media is fragm ented. 

There are ways in which digital platforms, as participants within the 

broader social framework for news media, could help maintain 

journalism’s accountability schemes. 

The concept of quality journalism has long been the subject of debate among acad emic 

researchers and professional journalists, who have developed various approaches to 

define and measure the quality of news and journalistic content (Anderson 2014, 

Shapiro 2010). The issue has attracted more attention — and new approaches —

during this time of rapid technological and commercial change in the news industry, a 

time characterised by cost -cutting, redundancies, mergers and a loss of trust in the 

news media in most countries, including Australia (Edelman 2018, McKewon 2018, 

Dawson 2017). 

An xiety over quality rises sharply at such inflexion points in the news media industry. 

Recently, attention to the role of quality in journalism has also caught the attention of 

regulators and policy -makers in the UK and the EU, as well as in Australia .15  

> 15 See: the Coun cil of Europe’s work on Quality Journalism in the Digital Age, < https://www.coe.int/en/web/freedom -
> expression/msi -joq >; the European Platform of Regulatory Authorities’ work on Implementing Accuracy, Objectivity and
> Impartiality in Practice, <https://www.e pra.org/attachments/vienna -plenary -1-news -in -digital -age -the -role -of -regulators -
> epra -background -document>; and the UK Department of Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s Review of the Sustainability
> of High Quality Journalism, <https://www.gov.uk/government/ news/chair -appointed -to -lead -review -of -press -
> sustainability -in -the -uk>. 74

As we will see, ideas of quality are mutable, subject to a host of issues, some 

definitional, most in some way affected by the transition of news media to the digital 

age. In this section we consider a range of approaches to the conceptualisation and 

assess ment of quality in journalism, in particular how they are applied in the internet -

based media ecology. After an initial review of the impact of digital journalism, we turn 

to specific attempts to assess journalistic quality and present a set of the most us eful 

indicators. 

Most of the studies and schemes described in this chapter are focused squarely on 

journalists and news producers, although more recently audience engagement has 

featured strongly in measures of journalistic quality. What is missing from m uch of this 

work – not surprisingly, given the pace of change – is an assessment of the distribution 

function of digital platforms. In the final part of the chapter, then, we explore whether 

there could be a role for platforms in helping to promote quality .

# Quality in the contemporary media landscape 

Professional standards and regulation 

Despite the rise of digital media platforms and new media products, traditional news 

media still maintain a firm foothold among news consumers (Ofcom 2018, Newman et 

al. 20 18, Klepova 2017). People still rely on news media to form opinions and make 

collective decisions as the civic and democratic role of media remains and the civic 

values of journalism look set to endure well into the future (Ellis & Thompson 2016). 

These no rmative traits appear to readily cross between online and offline news media. 

Van der Wurff and Schönbach (2011) confirm that practitioners in the Netherlands , for 

example, uphold a ‘set of core standards’ in their daily practices, both online and 

offline, and that these standards include accuracy, independence, truthfulness, 

impartiality, comprehensibility and transparency. 

Historically, the quality of journalism has been encouraged by various accountability 

instruments that embody these values or standar ds: industry codes of ethics, 

journalistic norms and practices and regulatory sanctions (Fengler et al. 2015). Hence 

there are both informal, personal codes of conduct that drive individual journalists, and 

more formal (or semi -formal) codes of practice o r other rules that apply on an industry 

basis. Van der Wurff and Schönbach (2011) describe first the ‘overarching norm’ in 

which journalists willingly accept and comply with the professional rules in their 

everyday practices, and second, the ‘voluntary but binding code’, which covers the core 

standards (or norms) of journalism. 

In Australia, the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance’s (MEAA) Journalist Code of 

Ethics is usually seen as the instrument that informs journalists’ own, ethical practice; 

the mor e formal accountability schemes are found in the codes of practice of the 

Australian Press Council (APC) and the Independent Media Council (IMC) for print and 

online publishers, and in the broadcasting codes of practice registered with the 

Australian Commu nications and Media Authority. The standards advocated by the 

APC, for example, are based on journalistic values and norms surrounding accuracy 75 

and clarity, fairness and balance, privacy and the avoidance of harm, and integrity and 

transparency ( Australian Press Council 2018). 

These media standards schemes can be seen as one source of ‘quality’ in news and 

journalistic content. As formal, public accountability instruments, they necessarily play 

an important role, and we will return to them later in this cha pter. First, though, we will 

consider some contemporary challenges to journalistic standards. 

The digital challenge 

We noted in Chapters One and Two that one of the core challenges to contemporary 

journalism is the transition to the digital news environm ent with its 24/7 news cycle. It 

has been said that the traditional journalistic ‘model of verification’ is being replaced by 

a new ‘model of assertion’ (Karlsson , Clerwall & Nord 2017). The verification model 

was based on the overarching journalistic valu e of accuracy, and the concomitant 

anxiety associated with potential sanctions that might result from inaccuracy; the new 

model of assertion is driven by the 24/7 news cycle in which the primary imperative is 

disseminating the news as fast as possible (Tam bini 2017). In their study of five leading 

European newspapers, Ramirez de la Piscina et al. (2015) investigated the impact of 

new technologies on news quality; they found that the printed versions of newspapers 

scored more highly on quality than their onl ine counterparts . They attributed this result 

to the increased demands and intensity of the 24/7 news cycle in the online 

environment: 

> The haste with which the digital editions are written up provokes all kinds of
> errors, relaxes quality controls and acce lerates the elaboration process of the
> news. All this has repercussions on the quality of the end product (p. 784).

One of the main challenges faced by British newspapers (apart from falling print 

circulation and revenue) is the struggle to adapt to the fa ster pace of the online news 

cycle, which has increased pressure on workers while reducing the quality of 

journalism products (Anderson, Williams & Ogola 2014). There is concern that the 

reporting of reliable facts is increasingly being replaced with less reliable information as 

publishers rush to push content online (Karlsson et al. 2017). Tambini (2017) views this 

phenomenon as a response to the breaking down of fact -checking as producers rush to 

publish content in the fast -paced online environment: 

> In s ome (but by no means all) online journalism, the approach has been to
> ‘publish now, correct later,’ the idea being that the ‘wisdom of crowds’ or crowd -
> sourced fact -checking can easily correct errors in this medium (p. 8).

Some publishers have adopted str ategies for making updates and corrections explicit: 

an online article that has been corrected may state, ‘This article has been amended 

from the original’, as is the case with The Sydney Morning Herald, which has had a 

digital -before -print policy since 2 012. But online corrections by news media web sites 

are often not transparent, and few newsrooms offer their audience the opportunity to 

correct errors (Domingo & Heikkilä 2012). 76 

Nic Newman of the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, Oxford Univ ersity, 

declared 2017 the year the news media focused its fears on how changing technology 

is affecting the quality of information. 

Another of the challenges in this environment – for newsrooms, but also for consumers 

– is that questions of defining, asses sing and ensuring journalistic quality apply not only 

to traditional news media and journalism but also to online commentary about news 

and the ‘blogosphere’. Problems have arisen concerning the ‘quality of digital content, 

which is a direct result of the hypertextuality, multimodality and interactivity of online 

communication, the general data explosion and the uneven distribution of internet 

access’ (Eberwein & Porlezza 2016 , p. 329 ). An earlier investigation by Frijters and 

Velamuri (2010) into the impac t of the internet on high -quality news in the US news 

media discovered the emergence of two opposing trends: first, the increasing 

fragmentation of the news market, which has led to fewer traditional providers of high -

quality news; second, the relatively s table consumer demand for quality news, despite 

increased competition from bloggers. Concerns about the quality of news and 

journalism continue to intensify in a rapidly changing landscape in which bloggers who 

have no ties to established media outlets now assume the role of critic and ‘watchdog’ 

of those organisations that have historically operated with (varying degrees of) 

consistency, accuracy and accountability. 

Despite these concerns, some argue that digitisation has been a generator for 

innovation in journalistic standards and ethics. This is said to be due to the growth of 

media watch blogs, cyber ombudsmen and media criticism on or through platforms 

including Facebook and Twitter (Eberwein & Porlezza 2016). Yet while some blogs are 

now performing t he function of media watchdog, Wischnowski (2011) points out that 

the blogosphere also thrives in an absence of transparency: while traditional media has 

‘multiple layers of editorial review each accountable to a superior editor’ the 

blogosphere is ‘inhere ntly non -transparent’ (p. 336). This highlights some ambiguity in 

the function of these blogs:  

> Whether the internet’s inherent decentralisation, along with concomitant lack of
> uniform editorial standards, forecloses the possibility that these blogs can be
> legitimate regulators of the flow of information remains hotly contested (p. 344).

Likewise, Fengler et al. (2015) write that it remains to be seen ‘whether the 

accountability instruments emerging online like newsroom blogs, online ombudsmen 

and media cri ticism on the social web – successfully support or even replace … 

traditional instruments of self -regulation’ (p. 250). 

Innovations in journalism 

Problems with quality and transparency are exacerbated when algorithmic components 

are integrated into news p roducts and social networking platforms designed to assist 

with the optimisation, dissemination and even the production of news. Some scholars 

argue that the use of algorithms to curate or disseminate news should always be 

disclosed to news consumers (Diak opoulos & Koliska 2017). 77 

Further complicating the issue of quality is robo -journalism, which we noted in Chapter 

Two. This is already being used by Bloomberg, Dow Jones and the Associated Press 

to create basic finance stories virtually instantaneously, ba sed on data released as 

soon as firms announce quarterly results; this type of journalism has further extended 

to sports journalism (Newman 2017). Mindful of the current limitations of machine 

learning and the as -yet uncontested public acceptance of robo -journalism, companies 

such as Bloomberg stress that humans will work with the machines to ensure the 

accuracy of the news published – journalists will also have more time to concentrate on 

analysis, says Ed Johnson, the managing editor of Bloomberg News in Australia and 

New Zealand: 

Jobs will go in the industry, but a lot of them will be the humdrum, rote elements 

of journalism. AI will free up time for humans to focus on the ‘why’ – in other 

words, analysis of news. Automation will tackle the ‘what’ but it doesn’t tackle 

the ‘why’ (Fray 2018 b, p. 44). 

Notwithstanding the opportunities afforded by smart machines for publishers to reduce 

or otherwise redeploy editorial staff, scholars argue that adequate funding of 

newsrooms to ensure quality journalism is a good investment for the media, the public 

and democracy (see for example White 2015, O’Donnell 2009). In response to the 

trend towards weakening quality standards in the news media, digital online 

communities have formed to signal quality and its associate , trust. Members of the 

International Fact -Checking Network (IFCN), a broad coalition of 50 news fact -checking 

websites, are required to sign a statement of transparency and accountability principles 

that acts as ‘a badge of trustworthiness for audiences, researchers, donors and 

technology platforms’. 

In a more direct and ambitious way, journalist and academic Frederic Filloux, a former 

editor -in -chief of Libération , is developing Deepnews.ai, a machine learning project that 

aims directly to link the provi sion of quality news with financial reward. His backers 

include Google, Stanford University, The Guardian and The Trust Project (which has 

developed its own ‘trust tick’ to encourage quality news consumption and sharing on 

the internet). Filloux’s aim is t o produce a machine learning system that scores, 

surfaces and financially incentivises quality journalism: 

Deepnews.ai’s scoring system will interface with ad servers to assess the value 

of a story and price and serve ads accordingly. The higher a story’s quality 

score, the pricier the ad space adjacent to it can be. This adjustment will 

substantially raise the revenue per page .

In theory, innovations such as Filloux’s should help to address the problem of 

misinformation. Newman (2017) observes that much of the recent upheaval about 

journalistic quality relates to the phenomenon commonly called ‘fake news’. 16 Running 

counter to the spread of fake news is the trend towards trusted brands – that is, 

traditional high -quality news organisations. Over two -thirds of the respondents to the  

> 16 See Chapter One for a more detailed account of fake news, as well as a brief account of various trust -enhancing
> initiatives, several of which are supported by digital platforms. 78

Reuters Institute’s 2017 Digital News Report believed that concerns over fake news 

would serve to strengthen support for traditional news providers (Newman et al. 2017). 

In the US in particular, the two -year period since the camp aign and election of 

President Donald Trump has made real the opportunity identified by the economist Lisa 

George (2015) who suggests that the problem readers face in distinguishing informed 

analysis from uninformed opinion opens up a financial opportunity for ‘enterprises 

which can establish a reputation for quality’. In her view, one approach to assessing 

quality is quite simply the question: are consumers willing to pay for it? Organisations 

that can ‘credibly signal information quality’ by ensuring the integrity of the information 

they provide, stand a far greater chance of attracting paying customers. In her analysis, 

she foresees a ‘flight to quality news brands’ prompted by the rise of fake news in the 

wake of Trump’s election. 

This contemporary affi rmation of the importance of quality points to the need to find 

some means of characterising and measuring it. 

# Approaches to assessing quality 

Many scholars argue that evaluating quality in journalism requires a greater effort than 

simply judging content in isolation (Romero -Rodriguez & Aguaded 2017 ; Lacy & 

Rosenstiel 2015 ; Ramirez de la Piscina et al. 2015 ; O’Donnell 2009 ; Hollifield 2006 ;

Picard 2000). Romero -Rodriguez & Aguaded (2017) argue that content -only evaluation 

models of journalistic quality ar e inherently flawed as quality is the result of multiple 

factors involved in the pre -information and production stages, including the working 

conditions of journalists. Ramirez d e la Piscina et al. (2015) note that, although many 

scholars have evaluated qu ality from an organisational perspective – for example, 

measuring the impact of economic and labour conditions on the quality of the product –

news quality has traditionally been analysed solely through its content. However, that is 

not always the case. 

In her review of the academic literature on journalistic quality, O’Donnell (2009) found 

four main approaches to evaluating journalistic quality. The quality -popular divide pits 

the ‘quality press’, which produces ‘serious’ journalism for educated readers, a gainst 

the ‘tabloid press’, which targets a popular readership with light, entertaining content. 

The newsroom resources approach asserts that quality is the product of investment 

in human and material resources needed to do the job properly – editorial sta ffing 

levels top the list of newsroom indicators of quality journalism. The notion of quality in 

journalism as a creative work conceptualises journalism as an intellectual product 

that resists easy measurement. Finally, the approach centred on judging jour nalistic 

commitment to democratic values proposes that journalists should be most 

concerned about the ends that may or may not be achieved as a result of the content 

they produce. O’Donnell selects the ‘creative work’ and ‘newsroom resources’ methods 

as mo st useful in determining the factors that contribute to peak excellence in 

journalism: 79  

> … taken together [they] point to key issues that need to be explored in more
> depth in any analysis of prize -winning journalism. They are the creative work of
> journalism, and its appeal to professional peers and newsreaders, as well as
> the newsroom resources that might sustain its production (p. 52).

O’Donnell’s analysis on journalism as creative work will be further explored below. 

Hollifield (2006) argues that factors in dicating quality journalism can be divided into 

three subcategories: content , organisation and financial commitment to the news 

product . Media economist Robert Picard (2000) also argues that journalistic quality is 

critical for producing the range of posit ive externalities in the form of social, political and 

cultural goods that are expected of journalism in democratic societies. He says it is 

impossible to objectively measure journalistic quality using standards based on values 

such as truth, fairness and completeness, which are in essence behaviours of good 

journalists that do not lend themselves to ready quantification: 

> Journalism is not in itself a product or service. We do well, in my opinion, to
> consider it the mental activity of journalists that prod uces value in the forms of
> news, features, commentary, photos, and entertainment. It is also the mental
> activity that creates additional value by editing, drawing parallels between
> stories, creating layout, and employing design to enhance the communication s.
> It is obviously impossible to measure this mental activity, but I believe it is
> possible to measure activities that make these mental activities possible and
> affect its quality (p. 100).

Picard argues that quality is dependent upon the mental activities of journalists 

(echoing the ‘journalism as creative work’ perspective identified by O’Donnell 2009), 

and these mental activities are dependent on organisational investment , culture and 

the focusing of resources . His quantitative approach to journalistic q uality 

assessment will be discussed in greater detail below. 

In the most recent academic research on media quality, González -Gorosarri and 

Tolosa (201 9) present a framework of three categories of assessment criteria based on 

reviewing European and American academic research. The first category, ‘format 

quality’ , includes ‘technical error -free supply’, ‘artistic values’ and ‘originality format’ (p. 

174). The second category is ‘content quality’, which includes diversity, usefulness 

and reduction of complexit y/increase of comprehensibility. The third category of ‘social 

quality’ assesses the media’s community impact. This category relates to the final 

media product and the social roles of journalism including ‘monitorial, radical, 

collaborative and facilitativ e roles’ (p. 175). The framework of González -Gorosarri and 

Tolosa (201 9) is designed for cross -platform application and can be used to assess the 

quality of various types of news and journalistic content. 

Lacy and Rosenstiel’s (2015) review of the scholar ly work in this area identifies three 

approaches to assessing quality in news and journalistic content: the first is to specify 

the characteristics of quality -oriented news organisations ; the second is to specify 

the content attributes that reflect the out put of these organisations ; the third is to 

analyse engagement data to see what kind of qualities resonate with audiences. 

Given the increasing imperative to engage news audiences and explore their 80 

perceptions of quality, the following sections borrow Lacy and Rosenstiel’s basic 

structure of organisational, audience and content indicators of journalistic quality. 

Organisational quality indicators 

The quality of journalism is said to be strongly influenced by organisational factors and 

financial commitment to quality (Hollifield 2006). Organisational factors include editorial 

independence, staff professionalism, impartiality, editorial courage and community 

leadership. Meanwhile, a news organisation’s f inancial commitment to quality can be 

measured by indica tors such as the amount of copy in news production, advertising, 

the number of reporters, readers and other indicators (Hollifield 2006). 

An economics -based approach to measuring quality can be found in the work of Ying 

Fan (2013), whose modelling of owne rship consolidation in the US daily newspaper 

market considers whether mergers and acquisitions improve or diminish content 

quality. Her work simulates the merger of two newspapers in Minneapolis (blocked in 

real life by the Department of Justice on anti -competitive grounds) to conclude that ‘if 

the merger had occurred, both newspapers would have decreased the news content 

quality, the local news ratio, and the content variety’. While analysing Fan’s work is 

beyond the scope of this report, we note that her simulation includes development of a 

content quality index based on the specific internal characteristics — the endogenous 

values — of news media and organisational factors of newspapers, such as the 

number of reporters. 

Furhoff (1973) argue s that there is a causal link between quality, commercial success 

and audience: in essence, stronger newspapers with bigger readerships, more 

journalists and advertising support are better able to guarantee quality standards than 

those with narrower audiences. This vi ew is supported by Gabszewicz, Resende and 

Sonnac (2015) who found that size and scale were often prerequisites for quality. 

Bogart (2004) questions the direction of the causal relationship, noting that journalistic 

excellence clearly serves financial succ ess; nevertheless, he acknowledges that more 

investment in a news operation will further enhance the quality of its journalism. 

In New Zealand, Gibbons (2014) used content analysis of four print newspapers with 

large circulations to explore the relationsh ips between ownership, content and quality 

— and the relationship between quality and readership. Gibbons’ findings support the 

theory that newspapers have used different investment strategies to attract readers: 

‘quality newspapers’ have by and large soug ht to link the number of reporters to the 

quality of the news provided, with more of the former leading to higher quality of the 

latter. As discussed earlier, such thinking may oversimplify issues around quality; but, 

as other studies have shown, it is com monplace in the news media industry. 

Delivering the Andrew Olle Media Lecture in Sydney in October 2017, The New York 

Times managing editor Joseph Kahn argued that his newspaper successfully navigated 

the triple threat of digital disruption to its busines s model, the proliferation of fake news 

and relentless attacks from US President Donald Trump . Kahn said that the paper 

sharpened its focus on investigative journalism and resisted the temptation to become 

partisan ; The New York Times increased its investm ent in reporters and gave them the 81 

time they needed to break important news stories, including those that exposed 

unchecked sexual harassment and resulted in the downfall of powerful public figures 

such as Bill O’Reilly and Harvey Weinstein. Kahn sa id the newspaper’s strategic plan 

had been focused on continually improving the quality of its journalism, and it is now 

cultivating a much larger national and global audience (Meade 2017). 

Picard’s (2000) quantitative method tackles concepts that are not measur eable in 

themselves by using proxies. For example, a quality indicator such as accuracy relies 

upon an understanding of events or issues, so Picard includes measureable proxies 

that correlate with accurate journalism . The proxies for quality indicators su ch as 

completeness and breadth includ e: a higher number of interviews; greater time spent 

gathering information; personal attendance at events; greater time spent background 

reading; and greater time spent thinking during the preparation of the journalisti c

product. 

Audience engagement quality indicators 

In the digital era, an increasing number of scholars are turning their attention to the 

engagement and participation of news audiences ; hence , the issue of audience 

engagement with news content now sits a t the centre of debate about journalism 

quality. The audience -focused approach of Meijer (2013) values the role of news 

consumers’ ratings, likes, shares and circulation statistics. While journalists may prefer 

to ignore audience ratings, they tend to use engagement data to measure the 

audience’s level of interest in content. As Meijer observes, there is a ‘complex 

discrepancy’ between the viewpoints of journalists and their audiences about quality. 

Her work suggests a key question in any discussion about d ifferent perceptions of 

news quality: can the news media truly satisfy audience expectations for pleasure, 

representation and engagement? In other words, can the expectations of the audience 

align with that of practitioners? 

Meijer (2013) calls her audien ce -centred approach ‘valuable journalism’, in which she 

aims to extend the concept of journalistic quality to include the perspectives of news 

producers and consumers. Her perspective is aligned with the broad concepts of 

journalism as a service, a highly contested idea in the digital era. Zelizer (2017) gets 

straight to the heart of the tension between news producers (who are protective of their 

autonomy and their professional identity as journalists) and news consumers:   

> … the metaphor of service in many cases [is] less attuned to the notion of the
> public good and more to the ability to give select audiences what they want …
> In that regard, platforms as wide -ranging as Facebook and Reddit articulate
> satisfying the audience as part of their mission … As the Nieman Reports
> succinctly put it, ‘what interests the public … is not the same as public interest’
> (Tremblay 2010, p. 23).

Van der Wurff and Schönbach (2014) have continued their study of journalism quality 

from the perspective of audience’s expectations in the Netherlands, exploring the idea 

that audiences could share with journalists the responsibility of securing high -quality 

journalism in the future. In their own country, the crowd -sourced and crowd -funded 82 

news website, De Correspondent , is showing pro mise. The concept may well be better 

placed to succeed in countries such as the Netherlands, owing to its ‘democratic -

corporatist model of journalism’ and audiences who maintain a strong interest in 

current affairs. However, their results underscore that m any news consumers align 

closely with the role played by professional journalism. The quantitative survey of 

20,000 adults showed that the audience places high importance on the professional 

role of journalism. Respondents say they consider the independenc e of journalism to 

be crucial. Digging deeper, audiences are categorized in two groups: the better 

educated and lower educated groups. Each has different demands for journalism. The 

better -educated audience have more ‘civic demands’, or demands for quality news that 

combine audience expectations on traditional information and the democratic role of 

media. The lower -educated audience have more ‘citizen demands’. They want 

journalists to take into account their experiences, contributions, desires and needs. 

The findings of Van der Wurff and Schönbach (2014) provide valuable insights into how 

audiences engage with the news. As a counterpoint to studies based in the US, where 

there is a ‘complex discrepancy’ between the viewpoints of news producers and 

consumers , European audiences (at least in the Netherlands) appear to have a higher 

level of respect for the functions of journalism in democratic society. 

The connection between the democratic function of journalism and audience 

engagement underpins the work of Finnish journalist Johanna Vehkoo (2010). She 

proposes conceptualising quality journalism based on the consensus of scholars and 

journalism professionals, who agree on the two primary functions of journalism: that of 

power monitor and that of ‘servant of c itizens’. Vehkoo argues that, while journalism 

can exist without democracy, democracy cannot exist without journalism. She 

strengthens her argument by quoting Scheuer (2008):     

> If journalism serves a core democratic function, without which democracy itself
> is all but inconceivable, then journalistic excellence must also factor into the
> quality of democracy. Journalistic excellence –and not just freedom of speech
> and the press –must be a basic democratic value (Scheuer 2008, p. xi).

Vehkoo (2010) argues that ‘truth’ could be the most important feature to differentiate 

journalism from other media products, but that this is not enough. She wants quality 

journalism to give priority to the context of the news by answering the questions of 

‘how’ and ‘why’. But in thinking about quality, she offers a broad definition: quality 

news is almost everything that satisfies the public. This, her definition of quality 

journalism, doesn’t require a set of standards, but simply demands that news should:  

> … make sense of the ch aotic world around us. It gives context and background
> to events. It interprets, analyses, and strives to give meaning to all the babbling
> that’s going on. It looks beyond the obvious and behind the trickery, but also
> forward, to where we are being led by the ones who are in power (p. 22). 83

Content quality indicators 

Although Romero -Rodriguez & Aguaded (2017 , pp. 1331 -3) warn that journalistic 

quality cannot be assessed based only on content, they nevertheless offer a number of 

criteria that can be used to assess the quality of content: verification of information; 

evidence/presence of investigative journalism; feedback, reader rights and citizen 

participation; use of international news agencies; self -obtained photographs; 

references to primary (direct) sou rces; sufficient documentation and contrasting 

information; clear identification of corporate sources; different types of information in 

edition/issue; geographical diversity (e.g., outside capital cities) and balance of 

opinions featured. 

Ramirez de la Pi scina et al. (2015 , p. 770 ) define quality journalism as achieving a 

series of minimum standards related to selection, elaboration and social contribution. 

Their method analyses both qualitative and quantitative aspects of journalistic content. 

The absence or presence of the qualitative attributes is simply noted, not measured (or 

even measurable objectively); these indicators include dimensions of format quality 

such as technical aspects, aesthetic considerations and functional considerations. The 

quantita tive indicators are grouped into three sub -categories. First is the selection 

process, which includes: mention of the source of the news; the character of the 

sources; factuality of the reported fact (event or statement); degree of factualness; and 

newswor thiness (the degree of interest in the news item). The second and most 

important sub -category involves the elaboration process which includes: accuracy 

(correspondence between the headline and the body of the item); depth (who, what, 

when, where, why); pre sence of different perspectives within the item; contributions 

made by other informative elements (photographs, graphics, infographics, etc.); and 

correctness of journalistic language (errors in the text). The third and final sub -category 

is social contrib ution, which takes inspiration from the UNESCO International Principles 

of Professional Ethics in Journalism (1983). This final category includes: power 

watchdog; promotion of social debate; respect for human dignity; presence of cultural 

references from o ther countries; and combating of social marginalisation. 

Drawing on the theoretical work of Bogart (2004), in which journalism is conceptualised 

as creative work, O’Donnell (2009, p. 51) considers 14 indicators of excellence in 

journalism, most of which a re content -based: integrity, fairness, balance, accuracy, 

comprehensiveness, diligence in discovery, authority, breadth of coverage, variety of 

content, reflection of the entire home community, vivid writing, attractive makeup, 

packaging or appearance, and easy navigability. Taking into account her empirical 

study of the criteria used by the Walkley Foundation to bestow its prestigious awards 

for excellence in journalism, O’Donnell (2009) proposes that these quality indicators 

might be best reclassified int o three subsets: professional journalism skills 

(newsworthiness, research, writing, production and incisiveness); social/democratic 

priorities (impact, public benefit and ethics); and creative values (originality, innovation 

and creative flair). She conclu des: 84   

> ‘Quality journalism’ …needs to be defined and studied in ways that open up the
> conceptual complexities and tensions, rather than only trying to reduce them to
> quantifiable variables (p. 57).

Other scholars have continued to expand the body of litera ture on assessing the quality 

of journalistic content. In a more recent review of studies on journalism quality, Lacy 

and Rosenstiel (2015 , pp. 27 -8) propose seven characteristics of high quality 

journalism:  

> 

Presentation quality: High quality journalism sh ould have high 

production quality and be accessible to a wide -range of community 

members.  

> 

Trustworthiness: High quality journalism should be accurate and 

credible, which can be measured in various ways.  

> 

Diversity: High quality journalism should be divers e in the number of 

sources, issues, topics and ideas within information bundles and 

across the community.  

> 

Depth and breadth of information: High quality journalism should 

provide a deep and broad understanding of issues and trends. In 

addition to looking i n depth at important issues, this involves efforts 

to provide context through both news reporting and opinion. This 

could be said to include, according to the API data, a range of story 

presentation styles, as that correlates to broader and deeper 

audience engagement.  

> 

Comprehensive: The bundle of quality journalism available in a 

community should cover the range of important community events, 

issues, and trends. This is measured at the community level, 

whereas depth and breadth are measures of range at the 

publication and story level.  

> 

Public affairs: Bundles of information from outlets should include a 

strong emphasis on public affairs reporting and opinion about 

government, politics, schools and other activities that affect the 

quality of life in the comm unity.  

> 

Geographic relevance: Bundles of journalism should devote a 

significant amount of their content to events, issues and trends of 

importance to people in their primary geographic coverage areas. 

Gladney , Shapiro & Castaldo (2007) explore the attribu tes of journalistic quality applied 

to online news and compare these standards with those of traditional print. Thirty -eight 

criteria of news standards were categorized in six groups, each with its own theme: 

Content, Interactivity, Look and Feel, Navigati on, Functionality and Community 

Relevance. This list, comprising a mix of content and non -content indicators, 

represents the first ‘comprehensive’ set of quality standards combining key criteria 

applied in online media and traditional media. After analysin g the survey results 85 

provided by 121 online news editors in the United States and Canada, the authors 

found that online editors place the traditional standard of news first, with the content 

category ranked at the top. This category includes credibility, u tility, immediacy, 

relevance, ease of use, fact -opinion separation, clear paths and simplicity. The typical 

attributes of websites such as reach, bandwidth, customization, user choice/control, 

interactive reading, community dialogue and civic/public discou rse are rated by editors 

at the bottom of the list (Gladney, Shapiro & Castaldo 2007 , p. 61 ).

This study builds on the work of Gladney (1996), which involves a broad survey asking 

newspaper editors and readers to rank and rate 18 standards of news excelle nce. 

Gladney’s (1996) analysis is based on the responses of 257 senior editors working at 

large, medium and small daily and weekly newspapers in the US, as well as the 

responses of the newspapers’ readers. Gladney’s key finding is that readers and 

editors both agree on six key standards essential to newspaper quality: integrity; strong 

local news coverage; impartiality; accuracy; editorial independence; and good writing. 

Anderson, Ogola & Williams (2014 , p. 26 ) examine the quality of journalism in the 

mode rn strained environment of fast -paced newsrooms, cost -cutting and job 

reductions. They propose ‘the five Cs and one A’ framework to help news producers 

effectively monitor the quality of news content: comprehensibility; context; causality; 

comparativeness; comprehensiveness; and accuracy. This framework draws on the 

quality matrix developed by Anderson and Egglestone (2012) after evaluating BBC 

online journalism. The ‘five Cs and one A’ framework suggests equations that can be 

used to measure quality journa lism. 

Although some contemporary studies include new indicators for assessing the quality 

of journalism in the rapidly changing media landscape, it is interesting to note that one 

of the most technologically advanced sources – Frederic Filloux’s deepnews 

(mentioned above) – uses some of the most simple quality indicators based on 

traditional journalistic values: 

> We define quality narrowly; in its simplest terms, we look for value -added
> journalism. This means coverage built on a genuine journalistic approa ch: depth
> of reporting; expertise; investigation; analysis; ethical processes; and resources
> deployed by the newsroom .

Table of quality indicators 

In t he following table s we p resent what we consider to be the most useful quality 

indicators discussed in th e academic literature in the above section. While the 

combined studies contain an extensive list of quality criteria, there are some cases of 

similarity or overlap. Other indicators, such as ‘comprehensiveness’, seem unattainable 

– so the more realistic in dicator s of ‘in -depth reporting’ and ‘diversity (content) ha ve 

been included instead. This table attempts to distil the most effective quality criteria into 

a manageable and organised list. The selected indicators are divided into three 

categories that ref lect the structure of the above section: content attributes; audience 

engagement; and organisational factors. The content indicators (the largest category) 

is then shaded to reflect the following sub -classification: 86 

A. Core standards of practice 

B. Core pr ofessional practice indicators 

C. Broader social functions 

The individual indicators should not be required to carry equal weight; the table is a 

guide to factors that can be taken into account. Keeping in mind O’Donnell’s warning 

against trying to reduce conceptual complexities to quantifiable variables, a table of 

quality indicators that helps to build a picture of overall quality is likely to be useful . We 

acknowledg e, however, that development of a more dynamic matrix to suit the 

contemporary environmen t requires separate research. 

Table 2. Quality Indicators – Content Attributes 

Indicator  What it indicates  Indicator  What it indicates 

A.  Core Standards o f Practice  C.  Broader Social Functions 

Accuracy  Content is factual, verified and not misleading; 

op inion is based on accurate information and 

does not omit key facts; material presented in 

the body corresponds with the headline. 

Power watchdog  Scrutinises the activities and conduct of 

powerful interests so they can be held 

democratically and socially a ccountable. 

Clarity  Easy to understand; distinguishes fact from 

opinion. 

Public sphere  Facilitates deliberative, rational and 

representative public discourse. 

Fairness  Material is fairly presented; persons or groups 

unfavourably portrayed given righ t of reply. 

Critical 

Information 

Needs (CINs) 

Gives details of emergencies, risks, health, 

welfare, education, transportation, economic 

opportunities, environment, civic information 

and political information. 

Privacy and 

protection from 

harm 

Respects pri vacy; avoids causing substantial 

offence, distress or risk to health or safety 

(unless it is in the public interest). 

Geographical 

relevance 

Provides original local news voice for local 

communities; reports on local institutions, 

decision -making processes  and events. 

Balance  Presentation of contrasting information and 

viewpoints from different sources. 

Usefulness  Provides citizens with information they can use 

to make effective decisions that benefit their 

personal and civic lives. 

Integrity and 

transpare ncy 

Avoids or discloses potential conflicts of 

interest; content has not been produced via 

unethical or deceptive means. 

Diversity (social)  Positive coverage of minority groups; variety of 

content  appeals to a range of social groups ;

multicultural referen ces. 

B.  Core Professional Practice Indicators 

Immediacy  Publication and updating of breaking news as 

soon as practicable (after fact -checking) for 

each given format. 

Analysis  Rational, knowledgeable and insightful 

interpretation of events and issues that helps 

people make sense of their world. 

Authority  Stories use the expertise of authoritative and 

reliable sources; corporate or partisan sources 

are clearly identified. 

Originality  Content is produced in -house through original 

research, interviews, verif ication of information, 

self -taken photos. 

Depth and 

breadth of 

coverage 

Explaining background context, c auses and 

consequences involved; range of content from 

range of genres. 

Creativity  Written and illustrated with creative flair; 

innovative use of tech nology; evinces 

multimedia richness (e.g., websites). 

Ethical conduct 

in 

newsgathering 

Uses fair honest, responsible means to gather 

material. 

Presentation  Uses a gratifying narrative and layered 

information; format is captivating, aesthetically 

pleasing, well -illustrated, technically and 

textually error -free, and easy to navigate (e.g., 

websites). 87 

Table 3. Quality Indicators – Audience Engagement 

Indicator  What it indicates  Indicator  What it indicates 

Representation  Takes into account the concerns,  views, 

experiences, contributions, desires and needs 

of audience members. 

Community  Provides space and infrastructure to host 

audience fora and communities; facilitates 

community dialogue and public debate. 

Participation  Content takes account of the indi vidual and 

collective wisdom of the audience. 

Customisation  Provides means for audience to control and 

customise their user experience. 

Interactivity  Provides links to related content; invites 

comments and actionable feedback. 

Table 4. Quality Indica tors – Organisational Factors 

Indicator  What it indicates  Indicator  What it indicates 

Independence  Editorial staff enjoy independence from 

commercial and political interference. 

Newsroom 

resources and 

measures of 

journalistic 

activities 

Number of reporte rs relative to size of 

operation; sufficient number of reporters with 

at least five years’ experience; time allowed 

for gathering and analysing information and 

attending events; ratio of space devoted to 

copy vs space devoted to advertising; ratio of 

space  devoted to original news; ratio of staff -

written content vs news agencies content. 

Community 

leadership 

Influence with opinion leaders; ability to inform 

public opinion and debates. 

Price & 

circulation, 

reach, or 

number of 

unique visitors 

Consumers’ w illingness to pay; news market 

penetration. 

# Quality and regulation in Australia 

As noted above, the literature shows that one measure of quality is the extent to which 

media content can be regarded as meeting certain standards of practice. While there is 

some variation in what these standards should be, elements common to most 

standards schemes are qualities such as accuracy, fairness, transparency (or avoiding 

conflicts of interest) and respect for privacy. These are represented in the table above 

as Set A or the content indicators. As they are the subject of various government and 

industry -based regulatory regimes, with many years of implementation and critique, 

they are the easiest (or perhaps the least difficult) aspect to measure. However, these 

sc hemes vary greatly, even within Australia. Accordingly, in this section we briefly 

explain how these standards are established in Australia; we then give some indication 

of how quality is considered in the handling of complaints under these schemes; and 

we conclude by considering their suit ability for a digital platform environment. 

Fragmentation: Fourteen separate codes of practice 

Australia’s system of media standards is fragmented. The principal division is between 

broadcast media and print/online, but t here are separate schemes even within those 

sectors. 88 

In the broadcast environment, there are eight separate sets of rules as each type of 

broadcasting service ( e.g., commercial television, commercial radio) has its own code 

of practice, as does each of the national broadcasters. 

For print and online news and comment, most large publishers and some smaller 

publishers are members of the Australian Press Council (APC) and therefore subject to 

its two statements of principles (together the equivalent of a broa dcast code of 

practice) . The except ion is Seven West Media, which established the Independent 

Media Council (IMC) with its own standards and complaints scheme. 

Overlaying all of this is the code of ethics operated by the journalists’ union, the Media, 

Ent ertainment and Arts Alliance. 

The current list of codes is as follows: 

1. Commercial Television Industry Codes of Practice 2015 (March 2018) 

2. Commercial Radio Codes of Practice March 2017 (March 2018) 

3. ABC Code of Practice 2011 (March 2016) 

4. SBS Codes of Practic e 2014 (October 2018) 

5. Community Radio Broadcasting Codes of Practice 2008 

6. Community Television Codes of Practice 2011 

7. Subscription Broadcast Television Codes of Practice 2013 (March 2018) 

8. Subscription Narrowcast Television Code of Practice 2013 (March 2018 )

9. Open Narrowcast Television Codes of Practice 2009 

10. Subscription Narrowcast Radio Codes of Practice 2013 

11. Open Narrowcasting [Radio] Codes of Practice 

12. Australian Press Council Statement of General Principles/Statement of 

Privacy Principles (2014) 

13. Independe nt Media Council Code of Conduct (2012) 

14. MEAA Journalist Code of Ethics (1999). 

# Rulemaking, complaints and enforcement 

Regulatory framework 

Broadcasting 

The media standards schemes for broadcasting can be said to be ‘co -regulatory’ 

because the rules are dev eloped by industry (via the respective industry bodies) then 

registered with and enforced by the statutory regulator (the ACMA) under the 

Broadcasting Services Act 1992 (BSA) . Complaints go to the broadcaster (not the 

industry body) in the first instance b ut the complainant may take their complaint to the 89 

ACMA if they do not receive a response within 60 days or if they consider the response 

inadequate. 17 

The key legislative provision is section 123 which explains that it is Parliament’s 

intention that repre sentative industry groups, in consultation with the ACMA, develop 

codes of practice. 18 The section specifies the following as one of the matters to which 

the codes may relate: ‘promoting accuracy and fairness in news and current affairs 

programs’. This is a gainst the backdrop of Object 3(1)(g) of the Act: 

(g) to encourage providers of commercial and community broadcasting 

services to be responsive to the need for a fair and accurate coverage of 

matters of public interest and for an appropriate coverage of m atters of local 

significance … 

Under s 123 the representative industry groups develop the codes and ACMA is then 

given the decision to approve and register them (which in turn gives it an enforcement 

role). In fact, under this section the ACMA has no choic e to approve a code provided a 

group representing that section of the industry develops it and that the ACMA is 

satisfied that 

i. the code of practice provides appropriate community safeguards for the matters 

covered by the code; and 

ii. the code is endorsed by a majority of the providers of broadcasting services in 

that section of the industry; and 

iii. members of the public have been given an adequate opportunity to comment 

on the code .19 

The enforcement provisions are somewhat convoluted and not of relevance here, but it 

should be noted that the formal enforcement tools given to the ACMA are not available 

in the case of the national broadcasters; nevertheless, the complaint and investigation 

process is similar, with ACMA only hearing complaints after an attempt by t he ABC or 

SBS to resolve them. 20 

Print and online 

In contrast to the broadcasting scheme, both the Australian Press Council and the 

Independent Media Council are industry -based self -regulatory schemes with no 

statutory component. They are funded by publishe r members, but community (public)        

> 17 Th is is set out in s 148. Although under s 147 complaints about matters addressed directly in the Act or in ACMA -
> made rules (e.g., a program standard, as distinct from an industry code) go to the ACMA in the first instance, almost all
> of the matters under di scussion here are covered in the codes. Complaints about disclosure of commercial agreements
> in commercial radio current affairs programs are an exception to this: see the Broadcasting Services (Commercial Radio
> Current Affairs Disclosure) Standard 2012 .
> 18 These arrangements apply only to broadcasting services, not to content on websites. Streamed versions of broadcast
> content are also excluded.
> 19 The nature of public and consumer participation in communications industry codes of practice is the subject of current
> research by Derek Wilding and Karen Lee under the Australian Communications Consumer Action Network Research
> Grant Fund.
> 20 This difference in approach arises from s 13(5), restricting the application of the BSA in relation to the national
> broadc asters (which also operate under separate legislation), in conjunction with Division 2 of Part 11 which specifies
> complaint and investigation processes and powers. 90

members are involved in both drafting the code rules and hearing complaints. Publisher 

members are required to publish adjudication outcomes, but there is no statutory 

enforcement. Whereas the IMC was established in 2012 a nd applies only to the 

publications of Seven West Media, the APC was established in 1976 and applies to 

most print/online publishers and also to a number of digital -only publishers. 

The MEAA Code of Ethics has wide recognition among journalists but its low -key 

complaints scheme is infrequently used. In contrast to the publisher schemes, the 

obligations under this code are placed upon individual journalists as members of the 

MEAA. 

Code rules 

It is not practicable here to reproduce all the code rules relevan t to news and current 

affairs. In addition, variations in terminology mean that the provisions are not directly 

comparable across schemes. To provide some insight into how quality is promoted 

within these regulatory environment s, we set out below the key r ules for accuracy (and 

the correction of errors) and fairness and impartiality in three of these schemes: APC 

print/online, commercial television and commercial radio. 

Print/online (Australian Press Council) 21 

Accuracy and clarity 

1. Ensure that factual mat erial in news reports and elsewhere is accurate and 

not misleading, and is distinguishable from other material such as opinion. 

2. Provide a correction or other adequate remedial action if published material 

is significantly inaccurate or misleading. 

Fairne ss and balance 

3. Ensure that factual material is presented with reasonable fairness and 

balance, and that writers’ expressions of opinion are not based on 

significantly inaccurate factual material or omission of key facts. 

4. Ensure that where material refers adversely to a person, a fair opportunity is 

given for subsequent publication of a reply if that is reasonably necessary to 

address a possible breach of General Principle 3. 

Commercial Television 22 

3.3 Accuracy and fairness 

3.3.1 In broadcasting a news o r Current Affairs Program, a Licensee must 

present factual material accurately and ensure viewpoints included in the 

Program are not misrepresented.     

> 21 The requirement under the General Principles is to ‘ take reasonable steps to comply with ’these principles.
> 22 Under clause 3.1.2, clause 3.1 is to be read ‘taking into account all of the circumstances at the time of preparing and
> broadcasting the material, including: a) the facts known, or readily ascertainable, at that time; b) the context of the
> segment … in its entirety; and c) the time pressures associated with the preparation and broadcast of such
> programming.’ 91

3.3.2 Clause 3.3.1 applies to material facts and material misrepresentations of 

viewpoints only. 

3.3.3 Lice nsees must make reasonable efforts to correct or clarify significant 

and material errors of fact that are readily apparent or have been demonstrated 

to the Licensee’s reasonable satisfaction in a timely manner. 

3.3.4 If a Licensee makes a correction in an appropriate manner within 30 

days of a complaint being received or referred to the ACMA (whichever is later), 

then the Licensee will not be in breach of clause 3.3.1 in relation to that matter. 

3.3.5 A correction under clause 3.3.4 may be made in one or more of the 

following ways: 

a) during a later episode of the relevant Program; 

b) on a Licensee’s news website; 

c) on the official website of the relevant Program; or 

d) any other way that is appropriate in the circumstances. 

3.4 Impartiality 

3.4.1 In b roadcasting a news Program, a Licensee must: 

a) present news fairly and impartially; 

b) clearly distinguish the reporting of factual material from commentary 

and analysis. 

3.4.2 Nothing in this Section 3 requires a Licensee to allocate equal time to 

differ ent points of view, or to include every aspect of a person’s viewpoint, nor 

does it preclude a critical examination of or comment on a controversial issue 

as part of a fair report on a matter of public interest. 

3.4.3 Current Affairs Programs are not req uired to be impartial and may take a 

particular stance on issues. 

Commercial Radio 23 

3.1 In broadcasting News Programs, a Licensee must use reasonable efforts to: 

3.1.1 present news accurately and impartially; 

3.1.2 present news in a way that is not likel y to create public panic, or 

cause serious distress to reasonable listeners, unless it is in the public 

interest to do so; and 

3.1.3 distinguish news from comment.   

> 23 Under clause 3.10, this clause is to be read ‘taking into account all of the circumstances at the time of preparing and
> broadcast ing the material, including: 3.10.1 the facts known, or readily ascertainable, at that time; 3.10.2 the context of
> the material within the News Program or Current Affairs Program in its entirety; 3.10.3 the time pressures associated
> with the preparation an d broadcast of News Programs and Current Affairs Programs; and 3.10.4 in relation to a Current
> Affairs Program, the format and style of the Current Affairs Program. ’92

3.2 In broadcasting Current Affairs Programs, a Licensee must use reasonable 

efforts to ensu re that: 

3.2.1 factual material is reasonably supportable as being accurate; 

3.2.2 factual material is clearly distinguishable from commentary and 

analysis; and 

3.2.3 viewpoints expressed to the Licensee for broadcast are not 

misrepresented or presented i n a misleading manner by giving wrong or 

improper emphasis on certain material or by editing material out of 

context. 

[…] 

3.4 A Licensee must make reasonable efforts to correct or clarify significant 

and material errors of fact which would be readily appar ent to a reasonable 

person in the Licensee’s position or which have been demonstrated to the 

Licensee’s reasonable satisfaction in a timely manner. 24 

3.5 There will be no breach of the accuracy requirements at 3.1.1 or 3.2.1 if: 

3.5.1 the Licensee can est ablish on the balance of probabilities that the 

news or factual material is accurate; or 

3.5.2 a disputed fact was not a material fact; or 

3.5.3 a correction, which is appropriate in all the circumstances, is made 

within 30 Business Days of the Licensee re ceiving either a Code 

Complaint, or notice of a Code Complaint being referred to the ACMA 

(whichever is later). 

3.6 A correction under this section 3 may be made in one or more of the 

following ways: 

3.6.1 during a later episode of the relevant Program or a comparable 

Program; 

3.6.2 on the Program’s website, the station’s home page or the 

Licensee’s main website as appropriate; or 

3.6.3 in any other way that is appropriate in all the circumstances. 

3.7 For the purposes of 3.2 above, a contribution made to a Current Affairs 

Program by a talkback participant will not be considered factual material, 

unless it is factual material that is endorsed or adopted by the Presenter. 

‘Talkback participant’ means a member of the public who contributes to 

open -line disc ussions via the Licensee’s dedicated talkback line or by 

other communication methods accepted by the Licensee.  

> 24 Footnote to clause 3.4: ‘ For the avoidance of doubt, a Licensee will not breach this pro vision by failing to correct
> errors of fact which are of a trivial or minor nature. ’93

3.8 Nothing in this section 3 obliges the Licensee to allocate equal time to 

different points of view, nor to include every aspect of a person’s viewpoint, 

nor does it preclude a critical examination of, or comment on, a 

controversial issue as part of a fair report on a matter of public interest. 

3.9 Current Affairs Programs are not required to be impartial and may take a 

particular stance on iss ues. However, a Licensee must provide reasonable 

opportunities for significant alternative viewpoints to be presented when 

dealing with controversial issues of public importance, while the issue has 

immediate relevance to the community. 25 

Complaints 

As an i ndication of how these standards schemes are actually applied to publishers 

and broadcasters in Australia, in the table below we present complaint numbers for the 

past five years for the news and current affairs complaints made to the APC about print 

and o nline media and made to the ACMA about commercial radio, commercial 

television and the public broadcasters (the ABC and SBS) . As variation in the codes 

and principles means it is sometimes difficult to make a direct comparison, we have 

mapped the broadcast standards against the general categories used by the APC. 26 

We have compiled this table on the number of issues – not on the number of 

complainants, investigations or adjudications. Where a single matter raised more than 

one issue, it is recorded against each separate category i.e., one investigation or 

adjudication might have an accuracy aspect and a separately -recorded fairness aspect, 

so it would be counted in the column for ‘accuracy and clarity’ and in the column for 

‘fairness and balance’. However, we have not counted multiple instances of the same 

issue i.e. , three inaccuracies in the one article. This means the total will be greater than 

the total number of complainants, but less than the total number of issues. We 

acknowledge this makes our repres entation of complaints numerically different from the 

counts used by the regulators, but our purpose is to give an indication of when these 

markers of quality have been considered rather than to establish trends over time or 

the workload of broadcasters, p ublishers and regulators in handling complaints.       

> 25 Footnote to clause 3.9: ‘ For the purposes of this provision, “reasonable opportunities ”can be accommodated within
> the same Program or a similar Program. The requirement does not impose an obligation on Licensees to allocate equal
> time to different points of view, nor to broadcast all viewpoints expressed to it. ’
> 26 A copy of the current APC General Principles is available at < https://www.presscouncil.org.au/standards/ >. We have
> not included complaints concerning its Privacy Principles (as privacy is also covered in the General Principles) or its
> specific standards such as the suicide reporting standards. We have mostly relied on the ACMA’s tables recording
> investigation o utcomes, checking investigation reports where there appeared to be some ambiguity on the issue or its
> classification. As the APC principles and some of the broadcasting code rules changed during this five -year period, and
> as judgment is involved in classif ication across different instruments, the results in the table should be regarded as
> indicative only. 94

Table 5. Complaints about quality 

Accuracy and 

clarity 

Fairness and 

balance 

Privacy and 

avoidance of harm 

Integrity and 

transparency 

No. of 

issues 

Upheld  No. of 

issues 

Upheld  No. of 

issues 

Upheld  No.  of 

issues 

Upheld 

TV –

commercial 

40 8 17 2 30  6 0 0

TV –

public 

34  0 50  3 20  0 1 0

Radio –

commercial 

16 4 4 0 15  1 0 0

Radio –

public 

12  0 14 0 7 0 0 0

Publishers 

(print/online) 

11 3 81 11 5 76 85  46 17 4

Upholding complaints about quality 

Below we extract some of the statements used in these decisions to provide a glimpse 

of how the regulators speak of quality in news and current affairs. 27 

Adjudication 1741: David Gallagher/ The Sun -Herald (June 2018). The complaint 

concerned a front -page article hea ded ‘The deadly hidden disorder inside our university 

colleges’, featuring a large photograph of the complainant’s deceased daughter and the 

daughter’s mother. The full article began on page eight, headed ‘Deadly conditions 

hidden inside unis’, followed by the subheading: ‘Students living on campus could be 

heading into a culture that makes eating disorders worse …’ The article was also 

published online, headed ‘The deadly hidden disorder inside our universities’. 

The Council notes the public interest in re porting matters of public health and 

safety; for instance, in exposing potential risk factors for young university 

college students. However, the publication was aware of the complainant’s wish 

that the article not be published. The Council considers that the complainant 

and Rebecca’s mother had a reasonable expectation of privacy and that the 

details relating to them would not be published. As the publication did not take 

reasonable steps to avoid intruding on the complainant’s reasonable 

expectations of p rivacy, and there was no public interest justifying this, the 

publication breached General Principle 5. 

The Council notes that the publication of the article occurred on the eve of 

Rebecca’s birthday, a year after her death. The Council accepts that this 

exacerbated the complainant’s distress, as did the inclusion of details relating to 

him and Rebecca’s mother. The statement in the online article that the family 

was contacted prior to publication implied they cooperated with the publication. 

This would als o have exacerbated their distress. In such circumstances, the 

Council concludes that the publication failed to take reasonable steps to avoid   

> 27 Adjudications by the APC can be found at < https://www.presscouncil.org.au/adjudications -other -outcomes/ >.
> Investigation reports and a table of findings by the ACMA can be found at
> <https://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/Library/Industry -library/Broadcasting/broadcasting -investigation -reports >. 95

causing substantial distress to the complainant and his family, without sufficient 

public interest justifying this . Accordingly, the publication breached General 

Principle 6. 

Adjudication No. 1572: Complainant/news.com.au (September 2013) Article 

published on 23 November 2012. This consisted of a headline and article, both 

bringing attention to the fact that an ‘autis tic man’ had been convicted of murdering his 

mother. The complainant argued that this suggested that the autism was a contributing 

factor to the crime. The complainant remarked that the autism had not been mentioned 

in the judgment. 28 

The Council consider s that it was justifiable to make some mention of autism 

when reporting the outcome of the trial itself. However, the headline and the first 

sentence were likely to have led many readers to conclude that autism had 

been found to be the main cause of the mu rder, or at least one of the causes. 

Nothing in the remainder of the article would have corrected this 

misunderstanding. 

ACMA Investigation Report No. BI -54 –Network TEN – Ten Eyewitness News –

Broadcast on 15 April 2015. The news report focussed on a poli ce request for men 

living in an assault victim’s area to provide their DNA samples voluntarily. The 

complainant was shown on film talking about the victim. The complainant alleged that 

the report contained inaccurate information and had invaded his privacy . He 

considered that Channel Ten’s offer of an online apology and correction, to be 

published on Ten’s TEN play website, was inadequate because people who viewed the 

broadcast may not have access to that website. The complaint was upheld on accuracy 

and in vasion of privacy. 

The ACMA considers that a report about a serious assault is a matter of public 

interest, but the broadcast of inaccurate information relating to a police 

investigation of a serious assault is not in the public interest. The complainant’ s

image was not pixelated and he was not otherwise de -identified. The 

information about the assault and the success of the call for volunteers to give a 

DNA sample could have been provided without visually identifying the 

complainant. The disclosure was no t proportionate or relevant to the public 

interest matter disclosed. The visual identification of the complainant could have 

been avoided without the segment losing any coherence or meaning. 

ACMA Investigation report no. BI -325 – Seven – Today Tonight – Br oadcast on 7 

March 2017. Bloomex Australia argued that a segment ‘misrepresented a viewpoint by 

using misleading emphasis, withholding available facts, and editing out of context’. The 

complaint was upheld on accuracy and fairness. 

ACMA considers that Com missioner Stowe’s interview comments about online 

flower sellers generally and about Bloomex’s appearance on the Register 

lacked specificity, formality and force. At their strongest, Commissioner Stowe’s    

> 28 The relevant principle at the time was principle 8: the prohibition against placing gratuitous emphasis on the race,
> religion, nationality, colour, country of origin, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, disability, illness, or age of an
> individual or group, unless relevant in the public interest. Now, the relevant principle would be principle 6. 96
> statements urge consumers to ‘take heed’ of the fact that Bloomex is on the
> Register as having received more than 10 complaints in a given month. They do
> not amount to the Commissioner issuing a public a warning to consumers not to
> use Bloomex.

ACMA Investigation report no. BI -305 – ABC – ABC News – Broadca st on 19 

November 2016. This report focussed on child sexual abuse allegations against Dr 

Flynn, who had been imprisoned in India in 1995 -96 but, according to the complainant, 

never charged with offences against children. The complaint was upheld on 

impart iality. 

> Given the very serious nature of the allegations and the fact that Dr Flynn had
> previously denied them, both publicly and to ABC News, the ACMA also
> considers that an explicit statement that Dr Flynn had denied the allegations
> should have been made .
> The ACMA considers that the way the report was framed strongly suggested to
> the reasonable viewer that Dr Flynn was a criminal who had not been brought to
> justice. Allegations of child sexual abuse are among the most serious claims
> that can be made agai nst a person. Because of the seriousness of claims of this
> kind, particular care should be taken when reporting on such matters.

# Co nclusion 

The news industry is subject to a wide range of accountability instruments, including 

codes of ethics and journalist ic norms and practices , all of which promote quality in 

news and journalistic content . As we have seen, indicators of journalistic quality can be 

grouped under three sets of criteria: content indicators; organisational indicators; and 

audience engagement i ndicators. Yet a spects of digitisation such as the 24/7 news 

cycle, algorithms and the blogosphere have introduced new challenges to the pursuit of 

quality and to the effectiveness of these accountability scheme s. In some cases, this 

enables online actors and communities to assume roles that traditionally belonged to 

news media, including those of ‘watchdog’, ‘fact -checker’ and ‘critic’. This in turn raises 

concerns about how such online actors and communities are accountable. They may 

fulfil roles traditio nally played by journalists, while not subject to the industry's 

accountability instruments. 

We make two observations about Australia's abundance of standards schemes . First, 

they are actively implemented, accessed by the public, and enforced by the regula tors. 

Second, however, the impact of fragmentation produced by multiple schemes may be 

felt in several ways. In addition to the well -recognised problem of convergence —

where a single piece of content published across different platforms might be subject t o

different standards and complaints schemes — this disjointed approach to one aspect 

of quality is unlikely to inspire confidence or boost the credibility of news providers. 

It is difficult to characterise the role of platforms in this , but it is certain ly the case that 

harm which is caused by the publication of inaccurate or unfair material, or a report that 

unnecessarily invades a person’s privacy, is likely to be amplified in an environment 97 

where it is shared widely. Further, that harm is unlikely to b e undone , although it may 

be ameliorated, where a correction is made or other remedial action is taken by the 

publisher. 

This, however, is a secondary effect of digital platforms and the literature o n this topic 

does not support a sweeping conclusion that it is digital platforms themselves – as 

opposed to digitisation – that threatens quality. (This is aside from the risks to business 

viability posed by the loss of advertising revenue, which we have not been asked to 

consider.) The exception to this, noted in Chapter Two, might be in the production of 

shorter and more emotive content, specifically designed for sharing via digital 

platforms. 

Continuing to attach accountability obligations to the production of news and 

journalistic content seems to be justif ied. However, t his observation should not be 

taken to suggest that platforms should be free of responsibi lity – merely that their 

responsibilities may be of a different order. 

In this regard, it is interesting to note Philip Napoli’s (2015b, pp 755) chara cterisation of 

the contrast between the approach to standards taken by publishers and that of 

platforms . He has characterised the public interest elements of social media 

governance as ‘restrictive ’ rather than the ‘affirmative ’ approach adopted by news 

me dia. He argues that in social media the concept of ‘the public interest ’ is :        

> …much more oriented around the activities that the operators of these
> platforms should not be engaged in (in order to protect the public), and the type
> of content flows that need to be restricted … rather than on articulating,
> imposing or adopting specific formulations of activities that should be engaged
> in, or content flows they should be facilitating, in order to effectively serve users’
> information needs.

In this way, the remo val of offending content from platform sites is an act that might 

contribute to the quality of public discourse. In their distributor capacity, there may be 

other ways in which platforms could support , more specifically, the quality of news and 

journalisti c content. At the time of the Leveson Inquiry in the UK, Lara Fielden (2011) 

proposed a hierarchical scheme involving tiers of standards regulation, with opt -in 

arrangements. A News Media Council was then recommended by the Convergence 

Review (2013), as a scheme that could be industry -based, rather than statutorily 

administered, relieving the ACMA of this responsibility and removing largely ineffective 

statutory remedies. Such a scheme was intended to prioritise mediated outcomes and, 

where these fail, esta blish a clear obligation for the news producer prominently to 

publish the outcome of adjudications and investigations. 

In an environment that now includes search, aggregation and social media, the 

‘prominence’ of published outcomes is far more likely than in an analogue world. It may 

be possible that digital platforms could contribute, at least financially, to journalism’s 

accountability schemes, in recognition of their role as distributors of news and 

journalistic content .

This is a theme to which we retu rn in the next chapter , on plurality and diversity. 98 

# 4 Choice and diversity  

> 

‘Choice’ in competition law has a close parallel in media regulation 

where ‘availability’ is a measure of media diversity; as a framework 

for assessing the digital media environme nt, media diversity can 

account for the public functions of journalism.  

> 

Media regulation in Australia takes a narrow approach to diversity, 

based on availability of traditional media, while omitting all online 

news , pay TV and public media.  

> 

Australian regu lation only considers the supply aspect of availability ;

measurement systems used in the EU and the UK take account of 

consumption and impact , and this offers a richer picture of choice.  

> 

These contemporary approaches are based on a concept of 

‘plurality’ or ‘pluralism’ , rather than ‘diversity’, but internationally 

there is no consensus on the most suitable term for regulation.  

> 

The more targeted concept of ‘media plurality’ used in the UK is 

likely to be more suitable for application in Australia than the 

expansive concept of ‘media pluralism’ used in the EU.  

> 

Even these recent attempts at measuring plurality or pluralism have 

only limited success in accounting for the impact of algorithmic 

delivery of news and the use of recommenders; this is now the 

focus of international research on diversity and pluralism. 

The Terms of Reference for the Digital Platforms Inquiry include the impact of platforms 

on ‘the level of choice and quality’ of news and journalistic content. In its Issues Paper, 

the ACCC (2018 , p 6) indicates it will specifically consider diversity of choice and 

content, noting that media choice and diversity can be measured in different ways. The 

Commission acknowledges a couple of well -recognised measures: ‘the number of 

independent media voices pr esent in the relevant region and the range and diversity of 

perspectives typically covered by those media voices’. 

As these statements indicate, ‘choice’ and ‘diversity’ are not identical concepts :

diversity is generally regarded as broader in scope than level of choice, which is 

essentially a numer ic al account of the number of sources that might be consumed. In 

this way, choice is very closely aligned to the concept of availability used in the field of 

media regulation. Competition law and media regulatio n both use the concept of 

‘concentration’ to describe the narrowing of choice when patterns of ownership and 

control are taken into account; the notion of a media ‘ voice ’ is used to identify 

commonly controlled media outlets. 

In this chapter we explore th ese concepts and work towards a way of measuring them 

and of accounting for the place of digital platforms in the contemporary media 99 

environment. A key consideration is the extent to which regulatory approaches 

adopted internationally have moved beyond th e measure of availability and the overlay 

of ownership and control; in other words, moving beyond ‘voice’. 

We begin with an outline of how the concept of diversity is understood in Australian law 

and regulation. 

# The Australian regulatory environment 

This section provides an outline of sector -specific regulation in Australia. As such, it 

does not refer to the application of competition law in a merger environment, 29 which 

may, in some circumstances, have a similar or even additional effect to media 

regulatio n. 

Overview of the regulatory environment 

For the most part, media regulation in Australia is the responsibility of the Federal 

Government rather than state or territory governments. 30 A provision of the Constitution 

has been held to give the Federal Gover nment the power to regulate broadcasting 

services as well as online services. This power does not directly extend to print media, 

although newspapers have been regulated under related powers concerning laws 

relating to corporations, as well as by means of their association with broadcasting 

services. 31 

The regulatory framework is based on four tiers: 

 Legislation passed by Parliament. The principal Act of Parliament is 

the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 (BSA) . Its companion act is the 

Radiocommunications Act 1992, although other, supplementary acts 

also deal with specific issues (for example – until its repeal in 2017 

– the Television Licence Fees Act 1964). 

 Government regulation, such as ‘content standards’ decided by the 

regulator, the Australian Communicati ons and Media Authorty 

(ACMA), under Part 9 of the BSA (eg, the Broadcasting Services 

(Australian Content) Standard 2016) or by the Minister under a 

specific power (eg the Broadcasting Services (Events) Notice (No. 

1) 2010 – the ‘anti -siphoning list’ regul ating the acquisition of sports 

rights by pay TV).                   

> 29 The ACCC’s appr oach when applying s 50 of the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 is se t out in its Media Merger
> Guidelines (ACCC 2017) . The Guidelines (p .6) explain that the Commission takes into account the level of
> concentration in a market, including the market power before and after the merger. The class of participants considered
> by the ACCC is broader than the ‘media operations’ regulated under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 .
> 30 There are nevertheless numerous state and territory laws that apply to media organisa tions, some of which vary in
> significant ways across Australian jurisdictions e.g., rules applying to the recording and broadcasting of private
> conversations under surveillance devices legislation. In addition, the common law continues to apply in areas su ch as
> defamation.
> 31 The ‘communications power’ –the power to regulate ‘postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like services’ –is
> found in section 51(v), Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act . See Raiche (2001) for an explanation of its
> applicati on to broadcasting and Kildea and Williams (2013) for its application to online media. The ‘corporation’s power’
> is s 51(xx). The ‘association’ of newspapers with broadcasting services is explained below. 100
> 

Co -regulation – regulatory instruments developed by industry 

participants and registered and enforced by the ACMA under Part 9 

of the BSA (eg the Commercial Television Industry Code of Practice 

2015).  

> 

Self -regulation – regulatory instruments developed and enforced by 

industry participants (eg the Statement of General Principles issued 

by the Australian Press Council or the Advertiser Code of Ethics 

issued by the Australian Association of National Advertiser s with 

complaints and enforcement handled by Ad Standards). 

Media diversity is substantially a top -tier issue in Australia, meaning it is the subject of 

legislation, but there are elements of all of these forms of regulation, as explained 

below. 

Sector -sp ecific rules 

The Objects of the BSA give some indication of the ways in which diversity is 

accommodated within the Act (emphasis added in the excerpt below) .            

> 3 Objects of this Act
> (1) The objects of this Act are:
> (a) to promote the availability to audie nces throughout Australia of a diverse range
> of radio and television services offering entertainment, education and information ;
> (c) to encourage diversity in control of the more influential broadcasting services;
> and
> (ea) to promote the availability to audiences throughout Australia of television and
> radio programs about matters of local significance ; and
> (g) to encourage providers of commercial and community broadcasting services to
> be responsive to the need for a fair and accurate coverage of matters of public
> interest and for an appropriate coverage of matters of local significance …

Three aspects of regulation, set out below, enact these objects and can be regarded as 

contributing to media diversity. 

1. The broadcasting licensing scheme creates diffe rent categories of 

broadcasting service – recognising for example, not -for -profit community 

services as well as private, commercial services and public service 

broadcasting – along with the reservation of radiofrequency spectrum for those 

services. This st atutory form of regulation attempts to produce a level of 

diversity in industry structure. The seven categories of broadcasting service set 

out in Part 2 of the BSA are:  

> 

national broadcasting services (the public service broadcasters, the 

Australian Broad casting Service [the ABC] and the Special 

Broadcasting Service [SBS]);  

> 

commercial broadcasting services (both television and radio); 101  

> 

community broadcasting services (not -for -profit services, now 

almost exclusively radio services);  

> 

subscription broadcasting services (pay TV);  

> 

subscription narrowcasting services (mostly used for niche pay TV 

channels, but also satellite services from overseas);  

> 

open narrowcasting services (free -to -air radio services that do not 

amount to full, commercial services);  

> 

internatio nal broadcasting services (services broadcasting 

internationally from Australia). 

2. Statutory media ownership rules , in certain circumstances, attempt to prevent 

further consolidation in an already concentrated market. Though structural in 

the sense that thi s form of regulation is designed to ensure at least a minimum 

number of industry participants, there are behavioural aspects such as those 

which regulate conduct that might amount to ‘control’ within the meaning of the 

Act. This aspect is explained further below. 

3. Content regulation imposes rules relating to accuracy, fairness, the 

representation of opinions and other aspects that are sometimes regarded as 

measures of ‘quality’ (discussed in Chapter Three, above) , as well as quotas 

and related rules which re quire certain services to be provided as well as the 

promot ion of localism. This regulation is all behavioural in character, although it 

takes all four forms of regulation. Examples are:  

> 

statutory rules in Part 5, Division 5B of the BSA requiring disclosur e of 

cross -media relationships ; 

> 

a statutory licence condition in Schedule 2 that requires a licensee to 

provide a service that, when considered together with other broadcasting 

services in the licence area, ‘contributes to the provision of an adequate and 

comprehensive range of broadcasting services’;  

> 

licence conditions made by the ACMA (as required under Division 3 of Part 

4 of the BSA ) for local presence and local content levels of regional radio, 

as well as legislative requirements for local programming imposed on both 

regional radio and regional television under Divisions 5B and 5C of Part 5;  

> 

codes of practice for broadcasting services (containing rules about 

accuracy, fairness etc), developed by industry participants and registered by 

the ACMA under s 1 23 of the BSA; the industry -based equivalent of these 

codes of practices devel oped for print and online media by the Australian 

Press Council. 

Media ownership rules 

The media ownership rules in Australia apply only to commercial television, commercial 

radi o and newspapers ‘associated with’ the licence areas of these categories of 102 

service. 32 Even before the emergence of online news, the exclusion of pay TV from this 

scheme was notable, and reflects the foundations of Australia’s media ownership 

regime in the late 1980s. At this time, a prohibition on the formation of television 

networks from licences held in more than two capital cities was replaced by a national 

‘reach rule’ that effectively required separate commercial television networks in 

regional and met ropolitan areas, along with a prohibition on cross -media ownership in 

local areas. The new cross -media rule applied to control of more than one of the 

regulated platforms in a single licence area. 33 

These rules commenced in 1986 and after amendment in 1987 , remained intact until 

the recasting and scaling back of the cross -media ban so that it permitted control of two 

of the three regulated platforms as well as the removal of foreign ownership limits, 

which came into effect in 2007. However these aspects of deregulation were 

accompanied by a new ‘minimum voices rule’ that stops further consolidation in 

regional areas when certain concentration levels in the regulated platforms are 

reached. 

These arrangements remained in place until a further round of legisla tive change in 

2017, which repealed the ‘two -out -of -three’ cross -media rule and the 75 per cent 

national reach rule. 34 

Following the most recent round of changes, Australia’s media ownership rules are 

confined to the following: 

 the limit of one commercial t elevision licence in a commercial 

television licence area (s 53(2), with some exceptions for smaller 

markets) 

 the limit of two commercial radio licences in a commercial radio 

licence area (s 54) 

 the 5/4 minimum voices rule (ss 61AG and 61AH) which establis hed 

the concept of ‘an unacceptable media diversity situation’ based on 

a points scheme in ss 61AB and 61AC (established by way of the 

Register of Controlled Media Groups) that applies a floor of five 

points in metropolitan licence areas and four points in regional 

licence areas, after which transactions resulting in further 

concentration are prohibited. 35       

> 32 The categories of service and ownership and contr ol rules are found in Part 4 and Part 5 respectively of the BSA. An
> associated newspaper under s 59 is one that is entered in the register kept for this purpose on the basis that, among
> other factors, at least 50 per cent of its circulation is in the appli cable licence area. The definition of ‘newspaper’ in s 6
> further restricts the class to English language newspapers published at least four days per week with at least 50 per
> cent of their circulation by way of sale.
> 33 There were several other important a spects to these changes, as well as significant, preceding developments
> concerning the ‘equalisation’ of the number of commercial television services in regional and metropolitan areas. Paul
> Chadwick (1989) provides a detailed analysis of the policy motiva tions and political manoeuvres involved in the highly
> charged environment of the late 1980s.
> 34 See respectively: ss 61AMB and 61 AH ;ss 61AMA and 61AMB .
> 35 For comment on this scheme and how it would apply to various potential transactions, see Derek Wildi ng’s
> submission (March 2016) to the Senate Environment and Communications Legislation Committee on the Broadcasting
> Legislation Amendment (Media Reform) Bill 2016. Jock Given (2007) comments on the legislative changes that 103

Assessing diversity within this framework 

On this measure of diversity, Australia has long been regarded as a highly 

concentrated market, partly due to th e very small number of print media (now print and 

online) providers. 36 The ACMA’s ‘Media Interests Snapshots’ infographic records ‘the 

main interests in major commercial television and commercial radio networks and 

associated newspapers’ .37 The graphic shows only ‘ substan tial shareholders’ (five per 

cent or more) in ‘major media players’, excluding fund managers who ‘hold shares on 

behalf of others and do not do not exercise control over them’. Without commenting on 

the level of concentration, the ACMA provid es some insight into the ten ‘media 

interests’ that meet these criteria. They can be grouped as follows: 

Rupert Murdoch and Lachlan Murdoch , with the latter being a controller of 

the Nova Entertainment radio network as well as News Corp Australia, 

publish er of a number of metropolitan, regional and suburban newspapers and 

part owner of pay TV provider, Foxtel. 

Fairfax Media Limited , which publishes a number of metropolitan, regional and 

suburban newspapers and which owns several radio stations, some in 

par tnership with Macquarie Media .

Kerry Stokes and Seven Group Holdings Ltd , controllers of the Seven 

Network as well as the metropolitan daily newspaper in Perth and a number of 

other Western Australian newspapers and radio stations. 

CBS Corporation , contro ller of the Ten Network. 

Bruce Gordon , owner of the WIN regional television network, as well as having 

a 14.9 per cent stake in both the Nine Network and the Prime regional television 

network. 

Bill Caralis , controller of the largely regional, family -owned Super Radio 

Network. 

Janet Cameron , controller of the largely regional, family -owned Grant 

Broadcasters. 

This type of analysis is useful in identifying the key me dia organisations in any 

market. 38 When considering the level of choice under competition law , the listing of 

independently owned media suppliers may also help in characterising the level of 

market power held by any one firm. However, the current media regulatory framework      

> introduced these schemes. On the development of the policy underpinning these changes, see Dwyer et al (2006) and
> on a failed earlier attempt to change the laws, see Wilding (2003).
> 36 Franco Papandrea and Rod Tiffen (2016) provide a recent attempt to represent the level of concentration i n Australia,
> albeit before the acquisition of regional newspaper group APN News and Media by News Corp Australia. Until 2005, the
> Communications Law Centre published a regular Media Ownership Update as a special issue of its journal,
> Communications Update .The last of these was issue 168 (2005).
> 37 The ACMA’s ‘“Media Interests” Snapshot’ is available at < https://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/media -interests -
> snapshot >.
> 38 The criteria for defining ‘media interests’ mean that this particular analysis by the ACMA om its some key media
> participants, such as Southern Cross Austereo which controls commercial television and radio licences. 104

provides only a limited understanding of diversity in Australian media. The re are three 

reasons for this. 

First, ‘diversity’ as it is used within the BSA only relates to media ownership and 

control; it does not tell us anything about viewpoint diversity , for example, or even how 

significant a source is in terms of the supply of n ews and journalistic content. Diversity 

within this framework is a purely numerical concept . This means that a ‘classic hits’ 

format radio station is allocated the same, single point within the diversity points 

scheme as a regional daily newspaper that emp loys local journalists. 39 Supply of news 

and local information is, to some extent, a separate policy goal for commercial radio 

and commercial television, but its application in regulation is uneven across the various 

states and population centres of Austral ia. 

Second, while this numerical approach gives some indication of the number of voices 

available within a local area, it omits key sources within that environment – for 

example: national newspapers such as The Australian and The Australian Financial 

Revi ew ; pay TV, including Sky News; public broadcasters, the ABC and SBS; online -

only and other digital media sources such as Guardian Australia , Buzzfeed , Daily Mail 

Online and small, local services; community and narrowcasting radio stations; non -

daily and f ree newspapers; ethnic press and other media targeting culturally and 

linguistically diverse communities. 

Third, as a measure of available voices, it takes no account of consumption, impact or 

context – including, for example, how platforms might be used to access and share 

news. 

This leads us to ask whether there is a more useful approach to media diversity, better 

placed to evaluate the contemporary media environment. 

# The meaning of diversity, plurality and pluralism 

At this stage, it may be helpful to refer back to the principles outlined in Chapter One 

and the argument that the supply and consumption of news and journalistic content 

may need to be considered dif ferently from other goods and services. A commitment to 

this idea underpins regulation fo r media diversity internationally , and it is exemplified in 

the following statement from the UK House of Lords Select Committee on 

Communications (2014, p. 77): 

Achieving a workable approach to plurality, particularly in provision of news and 

current affa irs, is generally considered fundamental to a well -functioning 

democratic society, ensuring as far as possible informed citizens and a media 

without any single set of views or individuals wielding too much influence over 

the political process. 

It will alre ady be evident that there are multiple interpretations of ‘diversity’, ‘plurality’ 

and ‘pluralism’. In this section we consider the meaning of these terms as we continue       

> 39 This assumes that these individual media operations are not part of a media group, in which case the group as a
> whole –rather than each individual operation –is allocated the diversity point. 105

to work towards a method for measuring choice in a way that takes account of the 

publi c good function of news and journalistic content and any impact of digital 

platforms. 

Mu ltiple meanings 

At the commencement of their study of media ownership and control across several 

jurisdictions, Suzanne Rab and Alison Sprague (2014, p. 1) note: 

… int ernationally, there is no consensus in terms of the manner and scope of 

interventions that are appropriate to protect competition and pluralism in media 

markets. 

This lack of consensus on the mode of regulation is matched by – and perhaps partly 

explained by – the different understandings of what constitutes diversity, plurality and 

pluralism. As Helberger, Karppinen and D’Acunto (2018, 193) put it: 

Despite decades of debate on diversity as a policy objective … there is no 

consensus on a generally accepted , consistent definition of what constitutes 

‘diversity’ or ‘pluralism’, even at the level of supply. 

Below we discuss some ways in which various aspects of this subject have been 

classified. 

Structural regulation and content regulation 

Lesley Hitchens (201 5, p. 253) has noted that in Australia, we generally refer to 

‘diversity ’, a term usually reserved for content rather than structure in the UK and 

Europe. In earlier work, Hitchens (2006, p. 9) presents a review of the various terms, 

suggesting it is first helpful to understand that regulation can essentially be 

characterised as either structural regulation or content regulation. She uses the term 

‘pluralism’ to describe two kinds of structural regulation and the term ‘diversity’ to 

describe two types of co ntent regulation. The two types of structural regulation are 

ensuring a number of different types of media ( e.g. , commercial television) and 

ensuring a number of different owners. The two types of content regulation are diversity 

of opinions and diversity in the range of programs ( e.g. , information, entertainment). 40 

Kari Karppinen provides examples using Hitchens’ categorisation of structural 

regulation (licensing, competition regulation, subsidies, public service media) and 

content regulation (accuracy an d fairness, right of reply, political airtime etc.) Jonathan 

Levy (2015, pp. 278 -79), in speaking of three categories of government policy applied 

to media, nominates structural regulation and behavioural (content) regulation, in a 

similar way to Hitchens and also Gillian Doyle (2002, p. 12), but adds subsidy as a 

separate category (whereas Hitchens includes this as a structural mechanism). 

A different approach, but one which assists in understanding connections between 

structural and content regulation, is taken by Mihaly Gálik (2010, p. 235) who notes that 

in the US the Federal Communications Commission defines five types of diversity   

> 40 This is similar, but not identical, to the Council of Europe’s use of ‘media pluralism’ to mean structural pluralism and
> ‘diversity’ ‘to signify diversity of media content or a diversity of voices in media content’ (Jakubowicz 2015, p. 26) .106

relevant to media ownership policy: viewpoint, outlet, program, source and minority and 

female ownership. 41 Two of these des erve mention because they have historically been 

seen across many jurisdictions as the central elements of regulation for media 

diversity. These are viewpoint diversity (which might be addressed via content 

regulation, in the terms described above) and out let diversity or a variation on it e.g. 

‘number of voices’ (the subject of structural regulation). Only the second of these is a 

part of media regulation in Australia .

In the research and policy work below, we show how understandings of diversity or 

plura lity have developed beyond this approach, but even at this stage it is worth noting 

some variation among scholars on the importance of ‘viewpoint’ diversity as a single 

measure and, specifically, the link between it and ownership diversity. Levy (2015, p. 

291) reviews various studies on this point and concludes that taken together they seem 

either inconclusive or tend to point to an absence of evidence that market structure 

influences viewpoint diversity. In addition, Karppinen (2013, p. 94) notes the diffi culty in 

empirically establishing a link between ownership and viewpoint diversity, and –

although he ultimately disagrees with the underlying proposition – notes that some 

have advanced the view that consolidation of ownership is benign or even desirable in 

circumstances where resources are needed for the production of quality journalism or a 

variety of services. 

External pluralism and internal pluralism 

A further distinction which relates to aspects of pluralism itself, rather than regulation, is 

the char acterisation of external and internal pluralism (see, for example, Hitchens 

2006; Doyle 2002; Karppinen 2013, p. 100) . Hitchens (2006, p. 9) characterises 

structural regulation in relation to external pluralism and content regulation in relation to 

interna l pluralism or diversity. Doyle (2002, p. 12) uses ‘external pluralism’ to denote a 

range of suppliers ( i.e. , diverse ownership) and ‘internal pluralism’ to denote pluralism 

within a single supplier (which therefore is essentially about diversity of conten t). 

Doyle (2002) goes on to distinguish between ‘political pluralism’ and ‘cultural pluralism’: 

political pluralism concerns ‘the need, in the interests of democracy, for a range of 

political opinions and viewpoints to be represented in the media’, wherea s cultural 

pluralism concerns ‘the need for a variety of cultures, reflecting the diversity within 

society, to find expression in the media’. 42 This is similar to the distinctions made by 

Valcke , Picard & Sükösd (2015 , p . 5), who speak of the cultural, poli tical and 

geographic dimensions of pluralism as well as content and format. 

The addition of consumption and exposure diversity 

In recent years, the aspect of consumption has taken a central place in both scholarly 

and regulatory consideration of media div ersity, although it was an element of Phillip 

Napoli’s (1999) influential classification of diversity as: source diversity, content 

diversity and exposure diversity (what people actually use). Sjøvaag (2016, 179)    

> 41 FCC (2003), Report and Order and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking .
> 42 Both Hitchens and Doyle were writing before the work by Ofcom and the EU on their expanded concepts of pluralism
> examined here. 107

locates it (using the term ‘reception’) wit hin the external/internal classification, 

describ ing two types of external pluralism (structure and reception) and three types of 

internal diversity (organisational, production, output). 

The more recent attention to aspects of consumption (which we will s ee below in the 

regulatory initiatives) has evolved over time. This Natalie Helberger’s recent work 

(2018) is an example of how exposure diversity is applied in a digital platform 

environment. 

We will examine this aspect of consumption or exposure divers ity more closely in 

relation to recent regulatory initiatives below. We will also return to the contested issue 

of ownership regulation. For now, to the extent that media regulation can assist in 

understanding and measuring ‘choice’ in competition terms – and we think that it can –

it is worth noting that there are several additional factors besides number of voices and 

range of viewpoints that are the subject of contemporary scholarly and regulatory 

consideration. 

Further, in our attempt to formulate a co nceptual framework for measuring choice via 

the concept of media diversity, we could also not the range of meanings attach ed to the 

term ‘diversity’, and the tendency for this term to be specified or qualified in some way 

(‘viewpoint diversity’, ‘ownership diversity’ etc). We now also need to note a key 

difference in how ‘pluralism’ and ‘plurality’ are used in regulation. 

‘Pluralism’ in the EU and ‘plurality’ in the UK 

This difference is seen in practice when comparing two of the current measurement 

tools. These are the Measurement Framework for Media Plurality used by Ofcom in the 

UK and the Media Pluralism Monitor used by the Centre for Media Pluralism and 

Freedom in European territories (both are described in more detail below). Whereas 

Ofcom’s tool, and the policy objective that drives it, is concerned with plurality, the EU’s 

tool is concerned with pluralism, of which ‘market plurality’ (which is focused on media 

ownership) is only one measure. 

The instruments that give rise to these policy tools are im portant in informing their 

design and scope: Article 11.2 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights states ‘the 

freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected’; whereas section 58 of the 

Enterprise Act 2002 UK refers to ‘a sufficient plurality of view s in newspapers’ and ‘a 

sufficient plurality of persons with control of the media enterprises’ .43 

The breadth of the concept of ‘pluralism’ as it is regarded in the EU can be seen in a 

recent statement by the European Parliament’s Committee on Legal Affairs in response 

to the proposals of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (2018, 

p. 31) in its Report on Media Pluralism and Media Freedom in the European Union . In 

the report, the Legal Affairs committee makes the point that  

> … media pl uralism embraces many aspects, including merger control rules,
> content requirements in broadcasting licensing systems, transparency and
> 43 See sec tions 58[2B] and 58[2C] respectively. Emphasis added in each case. 108

limited concentration of media ownership, the establishment of editorial 

freedoms, the independence and status of public service broadcasters, the 

professional situation of journalists, the relationship between media and political 

actors, as well as economic actors, the access of women and minorities to 

media content, diversity of opinions, etc … 

In contrast, ‘plurality’ is defined by UK regulator Ofcom (2015, p. 6) using the following 

twin elements (emphasis added) :

Ensuring that there is diversity in the viewpoints that are available and 

consumed, across and within media enterprises. There should be a diverse 

range of inde pendent news media voices across all platforms, a high overall 

consumption across demographics and consumers and active use of a range of 

different news sources. 

Preventing any one media owner, or voice, having too much influence over 

public opinion and the political agenda. This can be achieved by ensuring that 

no organisation or news source has a share of consumption that is so high that 

there is a risk that pe ople are exposed to a narrow set of viewpoints. 44 

Which term is most suitable for Australia? 

Ofcom’s approach shows that accounting for ‘news media voices’ requires an 

understanding of more than just ownership. This suggests there is an inherent 

limitation in the Australian regulatory approach, a s ‘media diversity’ is understood in 

Australian legislation to mean ownership and control . Accordingly, ‘diversity’ might not 

be the most useful term to capture something that can also take account of the impact 

of p latforms. 

Another persuasive reason to avoid ‘diversity’ as an umbrella term is its increasingly 

strong connection with cultural diversity. Added to this is the European regulatory and 

scholarly practice of associating diversity with media content, meanin g that ‘media 

diversity’ is used by researchers and activists in Australia to bring attention to a range 

of concerns from the number of women in film and TV production through to the 

representation of people often excluded from media content. 45 In journalis m, even as 

long ago as 2001, the A ustralian Broadcasting Authority ’s research on sources of news 

and current affairs showed confusion on the part of media practitioners: 

The notion of ‘diversity’ was interpreted variously by news producers. Some 

linked it with ownership and control, and viewed it as an indication of the 

number of voices expressed through the news and current affairs media. Others 

linked it with multiculturalism, and the extent to which different ethnic sectors of 

society had expression thro ugh the media (pp. 193 -94).         

> 44 This definition and the matrix that accompan ies it have now been applied to a small number of merger applications,
> two of which are mentioned below. It was heavily relied upon by the Comp etition Commission in New Zealand in 2017
> when considering the proposed merger of NZME and Fairfax in New Zealand (also mentioned below).
> 45 See, for example, the work of the non -profit group Media Diversity Australia. 109

We suspect this confusion has only increased over time. ‘Diversity’ is perhaps better 

avoided as an overall regulatory concept, although it remains useful when combined 

with any number of qualifiers such as in ‘ownership diversi ty’. 

Hence for the purposes of this r eport :

Media diversity generally will be used with a qualifying term to refer to specific 

aspects such as viewpoint diversity, cultural diversity, ownership diversity and 

exposure diversity. 

This leaves us with the ter ms ‘plurality’ (used in the UK) and ‘pluralism’ (used in the 

EU). 

Before suggesting which of those is more useful in the Australian context , we should 

consider one final aspect of the way in which either term may be used by different 

actors. While legisla tors and regulators are likely to seek a term that allows for a very 

pragmatic deployment, even allowing for a more expanded meaning such as those 

considered above, academics and activists may well seek a much more 

comprehensive approach to reforming media coverage, participation and 

representation. 

On this basis, Karppinen (2013) explains his own use of the terms: 

… media diversity is understood in a more neutral, descriptive sense, as 

heterogeneity on the level of contents, outlets, ownership or any othe r aspect of 

the media deemed relevant; whereas media pluralism, as a broader socio -

cultural and evaluative principle, is understood as referring to the 

acknowledgement and preference of such diversity, which also required some 

schematization of its relatio nship to democracy or other social values (p. 3 -4). 

Karppinen’s approach is based on a review of different approaches to democracy itself. 

His study advances a view of ‘radical pluralism’ – in contrast both to liberal pluralism 

(based on freedom of the in dividual and the marketplace of ideas) and deliberative 

democracy (based on an understanding of the public sphere) – which we do not wish to 

adopt here. The concept of the public sphere developed by Habermas (1989) 46 is 

something that has been used and adap ted by many media scholars from the 

disciplines of law, media, journalism and associated research fields. A more expanded 

form is recognised by Karppinen arising out of Habermas’ later work, and this is seen, 

for example, in the recent work of McNair et al . (2017) on democracy, politics and the 

media in Australia. 

For present purposes, however, Karppinen’s analysis is helpful in that it associates 

‘pluralism’ but not ‘plurality’ with a much broader, normative concept:            

> 46 Habermas criticised the commerciali sation of the press, arguing that it had become driven by advertising and the
> profit motive to become undemocratic. In theory, the internet offers the promise of an equitable public space . A lthough
> Habermas has made few pronouncements about this, his rare comments have been negative (see Fortunat and
> O’Sullivan, 2016). Others have been more outspoken with their pessimism. Marxist scholar Christian Fuchs, for
> instance, argues that the only way to make Twitter properly democratic is to transform it into a‘no n-commercial, non -
> profit platform that stops using advertising, does not aim at accumulating capital, and substitutes the focus on the logic
> of accumulation with the logic of trying to foster sustained political communication '(Fuchs, p. 245). Yardi and Boyd
> agree: ‘Twitter is hardly a medium for deliberative democracy ’(2010 , p. 317). 110

I use the concepts of diversity or pl urality primarily when referring to the 

empirical fact of plurality, while pluralism, as an ism , refers more explicitly to a 

value orientation that considers multiplicity and diversity in ideas and institutions 

a virtue (pp. 3 -4). 

This understanding helps us in finding a suitable term to use in relation to regulation in 

Australia. For the reasons described above, we have already recommended avoiding 

the term ‘diversity’ when speaking of something more than just ownership. We can now 

add to this a desire to avoid, at least for regulatory purposes, the sweeping, normative 

‘ism’ represented by ‘pluralism’. 

For the purposes of this report :

Media pluralism will be used as a broader, normative concept – an ism – that 

embraces the more philosophical aspects assoc iated with a vibrant, democratic 

media environment. 

This brings us to the term ‘plurality’, which captures the sense of factual heterogeneity ,

while avoiding the narrowness of ‘diversity’ and the expansiveness of ‘pluralism’. It 

therefore moves us one st ep closer to understanding the elements that might comprise 

a measurement tool. 

For the purposes of this report :

Media plurality will be used as a core regulatory concept that captures at least 

some of the variations of diversity mentioned above (such as v iewpoint diversity 

and ownership diversity), but expands to embrace elements of Ofcom’s 

framework such as consumption and impact, as well as influence over public 

opinion and the political agenda .

We now turn to the ways in which media plurality might be assessed and measured. 

# Measurement 

Despite some common themes, there is still wide variation in how, and even whether, 

regulation should be used in promoting a free and pluralistic environment. Klimkienwicz 

(2010, xiii) characterises such a divergence, eve n across the territories of Europe, in 

the following terms: 

… the fundamental divide between the belief in efficiency of market forces or 

deregulation to create a free and diverse media environment, versus the belief 

that regulation is needed in order for social, cultural and democratic needs to be 

met and communication rights to be fully exercised. 47 

These differences are further accentuated in the contrast between European and US 

traditions. In the US, regulation has been more limited and directed at effe ctive     

> 47 Klimkienwicz cites various sources including P J Humphries (2008), ‘The Principal Axes of the European Union’s
> Audiovisual Policy’ in I. Fernandez Alonso & M. de Mogaras i Spa (eds), Communication and Cultural Policies in
> Europe , Barcelona: Uni versitat Autonoma de Barcelona. 111

competition of commercial participants, in contrast to a longstanding investment in 

public broadcasting in the UK and Europe (see, for example, Metykova, 2016, p. 4): 

In Western European countries public service broadcasting foregrounded the 

public interest in communication from its inception, while the United States 

supported competition in a marketplace of ideas that was independent from the 

intervention of the state. 

This contrast between a liberal free market, ‘marketplace of ideas’ approach to 

regulation and the more interventionist, social democratic, public service style 

approach is also noted by Karol Jaku bowicz (2015, pp. 33 -35), among others. 

Given the variation in approaches to media plurality, and the different rationales for 

regulating in this area, it is not surprising that measurement is still an evolving field and 

is itself characterised by significantly different approaches. Having described the goal 

of the FCC’s approach to diversity as being ‘instrumental’, meaning ‘it is designed to 

provide citizens with the information they need to discharge the obligations of 

citizenship’, Jonathan Levy (2015, pp. 278, 280) characterises the policy challenge in 

the following way: 

First, defining a performance metric is hard; second, deciding what level is 

acceptable involves judgment; third, at least part of what affects citizens is 

consumption of media content, something that generally cannot be regulated. 

In this report we do not have scope to include an assessment of the FCC’s approach to 

diver sity, but we note Napoli (2015 a, p. 146) provides a review of the agency’s 

unsuccessful attempt in the early 2000s to create a Diversity Index (with an appeal 

court commenting on its failure to differentiate between media outlets that provide local 

news co ntent and those that do not). 48 Doris A Graber and Johanna Dunaway (2018, 

p. 47) comment on what they see as the FCC’s failure to use its power to define what is 

meant by ‘programming in the public interest’, and to develop rules about public service 

and l ocal interest programs, as well as to monitor and enforce existing standards. 

Asserting that ‘political cross -pressures are strong’, they describe the ‘very light hand’ 

applied in comparison even to Europe, Canada and Australia (p. 48). 

The remainder of t his section will discuss two leading approaches to measurement of 

media plurality, with comments also on the way in which aspects of the UK approach 

have been used in New Zealand. 

# EU: The Media Pluralism Monitor 

On one level, the European Union is a leader in recognising the importance of media 

pluralism and in implementing a program for measuring it. The European Commission 

funds a program that annually reviews media pluralism across the EU. The program is 

administered by the Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom at the European 

University Institute in Florence. The CMPF is responsible for the Media Pluralism  

> 48 Jock Given (2007) compares developments in cross -media ownership regulation in the US and Australia following
> legislative change in 2006. 112

Monitor (MPM), which resulted from work commissioned by the EC a decade ago, with 

a version of the MPM first published in 2009, then subject to review and development, 

including input from a group of expert advisors. 49 

On another level, however, the overall European approach (as distinct from the MPM 

itself ) has been criticised for comprising substantial monitoring with little in the way of 

regula tory response. The principle regulatory instrument, the EC Merger Regulation, 

concerns concentration of undertakings that would ‘significantly impede effective 

competition’, but does not concern media plurality, which is left to member states. This 

is said to be due to the need for the EU to allow its member states some degree of 

autonomy over a sensitive aspect of culture and regulation. 50 

Nevertheless, the MPM appears to have considerable support, at least in parts of the 

EU and among members of the Europe an Parliament. A 2018 report (mentioned 

above) of its Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (2018, p. 17) 

called on the European Commission to allocate permanent, adequate funding for the 

MPM to be used in considering candidate countries f or admission to the EU, with the 

MPM results to ‘have an actual bearing on the progress of the negotiation process’. 51 

How the MPM works 

The MPM program essentially comprises country reports on the 28 EU member states 

and now two ‘candidate counties’ (Turke y and Montenegro), along with an overall 

Policy R eport for the year , which analyses the country data under several themes. The 

country -level assessments are undertaken by independent researchers, mostly based 

in the applicable territories. The researchers use a set of 20 indicators of media 

pluralism that have been developed by the CMPF and others who have worked on the 

development of the MPM over several years. 52 The results for each indictor, along with 

sub -indicators that overall provide 200 variables, ar e then analysed by the CMPF to 

provide a risk level (low, medium, high) for each. 

The indicators are then arranged into four generalised ‘areas’ (basic protection; market 

plurality; political independence; social inclusiveness), which are also given a ri sk level. 

In the Policy R eport, the results of all territories are collated to give a pan -European 

assessment on the indicators, sub -indictors, and the generalised areas. The results are 

presented in tables, risk meters, and maps.         

> 49 See K.U. Leuven et al (2009). On the development of the MPM, see Valcke et al (2010). See also the EC’s own
> webpage on the project, <ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/media -pluralism -monitor -mpm>. For current work, see
> the CMPF’s site, < cmpf.eui.eu/media -plural ism -monitor >.
> 50 Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the Control of Concentrations between Undertakings .
> Jan Oster (2017, 448) notes this reservation of EU member rights in relation to the application of the Merger Regulation.
> Martin Moore and Damian Tambini (2018b, p. 3) note the political sensitivity and that attempts to introduce media
> pluralism protections have failed.
> 51 See Motion 50 .Examples of other recent work in the EU are the EC’s focus on media pluralism and democracy for its
> 2016 Annual Colloquium on Fundamental Right, and the work of the Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts on
> Media Pluralism and Transparency of Media Ownership.
> 52 CMPF (2017). The researchers are given a questionnaire. Most of the responses are yes/n o/not applicable/no data,
> although some ask for specific values (e.g. market share). The methodology is summarised on page six of the 2017
> Policy Report which gives results for 2016 data gathering. MPM Figures 5 and 1.2.4 below are taken from this report. 113

The MPM is a substantial undertaking and much could be said about it. As this report 

does not seek to comprehensively assess competing approaches to media pluralism, 

the various elements will not be discussed at length, but its target issues are readily 

apparent from the matrix of indicators and areas below.     

> Figure 2.MPM FIGURE 5 –List of indicators per area

Given the limited scope of the current inquiry, it is most useful to mention Market 

Plurality . The overall assessment of the EU territories is represented in the map below.     

> Figure 3.MPM FIGURE 1.2.1 Media Plurality area –Map of risks per country 114

Greater levels of risk were seen in one of the indicators for this area, that of cross -

media concentration of ownership and competition enforcement, as shown in the figure 

below.       

> Figure 4.MPM FIGURE 1.2.4 –Cross -media concentration of ownership and
> competition enforcement –Map of risks per country
> Notes
> High risk: Belgium, the Czech
> Republic, Finland, Lithuania,
> Romania, Spain, Malta, Montenegro,
> Bulgaria, Luxembourg, Poland ,
> Low risk: Ireland, Portugal, Greece,
> France, Italy, the United Kingdom,
> Germany and Cyprus

The indicators in this topic area are discussed briefly below in relation to some factors 

that might be relevant to an assessment of media pluralism in Aus tralia, using the tool.  

> 

‘Transparency of media ownership’ would take account of aspects 

such as the control notifications under the Broadcasting Services 

Act and information presented in the Register of Controlled Media 

Groups and other ACMA databases and information sources, as 

well as access to shareholding information from ASIC registers and 

information provided by the ACCC in merger consultations.  

> 

‘Horizontal control of media ownership’ would take account of the 

limits in the BSA on control of commercia l radio and commercial 

television licences in the same licence area, but would also take into 

account actual concentration levels, including market share.  

> 

‘Cross -media concentration of ownership and competition 

enforcement’ would take account of the rep eal of Australia’s cross -

media rules, but would go beyond this to look at how competition 

law is enforced and its potential to prevent cross -media ownership 

to the extent that it harms pluralism. In Ireland, for example, the 

Competition and Consumer Protec tion Act 2014 involves the 

Minister for Communications, the Broadcasting Authority and the 

Competition and Consumer Protection Commission. In the 2017 

Policy Report (p. 29), the CMPF says: 115  

> …even if a (merger) transaction and/or unilateral conduct do not r aise
> competition concerns, they may raise concerns over media pluralism. In
> certain countries these concerns are addressed by subjecting the outcome
> of competition enforcement to pluralism -related considerations.
> 

This indicator would also take account of support for public media 

and community broadcasting.  

> 

‘Commercial and owner influence over editorial content’ is a more 

difficult matter to consider. The CMPF (2017, pp. 31 -32) has said 

not all concentration harms pluralism (for example, it can save a 

publi cation from folding), but it may where ‘the power that stems 

from ownership is used to influence editorial content’. Australian 

mechanisms might include charters of editorial independence and 

rules about separation of editorial content.  

> 

‘Media viability’ is seen by the CMPF as an even more difficult 

measure, not only because of the variety of dissimilar initiatives that 

might be taken into account, but because of the difficulty of 

obtaining data and making predictions. A number of the ‘non -

traditional rev enue streams’ cited in relation to European territories 

can be seen in Australia: new apps for tablets and smartphones; 

‘package subscriptions’ for print and digital; crowdfunding; podcasts; 

event management.  

> 

The comments above are intended as a guide onl y; while Hitchens 

(2015) notes some aspects of the Australian environment relevant 

to the MPM criteria, there has been no systematic application of the 

MPM here . For the UK, t he 2016 UK c ountry report (Dzakula, 2016) 

provide s this assessment:        

> Table 6.UK Country report table 3.2 –UK Market Plurality Area 116

The researcher who prepared this report was Jelena Dzakula from the University of 

Westminster. 53 She concluded that overall in the UK ‘risks to media pluralism are low’, 

but commented on the possible impa ct of Brexit, as follows: ‘there is the need to 

maintain positive provisions that aim to protect media plurality once the UK leaves the 

EU’ (11). She provided the following observations on Market Plurality, the one area 

where she regarded there to be mediu m risk level.  

> 

In relation to transparency, although there are legislative 

requirements for disclosure of company interests, this occurs 

through annual reports, so there is no specific obligation to notify 

Ofcom. Furthermore, as shareholders are sometimes l arge 

investment funds, ‘it takes research and knowledge to establish who 

owns which media company despite these transparency 

requirements’ (p. 6).  

> 

Restrictions on horizontal concentration are limited to television, 

while cross -media restrictions only apply to control of a Channel 3 

television service and national newspapers (see below). The report 

does, however, mention the application of the public interest test in 

the Enterprise Act 2002 (described in more detail below).  

> 

In terms of regulatory authorities and procedures, the report cited 

with approval the involvement of Ofcom, the Competition and 

Market Authority and the Competition Appeal Tribunal, noting ‘these 

bodies have sufficient powers and have been seen as efficient’ but 

argued that the system over all is complex and that ‘the issue might 

not be the efficiency of the bodies involved but rather the ideology 

that has underpinned the relaxation of the rules over the years since 

the Broadcasting Act 1996’ (p. 6).  

> 

On actual levels of concentration, the re port (p. 7) commented on 

the prominence of the ‘top four’ enterprises in various parts of the 

sector – a standard measure used by the CMPF – and noted the 

following:  

> –

the top four audiovisual media owners command 92 per cent 

of revenues and 74 per cent of a udiences;  

> –

the top four newspaper owners command 75 per cent of 

revenues and 71 per cent of readership;  

> –

the top four internet providers command 59 per cent of 

revenues and 90 per cent of subscribers.  

> 

On viability, while noting challenges for the sector, th e report (p. 7) 

noted the emergence in the UK of crowdsourcing initiatives as well 

as ‘community -driven hyperlocal journalism websites’.   

> 53 Media Pluralism Monitor 2016 Monitoring Risks for Media Pluralism in the EU and Beyond Country Report: United
> Kingdom . Written by Jelena Dzakula. See cmpf.eui.eu/media -pluralism -monitor/mpm -2016 -results/united -kingdom 117

There are other aspects of the MPM that take it outside the territory most Australian 

critics, and probably all regula tors, would consider suitable matters for inclusion, in 

some cases because the criteria are inevitably subjective with little evidence available. 

Editorial autonomy, for example, is an indicator appearing under the ‘political 

independence’ category, separa te from the aspect of commercial/owner influence over 

content. The social inclusiveness indicators are perhaps the clearest examples of the 

difference in approach in the EU (at least at the point of research and debate , if not in 

terms of regulation). Some Australian policy or regulatory ini ti atives – captioning 

requirements for commercial , public service and pay television ; the cultural diversity 

objectives of SBS radio and TV ; the funding of the National Indigenous Television 

service – could perhaps be re garded as part of a more comprehensive concept of 

media pluralism. However, t hey are far removed from the ownership and control focus 

of Australian law . W hile international experience suggest s Australia might need to 

expand its concept of ‘media diversity’ to account for the contemporary digital 

environment, aspects of social inclusiveness might be better regarded as separate 

policy and regulatory initiatives rather than as a part of a regulatory framework for 

media plurality .

# UK: The Ofcom framework 

The w ork by Ofcom in developing a framework for measuring media plurality across 

several dimensions and across media platforms is world -leading. As this is an 

environment that has at least some similarities to the Australian environment (in its 

legal and parlia mentary framework as well as the presence of both private, commercial 

media and public service broadcasting), it is a good point of comparison in any 

consideration of how this topic should be approached in Australia. 

In contrast to Australia, the UK retai ns a cross -media rule which operates at a national 

level and prohibits a newspaper operator with a national market share of 20 per cent or 

more from holding a Channel 3 licence or a stake in a Channel 3 licensee company 

that is greater than 20 per cent. Th is is the key ownership rule aimed at plurality, but it 

is accompanied by rules relating to the inde pende nt supply of national news services 

by Channel 3 licensees; rules that disqualify certain persons and groups (such as 

advertising agencies and politica l associations) from holding licences; and the Media 

Public Interest Test applied in relation to mergers. 54 In addition to these rules, Ofcom 

(2015b, pp. 22 -23) nominates the fit and proper person test 55 and the content 

requirements in the Broadcasting Code as ‘other regulatory tools’ that address plurality. 

Ofcom’s work on measuring pluralism, which resulted in the Measurement Framework, 

was initiated in 2011. Ofcom itself (2015, p. 8) has noted the importance of the 

Leveson Inquiry, which reported in 2012, in shaping the form of its Framework. 

Nevertheless, it and its predecessors had long held responsibilities for monitoring and 

regulating media ownership and control. Aside from decisions on media ownership       

> 54 The cross -media rule is found in Schedule 14 of the Communications Act 2003 . See Ofcom’s most recent media
> ownership review for an outline of how these rules fit together (Ofcom 2015b, 9 ).
> 55 Sec tions 3(3) and 86(3) of the Broadcasting Act 1990 and sections 3(3) and 42(3) of the Broadcasting Act 1996 .118

laws, in 2003 , plurality became a ‘public interest consideration’ included in the 

Enterprise Act 2002 .56 This meant that in certain media merger assessments, the 

Secretary of State could ask either or both the broadcasting regulator (Ofcom) and the 

competition regulator (now the Competition and Markets Aut hority) to report on the 

potential effects of a merger on media pluralism. 57 

Although newspapers and broadcasting services are treated separately, in both cases 

there is a core test for a ‘sufficient plurality’. For newspapers, this is (where reasonable 

an d practicable) ‘a sufficient plurality of views’ (s 58[2B]), whereas for radio and 

television it is ‘a sufficient plurality of persons with control of the media enterprises 

serving that audience’ (s 58[2C][a]). And in a demonstration of the ways in which 

plurality, quality and standards are interwoven, the Secretary may also issue an 

intervention notice in relation to: accurate presentation of news and free opinion in 

newspapers (s 58[2A]); a wide range of broadcasting services ‘of high quality and 

calculat ed to appeal to a wide variety of tastes and interests’ (s 58[2C][b]); and a 

genuine commitment to broadcasting standards (s 58[2C][c]). 58 

A merger environment is of course a key moment at which a plurality assessment 

might be made. However, it is not the only such environment and in this report we are 

concerned not with mergers but with a more general assessment of media plurality. To 

this end, we note that Ofcom has a statutory responsibility to review media ownership 

rules at least every three years and, in the US, the FCC has a statutory responsibility to 

review media ownership rules every four years. 59 While these reviews assess the 

operation, effectiveness and relevance of the rules, not the state of plurality per se, 

Ofcom has conducted extensive work in response at the request of government. 

In its 2012 advice to the Minister on measuring plurality, Ofcom (2012, p. 28) 

responded to specific questions on how a plurality review might be triggered in the 

absence of a merger. Ofcom identified two types of triggers for a plurality review 

outside of a merger environment, which would be able to take account of organic 

growth and other developments, not simply proposed transactions. These comprised: 

A metric -based trigger , which would require a plurality revie w to be carried out 

if organic growth resulted in a specific metric being breached. 

A time -based trigger , which would require a plurality review to be carried out 

automatically on a periodic basis.                 

> 56 Section 58 sets out the public interest considerations, while sections 42 and 67 give the Secretary of State the power
> to issue an ‘intervention n otice’ or a ‘European intervention notice’ respectively if one or more of the public interest
> grounds in section 58 is activated.
> 57 In a recent matter, the CMA (2018) explained that it takes Ofcom’s framework as ‘an appropriate starting point’ ( p. 97)
> in the plurality analysis ;however ,it notes that there is limited external guidance on the subject and that the framework
> does not establish a benchmark for what is a ‘sufficient’ level of plurality ( p. 13). See Competition and Markets Authority,
> 21st Centur y Fox, Inc and Sky Plc: A report on the anticipated acquisition by 21 st Century Fox, Inc of Sky Plc , May 2018.
> 58 In the UK there is also a ‘fit and proper person’ test which applies to the holders of broadcasting licences:
> Broadcasting Act 1990 s3(3) and B roadcasting Act 1996 s3(3). This test is more far -reaching than Australia’s ‘suitable
> licensee’ test at section 41 of the BSA. This test has been applied by Ofcom in recent matters but will not be considered
> here.
> 59 The UK responsibility is found in sectio n 391 of the Communications Act 2003 while the US responsibility is found in
> section 202(h) of the Telecommunications Act 1996 .119

For reasons that include the difficulty of developing a me tric -based trigger and the 

additional certainty provided to industry participants through the use of a time -based 

metric, Ofcom favoured the latter. This position was echoed by the House of Lords 

Select Committee on Communications (2014, 54) in its report on media plurality which 

recommended a statutory periodic review by Ofcom every four to five years. 

Finally, in its own consultations on the development of a measurement framework, the 

Department of Culture, Media and Sport explicitly recognised the need f or a ‘baseline 

market assessment of media plurality in the UK’ (DCMS 2014, p. 7). 

It is in this context that we present information on the Ofcom arrangements, even 

though at times we provide illustrations of the application of the framework tests by 

refer ence to UK merger decisions. 60 We will also return to the concept of ‘sufficient 

plurality’ later in this chapter, as it has value outside of the merger environment, along 

with the proposal for a baseline assessment. 

In one final point before considering t he elements of the framework, it is worth noting 

the different methodologies involved in this assessment. Most of this work is 

quantitative, with Ofcom drawing on commercial consumer research data and its own 

surveys. In ‘contextual factors’, and in seekin g to understanding other aspects, Ofcom 

will adopt other approaches to information gathering. In a recent inquiry, for example, it 

needed information on news supply arrangements at the wholesale level in order to 

determine the reach for various competitors at the retail level. It spoke to commercial 

radio news suppliers to understand these arrangements, including the extent to which 

they produce their own news and adapt the supply from one of the parties to the 

transaction. Ofcom also conducted content samp ling and, for digital news, obtained 

commercial data on use of news sites via desktop, laptop and mobile devices. 61 

Elements of the Measurement Framework 

The Ofcom Measurement Framework is based on the key elements of availability, 

consumption , impact and ‘contextual factors’ (represented in the table below ). ‘Market 

context’, meaning the relevant media environment , is also considered . This involve s an 

extensive review of aspects of the national media market, including the results of 

recent surveys which sh owed relative use of the relevant media platforms (television, 

radio, newspapers and internet); the average weekly reach of these platforms by age 

group; cross -platform audience reach; and use of digital intermediaries, which Ofcom 

groups into three catego ries: aggregators (such as Google News); search engines 

(such as Google and Yahoo); and social media (such as Facebook and Twitter). 62         

> 60 We note that in Australia the idea of a three -yearly review of media diversity (and also localism) was raised by the
> Public In terest Journalism Foundation in its submission to the Senate committee examining the 2016 Media Reform Bill
> (see PIJF, 2016).
> 61 See Public Interest Test for the Proposed Acquisition of Sky Plc by 21st Century Fox, Inc: Ofcom’s R eport to the
> Secretary of S tate , 20 June 2017 (Ofcom 2017, referred to below as ‘Sky/21C Fox report) ,p.58.
> 62 This was the approach taken in the Sky/21C Fox matter (Ofcom 2017). 120

Figure 5. Ofcom figure 1 - Media plurality measurement framework 

If relevant, in this market context review Ofcom may also include information such as 

newspaper circulation and advertising revenue across different platforms. In one recent 

matter involving newspapers, the market context discussion included information on 

the overall number of newspapers in the UK at both a national and local level, and the 

number of suppliers; the information on the four main platforms and top 20 news 

sources; as well as information on newspaper circulation, readership and revenue. 63           

> 63 Public Interest Test for the Acquisition by Trinity Mirror Plc of the Publishing Assets of Northern and Shell Media
> Group Limited: Ofcom’s Advice to the Secretary of State , May 2018 (Ofcom 2018c, referred to below as the Trinity
> Mirror report). Among other assets, the transactions brought together The Daily Mirror and a large number of regional
> titles (T rinity Mirror) and The Daily Express and The Daily Star (Northern and Shell). 121

Availability 

This is a quantitative measure of the number of news sources available in the identified 

market, across different platforms. It is described in the framework as ‘a count of the 

number of entities providing news sources’ and is assessed using industry data. 

By analysing availability at the wholesale level as well as a retail level, the Framework 

provides a picture of content supply by prominent media groups. 

Ofcom stresses it is only one measure of plurality and offers an indication only of the 

potential for diversity of viewpoints. In a dvice to the S ecretary of State , Ofcom (2012b, 

p. 18) described this measure as a reflection of ‘the “shelf space” occupied by titles or 

news organisations ’. In pointing to its limitations, Ofcom said: 

At the most extreme, adopting a count of the number and range of own ers of 

media enterprises, without taking account of their ability to influence opinion 

would mean that all news and current affairs providers would be included as 

contributing to plurality simply by being available, regardless of whether they 

were used by several million or very few consumers (p. 19). 

Figure 6 below shows the snapshot of available sources recorded by Ofcom in a 2017 

matter. 64 

Although Ofcom comments indirectly on ownership when assessing the possible 

impact on availability, a more explicit approach to ownership diversity was taken in a 

recent application of the elements of the framework in New Zealand. The Commerce 

Commission noted that in an international ranking of 41 countries on the basis of 

contribution of media ownership structure to media pluralism, New Zealand ranked 

equal last with Romania and Turkey. The Commission also looked at the number of 

journalists and editorial staff at the two companies subject to the transaction, as well as 

at a rival organisation. 65           

> 64 Sky/21C Fox report (Ofcom 2017, p. 49).
> 65 See NZME Limited and Fairfax New Zealand Limited [2017] NZCC 8 (2 May 2017). In New Zealand there are no
> sector -specific media ownersh ip laws and no formal framework for considering media plurality. The Commerce
> Commission’s decision to take this into account was challenged by a party to the transaction but both the Commission’s
> jurisdiction and its findings on plurality were upheld by t he High Court. See NZME Limited v Fairfax Media Limited
> [2017] NZHC 3186, [231], [306] .122
> Figure 6.Ofcom fi gure 5.1 –Multiplatform scope of the news offer provided by different
> news operators (at retail level –UK)

Consumption 

The consumption measure marks a significant point of departure from traditional ways 

of assessing plurality, including the approach a dopted in Australia. It represents a shift 

away from supply , towards the kind of ‘exposure diversity’ that has been identified as a 

crucial factor in a more effective assessment of plurality. Ofcom itself has described 

consumption metrics as ‘the most usef ul starting point of any plurality assessment’ 

(2015a, p. 12). 

In the Measurement Framework, Ofcom explains that its consumption metrics measure 

‘the number of people using news sources and the frequency and/or time that they 

spend consuming it’ (2015a, p. 12). This inquiry involves measures of reach used 

within different sectors of the industry (for example, number of people who spent at 

least five minutes watching television at a particular time ; print circulation ; number of 

‘likes’ on Facebook). But Ofco m has enhanced these results by taking account of time 

spent watching (for example) and consumption across different platforms. It looks at 

‘multi -sourcing’, a measure of the average number of sources a consumer uses across 

different platforms across a spe cified period. 

In 2018 it published the following chart (‘slide 24’) on reach at a retail level, including 

digital intermediaries: 66  

> 66 News Consumption in the UK: 2018 , slide 24. 123

Figure 7. Ofcom slide 24 – Cross platform audience 

In moving beyond the measure of reach, Ofcom has developed its own measure known 

as ‘share of references’. 

Ofcom describes this approach in the following terms (2015a, p. 12): 

Share of references is calculated by asking people which news sources they 

use and the frequency with which they use them. Each reference is then 

weighted for the frequency of use, and summed. The share of each source or 

provider can then be calculated based on their total number of references as a 

proportion of all references for all news sources, regardless of the platform or 

media. 

Ofcom calls thi s result share of consumption . It uses this tool in its annual 

consumption survey to produce various snapshots of this aspect of plurality. 

For example, in 2018 it published the following chart (‘slide 83’) on share of references 

at a retail level, includ ing digital intermediaries: 67  

> 67 News Consumption in the UK: 2018 , slide 83. 124

Figure 8. Ofcom slide 83 – Share of references 

The value of this more sophisticated measure that combines ‘use’ with ‘frequency of 

use’ can be seen when this chart (slide 83) is compared with the cross -platfo rm 

analysis of reach (slide 24). This comparison shows ITV , for example, has a reach 

measure of 45 per cent (just over half that of the BBC), but when frequency is added 

and the results are weighted to give a ‘share of references’ measure (as shown in 

Ofcom’s Figure 1 1.3, above) , ITV’s share drops to less than one quarter of that of the 

BBC (7 per cent compared to 32 per cent for the BBC ). 68 

In a recent merger assessment (where Ofcom takes a ccount of ownership by 

combining the shares for the separate sources subject to the transaction) , this form of 

analysis was used to show that the print sources subject to the transaction would have 

a combined share of references of 3 per cent (compared to 42 per cent for the BBC) 

even though they had a combined reach of 10 per cent ( compared to 77 per cent for 

the BBC). 69    

> 68 These results are at the retail level. They differ slightly from the res ults at the wholesale level, mostly on account of
> the role of ITN as a wholesale supplier of news to ITV. The wholesale results for ITN/ITV are 53 per cent reach and 10
> per cent share of references. The results for the BBC, Facebook, Google and Twitter are the same at wholesale level.
> 69 Trinity Mirror report (Ofcom 2018c, pp. 26 -27). 125

The other interesting aspect of this comparison of ‘share of references’ to ‘reach’ is that 

platforms appear less significant . In the 2018 news consumption results, Facebook’s 

share (for news, not all social media), w hen considered just as the total number of 

people reporting they use it for news, is 34 per cent. But when frequency of use is 

added and considered relative to all other news sources, Facebook’s share drops to 8 

per cent. Applying the same approach, Google ’s share (which in this measure 

comprises Google search, Google News and YouTube) drops from 21 per cent to 6 per 

cent. 

In a report published as part of the development of the Framework , Ofcom (2012b) 

explained how these various aspects work together to pr ovide an overall picture of 

consumption:   

> Share of consumption (using single -sector measurement systems, where this is
> possible, and bespoke cross -media ‘share of references’) is a good proxy for
> measuring influence in the news media market .
> Reach (particul arly cross -media, using bespoke quantitative research) and
> multi -sourcing (using the same) are good proxies for diversity of viewpoints
> consumed (p. 21, emphasis added).

This kind of analysis of consumption is not conducted in Australia. The news media 

off ering for Australian consumers in more narrow than that in the UK; nonetheless, it 

would be illuminating to understand the local market in these terms – in particular, to 

understand the share of consumption and references of the digital platforms in a more 

concentrated yet no more fluid market. 

Impact 

Impact is designed to extend the measure of consumption and allows for some insight 

into the influence of a media source. Ofcom acknowledges that influence and impact 

are difficult concepts to measure, and tha t certain proxy measures should be used to 

gauge them. Ofcom uses ‘personal importance’ as a principal measure, complemented 

with ‘perceived impartiality’, ‘reliability’, ‘trust’ and ‘the extent to which sources help 

make up their mind about the news’. 

Ref erring to one of these measures, Ofcom (2018, p. 32) has said, ‘News providers 

may have a particular impact on the people who use them if they are trusted by their 

readers, viewers or listeners and can influence their opinions’. Prompts such as ‘offers 

a r ange of opinions’, ‘helps me make up my mind’, and ‘is of high quality’ are used in 

consumer surveys. 

The table below, from the 2018 consumption survey, provides a useful indication of 

some of these points for selected digital news sources: 126      

> Figure 9.Ofcom slide 98 –Impact

In the Trinity Mirror matter, Ofcom noted that affected titles rated relatively low on these 

measures. However, in the Sky/21 C Fox matter, Ofcom (201 7, p. 70) used its data to 

conclude: 

> … the evidence suggests that Sky News i s held in similar regard to the public
> service broadcasters in terms of importance, trustworthiness and impartiality.
> We may therefore be more concerned about a transaction involving Sky News
> than we would be were a less trusted news provider involved.

Con textual factors 

Ofcom (2015 a, p. 13) explained, ‘The importance of contextual factors arises from the 

fact that the operating environment can differ between news sources and news 

organisations.’ To this end, while quantitative metrics such as those conside red above 

are an important part of assessing plurality, ‘a purely mechanistic approach’ may fail to 

appreciate these differences between news organisations. 

It gave the example of news standards on a matter such as impartiality differing across 

platforms a nd applicable rules. In its framework document, Ofcom gave the following 

(non -exhaustive) list of examples of contextual factors: 127 

i. governance models – such as trusts, publicly limited companies with 

shareholders, private companies, statutory corporations; 

ii. funding models – such as advertising revenues, circulation revenues, 

subscription fees, public funding; 

iii. the potential power or editorial control exercised by owners, proprietors or senior 

executives within news organisations; 

iv. internal plurality – i.e., how far an organisation enables, supports or promotes a 

range of internal voices and opinions; 

v. market trends and potential future developments; and 

vi. regulation and oversight, in some cases based on statutory obligations – e.g., 

Ofcom’s Broadcasting Code or the BBC’s own editorial or regulatory processes 

and compliance. 

Ofcom has noted (2015a, p. 13) the importance of the ‘due impartiality’ rule that applies 

to television services under the Broadcasting Code. This observation is worth 

repeating, given the similar ity with the Australian environment, where broadcasting 

services are also subject to content rules under codes of practice enforced by the 

broadcasting regulator, the ACMA (even though in the UK it is the regulator that 

formulates the code): 

From a regulat ory perspective, broadcasters are subject to impartiality 

requirements, while newspapers and websites are not. Ofcom’s Broadcasting 

Code requires that ‘news in whatever form, must be reported with due accuracy 

and presented with due impartiality’. The requ irement for ‘due impartiality’ is not 

absolute and broadcasters have a degree of editorial discretion in the selection 

of the news agenda. We recognise that the impartiality rules may contribute as 

a safeguard against potential influence on the news agenda by media owners, 

but they cannot themselves necessarily ensure against it. 

We will return to the relationship between media standards and plurality, but for now it 

is worth noting a difference in the contribution of contextual matters seen in Ofcom’s 

appl ication of the framework in two recent matters. 

In the Trinity Mirror matter, Ofcom did not identify any internal plurality concerns. It 

noted a study (Cushion et al ., 2016) of coverage of the 2015 UK election which 

indicated the newspapers that were the s ubject of the review were cited far less 

frequently in broadcast coverage, indicating a lower level of influence. 

In the Sky/ 21 C Fox matter, after conducting its assessment of the availability, 

consumption and impact elements, and before considering conte xtual factors, Ofcom 

(2017, p. 78) examined the aspect of ‘preventing any one media owner or voice having 

too much influence over public opinion and the political agenda’. 70 Ofcom considered 

the potential for influence by individuals within the media group following the proposed  

> 70 This aspect of agenda setting and influence is noted above. It is the second of two limbs used by Ofcom (2015, p. 6)
> in its definition of plurality. 128

transaction, taking account of its findings on reach etc; comments made in submissions 

to it; the observations of Lord Justice Leveson in the 2012 inquiry; and the results of 

the study by Cushion et al. 2018. Ofcom (2017, p. 87) conc luded there was a risk that 

the editorial stance of Sky News could be made to align with other news sources in the 

combined group ‘through the selection and omission of stories or through the choice of 

commentators invited on to Sky News’. Ofcom also consi dered whether there were 

aspects of internal plurality that could mitigate this level of influence. These included 

the impartiality rules in the Broadcasting Code, the likely adverse reaction of audiences 

to any interference, and a culture of editorial ind ependence at Sky. Ofcom considered 

these were not sufficient to address its concerns about the potential for influence. 

This aspect was also considered in the decision of the New Zealand Commerce 

Commission mentioned above (2017, pp. 324 -28). The Commissi on did not consider 

editorial policies and codes of practice to be sufficient safeguards. It also noted how 

internal correspondence from a related company in Australia demonstrated that 

centralisation may decrease internal plurality through the adopting of joint editorial 

positions. 

Criticism of the Ofcom Measurement Framework 

These arrangements have not been without criticism. In relating two matters subjected 

to the plurality regime up to 2013, Rab and Sprague (2014, pp. 67 -68) note that 

although divestme nts of interests were required, in both cases this was to meet 

competition law requirements. 71 In the second case the Secretary did issue an 

intervention notice prompting a review on public interest grounds. Ofcom 

recommended against referral to the (then) Competition Commission on media plurality 

grounds, even though it was referred on competition grounds. Rab and Sprague regard 

this as revealing the unsatisfactory nature of plurality regulation, while also raising the 

risk of political interference. 

Both Steven Barnett (2015) and Rachael Craufurd Smith (2015) characterise the 

changes in UK law as a move away from fixed ownership limits (or ‘bright -line 

regulation’) with, as Crauford Smith puts it, a ‘flexible, multi -faceted approach’ for 

assessing media pl urality (p. 310). Nevertheless, Barnett (2015, pp. 51 -56) forcefully 

makes this point when criticising Ofcom’s ‘share of references’ methodology which he 

notes resulted in 2013’s conclusion that in overall news sources the BBC had a 44 per 

cent share of re ferences while the News Corp newspapers had 4 per cent (p. 53). 

Among other points, Barnett notes the campaigning nature of the newspapers and a 

tendency towards a more balanced and detached tone in BBC news reports. He 

concludes: 

… the power to exercise . .. passion and thus to influence hearts and minds is 

missing from [Ofcom’s] purely consumption -based and perception -based 

calculation based on responses to consumer surveys (p. 54).  

> 71 The two matters are BS kyB’s interest in news provider ITV and Global Radio’s acquisition of GMG Radio Holdings.
> Rab and Sprague also mention News Corp’s 2010 proposal to acquire additional shares in BSkyB, noting this proposal
> was withdrawn. The subsequent attempt at this trans action in 2017 is explained above. 129

Crauford Smith has also outlined problems with the three quantitative crit eria used by 

Ofcom to measure plurality in local areas (2015, p. 316) while Gibbons (2015, p. 28) 

proposes his own formulation based on the question, ‘Are media users exposed to all 

significant standpoints of opinion?’ 72 Craufurd Smith (p. 321) argues that the system 

offers little protection for local audiences, leading her to conclude that after about 10 

years of this system, the UK should consider moving back to ‘bright -line’ regulation. 

The level of discretion on the part of the minister is one of the dr awbacks she identifies 

(pp. 313 -15). Peter Humphre ys (2015, p. 163) argues the case for a ‘dedicated and 

politically independent media pluralism monitoring body with the final say, thereby 

removing the element of ministerial discretion in the decision maki ng’. His conclusion is 

that in the UK such a body could be ‘housed’ in Ofcom. 

Some of these points of criticism will be considered below in relation to the suitability of 

the international measurement frameworks for Australia . First, though, we will exami ne 

one other aspect which appears to need further thought: the place of platforms with a 

plurality framework. 

# The place of platforms 

As noted at the start of this chapter, a framework for measuring media pl urality can 

assist in understanding the level of c hoice experienced by consumers, and beyond this, 

the contribution of media sources to a diverse and dynamic news environment . It can 

also help to identify threats to existing levels of plurality. However, the tools examined 

above were not designed specific ally to account for the place of digital platforms and 

the algorithmic delivery of news . We therefore need to consider whether they have 

capacity to address some of the factors identified in Chapters One and Two – for 

example, enhanced exposure through ava ilability of more sources, or reduced 

exposure through the funnelling of audiences to certain providers. 

Influence of algorithms of public affairs 

Natali Helberger’s (2018 a) work on the need to take account of ‘digital dominance’ is 

helpful in trying to understand the role of platforms in relation to pluralism. 73 She 

argues: 

The true source of digital dominance is the ability to control the way people 

encounter and engage with information and the ability to steer their choices 

through the sheer knowledge about their interests and biases. More than ever, 

diversity has become the result of social dynamics, dynamics that are carefully 

orchestrated by one or few platforms (p. 156). 

The significance of Facebook as the dominant social media platform was seen in 

Ofcom’s recently released 2018 consumption survey results: 76 per cent of           

> 72 Gibbons (2015, p. 27) does, however, note a potential problem with his test based on users’ exposure to all significant
> standpoints of o pinion (a ‘sufficiency’ test) in that it involves close scrutiny of substantive media content. He says that
> should not be too much of a problem given Ofcom already does that in, for example, testing local plurality .
> 73 Helberger’s work we draw on here is part of a new collection edited by Martin Moore and Damian Tambini (2018)
> under th e title Digital Dominance: The power of Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple .130

respondents cited Facebook as a social media source they use ‘nowadays’ for news, 

with Twitter, the next most popular, a distant second at 32 per cent (Ofcom 2018, p. 

47). As noted above, this does need to be considered alongside Ofcom’s findings of 

Facebook’s lower share of all news sources in the market. 

Perhaps more significantly – to take up Helberger’s point about platforms’ ability to 

‘steer the choice’ of users, Ofcom’s resea rch (2018, p. 51) on how Facebook users 

receive news showed a large gap between active following of news producers and 

‘seeing news stories that are trending’:    

> Actively follow online -only news organisations 19 per cent
> Actively follow traditional news orga nisations 34 per cent
> See news stories that are trending 55 per cent

These results can be seen in the light of findings from other research, mentioned in 

Chapter Two, about the channelling of users to certain sites and the concern over a 

loss of autonomy , or rather, a compromised autonomy. Hindman’s early research 

(2007) on search engines commented on the ‘funnelling’ of users via search engines to 

a relatively small number of news sites, while his later work (2015) on social media 

found Facebook also fav oured large, national news outlets. For consumers, this 

suggests a potential narrowing in diversity of exposure, but it also has implications for 

news producers. The pre -programming of recommender systems can also favour large 

providers, and while global n ews organisations do offer additional choices, they 

compete with the local new s gatherers for advertising or subscription revenue. 

As we noted above, research on this subject is still relatively new and at this stage 

evidence on these effects is insuffici ent. Nevertheless, as the potential harm from such 

risks is great, it is important to at least acknowledge it and be aware of the possible 

impact on public affairs. This is not to say that digital platforms as corporations are 

motivated by a desire to infl uence public affairs , and that this is in a sense beside the 

point. In his characterisation of platform power, John Naughton (2018, p. 376) 74 points 

to forms of direct power (such as the power overs users who have little choice but to 

agree to standard ter ms of use) and the indirect power that comes from their role in 

public affairs. While this might seem like a rather theoretical point of discussion, it is 

also relevant to regulation; in fact, it is the basis of the second limb of Ofcom’s 

definition of plu rality, cited above:  

> Preventing any one media owner, or voice, having too much influence over
> public opinion and the political agenda. This can be achieved by ensuring that
> no organisation or news source has a share of consumption that is so high that
> ther e is a risk that people are exposed to a narrow set of viewpoints (Ofcom
> 2015, p. 6, emphasis added).

Naughton cites two example s of algorithmic, indirect power and the response it 

prompted. The first is the controversy generated by Google’s autocomplete s earch  

> 74 ‘Platform power and Responsibility in the Attention Economy’, in Moore and Tambini (2018), pp. 371 -395). 131

function in December 2016 when it was found that ‘evil’ was one prompt for completing 

the query, ‘Are Jews …’ The algorithm was rapidly modified by Google, with the 

company pointing out that it was mechanically generated and did not reflect the 

compa ny’s own beliefs. 

The second example is the gaming of Google search in May 2017 by sources seeking 

to promote President Trump and discredit former President Obama. A legitimate article, 

critical of President Trump, was published by The Washington Post . Th e pro -Trump 

response was false and had been disproved five years earlier, but searches on the 

topic returned the recent, false reports as the first six search results. Naughton explains 

that the method of achieving this result is widely understood and invo lves writing 

stories in ways that do not appear to be grossly exaggerated and in ways that 

encourage sharing: ‘After that, Google’s algorithms (which privilege up -to -date and 

widely shared content) will do the rest’ (p. 378). 75 

Naughton’s point in citing th ese events is not to condemn Google or its algorithms, but 

to observe that those algorithms ‘have the power to shape the public sphere’ (p. 377). 

This public impact needs to be considered alongside the personal impact we noted in 

Chapter Two – how channell ing consumer choice can compromise personal autonomy. 

However, as we have noted, the evidence is not sufficiently established and at this 

stage it is difficult to speak with authority about the effects of digital platforms on news 

consumers in Australia, a nd of algorithmic delivery more generally. Justin Scholsberg 

(2018, p. 211) , for example, has argued that ‘major news algorithms might be having 

both a personalizing and an aggregating impact on news agendas’, noting that some 

studies suggest algorithms are responsible for limiting exposure to diverse content 

while others suggest user choice plays a greater role. Moller et al (2018, 901) note that 

different research outcomes can have different understandings of diversity or plurality 

underpinning them: soc ial sciences studies usually take account of the ‘inclusion of 

counter attitudinal information’ whereas computer science studies tend to look at the 

‘inclusion of unexpected items’. 

This leaves us with a contemporary conundrum. On the one hand, digital te chnology 

offers opportunities for publication and platforms offer opportunities for distribution that 

were unknown in the pre -internet era, substantially reducing some of the barriers to 

entry that have characterised this industry; possibilities for exposu re to new sources 

are opened. On the other, algorithmic practices can narrow the field of consumption, 

closing opportunities for enhanced exposure as a smaller number of the most popular 

sources of news are prioritised; meanwhile, changing business models mean even 

these most popular news producers are squeezed for revenue. 

As we have noted above, this report does not directly explore the revenue side of news 

production, distribution and consumption. But we can categorically say that – partly as 

a result of digitisation and partly owing to the emergence of digital platforms – the     

> 75 A variation on this practice has been described by News Corp Australia (2018, pp. 87 -88), in which new, unique and
> original material published by The Australian following a significant investment of resources including funding a
> journalist to travel to Argentina appeared ‘anywhere from second to sixth in research results dep ending on the query
> and the timing of the search’. 132

game has changed for conceptualising diversity or plurality in the supply and 

consumption of news and journalistic content. Helberger describes this shift, at least in 

relation to s ocial media, as follows: 

… social media platforms are instrumental in a more conceptual shift from 

mass -to -personalized modes of distributing media content. This is a shift in 

which it is not so much ownership and control over content that matters, bu t

knowing the users, and establishing the knowledge, relationships, and technical 

infrastructure to trigger the engagement of users with particular types of content 

(Helberger 2018, p, 163). 

It is important to note that in asserting the importance of contr ol over user engagement, 

Helberger is not claiming that content itself is unimportant, only that ownership of that 

content is far less significant. And Valcke , Picard & Sükösd (2015, p. 2) say: 

... the concentration of where the audience goes – in terms of aggregators and 

sites – is every bit as damaging to pluralism as limitations on spectrum and 

concentration of ownership. 

When approached from this perspective, the concept of concentration adds a new 

dimension to ‘consumer choice’ in competition law or ‘ diversity and plurality’ in media 

regulation. 

While there have been previous attempts to expand the regulatory understanding of 

media diversity in Australia, they have not resulted in any meaningful reform. 76 The first 

of these, by the Productivity Commiss ion, proposed (2000, p. 366) that a media -

specific public interest test should be introduced into competition law (then the Trade 

Practices Act 1974 ), administered by the ACCC but with a requirement for the ACCC to 

take advice from the broadcasting regulat or (then the Australian Broadcasting 

Authority) on ‘social, cultural and political dimensions of the public interest’. 77 As part 

of its review, the Productivity Commission (2000, pp. 353 -55) explored ways in which 

the level of concentration in a market cou ld be considered. These included: the number 

of licences controlled by a single business; financial measures (e.g. , revenue and 

market power); and audience -based measures (actual use of media). It is interesting 

now to note that, writing in 2000, the Produ ctivity Commission observed that the UK 

government had recently considered a ‘share of voice’ measure which would assess 

perceived influence, but abandoned the idea and ‘opted for a mix of more traditional 

policy instruments’ (p. 355). As we have seen abov e, a share of influence approach 

was later adopted in the UK and became a central part of the Ofcom Measurement 

Framework in 2015.    

> 76 These reviews include: the Productivity Commission’s (2000) inquiry into broadcasting; the Convergence Review’s
> (2012) recommendations concerning ‘content services enterprises’; the Gillard Government’s unsuccessful presentation
> of a media reform package, including the Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (News Media Diversity) Bill 2013; and
> the Department of Communications and the Arts’ policy background paper on ownership and control (DOCA 2014) and
> fina l report on the review of the ACMA (DOCA 2016). For discussion of some of these matters, see for example:
> Hitchens (2015); Brevini (2015); Rab and Sprague (2014); Flew and Swift (2013);
> 77 In the Productivity Commission’s recommendations, the public intere st test was to be accompanied by the repeal of
> foreign ownership restrictions and other non -technical (i.e., other than to do with aspects such as spectrum
> management) caps on the number of broadcasting licences that could be issued. When these steps had b een taken, the
> cross -media ownership limits in the BSA were also to be repealed. 133

As mentioned, neither this nor various other reform proposals has been adopted in 

Australia and the law continues to depend o n ownership and control as the determinant 

of media diversity . At this stage then, the question remains: does ownership have any 

continuing relevance in an environment of digital platforms and algorithmic decisions 

about the relevance of news to individual consumers? 

The role of ownership and control 

The role of ownership and control rules was at issue in the recent wave of media 

reform in Australia that resulted in the repeal of the cross -media rule and the 75 per 

cent reach rule. The place of this form o f structural regulation is still hotly contested. 

Earlier, we mentioned that some in the UK are of the view that strict ‘bright -line’ 

regulation should be reintroduced (Crauford Smith, 2015), and structural regulation still 

has support in Australia (see, f or example, Dwyer, 2016). So there remains uncertainty 

around the appropriate ways to consider concentration in the news industry, and the 

emergence of platforms appears to give this additional relevance. On the one hand, as 

Australia already has a small n umber of adequately resourced producers of original 

journalism with an influential role on public affairs, a ny narrowing of opportunities fo r

exposure via algorithmic decision -making is likely to be of concern. On the other, policy 

interventions directed a t encouraging a range of competing news producers might, in 

some circumstances and if they go too far, harm the thing they are seeking to protect 

by making the separate resourcing of local newsgathering unviable .

Gillian Doyle (2002, p. 172), even while asserting the importance of upper restraints on 

ownership, notes that ‘Restrictions on ownership could, for example, result in 

replication of resources which prevents the industry from capitalizing on all potential 

economies of scale’. On a related point, Raymond Kuhn (2015, p. 185) suggests some 

concentration may be desirable ‘especially if a strong commercial presence is to be 

secured in transnational markets and/or the domestic market is to be protected from 

challenges posed by foreign companies’. 

This last point was of course a central argument in the need to review Australia’s 

ownership laws. However, Helberger’s characterisation of the issue provides an 

indication of how rapidly conditions within this field are developing – even since the 

arguments f or Australian media reform were advanced. Helberger (2018 a, p. 158) also 

argues that enhanced diversity of supply can sometimes result in reduced diversity of 

exposure 78 but, as shown above, her reasons are more to do with algorithmic delivery 

of news. 

The implications of this, according to Helberger, are that the regulatory toolbox for 

protecting diversity must include mechanisms for scrutinising and, if necessary, 

intervening in, the arrangements platforms make with media companies. On the kind of 

benchma rks that might be applied when assessing diversity in a digital environment, 

she says:  

> 78 Helberger draws here on the research of Napoli (1999); Ferguson and Perse (1993); Cooper and Tang (2009); and
> Wojcieszak and Rojas (2011). 134

… new benchmarks need to be developed that include the amount of consumer 

data, characteristics of the recommendation algorithm, and number of users, 

activity of users, and also the balance in the contractual conditions between 

platforms and media companies, the level of independence of the media from 

platforms, and the existence of an equal level playing field. Doing so may also 

require new forms of monitoring and measur ing diversity, for example, in order 

to be able to ascertain the level of diversity that different categories of users on 

different platforms are eventually exposed to (p. 16 5). 

All of this is a significant departure from current practice , suggesting not t hat regulation 

of ownership should be abandoned, but that it is only one element and that 

mechanisms such as Australia’s diversity points scheme may have less significance in 

an algorithmic, platform environment. 

We now turn to consider whether some of th ese elements might provide the basis for 

measuring plurality in Australia – and providing a richer understanding of choice .

# Suitability of these schemes for Australia 

We previously discussed in some detail two separate schemes for measuring media 

plurali ty: the Media Pluralism Monitor used in the EU and Ofcom’s Measurement 

Framework for Media Plurality used in the UK. 

In some ways, the MPM provides a more comprehensive account of the role of 

platforms, as its criteria are broader in nature and allow for o pportunities as well as 

limitations to be considered. We note above that this same quality – breadth of 

coverage – means it may not fit well within the Australian policy and regulatory 

environment, where aspects of social inclusiveness, for example, are pu rsued as 

separate policy objectives. Its strength probably lies in its facility for comparing 

jurisdictions within the EU. When applied to a single jurisdiction such as Australia, 

indicators such as ‘media and democratic electoral process’ are unlikely to provide 

much insight or guidance to regulators. 

Accordingly, in this section we consider the utility of the Ofcom Measurement 

Framework in the Australian environment and the extent to which it could be adapted to 

embrace a more explicit assessment of the impact of digital platforms on the range of 

choices available to consumers. Of course, serious attempts to develop a matrix or 

other framework have called on expert assistance and have undergone substantial 

consultation . Expert assistance, for example, wou ld be needed on the specific survey 

tools used in some of the quantitative research methods, but also on the best ways in 

which algorithmic distribution can be assessed. 79 However, in the light of issues raised 

as part of the current Digital Platform Inquir y, we think some observations on the 

suitability of the Ofcom Framework are likely to be helpful.    

> 79 The Australian Research Council -funded Media Pluralism Project at University of Sydney and University of
> Technology Sydney is developing a metric for online news consumption. It is testing existing policy approaches to media
> pluralism against a series of innovative news practices. 135

Applying the Ofcom m etrics 

We note the House of Lords Select Committee’s (2014, p. 45) description of the broad 

acceptance of ‘three families of metric’, bei ng the quantitative measures of availability, 

consumption and impact, along with the qualitative measure of context factors such as 

applicable media standards and internal plurality. This is the approach adopted by 

Ofcom, and we consider each of these belo w. 

Market c ontext would take account of current commercial arrangements for 

news and journalistic content in Australia, including profitability and business 

models. It would take into account media ow nership arrangements at a high 

level (e.g., number of re gional radio networks) and the presence of international 

news organisations, as well as the presence and remit of public broadcasters. 

In addition, it would recognise the conditions under which content is produced, 

including mechanisms for encour aging high quality content and meaningful 

engagement with consumers. It could also take account of contribution to the 

news cycle, an aspect of impact that is not directly related to co nsumption 

metrics (see below). 

Availability would carefully document the media ma rket at a national and local 

level ( for example, using the ACMA’s commercial radio licence areas as the 

basis for the local market analysis). It would chart, in as much detail as 

possible, the presence of new digital -only sources of news and local informat ion 

as well as more established media sources, acknowledging that start -ups 

featuring strongly in one plurality review might be replaced in a future review .

The output of these media sources would be described against criteria 

recognising aspects such as l ocal production, type of content (e.g., investigative 

reporting, comment and analysis). It would also examine the extent to which the 

ownership patterns examined in market c ontext have any relationship with the 

range of news offered at a local level. Digit al platforms could be considered 

directly in this category , although below we explore an alternative approach 

based on distribution that might more fully account for their role .

Consumption , following the lead of Ofcom, could be measured in part through 

ex isting data on reach of television networks, for example . These data start to 

provide a picture of consumption , but the snapshot offered here would need to 

be supplemented by surveys account ing for con sumers’ use of different 

platforms to obtain news, and the frequency with which they use those sources. 

The construction of a share of consumption measure may require a bespoke 

metric developed specifically for this purpose. 80 Above we noted the insights 

into the BBC’s place in the UK market when the metric mov ed from ‘use 

nowadays’ (i.e., reach) to include time spent and frequency of access. In 

Australia, measuring consumption across platforms and taking account of time 

and frequency could provide some understanding, for example, of the 

sign ificance of News Cor p’s control within Sydney of a metropolitan daily   

> 80 Thi s is an assumption made without knowledge of the full range of consumption measures currently available from
> commercial sources such as Roy Morgan’s Single Source data, or the Nielsen Digital Content Ratings .136

newspaper, suburban titles, a national newspaper (and all their online 

platforms) along with news.com.au and Sky News. Similarly, it could account for 

the place of the ABC as a provider of television, radio and digital content. 

Impact – a separate category in the Ofcom framework – could possibly be 

accommodated within th e consumption category, as its relevance is 

increasingly seen in terms of audience engagement and response. Further, the 

methods used to ga uge this (e.g., survey indicators such as ‘helps me make up 

my mind’) are closely related to the other consumption metrics. In a regional 

Australian environment where there may only be one or two commercial 

television stations providing local news, supplem ented by short radio news 

bulletins, d ata on how residents regard the trustworthiness and impartiality of 

these sources in reporting on local government, for example, could help 

regulators and policy -makers to gain a realistic understanding of the extent o f

choice available to consumers. 

Other contextual factors would include relevant aspects from the Ofcom 

category such as: whether organisations are a part of news standards schemes 

(such as those identified in Chapter Three); other relevant editorial poli cies 

(e.g., how native advertising is approached); arrangements for separate 

editorial oversight of different news -producing arms within a media g roup (e.g., 

commercial radio stations and print mastheads); editorial positions and the 

extent to which a rang e of viewpoints appears in opinion articles. 

Accounting for platforms 

As noted above, while the Ofcom framework provides a much fuller picture of media 

plurality than, say, the diversity points scheme under the Broadcasting Services Act, it 

is only partial ly successful in accounting for the role of platforms in the contemporary 

media environment. Its share of reference metric goes some way towards 

differentiating consumption of news on Facebook from the overall use of Facebook as 

a platform and measuring co nsumption of news through Facebook as a proportion of 

consumption of news via all news sources . However, these methods do not look 

beh ind the means of distribution to examine the originators of news content . Further, as 

the work of Helberger and others (no ted above ) suggests , the impact of algo rithmic 

delivery of news and journ alistic content and its potential to shape the public sphere 

may require deeper and separate consideration. It is important to note that news media 

organisations themselves use algori thms and recommender systems in addition to the 

editorial decisions made by humans – for example, in the promoting of particular news 

stories based on a reader’s initial selection. Accordingly, below we review some of the 

commentary on how algorithmic deli very might be measured , whether by publishers or 

platforms ; we conduct this review through the framework of ‘distribution’. 

Distribution as a discrete media plurality metric c ould cover network arrangements and 

syndication of content, but also the arrange ments that news producers have with 

platforms and the conditions under which revenue is earned from content. It could also 

look at conditions under which content is supplied to consumers, including the use of 137 

recommender systems and other ways in which alg ori thms govern the delivery of 

content. It could include the ‘digital gateway’ access issues (Valcke et al, 2015, pp. 2 -3; 

Jakobuwisc 2015, p. 41) associated with aggregators, search engines, multiplexes, 

electronic program guides and conditional access sc hemes. 

Foster (2012, p. 49) proposes the following indicators of consumption and impact when 

both the positive effects and the risks to diversity associated with digital intermediaries 

are accounted for: 

 the share of news consumed via intermediaries colle ctively and via any single 

intermediary; 

 the extent to which users can easily switch between intermediaries or choose 

other ways of accessing news; 

 levels of user satisfaction and trust associated with intermediaries; 

 the extent to which intermediaries pro vide access to a sufficiently wide range of 

news, in an easily accessible format; 

 the extent to which intermediaries enable easy access to sources of impartial 

news and other news deemed to be of public interest. 

More specifically, Hel berger, Karppinen and D’Acunto (194 -95) suggest basic 

indicators could include session length, navigation behaviour (links followed etc) and 

number of likes and shares, while a more sophisticated measure of diversity could 

include user engagement with opposing political views, cross -ideological references or 

social media connections between people with opposing views. 81 This is similar to the 

work noted by Moller et al (2018) on the effects of algorithms, including studies 

examining how ideologically opposing content is presente d to a user, different 

categories of articles presented, or the number of articles per news outlet. They noted 

a study by O’Callagham et al (2015) which found that ‘the YouTube recommendation 

system is likely to recommend extreme right wing content if a us er has just watched an 

extreme right -wing video’. Helberger (2018b) has provided a useful way of categorising 

these recommender systems when considering their role in promoting diversity, which 

may be of use in reviewing specific examples in a plurality re view: 

Liberal recommender: informs about politics, shows political alternatives, makes 

expert citizens more clever, and for the rest gives people what they want 

Participatory recommender: maps diversity of ideas and opinions in society, responds 

to differe nces in information needs, styles and preferences 

Deliberative recommender: nudges to encounter different perspectives, serendipity, 

activates people to comment, share, engage, like, dislike 

Constructionist recommender: nudges people to encounter and ackno wledge 

minority opinions, but also supports finding and engaging with like -minded [people] .      

> 81 These factors could also be applied to publi shers’ own news sites, and may be regarded as aspects of consumption.
> We have placed them in the distribution category here because we are exploring how the role of platforms could be
> considered more fully, and these indicators do still relate primarily to the ways in which consumers are presented –by
> platforms –with content created by news producers. 138

In another study, Helberger, Kappinen and D’Acunto (2018, 202) draw on the work of 

Hansen and Jespersen (2013) in suggesting that algorithms may ‘nudge’ users to 

ma ke a decision o r change a view ; some of these actions can be seen to help stimulate 

reflection, while others are considered to interfere with user autonomy. 

Additional comments 

As noted above, we are only attempting here to consider the ways in which a l eading 

international measurement framework might be used in or adapted for Australia in 

order to better understand the concept of consumer choice in an environment of 

algorithmic news delivery, including via digital platforms. We have attempted to tak e

int o account local industry configurations, the regulatory framework, and certain policy 

objectives. Four additional comments or caveats are needed. 

Acknowledging content producers 

First, e ven though media has changed profoundly in recent years, it appears th at 

attributing news and journalistic content to its originating media ‘platform’ (in the old 

sense of the term) is still important. The Ofcom work shows that for consumption 

metrics it is necessary to ask whether a consumer accessed a news report from 

smh. com.au or from The Sydney Morning Herald , or from a Seven Network news 

broad cast or its catch -up service. Similarly, it is important to know if it was accessed by 

Facebook or a news aggregator. But we also need to understand where the 

news rooms are. This may require a mapping of news producers as part of the ‘supply’ 

measure, at a local level and, where there is syndication or sharing, tracing the origins 

of the content. Despite the changes to the media landscape – and provided different 

measures are used f or supply and consumption – it appears the following categories 

are still useful in identifying where consumers access news and where it is produced: 

television; radio; print (including print and online); digital -only news sites; aggregators; 

search; socia l media. Consumers will of course access content across these platforms 

and they will access content that is not (geographically) targeted at them. These 

categories will still be useful, however, as a means of tracing the origins of content 

crediting those who produce it. 

‘Sufficient’ plurality 

Second , we note the difficulty in drawing conclusions about the overall level of plurality. 

Both Ofcom (2012, pp. 37 -38) and the House of Lords Select Committee (2014, p. 45) 

commented on the absence of any statutor y guidance for the term ‘sufficient plurality’ in 

the Public Interest Test in the Enterprise Act 2003. Both suggested Parliament might 

provide some additional guidance while leaving the final determination to Ofcom. 82 This 

approach may well be contentious a nd also unnecessary unless the test was deployed 

in the context of a merger scenario. If subsequent media plurality reviews were 

conducted after an initial baseline review , it might be possible to make some 

assessment of plurality levels against the findin gs of the baseline study, but in the first  

> 82 See also the earlier discussion of this concept by Arnott (2010, pp. 245 -75). 139

instance a plurality review would presumably only need to map the existing media 

environment and produce only observations against its objectives. Some possible 

objectives for a review of media plurality (to be te sted through consultation) could be :

 to document and assess the most signifi cant sources of news and 

journalistic content; 

 to provide a broad evaluation of the level of plurality (in the sense of overall 

‘heterogeneity’, as mentioned earlier); 

 to identi fy any specific areas where the community might be underserved or 

the integ rity of news and journalistic content might be impaired; 

 to identify areas where the viability of news production might be threatened 

as a result of distribution arrangements; and 

 to assess whether any action might need to be taken to address any 

identified problems. 

This exercise might produce a guide that sets out certain expectations about the 

conditions under which news and journalistic content is produced, distributed and 

con sumed. For example, the following table was developed by Helberger, Kleinen -von 

Konigslow and van der Noll (2014, pp. 28 -29). 83 

Table 7. Impact of different information intermediaries on diversity of supply and 

exposure 

Diversity of supply  Diversity of exp osure 

News websites  + contextual recommendations 

- personalised content 

(= opportunities for discovery )

+ no (explicit) ideological selection 

possible 

- no control of criteria/switch off 

News aggregators  + range of news sites 

- focus on popular news sites 

+ no evidence of increased 

passive selective exposure 

+ generate traffic to news 

websites 

- traffic primarily to mainstream 

websites 

(= most familiar) 

Search engines  + range of result list 

- ranking based on link 

structure/popularity 

+ journali sts use to identify sources 

for contra arguments 

- users focus on first items 

-/+ generate traffic to mainstream 

news websites 

(= most familiar) 

Social media  + access to unfamiliar news channels 

- participation through like -minded 

networks 

+ access to sources for journalists 

+ cross -cutting exposure and 

dialogue occurs 

- preference for like -minded users 

App stores  - news providers have to agree to app 

stores’ terms of service 

- limited news offer 

+ facilitates access to news on 

mobile      

> 83 The entries in the cells for ‘News websites –Diversity of supply’ and ‘Se arch engines –Diversity of exposure’ have
> been edited slightly to adjust what appears to be a problem in translation; the edits were not intended to alter the
> meaning. 140

Encouraging d igital platform initiatives 

Third , it would seem important to acknowledge any initiatives taken by distributors of 

news and journalistic content to improve transparency and the veracity of information 

available to consumers . We mentioned some recent initia tives in Chapter One. To 

date, these have not addressed the concerns of news producers about the impact on 

their business model . These concerns are crucial considerations in the continuing 

viability of news producers. However, they may not necessarily be t he same as those 

of consumers and citizens. Platform initiatives that promote media plurality may 

deserve consideration and recognition even if, of themselves, they do little to address 

publishers’ financial concerns. 

Accordingly, w e note a recent develop ment by Microsoft in which the ‘Spotlight’ 

function in its search engine Bing attempts to provide access to more diverse news 

sources, including alternative perspectives on controversial issues. 

An article published by Nieman Lab (Owen 2018) provided an i llustration:    

> Figure 10 .Bing Spotlight

Microsoft was quoted as follows: 

> We look at various user signals such as queries and browser logs, and
> document signals from publishers such as how many publishers cover a story,
> their angles, and how prominentl y they feature the story on their site. For
> controversial topics, in the Perspectives module, we show different viewpoints
> from high -quality sources. For a source to be considered high quality, it must
> meet the Bing News PubHub Guidelines, which is a set o f criteria that favors
> originality, readability, newsworthiness, and transparency. Top caliber news
> providers identify sources and authors, give attribution and demonstrate sound
> journalistic practices such as accurate labeling of opinion and commentary.

This facility is new and not yet available in Australia, although there does appear to be 

a variation of the approach in the latest version of Google News headlines. The 141 

screenshot below shows a lead article followed by alternative reports on the same 

topi c: 84 

Figure 11 . Google news 

A further variation is seen in the way in which Facebook gives links to competing news 

sources. 

In the example below, a user accessing the Facebook page for WIN News in 

Toowoomba is offered links to WIN’s competitors, Seven News, the ABC and The 

Chronicle: 85      

> 84 Google News, Headlines, 16 September 2018, 6.20 pm. <https://news.google.com/?hl=en -AU&gl=AU&ceid=AU:en >.
> 85 WIN News Toowoomba, Facebook page, 19 September 2018, 5pm. <https://www.facebook.com/
> WINNewsToowoomba/ >. 142
> Figure 1 2.WIN Facebook page

The effect of these methods of present ing alternative media sources i s difficult to 

assess but merits further consideration. The initiatives appears at face value to be a 

positive step a t the level of consumption; whether they addresses the interests of news 

producers – and the broader interests of the community in having viable news media 

businesses – is a different question. 

Regulatory intervention 

As we have not been asked in this repo rt to consider options for regulation, we limit our 

comments to some general observations on regulatory intervention in other 

jurisdictions. 

As noted above, there have been calls for algorithmic regulation, or at least the 

identification of the circumstan ces under which regulators might intervene if there was 

a finding of insufficient plurality. Earlier we mentioned the possibility of explanation of 

how algorithmic decisions come to present a user with certain content . If successful, 143 

such an approach might be an alternative to a formal, regulatory obligation for 

transparency in algorithmic design. 

Napoli (2015 b, p. 758) asks whether ‘a commitment to the circulation of diverse ideas 

and viewpoints from a diverse array of sources’ might be required as an asp ect of 

algorithmic design. Helberger (2018 a, p. 168) also points to this type of initiative, 

suggesting that it is possible to ‘program for diversity ’. And Karen Yeung (2017, p. 28) 

has said   

> … it seems theoretically possible that systems of algorithmic re gulation might
> be imagined and designed in ways that are more egalitarian and progressive in
> their values, orientation and operation.

Yeung gives the example of computer -mediated contracts which give opportunities for 

genuine negotiation of terms. 

More com prehensively on the aspect of regulatory intervention (although not 

specifically on algorithms) , the House of Lords Committee (2104, p. 46) referred to 

Ofcom’s own advice to it on the subject of broader intervention: 

> They can be grouped into five broad cat egories: structural remedies that raise
> levels of external plurality; behavioural rules that may help to increase levels of
> internal plurality; behavioural rules that impose standards on providers of news;
> behavioural remedies that improve access by citize ns to providers of news; and
> positive interventions to encourage more news provision. There is unlikely to be
> a ‘one size fits all’ approach.

Ofcom (2012, p. 23) represented these approaches in the following diagram:     

> Figure 1 3.Ofcom figure 4 –Suitability of remedies, by nature and significance of
> plurality concerns 144

In commenting on Ofcom’s approach, Foster (2012, pp. 49 -50) suggested remedies for 

an insufficient degree of plurality could be grouped as: 

Access commitments : for example, ‘digital intermed iaries found to be 

affecting plurality could be required to guarantee that no news 

content will be blocked or refused access, unless for legal or other 

good reason, such reason to be explained with reference to publicly 

available criteria’; or more proacti ve requirements such as requiring 

a number of different news sources or public interest sources in 

search results; 

Independent boards : for example, to review algorithmic transparency; 

Commitments to invest : for example, to an independent news fund to 

supp ort high -quality journalism. 

We also note that Helberger, Kleinen -von Konigslow and van der Noll (2014, p. 19) 

combined the proposals of Foster (2012) and Danckert and Mayer (2010) in 

summarising possible interventions to safeguard media plurality: 

a) object ive point system for ranking search results; 

b) an obligation to always list a pre -defined number of different news sources 

on the first page of a search result; 

c) add a search result box on the front page which is designed to find news and 

views specifically f rom a range of ‘non -mainstream’ sources; 

d) require one ‘public interest’ news source on the front page of any news 

search; 

e) internal pluralism safeguards in the form of ‘program windows’; 

f) routinely check for each search query whether the online offers of the press 

or broadcaster have something meaningful to say, in which case a link 

should be made to their offers. 

As an alternative to ex ante approaches which specify plurality -enhancing obligations, 

an outcomes -focussed approach would set certain objectives an d provide a regulator 

with ex post enforcement powers. 86 In this environment, the objective might be similar 

to the concept of ‘sufficient plurality’ in the UK Enterprise Act 2002 .

As noted above, we have not been asked to recommend regulatory options. We n ote 

only that, if regulation is proposed, possible interventions could range from 

encouragement of industry initiatives to licensing and content regulation.  

> 86 This observation was made (in a personal capacity) by Nick Morris (2018) from KPMG London when commenting on
> the practical d ifficulties of algorithmic regulation, although not specifically in relation to media plurality. 145

# Summary and observations on the role of regulation 

The preceding discussion of the regulatory fr amework in Australia , key features 

emerging from scholarly research on media plurality and the regulatory application of a 

plurality test allow for some general observations about the conditions under which 

news and journalistic content is produced, distri buted and consumed in Australia. 

1. Whether the issue is defined as ‘diversity’, ‘plurality’ or ‘pluralism’, an 

understanding of the extent of choice faced by Australian consumers requires 

consideration of more than just ownership and control and the structu ral 

regulation of the market .

2. A contemporary approach to media plurality – one that offers a richer 

understanding of consumer choice – would extend beyond availability of 

media sources. This is a point that was made by Doyle in 2002 (p. 12), 

commenting on the limited definition of pluralism used by the Council of Europe: 

‘According to MM -CM’s definition, pluralism is about diversity within what is 

made available, rather than within what is actually consumed’. 87 Since then, in 

the UK, Ofcom (2012, pp. 19 -21) has said that consumption should form the 

foundation of a plurality assessment because availability, while still relevant, 

offers only ‘limited insight’ and on its own is insufficient as a measure of 

plurality. In the Australian legislative version of ‘div ersity’, even in the 

complicated scheme for protecting ‘voices’ in regional licence areas, a 

numerical count is all that is required, with no regard to the news output of 

those sources, let alone the ways in which they are used by consumers. The 

monitoring and reporting involved in the application of a plurality framework 

such as Ofcom’s would provide a ga uge of plurality , and a richer understanding 

of consumer choice .

3. All attempts to conceptualise media plurality recognise in some way the 

element of power and influence over the political process . As is made clear 

in the two -part definition used by Ofcom and in its application, there is a 

difference between encouraging a range of different viewpoints on public 

affairs, and preventing one firm or person from – in the words of the House of 

Lords committee – ‘wielding too much influence over the political process’. 88 For 

many years, Australia’s cross -media rules were seen as a proxy for this kind of 

protection. What remains – the licence area caps of one commerci al TV licence 

and two commercial radio licences, and the diversity points scheme for regional 

areas – would hardly be considered, by international standards, as safeguards 

against the concentration of power.            

> 87 Doyle is referring here to the ap proach of the Council of Europe though it’s Committee of Experts on Media
> Concentration and Pluralism (MM -CM) .Mih aly Galik (2010, p. 234) has noted that attempts by the Council of Europe to
> promote pluralism and limit compe tition date from the mid -1970s.
> 88 See also Zrinjka Perusko ’s (2010, p. 262) observation that w hat’s behind ‘market concentration’ is, ‘framed in p olitical
> terms, problems of excessive control over the media’. ‘The Link that Matters: Media Concentration and Diversity of
> Content’ in Klimkiewicz, pp. 261 -73. 146

4. Relying on public service broadcasters alone is not enough . Public service 

broadcasters have obligations to reflect Australian society and opinion, and 

Hitchens (2015, p. 253) notes ‘the almost complete reliance on the non -

commercial broadcasting services to fulfil the normative pluralism dimensions’. 

5. Media ownership is still a relevant , although insufficient element , in 

protect ing media plurality. Despite the advent of streaming and catch -up 

services, at least while broadcast television figures strongly in the Australian 

media environment, the three -lic ence ‘moratorium’ and the accompanying 

concentration (‘one -to -market’) rule are effective mechanisms for promoting at 

least three core newsgathering networks. It may be that a fully developed power 

to consider media plurality and take action where needed, coupled with these 

existing concentration provisions, could replace the existing points scheme for 

‘media diversity’ in the Broadca sting Services Act. 

6. Despite this observation that ownership rules still have a part to play, in some 

cases increased concent ration may be the best option – the approach most 

in the public interest. Doyle (2002, pp. 172, 179) argued that ‘effective and 

equitable upper restraints on ownership are vitally important tools that no 

responsible democracy can afford to relinquish’, whi le still recognising that in 

some cir cumstances restrictions on ownership can impede effective exploitation 

of economies of scale. And in a platform environment, increased supply does 

not necessarily lead to increased exposure. 

7. The potential for platforms to influence public discourse hinges on their 

intermediary or distributor role; they are an increasingly influential means by 

which Australians receive news and journalistic content. The use of platforms to 

spread misinformation has been well -document ed , but on the issue of media 

plurality, current evidence does not appear to establish a harmful impact 

by platforms . Some recent initiatives could in fact enhance plurality , although 

the effect of search, aggregation and social on advertising revenue (not 

exa mined here ) may have an indirect negative impact on consumer choice. 

8. Even though a research base on algorithms, digital platforms and plurality is still 

developing, it is clear that platforms do have considerable power over the way 

in which consumers acc ess and use content and, by extension, how news 

producers structure their business es . Many aspects of these arrangements are 

opaque; what is clear is that intermediaries or distributors now loom large in the 

frame for media plurality in Australia. Although existing approaches do not deal 

explicitly with this issue, the ‘distributor’ function of digital platforms 

appears to offer a mechanism for inclusion within measurement 

frameworks for media plurality and effective consumer choice .

9. A baseline measure of m edia plurality at a national and local level, with 

platforms assessed separately from publishers – in their capacity as distributors 

of news and journalistic content – would offer a richer understanding of media 

pluralism and could assist in addressing spe cific concerns about the narrowing 

of choice for consumers .147 

# Conclusion 

We started this report by noting the contested and fraught nature of the contemporary 

news media landscape. The stakes are high: journalism is a vital part of our democratic 

discourse, a check on power and a means of ordering and understanding the flow of 

information Australians receive. Without it, our nation would be much poorer and more 

vulnerable to all manner of manipulations, distortions and disruptions. 

We are not seeing journali sm’s death. But we are witnessing it stretch and strain under 

the weight of expectation, loss of revenue, demands of its audiences and the multiple 

challenges thrown up by the digital platforms and by digitisation more generally. We 

are seeing its influenc e under direct and constant challenge. 

This report is about the impact of digital platforms on news and journalistic content. As 

we have shown, this impact is profound and complicated. Just as journalism is 

produced in different environments (from print t o broadcast to digital), platforms 

themselves work differently and the impact of social media is different from that of 

search, which is different again from that of aggregators. What's more, there are 

significant differences within those categories. Faceb ook, Twitter and Snapchat are all 

social media (as is YouTube), but their impacts are radically different. As we have 

documented, each type of platform offers unparalleled opportunities for the distribution 

of news on the one hand but threatens the relatio nships and reach that news producers 

have with their audiences on the other. The migration of advertising revenue from 

producers to distributors simultaneously threatens the business model for news 

producers. 

The literature examined in this report indicat es a shift in modes of communication, from 

the mass (which suited the news media) to the personalised (which strongly favours 

the platforms). As Natali Helberger notes, in this shift, control over content may not 

matter as much as ‘knowing the users, and e stablishing the knowledge, relationships 

and technical infrastructure to trigger the engagement of users with particular types of 

content’ (2018a, p. 163). This is a fundamental change for those previously responsible 

for both the production and distributi on of news and journalistic content. In our account 

of technology (see Chapter Two), we saw how well -equipped the platforms are to have 

an impact on every aspect of what consumers read, watch and hear, from choice and 

quality to diversity. 

The digital pla tforms are now the distributors of much of the news and often the 

mediators of the relationship between news media and its audiences. The algorithms 

they own and control have an immediate impact on what we read. As documented in 

this report, changes to the se algorithms can have both a positive and negative 

influence on news creators, on their income streams and their level of audience 

engagement. In this way and in others, digital platforms are having both positive and 

negative effects on the choice and qua lity of news and journalistic content available to 

consumers. Positive effects stem from the platforms' ability to distribute, filter and 148 

curate news for consumers; negative effects include the platforms' influence on the 

types of news being produced. 

Mor e specifically: on the positive side, there is the undeniable consumer benefit 

provided by search as a means of navigating vast amounts of information; of news 

aggregation as a means of collating content from different sources; and of social media 

as a mea ns of sharing content and engaging with others on matters of concern to 

social groups and the wider community. As we have shown, digital platforms are 

working to enhance the health of the news media industry and deliver credible, quality 

information to new s consumers. Aggregators, such as Google News, are offering 

different ‘takes’ on the same story, potentially aiding diversity (if also duplication). 

Facebook has released and promotes tools to help publishers capture digital 

subscribers, a potential key to the industry’s ongoing financial health. And Facebook 

and Google are actively improving the integrity of the content they provide with 

initiatives designed to promote journalist -created news content over its facsimiles. 

But we have also seen downsides i n digital platforms assuming the role of distributors 

of news and journalistic content – and many publishers would argue that the platforms, 

in supporting the integrity initiatives cited above, are simply attempting to fix problems 

they themselves created. There is some justification in this, given the platforms, 

particularly social media, have provided the environment for the rapid distribution of 

misinformation. In addition, the literature we reviewed pointed to the following aspects 

that are arguably att ributable to platforms: 

 social media in particular is said to promote shorter and more emotive content 

as encouragement to click through; 

 atomisation brought on by social media but also by search and aggregation 

means individual articles or bits of informa tion are valued, without the context 

often provided by accompanying reports or comment, and with problematic 

effects for revenue streams for news producers; 

 for those who are the subject of content which intrudes upon privacy or harms 

someone in some way, the effects are likely to be amplified in an environment 

of wide and rapid sharing; 

 hypervisibility of journalists’ work promoted by social media in particular can 

mean that stories develop in the context of other reports, leading to duplication 

and recycl ing rather than the creation of new material; 

 in search, the demands of search engine optimisation (SEO) call for a constant 

supply of new (if not necessarily original) content, with timeliness sometimes 

outranking quality; 

 the need to promote content, esp ecially though social and SEO, diverts 

resources away from newsgathering and into a new form of content marketing 

as well as consumption analysis; 

 the form of walled -garden consumption in which readers and viewers follow 

links but never leave the domain of the platforms enables a form of control over 

consumption, including important (and potentially lucrative) knowledge of reader 

practices and preferences. 149 

These are all aspects of the relationship between news producers, digital platforms and 

consumers identified by researchers. Some of them are being addressed by platforms, 

but there are other factors that affect journalism and its role in the community that are 

largely the result of digitisation itself, rather than of digital platforms. The demand for 

volume of content and the need for immediacy, for example, are manifestations of the 

movement away from print and broadcast environments where the producer/distributor 

established publication deadlines and the scheduling of new content. 

Hence, as we have discussed throughout this report, there are both positive and 

negative outcomes for news producers and consumers in the current news media 

environment. Some of these – on both sides of the equation – can be attributed to 

digital platforms. Others cannot. F or audiences, there are opportunities to access new 

sources and new perspectives. As we saw in Chapter Two, there are also concerns 

over the channelling of consumer choice though recommenders and the consequential 

narrowing of public debate. The available evidence for these effects – the proliferation 

of filter bubbles and echo chambers – does not seem to support a conclusion that 

platforms have themselves been responsible for a degraded public sphere, but the 

potential for significant harm remains real. 

What the literature does show is that beyond the specific negative impacts listed 

above, digital platforms are now key actors in the shaping of social relations and that 

this does not just involve how we engage with friends, family and colleagues; it 

influe nces how we receive and act on information about our community, governments 

and the corporations and institutions with which we deal. The circumstances under 

which we engage with public issues have changed and in this way digital platforms 

have acquired a degree of influence that is not the same, but may in time be as 

substantial , as those who produce the news. 

This difference suggests that platforms are right to seek to be distinguished from 

publishers. This distinction is important for platforms and it ma y also be in the broader 

interests of the community. We would not encourage giving platforms an institutional 

status that is inappropriate; exemptions from certain statutory obligations enjoyed by 

the news media, for example, do not lend themselves to digi tal platforms. At the same 

time, it would seem counterproductive to drag platforms into the mire of defamation 

litigation, for example, any more than they are now. To settle for that solution would be 

to address only what Judge Judith Gibson (2018, p. 119) recently referred to as ‘the 

challenges of yesterday’. 

But just as it may be desirable to sidestep the issue of publisher status, the evidence 

we have reviewed points to a different kind of responsibility on the part of platforms. 

As we noted in Chapter One, Tarleton Gillespie (2018, pp. 31 -33) puts the case that 

social media exceed the ‘intermediary’ category as it has been understood historically 

(in the sense of the trusted conduit such as the telephone company or post office, 

which we trust not to mon itor content), yet are not fully media content producers. He 

argues for recognition and appropriate regulation on the basis of their ‘hybrid’ status. It 

is worth restating the application of his guiding principle, specifically in relation to 

Facebook: 150     

> … th e moment that a platform begins to select some content over others, based
> not on a judgment of relevance to a search query but in the spirit of enhancing
> the value of the experience and keeping users on the site, it has become a
> hybrid. As soon as Facebook changed from delivering a reverse chronological
> list of materials that users posted on their walls to curating an algorithmically
> selected subset of those posts in order to generate a News Feed, it moved from
> delivering information to producing a media co mmodity out of it. If that is a
> profitable move for Facebook, terrific, but its administrators must weigh that
> against the idea that the shift makes them more accountable, more liable, for
> the content they assemble —even though it is entirely composed out of the
> content of others.

We are attracted to this approach because it recognises that responsibility arises at 

some point, but not at the outset and not always. It is not in our brief to consider such 

inte rvention in the Australian environment — although we note that in August 2018 

Germany's broadcasting authority proposed specific regulatory amendments 

recognising the category of ‘media intermediary ’, which would carr y with it explicit 

responsibilit ies (Rundfunkkommission 2018) .

We do wish to highlight t wo specific aspects of this new role that we have noted in this 

report. First, a common, constant and legitimate complaint from news media 

companies is that the producers of news and journalistic content simply don't know 

what comprises the algorithms of d igital platforms and when they will change. 

Publishers are subject to the whims of organisations that are primarily motivated not by 

notions of serving the public with news, rather than by maximising profits — in part by 

using that news content to do it. O f course, this is essentially what publishers did with 

news in the pre -digital era; they used it to attract advertisers with the proposition that 

they (the publishers) had all the audience any advertiser might need. However, the 

change is that now the prod ucers of news are often not the distributors of news. The 

roles have been de -coupled. In this context, the public interest motive is crucial. And it 

is easy to see why unpredictable changes made by a company over which producers 

of news and journalistic co ntent have no say would cause consternation among those 

who rely in large part on those companies to distribute their product. 

In Chapter One, we observed how the 'product' of news is fundamentally different from 

others. All manner of businesses can be ha rmed by algorithmic changes that affect 

communication with their customer base; but with news media – an industry already 

struggling with the economic challenges of producing a public good in a multisided 

market – the impacts can be more widespread. For ci tizens, these impacts can affect 

relationships with business, government and each other. In this environment, there is a 

case for digital platforms to be more transparent, at least by explaining to consumers 

as well as to the producers of news and journali stic content the ways in which 

decisions on content delivery are made. The public benefit which distinguishes news 

media from other businesses establishes a strong case for requiring platforms to give 

advance warning of changes which significantly affect n ews media business operations 

and revenues. In more general terms, it is reasonable to regard digital platforms as 

having a duty not to harm the public benefit provided by news and journalistic content. 151 

Second, as we noted in Chapter Two, both Google and F acebook are making great 

strides in the automation and summarisation of editorial content using AI -powered deep 

learning. These systems will be capable of automatically delivering to audiences 

digestible nuggets of news. There are obvious benefits to such a machine -driven 

service: time -poor consumers need news; the platforms deliver it to them in easy bites, 

rapid fire. But there are potential downsides. One is the risk that any summarisation 

may not accurately reflect the content of the document it draws u pon, and might thus 

misrepresent facts or spread misinformation. But such risks will diminish as the AI 

behind them improves. Perhaps the greater risk is to the production of original 

journalism: there are legitimate concerns that automation will reduce on line traffic to 

news content producers. We see potential here for ongoing conflict between news 

producers and the digital platforms as the ability of publishers to monetise content on 

their own platforms is further eroded. There is unquestionably a need fo r journalism; 

regardless of who employs the journalists, the devaluation of their work through 

summarisation cannot be in the public interest. 

Earlier, we cited Philip Napoli’s distinction between how social media platforms and the 

news media (2015b, pp 755) consider the concept of public interest. In short, the 

platforms are more concerned with restricting inappropriate content than affirming the 

creation of quality content. Various programs supported by the platforms in areas such 

as media literacy and fact -checking indicate that these attitudes are changing. But, as 

we detail in Chapter Three, it appears the platforms can do more to actively contribute 

to the quality of news media and recognise their role in filtering and distributing news 

media conten t. As we note above, this does not necessarily require platforms to be 

treated as publishers; simply that they could be seen for what they are – participants in 

the expanded social framework for news and journalistic content. In Chapter Four, 

where we offe r a framework for approaching the concept of consumer choice via the 

measure of media plurality, we suggest that a mechanism which measures only supply 

of regulated media operations and omits platforms will give an inadequate perspective 

on choice, and no insight into identifying the important sources of news and journalistic 

content and the ways in which they are used within the Australian community. 

Finally, we return to the work of C. Edwin Baker (2002), who has spoken of the 

importance of other people’s media consumption in democratic societies and the huge 

externalities this produces. He observed: 

> … people who want to live in a well -governed democracy are the third party
> beneficiaries (or victims) of the extent and quality of other people’s media
> consum ption (p. 45).

This short statement shows the importance of choice and quality, and of the need to 

look at what is available and how it is used and consumed within society. In the digital 

platform era, news and journalistic content continue to play a vital role in our society. 

However, the impact of digital platforms on news and journalistic content is profound 

and complicated. If the negative impacts we have described can be countered, and if 

the positive impacts can be encouraged, the beneficiaries will b e all citizens of our 

democracy, even including those who choose never to engage with the news. 152 

# Bibliography 

Works Consulted: Regulation 

Acts 

Australian Constitution 

Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (Media Reform) Bill 2016 

Broadcasting Services Act 199 2 (Cth) 

Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth) 

Evidence Act 1995 (Cth) 

Radiocommunications Act 1992 (Cth) 

Television Licence Fees Act 1964 (Cth) 

Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) 

Evidence Act 1995 (NSW) 

Evidence Act 2008 (Vic) 

Enterprise Act 2002 (UK) 

Commun ications Act 2003 (UK) 

Broadcasting Act 1990 (UK) 

Broadcasting Act 1996 (UK) 

Other Australian regulation 

ABC Code of Practice 2011 (revised 2016) 

Australian Press Council Statement of General Principles/Statement of Privacy Principles 

Broadcasting Services (Australian Content) Standard 2016) 

Broadcasting Services (Commercial Radio Current Affairs Disclosure) Standard 2012 .

Broadcasting Services (Events) Notice (No. 1) 2010 

Community Radio Broadcasting Codes of Practice 2008 

Community Television Codes of Practice 2011 

Independent Media Council Code of Conduct 

MEAA Journalist Code of Ethics. 

Ofcom Broadcasting Code 2017 

Open Narrowcast Television Codes of Practice 2009 

Open Narrowcasting Codes of Practice 

SBS Codes of Practice 2014 

Subscription Broadcast Television Codes of Practice 2013 

Subscription Narrowcast Codes of Practice 2013 

Subscription Narrowcast Television Code of Practice 2013 153 

International instruments 

Accountable Journalism 1983, International Principles of Professional Ethics in Journali sm .

<https://accountablejournalism.org/ethics -codes/International -Principles>. 

British Broadcasting Corporation Trust 2016, Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting 

Corporation, BBC Trust, London. 

European Parliament 2016, Regulation ( EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data 

and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 

Regulation) , Official Journal of the European Union , viewed 3 February 2017, <http://eur -

lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN>. 

European Union, Charter of Fundamental Rights , < https://ec.europa.eu/info/aid -development -coop eration -

fundamental -rights/your -rights -eu/eu -charter -fundamental -rights_en>. 

Federal Communications Commission (US), Report and Order and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 2003. 

United Nations 1948, United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights , UN, New York. 

United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner 1976, International Covenant on Civil and 

Political Rights, UN, New York. 

United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner 2017, Status of ratification: interactive 

dashboard, UN , New York. 

Cases and decisions 

Competition and Markets Authority, 21st Century Fox, Inc and Sky Plc: A report on the anticipated 

acquisition by 21 st Century Fox, Inc of Sky Plc , May 2018. 

Ofcom , Public Interest Test for the Proposed Acquisition of Sky Plc by 21st Century Fox, Inc: Ofcom’s 

Report to the Secretary of State , 20 June 2017 (Ofcom 2017). 

Ofcom Public Interest Test for the Acquisition by Trinity Mirror plc of the Publishing Assets of Northern and 

Shell Media Group Limited: Ofcom’s Advice to the S ecretary of State, May 2018, (Ofcom 2018c). 

NZME Limited and Fairfax New Zealand Limited [2017] NZCC 8 (2 May 2017). 

NZME Limited v Fairfax Media Limited [2017] NZHC 3186, [231], [306]. 

Works Consulted: Literature 

Ahmadi, M. & Wohn, D.Y. 2018, 'The Ant ecedents of Incidental News Exposure on Social Media', Social 

Media + Society , 3 May, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305118772827>. 

Aitamurto, T. 2011, 'The impact of crowdfunding on journalism: Case study of Spot.Us, a platform for 

community -funded reporting', Journalism Practice , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 429 -45. 

Akinfemisoye, M. & Deffor, S. 2014, 'Finding viable business models for intermediate and developing world 

broadcast, print and online newspaper sectors', in P.J. Anderson, G. Ogol a & M. Williams (eds), 

The Future of Quality News Journalism: A Cross -continental Analysis , Routledge, London, pp. 88 -

101. 

Ali, C., Radcliffe, D., Schmidt, T.R. & Donald, R. 2018, 'Searching for Sheboygans: On the future of small 

market newspapers', Journa lism , 1 January, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884917749667>. 

Allen, D.S. 2008, 'The trouble with transparency: The challenge of doing journalism ethics in a surveillance 

society', Journalism Studies , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 323 -40. 

Amod ei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P., Schulman, J. & Mané, D. 2016, 'Concrete problems in 

AI safety', viewed 8 September 2018, arXiv.org , <https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565>. 

Anderson, C.W., Bell, E. & Shirky, C. 2015, Post -Industrial Journalism : Adapting to the Present , Tow 

Center for Digital Journalism, Columbia University. 

Anderson, K. 2016, 'Peak content: The collapse of the attention economy', 4 January, viewed 12 August 

2018, <https://www.themediabriefing.com/>. 154 

Anderson, P. 2014, 'Introduc tion: Defining and Measuring Quality News Journalism', in P. Anderson, M. 

Williams & G. Ogola (eds), The Future of Quality News Journalism: A Cross -continental Analysis ,

Routledge, London. 

Anderson, P., Ogola, G. & Williams, M. (eds) 2013, The Future of Qu ality News Journalism: A Cross -

continental Analysis , Routledge, London. 

Anderson, P.J. & Egglestone, P. 2012, 'The development of effective quality measures relevant to the 

future practice of BBC news journalism online', Journalism , vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 923 -41. 

Armstrong, C.L. & Collins, S.J. 2009, 'Reaching out: Newspaper credibility among young adult readers', 

Mass Communication and Society , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 97 -114. 

Arnott, C. 2016, 'Media Mergers and the Meaning of Sufficient Plurality: A Tale of Two A cts', Journal of 

Media Law , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 245 -75. 

Arpan, L.M. & Nabi, R.L. 2011, 'Exploring anger in the hostile media process: effects on news preferences 

and source evaluation', Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly , vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 5 -22. 

Athey, S., Mobius, M.M. & Pál, J. 2017, The Impact of Aggregators on Internet News Consumption: The 

Case of Localization (Working Paper No. 3353), Graduate School of Business , Stanford University, 

Stanford CA. 

Australian Communications and Media Authorit y 2011, Enduring Concepts: Communications and Media in 

Australia, Australian Communications and Media Authority, Canberra. 

Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 2017, Media Merger Guidelines , ACCC, Canberra. 

Australian Competition and Consumer Com mission 2018, Digital Platforms Inquiry: Issues paper 28 

(February 2018), ACCC, Canberra. 

Australian Law Reform Commission 2007, Review of Australian Privacy Law: Discussion Paper 72, ALRC, 

Sydney. 

Australian Law Reform Commission 2013, Serious Invasions o f Privacy in the Digital Era (ALRC Report 

123), ALRC, Sydney. 

Baker, C.E. 2002, Media markets, and democracy , Cambridge University Press, New York. 

Bakir, V. & McStay, A. 2018, 'Fake news and the economy of emotions: Problems, causes, solutions', 

Digital J ournalism , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 154 -75. 

Balkin, J.M. 1999, 'How Mass Media Simulate Political Transparency', Journal for Cultural Research , vol. 

3, no. 4, pp. 393 -413. 

Banikarim, S. 2017, 'R.I.P. Pivot to Video (2017 –2017)', NiemanLab , December, viewed 12 Au gust 2018, 

<http://www.niemanlab.org/2017/12/r -i-p-pivot -to -video -2017 -2017/>. 

Banning, S.A. & Sweetser, K.D. 2007, 'How much do they think it affects them and whom do they believe? 

Comparing the third -person effect and credibility of blogs and traditional media', Communication 

Quarterly , vol. 55 no. 4, pp. 451 -66. 

Barnard, S.R. 2018, Citizens at the Gates: Twitter, Networked Publics and the Transformation of American 

Journalism , Palgrave Macmillan, London. 

Barnett, S. 2015, 'Plurality and Public Service Br oadcasting: Why and How PSBs Deserve Protection', in 

S. Barnett & J. Townend (eds), Media Power and Plurality: From Hyperlocal to High -Level Policy ,

Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 45 -62. 

Barnett, S. & Townend, J. (eds) 2015a, Media Power and Plurality: Fr om Hyperlocal to High -level Policy ,

Palgrave Macmillan, London. 

Barnett, S. & Townend, J. 2015b, 'Plurality, policy and the local: can hyperlocals fill the gap?', Journalism 

Practice , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 332 -49. 

Barthel, M. & Mitchell, A. 2017, 'Americans’ attitudes about the news media deeply divided along partisan 

lines', Pew Research Center for Journalism and Media , 10 May, viewed 13 September 2018, 

<http://www.journalism.org/2017/05/10/americans -attitudes -about -the -news -media -deeply -divided -

along -partisa n-lines/>. 

Beckett, C. 2018, 'Facebook’s newsfeed changes: a disaster or an opportunity for news publishers?', 

London School of Economics Blog, 20 January, viewed 10 August 2018, 155 

<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/polis/2018/01/12/facebooks -newsfeed -changes -a-disaste r-or -an -opportunity -

for -news -publishers/>. 

Belair -Gagnon, V. & Holton, A.E. 2018, 'Boundary Work, Interloper Media and Analytics In Newsrooms: An 

analysis of the roles of web analytics companies in news production', Digital Journalism , vol. 6, no. 

4, pp. 4 92 -508. 

Bell, E.J., Owen, T., Brown, P.D., Hauka, C. & Rashidian, N. 2017, The platform press: How Silicon Valley 

reengineered journalism, Tow Center for Digital Journalism, Columbia University. 

Bennis, W. 2013, 'Leadership in a digital world: embracing transparency and adaptive capacity', MIS 

Quarterly , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 635 -6. 

Bhattacharyya, S. & Hodler, R. 2010, 'Natural resources, democracy and corruption', European Economic 

Review , vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 608 -21. 

Björkroth, T. & Grönlund, M. 2015, 'Mar ket share mobility in regional newspaper markets', European 

Journal of Communication , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 714 –44. 

Blei, D.M. 2012, 'Probabilistic topic models', Communications of the ACM , vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 77 -84. 

Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y. & Jordan, M.I. 2003, 'Latent dirichlet allocation', Journal of Machine Learning 

Research , vol. 3, pp. 993 -1022. 

Blöbaum, B. 2014, Trust and Journalism in a Digital Environment (Working Paper), Reuters Institute for the 

Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Boczkowski, P. J. 2010, News at Work: Imitation in an Age of Information Abundance , University of 

Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Bogart, L. 2004, 'Reflections on content quality in newspapers', Newspaper Research Journal , vol. 25, no. 

1, pp. 40 -53. 

Boland, G. 2018, The biggest Facebook publishers of August 2018 , Newswhip, 6 September, viewed 12 

September 2018, <https://www.newswhip.com/2018/09/august -facebook -top -sites/>. 

Botsman, R. & Rogers, R. 2010, What’s Mine is Yours: The Rise of Collaborative Consumption ,

HarperCollins, N ew York. 

Bouayad -Agha, N., Casamayor, G., Mille, S. & Wanner, L. 2012, 'Perspective -oriented generation of 

football match summaries: Old tasks, new challenges', ACM Transactions on Speech and 

Language Processing (TSLP) , vol. 9, no. 2. 

Boulter, T.R. 2017, ' Following the familiar: the effects of exposure and gender on follow intent and 

credibility of journalists on Twitter', PhD Thesis, University of Texas at Austin. 

Bourke, E. 2018, 'Catholic Church national wealth estimated to be $30 billion, investigation finds', 12 

February, viewed 12 September 2018, <http://www.abc.net.au/news/2018 -02 -12/catholic -church -

worth -$30 -billion -investigation -finds/9422246>. 

Bourdieu, P & Wacquant L. J. D. 1992, An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology, University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago. 

Bouvier, G. 2017, 'How journalists source trending social media feeds: A critical discourse perspective on 

Twitter', Journalism Studies , 12 September, viewed 13 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1080/1461670X.2017.1365618>. 

Bowd, K. 2016, 'Social Media and News Media: Building New Publics or Fragmenting Audiences?', in M. 

Griffiths & K. Barbour (eds), Making Publics, Making Places , University of Adelaide Press, Adelaide, 

pp. 129 -44. 

Bowman, S. & Willis, C. 2003, We Media: How Audiences are Shaping the Future of News and 

Information , The Media Centre, American Press Institute, Reston, VA. 

boyd, d. 2014, It's Complicated: the social lives of networked teens, Yale University Press, New Haven. 

Brand, M. 2016, 'Can Facebook influence an election result? ', The Conversation , 27 September, viewed 

28 September 2016, <https://theconversation.com/can -facebook -influence -an -election -result -

65541>. 156 

Breaux, C. & Doll, B. 2018, ' Research Study: Only 1 in 3 publishers see a clear traffic boost from AMP ', 23 

August, viewed September 12 2018. <http://blog.chartbeat.com/2018/08/23/research -study -1-3-

publishers -see -clear -traffic -boost -amp/> 

Brevini, B. 2015, 'From Media Policy to ‘Big’ Media Policy: The Battle for Pluralism in Australia', in S. 

Barnett & J. Townend (eds) , Media Power and Plurality: From Hyperlocal to High -Level Policy, 

Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 116 -30. 

Bright, J. & Nicholls, T. 2014, 'The Life and Death of Political News: Measuring the Impact of the Audience 

Agenda Using Online Data', Social Science Computer Review , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 170 -81. 

Brown, P. 2018, 'More than half of Facebook Instant Articles partners may have abandoned it', Columbia 

Journalism Review, 2 February, viewed 12 September 2018, <https://www.cjr.org/tow_center/are -

facebook -insta nt -articles -worth -it.php>. 

Brummette, J., DiStaso, M., Vafeiadis, M. & Messner, M. 2018, 'Read All About It: The Politicization of 

“Fake News” on Twitter', Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly , vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 497 -

517. 

Bruns, A. 2007, 'Produsage : Towards a Broader Framework for User -led Content Creation', Proceedings 

of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition, ACM, pp. 99 -106. 

Bruns, A. 2018, Gatewatching and News Curation , Peter Lang, New York. 

Bucher, T. 2015, 'The Algorithmic I maginary: Exploring the ordinary affects of Facebook algorithms', 

Information, Communication and Society , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 30 -44. 

Bucher, T. & Helmond, A. 2017, 'The Affordances of Social Media Platforms', in J. Burgess, A. Marwick & 

T. Poell (eds), The SAGE Handbook of Social Media , SAGE Publications Ltd., London, pp. 233 –53. 

Buhl, F., Günther, E. & Quandt, T. 2018, 'Observing the Dynamics of the Online News Ecosystem: News 

Diffusion Processes Among German News Sites', Journalism Studies , vol. 19, no. 1 , pp. 79 -104. 

Burggraaff, C. & Trilling, D. 2017, 'Through a different gate: An automated content analysis of how online 

news and print news differ', Journalism , 14 July, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884917716699>. 

Cagé, J., Hervé, N. & Viaud, M. -L. 2017, The Production of Information in an Online World: Is Copy Right? 

(Discussion Paper DP12066), Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. 

Caplan, R. & boyd, d. 2018, 'Isomorphism through algorithms: Institutional dependencies in th e case of 

Facebook', Big Data & Society , 14 February, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951718757253>. 

Carey, J.W. 1987, 'The press and public discourse', The Center Magazine , vol. 20, pp. 6 -15. 

Carlson, M. 2015, 'The Robotic Reporter: Automated journalism and the redefinition of labor, compositional 

forms, and journalistic authority', Digital Journalism , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 416 -31. 

Carlson, M. 2017, Journalistic Authority: Legitimating News in the Digital Era , Columbia University Press, 

New York. 

Carlson, M. 2018a, 'Automating judgment? Algorithmic judgment, news knowledge, and journalistic 

professionalism', New Media & Society , vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1755 -72. 

Carlson, M. 2018b, 'Facebook in the News: Social media, journalism, and public res ponsibility following the 

2016 Trending Topics controversy', Digital Journalism , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 4 -20. 

Carr, N. 2010, The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains , WW Norton & Company, New York. 

Carson, A. & Muller, D. 2017, The Future Newsroo m, Centre for Advancing Journalism, The University of 

Melbourne. 

Castells, M. 1996, The rise of the network society: The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture ,

John Wiley & Sons, Oxford. 

Center for Democracy and Technology 2008, 'Existing Federal Privacy Laws', 30 November, viewed 14 

February 2017, <https://cdt.org/insight/existing -federal -privacy -laws/>. 

Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom 2017, Monitoring media pluralism in Europe: Application of 

the media pluralism Monitor 2016 in the E uropean Union, Montenegro and Turkey , European 

University Institute, Florence. 157 

Chadwick, P. 1989, Media Mates: Carving up Australia's Media , Macmillan, Melbourne. 

Chatzimilioudis, G., Konstantinidis, A., Laoudias, C. & Zeinalipour -Yazti, D. 2012, 'Crowdso urcing with 

Smartphones', IEEE Internet Computing , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 36 -44. 

Chaykowski, K. 2018, 'Facebook's Latest Algorithm Change: Here Are The News Sites That Stand To 

Lose The Most', Forbes, 31 July, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://www.forbes.com/ sites/kathleenchaykowski/2018/03/06/facebooks -latest -algorithm -change -

here -are -the -news -sites -that -stand -to -lose -the -most/#3edef0ee34ec>. 

Cheever, N.A. & Rokkum, J. 2015, 'Internet Credibility and Digital Media Literacy', in L.D. Rosen, N.A. 

Cheever & L.M. Carrier (eds), The Wiley Handbook of Psychology, Technology and Society , Wiley 

Blackwell, Malden, MA, pp. 56 -73. 

Chen, S. -M. & Huang, M. -H. 2014, 'Automatically Generating the Weather News Summary Based on 

Fuzzy Reasoning and Ontology Techniques', Informa tion Sciences , vol. 279, pp. 746 -63. 

Cherubini, F. & Nielsen, K.R. 2016, Editorial Analytics: How News Media are Developing and Using 

Audience Data and Metrics, Digital News Project 2016 , Reuters Institute for the Study of 

Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Chun, W.H.K., Fisher, A.W. & Keenan, T. 2006, New Media, Old Media: A History and Theory Reader ,

Routledge, New York. 

Civic Impact of Journalism Project 2017, Civic Impact of Journalism Project, University of Melbourne. 

<https://arts.unimelb.edu.au/caj/re search/research -projects/the -civic -impact -of -journalism>. 

Clark, L.S. & Marchi, R.M. 2017, Young People and the Future of News: Social Media and the Rise of 

Connective Journalism , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Coen, S. 2018, 'Facebook has introduc ed a user trustworthiness score – here’s why it should go further', 

The Conversation , 28 August, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://theconversation.com/facebook -

has -introduced -a-user -trustworthiness -score -heres -why -it -should -go -further -102060>. 

Cohen, N.S. 2018, 'At Work in the Digital Newsroom', Digital Journalism , viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1419821>. 

Coleman, S., Anthony, S. & Morrison, D.E. 2009, Public Trust in the News: A Constructivist Study of the 

Social Life of th e News , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Collet, S. 2007, 'Cracking Google's 'secret sauce' algorithm', ComputerWorld, 14 March, viewed 9 

September 2018, <https://www.computerworld.com/article/2543807/networking/cracking -google -s--

secret -sauce --algorithm.html>. 

Committee on Civil Liberties Justice and Home Affairs 2018, Report on Media Pluralism and Media 

Freedom in the European Union, (2017/2209(INI)) , European Parliament, Brussels. 

Communications Law Centre 2005, Commun ications Update , no. 168, Communications Law Centre, 

University of Technology Sydney. 

Conill, R.F. 2016, ‘Camouflaging church as state: an exploratory study of journalism’s native advertising’, 

Journalism Studies , vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 904 -14. 

Constine, J. 2 016, 'Zuckerberg implies Facebook is a media company, just not a traditional media 

company', Tech Crunch , 10 September, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/21/fbonc/>. 

Cornia, A., Sehl, A. & Nielsen, K.R. 2016, Private Sector Media and Digital News (Digital News Project 

2016) , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Cotterrell, R. 1999, 'Transparency, mass media, ideology and community', Journal for Cultural Research ,

vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 414 -26. 

Cramer, H., E vers, V., Ramlal, S., Van Someren, M., Rutledge, L., Stash, N., Aroyo, L. & Wielinga, B. 

2008, 'The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content -based art recommender', 

User Modeling and User -Adapted Interaction , vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 454 -96. 

Crawford, H., Hunter, A. & Filipovic, D. 2015, All Your Friends Like This: How Social Networks Took over 

News , HarperCollins, London. 158 

Crawford, K., Whittaker, M., Elish, M., Barocas, S., Plasek, A. & Ferryman, K. 2016, The AI Now Report: 

The social and economic implications of artificial intelligence technologies in the near -term, paper 

presented to the AI Now Public Symposium, New York, 7 July .

Critchlow, W. 2017, 'First Click Free is Dead, but is its Replacement Really any Better for Publishers?', 

Dis tilled , 2 October, viewed 12 September 2018, <https://www.distilled.net/resources/first -click -free -

dead -is -replacement -better/>. 

Cushion, S., Kilby, A., Thomas, R., Morani, M. & Sambrooks, R. 2018, 'Newspapers, impartiality and 

television news: intermedia agenda -setting during the 2015 UK General Election campaign', 

Journalism Studies , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 162 -81. 

Danckert, B. & Mayer, F.J. 2010, 'Die vorherrschende Meinungsmacht von Google', MMR , vol. 4. pp. 219 -

222. 

Davies, N. 2008, Flat Earth News: An Awa rd -Winning Reporter Exposes Falsehood, Distortion and 

Propaganda in the Global Media , Vintage, London. 

Dawson, A. 2017, 'Public trust in Australian media falls to all -time low', Mumbrella , 17 March, viewed 8 

September 2018, <https://mumbrella.com.au/trust -in -daily -and -local -newspapers -on -a-steady -

decline -according -to -essential -research -432670>. 

deepnews.ai 2018, The project: applications - advertising deepnews.ai, viewed 9 August 2018, 

<https://www.deepnews.ai/>. 

Del Vicario, M., Bessi, A., Zollo, F., Petro ni, F., Scala, A., Caldarelli, G., Stanley, H.E. & Quattrociocchi, W. 

2016, 'Echo chambers in the age of misinformation', Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences , vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 554 -9. 

Dept for Culture, Media and Sport (UK) 2014, Media Owners hip & Plurality Consultation Report: 

Government response to the House of Lords Select Committee on Communications Report into 

Media Plurality, DCMS, London. 

Dept of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy 2012, Convergence Review Final Report 

(Ma rch 2012) , DBCDE, Canberra. 

Dept of Communications and the Arts 2014, Media Ownership and Control: Policy Background Paper No. 

3, DOCA, Canberra. 

Dept of Communications and the Arts 2014, Regulating Harms in the Australian Communications Sector: 

Observatio ns on Current Arrangements (May 2014) , DOCA, Canberra. 

Dept of Communications and the Arts 2016, Review of the Australian Communications and Media 

Authority: Final Report (October 2016) , DOCA, Canberra. 

Deuze, M. 2003, 'The Web and Its Journalisms: Conside ring the consequences of different types of news 

media online', New Media & Society , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 203 -30. 

Deuze, M. 2005, ‘What is Journalism? Professional identity and ideology of journalists reconsidered’, 

Journalism vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 442 –464 

DeVi to, M.A. 2017, 'From editors to algorithms: A values -based approach to understanding story selection 

in the Facebook news feed', Digital Journalism , vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 753 -73. 

Dewey, C. 2013, 'Kenyans mock foreign media coverage on Twitter', The Washington Post , 4 March, 

viewed 1 October 2015, <https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2013/03/04/ 

kenyans -mock -foreign -media -coverage -on -twitter/>. 

Diakopoulos, N. & Koliska, M. 2017, 'Algorithmic transparency in the news media', Digital Journalism , vo l. 

5, no. 7, pp. 809 -28. 

Dolata, U. 2017, Social Movements and the Internet: The Sociotechnical Constitution of Collective Action, 

Institute for Social Sciences, University of Stuttgart. 

Domingo, D. & Heikkilä, H. 2012, 'Media Accountability Practices in O nline News Media', in E. Siapera & 

A. Veglis (eds), The Handbook of Global Online Journalism , John Wiley & Sons, West Sussex. 

Dörr, K.N. 2016, 'Mapping the field of algorithmic journalism', Digital Journalism , vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 700 -22. 

Doshi -Velez, F., Ko rtz, M., Budish, R., Bavitz, C., Gershman, S., O'Brien, D., Schieber, S., Waldo, J., 

Weinberger, D. & Wood, A. 2017, 'Accountability of AI under the Law: The Role of Explanation', 

arXiv , 21 November, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.011 34>. 159 

Doyle, G. 2002, Media Ownership: The economics and politics of convergence and concentration in the 

UK and European media , SAGE, London. 

Doyle, G. 2013, Understanding Media Economics , SAGE, London. 

Doyle, G. 2015, 'Why ownership pluralism still matter s in a multi -platform world', in P. Valcke, R.G. Picard 

& M. Sükösd (eds), Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and Global Trends , Palgrave 

Macmillan, London, pp. 297 -309. 

Dubois, E. & Blank, G. 2018, 'The echo chamber is overstated: the moderati ng effect of political interest 

and diverse media', Information, Communication & Society , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 729 -45. 

Duguay, S. 2018, 'Social media’s breaking news: the logic of automation in Facebook Trending Topics and 

Twitter Moments', Media Internatio nal Australia , vol. 166, no. 1, pp. 20 -33. 

Dwyer, T. 2016, 'What changes to Australia's media ownership laws are being proposed?', Camla 

Communications Law Bulletin , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 17 -9. 

Dwyer, T., Wilding, D., Wilson, H. & Curtis, S. 2006, Content, C onsolidation and Clout: How Will Regional 

Australia be Affected by Media Ownership Changes? , Communications Law Centre, Melbourne. 

Dzakula, J. 2017, Media pluralism monitor 2016: monitoring risks for media pluralism in EU and beyond 

country report: United Kingdom , European University Institute, Florence. 

Eberwein, T. & Porlezza, C. 2016, 'Both sides of the story: Communication ethics in mediatized worlds', 

Journal of Communication , vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 328 -42. 

Edelman 2018, '2018 Edelman Trust Barometer: Glo bal Report', viewed 13 September 2018, 

<https://www.edelman.com/trust -barometer>. 

Edutopia 2015, 'Digital Citizenship: Resource Roundup', Edutopia , 21 October, viewed 10 February 2018, 

<http://www.edutopia.org/article/digital -citizenship -resources>. 

Edward s, C.R. 2016, 'Snap Inc. does what Google couldn't - exemplifies privacy by design', Digerati , 28 

September, viewed 29 September 2016, <https://digeratimag.com/2016/09/28/snap -inc -google -

couldnt -exemplifies -privacy -design/>. 

Edwards, J. 2012, 'How Facebook is hunting down and deleting fake accounts', Business Insider Australia ,

30 December, viewed 12 August 2018, <http://www.businessinsider.com.au/facebook -fake -likes -

and -accounts -2012 -12>. 

Elgesem, D. 1996, 'Privacy, respect for persons, and risk', in C. Es s (ed.), Philosophical perspectives on 

computer -mediated communication , State University of New York Press, Albany, pp. 45 -66. 

Elkin -Koren, N. 2014, 'After twenty years: Revisiting copyright liability of online intermediaries', in S. 

Frankel & D. Gervais ( eds), The Evolution and Equilibrium of Copyright in the Digital Age ,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Ellery, D. 2016, 'Ugg boot business fined $10,800 for ACT manufacture claim', The Sydney Morning 

Herald , 3 May, viewed 9 February 2017, < https://www .smh.com.au/business/consumer -affairs/ugg -

boot -business -fined -10800 -for -act -manufacture -claim -20160503 -gokshh.html >. 

Ellis, G. & Thompson, P.A. 2018, 'Restoring civic values to the news media ecology', Policy Quarterly , vol. 

12, no. 2, pp. 37 -40. 

Ellis, S. 2018, 'You have to interrogate everything: How Adele Ferguson breaks her biggest stories', The 

Age , 25 June, <https://www.theage.com.au/business/banking -and -finance/you -have -to -interrogate -

everything -how -adele -ferguson -breaks -her -biggest -stories -20180625 -p4znn8.html>. 

Ergas, H., Pincus, J. & Schnittger, S. 2018, The crucial role of public interest journalism in Australia and 

the economic forces affecting it , Green Square Associates. 

Errington, W. & Miragliotta, N. 2007 Media & Politics: An Introduction , Oxford University Press, Melbourne. 

Eslami, M., Rickman, A., Vaccaro, K., Aleyasen, A., Vuong, A., Karahalios, K., Hamilton, K. & Sandvig, C. 

2015, '“I always assumed that I wasn't really that close to [her]”: Reasoning about Invisible 

Algorithms in News F eeds', Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in 

computing systems, ACM , pp. 153 -62. 

Etzioni, A. 2000, 'Social norms: Internalization, persuasion, and history', Law and Society Review , vol. 34, 

no. 1, pp. 157 -78. 160 

Evans, P. & Wurster , T.S. 2000, Blown to Bits: How the New Economics of Information Transforms 

Strategy , Harvard Business School Press, Brighton, MA. 

Facebook 2018, 'Submission to ACCC Digital Platforms Inquiry', 

<https://www.accc.gov.au/system/files/Facebook%20Australia%20% 28April%202018%29.pdf>. 

Fagerlund, C. 2016, 'Back to the Future - Email Newsletters as a Digital Channel for Journalism', Polis , vol. 

25, pp. 1 -16. 

Fan, Y. 2013, 'Ownership consolidation and product characteristics: A study of the US daily newspaper 

market ', American Economic Review , vol. 103, no. 5, pp. 1598 -628. 

Federal Communication Commission 2003, Report and Order and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking ,

Federal Communication Commission, Washington, DC. 

Fengler, S., Eberwein, T., Alsius, S., Baisnée, O., Bic hler, K., Dobek -Ostrowska, B., Evers, H., Glowacki, 

M., Groenhart, H. & Harro -Loit, H. 2015, 'How effective is media self -regulation? Results from a 

comparative survey of European journalists', European Journal of Communication , vol. 30, no. 3, 

pp. 249 -66. 

Fenton, N. 2011, Deregulation or democracy? New media, news, neoliberalism and the public interest, 

Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 63 -72. 

Fernandez -Planells, A. 2015, 'Factors influencing trust in media: exploring the association between media 

consumption and news about the 15M Movement', hipertext.net , no. 13, viewed 13 September 

2017, <https://raco.cat/index.php/Hipertext/article/view/294100>. 

Ferrer -Conill, R. 2017, 'Quantifying journalism? A study on the use of data and gamification to motivate 

journalists', Television & New Media , vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 706 -20. 

Fielden, L. 2011, Regulating for Trust in Journalism , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, 

University of Oxford. 

Finkelstein, R. & Ricketson, M. 2012, Report of the Independent Inquiry into the Media and Media 

Regulation , Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Canberra. 

Fisher, C. 2016, 'The trouble with ‘trust’ in news media', Communication Research and Practice , vol. 2, no. 

4, pp. 451 -65. 

Fisher, M. 2012, 'Watergate: The long shadow of a scandal', 14 June, viewed 12 September 2018, 

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/as -years -go -by -watergate -drifts -toward -

myth/2014/06/14/cff4080c -aa8a -11e1 -b15f -a61faf9b4d76_story.h tml?utm_term=.b3fc969a46b0>. 

Fischer, S. 2018, Big tech ratchets up oversight on conspiracy theories, Axios.com, 7 August, viewed 8 

September 2018, <https://www.axios.com/big -tech -oversight -alex -jones -infowars -conspiracy -

theories -8012bb09 -503b -44d5 -88b3 -d7 239d07d95e.html>. 

Flew, T. & Cunningham, S. 2015, 'Reconsidering media economics: From orthodoxies to heterodoxies', 

Media Industries , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1 -18. 

Flew, T. & Swift, A. 2013, 'Regulating Journalists? The Finkelstein Review, the Convergence Revi ew and 

news media regulation in Australia', Journal of Applied Journalism and Media Studies vol. 2, no. 1, 

pp. 181 -99. 

Flood, A. 2008, 'Knife story wins Guardian children's fiction prize', The Guardian , 25 September, viewed 31 

January 2017, <https://www.th eguardian.com/books/2008/sep/24/guardian.childrens.fiction.prize 

.patrick.ness.the.knife.of.never.letting.go>. 

Flynn, K. 2016, 'Facebook users show range of reactions to new love, haha, sad, angry, wow emoticons', 

International Business Times , 25 February, viewed 12 August 2016, <http://www.ibtimes.com/ 

facebook -users -show -range -reactions -new -love -haha -sad -angry -wow -emoticons -2323629>. 

Foer, F. 2017, World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech , Penguin, London. 

Fortunati, L. 2014, 'Media between power and empowerment: Can we resolve this dilemma?', The 

Information Society , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 169 -83. 

Foster, R. 2012, News Plurality in a Digital World , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University 

of Oxford. 161 

Foster, R. 2014, 'Striking t he balance: why we still need a plurality dialogue', Media Policy Project Blog , 5 

November, viewed 12 September 2018, <http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2014/11/05/ 

striking -the -balance -why -we -still -need -a-plurality -dialogue/>. 

Fray, P. 2017, 'Beyo nd cats and Kardashians: can journalism satisfy audiences without dumbing down?' 

The Conversation , 2 September, viewed 19 September 2018. <https://theconversation.com/beyond -

cats -and -kardashians -can -journalism -satisfy -audiences -without -dumbing -down -83040>. 

Fray, P. 2018a, 'If love isn’t an option, how about trust?', Medium.com , 1 June, <https://medium.com/news -

integrity -initiative/if -love -isnt -an -option -how -about -trust -649867b4b6d8>. 

Fray, P. 2018b, 'Bush Mechanics: How to Fund Regional Journalism', The Wal kley Magazine , no. 91, July 

2018, pp. 42 -46. 

Fray, P., Molitorisz, S. & Marshall, C. 2018, Trust and news media: a qualitative study , Centre for Media 

Transition, University of Technology Sydney. 

Frijters, P. & Velamuri, M. 2010, 'Is the Internet bad news? The online news era and the market for high -

quality news', Review of Network Economics , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1 -31. 

Fukuyama, F. 1995, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity , Penguin, London. 

Furhoff, L. 1973, 'Some reflections on newspaper concentration', Scandinavian Economic History Review ,

vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1 -27. 

Gabszewicz, J., Resende, J. & Sonnac, N. 2015, 'Media as multi -sided platforms', in R.G. Picard & S.S. 

Wildman (eds), Handbook on the Economics of the Media , Edward Elgar Publ ishing, Cheltenham, 

pp. 3 -35. 

Gálik, M. 2010, 'Regulating Media Concentration within the Council of Europe and the European Union', in 

B. Klimkiewicz (ed.), Media Freedom and Pluralism: Media Policy Challenges in the Enlarged 

Europe , Central European Unive rsity Press, Budapest, pp. 229 -44. 

Galtung, J. & Ruge, M.H. 1965, 'The Structure of Foreign News: The Presentation of the Congo, Cuba and 

Cyprus Crises in Four Norwegian Newspapers', Journal of Peace Research , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 167 -

91. 

Gambhir, M. & Gupta , V. 2017, 'Recent automatic text summarization techniques: a survey', Artificial 

Intelligence Review , vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1 -66. 

George, L. 2015, 'Digital technology, disruption and the market for news', in R.G. Picard & S.S. Wildman 

(eds), Handbook on the Economics of the Media , Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, pp. 259 -

76. 

Gibbons, M. 2014, 'Newspaper quality, content and competition in New Zealand', Pacific Journalism 

Review , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 181 -99. 

Gibbons, T. 2015, 'What Is ‘Sufficient’ Pluralit y?', in S. Barnett & J. Townend (eds), Media Power and 

Plurality: From Hyperlocal to High -Level Policy, Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 15 -30. 

Gillespie, T. 2010, 'The politics of ‘platforms’', New Media & Society , vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 347 -64. 

Gillespie, T. 2016, 'Algorithmically recognizable: Santorum’s Google problem, and Google’s Santorum 

problem', Information & Communication and Society , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 63 -80. 

Gillespie, T. 2018, Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, Content Moderation and the Hidde n Decisions 

That Shape Social Media , Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 

Given, J. 2007, 'Cross -Media Ownership Laws: Refinement or Rejection?', UNSW Law Journal , vol. 30, 

no. 1, pp. 258 -68. 

Gladney, G.A. 1996, 'How editors and readers rank and rate the importance of eighteen traditional 

standards of newspaper excellence', Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly , vol. 73, no. 2, 

pp. 319 -31. 

Gladney, G.A., Shapiro, I. & Castaldo, J. 2007, 'Online editors rate web news quality criteria', Newspaper 

Researc h Journal , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 55 -69. 

Glynn, C.J. & Huge, M.E. 2014, 'How pervasive are perceptions of bias? Exploring judgments of media 

bias in financial news', International Journal of Public Opinion Research , vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 543 -53. 162 

González -Gorosa rri, M. & Tolosa, A.I. 2019, 'Proposal for a Common Framework to Assess Media Quality', 

in M. Túñez -López, V. -A. Martínez -Fernández, X. López -García, X. Rúas -Araújo & F. Campos -

Freire (eds), Communication: Innovation & Quality, Springer International Publi shing, Santiago, pp. 

163 -84. 

Google 2008, 'First Click Free for Web Search', Webmaster Central Blog , 17 October, viewed 8 September 

2018, <https://webmasters.googleblog.com/2008/10/first -click -free -for -web -search.html>. 

Google 2015, 'First Click Free Updat e', Webmaster Central Blog , 12 September, viewed 8 September 

2018, <https://webmasters.googleblog.com/2015/09/first -click -free -update.html>. 

Google 2016, 'Text Summarization with TensorFlow', Google AI Blog , 24 August, viewed 8 September 

2018, <http://ai.g oogleblog.com/2016/08/text -summarization -with -tensorflow.html>. 

Google 2018a, 'Mark up your content items', Google Developers , viewed 12 August 2018, 

<https://developers.google.com/search/docs/guides/mark -up -content>. 

Google 2018b, 'Search Engine Optimizat ion (SEO) Starter Guide', Google Support , viewed 8 September 

2018, <https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/7451184?hl=en.>. 

Gould, J. & Hirst, R. 2017, 'Show me the money', In Competition , 15 February, viewed 9 May 2017, 

<http://incompetition.com.au/ 2017/02/show -me -the -money -higher -pecuniary -penalties/>. 

Graber, D.A. & Dunaway, J. 2017, Mass media and American politics , CQ Press, SAGE Publishing, 

Washington, DC. 

Granados, N. & Gupta, A. 2013, 'Transparency strategy: Competing with information in a dig ital world', MIS 

Quarterly , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 637 -41. 

Griffin, A. 2015, 'Donald Trump wants to ban the internet, plans to ask Bill Gates to 'close it up'', The 

Independent , 8 December, viewed 11 December 2016, <http://www.independent.co.uk/news/ 

people/d onald -trump -wants -to -ban -the -internet -will -ask -bill -gates -to -close -it -up -a6764396.html>. 

Grimmelmann, J. 2008, 'The Google Dilemma’, 53 New York Law School Law Review 939 (2009); NYLS 

Legal Studies Research Paper No. 08/09 -2, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<http s://ssrn.com/abstract=1160320>. 

Guess, A., Lyons, B., Nyhan, B. & Reifler, J. 2018, Avoiding the Echo Chamber about Echo Chambers: 

Why selective exposure to like -minded political news is less prevalent than you think ( Knight 

Foundation White Paper) , John S . and James L. Foundation, Miami, FL. 

Guynn, J. 2015, 'Google Photos labeled black people 'gorillas'', USA Today , 1 July, viewed 8 September 

2018, <https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2015/07/01/google -apologizes -after -photos -identify -

black -people -as -gori llas/29567465/>. 

Habermas, J. 1989, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere , Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Hackett, R. 2017, 'Mark Zuckerberg: Facebook will tackle fake news as it did click bait', Fortune , 12 April, 

viewed 8 September 2018, <http://f ortune.com/2017/04/12/facebook -mark -zuckerberg -fake -news/>. 

Hafner, K. & Lyon, M. 1996, Where Wizards Stay up Late: The Origins of the Internet , Simon and 

Schuster, New York. 

Haim, M., Graefe, A. & Brosius, H. -B. 2018, 'Burst of the filter bubble? Effects of personalization on the 

diversity of Google News', Digital Journalism , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 330 -43. 

Hambrick, D.Z. & Marquardt, M. 2018, Cognitive Ability and Vulnerability to Fake News: Researchers 

identify a major risk factor for pernicious effects of mi sinformation , 6 February, viewed 12 

September 2018, <https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/cognitive -ability -and -vulnerability -to -

fake -news/>. 

Hansen, P. G. & Jespersen, A. M. 2013, ‘Nudge and the manipulation of choice: a framework for the 

responsibl e use of the nudge approach to behaviour change in public policy’, European Journal of 

Risk Regulation, vol. 1, pp. 3 -28. 

Hanusch, F. 2017, 'Web analytics and the functional differentiation of journalism cultures: individual, 

organizational and platform -sp ecific influences on newswork', Information, Communication & 

Society , vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1571 -86. 

Harcup, T. & O’Neill, D. 2001, 'What is news? Galtung and Ruge revisited ', Journalism Studies , vol. 2, no. 

1, pp. 261 -80. 163 

Harcup, T. & O’Neill, D. 2017, 'W hat is news? News values revisited (again)', Journalism Studies , vol. 18, 

no. 12, pp. 1470 -88. 

Hardt, M., Megiddo, N., Papadimitriou, C. & Wootters, M. 2016, 'Strategic classification', Proceedings of 

the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical C omputer Science , ACM, pp. 111 -22. 

Harte, D., Williams, A. & Turner, J. 2017, 'Reciprocity and the hyperlocal journalist', Journalism Practice ,

vol. 11, no. 2 -3, pp. 160 -76. 

Hayes, A.S., Singer, J.B. & Ceppos, J. 2007, 'Shifting roles, enduring values: The credible journalist in a 

digital age', Journal of Mass Media Ethics , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 262 -79. 

Hayes, D. & Lawless, J.L. 2018, 'The Decline of Local News and Its Effects: New Evidence from 

Longitudinal Data', The Journal of Politics , vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 332 -6. 

Helberger, N. 2018a, 'Challenging Diversity: Social Media Platforms and a New Conception of Media 

Diversity', in M. Moore & D. Tambini (eds), Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, 

Facebook, and Apple, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 153 -75. 

Helberger, N. 2018b, ‘On the democratic role of news recommenders’, paper presented to Algorithms, 

Automation, and News: An International Conference , Centre for Advanced Studies, Ludwig -

Maximilians University, Munich, 22 -23 May. 

Helberger, N., Kar ppinen, K. & D’Acunto, L. 2018, ‘Exposure diversity as a design principle for 

recommender systems’, Information, Communication and Society, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 191 -207. 

Helberger, N., Kleinen -von Königslöw, K. & van der Noll, R. 2014, Convergence, informat ion 

intermediaries and media pluralism - mapping the legal social and economic issues at hand: a quick 

scan, Institute for Information Law , University of Amsterdam. 

Hern, A. 2018a, 'Why Facebook's news feed is changing – and how it will affect you', The G uardian , 12 

January, viewed 9 September 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan/12/why -

facebooks -news -feed -changing -how -will -affect -you>. 

Hern, A. 2018b, 'YouTube to crack down on fake news, backing 'authoritative' sources', The Guardian, 10 

July, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jul/09/youtube -

fake -news -changes>. 

Hills, B. 2014, Stop the Presses! How Greed, incompetence (and the internet) Wrecked Fairfax ,

HarperCollins, New York. 

Hindman, M. 2007, 'A Mile Wide and an Inch Deep: Measuring Media Diversity Online and Offline', in P.M. 

Napoli (ed.), Media Diversity and Localism: Meaning and Metrics , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 

Mahwah, NJ, pp. 521 -56. 

Hindman, M. 2015, Stickier News. What Newspapers Don’t Know about Web Traffic Has Hurt Them Badly 

- But There is a Better Way , Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy, Harvard 

Kennedy School, Cambridge, MA. 

Hindman, M. 2017, 'Journalism Ethics and Digital Audience Data', in P.J. Boczkowski & C.W. A nderson 

(eds), Remaking the News: Essays on the Future of Journalism Scholarship in the Digital Age , MIT 

Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 177 -94. 

Hitchens, L. 2006, Broadcasting Pluralism and Diversity: A Comparative Study of Policy and Regulation ,

Hart Publishin g, Portland, OR. 

Hitchens, L. 2015, 'Reviewing Media Pluralism in Australia', in P. Valcke, R.G. Picard & M. Sükösd & (eds), 

Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and Global Trends , Palgrave Macmillan, London, 

pp. 252 -66. 

Hobbs, R. & Jensen, A. 2013, 'The Past, Present and Future of Media Literacy Education', Journal of 

Media Literacy Education , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1 -11. 

Hofstetter, B. & Schoenhagen, P. 2017, 'When Creative Potentials are Being Undermined By Commercial 

Imperatives: Change and res istance in six cases of newsroom reorganisation', Digital Journalism ,

vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 44 -60. 

Hollifield, C.A. 2006, 'News media performance in hypercompetitive markets: An extended model of 

effects', The International Journal on Media Management , vol. 8 , no. 2, pp. 60 -9. 164 

Humphreys, P. 2008, 'The Principal Axes of the European Union’s Audiovisual Policy', in I.F. Alonso & M. 

de Moragas i Spa (eds), Communication and Cultural Policies in Europe , Universitat Autonoma de 

Barcelona, Barcelona pp. 151 -84. 

Hump hreys, P. 2015, 'Transferable media pluralism policies from Europe', in S. Barnett & J. Townend 

(eds), Media Power and Plurality, From Hyperlocal to High -Level Policy, Palgrave Macmillan, 

London, pp. 151 -69. 

Hunter, A. 2015, 'Crowdfunding independent and f reelance journalism: Negotiating journalistic norms of 

autonomy and objectivity', New Media & Society , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 272 -88. 

Hunter, A. & Di Bartolomeo, J. 2018, '“We’re a movement”: crowdfunding, journalism, and feminism', 

Feminist Media Studies , 15 February, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://doi.org/10.1080/ 

14680777.2018.1434805>. 

IBM 2016, 10 Key Marketing Trends for 2017 and Ideas for Exceeding Customer Expectations: White 

Paper, CMOatWORK , 15 February, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://cmoatwork .com/ 

whitepapers/1766 -10 -key -marketing -trends -for -2017 -and -ideas -for -exceeding -customer -

expectations>. 

ICIJ 2017, About the Investigation, ICIJ weblog, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.icij.org/ 

investigations/panama -papers/pages/panama -papers -about -the -investigation/>. 

Interactive Advertising Bureau 2013, The Native Advertising Playbook , IAB. https://www.iab.com/wp -

content/uploads/2015/06/IAB -Native -Advertising -Playbook2.pdf 

Isaac, M. & Ember, S. 2016, 'For Election Day Influence, Twitter Ruled Socia l Media', The New York 

Times , 9 November, viewed 12 September 2018, <https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/ 

technology/for -election -day -chatter -twitter -ruled -social -media.html>. 

Isaak, J. & Hanna, M.J. 2018, 'User Data Privacy: Facebook, Cambridge Analytica, and Privacy 

Protection', Computer , vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 56 -9. 

Isinkaye, F., Folajimi, Y. & Ojokoh, B. 2015, 'Recommendation systems: Principles, methods and 

evaluation', Egyptian Informatics Journal , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 261 -73. 

Jahng, M.R. & Littau, J. 2016 , 'Interacting is believing: interactivity, social cue, and perceptions of 

journalistic credibility on Twitter', Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly , vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 

38 -58. 

Jakubowicz, K. 2015, 'New Media Ecology: Reconceptualizing Media Plural ism', in P. Valcke, R.G. Picard 

M. Sükösd (eds), Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and Global Trends , Palgrave 

Macmillan, London, pp. 23 -53. 

Jarvis, J. 2014, Geeks Bearing Gifts: Imagining New Futures for News , CUNY Journalism Press, New 

York. 

Jenkins, H. 2006, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide , New York University Press, 

New York. 

Jenkins Jr, H.W. 2010, 'Google and the Search for the Future', The Wall Street Journal , 14 August, viewed 

26 July 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articl es/SB10001424052748704901104575423294099527212>. 

Johnson, B. 2010, 'Privacy no longer a social norm, says Facebook founder', The Guardian , 11 January, 

viewed 26 July 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/jan/11/facebook -privacy>. 

Johnson, T.J. & Kaye, B.K. 2016, 'Some like it lots: the influence of interactivity and reliance on credibility', 

Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 61, pp. 136 -45. 

Jolly, J. 2014, 'How Algorithms Decide the News You Use', Columbia Journalism Review , 20 May, viewed 

8 Se ptember 2018, <https://archives.cjr.org/news_literacy/algorithms_filter_bubble.php>. 

Jordan, M.I. & Mitchell, T.M. 2015, 'Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects', Science , vol. 

349, no. 6245, pp. 255 -60. 

Just, N. & Latzer, M. 2017, 'Governan ce by algorithms: reality construction by algorithmic selection on the 

Internet', Media, Culture & Society , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 238 -58. 

Kalogeropoulos, A., Cherubini, F. & Newman, N. 2016, The Future of Online News Video , Reuters Institute 

for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 165 

Kalogeropoulos, A. & Newman, N. 2017, “I Saw the News on Facebook”: Brand Attribution When 

Accessing News From Distributed Environments , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, 

University of Oxford. 

Kantrowitz, A. 2018, 'How Twitter Made The Tech World's Most Unlikely Comeback', BuzzFeed , 21 June, 

viewed 31 July 2018, <https://www.buzzfeed.com/amphtml/alexkantrowitz/how -twitter -made -the -

tech -worlds -most -unlikely -comeback>. 

Karlsson, M., Clerwall, C. & Nord, L. 2017, 'Do not stand corrected: Transparency and users’ attitudes to 

inaccurate news and corrections in online journalism', Journalism and Mass Communication 

Quarterly , vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 148 -67. 

Karppinen, K. 2012, Rethinking Media Pluralism , Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Jönköping International Business School, Central European University & 

Ernst & Young Consultancy Belgium 2009, Independent Study on Indicators for Media Pluralism in 

the Member States Towards a Risk -based App roach: Preliminary Final Report (April 2009) ,

Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven. 

Khun, R. 2015, 'Media Plurality in France', in S. Barnett & J. Townend (eds), Media Power and Plurality: 

From Hyperlocal to High -level Policy , Palgrave Macmillan, London. 

Kildea , P. & Williams, G. 2013, ‘The Constitution and Commonwealth Proposals for New Media 

Regulation’, Media and Law Arts Review , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 2 -16. <http://classic.austlii.edu.au/ 

au/journals/UNSWLRS/2016/66.pdf >.

Kind, H.J. & Moen, J. 2015, 'Effects of taxes and subsidies on media services', in R.G. Picard & S.S. 

Wildman (eds), Handbook on the Economics of the Media, Edward Elgar Publishing, London. 

Klepova, O. 2017, 'Australians trust radio more than any other media channel', SBS Online , 5 July, viewed 

8 September 2018, <https://www.sbs.com.au/yourlanguage/russian/en/article/2017/07/05/ 

australians -trust -radio -more -any -other -media -channel>. 

Klimkienwicz, B. (ed.) 2010, Media Freedom and Pluralism: Media Policy Challenges in the Enlarged 

Europe , Central European University Press, Budapest. 

Koebler, J. 2018, 'Facebook Is Deprioritizing Our Stories. Good.', Motherboard , 12 January, viewed 10 

August 2018, <https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/zmqgn4/facebook -algorithm -news -feed -

change>. 

Kohring, M. & M atthes, J. 2007, 'Trust in news media: development and validation of a multidimensional 

scale', Communication Research , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 231 -52. 

Komanduri, S., Shay, R., Norcie, G., Ur, B. & Cranor, L.F. 2012, 'Adchoices? Compliance with online 

behavior al advertising notice and choice requirements', I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the 

Information Society , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 603 -38. 

Konstan, J.A. & Riedl, J. 2012, 'Recommender systems: from algorithms to user experience', User 

Modeling and User -Adapt ed Interaction , vol. 22, no. 1 -2, pp. 101 –23. 

Kramer, A.D., Guillory, J.E. & Hancock, J.T. 2014, 'Experimental evidence of massive -scale emotional 

contagion through social networks', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 111, no. 

24, pp. 87 88 -90. 

Kuiken, J., Schuth, A., Spitters, M. & Marx, M. 2017, 'Effective headlines of newspaper articles in a digital 

environment', Digital Journalism , vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1300 -14. 

Lacy, S. & Rosenstiel, T. 2015, Defining and Measuring Quality Journalism , S chool of Communication and 

Information, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ. 

Lamble, S. 2011, News As It Happens: An Introduction to Journalism , Oxford University Press, Melbourne. 

Lardinois, F. 2015, 'Google launches native ads in Gmail to all advertise rs', Tech Crunch , 1 September, 

viewed 11 August 2016, <https://techcrunch.com/2015/09/01/google -launches -new -native -ad -

format -in -gmail/>. 

Lardinois, F. 2018, 'Google promises an alternative to AMP', 8 March, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://techcrunch.com /2018/03/08/google -promises -publishers -an -alternative -to -amp/>. 

Lasica, J.D. 2003, 'Blogs and Journalism Need Each Other', NiemanReports , vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 70 -4. 166 

Lecheler, S. & Kruikemeier, S. 2016, 'Re -evaluating journalistic routines in a digital age: a review of 

research on the use of online sources', New Media & Society , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 156 -71. 

Leppänen, L., Munezero, M., Granroth -Wilding, M. & Toivonen, H. 2017, 'Data -Driven News Generation for 

Automated Journalism', Proceedings of the 10th Inter national Conference on Natural Language 

Generation , pp. 188 -97. 

Lessig, L. 2006, Code: Version 2.0 , Basic Books, New York. 

Levy, J.D. 2015, 'Economic analysis in media policy making', in R.G. Picard & S.S. Wildman (eds), 

Handbook on the Economics of the Me dia , Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, pp. 277 -301. 

Lezard, A. & Mimms, K. 2017, 'Face the Bubble: Revealing How Facebook Selects Users’ News Stories', 

Masters of Media , 25 October, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/ 

blog/2017/ 10/25/face -the -bubble -revealing -how -facebook -selects -users -news -stories/>. 

Libert, T. & Pickard, V. 2015, 'Think you're reading the news for free? New research shows you're likely 

paying with your privacy', The Conversation , 6 November, viewed 11 August 20 16, 

<https://theconversation.com/think -youre -reading -the -news -for -free -new -research -shows -youre -

likely -paying -with -your -privacy -49694>. 

Linden, C. -G. 2017, 'Decades of Automation in the Newsroom: Why are there still so many jobs in 

journalism?', Digital Jo urnalism , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 123 -40. 

Lindgren, M. 2016, 'Personal narrative journalism and podcasting', Intellect , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 23 -41. 

Lippmann, W. 1920, Liberty and the News , Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 

Lischka, J.A. 2018, 'Logics in social media news making: How social media editors marry the Facebook 

logic with journalistic standards', Journalism , 18 July, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884918788472>. 

MacKenzie, C. 2014, 'Three dimensions of autonomy: a relati onal analysis', in A. Veltman & M. Piper 

(eds), Autonomy, Oppression and Gender , Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 15 -41. 

MacKenzie, C. & Stoljar, N. 2000, Relational Autonomy: Feminist Perspectives on Autonomy, Agency, and 

the Social Self , Oxford Uni versity Press, New York. 

MacKinnon, R. 2012, 'The netizen', Development , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 201 -4. 

Malik, M.M. & Pfeffer, J. 2016, 'A macroscopic analysis of news content in Twitter', Digital Journalism , vol. 

4, no. 8, pp. 955 -79. 

Martens, B., Aguiar, L., Gómez, E. & Mueller -Langer, F. 2018, 'The Digital Transformation of News Media 

and the Rise of Disinformation and Fake News', SSRN Electronic Journal , 3 June, viewed 8 

September 2018, <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3164170>. 

Martin, K. 2016, 'Understanding privacy online: Development of a social contract approach to privacy', 

Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 137, no. 3, pp. 551 -69. 

Marwick, A.E. 2008, To catch a predator? The MySpace moral panic, FirstMonday, vol. 13, no. 6, viewed 8 

September 2018, <firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2152>. 

Marwick, A.E. 2018, 'Why do people share fake news? A sociotechnical model of media effects', 

Georgetown Law Technical Review, vol. 2, pp. 474 - 512. 

Marshall, C .F. & David, E.M. 2011, ‘Prior Restraint 2.0: A Framework for Applying Section 230 to Online 

Journalism’, Wake Forest Journal of Law & Policy, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 75 -91. 

Mayer, H. 1994, Mayer on the Media: Issues and Arguments , Allen & Unwin (with AFTRS), S t Leonards. 

Mayer -Schönberger, V. & Cukier, K. 2013, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work 

and Think , Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, London. 

McChesney, R.W. & Nichols, J. 2010, The Death and Life of American Journalism: The Media Revolut ion 

That will Begin the World Again , Nation Books, Philadelphia, PA. 

McDonald, D.G. & Dimmick, J. 2003, 'The Conceptualization and Measurement of Diversity', 

Communication Research , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 60 -79. 

McGoogan, C. 2016, 'Twitter to verify more user s: How to get a blue tick', The Telegraph , 20 July, viewed 

12 August 2016, <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/07/20/twitter -to -verify -more -users -

how -to -get -a-blue -tick/>. 167 

McKewon, E. 2018, Public Trust in Journalism: An Annotated Bibliography , Cen tre for Media Transition, 

University of Technology Sydney. 

McNair, B. 2005, 'What is journalism?', in H. de Burgh (ed.), Making Journalists: Diverse Models, Global 

issues , Routledge, London, pp. 25 -43. 

McNair, B. 2006, Cultural Chaos: Journalism, News and Power in a Globalized World , Routledge, London. 

McNair, B., Flew, T., Harrington, S. & Swift, A. 2017, Politics, Media and Democracy in Australia ,

Routledge, New York. 

McQuail, D. 1987, Mass Communication Theory: An Introduction , 2nd edn, SAGE Publications , Thousand 

Oaks, CA. 

McQuail, D. 1992, Media Performance: Mass Communication and the Public Interest , SAGE Publications, 

Thousand Oaks, CA. 

McQuail, D. 2000, McQuail's Mass Communication Theory , SAGE Publications. 

McQuail, D. 2013, Journalism and Society , SAGE Publications, London. 

Meade, A. 2017, 'Investigative reporting more vital than ever: NYT managing editor ', The Guardian , 28 

October, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/oct/28/ 

investigative -reporting -more -vital -than -ever -nyt -managing -editor>. 

Medvetz, Thomas 2012, Think Tanks in America, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Mehrabi, D., Hassan, M.A. & Ali, M.S.S. 2009, 'News media credibility of the internet and television', 

European Journal of Social Sciences , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 136 -48. 

Meijer, I.C. 2013, 'Valuable journalism: A search for quality from the vantage point of the user', Journalism ,

vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 754 -70. 

Meikle, G. & Young, S. 2012, Media Convergence: Networked Digital Media in Everyday Life , Palgrave 

Macmillan, London. 

Metykova, M. 2016, Diversity and the Media , Palgrave Macmillan, London. 

Misra, I., Lawrence Zitnick, C., Mitchell, M. & Girshick, R. 2016, 'Seeing through the human reporting bias: 

Visual classifiers from noisy human -centric labels', Pr oceedings of the IEEE Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 2930 -9. 

Molar, P. 2010, 'A Failure in Limiting Restrictions on Freedom of Speech: The Case of the Audiovisual 

Media Services Directive', in B. Klimkienwicz (ed.), Media Freedo m and Pluralism: Media Policy 

Challenges in the Enlarged Europe , Central European University Press, Budapest, pp. 77 -96. 

Molitorisz, S. 2008, ‘Chris Masters quits Four Corners’, smh.com.au, 10 November, 

<https://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/chris -masters -quits -four -corners -20081110 -gdt2as.html>. 

Möller, J., Trilling, D., Helberger, N. & van Es, B. 2018, 'Do not blame it on the algorithm: An empirical 

assessment of multiple recommender systems and their impact on content diversity', Information, 

Communicatio n & Society , vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 959 -77. 

Montal, T. & Reich, Z. 2017, 'I, robot. You, journalist. Who is the author? Authorship, bylines and full 

disclosure in automated journalism', Digital Journalism , vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 829 -49. 

Montfort, N. & Bogost, I. 2009, Racing the beam: the Atari Video computer system, MIT Press, Cambridge, 

MA. 

Moore, H.N. 2017, 'The secret cost of pivoting to video', Columbia Journalism Review , 26 September, 

viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.cjr.org/business_of_news/pivot -to -vi deo.php>. 

Moore, M. 2007, 'Public interest, media neglect', British Journalism Review , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 33 -40. 

Moore, M. & Tambini, D. (eds) 2018a, Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook and 

Apple , Oxford University Press, New York. 

Mo ore, M. & Tambini, D. 2018b, 'Introduction', in M. Moore & D. Tambini (eds), Digital Dominance: The 

Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple Oxford University Press, New York. 

Morris, N. 2018, ‘Game changing technologies: striking the right balance betw een regulating to provide an 

adequate protection for consumers and businesses, whilst not stifling innovation’, panel 168 

presentation to Trends in Converged Communications: 49 th Annual Conference of the International 

Institute for Communications , Mexico City, 10 -11 October. 

Moses, L. 2018, 'LittleThings shuts down, a casualty of Facebook news feed change', Digiday , 27 

February 2018, viewed 27 February 2018, <https://digiday.com/media/littlethings -shuts -casualty -

facebook -news -feed -change/>. 

Mullin, B. 2016, 'Fa cebook wants to make it easier for publishers to make money', Poynter , 12 September, 

viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.poynter.org/news/facebook -wants -make -it -easier -

publishers -make -money>. 

Napoli, P.M. 1999, 'Deconstructing the diversity principle', Journal of Communication , vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 7 -

34. 

Napoli, P.M. 2011, Audience Evolution: New Technologies and the Transformation of Media Audiences ,

Columbia University Press, New York. 

Napoli, P.M. 2015a, 'Assessing media diversity in the US: A comparati ve analysis of the FCC’s diversity 

index and the EU’s media pluralism monitor', in P. Valcke, R.G. Picard & M. Sükösd (eds), Media 

Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and Global Trends, Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 141 -

51. 

Napoli, P.M. 2015b, 'Soci al media and the public interest: Governance of news platforms in the realm of 

individual and algorithmic gatekeepers', Telecommunications Policy , vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 751 -60. 

Napoli, P.M., Stonbely, S., McCollough, K. & Renninger, B. 2017, 'Local journalis m and the information 

needs of local communities: Toward a scalable assessment approach', Journalism Practice , vol. 11, 

no. 4, pp. 373 -95. 

Naughton, J. 2018, 'Platform power and responsibility in the attention economy', in M. Moore & D. Tambini 

(eds), Digi tal Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple , Oxford University 

Press, New York. 

Nechushtai, E. & Lewis, S.C. 2018, 'What kind of news gatekeepers do we want machines to be? Filter 

bubbles, fragmentation, and the normative dimensions of a lgorithmic recommendations', Computers 

in Human Behavior , 9 August, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563218303650?via%3Dihub>. 

Nesterenko, L. 2016, 'Building a system for stock news generation in Russian', Pr oceedings of the 2nd 

International Workshop on Natural Language Generation and the Semantic Web (WebNLG 2016) ,

pp. 37 -40. 

Neveu, E. & Benson, R. 2005, Bourdieu and the Journalistic Field , Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Newman, N. 2017, Journalism, Media, and Tec hnology Trends and Predictions 2017 , Reuters Institute for 

the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., Levy, D.A. & Nielsen, R.K. 2017, Digital News Report 2017 ,

Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism , University of Oxford. 

Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., Levy, D.A. & Nielsen, R.K. 2018, Digital News Report 2018 ,

Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

News Corp Australia 2018, 'Submission to the ACCC Digital Platforms Inquiry', viewed 20 April 2018, 

<https://www.accc.gov.au/focus -areas/inquiries/digital -platforms -inquiry/submissions>. 

Nielsen, K.R. & Ganter, S.A. 2018, 'Dealing with digital intermediaries: A case study of the relations 

between publishers and p latforms', New Media & Society, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1600 -17. 

Nilsson, M. & Wadbring, I. 2015, 'Not Good Enough? Amateur images in the regular news flow of print and 

online newspapers', Journalism Practice , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 484 -501. 

Nyabola, N. 2014, 'Why do Western media get Africa wrong?', Al Jazeera , 2 January, viewed 8 September 

2018, <http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2014/01/why -do -western -media -get -africa -wrong -

20141152641935954.html>. 

O’Callaghan, D., Greene, D., Conway, M., Carthy, J. & Cun ningham, P. 2015, ‘Down the (white) rabbit 

hole: the extreme right and online recommender systems’, Social Science Computer Review, vol. 

33, no. 4, pp. 459 -478. 169 

O'Donnell, P. 2009, 'That's Gold! Thinking about Excellence in Australian Journalism', Australi an 

Journalism Review , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 47 -60. 

O'Sullivan, J., Fortunati, L., Taipale, S. & Barnhurst, K. 2017, 'Innovators and innovated: Newspapers and 

the postdigital future beyond the “death of print”', The Information Society , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 86 -95. 

Ofcom 2012a, Annex 7: Media plurality and news - a summary of contextual academic literature: Annex to 

Ofcom’s advice to the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, 29 June, Ofcom, 

London. 

Ofcom 2012b, Measuring media plurality Of com’s advice to the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, 

Media and Sport, 19 June, Ofcom, London. 

Ofcom 2012c, Measuring media plurality: Supplementary advice to the Secretary of State for Culture, 

Media and Sport and the Leveson Inquiry, 5 October, O fcom, London. 

Ofcom 2015a, Measurement framework for media plurality: Ofcom’s advice to the Secretary of State for 

Culture, Media and Sport, 5 November, Ofcom, London. 

Ofcom 2015b, Report to the Secretary of State on the operation of the media ownershi p rules listed under 

Section 391 of the Communications Act 2003, 26 November, Ofcom, London. 

Ofcom 2016, Adults’ media use and attitudes: Report 2016, April, Ofcom, London. 

Ofcom 2018a, Invitation to comment for public interest test on the completed ac quisition by Trinity Mirror 

plc of certain assets of Northern and Shell Media Group Limited, 8 May, Ofcom, London. 

Ofcom 2018b, News Consumption in the UK: 2018, Ofcom, London. 

Ogola, G., Anderson, P.J. & Williams, M. 2014, The Future of Quality News J ournalism: A Cross -

continental Analysis , Routledge, London. 

Oremus, W. 2018, 'The Great Facebook Crash', Slate , 27 June, viewed 31 July 2018, 

<https://slate.com/technology/2018/06/facebooks -retreat -from -the -news -has -painful -for -publishers -

including -slate.h tml>. 

Oster, J. 2016, European and International Media Law , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Oulasvirta, A., Hukkinen, J., & Schwartz, B. 2009, ‘When more is less: the paradox of choice in search 

engine use’, SIGIR , Boston, pp. 516 -523. <http://cites eerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/ 

download?doi=10.1.1.149.1861&rep=rep1&type=pdf> 

Owen, L. H. 2018, ‘ Facebook’s attempts to fight fake news seem to be wor king. (Twitter’s? Not so much.)’ ,

niemanlab.org, 21 September . <http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/09/facebooks -att empts -to -fight -

fake -news -seem -to -be -working -twitters -not -so -much/>. 

Pan, S.B. 2016, 'Get to know me: Protecting privacy and autonomy under big data's penetrating gaze', 

Harvard Journal of Law & Technology , vol. 30, pp. 239 -61. 

Papandrea, F. & Tiffen, R. 20 16, 'Media Ownership and Concentration in Australia', in E.M. Noam (ed.), 

Who Owns the Media? Media Concentration and Ownership Around the World , Oxford University 

Press, EBSCOhost eBook, pp. 703 -38. 

Pariser, E. 2011, The Filter Bubble: What the Internet i s Hiding from You , Penguin, London. 

Pariser, E. 2015, 'Did Facebook’s Big Study Kill My Filter Bubble Thesis?', Wired , 7 May, viewed 5 July 

2015, <https://www.wired.com/2015/05/did -facebooks -big -study -kill -my -filter -bubble -thesis/>. 

Park, D.H., Kim, H.K., Choi, I.Y. & Kim, J.K. 2012, 'A literature review and classification of recommender 

systems research', Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 10059 -72. 

Park, S., Fisher, C., Fuller, G. & Lee, J.Y. 2018, Digital News Report: Australia 2018 , News and Media 

Research Centre, University of Canberra. 

Pasquale, F. 2015, The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms that Control Money and Information ,

Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Pennycook, G., Cannon, T. & Rand, D.G. 2018, 'Implausibilit y and illusory truth: Prior exposure increases 

perceived accuracy of fake news but has no effect on entirely implausible statements', 3 May, 

Forthcoming in Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm?abstract_id=2958246>. 170 

Petersen, T.G. 2015, 'Revenue and the reporter: Understanding the Modern Journalist's Relationship with 

Newspaper Business Models', Florida Communication Journal , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 73 -86. 

Petre, C. 2015, The Traffic Facto ries: Metrics at Chartbeat, Gawker Media, and the New York Times, Tow 

Center for Digital Journalism, Columbia University .

Petre, C. 2018, 'Engineering Consent: How the Design and Marketing of Newsroom Analytics Tools 

Rationalize Journalists’ Labor', Digita l Journalism , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 509 -27. 

Picard, R.G. 2000, 'Measuring Quality by Journalistic Activity', in R.G. Picard (ed.), Measuring Media 

Content, Quality, and Diversity: Approaches and Issues in Content Research. Turku, Finland: Media 

Economics, Con tent and Diversity Project and Media Group, Business Research and Development 

Centre, Turku School of Economics and Business Administration , pp. 97 -104. 

Picard, R.G. 2014, 'Twilight or new dawn of journalism? Evidence from the changing news ecosystem', 

Jou rnalism Practice , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 488 -98. 

Picard, R.G. & Dal Zotto, C. 2015, 'The Dimension of Ownership and Control of Media', in P. Valcke, R. 

Picard & M. Sükösd (eds), Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and Global Trends, 

Palgrave Macmill an, London, pp. 54 -66. 

Picard, R.G. & Pickard, V. 2017, Essential Principles for Contemporary Media and Communications 

Policymaking , Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Picard, R.G. & Wildman, S.S. (eds) 2015, Handbook on t he Economics of the Media, Edward Elgar 

Publishing, Cheltenham. 

Plaisance, P.L. 2007, 'Transparency: An assessment of the Kantian roots of a key element in media ethics 

practice', Journal of Mass Media Ethics , vol. 22, no. 2 -3, pp. 187 -207. 

Plantin, J. -C., Lagoze, C., Edwards, P.N. & Sandvig, C. 2016, 'Infrastructure studies meet platform studies 

in the age of Google and Facebook', New Media & Society , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 293 –310. 

Pooley, E. 1989, 'Grins, Gore and Videotape, the trouble with local TV news', New York Magazine , vol. 22, 

no. 40, 9 Oct 1989, pp. 36 -44. 

Posner, R.A. 1977, 'The right of privacy', Georgia Law Review , vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 393 -422. 

PowerPress Podcast 2017, 'Podcast Statistics 2017: Will Android Continue To Gain Market Share While 

Appl e Slips?', 14 June, accessed 10 August 2018, <https://powerpresspodcast.com/ 

2017/06/14/podcast -statistics -ns -2017/>. 

Powers, E. 2017, 'My News Feed is Filtered? Awareness of news personalization among college students', 

Digital Journalism , vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 1315 -35. 

Productivity Commission 2000, Broadcasting, Report no. 11, AusInfo, Canberra. 

Prytz, A. 2018, 'The operation we'll never forget: new footage of the Thailand cave rescue', The Sydney 

Morning Herald , 12 July, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://w ww.smh.com.au/world/asia/the -

operation -we -ll -never -forget -new -footage -of -the -thailand -cave -rescue -20180712 -p4zqzv.html>. 

Public Interest Journalism Foundation 2016, Submission to Senate Environment and Communications 

Committee on broadcasting legislation a mendment (media reform bill) 2016 , PIJF, Melbourne. 

Quiggin, J. 2013, 'The Economics of New Media', in J. Hartley, J. Burgess & A. Bruns (eds), A Companion 

to New Media Dynamics , Blackwell Publishing Ltd, West Sussex. 

Rab, S. & Sprague, A. 2014, Media Owne rship and Control: Law, Economics and Policy in an Indian and 

International Context , Hart Publishing, London. 

Rachels, J. 1975, 'Why privacy is important', Philosophy & Public Affairs , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 323 -33. 

Rader, E. & Gray, R. 2015, 'Understanding us er beliefs about algorithmic curation in the Facebook news 

feed', Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems ,

ACM, pp. 173 -82. 

Rader, E.J. 2014, 'Awareness of Behavioral Tracking and Information Privacy Concern in F acebook and 

Google', SOUPS 2014 Proceedings: Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security , pp. 51 -67. 

Raiche, H. 2001, 'The Communications Power: The Real Threat to States' Rights?', Communications Law 

Bulletin , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 14 -9. 171 

Ramírez de la Piscina, T., González Gorosarri, M., Aiestaran, A., Zabalondo, B. & Agirre, A. 2015, 

'Differences between the quality of the printed version and online editions of the European 

reference press', Journalism , vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 768 -90. 

Rashidian, N., Brown, P., Han sen, E., Bell, E., Albright, J. & Hartstone, A. 2018, Friend and Foe: The 

platform press at the heart of journalism , Tow Center for Digital Journalism, Columbia University. 

Rein, K. & Venturini, T. 2018, 'Ploughing digital landscapes: How Facebook influenc es the evolution of live 

video streaming', New Media & Society , vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 3359 –80. 

Resende, J. 2008, 'The economic advantage of being the “voice of the majority”', Journal of Media 

Economics , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 158 -90. 

Ricci, F., Rokach, L. & Sh apira, B. 2015, Recommender Systems Handbook , 2nd edn, Springer US, New 

York. 

Riordan, J. 2016, The Liability of Internet Intermediaries , Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Romero -Rodríguez, L.M. & Aguaded, I. 2017, 'Toward a taxonomy of newspaper informatio n quality: An 

experimental model and test applied to Venezuela dimensions found in information quality', 

Journalism , vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1327 -45. 

Rosen, J. 2003, 'PressThink: An introduction', PressThink , 1 September, viewed 3 August 2016, 

<http://archive .pressthink.org/2003/09/01/introduction_ghost.html>. 

Rosen, J. 2006, 'The people formerly known as the audience', PressThink , 27 June, viewed 3 August 

2016, <http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr.html>. 

Rosen, J. 2018, 'Optimizing Journalism fo r Trust', Medium , 15 April, viewed 12 September 2018. 

Ruddick, G. 2017, 'UK government considers classifying Google and Facebook as publishers', The 

Guardian , 11 October, viewed 12 September 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ 

2017/oct/11/govern ment -considers -classifying -google -facebook -publishers>. 

Rundfunkkommission der Länder 2018, ' Diskussionsentwurf zu den Bereichen Rundfunkbegriff, 

Plattfo rmregulierung und Intermediäre' , Juli/August 2018, <www.rundfunkkommission.rlp.de >. 

Russ -Mohl, S. 2015, ‘The (Behavioural) Economics of Media Accountability’ in Fengle, S., Everwein, T., 

Mazzoleni, G., Porlezza, C., Russ -Mohl, S. (ed.), Journalists and Media Accountability: An 

International Study of News People in the Digital Age , pp. 213 -30 

Russell, F.M. 2 017, 'The new gatekeepers: an institutional -level view of Silicon Valley and the disruption of 

journalism', Journalism Studies, 14 December, viewed 8 September 2018, 

<doi.org/10.1080/1461670X.2017.1412806>. 

Rutt, J. 2011, Aggregators and the News Industry: Charging for Access to Content (NET Institute Working 

Paper No. 11 -19) , University of Cambridge. 

Ryan, C. 2013, Fairfax: The Rise and Fall , Melbourne University Publishing Ltd, Carlton. 

Samios 2018, 'Is Facebook Watch really the answer to monetising video content?', Mumbrella , 30 August, 

viewed 9 September 2018, <https://mumbrella.com.au/is -facebook -watch -really -the -answer -to -

monetising -video -content -538212>. 

Schafer, J.B., Frankowski, D., Herlocker, J. & Sen, S. 2007, 'Collaborative Filtering Recommender 

Systems', in P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa & W. Nejdl (eds), The Adaptive Web , Springer Berlin, 

Heidelberg, pp. 291 -324. 

Schaffer, J., Giridhar, P., Jones, D., Höllerer, T., Abdelzaher, T. & O'Donovan, J. 2015, 'Getting the 

message?: A study of explanation inte rfaces for microblog data analysis', Proceedings of the 20th 

International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , ACM, pp. 345 -56. 

Scherer, M.U. 2015, 'Regulating artificial intelligence systems: Risks, challenges, competencies, and 

strategies', Harvar d Journal of Law & Technology , vol. 29, pp. 353 -400. 

Scheuer, J. 2008, The Big Picture: Why Democracies Need Journalistic Excellence , Routledge, New York. 

Schlosberg, J. 2018, 'Digital agenda setting: Re -examining the role of platform monopolies', in M. Mo ore & 

D. Tambini (eds), Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple , Oxford 

University Press, New York, pp. 202 -18. 172 

Schlesinger, P. & Doyle, G. 2015, 'From organizational crisis to multi -platform salvation? Creative 

destruction and t he recomposition of news media', Journalism , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 305 -23. 

Schlitzer, A. 2018, 'The Spread of Top Misinformation Articles on Twitter in 2017: Social Bot Influence and 

Misinformation Trends', PhD thesis, University of Arizona. 

Schmidt, C. 2018 , 'So what is that, er, Trusted News Integrity Trust Project all about? A guide to the 

(many, similarly named) new efforts fighting for journalism', NiemanLab , 5 April, viewed 8 

September 2018, <http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/04/so -what -is -that -er -trusted -news -integrity -

trust -project -all -about -a-guide -to -the -many -similarly -named -new -efforts -fighting -for -journalism/>. 

Schmidt, E. & Cohen, J. 2013, The New Digital Age: Reshaping the Future of People, Nations and 

Business , Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York. 

Schne ier, B. 2015, Data and Goliath: The Hidden Battles to Collect Your Data and Control Your World ,

WW Norton & Company, New York. 

Schultz, J. 1998, Reviving the Fourth Estate: Democracy, Accountability and the Media , Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge. 

Sch wartz, B. 2004, The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less, How the Culture of Abundance Robs Us of 

Satisfaction , Harper Perennial, New York. 

Schwartz, B . 2008, ‘ Can there ever be too many flowers blooming?’ in S. Tepper & B. Ivey (eds), Engaging 

Art: The Nex t Great Transformation Of America's Cultural Life , Routledge, Oxford, pp. 239 -56. 

Scott, G.G. 2014, 'More than friends: popularity on Facebook and its role in impression formation', Journal 

of Computer ‐Mediated Communication , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 358 -72. 

Sehl, A., Cornia, A. & Nielsen, R. 2018, Public Service News and Social Media , Reuters Institute for the 

Study of Journalism, University of Oxford. 

Select Committee on Communications 2014, Media Pluralit y - 1st Report of Session 2013 -14, House of 

Lords, The Stationary Office Ltd., London. 

Shafer, J. 2010, 'Who Said It First?', Slate , 30 August, viewed 12 September 2018, 

<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/press_box/2010/08/who_said_it_first.h tml>. 

Shapiro, I. 2010, 'Evaluating journalism: Towards an assessment framework for the practice of journalism', 

Journalism Practice , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 143 -62. 

Shearer, E. & Gottfried, J. 2017, News Across Social Media Platforms 2017 , Pew Research Center, 

Washington, DC. 

Shearer, E. & Matsa, K.E. 2018, News Use Across Social Media Platforms: many Americans continue to 

get news on social media, even though many have concerns about its accuracy , Pew Research 

Center, Washington DC. 

Sheller, M. 2015, 'News Now : Interface, ambience, flow, and the disruptive spatio -temporalities of mobile 

news media', Journalism Studies , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 12 -26. 

Shirky, C. 2008, Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing without Organizations , Allen Lane, 

New York. 

Silverman , C. 2016, 'This Analysis Shows How Viral Fake Election News Stories Outperformed Real News 

On Facebook', BuzzFeed , 16 November, viewed 12 September 2018, 

<https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/craigsilverman/viral -fake -election -news -outperformed -real -

news -on -facebook>. 

Singer, J.B., Hermida, A., Domingo, D., Heinonen, A., Paulussen, S., Quandt, T., Reich, Z. & Vujnovic, M. 

2011, Participatory Journalism: Guarding Open Gates at Online Newspapers , Wiley -Blackwell, West 

Sussex. 

Síthigh, D.M. 2017, Medium Law, Routledge, London. 

Sjøvaag, H. 2016, 'Media diversity and the global superplayers: operationalising pluralism for a digital 

media market', Journal of Media Business Studies vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 170 -86. 

Smith, A. & Page, D. 2015, US smartphone use in 2015, Pew Research Center, 1 April, viewed 8 

September 2018, <http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us -smartphone -use -in -2015/>. 173 

Smith, M.R. & Marx, L. 1994, Does Technology Drive History?: The Dilemma of Technological 

Determinism , MIT Press, London. 

Smith, R. 20 10, 'Charter of Fundamental Rights of The European Union (2010/C 83/02)', in European 

Union (ed.), Core EU Legislation , pp. 125 -31. 

Smith, R.C. 2015, 'Bright -Line versus Responsive Regulation: Some Thoughts from the United Kingdom', 

in P. Valcke, R.G. Pica rd & M. Sükösd (eds), Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and 

Global Trends, Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 310 -24. 

Smyrnaios, N., Marty, E. & Rebillard, F. 2010, 'Does the Long Tail apply to online news? A quantitative 

study of French -speaking news websites', New Media & Society , vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1244 -61. 

Southern, M. 2016, 'Google’s Panda Now Part of Its Core Ranking Algorithm', Search Engine Journal , 12 

January, viewed 12 September 2018, <https://www.searchenginejournal.com/google -algorith m-

update/153989/>. 

Spangher, A. 2015, 'Building the Next New York Times Recommendation Engine', New York Times Open 

Blog , 11 August, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://open.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/building -

the -next -new -york -times -recommendation -engine/ >. 

Spinello, R.A. 2011, 'Privacy and social networking technology', International Review of Information Ethics ,

vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 41 -6. 

Sripada, S., Reiter, E. & Davy, I. 2003, 'SumTime -Mousam: Configurable marine weather forecast 

generator', Expert Upd ate , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4 -10. 

Srnicek, N. 2017, Platform Capitalism , Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Starkman, D. 2010, 'The hamster wheel', Columbia Journalism Review , vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 24 -8. 

Stencel, M. & Perry, K. 2016, Superpowers: The digital skills media leaders say newsrooms need going 

forward , Tow -Knight Center for Entrepreneurial Journalism, City University of New York. 

Statista 2018, The 100 largest companies in the world by market value in 2017 (in million US dollars), 

statista.com, viewed 9 January 2 018, <https://www.statista.com/statistics/263264/top -companies -

in -the -world -by -market -value/>. 

Stephens, M. 2014, The Future of Journalism , Columbia University Press, New York. 

Stringer, P. 2018, ‘Finding a Place in the Journalistic Field: The pursuit of r ecognition and legitimacy at 

BuzzFeed and Vice’, Journalism Studies, vol. 19, no. 13, pp. 1991 -2000. 

Strömbäck, J. 2005, 'In search of a standard: Four models of democracy and their normative implications 

for journalism', Journalism Studies , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 331 -45. 

Sunstein, C. 2007 Republic.com 2.0 , Princeton University Press, Princeton. 

Sunstein, C.R. 2017, #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media , Princeton University 

Press, Woodstock. 

Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O. & Le, Q.V. 2014, 'Seque nce to sequence learning with neural networks', 

Proceedings: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (NIPS 2014) , pp. 3104 -12. 

Swart, J., Peters, C. & Broersma, M. 2017, 'Navigating Cross -Media News Use: Media repertoires and the 

value of news in everyday life', New Media & Society , vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1343 -62. 

Swartz, David 1997, Culture and Power: The Sociology of Pierre Bourdieu, University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago. 

Swift, A. 2016, 'Americans’ trust in mass media sinks to new low', Gallup , 14 September, viewed 8 

September 2018, <https://news.gallup.com/poll/195542/americans -trust -mass -media -sinks -new -

low.aspx>. 

Tambini, D. 2017, Fake News: Public Policy Responses (Media Policy Brief 20) , Department of Media and 

Communications, The London Sc hool of Economics and Political Science. 

Tandoc, E.C. 2018, 'Five ways BuzzFeed is preserving (or transforming) the journalistic field', Journalism ,

vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 200 -16. 

Tandoc Jr., E.C., Lim, Z.W. & Ling, R. 2017, 'Defining “Fake News”: A typology of scholarly definitions', 

Digital Journalism , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 137 -53. 174 

Tenove, C., Buffie, J., McKay, S., Moscrop, D., Warren, M. & Cameron, M. 2018, Digital Threats to 

Democratic Elections: How Foreign Actors Use Digital Techniques to Undermine Democra cy ,

Centre for the Study of Democratic Institutions, The University of British Columbia. 

The Economist 2018, 'Truth and Power: should the tech giants be liable for content?', The Economist , 8 

September 2018, viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.economist .com/leaders/2018/09/08/ 

should -the -tech -giants -be -liable -for -content>. 

The Walkley Foundation 2016, Joanne McCarthy , viewed 12 September 2018, 

<http://www.walkleys.com/walkleys -winners/2013_gold_walkley_joanne_mccarthy/>. 

Thompson, M. 2018, Commentary - Speech of the CEO of the New York Times at the Open Markets 

Institute Conference - Breaking the News: Free Speech & Democracy in the Age of Platform 

Monopoly, Washington DC, 12 June , viewed 8 September 2018, 

<https://openmarketsinstitute.org/commentary/jou rnalism -free -speech -search -social -giants/>. 

Thurman, N. & Schifferes, S. 2012, 'The future of personalization at news websites: lessons from a 

longitudinal study', Journalism Studies , vol. 13, no. 5 -6, pp. 775 -90. 

Tremblay, J. 2010, 'Twitter: Can it be a r eliable source of news', Nieman Reports , vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 47 -9. 

Trilling, D. & Schoenbach, K. 2015, 'Challenging Selective Exposure: Do online news users choose sites 

that match their interests and preferences?', Digital Journalism , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1 40 -57. 

Turner, G. 2001, 'Ethics, entertainment, and the tabloid: the case of talkback radio in Australia', 

Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 349 -57. 

Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. 1974, 'Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases', Science , vol. 185, 

no. 4157, pp. 1124 -31. 

Usher, N. 2017, 'Venture -backed News Startups and the Field of Journalism: Challenges, changes, and 

consistencies', Digital Journalism , vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 1116 -33. 

Valcke, P., Picard, R.G., Sükösd, M., Klimkiewicz, B., Petkovic, B., Zotto, C.d. & Kerremans, R. 2010, 'The 

European media pluralism monitor: Bridging law, economics and media studies as a first step 

towards risk -based regulation in media markets', Journal of Media Law , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 85 -113. 

Valcke, P., Picard, R.G. & Sükösd, M. (eds) 2015a, Media Pluralism and Diversity: Concepts, Risks and 

Global Trends , Palgrave Macmillan, London. 

Valcke, P., Picard, R.G. & Sükösd, M. 2015b, 'A global perspective on media pluralism and diversity: 

Intro duction', in P. Valcke, R.G. Picard & M. Sükösd (eds), Media Pluralism and Diversity: 

Concepts, Risks and Global Trends , Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 1 -19. 

Vallor, S. 2016, Technology and the Virtues: A Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting , Oxf ord 

University Press, New York. 

van der Wurff, R. & Schönbach, K. 2011, 'Between profession and audience: Codes of conduct and 

transparency as quality instruments for off -and online journalism', Journalism Studies , vol. 12, no. 4, 

pp. 407 -22. 

van Dijck, J. 2013, The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media , Oxford University Press, 

New York. 

van Dijk, J. 2006, The Network Society , Sage Publications, London. 

Vehkoo, J. 2010, What is Quality Journalism? And how it can be saved , Reuters Inst itute of the Study of 

Journalism Fellowship Paper, University of Oxford, Oxford. 

Vogt, N. & Mitchell, A. 2016, Crowdfunded Journalism: A Small but Growing Addition to Publicly Driven 

Journalism , Pew Research Center, Washington, DC. 

Vosoughi, S., Roy, D. & Aral, S. 2018, 'The spread of true and false news online', Science , vol. 359, no. 

6380. 

Votavová, K. & Janda, J. 2017, Making online platforms responsible for news content: Kremlin Watch 

Report (25 July 2017) , European Values, Prague. 

Wallbank, P. 2018, ‘F acebook to rollout context button for Australian users in fight against fake news’, 

mumbrella.com.au, 20 September, <https://mumbrella.com.au/facebook -to -rollout -context -button -

for -australian -users -in -fight -against -fake -news -541758>. 175 

Wang, C. & Blei, D.M. 2011, 'Collaborative topic modeling for recommending scientific articles', 

Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 

Mining , ACM, pp. 448 -56. 

Wang, D., Park, S. & Fesenmaier, D.R. 2012, ‘The role of smartp hones in mediating the touristic 

experience’, Journal of Travel Research, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 371 -87. 

Ward, S.J.A. 2014, 'The Magical Concept of Transparency', in L. Zion & D. Craig (eds), Ethics for Digital 

Journalists: Emerging Best Practices , Routledge, New York. 

Watkins, J., Park, S., Blood, R.W., Deas, M., Breen, M.D., Fisher, C., Fuller, G., Lee, J.Y., Papandrea, F. & 

Ricketson, M. 2016, Digital News Report: Australia 2016 , News and Media Research Centre, 

University of Canberra. 

Weber, M.S. & Kosteric h, A. 2018, 'Coding the News: The role of computer code in filtering and distributing 

news', Digital Journalism , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 310 -29. 

Welbers, K., Van Atteveldt, W., Kleinnijenhuis, J., Ruigrok, N. & Schaper, J. 2016, 'News selection criteria 

in the digital age: Professional norms versus online audience metrics', Journalism , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 

1037 -53. 

Welch, M. 2013, Corrections: A Critical Approach , Routledge, London. 

White, A. 2015, The Trust Factor: An EJN Review of Journalism and Self -regulation , Ethical Journalism 

Network , London. 

White, M. 2016, 'The Panama Papers: Leaktivism's coming of age', The Guardian , 6 April, viewed 10 

August 2016, <https://www.theguardian.com/news/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/panama -papers -

leak -activism -leaktivism>. 

Wildin g, D. 2003, 'The House, the Senate and the Media Ownership Bill: An ‘Unacceptable Three -Way 

Control Situation’?', Media International Australia incorporating Culture and Policy , vol. 108, no. 1, 

pp. 115 -24. 

Wilding, D. 2016, Submission to the Senate Enviro nment and Communications Legislation Committee: 

Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (Media Reform) Bill 2016 .

Williams, A., Harte, D. & Turner, J. 2015, 'The value of UK hyperlocal community news: Findings from a 

content analysis, an online survey and inter views with producers', Digital Journalism , vol. 3, no. 5, 

pp. 680 -703. 

Williams, P. 2013, Killing Fairfax: Packer, Murdoch & the Ultimate Revenge , Harper Collins, New York. 

Willsher, K. 2018, 'How pioneering Mediapart has set the French news agenda', The G uardian , 16 March, 

viewed 8 September 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/mar/16/how -pioneering -

mediapart -has -set -the -french -news -agenda>. 

Wilson, C., Sala, A., Puttaswamy, K.P. & Zhao, B.Y. 2012, 'Beyond social graphs: User interactions in 

onlin e social networks and their implications', ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB) , vol. 6, no. 4, 

pp. 1 -31. 

Wischnowski, B.J. 2011, 'Bloggers with Shields: Reconciling the Blogosphere's Intrinsic Editorial Process 

with Traditional Concepts of Media Accountabil ity', Iowa Law Review , vol. 97, pp. 327 -44. 

Yardi, S. & boyd, d. 2010, 'Tweeting from the Town Square: Measuring Geographic Local Networks', 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media American 

Association for Artificial Intelligence, pp. 194 -201. 

Yeung, K. 2017, 'Algorithmic regulation: A critical interrogation', Regulation and Governance , 31 July, 

viewed 8 September 2018, <https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12158>. 

Zaripova, A. 2017, '“My boss is 18,000 people”: Journalism pra ctices in crowdfunded media organizations', 

MedieKultur: Journal of Media and Communication Research , vol. 33, no. 62, p. 19. 

Zelizer, B. 2017, What Journalism Could Be , Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Zion, L. & Craig, D. (eds) 2014, Ethics for Digital Journalis ts: Emerging Best Practices , Routledge, N Y.

Zook, M., Barocas, S., Crawford, K., Keller, E., Gangadharan, S.P., Goodman, A., Hollander, R., Koenig, 

B.A., Metcalf, J. & Narayanan, A. 2017, 'Ten simple rules for responsible big data research', PLoS 

Computati onal Biology , vol. 13, no. 3, p. e10053 

Zuckerberg, M. 2018, 'One of our big focus areas for 2018 […]', Facebook post, 11 January, viewed 8 

September 2018, <https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10104413015393571>.
