Title: WAR IN PARIS: Confirmed Muslim Terrorists. Watch And Hear The Chaos And Gunshots In Paris As Muslim Terrorist Attack - Walid Shoebat

URL Source: https://shoebat.com/2015/11/13/war-in-paris-confirmed-muslim-terrorists-watch-and-hear-the-chaos-and-gunshots-in-paris-as-muslim-terrorist-attack/

Published Time: 2015-11-13T22:33:10+00:00

Markdown Content:
**By Walid Shoebat**

Paris today looks like the movie The Siege. Sounds of AK47s and grenades were heard and reports of explosive belts caused a catastrophe including a massacre of at least sixty people with military filling the streets. One report stated that there was voices of “Allahu Akbar” coming from one attack. At least Sixty people are reported killed (and rising) during what obviously seems to be a Muslim terrorist Mumbai style coordinated attacks throughout Paris.

President François Hollande said on his orders the government had “mobilized all the forces we can muster to neutralize the threats and secure all of the areas” while shooting rampage, explosions and mass hostage-taking convulsed throughout Paris area of what seems like 4 battle ground attacks.

In one restaurant two were killed and there are reports of three explosions one at a soccer stadium where France was playing against Germany including hostage taking in a theatre (Konzerthaus Bataclan) were the victims were texting begging for police to enter since the terrorists were killing the hostages one by one. In the theatre there was carnage and bodies everywhere which is besides the sixty reported dead.A witness quoted by BFM television said he heard rounds of automatic rifle fire and someone shouting “Allahu akbar!” at The Bataclan theatre and a video shows the sounds of mayhem and gun shots with what seems to be screaming in Algerian dialect:

Scenes of an explosion can also be watched:

And then the explosion can also be heard in the soccer field with what appears a suicide bombing attacks:

Major parts of the train systems are shut down and borders are closed with complete lockdown of the airports. There were reported several explosions at the _Stade de France_ in _Saint-Denis_, west of Paris, Paris Deputy Mayor Patrick Klugman says. He said President Francois Hollande was evacuated at halftime of the France-Germany soccer match.

Hollande, Prime Minister Manuel Valls and Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve are holding a crisis meeting at the Interior Ministry to address the attacks in Paris and the explosions in Saint-Denis, according to BFMTV.

Paris police tell CNN there were three attacks. Attackers reportedly used AK-47 automatic weapons. There were one or two explosions at the Stade de France.

There was also reported was a hostage situation at one of the three sites where shootings took place. BFMTV said the ongoing hostage situation was at a theater named Bataclan where hostage police finally broke in and are raiding the theatre. The scene of the carnage and ambulances from the first footage can be seen here:

There was a lockdown at the _Stade de France_ due to possible explosions, according to French media. President Francois Hollande was at the stadium, watching France playing world champions Germany in a friendly soccer match, but he left to go to the Interior Ministry.

Police were outside the scene of one of the shootings, a restaurant in the 10th District.

France 2, stated that the neighborhood has many restaurants that were packed with patrons were authorities evacuated the area.

This is much bigger than the early January of this year when two gunmen attacked the Paris offices of the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, killing 12 and wounding 11.

But this is much different. Paris appears to be in a war.Eyewitnesses saw the dead lying on the ground, residents threw sheets out of the windows to cover the corpses. There were more injured, reported a reporter for the newspaper “La Libération” saying that the scene was a “nightmare”.

At​​the stadium Stade de France where the German national team played against France, about half an hour before the end of the match in Saint-Denis took first rumors spread about bomb blasts. ARD commentator Matthias Opdenhövel reported that during the explosion of the ground had quaked. Inside the stadium, the city gates are, meanwhile, opened to bring the spectators to safety.

Helicopters circled above the packed stadium as the stadium was closed off. Security forces called on the people who had gone out and ordered them back to the stadium. Later they were allowed to leave the stadium.

One eye witness describes it all:

print

CLICK HERE TO DONATE NOW
------------------------
