Title: National Public Transportation Safety Plan (2024)

URL Source: https://www.transit.dot.gov/sites/fta.dot.gov/files/2024-04/National-Safety-Plan-04-05-2024.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 08 Apr 2024 22:32:33 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

# National Public Transportation 

# Safety Plan 

# April 2024 

## Version 2 National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

2

# Table of Contents 

Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  3

Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...  4

Plan Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  4

Chapter I: Keeping Safety the Top Priority  ................................ ................................ ...............  6

FTA’s Safety Vision and Strategic Objectives  ................................ ................................ ...........  6

Areas of Safety Focus  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  6

The National Public  Transportation Safety Program  ................................ ................................ ..  7

Public  Transportation  Safety  Data  ................................ ................................ ...............................  8

Public Transportation Safety Concerns  ................................ ................................ .......................  9

Chapter  II:  Safety  Performance  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..................  11 

Safety  Performance  Measures  for  All  Agencies  Subject  to  the  PTASP  Regulation  ..................  11 

Safety  Performance  Targets  for  All  Agencies  Subject  to  the  PTASP  Regulation  .....................  13 

Safety Performance Measures for Safety Risk Reduction Programs  ................................ ........  13 

Modal  Groups:  Rail,  Fixed  Route  Bus,  and  Non -Fixed  Route  Bus  ................................ ...........  15 

Chapter III: Voluntary Minimum Safety Standards and Recommended Practices  ............  16 

Category A: Transit Worker Safety (Bus and Rail Transit)  ................................ ......................  19 

Category B: Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety (Bus and Rail Transit)  ................................ ........  22 

Category  C:  Rail  Grade  Crossing  Safety  (Rail  Transit)  ................................ .............................  24 

Category  D:  Bus  Transit  Safety  (Bus  Transit)  ................................ ................................ ...........  25 

Category  E:  Tunnel  Ventilation  and  Fire  Safety  (Rail  Transit) ................................ ..................  25 

Category F: Signal System Safety (Rail Transit)  ................................ ................................ ......  26 

Category G: Vehicle Safety (Bus and Rail Transit)  ................................ ................................ ..  30 

Category H: Electronic Recording Devices and Cameras (Rail Transit)  ................................ ..  34 

Category I: Operations Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and Rail Transit)  ...........  35 

Category J: Maintenance Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and Rail Transit) ........  36 

Category  K:  Precautionary  and  Reactive  Actions  during  an  Emergency  ................................ ...  39 

The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to 

bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public 

regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.  Recipients  and 

subrecipients  should refer to FTA’s statutes and regulations for applicable requirements. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

3

# Executive Summary 

Safety  is  the  number one  priority  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Transportation  (USDOT) and 

Federal  Transit  Administration  (FTA).  The  purpose  of the  National  Public  Transportation Safety 

Plan ( National Safety Plan ) is to guide the national effort to manage safety risk in our nation’s 

public transportation systems.  This update continues to mature FTA’s national safety program and 

addresses new requirements in the  Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, enacted as  the Infrastructure 

Investment and Jobs Act, to further advance transit safety. 

This plan supersedes the plan that FTA published in January 2017.  It lays out a performance -

based approach to reduce injuries and fatalities on transit systems under FTA’s safety jurisdiction. 

This plan also supports the USDOT’s  long -term goal of reaching zero fatalities on America’s 

roadways, as presented in the January 2022  National Roadway Safety Strategy , by adding  safety 

performance  criteria  for  vehicular  collisions  and  providing  voluntary  standards  for bus transit. 

This plan  includes: 

· Safety performance criteria for all recipients that must develop Agency Safety Plans under 

FTA’s  Public  Transportation  Agency  Safety  Plan  (PTASP)  regulation,  49  CFR part 673, 

including safety performance measures related to the PTASP  safety risk reduction program 

(see Chapter II); and 

· Voluntary  minimum  safety  standards  and  recommended  practices  to  support  mitigation  of 

safety risk and to improve safety performance (see Chapter III), including:  

> ¡

Recommendations  issued  by the  National  Transportation Safety  Board  (NTSB),  

> ¡

Recommended practices and standards developed by the transit industry, and  

> ¡

Recommended precautionary and reactive actions to ensure public and personnel safety 

and health during an emergency established in consultation with the Secretary of Health 

and Human Services .National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

4

# Introduction 

Safety  is  the  top  priority  of both  the  USDOT and the  FTA . While transit is already one of the safest 

modes of transportation, FTA is committed to improving safety even further.  FTA is  committed 

to developing, implementing, and consistently improving strategies and processes to ensure that 

public transportation achieves the highest practicable level of safety and is committed to the 

USDOT’s vision of a future with zero transportation -rel ated fatalities and the elimination of 

transportation -related serious injuries.  Transit should be safe for the passengers using the system, 

the workers operating  the system, and  the  pedestrians, bicyclists, and all other persons who interact 

with the syste m. 

FTA has adopted the  principles and methods of Safety Management Systems (SMS) as the  basis 

for enhancing  the  safety  of  public  transportation  in  the  United  States.  FTA  follows  the  principles 

and  methods  of SMS  in  its  development  and  revision  of this  plan,  regulations, policies, guidance, 

best practices, and technical assistance administered under the authority of 49 U.S.C. § 5329. 

SMS is a formal, organization -wide approach to managing safety risk and assuring the 

effectiveness  of a  transit  agency's  safety  risk  mitigation. 1 SMS  includes  systematic  procedures, 

practices, and policies for managing hazards and safety risk.  FTA will continue to support the 

transit industry’s implementation of SMS and will continue to use SMS to strengthen its own safety 

management processes. 

## Plan Overview 

The  purpose  of  the  National Safety Plan  is  to  improve  the  safety  of  all  public  transportation  systems 

that  receive funding under 49 U.S.C. Chapter 53.  FTA uses the  National Safety Plan  to guide the 

national effort to manage safety risk in our  Nation’s public transportation systems.  The Bipartisan 

Infrastructure Law, enacted as  the Infrastructure  Investment and Jobs  Act, adds  new elements  that 

must  be included in the  National Safety Plan , including: 

· Safety  performance  measures  related  to  the  PTASP safety  risk  reduction  program; 

· In  consultation  with  the  Secretary  of  Health  and  Human  Services, precautionary  and 

reactive actions required to  ensure public and  personnel safety and health during an 

emergency; and 

· Consideration,  where  appropriate,  of  performance -based  and  risk -based  methodologies. 

The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law also requires that the minimum safety performance standards 

for public  transportation  vehicles  used  in  revenue  operations  take  into  consideration,  to  the  extent 

practicable,  innovations  in  driver  assistance  technologies  and  driver  protection  infrastructure, 

where appropriate, and a reduction in visibility impairments that contribute to pedestrian  fatalities. 

The National Safety Plan also acknowledges recommendations made by the NTSB. Chapter III 

includes, to the extent practicable, voluntary minimum safety standards for public transportation     

> 149 CFR §673.5

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

5

vehicles and transit operations that take into consideration relevant NTSB recommendations. In 

addition to the voluntary standards contained in the National Safety Plan, FTA is exploring 

expanding its regulatory framework to include potential minimum manda tory baseline standards 

for public transit safety and NTSB recommendations, including those relating to  roadway worker 

protection and fatigue. 

The  National Safety Plan  is organized  into  three  chapters: 

· Chapter I: Keeping Safety the Top Priority  – This chapter presents FTA’s safety vision, 

strategic objectives, and an overview of FTA’s National Public Transportation Safety 

Program;  and  provides  high -level  safety  performance  data  related  to  FTA  safety  priorities. 

· Chapter II: Safety Performance Criteria  – This chapter defines safety performance 

measures 2 for  transit  agencies  required  to  establish  and  implement  Agency  Safety  Plans 

under FTA’s PTASP regulation, 49 CFR part 673.  The chapter identifies 14 safety 

performance measures for all modes of public transportation and presents eight safety 

performance measures for the PTASP safety risk reduction program for agencies that serve 

an urbanized area with a population of 200,000 o r more. 

· Chapter  III:  Voluntary  Minimum  Safety  Standards  and  Recommended  Practices  –

This chapter presents voluntary minimum safety  performance standards for public 

transportation vehicles used in revenue operations and voluntary minimum safety standards 

to ensure the safe operation of public transportation systems, as well as recommended 

practices  that may support  the  transit industry in  assessing and mitigating safety risk and 

help improve safety performance.                 

> 2In this plan FTA uses the term "performance measure" as asynonym for "performance criteria," which is used in 49
> U.S.C. § 5329(b)(2).

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

6

# Chapter I: Keeping Safety the Top Priority 

## FTA’s Safety Vision and Strategic Objectives 

FTA is committed to its vision of a better quality of life for all built on public transportation 

excellence and its mission of improving America’s communities through public transportation. 

Enhancing safety by reducing safety events on the Nation’s transi t systems is integral to achieving 

this vision.  The  USDOT Strategic Plan  establishes  Safety  as the top strategic goal for the 

Department, and emphasizes five objectives:  Safe Public , Safe Workers , Safe Design , Safe 

Systems , and  Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity . In addition, FTA has adopted the principles 

and  methods  of SMS to  achieve  the  highest  degree  of safety.  The SMS  approach  is  a formal, 

organization -wide  approach  for managing  safety  risk  and  assuring  the effectiveness of safety risk 

mitigation. 

## Areas of Safety Focus 

FTA  has  identified  the  following  five  areas  of  safety  focus  to  guide  the  implementation  of  the 

Federal Public Transportation Safety Program: 

· Transit’s role in the community  – Public transportation is on the frontline of many of 

society’s most challenging safety and public health issues, including the Coronavirus 

Disease  2019  (COVID -19)  pandemic,  substance  abuse,  mental  health,  homelessness,  and 

crime.  Transit also advances equity and sustainability in America’s communities. 

Documenting and sharing lessons  learned helps the transit community identify and mitigate 

safety risk to keep passengers and transit workers safe while also advancing opportunity 

and tackling climate change. 

· Shared responsibility  – Transit safety is a shared responsibility that is coordinated across 

stakeholders, including government at all levels, labor, industry, nonprofit and advocacy 

groups,  researchers,  and  the  public,  to  prevent  fatalities  and  serious  injuries. 

· Performance -based approach  to  SMS  – Setting  and  achieving  performance  targets  and 

using performance -based standards enhances the SMS approach and supports efforts to 

identify and mitigate safety risk in transit systems before harmful consequences occur. 

· Data -driven  decision -making  – Identifying  data  relevant  to  safety,  conducting  analyses, 

and  developing  data -driven  conclusions  strengthens  both  the  performance  of  an  SMS  and 

the understanding and management of safety risk. 

· Accounting for human factors as part of safety risk mitigation  – Safety risk mitigations 

developed as part of an SMS should consider and address certain types of human  error. 

This  approach  recognizes  the  role  of  human  behavior  and  works  to  effectively  reduce  safety 

risk  for  passengers,  transit  workers,  and  all  who encounter the  system. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

7

## The National Public Transportation Safety Program 

FTA carries out its safety vision, mission, and strategic objectives through the National Public 

Transportation  Safety  Program.  In  2012, the  Moving  Ahead  for  Progress  in  the  21st  Century  Act 

(MAP -21) amended Federal transit law by authorizing a new public transportation safety program 

at 49 U.S.C. § 5329.  FTA’s Safety Program was further strengthened in the Fixing America’s 

Surface Transportation (FAST) Act in 2015 and, most recently, in 2021 through the Bipartisan 

Infrastructure Law.  FTA also carries out an Alcohol and Controlled Substances Testing program 

under 49 U.S.C. § 5331, which was first established in law in the Omnibus Transportation 

Employee Testing Act of 1991 .

FTA follows the principles and methods of SMS in its development and revision of regulations, 

policies,  guidance,  best  practices,  and  technical  assistance  to  administer  its  Safety  Program  under 

the authority of 49 U.S.C. § 5329.  The following list identifies the main elements of FTA’s Safety 

Program which include: 

· The National Safety Plan  establishes key safety performance measures and identifies 

voluntary  minimum  safety  standards  and  recommended  practices  to  mitigate safety risk and 

improve safety performance across the  transit industry. 

· The Public Transportation Safety Certification Training Program (PTSCTP) ,

described in FTA’s  PTSCTP  regulation at  49 CFR part 672 , establishes  a curriculum and 

provides minimum training requirements to enhance technical proficiency for State Safety 

Oversight Agency personnel and contractors who conduct safety audits and examinations 

of rail fixed guideway public transportation systems, and for desi gnated transit  agency 

personnel  and  contractors  who  are  directly  responsible  for  safety  oversight of a recipient’s 

rail fixed guideway public transportation system. 

· The Public Transportation Agency Safety Plan  (PTASP)  Program,  described in FTA’s 

PTASP  regulation  at  49  CFR  part  673 , requires  certain  transit  agencies  to  develop agency 

safety plans and establish and implement an SMS. 

· The State  Safety  Oversight (SSO)  Program  for rail transit agencies (RTAs), described 

in  FTA’s  SSO  regulation  at  49 CFR part 674 , outlines  a State  Safety  Oversight  Agency’s 

authority to oversee rail transit agency safety performance. 

· FTA’s safety oversight and enforcement authorities , described in FTA’s Public 

Transportation  Safety  Program  regulation  at  49 CFR part 670 , establishes  substantive  and 

procedural rules for FTA's administration of the Safety Program.  Importantly, the rule 

formally  establishes  SMS  as  the  foundation  for  FTA's  development  and  implementation  of 

the Safety Program. 

FTA’s  Safety  Program  also  includes  a drug  and  alcohol  compliance  program.  The  Prevention  of 

Alcohol Misuse and Prohibited Drug Use in Transit Operations  at  49 CFR part 655 , establishes 

programs  to  be  implemented  by  employers  that  receive  financial  assistance  from  FTA and by 

contractors of those employers, that are designed to help prevent accidents, injuries, and fatalities 

resulting from the misuse of alcohol and use of prohibited drugs by those performing safety -

sensitive functions. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

8

In  addition, FTA’s  Safety  Program  considers  how  the  condition  of  transit  assets  can  affect  safety 

performance.  In passing MAP -21, Congress recognized the critical relationship between safety 

and asset condition, requiring the  National Safety Plan  to include the definition of state of good 

repair set in the rulemaking for asset management (49 U.S.C. §  5329(b)(2)(B)).  The  Transit Asset 

Management (TAM) rule at 49 CFR part 625 defines state of good repair as "the condition in which 

a capital asset is  able  to  operate  at  a full  level  of  performance"  (49  CFR  § 625.5).  Both  TAM  and 

PTASP emphasize opportunities for transit agencies to share information and analyses, thereby 

improving decision -making agency -wide to address safety risk. 

Finally,  FTA’s  internal  Safety  Risk  Management  (SRM)  process  supports  FTA’s  Safety  Program 

by proactively identifying and addressing safety concerns in the transit industry.  FTA uses its 

SRM process to assess and mitigate industry -wide safety risk using authorities specified in 

49  U.S.C.  § 5329.  FTA  also  used  outputs  from  this  process  to  support  the  identification  of  public 

transportation safety priorities outlined in this  National Safety Plan .

## Public  Transportation  Safety  Data 

While public transportation fatalities and injuries comprise less than one  percent of total casualties 

on America’s surface transportation network, 3 transit fatalities and injuries remain a significant 

concern for America’s communities. Over the last six years, there has been a general increasing 

trend in the number and rate of major transit safety events and fatalities reported to FTA’s National 

Tran sit Database (NTD). 

Between 2016 and 2021, the U.S. public transportation industry reported  an annual average of 

9,498  major safety events, 4 284  fatalities, and  21,066  injuries requiring immediate medical 

attention away from the scene to the NTD. 5 The table s below present the annual industry -wide 

counts and rates (per  100 million Vehicle Revenue Miles (VRM)) for these metrics between 

calendar years 2016 and 2021 as reported by transit agencies to the NTD. 

Counts  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  Annual 

Average 

Major  Events  9,988  9,801  10,121  10,522  7,739  8,819  9,498 

Fatalities  269  254  263  278  304  334  284 

Injuries  23,970  23,144  23,157  23,695  15,742  16,687  21,066                                 

> 3USDOT National Roadway Safety Strategy ,page 1.
> 4Major events are defined in the NTD Safety and Security Policy Manual .
> 5These numbers include data reported to the NTD by full and reduced reporters and excludes rail service under the
> jurisdiction of the Federal Railroad Administration. See the NTD Reporting Manuals for descriptions of reporting
> thresholds and other information.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

9

Rates  per 100M 

VRM 

2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2016 –2021 

Major  Event  Rate  227.90  221.90  227.81  234.69  214.54  238.76  227.72 

Fatality  Rate  6.14  5.75  5.92  6.20  8.43  9.04  6.80 

Injury  Rate  546.93  523.98  521.24  528.52  436.41  451.77  505.05 

From 2016 to 2021, the U.S.  public transportation industry averaged 284 fatalities per year. The 

fatality rate (per 100 million VRM) has increased in each of the last four years, with the transit 

industry reporting its highest number of fatalities in 2021, despite reduced service and  ridership 

during the COVID -19 pandemic  affecting years 2020 and 2021 .

Major event numbers and rates (per 100 million VRM) remained relatively constant but dropped 

in 2020. Major event counts remained low in 2021, but rates increased above pre -pandemic levels 

in 2021. Injury numbers and rates (per 100 million VRM) also did no t vary considerably between 

2016 and 2019 but dropped significantly in 2020. Injury numbers and rates increased in 2021 but 

were still below 2016 –2019 levels. 

## Public Transportation Safety Concerns 

FTA  has  identified  the  following  significant  safety  concerns in the transit industry: 

1)  Transit Worker Fatalities  – Despite safety risk mitigations put in place to protect transit 

workers from harm, the transit industry continues to  experience workforce fatalities.  The 

chart  below  shows  the  transit  worker  fatality  rates  (per 100  million  VRM) between  2016 

and 2021, as reported to the NTD. 6

Figure  1: Transit Worker Fatality Rate (per 100M VRM)      

> 6See NTD Reporting Manuals for reporting requirements.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

10 

2)  Assaults on Transit Workers  – FTA’s internal SRM process has identified assaults on 

transit workers  as  a key  safety concern for the  transit industry.  The  chart below, which 

uses data  reported  to  the  NTD, depicts  a significant  increase  in  the  rate  of  assaults  where 

a transit worker was  injured  or killed (per 100  million  VRM) between 2016 and 2021 

across  bus  and rail transit modes. 7

Figure  2: Transit Worker Assault Event Rate (per 100M VRM) 

3)  Bus Transit Collisions  – The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law requires Section 5307 

recipients that serve an urbanized area  with a  population of 200,000 or more  to include  in 

their Agency Safety  Plans  a safety  risk  reduction  program  that,  in  part,  addresses  the 

reduction  of  vehicular and pedestrian accidents involving buses.  The chart below shows 

bus transit pedestrian and vehicular collision fatality rates (per 100 million VRM) 

between 2016 and 2021, as reported to the NTD. 

Figure  3: Bus Vehicular and Pedestrian Collision Fatality Rates (per 100M VRM)      

> 7See NTD Reporting Manuals for reporting requirements.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

11 

# Chapter  II:  Safety  Performance  Criteria 

This chapter establishes safety performance measures 8 for all modes of public transportation. Per 

49 CFR § 673.11(a)(3), a recipient’s Agency Safety Plan must include performance targets based 

on the safety performance measures established under the  National Safety Plan . In addition, the 

Bipartisan Infrastructure Law requires the Safety Committee of recipients of Urbanized Area 

Formula funds under 49 U.S.C. § 5307 (Section 5307) that serve an urbanized area with a 

population of 200,000 or more (large UZA) to set performa nce targets for their safety risk 

reduction programs. 

The continuous improvement requirements for transit agencies established under the Safety 

Assurance component of SMS  at 49 CFR § 673.27(d)  require transit agencies to establish a process 

to assess safety performance. 

## Safety  Performance  Measures  for  All  Agencies  Subject  to  the  PTASP 

## Regulation 

Safety performance  measures help support transit agency safety risk management and safety 

assurance  processes. The Safety  Assurance  component  of an  SMS  leverages  a structured  approach 

of planning, identifying safety performance measures, conducting data analysis, setting safety 

performance targets, and monitoring safety performance.  Safety performance measures provide 

the basis for continuous safety improvement. 

To  align  safety  performance  measurement  requirements  across  all  agencies  subject  to  the  PTASP 

regulation, the measures outlined in this chapter are based on safety and service data that the NTD 

collects from applicable agencies.  For clarification on NTD reporting requirements and 

definitions, please refer to the latest NTD Safety & Security Reporting Policy Manual at the  NTD 

Manuals web page .

All transit agencies subject to the PTASP regulation report safety data to the NTD.  However, due 

to  NTD  reporting  requirements, some  smaller  transit  agencies  may  report  less -detailed  safety and 

security  event  data  than  larger agencies.  Some  of the  measures  defined  below  use  categories that 

exceed the  level  of detail  these  smaller agencies  report to the  NTD.  Where data  is not reported to 

the NTD, agencies should reference internal agency records to identify appropriate data for each 

measure to support the setting of all required targets. 

The previous version of the  National Safety Plan  identified safety  performance measures to support 

the required PTASP  safety  performance  target  setting  for  all  modes  of public  transportation, 

identifying  seven  (7) measures  for  each mode  (or  modal group).  This updated plan identifies 14 

safety  performance  measures for all transit  providers subject to the PTASP regulation.  The table 

below lists each safety performance measure and indicates which performance measures are 

additions from the previous version of the  National Safety Plan .                 

> 8In this plan FTA uses the term "performance measure" as asynonym for "performance criteria" which is used in
> statute at 49 U.S.C. § 5329(b)(2).

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

12 

Safety Performance Measure  Description 

1 Measure 1a  – Major Events  This includes all safety and security major events as 

defined by the NTD. 

2 Measure 1b  – Major Event Rate  This includes all safety and security major events as 

defined by the NTD, divided by VRM. 

3 Measure  1.1  – Collision Rate 

(new) 

This includes all collisions reported to the NTD, divided 

by VRM. 

4 Measure 1.1.1  –

Pedestrian  Collision Rate 

(new) 

This includes all collisions “with a person,” as defined by 

the NTD, divided by VRM. 

5 Measure 1.1.2  – Vehicular 

Collision Rate (new) 

This includes all collisions “with a motor vehicle,” as 

defined by the NTD, divided by VRM. 

6 Measure 2a  – Fatalities  This includes all fatalities as defined by the NTD. 

7 Measure 2b  – Fatality Rate  This includes all  fatalities as defined by the NTD, divided 

by VRM. 

8 Measure  2.1  – Transit Worker 

Fatality Rate  (new) 

This includes all transit worker fatalities as defined by the 

NTD, including the categories “Transit 

Employee/Contractor,” “Transit Vehicle  Operator,” and 

“Other Transit Staff,” divided by VRM. 

9 Measure  3a  – Injuries  This includes all  injuries  as  defined  by  the  NTD. 

10  Measure  3b  – Injury  Rate  This  includes all  injuries  as defined  by  the  NTD,  divided 

by  VRM. 

11  Measure  3.1  – Transit Worker 

Injury Rate  (new) 

This includes all transit worker injuries as defined by the 

NTD, including  the  categories  “Transit 

Employee/Contractor,”  “Transit Vehicle Operator,” and 

“Other Transit Staff,” divided by VRM. 

12  Measure  4a  – Assaults  on 

Transit Workers (new) 

This  includes  all  assaults on  transit  workers  as  defined  by 

the  NTD. 9

13  Measure  4b  – Rate  of Assaults 

on Transit Workers (new) 

This includes all  assaults on  transit  workers as  defined  by 

the  NTD, 9 divided by VRM. 

14  Measure  5 – System  Reliability  This  includes  Major  Mechanical  System  failures  as 

defined  by  the  NTD.                        

> 9Historically, assaults on transit workers were not collected in the NTD as aseparate category from other assaults and
> were not reported if they did not result in a fatality, injury, or other major event threshold .Additionally, the term
> transit worker previously only included paid employees and contractors and excluded volunteers .On February 23,
> 2023, FTA finalized new NTD reporting requirements that will collect data on all assaults on all transit workers,
> regardless of injury. Some of these reporting requirements took effect in Calendar Year 2023, while others will take
> effect in NTD Report Year 2023.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

13 

## Safety  Performance  Targets  for  All  Agencies  Subject  to  the  PTASP  Regulation 

The PTASP regulation requires all  applicable  transit agencies to set safety performance targets 

based on the safety performance measures established in the  National Safety Plan . In this context, 

the measure defines the data point that an agency will “watch” to monitor safety performance. The 

target defines the desired level of safety performance over a specified timeframe (e.g., annually). 

Rates are calculated using VRM, as defi ned by and reported to the NTD. 

In general, a transit agency sets annual safety performance targets that represent its safety 

performance goals for the coming year. Transit agencies may define their own methodology for 

setting targets. For example, in its efforts to improve safety an age ncy may want to improve its 

own current safety performance or set performance targets based on peer agency benchmarking. 

Please note that transit agencies that serve a large UZA are subject to additional target setting 

requirements as part of the safety ri sk reduction program, as defined in 49 U.S.C. § 5329. 

## Safety Performance Measures for Safety Risk Reduction Programs 

The  Bipartisan  Infrastructure  Law  requires  Section  5307  recipients  that  serve  an  urbanized  area 

with a population of 200,000 or more to include in  their Agency Safety Plan a safety  risk reduction 

program  for transit operations.  These safety risk  reduction programs aim to  improve safety 

performance by reducing the number and rates of accidents, injuries, and assaults on transit 

workers, including: 

· a reduction  of  vehicular  and  pedestrian  accidents  involving  buses  that  includes  measures to 

reduce visibility  impairments  for bus operators that contribute to  accidents, including 

retrofits to buses in revenue service and specifications for future procurements that reduce 

visibility impairments; and 

· the mitigation of assaults on transit workers, including the deployment of assault mitigation 

infrastructure and technology on buses, including barriers to restrict the unwanted entry of 

individuals and objects into the workstations of bus  operators when a risk analysis 

performed by the transit agency’s Safety Committee determines that such barriers  or  other 

measures  would  reduce  assaults  on  transit  workers  and  injuries  to  transit  workers. 

The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law directs that performance measures  for  a safety  risk reduction 

program,  required  under 49  U.S.C.  5329(d)(4),  be  included  in  the  National Safety Plan  (49 U.S.C. 

5329(b)(2)(A)).  FTA  identifies the below eight measures for the  safety  risk reduction program. 

The Safety  Committee of applicable transit agencies will use these measures to set targets for the 

safety risk reduction program, as required by 49 U.S.C. 5329(d)  and  49 CFR § 673. 19 (d) (2) . Under 

the  new  Bipartisan  Infrastructure  Law  requirements,  the  Safety  Committee  must establish  these 

targets  using a  3-year  rolling average  of  the  data  the  agency submits  to  the  NTD. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

14 

Required Safety Risk 

Reduction  Program  Measure 

Description 

1 Major  Events  This  includes  all  safety  and  security  major  events  as  defined 

by  the  NTD .

2 Major  Event  Rate  This  includes  all  safety  and  security  major  events  as  defined 

by  the NTD, divided by VRM. 

3 Collisions  This includes all  collisions  reported  to  the  NTD. 

4 Collision  Rate  This  includes all  collisions  reported  to  the  NTD,  divided  by 

VRM. 

5 Injuries  This includes all  injuries  as  defined  by  the  NTD. 

6 Injury  Rate  This  includes all  injuries  as  defined  by  the  NTD,  divided  by 

VRM. 

7 Assaults  on  Transit 

Workers 

This  includes  all  assaults on  transit  workers  as  defined  by  the 

NTD. 10 

8 Rate  of  Assaults  on Transit 

Workers 

This includes all  assaults  on transit workers  as  defined  by  the 

NTD, 10 divided by VRM. 

Some of the performance measures for the safety risk reduction program overlap with the measures 

for all agencies subject to the PTASP regulation described above. Section 5307 recipients that 

serve an urbanized area with a population of 200,000 or more may  choose to use the  target set by 

the Safety Committee for the safety risk reduction program  for both measures, provided the target 

for the safety risk reduction program is  set using  a 3 -year rolling average of NTD data. 

The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law establishes a safety set aside requirement for all Section 5307 

recipients that serve a large UZA. These transit agencies must allocate not less than 0.75 percent 

of section 5307 funds to eligible safety -related projects.  As required under the Bipartisan 

Infrastructure Law  and  at 49 CFR § 673.27(d) (3)( iii) , if an agency fails to meet a safety 

performance target under the safety risk reduction program, it must allocate its safety set aside in 

the following fiscal year to eli gible projects that are reasonably likely to assist the agency in 

meeting the target.                        

> 10 Historically, assaults on transit workers were not collected in the NTD as aseparate category from other assaults and
> were not reported if they did not result in a fatality or serious injury, or other major event threshold. Additionally, the
> term transit worker previously only included paid employees and contractors and excluded volunteers .On February
> 23, 2023, FTA finalized new NTD reporting requirements that will collect data on all assaults on all transit workers,
> regardless of injury. Some of these reporting requirements took effect in Calendar Year 2023, while others will take
> effect in NTD Report Year 2023.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

15 

## Modal  Groups:  Rail,  Fixed  Route  Bus,  and  Non -Fixed  Route  Bus 

Transit agencies  must set targets  for the different  modes  of transit service they  provide.  When 

setting  targets  based  on  the  safety  performance  measures  for all  agencies  subject  to  the  PTASP 

regulation and for the  safety risk reduction program, transit agencies should use the following 

modal groups: rail, fixed route bus, and non -fixed route bus.  Using this approach, a transit agency 

would only set the required targets for three modal groups, regardless of how many individual 

modes of transit service it reports to the  NTD.  The following table presents these three modal 

groups and the individual NTD modes included in each. 

Rail  Fixed Route Bus  Non -Fixed Route Bus 

· Heavy  Rail  (HR) 

· Light  Rail  (LR) 

· Streetcar  (SR) 

· Hybrid Rail  (YR) 

· Monorail/Automated 

Guideway (MG) 

· Inclined  Plane  (IP) 

· Cable  Car  (CC) 

· Aerial  Tramway  (TR) 

· Motorbus  (MB) 

· Commuter  Bus  (CB) 

· Bus  Rapid Transit  (RB) 

· Trolley Bus  (TB) 

· Publico  (PB) 

· Jitney  (JT) 

· Demand  Response  (DR) 

· Vanpool  (VP) 

Note:  The  modes  above  exclude  Alaska  rail  (AR),  commuter rail  (CR),  and  ferry  boat  (FB).  The 

PTASP  regulation does not  apply to  certain modes  of transit service that are  subject to the  safety 

jurisdiction of  another Federal  agency, including  passenger ferry operations  that  are  regulated  by 

the United States Coast Guard and commuter rail operations that are regulated by the Federal 

Railroad Administration. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

16 

# Chapter III: Voluntary Minimum Safety Standards and 

# Recommended Practices 

FTA has identified voluntary minimum safety standards and recommended practices for improving 

public  transportation  safety.  These include safety performance standards for public transportation 

vehicles used in revenue operations and safety standards to ensure the safe operation  of  public 

transportation  systems . These standards  also  further  a comprehensive approach to roadway safety 

within the United States.  These  voluntary  safety  standards  and  recommended practices are 

provided as resources to support the transit industry in assessing and mitigating safety risk. 

To the extent practicable, the voluntary minimum safety performance standards for public 

transportation vehicles take into consideration relevant recommendations of the NTSB, 

recommendations and best practices standards developed by the public transportati on industry, 

innovations  in  driver  assistance  technologies  and  driver  protection  infrastructure,  and  strategies to 

reduce  visibility impairments that may contribute to pedestrian fatalities. 

Similarly, to the extent practicable, the voluntary minimum safety standards to ensure the safe 

operation  of  public  transportation  systems  take  into  consideration  relevant  recommendations  of the 

NTSB, best practices standards developed by the public transportation industry, minimum safety 

standards or performance criteria being implemented across the public transportation industry, and 

recommendations from FTA’s Review and Evaluation of Pub lic Transportation Safety Standards 

report prepared pursuant to Sect ion 3020 of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) 

Act. 

FTA  strongly  encourages  transit  agencies  to  review  these  voluntary  minimum  safety  standards and 

recommended  practices and incorporate them into their operations and maintenance, as 

appropriate.  These standards and practices may help transit agencies improve safety performance 

in response to the safety performance measures outlined in Chapter II and may support the 

development of mitigations and strategies to address specific safety concerns ident ified by the 

transit agency or its Safety Committee. Further, FTA strongly encourages transit agencies to work 

with roadway owner(s) to proactively address safety concern s to benefit the riding public, 

particularly those that reach public transportation through walking, biking, and those that make 

use of assistive devices including wheelchairs. 

The voluntary safety standards and recommended practices included in this chapter include 

standards developed through research supported by FTA; other Federal agencies, such as the 

Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and Federal Railroad Administration ( FRA); the 

American Public Transportation Association (APTA), the designated standards development 

organization for the public transportation industry; and associations focused on electrical and 

mechanical engineering practices and technical and safety trai ning, among others.  This chapter of 

the  National Safety Plan  also  includes  voluntary  safety  standards  and  recommended  practices 

identified  by  the NTSB to address findings resulting from  investigations of major public 

transportation accidents. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

17 

Where  safety  standards  and/or  recommended  practices  have  not  yet  been  developed,  this  chapter 

identifies useful resources for transit agencies to consider from FTA, the Transit Cooperative 

Research  Program  (TCRP)  of  the  Transportation  Research  Board, FTA’s  Transit  Advisory 

Committee for Safety (TRACS), and other sources, where applicable. 

The  National Safety Plan  includes  11  categories  of  voluntary  safety  standards  and recommended 

practices: 

· Category A: Transit Worker Safety (Bus and Rail Transit)  – to reduce transit worker 

fatalities and injuries  

> ¡

Subcategory  A.1 : Transit  Worker  Assault  Prevention (Bus  and Rail  Transit)  

> ¡

Subcategory  A.2 : Roadway Worker  Protection  (Rail  Transit)  

> ¡

Subcategory  A.3 : Fatigue  Management,  Fitness  for  Duty,  and  Employee Distraction 

(Bus and Rail Transit) 

· Category  B: Pedestrian  and  Bicyclist Safety  (Bus  and  Rail  Transit)  – to  reduce 

collisions with pedestrians and bicyclists resulting in fatalities and injuries 

· Category  C:  Rail  Grade  Crossing  Safety  (Rail  Transit)  – to  reduce  rail  transit collisions 

at rail grade crossings resulting in fatalities and injuries 

· Category  D: Bus  Transit Safety  (Bus  Transit)  – to  reduce  bus  transit  collisions resulting 

in fatalities and injuries 

· Category  E: Tunnel  Ventilation  and  Fire  Safety  (Rail  Transit)  – to  reduce  the 

consequences of fire and smoke events in tunnels 

· Category  F:  Signal  System  Safety  (Rail  Transit)  – to  improve  the  performance  and 

reliability of signal systems to control train movement and reduce collisions 

· Category G: Vehicle Safety (Bus and Rail Transit)  – to improve the design and 

performance  of  transit  vehicles  to  protect  occupants,  communicate  safety  information, and 

support emergency access and egress  

> ¡

Subcategory  G.1 : Vehicle  Crashworthiness  and  Brake  Testing  (Bus  and  Rail  Transit)  

> ¡

Subcategory  G.2 : Vehicle  End -of -Railcar  Door  Messaging  (Rail  Transit)  

> ¡

Subcategory  G.3 : Vehicle Emergency  Systems  and  Fire  Safety  (Rail  Transit)  

> ¡

Subcategory  G.4 : Vehicle  Safety  Standards  and Practices  (Bus  Transit) 

· Category H: Electronic Recording Devices and Cameras (Rail Transit)  – to support 

monitoring of transit operations and investigation of safety events 

· Category I: Operations Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and Rail Transit) 

– to  support  compliance  with  and  sufficiency  of operations  procedures  and  the training, 

supervision, and qualification of operations personnel National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

18 

· Category J: Maintenance Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and Rail 

Transit)  – to  support  compliance  with  and  sufficiency  of maintenance  procedures  and  the 

training, supervision, and qualification of maintenance personnel 

· Category  K:  Precautionary  and  Reactive  Actions  during  an  Emergency  – to  ensure 

public and worker health and safety during emergencies National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

19 

## Category A: Transit Worker Safety (Bus and Rail Transit) 

(To  reduce  transit  worker  fatalities  and  injuries) 

Subcategory A.1 : Transit Worker Assault Prevention (Bus and Rail Transit) 

Vol. 1  – Research Overview  and  Vol. 2  – User Guide , TCRP 

TCRP  Report  193  – Tools  and  Strategies  for  Eliminating  Assaults  Against  Transit  Operators 

Considerations  for  preventing  assaults  against  transit  operators  and  a set  of  checklists, 

voluntary guidelines, and methodologies. 

Report 14 -01 , TRACS 

Preventing  and  Mitigating  Transit  Worker Assaults  in  the  Bus  and  Rail  Transit  Industry 

Recommendations  for  reducing  assaults. 

Subcategory  A.2 : Roadway  Worker  Protection (Rail  Transit) 11 

Report 0212 , FTA 

FTA  Standards  Development  Program: Rail  Transit  Roadway  Worker  Protection 

Research  on  existing  standards  and  best  practices, use  cases,  a risk  assessment  matrix, and 

high -level concepts of operations for roadway worker protection. 

APTA RT -OP -S-016 -11 , APTA 

Roadway Worker  Protection  Program  Requirements 

Recommendations  for  formalized  safe  operating  practices  as  they  pertain  to  work performed 

on or in proximity to rail transit rights -of -way. 

APTA RT -OP -RP -026 -20 , APTA 

Roadway  Worker  Near Miss  Reporting  Requirements 

Recommendations  on  the  elements  that  comprise  comprehensive  near -miss  reporting so useful 

information is gathered and analyzed.             

> 11 Recommended practices and safety standards in this subcategory also address safety concerns identified by the
> NTSB in R -13 -039, R -13 -040, R -14 -036, R -14 -038, R -14 -039 and R -14 -040.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

20 

APTA RT -OP -S-004 -03 , APTA 

Work Zone  Safety  Practices 

Recommendations on ways to address situations that are present when workers perform 

routine and emergency work on an operating rail line. 

APTA RT -OP -S-010 -04 , APTA 

Contractors’  Responsibility  for  Safety  on  the  Right -of -Way 

Recommendations for formalizing contractors’ responsibilities for knowing, complying with, 

and enforcing rail transit system  guidelines, rules, and procedures to govern the activities of 

contractors performing work on or near a rail right -of -way. 

Subcategory  A.3 : Fatigue  Management,  Fitness  for  Duty,  and  Employee  Distraction  (Bus  and 

Rail Transit) 12 

Fatigue  Management 

APTA  RT -OP -S-015 -09 , APTA 

Standard  for  Train  Operator  Hours -of -Service  Requirements 

Outline of the basic elements of an hours -of -service program that creates the conditions  in 

which  train  operators  have  an  opportunity  to  get  sufficient  rest  between work shifts to minimize 

the impact of fatigue on their job performance. 

APTA RT -OP -S-023 -17 , APTA 

Fatigue  Management Program  Requirements 

Recommendations  on  developing  a fatigue  management  program  to  mitigate  the impacts of 

fatigue. 

Report 14 -02 , TRACS 

Establishing  a Fatigue  Management  Program  for  the  Bus  and  Rail  Transit  Industry 

Recommendations regarding the components of a successful fatigue management program, 

including hours of service, shift scheduling, fatigue prevention and awareness training, 

fitness -for -duty medical evaluations and screenings, work and vehicle  environment  design, 

safety  culture,  incident  investigation,  and  data  collection.            

> 12 Recommended practices and safety standards in this sub -category also address safety concerns identified by
> the NTSB in R -15 -018, R -15 -019, R -15 -20 and R -15 -021.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

21 

Fitness  for  Duty 

APTA  RT -OP -S-018 -12 , APTA 

Fitness  for  Duty  Program  Requirements 

Recommendations  on  developing  a fitness  for  duty  program  so  rail  transit  systems  may 

formalize  measures  to  hire  rail  vehicle  and  on -track  equipment  operators  who  are  able to 

perform physical job duties. 

APTA  RT -OP -S-014 -04 , APTA 

Standard  for  Train  Operating  Employees  Reporting to  Work 

Recommendations  on  conducting  readiness  reviews  of  train  operators  before  they begin 

vehicle operations to allow an  extra margin of  safety concerning employee fitness and 

readiness to operate a rail vehicle. 

R-09 -011 , NTSB 

Recommendation  made to all rail transit agencies to establish a program to identify operators 

who are at high risk for obstructive sleep apnea or other sleep disorders and require that such 

operators be appropriately evaluated and treated .

Distraction 

APTA RT -OP -S-017  -11 , APTA 

Electronic  Device  Distraction  Policy  Requirements 

Recommendations  on  developing  a policy  that  provides  direction  as  to  when  and  where 

electronic devices may and may not be used by rail transit system employees. 

APTA  BTS -BS -RP -005 -09 , APTA 

Reducing  Driver -Controlled  Distractions  While  Operating  a Vehicle  on  Agency  Time 

Recommended  practices  for  reducing  operator  distractions. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

22 

## Category B: Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety (Bus and Rail Transit) 

(To  reduce  collisions  with  pedestrians  and  bicyclists  resulting  in  fatalities  and  injuries) 

Design 

Improving Safety for Pedestrians and Bicyclists Accessing Transit , FHWA/FTA 

Recommendations  for  improving  pedestrian  safety .

Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety , USDOT 

Links  to  Federal  policies,  manuals,  and  other  materials  on  pedestrian  and  bicycle  safety. 

Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety , FHWA 

Links  to  projects,  programs,  and  materials  for  use  in  reducing  pedestrian  and  bicyclist 

fatalities. 

Complete Streets , FHWA 

Links to funding and design, plans and analysis, and construction, operation, and maintenance 

practices in integrating safety in roadway design for all roadway users. 

Engineering Design for Pedestrian Safety at Highway -Rail Grade Crossings , FRA 

Research report on engineering designs for pedestrian treatments at rail grade  crossings. 

Transit Street Design Guide , National  Association  of  City  Transportation  Officials  (NACTO) 

Guidance  for  the  development  of  transit  facilities  on  city  streets  and  the  design  and 

engineering of city streets to prioritize transit, improve transit service quality, and support 

other transit -related goals. 

Urban Street Design Guide , NACTO 

The  toolbox  and  tactics  cities  use  to  make  streets  safer, more  livable, and  more economically 

vibrant. 

Urban Bikeway Design Guide , NACTO 

State -of -the -practice  solutions  for  creating  complete  streets  that  are  safe  and  enjoyable for 

bicyclists. 

Global Street Design Guide , NACTO 

Guidance  on  how  to  measure  the  success  of  urban  streets  to  include  access,  safety  and mobility 

for all users, environmental quality, economic benefit, public health, and overall quality of 

life. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

23 

APTA SUDS -UD -RP -009 -18 , APTA 

Bicycle  and  Transit  Integration:  A Practical  Transit  Agency  Guide  to  Bicycle Integration and 

Equitable Mobility 

Recommendations for transit agencies and municipalities seeking to facilitate active first/last 

mile connections to transit, reduce congestion, and promote healthy communities,  including 

context -driven  strategies  for  integrating  bicycles  with  transit. 

Treatments 

Report 0111 , FTA 

Manual  on  Pedestrian  and  Bicycle  Connections  to  Transit 

Best  practices  for  improving  pedestrian  and bicycle  safety  and access  to  transit. 

TCRP Report 175 , TCRP 

Guidebook  on  Pedestrian  Crossings  of Public  Transit  Rail  Services 

Engineering  treatments  designed  to  help  improve  pedestrian  safety  for  light  rail  and  streetcar. 

Proven Safety Countermeasures , FHWA 

Recommended  countermeasures  and  strategies  to  reduce  roadway  fatalities  and serious 

injuries. 

Safe Transportation for Every Pedestrian , FHWA 

Resources  for  recommended  countermeasures  to  protect  pedestrians. 

Guide for Improving Pedestrian Safety at Uncontrolled Crossing Locations , FHWA 

Recommendations  for  countermeasures  at  uncontrolled  pedestrian  crossing  locations. 

Suicide and Trespassing 

Report 0227 , FTA 

Mitigations for Trespasser and Suicide Fatalities and Injuries 

Mitigation strategies and countermeasures that may be used by rail transit agencies to reduce 

trespasser and suicide fatalities and injuries .National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

24 

## Category  C:  Rail  Grade  Crossing  Safety  (Rail  Transit) 

(To reduce rail transit collisions at rail grade  crossings resulting in fatalities and injuries) 

Assessment 

Report 0216 , FTA 

FTA  Standards  Development  Program:  Rail  Transit  Roadway/Pedestrian  Grade Crossing 

(Exploratory Report) 

Literature  review,  industry  survey,  development  of  general  use  cases  for  grade crossing, and 

case studies on four transit properties. 

Safety Bulletin 19 -03 , FTA 

Safety  Considerations  Associated  with  Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossings 

Voluntary  considerations  for  rail  transit  grade  crossing. 

APTA RT -RGC -RP -003 -03 , APTA 

Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossing  Safety  Assessment 

An  organized,  structured  approach  for  assessing  the  safety  of  new  and  existing  rail transit 

system highway rail grade crossings. 

Design and  Treatments 

Highway -Rail Crossing Handbook , FRA/ FHWA 

Current  practices  and  requirements  for  engineering  treatments  for  rail  grade  crossings. 

APTA RT -RGC -S-004 -03 , APTA 

Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossing  Warning  System  Design  Criteria  Installation  and  Operation 

Recommendations for selecting, installing, and operating highway rail transit grade crossing 

warning  systems,  warning  devices,  highway  traffic  signs,  and  other  highway traffic -control 

appliances. 

Public  Education 

APTA RT -RGC -RP -002 -02 , APTA 

Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossing  Public  Education 

Recommended  practices  for  developing  public  education  for  rail  transit  grade  crossings. 

Operation Lifesaver 

Voluntary  materials  for  improving  grade  crossing  safety. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

25 

## Category  D:  Bus  Transit  Safety  (Bus  Transit) 

(To  reduce  bus  transit  collisions  resulting  in  fatalities  and  injuries) 

Synthesis 126 , TCRP 

Successful  Practices  and  Training  Initiatives  to  Reduce  Accidents  and  Incidents  at Transit 

Agencies 

Analysis  of  practices  and  training  initiatives  to  reduce  accidents  and  incidents. 

Synthesis 145 , TCRP 

Current  Practices  in  the  Use  of  Onboard  Technologies  to  Avoid  Transit  Bus  Incidents and 

Accidents 

Analysis  of the use  of  on -board  technology  to  avoid  accidents  and  incidents. 

## Category  E:  Tunnel  Ventilation  and  Fire  Safety  (Rail  Transit) 

(To  reduce  the  consequences  of fire  and  smoke  events  in  tunnels 13 )

Safety Advisory 15 -1, FTA 

Audit  All  Rail  Fixed  Guideway  Public  Transportation  Systems  (RFGPTS)  with Subway 

Tunnel Environments 

Requirement  for  SSOAs  to  conduct  an  audit  of  all  RFGPTS  with  subway  tunnel environments 

(not currently active). 

Report 0231 , FTA 

Specifications and Guidelines for Rail Tunnel Design, Construction, Maintenance, and 

Rehabilitation 

Identifies existing specifications and guidelines for rail transit tunnel design, construction, 

maintenance , and rehabilitation .

Report 0235 , FTA 

Specifications and Guidelines for Rail Tunnel Repair and Rehabilitation 

Research on specifications and guidelines for rail transit tunnel repair and rehabilitation .

Report 0236 , FTA 

Specifications and Guidelines for Rail Tunnel Inspection and Maintenance 

Research on s pecifications and guidelines for rail transit tunnel maintenance  and  inspection .            

> 13 Recommended practices and safety standards in this category also address safety concerns identified by the NTSB
> in R -16 -001 and R -16 -002.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

26 

NFPA 130 , National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 

Standard  for  Fixed  Guideway  Transit  and  Passenger  Systems 

Fire  protection  requirements  for  transit  systems. 

## Category F: Signal System Safety (Rail Transit) 

(To  improve  the  performance  and  reliability  of  signal  systems  to  control  train  movement  and 

reduce collisions 14 )

General 

Safety Advisory 22 -2, FTA 

Signal  System  Safety  and  Train  Control 

Recommends that State Safety Oversight Agencies (SSOAs) direct rail transit agencies in their 

jurisdictions to consider signal system safety and train control as part of their Safety  Risk 

Management  processes.  Recommends  that  SSOAs  incorporate  SA  22 -2 into their  oversight 

activities. 

APTA  RT -SC -009 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Audio  Frequency Track Circuit  Inspection and  Maintenance 

Recommendations  for  assuring  the  safety  and  reliability  of  audio  frequency  track circuit 

systems. 

Communications  Based  Train  Control 

Report 0225 , FTA 

Needs  Assessment for Transit Rail Transmission -Based Train Control (TBTC) 

Identifies standards, systems and products that have the potential to provide risk reduction 

benefits .

IEEE 1474.1 , Institute  of  Electrical and  Electronics  Engineers  (IEEE) 

Standard  for  Communications -Based  Train  Control  Performance  and  Functional  Requirements 

Guidance  for  enhancing  performance,  availability,  operations,  and  train  protection using a 

communications -based train control system.             

> 14 Recommended practices and safety standards in this category also address safety concerns identified by the NTSB
> in R -15 -022.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

27 

IEEE 1474.2 , IEEE 

Standard  for  User  Interface  Requirements  in  Communications -Based  Train  Control  Systems 

Guidance  on  communications -based  train  control  systems  user  interface  and  how  to present 

this information to the user .

IEEE 1474.3 , IEEE 

Recommended  Practice  for  Communications -Based  Train  Control  System  Design  and 

Functional Allocations 

A preferred  system  design  and  functional  allocation  for  communications -based  train control 

systems. 

IEEE 1474.4 , IEEE 

Recommended  Practice  for  Functional  Testing  of  a Communications -Based  Train Control 

System 

A preferred  approach  for  functional  testing  of  a communications -based  train  control system 

based on the system design and functional allocations defined in IEEE Std  1474.3. 

Locking  Tests 

APTA  RT -SC -S-004 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Approach  Locking  Testing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  approach  locking  systems  are operating 

safely and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-005 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Route  Locking  Tests 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  route  locking  systems  are  operating safely 

and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-006 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for Time  Locking  Tests 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  time  locking  systems  are  operating safely 

and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-010 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Traffic  Locking  Tests 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  traffic  locking  will  prevent  traffic from 

changing direction on a section of track in between interlockings while that section is 

occupied or  while a signal displays an aspect to proceed into that section. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

28 

Signal  System  Components 

APTA  RT -SC -S-011 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Cable  Plant  Inspection and  Testing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  cable  plants  are  operating  safely and as 

designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-027 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Switch  Inspection and  Obstruction  Test ing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  switch  machines  and  associated indication 

circuitry are operating safely and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-028 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Vital  Relay  Test ing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  vital  relays  are  operating  safely and as 

designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -RP -033 -03 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for Visual  Inspection  of  Wayside  Signal  Equipment 

Recommendations  to  aid  in  identifying  visual  defects  or  other  potentially  hazardous conditions 

related to wayside signal equipment. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-035 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Vital  Processor -Based  System  Inspection,  Testing  and  Configuration  Control 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  vital  processor -based  systems  are  operating safely and 

as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -RP -008 -03 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Train -to -Wayside  Communication  System  Inspection  and  Testing 

Guidance  on  how  to  verify  that  train -to -wayside  communication  systems  and equipment are 

operating safely and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -RP -001 -02 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Wayside  Signal  AC  Power System  Inspection  and  Testing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  wayside  signal  AC  power  systems  and equipment are 

operating safely and as designed. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

29 

APTA  RT -SC -RP -002 -02 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Wayside  Signal  DC  Power System  Inspection  and  Testing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  wayside  DC  signal  power  systems  and equipment are 

operating safely and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-036 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Wayside  Signal  Inspection  and  Testing 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  wayside  signal  systems  are  operating  safely and as 

designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-040 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  AC  Track  Circuit  Inspection and  Maintenance 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  AC  track  circuits  and  equipment  are  operating safely 

and as designed. 

APTA  RT -SC -S-043 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Impedance  Bond  Inspection and  Maintenance 

Recommendations  on  how  to  verify  that  rail  transit  audio  frequency  and  power impedance 

bonds are operating safely and as designed. 

Public  Education 

APTA RT -RGC -RP -002 -02 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossing  Public  Education 

Recommendations  for  developing  rail  transit  grade  crossing  public  safety  and  trespass 

prevention education programs. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

30 

## Category G: Vehicle Safety (Bus and Rail Transit) 

(To improve the design and performance of transit vehicles to protect occupants, to communicate 

safety information, and to support emergency access and egress 15 )

Subcategory G.1 : Vehicle Crashworthiness and Brake Testing (Bus and Rail Transit) 

Vehicle  Crashworthiness 

Report 0141 , FTA 

FTA  Standards  Development  Program:  Crashworthiness/Crash  Energy  Management Follow -up 

for Less than 30 Ft Bus 

Results  of  a study  on  the  needs  and  gaps  for  voluntary  standards  or  recommended practices for 

crashworthiness and crash energy management for less that 30 -ft. paratransit body -on -chassis 

buses (cutaways). 

Report 0179 , FTA 

FTA  Standards  Development  Program:  Crashworthiness/Crash  Energy  Management for 

Transit Bus 

Results  of  an  examination  of  the  existing  standards,  guidelines,  and  recommendations 

associated with crashworthiness and crash energy management for transit buses, including 

articulated buses, bus rapid transit buses, and paratransit body -on -chassis  buses. 

Report 0233 , FTA 

FTA  Standards  Development  Program:  Crash  Energy  Management for  Heavy Rail Vehicles, 

Light Rail Vehicles, and Streetcars 

Report includes a summary of transportation modes that lack crashworthiness and crash 

energy management standards, existing standards implemented into industries related to 

crashworthiness, and crash energy management used for newly -procured equipment and 

industry survey results of the use of the standards implemented. 

ASME RT -2, American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers  (ASME) 

Safety  Standard  for  Structural  Requirements  for  Heavy  Rail  Transit  Vehicles 

Guidance  on  incorporating  passive  safety  design  concepts  related  to  heavy  rail  transit carbody 

performance during collisions. 

ASME RT -1, ASME 

Safety  Standard  for  Structural  Requirements  for  Light  Rail  Vehicles  and  Streetcars 

Guidance  on  incorporating  passive  safety  design  concepts  related  to  light -rail  vehicle carbody 

performance during collisions.             

> 15 Recommended practices and safety standards in this sub -category also address safety concerns identified by the
> NTSB in R -06 -006 and R -17 -004.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

31 

APTA RT -VIM -RP -025 -15 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Operator Protection  Features  for  Rail  Transit  Vehicles 

Recommendations  on  vehicle  features  to  consider  improving  operator  protection  when 

procuring new rail transit vehicles. 

Vehicle  Brake  Performance  and  Inspection 

Safety Advisory 14 -2, FTA 

Verification of  Rail  Vehicle  Safe  Stopping  Distances  in Terminal  Stations 

Requirement  for  rail  transit  agencies  to  review  terminal  station  configurations  to  verify that 

designed braking distances address the actual operating conditions in stations, including 

authorized train speeds, train length and length of platform, the position of signals and trip 

stops, and the bumping post installation. 

APTA RT -VIM -S-007 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Friction Brake  Equipment  Periodic  Inspection  and  Maintenance 

Recommendations on the basic procedures to apply when performing periodic inspections  and 

maintenance  of  brake  cylinders,  tread  brake  units,  disc  brake  units, brake discs, tread brake 

shoes, and disc brake pads for rail transit vehicles. 

Subcategory G.2 : Vehicle  End -of -Railcar Door Messaging (Rail Transit) 16 

Safety Bulletin 20 -01 , FTA 

End -of -Railcar Door  Signage  and  Messaging 

Safety  considerations  associated  with  end -of -railcar  door  signage  and  messaging  in rail transit 

vehicles. 

APTA PR -PS -S-002 -98, Rev. 3 , APTA 

Standard  for  Emergency  Signage  for  Egress/Access  of  Passenger  Rail  Equipment 

Recommendations on  designing and selecting the physical characteristics, informational 

content,  and  placement  of  all  interior  emergency  exit  and  exterior  rescue access 

signs/markings and instructions .             

> 16 Recommended practices and safety standards in this sub -category also address safety concerns identified by the
> NTSB in R -19 -039 and R -19 -040.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

32 

APTA RT -VIM -S-021 -10 , APTA 

Standard  for  Emergency  Signage  for  Rail  Transit  Vehicles 

Recommendations  on  minimum  design  and  performance  criteria  for  rail  transit  car emergency 

signage  that  functions  under  normal  conditions  and  also  operates  when normal and/or 

emergency lighting systems are unavailable. 

ISO 3864 -1:2011 , International  Standards  Organization  (ISO) Graphical Symbols  — Safety 

Colours and Safety Signs 

Part  1:  Design Principles  for  Safety  Signs  and  Safety  Markings 

Guidance on safety identification colors and design principles for workplace and public  area 

safety  signs  and  safety  markings  for  the  purpose  of  accident  prevention, fire protection, health 

and hazard information, and emergency evacuation. 

ISO 7010:2019 , ISO 

Graphical  symbols  — Safety  Colours  and Safety  Signs  — Registered Safety  Signs 

Guidance  on  safety  signs  for  the  purposes  of  accident  prevention,  fire  protection, health hazard 

information, and emergency  evacuation. 

Subcategory G.3 : Vehicle Emergency Systems and Fire Safety (Rail Transit) 

Emergency  Systems 

Report 0199 , FTA 

Emergency  Lighting  and  Signage  for  Rail  Transit  Passenger  Vehicles  (Report  0199) 

Results  of  research  on  existing  reports,  standards,  and  regulations  related  to emergency 

lighting and signage and their use on  all rail modes. 

APTA  RT -VIM -S-026 -12 , APTA 

Standard  for Rail  Transit  Vehicle  Passenger Emergency  Systems 

Information  on  various  passenger  emergency  systems  for  rail  transit  agencies  to consider 

when purchasing new vehicles. 

APTA RT -VIM -S-020 -10 , APTA 

Standard  for  Emergency  Lighting  System  Design  for  Rail  Transit  Vehicles 

Recommendations  on  emergency  lighting  system  designs  that  provide  lighting  when power loss 

disrupts normal lighting. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

33 

APTA RT -VIM -S-022 -10 , APTA 

Standard  for Low -Location  Exit  Path  Marking 

Recommendations  on  the  design  and  use  of  passive -type  markings  due  to  the  lower  cost and 

maintenance requirements compared with active marking system designs. 

Fire  Safety 

NFPA 130 , NFPA 

Standard  for  Fixed  Guideway  Transit  and  Passenger  Systems 

Guidance  on  essential  items  for  fire  protection  and  life  safety  for  underground, surface, and 

elevated fixed guideway transit and passenger rail systems. 

Safety Advisory 15 -1, FTA 

Audit  All  Rail  Fixed  Guideway  Public  Transportation  Systems  (RFGPTS)  with Subway 

Tunnel Environments 

Identifies  specific  areas  of  concern  identified  by  the  National  Transportation  Safety Board that 

State Safety Oversight Agencies will audit. 

Subcategory G.4 : Vehicle Safety Standards and Practices (Bus  Transit) 

Remanufacturing  or  Rebuilding  Brake  and  Chassis  Components 

APTA BTS -BC -RP -009 -20 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Remanufacturing  or  Rebuilding  of  Transit  Bus  Brake  and Chassis 

Components 

A high -level  overview  of  key  considerations  when preparing  specifications  to remanufacture or 

rebuild bus brake and chassis  components. 

Fire  Safety 

APTA  BTS -BS -RP -001 -05 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Transit Bus  Fire  Safety  Shutdown 

Recommendations  on  the  notifications  and  systems and  circuits  to  shut  off  after  a fire  is 

detected. 

APTA  BTS -BS -RP -002 -07 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Transit  Bus  Electrical  System  Requirements  Related  to  Fire  Safety 

Recommendations  for  transit  bus  electrical  control system  configuration  for  electrical circuits 

related to fire safety. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

34 

APTA  BTS -BS -RP -003 -08 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Installation of  Transit  Vehicle  Fire  Protection  Systems 

Recommended  minimum  performance  specifications  for  detection  of  and  suppression of 

thermal events on transit vehicles. 

## Category H: Electronic Recording Devices and Cameras (Rail Transit) 

(To  support  monitoring  of  transit  operations  and  investigation  of  safety  events 17 )

Event Data  Recorders 

IEEE 1482.1 -2013 , IEEE 

Standard for  Rail  Transit Vehicle  Event  Recorders 

Guidelines  for  on -board  devices/systems  with  crashworthy  memory  that  record  data  to support 

accident/incident analysis. 

Inward - and  Outward -Facing  Cameras 

Safety Bulletin 20 -02 , FTA 

Inward - and Outward -Facing Image  and Audio  Recorders 

Information  for  State  Safety  Oversight  Agencies  and  rail  transit  agencies  on  installing inward -

and outward -facing image and audio recorders in the controlling cabs and cab car operating 

compartments to support safety risk management and safety assurance activities. 

Report 0200 , FTA 

Inward - and Outward -facing Audio  and Video  Recordings  for  Transit Rail  Vehicles 

Report documents the research necessary to assist APTA in developing a recommended 

practice  for  the  industry  to  install  inward - and  outward -facing  cameras and audio recorders, 

consistent with the National Transportation Safety Board’s  recommendation to FTA, R -17 -13. 

APTA RT -OP -RP -024 -19 , APTA 

Recommended Practice for Crash and Fire Protected Inward -and -Outward -Facing Audio and 

Image Recorders in Rail Transit Operating Compartments 

Recommendations  on  the  specifications  for  and  the  installation  and  maintenance  of audio and 

image recording devices in rail transit vehicle operating compartments.              

> 17 Recommended practices and safety standards in this category also address safety concerns identified by the NTSB
> in R -15 -023 and R-17 -013.

National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

35 

## Category I: Operations Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and Rail 

## Transit) 

(To support compliance with and sufficiency of operations procedures and the training, 

supervision, and qualification of operations personnel) 

Operations  Control  Center 

APTA RT -OP -S-005 -03 , APTA 

Standards  for  Operations  Control  Centers 

Addresses  the  primary  elements  of  the  general  design/function  and  overall  authority essential 

in  an  OCC  facility  and  the  functional  elements  of  OCC  personnel  and  their applicable roles. 

APTA  RT -OP -S-006 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Rail  Transit Signals  Operating  Rules  and  Procedures 

Recommendations  on  applying  and  using  train  control  signal  technology  to  enhance safe, 

efficient train operation through the application of operating rules and  procedures. 

APTA RT -OP -RP -030 -21 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for Defensive  Rail  Operations 

Recommendations  on  creating  programs  that  encourage  and  promote  operating  trains and 

other rail transit vehicles in a defensive manner. 

Competencies  and  Training 

APTA  RT -OP -S-013 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for Training  of Rail  Operating  Employees 

An  outline  of  the  basic  elements  of  a comprehensive  rail  operating  employee  training and 

retraining program. 

APTA RT -OP -RP -029 -21 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Rail  Operations  Employee  Development  Practices 

A framework for the types of employee development practices that rail transit agencies may 

enact  to  assist  their  employees  in  gaining  the  requisite  skills  to  advance  within  rail operations 

and supervision. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

36 

Compliance  with  and  Sufficiency  of  Operations  Rules  and  Procedures 

APTA RT -OP -S-011 -10 , APTA 

Standard  for Rule -Compliance  Program  Requirements 

Recommendations  on  developing  a formal  program  that  promotes  comprehension  of rail 

transit  system  rules  and  how  to  measure  and  enforce  employee  adherence  to  the established 

rules. 

APTA RT -OP -S-001 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Rulebook Development  and  Review 

Recommendations  on  developing  and  revising  a transit  operating  system  rulebook,  and 

suggestions for rulebook issuance and authority. 

APTA  RT -OP -S-019 -14 , APTA 

Standard  for Rail  Transit  Operations  Supervisor Program  Requirements 

Baseline recommendations for rail operations supervisor job duties to improve supervisor 

effectiveness,  and  guidance  on  monitoring  and  managing  supervisor  performance. 

TCRP Report 149 , TRB 

Improving Safety -Related Rules Compliance in the Public Transportation Industry 

Potential best practices for all of the elements of a comprehensive approach to safety -related 

rules compliance. 

## Category J: Maintenance Procedures, Compliance, and Training (Bus and 

## Rail Transit) 

(To  support  compliance  with  and  sufficiency  of  maintenance  procedures  and  the  training, 

supervision, and qualification of maintenance personnel) 

Fixed  Structures 

APTA RT -FS -S-001 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Rail  Transit  Fixed  Structures  Inspection  and  Maintenance 

Recommendations on the minimum means, methods, and frequency of period safety inspections 

and maintenance activities of rail transit structure safety -critical components  and  the 

qualifications  that  employees  or  contractors  must  have  to  perform these procedures. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

37 

Track 

Report 0215 , FTA 

Research  Report  and  Findings:  Review  of  Standards  for  Track  Inspection  and  Maintenance 

Research  on  the  state  of  inspection  and  maintenance  practices  for  rail  transit  agencies in the 

U.S. 

APTA RT -FS -S-002 -02 , APTA 

Standard for  Rail  Transit  Track Inspection and  Maintenance 

Recommendations  for  rail  transit  track  inspection  and  maintenance .

Stations, Shops,  and  Yards 

APTA RT -FS -S-003 -02 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Rail  Transit  Station,  Shop  and  Yard  Inspection  and  Maintenance 

Recommendations  for  rail  transit  station,  shop,  and  yard  inspection  and  maintenance. 

Traction  Power  Electrification  Systems 

APTA RT -FS -S-004 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for Traction  Electrification  Substation  Inspection, Maintenance, and  Testing 

Recommendations  for  testing  traction  electrification  activities. 

APTA RT -FS -S-005 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Traction  Electrification  Stray  Current/Corrosion  Control  Equipment Inspection 

and Maintenance 

Recommendations  for  the  control  of  stray  current  and  corrosion  control. 

APTA RT -FS -S-006 -03 , APTA 

Standard  for  Traction  Electrification  Distribution  System  Inspection,  Maintenance,  and  Testing 

Recommendations  for  inspection,  maintenance,  and  testing  of  traction  electrification 

distribution systems. 

Rail  Grade  Crossings 

APTA RT -RGC -S-001 -02 , APTA 

Standard  for  Rail  Transit  Grade  Crossing  Warning  Device  Inspection,  Testing,  and 

Maintenance 

Recommendations  for  inspection,  maintenance,  and  testing  of  grade  crossing  warning  devices. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

38 

Rail  Maintenance  Training 

APTA  RT -RMT -RP -001 -10 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Rail  Vehicle s Maintenance  Training  Standards 

Recommendations  for  rail  vehicle  maintenance  training. 

APTA  RT -VIM -RP -011 -03 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Rail  Transit  Vehicle  Inspection  and  Maintenance  Training and 

Qualifications 

Recommended  practices  for  rail  vehicle  inspection and  maintenance  training  and 

qualifications. 

APTA  RT -RMT -RP -002 -10 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Rail  Signals  Maintenance  Training  Content  and  Standards 

Recommendations  for  rail  signal maintenance  training. 

APTA  RT -SC -RP -031 -03 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Signal  Maintenance  Personnel  Hiring  Qualifications, Training, and 

Competencies 

Recommendations  for  signal maintenance  personnel qualification and  training. 

APTA  RT -RMT -RP -003 -10 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Elevator  and  Escalator  Maintenance  Training  Guidelines  Standards 

Recommendations  for  training for  elevator  and  escalator  maintenance. 

APTA  RT -RMT -RP -004 -10 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Traction  Power  Maintenance  Training  Standards 

Recommendations  for  traction power  maintenance  training. 

Electric  Bus es 

Report 0252 , FTA 

Safety and Security Certification of Electric Bus Fleets  – Industry  Best Practices 

Minimum safety and security certification program practices and protocols for transit 

agencies to verify that battery electric buses and their associated facilities, systems, and 

equipment are safe for  revenue operations .

Report 0253 , FTA 

Procuring and Maintaining Battery Electric Buses and Charging Systems  – Best Practices 

Best practices for procuring and maintaining battery electric buses and charging systems .National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

39 

## Category  K:  Precautionary  and  Reactive  Actions  during  an  Emergency 

(To  ensure  public  and  worker  health  and  safety  during  emergencies) 

Coordination  with  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS) 

Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response , HHS 

HHS  emergency  preparedness  and  response  main  page. 

Ventilation in Buildings , CDC 

Ventilation mitigation strategies for buildings. 

Emergency  Response  and  Recovery 

COVID -19 Resource Tool for Public Transportation , FTA 

Federal COVID -19 guidance and recommendations .

Using Your Safety Management System (SMS) to Mitigate Infectious Disease and Respiratory 

Hazard Exposure , FTA 

Sources of hazard identification data and potential mitigations to inform the Safety Risk 

Management process .

Response and Recovery from Declared Emergencies and Disasters , FTA 

Transit response and recovery actions and funding in response to declared emergencies  and 

disasters,  including  major  accidents,  terrorist  actions,  and  natural  disasters. 

APTA  SS -SEM -S-014 -20 , APTA 

Standard  for Transit  Agency  Emergency  Management  Program 

Recommendations  for  transit  emergency  response  programs. 

APTA  RT -OP -S-007 -04 , APTA 

Standard  for Rail  Transit  Agency  System  Emergency  Management  Requirements 

Recommendations  for  rail  transit  emergency  management. 

APTA  SS -SEM -S-005 -09 , APTA 

Standard  for Developing  a Transit  Agency  Response  Plan  to  a Public  Health  Emergency 

Recommendations  for  creation  and  implementation  of  a basic  response  plan  to  a public health 

emergency. National Public Transportation Safety Plan 

40 

APTA  SS -SEM -WP -016 -20 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Developing  a Pandemic  Virus  Service  Restoration  Checklist 

Recommendations  for  service  restoration  after  pandemic  event. 

APTA SS -SEM -RP -002 -08 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  First  Responder  Familiarization  of  Transit  Systems 

Recommended  practices  for  ensuring  first  responder  system  familiarization. 

APTA  SS -SEM -S-004 -09 , APTA 

Standard  for  Transit  Exercises 

Recommendations  for  transit  drills  and  exercises. 

APTA  SS -SEM -RP -009 -09 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Emergency  Communication  Strategies  for  Transit  Agencies 

Recommendations  for  effective  communications  during  emergencies .

APTA  SS -SEM -RP -011 -09 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Regional  Emergency  Planning  and  Participation  in  Mutual  Aid 

Recommendations  for  regional emergency planning and mutual  aid. 

APTA  SS -SEM -RP -015 -19 , APTA 

Recommended  Practice  for  Suspension  of  Service  of  a Public  Transportation  System and 

Recovery 

Strategies  for  managing  service  suspension  and  recovery.
