Title: Chapter 1 crop.pmd

URL Source: https://www.ncert.nic.in/pdf/publication/exemplarproblem/classVIII/science/heep101.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2020 07:11:00 GMT

Markdown Content:
M ULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS 

1. Which one of the following condition is not essential to grow maize? (a) High temperature (c) Low temperature (b) Humidity (d) Rainfall 2. Propagation of ginger is generally done using (a) seed (c) root (b) stem (rhizome) (d) leaf 3. Which of the following statement is not true for organic manure? (a) It enhances water holding capacity of soil. (b) It has a balance of all plant nutrients. (c) It provides humus to soil. (d) It improves texture of soil. 4. The term used for the process of separation of grains from chaff is (a) sieving (c) winnowing (b) threshing (d) hand picking 5. Read the statements given below. (i) Seeds require moisture for germination. (ii) Plants can absorb nutrients mostly in dissolved form. (iii) Irrigation protects crops from both frost and hot air currents. (iv) Irrigation improves soil texture. Choose the combination of statements which indicate the need to irrigate crops. (a) i and ii (b) i, ii, iii (c) i, ii, iii, iv (d) i and iii 6. Which of the following tools would a farmer use to remove weeds from the field? (a) Hoe (c) Axe (b) Plough (d) Cultivator 

# Crop Production and Management 1

> 12/04/18

EEEEE XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR PPPPPROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS 27. Which of the following is not true for fertilisers? (a) They increase the yield. (b) Their excessive use disturbs the balance of nutrients in soil. (c) They are generally used in small quantity. (d) They are environment friendly. 8. Given below are statements about the harmful effects of weeds on crop plants. (i) They interfere in harvesting. (ii) They help crop plants to grow healthily. (iii) They compete with crop plants for water, nutrients, space and light. (iv) They affect plant growth. Choose the correct combination of statements. (a) i, iii, iv (c) iii, iv (b) iii only (d) i, ii, iii, iv 9. The process of loosening and turning of soil is called (a) irrigation and manuring (c) tilling and ploughing (b) digging and winnowing (d) harvesting and storage 10. The monsoon season in our country is during the months (a) April to December (c) November to March (b) June to September (d) January to May 11. The system of irrigation where in water is supplied drop by drop near the roots of plants, is called (a) pulley system (c) sprinkler system (b) drip system (d) lever system 

VERY SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS 

12. Pick out the odd one from the following words given in the box and give reason for it. Plough, Seed Drill, Hoe, Chain Pump, Sickle 13. If you are given a dry piece of land for cultivation what will you do before sowing the seeds? 

> 12/04/18

CCCCC ROP ROP ROP ROP ROP PPPPPRODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION AND AND AND AND AND MMMMM ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT 314. State whether the following statements are True or False . Correct the false statements. (i) Using good quality seed is the only criterion to get high yield. (ii) Growing different crops in different seasons in the same field will deplete the soil of nutrients. (iii) All crop plants are sown as seeds in the field. (iv) Cells of root nodules of leguminous plants fix nitrogen. (v) Freshly harvested grains must be dried before storing. 15. During which months do farmers grow mustard in India? 16. Which activity of the farmer can promote growth of earthworms and microbes in the field? 

S HORT ANSWER QUESTIONS 

17. Beera, wants to practice crop rotation in his field. Suggest a Rabi 

crop and a Kharif crop which will replenish his field with nitro-gen. Which crop replenishes nitrogen and why? 18. Match the agricultural implements given in Column A with their use given in Column B .

Column A Column B 

(i) Sickle (a) Ploughing (ii) Hoe (b) Sowing (iii) Seed Drill (c) Harvesting (iv) Sprinkler (d) Irrigation (i)___; (ii)___; (iii)___; (iv)___ 19. What are organic foods? 20. From the word puzzle given as Fig. 1.1 find atleast eight words which are ‘farmer’s friends.’ Classify them into living and non living. 

> 12/04/18

EEEEE XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR PPPPPROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS 421. (a) Name the tool used with a tractor for sowing seeds in a field. (b) What are the advantages of using this tool? 22. (a) Name the practice followed for large scale rearing of farm animals. (b) What facilities are provided to farm animals? 23. Clasify the following crops into Khariff and Rabi crops and write in the tabular column given below: Maize, paddy, mustard, pea, gram, wheat, groundnut, cotton. Fig. 1.1 

Khariff Khariff Khariff Khariff Khariff Rabi Rabi Rabi Rabi Rabi 

> 12/04/18

CCCCC ROP ROP ROP ROP ROP PPPPPRODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION RODUCTION AND AND AND AND AND MMMMM ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT ANAGEMENT 5

LONG ANSWER QUESTIONS 

24. Despite favourable climatic conditions, a farmer’s crop failed to give good yield. Give the possible reasons for this. 25. As a part of eco-club activity students were asked to raise a kitchen garden in the school premises. They were provided with some materials given in the box. List the other materials you would require. How will you plan the garden? Write the steps. 

khurpi, water-can, spade, shovel 

Note: You have been asked to use only environment friendly materials. 26. Paddy is a major cereal crop in our country. (a) In which season is paddy cultivated? (b) Discuss the method of sowing. (c) What measures must be taken to prevent spoilage and insect attack of harvested grains. 27. Unscramble the words related to crop production and its man-agement and write in the boxes given beneath them. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) Now, using the circled letters, form one word which is an activity carried out in fields, after maturation of crops. 28. Given below is a conversation between two farmers Heera and Beera. Heera : Brother Beera, your maize crops looks beautiful! They have grown pretty fast. Beera : Yes, I have sprayed urea this time. What about you? 

> 12/04/18

EEEEE XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR XEMPLAR PPPPPROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS ROBLEMS 6Heera : Well, I am still relying on good old cow dung. I am saving money for buying a tractor. Beera : That’s good. Tractor saves a lot of time and labour. Heera : Yes, it’s been very labour intensive for me and now these weeds have come up. Beera : Try weedicides, they are very effective. Now answer the following questions. (i) List the practices which are not environment friendly and why? (ii) What is the advantage of modern agriculture implements over traditional ones? (iii) Name one weedicide and the precaution farmers must take during its application. 29. For discussion Despite being one of the growing economies, our country still has a large section of population going hungry and malnour-ished. Do you think an efficient crop production mechanism is the only solution to this? Discuss in the class what else needs to be done to root out hunger and malnutrition from our country. 30. Terms related to agricultural practice are given below. Rearrange them in the correct sequence. harvesting, sowing, manuring, tilling and ploughing, irrigation, de–weeding.
