Title: Search for red lobster news on SeafoodNews.com. SeafoodNews.com, the most widely read seafood industry news in North America.

URL Source: https://seafoodnews.com/Search/EW5i94SFFOoLI1BMXT6i051y__OJQNCcpKYUzLx7kxUmf9fUFGvjT0g==

Markdown Content:
Red Lobster's 2017 Endless Shrimp Promotion Begins With 2 New Offerings

SEAFOODNEWS.COM[Seafood News] September 6, 2017

Shrimp lovers will want to flock to Red Lobster. The restaurant chain is bringing back their annual “Endless Shrimp” promotion for a limited time, giving customers the opportunity to “mix and match their shrimp selections.”

“This year,Red Lobster is giving guests the most abundant and generous portions on their initial order, making it the best Endless Shrimp experience yet,” Chef Dustin Hilinski, executive chef and director of culinary at Red Lobster, said in a statement. “And this year’s new flavors are ...

Full Story »

Live American Lobster, Dungeness Crab Pass Chinese Quarantine in 40 Minutes

SEAFOODNEWS.COM[Qingdao] translated by Amy Zhong - September 6, 2017

Three tons of American lobsters, Dungeness crabs and geoducks arrived in Qingdao from Canada recently.

On the evening of Aug. 24, Qingdao airport welcomed one flight from Vancouver, British Columbia, in Canada. It carried live American lobsters, Dungeness crab and geoducks with a total weight of 3 tons. This import sets a new record in Shandong’s edible seafood imports regarding their species number and weight. And they were available in local markets after clearance.

The inspection and quarantine bureau...

Full Story »

News Summary September 1, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Latest NOAA Surveys Off West Coast Spell More Bad News for Salmon**

Today's lead item reports that a NOAA Fisheries survey team has finished their spring and summer surveys off the coast of the Pacific Northwest with little evidence of juvenile coho or Chinook salmon. The team also discovered that ocean conditions foreshadow low abundance in the coming years.

Meanwhile, tuna-fishing nations have agreed on a plan to replenish the severely depleted Pacific bluefin stocks. The plan came after a week-long meeting in Busan, South Korea. The northern committee of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission and the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission agreed to ...

Full Story »

Lobstermen Test New Bait as Hedge against Herring Price Spikes

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Press Herald] BY PENELOPE OVERTON - August 29, 2017

_With The Nature Conservancy, lobstermen are testing the viability of frozen alewives as an alternative to Atlantic herring._

Lobstermen and environmentalists are trying to harness the dramatic comeback of the spring alewife to ease their summertime bait problems.

Two lobstering co-ops in Tenants Harbor and Port Clyde are working with The Nature Conservancy to see if they can freeze the alewives that bait their traps so successfully each spring to catch lobster at other times of the year. If it works, alewives could be the affordable bait they need when their usual favorite, Atlantic...

Full Story »

Brunei Blue Shrimp Sold Exclusively on Alibaba's T-Mall Platform Under New Agreement

SEAFOODNEWS.COM[Ishwang] translated by Amy Zhong - August 25, 2017

At the end of last month, T-mall platform signed a strategic cooperation agreement with more than 20 crab sellers in Jiangsu province who own aquaculture areas totaling 37,000 Mu (6,227 acres). All the crab will be supplied to the platform. And this month T-mall has made another big move: It signed a cooperation agreement with Zhangzidao during the World Seafood Shanghai Exhibition on Aug 19. The agreement reads that all Zhangzidao’s blue shrimps imported from Brunei will be sold through the platform.

According to Zhangzidao...

Full Story »

“Let’s Make the Lobster Emoji Happen” Campaign Grows on Change.org

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 24, 2017

What started off as a small campaign by a restaurant chain to add a lobster emoji to the electronic messaging pictogram catalogue has turned into a rally cry for seafood lovers.

Earlier this week, the Luke’s Lobster chain started a petition on Change.org to get UniCode Consortium, the organization responsible for adding emojis, to include a lobster in their next update. The online petition initially sought to get 100 signatures, but that number has since grown to ...

Full Story »

Hema Expands Fresh Retail/Restaurant Concept in China Merchandising Online Seafood; Plans 50 Stores in Chengdu

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Sichuan] translated by Amy Zhong - August 24, 2017.

The Hema store in Shanghai attracted a lot of public attention last month with the arrival of Jack Ma, a renowned businessman in China and founder of Alibaba. After his tour around the store, Ma enjoyed fresh food such as crayfish, king crab and lobsters, which were cooked in the store.

According to some sources, Hema is wholly invested by Alibaba and is trying a new retailing mode. It serves as a supermarket that provides various fresh food and also a restaurant where consumers can have their selected...

Full Story »

Seafood Veteran Greg Brown Joins GAA as Program Integrity Manager for BAP

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 23, 2017

Greg Brown, who has held the title of VP of corporate procurement for Flying Food Group and director of category management seafood for U.S. Foodservice, among other titles, has joined the Global Aquaculture Alliance (GAA). Brown will be taking on the role of program integrity manager for the Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP) third-party certification program.

The seafood industry veteran will lead a team that is dedicated to ensuring that ...

Full Story »

Rubicon Founder Brian Wynn Invests in Frozen “Food-tech” Company Cadence Gourmet

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 23, 2017

Seafood pioneer and Rubicon Resources founder Brian Wynn has invested in frozen “food-tech” company Cadence Gourmet.

The Los Angeles based frozen food company was launched in 2004 by CEO David Wells, a former food executive. A fast casual restaurant chain approached Wells with their problem of food inconsistency across their restaurants. Inspired by European frozen food and their technology, Wells and his team created frozen replacements for their client. From there they ...

Full Story »

News Summary August 22, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Congressional Bills Would Alter MSA to Benefit Recreational Fisheries in Gulf of Mexico**

Today's lead item reports that two companion bills in the House and Senate, both currently in committee, would alter the Magnuson-Stevens Act (MSA) in how it addresses recreational and commercial fisheries management. The bills call for a review of the red snapper fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico. It also seeks to alter the section in the MSA that deals with Gulf red snapper.

Meanwhile, fish plant workers are receiving aid from the Newfoundland and Labrador government in order to ...

Full Story »

**ANALYSIS: Lobster Meat Market Retreats From All-time High**

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Jim Kenny August 21, 2017

The market for CK meat has declined a little more than 14 percent in a year’s time; from a record-high $29.50/lb. to...

Full Story »

News Summary August 21, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Jeff Davis Says Blue Harvest Will Consolidate its Processing Operations in New Bedford**

Today's lead item reports that Blue Harvest Fisheries will consolidate their processing operations in New Bedford. CEO Jeff Davis confirmed the news to South Coast Today. The consolidation comes after the seafood processor purchased Fairhaven’s Harbor Blue in 2016. Blue Harvest is sinking $5 million into refurbishing their facilities to put all of their cutting and processing operations under one roof. Davis says the consolidation will make their business more efficient.

Meanwhile, a standoff has developed over low lobster shore prices in ...

Full Story »

Capital Seafood Rebuilding in Nova Scotia After 2016 Fire

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [The Chronicle Herald] by James Risdon

Eastern Passage-based Capital Seafood International is getting ready to rise from the ashes after a fire destroyed its lobster processing and storage building last November.

“Last year, it was terrible,” Jiu Chang, vice-president of Capital Seafood, said in an interview Thursday. “Not only did we lose the working area and the equipment but also the production. We just can’t do anything.”

The electrical fire that ripped through the two-story building on Government Wharf Road last year took out ...

Full Story »

Dispute Develops over Low Lobster Shore Prices in New Brunswick

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [CBC NEWS] By Sarah Betts - August 21, 2017

_Fishermen have been getting paid, but not as much as they expected, says Maritime Fishermen's Union_

Fifty lobster fishermen in New Brunswick tied up their boats and stayed on land to protest what they call unreasonably low prices on their catch outside a processing plant in Saint Anne de Kent Thursday.

Lobster fishermen, processors and union members met Wednesday to discuss the "unsatisfactory" low prices some have been paid for their catches this season.

'It's very troubling': N.B. lobster fishermen discouraged by lower wages, union...

Full Story »

Canadian, U.S. Scientists Scrambling to Solve Right Whale Deaths

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Press Herald] by Colin Woodward August 17, 2017

The North Atlantic right whale, the world’s second-most endangered marine mammal, is having a catastrophic year in the waters off New England and Atlantic Canada, and scientists from Maine to Newfoundland are scrambling to figure out why.

At least a dozen right whales have been found dead this summer in the worst die-off researchers have ever recorded, a disastrous development for a species with a worldwide population of about 500 ...

Full Story »

News Summary August 14, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Stronger Canadian Dollar Creating Standoff Over Falling Shore Lobster Prices in New Brunswick**

Today's lead item from Seafood News editor John Sackton reports that the strengthening Canadian dollar is pressuring the lobster industry. The season is currently closed in Nova Scotia, which means that dealers are selling off live inventory purchased at higher prices. With the Canadian dollar dropping from $1.35 to $1.25 in late July, this is the equivalent of a 7% drop in money returned back to Canada, squeezing margins.

In other news, the fleet owned by New Bedford fishing mogul Carlos Rafael is continuing to fish nearly five months after the Codfather pled...

Full Story »

Maxfield Seafood Sues Freight Co. Over Theft of $318,00 Load of Frozen Lobster from Boston

SEAFOODNEWS.COM by John Sackton August 14, 2016

Maxfield Seafood, a California Company, is suing Seneca Logistics, its trucking company, for the value of a load of frozen lobster stolen from the Preferred Freezer in Everett, Mass.

In a complaint filed in Massachusetts District Court last week, Maxfield says they hired Seneca to pick up a load of frozen lobster bullets and tails last December 14th. They had used Seneca for freight pickups on various occasions during the past few years.

Seneca accepted a bill of lading, and agreed to the transport. On Dec. 15 th, Seneca’s CEO gave verbal ...

Full Story »

News Summary August 11, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Russian Crab Companies Delay Fishing Due to New Processing Rules**

Today's lead item from Seafood News contributor Eugene Gerden reports that crab season in Russia is under threat of failure this year. The Russian government recently introduced a ban of on-board processing of crabs caught within Russian territorial waters. Leading crab producers in the Russian Far East have already started protesting, preferring not to fish until the ban is lifted.

Meanwhile, the U.S. may cease importing Vietnamese pangasius if processors in Vietnam fail to meet with new ...

Full Story »

FAO Predicts Decline of North American Lobster Production in 2017, Rise of China Imports

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 11, 2017

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has published a report on lobster based on market analysis from 2016 and the first quarter of 2017. The organization is predicting that North American lobster supplies will decline in 2017, while imports will rise in China.

Lobster growth in North America has been strong since 2007, but 2016 saw the first signs of decline with a six percent drop. The reason could be linked to new fishing restrictions that were put in place in...

Full Story »

Canada Considering Changes to Lobster Rope After Whale Deaths

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [CBC.CA] by Frances Willick August 8, 2017

As federal fisheries officials consider changes in the industry to avert whale deaths, some lobster fishermen are concerned about the potential effect on their livelihood.

Last week, Fisheries Minister Dominic LeBlanc said the federal government will bring "absolutely every protection to bear" to prevent further deaths of North Atlantic right whales in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

At least 10 right whales have died in the gulf since June 7. Necropsy reports suggest some of the whales died from ship strikes and fishing-gear entanglement...

Full Story »

News Summary August 8, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Weaker US Dollar Roiling Seafood Imports, Putting Pressure on Lobster, Crab and Shrimp Producers**Today's lead item from Seafood News editor John Sackton reports that after a period of dollar strength, which contributed to record seafood imports of commodities like shrimp and salmon in 2016, the dollar has reversed course. The dollar has fallen about 7% since January of this year against a composite of foreign currencies. The change in currency values could potentially have a big impact on profitability for overseas exporters to the US.

In other news, the Alaska Department of Fish and Game called for a complete ban on Chinook salmon catches throughout Southeast Alaska. Deputy commissioner of ADF&G, Charles O. Swanton, released a statement explaining that “extreme management measures are necessary to restrict harvests...

Full Story »

Shake Shack Introduces Lobster Topped Hamburger in NY, in Collaboration with Eleven Madison Park

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 8, 2017

Popular restaurant chain Shake Shack is known for their burgers, and for a limited time in August they’ll be adding seafood-inspired burgers to their menu.

Those who dine at the original Madison Square Park location in New York City from August 11 to the 13 will be able to snack on a Maine lobster-topped hamburger, which is pretty self explanatory, or a CLAMBurger, which is a cheeseburger topped with...

Full Story »

Maine Lobstermen’s ‘Union’ Trying to Establish Co-op for Self-Directed Lobster Sales

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Maine Public] By A.J. HIGGINS - August 7, 2017

Maine lobstermen have long been known as a fiercely independent lot. But some are looking to the power of unity, in the form of a statewide, catch-to-table co-op. The goal is to harvest a larger and more predictable share of the profits.

It’s 10 a.m. and Rock Alley has already been cruising Washington County’s Sequin’s Passage off Beals Island since a little after daybreak. The 60-year-old Jonesport fishermen tells his two stern men to get ready as he maneuvers his 46-foot, Jarvis Newman lobster boat through some shallow waters to get to his traps.

As the Miss Carmen idles down, one of the men snags the lobster buoy with a gaffer’s hook and pulls it aboard. Alley feeds ...

Full Story »

Clearwater Buys Scottish Crabber as Part of Bid to Expand

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Chronical Herald] by JAMES RISDON - August 7, 2017

Seafood giant Clearwater Seafoods is beefing up its presence in Europe by buying a crab fishing boat and licence and is casting its eye on other potential acquisitions.

The Bedford-based company picked up the Heather K., a Scottish crabber, in July for an undisclosed amount.

“It was nominal (amount) relative to our total capital expenditures,” Ian Smith, chief executive officer of Clearwater Seafoods, said Thursday during the company’s second-quarter earnings call. “What is important about that is that it was the beginning ...

Full Story »

Thai Union’s Stake in Red Lobster Remains Strong in Second Quarter

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 7, 2017

Thai Union, the world’s largest canned tuna producer, is benefitting from the 2016 deal in which they bought a stake in restaurant chain Red Lobster. The seafood chain brought in 235 million baht to the net profit in the second quarter, which translates to over $7 million in US dollars.

“Our strategic investment in Red Lobster and effort in cost control continue to deliver positive results,” said Thai Union Group CEO Thiraphong Chansiri...

Full Story »

More Women Move into Maine’s Rough and Risky World of Lobstering

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [KPBS] by Murray Carpenter, NPR August 7, 2017

It's 6 a.m. on a calm morning in Maine's Rockport Harbor, and Sadie Samuels is loading traps from her pickup truck onto her 28-foot lobster boat.

The daughter of a lobsterman, Samuels was born in a nearby hospital and has been on the water here for most of her 25 years. "I've been coming out fishing in this harbor since I was born. I came here before I went home from the hospital," she says. "I had my first student license when I was 7."

Lobstering is physically demanding, dangerous work, and it has traditionally been considered a man's job. But Maine's lobster fleet has a growing number of women who, like Samuels, ...

Full Story »

News Summary August 3, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Bumble Bee Foods Pleads Guilty to Price Fixing with Reduced $25 Million Fine**Today's lead item from Seafood News editor John Sackton reports that Bumble Bee Foods, the third largest tuna canner in the US, has pled guilty to price fixing yesterday in a Northern California District Court. The plea is the result of the government’s price fixing lawsuit that charged Bumble Bee and the other major tuna canners, Chicken of the Sea and Starkist, with colluding to fix prices of canned tuna at retail.

In other news, Alaska’s pink salmon harvest total as of August 1 is 49.08 million pinks. Cautious optimism is taking hold that the preseason...

Full Story »

News Summary August 2, 2017

**Today's Main Story: Quebec Private Equity Creates $140 Million Lobster and Crab Group Merging Riverside and Cheticamp**

Today's lead item from Seafood News editor John Sackton reports that Montreal based private equity firm Champlain Financial has purchased Riverside Lobster of Nova Scotia, and will merge the company with Cheticamp Fisheries, which it purchased in May 2017.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Senate Appropriations Committee has passed a bill to include shrimp in the Seafood Import Monitoring Program, a risk-based traceability program that requires certain imported seafood products to have records and specific data. The move is being commended by the National Chamber of Aquaculture of Ecuador, which exported 86,082,995 pounds of shrimp in June — a record high for the country.

Full Story »

Everything You Need to Know About the 2017 Boston Seafood Festival

SEAFOODNEWS.COM [Seafood News] by Amanda Buckle August 2, 2017

Bostonians will show their love of seafood at the sixth annual Boston Seafood Festival, which will take place on Sunday, August 13. Seafood fans will be flocking to the historic Boston Fish Pier for the family-friendly event, which kicks off at 11 a.m.

Hosted by the Boston Fisheries Foundation (BFF), an organization made up of seafood professionals from around the city, the festival has something for everyone — including seafood tastings, clambakes, chef demos, educational events and ...

Full Story »

Quebec Private Equity Creates $140 Million Lobster and Crab Group Merging Riverside and Cheticamp

SEAFOODNEWS.COM by John Sackton August 2, 2017

The Montreal based private Equity Firm Champlain Financial has purchased Riverside Lobster of Nova Scotia, and will merge the company with Cheticamp Fisheries, which it purchased in May, 2017.

The primary products of Riverside and Cheticamp are lobster and snow crab.

The group will be led by Marc Poulin, formerly CEO of Sobey’s, who will become the executive chairman of Champlain’s seafood platform.

"Both companies are strategically located in the most productive crab and lobster regions of the Nova Scotia Coast. I am...

Full Story »
