Title: Schneider - Final

URL Source: https://ccjls.scholasticahq.com/article/26973-far-left-versus-far-right-fatal-violence-an-empirical-assessment-of-the-prevalence-of-ideologically-motivated-homicides-in-the-united-states/attachment/67191.pdf

Markdown Content:
> VOLUME 22 ,ISSUE 2,PAGES 33 –49 (20 21 )

# Criminology, Criminal Justice , Law & Society 

E-ISSN 2332 -886X 

Available online at 

https://scholasticahq.com/criminology -criminal -justice -law -society/ 

Corresponding author : Celinet Duran, M.S., M.Phil. , 417 Mahar Hall , Oswego, NY 13126 , USA .

Email: celinet.duran@oswego.edu 

# Far -left versus Far -right Fatal Violence :

# An Empirical Assessment of the Prevalence of 

# Ideologically Motivated Homicides in the United States 

# Celinet Duran 

## SUNY Oswego 

A B S T R A C T A N D A R T I C L E I N F O R M A T I O N

As domestic terrorism incidents in the United States continue to rise, concerns have grown regarding the threat from left -

wing extremists, specifically anarchists and anti -government protesters. The current political schism in the country 

continues to drive t he conversation of far -left versus far -right threats , and d ata about the threat of far -left extremism ha ve 

been lacking. Using open -source data from the U.S . Extremist Crime Database, this exploratory study seeks to address 

this ga p in the literature by as sessing the differences between far -left and far -right ideologically motivated fatal violence 

between 1990 and 2020. Results indicate over the past three decades the overall prevalence and deadliness of far -right 

extremism far outweighs that of the far -lef t, even though far -left violence has increased over the last five years. The 

implications of these results and corresponding policy suggestions are discussed .

Article History: 

Received July 10 th , 2021 

Received in revised form July 20 th , 2021 

Accepted July 26 th , 2021 

Keywords: 

te rrorism , extremist violence , ideologically -motivated homicide , far -left extremism , far -

right extremism    

> ©20 21 Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society and The Western Society of Criminology
> Hosting by Scholastica. All rights reserved.

2 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

As domestic terrorism incidents in the United 

States continue to rise, concerns have grown regarding 

the rising threat from left -wing extremists (Camera, 

2021; Campion & West, 2020; Goldman et al., 2021), 

specifically anarchists and anti -government protest ers. 

During the latter portion of Trump’s presidency, his 

administration routinely pressed the issue of the left -

wing threat, especially Antifa, insisting the problem of 

terrorism “is not a right wing problem” (“ In America, 

Far -Right Terrorist Plots,” 2020). Attorney General 

William Barr claimed Antifa was responsible for 

instigating violence and “domestic terrorism” during 

the protests in Minneapolis triggered by the killing of 

George Floyd (Tucker, 2020). Conservative media 

outlets, such as FOX News, have also picked up on 

this narrative, blaming Antifa and other left -wing 

supporters for “cynically [using] Floyd’s tragic death 

as an excuse to spread mayhem and destruction” 

(Hanson, 2020, para. 2). Similarly, another narrative 

that has gained traction during the first half of 2021 

centers around beliefs that the insurrection at the 

Capitol last year was an Antifa attack. Conservative 

media personalities like Sean Hannity and Tucker 

Carlson echoed sentiments by network colleague 

Laura Ingram that rioters were actually Antifa, and not 

Trump sympathizers (Anderson, 2021). Due to these 

concerns, but despite evidence to the contrary (Freilich 

et al., 2009), public discourse leans heavily into the 

narrative that far -left and far -right extremists are 

equivalen t threats (Goldman et al., 2021). 

To provide context to the heightened rhetoric 

around the threat of ideological extremism, the 

purpose of this article is to inform the discussions 

through an exploratory, empirical examination of 

ideologically motivated ho micides committed by far -

left extremists and to compare these to similar far -right 

violence. Specifically, using open -source data from 

the U.S. Extremist Crime Database (ECDB), this 

article provides descriptive information about the 

frequency of far -left ideologically motivated 

homicides over the last 30 years, which has not yet 

been done. Descriptive statistics provide data on these 

homicides to assess differences across several key 

characteristics, including frequency, lethality, 

ideological motivation, a nd shifts across presidential 

administrations. Suggestions for future research and 

more robust empirical analysis are offered, along with 

discussions on policy implications relative to the 

research. 

The main contributions of this article to the 

literature on far -left extremism include (1) the results 

of an exploratory descriptive study that provide a 

comparative overview of far -left and far -right 

ideologically motivated homicides, something that has 

not been assessed before in the empirical literature; (2) 

A comprehensive definition of far -left extremism, 

which encompasses a more inclusive conceptual 

approach relative to what has been addressed in prior 

research; and (3) the expansion of Extremist Crime 

Database to include ideologically motivated far -left 

ho micides for theory testing and further analysis. 

## Literature Review 

Recent Events 

Last summer, America erupted as the 

growing unrest around racial justice issues came to a 

head with the highly publicized murders of Ahmaud 

Arbery (Fausset, 2020), George Floyd (Hill et al., 

2020), Breonna Taylor (Oppel et al., 2020), and others. 

Frustrated with the slow pace of criminal justice 

reform and issues surrounding law enforcement 

accountability, protestors flooded the streets of every 

major city in a show of soli darity against racism, 

oppression, and police brutality. While the vast 

majority of demonstrations were peaceful and 

operated within the confines of the law, fringe 

movements connected to the left did engage in 

criminal acts. At the same time, protests aga inst 

government regulations enacted to stop the spread of 

COVID -19 were led by right -leaning conservatives 

(Fitzsimons, 2020). In August of 2020, Michael 

Reinoehl, a known Antifa supporter, shot and killed 

Aaron J. Danielson, supporter of the far -right gro up 

Patriot Prayer, during police protests in Portland, 

Oregon (Hill et al., 2020). This, including a series of 

anti -police shootings by Black Separatists/Nationalists 

over the last seven years (Associated Press, 2016a, 

2016b; Hosenball & Murphy, 2016; Sern a et al., 

2017), have led to the perception of a prevailing and 

imminent far -left threat. These conversations have 

remained at the forefront of public and political 

discourse, especially within political campaigns. 

During the final days of the 2020 Presid ential 

Election Campaign, discussions of the direction of the 

nation were supercharged with rhetoric regarding the 

problem of left -wing protestors, with the Trump 

Administration moving to designate Antifa as a

terrorist organization (Haberman & Savage, 202 0). 

The previous election of President Trump, who 

quickly became a target of the movement’s supporters, 

fueled the growing interest of Antifa as a terrorist 

movement (Copsey & Merrill, 2020; LaFree, 2018). 

While the Trump administration and supporters 

cont inued to refer to Antifa as an official group, it is, 

in reality, more of a movement of individuals who 

share similar philosophies and ideologies rooted in 

anti -fascism (Bogel -Burroughs & Garcia, 2020; 

LaFree, 2018). Given the unofficial designation of thi s

ideology, and being that this is not a formal group with 

any direct ties to terrorism, discussions tying Antifa 

supporters/sympathizers to terrorist action have been FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 3    

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

done inconsistently and used as a broad catchall for 

most far -left individuals. Given ho w political 

discourse can drive public opinion (Matsubayashi, 

2012), addressing the existence of ideologically 

motivated fatal violence within the context of 

presidential administrations serves as an integral 

aspect of the current analysis. In a previous s tudy, 

Hewitt (2003) addressed the manner in which 

government policies have provoked American 

terrorism. Considering the significant overlap between 

terrorism and extremist violence, this paper similarly 

addresses political systems as they relate to the 

occ urrence of far -left and far -right extremist violence. 

The far -left has been more active in recent years; 

however, the idea that it poses a greater threat than the 

far -right is counter -intuitive to academic research and 

security assessments (Haines, 2021; Jones, 2018; 

Koehler, 2019; Silva et al., 2019). For example, right -

wing terrorism has been steadily increasing since 

2011, with atypical increases occurring after 2016 

(Jones, 2018). As Trump and other conservatives 

talked about the dangers of Antifa and anti -

government thought, the far -right continued to 

escalate its activities (Goldman et al., 2021). Even 

while domestic policy shifted resources to combat 

Antifa and leftist groups (Swan, 2020), far -right 

extremists continued to plot and act against public 

safety interests. 

In Oakland, California, in late May of 2020, 

while citizens began to protest the killing of George 

Floyd, Steven Carrillo and Robert A. Justus ambushed 

two federal security guards at a courthouse, killing one 

(Beran, 2020). Days later, as authorities attempted to 

apprehend Carrillo, he attacked them using pipe 

bombs, leading to the subsequent shooting death of 

another deputy. Initial reports attributed these attacks 

to Antifa or other leftist groups, given the rise of anti -

police demonst rations in the area. However, Carrillo 

and Justus are members of another fringe movement 

called the boogaloo movement, a loose network of 

anti -government, anti -police, libertarians that gained 

significant traction in 2020 (Anti -Defamation League 

[ADL], 202 0). Although not uniformly far -rightists, 

most individuals who identify with the boogaloo 

movement adhere to far -right anti -government and/or 

white supremacist ideologies and hope to inspire a 

civil war within the United States (Evans & Wilson, 

2020). Also in 2020, Kyle Rittenhouse traveled to 

Kenosha, Wisconsin, and killed two people during 

demonstrations protesting the shooting of Jacob Blake 

by police (Lenthang, 2021). Given that he travelled 

there for the explicit purpose to “protect businesses 

amid the protests” and was outspoken about his rights 

to defend his community, he is also not ideologically 

far -left. In fact, evidence suggests Rittenhouse 

travelled to Kenosha in response to a Facebook post 

by the leader of local militia group, Kenosha Guard 

(Ro senberg -Douglass, 2020). These examples 

demonstrate how the skewed perception of extremism 

in this country overestimates perceived threats, while 

trivializing the impact of far -right extremism (Castle, 

2020). 

This paper does recognize aspects of the far -

left opposition that could warrant cause for concern 

and lead to the perception of possible escalation. The 

murder of George Floyd created shockwaves on both 

a national and global scale, with an unprecedented 

gathering of protestors across every major cit y. The 

protests that took place in Portland, Oregon, were of 

significant concern for law enforcement and 

government officials alike. While the majority of these 

protests were peaceful, pocketed instances of civil 

unrest, looting, arson, and assaults toward s police and 

counter -protestors have occurred (Logan & Ligon, 

2021), which further contributes to the narrative of a 

growing left -wing threat. These instances of escalating 

violence are significant to the discussion of the impact 

posed by the anti -fascist movement. Most anti -fascists 

denounce the use of violence, except when deemed 

necessary as reactionary measure of protection against 

white supremacy (Vysotsky, 2020). Undoubtedly, 

militant anti -fascists will engage in political violence, 

and the Antifa man tra “by any means necessary” 

implies that any and all tactics are available, including 

lethal violence, should the need present itself (Copsey 

& Merril, 2020). A series of shootings inside Seattle’s 

self -proclaimed police -free zone, otherwise known as 

the Capitol Hill Organized Protest (CHOP), indicates 

the inherent dangers of a radical escalation (Golden, 

2020). 

Terrorism Research in the United States 

This article addresses aspects of far -left and 

far -right violent extremism in the United States, 

specifically as it relates to ideologically motivated 

homicides. Terrorism in the United States, similar to 

aspects of global terrorism, has undergone several 

different waves over the last 60 years. During the time 

span between the 1960s through the 1980s, domestic 

terrorism was dominated by far -left ideology that 

included anti -government movements driven 

predominantly by those with anti -capitalist grievances 

(H ewitt, 2003; Smith, 1994). During the late 1980s, 

there was a resurgence in activity corresponding to 

“single -issue” groups aligned with left -wing ideology, 

specifically environmental and animal rights 

extremism. Individuals and organizations connected to 

environmental rights issues contributed to criminal 

and terrorist acts against corporations and government 

agencies involved in activities such as animal research 

and deforesting. These acts often damaged property 

but very rarely caused injury (National Co nsortium for 4 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, 

2019). The Earth Liberation Front and Animal 

Liberation Front, two of the main “groups” associated 

with this wave of far -left extremism, engaged in 

hundreds of arsons and bombings, two -thirds of which 

occurred in the western United States (Chermak et al., 

2013). During this period, far -right extremists, such as 

White supremacists, Neo -Nazis, skinheads, sovereign 

citizens, and paramilitary groups were active and more 

likely to engage in interper sonal violence that resulted 

in injury and death (Chermak et al., 2012; 

Gruenewald, 2011; Gruenewald et al., 2013a; 2013b; 

Parkin & Freilich, 2015; Parkin et al., 2015). 

Although not always reflected in public and 

political discourse, far -right extremism has been one 

of the most prevalent and consistent extremist threats 

in the United States since the 1960s (Klein et al., 2017; 

Smith, 1994). Even after the terrorist attacks of 

September 11, 2001, far -right ideologically motivated 

homicides have occurred mu ch more frequently than 

jihadi violence inspired by Islamic extremism (Parkin 

et al., 2020). The relatively constant risk of far -right 

ideologically motivated violence occurring against the 

public and government representatives is empirically 

dissimilar to the way far -left extremist ideologies have 

manifested themselves through a series of intermittent 

waves. However, the current perceived rise of 

anarchist and anti -government movements has 

resulted in a growing concern by parts of the 

government and the pu blic that the risk presented by 

the far -left is equal, if not greater than, that presented 

by the far -right. Therefore, the purpose of this article 

is to empirically assess whether one form of terrorism 

and extremist criminal violence, namely ideologically 

motivated homicide, manifests itself differently across 

the far -left and the far -right. 

Extremist Violence in the United States 

As stated, this article assesses event -level 

data corresponding to ideologically motivated 

homicides committed by far -left or far -right 

extremists. When addressing the problem of terrorism, 

methodological rigor has been significantly affected 

by problems of inadequate definitions that are not 

uniform across studies. Similar to how studies 

concerning terrorism have historically rel ied on a 

variety of definitions, and no universal definition has 

been established (Hoffman, 2017 ), the same has been 

true of extremism. As this paper addresses aspects of 

extremism within the United States, the analysis 

focuses entirely on events that occu rred within the 50 

states between 1990 and 2020 and utilizes the below 

definitions of far -left and far -right extremism. 

Terrorism scholarship, and by extension 

extremism scholarship, increased exponentially after 

the 9/11attacks, with studies indicating th at more than 

50% of peer -reviewed articles were published in the 

two -year period immediately following these attacks 

(Lum et al., 2006). At the precipice of the terrorism 

scholarship wave, investigators were limited in the 

kind of information they could ac cess (i.e., 

government files, reports; Silke, 2001, 2009). An 

important contribution of this article is that it analyzes 

data from an open -source database that has been 

operating for more than a decade, allowing for wider 

and more reliable access to inform ation. 

The direction of research agendas tends to be 

driven by political and public discourse (Reid, 1997; 

Sageman, 2014), creating pressure to produce studies 

that are often biased against an unknown other. In 

addition to political discourse, public disc ourse 

(predominantly mass media) plays a major role in the 

way terrorism is defined, which subsequently drives 

the kind of data and data collection strategies used to 

assess the problem. Government agencies, for 

example, may face tremendous political press ure to 

interpret terrorism in a particular way (i.e., terrorism 

as a problem of a particular religion or country), and 

their research may suffer from issues of selectivity 

bias (LaFree & Dugan, 2004). Therefore, by adhering 

to definitions that operate inde pendently from political 

agendas, the inclusion and identification of incidents 

remains a constant over time .

Far -left Extremism 

For this analysis, far -left extremism refers to 

groups and/or individuals that (1) support violence 

and/or criminal activity explicitly, or implicitly, to (2) 

further aspects of one or more of the following ideals: 

Marxist and/or Socialist and/or Leninist and/or 

Stalinist beliefs; anarchist beliefs (including individual 

autonomy and collective equality); support for 

extreme egalitarianism and/or a classless society 

and/or workers’ and ordinary persons’ rights; 

opposition of capitalism and/or corporate 

malfe asance; opposition of racism, particularly within 

institutions that historically have suffered from system 

racism; a belief that American society in general, and 

the criminal justice system, especially the police and 

other law enforcement agencies, in part icular are 

systematically/institutionally racist; opposition of 

militarism and/or American imperialism and/or 

colonialism both abroad and domestically; suspicion 

of traditional mainstream religions (i.e., Judaism, 

Christianity); a belief in Black Separatis m/Supremacy 

and/or militant Black nationalism; support for Puerto 

Rican Independence; support for biodiversity and 

biocentric equality (i.e., that humans are no greater 

than any other form of life and have no legitimate 

claim to dominate earth); the earth and/or animals are 

in imminent danger; the government and /or parts of 

society such as corporations are responsible for this FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 5    

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

danger; this danger will ultimately result in the 

destruction of the modern environment and/or whole 

species; the political system is incapable and/or 

unwilling to fix the crisis by taking actions to preserve 

American wilderness, protect the environment, and 

support biological diversity; there is a need to defend 

the environment and/or animals. 

This definition is somewhat of a depart ure 

from more traditional approaches towards the study of 

far -left terrorism and a novel contribution to the study 

of extremism. The inclusion of environmental and 

animal -rights extremist groups here departs from 

earlier studies referencing these factions as single -

issue entities, with weak ties to the left -wing terrorist 

agenda (Smith, 1994). More recent literature has made 

significant connections between the ideological 

grievances of environmental and animal rights groups 

and left -wing terrorism (Carson, 2017; Carson et al., 

2017; Chermak & Gruenewald, 2015). The 

phenomenon is most commonly associated with the 

emergence of revolutionary groups of the 1960s 

through the 1980s (Malkki, 2018). During the 1980s, 

left -wing terrorism was most closely associated w ith 

groups that were generally considered as anti -U.S., 

anti -imperialist, with more global concerns over 

America’s exploitation of non -White peoples from 

less industrialized nations (Hoffman, 1986). The 

current wave of left -wing terrorism appears to have 

less global concerns, while still adhering to the anti -

capitalist structures of the more traditional left -wing 

movements of the 1960s. The inclusion of anarchists 

in the current definition is particularly important for 

addressing the issue of modern -day lef t-wing 

terrorism. While it is true that anarchist attitudes 

towards violence vary considerably, some factions of 

contemporary anarchism argue that since current 

hierarchical power structures are maintained through 

violence, violence is then necessary to de feat these 

structures (Borum & Tilby, 2005); it is those violence 

structures that are considered in the current context. 

These same ideals of a necessary violence are the same 

mechanisms that exist within the 

Marxist/Leninist/Stalinist movements identified in the 

first part of the definition. 

Far -right Extremism 

The definition of far -right extremism refers 

to groups and/or individuals that (1) support violence 

and/or criminal activity explicitly, or implicitly, to (2) 

further aspects of one or more of the following ideals: 

fiercely nationalistic, anti -global, xenophobic, and 

anti -immigration (as opposed to universal and 

international in orientation); suspicious of centralized 

federal and state authority; reverent of individual 

liberty (especially their righ t to own guns, be free of 

taxes); believe in conspiracy theories that involve a 

grave threat to national sovereignty and/or personal 

liberty; belief that one’s personal and/or national “way 

of life” is under attack and is either already lost or that 

the th reat is imminent (sometimes such beliefs are 

amorphous and vague, but for some the threat is from 

a specific ethnic, racial, social, or religious group); 

belief in the need to be prepared for an attack either by 

participating in or supporting the need for paramilitary 

preparations and training and/or survivalism; support 

of and/or inclusion in misogynistic subcultures; 

opposition of women’s reproductive health choices 

specifically related to abortion (Freilich et al., 2014). 

## Method 

The United States Extr emist Crime Database 

The aforementioned definitions for far -left 

and far -right extremism have been developed for use 

in the Extremist Crime Database (ECDB), which is an 

open -source relational database that examines 

incident, perpetrator, and victim/target -level data to 

determine the nature of criminal behavior, both 

ideological and routine, by extremists who commit 

violent and financial crimes. The ECDB tracks far -

right, far -left, jihadist -inspired, and environmental and 

animal rights related extremism (Freilich et al., 2014). 

The database identification and coding methodology 

has been quantitatively assessed and found to be valid 

and reliable (Chermak et al., 2012). Through open -

source data collection and analysis, a method that has 

proven to be as reliable, if not more so, compared to 

official sources (Baćak et al., 2019; Chermak et al., 

2012; LaFree, 2019; Sheehan, 2012), the ECDB is a 

multi -level relational database that addresses the 

impact of far -right, Al Qaeda/ISIS inspired, and 

environm ental/animal rights related extremism within 

the United States. Throughout the past decade, the 

ECDB has produced research empirically testing 

aspects of extremism, both conceptually and 

practically (Asal et al., 2016; Chermak et al., 2012; 

Freilich et al. , 2017; Gruenewald et al., 2013a; 

Gruenewald & Pridemore, 2012; Mills et al., 2017; 

Suttmoeller et al., 2015). This article uses ECDB data 

to examine ideologically motivated homicides in the 

United States between 1990 to 2020 committed by far -

left and far -right extremists. For an incident to be 

included in the ECDB and included in this research, it 

must be ideologically motivated and at least one 

suspect must have been a far -left or far -right extremist 

at the time of the incident. 

The sample of far -right id eologically 

motivated homicides was pulled from the ECBD and 

was constructed by first identifying crimes from 

various sources in an attempt to create a list of fatally 

violent incidents by far -right extremists in the United 

States from 1990 -2020 (Freilich et al., 2014). These 6 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

sources included existing terrorism databases, official 

sources (FBI, DOJ), scholarly and journalistic 

accounts, material published by private watch groups, 

and media publications. The ECDB uses multiple 

coders, thereby adhering to int er -rater (i.e., coder) 

reliability. First, a strict procedure is set into place for 

coders to check inconsistencies. Second, coding 

abnormalities are continually checked across coders. 

Third, filling in values for certain ECDB variables 

requires little int erpretation as the variables capture 

basic facts such as a suspect’s race, age, or gender. 

Fourth, a database analyst subsequently validates all 

incident records, verifying that coders systematically 

apply coding rules when creating relational records for 

suspects, victims, targets, and their networks. Where 

coding inconsistencies occur, records are updated and 

corrected so that coding procedures are uniform across 

all research assistants and incidents. Fifth, a

measurement of inter -rater reliability for se lected 

individual and situational characteristics of far -right 

homicides indicates coder agreement between 89% 

and 98% of the time. When coders disagree, it was 

usually not because of differences in the values coded, 

but because one coder found a document that contains 

information that could be coded, while the second 

coder did not find it. It is thus important to have 

multiple coders both search and code each incident 

when using open -source materials. 

Outside of environmental and animal rights 

extremism, t he ECDB does not collect information on 

far -left violent extremism. The sample of far -left 

ideologically motivated homicides was independently 

identified using the same procedures listed above. 

Crimes committed by far -left extremists were 

identified from v arious sources to create a list similar 

to that of the far -right homicides. Once homicides 

were identified, multiple coders collected information 

on the situational characteristics of interest for the 

current analysis. To ensure inter -rater reliability, fa r-

left homicides in this sample were coded 

simultaneously to address any inconsistencies. 

Variables 

The data are split across ideology, which are 

operationalized according to the ideological affiliation 

of the offenders and whether it falls within the 

defi nitions of far -left and far -right that were 

previously presented. The number of fatalities, 

generally, and the number of law enforcement deaths, 

specifically, are also captured. The weapons type 

variable is a categorical variable, corresponding to the 

prim ary weapon that suspects used during each 

homicide. These included arson/bombing, blunt or 

bodily weapon, firearm, knife/sharp object, or other. 

Ideological motivation is also captured. This variable 

covers motives that include anti -government, 

generally, or anti -law enforcement, specifically. 

Additional categories included anti -race/ethnicity, 

anti -social minority, and other ideological 

motivations. Finally, the presidential term in which the 

incidents occurred was coded according to each term, 

for example “George W. Bush Term 1” or “Barak H. 

Obama Term 2.” 

The last variable of this assessment 

corresponds to ideological strength, which determines 

the extent to which an incident was motivated as a 

direct result of the perpetrator’s extremist ideology. 

Ideolo gical strength in this context ranges from zero 

(no ideological connection) to four (strong ideological 

connection). Incidents that indicated no ideological 

motivation are excluded from the analysis, although 

they are still captured and coded within the EC DB. To 

determine a weak to strong ideological bond, open -

source materials are mined for a series of pro and con 

ideological indicators. For example, a homicide where 

a known white supremacist targets and kills Black men 

because he is looking to start a rac e war (pro 

indicator), with no evidence to the contrary, would be 

considered ideologically stronger than an incident 

with the same situational information plus the suspect 

had a history of mental illness that was used in court 

to challenge their competency to stand trial (con 

indicator). An incident with an ideological strength of 

four has multiple pro indicators and no con indicators, 

a three has only one pro indicator and no con 

indicators, a two has multiple pro indicators and at 

least one con indicator, and a one has only one pro 

indicator and at least one con indicator. The scale of 

one to four was then recoded so that a one was a weak 

ideological strength, a two or three was a moderate 

ideological strength, and a four was a strong 

ideological strength .

Analysis 

This article provides a descriptive overview 

of the key characteristic differences between far -left 

and far -right extremism. Given the descriptive 

approach of this paper, results are presented primarily 

in tabular form. In addition, line graphs provide a 

visual representation of incidents and victim counts 

across time split by ideology. FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 7    

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

## Results 

Trends 

A popular narrative surrounding the issue of 

extremism in the United States concerns the rising 

threat of incidents overall. Table 1 provides an 

overview of the key characteristics of ideologically 

motivated homicides occurring between January 1, 

1990 and December 3 1, 2020. During this time, there 

were 269 ideologically motivated homicides (an 

average of 8.7 incidents per year). Far -left homicide 

incidents accounted for 15.6% of these homicide 

events, and far -right homicides accounted for 84.4%. 

Incidents peaked at y ears 1999 ( n=18), 2009 ( n=18), 

and 2017 ( n=16). Since 2017, ideologically motivated 

homicides decreased dramatically from 22 incidents to 

7 incidents the following year and have remained 

relatively consistent since (Figure 1). The trend lines 

in this figur e depict this overall decrease in 

ideologically motivated homicides for the far -right, a 

trend that is also reflected among other types of 

ideologically motivated extremist events (Silva et al., 

Table 1. Ideologically motivated extremist homicides in the United States, 1990 –2020 

Far -left Far -right Total 

N % N % N

Homicide Incidents (% across total incidents) 42 15.6 227 84.4 269 

Fatalities (% across total fatalities) 78 13.0 523 87.0 601 

Average fatalities per incident w/ Oklahoma City 1.9 2.3 

Average fatalities per incident w/o Oklahoma City 1.9 1.6 

One Fatality 30 71.4 182 80.2 212 

Multiple Fatalities 12 28.6 45 19.8 57 

Law Enforcement Deaths 16 38.1 32 14.1 48 

Weapon Type 

Arson/Bomb 3 7.2 0 0.0 3

Blunt or Bodily Weapon 0 0.0 36 15.9 36 

Firearm 38 90.5 126 55.5 164 

Knife/Sharp Object 1 2.4 48 21.1 49 

Other 0 0.0 17 7.5 17 

Ideological Strength 

Strong 15 35.7 142 62.6 157 

Moderate 16 38.1 59 26.0 75 

Weak 11 26.2 26 11.5 37 

Ideological Motivations 

Anti -Government 3 7.1 7 3.1 10 

Anti -Law Enforcement 6 14.3 28 12.3 34 

Anti -Race/Ethnicity 14 33.3 97 42.7 111 

Anti -Social Minorities 6 14.3 73 32.2 79 

Other 13 31.0 22 9.7 35 

Presidential Administrations 

George H. W. Bush 2 4.8 22 9.7 24 

William J. Clinton, Term 1 4 9.5 41 18.1 45 

William J. Clinton, Term 2 3 7.1 44 19.4 47 

George W. Bush, Term 1 1 2.4 24 10.6 25 

George W. Bush, Term 2 1 2.4 22 9.7 23 

Barack H. Obama, Term 1 5 11.9 28 12.3 33 

Barack H. Obama, Term 2 9 21.4 21 9.3 30 

Donald J. Trump 17 40.5 25 11.0 42 8 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

2019). However, the far -left, as it has relatively low 

number s during the first 25 years of the dataset, shows 

a gradual linear increase over the period under study. 

Similarly, Figure 2 indicates a steady rise and fall in 

the number of ideologically motivated homicide 

victims, very similar to the rise and fall of ot her types 

of violence (Blumstein & Wallman, 2020). Prior 

research discusses the cyclical pattern on terrorism, 

highlighting how it generally occurs in waves (LaFree 

et al., 2009), and the same appears true here. Given the 

significant overlap between terror ism and extremist 

violence, the trends observed in the current analysis 

are not surprising. Although both the far -left and far -

right homicide events appear to occur in waves, the 

baseline for the number of far -right events is higher 

than the far -left’s b aseline .

With the exception of 2017 when far -left 

homicides ( n=12) out -numbered far -right homicides 

(n=10), the far -right has consistently been higher than 

the far -left. Not only do these figures echo prior 

research demonstrating the significance of the fa r-

right threat (Jones, 2018; Jones et al., 2021; Simi & 

Bubolz, 2017; Stevenson, 2019; Ware, 2000), but the 

results presented here also speak to the overall 

consistency of the movement. A far -right ideologically 

motivated homicide has occurred at least onc e every 

year since 1990. By comparison, far -left ideologically 

motivated homicides were present for only 17 years of 

the 31 -year timespan of the current analysis. FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 9    

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

Fatalities 

Compared to the universe of all homicides, 

ideologically motivated homicides and extremist 

violence are extremely rare. For example, even though 

the country experienced a surge in homicides during 

2020 with over 19,000 incidents (Centers for Disease 

Control and Prevention, 2021), there were only eight 

ideologically motiva ted homicides for the same year, 

and only one of these ideological homicides pertained 

to the far -left. When comparing the lethality of far -

right ideologically motivated homicides to the far -left, 

the results are consistent with the findings mentioned 

abov e. The far -right continues to surpass the far -left in 

both frequency of incidents and deaths. Even with the 

exclusion of deaths from the Oklahoma City 

Bombing 1 (n=168), deaths from far -right ideologically 

motivated homicides average 11.5 per year from 1990 -

2020, compared to only 2.5 deaths from the far -left for 

the same period. Far -left deaths surpassed far -right 

deaths for only three years of the current temporal 

analysis, 2010 (far -right=5, far -left=10), 2016 (far -

right=2, far -left=12), and 2017 (far -righ t=12, far -

left=13). When assessing other differences in 

fatalities, the majority of incidents (79%) resulted in 

one fatality, whereas only 31% resulted in two or more 

fatalities, further supporting findings from prior 

research detailing the rare occurrence of mass casualty 

events with regards to terrorism and extremist violence 

(Taleb, 2007). The ideological differences in this 

respect are a bit more nuanced. When comparing 

fatality differences between the far -left and the far -

right, a larger proportion of far -left homicides resulted 

in multiple casualties (29%, n=12) than the far -right 

(20%, n=45) indicating that far -left homicide incidents 

are more likely to have multiple homicide victims .

Weapons Used 

The majority of all ideologically motivated 

homicides involved a gun or some other firearm 

(n=164). This is not a surprising finding considering 

that most homicides are committed with a firearm and 

that prior research indicates terrorists are most likely 

to be involved in firearm offenses (Legault &

Hendrickson, 2009). When comparing firearm use 

between the far -left and the far -right, the far -left has a 

much higher use proportionally of firearms (90.5%) 

than the far -right (55.5%). Knives and sharp objects 

are used to a lesser degree (n=49) followed by

blunt/bodily weapons ( n=36). Interestingly, where the 

far -left has a higher incidence of firearm use compared 

to the far -right, the results here indicate the far -right 

has a higher incidence of knife use (21.1%) compared 

to the far -left (2.4%). Part of t hese differences may be 

explained by far -right extremists being more likely to 

engage in intimate violence (Parkin et al., 2015). 

Ideological Strength 

The ECDB uniquely measures the strength of 

ideological association between suspects and their 

motives for committing an attack. The range of 

ideological association/intensity was recoded from a 

numeric range (1 -4) to an ordinal range (Weak, 

Moderate, Strong). An interesting result to highlight 

here is that far -right incidents tend to have a stronger 

ideologic al association (62.6%) compared to the far -

left (35.7%). 

Ideological Motivation 

A key facet of this paper attempts to explain 

how these two ideological movements overlap in their 

motivations. The current analysis collapsed 

motivations into five general ca tegories: anti -

government (n=10), anti -law enforcement (n=34), 

anti -race/ethnicity (n=111), anti -social minorities 

(n=79), and other ( n=35). Incidents with an anti -

government motivation generally resist the legitimacy 

of the law and the institutions that u phold them. For 

the far -right, the belief is that there is too much 

government oversight and intervention, whereas for 

the far -left, the government is not doing enough to 

protect civil liberties. Anti -police rhetoric has 

permeated both sides of the ideolog ical spectrum, and 

the current analysis indicates this continues to be the 

case with both the far -left and the far -right targeting 

law -enforcement 14.3% and 12.3% of the time, 

respectively. The most significant ideological 

motivation corresponds to anti -ra ce/ethnicity, and this 

is the case for both the far -left (33.3%) and the far -

right ( n=42.7%). This was collapsed from the more 

specific motivations driven by a general disdain of 

race relations, such as animosity towards individuals 

perceived as Black, Whi te, Arab, Asian, and Hispanic. 

Incidents targeting anti -social minorities consist of 

marginalized groups including feminists, LGBTQIA+, 

religious minorities (i.e., Jewish and Islamic), leftists, 

and the homeless. Anti -social minorities comprise the 

second most significant target for the far -right 

(32.3%), though it is not as significant an issue for the 

far -left, accounting for only 14.3% of their incidents. 

All other motivations include opposition to abortion, 

racism, fascism, a general dislike of sex -off enders, and 

seeking retribution for personal and institutional 

wrongs. These motivations represent the second most 

significant target for the far -left (31.0%) .

Presidential Administration 

In addition to assessing the volume of 

incidents over time, this pap er analyzed the occurrence 

of ideologically motivated homicides across 

presidential terms. The period of the analysis spanned 

across five different presidential administrations: 10 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

George H. W. Bush ( n=24), William J. Clinton ( n=92), 

George W. Bush ( n=48), Ba rak H. Obama ( n=63), and 

Donald J. Trump ( n=42). It is important to note that 

these administrations are categorized according to the 

specific presidential term for more nuanced 

comparisons (i.e., George W. Bush, Term 2 versus 

Barak H. Obama, Term 1); the t emporal analysis 

includes only two years of the George H. W. Bush 

administration. Far -right incidents appear to be 

relatively consistent across all presidential terms, with 

the majority of incidents occurring during Terms 1 and 

2 of the Clinton administrat ion (18.1% and 19.4%, 

respectively). Interestingly, most of the far -left 

incidents occurred in the later portion of the analysis, 

with the highest proportion of incidents occurring 

during the Trump administration (40.5%). 

## Discussion 

An integral aspect of this paper is the 

comparison between far -left and far -right 

ideologically motivated homicides in response to 

concerns regarding the recent up -tick in far -left 

violence. The results indicate that there is little 

evidence to support the position of a heightened risk 

of a far -left threat. When comparing far -left extremist 

homicides to far -right extremist homicides, there are 

distinct differences between the ideological 

perspectives but also some interesting similarities. As 

expected, the far -right ha s been more active when it 

comes to ideologically motivated homicides than the 

far -left. With more incidents per year in all but one 

year over a 31 -year period, they account for a larger 

portion of fatalities and are more likely to target racial 

and ethnic minorities. However, the data demonstrate 

that far -left extremist homicides have a higher 

proportion of multiple fatalities and accounted for a 

slightly larger relative percentage of ideological 

homicides that are anti -police when compared to the 

far -righ t. In other words, while far -right extremists are 

responsible for a higher frequency of incidents, far -left 

extremists more often kill more than one individual 

and are also slightly more likely to target law 

enforcement when they engage in fatal violence. 

However, in raw numbers, the far -left has engaged in 

fatal violence much less often than the far -right and 

killed far fewer people over the last three decades. 

Importantly, though, these results indicate that the 

characteristics regarding far -left and far -right 

extremist homicides are more complex than what has 

been previously discussed. 

Given the unexpected nature of some of these 

findings, a more in -depth discussion of these 

phenomena is warranted. Concerning the proportion of 

single and multiple fataliti es, it is interesting how even 

though far -left extremists account for less than a third 

of ideologically motivated homicides, perpetrators 

appear to target more victims per incident compared to 

the far -right or, in some regard, are more successful at 

fatal violence when they choose to engage in it. This 

could be attributed to the fact that far -left extremists 

are more discerning of their targets and seek to make 

a larger statement, therefore selecting targets that 

could require more planning and effort. For example, 

the data here indicate most far -left incidents are 

motivated by anti -race (specifically anti -White) 

sentiments and seeking retribution from oppressive 

systems. Because of these overarching systemic 

motivations, it could stand to reason that far -left 

extremists are more purposeful in the targets they 

choose and are able to attack multiple victims due to 

better strategic planning. Far -right extremist 

homicides are also primarily motivated by anti -

racial/ethnic sentiments, an expected finding 

conside ring the movement’s roots in White 

supremacy. Smith (1994) found that far -left and 

international terrorists tend to operate/attack within 

more urban settings, whereas far -right terrorists attack 

more rural areas. Since urban areas are more densely 

populate d, far -left extremists might have more 

availability of targets, thereby contributing to the 

larger proportion of multiple victims. Further 

investigation for this result would be useful to 

determine the exact nature of these relationships. In 

addition, like the perspectives discussed above, the 

differences in the ideological strength of the homicide 

events could also be attributed to what the two 

movements consider legitimate. A larger proportion of 

far -right homicides were coded with an ideological 

strength as strong (62.6%) compared to the far -left 

(35.7%), indicating that evidence of an ideological 

motivation with no contradictory evidence is more 

likely for the former. 

While this paper attempts to show the 

differences between far -left and far -right ideol ogical 

homicides, it also attempts to establish the ways in 

which they are similar. For both the far -left and the far -

right, the most significant issue is related to anti -

race/ethnicity perspectives. Even though the far -right 

is motivated to a large extent by anti -race and ethnicity 

grievances, and the far -left driven by anti -White 

sentiments, this finding is very much consistent with 

prior research indicating how ideologically motivated 

homicides are inter -racial (Parkin et al., 2015). 

Homicide research (n ot ideologically motivated) 

indicates that these events are overwhelmingly intra -

racial because of the inter -personal nature of this type 

of violence. However, within this context, it is not as 

surprising that victims are mostly of a different race 

than th e perpetrators because of the increased social 

distance between the two groups. Ideologically, 

perpetrators and victims tend to have little in common, 

and each represents something with what the offender FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 11     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

disagrees. Additionally, not identifying with a vict im 

allows a perpetrator to dehumanize the victim, an ideal 

that has been explored at length within prior 

theoretical and terrorism research (Liddick, 2013; 

Sykes & Matza, 1957). This is also inherent to the 

category relating to anti -social minorities, whic h

represent other marginalized groups of society (i.e., 

anti -feminist, anti -gay), and whom the far -right is 

more likely to target for their identity being 

antithetical to their ideology. 

Looking at the rate at which far -left and far -

right extremists pursue anti -government and anti -law 

enforcement targets (21.4% and 15.4%, respectfully) 

and ideological strength, further investigation would 

be warranted as to the relationship between these two 

variables. Freilich and Chermak (2009) found that 

law -enforcement targeted by far -right extremists were 

mostly an occurrence of opportunity, which could 

explain why anti -police homicides account for a

smaller proportion of events compared to the far -left. 

Law enforcement and government officials represent 

a clear threat to the far -left, both individually and 

institutionally, so it would stand to reason that those 

perpetrators would purposely seek out these targets, 

therefore accounting for the larger proportion of anti -

government and anti -law enforcement targets. 

Finally, an interesting facet of this research 

addresses the occurrence of ideologically motivated 

homicides across presidential administrations. The 

analysis addressed the frequency of ideologically 

motivated homicides for each term, as opposed to the 

overall len gth of each administration. The majority of 

all ideologically motivated homicides occurred during 

both terms of the Clinton administration (January 

1993 - January 2001), a period during which homicides 

and violent crime began to decrease from historic 

highs . During the first term of the Clinton 

administration there were 45 ideologically motivated 

homicides, 41 of which were far -right ideologically 

motivated. Similarly, during the second term of the 

Clinton administration, there were 47 ideologically 

motivate d homicides, and 44 were from the far -right. 

Since the far -right is rooted in conservative political 

ideals, it makes intuitive sense that far -right 

ideological homicides might peak during a democratic 

presidential administration. This period also coincide d

with increases in far -right ideological homicides that 

were anti -government and motivated by the approach 

of the new millennium (Parkin et al., 2015). 

From the onset, the Clinton administration 

was tasked with confronting a great deal of scrutiny 

regarding the federal government’s errors in 

judgement and questionable policies of engagement. 

One month before Clinton was elected to office, an 11 -

day stando ff in Ruby Ridge, Idaho, resulted in the 

death of two civilians and one U.S. Marshal. One year 

later, another deadly standoff, this time in Waco, 

Texas, ended with an estimated 80 fatalities, including 

four ATF agents. The combination of these two events 

helped galvanize the far -right, creating a major 

resurgence of extremist violence (ADL, 2012; 

Crothers, 2019; Pitcavage, 2001). A direct result of 

these deadly events was a growing agitation among 

militia and White supremacist groups that helped fuel 

the mo tivation for the 1995 Oklahoma City Bombing 

(Giordano, 2002; Kaplan, 1996). This, in addition to 

several social welfare and military policies, such as the 

appointment of Janet Reno to Attorney General, 

“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” allowing gay service 

members i nto the military, several increases in federal 

taxes, striking down anti -abortion legislation, and 

several allegations of abuse of power and misconduct 

quite possibly created the environment for far -right 

ideological grievances to grow (ADL, 2012; Miller 

Center, 2020). 

On the other hand, far -left ideological 

homicides occurred most during the Trump 

administration, accounting for almost half of all far -

left ideological homicides for the period. Like the 

mechanisms contributing to the prevalence of the far -

right during the Clinton administration, policies and 

rhetoric during the Trump administration that directly 

challenged left -wing ideals could have contributed to 

the exponential resurgence of the movement. During 

his campaign, a not yet elected Trump would routinely 

use anti -immigrant rhetoric, contributing to the rifts 

between the right and the left. During his time as 

president, several domestic and foreign policies (e.g., 

a travel ban that targeted predominantly Muslim 

countries, the funding and building of a wall along the 

U.S. – Mexico border, and a controversial move to bar 

trans -persons from serving in the military), along with 

public calls that invigorated private citizens to take 

matters into their own hands created an environment 

where far -left ext remists could have felt compelled to 

react. This is reflected in the “other” category of the 

ideological motivations, which corresponded to 

retribution against centuries of systemic oppression 

and institutional racism. However, further inquiry into 

the spe cific nature of these motivations indicates the 

revenge enacted by far -left extremists is a response to 

some of the more egregious actions by the far -right. 

For example, in 2015, a former television studio 

employee shot and killed two reporters on air as a 

reaction to the Charleston Church shooting. The 

shooter, Bryce Williams, faxed a 23 -page manifesto in 

which he wrote, “What sent me over the top was the 

church shooting. And my hollow point bullets have the 

victims’ initials on them” (Thomas et al., 2015, para. 

6). In 2017, Emanuel Kidega Samson opened fire on a 

group of congregants at the Burnette Chapel Church of 

Christ in Antioch, Tennessee. Samson claimed 12 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

responsibility for the attack, indicating he also acted in 

revenge for the Charleston shooting (Ko valeski & 

Blinder, 2017). 

Policy Implications & Future Research Directions 

A number of noteworthy implications stem 

from the differences and similarities between far -left 

and far -right ideologically motivated homicides. First, 

the prevalent and consist ent nature of far -right 

ideological homicides suggests that this movement 

should be a prioritized concern for government policy 

and law enforcement agencies. As mentioned earlier, 

prior research has shown that law enforcement 

agencies indicate that the far -right is the most 

significant threat (Freilich et al., 2009). The results 

from this paper are consistent with these findings. This 

suggests that counter -measures should be put in place 

in proportion to the threat and risk of each ideological 

perspective. Because the far -right is responsible for 

more ideological homicides, and more fatalities, there 

should be more resources available to combatting this 

threat. Despite calls from top security officials calling 

for a recognition of the far -right as a viable t hreat, 

security briefings to state and local partners 

disproportionately have emphasized a far -left threat 

(Swan, 2020). The disconnects between empirical data 

and what policy emphasizes highlights a potential 

issue with domestic counterterrorism policy. In

addition to more accurate countermeasures, there 

should be better strategic planning to account for the 

differences of multiple fatalities between the two 

ideologies. As discussed, while the far -left is 

responsible for a smaller number of ideologically 

motivated homicides, a larger proportion of incidents 

have multiple victims and a slightly higher victim 

count on average, suggesting that left -wing extremists 

are more deadly when they do engage in fatal violence. 

In addition, although far -right ideologica lly motivated 

homicides are trending slightly downward over time, 

far -left violence is slightly trending upward. 

Second, opportunity reduction has proven an 

effective strategy in mitigating the consequences of 

crime. Findings from the current analysis are 

consistent with other homicide and terrorism research 

relating to the use of firearms (Legault & Hendrickson, 

2009). Both far -left and far -right extremists relied 

heavily on the use of guns, supporting calls for 

increased gun -control. Limiting the availab ility and 

access to firearms could reduce the impact of 

ideologically motivated homicides by affecting all 

homicides. Other research on terrorist and extremist 

crime has discussed how these types of crime are 

inherent to the same opportunity structures as other 

more traditional types of crime (Clarke & Newman, 

200 6). Reducing the availability of guns will 

subsequently reduce the opportunity. Merely reducing 

the availability of certain weapons, however, is not 

enough for adequately reducing the opportunity f or 

crime. Due to the nature of ideological crime and how 

it is driven by myriad personal and political 

grievances, in particular intra -racial and ethnic 

conflict, policy aimed towards cultural competency to 

improve race relations could help reduce the 

ideo logical motivations inherent to the types of crime 

discussed here. 

Limitations 

While this paper relies on information from a 

nationally recognized database that has been operating 

for more than a decade, there is no guarantee that all 

far -left and far -right ideologically motivated 

homicides have been captured for the study period. 

The ECDB is an open -source database that relies on 

de -classified, publicly available information to 

identify ideologically motivated violence occurring in 

th e United States since 1990. While acknowledging 

the conflicting nature of news -reporting and public 

information sharing, the severity of this type of 

violence, and the newsworthiness of homicides (i.e., 

“if it bleeds, it leads”), it is reasonable to expect that 

this study captured the majority of all far -left and far -

right ideologically motivated homicides for which 

information was available. In addition, this research 

focused only on ideologically motivated homicide; 

studies that expand to other ideologica lly motivated 

crime, such as failed and foiled plots, arsons and 

bombings, or assaults, may find different patterns 

between far -left and far -right extremist behaviors. 

## Conclusion 

The findings from this study echo a large 

body of research pointing towards an increased threat 

by far -right extremism over other ideological 

perspectives. The results indicate that the far -right 

remains the greatest threat to public safety for the most 

severe form of violence, namely ideologically 

motivated homicide. However, so me interesting 

nuances highlight areas in which the far -left might 

create cause for concern; the far -left has a larger 

proportion of homicides with multiple fatalities and a 

slightly higher rate of homicides targeting law 

enforcement, albeit at a frequency much lower than the 

far -right. In addition, far -left extremist violence has 

increased over the last five years, showing that there 

may be socio -political scenarios in which the far -left’s 

threat to domestic security increases to levels much 

higher than it s average over the last three decades. This 

shows the importance of relying on data -driven 

policies that strategically prioritize domestic extremist 

threats and reduce opportunities for ideological 

violence in a meaningful way. FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 13     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

References 

Anderson, M. (202 1, March 2). Antifa didn't storm the 

Capitol. Just ask the rioters. NPR. 

https://www.npr.org/2021/03/02/972564176/anti 

fa -didnt -storm -the -capitol -ju st -ask -the -rioters 

Anti -Defamation League. (2012). 20 Years later, 

shadows of Ruby Ridge standoff still linger .

https://www.adl.org/news/op -ed/20 -years -later -

shadows -of -ruby -ridge -standoff -still -

linger?gclid=Cj0KCQjwxJqHBhC4ARIsAChq4a 

uCAi3ovuRcfWYW6Vz6iX1mOrTAsiZRdy8w 

Oct7zpiP0O5q3FFpGkcaAkLkEALw_wcB 

Anti -Defamation League. (2020). The boogaloo 

movement . https://www.adl.org/boogaloo 

Asal, V., Chermak, S. M., Fitzgerald, S., & Freilich, J. 

D. (2016). Organizational -level characteristics in 

right -wing extremi st groups in the United States 

over time. Criminal Justice Review , 45 (2), 250 –

266. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734016815626970 

Associated Press. (2016a, July 8). The latest: 

Neighbor saw no racial tension in accused 

gunman . AP NEWS. 

https://apnews.com/article/7fdb036f38ea434190 

6dc71ebacea7cb 

Associated Press. (2016b, July 9). Dallas sniper 

profile: Micah Johnson was sent home from 

Afghanistan . The Guardian .

https://www.theguardian.com/us -

news/2016/jul/09/dallas -shooting -more -details -

emerge -abou t-micah -xavier -johnson 

Baćak, V., Mausolf, J. G., & Schwarz, C. (2019). How 

comprehensive are media -based data on police 

officer –involved shootings? Journal of 

Interpersonal Violence .

https://doi.or g/10.1177/0886260519860897 

Beran, D. (2020, July 13). The boogaloo tipping point .

The Atlantic .

https://www.theatlantic.com/technolo gy/archive/ 

2020/07/american -boogaloo -meme -or -terrorist -

movement/613843/ 

Miller Center. (2020, July 8). Bill Clinton - Key events .

University of Virginia. 

https://millercenter.org/pr esident/bill -

clinton/key -events 

Blumstein, A., & Wallman, J. (2005). The recent rise 

and fall of American violence. In A. Blumstein & 

J. Wallman (Eds.), The Crime Drop in America 

(pp. 1–12). Cambridge University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511616167.002 

Bogel -burroughs, N., & Garcia, S. E. (2020, May 31). 

What is Antifa, the movement Trump wants to 

declare a terror group? The New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/article/what -antifa -

trump.html 

Borum, R., & Tilby, C. (2005). Anarchist direct 

actions: A challenge for law enforcement. Studies 

in Conflict & Terrorism , 28 (3), 201 –223. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610 0590928106 

Camera, L. (2021). Half of GOP says Capitol riots 

were left -wing activists trying to make Trump 

look bad . U.S. News & World Report .

https://www.usnews.com/news/politics/articles/2 

021 -04 -05/half -of -gop -says -capitol -riots -were -

left -wing -activists -trying -to -make -trump -look -

bad .

Campion, K., & West, L. J. (2021, July 7). Trump 

claims 'left -wing extremism' is engulfing the US. 

Conflating protests with terrorism is the real 

danger . The Conversation. 

https://theconversation.com/trump -claims -left -

wing -extremism -is -engulfing -the -us -conflating -

protests -with -terrorism -is -the -real -danger -

142649 

Carson, J. V. (2017). Left -wing terrorism. In G. 

LaFree & J. D. Freilich (Eds.), The handbook of 

the criminology of terrorism (pp. 310 –322). 

Wiley & Sons. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/97811189239 86.ch20 

Carson, J. V., LaFree, G., & Dugan, L. (2012). 

Terrorist and non -terrorist criminal attacks by 

radical environmental and animal rights groups in 

the United States, 1970 –2007. Terrorism and 

Political Violence , 24 (2), 295 –319. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2011.639416 

Castle, T. (2020). “Cops and the Klan”: Police 

disavowal of risk and minimization of threat from 

the far -right. Critical Criminology , 29 (2), 215 –

235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10612 -020 -09493 -6

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). 

Underlying cause of death, 1999 -2019 request .

https://wonder.cdc.gov /ucd -icd10.html 

Chermak, S. M., Freilich, J. D., Duran, C., & Parkin, 

W. P. (2013, May). An overview of bombing and 

arson attacks by environmental and animal rights 

extremists in the United States, 1995 -2010: Final 

report to the Resilient Systems Divisio n, Science 

and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of 

Homeland Security. National Consortium for the 

Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism 

(START). 

https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publicatio 14 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

ns/OPSR_TP_TEVUS_Bombing -Arson -

Attacks_Environmental -Animal%20Rights -

Extremists_1309 -508.pdf 

Chermak, S. M., Freilich, J. D., Parkin, W. S., & 

Lynch, J. P. (2012). American terrorism and 

extremist crime data sources and selectivity bias: 

An investigation focusing on homicide events 

committed by far -right extremists. Journal of 

Quantitative Criminology , 28 (1), 191 –218. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940 -011 -9156 -4

Clarke, R. V., & Newman, G. R. (2006). Outsmarting 

The Terrorists . Praeger Security International. 

Copsey, N., & Merrill, S. (2020). Violence and 

restraint within Antifa. Perspectives on 

Terrorism , 14 (6), 122 –138. 

Crothers, L. (2019). Rage on the right: the American 

militia movement from Ruby Ridge to the Trump 

presidency . Rowman et Littlefield. 

Evans , R., & Wilson, J. (2020, October 24). The 

boogaloo movement is not what you think .

Bellingcat. 

https://www.bellingcat.com/news/2020/05/27/the 

-boogaloo -movement -is -not -what -you -think/ 

Fausset, R. (2020, April 26). Two weapons, a chase, a 

killing and no charges . The New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/26/u s/ahmed -

arbery -shooting -georgia.html 

Fitzsimons, T. (2020, December 15). Washington 

town hosts large anti -mask rally . NBC News. 

https://www.nbcnews .com/news/us -

news/washington -town -hosts -large -anti -mask -

rally -n1251294 

Freilich, J. D., Chermak, S. M., Belli, R., Gruenewald, 

J., & Parkin, W. S. (2014). Introducing the United 

States Extremis Crime Database (ECDB). 

Terrorism and Political Violence , 26(2), 372 –

384. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2012.713229 

Freilich, J. D., Chermak , S. M., & Simone, J. (2009). 

Surveying American state police agencies about 

terrorism threats, terrorism sources, and terrorism 

definitions. Terrorism and Political Violence ,

21 (3), 450 –475. 

https: //doi.org/10.1080/09546550902950324 

Freilich, J. D., Parkin, W. S., Gruenewald, J., & 

Chermak, S. M. (2017). Comparing extremist 

perpetrators of suicide and non -suicide attacks in 

the United States. Terrorism and Political 

Violence , 31 (5), 943 –965. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2017.1297708 

Goldman, A., Benner, K., & Kanno -youngs, Z. (2021, 

January 30). How Trump's focus on Antifa 

distracted attention from the far -right threat . The 

New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/30/us/politics 

/trump -right -wing -domestic -terrorism.html 

Golden, H. (2020, June 29). Seattle: one teen kille d

and another injured in shooting in police -free 

zone . The Guardian .

https://www.theguardian.com/us -

news/2020/jun/29/chop -chaz -shooting -seattle -

poli ce -free -zone 

Giordano, G. (2002). The Oklahoma City bombing .

Rosen Publishing. 

Gruenewald, J. (2011). A comparative examination of 

homicides perpetrated by far -right extremists. 

Homicide Studies , 15 (2), 177 –203. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1088767911408029 

Gruenewald, J., Chermak, S., & Freilich, J. D. 

(2013a). Distinguishing “loner” attacks from 

other domestic extremist violence. Criminology & 

Public Policy , 12 (1), 65 –91. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/1745 -9133.12008 

Gruenewald, J., Chermak, S., & Freilich, J. D. 

(2013b). Far -right lone wolf homicides in the 

United States. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism ,

36 (12), 1005 –1024. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610x.2013.842123 

Gruenewald, J., & Pridemore, W. A. (2012). A

comparison of ideologically -motivated homicides 

from the New Extremist Crime Database and 

homicides from the Supplementary Homicid e

Reports using multiple imputation by chained 

equations to handle missing values. Journal of 

Quantitative Criminology , 28 (1), 141 –162. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940 -011 -9155 -5

Haberman, M., & Sa vage, C. (2020, May 31). Trump, 

lacking clear authority, says U.S. will declare 

Antifa a terrorist group . The New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/politics 

/trump -antifa -terrorist -

group.html?ref erringSource=articleShare&action 

=click&module=RelatedLinks&pgtype=Article 

Haines. (2021, March 16). Foreign threats to the 2020 

U.S. federal elections . National Intelligence 

Council. 

https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/asse 

ssments/ICA -declass -16MAR21.pdf 

Hanson, J. (2020, May 31). Jim Hanson: Trump is 

right – Antifa has hijacked protests of George 

Floyd's death and turned them into riots . Fox FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 15     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

News. https://www.foxnews.com/opinion/jim -

hanson -trump -is -right -antifa -has -hijacked -

protests -of -george -floyds -death -an d-turned -

them -into -riots 

Hewitt, C. (2003). Understanding terrorism in 

America . Routledge. 

Hill, E., Tiefenthäler, A., Triebert, C., Jordan, D., 

Willis, H., & Stein, R. (2020, June 1). How 

George Floyd was killed in police custody . The 

New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/george -

floyd -investigation.html 

Hoffman, B. (1986). Left -wing terrorism in the United 

States. Journal of Conflict Studies , 6(4), 5 –14 .

Hoffman, B. (2017). Inside Terrorism . Columbia 

University Press. 

Hosenball, M., & Murphy, K. (2016, July 17). Baton 

Rouge shooter was ex -Marine who denied ties to 

any group . Reuters. 

https://www.reuters.com/article/us -usa -police -

shooter/baton -rouge -shooter -was -ex -marine -

who -denied -ties -to -any -group -

idUSKCN0ZX0WC 

In America, far -right terrorist plots have ou tnumbered 

far -left ones in 2020 . (2020, October 27). The 

Economist . https://www.economist.com/graphic -

detail/2020/10/27/in -america -far -right -terrorist -

plots -have -outnumbered -far -left -ones -in -2020 

Jones, S. G. (2018). Rise of far -right extremism in the 

United States . Center for Strategic and 

International Studies (CSIS) .

https://www.csis.org/analysis/rise -far -right -

extremism -united -states 

Jones, S. G., Harrington, N., & Doxsee, C. (2021, July 

26). The escalating terrorism problem in the 

United States . Center for Strategic and 

International Studies. 

https://www.csis.org/analysis/escalating -

terrorism -problem -united -states 

Kaplan, J. (1996). The politi cs of rage: Militias and the 

future of the far right. Christian Century , 657 –

662 .

file:///C:/Users/007710116/Downloads/politicsof 

rage.pdf 

Klein, B. R., Gruenewald, J., & Smith, B. L. (2017). 

Opportunity, group structure, temporal patterns, 

and successful outcomes of far -right terrorism 

incidents in the United States. Crime &

Delinquency , 63 (10), 1224 –1249. 

https://doi.org/10.1177 /0011128716654925 

Koehler, D. (2019). Violence and terrorism from the 

far -right: Policy options to counter an elusive 

threat . International Centre for Counter -

Terrorism – The Hague .

https://doi.org/10.19 165/2019.2.02 

Kovaleski, S. F., & Blinder, A. (2017, September 29). 

Suspect in Tennessee church shooting cited 

revenge for Charleston Massacre . The New York 

Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/29/us/tenness 

ee -shooting -revenge -note.html 

LaFree, G. (2018). Is Antifa a terrorist group? Society ,

55 (3), 248 –252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12115 -

018 -0246 -x

LaFree, G. (2019). The evolution of terrorism event 

databases. In E. Chenoweth, R. English, A. Gofas, 

& S. Kalyvas (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of 

Terrorism (pp. 50 –68). Oxfo rd University Press. 

LaFree, G., & Dugan, L. (2004). How does studying 

terrorism compare to studying crime? 

In M. Deflem (Ed.), Terrorism and counter -terrorism: 

Criminological perspectives (pp. 53 –74). 

Emerald Group Publishing. 

LaFree, G., Yang, S. -M., & Crenshaw, M. (2009). 

Trajectories of terrorism: Attack patterns of 

foreign groups that have targeted the United 

States, 1970 –2004. Criminology & Public 

Policy , 8(3), 445 -473. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745 -

9133.2009.00570.x 

Legault, R. L., & Hendrickson, J. C. (2009). Weapon 

choice and American political violence. 

Criminology & Public Policy , 8(3), 531 –559. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745 -

9133.2009.00573.x 

Lenthang, M. (2021, May 21). Kyle Rittenhouse, 

Illinois teen who allegedly killed 2 protesters, 

makes 1st in -person court appearance . ABC 

News. https://abcnews.go.com/US/kyle -

rittenhouse -illinois -teen -allegedly -killed -

protesters -makes/story?id=77825979 

Liddick, D. R. (2013). The radical environmental and 

animal liberation movements. In G. Michael 

(Ed.), Extremism in America (pp. 249 –273). 

University Press of Florida, Florida Scholarship 

Online. https://doi.org/10.5744/florida/97808130 

44972.003.0010 

Logan, M. K., & Ligon, G. S. (2021). Come one, come 

all: individual -level diversity among anti -fascists. 

Dynamics of Asymmetric Conflict , 14 (2), 209 –16 DURAN     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

224. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/17467586.2021.1913202 

Lum, C., Kennedy, L. W., & Sherley, A. (2006). Are 

counter -terrorism strategies effective? The results 

of the Campbell systematic review on counter -

terrorism evaluation research. Journal of 

Experimental Criminology , 2(4), 489 –516. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292 -006 -9020 -y

Malkki, L. (2018). Left -wing terrorism. In A. Silke 

(Ed.), Routledge handbook of terrorism and 

counterterrorism (pp . 87 –97). Routledge. 

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315744636 -8

Matsubayashi, T. (2012). Do politicians shape public 

opinion? British Journal of Political Science ,

43 (2), 451 –478. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007123412000373 

Mills, C. E., Freilich, J. D., & Chermak, S. M. (2017). 

Extreme hatred: Revisiting the hate crime and 

terrorism relationship to determine whether they 

are “close cousins” or “ distant relatives.” Crime 

& Delinquency , 63 (10), 1191 –1223. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0011128715620626 

National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and 

Responses to Terrorism (START), University of 

Maryland. (2019). The Global Terrorism 

Database (GTD) [Data file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd 

Oppel, R. A., Taylor, D. B., & Bogel -burroughs, N. 

(2020, May 30). What to know about Breonna 

Taylor's death . The New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/article/breonna -taylor -

police.html 

Parkin, W. S., Bejan, V., & Hickman, M. J. (2020). 

Police, public and communi ty violence: 

Exploring the relationships between use of deadly 

force, law enforcement killed, and homicide rates 

in the United States. Criminology, Criminal 

Justice, Law & Society , 21 (2), 1–20. 

https://ccjls.scholasticahq.com/article/14144 -

police -public -and -community -violence -

exploring -the -relationship s-between -use -of -

deadly -force -law -enforcement -killed -and -

homicide -rates -in -the -unit 

Parkin, W. S., & Freilich, J. D. (2015). Routine 

activities and right -wing extremists: An empirical 

comparison of the victims of ideologically - and 

non -ideologically -moti vated homicides 

committed by American far -rightists. Terrorism 

and Political Violence , 27 (1), 182 –203. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2014.975649 

Parkin, W. S., Freilich, J. D., & Chermak, S. M. 

(2015). Ideological victimization: Homicides 

perpetrated by far -right extremists. Homicide 

Studies , 19 (3), 211 –236. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1088767914529952 

Parkin, W., Klein, B., Gruenewald, J ., Freilich, J., & 

Chermak, S. (September 10, 2020). 19 years after 

9/11, Americans continue to fear foreign 

extremists and underplay the dangers of domestic 

terrorism. The Conversation .

https://theconversation.com/19 -years -after -9-11 -

americans -continue -to -fear -foreign -extremists -

and -underplay -the -dangers -of -domestic -

terrorism -145914 

Pitcavage, M. (2001). Camouflage and conspiracy. 

American Behavioral Scientist , 44 (6), 957 –981. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/00027640121956610 

Reid, E. O. F. (1997). Evolution of a body of 

knowledge: A n analysis of terrorism research. 

Information Processing & Management , 33 (1), 

91 –106. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0306 -

4573(96)00052 -0

Rosenberg -Douglas, K. (2020, August 28). Fledgling 

militia group put out call to arms in Kenosha and 

5,000 people responded. Now it's banned from 

Facebook after fatal shootings during protests .

Chicago Tribune .

https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/breaking/ 

ct -kenosha -wisconsin -militia -social -media -

shooting -20200828 -

aenx5ropmrfmtca34ezqvhwe7e -story.html 

Sageman, M. (2014). The stagnation in terrorism 

research. Terrorism and Political Violence , 26 (4), 

565 –580. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2014.895649 

Serna, J., Quelly, J., & Branson -Pott s, H. (2017, April 

18). Suspect in Fresno shooting rampage spoke 

about racial conflict and Black nationalism . Los 

Angeles Times .

https://www.latimes.com/lo cal/lanow/la -me -

fresno -shooter -suspect -20170418 -story.html 

Sheehan, I. S. (2012). Assessing and comparing data 

sources for terrorism research. Evidence -Based 

Counterterrorism Policy , 13 –40. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4614 -0953 -3_2 

Silke, A. (2001). The devil you know: Continuing 

problems with research on terrorism. Terrorism 

and Political Violence , 13 (4), 1–14. 

https://doi.org/10 .1080/09546550109609697 

Silke, A. (2009). Contemporary terrorism studies: 

Issues in research. In R. Jackson, M. Breen FAR -LEFT VERSUS FAR -RIGHT FATAL VIOLENCE 17     

> Criminology, Criminal Justice, Law & Society –Volume 22 , Issue 2

Smyth, & J. Gunning (Eds.), Critical terrorism 

studies: A new research agenda (pp. 34 –48). 

Routledge. 

Silva, J. R., Duran, C., Freilich , J. D., & Chermak, S. 

M. (2019). Addressing the myths of terrorism 

in America. International Criminal Justice 

Review , 30 (3), 302 –324. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1057567719833139 

Simi, P., & Bubolz, B. F. (2017). Far right terrorism in 

the United States. In G. LaFree & J. D. Freilich 

(Eds.), The handbook of the criminology of 

terrorism (pp. 295 –309). Wiley & Sons. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118923986.ch19 

Smith, B. L. (1994). Terrorism in America: Pipe 

bombs and pipe dreams . SUNY Press. 

Suttmoeller, M., Chermak, S., & Freilich, J. D. (2015). 

The influence of external and internal correlates 

on the organizational death of domestic far -right 

extremist groups. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism ,

38 (9), 734 –758. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/1057610x.2015.1038106 

Stevenson, J. (2019). Right -wing extremism and the 

terrorist threat. Survival , 61 (1), 233 –244. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2019.1568059 

Swan, B. W. (2020, August 26). They tried to get 

Trump to care about right -wing terrorism. He 

ignored them. POLITICO. 

https://www.politico.com/news/2020/08/26/trum 

p-domestic -extemism -homeland -security -401926 

Sykes, G. M., & Matza, D. (1957). Techniques of 

neutralizatio n: A theory of delinquency. 

American Sociological Review , 22 (6), 664 –670. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/2089195 

Taleb, N. N. (2017). The black swan: the impact of the 

highly improbable . Taylor and Francis. 

Thomas , P., Cloherty, J., Date, J., & Levine, M. (2015, 

August 26). After shooting, alleged gunman 

details grievances in “suicide notes.” ABC News. 

https://abcnews.go.com/US/shooting -alleged -

gunman -details -grievances -suicide -

notes/story?id=33336339 

Thomas, T., Gabbatt, A., & Barr, C. (2020, October 

29). Nearly 1,000 instances of police brutality 

recorded in US anti -racism protests . The 

Guard ian . https://www.theguardian.com/us -

news/2020/oct/29/us -police -brutality -protest 

Tucker, E. (2020, June 2). A look at the antifa 

movement Trump is blaming for vio lence . AP 

NEWS. https://apnews.com/article/donald -

trump -race -and -ethnicity -militant -groups -

violence -politics -

6b23fc56ac200d719daa2c4245cc5a88 

Vysotsky, S. (2020). Fascist and antifascist tactics. 

American Antifa , 71 –104. 

https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429265174 -3

Ware, J. (2019). Siege: The Atomwaffen Division and 

rising far -right terrorism in the United States .

International Centre for Counter -Terrorism – The 

Hague. 

https://www.icct.nl/app/uploads/2019/07/ICCT -

Ware -Siege -July2019.pdf 

# About the Authors 

Celinet Duran is a Co -Principal Investigator for the 

United States Extremist Crime Database and a

Doctoral Candidate in the Criminal Justice Program at 

John Jay College. Her research focuses on domestic 

terrorism and extremist violence. Currently, she is a 

visiting scho lar at SUNY Oswego as a PRODiG Pre -

Doctoral Fellow. 

Endnotes  

> 1

Fatalities from the Oklahoma City Bombing were excluded from Table 1 and Figure 2 as it is an extreme outlier 

and skews the data in such a way that it hides any underlying patterns .
