Title: Amtrak FY24-29 Five Year Service and Asset Line Plans

URL Source: https://www.amtrak.com/content/dam/projects/dotcom/english/public/documents/corporate/businessplanning/Amtrak-Service-Asset-Line-Plans-FY24-29.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jan 2025 04:42:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 170

Markdown Content:
# FY24-29 

# On Track for Transformation 

## Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans Executive Summary 01 On Track for Transformation 4

## Service Line Plans 02 Northeast Corridor 20 

03 State Supported 30 

04 Long Distance 38 

05 Ancillary 48 

06 Real Estate & Commercial 56 

07 Infrastructure Access/Reimbursable 64 

## Asset Line Plans 08 Transportation 80 

09 Equipment 84 

10 Stations 98 

11 Infrastructure 106 

12 National Assets & Corporate Services 134 

## Financials 13 Financial Assumptions 152 

15 Consolidated Account Structure Tables 158 

16 Ridership Projections 162 

National Railroad Passenger Corporation 

1 Massachusetts Avenue NW | Washington, DC 20001 Amtrak.com 

# FY24-29 

# Five-Year Plans 3

# About Amtrak 

Amtrak is the nation’s intercity passenger rail operator and infrastructure provider. We provide safe, efficient, and effective intercity passenger rail mobility consisting of frequent, high-quality service that is trip-time competitive with other intercity travel options. 

We provide intercity passenger services through our three operating service lines: Northeast Corridor, which operates Amtrak’s high-speed Acela and Northeast Regional trains between Boston and Washington , DC, State Supported, which provides service on corridor routes of 750 miles or less through cost-sharing agreements with State Partners; and Long Distance, which includes all routes over 750 miles nationwide, and receives financial support from the federal government. 

We also provide commuter and freight railroads access to key infrastructure we own or control, such as right-of-way, stations, and facilities. Additionally, we conduct ancillary activities such as real estate and commercial development and serve as a contract operator for commuter train services to generate net financial contribution that is used to advance our statutory goals. We also perform reimbursable work for third parties such as other railroads, local and state governments and others that takes place on Amtrak property or requires our unique expertise. Reliable, frequent intercity passenger rail service is an essential and growing part of our nation’s multimodal transportation system. Amtrak enhances business productivity and supports the nation’s long-term economic growth and global competitiveness. Our routes connect hundreds of smaller communities with major metropolitan areas, provide efficient transportation for business travelers, and offer a unique experience for leisure travelers. 4 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans | Executive Summary 

# On Track for Transformation 

Amtrak commenced FY24 with notable momentum, after successfully restoring service on all routes, experiencing a significant ridership rebound, and making substantial progress in forward-looking initiatives—all while upholding safety standards and practicing fiscal responsibility. The residual business impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are diminishing, and Amtrak is actively expanding its workforce, managing costs amid persistent inflation, and ensuring the operational deployment of our full fleet. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) presents a transformative opportunity for Amtrak’s business. It provides, for the first time since Amtrak’s creation in 1970, significant, multi-year funding—$66 billion over the five-year period through FY26— for Amtrak and for grants from the U.S. Department of Transportation for intercity passenger rail and other rail programs. This funding facilitates the modernization of trains, stations, and infrastructure, enabling service expansion in collaboration with states and host railroads. The historic level of funding is coupled with expectations to significantly augment service for a broader rider base. Amtrak’s appeal lies in its commitment to safety, emissions reduction, enhanced mobility, and increased economic opportunities. Meeting public demand for these benefits requires a substantial increase in service. The goal of doubling ridership by 2040—to 66 million riders—represents an ambitious target, one that Amtrak is dedicated to achieving within a significantly compressed timeframe. The last time we doubled our ridership, it took us 35 years, starting from 1976. We are now looking to double our ridership again—in half that time. Amtrak is focused on that goal as we leverage record funding to launch a new era for intercity passenger rail in the United States. As Amtrak progresses towards this new era, organizational alignment becomes critical to our success. The recruitment of over 4,800 new employees in 2023, with plans to hire an additional 3,500 this year, necessitates a strategic focus on resource allocation. This document outlines the steps Amtrak is taking to effectively guide efforts not only for the present but also for the next 5 to 15 years and beyond. 

# 01 Executive Summary  5

Opposite page: Amtrak Midwest tests a Venture locomotive in Chicago. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. This page, top: At work on the Portal North Bridge replacement. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. Bottom, left: Track repairs in the East River Tunnel. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman; right: In August 2023, members of the Capital Delivery leadership team visited Baltimore to complete a comprehensive site visit of the Frederick Douglass Tunnel program area. 6 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29   

> Top: In November 2023, Amtrak and Vornado Realty Trust marked the completed transformation of New York Penn Station’s busiest entrance at 7th Avenue and 32nd Street, including new elevators, a light-filled canopy, and full ADA compliance. Photo by Fernando Sandoval/MW. Middle, left: Rendering of Amtrak’s new Airo Trainset; right: Our dedicated employees are the backbone of our service and accomplishments. Bottom: In January 2023, President Biden kicked off the Frederick Douglass Tunnel project at an event in Baltimore. After receipt of over $4 billion in new federal funding created by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Amtrak is scheduled to launch early construction activities this year.

## FY 2023 Results and Accomplishments 

The past year was a banner year for Amtrak! Our team made significant accomplishments including: 

Ridership. We served more than 28 million customers nationwide. On the Northeast Corridor, ridership is booming and has been exceeding pre-pandemic levels since early summer. Multiple State Supported services also set ridership records. 

Historic Investment. Thanks to ongoing support from Congress and the administration, we’re making historic investments that will launch new and expanded services, advance safety and reliability improvements, improve accessibility, drive economic development and enhance the customer experience around the country. 

Fleet. Our state-of-the-art fleet is taking shape. We ramped up production of our new Amtrak Airo trains that will operate on Northeast Regional and many State Supported routes, began the process to replace our Long Distance overnight railcars, and advanced work to introduce new, high-speed Acela trains. 

Infrastructure. Transformation of the Northeast Corridor continues, with major infrastructure projects underway. Customers between New Jersey and New York can view this work firsthand as they pass by the new Portal North Bridge, where construction is now 33 percent complete in partnership with New Jersey Transit. President Biden also joined us to celebrate milestones for transformative projects, like the Frederick Douglass Tunnel in Baltimore and the Hudson Tunnel project—a critical piece of the Gateway Program to transform our most heavily trafficked line between New York City and Newark, New Jersey. 

Stations. Around the country, we upgraded many stations where customers begin and end their Amtrak journey. We completed more than $114 million of work to make our stations more accessible; advanced major redevelopment projects in Baltimore and Philadelphia; and progressed designs for future upgrades in Chicago, New York and Washington, DC. 

Recruiting. None of our accomplishments would be possible without our dedicated employees. This year, we welcomed 4,842 new hires who will help us continue to rebuild our infrastructure, improve existing service and serve more customers. Executive Summary  7

## FY23 Challenges 

Despite all the progress we made in FY23 and our recovery from the COVID pandemic, we still face challenges and risks to achieving our performance goals including the following. 

Delivering the IIJA capital projects 

to build infrastructure and capture planned benefits while simultaneously growing capacity and ridership. Executing these capital projects represents a significant opportunity. However, managing substantial investment programs alongside capacity growth, ridership improvement, and daily delivery of exemplary customer experiences is a significant challenge. 

Keeping funding levels 

and stakeholders’ support and commit-ment despite a lack of long-term funding consistency and guarantees. Sustaining financial support and stakeholder backing is essential to laying the groundwork for the transformation and enhancement of our assets and services. This requires fulfill-ing our commitments and consistently pro-viding excellent service to our customers to make the case for continuing increased funding for Amtrak. 

Tenant status on most of our network, resulting in difficulty enforcing schedule reliability and high capital costs for access. The majority of our services operate over host railroad-owned and dispatched lines on which ongoing improvement and collaboration is essential to enhance performance. Much un acceptable on-time performance was prevalent on our host railroad network during FY23; realizing the potential for enhanced service will require improved coordination and cooperation from our host railroad partners. 

Capacity constraints that inhibit revenue and ridership growth, and aged infrastructure and fleet. Addressing capacity constraints is essential if we are 

> Above: Philadelphia’s William H. Gray III 30th Street Station’s renovation is being completed in phases to maintain Amtrak operations. The full renovation is anticipated to be complete by the end of 2027.

to increase revenue and ridership growth, and our aging infrastructure and fleet negatively impact reliability and financial performance. While significant progress has been made in returning more of our equipment fleet to service in FY23 and FY24, the demand for ridership has surged. Diligent efforts are required to maximize passenger capacity and increase equipment utilization, and to maintain aged equipment and infrastructure assets while we work to replace them. 

Expanding the network while navigating uncertainties about timing of corridor development process, agreements, and fleet availability. Serving a broader segment of America and reaching more people and places requires strategic partnerships with states, host railroads, communities, and the federal government. These challenges constitute key focus areas that our company-wide team has identified as critical for achieving future success. 8 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Amtrak’s Corporate Strategy 

## Information Flow and Integration 

Our strategic process ensures continuous alignment. Amtrak’s plans are organized around long-term (15 years), short-term (5 years), and immediate (1 year) time frames. They provide a cascading set of goals and initiatives from the corporate level to the Service and Asset Lines and the AOP. The feedback from any given year and the results from every AOP are integral to keeping the long-term strategy in the Blueprint up to date. The Blueprint is our long-term strategy, and it informs Service and Asset Line Plans and the AOP. 

## Strategic Plan–Blueprint 

The Strategic Plan–Blueprint provides the foundation and formulation of long-term company strategy. It serves as a guide to developing our Service and Asset Line Plans and the Annual Operating Plan. The Blueprint provides a roughly 15-year outlook and is updated each year and fully revised every five years. It serves as a roadmap to the successful implementation of our strategy beginning with our Vision, which focuses on our future goals, and ending with our Scorecard, which is used to measure progress towards our Vision. As an organization in transition to a new era, Amtrak has refreshed its Corporate Strategy. This strategy is built on an iterative process with dynamic items that connect and integrate three core items: the Strategic Plan-Blueprint, Service and Asset Line Plans (Five-Year Plan), and Annual Operational Plans (AOPs).    

> Strategy is not only a long-term
> planning compilation of future thinking; it is a set of interrelated and powerful choices that position the organization for
> success and to align goals across Amtrak’s organization.

Executive Summary  9

Vision 

Our Vision is a projection into the future, where to focus, and what Amtrak wants to become. Our Vision is expressed as a short description of the business and its goals, serving as a reference for employees as well as customers. Amtrak’s Vision is: 

## Connecting More People and Places 

We will double Amtrak ridership by 2040 by being the preferred mode of transportation and a world-class operator, connecting more communities safely and sustainably while building the foundation for the next rail era in the United States. We will deliver exceptional services and focus on our customers while driving growth and performance through transformative investments in our people, technology, and infrastructure. 

> Amtrak customers now have a more accessible journey with the 2023 completion of a $3.2 million project at the Gastonia, NC, station. The upgrades, celebrated at the ribbon cutting in April, included the construction of a new concrete platform with all new lighting, guardrails, and signage; an accessible restroom, renovated waiting room, and power-operated door entrance in the station; and a newly paved parking lot with an entrance driveway and two accessible parking spaces for customers who use wheeled mobility devices.

Amtrak’s Strategic Plan-Blueprint: Our Roadmap to Success 

# 1

# Vision 

# 3

# Key Actions 

# 2

# Objectives 

# 4

# Strategic Initiatives 

# 5

# Scorecard 

Amtrak's Corporate Strategy, continued 10  Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans  FY24−29 

Key Actions 

Key Actions are the foundation of 

our strategy. They are the top-level 

priorities driven by the core business 

strategy and guiding principles that 

inform every decision made by the 

company. Our Key Actions are the 

building blocks to determine which 

critical areas Amtrak should focus on to 

create competitive advantage and drive 

business transformation. Our short-term 

objectives, described on page 11, are 

translated into Key Actions. 

By empowering our people 

and prioritizing customers, 

transformation, and growth, 

we will reach our goals, deliver 

results, safely expand our 

network and services, and 

create economic opportunities 

for the communities we 

serve while reducing our 

environmental impact and 

continuing to attract, retain, 

and develop the right talent. 

Strategic Initiatives 

Strategic Initiatives are specific, proactive 

programs which support our Key Actions 

and translate them into measurable 

outcomes. A Strategic Initiative can 

comprise multiple projects, and several 

Strategic Initiatives can function together 

to achieve a larger, more visionary goal. 

We will translate the four Amtrak Key 

Actions into outcomes through a list of 

12 Strategic Initiatives identified in the 

following table. 

A Strategic Initiative can comprise 

multiple projects, and several strategic 

initiatives can function together to 

achieve a larger, more visionary goal. 

They are action-oriented umbrellas that 

help convert Amtrak’s Key Actions into 

outcomes. 

Tiered Objectives 

LONG-TERM  OBJECTIVES 

> Beyond 15 Years (FY40)

SHORT-TERM  OBJECTIVES 

> Up to 5 Years (FY28)

Amtrak's Corporate Strategy, continued 

Objectives 

Strategic objectives identify tangible targets to achieve our Vision. Objectives are purpose-driven, long-term, forward-focused, actionable, and measurable. As tangible targets to achieve the long-term Vision, management has identified both long-term (FY40) and short-term (FY28) objectives aligned to our Vision and Mission. By FY28, we will reach 37 million passengers, reach break even in the train operations business, invest in our infrastructure and assets, and improve customer experience. By FY40, we will double ridership to 66 million passengers and achieve state of good repair with state-of-the-art assets and technology. To put Amtrak on the path toward achieving its long-range strategic objectives, management has identified key objectives to meet in the next five years (through FY28). Executive Summary  11 Our FY28 Objectives and How We Will Accomplish Them 

Be the employer of choice in the mobility and transportation industry in the United States. 

Empower Our People 

Empower employees to perform their job, drive change, take ownership, lead with courage, and act with financial stewardship. • Enable managers to drive alignment with the company’s strategy through their work with their teams. • Define Amtrak’s business model to clarify roles and improve the organization’s performance, productivity, and effectiveness. • Build tools and processes to allow people to develop and perform better 

Improve our Customer Experience, and operate safely and reliably. 

Delight Our Customers 

Deliver products and services that prioritize safety and go beyond customer needs to make our customers happy and satisfy our partners. • Create value and provide exceptional experiences, building loyalty and brand promotion. • Improve our safety, utility, reliability, and connectivity. • Foster strong relationships with partners and stakeholders. 

Increase our infrastructure and asset capacity, 

productivity, sustainability, and resilience. 

Drive Transformation 

Drive revolutionary inprovements in sustainability and efficiency through investments in our Assets and Technology. • Invest in modern, smart assets and technology. • Increase resilience, efficiency, and effectiveness in our operations. • Manage change safely and effectively to achieve a sustainable transformation. 

Reach 37 million passengers and 

break even in the train operations business. 

Grow the Business 

Deliver results and foster a modal shift to rail by expanding partners, the network, and services, meeting the demand for reliable transportation. • Expand the network and increase ridership, revenue and partnerships. • Increase the utilization and capacity of our assets. • Develop new value-generating services 

FY28 Objectives Blueprint Key Actions Blueprint Strategic Initiatives 

Amtrak's Corporate Strategy, continued 

The Blueprint connects to the Five-Year Plan, other company plans, and the Annual Operating Plan (AOP). Given the prior year’s AOP results, new market and customer trends, and other internal and external input, the Blueprint is subject to short-term annual reviews. 

Amtrak wants to help ensure that employees continue to play a key role in the execution of our strategy by developing an integrated Roadmap to ensure a successful implementation of the updated Strategy. 

This will require cl ea r communication, evolving our culture to integrate our Blueprint into various work processes and planning activities, illustrating how everyone’s work connects to the strategy, distributing and prioritizing resources, optimizing processes and governance, and aligning the organization to the strategy. 12 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Our Amtrak Values make clear to everyone what they can expect when they interact with our company. We want Amtrak to be a place where our employees recognize, appreciate, and demonstrate our Values in how they carry out their responsibilities. When this connection is made, we make Amtrak a great place to work—and we create a powerful and engaged team capable of achieving any goal. 

## Our Values 

Do the Right Thing 

Doing the right thing is about making respect and care priorities in our everyday actions, from how we interact with each other to how we treat the environment. 

Put Customers First 

We strive to exceed customer expectations by providing timely and courteous assistance and information to our customers and communities. 

Excel Together 

Working together we create innovative  solutions and pursue continuous improvement by learning from each other. 

# Amtrak’s Values and Capabilities 

## Our Core Capabilities 

Supporting our Values is a set of Core and Leadership Capabilities. 

Core Capabilities 

• Building Trust • Accountability • Effective Communication • Customer Focus • Proactive Safety and Security 

Leadership Capabilities 

• Strategic Acumen • Leading with Courage • Driving Sustainability and Innovation • Developing Trust Executive Summary  13 

Amtrak’s Five-Year Service and Asset Line Plans provide a summary of the strategies, opportunities, and needs facing the company’s different business units. The plans describe key strategies, initiatives and other steps the company intends to undertake to improve our business, enhance customer experience and invest in our future to meet the nation’s transportation needs. Amtrak is set to make substantial improvements through a robust commitment to capital spending. We are planning to invest over $5.5 billion this year, nearly double the capital spending from FY23. Looking ahead, our plans extend this commitment to over $50.4 billion throughout the Five-Year Plan period for sustained growth. Our ridership targets are equally ambitious, aiming to surpass 32 million passengers in FY24 and further grow to 39 million by 2029. This aligns with our overarching goal of doubling ridership by 2040, emphasizing the need for consistent, year-over-year growth and a steadfast commitment to safety, service quality, and on-time performance to cultivate customer loyalty. Financially, we are dedicated to improving our performance, targeting an adjusted operating income loss of $625 million in FY24 and $356 million by FY29. Stakeholders expect increased efficiency, reflecting our commitment to responsible financial management. These strategic initiatives underscore Amtrak’s commitment to operational excellence and sustainable growth. The Plans describe the expected resources and results across the upcoming five-year period. We submit them to Congress every other year, and they serve as the basis for our federal funding requests and Annual Operating Plan (AOP) planning. Some key takeaways from the Plans include: 

New Acela .

In 2024, Amtrak will unveil second-generation Acela trainsets, revolutionizing high-speed travel on the Northeast Corridor (NEC). The fleet expansion, from 20 to 28 trainsets, promises much needed additional capacity with enhanced comfort, technology, and safety for passengers. 

# Five-Year Plan Highlights     

> Above: Amtrak’s 2nd Generation Acela outside of the Old Erie Station in Hornell, NY. Photo by Amtrak/ Marc Glucksman/River Rail Photo. 14 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

Airo . Scheduled for revenue service on the Northeast Regional in 2027, Airo trainsets represent a significant generational investment. Boasting spacious interiors, ergonomic seating, and dual-mode locomotives, Airo aims to redefine efficiency and customer experience. Facility upgrades worth $2 billion support the 

Amtrak Airo Trainset program, improving major terminals for seamless integration and accommodating new trainsets. 

Expansion of State Supported Services. Amtrak’s commitment to State Supported services involves expanding or initiating new routes nationwide in conjunction with state partners. Key initiatives include the planned Twin Cities-Milwaukee-Chicago (TCMC) and New Orleans-Mobile services, and working with state partners to advance plans for the introduction of other new routes and additional frequencies. 

Improving Long Distance Travel. 

The procurement of a new Long Distance Fleet is a transformative step for Amtrak. Incremental growth in capacity and ridership is anticipated through the restoration of 43 Long Distance cars during FY24. 

Infrastructure and Safety Initiatives. 

Safety remains paramount, with numerous initiatives to improve safety. State of Good Repair (SOGR) Programs invest in Track, Structures, Electric Traction, and Communications & Signals. Major backlog projects address critical infrastructure needs for SOGR and capacity improvements. 

Strategic Growth and Capacity Enhancement. Amtrak’s growth strategy includes expanding routes and increasing service frequency nationwide. Improvement projects and strategic initiatives focus on reliability, safety, and capacity enhancements. High-profile projects such as the Hudson Tunnel, and Connecticut River Bridge Replacement support future growth in addition to addressing critical infrastructure needs. Strategic planning projects aim for higher speeds and reduced travel times. 

Customer Service Enhancements. 

The service plan through FY29 emphasizes maintaining operational frequency levels, exploring route extensions, increased frequencies, and new route introductions. A comprehensive refresh of railcars, ongoing since FY18, ensures elevated customer experiences. Newly refreshed dining and sightseer lounge cars enhance passenger amenities. 

Technology and Modernization. 

A multiyear initiative to modernize locomotives and passenger cars is underway, responding to the limitations of aging equipment. This re-fleeting includes base orders for 111 new 

Airo and Acela trainsets and 125 long distance diesel locomotives, with options for additional Airo trainsets and locomotives. The comprehensive refresh of railcars, spanning various models, aims at improving customer experience while progressing towards a full fleet replacement.   

> Above: Amtrak’s state-of-the-art Airo trainsets are driving the creation of sustainable, engineering and manufacturing jobs across the country with over 3,500 parts manufactured by nearly 100 suppliers in 31 states.

Five-Year Plan Highlights, continued Executive Summary  15 

The Five-Year Plan’s financial statements reflect a focus on improving Amtrak’s operating performance and providing increased capital investment for key strategic projects. The Plan includes revenue growth, continued management of costs, the successful launch of the new Acela 

trainsets and more robust assumptions on key capital project needs (fleet acquisition, Gateway, major infrastructure projects, etc.), along with refined funding assumptions highlighting the need for additional discretionary funding. 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal FY29 Goal Adjusted Ticket Revenue (Millions) $2,243.8 $2,471.7 $3,373.5 

Ridership (Millions) 28.5 32.8 39.1 

Customer Satisfaction Index 79.6% 81.0% -

Customer On Time Performance 74% 76% -

Revenue Per Available Seat Mile $0.30 $0.29 $0.31 

Cost per Available Seat Mile $0.37 $0.34 $0.33 

Passenger Miles (Millions) 5,823.2 6,675.9 7,774.4 

Average Load Factor 51% 53% 50% 

Cost Recovery 81% 86% 93% 

# Plan Organization 

Our Service and Asset Lines are the backbone of our operations. They enable us to fulfill our mission of providing efficient transportation, promoting safety, and contributing to the nation’s economic growth and competitiveness. We have structured this document to provide clarity and ease of navigation for our readers. It consists of several chapters covering each of our Service and Asset Line Plans, as well as a section outlining our key assumptions used to prepare the financial forecasts for the plan. Amtrak’s Service and Asset Line Plans, or the Five-Year Plan, outline strategies and initiatives at the Service and Asset Line level. These plans offer financial projections for the current year and a five-year time frame. While financial projections are updated annually, the full document is revised every other year in compliance with Congressional statute. 16 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Amtrak's Service and Asset Lines 

Amtrak performs a range of business activities for its customers in different capacities. Amtrak’s customers include intercity rail passengers and public and private sector entities that contract for, partner with, or invest in Amtrak’s business activities. 

# Service Lines 

Amtrak’s Service Lines share a common mission and core customers. Service Lines are responsible for meeting the needs of the respective customers to fulfill their mission. 

NEC Intercity Operations 

> Sponsor: Federico Gazzolo, VP Product Development

Provides premium and regular intercity rail passenger service along the NEC while seeking to maximize operating surplus. Its customers are intercity train travelers on the NEC. 

State Supported 

> Sponsor: Ray Lang, VP State Supported Services

Provides intercity rail passenger service and supporting services under contract to States on corridor routes of not more than 750 miles. Its primary customers are State Departments of Transportation and authorities, and intercity travelers. 

Long Distance 

> Sponsor: Federico Gazzolo, VP Product Development

Provides intercity rail passenger service on routes of more than 750 miles. Its primary customers are travelers and communities across the National Network and the Federal Government. 

Infrastructure Access 

> Sponsor: Tom Moritz, AVP Infrastructure Access & Investment

Plans, develops, manages, and provides access to users of Amtrak-owned or Amtrak-controlled infrastructure. Its primary customers are Amtrak’s NEC, State Supported and Long Distance Service Lines, commuter and freight railroads, and third-parties such as States and localities, utilities, and others that seek to make use of Amtrak’s infrastructure and fixed assets. 

Ancillary Services 

> Sponsors: Louis Wolfowitz, VP Real Estate & Commercial Development; Anna Lynn Smith, VP Strategy & Planning

Competes to operate commuter rail services, performs reimbursable work for States and railroads, and leverages Amtrak-owned real-estate and commercial assets. 

# Asset Lines 

Our Asset Lines support Service Lines by providing the resources necessary to produce revenue and support our mission and goals. 

Transportation 

> Sponsor: Shawn Gordon, VP Network Operations & Transformation

Transportation refers to assets related to the operation and movement of the trains, onboard services, and amenities. 

Equipment 

> Sponsor: George Hull, VP Chief Mechanical Officer

Amtrak-controlled rolling stock, locomotives, and mechanical shop facilities that are used to maintain and overhaul equipment. 

Stations 

> Sponsor: George Holz, AVP Stations & Facilities

All passenger rail stations served by Amtrak trains, with a focus on Amtrak-controlled stations and elements of other stations for which Amtrak has legal responsibility or where it intends to make capital investments. 

Infrastructure 

> Sponsor: Lee Moss, VP Infrastructure Maintenance & Construction Services

All Amtrak-controlled Northeast Corridor infrastructure assets and other Amtrak-controlled infrastructure, along with the associated facilities that support the operation, maintenance, and improvement of those assets. 

National Assets and Corporate Services 

> Sponsor: Judith Apshago, VP Chief Digital Officer

Cross-cutting assets such as systems for reservations, security, training, training centers, and others associated with Amtrak’s national rail passenger transportation system. Corporate Services include company-wide functions such as legal, finance, government affairs, human resources, and information technology. First Adirondack Train 68 AMTK 108 after the pandemic at Rouses Point, NY, April 2023. Executive Summary  17 Account Structure Framework 

Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans support the account structure and improvements to accounting methods originally prescribed by the FAST Act to promote efficient use and stewardship of Amtrak funds and enhance transparency. The account structure is designed around the service lines and asset lines. In addition to its core functions, each Service and Asset Line requires strategic and operational leadership, management, and administrative support to carry out its functions. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act 

(IIJA) authorizes a Northeast Corridor grant for the NEC Main Line between Washington and Boston, and a National Network grant for State Supported and Long Distance routes that fund operating and capital expenses. Segregation of this funding and the revenues from each Service Line ensures that the financial and planning elements of both networks can be clearly understood; net NEC revenues (pre-pandemic) are retained for reinvestment in the NEC network; and National Network needs are not overshadowed by the NEC’s large capital requirements. 

## Stakeholders and Relationship to Other Planning Efforts 

Understanding the stakeholders and the target audience for this plan is crucial. It is designed to serve internal teams, external partners, regulators, and anyone with a vested interest in Amtrak’s service and asset lines. Amtrak values transparency and engagement with the public. We have incorporated mechanisms for public input and feedback throughout the planning process. Coordination with our partners will be critical to successful implantation of our plans. Amtrak maintains regular communication with our state, commuter, and host railroad partners both on a bilateral basis and through our membership in entities such as the Northeast Corridor Commission and the State-Amtrak Intercity Passenger Rail Committee (SAIPRC). We are in continual communication with the federal government through the Federal Railroad Administration’s management of our NEC and National Network grants and its membership in both the Commission and SAIPRC. We also communicate regularly with Congress regarding current and planned activities. Current efforts to improve or maintain Amtrak’s assets that involve collaboration with stakeholders include Amtrak’s fleet acquisition process, managing investment in shared-use infrastructure on the Northeast Corridor, and participation in FRA’s Corridor Identification and Development Program (Corridor ID). Stakeholders and Relationship to Other Planning Efforts, continued 

Coordination on Fleet Acquisition with FRA and SAIPRC 

Amtrak is now severa l years into its procurement of the Airo 

trainsets, and we continue to coordinate with the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) and with state partners through SAIPRC. With state partners, we have recently finalized our governance process for operating the Airos on Amtrak and State Supported routes. We continue to meet regularly with state partners to review trainset production, and we are beginning the detailed planning for introducing the initial Airos into revenue service on the Amtrak Cascades route. The Airo team continues to meet regularly with the FRA to review the overall project. 

## At this time, the majority of the Siemens Venture cars ordered by Midwest and California State Partners have been delivered and introduced into revenue service, along with State-owned Siemens SC-44 Charger diesel locomotives.    

> At right: An Amtrak Siemens SC-44 Charger in the yard in Chicago, Illinois. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman.
> 18 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 Executive Summary 19

Coordination on Investments in Northeast Corridor Infrastructure 

The IIJA requires that stakeholders are consulted in the development of the asset line plans. Amtrak engaged both the Federal Railroad Administration and the NEC Commission (NECC) in developing its Infrastructure Asset Line Plan. Amtrak is continuing efforts to improve alignment between the Amtrak Infrastructure Asset Line Plan (IALP) and Commission’s Capital Investment Plan (CIP). Amtrak continues to work with the NECC to renew the cost allocation policy and to create a more inclusive process for plan development and review. Amtrak, in partnership with the NEC Commission, its partner NEC infrastructure asset owners (the states of Connecticut, Massachusetts and New York), and other NEC partner agencies, developed a long-range, 15-year strategic investment plan for the NEC is entitled CONNECT NEC 2035 (C35). This plan, adopted by the NEC Commission on June 24, 2021, and updated by the CONNECT NEC 2037 (C37) plan released in November 2023, provides a roadmap for implementing the initial 15-year phase of the 2040 horizon year vision for corridor development as established in the FRA’s 2017 NEC FUTURE Record of Decision. Amtrak continues to work with the FRA, NEC Commission, commuter authorities and other stakeholders in developing and evolving NEC CONNECT Plans to advance the NEC FUTURE Record of Decision. 

Corridor ID Program 

FRA’s Corridor Identification and Development Program (Corridor ID ) was created by the IIJA to guide intercity rail development throughout the US and create a pipeline of projects for funding and implementation. On December 8, 2023, FRA announced the 69 corridors accepted into the Corridor ID Program . The Corridor ID Program includes improvements to existing state-supported routes, extensions of state-supported routes, and new routes throughout the country. Amtrak expects to commence operation of several new state-supported routes and additional frequencies during the period this Five-Year Plan encompasses. However we are not able to project whether or when service will be initiated or increased on specific State Supported routes other than those identified, since that is dependent upon the decisions of state partners who provide funding, determinations made by FRA through its Corridor ID program and future discretionary grant awards, obtaining access to host railroad-owned rail lines, negotiation of agreements, the design and construction of any necessary capital projects, equipment availability, and other factors not within Amtrak’s control. As the Corridor ID program advances, future Five-Year Plans will include more detail and specificity. 

FRA Long Distance Study 

The IIJA directed the FRA to conduct an Amtrak Daily Long Distance Service Study ( Long Distance Study ) to evaluate the restoration of daily long distance intercity rail passenger service and the potential for reinstating Amtrak and pre-Amtrak long-distance routes that were discontinued. This includes bringing Amtrak’s three trip per week Cardinal and Sunset Limited services to daily and restoring service that would: link small and large communities, address the economic and social well-being of rural areas, and provide enhanced connectivity for the national rail system. The study is underway and has engaged stakeholders across the country, including Amtrak, to evaluate how to better connect people with Long Distance services. The study will be completed in 2024 and will create a long-term vision for long-distance passenger rail service and identify capital projects and capital and operating funding needed to implement that vision. 

## Legal and Regulatory Considerations 

The statutory requirement that Amtrak prepare Five-Year Plans is found in the United States Code, Title 49, Section 24320, which outlines the requirements and guidelines for the biennial submission of Five-Year Service Line and Asset Line plans to Congress and the Secretary of Transportation. These plans are intended to be based on available funding and must include detailed information on service objectives, financial projections, asset priorities, and performance measures. The statute directs Amtrak to consult with various stakeholders, including government entities and other relevant organizations. 

Stakeholders and Relationship to Other Planning Efforts, continued 20 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

The NEC Service Line (NECSL) leads Amtrak’s work to maximize the ridership and business performance of intercity passenger rail transportation services operating exclusively on the 457-mile Northeast Corridor (NEC) Main Line between Washington, DC and Boston. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Northeast Corridor Service Line 

Amtrak offers two distinct NEC intercity products: Acela , Amtrak’s premium, limited stop service that operates at speeds up to 150 mph (soon to be 160 mph with the introduction of the next generation Acela equipment), and Northeast Regional , which serves additional communities and operates at speeds up to 125 mph. Acela trainsets have 44 seats in first class and 260 seats in business class, and Northeast Regional consists vary from 305-710 seats depending on overall demand, time of day, and day of week. Five Amtrak Long Distance routes operate over the NEC, and two other Long Distance routes and 15 State Supported routes serve NEC stations and are maintained at NEC equipment maintenance facilities. Today, the Acela and the Northeast Regional play a critical role in enabling Americans to connect with family and friends, leisure and tourism activities, business opportunities, and jobs. Amtrak has transitioned from a period of post-pandemic recovery to future-focused growth. The population density in the northeastern United States helps make Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor the most heavily traveled portion of the American passenger rail system. Amtrak’s central challenge in the next five years is to maximize our ability to meet demand from the American public for our services in the Northeast. 

Acela and Northeast Regional served 12.1 million customer trips in FY23, or 98 percent of pre-pandemic (FY19) levels. The Northeast Regional experienced a record-breaking year in FY23, surpassing pre-pandemic ridership and serving more than 9 million customer trips. The Acela provided more than 3 million customer trips and exceeded pre-pandemic levels in July, August, and September 2023. This remarkable milestone was met even while Amtrak continues to operate fewer Acela frequencies today due to Acela equipment limitations. Our strategy for the next five years builds off our strategies to optimize schedules, pricing, and marketing to grow our customer base. The Northeast Corridor plays a vital role in supporting the economy of the Northeastern United States, and by extension the national economy. The Northeast Region generates 20 percent of gross domestic product and is home to a fifth of the country’s Fortune 500 companies. Business travel volume, while not at pre-pandemic levels, has steadily grown over the past two years. The return to business travel has demonstrated the enduring and unique value that Acela and Northeast Regional provide in offering downtown-to-downtown, efficient travel options that connect businesses in a variety of industry sectors to conferences, clients, suppliers, and partners. 

# 02 Northeast Corridor Service Line  21 NEC Ownership 22 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Strategy 

## Goals and Objectives 

Our NEC vision and goals are guided by Amtrak’s vision to connect more people and places and double system-wide ridership by 2040. The NEC vision is to maximize the contributions of 

Acela and the Northeast Regional to a thriving, diverse, and sustainable Northeast region. To do this, we are working to position Amtrak as the preferred mode of intercity travel in the Northeast and shifting trips from other, more carbon-intensive modes to rail. To achieve this vision, we are guided by the actions of our Amtrak Blueprint, to Empower Our People, Delight Our Customers, Drive Transformation, and Grow the Business. The NEC Service Line goals are aligned with our Amtrak Blueprint Key Actions. 

Position the Acela to Absorb Demand Increases 

The re-fleeting of the Acela with new trainsets beginning in 2024 will provide much needed additional capacity on the NEC. The total seats per train, including seats for passengers with disabilities, will increase from 304 on today’s Acela equipment to 386 on the new Acela trainsets. Our Acela fleet will also grow to 28 trainsets, eight more than the original Acela fleet. With the introduction of the new Acela fleet to the public, more customers will have the opportunity to experience our premium service. 

NECSL Five-Year Plan Goals and Objectives Are Aligned with the Amtrak Blueprint 

Blueprint Key Actions NECSL Goals NECSL Objectives Empower Our People Delight Our Customers Revitalize the NEC to meet the travel expectations of today’s customers. 

• Create value and provide exceptional experiences. • Increase resilience, efficiency, and effectiveness in our operations. • Increase customer awareness on how to access NEC stations via a variety of local transportation modes. 

Drive Transformation Capitalize on historic investments and system renewal. 

• Maximize the commercial value of the Airo trainsets. • Contribute to public awareness of the customer benefits 

of stations and infrastructure renewal across the NEC. 

Grow the Business Position the Acela 

to absorb demand increases. 

• Maximize the commercial value of the new Acela trainsets. • Increase the utilization and capacity of our assets. • Grow operating income. • Broaden general public and customer awareness of Amtrak services. 

> Rendering of entrance to the new Baltimore Penn Station expansion from St. Paul Street.

Capitalize on Historic and System Renewal 

IIJA investments are enabling historic, and greatly needed, renewal of the NEC Main Line’s infrastructure, including stations, bridges, track, technology, and more. These investments will serve as a catalyst for attracting new customers and enhancing our customer experience. 

Revitalize the NEC to Meet the Travel Expectations of Today’s Customers 

While aggregate demand for intercity rail travel has fully recovered, the COVID-19 pandemic left lasting impacts on travel patterns. Amtrak will continue to proactively adjust our services, including schedules, station stopping patterns, and pricing, to meet the needs of today’s traveler. Northeast Corridor Service Line  23 

other modes, particularly highway travelers, to rail. These strategies include tactics to raise public awareness of Northeast Corridor services, address specifically-identified barriers to Amtrak use by non-customers, adjusting Acela 

and Northeast Regional schedules to meet current demand patterns, and providing more affordable pricing. Many of these strategies will build upon the successes of recent strategies implemented in the post-pandemic era, including innovative pricing strategies like our Night Owl fares and our new affordable and flexible fare structure, as well as increasing service at locally serving stations to match evolving travel demand patterns. Amtrak is excited to capitalize upon the transformative investments in our fleet, stations, tracks, bridges, and other infrastructure that are forthcoming on the NEC in the next five years. These investments, largely enabled by the IIJA, will modernize and elevate the Northeast Corridor customer experience and support continued safe and efficient operations. As these important investments are being made, we will ensure that customers have ample opportunities to learn about our renewal work underway and its associated benefits. As our station enhancements at Philadelphia 30th Street Station, Baltimore Penn Station, and Washington Union Station are completed, and new 

Acela trainsets and the Airo trainsets are introduced on our Acela and Northeast Regional services respectively, interactive customer education and engagement will both highlight benefits our customers will see and give the public a chance to celebrate these landmark achievements with us. 

> Customers boarding the
> Northeast Regional.

Shifting travel from other modes to the Northeast Corridor provides significant environmental, as well as quality of life and safety benefits, for Northeast travelers and our Northeast Corridor communities. Amtrak’s all-electric Northeast Corridor produces up to 83 percent fewer greenhouse gas emissions than driving and up to 72 percent fewer emissions than domestic air travel, per calculations that utilize the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 

Goals and Objectives, continued 

Our NEC Service Line strategy is centered on positioning the Acela and Northeast Regional to serve the travel needs of many more customers in the years ahead, contributing to meeting Amtrak’s Vision of Connecting More People and Places. 

With demand for Northeast Corridor travel surging, and strong overall travel demand in the market, our focus is on growing our customer base by attracting and retaining more riders and shifting more trips from other modes to Acela and the Northeast Regional. In FY23, 53% of Northeast Corridor customers were new to Amtrak, demonstrating the success of our growth-oriented strategies. Over the next five years, Amtrak will pursue a variety of strategies aimed at 

accelerating the shift of travelers from Interior rendering of the new Amtrak Airo , Business Class. 

Airo 

In 2027, the first Airo trainsets will enter revenue service on the Northeast Regional ,replacing Amfleet I rail cars manufactured between 1975 and 1977. The Airo trainsets, funded by the IIJA, are a significant, generational investment in Amtrak and will modernize and elevate the customer experience. The Airos feature a spacious interior; seating that prioritizes ergonomics, offers enhanced comfort, and provides plenty of legroom, bigger and sturdier tray tables, moveable headrests and a dedicated cup and seatback tablet-holder; enhanced lighting; and improved technology with digital customer information systems, dedicated individual outlets, USB ports, onboard 5G Wi-Fi, and touchless restroom controls. In Business Class, the Airo trainsets will offer a choice of double and single seats to give customers greater flexibility and more privacy options. Airo will also provide improved accessibility for passengers with spacious and accessible restrooms and vestibules, accessible café cars and wheelchair lifts for passengers using mobility devices and wheelchairs. Today, around 40 percent of Northeast Regional trips begin or end in Virginia, which is beyond the NEC Main Line and does not have electrified tracks. As Amtrak’s Virginia Services operate with diesel locomotives, an engine change is necessary at Washington Union Station. The new Airo trainsets will operate with a dual-mode locomotive which can use both electric and diesel power, thus eliminating time-consuming locomotive changes. 

As the Airo trainsets enter revenue service, the NECSL will work with the State Supported and Long Distance service lines that will also use Airo trainsets to provide ample opportunities for the public to engage with and learn about the new trainsets. 

## Primary Initiatives 

New Acela 

In 2024, Amtrak will introduce our second-generation trainsets on our flagship, high-speed Acela service. With the introduction of the new 

Acela fleet, Amtrak is reimagining the future of rail and setting the stage for the next generation of train travel in America and on the NEC. Elevating the travel experience, the new Acela offers enhancements in comfort, technology, innovation, and safety on Amtrak’s most environmentally sustainable fleet of trains to date. The new Acela trainsets will operate at top speeds of 160 mph versus today’s fleet, which operates at top speeds of 150 mph. 

Designed with the customer in mind, the new Acela 

has nearly 25% more seats than our current Acela fleet, personal outlets, USB ports, complimentary 5G Wi-Fi, sophisticated onboard information systems, and spacious restrooms with contactless features. 

With the new Acela trainsets, we’re also growing our Acela fleet from 20 trainsets in the current fleet to 28 trainsets, which will enable Amtrak to offer additional 

Acela trips throughout the day, providing more opportunities for the travelers to experience the benefits of high-speed, limited -stop service in the NEC. Amtrak looks forward to introducing the new Acela trainsets to the traveling public. We are planning a variety of interactive events and engagement opportunities that will give the public an opportunity to experience the new 

Acela trainset.      

> 24 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 An Acela crosses the Pelham Bay Bridge. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. Northeast Corridor Service Line 25

and 7 a.m. The Night Owl fares have succeeded in attracting new riders to Amtrak, with nearly 40 percent of Night Owl riders to-date new to Amtrak and has demonstrated the demand for affordable intercity transportation in the NEC. Over the coming five years, Amtrak will continue to implement innovative initiatives that provide opportunities for travel on the NEC where the capacity exists to allow for lower prices. Providing affordable pricing supports our progress towards meeting Amtrak’s goal of doubling systemwide ridership by 2040, while also increasing revenue by maximizing the sale of available capacity. 

Balancing Infrastructure Renewal with Service Delivery 

The IIJA has delivered an unprecedented level of funding for critical infrastructure renewal to modernize critical infrastructure, improve stations and support future ridership growth on the Northeast Corridor (NEC). These projects include the new Frederick Douglass Tunnel in Baltimore, the Hudson Tunnel Project in New Jersey and New York, and multiple new rail bridges including those over the Susquehanna an d Gunpowder Rivers an d over Pelham Bay among others. This historic funding comes at a critical time as NEC ridership and demand for Amtrak’s NEC services continues to rise. Amtrak’s challenge in the forthcoming five year period is to meet demand for rail travel in the Northeast Corridor while undertaking all of the necessary revitalization work that is taking place on our heavily used tracks, stations, yards, and other essential infrastructure. Internal coordination is occurring across Amtrak to balance the need for infrastructure work with operating high-quality intercity passenger rail service. 

Primary Initiatives, continued 

Schedule Adjustments to Meet Demand 

Key to continued ridership growth on the NEC is ensuring that 

Acela and Northeast Regional services are available at the times that customers wish to travel. Amtrak has been actively adjusting NEC schedules throughout the post-pandemic period in response to changes in travel demand patterns at the corridor-wide and individual station-levels. These adjustments will continue, and further our focus on optimizing service at both major and locally serving stations. Within the next five years, service will expand with additional Acela trips on both the South End (Washington to New York) and North End (New York to Boston) of the Northeast Corridor that will be enabled by the growth in the Acela trainset fleet. The additional Acela trips added to the schedule will be positioned to serve riders at our highest demand periods of the day across the Northeast Corridor. Over the next decade, schedule adjustments will be made in concert with track outage planning as historic investments in the Northeast Corridor’s infrastructure are made. As Amtrak triples the volume of work conducted by NEC construction programs, we will also maintain service to meet our ridership goals and the travel needs of our customers. 

Innovative and More Affordable Pricing 

The Night Owl initiative, introduced on the NEC’s South End in March 2023 and expanded to encompass the NEC’s North End in September 2023, provides low fares for Coach tickets on Northeast Regional and other select NEC routes departing between 7 p.m. Above: A view of the 2023 winter holiday travel season at Moynihan Train Hall. Photo by Amtrak/ Marc Glucksman/River Rail Photo.   

> 26 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

Customer Communication Enhancements 

Enhancing customer communication is a near-term focus for not only the NECSL, but for all Amtrak services. The NECSL is leading efforts to increase proactive communications with our customers across the NEC in new ways. This work includes NEC-focused customer email communication and locally focused communication and outreach around service enhancements. Amtrak is also improving how we communicate with customers during service disruptions. We are using communication protocols, messaging, and technology to deliver timely and accurate information during service disruptions for all customers on the NEC and beyond. 

Customer Experience Enhancements 

The implementation of what we call the New Era of Rail that will transform what Amtrak customers experience during their rail travel will accelerate over the next five years. The new Acela 

and Airo trainsets and enhanced food and beverage services will provide a modern, comfortable on-board customer experience that will be matched with what our customers experience in our stations and our digital channels across the NEC. Innovation and continuous improvement are central to Amtrak’s vision for food and beverage services in the Northeast Corridor. In the past two years, Amtrak has piloted the re-introduction of cart service and a new order-at-seat food service delivery model on the Acela , as well as launched our highly esteemed collaboration with visionary restaurateur Stephen Starr—bringing on board his renowned, delectable cuisine—for our Acela First Class customers. Over the coming five years, we are focused on enhancing the quality and freshness of our menu items on Acela and Northeast Regional . We will also continue to refine and iterate on new food service delivery models, including a brand-new self-checkout option on the new Acela trainsets. These enhancements will occur while we maintain the friendly, world class customer service that Amtrak staff deliver today in our Acela Café and our Café Cars on the Northeast Regional .The 2021 opening of New York’s Moynihan Train Hall provides premium passenger facilities for travelers within a grand Train Hall featuring a skylit atrium, set a new standard for the Amtrak station experience. Three additional NEC stations, Philadelphia’s 30th Street Station, Baltimore Penn Station, and Washington Union Station, are currently undergoing significant revitalization work. 

Primary Initiatives, continued Above: Amtrak kicked off Art at Amtrak’s third year with the latest installation at New York Penn Station by New York-based artist Rico Gatson (pictured), which opened on Jan. 25, 2024. The art,   

> Untitled (Collective Light Transfer), covers the entire station concourse and will remain on view through summer 2024. Northeast Corridor Service Line 27

Primary Initiatives, continued 

At Philadelphia’s William H. Gray III 30th Street Station, a large-scale restoration and renovation will modernize station operations and improve the traveler experience with expanded food and beverage offerings, better pedestrian circulation and wayfinding, and additional public s pac e and landscaping upgrades. Improvements at Baltimore Penn Station include a brand-new, state-of-the-art station expansion that will be constructed and integrated with the existing station and with a new high-speed rail platform, modernizing station functions and increasing capacity. Transit functions, such as ticketing and baggage, will be relocated to the new station expansion, freeing up the concourse level for commercial uses. At Washington Union Station, the Concourse Modernization Project will modernize and reconfigure the concourse area where passengers wait to board trains, alleviating congested conditions and doubling its present capacity, while also enlivening the space with new architectural finishes and natural light. Within the next five years, early phases of work at William H. Gray III 30th Street Station and Baltimore Penn Station will deliver tangible benefits for our customers, while the Concourse Modernization Project is scheduled to be completed in 2028. 

Finally, Art at Amtrak, the official public art program of Amtrak, presents diverse, unique, and memorable art projects to enhance, invigorate and humanize the travel experience. 

Since the inception of Art at Amtrak at New York Penn Station in 2022, the program has expanded to feature art installations in Moynihan Train Hall, Philadelphia’s 30th Street Station, Washington Union Station, and the fencing around the Gateway Program’s Block 675 construction site. Art at Amtrak serves the dual purpose of elevating the customer experience in Amtrak’s physical spaces and engagement with the broader community. Over the next five years, development of Art at Amtrak will continue across the NEC. 28 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal FY29 Goal Adjusted Ticket Revenue (Millions) $1,242.5 $1,379.1 $1,970.7 

Ridership (Millions) 12.1 13.0 16.0 

Customer Satisfaction Index Acela: 81.3 NER: 78.2 Acela: 81.8 NER: 79.4 -

Customer On-Time Performance 1 Acela: 82% NER 2: 81% Acela: 85% NER 2: 85% -

Revenue Per Available Seat Mile $0.38 $0.39 $0.41 

Cost per Available Seat Mile $0.32 $0.27 $0.26 

Passenger Miles (Millions) 2,208.0 2,364.4 2,944.0 

Average Load Factor 65% 64% 58% 

Cost Recovery 118% 143% 158%   

> 1. Customer OTP measures the actual on-time performance of our customers instead of endpoint OTP. 2. NER from Boston to Washington

The initiatives, projects and proposals for the NEC are outlined with one purpose in mind: positioning Amtrak to be the first choice for travel in the NEC. With a special focus on an improved customer experience to grow ridership and revenue, the next five years will continue our transformation in this New Era of Rail. 

Leisure travel volumes have fully recovered from pandemic-era lows and are now exceeding pre-pandemic levels. The number of unique individual customers who took a trip on the Acela 

and/or the Northeast Regional has grown from 2.9 million in FY19 to 3.9 million in FY23, reflecting a remarkable expansion of our customer base and a leisure travel renaissance on the NEC. Amtrak has nimbly responded to the changing nature and volumes for business travel. The NEC remains an essential service for businesses in a variety of industries throughout the Northeast; however, the frequency and types of trips taken for business purposes have changed. Business travel patterns continue to shift as business navigate the “new normal” of hybrid work and geographically distributed teams. Amtrak is positioning the Acela 

and the Northeast Regional to capture demand in both the leisure and business travel markets in the years ahead. 

# Performance and Outlook Northeast Corridor Service Line  29 Northeast Corridor Service Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 1,379,062 1,517,708 1,636,265 1,786,497 1,908,268 1,970,711 10,198,511 Food and Beverage 23,481 28,438 30,614 33,084 35,230 37,412 188,259 Contractual Contribution (Operating) 0 0PRIIA 209 Operating Payments - - - - - - -PRIIA 212 Operating Payments - - - - - - -Commuter Operations - - - - - - -Reimbursable Contracts 1,675 1,689 1,762 1,838 1,917 2,000 10,880 Access Revenue - - - - - - -Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) - - - - - - -All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 30,760 32,582 33,560 34,567 35,604 36,672 203,745 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 1,434,978 1,580,417 1,702,201 1,855,985 1,981,018 2,046,794 10,601,394 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 10,271 10,500 12,732 6,239 3,405 457 43,605 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 71,338 71,879 76,385 78,405 78,573 78,513 455,094 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 11,470 255,589 92,011 180,986 195,975 159,778 895,809 Financing Proceeds Applied 278,483 101,283 50,642 - 329,170 - 759,578 Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 58,271 132,940 203,512 179,895 185,778 185,815 946,210 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 429,833 572,192 435,281 445,525 792,900 424,563 3,100,295 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 311,041 21,172 - - - - 332,213 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating - - - - - - -Capital 471,111 513,807 436,662 429,170 458,867 471,753 2,781,369 IIJA Supplemental 252,472 853,815 947,267 537,343 656,899 780,232 4,028,028 IIJA Discretionary 300,827 630,924 1,267,666 1,170,987 1,345,102 1,399,261 6,114,768 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 2,669 1,819 1,383 1,383 1,383 948 9,586 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 1,338,119 2,021,538 2,652,979 2,138,883 2,462,252 2,652,194 13,265,964 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 3,202,931 4,174,147 4,790,461 4,440,393 5,236,169 5,123,551 26,967,653 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 3,061 3,448 3,609 3,757 3,886 3,946 21,707 Transportation 298,912 336,626 352,393 366,771 379,437 385,295 2,119,434 Equipment 226,990 255,631 267,604 278,522 288,140 292,589 1,609,477 Infrastructure 149,592 168,466 176,357 183,552 189,891 192,823 1,060,681 Stations 55,028 61,971 64,874 67,521 69,853 70,931 390,178 National Assets and Corporate Services 269,232 303,202 317,404 330,354 341,762 347,039 1,908,994 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 1,002,816 1,129,345 1,182,242 1,230,477 1,272,969 1,292,623 7,110,471 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) 432,162 451,072 519,959 625,508 708,049 754,172 3,490,923 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

2,200,115 3,044,802 3,608,219 3,209,917 3,963,200 3,830,929 19,857,182 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 15,011 17,109 14,745 11,951 10,781 8,560 78,158 Equipment 533,033 871,581 604,207 407,248 854,152 586,440 3,856,661 Infrastructure 972,616 1,375,664 2,012,607 1,623,328 1,654,847 1,747,919 9,386,981 Stations 153,984 235,814 361,038 432,926 621,829 603,111 2,408,703 National Assets and Corporate Services 93,307 86,667 88,769 102,060 106,649 123,833 601,286 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 1,767,952 2,586,836 3,081,366 2,577,514 3,248,258 3,069,863 16,331,789 

Debt Repayments 127,429 242,726 164,045 157,850 158,241 159,094 1,009,386 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 1,895,381 2,829,562 3,245,411 2,735,365 3,406,499 3,228,957 17,341,175 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $304,733 $215,240 $362,808 $474,552 $556,701 $601,972 $2,516,007 30 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

SSSL in 2023 

# 34,000 Daily Riders on State Supported Routes 1.6 Million Engineer and Conductor Hours 12.5 Million National Amtrak Guest Rewards Members 5.2 Million SSSL Amtrak Guest Rewards Riders 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# State Supported Service Line 

The mission of Amtrak’s State Supported Service Line (SSSL) is to grow ridership and passenger utility from our State Supported routes. Our primary stakeholders are our state partners and regional partners that fund the service, the passengers we serve and the Federal government. To meet our stakeholder’s goals, we utilize our commercial and transportation expertise to deliver and evolve our exceptional service while achieving the financial and transportation objectives of our state partners. 

Amtrak operates 29 State Supported routes. Train operations on these routes are funded by 20 partners from 17 states, including state departments of transportation and regional authorities chartered specifically to administer individual rail corridors. Collectively, these transportation departments and other entities are referred to as state partners, and the routes they fund are referred to as State Supported routes. All such routes are 750 miles or less in length as defined by statute. The service characteristics of existing and planned high-potential State-Supported corridors align with Amtrak’s statutory goals and mission. They are trip time competitive, operate efficiently, and minimize the required federal subsidy. These corridors occupy rail’s “sweet spot,” serving markets where their unique characteristics allow them to compete with other travel modes and align with population growth trends, urban densification, and demographic trends. In 2023, the State Supported routes carr ied nearly half of Amtrak’s total ridership. The different service variations operating today provide multiple models that can be applied nationwide to seed new corridor services and grow existing ones. The SSSL has two primary customers: the passengers who use the services and the states that provide funding. State Supported services have been the fastest growing segment of Amtrak’s rail network for many years, linking urban areas and intermediate communities with frequent, reliable rail service. They are also a vital developer of travel and patronage habits, having the highest share of passengers between 18–34 years old of Amtrak’s service lines. 

# 03 Amtrak’s State Supported Routes by Region 

Region Route Cities Served Funding Partner(s) 

> Northeast

Downeaster Boston–Portland–Brunswick Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority (NNEPRA) 

Hartford Line / Valley Flyer New Haven–Springfield Connecticut, Massachusetts 

Vermonter Washington–St. Albans, VT Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont 

Berkshire Flyer New York - Albany - Pittsfield New York State, Massachusetts 

Empire Service New York–Albany–Niagara Falls New York State 

Maple Leaf New York–Toronto New York State 

Adirondack New York–Montreal New York State 

Ethan Allen New York– Burlington , VT New York State, Vermont 

Keystone New York–Philadelphia–Harrisburg Pennsylvania 

Pennsylvanian New York–Philadelphia–Pittsburgh Pennsylvania 

> South

Washington–Roanoke Boston–Roanoke Virginia Passenger Rail Authority (VPRA) 

Washington–Newport News Boston–Newport News Virginia Passenger Rail Authority (VPRA) 

Washington–Norfolk Boston–Norfolk Virginia Passenger Rail Authority (VPRA) 

Washington–Richmond Boston–Richmond Virginia Passenger Rail Authority (VPRA) 

Carolinian New York–Charlotte North Carolina 

Piedmont Charlotte–Raleigh North Carolina 

Heartland Flyer Oklahoma City–Fort Worth Oklahoma, Texas 

> Central

Lincoln Service Chicago–St. Louis Illinois 

Illini / Saluki Chicago–Carbondale Illinois 

Illinois Zephyr / Carl Sandburg Chicago–Quincy Illinois 

Hiawatha Chicago–Milwaukee Wisconsin, Illinois 

Wolverine Chicago–Detroit Michigan 

Blue Water Chicago–Port Huron Michigan 

Pere Marquette Chicago–Grand Rapids Michigan 

Missouri River Runner St. Louis–Kansas City Missouri 

> West

Pacific Surfliner San Diego–Los Angeles–San Luis Obispo Los Angeles–San Diego–San Luis Obispo (LOSSAN) Rail Corridor Agency 

San Joaquins Oakland/Sacramento–Bakersfield San Joaquin Joint Powers Authority (SJJPA) 

Capitol Corridor San Jose–Oakland–Sacramento–Auburn Capitol Corridor Joint Powers Authority (CCJPA) 

Cascades Vancouver, BC–Seattle–Portland–Eugene Washington State, Oregon    

> State Supported Service Line 31 32 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

Amtrak's State Supported Routes 

# Market Overview 

In FY 2023, State Supported routes carried 12.5 million riders, comprising 44% of Amtrak’s total ridership. The capacity on State Supported routes has been restored to pre-pandemic levels. Furthermore, we anticipate a 4% increase in capacity, measured by Available Seat Miles (ASMs), in 2024 versus 2019. We are preparing to launch two new routes—the Gulf Coast service between New Orleans and Mobile and Twin Cities-Milwaukee-Chicago (TCMC) service. Additionally, new frequencies have been added to the Amtrak Cascades and Piedmont routes. While a few routes have not had capacity fully reinstated, Our State Supported network is growing, as is its importance to the passengers and communities it serves. 

Available Seat Miles (in Millions) State Supported Service Line  33 

## Our Markets 

Our SSSL corridors create transportation options and choices, providing passengers with a unique value proposition with very competitive fares, low environmental impact, high comfort, no-stress planning, and convenient connections to other modes. To deliver this compelling value proposition, we leverage our pooled investments, our unique access rights, commitment to safety, and operational expertise across the full Amtrak network to deploy solutions that would be challenging to deliver if not at scale. 

## Recent Performance and Results 

Amtrak's commitment to excellence in service delivery remains unwavering, exemplified by our performance in adhering to budgetary constraints. For our internal performance tracking, we measure our success based upon how well we adhere to targets with our state partners. We introduced a monthly scorecard that we jointly track with our partners to measure route performance, including state payment target, ridership, Customer Sati sfactio n Index (CSI), and Customer On-Time Performance (COTP). One of our key metrics is providing state partners an accurate estimate of their cost to run the service. We measure this with the metric “State Partner Cost Recovery”, which is the percent of costs covered by passenger revenue. In 2023 we achieved the “State Partner Cost Recovery” target. The initial cost recovery forecast provided our partners was 52% and we achieved two points better at 54%. While we have achieved the target at the service line level, with many states outperforming, we missed the target for 14 of our routes. Ridership has rebounded well from the pandemic period. For the last quarter of 2023, ridership was 88.5% of the same period in FY19. While we are now on a solid trajectory, we did miss the target for FY23, falling 470,000 riders short. However, if we isolate the landslide-driven service disruption on the Pacific Surfliner, which was 365,000 short of the target, ridership was just below our target. Given this and our solid recovery in the 4th quarter, ridership remains on a good trajectory. The Customer S ati sfaction Index missed the target by 1.5 points in FY23. There are numerous drivers for the underperformance, but the service outage on the Pacific Surfliner and Customer On-Time Performance (COTP) underperformance of four points were significant contributors. On-time performance (OTP) has proven to be our most difficult measure to improve. COTP was adopted as the primary OTP performance metric in late 2020. On State Supported routes, COTP over the last three years has declined from the relatively high levels seen during the pandemic. Summer months continue to be the biggest challenge for COTP. Amtrak has numerous initiatives to improve COTP focused on improvement in the variables we control and collaboration with our host railroads .

2023 Estimates Versus Actual Performance 

Metric FY23 AOP FY23 Actual Performance Cost Recovery 52% 54% Above 

Revenue per Available Seat Mile $0.17 $0.19 Above 

Cost per Available Seat Mile $0.21 $0.24 Over 

Ridership (thousands) 12,939 12,472 Below 

Customer S atisfaction Index 85.1 83.6 Below 

Customer On-Time Performance 80% 76% Below 

Average Load Factor 38% 36% Below 

Total Seat Miles (millions) 4,702.3 4,341.7 Below 

Total Passenger Miles (millions) 1,788.3 1,572.3 Below 

Customer OTP FY21-FY23 34 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Strategy 

Our Five-Year Plan focuses on improvement in our primary objectives—providing sustainable economics for our state partners, growing ridership, improving CSI, and driving improved OTP for our customers. While these actions we are taking to achieve these objectives will be primarily delivered at the full Amtrak level, our State Supported services will benefit from them. 

## Sustainable State Partner Economics 

Our strategy to achieve sustainable economics, is to reduce our cost on a per seat mile basis, and grow our ridership. 

Reduce Cost per Available Seat Mile 

The primary focus to improve Cost per Seat Mile is to grow useful capacity while limiting growth in the cost base. Key initiatives include improved equipment utilization, deploying new equipment, adding new frequencies, adding cars to trains where demand warrants, and adding new routes. 

Grow Ridership by 37% 

Key initiatives to drive increased ridership include adding capacity, improving the customer experience to increase CSI scores, and reducing delays to improve COTP. Additionally, improvements in our loyalty program (Amtrak Guest Rewards), our distribution platform, and revenue management system enhancements will support this objective. Growing ridership will be critical to improving unit revenue, measured by Revenue per Available Seat Mile (RASM). 

## Improve CSI 

To improve CSI we are focusing on improving COTP, supporting the integration of state partners into the Amtrak Service Recovery vision, and developing a CSI improvement strategy that integrates the states and Amtrak experience vision to include Wi-Fi reliability and onboard service standards . 

Improve Customer Experience 

We will focus on ensuring we have the right service standards in place, efficient and coordinated execution of the standards via the Unified Operations Center, continued improvements in station accessibility for customers of all abilities, recurring employee training to drive consistency, improved insights from analyzing CSI data, and continued focus on improving our customer communications, particularly during service disruptions.. 

Improve OTP 

To improve COTP, we are focusing on partnering with Amtrak’s Host Railroad Strategy team to enable state partners to advocate with host railroads for improved performance, have employed a joint scorecard with state partners to keep high-level visibility on COTP, and are implementing state level annual plans that will be aligned with actions to improve COTP. State Supported Service Line  35 Nourish Sustainable and Mutually Beneficial State Partnerships 

The Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act (PRIIA) Section 209 cost policy that governs the financial relationships between states and Amtrak has been updated by the State-Amtrak Intercity Passenger Rail Committee (SAIPRC) to reflect the recommendations of our state partners. The revised policy builds upon the foundation of consistent and equitable treatment of state partners. It adds features to help the financial performance of State Supported routes benefit from economies of scale and improved asset utilization while creating a model that produces more predictability in state invoices. The policy revision addresses the four priorities SAIPRC members identified: costing, business partnership, governance, and economics. Additionally, the revised policy will more clearly define what is included in federal appropriations. We have added a Strategy and Performance Management team within the SSSL to increase our strategic alignment with state partners. This team will supplement the already existing state Relationship management team. Its focus will include creating a joint annual plan for the service line that reflects states’ input. 

## Food and Beverage Vision and Strategy 

Amtrak will continue to work with state partners to enable them to improve food and beverage service on State Supported routes— creating a robust process that will facilitate interaction, enhance decision-making, and improve monitoring. We plan to include Food and Beverage in our annual route-level planning process, business intelligence portal, and route level scorecards. We will incorporate Food and Beverage performance into our bilateral quarterly business reviews and within SAIPRC meetings. Additionally, we are developing guidelines for suppliers and product placements that will inform our state partners about the process for adding new Food and Beverage items to those sold on Amtrak trains, spell out the requirements such as food safety that must be addressed and provide points of contact to whom questions can be directed. 

## Risks and Environmental Factors 

Funding 

Our success depends in large part on a reliable funding stream from our state partners and Congress. In many states, operating and capital funding is subject to annual state appropriations. We recognize the challenges states face in providing adequate funding for their passenger rail services. We will continue to work with state transportation departments and agencies on initiatives to improve ridership, revenues, and cost efficiency of State Supported services, and to ensure that state legislatures and local governments are informed and educated about the benefits of intercity passenger rail. 

We will likewise continue to inform and educate Congress and the Administration on the importance of adequate, consistent federal funding for Amtrak to continue our operating and capital contributions to State Supported services and increase capital investments to permit greater Amtrak investment in route expansion, fleet, technology and station and facility improvements in partnership with states. 

Host Railroad Performance 

OTP and reliability remain challenges due to freight train interference. Host railroads are also often resistant to accommodating new, additional, or rerouted Amtrak trains on their lines, even though capital improvements to support new passenger service often bring joint benefits to freight operations. Host railroads typically seek large up-front capital investments to increase capacity, which places a major constraint on Amtrak’s ability to optimize and expand its network and services. Potential host railroad downgrading or abandonment of rail lines used by Amtrak also pose a threat to several State Supported routes. 36 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak plans to expand or initiate several State Supported services nationwide, as sought by current and prospective state partners. These changes will include the new TCMC service between the Twin Cities, Milwaukee, and Chicago and Gulf Coast service between Mobile and New Orleans, additional frequency on the Pennsylvanian route, other potential new services being evaluated by state partners, and anticipated service growth. We anticipate the new services will contribute to 23% ASM growth over the next five years. We anticipate the new services will contribute to 23% ASM growth over the next five years. Additionally, we will continue to leverage Thruway bus service connections to expand the reach of our State Supported network and increase ridership. While Amtrak expects to commence operation of other new State Supported routes and frequencies during the period this five-year plan encompasses, we are not able to project whether or when service will be initiated or increased on specific State Supported routes, since that is dependent upon the decisions of state partners who provide funding, determinations made by FRA through its Corridor ID program and grant awards, obtaining access to host railroad-owned rail lines, negotiation of necessary agreements, the design and construction of any necessary capital projects, equipment availability and other factors not within Amtrak’s control. The following tables include key business drivers and a Profit and Loss (P&L) statement for the service line, offering a comprehensive overview of the five-year plan timeframe and our expected operational and financial performance. 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal FY29 Goal Adjusted Ticket Revenue (Millions) $438.9 $489.8 $647.9 

Ridership (Millions) 12.5 15.4 18.4 

Customer Satisfaction Index 83.6 84.7 -

Customer On-Time Performance 76% 80% -

Revenue Per Available Seat Mile $0.19 $0.18 $0.17 

Cost per Available Seat Mile $0.24 $0.22 $0.20 

Passenger Miles (Millions) 1,572.3 1,934.8 2,252.1 

Average Load Factor 36% 40% 37% 

# Performance and Outlook  

> Above right: Customers boarding the Carolinian.

State Supported Service Line  37 State Supported Service Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 489,756 527,106 558,940 591,989 617,829 647,889 3,433,508 Food and Beverage 20,202 22,142 23,884 25,567 27,206 29,976 148,976 Contractual Contribution (Operating) PRIIA 209 Operating Payments 347,526 310,264 311,639 312,426 323,359 312,244 1,917,457 PRIIA 212 Operating Payments - - - - - - -Commuter Operations - - - - - - -Reimbursable Contracts 1,200 1,290 1,346 1,405 1,466 1,531 8,238 Access Revenue - - - - - - -Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) - - - - - - -All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 21,310 22,573 23,250 23,947 24,666 25,406 141,151 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 879,994 883,374 919,058 955,334 994,526 1,017,045 5,649,331 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 60,292 53,000 53,429 52,088 52,289 40,174 311,272 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 18,729 18,321 19,959 20,435 20,481 20,027 117,953 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 21,371 36,608 47,960 48,965 50,268 45,540 250,713 Financing Proceeds Applied - 78,625 39,312 - 255,530 - 373,468 Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 46,573 85,691 109,237 122,840 95,107 92,496 551,946 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 146,965 272,245 269,898 244,329 473,676 198,238 1,605,351 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 397,007 76,547 32,245 1,790 - - 507,588 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating 181,497 178,594 186,282 194,096 202,555 207,322 1,150,347 Capital 152,278 379,847 469,523 455,739 408,520 416,649 2,282,555 IIJA Supplemental 227,557 869,160 976,190 516,936 628,868 684,723 3,903,433 IIJA Discretionary 46,165 107,007 293,431 360,300 315,554 306,378 1,428,834 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 4,083 4,272 3,249 3,249 3,249 2,226 20,327 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 1,008,587 1,615,426 1,960,919 1,532,110 1,558,746 1,617,297 9,293,085 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 2,035,545 2,771,046 3,149,876 2,731,772 3,026,948 2,832,580 16,547,767 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 9,357 9,317 9,695 10,080 10,496 10,734 59,678 Transportation 436,351 434,461 452,112 470,055 489,444 500,552 2,782,975 Equipment 296,287 295,004 306,990 319,173 332,338 339,881 1,889,672 Infrastructure 52,107 51,881 53,989 56,132 58,447 59,773 332,329 Stations 97,867 97,443 101,402 105,426 109,775 112,266 624,179 National Assets and Corporate Services 180,238 179,458 186,748 194,160 202,178 206,757 1,149,539 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 1,072,207 1,067,564 1,110,937 1,155,025 1,202,677 1,229,963 6,838,372 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) (192,213) (184,190) (191,878) (199,691) (208,151) (212,918) (1,189,042) 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

963,338 1,703,482 2,038,939 1,576,747 1,824,271 1,602,617 9,709,395 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 18,145 26,926 19,688 12,544 9,086 1,565 87,954 Equipment 312,302 892,667 914,108 439,040 808,868 603,741 3,970,726 Infrastructure 385,990 460,347 694,877 698,800 580,625 571,451 3,392,090 Stations 139,035 157,936 220,952 224,257 246,735 271,709 1,260,623 National Assets and Corporate Services 118,583 165,563 189,272 202,065 178,916 154,110 1,008,508 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 974,055 1,703,440 2,038,897 1,576,705 1,824,229 1,602,575 9,719,901 

Debt Repayments 42 - 42 42 42 42 210 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 974,097 1,703,440 2,038,939 1,576,747 1,824,271 1,602,617 9,720,111 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $(10,758) $42 $0 $(0) $(0) $(0) $(10,716) 38 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# 123

Connect markets, regions, and hubs on routes of more than 750 miles, providing an 

intercity transportation 

experience that links the nation’s major metropolitan regions with small and medium size communities through an integrated network; Connect 39 States and over 300 communities, contributing to the economic vitality 

of the communities and regions served; and 

Provide a unique and treasured travel excursion experience through our sleeper class service, offered on all overnight trains, which is popular with customers making longer trips and supports local economies and the development of leisure destinations. 

Long Distance Services 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Long Distance Service Line 

The Long Distance Service Line (LDSL) provides a safe and unique intercity transportation experience, one that connects the nation’s major metropolitan regions with over 300 diverse and varied communities across the country. An alternative to automobiles, buses and airplanes, Long Distance routes offer convenient and comfortable transport that contributes to the economic vitality of the communities and regions they serve. 

For more than 50 years Amtrak has been the national provider of intercity passenger rail services in the U.S., and much of Amtrak’s identity is tied to its Long Distance trains. Their rich heritage has played a major role in providing transportation services across the nation and in developing some of today’s high-frequency corridors. While customer demographics, traveler preferences and the competitive landscape have all evolved during the period since Amtrak’s creation, the Long Distance network continues to provide an essential service for many passengers, particularly in rural communities. Amtrak is work ing to address long-standing reliability issues, particularly with host railroad partners, that impact on-time performance, and is addressing customer service challenges resulting from operating an aging fleet. In addition to interior refreshes and the ongoing entry of new locomotives into service, Amtrak initiated a procurement process in CY22 for the new Long Distance fleet. With funding provided by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) , Amtrak is seeking competitive bids from car builders to replace Long Distance rail car fleets. Amtrak released a Request for Proposals (RFP) in late 2023, and 

based on the RFP schedule, target to negotiate terms and secure final funding approval by year-end CY24. The LDSL includes a portfolio of 15 Long Distance routes—each running more than 750 miles, end-to-end, and operating through 39 states. With connecting trains and Thruway buses, Long Distance services reach 47 of the 48 contiguous states. The Connected Services (Thruway) portfolio of routes is critical to the Long Distance network, primarily using bus services that bridge Long Distance rail routes that may be 150–225 miles apart and bus routes that branch outward from Long Distance rail routes near population centers. These services on average drive 7% to 8% of total revenue on the Long Distance network. 

# 04 Long Distance Service Line  39 

Amtrak's National Network 

Amtrak operates 15 Long Distance trains whose routes range in length from 780 miles to 2,728 miles. These trains provide the only rail service at nearly half of the stations in the Amtrak system and are the only Amtrak trains in 23 of the 46 states in the network. 40 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## FY 2023 Performance and Results 

Amtrak restored Long Distance service frequencies in FY23 to pre-pandemic 2019 levels on all routes, providing one daily round trip on all Long Distance routes except the tri-weekly Sunset Limited and Cardinal . FY23 capacity was slightly below FY19 capacity due to reduced equipment availability. In FY23, the Long Distance routes carried more than 3.9 million riders, a 13% increase versus FY22, and generated $563 million in ticket revenue, up 11% over FY22. Long Distance service accounted for 14% of Amtrak network-wide totals for ridership and over 25% of total ticket revenue. 

Long Distance Service Classes FY23 Year-Over-Year LDSL Ridership Growth by Month Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept 

18% 12% 0% 33% 40% 21% 14% 14% 4% 4% 3% 18% 

> Note: Long Distance frequencies were reduced in FY22 due to COVID impacts.

## Coach Class 

Available on all trains, offering 2x2 reclining seats, big picture windows and access to power outlets. 

## Private Rooms 

First Class private rooms in sleeping cars are available on all LDSL routes except the daytime Palmetto . Customers in private rooms enjoy several premium class amenities including complimentary onboard meals, turndown service, access to private restrooms and showers, a dedicated First Class attendant and complimentary Metropolitan Lounge access. 

## Business Class 

Available on the Palmetto , Business class provides additional amenities such as a dedicated car, extra legroom, lounge access at select stations, flexibility regarding cancellations and a 25% point bonus for Amtrak Guest Rewards members.  

> Dining Car on the Sunset Limited

# Market Overview 

The LDSL customer profile is primarily driven by “purpose trips”—leisure travel and visits to family and friends. Ten percent of trips are taken for personal or family business. Overall, the LDSL skews more females than males, and over a third of customers are over the age of 65. But even within the LDSL, there are striking differences between the two primary classes of service. While Coach class represents 84% of trips, private rooms account for 52% of ticket revenue. In addition, the average trip in Coach is, on average, less than half of the distance traveled by a customer in a room: 463 vs. 933 miles. In FY23, 72% of all Long Distance passengers and 79% of Long Distance coach riders traveled less than 750 miles. However, 67% of Long Distance sleeper customers traveled more than 750 miles. Most Long Distance customers are traveling to and/or from intermediate stations on Long Distance routes; only 13.5% traveled from one 

route endpoint to the other. Long Distance Service Line  41 

In addition to fleet refurbishment, Amtrak commenced a two-year program to accelerate the restoration of fleet in need of repair or overhaul. Over a dozen Long Distance cars have re-entered service with a total of 63 projected to be restored. Amtrak has also ordered 125 ALC-42 locomotives—the most energy-efficient in the industry—aimed to reduce emissions and consume less fuel while reaching a top speed of 125 mph. Over three dozen engines are now in service. 

Improved Accessibility 

A redesigned accessible bathroom is being added to 23 Superliner I Coach cars. These new rooms accommodate larger wheelchairs and include a changing room. An initial investment of $560 million brought 103 Amtrak stations to full compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Amtrak is on track to make all stations for which it has ADA responsibility fully compliant by 2028. 

New Product Launches 

During 2023, several programs were introduced to improve customers’ experiences prior to travel, at the station, and on the train. In Spring 2023, Amtrak launched a comprehensive notification service that relays key updates to customers via email, text messages, and push notifications through the Amtrak mobile app. This allows Amtrak customer service teams to notify customers of any service disruptions whether at the station or on the train. Amtrak installed 200 new ADA-compliant ticketing kiosks across over 150 stations. These ticketing kiosks offer customers an updated user interface and “minimum touch” features that allow for a more enjoyable and seamless experience. 

## Major Initiatives 

Reimagining Traditional Dining Extension 

Traditional dining for First Class features seasonal menus with a variety of entree selections for breakfast, lunch and dinner and a complimentary alcoholic beverage served with dinner. It was extended to both the Silver Meteor 

and Silver Star in 2023, bringing the total of routes offering traditional dining services to eight. Traditional dining is also available on the Auto Train, California Zephyr, Coast Starlight, Empire Builder, Southwest Chief, Sunset Limited and Texas Eagle (between San Antonio and Los Angeles). 

Enhancements to Fleet 

During FY23, Amtrak formally commenced the next major milestone in its multi-year fleet refurbishment initiative. Following interior refreshes of 

Acela , Amfleet and Horizon equipment in recent years, the company began interior refurbishment of the bi-level Superliner fleet that operates on nine of the 15 Long Distance routes. The Superliner project will enhance nearly 400 passenger cars, over 100 of which have already been refreshed and are in revenue service. Additionally, this latest phase formally expanded the scope of the refresh beyond Coach and Business Class cars by including Sleeping Cars, Dining Cars, and Superliner bi-level Sightseer Lounges in its scope. A refresh of all Viewliner I Sleeping Cars will begin in 2024—better aligning the in-room experience between a Viewliner I and the new Viewliner II Sleeping Cars that both operate on Eastern routes with single-level equipment.   

> Relaxing in a refreshed sleeper car. 42 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

# Strategy 

Utilizing Amtrak’s four Key Actions, several LDSL Strategic Initiatives have been developed that are aimed at increasing ridership, improving the customer experience, building the future, empowering our employees to drive change and positioning Amtrak as a compelling choice for Long Distance travel. 

## Empower our People 

The procurement of the new Long Distance Fleet will enable Amtrak to align our product offer to market demand and optimize our operating model. The future product offer and features will create a greater value proposition for our customers. The operating model includes all the components needed to deliver and execute a service more efficiently and effectively. The new Long Distance Fleet will help us to improve the customer experience and the business overall. The combination of the future value proposition and operating model will create the future Long Distance Business Model. Key activities in the next five years include developing tools and training for front-line employees and the operational teams. 

## Delight Customers 

To delight our Long Distance customers, Amtrak is enhancing the private room and Long Distance coach products to better meet current customer needs, and will pursue various other product initiatives to improve the customer experience as detailed below. Over the next few years, Amtrak will also update the Long Distance value proposition through the procurement of our new Long Distance fleet. We anticipate that these combined initiatives will increase customer loyalty, promote the Amtrak brand, and enable us to attract new riders to our best-in-class service. 

Product Initiatives 

Interior Fleet Refresh: $28 Million Investment in Upgrades 

Upgrades include enhancing nearly 400 passenger cars in our Superliner fleet, and undertaking a Viewliner I refresh (49 Sleepers) which is scheduled to begin in FY24. 

Improvement of the Food and Beverage Offerings 

We will address opportunities identified by the Food and Beverage Working Group study, such as reintroducing traditional dining on additional Long Distance Routes and redefining the Food and Beverage vision for the Long Distance Service Line.  

> Above, top: For customers seeking the ultimate First Class experience, Bedrooms Suites combine two adjoining Bedrooms—featuring two sofas and two separate chairs by day transformed into four beds by night. Each suite includes two big picture windows, newly upgraded bedding, pillows, towels and linens and two in-room sinks, restrooms and showers. Bottom: New dishes on Amtrak's LDSL Traditional Dining Menu include oven roasted Atlantic salmon with ancient grains, mixed vegetables and lemon caper white wine sauce. Long Distance Service Line 43

Improved Accessibility 

Improved accessibility will result from redesigned accessible bathrooms being added to 23 Superliner I Coach cars that will accommodate larger wheelchairs and include a changing room; and 100% ADA compliance by 2028 at all Amtrak-responsible stations. 

Focus on Communication 

We will also improve communication with our customers during delays and service disruptions, especially via email, text message, and push notifications via the Amtrak App. 

Wi-Fi Improvements 

This includes enhancing Wi-Fi on single-level equipment and exploring the deployment of Wi-Fi on the remainder of our Superliner fleet to offer connectivity for passengers on western Long Distance routes that riders in the East already enjoy, and making free Wi-Fi to a network-wide feature of Amtrak travel. 

Spotlighting First Class Private Rooms 

Ridership trends since the pandemic have shown that Amtrak possesses a unique opportunity to spotlight its First Class private rooms. More customers are opting to travel in private rooms given the benefits provided by this class of service— physical distance-friendly space, superior comfort and an elevated travel experience with club access, complimentary meals, priority boarding and more. Efforts to promote these benefits to both new and existing customers include strategic flash sales offering the opportunity to have a private room companion travel free, an experiential landing page on Amtrak.com, new emphasis on private rooms in paid, earned, and owned media, and more prominent display of room choices when passengers book travel on Amtrak.com and the Amtrak app. 

Improve Long Distance Utility and Reliability 

On-time performance (OTP) has a significant impact on customer satisfaction. OTP weighs heavily in a customer’s decision to travel on Amtrak and is a factor for future travelers when deciding to make travel plans by train. Long Distance has the lowest OTP of Amtrak’s service lines and—not coincidentally—the highest level of freight train interference delays, driven by the persistent failure of host railroads over which Amtrak trains operate to give Amtrak trains preference over freight trains, as required by federal law. As an example: the host-responsible delays (delays attributable to actions of the rail line owner) on the six major host railroads accounted for about 67% of the total delays to Amtrak trains in FY23. 23% of delays were attributed to Amtrak (Amtrak-caused delays) and 10% were driven by third-party factors (which include weather). 

Of their share, 38% of host-responsible delays were caused by freight train interference. This cause alone resulted in approximately 424 minutes (over 7.0 hours) of delay per 10,000 train miles for Amtrak customers. 

On November 16, 2020, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) published the final rule in the Federal Register establishing metrics and minimum standards for the performance and service quality of intercity passenger train operations. The performance and service quality metrics relate to OTP and train delays, customer service, and financial and public benefits. The final rule sets an on-time performance minimum standard of 80% and a process under which schedules can be “certified” by each host railroad participating in a route. 

FRA’s rule provided a much-anticipated framework for enforcing Amtrak’s right of preference over freight transportation and offered a positive step on the path of addressing chronic OTP issues impacting LDSL performance and customer service. Amtrak has collaborated in detailed evaluation and fine-tuning of operating schedules with host railroads to enable certification of schedules on most LDSL routes. Despite this new framework with Metrics and Standards, OTP performance on Amtrak’s Long Distance services has continually fallen below the level of performance that FRA prescribed. Amtrak has filed a complaint with the Surface Transportation Board (STB) regarding host railroad performance on the Long Distance S unset Limited service. After review, the STB has begun an investigation. Amtrak is providing information to assist in the investigation and has requested that the Board award damages and other relief to Amtrak to compensate for the unacceptable level of delays experienced by Amtrak passengers on this route. Amtrak will continue to use a data-driven approach to address host railroad and Amtrak-related delays, and to work with the host railroads to understand the causes of host railroad and Amtrak-caused delays, opportunities to mitigate them, and the actions required to improve OTP. Amtrak will also continue to consider asking the STB for additional relief on other Amtrak routes to ensure an appropriate level of service for our customers. Amtrak is also piloting new schedules to improve Long Distance service performance on some host railroad routes. 

Delight Customers, continued 44 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Drive Transformation 

Invest in a Sustainable, Modern and Smart New Long Distance Fleet 

As a result of funding made available to Amtrak in the IIJA, the LDSL is spearheading the procurement of the new Long Distance fleet. In partnership with other Amtrak departments, the LDSL has developed a long-term vision of product and customer experience attributes to drive the operating and financial impacts of replacing equipment to build a business case. The new fleet will be sustainable, modern and smart because it will leverage the current safety and technology standards. 

Our LDSL Fleet Upgrade Objectives 

The acquisition of new equipment will provide the opportunity to accomplish several goals, including: • Modernizing equipment and amenities to support the future Long Distance Value Proposition and the enhanced operating model to improve customer satisfaction and financial performance of the Long Distance Business. • Improving the customer experience with private room beds that can be self-deployed when passengers wish, a better experience for the disabled community with a fully accessible core trainset that includes coaches, private rooms and dining and lounge cars, and the ability to provide new onboard services. • Redesigning train consists to match passenger demand, create operating efficiencies, and reduce capital needs. • Reducing car and locomotive maintenance and turnaround costs. • Reducing engine and car related mechanical delays to improve OTP. • Improving sustainability with more sustainable materials, less trash, and reduced fuel consumption and emissions of greenhouse gases and other pollutants. 

Procurement In Progress 

The procurement currently underway will transform our current Long Distance fleet. 

Superliners. Replacement of the bi-level Superliner fleet is a primary focus of LDSL equipment replacement plans. Nearly 60% of the approximately 480 Superliner railcars, used primarily on Long Distance routes, were built more than 40 years ago and are rapidly approaching the end of their useful lives. The remaining railcars are nearing 30 years old. 

Viewliner I. Amtrak’s fleet of 50 Viewliner I sleeping cars operates on single-level Long Distance routes serving New York City where clearances preclude use of bi-level cars. As of the start of FY24, 36 of 50 cars were active; the remainder will re-enter service following overhauls delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic-related storage as Mechanical resources permit. These railcars were built in 1996-1997 by Amerail; their long-term future operation is being evaluated as part of the Long Distance fleet replacement program. 

Viewliner II. Amtrak’s fleet of 130 Viewliner II sleeping, dining, baggage and baggage-dorm cars is in service on single-level Long Distance routes serving New York, with baggage cars also used on other routes across the National Network. These railcars were built within the past ten years by CAF, and Amtrak intends to use them for their remaining lives. At the start of FY24, 108 of 130 cars were active, with remaining cars restored to service from pandemic-related storage as Mechanical resources permit. 

Amfleet II. The 135 Amfleet II coaches and lounge cars, which are approximately 40 years old, operate primarily on single-level Long Distance routes. Options for additional equipment included in Amtrak’s procurement of new Airo trainsets as a replacement for the Amfleet I fleet or separate procurement of long distance cars will provide the basis for Amfleet II replacement. 

Further deployment of the New ALC-42 Locomotives 

Amtrak will continue to deploy the new ALC-42 Locomotives in FY24. By the end of FY23, 38 ALC-42 locomotives were deployed, and Amtrak will deploy the balance of the 125 ALC-42 locomotives by FY31. 

Increase Operational Resilience, Efficiency, and Effectiveness 

The Long Distance fleet procurement, the future Long Distance Value Proposition, the new core trainset approach, and continuous programmed equipment maintenance will create new opportunities to optimize our business model at different levels. The main objectives will be to reduce car and locomotive maintenance costs and turnaround times. The evolution of the operating model is also expected to improve fleet availability.  

> ALC-42 Delivery. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. Long Distance Service Line 45

serving New York Penn Station are serviced, Amtrak may need to temporarily alter train service on all service lines that operate over the NEC or use NEC stations and facilities. We will keep Congress, state partners, key stakeholders, the Administration and our customers apprised of these temporary, necessary service adjustments. We plan to increase coach and private room capacity on Long Distance trains, reduced due to delayed overhauls during the COVID-19 pandemic and accidents that have damaged equipment, and restore food service cars where customer demand warrants, to the extent that equipment availability allows. Currently planned equipment restorations on existing Long Distance routes within the Five-Year Plan timeframe include: 

• Restoring a Viewliner II dining car to the Crescent in Q4 FY24. • Restoring a Superliner sightseer lounge car to the Texas Eagle 

beginning in Q1 FY25. • Operating a transition sleeper on all Superliner long distance routes except the Auto Train by Q1 FY26. • Addition of coaches and sleeping cars on routes throughout our long-distance network with the highest passenger demand and revenue potential. 

FRA is currently conducting an Amtrak Daily Long Distance Service Study ( Long Distance Study ), required by the IIJA, to evaluate operation of daily Long Distance service on the tri-weekly Sunset Limited and Cardinal and the potential for reinstating discontinued Long Distance routes in order to link small and large communities, address the economic and social well-being of rural areas, and provide enhanced connectivity for the national rail system. The study, which will be completed during 2024, will create a long-term vision for expansion of long-distance passenger rail service and identify capital projects and capital and operating funding needed to implement that vision. 

## Grow the Business 

The opportunity in the long-distance business is the incremental growth of capacity and ridership while controlling costs. 

Increase Ridership, Expand the Network 

We will increase incremental ridership on existing network and frequencies, and expand the network based upon the FRA Long Distance Study and available resources in two phases: In the first phase, Amtrak targets restoring 63 cars to service. This will increase the available capacity to capture additional market demand. In a second phase, depending on the results of the currently underway FRA Long Distance Study discussed below and available funding and fleet, Amtrak will support the implementation of expanded Long Distance service, prioritizing the increase to daily frequency on existing tri-weekly routes (the Sunset Limited and the Cardinal ). 

Improve Asset Utilization 

Amtrak is identifying and undertaking initiatives to improve asset utilization and fleet availability on the existing Long Distance network to increase and better deploy capacity to meet demand. 

## Service Plan 

The current service plan for Long Distance routes maintains existing operational frequency levels through FY29. Given the critical infrastructure improvement work planned on the Northeast Corridor (NEC) in the coming years, particularly the rehabilitation of the East River Tunnels in New York City and the resulting reduced access to Sunnyside Yard where trains 46 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal FY29 Goal Adjusted Ticket Revenue (Millions) $562.4 $623.4 $754.9 

Ridership (Thousands) 3.942 4.426 4.703 

Available Seat Miles 3,655 4,017 4,440 

Customer Satisfaction Index 71.1% 71.3% -

Customer On-Time Performance 52% 50% -

Revenue Per Available Seat Mile $0.16 $0.16 $0.18 

Cost per Available Seat Mile $0. 33 $0. 31 $0. 31 

Passenger Miles (Millions) 2,042.8 2,376.7 2,578.3 

Average Load Factor 56% 59% 58% 

Cost Recovery 50% 53% 59% 

In summary, the LDSL is committed to enhancing customer service, addressing operational challenges, and strategically growing the business while anticipating future developments, with the FRA Long Distance study currently underway. The following tables provide information on key metrics and the profit and loss statement for the LDSL. 

Above: A dedicated First Class attendant provides turndown service for a Family Room on a refreshed Superliner. Family Rooms are First Class accommodations which span the width of the car with ample space for two adults and two children. Each room features seating for four by day transformed into two upper and two lower beds by night, plus two big picture windows, newly upgraded bedding, pillows, towels and linens. 

# Performance and Outlook Long Distance Service Line  47 Long Distance Service Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 623,369 668,039 688,211 708,998 731,930 754,919 4,175,465 Food and Beverage 24,912 26,765 27,911 29,105 30,416 32,741 171,848 Contractual Contribution (Operating) 0PRIIA 209 Operating Payments - - - - - - -PRIIA 212 Operating Payments - - - - - - -Commuter Operations - - - - - - -Reimbursable Contracts 339 448 466 484 503 524 2,763 Access Revenue - - - - - - -Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) - - - - - - -All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 13,036 13,809 14,223 14,650 15,089 15,542 86,350 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 661,656 709,060 730,810 753,236 777,938 803,726 4,436,426 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 16,378 22,438 19,888 27,683 29,909 36,776 153,071 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 10,499 10,285 11,136 11,393 11,365 11,188 65,865 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 10,480 16,905 19,351 25,903 26,104 21,751 120,495 Financing Proceeds Applied - 2,492 1,246 - 8,100 - 11,838 Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 11,841 39,496 51,686 62,674 56,679 51,277 273,654 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 49,198 91,616 103,308 127,653 132,156 120,992 624,923 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 338,720 105,010 - - - - 443,730 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating 559,595 486,866 506,773 525,865 551,649 552,124 3,182,872 Capital 111,487 272,426 345,059 341,808 336,139 319,300 1,726,219 IIJA Supplemental 261,479 818,794 897,952 1,187,340 980,335 832,164 4,978,063 IIJA Discretionary 31,727 71,212 142,286 183,357 191,948 162,365 782,895 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 1,665 2,259 1,718 1,718 1,718 1,177 10,254 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 1,304,674 1,756,567 1,893,788 2,240,087 2,061,788 1,867,130 11,124,033 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 2,015,528 2,557,242 2,727,906 3,120,977 2,971,882 2,791,848 16,185,383 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 6,258 6,058 6,267 6,476 6,731 6,863 38,653 Transportation 655,169 634,182 656,107 677,985 704,585 718,425 4,046,453 Equipment 280,321 271,342 280,722 290,083 301,464 307,386 1,731,318 Infrastructure 28,780 27,858 28,821 29,782 30,950 31,558 177,749 Stations 84,086 81,392 84,206 87,014 90,428 92,204 519,329 National Assets and Corporate Services 188,790 182,717 189,082 195,383 203,052 207,037 1,166,061 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 1,243,404 1,203,549 1,245,206 1,286,723 1,337,209 1,363,472 7,679,564 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) (581,748) (494,489) (514,396) (533,487) (559,271) (559,746) (3,243,137) 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

772,124 1,353,694 1,482,700 1,834,254 1,634,672 1,428,375 8,505,819 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 10,964 19,329 20,387 13,362 9,526 1,268 74,836 Equipment 275,669 748,885 643,285 657,937 729,636 854,027 3,909,439 Infrastructure 197,617 205,141 424,273 776,579 532,105 280,310 2,416,025 Stations 168,344 235,126 261,301 249,489 239,328 193,604 1,347,191 National Assets and Corporate Services 141,682 145,172 133,412 136,846 124,036 99,125 780,272 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 794,277 1,353,652 1,482,658 1,834,212 1,634,630 1,428,333 8,527,762 

Debt Repayments 42 - 42 42 42 42 210 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 794,319 1,353,652 1,482,700 1,834,254 1,634,672 1,428,375 8,527,972 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $(22,195) $42 $0 $0 $0 $0 $(22,153) Photo by Amtrak/Doug Riddell 

48 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak’s departments work together to achieve these outcomes. When opportunities are pursued and new business is won, Amtrak’s functional departments collaborate to deliver the service, while other departments manage the profits and losses and seek additional business with the customer or in the marketplace. Amtrak currently pursues opportunities in four major areas that will be discussed in this Plan: Contract commuter operations; Thruway connecting services; Charter trains and private cars; and Multimodal connections and other opportunities. The overall objective of the Ancillary Service Line is to support Amtrak’s strategy by identifying, selecting, developing, competing for, and implementing market-based services, projects, programs and initiatives that satisfy three key tenets: 1.  Provide positive financial contribution to Amtrak; 2.  Provide clear strategic value for Amtrak; and 3.  Do not distract from or impede Amtrak’s core activities. Amtrak’s Ancillary Service Line pursues opportunities for the company to provide services at market-based prices to commuter rail authorities and commercial entities and seeks to develop business partnerships that can be leveraged to grow Amtrak’s own ridership and revenues. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Ancillary Service Line 05 Ancillary Service Line  49 Key Highlights 

Amtrak’s contract commuter business has opportunities to grow existing and new commuter services for which contracting opportunities will become available during the period of this Five-Year Plan. The financial estimates in this Plan do not assume bidding on or winning any new opportunities, but they do incorporate the financial impact of renewal of the MARC Penn Line train and engine contract in 2022, which will extend Amtrak’s operation of the service to June 2028. 

## Amtrak Product Offerings 

Commuter Operations and Maintenance Contract Services 

Amtrak provides services such as train and engine crews to commuter rail authorities on a market-based contract basis. (Commuter rail authorities’ access to Amtrak infrastructure is managed separately by the Infrastructure Access group). Based on annual billing revenue, there are approximately $950 million worth of commuter contracts in the U.S. Contracts come up for bid at various times, often only every five to ten years. Of these total potential contracted services, Amtrak’s commuter revenues in FY23 constituted approximately $138 million. When evaluating opportunities for potential Amtrak response when services are put up for bid, Amtrak refers to its key tenets and does not pursue contracts that do not fit these criteria. Amtrak offers a network of connecting motorcoach routes branded as “Thruway” services. Thruway routes are operated by contractors or interline partners such as Greyhound Lines. While ridership on Thruway buses decreased dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic, it has recovered and exceeded FY19 levels during FY23. Expansion of Thruway bus service can provide a means to grow Amtrak ridership and revenue in the near term while concurrently working toward expanding intercity passenger rail service. The charter train and private car portfolios were significantly restructured during FY18 and are now on a sustainable footing. Although the pandemic strongly affected both services, they each generated revenues in excess of both fixed and variable costs in FY23, thanks to a strong market for charter services in the NEC and a return of conditions that supported large group travel and public events. This allowed them to play the role that Congress envisioned of making a positive financial contribution to Amtrak’s bottom line. 

Current Amtrak Commuter Customers 

Agency Commercial Services Provided Notes Maryland Transit Administration 

Baltimore, MD Train and engine crews; Maintenance of equipment Train and engine crews Penn Line only; access and ancillary support discussed elsewhere 

Southern California Regional Rail Authority 

Los Angeles, CA Train and engine crews -

Connecticut Department of Transportation 

New Haven, CT Train and engine crews; Maintenance of equipment Train and engine crews Shore Line East only; access and other ancillary services discussed elsewhere 

Sound Transit 

Seattle, WA Maintenance of equipment -

Central Florida Commuter Rail Commission 

Orlando, FL Maintenance of equipment -50 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Thruway Connecting Services 

Amtrak uses the marketing name “Thruway” to refer to through tickets between Amtrak’s rail network and connecting services, most of which are buses. Thruway services also encompass vans, shuttles, ferries, and some commuter rail operations. The Thruway system highlights are at left. The primary purpose of Thruway connections is to help customers access Amtrak’s rail network. Market research estimates that 80 percent of Thruway bus connecting passengers would not travel on Amtrak trains if it were not for the existence of the Thruway bus connection making the train accessible to them. Amtrak combines two types of Thruway bus service with its rail network. “Dedicated” bus routes are contracted by Amtrak to private bus service providers to carry only Amtrak passengers. “Interline” tickets are sold for travel on independently operated services of partner carriers which may carry non-Amtrak passengers. Interline transportation carriers receive ticket revenue from the Thruway segment of the trip, and Amtrak usually retains a commission on sales. In a few select cases, Amtrak will provide a minimum revenue guarantee of ticket sales to an interline partner in order to arrange for a coordinated route connection. Dedicated buses are generally used where no interline option is available, the on-time performance of Amtrak train service is too unreliable for connecting service, or the volume of Thruway passengers is too large for an interline route to absorb. Amtrak contracts with dedicated bus operators through a competitive procurement process. While the intercity bus network has contracted significantly through most of Amtrak’s history, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in accelerated reductions in bus service by private carriers. Partnering with Amtrak may help keep some intercity bus routes financially viable and preserve mobility for communities. Thruway connections do not need to be buses. Interline ticketing with commuter rail and mass transit is an opportunity for Thruway expansion. Upgrades to Amtrak’s reservation system and related IT applications combined with potential new interline agreements with commuter rail and transit operators can open new markets for Amtrak travel, especially in the Northeast Corridor, which has the largest volume of commuter rail connections in the Amtrak network. 

Charter Trains and Private Cars 

Amtrak offers the services of operating charter trains and moving privately-owned passenger rail cars. Charter trains may use Amtrak cars and locomotives, or customer-supplied cars and locomotives, or any combination, moving as a non-regularly scheduled Amtrak train. Private Cars are privately owned railcars moved on regularly scheduled Amtrak trains. In the wake of the pandemic, both Private Car and Charter revenues rose significantly. Private car revenue dropped slightly in FY23 but increases in charter revenue provided a compensating offset. In FY23, Private Cars contributed $1.5 million in revenue, while Charters added an additional $1.1 million. Amtrak anticipates in the FY24 Annual Operating Plan Private Car revenue of $2.4 million and Charter Train revenue of $2.5 million. 

Other Opportunities 

Amtrak pursues other commercial services opportunities that align with its key tenets. For example, Amtrak is also collaborating with the proposed privately-funded high speed rail operation between Dallas and Houston, TX. Amtrak has executed a through ticketing agreement that, following construction of the high-speed rail line, would allow its passengers to connect to the nationwide Amtrak rail network in Dallas and Houston. Amtrak is studying competitive opportunities that may come to maturity in the next five years, with a view to potentially participating, if it can do so under circumstances which will meet its strategic objectives and improve its bottom line. 

FY 2023 Thruway System Highlights 

# +140 Routes operated by over 80 carriers $100M Gross trip revenue (Train + Thruway connections) +400 Bus stops, in addition to the rail network $80M Connected train segment revenue; Thruway segment revenue is $20M 1.6M Nationwide Bus Ridership 

Thruway services play a key role in the existing and future Amtrak network as feeders, connectors, auxiliary frequencies, and in some cases providing Amtrak transportation service in advance of instituting passenger rail service. 

Amtrak Product Offerings, continued Ancillary Service Line  51 

Amtrak operates in a range of markets with customers and competitors that include public agencies and private businesses. Amtrak adapts its approach and pricing to the market to achieve the best deals that can be made with partners and vendors in each circumstance. 

## Opportunities and Strengths 

1.  The conventional rail operating model of a single integrated system run by agency employees has not been expanding. Nearly every new commuter system which has begun service since the early 1990s has contracted out the traditional railroad work disciplines. 2.  When new commuter operations were established, Amtrak was chosen in many cases as the initial provider to set up the service and ensure that it was operated safely and in a manner that met all Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) regulatory requirements. 3.  Amtrak’s strategy embraces both geographic locations where its economies of scale can be most effectively applied and business opportunities where a commuter rail provider is looking for a competent and experienced operator. Commuter operations bids can also solidify Amtrak’s presence in strategically important areas such as California. 4.  Commuter contracts may provide Amtrak with an opportunity to develop other business with its customers, who could potentially come to Amtrak in search of operational, mechanical, engineering, or dispatching expertise. 5.  Most commuter rail systems must comply with FRA requirements, which creates an opportunity for Amtrak to offer its knowledge of compliance and expertise in this area to agencies. 6.  Although commuter rail ridership has not recovered to pre-pandemic levels as Amtrak ridership has, commuter agencies have not reduced service in proportion to ridership declines because of the essential nature of their service. While every agency implemented service reductions, the impact to their operations and Amtrak commuter revenue has not been as significant as the ridership drop. Amtrak does not expect that ridership or service on many commuter railroads will return to pre-COVID-19 levels in the near future, but it is likely that agencies will continue to seek competitive bids in an effort to become more efficient and effective. Amtrak has nationwide in-house expertise in nearly all dimensions of operating a North American passenger railroad. Amtrak has resources such as train and engine crews, maintenance facilities, and supervision already in place in many major cities. Amtrak has more than 50 years of experience providing intercity passenger trains nationwide, along with more than four decades of experience providing commuter operations and equipment maintenance under contract. Amtrak operates over and is trusted by nearly 30 host railroads nationwide and has a strong reputation for operating safely. Amtrak maintains a unique set of key resources necessary for the efficient and effective operation of rail services, including planning, training, mechanical, safety, security, environmental, strategy, operational and infrastructure engineering resources. Amtrak train and engine crews operating Amtrak’s own trains, or operating trains where Amtrak provides crews on a contract basis, are trained in its world-class training facility, which includes providing the opportunity to refine their skills with up-to-date simulator technology before going out under qualified supervision to complete their training on the job. Amtrak enjoys a reputation as a competent and reliable train operator, with a deeper bench of available staff than most of its contract commuter competitors, plus unique training capabilities. However, pricing to win business while providing a reasonable financial return for the company can be a challenge in this competitive field. 

# Market Overview 52 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Strategy 

Amtrak is seeking market-based and competitively bid business opportunities. Pricing is designed to obtain, at a minimum, a positive financial contribution, or more, if a particular market will support it. Amtrak uses a selection process that evaluates potential projects based on the key tenets. Other considerations for potential projects or target markets include: • Are investments required to make Amtrak competitive? If so, is public or private seed money available? • Should Amtrak join with joint venture partner(s)? Are market opportunities large enough to justify this? An attractive return on investment is required, along with effort to establish legal and business agreements. • If modifications to work rules, wages, etc., from the agreement workforce are required, can they be negotiated? • Will there be opportunities where establishing a subsidiary may be beneficial? • Understanding of and adherence to any applicable regulatory/governmental requirements. • Can Amtrak develop methods to handle flow-down requirements on work funded by the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), which differ from requirements for FRA-funded work with which Amtrak otherwise complies, or can those rules be addressed in some other way? The level of Amtrak resources will determine how much time it can spend developing options and bidding more effectively based on deep understanding of markets and relationships established prior to Requests for Proposals. 

## Primary Objectives 

Amtrak seeks to pursue opportunities with intention, rather than reacting to potential projects without a strategy. Achieving this requires the following to be accomplished: 

Pursue Commuter Operations Opportunities 

Pursue and win targeted opportunities through competitive and compelling proposals that meet customer needs. In addition, work with existing and potential customers on an ongoing basis to understand their needs and offer its services to their operations. In FY18, Amtrak was awarded a five-year contract, with an option for an additional five years that MARC exercised in July 2023, to continue to provide train and engine crews services for the MARC Penn Line commuter service. The MARC contract is expected to generate as much as $226 million in revenue over its ten year life. In FY20, Amtrak won a competitive bid to continue to provide the train and engine (T&E) crews for the Southern California Regional Rail Authority in Los Angeles. This five year contract, which contains options for an additional two years, will generate more than $221 million in revenue over the five year base performance period. Several commuter contracts are likely to be put up for bid in the next two to four years. Amtrak will review opportunities to provide commuter services for fit with its key tenets, and will also consider the best approach for each bid, including self-performing services, using subcontractors, or forming a joint venture or other form of business structure.  

> Amtrak’s Thruway Service Connector Ancillary Service Line 53

Support Existing Commuter Agency Customers 

For existing customers, the Ancillary Service Line works with Amtrak functional areas to provide the services customers require to execute their vision, while developing opportunities for Amtrak to meet additional needs. 

Continue to Improve Financial Performance of Charter Trains and Private Cars 

The private car business has now stabilized and is making an effective contribution to Amtrak’s bottom line. A process of engagement has been established with the private car owners’ associations, and the ongoing dialogue that has resulted has helped both Amtrak the owners to manage their businesses effectively. Private car owners have become more cognizant of the operating constraints that Amtrak’s core mission places on the private car business, and Amtrak managers are working with them to find creative solutions that minimize inconvenience to passengers. This business will continue to adapt, but the indications are that the established margins will be sustainable over the next five years. Amtrak will continue to work with the private car community to adapt its service offerings as necessary to maximize contribution without distracting from Amtrak’s core activities. 

Continue to Expand Thruway Services 

Expanding rail service can have high barriers due to funding requirements and host railroad resistance frequently accompanied by large capital investment demands. Thruway service provides a means to grow ridership and revenue in new and existing Amtrak markets by instituting bus service at low initial cost to establish an Amtrak presence in new markets, and to provide route extensions and additional frequencies for existing rail routes. Amtrak will explore closer schedule and operational coordination with bus operators and with state funding partners. Current national network planning concepts envision buses performing some, or all, of the following roles: • Enhancing rail service with auxiliary frequencies. Current example: The Amtrak Cascades service. • Adding new markets to feed customers to/from the Amtrak rail system using bus connections. Example: Replicate Bakersfield, CA hub in Harrisburg, PA or other locations. • Pursuing interline ticketing partnerships with commuter rail and transit operators to expand the Amtrak network to new markets. Federal and some state laws preclude or limit Amtrak from selling “bus-only” trips on dedicated bus routes contracted by Amtrak. This impairs mobility for passengers and unnecessarily increases the federal funding required to maintain nationwide connectivity. A statutory change eliminating this restriction would address this situation and would be particularly beneficial to potential passengers on routes, most of which serve rural areas, over which direct intercity bus service is not otherwise offered. 

## New Opportunities 

Amtrak intends to pursue other commercial service opportunities which fit its key tenets. During the period of this Plan, this is investigating the possibility of a Multimodal Travel initiative to provide information to customers regarding connections to help them travel beyond Amtrak stations to their ultimate destination address from their origin address. This is the so-called “First Mile/Last Mile” challenge. By reducing uncertainty regarding travel to/from Amtrak stations, Amtrak can attract new riders to public transportation. Potential partners could include commuter railroads, transit systems (e.g., light rail, subways and buses), taxis, Transportation Network Companies / ride-hailing services to/from specific addresses, among others. Amtrak is also focusing on how people get to and from a station, making the first mile/last mile as frictionless as possible. The multi-modal approach focuses on current transit partners including Rhode Island Public Transit Authority (Providence Circulator), NJ Transit (Atlantic City Rail Line), Shore Line East Service and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (Newark AirTrain), and we are planning to expand to others. Amtrak is also doing technical discovery to connect Amtrak booking channels with third party travel searchers. We aim to improve content on Amtrak’s web site to bring greater visibility to first/last mile options. Amtrak is also planning to improve “Thruway” program functionality to include alignment on comprehensive service standards for interline carriers designed to improve the customer experience. We are incorporating service audits, carrier input, and customer service feedback to improve operating policy and address gaps in areas including signage, infant seats, and driver announcements. There is a capital project underway to integrate Amtrak reservations with primary intercity bus reservations, providing a live count of seats remaining on interline buses. We are also focusing on product features and details in the booking channel and exploring digital marketing and free promotional options to increase ridership on new routes. 

Primary Objectives, continued 54 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Risks and Environmental Factors 

External Factors 

Contract Commuter Operations 

Entrenched competitors exist in each potential market with resources and market presence that generally exceed what Amtrak has available, at least initially. Many of Amtrak’s competitors for contract commuter operations are subsidiaries of large, foreign government-owned, railroads. Some competitors, particularly in the commuter services area but potentially also in other areas, may be willing to price below their cost or take significant risks in areas such as liability to establish or defend their positions in the marketplace. Commuter operations are funded by public agencies as a service and by their nature operate at a financial loss. When combined with state and local funding pressures, this drives commuter agencies to economize, pursuing lower costs and pushing risk onto contractors. Meeting Amtrak’s goal of achieving sufficient contribution while operating in this market is a challenge. One consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic has been a worsening of both ridership and financial performance of most commuter rail agencies that continues to impact commuter rail operations across the nation. Many agencies are now looking for both efficiencies and service improvements, and these may afford Amtrak with competitive bid opportunities in the coming years that would generate substantial new revenues. Amtrak also faces accounting and compliance hurdles. Amtrak receives federal funding through the FRA, while commuter carriers generally receive federal funding through the FTA. Currently, the federal flow-down compliance rules are different for the two sources of federal funding. It would be beneficial to Amtrak and commuter operators if this impediment was eliminated through regulatory or legislative action. 

Thruway Connecting Services 

Dedicated Amtrak bus routes (for which Amtrak charters the buses) currently have legal restrictions, as noted earlier, that impact Amtrak’s ability to leverage bus services to connect communities across the country. 

Charter Trains and Private Cars 

Amtrak significantly restructured both of these businesses during FY18 to retain as much financial contribution as possible, while eliminating low contribution moves and interference with Amtrak’s core operations, to comply with its key tenets. Amtrak’s consistent application of the clear guidelines for Charter Trains it has adopted has enabled implementation of its restructuring strategy, and the Private Car and Charter business should continue to generate contribution for Amtrak. 

Internal Factors 

Capacity 

The bandwidth available to actively pursue new business, including the effort required from across Amtrak to respond to each potential business opportunity and Request for Proposal, can present a challenge to pursuing new opportunities. For example, the capacity of Amtrak functional areas such as Engineering and IT to take on additional work within the timeframes required is limited. Subcontracting, licensing, or partnering are options, although they still require Amtrak resources to hire and manage and can cut into Amtrak returns. 

Risk Appetite 

Willingness to take on reasonable business liability risks from performing additional work can be a challenge. 

Ability to Price Competitively 

Essential to running Amtrak as a business is market-driven pricing that contributes positive financial contribution but is also competitive in the marketplace. 

# Conclusion 

One of the basic tenets for Amtrak’s efforts seeking commercial opportunities is to provide a positive financial contribution to Amtrak. Amtrak will continually evaluate business opportunities and pursue those that satisfy its three key tenets: (1) Provide positive financial contribution to Amtrak; (2) Produce clear strategic value for Amtrak; and (3) do not distract from or impede Amtrak’s core activities. Ancillary Service Line  55 Ancillary Service Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) (2,934) - - - - - (2,934) Food and Beverage - - - - - - -Contractual Contribution (Operating) PRIIA 209 Operating Payments - - - - - - -PRIIA 212 Operating Payments - - - - - - -Commuter Operations 144,723 150,885 155,411 160,074 164,876 169,822 945,791 Reimbursable Contracts 180,395 188,410 196,889 205,749 215,007 224,682 1,211,132 Access Revenue - - - - - - -Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) 135,349 166,779 171,783 176,936 182,244 188,206 1,021,297 All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 629 676 699 723 752 786 4,265 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 458,162 506,750 524,781 543,482 562,880 583,497 3,179,551 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 95 109 43 22 22 51 342 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments - - - - - - -Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 677 162 382 373 384 - 1,978 Financing Proceeds Applied - - - - - - -Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 415 2,168 1,405 22 22 22 4,054 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 1,187 2,439 1,830 417 427 74 6,374 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 10,245 - - - - - 10,245 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants -Operating - - - - - - -Capital 16,459 17,512 24,135 16,001 12,570 14,967 101,644 IIJA Supplemental 963 2,281 2,290 2,565 1,981 777 10,857 IIJA Discretionary 302 86 1,315 1,492 1,534 - 4,729 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 173 - - - - - 173 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 28,142 19,880 27,740 20,058 16,084 15,744 127,648 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 487,491 529,069 554,352 563,956 579,391 599,315 3,313,573 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 11,199 9,976 10,214 10,452 10,707 11,959 64,506 Transportation 100,194 104,971 108,359 111,906 115,687 120,028 661,144 Equipment 77,095 80,379 83,025 85,777 88,697 91,948 506,922 Infrastructure 156,046 162,178 167,807 173,517 179,496 185,752 1,024,796 Stations 5,944 5,787 5,954 6,131 6,321 6,739 36,877 National Assets and Corporate Services 87,688 90,587 93,593 96,686 99,948 103,934 572,435 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 438,166 453,878 468,952 484,469 500,855 520,360 2,866,680 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) 19,996 52,873 55,830 59,012 62,025 63,136 312,871 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

49,325 75,191 85,400 79,487 78,537 78,954 446,893 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 1,345 1,056 1,404 929 650 87 5,472 Equipment 11,627 6,656 14,104 5,998 2,833 2,129 43,349 Infrastructure 5,493 5,215 4,524 2,808 2,464 2,290 22,794 Stations 47 15 15 15 14 14 121 National Assets and Corporate Services 10,817 9,376 9,523 10,724 10,549 11,298 62,286 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 29,329 22,319 29,570 20,474 16,512 15,818 134,022 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 29,329 22,319 29,570 20,474 16,512 15,818 134,022 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $19,996 $52,873 $55,830 $59,012 $62,025 $63,136 $312,871 56 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

New York Penn Station 

Amtrak’s nationwide portfolio of real estate—owned and leased—spans the Amtrak system. This portfolio includes more than eight million square feet of station and maintenance facilities, five of Amtrak’s top ten busiest stations, and over 800 miles of right-of-way and other property in 46 states, Canada, and the District of Columbia. While Amtrak’s assets are primarily used for railroad operations, some produce recurring revenue and select assets have the potential to generate additional revenues for reinvestment into critical infrastructure and operational improvements for the benefit of our customers. The financial performance of real estate assets reported through the Ancillary Service Line under the FAST Act account structure. Amtrak’s Real Estate & Commercial Service Line plays an essential role in Amtrak’s mission, day-to-day operations, and long-term strategy, with touchpoints across all divisions and corporate staff functions. It supports the organization through both internal-facing and external-facing functions, as detailed in the table on the following page. 

Amtrak Portfolio Facts 

# 1.1 Million Square feet of offices, of which Amtrak owns 70% 528 Stations (including platforms and shelters) served across the United States and Canada 665,000 Square feet of warehouse space, located nationwide 751 Miles of owned or leased right-of-way 111,000 Square feet of leasable retail space in Amtrak’s Major Stations and other properties Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Real Estate and Commercial Service Line 

# 06 Real Estate and Commercial Service Line  57 

Internal Functions External Functions 

## Real Estate Services 

Supports Amtrak’s core business by providing internal customers across the organization with highly specialized subject matter expertise necessary to secure and maintain real property rights critical for the safe, reliable operation of Amtrak’s passenger rail service. 

## Commercial Revenue 

Leverages Amtrak’s extensive property holdings across the United States—stations, parking facilities, and along its right-of-way—to generate reliable, recurring program income from external customers. 

Objectives: 

• Defend Amtrak’s property interests, both legally and economically; • Acquire properties in connection with the introduction of new or expanded service across Amtrak’s route network; and • Align real estate decisions with enterprise business strategy, while minimizing operating expense and risk. 

Objectives: 

• Grow commercial revenue from all sources, including Telecommunications, Retail, Advertising, Pipe & Wire, and Commercial Parking; • Take advantage of the scale of Amtrak’s real estate holdings, and by applying best practices used by other Class I railroads; and • Utilize technology to improve internal process efficiency, such as design review and applications for permits to enter. 

## Corporate Real Estate 

Oversees Amtrak’s 1.1 million square foot portfolio of offices—owned and leased—across the country. 

## Commercial Development 

Identifies and executes opportunities to realize embedded real estate value through public-private partnerships and other transactions. 

Objectives: 

• Implement the recommendations in Amtrak’s Long Term Facility Plan (LTFP) to minimize real estate occupancy expense; • Establish standards for Amtrak-owned and leased facilities to deliver high-quality space to all customers, employees, and visitors; • Implement New Ways of Working (NWOW) initiatives that enhance employee experience and accommodate all types of work arrangements (on-site, hybrid, and remote); and • Acquire and/or lease space, on financially responsible terms to accommodate Amtrak’s hiring goals. 

Objectives: 

• Unlock and monetize unrealized real estate value through strategic development opportunities, provided these do not conflict with our ability to run our business and deliver major capital projects; and • Capture property value appreciation generated from service expansion across Amtrak’s route network, while sharing a portion of it to enhance the communities in which these properties are located. 

Real Estate Department Functions 58 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Real Estate Services 

Real Estate Services (RES) provides operational, management, and advisory support necessary to secure and maintain real estate property rights critical for the safe, reliable operation of Amtrak’s passenger rail service. RES professionals possess subject matter expertise unique to railroads and must maintain fluency in the languages of both railroading and real estate. This function is critical to Amtrak’s current operations, as well as supporting its expansion goals. 

RES’s Responsibilities 

Advertising. Manages a portfolio of over 270 existing static billboards and over 650 static indoor station advertising locations throughout the Amtrak network. Responsible for the conversion from static to digital medium for strategic billboard and in-station locations. Manages the onboard advertising for trains throughout the Northeast Corridor, Keystone and Empire lines. 

Transaction Management. Negotiation and management of all real property acquisitions and disposition transactions (fee, lease, license, easement, use, etc.) including market research, due diligence, valuation, and closing administration. 

Strategic Advisory. Management of all real estate needs for Amtrak rail operations, responses to information requests regarding rights and responsibilities, project support, ownership research and determinations, support for property-related concerns and needs, encroachments, litigation support. 

Portfolio Management. Agreement administration (abstracting, tracking rights and responsibilities, updating terms, renewals, terminations, etc.); relationship management with agreement parties; cost review and approval; and maintenance of ownership records, assessment management system and digital asset library. 

Real Estate Agreement Administration. Revenue generation from real estate property leases and easements. This revenue is in addition to Commercial Revenue derived from advertising, telecom, parking, pipe and wire, and retail agreements. 

Acquisition Support for Major Capital Projects. Dedicated RES teams embedded within the Gateway and Frederick R. Douglass tunnel replacement projects handle all required real estate transactions (acquisitions, easements, and subsurface rights). 

Property Control. Responsible for the interpretation, custodianship and management of Amtrak’s nationwide property plans and document records, an essential resource for establishing ownership, rights and legal obligations related to all properties in which Amtrak has an interest.  

> A colorful advertising campaign makes great use of ad space at the William H. Gray III 30th Street Station in Philadelphia. Real Estate and Commercial Service Line 59

Warehouse Space. Approximately 665,000 square feet, located nationwide, of which approximately 46% is owned. 

Industrial Facilities. Includes yards, electric traction facilities, maintenance of equipment facilities, maintenance of way facilities, and ventilation facilities, located nationwide. 

Right-of-Way. Approximately 729 miles, located primarily along the Northeast Corridor region, as well as along other lines in six states. 

Space Planning & Strategy 

Space Planning & Strategy serves as single point of contact for occupancy and space planning, floor plans, move management, and large and small office buildout projects. Interfaces with business lines to align occupancy plans with department needs and hiring plans, maintain consistent interior office space guidelines, and implement Amtrak’s Long Term Facilities Plan. 

Utilization. As of August 2023, approximately 55% of total seats (offices and cubicles) are assigned. Under Amtrak’s New Ways of Working initiative, employees’ eligibility for dedicated workspaces is determined based on their work schedule: onsite, hybrid, traveling, or remote. 

Technology. Developed in partnership with Amtrak’s Digital Technology & Innovation department, the Office Space software platform provides a self-service portal that allows employees to use a desktop or mobile device to reserve a cubicle or office while traveling. This platform also provides analytical tools that furnish Amtrak Real Estate with real-time data on space utilization and employee mobility. 

# Corporate Real Estate 

Amtrak’s real estate portfolio, including both owned and leased properties, consists of corporate offices, stations, warehouses, industrial facilities, and right-of-way. We continue to implement the recommendations in Amtrak’s Long Term Facility Plan to minimize real estate occupancy expense by transitioning, to the extent possible, from leased to owned properties. 

Asset Management 

Corporate Offices. Approximately 1.1 million square feet, 90% of which is concentrated in five cities: Philadelphia, District of Columbia, Wilmington (DE), New York, and Chicago. Approximately 70% of this portfolio is owned. 

Stations. Amtrak currently provides train service to more than 525 stations (including platforms and shelters). More than a 25% are in the Northeast Corridor region, many of which are owned. The remainder are located on Amtrak’s National Network across the United States and Canada. Most of the stations Amtrak serves are owned by other entities, including host railroads, commuter authorities, states, communities and private companies. Some rental payments for stations are reimbursed by state and other partners who fund state-supported services under the cost allocation methodology established pursuant to Section 209 of the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 (PRIIA). 60 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Commercial Revenue 

Amtrak generates revenue by leveraging its unique property holdings and other proprietary assets, including Major Stations and the Northeast Corridor right-of-way, as well as properties in New York, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and other states. Commercial Revenue augments Amtrak’s financial performance and reduces requirements from other funding sources. The Commercial Revenue team works closely with other Amtrak departments to coordinate design review and approval processes, and to obtain entry permits. Careful coordination is required to manage use of these resources to avoid conflicts with Amtrak’s maintenance and capital projects. FY23 revenue was approximately $93M. 

## Telecommunications 

Commercial Revenue negotiates, manages, and enforces agreements with telecommunica-tions companies for wireless and fiber optic cable installations at stations, tower sites, and along the right-of-way. Telecom also manages the review and approval of third-party tele-communications projects in coordination with Amtrak’s Engineering and Operations groups, including new installations and upgrades at existing sites. Revenue is derived from annual rental or license fees from agreements and from support services (reimbursable revenue) for third parties to construct and maintain facilities on Amtrak’s right-of-way. 

Market Conditions 

Customer demand remains strong and growing, although Amtrak has faced challenges in satisfying this demand due to the need for the same resources to support Amtrak’s own maintenance and capital projects. Revenue growth over the past two years has been driven by entering into new agreements, renewing existing agreements at increased rates and increasing cost reimbursement from customers. Additional growth is expected from the telecommunications industry’s emphasis on upgrading to 5G technology, which will require new agreements and/or modifications to existing customer installations on Amtrak’s property. 

RE&C FY23 Performance Highlights 

# $29.0M Telecommunications Revenue $18.5M Retail Real Estate $12.0M Advertising Revenue $11.8M Pipe & Wire Revenue $8.4M Commercial Parking Revenue $7.2M Real Estate Transactions Revenue $6.3M Other Real Estate Activity 

Above: Engineers installing secure trackside wireless broadband network (TSN) on Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor (NEC). The purpose of TSN is to provide passengers aboard Amtrak’s Wi-Fi equipped trains on the NEC with a reliable, consistent broadband-speed Internet connection. Real Estate and Commercial Service Line  61 Retail Leasing 

Negotiates agreements, oversees tenant improvement work, and manages daily operations for a 110,000 square foot portfolio at stations and other Amtrak properties (primarily along the Northeast Corridor). Retail serves as both a source of revenue for Amtrak and an amenity for passengers waiting to board trains. Typical in-station retail tenants include food and beverage, newsstands, gifts shops, drug stores, and other non-food uses. Amtrak also rents kiosk space to operators of public vending machines and ATM’s, car rental agencies, taxi dispatch and brochure racks. In addition, public space within certain stations is licensed for short term use for special events, filming, and photography, provided such license agreements do not conflict with passenger service. 

Market Conditions 

Rental revenue is closely correlated with overall economic activity, and Amtrak’s retail tenants rely on consistent business and leisure travel. Occupancy was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic but has since recovered to close to pre-pandemic levels. 

## Advertising 

Amtrak has advertising available at its five Major Stations, on three train routes, and along its right-of-way, where more than 300 billboards have been installed. Amtrak contracts with third parties that collect commissions for selling ad space to advertisers. 

Market Conditions 

Revenue growth is expected from the conversion of billboards from static messages, which require periodic manual changeovers, to digital signage, which can rotate messages and be operated remotely. Digital billboards and in-station signage generate substantially more revenue per unit than static messaging. Additional revenue growth can be derived from installation of billboards at new locations along Amtrak’s right-of-way. Other initiatives include locomotive wrapping, and sponsorships associated with improved onboard Wi-Fi service; we are exploring other partnerships to enhance revenue. 

## Pipe & Wire 

Pipe & Wire manages agreements that allow third parties to occupy portions of Amtrak’s right-of-way (along or crossing over) and other property throughout the country. Agreements provide for underground installations of conduit or encased pipe installed below the track structure, aerial facilities attached to poles, and ancillary installations such as poles, guywires, and manholes. 

Market Conditions 

The Pipe & Wire business produces steady revenue and was relatively unaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Customer demand remains strong and growing, although Amtrak has faced challenges in satisfying this demand due to the need by Amtrak’s own maintenance and capital projects for resources. 

## Commercial Parking 

Commercial Parking contracts with third party operators to manage, on a fee-for-service basis, eight commercial parking facilities, comprising 4,000 spaces in aggregate. Amtrak owns six of these facilities and leases the other two. 

Market Conditions 

Commercial parking revenue is correlated with overall economic activity and business and leisure travel. Occupancy was significantly adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic but has since recovered to close to pre-pandemic levels. Operators of certain facilities have been authorized to enter into agreements with adjacent businesses that require regular access to parking spaces, which generate minimum revenue irrespective of actual usage.   

> Retail space in the Waiting Room at New York Penn Station. 62 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

# Commercial Development 

## Major Station Redevelopments 

Over the past decade, Amtrak has formed Public Private Partnerships (P3) with commercial real estate organizations for major station redevelopment projects in Baltimore, Chicago, and Philadelphia. In each case, Amtrak successfully monetized real estate value, funded necessary state of good repair projects, and acquired leading industry expertise for maximizing revenue. 

## Strategy 

While Amtrak, as a transportation provider, seeks to avoid risk, commercial real estate developers target and embrace it. Amtrak’s strategy for commercial development is to identify opportunities to maximize embedded value by transferring real estate risk to third parties in exchange for reliable, long term revenue streams, provided doing so does not conflict with operations and capital projects. In addition to large-scale P3 projects, Amtrak seeks to capture property value increases associated with its expansion of service across the route network, while creating benefits for the communities where these properties are located. 

# Opportunities and Risks 

## Growth Initiatives 

Joint Development 

Leverage Amtrak’s extensive property holdings across the United States—stations, parking facilities, and along its right-of-way— to realize embedded real estate value through public-private partnerships and other transaction structures, provided these activities do not conflict with Amtrak’s passenger rail operations. 

Technology 

In partnership with Amtrak’s Digital Technology & Innovation department, implement new software platforms, including the Integrated Real Estate Information System (IRIS) and Third Party Access Portal. 

Facilities Optimization 

Continue implementing the recommendations in Amtrak’s Long Term Facility Plan to minimize real estate occupancy expense by transitioning from leased to owned properties while enhancing employee experience through New Ways of Working. 

## Risks and Environmental Factors 

Federal Appropriations 

While Amtrak does not use federal funds for real estate development initiatives intended to generate ancillary revenues, inadequate annual appropriations could impact station redevelopment projects and would require increased revenues to fill the resulting gap. Such a gap could lead to prioritization of initiatives generating short term revenue streams over longer-term real estate and commercial objectives. 

Major Service Disruption 

A major disruption in Amtrak service due to extreme weather, terrorist attack, infrastructure failure, pandemic concerns or other similar event could cause significant interruption of service and station usage that would adversely impact real estate and commercial revenues and initiatives. 

Force Majeure Events 

Unexpected events such as natural disasters, severe weather events, terrorism, and health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic may have severe impacts on the economy, including severe disruptions in travel that could result in loss of commercial revenue and development opportunities. 

Complex or Shared Ownership of Some Facilities 

Some Amtrak facilities have shared ownership, which may provide benefits but requires extensive coordination that can slow down implementation of projects and initiatives. 

Staff Resources and Expertise 

Amtrak requires sufficient staff in both the SFPA group and among the Operations disciplines that support third party work along Amtrak’s right-of-way and other assets. Revenue-generating opportunities are in constant competition for resources with capital and state of good repair projects, which will significantly increase during the period covered by this Plan as a result of the large increases in funding provided by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. Real Estate and Commercial Service Line  63 

> Chicago Union Station

64 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

The Infrastructure Access Service Line (IASL) plan summarizes Amtrak’s plans to develop, manage, and provide access to Amtrak-owned or controlled infrastructure. The primary customers of IASL services are commuter and freight railroads and the Amtrak Service and Asset Lines that utilize Amtrak infrastructure. Amtrak’s fundamental responsibilities in delivering IASL services include meeting customer expectations related to use of Amtrak assets; generating and growing revenue from asset use; and driving investments to renew, rebuild and enhance Amtrak infrastructure to meet present and future service needs. Success depends on clear and consistent communication with stakeholders, robust asset and work management practices, integrated service and capital planning, and project delivery processes to reliably provide infrastructure access. The key goal is to generate sufficient funding from users and investors to perform ongoing maintenance, recapitalization and improvement activities needed to ensure Amtrak’s infrastructure supports safe and reliable operations and accommodates future demand. IASL provides infrastructure access primarily to commuter authorities and freight railroads on the Amtrak-owned portions of the Boston-to-Washington Northeast Corridor (NEC) main line, but also manages Amtrak-owned/operated lines elsewhere on Amtrak’s National Network. Principal financial sources include operating and capital payments by NEC users pursuant to agreements governed by the Northeast Corridor Commuter and Intercity Rail Cost Allocation Policy (hereafter referred to as “the Policy”) developed by the Northeast Corridor Commission (NEC Commission), freight railroad payments under existing access agreements, payments by other entities outside the NEC that use Amtrak assets (such as Metra), and federal appropriations to the National Network Account. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) enacted in 2021 provides transformative levels of federal funding, through grants to Amtrak and transit agencies and competitive grant programs, for investments in Amtrak owned/operated infrastructure shared with commuter railroads during the first few years of the five-year period covered by the Plan. 

Above: A helicopter strings rope during a power transmission pole wire installation in Newark, NJ. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman/River Rail Photo. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Infrastructure Access Service Line 07 Infrastructure Access Service Line  65 IASL Activities 

Partner Relationship Management and Coordination 

IASL is the primary point of contact for major capital projects involving internal and external stakeholders through its management of contractual agreements related to access and design and construction support services. It supports the company’s priorities through relationship management and coordination, which requires extensive communication with various stakeholders through regular outreach sessions and negotiations with, among many others, federal, state, and local governments. In 2023, Amtrak expanded partner engagement to support the increase in projects resulting from IIJA with the addition of a Capital Delivery External Partnerships team. 

Infrastructure Planning 

Coordinating planning for Amtrak infrastructure for both existing and new services requires a strategic, proactive approach to building consensus with the other rail service providers which use Amtrak assets. Long-term infrastructure planning is a complex responsibility that requires regular communication with partners and other stakeholders, extensive attention to resource allocation, integration of intercity commuter and freight service plans, and strategic planning for improved or expanded services. With the addition of a NEC Project Development and Work Planning team, Amtrak is advancing long range planning strategies to address this need. 

Capital Program Management 

In conjunction with other departments (notably Capital Delivery), IASL supports the development and management (i.e., monitoring, reporting, and adjusting) of both annual and five-year infrastructure capital plans to maintain Amtrak assets in a state of good repair and advance improvements to meet expanded service, reliability, frequency, and trip time improvements. IASL’s collaboration with external stakeholders in the pursuit of IIJA and other discretionary grant funding sources is critical to the effort to secure funding for shared benefit capital investments. 

Coordination with the NEC Commission 

The NEC Commission includes Amtrak, the U.S. Department of Transportation, and the eight Northeast states and the District of Columbia. It was established by Section 212 of the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 (PRIIA), which mandated development of a cost sharing policy for Corridor users and coordinated regional leadership on near- term strategies to stabilize the NEC and establish a foundation for growth. Amtrak has been informed by its NEC Commission membership in developing this plan by participating in its committees and working groups. Amtrak also regularly meets with NEC partners on a bilateral basis to discuss issues and ensure appropriate coordination among the relevant parties. On an operational level, Amtrak communicates with partners daily. An important next step is Amtrak’s work with the NEC Commission to continue integration of Service and Asset Line plan development and approval processes into the Commission’s planning timeline, and further implementation of normalized replacement for stations. Many items addressed in this Plan are covered in greater detail in the Infrastructure Asset Line Plan.   

> Night work at SWIFT Interlocking near Kearny, NJ. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman/ River Rail Photo. 66 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

## Reimbursable 

Amtrak also performs a variety of services for third parties. While these services are labeled “reimbursable,” the actual financial terms are agreed to with the respective third party on a case-by-case basis. Reimbursable work is considered an ancillary business and reported separately under the IIJA accounting framework but is discussed here because Infrastructure Access and Reimbursable activities have similar customers, and both often derive from access agreements. Financial forecasts are provided separately. Many contractual arrangements are single-sourced to Amtrak based upon unique expertise Amtrak may possess or Amtrak’s ownership of right-of-way and property where work takes place. In addition, IASL also responds to requests for proposals issued by states and public agencies. This Plan outlines the current functions provided by Amtrak in detail, discusses selected ongoing projects, and describes Amtrak’s approach to this type of work. 

Reimbursable Projects 

Amtrak is often asked to perform engineering design and construction services on various state, commuter authority or third-party projects on a reimbursable basis. These services range from the support of local station construction to some of the largest transportation projects in the United States. The largest projects may involve dozens of staff from the design phases through project close-out, including related activities like project management and budgeting. Amtrak seeks payments from these services to cover the fully allocated costs of Amtrak’s work, including direct costs, overheads, and general, administrative and other costs. Lower rates may be charged in certain instances where the investments have a direct benefit to Amtrak services or assets. Amtrak recently completed several third-party projects and has others ongoing. Select examples of reimbursable projects recently completed or near completion are detailed on the following pages. 

Ardmore Transportation Center Improvement Project 

Amtrak is supporting improvements to the Ardmore station on the Keystone Line that is served by Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) commuter trains and Amtrak. Improvements to Ardmore Station will include construction of new high-level platforms, elevators, stairs, and canopies and will provide ADA accessible access to and from the platforms and station building. This project is scheduled for completion in October 2024. 

Amtrak's Reimbursable Functions Design Review and Approval 

Amtrak review, comment and approval of Engineering design activity performed by third parties for projects which will impact Amtrak rail-related assets. 

## Safety 

Railroad protective services for projects in the vicinity of rail infrastructure, including flagging and overhead catenary system de-energization. 

## Rail Construction and Support 

Track construction and tie replacement. 

## Station Maintenance 

Support of maintenance and construction activities for commuter rail stations. 

## Ancillary Commuter Services 

Contractual-based services providing Amtrak ticket sellers and other station management personnel. Infrastructure Access Service Line  67 

Claymont Regional Transportation Center 

Amtrak supported the Delaware Transit Corporation, the operating division of the Delaware Department of Transportation (DelDOT) which provides SEPTA-operated commuter rail service within Delaware, in replacing the existing commuter rail station in Claymont with a new facility located 0.6-miles north of the existing station on the NEC. The new station, opened in December 2023, offers two 630-foot-long canopy covered high level platforms served by SEPTA’s Wilmington/Newark Regional Rail line. It features an enclosed pedestrian overpass that includes elevators and stairs providing ADA accessible access to and from the platforms and station building, restrooms, a waiting area, and ground level parking as well as a tiered parking garage. Amtrak reimbursable services included roadway worker protection for contractors, design review services and construction management services at an estimated total cost of $7.9 million. 

MTA Harold Regional Investments/East Side Access 

The New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) has undertaken the East Side Access project which enables Long Island Rail Road trains to access Grand Central Terminal. A major component of the project is the Harold Regional Investments which includes constructing and upgrading trackage, signals, circuits, and other components of existing infrastructure at the Harold and Loop Interlockings near Amtrak’s Sunnyside Yard in Queens. While Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) service to Grand Central Terminal commenced in early CY23, the Harold Regional Investment portion of the project is ongoing. Amtrak has provided various support functions for the project where it intersects Amtrak’s tracks and other infrastructure. 

Providence Station 

The Providence Station State of Good Repair and Capacity Project will complete a redesign and major renovation of the station. Over two million Amtrak and The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) passengers utilize this station each year. Funded under a $25 Million Federal State Partnership (FSP) grant, with Amtrak contributing $7.25 Million towards the local match, key improvements include interior renovations and expansion of the restrooms, baggage areas, public waiting areas and other parts of the station, as well as platform emergency egress and pedestrian access enhancements. 

Penn Station Access for Metro-North Trains 

This project, sponsored by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and Metro-North Railroad, includes construction of four new stations in the Bronx, NY, and additional track structure to support Metro-North commuter rail service over Amtrak’s Hell Gate Line between New Rochelle, NY, and New York Penn Station. 

Coatesville Station 

Amtrak is supporting the construction of a new Coatesville Station on the Keystone Line. This initiative is being led and funded by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation with construction mobilization underway. The station will include two new high-level platforms, track improvements, two elevator and stair towers providing ADA accessible access to and from the platforms via a pedestrian walkway and underpass signage, lighting, and storm water management and security systems. Substantial project completion is projected for April of 2025. 

Pawtucket Train Station 

Amtrak has supported the Rhode Island Department of Transportation (RIDOT) project to build a new commuter rail station in Pawtucket, RI that opened in January 2023. Amtrak support work for remaining elements of the project, including additional station parking, was completed during FY23. 

> Providence Station in Rhode Island

Reimbursable, continued 68 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak’s right-of-way infrastructure assets are primarily located in the Northeast but also include some important assets on Amtrak’s National Network, principally the Michigan Line and several major terminal areas. 

## The Northeast Corridor 

Amtrak owns 363 miles of the 457-mile right-of-way of the NEC main line between Washington, DC and New Rochelle, NY, and between New Haven, CT, and the Rhode Island-Massachusetts border. Amtrak acquired its portions of the NEC, along with the branch lines to Springfield, MA (Springfield Line) and Harrisburg, PA (Keystone Line), pursuant to the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976. While the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 (PRIIA) defines the NEC as the Washington–Boston main line and the branch lines as part of Amtrak’s National Network, the branch lines are part of the NEC in several contexts, including being subject to capital planning and PRIIA Section 212 Amtrak-commuter cost allocation statutory provisions. Some statutory and other definitions of the NEC, including those used by some states, commuter agencies, or the public also include portions of the New York–Albany line (Hudson Line) and/or the Washington, DC–Richmond, VA line. Many customers connect to the NEC on state-supported trains operating via those lines, but they are not considered part of the NEC under the statutory provision that governs Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans. On the NEC main line, Amtrak provides infrastructure access for commuter services provided by eight commuter authorities, two of which (RIDOT and DelDOT) use other commuter authorities to operate their services.  

> Albany
> Springfield Hartford Worcester Bridgeport Wilmington Trenton New Haven New London Providence Newark Harrisburg Stamford Baltimore Richmond

Philadelphia New York Washington, D.C. Boston 

> NE C Main Line Owne rship
> Amtrak Metro-North ConnDOT MBTA

Richmond Washington, D.C. 

NE C Main Line Owne rship 

Amtrak Metro-North ConnDOT MBTA 

Amtrak's NEC Infrastructure Access Customers 

Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) for operation between the Rhode Island/Massachusetts State Line and Providence, RI, and between Providence and Wickford Junction, RI under contract with the Rhode Island Department of Transportation 

Shore Line East commuter rail service between New London and New Haven, CT by Connecticut Department of Transportation. 

Long Island Rail Road between Harold Interlocking (Queens), NY and New York Penn Station. 

New Jersey Transit (NJT) between New York Penn Station and Trenton, NJ, and from Frankford Junction, PA to Philadelphia, PA. 

Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) 

between Trenton, NJ and Newark, DE; service within Delaware is provided under contract with the Delaware Department of Transportation. 

Maryland Area Regional Commuter (MARC) between Perryville, MD and Washington, DC. 

Virginia Railway Express (VRE) between Washington Union Station and Virginia Avenue in Washington, DC. 

# Market Overview 

NEC Main Line Ownership Infrastructure Access Service Line  69 Competitive Landscape 

As an access provider to passenger and freight railroad operators, Amtrak must optimize and enhance competitiveness of all rail services that rely on Amtrak infrastructure. The NEC— Amtrak’s primary infrastructure asset—has geographic advantages stemming from its location in a growing region that accounts for the largest share of U.S. commercial activity. Regional competitive advantages created by its high-volume, high-speed main line serving central business districts and ports enable NEC rail operators to capitalize on the advantages rail transportation offers compared to other modes. Many rail assets need replacement to continue to provide safe, reliable, and convenient rail service to, and the capacity needed for a growing population and economy. The number of passenger trips on the NEC is projected to reach over a half billion—almost twice as many as prior to the COVID-19 pandemic—by 2040. As the popularity of rail increases, Amtrak and its NEC partners are challenged to ensure the NEC can meet the demand for new capacity on this critical infrastructure asset. Accommodating heavy daily use of aging NEC infrastructure—some more than a century old—that has reached or exceeded the limits of its capacity and service life, is one of the greatest challenges Amtrak faces. 

Amtrak's National Infrastructure Access Customers 

Connecticut Department of Transportation 

for CTrail service on the Springfield Line. 

New York State Department of Transportation 

for Amtrak Empire Service .

Pennsylvania Department of Transportation 

for Amtrak Keystone Service on the Harrisburg Line. 

Michigan Department of Transportation 

for Amtrak Michigan Services. 

Metra for access to Chicago Union Station and adjacent terminal trackage. 

Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) for commuter rail service on the Paoli/Thorndale –Philadelphia portion of the Harrisburg Line. 

## National Network 

Amtrak owns the 104-mile Keystone Corridor from Philadelphia, PA to Harrisburg, PA and the 61-mile Springfield Line from New Haven, CT to Springfield, MA. Amtrak holds a long-term lease with CSX for the Hudson Line between Poughkeepsie, NY and Schenectady, NY (and owns outright two short segments of the Hudson Line in New York City and the Schenectady area). In the Midwest, Amtrak owns 95 miles of right-of-way and infrastructure between Porter, IN and Kalamazoo, MI (Michigan Line), and Chicago Union Station and adjacent trackage. Chicago Union Station is the hub of Amtrak’s Long Distance Service Network. In these segments, Amtrak provides infrastructure access to the commuter rail agencies detailed at in the table at right. 

## Customer Analysis 

Amtrak’s primary external customers for infrastructure access activities are commuter and freight railroads. Amtrak also hosts its own trains for the NEC, State Supported and Long Distance Service Lines, which have different service and infrastructure requirements than Amtrak’s external partners. Ultimately, the end users are Amtrak and commuter rail passengers and freight shippers, who depend on Amtrak to provide reliable and safe infrastructure and services to freight operators entrusted with their shipments. Other institutional customers include third parties such as states and localities that seek to use Amtrak’s infrastructure or engage in capital projects or other activities that affect Amtrak’s infrastructure temporarily or over an extended period. 70 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## FY22 –23 Performance 

The NEC Commission’s Cost Allocation Policy continues to provide annual capital funding for the Normalized Replacement of Amtrak’s basic infrastructure assets through annual Baseline Capital Charges (BCCs). Over the past two fiscal years, Amtrak’s BCC-funded program has continued to grow and incorporate new asset data. We work with our NEC partners on an ongoing basis to ensure that we are effectively collaborating and adhering to the Policy’s requirements while improving identification of capital funding needs, capital program delivery, and reporting. During FY21, the NEC Commission completed an updated geo-specific Asset Assessment for NEC Infrastructure, providing a much stronger geographic link than the prior assessment that dates back to 2011. The new Asset Assessment is being phased-in as the original assessment is gradually removed from the Cost Allocation Model that the NEC Commission uses to calculate BCC Obligations for Amtrak and commuter agencies. For FY22 the NEC Commission agreed to derive BCC Obligations using a 50/50 blend between the original and new asset data, with Normalized Replacement levels at 100% and 70% respectively. In FY23 this shifted further towards the new Asset Assessment with a 35/65 blend in favor of the new data and Normalized Replacement at 100% and 75%. At the 2023 meeting, the NEC Commission unanimously approved a 25/75 blend with Normalized Replacement at 100% and 80% for the FY24 Model year. Starting with the FY23 Model, the NEC Commission has adopted a comprehensive framework for Normalized Replacement costs of shared benefit station infrastructure that closely parallels the methods used to assign Right-of-Way BCCs to agencies. NEC Commission staff conducted a detailed assessment of station assets in FY21 followed by feedback and review from Commission members. While the assessment was fundamentally accepted by members in FY23, phase-in did not begin until FY24 when Stations BCCs were added to total BCC Obligations at an initial Normalized Replacement value of 33%. Stations BCCs will now provide funding for ongoing station capital costs and are expected to positively impact Amtrak and commuter passengers and improve station asset conditions. As a result of the continued phase-in of the new asset data and the adoption of Stations BCCs, the entire BCC-funded program for NEC infrastructure governed by the PRIIA Section 212 cost allocation policy increased from $190M in FY22 to $860M in FY24. Amtrak’s portion of the BCC-funded program grew to $658M in FY24, up from $544M in FY22. After contributing its own share to other NEC infrastructure owners, Amtrak will receive more than $172M in net funding from BCC Obligations in FY24. This funding supports Amtrak’s constant progress on Capital Renewal projects and programs that help ensure safe and reliable operations across all PRIIA 212 territory. For major infrastructure projects outside of the BCC-funded Capital Renewal program, Amtrak is expecting significant support through Federal-State Partnership (FSP) and other grant programs receiving an unprecedented funding infusion from the IIJA. In preparation for grant awards expected in FY24, Amtrak continues to work internally and with state/commuter partners to successfully reach funding agreements pursuant to the Project-Based Cost Allocation provisions in the NEC Cost Allocation Policy. Adherence to these provisions, including joint planning and development with state/commuter partners and submission of agreements to the NEC Commission where required, is helping Amtrak and its partners determine equitable local matches and make competitive applications to IIJA-funded grant programs. Anticipated funding will advance projects that dramatically improve SOGR, reliability, and overall service quality for Amtrak and commuter rail passengers.   

> The Cardinal at White Sulphur Springs.

Infrastructure Access Service Line  71 FY22-FY23 Federal-State Partnership for Intercity Passenger Rail Program (NEC) PROJECT PARTNER(S) AMTRAK LED? PHASE OF WORK PROJECT COST FY22-23 NEC FSP APPLICATION AMOUNT IIA CATEGORY 

INFRASTRUCTURE ASSET LINE 

Fredrick Douglass Tunnel Program MD DOT X Final Design / Construction $ 6,030,000,000 $ 4,710,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Susquehanna River Bridge MD DOT X Final Design / Construction $ 2,700,000,000 $ 2,089,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Bush River Bridge MD DOT X Planning / Preliminary Engineering / NEPA $ 744,000,000 $ 18,800,000 Backlog Replacement 

Gunpowder River Bridge MD DOT X Planning / Preliminary Engineering / NEPA $ 1,306,000,000 $ 30,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Walk Bridge CT DOT Construction $ 1,080,000,000 $ 465,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Connecticut River Bridge (NEC Spine) CT DOT Pre-Construction Activities / Final Design $ 1,276,000,000 $ 826,640,000 Backlog Replacement 

Connecticut River Bridge (Springfield Line ) CT DOT Study $ 5,000,000 $ 4,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Saugatuck River Bridge CT DOT PE / NEPA $ 580,000,000 $ 23,200,000 Backlog Replacement 

Devon Bridge CT DOT PE / NEPA $ 3,074,000,000 $ 245,900,000 Backlog Replacement 

Devon Bridge Interim Repairs CT DOT Design / Construction $ 157,000,000 $ 119,300,000 Backlog Replacement 

Cos Cob Bridge CT DOT PE / NEPA $ 2,674,000,000 $ 107,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

New Haven to Providence Capacity Planning Study CT DOT Study $ 5,000,000 $ 4,000,000 Improvement 

Pelham Bay Bridge MTA X Final Design $ 72,000,000 (Final Design)/ $ 716,000,000 (Final Design & Construction) $ 58,000,000 (Final Design) / $ 515,000,000 (Construction) Backlog Replacement 

Penn Station Access MTA Final Design / Construction $ 2,637,000,000 (Excludes catenary cost and costs incurred pre-Oct. 2021) $ 2,109,000,000 Improvement 

East River Tunnel Rehabilitation MTA, NJT X Construction $ 1,577,000,000 $ 1,262,000,000 Backlog Replacement 

Infrastructure Renewal and Speed Improvement Program 

MD DOT, VRE, SEPTA, DEl DOT, NJT X Planning Study $ 27,000,000 $ 21,000,000 Improvement 

New Haven Line Infrastructure Upgrade CT DOT Construction $ 30,000,000 $ 22,800,000 Improvement 

TIME Phase 5 CP 223-229 CT DOT PE / NEPA $ 114,400,000 $ 23,800,000 Improvement 

New Haven Line Power Improvements CT DOT Design / Construction $ 2,004,000,000 $ 136,000,000 Improvement 

TIME Phase 1- Devon Bridge area and CP 257-261 CT DOT Final Design / Construction $ 952,000,000 $ 647,400,000 Improvement 

Hartford Line Double Track Phase 3B CT DOT Final Design / Construction $ 220,000,000 $ 187,000,000 Improvement 

Track 3 Extension -Readville to Canton MBTA Final Design $ 13,700,000 $ 11,000,000 Improvement 

Hunter Flyover NJT Conceptual Design $ 14,000,000 $ 11,200,000 Improvement 

Delco Lead NJT Construction $ 456,750,000 $ 180,910,000 Improvement 

STATIONS ASSET LINE 

Baltimore Penn Station MD DOT X Construction $ 306,000,000 $ 201,000,000 Improvement 

Stamford Station Improvements CT DOT PE / NEPA $ 297,000,000 $ 91,500,000 Improvement 

NHL Station Platform Replacement Program ( New Haven Only ) CT DOT Design / NEPA / Construction $ 350,000,000 $ 28,000,000 Improvement 

Hartford Station Relocation CT DOT Planning Study $ 519,000,000 $ 2,500,000 Improvement 

Vertical Circulation at Newark Penn NJT Design $ 74,000,000 $ 59,200,000 Improvement 

Cornwells Heights Station SEPTA Final Design / Construction $ 61,000,000 $ 48,800,000 Improvement 72 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Primary Initiatives 

Advance the Gateway Program 

The Gateway Program is Amtrak’s highest infrastructure investment priority and the most urgently needed infrastructure program in America. Gateway will modernize and expand the busiest stretch of the Northeast Corridor—the ten miles between Newark, NJ, and Penn Station New York—through a series of phased investments to double capacity, allowing service increases for Amtrak and its commuter partner NJ TRANSIT. With billions of dollars in funding made possible by Congress through the IIJA, the Gateway Program is moving quickly from planning to delivery. With a supportive and fully engaged Federal partner, engaged local, state, and regional stakeholders, and a public mandate that supports investment in the Gateway Program, momentum continues to build as the start of construction nears. 

# Strategy 

IASL Strategies 

1.  Increase investment in shared-use infrastructure through discretionary grant opportunities established, enhanced and/or funded in the IIJA. 

2.  Increase productive utilization of Amtrak infrastructure where capacity exists. 

3.  Enhance utilization of data available for decision making. 

4.  Collaborate with partners in developing long-range infrastructure planning and construction strategies.  

> Currently under construction, completion of the New Portal North Bridge is targeted for 2027. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. Infrastructure Access Service Line 73

Upcoming Milestones 

The Gateway Program continues progress toward improving reliability, resiliency, and redundancy while creating new capacity for the NEC. The next five years will see crucial milestones in delivering these goals. Start of construction of Dock Bridge Rehabilitation is anticipated in late FY24. The project will repair structural steel and the in-river fender system and—with a permit from the U.S. Coast Guard— convert the moveable bridge span to fixed, improving reliability for Amtrak, NJ TRANSIT, and Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) trains. To provide value to the community and enhance presence along the Newark-Harrison waterfront in New Jersey, aesthetic lighting will be added to the bridge—a first-of-its-kind endeavor for Amtrak. 

The Harrison 4th Track is projected to begin construction in FY25. The project will add 10,000 additional feet of NEC track and 2,700 feet of new, shifted Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) track in Harrison, New Jersey. 

The Sawtooth Bridges Replacement project is expected to begin construction in FY26. This complex project will replace the existing, structurally deficient two-track bridges with new four-track structures. NJ TRANSIT, PATH, and Conrail all utilize the crossings underneath these bridges. HTP construction will continue on the New Jersey and New York sides of the Hudson River. Full project completion, inclusive of the construction of a new, two-track tunnel and a full rehabilitation of the existing North River Tunnels, is anticipated in 2038. During FY24, the Secaucus Capacity Expansion, Bergen Loops, and Portal South Bridge projects will be chartered at Amtrak for project development. Secaucus Capacity Expansion will connect the upper and lower levels of Secaucus Junction and expand station tracks and platforms to accommodate future growth. The Bergen Loops will enable a one-seat ride for customers on the MTA Metro-North Port Jervis and Pascack Valley lines and the NJ TRANSIT Main-Bergen line. Completion of Portal South Bridge, which will follow construction of Portal North Bridge, will provide a four-track alignment over the Hackensack River in New Jersey. Together with the project partners for the Gateway Program, continued engagement with key stakeholders including elected officials, local communities, and neighboring businesses is planned throughout the life of the Program and beyond. 

FY23 Milestones 

In FY23, the Gateway Program achieved numerous key milestones: The New Jersey TRANSIT (NJ TRANSIT)-led Portal North Bridge (PNB) project advanced past the 33% construction mark, as evidenced by progress visible to those traveling along the NEC. The target completion date remains 2027. 

The Hudson Tunnel Project (HTP) saw forward momentum transition to action: • President Joseph R. Biden visited New York City to announce a $292 million National Infrastructure Project Assistance (Mega) grant for the third phase of the Hudson Yards Concrete Casing (HYCC-3) on the west side of Manhattan to preserve the right-of-way for the new Gateway Hudson River Tunnel. • The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) approved HTP for entry into the Engineering Phase of the Capital Investment Grant (CIG) program, making the project eligible for up to $6.88 billion in grant funding through the CIG program. • Serving as the procuring entity on behalf of the Gateway Development Commission (GDC), Amtrak and GDC received bids for the crucial procurement of a Project Delivery Partner (PDP) for the HTP, with a contract award anticipated in early 2024. Amtrak has provided support across GDC’s HTP procurement packages; five out of nine contracts are in construction or procurement. • Construction on HYCC-3 and the Tonnelle Avenue Bridge and Utility Relocation Project in New Jersey began in November 2023. 

Critical Phase II projects of the Gateway Program projects achieved advanced design milestones, with Dock Bridge Rehabilitation and Harrison 4th Track projects receiving 90% design submittals. Preliminary Engineering of Penn Station Reconstruction 

commenced in June 2023. Project partners Amtrak, MTA, and NJ TRANSIT are advancing preliminary design with the selected design consortium. 

The Penn Station Expansion project has advanced to the 10% design threshold. Track alignments and station configurations to achieve a doubling of rail capacity for Trans-Hudson service, a key goal of the Gateway Program, are being identified. 

Primary Initiatives, continued 74 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Funding Commitments for the Frederick Douglass Tunnel 

Built in 1873, the Baltimore & Potomac (B&P) Tunnel is Amtrak’s oldest tunnel on its busiest corridor. One-third of Amtrak’s ticket revenue and two-thirds of Maryland Area Rail Commuter (MARC)’s ridership are attributable to trains traveling through the tunnel, which has no redundancy or alternate route and is critical to Amtrak and MARC operations. The existing tunnel suffers from excessive water infiltration, structural deterioration, and inadequate size to permit the addition of modern fire/life safety systems. Furthermore, it is the largest chokepoint on the NEC between Washington and New Jersey, with the NEC’s lowest speed restriction (30 mph) not within major station terminal areas, and frequent delays for the approximately 150 trains per day that rely on it. The Frederick Douglass Tunnel Program will modernize and transform a nearly four-mile section of the NEC. It includes two new tunnel tubes, new roadway and railroad bridges, new rail systems, track and railroad infrastructure, and a new ADA-accessible West Baltimore MARC Station. The new tunnel will enable speed increases to up to 100 mph and enhance ride quality, capacity, and reliability. The State of Maryland has agreed to replace its current diesel MARC trains with electrified trains to support operations through the new Frederick Douglass Tunnel, which will primarily serve electrified passenger trains. During FY23, Amtrak completed an early work project, which included replacing aging wooden ties with new concrete ties, installing new rail, and completing track drainage improvements on Track A between Halethorpe Station and West Baltimore. This initial project allowed for an increase and speed and reliability and will also directly reduce impacts during later construction phases. 

> Above: In June 2021, federal, state and local leaders highlighted the 150th anniversary of the Baltimore and Potomac (B&P) tunnel’s groundbreaking and unveiled new plans to advance the Frederick Douglass Tunnel Program. The initial implementation will include two new high-capacity tunnel tubes for electrified passenger trains but defer the construction of two additional tunnel tubes that could be designed to accommodate freight trains in the future.

Amtrak also awarded several contracts, including one of the three major construction contracts. In November 2023, the project received an 

FSP grant of up to $4.7 billion which, along with matching contributions from Amtrak and the State of Maryland, will fully fund the projected construction cost of approximately $6 billion. In February 2024, Amtrak awarded the contract to build the tunnel. Construction is projected to commence in 2026. 

Primary Initiatives, continued Infrastructure Access Service Line  75 

Phase 2 consists of the construction of a new two-track bridge located east of the newly constructed West Bridge (the “East Bridge”) and all associated work, including trackwork, retaining walls, interlocking work, catenary work, and the approach bridges. Amtrak, along with its commuter partner, the Maryland Department of Transportation/Maryland Transit Administration (MDOT/MTA) was selected for FSP funding of up to $2,081M that is estimated to cover 80% of the costs for project development, with Amtrak and MDOT/MTA providing matching funds. This grant award includes final design and construction. 

Funding Commitments for Bush River Bridge Replacement Project 

Completed in 1913, the half-mile-long Bush River Bridge connects Edgewood and Perryman, Maryland on the busiest segment for freight trains on the NEC and carries Amtrak, MARC, and Norfolk Southern freight trains. The current two-track operable bridge is of unique construction, as it is the only operable below deck counterweight type of Strauss bascule bridge on the NEC, and requires extensive ongoing maintenance, undermining service reliability. Amtrak is required to open the bridge twice a day during weekend and holiday daylight hours between May 1st and October 31st. The Bush River Bridge Replacement Project will replace the existing, century-old bridge with a new structure or structures, as well as enhancing the performance of the bridge approaches. The Project will upgrade signaling, interlocking and electric traction systems to improve safety and reliability and add capacity. Planning for the bridge will include consideration of options to construct a new bridge at a height that will allow boats to pass below without the need for bridge openings, which would further increase reliability and reduce disruptions for rail passengers while improving efficiency for operations. Amtrak submitted a successful joint appli-cation with MDOT/MTA for FSP funding of $18.8M that is estimated to cover 80% of the costs for project development, with a $4.7M (Amtrak $3.7M and MDOT/MTA $1.0M) non-federal commitment. This grant award includes project planning and conceptual engineering, preliminary engi-neering, and National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) studies.   

> An Acela train crosses over the Bush River Bridge in Maryland.

Funding Commitments for Susquehanna River Rail Bridge 

This 111-year-old, two-track bridge connects Havre de Grace and Perryville, MD, and is used by Amtrak, MARC and Norfolk Southern. As the longest moveable bridge on the NEC, it is a critical and fragile link that needs to be replaced with a new structure to maintain NEC rail services. The bridge’s functionally obsolete design and age require increasingly larger-scale rehabilitation and repairs which drive up maintenance costs and conflict with the need to maintain continuous rail operations. The replacement project will provide future improvements to capacity, trip time, and safety for commuter, freight, and intercity passenger rail services on the NEC, consistent with State and Amtrak plans, and could also improve the navigation channel for marine users. Environmental reviews for the Susquehanna Bridge Replacement Project were completed in 2017 and final design was begun. A two-phase approach is planned for construction. Phase 1 consists of the construction of a new two-track bridge located west of the existing Bridge (the “West Bridge”) and associated work, including five miles of new approach trackwork, undertrack bridges, retaining walls, interlocking work, relocation of existing utilities, civil work, and demolition of the existing Susquehanna River Rail Bridge. The new West Bridge will have a higher vertical clearance for marine traffic, eliminating freight and passenger train disruption due to bridge openings for marine traffic. The 60% Design Milestone was achieved in June 2023. The project team is working toward incorporating review comments while progressing the design toward the 90% Design Milestone which is expected in summer 2024. 

Primary Initiatives, continued 76 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Funding Commitments for Gunpowder River Bridge Replacement Project 

The Gunpowder River Bridge, approximately one mile long, carries Amtrak, MARC, and Norfolk Southern freight trains over a broad estuary connecting Chase and Joppatowne, Maryland. The bridge was completed in 1913 and many of its components have badly deteriorated, increasing maintenance costs for Amtrak. The current two-track bridge restricts NEC capacity. The Gunpowder River Bridge Replacement Project will replace the existing, century-old bridge with a new structure or structures, as well as enhancing the performance of the bridge approaches. Work will include upgrading signaling, interlocking and electric traction systems to improve safety and reliability, add capacity and allow for faster rail travel on this portion of the NEC. The Project will also benefit commuters traveling on MARC service. Amtrak submitted a successful joint application with MDOT/MTA for FSP Program funding of $30.0M that is estimated to cover 80% of the costs for project development with a $7.5M non-federal commitment ($5.9 M Amtrak and $1.6M MDOT/MTA $1.6M). The award, includes project planning and conceptual engineering, preliminary engineering and NEPA studies. 

Building Partnerships for Planning and Investment 

Over the next five years, Amtrak will maintain and build partnerships to improve planning and increase investment by: • Enhancing internal and external partnerships through the NEC Commission and bilateral efforts. • Ensuring costs and obligations are being paid by all partners. • Implementing new Station BCCs that were approved by the NEC Commission and in 2023 and will provide funding for normalized station replacement. • Aligning infrastructure investments with the NEC Commission’s plans and member contributions, and coordinating with partners in advancing long range investment planning strategies. • Continuing to seek additional funding via joint or sole application for various federal grant programs. • Working with FRA, the NEC Commission, commuter authorities and other stakeholders in developing and evolving the CONNECT NEC 2040 (C40) Plan to advance NEC FUTURE Record of Decision. • Continuing coordinated planning and project construction efforts with other users of the NEC to prioritize work, coordinate service impacts and schedule track outages in the near and long term. • Continuing to practice and implement cost control measures to manage project budgets. 

Work Planning 

Over the last several years, Amtrak instituted a Prioritization of Capital Projects process to seek collaborative input on the NEC capital project rankings for the upcoming fiscal year. Amtrak coordinates with state Departments of Transportation, commuter agencies, and various other third parties to obtain relevant information projects and the Amtrak resources they will require. In 2023, Amtrak evolved its project review process by instituting a Service Planning and Outages Roundtable (SPORT). We are targeting FY25 as the first capital program season for implementation of the SPORT process. The SPORT process extends the duration of capital planning and review to ensure that projects are thoroughly reviewed for practicability, workforce opportunities and constraints, operational conflicts, and alignment with Amtrak’s Pillars. The prioritization process provides accountability and transparency, increased engagement with partners, and better partner understanding of why some projects cannot be initiated. 

Primary Initiatives, continued Chicago Union Station Infrastructure Access Service Line  77 Risks and Challenges 

General 

Inadequate funding from the federal government and Amtrak’s commuter partners has historically been a significant issue. The NEC Commission estimates the NEC’s state of good repair backlog at $78.7 Billion. The passage of the IIJA will help address this funding shortfall. 

Climate change. Severe weather conditions, including hurricanes, floods, and other natural disasters, may cause service interruptions and result in revenue loss, increased costs, and liabilities, and require urgent repair work. 

Infrastructure Condition. Unplanned outages from infrastructure failures. 

Terrorism. Any terrorist attack, or other similar event, could cause significant interruption of service and adverse effects. 

Accidents. Accidents may cause significant interruption of service and result in loss of revenue, increased costs and liabilities, and other adverse effects. 

Resources. The IIJA will require an enormous increase in resources for staffing and training, and track outages to perform the work. 

Information Technology (IT) and Planning. IIJA funding also increases the need to link infrastructure investment priorities to goals and information about asset conditions and relationships to train delays, ridership, revenues, and partner satisfaction. 

Fraud. IIJA funding is a target for fraudulent criminal activity. Amtrak has implemented an Integrated Risk and Compliance Program to proactivity identify fraudulent activity. 

Human failure. 

Asset Condition and Capacity 

Deteriorating asset conditions and inadequate track, station and tunnel capacity threaten current performance and future growth. Many of the most critical Amtrak-owned NEC infrastructure assets—particularly New York Penn Station and the adjacent Hudson River Tunnels, and Washington Union Station—have grossly inadequate capacity to handle current levels of trains and passengers, let alone future growth. Amtrak’s premier National Network asset, Chicago Union Station (CUS), has also experienced large increases in passengers and commuter trains that have produced severe overcrowding. CUS requires substantial investment to increase station and track capacity and fulfill its potential to become a world-class transportation facility 

Available Funding 

While the enactment of the IIJA provides a historic level of funding that creates a unique opportunity for Amtrak and its partners to finally begin remediating the excessive backlog of needed investments, the level of funding provided by the IIJA is insufficient to meet all needs. Intercity passenger rail continues to be without a trust fund or other assured, long term federal funding source for investments like those provided for other transportation modes. Additional state/commuter agency funding beyond the BCCs is required to fully fund the non-federal share of normalized replacement costs of basic infrastructure and necessary infrastructure rehabilitation and improvement projects. Many commuter partners are continuing to experience reductions in ridership and ticket revenues due to the post-COVID-19 decrease in commuting to work that have constrained their financial resources. 78 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Managing Shared Assets 

Different services have different needs: • Commuter trains are slower and stop more frequently than intercity trains, making scheduling difficult. • Deadhead positioning moves of empty commuter trains and their need for midday storage at capacity-constrained terminals consume valuable capacity. • Major stations (e.g., Chicago Union Station) are primarily used by commuters. • Challenges in managing and reporting information in a useful format make it difficult to link capital planning with service goals. Many station assets are owned or controlled by others, and their owners may have broader interests than serving Amtrak (and in some cases commuter rail) passengers. A few examples: • Washington Union Station is owned by the U.S. Department of Transportation and managed by the Union Station Redevelopment Corporation (USRC). In addition to Amtrak, other users include MARC, Virginia Railway Express (VRE), Washington Area Metropolitan Transit Authority (WMATA) Metro passengers, public and private bus passengers, retail, and office space. • At Penn Station New York, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR), Amtrak, and NJ TRANSIT each control different areas, and some areas have shared control. While various users share control of the facility, Amtrak owns the station and facilities. • Shared use stations in New Jersey are owned by NJ TRANSIT, though Amtrak remains responsible for track maintenance and in some cases station platforms. 

Resource Availability, Including Track Time, and Trained Workforce 

• Hiring, training, and retaining a qualified workforce is an ongoing challenge that has become much greater due to the greatly increased work activity the IIJA will trigger and the difficulty all companies are having in finding workers, particularly those with specialized skills required for many Amtrak jobs. • Specialized equipment or materials can take a long lead time to procure, particularly during a time of supply chain disruptions. • Available time for infrastructure maintenance, renewal and improvement must be balanced against existing service needs. • Track time constraints must be balanced with other infrastructure projects, service needs, and broader priorities. 

# Conclusion 

The next five years will provide a long-sought opportunity for Amtrak and its partners to advance essential infrastructure projects to maintain current rail services and to make vital investments that ensure the long-term utility of the network. Strong partnerships among federal, state, and local stakeholders are crucial for meeting the significant challenges that accompany this opportunity and achieving success. While Amtrak will continue to face many challenges, the IIJA has launched a new era in investing in rail transportation. As a result, Amtrak and its partners are well positioned to carry out the vital initiatives included in Amtrak’s Five-Year Plan to replace and improve infrastructure on the NEC and elsewhere so that passenger rail in the United States can at last realize its full potential. 

Maintenance Windows and Service Curtailments 

While longer track outages requiring schedule changes and service curtailments allow railroad infrastructure work to be performed in a more timely and productive fashion that minimizes costs, the public, elected officials, and commuters have a limited appetite for delay or disruption. 

Governance 

• Intercity and commuter rail are governed by different statutory, regulatory, and funding schemes overseen by different federal agencies: the FRA and the FTA. • There is not a single process or point of contact at the federal level when projects involving multiple participants are proposed. This fragmented approach makes it challenging to implement jointly funded projects. • Conflicting regulations of different federal modal agencies relating to grant agreement (“flowdown”) provisions, Buy America requirements, environmental review of projects, the application to various participants of the costs and responsibility for complying with certain labor regulations, and disaster relief hamper funding and management of projects and impose unnecessary costs. 

Risks and Challenges, continued Infrastructure Access Service Line  79 Infrastructure Access Service Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) (17,583) - - - - - (17,583) Food and Beverage - - - - - - -Contractual Contribution (Operating) PRIIA 209 Operating Payments - - - - - - -PRIIA 212 Operating Payments 255,321 275,554 286,577 295,174 304,029 313,150 1,729,805 Commuter Operations - - - - - - -Reimbursable Contracts 3,129 3,291 3,438 3,591 3,751 3,919 21,120 Access Revenue 20,852 22,087 22,750 23,432 24,135 24,859 138,114 Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) - - - - - - -All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) - - - - - - -

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 261,718 300,933 312,764 322,197 331,916 341,928 1,871,456 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 122 123 33 3 3 7 291 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 89,609 89,837 82,611 80,428 80,243 80,854 503,582 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 22,694 170,666 135,489 187,450 212,005 183,936 912,239 Financing Proceeds Applied - - - - - - -Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 145,805 372,179 417,260 364,443 288,749 295,422 1,883,857 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 258,230 632,805 635,393 632,324 580,999 560,218 3,299,969 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 456,023 113,709 - - - - 569,732 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating 80,223 89,854 93,136 96,501 100,621 102,510 562,845 Capital 518,909 515,610 395,060 341,043 409,011 363,688 2,543,322 IIJA Supplemental 95,224 102,019 129,814 56,839 38,550 52,252 474,698 IIJA Discretionary 651,288 1,259,808 1,726,897 1,771,526 1,657,266 1,746,543 8,813,328 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 1,609 - - - - - 1,609 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 1,803,277 2,080,999 2,344,908 2,265,910 2,205,447 2,264,993 12,965,534 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 2,323,225 3,014,737 3,293,065 3,220,431 3,118,362 3,167,139 18,136,959 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 7,105 8,413 8,696 8,972 9,316 9,461 51,963 Transportation 79,725 92,962 96,116 99,212 103,036 104,710 575,760 Equipment 14,249 17,054 17,621 18,177 18,869 19,156 105,126 Infrastructure 164,735 191,262 197,773 204,165 212,052 215,533 1,185,520 Stations 78,775 91,972 95,090 98,150 101,931 103,581 569,499 National Assets and Corporate Services 220,611 258,196 266,934 275,506 286,108 290,710 1,598,065 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 565,200 659,860 682,230 704,181 731,312 743,151 4,085,934 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) (303,481) (358,927) (369,466) (381,984) (399,397) (401,223) (2,214,478) 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

1,758,025 2,354,877 2,610,835 2,516,250 2,387,049 2,423,988 14,051,025 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 5,419 2,104 2,433 1,174 836 140 12,107 Equipment 92,866 2,935 2,347 2,119 2,395 2,034 104,696 Infrastructure 1,643,660 2,147,562 2,105,673 1,748,685 1,361,274 1,331,563 10,338,417 Stations 172,821 411,372 716,581 981,923 1,252,156 1,312,602 4,847,454 National Assets and Corporate Services 66,518 58,818 58,972 66,674 68,005 75,203 394,190 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 1,981,284 2,622,792 2,886,006 2,800,574 2,684,666 2,721,542 15,696,863 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 1,981,284 2,622,792 2,886,006 2,800,574 2,684,666 2,721,542 15,696,863 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $(223,258) $(267,915) $(275,171) $(284,324) $(297,617) $(297,554) $(1,645,838) 80 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

TAL teams collaborate to ensure the safe and efficient implementation of strategies and initiatives, striving for optimal outcomes. Dedicated initiatives focus on enhancing safety, customer service, and productivity. A major initiative, known as Operations Transformation, is underway to revolutionize our operations. It involves shedding outdated practices and processes while fostering innovation in systems and workflows by placing data science, enterprise asset management principles, and employee engagement at the core of daily operations. The aim is to reengineer the activities of Amtrak’s Centralized National Operations Center (CNOC), with a strong focus on customer care, through improved planning, collaboration, and communication across all functions. At Amtrak, we uphold the principles of a "Just Culture" management approach. We encourage the reporting of human errors without fear of punitive measures. This approach is rooted in our commitment to learning from these errors and implementing preventive measures for the future. We pledge not to penalize self-reporting, and our responses are guided by fairness, appropriateness, and compliance with our values and the law. Every day, the traveling public entrusts us with their safety, and we are unwavering in our commitment to uphold the highest standards, never tolerating intentional disregard or reckless behavior that contravenes Amtrak’s policies and procedures. The Transportation Asset Line (TAL) encompasses a diverse range of assets vital for the efficient operation and movement of our trains, as well as the delivery of onboard services and amenities. These complex assets are effectively managed and operated by a dedicated workforce. This workforce serves as the execution arm of our service lines, working tirelessly to enhance safety, customer service, and productivity for our valued stakeholders and passengers. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Transportation Asset Line 08 Transportation Asset Line  81 Strategy 

Amtrak’s strategy development is guided by identifying challenges and risks and taking a focused approach to address them efficiently that aligns with our commitment to delivering safe, efficient, and customer-centric rail services. 

Staffing and Workforce Management 

Our strategy includes hiring and training initiatives to meet increased service levels, introduction of new Acela and Airo 

trainsets, and capital plans. Ensuring efficient staffing to avoid excessive overtime and balancing management and agreement headcount ratios are paramount, as is adapting to Amtrak’s new Paid Time Off (PTO) policies is essential. We will continue leveraging training programs to enhance safety and improve customer experiences, including management training for new leaders. 

Operational and Customer Focus 

We are prepared for shifts in operational requirements needed to support adaption to increased service demands, with a focus on network performance optimization. Severe weather resilience, fuel price sensitivity, and support for construction projects are integral to our strategy. Key goals include the following. • Execute the level of operations plan efficiently by analyzing and optimizing staffing of extra boards (employees who fill positions of absent employees) and total labor hours. • Elevate service standards to world-class levels through comprehensive customer service training and a mindset of continuous improvement and roll out ADA training for all customer-facing employees within the next two years. • Lead problem-solving efforts to achieve On-Time Performance (OTP) goals, focusing on key operational employees and addressing factors hindering achievement of OTP targets. • Enhance On-Board Service, including more frequent and consistent announcements, utilization of social media for communication, and effective use of the Centralized National Operations Center (CNOC) to interact with customers. • Reimagine CNOC to improve planning and incident response, foster collaboration, and remove inefficiencies. • Cultivate a culture of continuous improvement to empower our diverse workforce and drive Amtrak’s transformation into a learning organization, applying data-driven principles to fuel continuous progress. • Establish a 24/7 service disruption desk in the CNOC for prompt issue resolution. • Reengineer business processes with a focus on enterprise asset management principles to optimize the reliability of train operations and maintenance, especially in preparation for the transition to the new Airo trainsets. 

Financial Management 

Our strategy also focuses on financial management of the TAL. Actions to improve financial management include: • Implementing mitigation strategies and enhancing customer service to manage potential passenger inconvenience costs. • Focusing on expense management to meet and exceed the targets for OBS, Stations, and Food & Beverage (F&B). • Implementing improvements and exploring options related to the contract for F&B commissary services to optimize the financial performance of our F&B services. • Exploring opportunities to increase revenue by enhancing our menu offerings, adjusting menu prices, and F&B delivering to passengers at their seats. • Establishing new governance and organization change management frameworks to implement a portfolio of technology initiatives, addressing our technology deficit with state-of-the-art systems. 

Enhancing Safety 

Safety remains paramount, with initiatives to ensure workforce well-being and safety standards adherence. We continue to promote and integrate the concept of a “Just Culture” to create a learning organization, foster decision-making at lower levels, enhance accountability, and drive improvements in safety, customer service, and productivity. We will also complete the rollout of ‘Safety Starts with Me’ training for all managers in Transportation and the workers who deliver our service. 82 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Performance and Outlook 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal Customer On-Time Performance  74% 76% 

Employee FRA Incident Rate 2.70 2.43 

Fatalities (F) and Serious Injuries (SI) O F and 3 SI 0

Amtrak-Caused Delay (per 10k train miles) 431 427 

We are committed to a transformation of our operations over the next five years that advances safety, customer satisfaction, and operational efficiency. Our Operations Transformation initiative will be the driving force behind our realization of long-term efficiencies, and our culture of continuous improvement will empower our workforce to excel. Safety remains at the core of our mission, and we are determined to achieve world-class safety results. As the TAL continues to embrace new technologies, practices, and systems, we are poised to meet the evolving needs of our passengers and stakeholders. Our focus is on making rail travel safer, more efficient, and more delightful for everyone involved. Transportation Asset Line  83 Transportation Asset Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 36,981 37,212 38,481 39,737 41,135 42,963 236,509 Train and Engine Crew Labor 508,713 516,356 536,662 556,611 578,018 589,842 3,286,202 On Board Service Labor 205,705 205,701 213,507 221,157 229,698 234,131 1,309,899 T&E Overhead and Operations Management 136,897 136,066 140,690 145,458 150,876 155,466 865,452 Commissary Operations 159,436 161,507 167,811 173,937 180,583 184,001 1,027,276 Connecting Motor Coach 38,520 38,222 39,734 41,264 42,945 43,889 244,574 Host RR, MOW and Performance Incentives 155,936 158,648 165,083 171,405 178,098 181,677 1,010,846 Dispatching 71,156 79,675 82,729 85,666 88,893 90,407 498,525 Fuel and Power 261,927 274,777 285,371 295,699 306,997 312,788 1,737,560 Commissions 3,695 3,579 3,704 3,828 3,979 4,057 22,842 Passenger Inconvenience & Claims 28,366 28,672 29,797 30,903 32,103 32,750 182,591 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 1,607,331 1,640,414 1,703,569 1,765,666 1,833,323 1,871,972 10,422,275 

FINANCIAL USES (DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS) 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

Total Debt Service Payments - - - - - - -FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Technology & Systems 31,489 29,277 17,633 10,695 7,699 - 96,793 Facilities 13,007 16,209 28,083 18,673 12,588 1,028 89,588 Operations Equipment & All Other 6,389 21,038 12,942 10,592 10,592 10,592 72,145 

Capital Expenditures 50,885 66,524 58,658 39,960 30,880 11,620 258,526 Total Capital Uses 50,885 66,524 58,658 39,960 30,880 11,620 258,526 TOTAL TRANSPORTATION SPEND $1,658,216 $1,706,938 $1,762,228 $1,805,626 $1,864,203 $1,883,591 $10,680,802 84 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak’s Equipment Asset Line includes its fleet of passenger locomotives, railcars, and trainsets, as well as the facilities to maintain this fleet. This fleet, and accompanying facilities, are used to carry customers on the railroad’s three intercity rail passenger service lines: Northeast Corridor, State Supported, and Long Distance. The Equipment Asset Line Plan (EALP) supports the current and planned product mix and service structures of each of the service lines above. For example: 

The Northeast Corridor Service Line (NECSL). The NECSL’s plan to increase Acela 

capacity and service, and to provide an enhanced customer experience is supported by the forthcoming launch of next generation Acela trainsets and the Amtrak Airo procurement. 

The State Supported Service Line (SSSL). The SSSL plans to increase ridership and revenue and improve financial performance by developing new and expanding existing corridors, acquiring new fleet, and maximizing operational efficiencies to help contain costs funded by state partners. The Amtrak Airo procurement initiative is integral to all three goals. 

The Long Distance Service Line (LDSL). A key goal of the LDSL is acquiring new equipment that will improve operational and financial performance and enhance customer satisfaction, which is also a major strategic initiative for the Equipment Asset Line. The strategic initiative to refresh long-distance Superliner and Viewliner I equipment in this plan supports the LDSL’s goal of near-term product improvement. Equipment initiatives are managed with close coordination among teams. Mechanical work (from refresh through heavy overhauls and wreck repair) and the development of specifications for equipment acquisitions is managed by the Vice President and Chief Mechanical Officer. Fleet planning work, including route/service needs and fleet and repair facility sizing needs, are managed under Amtrak’s planning organization. New equipment acquisition initiatives, including Requests for Proposal (RFPs), Financial and Technical evaluation work, are conducted by a cross-functional team under the Vice President Chief Procurement and Supply Chain Officer. Implementation initiatives following contract award, as well as facilities construction initiatives, are led by the Capital Delivery team. 

Amtrak Fleet Facts 

# 2,075 Total Amtrak-Operated Units 24 Years Average age of an Amtrak-owned or leased railcar 330 Amtrak-Owned/Leased Locomotives 1,270 Amtrak-Owned/Leased Railcar Fleets 128 State-Owned Fleets Operated by Amtrak Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Equipment Asset Line 09 Equipment Asset Line  85 Delight Our Customers 

Improve Our Safety, Utility, Reliability, and Connectivity 

The Equipment Plan includes replacement of legacy equipment with new, more reliable equipment that incorporates modern safety features, allowing Amtrak to take advantage of nearly 50 years of design innovations in railcar safety. 

## Drive Transformation 

Invest in Modern, Smart Assets, and Technology 

The initiatives in this Equipment Plan represent a key component of Amtrak’s pivot from survival towards an aggressive program of building for the future. They will provide the additional capacity and modern customer amenities necessary for the significant expansion of Amtrak service contemplated by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA). The Equipment Plan also includes the construction and/or retrofit of maintenance facilities to support new maintenance practices that will improve the reliability and performance of Amtrak’s equipment fleet of the future. The new fleet and related facilities initiatives provide a pathway to equip future expansion services as they are identified and funded following the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) Corridor ID and Long Distance Route Study initiatives. Amtrak envisions a future with a greater emphasis on fleet diagnostic technologies to alert staff to mechanical faults before they become noticeable, scheduled maintenance in state-of-the-art maintenance facilities and greater ongoing vendor engagement across the lifespan of equipment through Technical Services and Spares Supply Agreements (TSSSAs). From a customer’s perspective, the new fleet will also incorporate new on-board technology such as enhanced electronic signage, lighting and connectivity; reflect 50 years of global best practices in intercity rail fleet utilization (such as push-pull equipment on corridor routes); and enable faster equipment turns to allow Amtrak to increase equipment utilization and service frequency. 

# Goals and Objectives 

Equipment Asset Line Plan (Equipment Plan) initiatives support Amtrak’s corporate-wide Strategic Initiatives and Key Actions: 

## Grow the Business 

Increase The Utilization and Capacity of Our Assets 

Amtrak’s goal of doubling ridership by FY40 (from 2019 levels) can only be accomplishedl through a comprehensive re-fleeting of Amtrak’s aged rolling stock and fleet expansion. Within the next decade, nearly all routes will benefit from new, modern equipment with up-to-date features to attract new riders. All of Amtrak’s new fleet procurements provide for increasing passenger capacity to accommodate new riders through base orders for larger train consists and/or, order options for more train consists, or both. Furthermore, the introduction of dual-power (diesel and electric) propulsion and double-ended consists on Northeast Regional, Empire Service and other routes will allow Amtrak to operate more trips each year with a given number of trainsets than it can today. Specific examples of fleet procurements positioning Amtrak for growth include: • The high-speed Acela trainsets Amtrak is acquiring increase both fleet size and same-train capacity, producing a 78 percent increase in Acela seats. This capacity increase can be further leveraged through more aggressive equipment utilization. • The Amtrak Airo procurement for 83 trainsets to replace the Amfleet I and Talgo fleets has up to 130 options available for further fleet expansion to increase short distance corridor services. • The Long Distance procurement, currently underway, will take forecast organic increases in same-route ridership into account for sizing proposed train consists. While specific base order and options quantities have not yet been finalized, the procurement will be cognizant of the potential for additional Long Distance routes as a result of the FRA’s currently underway study of Long Distance Service Expansion, should necessary funding be provided. In order to increase near-term capacity, we are also restoring to our active fleet many cars that require major repairs or overhauls, including 63 Long Distance cars. 86 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Fleet Type Ownership Status Active Fleet Avg. Yr. Built Avg. Unit Age (Yrs) Notes Amtrak-Owned/Leased Locomotive Fleets Siemens ALC-42 Amtrak 45 2021 2

GE P42-8 Diesel Amtrak 168 1998 25 

GE P32-8 Diesel Amtrak 16 1991 32 

P32ACDM Dual Mode Amtrak 18 1996 27 

GE P40-8 Diesel Amtrak 11 1993 30 

Siemens ACS-64 Amtrak 66 2015 8

Bombardier/Alstom HHP-8 Amtrak 6 2000 23 In reserve status. 

Amtrak-Owned/Leased Railcar Fleets Heritage Amtrak 2 1952 72 

Amfleet I Amtrak 445 1976 47 

Amfleet II Amtrak 135 1982 41 

Horizon Amtrak 56 1989 34 

Superliner I 35 leased, 182 owned 217 1980 43 As of October 2023, 35 units remain under lease; remaining Superliners are owned. 

Superliner II Amtrak 163 1995 28 

Viewliner I Amtrak 35 1996 27 Includes prototype diner. 

Viewliner II Amtrak 108 2017 6

NPCU (former F40PH) Amtrak 13 1977 46 F40PH locomotives built 1977 and rebuilt into NPCUs. 

Single Level Cab Control Car Amtrak 19 1969 54 Includes 4 cab/baggage units (NPCU)(California Service) and 15 ex-Metroliner cab control coaches 

Auto Carrier Amtrak 77 2005 18 

Trainset Fleet Owned/Leased by Amtrak First-Gen Acela 2 sets leased, 14 owned 128 1999 24 Does not include Acela Inspection Car (non-passenger equipment). 

Next-Gen Acela Amtrak 0 2021 2 First trainsets undergoing testing, not yet active for revenue service. 

State-Owned Fleets Operated by Amtrak California Cars California 91 1996 27 Most cars are California I built in 1996, also includes Comets (1968) and California II (2002). 

Talgo Oregon 26 2013 10 Active trainsets are Oregon DOT-owned. 

Oregon NPCU Units Oregon 2 1977 47 Subfleet of Amtrak NPCU fleet with an average build date as F40PHs in 1977. 

NCDOT Railcar North Carolina 20 1961 62 

NCDOT F59/F59PHI North Carolina 13 1991 32 

F59PHI / P32-8 (Caltrans) California 13 1996 27 

Venture Cars IDOT, California 71 2020 3

Siemens SC-44 Charger WSDOT, IDOT, California, Maryland 62 2017 6 Of 62 total units, 8 are owned by WA, 20 owned by CA, 31 owned by IDOT. 

Trainset and Railcar Fleets With Ownership Split Between Amtrak and State Partners at the Unit Level Surfliner Amtrak, California 49 2000 23 Amtrak owns 39 units, California owns 10 units. 

Unit Summary # Units Avg. Age 

Total Amtrak-Operated Units: 2,075 24 years 

Amtrak-Owned/Leased Locomotives: 330 19.1 years 

Amtrak-Owned/Leased Railcar Fleets: 1,270 36.2 years 

State-Owned Fleets Operated By Amtrak: 128 23.8 years 

Amtrak Owned/Leased Trainset Fleet Owned/Leased By Amtrak: 298 18.1 years 

State Or Split-Ownership Fleets: 49 22.8 years 

Amtrak's Active Fleet of Operated Passenger Equipment, Start of FY24 

October 1, 2023. Active counts based on October 2023 query of Amtrak's Operations Maintenance Systems (OMS). 

These figures do not include non-revenue company service/inspection cars. Additional detail is provided in the Equipment appendices. Equipment Asset Line  87 

## Amtrak’s Mechanical Facilities and Capabilities 

Facilities 

Amtrak maintains the facilities that provide various levels of car, locomotive, and trainset maintenance on a national basis, and manages a maintenance program that includes facilities operated by contractors or owned by state partners. Work ranges from simple overnight or midday turnaround of equipment between trips to restoration of wreck-damaged equipment and heavy overhauls on equipment that is no longer supported by the original manufacturer. 

High Speed Train Facilities. 

All maintenance for high-speed Acela 

trainsets takes place at three purpose-built facilities in Boston, New York, and Washington. 

Backshops . Three major backshops maintain conventional equipment: Wilmington, Delaware (specializing in locomotives), Bear, Delaware (specializing in Amfleet I equipment) and Beech Grove, Indiana (specializing in equipment which operates predominantly outside the Northeast). The Beech Grove and Bear shops perform restorations of damaged equipment that is deemed economically repairable and convert equipment from one configuration to another as business needs evolve. Restoration of wreck-damaged equipment is critical to the continuation of current Amtrak service levels, since replacements of the specific types of custom-built equipment used in Amtrak’s legacy fleets are usually unobtainable. Specific quantities of cars and locomotives to be repaired each year fluctuate depending upon funding, the number of restorable equipment units, and the widely varying scope of work necessary to rebuild each one. Other programmed mechanical work and repairs take place in over a dozen other facilities located throughout the country, while servicing work between trips is performed at approximately three dozen field locations where trains terminate (or, for Long Distance trains, where they reach a mileage limit for federally-required inspections); this work is sometimes performed by contractors at small route endpoint locations. Please refer to the Equipment appendices for tables which provide information on all Amtrak mechanical facility locations and the work performed at each. 88 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Maintenance Capabilities 

Turnaround and Layover Servicing 

The most basic type of train maintenance is turnaround and layover servicing. Typical servicing tasks include daily federally mandated inspections of equipment; emptying sanitary waste tanks; refueling; restocking paper goods and other consumables; and rectifying minor mechanical issues that may develop over the course of a train’s daily operation (minor bad order repairs). More extensive repairs can typically be carried out at the larger turnaround end point facilities (of which most routes have one) although such extensive repairs currently often require equipment to be taken out of service for several days. 

Preventive, Continuous, and Overhaul Maintenance 

Every piece of equipment in revenue service is maintained on an inspection schedule to address regulatory requirements and mechanical issues. In the case of most legacy equipment, this type of work is performed during Preventative Maintenance and Overhaul cycles. For Acela , the ACS-64 electric locomotive fleet, Amtrak Cascades service (legacy equipment), and new equipment procurements such as Amtrak Airo trainsets, a Continuous Maintenance approach is (or will be) used. 

Preventive Maintenance (PM). Equipment is taken out of service and deadheaded to a facility for maintenance work every 92 to 184 days, with work typically taking several days to a week to complete. Tasks during a periodic inspection include a deeper cleaning of equipment than is typical for revenue service, repair of critical and non-critical issues that may require additional tools or staff time/ expertise to rectify, application of small-scale modifications to equipment, and mandatory periodic regulatory inspections. 

Continuous Maintenance (CM) and Life Cycle Preventive Maintenance (LCPM). 

CM spreads the traditional PM tasks into bi-weekly blocks which results in more frequent “touch times” with the equipment and reduces the duration of time the equipment is in non-revenue status between operations to hours instead of days. Required work can often be performed overnight or otherwise in between revenue trips, thus potentially increasing fleet availability for revenue service. This maintenance approach is paired with vendor support through a Technical Support and Spares Supply Agreement (TSSSA) to further increase equipment reliability and availability. LCPM, which follows a similar approach, has already been implemented for the existing P-42 diesel locomotive fleet. Rather than performing all heavy maintenance work on a locomotive, railcar, or trainset in an extended outage once every four years, LCPM evaluates and replaces components individually on rotating schedules aligned with periodic inspections or other maintenance periods to better match the replacement cycles of individual parts based on failure rate experience or Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) recommendations. Amtrak has committed to this maintenance approach with the ACS-64 locomotives now entering service and will implement similar programs with new equipment including Acela high speed trainsets, Amtrak Airo trainsets, and the new Long Distance equipment as they enter service. 

Overhauls 

Overhauls are the centerpiece of the heavy mechanical work program for Amtrak’s existing fleet. Regulatory required mechanical tasks are assigned one of three levels during the overhaul cycle (see sidebar at right for details). 

> At right: E-leather seats like the one on the left replaced the original cloth seats (on the right) during a Amfleet I Level II Overhaul in 2017.

Amtrak’s Overhaul Cycle Level I 

Every 4 Years 

The lightest overhaul includes complete rebuilding of trucks, HVAC units, brake valves, door operators and system critical components as well as heavy cleaning of carpeted surfaces and seat cushion replacement. 

# Level II 

Every 8 Years 

A Level I overhaul plus a complete replacement of all major components such as seats, diaphragms, windows and 480V trainline cabling. 

# Level III 

As Needed 

A Level II overhaul plus a complete interior upgrade or reconfiguration, including bathroom modules and any required modifications. 

Amtrak's Mechanical Facilities and Capabilities, continued Above: A shortage of diesels lead to AMTK 702 (P32AC-DM) being sent out on an unusual assignment —leading the Amtrak Lake Shore Limited to Boston, Massachusetts. Normally these dual mode engines can only be seen on New York State supported trains or the New York Penn leg of the Lake Shore Limited .Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. Equipment Asset Line  89 

# Outlook 

## Planned Enhancements 

Since FY18, Amtrak has “refreshed” approximately 1,000 Amfleet I, Amfleet II, ex-Metroliner, Horizon and Superliner railcars, including railcars within 20 legacy Acela trainsets. The refresh of the Amtrak Superliner fleet is ongoing; refreshed elements include new seat cushions, new carpets, restroom air fresheners, and other soft goods changes. These enhancements improve customer experience on Amtrak’s aging equipment as we bridge the gap to a full fleet replacement. Furthermore, while not a customer amenity enhancement, Amtrak is currently testing the feasibility of retrofitting HHP-8 electric locomotives as cab control cars, enabling push-pull operation with legacy fleets even in the Northeast Corridor (NEC), where previous generations of non-powered control units cannot operate due to clearance limitations. This retrofit will enhance Amtrak’s ability to turn equipment quickly, operating additional routes in push-pull configuration, which will enhance frequencies and increase customer choices in departure times on busy corridor routes. 

## New Product Launches 

Historically, most railcars operating in North America have a useful commercial life of approximately 30 years, and locomotives remain in service for 20 to 25 years. Globally, most high-speed trainsets are replaced on a shorter interval than Amtrak equipment has been (for example every 20 years). The key factors that limit useful commercial life of train equipment include the following: 

Maintainability. Cost of routine maintenance on equipment— which rises over time, due to wear and component obsolescence. 

Availability. Quantities and types of cars required to meet evolving service needs. 

Technical Capability. Ability to meet service requirements. 

Customer Acceptance. Appeal of the equipment to passengers. 

Capital Availability. Ability to fund fleet replacements, which may not exist when the outermost limit of useful or commercial life is reached. Amtrak’s fleet generally consists of custom-built equipment nearing the end of its useful service life, much of which was built by manufacturers who are no longer in business. To address this issue, Amtrak has embarked on a comprehensive, multiyear strategy of initiatives to modernize its locomotive and passenger car roster. Amtrak has placed orders for at least 111 new Acela 

and Amtrak Airo trainsets and 125 ALC-42 diesel locomotives, all to be manufactured in the United States, and has recently issued an RFP for new Long Distance equipment. Our contracts with the manufacturers include options to purchase up to an additional 130 additional Amtrak Airo trainsets and up to 50 more ALC-42s. Renewal of Long Distance locomotive and railcar fleets will allow Amtrak to provide a more modern, efficient rail service across its Long Distance network, which serves the majority of rural and underserved communities on its system and will allow Amtrak to operate a uniformly modern and efficient fleet of equipment nationwide. We also plan to assess and modify our mix of capabilities at shops and terminals to support the new trainsets on order and dispose of aged equipment to fundamentally improve overall efficiency, quality, reliability, and availability of our rolling stock. These acquisitions will materially reduce the average age of Amtrak’s fleet. Amtrak’s fleet initiatives present several excellent opportunities for effective uses of IIJA funding. Our plan is an ambitious one, requiring the execution of several major equipment acquisition programs in relatively quick succession. However, the benefits of such a program will be enormous. 90 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Amtrak Re-Fleeting Initiatives 

Re-fleeting General Electric P-40/P-42 Diesel-Electric Locomotives 

In late 2018, Amtrak placed an initial order for 75 diesel-electric locomotives from Siemens. Dubbed the ALC-42 (for Amtrak Long Distance Charger, 4,200 horsepower), this base order of 75 units has begun replacing General Electric P-40/P-42 diesels used in long-distance service. The P-40 and P-42 locomotives, which have been in service since the 1990s, are nearing the end of their useful lives. In 2022, Amtrak exercised options for 50 additional ALC-42’s that will complete the replacement of P-40/P-42 motive power on Amtrak’s Long Distance network. The new ALC-42 locomotives commenced revenue service in early 2022. The 75th unit is scheduled to enter service by early 2025 and the 125th unit in 2029. The total order cost is $1.7 billion, which includes the purchase price, warranty, technical support, and spare parts through a multi-year TSSSA. Funding for this order comes from a combination of Amtrak’s cash reserves, IIJA funding, and Amtrak’s National Network grant. Amtrak P-42s in shorter-distance service have either been replaced by state-owned SC-44 Charger locomotives in Amtrak Midwest service or will be displaced by the Amtrak Airo trainsets. Therefore, we anticipate the complete retirement of the P-40/P-42 fleet within the current decade. The ALC-42 represents a significant generational advancement over current power. Its benefits include: 

Better Performance. The ALC-42 operates at speeds up to 125 MPH (15 MPH faster than the P-42) and accelerates 30 percent faster. While both unit types are rated at 4,200 horsepower, the ALC-42 generates head-end power (HEP) for onboard lights, climate control and appliances more efficiently via inverters. This allows an ALC-42 locomotive to provide HEP to more passenger cars than the current P-42, which could facilitate operation of additional cars on 

Auto Train to increase capacity and revenues. The ALC-42’s 2,200 gallon fuel tanks give it greater range than P-40s/P-42s and the state-owned SC-44 Chargers that operate on many State Supported routes. 

Environmental Benefits. The ALC-42s will meet EPA Tier IV standards for emissions, with reductions of up to 90 percent in various emission types versus the Tier 0 P-42 units they replace. The units will be approximately 10 percent more fuel efficient, helping Amtrak reduce its carbon footprint. The new units are also significantly quieter than the locomotives they replace. 

Safety and Reliability Benefits. The ALC-42 features several reliability improvements over the P-42. Scheduled maintenance will be required only twice rather than four times per year, reducing the time units are out of service. The ALC-42s will feature onboard diagnostics which will allow both Amtrak’s mechanical team and Siemens technical staff to monitor and diagnose unit conditions in real time. The ALC-42’s TSSSA provides stiff penalties for Siemens if the new units do not achieve significant reductions in both the frequency of enroute failures and the time necessary to receive spare parts. The ALC-42s also contain several enhancements over the earlier SC-44 Charger locomotives, including enhanced winterization/ weatherproofing and a bolt-on nose cone for easy replacement in the event of a grade crossing collision. All units come equipped with Positive Train Control equipment. The first units are already in service on the Empire Builder, City of New Orleans, Capitol Limited 

and other Long Distance routes, and we continue to work with the vendor on improving reliability using “lessons learned” from initial months of operation.  

> An ALC-42 Charger locomotive sports the bold, new Phase VII livery designed to reflect the advancements and investments being made at Amtrak. Equipment Asset Line 91

Re-Fleeting Acela Trainsets 

In 2016, Amtrak ordered 28 next-generation high-speed trainsets to modernize Acela service on the Northeast Corridor (NEC). These new trainsets will replace 20 first-generation Acela trainsets built in the late 1990s. The new trainsets are being built by Alstom, which has built many of the latest-generation European high-speed trainsets at its plant in Hornell, New York. The new Acela fleet will re-equip the entirety of the NEC’s premium Acela service. The Acela fleet size will increase by 40% (28 trainsets compared to 20 legacy sets—16 of which are still in active status) and total seating capacity by 77%, with each of the 28 sets having 386 seats, versus the current 304. 

The additional trainsets will allow Amtrak to increase its Acela service, making possible hourly service between New York and Boston, and service every thirty minutes between New York and Washington during peak travel hours. By leveraging a TSSSA to ensure reliable maintenance and parts availability, the new Acela trainsets will meet the high customer expectations for Amtrak’s premium service in both the near future and throughout their anticipated 30-year service life. The new trainsets are primarily funded through a $2.45 billion Railroad Rehabilitation and Investment Financing (RRIF) loan from the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) that will be repaid using revenues generated through increased Acela ridership and ticket sales. Additional new features on these trainsets include USB ports, outlets and lights in the seats, and an increased focus on sustainability via use of materials like e-leather and reduced packaging. The new trainsets will operate at speeds of up to 160 miles per hour on upgraded sections of the NEC as track projects are completed and are capable of operating at higher speeds if further NEC infrastructure upgrades are made. Introduction of the new Acela trainsets has been delayed since early 2023 due to Alstom’s inability to satisfactorily complete computer modeling required to receive the FRA’s approval to conduct qualification testing on the NEC. FRA approval has recently been obtained, allowing qualification testing to commence. Launch of revenue service, which will begin after completion of testing and validation, commissioning activities, and training on the equipment for employees, is anticipated during CY24.  

> Amtrak’s next-generation Acela . Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman.

Amtrak Re-Fleeting Initiatives, continued 92 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Re-Fleeting Amfleet I 

In July 2021, as part of a $7.3 billion program, Amtrak signed a contract with Siemens Mobility for new multi-powered 

Amtrak Airo trainsets to replace aging equipment and provide a platform to equip future growth on corridor routes. The base order for 83 trainsets (each including a locomotive and six or eight passenger cars) is intended to replace Amtrak’s aged fleet of 445 Amfleet I railcars built in the 1970s and 15 ex-Metroliner railcars built in the 1960s, as well as Talgo and Horizon equipment used on Amtrak Cascades. The contract for new Airo 

trainsets provides pricing for up to 130 options for additional trainsets which allow Amtrak to equip future corridor service growth, including the implementation of the Corridor ID corridor vision strategy. Amtrak plans to use IIJA funding for the base order and possibly for exercise of future options. The contract with Siemens also includes a 23-year TSSSA for technical support and spare parts. Amtrak will construct new or retrofit existing maintenance facilities to enable the trainsets to be maintained in accord with twenty-first century best practices. All trainsets will include a Charger locomotive on one end of the consist and a cab-control passenger car on the opposite end. The base order trainsets will be built in four configurations—B-1, B-2, C, and D—each tailored to the capacity and propulsion needs of the routes over which they will operate. 

Configuration B-1. Twenty-six catenary-diesel dual-power trainsets, consisting of an ALC-42E locomotive and six passenger cars, for use on the Downeaster, Vermonter, Pennsylvanian, Palmetto, Carolinian and Keystone Service. The passenger car closest to the locomotive will be an Auxiliary Power Vehicle (APV) containing a pantograph, transformer cabinet, and supplemental powered trucks for use in electrified territory; power drawn from the APV will also be fed to the traction motors in the locomotive to ensure sufficient acceleration when operating on the Northeast Corridor (NEC). 

Configuration B-2. Thirty-two catenary-diesel dual-power trainsets (with a short-term option to acquire eight more), consisting of an ALC-42E locomotive and eight passenger cars, for use on Northeast Regional including through trains to Virginia and Springfield, Massachusetts. These trainsets will also include an APV for use on the NEC. 

Configuration C. Seventeen battery-diesel hybrid trainsets (with a short-term option to acquire two more), consisting of an ALC-42E locomotive and six passenger cars, for use on the Empire Service, Ethan Allen Express, Adirondack, and Maple Leaf. The passenger car closest to the locomotive will contain a battery which will supply electricity to the locomotive for power when operating around New York Penn Station, eliminating the need for third rail propulsion. These trainsets represent the first time that battery propulsion will be used for intercity service. 

Configuration D. Eight diesel trainsets, consisting of either an ALC-42E or Washington DOT (WSDOT)-owned SC-44 Charger locomotive and six passenger cars, for use on all Amtrak Cascades trains. Amtrak’s trainset project team is currently working with Siemens on the testing, inspection, and manufacturing ramp up now that final designs have been completed ahead of schedule. Additional trainset renderings, branding and other public announcements will be released as this work is completed and the project transitions to construction. The first Amtrak Airo Trainsets are currently forecast to enter service on Amtrak Cascades in 2026, with all 83 trainsets currently on order in service by the end of 2031. As part of the implementation of the new fleet, Amtrak has begun the process of upgrading its maintenance facilities in preparation for bringing the Amtrak Airo 

trainsets into revenue service.    

> A rendering of the new Amtrak Airo trainset.

Amtrak Re-Fleeting Initiatives, continued Equipment Asset Line  93 

Facility Upgrades to Support Amtrak Airo 

Approximately $2 billion of the $7.3 billion Amtrak Airo Trainset program is allocated to upgrade Amtrak facilities in the major Northeast and Northwest terminals which will handle the new trainsets, as well as make improvements to rail yard and turnaround facilities at outlying points. Major maintenance facilities at Boston-Southampton Street, New York-Sunnyside, Washington-Ivy City, Albany-Rensselaer, and the Seattle coach yard are all planned for upgrades to handle the new Amtrak Airo trainsets and are currently either undergoing alternatives analysis or design work. These facilities will include Maintenance & Inspection (M&I) tracks which will provide all the capabilities of current Service & Inspection (S&I) tracks, plus additional servicing and cleaning capabilities. They will also perform five-day brake inspections in compliance with FRA regulations. Outlying terminals in Harrisburg, Pittsburgh, Savannah, Charlotte, Newport News, Norfolk, Roanoke and/ or New River Valley, Richmond, Springfield (MA), Brunswick, Burlington (VT), Niagara Falls (NY), Portland (OR) and Eugene will also be improved as necessary to support overnight servicing of the new trainsets. Outlying facility improvements will enable the addition of Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) resupply to the current overnight servicing processes of inspections, cleaning, re-watering, refueling, and waste retention tank servicing. Larger facilities will receive dedicated Servicing & Cleaning (S&C) tracks to expedite the overnight train turnaround process when equipment does not need to access Maintenance and Inspection (M&I) buildings; some facilities will include pit tracks where necessary to meet FRA mandated pit inspection intervals. Trainset facility construction will continue throughout the late 2020s, with new facilities coming online in tandem with the deliveries of trainsets. 

Spacious, Comfortable, Enhanced Seating 

• Dedicated power, USB-C ports, seatback tablet and phone holders • Bigger and sturdier tray tables and adjustable cup holders • Contoured seat cushions, enhanced leg room, individual arm rest • Adjustable headrests with a focus on ergonomics • Enhanced lighting provides a softer yet functional interior with individual reading lights at each seat 

• Business Class Seating Upgrades additionally include increased space between customers, offering double and single seats, wider arm rests, additional outlets, footrests and improved ambiance. 

Greener Impact 

• More fuel efficient, producing 90% less particulate emissions in diesel operations. • Dedicated water stations on each trainset, providing chilled and filtered hydration, while reducing the need for disposable plastic bottles .

Elevating the Customer Journey on the Amtrak Airo 

Enhanced Accessibility 

• Spacious and accessible restrooms, vestibules and Café cars with integrated boarding equipment for customers with reduced mobility. • Inductive hearing technology to assist with onboard announcements. 

Additional Features: 

Café Car. Contemporary food service allows for a grab-and-go experience. 

Trip and Train Navigation. Bolder, color-coded signage to identify amenities and differentiate classes of service, both on board and on the platform. 

Modern Tech. New 5G Wi-Fi and digital information systems. 

Restrooms. Touchless controls with spacious, accessible interiors. 

Luggage. Access to ample storage space for baggage. 

Amtrak Re-Fleeting Initiatives, continued 94 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Re-Fleeting Long Distance Equipment 

On December 22, 2023, Amtrak issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to rail rolling stock manufacturers for new Long Distance equipment. This RFP release comes approximately one year after a Request for Information (RFI) was released to the industry, and following months of customer surveys, focus groups and other market research to determine specifications for the new equipment. Amtrak’s Long Distance active railcar fleet as of October 2023, consists of 658 units: • 217 Superliner I railcars, built by Pullman-Standard between 1979–1981; • 135 Amfleet II railcars, built by Budd between 1981–1983; • 163 Superliner II railcars, built by Bombardier between 1993–1996; • 35 Viewliner I railcars, built by Morrison-Knudsen in 1995 and 1996; and • 108 Viewliner II railcars, built by CAF (Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles) USA and delivered to Amtrak between 2014–2021. Except for the Viewliner IIs, all Amtrak’s Long Distance railcars are over 25 years old. Over half of the fleet has approximately four decades in Amtrak service, and nearly 60 percent was built by manufacturers who are no longer in the passenger rail industry. The fleet is well-worn from a usage perspective as well: The oldest Superliner I railcars have traveled approximately nine million miles in Amtrak service. This aged fleet hinders Amtrak’s ability to satisfy customers today, a problem which will only get worse with time. While the re-fleeting of Amtrak’s Long Distance network is a major priority and an excellent use of IIJA funding, a new railcar order of this magnitude for unique equipment could not occur overnight. Significant customer and marketplace research has been necessary for this once-in-a-generation procurement. The bilevel Superliner fleet’s original design roots trace back to the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railway’s Hi-Level railcar design from the 1950s, while single level Amfleet II is based upon the design of the original 

Metroliner railcars of the 1960s. The new fleet must reflect the major changes in customer preferences and rolling stock design over the past six to seven decades. While specific delivery timelines for new equipment will be negotiated with the vendor, new railcars generally require about five or more years from the time of contract award until the first new unit enters service, and deliveries of hundreds of railcars from an order usually take place over the span of three to five years. Therefore, Amtrak anticipates that the bulk of Long Distance railcars to be received through the underway procurement will enter service in the early 2030s. 

Amtrak Re-Fleeting Initiatives, continued Equipment Asset Line  95 

New Siemens Venture Railcars for Amtrak Midwest and California Routes 

Utilizing a federal grant, Amtrak’s state partners are acquiring 137 Siemens Venture railcars that will replace most of the equipment on Amtrak Midwest State Supported routes and the San Joaquins .This fleet will be owned by the states and operated by Amtrak. California is acquiring seven 7-car semi-permanently coupled trainsets for the San Joaquins. Michigan, Illinois, and Missouri are acquiring 20 coaches, 17 married pairs of cars consisting of a coach and food service car, and 17 married pairs of cars consisting of a coach and business class car. In addition, Wisconsin has received a separate Federal discretionary grant for nine additional railcars, including three cab control coaches, which are being acquired through a separate procurement. The first Venture cars entered Amtrak Midwest service in February 2022; the first California trainset operated in San Joaquin service in December 2023. Remaining deliveries are anticipated to take place over the next two years. The Venture railcars will displace older equipment currently operating in Midwest corridor service, including most of Amtrak’s Horizon fleet. The Horizon fleet, built around 1990, can then be re-used for the launch of new state corridor services, including routes in the Corridor ID vision, until those cars are replaced in the early-mid 2030s by additional 

Amtrak Airo trainsets beyond the initial 83 trainset base order. In California, the new Venture cars will replace state-owned bi-level California cars, which the state could shift to its other State Supported routes; the California Venture trainsets can also displace the state-owned Comet railcars built in the 1960s. 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal Fleet Mean Distance Between Service Interruptions (MDBSI) -Passenger Car 

242,596 247,300 

Fleet Availability -Passenger Car 84% 85% 

California Procurement of Stadler FLIRT Zero Emissions Equipment 

In addition to the Venture trainsets, our California state partner and Stadler have announced a procurement for up to 29 hydrogen-powered Zero Emissions Multiple Unit (ZEMU) trainsets for use on intercity and commuter services throughout the state. These trainsets, based on the Stadler FLIRT product line, will provide equipment that can operate intercity feeder services to future California High-Speed Rail (CAHSR) electrified service, as well as a mix of commuter and new intercity services throughout the state. Amtrak plans to collaborate with California going forward to determine the best deployment strategy by route for this equipment, as well as existing California Cars that will not yet have reached end-of-life when new equipment is delivered. 

## Amtrak State Partners Re-Fleeting Initiatives   

> Settling in to work in a Venture car on the Hiawatha line.

96 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak Refleeting By Route: Five-Year and Ten-Year Outlook Route FY 2024 Equipment FY 2029 Forecast FY 2034 Forecast 

NORTHEAST CORRIDOR SERVICE LINE 

Acela Acela First Generation Trainsets Acela Next Generation Trainsets Acela Next Generation Trainsets 

Northeast Regional Amfleet I + ACS64 Amtrak Airo Trainsets Amtrak Airo Trainsets 

VA Service, MA/CT Thru Trains 

Amfleet I + P42 Transition from FY23 Equipment to Amtrak Airo Trainsets Amtrak Airo Trainsets 

Vermonter Downeaster Empire Service Ethan Allen Express Carolinian Keystone Service Amfleet I + ACS64 

Maple Leaf 

Amfleet I + Amfleet II + P-42/P32ACDM 

Pennsylvanian Adirondack Amtrak Cascades Talgo 8 + Amfleet I + Horizon 

Pere Marquette Superliner + State Owned SC-44 Charger State Owned Charger Locomotives and Venture Cars 

Illini/Saluki Currently Superliner; Usually Amfleet I / Horizon; Hauled by State Owned SC-44 

Wolverine Service 

Horizon + State Owned SC44 Charger + State Owned Venture 

Blue Water Hiawatha Service Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg Lincoln Service Missouri River Runner Piedmont Primarily NCDOT Owned Equipment 

Heartland Flyer Superliner + P42 

Capitol Corridor Primarily California Owned Equipment 

San Joaquins Pacific Surfliner Primarily Amtrak Surfliner + California Owned Equipment 

NEW AMTRAK CONNECTS US CORRIDOR VISION ROUTES 

Fleet Available for Start-up Routes Horizon + P42 Horizon + P42/ Amtrak Airo Trainsets 

LONG DISTANCE SERVICE LINE 

Palmetto Amfleet I + Amfleet II + P42 / P32ACDM Amtrak Airo Trainsets + ACS64 (Some Amfleet may still be in phase-out process) Amtrak Airo Trainsets 

Auto Train 

Superliner + P40/42 Superliner +ALC42 New Long-Distance Fleet + ALC42 

Califorina Zephyr City of New Orleans Coast Starlight Empire Builder Southwest Chief Sunset Limited Texas Eagle Capitol Limited Cardinal 

Viewliner / Amfleet II + P42 Viewliner / Amfleet II + ALC-42 Viewliner / New Long Distance Fleet + ALC42 

Crescent Lake Shore Limited Silver Meteor Silver Star Equipment Asset Line  97 Equipment Asset Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Terminal Yard Operations 44,296 47,155 49,009 50,798 52,719 53,663 297,640 Car & Locomotive Maintenance and Turnaround 686,765 704,444 732,728 760,348 789,362 805,624 4,479,270 MOE Supervision Training and Overhead (Less Backshops) 69,511 70,365 72,946 75,565 78,383 80,503 447,273 Yard Operations - Mechanical Support 43,021 44,797 46,513 48,200 50,055 51,055 283,641 Mechanical Backshops 15,902 16,021 16,613 17,184 17,828 18,150 101,698 On Board Passenger Technology 29,859 30,964 32,267 33,530 34,817 35,495 196,932 Fleet Strategy 5,591 5,663 5,887 6,107 6,344 6,469 36,061 

Total Operating Uses 894,944 919,409 955,963 991,732 1,029,508 1,050,959 5,842,515 

FINANCIAL USES (DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS) 

Debt Repayments 127,513 242,726 164,129 157,934 158,325 159,178 1,009,806 

Total Debt Service Payments 127,513 242,726 164,129 157,934 158,325 159,178 1,009,806 FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Overhauls 263,658 649,058 641,597 606,212 661,027 690,517 3,512,069 New/Replacement Equipment 531,498 1,125,386 658,551 369,602 1,117,967 561,283 4,364,287 Facilities 380,152 695,497 834,327 482,371 566,024 737,034 3,695,406 LCPM 43,652 47,781 41,341 51,894 50,378 56,799 291,846 Other Train Capital 6,537 5,001 2,235 2,263 2,489 2,738 21,263 

Capital Expenditures 1,225,497 2,522,724 2,178,052 1,512,342 2,397,884 2,048,371 11,884,870 Total Capital Uses 1,225,497 2,522,724 2,178,052 1,512,342 2,397,884 2,048,371 11,884,870 Total Equipment Spend $2,247,954 $3,684,860 $3,298,143 $2,662,008 $3,585,717 $3,258,508 $18,737,191 98 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak’s stations mirror the development landscape of the country from small rural stations served by a shelter and a platform to large cities served by urban stations connecting multiple transportation modes. The mixture of stations and the variety of service routes combine to provide a national passenger rail network that supports national mobility and economic, urban, and community development. The key focuses of Amtrak’s station planning include identifying ways to enhance the customer experience at stations, implementing customer-focused near-term improvements, preserving and improving Amtrak assets, and continuing development of Amtrak’s Major Stations Program. 

The Stations Asset Line includes all Amtrak-controlled passenger rail stations and elements of other stations across our network for which Amtrak has legal responsibility or intends to make capital investments. The Amtrak network is currently made up of 525 stations across 46 states, the District of Columbia and three Canadian provinces. 

At right: Amtrak and Penn Station Partners executives gathered in Baltimore for the groundbreaking ceremony at Baltimore Penn Station. Restorative work on the exterior of the historic station began in early 2022. Core and shell improvements, and the station expansion are also currently underway. 

Amtrak invested over $265 million in FY23 for station improvements throughout our network. These improvements included the design and installation of new escalators and stairs between the waiting room and the platform at the Joseph R. Biden, Jr. Station in Wilmington, Delaware, the design and start of construction of the Baltimore Penn Station Expansion Project, the design and construction of the revitalization of the Harrisburg Train Shed, the construction of 16 new Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant platforms, and additional customer facing improvements, such as upgraded lighting, signage, and passenger seating. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Stations Asset Line 10 Stations Asset Line  99 

Amtrak’s strategy for stations is designed to support our Strategic Blueprint. We are investing in critical station projects that will enhance the passenger experience, sustain the national passenger network, provide additional capacity, and improve reliability and safety. Among the unique challenges in developing a plan to manage station assets are: working with other stakeholders, such as states, cities and host railroads that own many of the stations Amtrak utilizes; working with state DOTs and commuter agencies that either own or utilize stations served by Amtrak and have their own service goals; making improvements that align with Amtrak guidelines for station aspects such as branding and signage so as to provide consistent and recognizable products and services; operating and maintaining a safe, world-class passenger railroad utilizing a mixture of modern and historic station assets; managing station roll-outs of technological updates such as ticketing and baggage handling upgrades; and coordinating station management plans with Amtrak’s asset development and monetization initiatives. 

## Strategic Focus for Stations 

Our focus for the next five years is to execute station projects that support and further the successful implementation of the new Strategic Blueprint. This will include projects and initiatives that align specifically with three out of the four Blueprint actions: Delighting Our Customers, Driving Transformation, and Growing the Business. The projects we accomplish will improve safety, utility, reliability, and connectivity across our network. We will continue to foster strong relationships with our external partners and stakeholders as we invest in modern, smart assets and technology, thereby increasing ridership, revenue, and partnerships. We will also ensure that any new or rehabilitated asset that we commission in the next five years increases both our capacity and the asset’s utility. 

## Core Objectives and Key Goals 

In support of the Strategic Initiatives laid out in the section above, we will continue to invest in projects to enhance the customer experience at our stations. This includes developing a plan to have at least one improvement project at each station within our network by 2030. We are also working with all our partners within and outside of Amtrak to ensure that strong relationships are established and maintained. We will continue to identify ways to implement customer-focused near-term improvements, preserving and improving Amtrak assets, and advancing Amtrak’s Major Stations program for comprehensive station development at the five Amtrak-owned or controlled stations with the highest ridership. All the projects we invest in will align with Amtrak’s core and strategic values; Do the Right Thing, Put Customers First, and Excel Together, as well as with the new Strategic Blueprint. 

# Goals and Objectives   

> Joseph R. Biden Jr. Station in Wilmington, Delaware. 100 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

# Asset Inventory 

## Asset Management Approach 

A five-year cycle of comprehensive condition assessments identifying deficiencies and prioritizing improvements at Amtrak stations began in 2017. Amtrak has completed comprehensive condition assessments for Amtrak owned or maintained stations in the Southeast, Southwest, and Northeast divisions, and it is currently assessing stations in the Central Northwest division. In addition, Amtrak completed a pilot inventory of station assets that have a direct relationship to its customers such as elevators and escalators, HVAC, plumbing, electrical, and fire/life safety equipment. These assets and their specifications within stations are accessible in Amtrak’s Mainline Rail Maximo enterprise asset management system. Once Amtrak has a comprehensive understanding of the conditions at all stations we own or maintain, it can develop an asset management plan aligned to its service line plans and overall corporate goals that defines a clear path for decision-making and investment. This effort will be aligned and integrated with existing information systems and processes. 

## Amtrak Stations and ADA Responsibility 

Amtrak trains serve 525 stations in 46 states, the District of Columbia and three Canadian provinces 1 .Excluding the nine stations located in Canada, 515 stations in the Amtrak network must be made accessible under the ADA. Amtrak has ADA responsibility, as described in the sidebar at right, for all or part of 385 of those stations. ADA responsibility for the various station components (i.e., structure, platform and parking) is determined by Amtrak and is reviewed and updated if ownership changes. Ownership and responsibility are determined using a “separate component” approach that splits each station into three distinct components: station structure, platform, and parking. Each component is analyzed separately for purposes of determining first, ownership, and second, ADA responsibility. 1. This figure does not include stations where Amtrak trains stop only for passengers of partner commuter agencies: New Haven – State Street, CT; Perryville, MD; and L’Enfant Plaza in Washington, DC. 2. Emeryville, CA and Bellows Falls, VT, where ADA responsibility for station components will be transferred to Amtrak upon completion of real estate transactions, are included in the ADA program and the station count. Since issuance of the ADA plan, responsibility for the platforms at the San Bernardino, CA and Stockton – Downtown, CA stations has changed to the City of Sand Bernardino and the San Joaquin Joint Powers Authority, respectively. Determining ADA responsibility for each station component is a two-step process: First, Amtrak determines ownership of each station component and applies the rules set forth in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 37.49 which assigns ADA responsibility based on ownership. For example, if more than 50% of a station component is owned by a public entity, then that public entity has 100% of the ADA responsibility for that component. If more than 50% of a station component is owned by a private entity, then Amtrak and the commuter railroads that serve that station have 100% of the ADA responsibility for that component (responsibility amongst the railroads is proportional based on passenger boardings). Next, Amtrak reviews its agreements with third parties (e.g., landlords, tenants, freight railroads) to determine if there are any contractual terms that specify responsibility for ADA compliance of the station components. 

The Stations Appendices include Amtrak’s latest ADA plan for stations and an overview of ownership and ADA responsibility for all station components. 

ADA Responsibility 

As of April 30, 2023, ADA responsibility for the 515 2 stations required to meet the ADA accessibility requirements is as follows: 

# 525 Total number of stations in the Amtrak system 147 Stations where Amtrak has Sole ADA Responsibility 130 Stations where Amtrak has No ADA Responsibility 515 Stations to be made accessible per the ADA 238 Stations where Amtrak has Shared ADA Responsibility 385 Stations included in the ADA Stations Program where Amtrak will address deficiencies Stations Asset Line  101 Planned Enhancements 

Amtrak’s Five-Year Plan supports continued improvements to stations and facilities throughout our network and advancing major stations projects. It includes approximately 450 station projects that will be deployed and/or deliver within the next five years by Amtrak’s ADA Program and Facilities, Stations Design and Delivery, Major Stations, and Digital Technology departments. These projects include major station development projects, accessibility improvements and many other projects that will enhance the customer experience at our stations and bring them to a state of good repair. 

Key Initiatives 

Station Capacity Program. Strategic measures to augment existing station capacity, aligning with projected ridership growth. 

ADA Platform Program. Comprehensive replacement or rehabilitation of platforms to align with ADA requirements. 

ADA Station Upgrades. Systematic upgrades across stations to ensure compliance with ADA standards. 

Roofing Program. Re-roofing and repair efforts at station facilities, including crew bases. 

HVAC Program. Systematic replacement and enhancement of HVAC units at stations and crew bases. 

Digital Technology Program. Forward-looking upgrades to digital signage, Passenger Information Displays (PIDS), and Audio Frequency Induction Loop Systems. 

Signage and Branding Program. 

Continuous rollout of comprehensive branding and signage overhauls across all stations. 

Landscaping Program. Re-landscaping, replacement, or repaving initiatives for station grounds and parking areas. 

Lighting Program. Upgrading of station lighting to align with current Amtrak standards, covering interior, exterior, and platform lighting. 

Doors and Locks. Implementation of advanced security measures through the upgrade of stations to card swipe locks. 

Furniture Upgrades. Upgrading and replacement of station furniture for enhanced aesthetics and comfort. 

Flooring Upgrades. Upgrading and replacement of floor tiles and carpeting to create a fresh and inviting environment. 

Painting Program. Repainting and cleaning of station interiors and exteriors. 

Restroom Upgrades. Upgrading and replacing restroom fixtures to ensure a modern and hygienic experience. 

Ticket Counter Upgrades. Upgrading and replacement of ticket counters to optimize functionality and customer service efficiency. These efforts reflect Amtrak’s dedication to ensuring our stations are not only operationally efficient and compliant with the ADA but also provide a seamless and delightful experience for our passengers.   

> PIDS display at Philadelphia’s Willam H. Gray III 30th Street Station. 102 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

## Major Stations Programs 

In addition to systemwide improvement, Amtrak’s Five-Year Plan includes significant work at major stations in Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington. 

Chicago 

Amtrak continues to make progress in modernizing and expanding Chicago Union Station (CUS) by launching the Chicago Hub Improvement Program (CHIP). CHIP is intended to transform the station experience for Amtrak and commuter rail passengers in CUS, the hub of our Long Distance network and our Midwestern state-supported corridors, while improving operations, providing capacity for expanded service, enhancing safety and reducing our carbon footprint. The program is supported by a broad coalition of regional government and industry leaders including labor, business, and environmental groups. It is divided into three major components; Station Improvements, Chicago Area Infrastructure Improvements, and Chicago-Detroit Infrastructure Improvements. Amtrak is advancing final design for the reactivation of the former Mail Platform for passenger use, which is on target to be completed in FY24 with construction to follow. Amtrak has also initiated the Concourse Improvement project, which will remove existing barriers in the heart of the station on both the concourse and mezzanine levels to significantly improve the passenger experience, circulation, accessibility and capacity. The long-abandoned Fred Harvey restaurant space and other unutilized retail space in CUS have been restored for lease to food/retail establishments in order to generate revenue and provide additional amenities for passengers. In December 2023 Amtrak won two FY22–23 Federal-State Partnership National Network discretionary grant awards for CHIP that will provide construction funding for the CUS Mail Platform Reactivation project and Preliminary Engineering/NEPA funding to initiate the CUS Ventilation Improvements and Platform Expansion projects. 

New York 

As part of the overall Amtrak Gateway Program, we will be expanding Penn Station in New York City to provide increased rail capacity through the station. This multi-billion dollar expansion will add additional tracks at the station for Amtrak as well as our partners, MTA’s Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit. The project will also replace the Penn Station Service Building that housed the coal-fired power plant that originally served the station and upgrade services to Penn Station with more energy efficient equipment to help us meet our overall sustainability goals. The project will also include overbuild development above the new station expansion to help offset development costs. Coupled with the Penn Expansion Project is the Penn Reconstruction Project. This multi-billion dollar project will provide more space for passengers and better pedestrian flow through and around the station. The project will also improve the connection between Penn Station and the new Moynihan Trail Hall. The Penn Reconstruction project will also promote better connections to areas in the neighborhood around the station. In the meantime, while these projects are developing, Amtrak continues to make other improvements for a better customer experience at the station.  

> Above: The new ADA entrance at New York Penn Station was unveiled in November 2023. Stations Asset Line 103

Washington 

Amtrak is currently working with FRA to advance several improvements in and expand Washington Union Station (WUS), the the second busiest station in our network. To address one of the most common customer questions at the station—“Where are the trains?”—Amtrak plans to create a visible connection between the historic train hall through the concourse to the platforms that will be part of the larger concourse modernization project to improve the customer experience and station operations at the station. The North Hanger that connects to the platforms adjacent to the station’s lower level through tracks will be modified to bring more natural light into the station and increase visibility between the station and the platforms. As in New York Penn Station, Amtrak will also be progressing the Washington Union Station Expansion Project in order to increase rail capacity and accommodate additional ridership at the station for Amtrak, MARC, VRE and WMATA Metrorail. This project will include expanded tracks and widened/extended platforms with a brand new concourse below the tracks. It will also modernize and improve facilities for the local and intercity buses that operate out of the station. 

Philadelphia 

At William H. Gray III 30th Street Station, construction has begun to renovate the station and the office towers within the station building. This project will improve the passenger experience at the station, restore the historic fabric of the building, and improve operations in order to accommodate more trains and passengers for Amtrak and its partners, SEPTA and New Jersey Transit. At the same time, improved commercial and retail development will not only provide a first-class customer experience, but also make the station a great destination within the City of Philadelphia. 

Baltimore 

Phase 1 construction has begun on both the Baltimore Penn Station development and restoration and the new Lanvale station expansion. The historic Baltimore Penn Station building will be undergoing significant renovations and adaptive reuse that will provide modern amenities for passengers and guests within the station building, such as new retail and restaurants at the concourse level, and new office spaces on the three levels above. Across the tracks, with a bridge connection to the historic station, will be a new state-of-the-art station building. Most passenger service functions, such as ticketing and baggage checking, will operate out of the new station building to enhance the customer experience and improve operations. Another major benefit of this project is the improved connections to the rapidly developing neighborhoods to the north of the station. 

> Above: The waiting area at Washington Union Station. Below: A January 2024 ribbon cutting inaugurates a newly constructed boarding platform at Baltimore Penn Station. The new platform is scheduled to begin serving trains this spring. This project is part of Amtrak’s overall redevelopment of Baltimore Penn Station, a $150 million investment to improve customer experience and grow passenger rail.

Major Stations Programs, continued 104 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak’s Station Plan is strategically aligned to address key operational and customer-centric objectives. A primary focus is on ensuring safety, with initiatives dedicated to creating secure environments for both customers and employees. The initiatives and projects are designed to establish a consistent network image and promote standardized appearance and guidelines across the entire Amtrak network. This effort is integral to enhancing the overall representation of the Amtrak brand and fostering a cohesive and recognizable identity. In addition to prioritizing safety and consistency, Amtrak’s station projects aim to deliver more personalized and connected experiences for customers. By leveraging technology and optimizing processes, Amtrak seeks to efficiently meet the evolving needs of passengers. Moreover, these initiatives are geared toward empowering customer-facing employees, equipping them with the tools and resources necessary to elevate service delivery. The objective is to ensure that Amtrak staff members are well-supported in engaging effectively with passengers, contributing to an overall positive travel experience. Operational efficiency is a critical aspect of station initiatives, with a specific focus on reducing inefficiencies within various operational processes. Streamlining processes contributes to a smoother operation, while improving service delivery and resource utilization. By optimizing the overall customer experience and investing in operational excellence, Amtrak seeks to attract more passengers and sustain growth. Amtrak’s commitment to increased annual station capital expenditures over the next five years reflect long-term investment in the continuous improvement of operations and services. Integrating sustainability into these projects through inclusion of green building elements aligns with Amtrak’s broader commitment to environmental responsibility and contributes to achieving sustainability goals over the coming years. 

# Performance and Outlook 

Stations Asset Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Station Staffing 194,114 198,856 206,684 214,366 222,662 227,093 1,263,775 Station Facility Operations 127,585 139,710 144,842 149,876 155,645 158,628 876,288 

Total Operating Uses 321,700 338,566 351,526 364,242 378,307 385,721 2,140,062 

FINANCIAL USES (DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS) 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

Total Debt Service Payments - - - - - - -

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Normalized Replacement 49,645 129,824 88,382 83,349 66,682 24,550 442,432 Safety & Mandates 212,760 246,819 248,231 194,794 154,625 97,490 1,154,720 Major Backlog 8,200 6,500 4,125 4,125 4,125 2,170 29,245 Improvements 363,626 657,120 1,219,148 1,606,341 2,134,629 2,256,830 8,237,694 

Total Capital Uses 634,231 1,040,263 1,559,887 1,888,609 2,360,062 2,381,039 9,864,091 Total Stations Spend $955,930 $1,378,830 $1,911,413 $2,252,851 $2,738,369 $2,766,761 $12,004,153 Stations Asset Line  105 106 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak—America’s Railroad—is dedicated to safe and reliable mobility as the nation’s intercity passenger rail service provider and high-speed rail operator. The infrastructure we own and maintain is largely located in the northeast—this includes 1,240 miles of main-line track miles on the Northeast Corridor (NEC) between Washington, DC, and New Rochelle, NY and between New Haven, CT and the Rhode Island-Massachusetts border. Our infrastructure on the NEC is used by over 2,100 passenger trains and 60 freight trains each day, at speeds of up to 150 mph (241 kph). We own infrastructure nationwide, as well as manage infrastructure on behalf of the States of Michigan and New York. We provide efficient and effective intercity passenger rail mobility, connecting more than 500 destinations in 46 states that is trip-time competitive with other intercity travel options. The Infrastructure, Maintenance & Construction Services (IMCS) Department 

acts as the custodian of the infrastructure on which Amtrak customers travel. IMCS endeavors to provide a proactive, preemptive, customer-service focused approach to infrastructure maintenance and construction that will deliver a safe and reliable railroad for Amtrak customers and employees. To achieve this mission, the IMCS Department consists of five key functions—Production and Construction Services, Maintenance of Way, Industrial and Systems Engineering, Quality Management, and the Maintenance of Way Operations Desk. The Production & Construction Services 

group is responsible for major construction work on the infrastructure. These are dedicated gangs aimed at achieving large volume asset renewals including, but not limited to, Undercutter, Track Laying System, and Switch Exchange System. The production season from March through November is the greatest opportunity for advancing the IMCS State of Good Repair program work. During the off-season Production & Construction Services shifts focus to next-season planning, equipment refurbishment, non-mainline refurbishment work and smaller projects. The Maintenance of Way group maintains the infrastructure to a State of Good Repair (cost effectiveness vs. asset efficiency). It promotes production and quality processes to improve the products delivered and continuously assesses the state of all assets, taking necessary actions to maintain and improve them. The 2024 Infrastructure Asset Line Plan (IALP2024) includes all Amtrak-owned or maintained assets: track, communications and signals, electric traction, bridges and buildings, and maintenance of way equipment. The Infrastructure Asset Line Plan effort is led by the Infrastructure, Maintenance & Construction Services Department with contributions from Safety, Operations and Capital Planning. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Infrastructure Asset Line 11 Infrastructure Asset Line  107 

Maintenance has overall responsibility and oversight for directing IMCS Department resources in all inspection and maintenance activities with Amtrak-owned and/or maintained right-of-way assets including track, bridges, buildings, communications and signals, and electric traction to provide continued safe and reliable operation of inter-city passenger, commuter rail and freight trains over the Amtrak infrastructure. The Industrial & Systems Engineering (I&SE) group develops the strategy and implements business processes and systems solutions collaboratively across IMCS to promote best practices in infrastructure asset management. The Asset Management Strategy team sets the strategic direction for the department, Engineering Disciplines, and Divisions based on Amtrak’s corporate objectives and the goals of the Vice President of IMCS. Industrial Engineering works with IMCS Production and Division Maintenance personnel to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of their work. Systems Engineering—comprised of the Infrastructure GIS team, the Engineering Asset Management System team, and the Data Analytics team—delivers and implements the tools and technology required to support process improvements and manage asset data to enable data-driven decision-making for infrastructure assets. The I&SE group drives value by delivering solutions that reduce asset downtime, extend equipment life, and enable the right people to perform the right work at the right time, optimizing system performance to reduce the overall cost of asset management and achieve Amtrak’s strategic goals. The Quality Management (QM) group is entrusted with the pivotal role of devising and implementing a comprehensive Quality Management System throughout the IMCS Department. Their primary focus is on fostering processes that consistently elevate safety, productivity, financial outcomes, and customer service standards. By working in tandem with IMCS’s senior leadership and crucial stakeholders, the QM team identifies areas for process optimization, standardization of resources, risk reduction, cost-saving measures, and solutions in line with the department’s strategic direction. Their commitment to quality assurance ensures that asset maintenance is executed accurately, aligning all asset management activities with Amtrak’s overarching vision and objectives. As corporate asset management policies evolve, the team ensures adherence and alignment. Among the QM team’s key strategic initiatives are the establishment of a robust quality assurance system to validate adherence to processes and procedures, introduction of dedicated QA/QC resources, and a thorough revision of existing work documentation and approval procedures to bolster quality control. The Maintenance of Way (MOW) Operations group, presently consisting only of the Engineering Operations Desk team, oversees the recording of all infrastructure asset failures. They ensure quality reporting of Amtrak’s primary production gangs, as well as distribute a Daily Summary Report to IMCS Senior Leadership. This report details IMCS employee illnesses and injuries, estimated FRA reportable rates, significant operating rule violations, temporary speed restrictions, customer on-time performance, and infrastructure failures with associated delays. In the future, the MOW Desk team will be integrated into the newly formed Unified Operations Center (UOC) in Wilmington, DE. The UOC aims to unify the MOW Desk, Consolidated National Operations Center (CNOC), Amtrak Police Department (APD), Stations, Mechanical and field personnel to streamline processes, foster new strategies, and consistently improve the safety and dependability of our train service for our valued customers. The Infrastructure Asset Line Plan (IALP) defines Amtrak’s strategic approach to infrastructure management. It not only describes how we assess the State of Good Repair backlog but also emphasizes enhancements to data that determine asset conditions. An essential aspect is the short-term projection of our infrastructure, especially in terms of how IMCS deploys vital resources like labor, track possession, and equipment, consistent with our asset information. In partnership with Capital Delivery, our ambition is to ensure the most effective return on capital, benefiting both Amtrak and other stakeholders. To accomplish this, collaboration with the subsequent Capital Delivery sectors is paramount: • Workforce Management Planning, Analytics, and Business Services • Program Delivery and Work Planning • Engineering Services The IALP2024 will deliver a geographically specific State of Good Repair Program plan for FY24 (base) and FY25-FY29. Key strategic initiatives and major capital projects will also be highlighted for this plan period. 

Infrastructure Asset Line Introduction, continued 108 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Key Accomplishments 

In FY22 and 23, Amtrak IMCS achieved several noteworthy accomplishments: 

Penn Station New York: Infrastructure Renewal Program 

FY22 accomplishments include complete replacement of Track 5 and Track 13 block ties, and complete replacement of the switches in A Interlocking and JO Interlocking, in accordance with plan. In FY23, block tie replacement on Track 6 was completed. Work replacing block ties on Track 2 started in June 2023 and is expected to be finished in early FY24. Construction started and is substantially complete for crossovers, slip switches and turnouts in Zones 2A, 2B and 2C. 

Mid-Atlantic South: Structures Program 

FY22 accomplishments include successful completion of 4 culvert replacements, 2 culvert replacement designs, 1 bridge improvement at Susquehanna Bridge, Slab Rehabilitation at Gunpowder Bridge, 1 undergrade bridge upgrade at Jay’s Run Bridge, and various other projects under this multi-project/multi-year program. In FY23, block tie replacement on Tracks 3 and 4 at 30th Street Station was completed several weeks ahead of schedule. 

TLS Concrete Tie Replacement Program 

In FY22, the TLS work group installed a total of 28,406 concrete ties and 111,810 feet of continuously welded rail (CWR). Locations addressed as part of the FY22 plan include Track 3 between Bacon and Prince Interlockings in Maryland (AP Line MP 51.1 to 57.1) and Track A between Elmora and Union Interlockings in New Jersey (AN Line MP 15.1 to 19.4. In FY23, the TLS work group installed a total of 56,760 concrete ties and 223,831 ft of CWR. Locations addressed as part of the FY 2023 plan include Track B between Elmora and Union Interlockings and Track 1 between Cork to Rheems and Roy to State Interlockings near Lancaster, PA. The Roy to State block started in September 2023 and the balance of the total block will be replaced in Q1 FY24. Additionally in FY23, the TLS work group began a multi-year project to upgrade Thorn Yard. During the winter months, the team rehabilitated an existing OOS yard track, installed 2 new storage tracks, and installed two switches. Aside from wood ties, all material utilized to complete these yard upgrades was “fit” material (previously used), which came to the project at zero procurement cost. 

Track Undercutting Program 

In FY22, Undercutter #1 completed a total of 81,100 feet of undercutting in Maryland at the following locations: Track 3 between Bacon and Prince Interlockings, Track 4 between Grace and Oak Interlockings and Track 3 between Oak and Bush Interlockings. In FY23, Undercutter #1 completed a total of 116,951 feet of undercutting at the following locations: in Maryland on Track 2 between Prince and Perry, Track 3 between Oak and Bush, Track A from Bridge to Winans on Track A, and near Lancaster, PA, Track 1 between Cork and Rheems. A second Undercutter (#2) was put into service in August 2023. This new equipment will cut in at the Roy to State block following the TLM in early FY24. 

Production Wood Tie/ Timber Replacement Program 

FY22 accomplishments include tie installations at various locations, including the Harrisburg Line between Thorn and Park, Washington DC, Lorton, VA, and the Springfield Line. Previously planned scope for FY23 was not executed and was reduced significantly, which resulted in no production work during the first quarter of the fiscal year. The scope for FY23 is to start and substantially finish construction at Michigan MP145.5 to 238, Track 2 from Rheems to Cork, and two critical curves on the Springfield Line (MP49 and MP50.6). Completed units as of August 2023 is 29,758 wood ties. 

Rail Replacement Program 

FY22 accomplishments in New England include 10,066 feet of continuously welded rail (CWR) installed from Post to Mill River, 15,748 feet installed from Mill River to Shoreline Junction, 10,780 feet installed from Shoreline to Bradford, 7,150 feet installed from Groton to High Street and 12,700 feet as of August 2023 from Davisville to Packard. Track Production installed 922 feet of CWR. In FY23, a total of 181,292 feet of CWR was installed as follows: 76,180 feet in the Empire Line Division, 55,112 feet in the Mid-Atlantic Division and 50,000 feet in the New England Division. 

Turnout Renewal Program 

In FY22, a total of 61 turnouts on the New England, Empire, New York, and Mid-Atlantic divisions were replaced. Cable and panel replacements were also performed as needed at the install locations. In FY23, a total of 44 turnouts on the New England, Empire, New York, and Mid-Atlantic divisions were replaced. The plan is to install 5 of the 44 in September 2023. Cable and panel replacements were also performed as needed at the install locations. Infrastructure Asset Line  109 

Ride Quality Improvements 

FY22 accomplishments include the replacement of bridge approaches, exits and panels on Tracks 2 and 3 on the Central Ave, Tilghman St., Kerlin St., Parker Ave., Concord Ave. and Barclay St. Bridges in Chester, PA. In FY23, the replacement of bridge approaches, exits and panels on Track 1 was completed at Flower St., Reaney St., Yarnall St., Jeffery St., and Engle St. Bridges, and Stream Culvert in Chester, PA. 

High Speed Surfacing Program 

FY22 accomplishments include completion of planned cycle surfacing and undercutter settlement surfacing on the various lines by gangs Y062 (AN Line, New Jersey - New York Region), Y081 (AH Line, Harrisburg, PA), Y382 (AH Line), and Y405 (New England). In FY23, the program successfully started a 6th surfacing unit and is currently in scope and will continue planned program support work until the end of fiscal year. Collectively, all six units from NED to DC have completed a total of 717k ft of surfacing work, touching on the Hellgate line, North Jersey/New York Division, Phil, Zoo Interlockings in Mid-Atlantic Division, all the way to the Maryland subdivision (Odenton, Wood, etc.). 

Rail Grinding 

In FY22, the rail grinder completed 408.12 track miles along the NEC (approximately 167.72 track miles in the New York Division, and 240.40 track miles in the Mid-Atlantic Division). In FY23, the rail grinder completed 506.77 track miles along the NEC (approximately 103.78 track miles in the New York Division, 331.47 track miles in the Mid-Atlantic Division and 71.52 track miles on the New England Division). The rail grinder had a hard stop date of June 29, 2023, due to a cut in the budget at the beginning of the fiscal year. 

Electric Traction System Aerial Assessment 

This program is to perform and complete assessment, categorization, prioritization, and project management for Amtrak’s catenary, signal, transmission system structures, electrical lines, components, and system assets along Amtrak’s Electric Traction System right of way. This work will occur over multiple years. In FY22, 2,322 structures were captured along the Northeast Corridor. In FY23, 8,165 structures were captured along the Northeast Corridor. 

New York: Catenary Program 

FY22 accomplishments include completion of the trolley switch replacement/catenary upgrades at Lane Interlocking; DC heater replacement along with associated hardware at Q Interlocking and Trolley Wire/Signal Feeder upgrades at Bergen Interlocking. These projects maintained the State of Good Repair for New York Division’s Catenary assets and improved railroad operations. In FY23, the New York Division completed 163 catenary and Transmission related defects identified within the helicopter inspection program, upgraded the aerial signal power equipment in Ham interlocking, and replaced catenary within Grundy interlocking. The balance of the work scheduled within the program will resume in FY24. 

Total Track Renewal Program 

FY22 accomplishments include the removal and replacement of track infrastructure on Tracks 5 and 6 in 30th Street Station. In FY23, block tie replacement on Tracks 3 and 4 at 30th Street Station was completed, as mentioned above under the Mid-Atlantic Structures Program. 

Track Rehabilitation Program 

FY22 accomplishments include renewed track assets throughout the Amtrak System, primarily in yards. In FY23, the Z181 group of the Mid-Atlantic Division completed 2,500 wood tie replacement in Adams Yard, with a 700-foot track extension. 

New York: Track Program 

FY22 accomplishments include completion of the steady state capital maintenance work, which included 140,000 feet of surfacing, replacement of 11,000 feet of rail and 4,500 ties, and replacement of track panels for four (4) body tracks at Sunnyside Yard (SSYD). These projects maintained the State of Good Repair for New York Division’s Track assets, improved ride quality, reduced train delays, mitigated potential derailments and improved resiliency of railroad operations. In FY23, track improvement work continued. Some accomplishments include tie/timber replacement at Grundy and on the AE, AG, and AN lines, concrete timber replacement at Iselin, drainage upgrades at Lincoln and on the AE, AG, and AN lines, rail replacement at Menlo, track panel replacement in the North Tube, bridge timber/tie replacement at Dock and Portal Bridge, body track replacement at SSYD, paving at Adams, F and Q Interlocking Renewal, as well as surfacing, insulated joint replacements, joint eliminations, interlocking steel replacements, spot rail replacements, concrete tie replacements, vac train, construction on layover equipment, and rail lubrication upgrades at several locations throughout the New York Division. 

Key Accomplishments, continued 110 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

FY2023 IMCS Major Production Capital Renewal Accomplishments 

In FY22 and FY23, IMCS completed significant capital renewal/ SOGR work that improved Amtrak’s operational flexibility, reliability, on-time performance (OTP), and customer satisfaction. In addition, IMCS advanced several critical major capital projects, including Amtrak’s own priority projects and third-party projects on behalf of partner agencies. Notable accomplishments are detailed below. 

Fitter Interlocking (Connecticut) 

Completed design, C&S cable relocation, and fiber cable installation. The fabrication of the new CIH at Lancaster Shops was completed and delivered to Midway. Cat pole foundation installation, tree and brush clearing, and silt socks installation for sediment and erosion control have also been completed. Two temporary construction crossings have been installed, four of five steel platforms for C&S houses are complete, Track 2 catenary has been temporarily relocated onto new poles, and Track 1 side swale reconstruction is complete. This project will break an 18-mile block (Guilford to View) thereby increasing operational track availability, reliability, OTP, and customer satisfaction. Construction is expected to be substantially complete in mid FY24 and signal cutover is targeted for Q4 of FY24. 

Veltri Interlocking (Connecticut) 

Design is complete and NEPA/SHPO applications are prepared for submittal. CIH, A & B Locations have been delivered to BERLIN; #20 turnouts were delivered to Westerly Yard and pre-assembled; RFP development has begun with procurement for foundation/ electrical contractor. This project will split a 19-mile block (Groton to High Street) and will provide operating flexibility needed to increase capacity, improve reliability, and allow for future maintenance outages. Construction start is scheduled for spring of 2024, and the conclusion of the Fitter installation.                                                       

> Asset Work Description Plan Unit Qty YTD Actual Units FY Unit % Complete FY23 Plan $ YTD Budget $ YTD Actuals $ FY Spend %
> Continuous Welded Rail (CWR) (FT) 191,600 150,761 78.69% $31,299,131 $25,154,014 $27,964,936 89.35%
> Undercutting (FT) 139,392 34,540 24.78% $17,698,683 $11,680,564 $13,177,377 74.88%
> TLS - Concrete Ties (EA) 53,596 37,520 70.01% $46,278,408 $30,591,968 $44,760,230 96.72%
> TLS - CWR (FT) 214,384 153,848 71.76% $46,278,408 $30,591,968 $44,760,230 96.72%
> Turnouts (EA) 62 37 59.68% $73,432,100 $56,276,184 $64,515,161 87.86%
> Wood Ties (EA) 6,500 6,634 102.06% $14,757,167 $11,660,155 $13,443,152 91.10%
> Surfacing (FT) 898,000 807,702 89.94% $20,341,196 $16,184,131 $19,987,693 98.26%

Capital Delivery FYTD Production through July 2023 

The Capital Delivery annual plan, executed by IMCS, supports Amtrak’s continuing efforts to achieve a State of Good Repair across its infrastructure assets and to advance the Company’s strategic priorities. The following table summarizes the major production work delivered in FY23. Infrastructure Asset Line  111 

Hook to Baldwin Ride Quality Improvements (South of Philadelphia) 

Completed ride quality improvements on Tracks 2 and 3 in FY22 and Track 1 in FY23 by replacing, remediating fouled ballast with geo cell subgrade upgrades, addressing geometry defects at bridge approaches and mitigating poor drainage conditions by ditching. In addition to bringing ride quality improvements, this work reduces geometry impacts that cause slow orders and increases customer satisfaction. 

Kearny to Waverly Transmission Tower Replacement (North New Jersey) 

This project will bring the existing transmission infrastructure crossing the Passaic River to a state of good repair, thereby improving the safety and reliability of the NEC. The planned scope includes the furnishment and installation of 12 new transmission monopoles. Of the new monopoles, 8 will be permanent and 4 will be temporary to accommodate Substation 41 construction, which is under a separate contract. The final design is 100% completed, and the Conrail and PATH construction agreement has been signed and executed. Construction is in progress; as of July 2023, 5 out of 12 foundations have been completed. 

## Major Capital Accomplishments 

East River Tunnel Rehabilitation Project 

The completed scope at the end of FY23 includes 100% design for the East River Tunnel base scope, 60% design for outside of portal scope expansion, S-3 Phase I construction and 90% signal design for Sunnyside Yard Sub3/Sub 4. 

Connecticut River Bridge Replacement Project 

During FY23, Amtrak completed review of Contract Drawings; submitted applications for Environmental Permits; completed procurement for a Construction Manager; and commenced procurement of the Construction Contractor, including issuance of a Request for Proposals. Approximately 70% of archeological excavation was also completed. 

Clark to Ham Constant Tension Catenary Project 

Design and procurement for 3rd party foundation contractor are complete. As of July 2023, 100% of foundation at Track 1 is completed and 91% Complete at Track 4. All steel columns structural poles have been delivered and 100 out of 160 portal beams have been delivered. Amtrak ET erected 94% lower columns at Track 1 and 66% lower columns at Track 4. 

## Workforce Headcount and Forecast 

In an effort to rise to the challenge of addressing the SOGR backlog, the demands of our customers, and the historic opportunity provided by the stimulus funding, in FY23, Amtrak hired over 1,360 new personnel, including nearly 1,331 agreement employees and just over 29 management employees. This presents an exciting opportunity for IMCS to gain new skills in the workforce, develop existing employees, take on SOGR projects that address the backlog, and deliver on commitments to stakeholders. 

Total Agreement Headcount Total Management Headcount 

Capital Renewal Accomplishments, continued 112 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Strategy 

Amtrak asset strategies are owned by Deputy Chief Engineers in Capital Delivery Engineering Services. Once such strategies have been adopted, IMCS is responsible for carrying out the strategies to ensure normalized steady state activities deliver the best investment opportunities in the near term and work towards a SOGR in the longer term that is able to support a safe, efficient, and sustainable railroad. Amtrak IMCS is driving a plan to ensure the continued viability of the infrastructure with a longer view on achieving a State of Good Repair (SOGR) across infrastructure assets. With the introduction of the Steady State Program in 2017 and Construction Program Procedure in 2018, there has been a renewed focus on capital maintenance. Moreover, capital improvement projects which contribute to the replacement or renewal of aging infrastructure are prioritized higher than those projects which provide little to no SOGR benefits. The steady state (normalized replacement) program identifies the count of units to replace annually, preventing an increase to the existing SOGR backlog. When Amtrak achieves a SOGR, the normalized replacement annual requirement will ensure infrastructure assets remain in a state of good repair. 

## Strategies for Ensuring Safe Operation 

In I-AMP2017, Amtrak IMCS commenced a review of the Asset Strategies for all infrastructure assets to develop the long-term infrastructure maintenance and improvement programs to reach SOGR. Each year, the Asset Management Strategy team reviews the strategies with the Deputy Chief Engineers to ensure they remain relevant to the ever-evolving infrastructure. Such strategies are outlined in Appendix A – Asset Strategies. Our existing strategies for ensuring continued safe operation can be summarized as follows: 

Core Funding 

• Inspection/monitoring activities to confirm the asset can function in its required state and provide a safe operational environment. • Preventive maintenance activities to achieve a required level of asset performance and maintain a safe operational environment. • Corrective maintenance activities to return the asset to its required function. 

Capital Funding 

• Capital maintenance to restore the asset to an operational design standard and maintain performance. • Capital replacement to renew the asset and maintain performance. • Capital improvement to replace the asset and improve performance or network capability. 

Inspection/Monitoring Activities 

Amtrak’s Capital Delivery Engineering Services standards set out the requirements for inspection and monitoring of assets to ensure safe infrastructure performance. Except for ET assets, these are aligned to FRA mandated inspections, and in some areas (track and movable bridges for example) go beyond FRA requirements. Inspection and monitoring programs drive corrective and capital maintenance programs. 

Maintenance (Preventive, Corrective and Capital) Activities 

Historically, Amtrak asset maintenance strategies could be summarized as run-to-fail (where fail exceeds a maintenance defined limit, and not a failed asset that is unsafe). Currently, data is being recorded utilizing root cause analysis to identify high impact assets and introduce preventive maintenance replacement cycles. Corrective actions are typically assigned following an inspection. These are a mix of addressing identified faults and poor conditions which will lead to an asset failure, either through a corrective maintenance action or through a capital maintenance action. 

Capital Replacement and Improvement Activities 

Tools are in use that allow for a more consistent approach in the use of manpower, track possession and equipment resources. Historically, the capital replacement of assets was determined by IMCS judgment – including conditions, safety and reliability, funding availability and track access. In 2018, to address performance issues, Amtrak IMCS introduced reliability analysis to better inform replacement decisions. This included identifying assets with repeat failures or asset types which may be prone to failures. In 2019, significant steps were taken to advance root cause analysis. Each failure work order was linked to the asset that failed, the minutes of Amtrak and commuter train delay and an enhanced problem, cause, remedy structure designed by the technical departments. These tools and others reflect a desire on the part of IMCS to use the latest asset management techniques to improve asset performance and expected economic life within the resources available to the Department. Infrastructure Asset Line  113 

Establishing Capital Investment Priorities 

FY24 Capital Prioritization 

For the FY24 construction plan, the prioritization process has been further developed to align fully to Amtrak’s Strategic Pillars to demonstrate how each project supports our corporate strategic objectives. The approach is presented in the table below. 

FY24 –29 Capital Prioritization 

For the FY24 construction plan, Amtrak Capital Delivery Engineering Services will be applying a tiered prioritization process to its annual program. Major production work performed by IMCS force account will take top priority, this includes but is not limited to Undercutter, Track Laying System and Switch Exchange System. The second tier will be for the SOGR capital maintenance performed by local divisions. The third tier will be capital and party projects which will be prioritized in accordance with the table below. 

FY 2024-2029 Infrastructure Capital Investment Prioritization Approach 

Engineering Category and Definition Infrastructure Capital Investment Prioritization - Rating 0 1 2 3 4 5SAFETY 

Unsafe condition for employees or customers No improvements to overall safety Minimal improvements to overall safety Safety measures can be put in place to mitigate risk No measures can be put in place to mitigate addressed safety risk 

CUSTOMER IMPACT 

Significantly improve OTP, ride quality or reliability of the asset No positive impact to OTP, ride quality or reliability Minimal positive impact to OTP, ride quality or reliability Positive impact to OTP, ride quality, and/or reliability If project not completed, asset will be taken out of service with negative customer impact 

NON-STRATEGIC REQUIREMENTS 

Strong external requirements which may not align with Amtrak Strategic Pillars Project aligns with an Amtrak Strategic Pillar (Already factored into priority ranking) Project has external pressure for completion but is only in planning and/or initiation phase Project has external pressure for completion but does not have to be completed in upcoming fiscal year Project has significant external pressure for completion and must be completed in upcoming fiscal year 

STEADY STATE CONTRIBUTION 

Work completed will achieve steady state unit contribution No Steady State improvements achieved Minimal Steady State improvements achieved Steady State unit replacement contributes to annual required levels Steady State unit replacement significantly contributes to annual required levels 

FINANCIAL STEWARDSHIP 

Project will have a positive return on investment Project has no financial impact or a negative return on investment Project has minimal financial impact or a low return on investment Projects return on investment will break even Project is funded by external resources or will result in positive return on investment 114 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

# Moving Towards Normalized or Steady State Maintenance 

## Useful Life Benchmarks 

The approach taken has been to establish useful life benchmarks (ULBs) to define a program of steady state or normalized levels of capital replacement necessary to move to a sustained state of good repair. 

Useful life benchmarks have been established through several sources, including: 

• Previous SOGR reports and studies conducted in the last five years • IMCS review and judgment of typical asset lifecycles on Amtrak property • Independent review by outside parties • International benchmarking against comparable rail networks including those in the United Kingdom and Europe 

Achieve SOGR 

The primary objective of this strategy is to bring the infrastructure assets to a state of good repair and then maintain them in a steady state to ensure sufficient capability to meet operational needs. 

Prevent Insidious Decline 

While Amtrak progresses towards SOGR, introduction of an enhanced assessment regime will guard against the insidious decline in the condition of any individual assets and ensure that they remain in a safe operational state. 

Maintain Performance 

The implementation of the steady state strategy is through a program that is prioritized to ensure that the infrastructure assets can function in their required state, thus minimizing performance loss due to asset faults and failures. 

Support Network Capability 

Improvement 

The program is also designed to ensure that the infrastructure assets contribute to capability targets established through the Amtrak Service Plans, including enabling higher speed operations. 

## Lifecycle Management Strategies 

Amtrak Engineering has four key elements to its lifecycle management strategies (see Appendix A). Infrastructure Asset Line  115 Transition Strategy 

The concept of a useful life benchmark supports the development of a work-bank, but it is not an asset management strategy. This is because the transition to steady state maintenance requires SOGR backlog needs to be addressed first. To address this, Capital Delivery Engineering Services has identified a series of delivery strategies which must be fully implemented to effectively move to a steady state maintenance strategy. These are described in the following six sections. 

Reducing Expenditure 

More efficient delivery of work in the long-term reduces the funding needed and ensures that steady state maintenance is affordable. To achieve this, we need to invest in our equipment—high-output plant delivering maintenance efficiently; invest in our people—so we have qualified and experienced staff delivering the work; and invest in our asset management approaches—so we have the right information to inform our decisions, so our assets are performing to the optimum service levels. 

Equipment Availability 

The performance of Amtrak’s maintenance of way equipment has a direct impact on our ability to achieve steady state (normalized) maintenance of the infrastructure. The work of replacing assets is done by large machines in consist with an assembly line of smaller support machines. The tempo of work is determined by factors including track possession efficiency, where successive blocks of work are driven not only by the speed of the large machine but by the finish of the smaller machines. Pace is also set by the logistics of material fed and removed from the process by work trains, the reliability of the equipment to work without failure, and the skill of the people operating the equipment. To address the challenges associated with outmoded, unproductive, and insufficient equipment, the IMCS Department prepared an Equipment Asset Strategy and received approval to procure $362M in equipment over five years, including one new TLS for ties and rail replacement, two new undercutters for ballast cleaning and replacement and five new high-speed tampers for track geometry maintenance. The strategy was designed based on our current production capacity and our forecasted production capacity, with the goal of addressing state-of-good repair and transitioning to steady state. Equipment began arriving in FY19 and continues to arrive. The first undercutter arrived on Amtrak property in May 2023 and the second is expected in early 2024. The TLS is expected to be delivered in mid-February 2025. 

Availability of Qualified Personnel 

IMCS witnessed a significant loss of expertise due to attrition in previous years under normal circumstances. The intention was to counterbalance attrition through our hiring initiatives, but the COVID-induced hiring freeze allowed workforce depletion to go unchecked. Over this period, 40% of departing employees possessed over 20 years of experience, leading to a loss of more than 4,700 years of experience within a relatively short timeframe. IMCS’s hiring plan, as per the agreement, has restored our workforce levels to those before the pandemic. Nonetheless, there remains a void in terms of experience and qualifications within the workforce. The workforce management and business services group’s role involves supervising the position progression strategy and qualification mapping strategy, aiming to align the supply with projected demand. The position progression strategy centers around new hires, focusing on acquiring the necessary qualifications within specific regions to meet future project demands. The qualifications mapping strategy also adjusts our supply to match projected demand, but focuses on current, more seasoned employees. This group devises a strategic plan for managing positions and qualifications to fulfill demand. Furthermore, IMCS and labor relations are actively discussing potential changes to work rules and/or agreements with the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees (BMWE) to address challenges related to position management. 

Strategies for Improving Track Time Availability 

Amtrak has established new organizations within the Capital Delivery Department to work in partnership with other internal departments and external partners to improve resource demand planning and coordination and maximize the productivity and efficiencies of Amtrak’s capital construction program. Improving track time availability for critical SOGR maintenance work and major capital projects is among the top priorities for these new functions. Strategies being evaluated and/or implemented by Amtrak include: 

Long-term implementation planning 

Amtrak is developing long-term capital and outage plans to ensure planned outages are communicated broadly and with sufficient lead time to encompass all potential work, including maintenance work that can “piggyback” on capital projects’ outages. 

Expanding overnight work windows 

In response to shifts in ridership and travel patterns following the COVID-19 pandemic, Amtrak and commuter rail agencies are exploring opportunities to expand overnight work windows and thereby increase the amount of “productive” track time available to perform critical maintenance and advance capital projects each night. 116 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Integrating service and outage planning 

To further its capital construction program while protecting passenger service to the extent possible, Amtrak has established a Service Planning & Outages Round Table. This forum—which includes representation from 5 Amtrak departments—is tasked with evaluating the company’s commercial goals and track time requests and developing a unified set of service plan parameters that appropriately balance both objectives. 

Addressing Funding 

The SOGR backlog on the NEC, its branches, and other Amtrak-owned rail lines, identified using a mix of condition assessments and age, is significant - $47.0 billion. If sufficient resources are made available, Amtrak is ready to meet the challenge; Congress has expressed confidence in our ability to deliver by providing significant Federal funding over a five-year period (FY 2022-26). The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), signed into law in November of 2021, includes for that five-year period advance appropriations of: • $22.0 billion to Amtrak ($6.0 billion for the NEC and $16.0 billion) to address the backlog of obsolete infrastructure and other assets and deferred maintenance; • $36 billion for Federal-State Partnership competitive grants to be awarded by FRA—Up to $24.0 billion for NEC capital projects and at least $12.0 billion for non-NEC capital projects; and • $8.0 billion for Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvement and Railroad Crossing Elimination competitive grants, also to be awarded by FRA. Importantly, not all of the IIJA funding described above will flow to Amtrak. The company will continue to require robust annual appropriations to fund operating costs and capital expenditures not eligible for IIJA advance appropriations that are required to maintain infrastructure and other assets. While the IIJA authorized an additional $19.2 billion for NEC and National Network grants to Amtrak in FY22-26, the funding Amtrak actually receives in each year is subject to annual appropriations, which to date have been well below authorized amounts. However, IIJA advance appropriations, in conjunction with funding made available as a result of the NEC Commission’s finalization of a methodology for cost-sharing and mutual obligation among NEC users, will enable substantial progress in addressing the SOGR backlog. 

Improving our Strategies and Plans 

As we move to a steady state replacement cycle, we acknowledge that the first iteration needs to be staged (prioritized) such that the ongoing work program is manageable year-over-year. The asset plans in the Appendices therefore propose replacement cycles and implementation strategies. This work will be further developed, refined, and implemented through the asset plan period. 

Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), FY22-26 

# $66 Billion 

Advance Appropriations for Intercity Passenger and Freight Rail 

Includes $22 Billion in Grants to Amtrak ($6 Billion for NEC and $16 Billion for the National Network) $36 Billion 

FRA Federal-State Partnership Grants 

Includes up to $24 billion for NEC capital projects and at least $12 billion for non-NEC capital projects $8 Billion 

FRA CRISI and Railroad Crossing Elimination Grants 

Transition Strategy, continued Infrastructure Asset Line  117 

# Asset Inventory 

Amtrak is responsible for 2,507 track miles of track, 1,251 undergrade bridges, 510 route miles of electric traction, and 296 signaling interlockings nationwide. This includes 1,432 track miles of main-line infrastructure along the Northeast corridor—the nation’s highest speed rail line. Amtrak owns and/or manages infrastructure nationwide with an estimated replacement value of $86.8 billion. The infrastructure is largely located on the Northeast Corridor (NEC) between Washington, DC; Philadelphia, PA; New York, NY; and Massachusetts/Rhode Island border. Outside of the NEC, the majority of the infrastructure is located on the Michigan line in Illinois and Michigan. 

## NEC Main Line 

Amtrak owns and operates 1,240 track miles of main-line infrastructure (excluding yards and sidings) on the NEC main line connecting Washington D.C.; Philadelphia, PA; New York, NY; and up to the Massachusetts/Rhode Island border (see Figure 1). The corridor is largely built to operate as an FRA class 7 railroad with passenger speeds up to 125 mph. There are a limited number of track segments classified at a special ‘class 8’ status for 150 mph. 

## NEC Branch Lines 

In addition to the main-line assets described above, Amtrak also owns branch lines which are considered part of the NEC in several contexts. These include primarily: • The 261 track miles of infrastructure up to 110mph track along the Keystone Corridor from Philadelphia, PA to Harrisburg, PA. • The 108 track miles of the Springfield Line from New Haven, CT to Springfield, MA, which includes 19.5 miles of main-line track added in 2018, as part of the Springfield double-track program. • The 19 track miles of the West Side Connection from New York Penn Station to Spuyten Duyvil, NY. • The 12 track miles of infrastructure on the Post Road Branch from Post Road Junction to Rensselaer, NY. The NEC branch lines are largely built to operate as an FRA class 6 railroad with passenger speeds up to 110 mph. In addition to the main line, Amtrak maintains 53 track miles of sidings along the NEC branch lines.   

> Amtrak’s Empire Service crosses the Spuyten Duyvil Bridge over the Harlem River. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. 118 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

State of New York Supported Assets 

Amtrak is the responsible infrastructure manager for the long-term leased infrastructure 3 on the 181 track miles Empire Corridor on the Hudson Line between Poughkeepsie, NY and Hoffmans (near Schenectady, NY), along with 9 track miles of sidings, and owns outright two short segments of the Hudson Line in New York City and the Schenectady areas. The State of New York contributes to the capital and operating expense of portions of this infrastructure. 

State of Michigan Supported Assets 

Amtrak is responsible for maintaining and operating the 171 track miles of infrastructure from Kalamazoo, MI to Dearborn, MI owned by the state of Michigan, along with 40 track miles of sidings. The Michigan line (Chicago-Detroit Line) has been upgraded to operate as an FRA class 6 railroad with speeds up to 110 mph. 

Infrastructure Accountabilities 

Dark blue lines are owned and managed by Amtrak; light blue lines are managed by Amtrak and owned by others; orange lines are owned and managed by others. 

NEC Main Line and Branch Lines 

National Network 

> 3. Amtrak entered into a lease agreement with owners CSX in 2012.

NEC Branch Lines, continued Infrastructure Asset Line  119 Amtrak Infrastructure Assets - Summarized by Route/Ownership 

Track Bridges and Buildings Electric Traction Communications and Signals NEC Main Line 

• 1,432 Track miles of Rail main and siding • 2,075 Turnouts • 1,370,846 Wood ties • 2,852,132 Concrete ties • 10 Movable bridges • 451 Signal bridges • 770 Undergrade bridges • 487 Culverts • 100,476 Linear feet of tunnel Two systems: • 371 track miles 60 Hz constant tension in the north • 818.5 track miles 25 Hz fixed tension in the south • 23.5 track miles 60 Hz constant tension in the south • 175 Interlockings • 2,687 Switch machines • 272 Switch heaters • 2,209 Signals • 4,918 Track circuits • 173 Central Instrument Houses (CIH) • 3,902 route miles of Positive Train Control (PTC) 

NEC Branch Line 

• 469 Track miles of Rail main and siding • 448 Turnouts • 1,121,680 Wood ties • 338,820 Concrete ties • 1 Movable bridge • 87 Signal bridges • 274 Undergrade bridges • 349 Culverts • 2,681 Linear feet of tunnel 254 track mile 25Hz fixed tension on the Harrisburg line • 61 Interlockings • 483 Switch machines • 88 Switch heater cabinets • 454 Signals • 1,770 Track circuits • 59 CIH • 1,896 route miles of PTC 

Infrastructure leased from CSX, Capital Funded by the State of New York and maintained and operated by Amtrak 

• 190 Track miles of Rail main and siding • 130 Turnouts • 99,088 Wood ties • 5,674 Concrete ties • 1 Movable bridge • 13 Signal bridges • 114 Undergrade bridges • 3,031 Bridge ties • 58 Culverts • 57 Linear feet of tunnel There are no electric traction assets off the NEC corridor. • 22 Interlockings • 92 Switch machines • 36 Switch heater cabinets • 189 Signals • 879 Track circuits • 22 Central Instrument Houses 

National Network 

• 207 Track miles of rail main and siding • 614 turnouts • 728,640 Wood ties • * Concrete ties • 1 Movable bridges • 4 Signal bridges • 41 Undergrade bridges • 75 Culverts • 0 Linear feet of tunnel There are no electric traction assets off the NEC corridor. • 17 Interlocking • 33 Switch machines • 36 Switch heater cabinets • 96 Signals • 921 Track circuits • 17 CIH 

Infrastructure owned by the State of Michigan and maintained and operated by Amtrak 

• 211 Track miles of rail main and siding • 170 Turnouts • 742,720 Wood ties • * Concrete ties • 1 Movable bridges • 12 Signal bridges • 60 Undergrade bridges • 173 Culverts • 0 Linear feet of tunnel There are no electric traction assets off the NEC corridor. • 21 Interlocking • 460 Switch machines • 60 Switch heater cabinets • 307 Signals • 2,944 Track circuits • 21 CIH * Inventory data was not available for confirmation in this IALP, but will be incorporated in future updates. Above: Track tie renewal work near Elizabeth, New Jersey   

> 120 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

Inventory Improvement Actions 

The development of the 2019 Infrastructure Asset Line Plan highlighted the need to improve the confidence in infrastructure asset information – including the completeness, consistency and accuracy of the records held about the infrastructure for which Amtrak IMCS is responsible. Good quality information will enable engineering analysis to address asset performance issues and improve efficient planning of capital investments. Amtrak IMCS has undertaken an initiative to establish a robust information set to support asset decisions and management actions. The scope of this initiative includes defining the asset information requirements, leveraging industry leading geospatial database for location and asset inventory, collating information from existing sources and undertaking a program of field verification, where necessary, to improve the confidence in asset information—resulting in a complete data set, which is consistent and accurate. To date, IMCS has completed migration of its infrastructure assets to a geodatabase utilizing the ArcGIS platform and the IMCS Geographic Information System (GIS) team has worked with the various Engineering disciplines to define information requirements for asset classes. The new GIS database can be queried by Tableau, enabling development of fully automated infrastructure asset data models that yield real-time information on asset counts and SOGR status. A bi-weekly update cycle has been established to ensure that asset age data incorporates the latest replacement information. Data cleansing work is being performed and includes desktop, field, and SME data verification components. A Trace Network model of the track network in the GIS database is being built. In addition, formalization of GIS data standards and data editing/management workflows is underway. Once asset data is verified and standards are approved for data editing and management, the IMCS GIS team will begin adding new asset classes to the infrastructure asset inventory and augmenting existing data to support enhanced infrastructure asset data models. When completed, the Trace Network model will be used to produce flat-line schematics of Amtrak’s Track Charts in-house. 

NEC Branch Lines, continued Infrastructure Asset Line  121 Asset Condition 

Current Condition Monitoring (Inspection) Approaches 

Amtrak currently conducts extensive condition monitoring (inspection) programs of its infrastructure assets, as further described in the Asset Class Strategies (Appendix A). The monitoring activities—many of which are federally mandated— ensure day-to-day safe operation of the railroad. They are used to identify faults and potential faults which result in prioritized and scheduled maintenance. 

Asset Condition Assessment 

Except for Structures (i.e., undergrade bridges), a challenge across all asset classes is that there, historically, has been little done to assess the long-term condition of the asset. This limits the level of predictive analysis to determine future investment needs based on the state of good repair of the asset. In 2018, Amtrak Engineering developed and introduced the initial asset condition assessment framework, which was designed to provide an indicator of long-term trends in the state of good repair (SOGR) of the asset and results in a measured SOGR index for each asset. The guidelines will be used to inform capital replacement decisions and assign investment prioritization. Separate condition assessment guidelines have been developed for the major asset classes for each Amtrak Engineering Discipline. Within each asset class, the ‘parent level’ to assess condition has been determined based on the intervention activity options. For each parent asset type, a condition assessment matrix has been produced that considers one or more of the following five factors, along with how the information is operationalized: 1.  Age (or cumulative level of use): Estimate compared to an asset’s useful life. 2.  Visual Condition: Assessment based on visually identifiable signs of asset wear or deterioration. 3.  Reliability: Assessment based on an asset’s ability to meet the required technical level of service. 4.  Measured Condition: Assessment based on automatic, equipment-based, or manual measurement of one or more specific asset characteristics, which are indicative of the asset’s overall condition. 5.  Maintenance Condition: Assessment based on ability to maintain condition using planned maintenance activities, and the number of outstanding maintenance activities that exist within the system requiring unplanned interventions outside of routine maintenance. For each factor, a grading system has been developed for the parent asset type that ranges from zero (asset is non-operable) through five (asset is new or nearly new). An assigned condition index has then been derived from a review of the above factors. 

Defining State of Good Repair (SOGR) 

Amtrak considers an asset to be in SOGR when it satisfies the following: • It is in a condition where it can continue to meet and perform the functional requirements for which it was designed. • The use of the asset in its current condition does not pose a safety risk. • The lifecycle investment needs of the asset have been met, including all scheduled maintenance and where any minor backlog of capital needs can be programmed before any risks to safety or service reliability are introduced. Amtrak grades an asset in SOGR if it scores greater than or equal to 2.5 on its updated condition assessment framework. 

IALP2024 – Condition Assessment Approach 

Condition assessments are comprised of at least one of the five components detailed above: age, visual condition, measured condition, maintenance condition, and reliability. Amtrak IMCS, in collaboration with Capital Delivery Engineering Services, has started to develop condition assessments for one asset type per technical discipline as detailed below. Depending on the asset type, a subset of the components may be used to determine the overall asset SOGR score. In the absence of a condition assessment for the remaining asset types, age will continue to be used for assessing SOGR. The following score ranges are provided for guidance on the overall asset SOGR based on age: • Score 5: Asset is new or nearly new; 76% to 100% of expected useful life benchmarks remaining. • Score 4: Asset is at or nearing its midlife point; 50% to 75% of expected useful life benchmarks remaining. • Score 3: Asset has passed its midlife point; 25% to 49% of expected useful life benchmarks remaining. • Score 2: Asset is nearing the end of its useful life; 0% to 24% of expected useful life benchmarks remaining. • Score 1: Asset is beyond its useful life; 0% of expected useful life benchmarks remaining. • Score 0: Asset is non-operable. 122 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

The Electric Traction Department began utilizing the condition assessment framework methodology as part of the catenary structure assessment in FY20. A helicopter performs an aerial flight assessment of Amtrak’s catenary, signal and transmission system structures, electrical lines, and components and system assets along the Right of Way (ROW). Qualified personnel review the baseline assessment and identifies defects and assign a condition rating of specified components based on a rubric developed following the above scoring model. These defects are created by the appropriate division personnel as work orders for action in Amtrak’s enterprise asset management system. This initiative is aiding in the development of reliability centered maintenance regimes and improved capital planning for catenary structure renewal or replacement.. A SOGR score for catenary structures is based on three factors of condition: visual, maintenance and age. The visual condition accounts for 55% of the structures SOGR score, the maintenance condition 30%, and age 15%. The visual condition assessment is an aggregate value derived from the condition rating of each structure component. The maintenance condition is based on the total defects identified on the structure, with the 0 to 5 rating scale defining the allowable number of defects per condition score. The age SOGR score will remain unchanged from previous years but equate to a lower percentage of the overall asset condition. Catenary structures yet to be inspected during the helicopter flights will continue to solely use age as the measure of condition. The Track Department will soon (i.e., beyond the IALP2024) provide SOGR scores for turnouts based on the measured, visual and age factors of condition. The measure condition factor will be established based on findings during turnout inspections, where the turnout components are assessed using a good, fair, poor rating by Track inspectors. These ratings are translated into the 0 to 5 scoring methodology utilized in SOGR and will determine the measured condition score. The visual condition factor will be determined from visual track assessments performed by the System Track Office. The age of the asset and its impact on the SOGR score will remain unchanged from previous years but will equate to a lower percentage of the overall asset condition score. The exact weighting for each factor has not yet been determined, but the measured factor will account for the largest percentage of the SOGR score, while the visual condition and the age components will be equally weighted to provide an overall SOGR score for each turnout. The Structures Department began utilizing their required FRA annual inspections and system level annual inspections as an additional measure of condition, representing the visual condition factor of the SOGR score, which was only age-based for prior IALP updates. Undergrade bridges are visually inspected once per year by Bridge & Building (B&B) inspectors, with each component receiving a score based on the condition of the component. The undergrade bridge SOGR score in the IALP is now determined by weighting several of the component ratings together to form a composite score for each structure. Future IALP updates will incorporate inspection data as a measure of condition for assets that currently only have age-based scores. The Communication & Signals (C&S) Department is continuing to determine the best approach for defining condition of their assets, outside of age, as many of their assets are run to fail. This makes it challenging to determine a condition score, since the assets are either working or not. For other C&S assets, an obsolescence indicator may be used in lieu of maintenance factor. Obsolescence considers whether an asset or component is still manufactured and can be easily procured, will no longer be manufactured in the near future, meets functional needs but is technologically obsolete, or needs to be prioritized for replacement since a custom order is required or it needs to be fabricated in house. C&S, in conjunction with System Track, will soon be performing joint visual assessments of switch machines to develop visual condition factor scores. 

> Above: A lineman of the Electric Traction team works from a Catenary Car in New Jersey.

Asset Condition, continued Infrastructure Asset Line  123 Summary Assessed Condition – by Asset Class, Route and Ownership 

Asset Class NEC Main Line NEC Branch Line National Network Average SOGR Score % Not in SOGR Average SOGR Score % Not in SOGR Average SOGR Score % Not in SOGR Assets Owned by Amtrak Track 2.51 36% 3.14 38% 1.89 77% Bridges and Buildings 1.67 61% 1.99 41% 1.98 32% Electric Traction North End 3.71 6% - - - -South End 2.10 69% 2.00 83% - -Comms and Signals 2.50 55% 3.04 42% 3.17 52% Assets Maintained and Operated by Amtrak – Owned by Others Leased From CSX, Capital Funded by State of New York Owned by State of Michigan Track 3.20 32% 1.52 86% Bridges and Buildings 2.36 35% 2.14 35% Electric Traction - - - -Comms and Signals 1.34 89% 4.85 1% 

Note: Average SOGR’s are weighted based on replacement value of the asset – not the proposed project value which could include additional improvements. The average SOGR score and the % not in SOGR are not directly proportional. Average SOGR scores are weighted based on replacement cost, so assets with higher replacement costs have greater impact on the values presented in the table above. Amtrak is working on asset information initiatives to improve the estimation of average SOGR scores. Lastly, “-“ indicates there are no assets. It should be noted that this is the estimated value of assets that are past their useful life, and which need replacement. It is not the forecast project costs associated with replacing these assets. The total value of the SOGR backlog is based on unit rates developed as part of the NEC Commission’s Cost Allocation Policy update and confirmed by the Deputy Chief Engineers responsible for each asset class. Many of the highest priorities for SOGR are also identified as opportunities for network performance improvement (for example infrastructure assets under the Gateway Program). The SOGR backlog figure considers the refurbishment of the existing asset only and does not consider the proposed project costs of these capital improvement programs. 

## Assessed Asset Condition 

The following table provides a summary of assessed condition by asset class, route and ownership. The replacement value of infrastructure, with assets having a condition rating below 2.5, is considered to be Amtrak’s SOGR backlog for infrastructure and is estimated to be $47.0 billion in 2023 dollars. 124 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Communication & Signals:  $ 3,699,705,807 Electric Traction:  $ 4,665,698,394 Track:  $ 3,341,538,792 Bridge & Buildings:  $ 35,337,927,728 $44.5B 

## Total Assessed Value of State of Good Repair Backlog 

The figures below present the backlog by line and asset class. Ninety-five percent of the total backlog ($44.5 billion) is on the NEC main line and branch lines. About three quarters of the backlog is Bridge & Buildings, with Electric Traction, Track, and Comms & Signals making up the remaining quarter. 

Assessed State of Good Repair Backlog 

## Backlog by Line Backlog by Discipline Infrastructure Asset Line  125 Infrastructure Asset Line Planned Capital Spend FY24–29 by FAST Act Investment Category 

In Millions USD $ Investment Category FY24 (Base Year) FY25 FY26 FY27 FY28 FY29 FY24-29 Total Safety and Mandates 117.9 96.9 59.2 32.9 31.9 32.7 371.5 SOGR/Normalized Replacement Programs 1,217.1 1,555.2 2,566.1 2,113.5 1,997.7 1,576.2 11,025.8 

Track 632.3 638.6 697.2 724.9 756.9 789.2 4,239.1 

Communication & Signals 79.4 49.6 44.9 45.1 36.2 34.7 289.9 

Electric Traction 99.6 167.1 164.1 154.9 144.7 154.7 885.4 

Structures 405.8 699.7 1,659.8 1,188.5 1,059.8 597.5 5,611.3 Major Backlog Projects 520.9 1,172.5 1,097.1 1,040.2 809.5 961.1 5,601.4 Improvement Projects and Strategic Initiatives 1,349.3 1,369.3 1,519.5 1,663.6 1,292.2 1,363.5 8,557.5 Total 3,205.3 4,193.9 5,241.9 4,850.2 4,131.3 3,933.5 25,556.3 

# Five-Year Capital Program 

The capital spend plan for the FY24–29 Infrastructure Asset Line Plan includes safety projects and mandates ($340 million), SOGR/normalized replacement programs ($5.1 billion), major backlog projects ($7.6 billion), and improvement projects and strategic initiatives ($6.8 billion). A large portion of the capital investment within the SOGR/normalized replacement programs are directed towards track investments ($2.8 billion) and electric traction investments ($638 million). Over the past several decades, Amtrak’s annual appropriations and limited discretionary funding available to intercity passenger rail hindered the company’s ability to address its largest and most complex infrastructure priorities in an efficient and effective manner. With the passage of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), Amtrak is set to receive historic funding levels between FY23 and FY27. This funding will help the company address its long-standing SOGR backlog and advance improvement projects and strategic initiatives to create a modern and resilient railroad with more frequent service, connections to new markets, and reduced travel times between communities. Significant planning efforts—including the CONNECT NEC 2035 planning process led by the NEC Commission and Amtrak Connects US —are underway that seek to maximize the impact of this funding and our growing workforce and, most importantly, improve the travel experience for our passengers. Pursuant to 49 U.S.C § 24320(a)(2), the planned capital spending presented in this section is based on funding levels authorized or otherwise available to Amtrak in a fiscal year. The figures presented for FY24–29 are fiscally constrained based on funding available in FY23, plus inflation. The capital spending figures represented in this plan were prepared prior to the passage of the IIJA and will be updated in future plans to align with the significant increase in authorized funding levels for Amtrak and supplemental appropriations provided through FY26. 126 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Safety and Mandates 

This section provides examples of projects and activities that enhance the safety of our right-of-way infrastructure and/ or respond to legislative mandates, such as the continued implementation and advancement of Positive Train Control (PTC) technologies on Amtrak-owned right-of-way. 

Penn Station NY SCADA Phase II 

This project will create a new SCADA system for Fire and Life Safety elements from Weehawken, NJ to First Avenue in Long Island City including New York Penn Station. The new system will replace the existing SCADA Fire and Life Safety System to ensure efficient and safe operation of Amtrak’s assets and infrastructure and maintain compliance with current regulations and standards. 

Limits Compliance and Collision Avoidance System (LCCAS) 

The Piper’s Helix LCCAS solution allows for fleets of rail-bound and hi-rail equipped Maintenance-of-Way equipment to be detected and tracked on the railroad for the purpose of enhancing safety. The solution will serve to reduce the potential for employee and customer injury, equipment damage, and operational disruptions resulting from accidents and/or major rules violations. 

Engineering Advanced Technology Track Inspection 

This program provides for compliance with current regulations and the Tier III operation waiver for the New Acela trainsets. This work includes two projects which are (1) construction of a track geometry car and (2) the development of a computer-based visual inspection system to improve effectiveness of high-speed track inspections. This work will be performed over multiple years. 

New AEI Tag Reader Wayside Defect Detection 

This project will install a total of 28 single-track AEI Tag Reader sites at 18 new critical locations throughout the NEC over the next several years. The scope of work for this project relies on MOW Production crews, C&S Communication crews and / or contractor services to perform the installation of the AEI Tag Readers while the network interface will be performed by Amtrak’s IT department. Tag readers assist managers with locating equipment which will enhance the ability to support track construction. 

Amtrak Owned Positive Train Control Installation 

Positive Train Control is a safety measure mandated by the federal government for train operations and is used for collision avoidance, civil speed restrictions enforcement, temporary speed restrictions, and rail worker wayside safety. Moving forward, this project will make upgrades to address conditions issued by FRA with Amtrak’s PTC system certification, correct defects, and begin replacement of obsolete components. Critical activities are focuses on modifications to onboard PTC software required to address the FRA conditions. 

## SOGR Programs 

This section describes key activities within the four major SOGR/ Normalized Replacement program categories for Amtrak-owned and maintained right-of-way infrastructure: (1) Track, (2) Structures, (3) Electric Traction, and (4) Communications & Signals. Activities within these programs are ongoing and support our efforts to achieve and maintain a state of good repair on the NEC and across the US. 

Major Track Program Capital Investments 

Track Ballast. Perform work to advance the ballast condition towards a state of good repair. Examples of work performed under this program include replacement through spot undercutting, removal of mud-spots, out-of-face undercutting to improve track geometry and preserve ties and rail, and shoulder cleaning where total replacements are not needed. 

Track Drainage. Renew and replace track drainage assets currently not in a state of good repair. If not corrected, poor drainage will result in slow orders and higher maintenance costs associated with the accelerated degradation of track geometry. Examples of work performed under this program include the utilization of the slot-train, the Badger ditcher, and conventional earth moving equipment to re-profile existing drainage ditches and establish new ones. 

Tie Replacement Program. Utilization of Track Laying System (TLS) for the complete replacement of wood tie track with concrete cross ties and replacement of concrete ties that have been found to be defective or to have exceeded their useful life. This replacement program will reduce maintenance costs, potential slow orders and allow for improved on-time performance. 

Timber Program. Replace crosstie and track timber along the NEC which will reduce train delays, track geometry degradation, FRA track defects, and switch failures. Examples of work performed under this program include the installation of timber underneath turnouts in yards and block tie replacement at specific locations. 

Track Geometry. Surfacing, realignment and re-profiling of the track surface as required to meet FRA Track Safety standards, maintain ride quality standards and extend the life of track components. Infrastructure Asset Line  127 

Track Turnouts. Replacement of standard wood turnouts and associated components not currently in a state of good repair. Associated components include frogs, switch points, and wood and concrete switch timbers and other Track turnout material. 

Track Rail Replacement. Replacement of rail that is currently not in a state of good repair. Amtrak replaces an average of 35 miles of rail per year. Useful service life of rail has been exceeded once horizontal or vertical wear limits, internal defect rates, or surface conditions are approaching safety limits. This program will help to reduce maintenance costs and slow orders. 

Rail Grinding. Cyclical grinding of rail to extend useful life by removing surface flaws before they become larger defects impacting other track components and optimize wheel/rail interface for ride quality. 

Insulated Joint Repair. Replacement of defective or past useful life insulated joints to maintain properly functioning signal system and safe track structure. 

Joint Elimination Program. Program replacement of joint elimination to improve operational performance. 

Interlocking Renewal. Total renewal of the existing track structure within interlocking limits with new advanced technology; updates include repair or replacement of turnouts, concrete switch ties, movable point frogs, and switches. These interlocking renewal projects will move the railroad towards a state of good repair by eliminating failures and reducing maintenance costs. 

Major Structures Program Capital Investments 

Movable Bridges. Funding to advance Amtrak’s movable bridges towards a state of good repair. Some of the bridges will be brought to a state of good repair through selective component replacement while others require complete replacement of movable structure, mechanical and electrical systems. 

Undergrade Bridges. This program will address undergrade bridges currently not in a state of good repair including conversion of open deck undergrade bridges to ballast deck for improved train performance. Some of the undergrade bridges can be brought to a state of good repair through selective component replacement and others will require complete replacement. 

Culverts. A program aimed at rehabilitating or replacing culverts currently not in a state of good repair. Projects will improve the right of way drainage for improved reliability. 

Bridge Timber Replacement. Replacement of bridge timbers. Replacement of aging and deteriorated timbers will address SOGR needs, improve safety, efficiency and operational reliability. 

Tunnels. To advance tunnels towards a state of good repair. This will be accomplished primarily through component replacement or through complete replacement of the tunnel under extreme circumstances. 

Facility upgrades. Upgrades to Transportation, M/W, and M/E Facilities – to address SOGR needs, improve safety, efficiency, and security. 

Retaining wall replacement. Rehabilitation or replacement of retaining walls to address SOGR needs and backlog repair. Projects will improve safety and reliability. 

Major Electric Traction Program Capital Investments 

Catenary. The replacement and renewal of catenary wire, insulators and hardware currently not in a state of good repair. Elements of this program include not only the replacement of components that are beyond their useful life, but also the replacement of wire that is beyond the allowable wear percentages. 

Catenary Pole. Many of the catenary poles are over 90 years old and are beyond their designed service life. Replacement of the poles will provide physical support to the power transmission and catenary systems. 

Transmission. The replacement of traction power transmission wires and associated hardware currently not in a state of good repair. Much of the existing wire has been in service for over 70 years and has far exceeded its useful life. Examples of the work performed under this program include the replacement of transmission lines, the design, purchase and installation of new solid dielectric cable, demolition of the existing duct bank and construction of a new duct bank, terminations, splices and testing of the new cable. 

Substations and Frequency Converters. Improvements made to the electric traction and substations along the Northeast Corridor. Some examples of the work performed under this program are the replacement of traction power frequency converters, the replacement or renewal of air break switches, and renewal of substation components such as power transformers, circuit breakers and control cables. The reliable operation of these assets is critical to on-time performance. 

Signal Power Upgrades. Replacement and renewal of the existing signal power machines that generate the 6,900 volts for the signal transmission lines. This equipment runs 24 hours a day, seven days a week, has many rotating parts and requires extensive maintenance. Another example of work provided under this program includes the upgrade of the open signal power wire to insulated cable at key locations. 

SOGR Programs, continued 128 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Major Communications & Signals Program Capital Investments 

Automatic Block Signaling (ABS). ABS component failures have been identified as a major contributor to train delay. Signal upgrades will address SOGR needs and improve railroad safety, on-time performance and reliability for all users. 

ACSES. ACSES is the PTC system used on the NEC. This program includes upgrades to Central Instrument House, radio transmission equipment and wayside interface units. For interoperability with freight carriers operating on the NEC, Amtrak will install I-ETMS overlay that will allow freight trains and some commuter trains to operate on the NEC without ACSES equipment. See the Positive Train Control section beginning on page 27 of this document for additional detail. ACSES was mandated by the FRA for high- speed operation. 

Interlocking – C&S. This program is to address interlocking signal system components not currently in a SOGR. Upgrade signal systems at interlockings to eliminate equipment failures and reduce maintenance costs. This program involves the conversion of air switch machines to electric machines, automation of manual towers and the replacement of obsolete interlocking signal-system components. 

Grade Crossings. Upgrade highway crossing detection devices for more reliable operation of warning systems and enhance grade crossing system safety while reducing maintenance costs. Examples of work included under this program include the renewal of ties, rail, and crossing material at road crossings as well as concrete tie installation at grade crossings. 

Radio Upgrades. With the conversion to FCC required narrow banding, radio coverage will become an issue as signal strength is restricted by bandwidth. Engineering work (including a coverage study) and design are needed to ensure adequate coverage along the right of way. As a part of maintaining adequate radio coverage C&S will needs to add additional and replace the existing analog radio voters (quality signal selector) with state-of-the-art voters on the Northeast Corridor. 

Comms Equipment Housing. Replacement of communication equipment houses to address SOGR needs. Procure and install new equipment houses and move existing equipment and cabling into new houses. 

## NEC Major Backlog Projects 

The NEC Commission’s Intercity and Commuter Rail Cost Allocation Policy defines major backlog projects as “projects necessary for achieving a state of good repair, but are not undertaken on a routine basis, such as the rehabilitation or replacement of major bridges and tunnels.” This section describes Amtrak-led major backlog projects on the NEC advancing between FY2024 and FY2029. 

Hudson Tunnel Project 

This project will construct a new two-track rail tunnel beneath the Hudson River and rehabilitate and modernize the existing two-track North River Tunnel. When complete, the project will provide increased reliability and operational flexibility for Amtrak and New Jersey Transit on the NEC. 

Connecticut River Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace the Connecticut River Bridge between Old Saybrook and Old Lyme, CT that carries Amtrak and Shore Line East trains. Completed in 1907, it is the oldest movable bridge between New Haven, CT and Boston, MA. A century of operation has taken a toll resulting in restricting speeds over the bridge to 45mph. The frequent opening and closing of the bridge puts high demands on its aging components, thus increasing maintenance costs and reducing reliability for both railway and marine traffic. A full replacement of the existing bridge will have two-track, electrified movable bridge, steel through-truss trunnion bascule span; a ballasted, reinforced concrete deck on steel girder approach spans, and at grade approaches that tie into the existing railroad. 

Highline Renewal and State of Good Repair: Dock Bridge 

This project will convert Dock bridge from a movable to a fixed bridge along with making enhancements to the structural steel paining. This will help bring the bridge to a state of good repair which will help prolong the life of the bridge and minimize the risk of more costly rehabilitation in the future. 

Sawtooth Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace Amtrak’s Sawtooth Bridges, which currently limit the efficiency and reliability of rail operations along the NEC. The project replaces an approximately 1.1-mile-long segment of existing transportation right-of-way along Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor with new structures that would result in a four-track segment of the NEC with improved design speed. 

Susquehanna River Bridge Replacement 

To address SOGR and provide the increased capacity necessary for high-speed rail services between Philadelphia and Washington, DC, this project will replace the existing two-track movable Susquehanna River Bridge with two modern high-level, fixed structures, each with two tracks. 

SOGR Programs, continued Infrastructure Asset Line  129 

East River Tunnel Rehabilitation 

This project will rehabilitate Tubes 1 and 2 of the East River Tunnel between Penn Station, NY and Queens, NY. These tubes are in desperate need of rehabilitation and improvement due to continually worsening conditions given its age and damage related to Superstorm Sandy. Completing this project will ensure continuation of operations for Long Island Rail Road, New Jersey Transit, and Amtrak and address current capacity constraints which cause bottlenecks in and out of Penn Station. 

Pelham Bay Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace the over 100-year-old Pelham Bay Bridge which spans the Hutchinson River in New York. The current bridge is an outdated, lift style, moveable bridge and it is required to open multiple times per day. The overall deteriorated condition restricts the speed of trains passing over the bridge. 

Baltimore and Potomac Tunnel Replacement Program (Frederick Douglass Tunnel) 

The current Civil War-era Baltimore and Potomac Tunnel in Baltimore, Maryland will be replaced by a new, state-of-the-art-tunnel named in honor of Frederick Douglass. The new tunnel will reduce trip-time by permitting speeds up to 100 mph, minimize operational conflicts among high-speed, intercity, and commuter passengers, and increase throughput capacity. Phase 1 of the Frederick Douglass Tunnel will be constructed as two single track bores to provide an inherent resiliency and robust Fire & Life Safety measures that meet contemporary standards. 

Bush River Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace the existing two-track movable Bush River Bridge with new modern high-level, fixed structures with a total of four tracks. The project would benefit commuter and intercity rail as well as Norfolk Southern Railway, which uses the segment to access the Port of Baltimore. Funding is required for design and construction. 

Springfield Line Connecticut River Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace the existing single track Connecticut River Bridge with a new double track bridge to increase speeds for both commuter and intercity trains, eliminate capacity bottlenecks, and enhance on-time performance. 

Gunpowder River Bridge Replacement 

This project will replace the existing two-track Gunpowder River Bridge with new modern high-level, fixed structures with a total of four tracks. The project would benefit commuter and intercity rail as well as Norfolk Southern Railway, which uses the segment to access the Port of Baltimore. Funding is required for design and construction. 

> Working in the East River Tunnel. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman.

NEC Major Backlog Projects, continued 130 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

While much of our infrastructure capital investment focuses on urgent SOGR and normalized replacement programs, Amtrak is committed to the infrastructure improvements necessary to support and grow the business in the near- and long-term. The following section describes example improvement projects and strategic initiatives that are proceeding during FY2023 to FY2028 to improve reliability, safety, OTP, and capacity, including those identified as part of the CONNECT NEC planning process. 

Harrisburg Line Automatic Block System Park to Zoo 

Recognizing that the signal system on Amtrak’s Keystone Corridor and SEPTA’s Paoli-Thorndale Regional Rail Line is functionally obsolete, PennDOT, in coordination with the FRA, SEPTA and Amtrak, are proposing an upgrade to the signal system. Currently, the Keystone Corridor has ABS signals between Harrisburg and Park interlocking. Between Park Interlocking and Philadelphia, train traffic is controlled with single direction wayside signals. These projects are to design, construct, and install a new Automatic Block Signal system between Park Interlocking and Zoo Interlocking. 

Fitter Interlocking 

This project includes the construction of a new, wired universal interlocking in Clinton, CT that subdivides a 16-mile interlocking-to-interlocking segment (Guilford and View Interlockings) into two shorter segments. This allows single track operation over a shorter distance during maintenance and results in less operational disruption and improved reliability. 

Veltri Interlocking 

This project includes the design and installation of a new universal interlocking at MP133 in Mystic, CT. Construction includes the installation of turnouts, rail, ties, sub-grade, ballast, overhead catenary, signal transformers, signals cables, signal bridges, switch heater, switch machines, switch houses, instrument houses, and interlocking lighting. This new interlocking will provide operating flexibility, improve reliability by subdividing an 18-mile interlocking-to-interlocking segment into two shorter segments. 

Clark to Ham Constant Tension Upgrade Project 

Provide constant tension upgrade between Clark NJ to Ham Interlocking. Construction, testing/commissioning, acceptance and closeout for 7 route miles of 4-track mainline constant tension catenary, including installation of 305 Foundations, 155 portal beams, 6 catenary cantilever structures, and approximately 28 miles of constant tension catenary wires and hardware. Removal and retirement of existing catenary structures, installation of temporary platforms at two New Jersey Transit stations and other support tasks. This work is to be performed over multiple years. 

Mid-Atlantic Overhead Catenary System Replacement Program, Phase 1: Zoo to Paoli 

The scope of this project is to design, permit, construct, test, commission, startup, accept and closeout the relocation of the 138kV transmission line currently located off of Amtrak’s right-of-way to Amtrak’s right-of-way between Zoo and Paoli. Construction will include the new transmission line with approximately 620 new catenary structures, static wire and associated insulators, upgrades to the existing Bryn Mawr switching station for 138kv service, SCADA modifications for the new transmission line and decommissioning the existing transmission line. 

## Improvement Projects and Strategic Initiatives    

> A pre-production New Acela on the PH Line at Bryn Mawr. Infrastructure Asset Line 131

Mid-Atlantic OCS Replacement Program, Phase 2: Brill to Landlith 

The scope of this project is to complete design, permitting, NEPA/SHPO compliance, utility coordination, construction, testing/commissioning and closeout of 20 miles of new overhead catenary structures and wires from Brill Substation to Landlith Interlocking. The existing circa 1930 overhead catenary structures will be removed and salvaged. 

Bridge to Hanson Catenary Renewal 

This project will result in the replacement and installation of new catenary wire and the reprofiling of the OCS from Hanson to Bridge (all tracks) with approximately 140 Miles of wire replacements. The work being done on this project includes procurement of cable wires, hangers, and all necessary ET components. This project will support the high-speed operation for the new Acela. 

County to Newark Catenary Upgrades 

The scope of this project includes the replacement of all catenary structures from the EBHS of County Interlocking (MP 32.8) to west of Newark Station (MP 9.3) Including testing/commissioning, acceptance and closeout for 25 route miles of 4-track mainline catenary, upgrade of all catenary with SAP assemblies and fixed termination catenary, replacement of all signal power, installation of new OCS foundations, portal beams, structures, installation of temporary platforms, installation of new grounding and bounding of stations within the project limits, and demolition and removal of existing catenary structures. 

New York Metro Signal System Upgrades to 562 Program, Phase 1: County to Elmora 

The scope of this project is to design, supply, procure, install, test, commission, accept, and closeout a new Rule 562 cab no wayside signal system between County Interlocking MP 32.8 and Elmora Interlocking MP 14.7. Completion of this work will ensure the efficient and safe operation of Amtrak’s assets and infrastructure and maintained compliance with current regulations and standards. The work performed under this project includes the replacement of existing Interlocking signals with new signal head with clear block aspects and the retirement of all intermediate signals between County and Elmora. The existing signal system is signaled for traffic in only one direction for the outer tracks. 

Mid-Atlantic South Signal System Upgrades to 562 Project 

Design, construct, test, accept and closeout a new 562 cab no wayside signal system to replace the existing 251/261 ABS system including new interlockings with new signal houses containing vital microprocessor equipment, new signal heads with clear block aspects. Existing wayside intermediate signals will be retired. 

New York Penn Station Expansion 

This project would expand Penn Station New York to add new tracks, platforms, railroad systems, passenger concourses and underground connections, substation, station services, and “back-of-house”, i.e., non-customer facing support activities, to enable additional service capacity between New York and New Jersey upon completion of the Hudson Tunnel Project and the elements on the Gateway Program in New Jersey. The following are examples of projects that were developed as part of the CONNECT NEC plan. These projects support higher train speeds, greater operational flexibility, and reduced travel times along the corridor and are subject to further review and analysis by Amtrak through the CONNECT NEC planning process. 

Brook Interlocking 

This project will improve on-time performance for all users traveling between New Haven to New London by improving reliability and supporting operational flexibility during maintenance-related track outages. This project would add a westbound Track 2 to Track 1 right-hand crossover at Brook Interlocking that, when combined with the existing Saybrook Interlocking, will provide full universal interlocking functionality. 

Sunnyside Yard/Loop Track Capacity Improvement 

The project will provide capacity improvements at Sunnyside Yard, including upgrades to loop tracks, improvements to signaling, and the conversion of principle turnouts from hand-thrown to power. These improvements will increase average speeds and reduce travel times for Amtrak and NJ TRANSIT trains using Sunnyside Yard. This will increase equipment utilization, efficiency, and improve reliability when recovering from service disruptions. 

Landlith Interlocking – Wine Interlocking NEC Section Improvement Project 

This project will eliminate the last section where Amtrak and SEPTA share a two-track bottleneck, thus reducing delays, improving on-time performance, and increasing scheduling flexibility. The scope adds a 3rd main track from Landlith to Wine, completes Landlith Interlocking as a universal interlocking, retires Wine Interlocking, and restores Track 1 from Landlith to Wine. 

Improvement Projects and Strategic Initiatives, continued 132 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

A principal goal of IALP2024 is to continue the implementation of a transition strategy to move to normalized investment levels to maintain SOGR. To achieve this, it is necessary to address the SOGR backlog. 

Steady State Capital Replacement 

The ability to maintain infrastructure assets in a reliable state, or a State of Good Repair (SOGR), is accomplished by replacing capital components at the end of their useful lives which are defined in the Asset Strategies section in Appendix A. For planning purposes, replacement units are calculated by taking the number of assets in the sys-tem and dividing them by their useful life. This is what we define as normalized capital replacement, or steady state. Historically, the significant backlog of essential replacement work has rendered the achievement of a steady state, or true SOGR, elusive. In the past, Amtrak did not receive the requisite funding to maintain this steady state annually. However, with the funding provided by the IIJA, Amtrak and its partners can begin to address the SOGR backlog. 

SOGR Backlog 

Maintaining infrastructure assets in a SOGR with a steady state maintenance approach is only possible if the backlog is first addressed in a timely manner. Delaying SOGR efforts widens the gap to steady state and increases risk to reliable service for the customer. To determine the SOGR backlog, Amtrak has assessed the backlog of infrastructure investment using the condition assessment methodology detailed in the earlier Asset Condition section. Deferred work from prior years is now being prioritized. As discussed above, Amtrak IMCS has estimated the SOGR backlog at $47.0 billion for infrastructure nationally. Given the advancing age of the infrastructure, historical underinvestment, and the precipitous end of life facing major asset classes, IMCS has set a target of fifteen years to eliminate the SOGR backlog. Achieving a 15-year schedule for all asset types historically required significantly more federal funding and more support resources (manpower, equipment, and track outages) than were available. Using the FY24–29 capital funding forecast, Amtrak will be able to closely address both the backlog and the steady state need moving forward. It should be noted that funding for SOGR backlog is in addition to the necessary $1.2 billion annually to prevent further infrastructure deterioration in the steady state program. For this reason, we will continue to advocate for grants, state support, and consistent reliable funding. The table below shows a visual summary by discipline of total value and percent of assets not in SOGR. 

## Moving Towards Steady State and Addressing SOGR Backlog Assets Not in SOGR             

> Comm. & Signal Electric Traction Track Bridge & Buildings Total Asset Value $6,890,557,006 $9,504,581,510 $9,936,934,185 $60,420,520,000
> % Not in SOGR 49.97% 50.38% 38.94% 58.50% Infrastructure Asset Line 133

Infrastructure Asset Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Maintenance of Way & Engineering Support 551,259 601,645 624,747 647,148 670,836 685,440 3,781,075 

Total Operating Uses 551,259 601,645 624,747 647,148 670,836 685,440 3,781,075 

FINANCIAL USES (DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS) 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

Total Debt Service Payments - - - - - - -

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Normalized Replacement 1,217,119 1,555,162 2,566,123 2,113,485 1,997,671 1,576,236 11,025,797 Safety & Mandates 117,944 96,968 59,220 32,856 31,862 32,698 371,550 Major Backlog 520,983 1,172,479 1,097,087 1,040,226 809,536 961,136 5,601,447 Improvements 1,310,873 1,335,073 1,480,549 1,622,344 1,249,346 1,320,911 8,319,094 Environmental Remediation 11,649 6,332 9,907 11,016 11,370 9,710 59,984 Program Management 26,808 27,914 29,068 30,273 31,530 32,842 178,435 

Total Capital Uses 3,205,377 4,193,929 5,241,954 4,850,200 4,131,315 3,933,533 25,556,307 Total Infrastructure Spend $3,756,636 $4,795,574 $5,866,701 $5,497,348 $4,802,152 $4,618,972 $29,337,382 

> Connecticut River Bridge

# Performance and Outlook 

The FY24–29 Infrastructure Asset Line Plan outlines a comprehensive capital spend plan for Amtrak, focusing on safety projects, SOGR/normalized replacement programs, major backlog projects, and improvement projects. The plan reflects Amtrak's efforts to address its infrastructure priorities more efficiently and effectively, supported by historic funding levels from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. Additional details and information can be found in the Infrastructure Asset Line appendices. 134 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Primary Functions 

Many of the functions that support the NACSAL line do not directly own or maintain physical assets. A summary of identified NACSAL assets is provided below. 

Digital Technology and Innovation (DT&I) 

DT&I owns few physical assets. Amtrak’s strategy is to move from owning hardware and software to a managed service, cloud, and software subscription model. The majority of our hardware is contracted for either under a managed service contract or through our cloud vendors. Many of our software titles are contracted for using a SaaS (software as a service) model for an annual subscription fee. Amtrak benefits from this model by gaining the ability to move quickly to set up new solutions and provide customers with up-to-date versions and patches, and a secure software environment. 

Amtrak Police Department (APD) 

Amtrak has its own police department, responsible for safeguarding Amtrak employees, customers, patrons and infrastructure through partnerships and best practices. For security reasons, only summarized information regarding APD assets is provided. APD’s asset types include: facilities in more than 20 locations; Police vehicles; Canine (K-9) detection dogs with supporting facilities (e.g., kennels, vehicle cages); and Tactical equipment such as training simulators, multimode threat detectors, thermal imaging cameras, explosive trace detectors and communication devices (e.g., police radios). 

Human Resources (HR) 

Our Human Resources organization is responsible for managing and supporting Amtrak’s workforce by providing technical skills training for employees, as well as providing core training programs that ensure compliance with regulatory training mandates and improve employee performance. Training and Development staff are located at various facilities, with training provided virtually and at locations that include Amtrak stations and other facilities. The National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line (NACSAL) is responsible for cross-cutting assets such as systems for reservations, security, training, training centers, and others associated with Amtrak’s national rail passenger transportation system. Corporate Services include company-wide functions such as legal, finance, government affairs, human resources, and information technology. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# National Assets & Corporate Services Asset Line 

# 12 National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  135 

The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) requires Amtrak to acquire additional assets and greatly increase corporate services to support a transforming and growing business. The rapidly expanding need for new technology and accelerated delivery will require Amtrak to continue to embrace cloud-based platforms and adoption of best practice processes and user experiences which will also provide greater resiliency for critical systems. A key focus area is user adoption of new technology. A holistic view of the overall user experience will be a key factor to ensure we can adapt to changing technology quickly and successfully. 

Key Strategic Investment Themes 

# Strategy 

## Challenges and Mitigations 

In the United States, talent shortages persist, with technology equipment also facing limited supply. HR is actively engaged with its departmental partners in re-evaluating staffing needs to prioritize critical sources, enabling hiring of less seasoned staff by providing additional training, and improving the skills and training provided to our existing staff to use them more effectively. We expect supply chain challenges will continue to be significant in the short-term and will ease over time. We should expect challenges, particularly with large technology deployments, but we believe they will be manageable. 

Safety & Security 

Drive a culture of safety and security, enable safety awareness, efficiency, data visibility, and compliance. 

Manage Transportation, Rail Operations & Assets 

Support on-time performance, dispatch, and monitoring, enhance asset availability and management, enable condition-based maintenance, and achieve data-driven decisions. 

Financial Visibility & Cost Discipline 

Enable real-time financial insights, optimize cost structure, improve efficiency and predictability, and drive transparent project and portfolio reporting. 

Technology & Cybersecurity Capabilities 

Modernize infrastructure, transform data platforms and strengthen cybersecurity to improve resiliency of critical business operations and protect revenue. 

Revenue, Ridership & Transformation 

Anticipate customer trends and demand to maximize yield per seat. 

Customer Experience 

Provide a superior customer experience throught enhanced engagement and communication, targeted marketing, and reliable Wi-Fi. 

Fleet Modernization 

Provide one-fleet view of Amtrak’s rolling assets. Standardize technology solutions across New Acela, Airo , IDOT, and future new fleet purchases. 

Connected Employee 

Support an engaged digital workforce, achieve process efficiencies and real-time analytics, and improve employee self-service capabilities. 

## Business Alignment 

Amtrak’s strategy focuses on a set of strategic imperatives that apply information technology (DT) in alignment with the organization’s strategic pillars and core business objectives. 136 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Improving Safety and Security 

Amtrak has established improved safety and security as a top priority for the enterprise. Success against this objective will require the effective delivery of new technology and analytics across a broad spectrum of safety processes and goals. The DT&I Safety and Security Technology team works collaboratively with the Safety and Security department to deliver required technology initiatives in support of the business roadmaps. These initiatives include capabilities for improved safety compliance, data analytics, predictive modeling, modernized and updated law enforcement and surveillance equipment, passenger pre-screening programs, information sharing with intelligence and law enforcement communities and supporting systems for the Amtrak Police Department (APD), safety management, and continuous improvement. 

Key Initiatives 

Safety Management System (SMS) 

SMS is a comprehensive technology application that supports the safety management framework to include safety promotion, assurance, risk management, and policy. The SMS technology project will enhance data collection, integration, reporting, and analysis that informs decision making to mitigate safety hazards and environmental and public health risks throughout the organization and increase compliance. This project serves as a foundation to Amtrak’s SMS, required by 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 270, System Safety Program Plan. Employee and Customer Injury processes will be completed in FY24 and Environmental and Public Health modules will be implemented in FY25. 

Safety Analytics 

Create a large, complex portfolio of data related to safety outcomes, processes, and risk factors, including environmental and public health. These robust data assets will support advanced analytics, and capabilities for predictive modeling and other analytical techniques, that will help Amtrak move beyond measuring safety outcomes to understanding risk factors that lead to injuries and incidents. Actionable analytics will lower the frequency and severity of safety related incidents. 

Mobile Document Compliance System 

Provide access to safety critical and federally required documentation by Amtrak Operations employees electronically through an application on a mobile device, replacing a highly manual paper-based system. This will improve efficiency and safety compliance by ensuring up-to-date documentation is available to staff at any time. The distribution of tablets to Operations staff will also serve as the foundation for further automation and mobility. 

Safety, Performance and Record Tracking Network (SPARTN) 

Enhancements to SPARTN will provide new functionality for safety related audits and inspections, meeting Federal Railroad Administration regulatory requirements (e.g., 49 CFR parts 217, 240 and 242). Planned capabilities include improving compliance with Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) audit findings related to Test Officer and Employee Certifications, streamlining training data management, integrating with the Enablon Platform, enhancing observational testing, optimizing Application Programming Interface (API) infrastructure, and harnessing artificial intelligence for targeted analytics. 

Aware 

Enhancements to Aware, which provides location data and real-time alerts on conductor handheld devices used on rail lines without Positive Train Control (PTC) when trains are approaching locations where conductor-engineer communications are required by safety requirements. Aware will be further integrated within the Conductor device to support an improved user experience and enable conductors to provide specific issue feedback via their devices. 

Electronic Physical Security Systems 

Replace outdated video surveillance systems (VSS) infrastructure and access control systems at key locations, centralize existing VSS systems onto the Amtrak Business Network, and create a core VSS platform for new site deployments. This integrated approach ensures a unified experience for Corporate Security and APD partners, enhancing their ability to respond effectively to security threats. Simultaneously, this initiative focuses on standardizing video technology and expanding electronic security systems across passenger fleets and trainsets, including Airo, New Acela, Siemens Venture cars, and Long-Distance trains, all with the overarching objective of enhancing passenger and employee safety. 

Access Control Systems 

Develop a detailed future state architecture and operating model to drive increased security and standardization of physical access control systems in buildings, yards, and right-of-way. Implement a Visitor Management system for planned access to Amtrak buildings and yards. Integrate physical access control systems, including Lenel Smart ID and Genetec cameras, for increased security. National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  137 Customer Experience 

We will continue to support the development of responsive technologies for Amtrak’s customers, prospects, employees, and business partners. Amtrak’s technology platforms are continuously improving on time-to-market. Our objective is to position Amtrak to gain new riders, retain customers, maximize customer satisfaction, and enable the Amtrak brand. Amtrak will support all phases of the customer experience, across all channels, segments, and transactions. The customer experience strategy includes unified communications across all channels, devices, and locations; simplified, intuitive, customer interface that requires minimal customer effort to use; continuous exchange of information from Amtrak to passengers and vice versa; and creation of rich, connected, reliable and clean data assets. Digital payment solutions will evolve to support self-service for point of sales, cashless and touchless product offerings, future trends for onboarding, and customer-initiated check-in including automated ticket lifts. Moving forward, we will work with state partners to standardize innovative technology solutions that benefit customers, and operate and maintain them at the highest level, to help state partners improve their operations and provide them with economies of scale. 

Key Initiatives 

Unifying all digital and physical customer channels with the Omni-channel program will deliver a singular customer experience to any location, including home, office, station, or train, and on any device. 

Next Generations Reservation System 

As a component of the Road to Retailing key initiative, replace 1970s Mainframe legacy reservation system written in an old systems language, which is difficult to maintain resources to support. The new system will modernize Amtrak’s pricing, inventory, offer management, and reservations management capabilities. Enhancing these functions will help to resolve business challenges with the system flexibility, scalability, and maintainability necessary to respond to changing customer demands and market influences. 

Amtrak Guest Rewards (AGR) 

Continue the efforts to drive incremental ridership and revenue, recognize high value members, and fuel customer retention and new customer acquisition. The AGR system will enable more opportunities for points redemption, dynamic redemption fare point sales that will leverage an optimized and modernized rules engine. Increase AGR and promotional capabilities in the mobile app to further engagement, thereby increasing participation and improving member satisfaction. 138 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Mobile App Re-Engineering 

Amtrak’s mobile application runs on old and outdated framework which does not leverage capabilities available on modern devices. Rebuild Amtrak mobile app to enhance competitiveness, improve travel experience, increase customer satisfaction, boost AGR membership and retention, and drive ridership and revenue growth. 

Multimodal Travel Support 

Integrate with different travel partners and expand Amtrak’s distribution channels with third party trip planners, which will increase ridership and improve customer experience. 

Customer Notification and Service Change Management 

Improved customer notification and self-service functionality will provide accurate and timely information throughout the customer journey by enhancing pre-trip, enroute, gate/track, and advisory notifications to internal and external customers. To improve the customer experience and reduce calls to Amtrak’s contact center in times of service disruption and when automatic reassignment of reservations required by service changes is not possible, the self-service functionality will notify customers and allow them to access channels to cancel or modify their bookings. 

Customer Experience, continued National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  139 

E-Commerce/Customer Experience 

The DT&I strategy will drive the engaging customer experience in the customer facing eCommerce channels and agent systems to provide customers with an intuitive, personal, and simple experience when shopping, planning, and booking their travel. It will build a customer centric experience that will provide a path forward to capitalize on unrealized revenue opportunities for differentiated service and relevant offers. These new revenue streams will require system and process changes to create, and a robust retail-like platform to display, sell and service. The transformational capabilities will include a redesigned booking experience for long distance versus other routes; enhanced customer personalization and target promotions based on geographic location; driving the Omni channel experience across channels; allowing customers to order food via the mobile app and to self-check-in the ticket on certain trains; enabling customers to see the notifications in the message center inbox; and overall home page experience improvement for both the Amtrak website and mobile applications. Newly implemented technologies will ensure eCommerce channels satisfy international and federal data privacy and Accessibility regulations. 

Unified Train Status & Communications 

Implement a unified train management system to track train locations, provide accurate arrival and departure information to customers, optimize rail operations, reduce manual intervention, and mitigate legacy technology risks. This strategic initiative will redefine, reimagine, and implement how Amtrak manages train location, train status, and projected train arrival and departure information so that we can improve the information we share with our customers, increasing their satisfaction and ridership, as well as improve rail operations, reduce manual intervention and risks associated with legacy technology solutions, and improve overall employee satisfaction. 

Passenger Wi-Fi 

Because Wi-Fi plays a vital part in influencing customer experience, Amtrak will continue to invest in technical innovations and upgrades to the overall service offering. DT&I is working to transition long-distance and State Supported routes to a new service provider who will enhance Wi-Fi service under a unified national Wi-Fi strategy. We are also future proofing our onboard networks for the emergence of 5G and are expanding the role of Wi-Fi to provide connectivity for new systems such as Point-of-Sale, Video Surveillance, and others. 

On-Board Entertainment (OBE) 

OBE enables customer Wi-Fi devices to access on-board movies, television, and other entertainment options. It reduces train-to-ground Wi-Fi congestion and Amtrak’s Wi-Fi data costs and offers compelling entertainment in areas where cellular services may be limited or non-existent. 

On-Board Food and Beverage Point-of-Sale 

On-board functionality to collect food and beverage sales data will streamline sales and improve analytics for revenue, profitability, and the mix of onboard products for sale; manage and facilitate replenishment of inventory; and provide better auditability. These capabilities will also support new equipment fleet launches and state partner programs to enhance food service. 

Mobile Customer Service Representatives (CSRs) 

Mobile CSRs will bring customer service employees into the Omni-channel eco-system, whether they are in stations, on trains or a contact center agent. Technology enhancements such as handheld devices with access to customer information and improved baggage tracking will provide better service to customers. Situational awareness of CSRs will be upgraded to include Service Change Management alerts. 

Customer Satisfaction Data Collection 

In support of our relentless focus on growing customer satisfaction and driving continuous improvements, Amtrak will continue to increase customer survey data collection and improve the post travel survey formats for our passengers. Additionally, we will integrate the customer satisfaction data into customer service channels to enable a personalized customer service experience. Amtrak is building near real-time capability that will enable us to target specific aspects of the travel experience with short surveys, request feedback from passengers during their travel and reduce time for data collection and insights. DT will enable Marketing to identify and create customer segments to further improve the relevance of marketing outreach programs that serve both existing and future customers. 

Passenger Information Display Systems (PIDS) 2.0 

Replace outdated customer-facing PIDS on monitors at Amtrak stations with next generation, state of the art, technology that will give passengers e access to the latest updates on train information. The new technology will enable Amtrak to quickly disseminate information to passengers regarding service disruptions and in the event of an emergency. PIDS 2.0 will also replace legacy interior and exterior passenger displays at Amtrak owned stations with a modern all-in-one display. 

Customer Experience, continued 140 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Revenue, Ridership, and Transformation 

DT&I is delivering new and sophisticated technology services and solutions to support Amtrak’s customer and revenue growth. A major priority of this strategic imperative is the overhaul of Amtrak’s revenue recognition and reporting processes and platforms. This transformation will significantly decrease the overall complexity of the current platform by addressing antiquated technology, rules, and processes to enable better revenue reconciliation, accounting and reporting of revenue. Continuous improvement to data, analytics and forecasting for the Pricing and Revenue Management group will facilitate pricing products and services optimally and effectively balance price versus demand at the margin. 

Key Initiatives 

Road to Retailing 

Today’s retail travel environment requires a strategic shift away from reservation centric eco-systems to customer centric, revenue optimizing product offerings. The Road to Retailing is a paradigm shift to create customer centric, relevant products where the differentiator is the experience. The four strategic pillars of this initiative are Offer Management, Inventory Management, Order Management, and Customer Experience. 

Pricing and Revenue Management (PRM) 

Leverage the new Revenue Management System (RMS) with big data and AI by integrating historical passenger booking activity, pricing and inventory data, and various real-time data sources to optimize revenue management. Improved analytical tools and competitive analysis to execute predictive modeling and what-if scenarios will help the company modify pricing in real time as demand patterns dictate. These real time adjustments will be designed to work with the evolving reservation system platform as part of the Road to Retailing approach The BidUp program continues to provide opportunities for unsold inventory and instant upgrades enhancing the customer experience while providing insight to customer behaviors for new offering ideation. 

Sales Data Insights 

As the country’s demand for intercity travel rebounds, old patterns and heuristics relating to pricing, demand and customer travel patterns are being replaced by new ones. Improved forecasting and inventory management technology will ensure that Amtrak can precisely understand capacity and load factors so that we can optimize supply against demand and develop enhanced pricing algorithms that deliver maximum revenue yield across the customer base. 

Agent Productivity Workspace 

Replace Amtrak’s obsolete, 20-year-old contact center and station agent mainframe-based reservation applications with a modern web service bases Software as a service (SAAS) platform for the creation and management of reservations and related requests. 

Digital Payment Next Gen 

Replace the current outdated payment processing system with a next generation payment processing platform that will add convenience and modern payment and refund processing capabilities for all Amtrak sales channels: Amtrak.com, Mobile, Kiosk, Station Agent, Contact Center Agents, B2B, manual credit card system (MCCS) and chatbot (Julie), and on-board Point of Sale with. The new platform will provide a comprehensive and integrated payment platform for Amtrak applications to directly interact with the payment processor gateway. The platform will also support extendibility to include new payment models, eliminating the need for multiple payment processors. National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  141 Financial Visibility and Cost Discipline 

Amtrak continues to find opportunities to reduce operating costs and become a leaner, more efficient operation. Technology will play a vital role in enabling the organization to optimize its cost structure and spending. Our strategy is based on key investments in data and analytics, process redesign and automation, and Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) platform optimization. 

Key Initiatives 

Improved Project/Portfolio Management and Reporting 

Ongoing development of the Enterprise Project and Portfolio Management program will standardize, automate, and provide transparency in the planning, monitoring, and reporting of capital projects across the company. An integrated technology solution will improve efficiency, quality controls and analytics through a consistent lifecycle for project and portfolio management and execution. 

Timekeeping Standardization 

Continue development and roll out of the Enterprise Timekeeping solution for agreement employees as we consolidate timekeeping systems to capture time across a diversified workforce; apply relevant pay rules, schedule employee shifts; and manage overtime and labor costs with ease. Continue to improve internal controls, reduce manual work, centralize pay rules, align to collective bargain agreements, provide aggregated insights into overtime, and minimize opportunities for fraud. 

Funds Management System 

By implementing a comprehensive funds and grants management solution, Amtrak can establish stronger controls, enhance compliance, improve transparency, and ensure accurate reporting. This will enable better financial management and strengthen the enterprise's overall effectiveness in utilizing funds. Amtrak will implement an end-to-end funding sources management solution to streamline and modernize the legacy administration of all funding sources. Its implementation will ensure efficient, standardized processes; and automation of antiquated manual processes, resulting in enhanced operational efficiency, compliance, and risk reduction. 

Integrated Risk and Compliance Program 

This initiative aims to replace obsolete processes by implementing a comprehensive enterprise-wide risk and control management platform that will ensure adherence to risk compliance guidelines, fraud and internal audit policies, and procedural regulations. The new program will proactively detect fraud and misconduct and provide advanced analytics capabilities for preventative measures and decision making. 

Modernized Supply Chain Inventory and Warehouse Management Processes 

Modernize supply chain inventory and warehouse management processes by using GPS-integrated RFID technology for tracking materials stored alongside the tracks and introducing Lineside Distribution through Autocrib machines at around 40 locations to enable efficient self-service material dispensing. Additionally, the deployment of state-of-the-art Kardex Machines at multiple Amtrak warehouses will enhance efficiency, ensuring continuous operations with minimal downtime and aligning with Amtrak's safety-first vision. 

Procurement and Supply Chain Management Insights 

Procurement and Supply Chain analytics empower detailed spend analysis, offering increased visibility into trends, pricing variations, and inventory optimization. Amtrak's enterprise data warehouse (EDW) has established the data foundation for data-driven decisions through self-service reporting and analytics. Efforts are ongoing to incorporate additional data sources and expand analytic capabilities for end-users, significantly improving the current labor-intensive, supplier-level spend analytics processes. 

Single Audit Asset Tracking 

Amtrak is responsible for maintaining accurate equipment records and validating the physical existence of equipment every 24 months under the requirements of 2 CFR 200.313 for “Single Audit Assets” (property subject to Amtrak’s Equipment Control Policy). To meet audit requirements, the Single Audit Asset Tracking System will collect data from various tracking technologies currently in use and transmit it to a single repository where all relevant audit data (location, condition, etc.) for the assets is stored. It will create a unified dashboard with mobile access for asset tracking and data visualization. 

Integrated Supply and Demand Planning 

Implement a new material planning solution to optimize material inventory based on consumption and demand signals, both planned and unplanned. The new capability will enhance fill rates, optimize inventory, boost labor productivity, improve maintenance effectiveness, enhance schedule compliance, and ensure material availability by employing advanced planning and forecasting methods. 

Continuous Process Improvements 

Many current Finance, Procurement and Supply Chain Management processes are heavily manual and inefficient. Amtrak will identify opportunities to increase efficiency and reduce complexity by leveraging key capabilities in existing systems to automate repetitive and manual tasks. 142 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Connected Employee 

The connected employee is an objective supported by DT&I as part of our overarching strategy to take a user-centric approach to delivery. An engaged employee is more motivated, productive, and committed to Amtrak’s goals, leading to a more satisfied and retainable workforce. Technology solutions that facilitate effective and efficient processes, standardized workflows, self-service capabilities, training, consolidated data; and easy access to HR functions such as compensation, performance, benefits, time off, and resolution of employment-related issues will create a better employee experience and are the key to success. Consolidation of core HR data along with a data-driven approach to workforce management, using built-in platform reporting and the EDW for enterprise-level analysis, will drive efficiency and consistency. A connected employee can access systems critical to perform their job functions anywhere, any time and on any device. The technology platform provides the structure for a series of flexible solutions adapted to employee information and support needs. A centralized platform that enhances the employee experience by utilizing self-service capabilities, mobile friendly interface, and expanding single sign-on capabilities serves as the means for the employee to easily locate, access, and utilize the systems they need to do their jobs. Amtrak’s DT&I strategy will focus on providing search capabilities for employees to find enterprise information, policies, and rules, regulations, and advisories; offer access to Office 365 productivity tools and the collaboration portal; and increase digital engagement with employees to facilitate training, corporate initiatives, and communications. 

Key Initiatives 

HR Information System (HRIS) / Employee Central (EC) 

Building on the HR Transformation Assessment completed in FY 2021, DT&I will migrate the current core HRIS to the latest SuccessFactors Employee Central to provide a unified platform for core HR functions and leverage available functionality to meet key business needs. The unified platform will address existing pain points with a focus on frictionless HR processes and customer-like user experience, create the ability to tell stories and insights with people data, and drive standardization of HR processes to create a modern user interface emphasizing employee self-service which includes a mobile-first approach. The platform will fully embrace SuccessFactors processes and functions to provide a single point of contact for employees and replace third-party add-ons and customizations with similar functionality in the core system. 

Digital Adoption Platform 

Implement a platform to improve adoption of enterprise systems such as Ariba, SAP, and SuccessFactors. This solution will provide a directed, modern user interface to help users perform tasks and provide tutorial walkthroughs. This will assist users in adopting new technologies and enhance the employee experience by integrating with mobile and desktop applications. 

S/4 HANA Implementation 

Replace Amtrak’s current ERP system, a now obsolete core technology and information sharing platform, with an S/4HANA system. Amtrak will rearchitect the ERP platform and its supplementary suite of products to improve efficiency and functionality for internal information sharing between Amtrak’s departments and external interface with Amtrak's customers. Rearchitect Amtrak's core ERP system by developing a multi-year roadmap to successfully implement S/4HANA. Replacing legacy technologies with the modern, DT supported S/4HANA is fiscally prudent, will align Amtrak's internal processes with best practices, and allow Amtrak to achieve desired and measurable business outcomes as we move into the future. 

Integrated Real Estate Management Platform 

Replace Amtrak's labor-intensive real estate administration, facilities management and maintenance, sustainability, and energy management, and space planning processes with an integrated Real Estate Information System (IRIS). The current manual methods hinder forecasting, planning, and efficient utilization of real estate assets across various departments. An IRIS, will give Amtrak a comprehensive view of its real estate portfolio, including value, occupancy, maintenance, leases, suppliers, and models, and optimize real estate and facility resources, significantly reducing costs while increasing business productivity. This shift will provide Amtrak with valuable insights about and better control over its real estate assets and operations. 

Financial Visibility and Cost Discipline, continued National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  143 

Law Systems 

Continue to expand capabilities for the Passport application which encompasses claims, matters management and invoicing. Implement an enterprise-wide records management tool to ensure compliance with external regulations and internal policies by managing the retention and disposition of content. 

Employee Training 

Deploy mobile devices to be used on a loaner basis by Operations staff to access the Electronic Learning Management Platform for required training. Centralize training and certifications and implement tools and processes to provide remote training, as well as virtual reality options when appropriate. 

Knowledge Access 

The ability to find information, both structured and unstructured, is a key part of ensuring workers can do their job effectively. All Aboard, Amtrak’s intranet site, Microsoft Teams and email are key components of the Unified Communications approach, giving tools to employees to collaborate and stay connected. We will continue to evolve the All Aboard platform, including providing mobile access and expanding content and leveraging it as a central portal, so employees can access key DT&I applications and information they need in the course of their daily work. This is a critical component in providing opportunities for real-time collaboration and meaningful connections. 

Rewards and Recognition Platform 

Amtrak implemented a new technology platform in 2022 to support real-time feedback, social recognition, peer to peer recognition, service milestone rewards, and other employee recognition. This platform has enhanced communication, enabled increased recognition of employee accomplishments, and created visibility for spot bonuses. 

Continuous Improvements 

Leverage features within the core HRIS platform and ancillary technologies to implement continuous improvements and enhance the employee experience. Focus will be given to streamlining and automating the recruitment and onboarding processes including leveraging AI, mobility, and other technology advancements. Additional improvements will include adding new capabilities such as employee referral to support hiring, introducing competencies to hire, and measuring and training employees. 

Workforce Planning 

Amtrak is seeking a comprehensive platform for workforce planning with the objective of streamlining and automating the process, reducing administrative burdens, identifying and responding to changing business needs, providing access 

to data analytics to facilitate informed decision making based on real-time workforce data, minimize labor costs by aligning workforce needs with business needs, and ensure optimal staffing levels and allocation of resources for maximum productivity and compliance with labor laws and regulations. 

Workplace Infrastructure Technology 

Improve physical workspace and infrastructure through upgrades to Amtrak offices, stations, shops and maintenance buildings and associated properties. These upgrades will modernize aging building infrastructure with smart sensors and controls and implement deferred building technology investment. The goal is to optimize performance, reduce costs, enhance productivity, and optimize use of our real estate assets. 

Connected Employee, continued 144 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Manage Transportation, Rail Operations and Assets 

Variability must be reduced to increase the capacity of Amtrak’s network capacity so that Amtrak can deliver reliable service. The current Amtrak culture relies heavily on legacy practices and a labor-intensive approach to produce data and results. Not only does this add variability to the performance and management of the network, but it also limits the ability of managers and front-line users to efficiently obtain the information they need to make better decisions. The systems and practices of many aspects of rail operations are ready for modernization. Multiple platforms that control systems such as train traffic and overhead (catenary) power are nearing end-of-life. Inconsistent practices and safety protocols have led to issues with training, rules violations and maintenance. Manual processes related to labor, incident and yard workflow management, and other core Operations processes, cause inefficiencies, delays, and unnecessary costs. Rather than just performing a “one-for-one" replacement of obsolete systems, Amtrak will design an integrated, ecosystem of Operations Technology that delivers value at each phase of deployment. Asset maintenance is an integral part of rail operations requiring a high degree of coordination to ensure optimum asset utilization. Amtrak’s targeted approach to asset management addresses modernizing and automating practices and procedures for maintenance of physical assets consistently across the company. Modernization and automation goals extend to other aspects of operations to leverage automation for improved efficiency. Leveraging richer data, coupled with supporting analytical technologies, will enhance asset performance, identify productivity opportunities, and reduce unplanned issues, as well as help prioritize investments that lead to the largest performance improvement. 

Key Initiatives 

Enterprise Asset Management (EAM) 

Currently, Amtrak manages its physical assets with multiple systems, some of which are nearing the end of life or are no longer supported by vendors. The EAM Program is a multi-department, multi-phase program to deliver a single EAM system for the Stations, Facilities, Properties, and Accessibility group and the Mechanical and Infrastructure Management and Construction Services (IMCS) departments. The EAM program is a multi-year project to deliver an enterprise-wide asset management solution that will modernize the way Amtrak maintains and invests in the repair and replacement of our assets, shifting the focus from a reactive to a predictive approach that will maximize the value of investments in and maintenance on our equipment. This will be achieved by utilizing standard out-of-the-box capabilities wherever possible and, where gaps exist, working directly with the software providers to develop required capabilities within their core commercial product. The EAM initiative will also create rich data assets that can be used to execute conditional maintenance and identify opportunities for improved processes and procedures throughout our network. As Operations adapts to its new capabilities and datasets, additional tools such as geospatial information systems, wayside and onboard health monitoring, automated alerting, dashboards, and other leading asset management technologies will support, streamline, enhance, and modernize the asset management lifecycle. These tools, coupled with analytics capabilities, will shift asset management to a more predictive focus. The EAM program and its technology improvements will drive materials savings, reduced overtime, and greater workforce efficiency while improving asset reliability and increasing customer satisfaction by reducing service disruptions and improving on-time performance. 

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 

This initiative will establish a scalable Enterprise GIS Infrastructure and undertake development of integrated geospatial applications and analytics. Location and asset data from across Amtrak will be leveraged to provide new capabilities, improved operational efficiencies and new insights—all leading up to evolution of a digital twin of Amtrak's right of way. New capabilities will be developed to enable planning for track outages to support major construction programs, location tracking of high value assets for auditing, next generation train operations, asset and property mapping, sharing of train schedules with external mapping applications such as Google Maps, imagery and Lidar viewing, grade crossing safety and map-based field data collection. Multiple operational efficiencies and customer satisfaction improvements will be achieved by use of geospatial technology to support train operations, precise train location and status monitoring, arrival/departure station operations, asset utilization and coordinating responses to weather related events and incidents. New insights will be gained from being able to analyze the location-based data (both internal and external) in its full geographic context to drive action and identify new opportunities across Amtrak’s network, including but not limited to identification of new train routes and new stations, train delays analysis, asset failure analysis and understanding the potential impact of climate change on Amtrak's infrastructure. National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  145 

Consolidated National Operations Center (CNOC) Modernization 

Amtrak will create a new Unified Operations Center at its King Street location in Wilmington, DE with an operations focused Incident Management System that will provide a single system to monitor operations-related incidents from initiation to closure, including root cause analysis and remediation plans to avoid recurrence. Updating of technology and processes for incident management, train and consist schedule optimization, crew usage optimization, and rail traffic management will support the goal of Service Development and Operations (SD&O) of ensuring the new Center fundamentally changes and improves the way employees work. 

Asset Condition Monitoring 

Initiative to enable condition-based asset maintenance capabilities by integration of independent siloed asset monitoring technologies (wayside, fixed infrastructure, rolling stock, building systems, stations, and others) into a single unified platform. As a part of this initiative, current labor intensive, outdated manual processes, based on spreadsheet analytics, will be replaced with automated consolidation, analysis and alerting solutions that integrate with the Enterprise Asset Management (EAM) system to enable an end-to-end Enterprise condition-based maintenance system. This capability will allow Amtrak to not only accurately track its assets and their condition, but also proactively identify maintenance opportunities and target safety critical areas before they become an issue. Asset Condition Monitoring will enhance Amtrak’s ability to develop ‘Analytics at the Edge’ to collect real-time data, including automated predictive alarms establishing wayside infrastructure data analytics along with establishing streamlined communication with host rail roads. 

Operations of the Future 

Integrate standalone aging systems and manual processes currently pulled together to help support SD&O’s planning and execution activities around crew, train, track, yard and platform availability. Currently, the planning and execution process within SD&O leverages Excel sheets, emails and outdated systems, coupled with manual knowledge, to plan and execute services, especially during times of change or disruptions. This system will replace these outdated applications and integrate with industry standard systems which will support the planning and execution of train service activities across the network. 

Train Control Systems 

Advances in train positioning, railroad management, Limit Compliance and Collision Avoidance Systems (LCCAS), implementation of Positive Train Stop Override and interoperability provide the foundation on which to build a safer railroad. Implementation of the Interoperable Electronic Train Management System (ETMS) for PTC, which was completed for all Amtrak-operated rail lines except New Orleans in FY21, has provided interoperable PTC train operations for Amtrak trains on host railroads and for tenant railroads on Amtrak lines. Maturation of the PTC, Positive Train Stop Release (PTSR) and LCCAS system across the Amtrak network will create additional passenger and employee safety benefits. Consolidation of the Electric Traction Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (ET-SCADA) Systems to a standardized, modern platform will improve reliability, supportability, and safety. An initiative to standardize dispatch systems on the Amtrak-developed Amtrak Traffic & Electrification Control (AMTEC) platform to replace the legacy Collins dispatch system will provide a common dispatch platform for the Northeast Corridor (NEC) and Central division, a more reliable and resilient system, and a reduction in maintenance costs. An initiative to build interfaces between the new ET-SCADA & AMTEC train dispatch systems across the NEC will improve visibility for train dispatchers and power directors, allowing Amtrak to increase preventative maintenance practices while improving safety and security. 

Manage Transportation, Rail Operations and Assets, continued 146 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Labor Management Improvements 

This project will implement and execute Labor Management enhancements in support of Crew Management Operations. Labor Management applications are currently utilized by approximately 3,500 Trainmen and Engineers to submit vacation requests and submit and award jobs during the weekly and optional bulletin processes. Providing continuous support to end users of these applications is therefore critical. Key activities will include the procurement of a System Integrator to continue building out functionality that will enhance the processes and functionality within the Labor Management System (LMS). Amtrak’s internal DT&I team will also work closely with LMS users to gather requirements and identify processes that can be enhanced and streamlined. 

Advanced Analytics - Rolling Stock, Wayside and Other 

Amtrak will accelerate the adoption of advanced analytics by using scanning technology and wayside detectors to collect data and images of rolling stock, large track geometry sets, large data sets to analyze and proactively identify maintenance requirements and safety risks, and leveraging data to better manage train performance and drive decisions. These efforts will rely on Amtrak’s EDW, Enterprise Data Lake (EDL), and established analytics and reporting tools like Tableau and Business Objects, as well as optimization and prescriptive analytics tools. This initiative will help identify opportunities within SD&O to improve safety, enhance the customer experience, and reduce costs and optimize crew & service planning. 

Labor Management of the Future 

This strategic initiative will design and implement an agreement workforce management platform to replace numerous disparate legacy systems and manual processes, comply with union agreements, ensure FRA compliance, achieve cost reductions, and avoid fines. Its implementation will redefine and reimagine how Amtrak manages our Agreement Workforce so that we can reduce our costs, improve compliance with FRA regulations, avoid fines and abide by union agreements. There are a few products that exist on the market that may meet our needs. We would like to We plan to explore products available on the market, define our needs and begin implementation of a future state solution(s). This solution will replace the existing legacy LMS to enable automation and provide self-service capabilities for Onboard Services (OBS) employees, Transportation Communications Union (TCU)-represented employees, and Train & Engine (T&E) crafts (engineers and conductors). The current processes for Bulletin, Bidding and Awarding Assignments, Vacation and Entitlement, and manual processes related to Position Control and Day of Operations, will be replaced with modern, automated processes that meet the needs of the end users. 

Operational Improvements 

Amtrak will continue to leverage technology to implement continuous improvements to address process inefficiencies, inconsistencies, and performance gaps. Possible initiatives include yard workflow management, automatic equipment identification tag readers, incident management, project management information systems, computer aided design improvements, fleet availability management, asset tracking and utilization analyses, electronic documents management, illustrative parts visualization, work planning and scheduling, forecast and demand planning, integrated service planning, train and network simulations including track outage planning, and irregular operations management. 

Train Velocity Improvement & Optimization 

The overall goal of this project is to maximize the capacity of existing and future rail infrastructure through the development of an ecosystem of train scheduling and train/terminal planning and control systems. This ecosystem will draw from internal expertise and leverage solutions currently deployed by major North American railroads and leading international intercity passenger train operators This project will modernize key legacy systems and operational areas such as Train Control and Scheduling, incorporate widely deployed industry leading automation, optimization, technology, and operational practices, and help Amtrak overcome capacity and service challenges due to planned capital construction projects and infrastructure upgrades across our network in the near and long term. Incorporation of modern advanced technologies to either supplement or replace existing legacy systems will help Amtrak dispatchers get more insight into host and tenant railroad train operations to identify potential conflicts and recommendations for their resolution. Seamless integrations will enable better management of slow orders, proactive maintenance and improved decision making at all levels of SD&O Operations and IMCS. 

Manage Transportation, Rail Operations and Assets, continued National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  147 Fleet Modernization and Facilities 

Amtrak is in the midst of a multi-year, multi-billion-dollar replacement of its fleet with modern locomotives, railcars and trainsets that is described in the Equipment Asset Line Plan. This initiative includes a comprehensive coordination of Amtrak’s innovative technology solutions across our network. Amtrak will take full advantage of technological advancements in new equipment to improve safety and the passenger experience, as well as improve operations and maintenance. The new fixed-consist of Airo trainsets will align with Acela and fundamentally alter how Amtrak maintains and operates its equipment fleet. Access to near-real-time data from modern digital trainsets, along with advanced analytics, will transform Amtrak’s ability to gain key insights into safety, performance, and reliability of its equipment fleets. DT&I regularly works with other departments to implement state of the art technology solutions for stations, corporate offices, infrastructure, operating facilities. Technology is an essential part of all facilities and asset-based structures, which incorporate technologies such as customer information systems, building automation, robotics, and sensors in stations, bridges, tunnels, and right-of-way to provide real-time information on facility conditions. 

Key Initiatives 

Amtrak DT&I is developing and deploying technology solutions for New Acela, Airo , Midwest Venture Car, Long Distance, and ALC-42 diesel locomotive initiatives. 

One Fleet 

Early DT&I involvement in the Long-Distance procurement will ensure equipment technology capabilities will align with Amtrak’s One Fleet vision, which seeks to standardize technology solutions across our current and in future fleet procurements wherever possible to enhance the customer experience and ensure high-performance railroad operations that benefit Amtrak, state partners and Amtrak’s customers. 

Safety and Security Insights 

Amtrak is enhancing support for the critical Safety, Compliance and Training organization through the adoption of new train simulators, provisioning and access to train events and telemetry data, development of dashboards, and providing secure, easy access to on-line closed-circuit television video recordings. Amtrak is also developing integrated video surveillance capabilities to provide effective, comprehensive security capabilities across the passenger journey from stations, platforms, and aboard trains. 

Passenger Experience 

Amtrak is developing solutions to provide passengers with positive and connected experiences throughout their journeys. This includes on-board services such as Passenger Information Systems, Wi-Fi, Food & Beverage Point-of-Sale and Reserved Seating. Amtrak seeks to deliver a modern, consistent and accessible experience to our customers regardless of what rolling stock fleet they are riding. 

Cooperative Service and Maintenance 

Amtrak is developing new rolling stock supplier cooperative models for service and maintenance through creation of common interfaces that integrate Amtrak and supplier systems for seamless performance and condition insights, scheduling and dispatching of work. Standardized technical support and spares and supplies agreement solutions provide virtual warehousing, parts masters, and procure-to-pay capabilities. 

Condition and Performance 

Amtrak will use event and telemetry data collection from new trainsets to evolve Amtrak’s condition and performance insights to improve operational efficiency by moving away from risky preventative/corrective maintenance models toward continuous condition-based and predictive maintenance models. 

Fleet Cybersecurity 

Amtrak’s cybersecurity capabilities will extend into the advanced technology trainsets through tooling for scanning and monitoring for cybersecurity risks. This approach includes developing partnerships with train supplier cybersecurity operations centers for cooperative incident detection and response. 

Stations, Facilities, and Infrastructure Modernization 

Digital technology services are an integral part of creating future Amtrak stations, operating facilities, and infrastructure that will support the growth of our services. In partnership with the Capital Delivery, Accessibility, Stations & Facilities (AS&F), and (SD&O organizations, DT&I will continue to optimize and modernize how integrated technology services are designed and deployed into new Amtrak stations, facilities, and mega construction projects. This includes data networking, fiber and conduit installations, building automation and monitoring, security and video surveillance, collaboration, PIDS, media, and other emerging technologies. Programs incorporating this approach include new maintenance facilities for the new fleets, major station development projects, the Gateway program, and the new Unified Operations Center. We are also extending Wi-Fi and cellular network communication and safety technology into bridges and tunnels on the NEC. 148 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29  

> Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line 149

## Technology and Cybersecurity Capabilities 

In this new era of rail, Amtrak is committed to bolstering its infrastructure, data platforms, and cybersecurity measures to enhance the resiliency of critical business operations and safeguard revenue. To achieve these objectives, Amtrak will focus on improving operational effectiveness, advancing cloud transformation, enhancing disaster recovery and resiliency capabilities, and elevating service quality in its DT&I operations. With a strong emphasis on cybersecurity, Amtrak recognizes the importance of modernizing its Operational Technology (OT) infrastructure to ensure the protection and visibility of critical infrastructure. Simultaneously, Amtrak will continue its evolution towards a zero-trust architecture, fortifying its defenses against potential cyber threats. This aligns with the key objective outlined in Amtrak’s National Cybersecurity Strategy adopted in March 2023. Amtrak's commitment to resiliency is underscored by its dedication to partnerships and collaboration with federal agencies and institutions, a strategy that will further enhance the organization's overall preparedness and security posture in line with the National Cybersecurity Strategy. 

Key Initiatives 

National Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) Program 

Improve coverage area performance for Wi-Fi, Very High Frequency (VHF) and cellular networks at Amtrak facilities leveraging an array of Distributed Antenna System (DAS) solutions. The initiative will support business and operational initiatives for Amtrak employees, customers, and first responders in locations where wireless coverage is unreliable or unavailable. 

NEC Gigabit Connectivity 

A two-prong initiative along the NEC to deliver gigabit speed wireless connectivity and train-to-ground station augmentation to increase capacity for Acela and New 

Acela trainsets to send/receive data during boarding at 10 of Amtrak’s busiest stations. 

Network Transformation and Convergence 

Replace Amtrak’s obsolete legacy network topology and hardware infrastructure with new network designs and hardware to improve network performance, resiliency, and redundancy. The result of this initiative will be improved network security, a better customer W-Fi experience, and network support for high-definition video surveil-lance requirements for Amtrak facilities. 

Operational Technology (OT) Cybersecurity Modernization 

Replace and augment physical security controls with modern capabilities for asset identification and management, traffic monitoring, security policy enforcement, and automated incident response to ensure Amtrak's continued operations while improving our customers' safety against cyber threats. To achieve full compliance with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Security Directive (SD) 1580/82-2022-01, Amtrak will modernize and secure Operational Technology (OT) environments in accordance with Amtrak’s TSA-approved Cybersecurity Implementation Plan. 

Zero Trust Foundations 

A Zero Trust Architecture will significantly reduce cybersecurity risk and improve cus-tomer safety. Amtrak will adapt to the mod-ern, fluid work environment by eliminating implicit trust in all informational technology assets, which will provide a foundation for continuous monitoring and analytics that will enable Amtrak to promptly detect and respond to suspicious activities. This will enhance safety, streamline operations, and guard against evolving cyber threats. 

API and eCommerce Automation Enhancements 

Modernize over 300 existing APIs and their versions built on outdated technology and platform. The APIs serve as critical data pipelines supporting multiple l functions across the enterprise, including travel, searches, reservations and revenue accounting. This update will migrate the APIs to the AWS platform; benefits will include unrestricted, load based scaling of capacity that will result in performance and cost efficiencies. The project will replace outdated manual development and deployment processes with automated processes that will make API maintenance easier and improve service quality. 

Enterprise Data and Analytics Platform Modernization 

Establish and advance a cutting-edge data infrastructure that empowers data exploration, self-service machine learning, and AI capabilities to enhance our business agility through timely insights. This initiative will retire outdated and inefficient one-off solutions, interfaces, and workflows, resulting in a streamlined data ecosystem that fosters improved data integration, increased data reusability, and accessible self-service analytics for business users. This project will also include seamless integration with other Amtrak analytical components, including SAP and operational systems, facilitating the automated delivery of insights generated from analytics, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Machine Learning (ML) back to our operational systems. 150 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Enterprise Monitoring 

Rearchitect Amtrak’s Enterprise Monitoring Platform and implement a modern Observability and Application Performance Monitoring Platform that will provide a holistic view of Amtrak’s services and applications, including interdependencies, network, and infrastructure components. Network components that have reached their end-of-life will be replaced. The new Observability Platform will provide a single pane of glass into Amtrak’s ecosystem that will help minimize service disruptions which can result in revenue loss. Amtrak has been on a Cloud Maturity path for several years. We are building a multi-region, multi-cloud ecosystem which currently hosts mission critical applications in several domains such as Financial Portfolio, customer facing revenue generating applications, and operationally critical applications (PTC and Conductor devices). The cloud portfolio is secured by network segregation, along with strong cloud security practices and governance. 

## Technology of The Future 

The leading-edge technologies of today are often the mainstream technologies of tomorrow. Amtrak monitors emerging technologies and considers their use when the technology is promising and has begun to show value in the market. As new business opportunities arise, we partner with business leaders to make decisions about deploying these new technologies. 

# Outlook 

As we continue to embrace new technologies, practices, and systems, we are poised to meet the evolving needs of our passengers and stakeholders. Our focus is on making rail travel safer, more efficient, and more delightful for everyone involved. 

Key Business Drivers 

Metric FY23 Actual FY24 Goal FY29 Goal National Cybersecurity Strategy Objectives Addressed 3 6 2

Technology and Cybersecurity Capabilities, continued National Assets and Corporate Services Asset Line  151 NACS Asset Line: Profit & Loss Analysis 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Regional/Local Police 79,321 88,620 91,873 95,035 98,640 100,490 553,979 National Police and Safety 28,484 30,733 31,915 33,061 34,307 34,958 193,457 Non-Passenger Claims 12,257 13,255 13,768 14,264 14,803 15,076 83,423 Information Technology (IT) 159,460 172,446 179,122 185,586 192,589 196,148 1,085,351 Training and Training Centers 25,318 27,808 28,873 29,901 31,029 31,573 174,502 Insurance 123,830 129,738 134,879 139,864 145,179 147,943 821,433 Environmental 14,567 15,741 16,349 16,938 17,578 17,904 99,077 Real Estate & Lease Costs - - - - - - -Reservations & Call Centers 60,992 61,728 64,169 66,559 69,135 70,489 393,072 Corporate Operations 442,331 474,091 492,813 510,880 529,788 540,896 2,990,799 

Total Operating Uses 946,560 1,014,160 1,053,762 1,092,088 1,133,048 1,155,477 6,395,094 

FINANCIAL USES (DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS) 

Debt Repayments - - - - - - -

Total Debt Service Payments - - - - - - -

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Information Technology (IT) 74,454 126,538 161,098 184,910 170,539 181,328 898,867 Station & Facility protection - - - - - - -Corporate Operations 356,453 339,060 318,849 333,458 317,615 282,240 1,947,675 

Total Capital Uses 430,907 465,597 479,947 518,369 488,154 463,569 2,846,542 Total NACS Spend $1,377,467 $1,479,757 $1,533,708 $1,610,457 $1,621,202 $1,619,045 $9,241,637 152 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

This plan builds on the FY24 Annual Operating Plan (AOP) and includes the outcomes of the Acela delivery and early results of Amtrak’s capital investments to date. In addition, the Plan also supports efforts to improve our existing infrastructure and expand operations onto new and expanded corridors nationwide. These growth plans are expected to become reality through sustained federal funding and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA). Plan financials are built with the continuation of assumptions from the FY24 AOP. The Plan continues to set a path for operational improvement and includes more robust assumptions on key capital project needs (Fleet acquisition, Gateway, key infrastructure projects, etc.). 

Fundamentals of this year’s Plan are in line with prior years, but with improved financial performance, optimal cash levels, and the effects of the increased capital workforce. 

Above: First steel beam is placed on the New Portal North Bridge. Photo by Amtrak/Marc Glucksman. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Financial Assumptions 13 Financial Assumptions  153 Critical Assumptions 

• Continuation of FY23 travel demand with Gross Ticket Revenue and Ridership levels having already effectively returned to 2019 levels but with future growth being driven by new fleet availability and enhanced customer experience; • Capacity continues to grow with the expansion of the Acela service, and new State Supported routes, continuation of major capital priorities with an average annual cost of $9.0B from FY25-29 (which prioritizes ongoing capital maintenance, advancement of large-scale projects and maintaining service across the entire network); • Unprecedented infrastructure capital spending across the network, including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance investments, Fleet, Gateway, etc. to fully utilize the Supplemental and Discretionary funding available through IIJA for Amtrak and its Partners; and The Five-Year Operating Plan includes continued consolidated bottom-line improvement over the five-year window from an Adjusted Operating loss of ($625.3MM) in FY24 AOP to ($356.6MM) in FY29. Key to achieving this improvement is the successful delivery of the new 

Acela trainsets, maintaining capitalization levels, and implementing non-labor cost efficiencies. The Five-Year Capital Plan will significantly increase from historical levels with the expected continuation of annual appropriations, IIJA supplemental spend, and the availability of discretionary grant programs. Spend is expected to increase in the FY24 AOP to $5.5B growing to $8.3B in FY25 and maintaining spend at ~$8B to $9B through FY29. Across all funding sources, spending will center around maintaining and upgrading railroad infrastructure, re-fleeting through the acquisition of new rolling stock and its associated facilities, as well as maintaining and upgrading Major Bridges and Tunnels. 

Key Financial Highlights 

In Millions FY24 Goal FY29 Goal Delta (#) Delta (%) Frequencies (In Thousands) 104.8 130.4 25.7 24% 

Train Miles 39.1 44.9 5.8 15% 

Ridership 32.8 39.1 6.3 19% 

Operating Revenue $ 3,696.5 $ 4,793.0 $ 1,096.5 30% 

Operating Cost $ 4,321.8 $ 5,149.6 $ 827.8 19% 

Adjusted Operating Results $ (625.3) $ (356.6) $ 268.7 43% 

Consolidated Amtrak: Total Capital Spend Consolidated Amtrak: Adjusted Operating Results   

> $ in Millions $ in Millions 154 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29

## Operating Overview 

Adjusted Operating Results over the five-year planning horizon are expected to improve from a FY24 AOP of ($625.3MM) to a loss of ($356.6MM) in FY29. 

Operating P&L (FY24–29) 

($s in Millions) AOP FY24 5YP FY25 5YP FY26 5YP FY27 5YP FY28 5YP FY29 

Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) $ 2,471.7 $ 2,712.9 $ 2,883.4 $ 3,087.5 $ 3,258.0 $ 3,373.5 Food and Beverage 68.6 77.3 82.4 87.8 92.9 100.1 State Supported Train Revenue 347.5 310.3 311.6 312.4 323.4 312.2 

Subtotal Passenger Related Revenue 2,887.8 3.100.5 3,277.5 3,487.7 3,674.2 3,785.9 

Other Revenue 808.7 880.1 912.2 942.6 974.0 1,007.1 

Total Revenue 3,696.5 3,980.5 4,189.6 4,430.2 4,648.3 4,793.0 

Salaries, Wages and Benefits 2,747.1 2,824.8 2,972.5 3,118.7 3,288.5 3,414.2 Train Operations 362.0 378.8 396.0 414.5 430.1 429.8 Fuel, Power and Utilities 300.4 326.5 340.8 356.2 369.2 369.8 Facility, Communication and Office 220.6 221.0 225.0 228.9 232.8 228.8 Advertising and Sales 95.6 115.5 120.8 127.0 132.1 135.3 Professional Fees and Data Processing 248.4 258.1 260.5 265.5 268.8 268.5 TSSSA and Materials 170.1 224.1 236.5 241.5 239.1 240.2 All Other Expense 259.2 270.5 279.9 289.9 299.0 300.2 Transfer to Capital and Ancillary $ (449.9) $ (485.4) $ (534.5) $ (585.5) $ (631.0) $ (666.2) 

Core Expense 3,953.4 4,133.9 4,297.5 4,456.7 4,628.6 4,720.7 

Ancillary Expense 368.4 380.3 392.1 404.2 416.4 428.8 

Total Expense 4,321.8 4,514.2 4,689.6 4,860.9 5,045.0 5,149.6 Adjusted Operating Results $ (625.3) $ (533.7) $ (500.0) $ (430.6) $ (396.7) $ (356.6) 

## Level of Operations Update 

The Level of Operations compiled for the Plan includes key statistics and other information about how much capacity and scheduled train activity Amtrak expects to operate over the five-year planning horizon (FY25–29). A key component to the operating Plan is adjusting capacity across the network to match anticipated demand. The Level of Operations serves as a key input in developing the Plan and includes frequencies, train miles, available seat/berth miles number of cars required, and fleet utilization. This year’s Level of Operations represents the most up to date information with regards to equipment deliveries (i.e., new Acela and Airo ),

timing of new routes, route expansions, and mechanical shop throughput. 

Key Capacity Statistics (FY19–29) 

Level of Operations Actual AOP Five-Year Plan FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 FY26 FY27 FY28 FY29 

Train-Miles (000s) 38,178 31,126 24,964 32,705 36,168 39,073 41,770 42,971 44,357 44,749 44,886 

Frequencies 108,514 81,626 70,799 91,004 100,922 104,781 115,670 120,514 127,410 128,979 130,439 

ASMs (M) 12,703 9,772 8,020 10,273 11,386 12,558 14,118 14,885 15,411 15,512 15,558 Financial Assumptions  155 Revenue and Ridership 

Plan revenue and ridership growth are underpinned by the three main factors previously discussed: • Service expansion across 16 State Supported routes; • Launch of the new Acela fleet; and • Initial delivery of Airo Trainsets to State Partners and NEC. 

Gross Ticket Revenue (FY24–29) Ridership (FY24–29) 

With the combination of these three factors, year-over-year ticket revenue growth is expected to average 6.4% over the planning horizon. Ridership follows a similar profile, averaging 3.6% growth through FY29. In total, this represents a ten-year compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.6% in ticket revenue over FY19 actuals, and a 2.0% CAGR for ridership over the same period. Baseline projections include assumptions for market growth, price changes, and service adjustments. 

## Key Expense Drivers 

Variable expense growth over the planning horizon follows capacity changes in the Level of Operations, and therefore ramps up steadily through FY29 due to route expansion and the launch of the new 

Acela trainsets. It is anticipated that all non-variable expenses grow with inflation (beginning in FY25). 156 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Capital Overview 

Total Capital spend over the five-year planning horizon (FY25–29) is expected to be approximately $44.9B. Capital spend will increase from historical levels beginning in the FY24 AOP and further increase in FY25 as a result of the expected continuation of annual appropriations, IIJA supplemental spend, and the availability of discretionary grant programs. Baseline capital spend will average $3.2B, annually, consistent with the capital spending in the FY24 AOP, while IIJA Supplemental and Discretionary spend will increase beginning in FY25 through FY29. Over the Five-Year period, the Capital plan includes $12.5B in capital from IIJA Supplemental funding and $16.1B from Discretionary Grants (i.e., Federal-State Partnership for Intercity Passenger Rail program, Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements (CRISI) program, National Infrastructure Project Assistance Program (MEGA) etc.). As a result of the passage of IIJA, capital spend will include a backlog of large scale projects, consisting of projects with a focus on maintaining Amtrak’s infrastructure in a state of good repair, high speed rail improvements, and large investments in upgrading/replacing bridges and tunnels (including the Frederick Douglass Tunnel). Other areas of spending include continuing work in ADA compliance, 

Airo and Long Distance fleet, Airo and Long Distance maintenance facilities, and various National rail passenger system obsolete assets (including IT, Training Center, and Security projects). 

Total Debt Expense (FY24–29) 

Total Capital Spend, All Fund Sources (FY24–29)                                                                       

> $ in Millions
> ($s in Millions) AOP FY24 FY25 FY26 FY27 FY28 FY29 Total FY25-29
> Leveraged leases for HHP Locomotives and Acela Trainsets $ 0.1 $ -$ -$ -$ -$ -$ -Real Estate & CDT Lease 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 Secured & Unsecured Private Placement Notes 38.1 38.7 37.6 35.5 35.1 33.7 180.6 Revolver 0.5 0.5 1.6 0.5 0.5 1.8 4.8 RRIF III Reserve 12.0 70.0 ----70.0 RRIF III Debt Service 60.8 90.3 124.9 121.8 122.7 123.7 583.4 RRIF III CRP 16.8 43.2 ----43.2
> RRIF III 88.7 203.5 124.9 121.8 122.7 123.7 696.6 Total Amtrak Debt Service $ 127.5 $ 242.8 $ 164.1 $ 157.9 $ 158.3 $ 159.2 $ 882.4

## Debt 

Overall debt service levels peak in FY 2025 (when the final RRIF draw is made) and then decrease and remain relatively constant at an average of ~$160MM from FY 2026 through FY 2029. Debt Service is largely reserved from Operating Revenue. Financial Assumptions  157 Cash 

Amtrak’s Cash balance over the Five-Year Plan horizon reflects fiscally restrained assumptions for annual funding of $12.3B over the Plan, based on a continuing resolution of appropriated levels in FY24 ($2.4B), as well as $28.7B of IIJA related funding (Supplemental funds directed for Amtrak’s use and competitive Discretionary grant programs open to Amtrak and partners), and $6.5B of 3rd Party, RRIF, and PRIIA. Offsetting the inflow of funding, cash includes the impact of Adjusted Operating Loss ($2.2B), Capital spend ($44.9B), and Debt expense of ($0.9B). 

## Authorized Funding 

The Plan assumes Annual Federal funding of $2.4B, this represents a continuing resolution at the FY23 appropriated levels. If Amtrak received the funding levels authorized in IIJA ($4.0B in FY25 growing to an estimated $4.9B in FY29), spend would be allocated between operating and capital, focusing on several key areas. These investment areas include Improvement programs for Long Distance & NEC (Including Trip Time Improvements), service expansion opportunities, and additional spend for the Stations and Customer Experience investments. 

Total Cash (FY25–29) 

($s in Millions) FY25 FY26 FY27 FY28 FY29 Total 

Cash From/(Used) in Operating 

Operating Income (533.7) (500.0) (430.6) (396.7) (356.6) (2,217.6) 

Total CFO $ (533.7) $ (500.0) $ (430.6) $ (396.7) $ (356.6) $ (2,217.6) 

Cash From (Used) in Investing Capital Spend (8,289.0) (9,518.5) (8,809.5) (9,408.3) (8,838.1) (44,863.4) 

Total CFI $ (8,289.0) $ (9,518.5) $ (8,809.5) $ (9,408.3) $ (8,838.1) $ (44,863.4) 

Cash From Grants & Financing 

Annual Grant $ 2,453.0 $ 2,453.0 $ 2,453.0 $ 2,453.0 $ 2,453.0 $ 12,265.0 All Other Funding 6,577.4 7,562.9 6,830.5 7,348.7 6,893.1 35,212.6 Interest Income 80.0 70.0 60.0 60.0 50.0 320.0 Debt Expense (242.8) (164.1) (157.9) (158.3) (159.2) (882.4) 

Total CFF $ 8,867.5 $ 9,921.8 $ 9,185.6 $ 9,703.4 $ 9,236.9 $ 46,915.2 

Total Change in Cash $ 44.8 $ (96.7) $ (54.5) $ (101.6) $ 42.2 $ (165.8) 

Cash Beginning of Period $ 2,598.8 $ 2,643.6 $ 2,547.0 $ 2,492.5 $ 2,390.8 $ 2,598.8 Cash End of Period $ 2,643.6 $ 2,547.0 $ 2,492.5 $ 2,390.8 $ 2,433.0 $ 2,433.0 Photo by Amtrak/Mark Glucksman 

158 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Consolidated Account Structure Tables 

# 14 Consolidated Account Structure Tables  159 Consolidated Account Structure: Northeast Corridor 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 1,361,785 1,517,708 1,636,265 1,786,497 1,908,268 1,970,711 10,181,234 Food and Beverage 23,481 28,438 30,614 33,084 35,230 37,412 188,259 Contractual Contribution (Operating) - -PRIIA 209 Operating Payments - - - - - - -PRIIA 212 Operating Payments 242,555 261,777 272,248 280,415 288,828 297,493 1,643,315 Commuter Operations 81,373 84,838 87,383 90,004 92,704 95,486 531,788 Reimbursable Contracts 92,168 96,172 100,495 105,012 109,732 114,666 618,245 Access Revenue 19,183 20,320 20,930 21,557 22,204 22,870 127,065 Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) 112,339 138,427 142,580 146,857 151,263 156,211 847,676 All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 31,125 32,975 33,966 34,987 36,041 37,129 206,221 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 1,964,010 2,180,653 2,324,479 2,498,414 2,644,270 2,731,977 14,343,803 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 10,420 10,658 12,782 6,253 3,419 491 44,023 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 144,929 142,612 140,594 144,311 144,342 145,343 862,132 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 27,448 413,415 210,495 352,719 399,138 324,504 1,727,719 Financing Proceeds Applied 278,483 101,283 50,642 - 329,170 - 759,578 Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 177,223 433,105 569,789 496,452 441,087 436,656 2,554,312 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 638,503 1,101,073 984,302 999,736 1,317,155 906,994 5,947,763 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 681,294 120,600 - - - - 801,894 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating - - - - - - -Capital 969,491 965,432 753,608 688,150 782,208 744,083 4,902,972 IIJA Supplemental 346,201 947,575 1,069,101 585,886 688,063 829,909 4,466,735 IIJA Discretionary 934,431 1,801,558 2,851,085 2,810,626 2,925,547 2,981,540 14,304,788 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 3,598 1,819 1,383 1,383 1,383 948 10,515 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 2,935,015 3,836,985 4,675,177 4,086,046 4,397,202 4,556,480 24,486,905 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 5,537,527 7,118,711 7,983,959 7,584,195 8,358,627 8,195,451 44,778,471 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 18,664 18,757 19,391 20,010 20,684 21,574 119,080 Transportation 414,855 466,577 486,602 505,328 523,081 532,405 2,928,848 Equipment 289,749 322,700 336,880 350,088 362,245 368,957 2,030,619 Infrastructure 364,792 411,158 427,220 442,532 458,379 467,291 2,571,373 Stations 124,975 144,145 149,774 155,107 160,749 163,430 898,179 National Assets and Corporate Services 505,001 575,481 598,742 620,672 642,928 654,134 3,596,959 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 1,718,037 1,938,817 2,018,610 2,093,737 2,168,066 2,207,792 12,145,059 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) 245,973 241,837 305,869 404,676 476,204 524,185 2,198,744 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

3,819,490 5,179,894 5,965,348 5,490,458 6,190,562 5,987,659 32,633,412 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 21,097 18,906 17,380 13,367 11,785 8,784 91,320 Equipment 626,421 876,206 607,402 410,214 857,783 587,698 3,965,725 Infrastructure 2,494,080 3,351,986 3,982,769 3,242,229 2,889,202 2,932,104 18,892,371 Stations 276,116 545,159 903,345 1,250,710 1,780,018 1,730,905 6,486,253 National Assets and Corporate Services 155,802 138,907 141,689 162,368 168,675 197,089 964,530 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 3,573,517 4,931,164 5,652,586 5,078,888 5,707,463 5,456,580 30,400,198 

Debt Repayments 127,429 242,726 164,045 157,850 158,241 159,094 1,009,386 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 3,700,946 5,173,890 5,816,630 5,236,738 5,865,705 5,615,675 31,409,584 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $118,544 $6,004 $148,718 $253,720 $324,857 $371,985 $1,223,828 160 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Consolidated Account Structure: National Network 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 1,109,885 1,195,144 1,247,151 1,300,986 1,349,759 1,402,808 7,605,734 Food and Beverage 45,114 48,907 51,795 54,671 57,621 62,716 320,824 Contractual Contribution (Operating) - -PRIIA 209 Operating Payments 347,526 310,264 311,639 312,426 323,359 312,244 1,917,457 PRIIA 212 Operating Payments 12,766 13,778 14,329 14,759 15,201 15,658 86,490 Commuter Operations 63,350 66,047 68,029 70,069 72,172 74,337 414,004 Reimbursable Contracts 94,570 98,957 103,405 108,054 112,912 117,990 635,888 Access Revenue 1,668 1,767 1,820 1,875 1,931 1,989 11,049 Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) 23,009 28,352 29,203 30,079 30,982 31,995 173,620 All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 34,610 36,665 37,766 38,900 40,070 41,277 229,289 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 1,732,498 1,799,881 1,865,136 1,931,820 2,004,007 2,061,013 11,394,356 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 76,738 75,513 73,343 79,781 82,208 76,975 464,558 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 45,245 47,710 49,497 46,351 46,320 45,239 280,362 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 39,243 66,515 84,698 90,959 85,597 86,501 453,513 Financing Proceeds Applied - 81,117 40,558 - 263,630 - 385,306 Other Capital and Special Grants (including state/local sources) 85,683 199,370 213,311 233,422 185,248 188,376 1,105,410 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 246,910 470,224 461,408 450,512 663,003 397,091 2,689,149 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 831,743 195,837 32,245 1,790 - - 1,061,615 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating 821,315 755,314 786,192 816,462 854,825 861,956 4,896,064 Capital 300,753 733,770 916,831 895,611 842,898 842,275 4,532,137 IIJA Supplemental 491,494 1,698,494 1,884,412 1,715,136 1,618,568 1,520,238 8,928,343 IIJA Discretionary 95,878 267,478 580,510 677,036 585,857 633,007 2,839,766 Other Federal Grants (including FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 6,602 6,531 4,967 4,967 4,967 3,402 31,435 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 2,547,784 3,657,425 4,205,156 4,111,002 3,907,115 3,860,878 22,289,360 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 4,527,193 5,927,530 6,531,701 6,493,335 6,574,125 6,318,981 36,372,864 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 18,317 18,455 19,090 19,727 20,451 21,388 117,428 Transportation 1,155,496 1,136,626 1,178,486 1,220,600 1,269,107 1,296,604 7,256,919 Equipment 605,194 596,709 619,082 641,644 667,263 682,002 3,811,896 Infrastructure 186,467 190,487 197,527 204,616 212,457 218,148 1,209,702 Stations 196,724 194,422 201,752 209,135 217,559 222,291 1,241,883 National Assets and Corporate Services 441,559 438,679 455,019 471,416 490,120 501,342 2,798,136 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 2,603,757 2,575,379 2,670,956 2,767,139 2,876,957 2,941,776 16,435,963 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) (871,258) (775,497) (805,820) (835,319) (872,950) (880,763) (5,041,607) 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

1,923,436 3,352,152 3,860,745 3,726,196 3,697,168 3,377,205 19,936,901 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 29,787 47,618 41,278 26,592 19,095 2,835 167,206 Equipment 599,076 1,646,518 1,570,650 1,102,128 1,540,101 1,460,673 7,919,145 Infrastructure 711,296 841,942 1,259,185 1,607,971 1,242,113 1,001,429 6,663,937 Stations 358,114 495,105 656,541 637,900 580,044 650,135 3,377,839 National Assets and Corporate Services 275,105 326,691 338,257 356,001 319,479 266,479 1,882,012 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 1,973,380 3,357,874 3,865,912 3,730,592 3,700,831 3,381,551 20,010,139 

Debt Repayments 84 84 84 84 84 84 504 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 1,973,464 3,357,958 3,865,996 3,730,676 3,700,915 3,381,635 20,010,643 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE $(50,028) $(5,806) $(5,251) $(4,480) $(3,747) $(4,430) $(73,742) Consolidated Account Structure Tables  161 Consolidated Account Structure: Total Amtrak 

FY24–29 

($s in Thousands) FY 2024 FY 2025 FY2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 

Passenger Related Revenue Ticket Revenue (Adjusted) 2,471,670 2,712,852 2,883,416 3,087,483 3,258,027 3,373,520 17,786,967 Food and Beverage 68,595 77,345 82,409 87,755 92,851 100,128 509,083 Contractual Contribution (Operating) - -PRIIA 209 Operating Payments 347,526 310,264 311,639 312,426 323,359 312,244 1,917,457 PRIIA 212 Operating Payments 255,321 275,554 286,577 295,174 304,029 313,150 1,729,805 Commuter Operations 144,723 150,885 155,411 160,074 164,876 169,822 945,791 Reimbursable Contracts 186,738 195,128 203,900 213,066 222,645 232,656 1,254,134 Access Revenue 20,852 22,087 22,750 23,432 24,135 24,859 138,114 Commercial Revenue (incl. Pipe/Wire, Real Estate, Parking) 135,349 166,779 171,783 176,936 182,244 188,206 1,021,297 All Other Revenue (incl. Insurance Revenue, Cobranded Commissions, etc.) 65,735 69,640 71,732 73,887 76,111 78,406 435,510 

OPERATING SOURCES SUBTOTAL 3,696,509 3,980,534 4,189,615 4,430,234 4,648,277 4,792,990 25,738,158 

Contractual Contribution (Capital) PRIIA 209 Capital Payments 87,158 86,170 86,126 86,035 85,627 77,465 508,581 PRIIA 212 Capital Payments 190,174 190,322 190,092 190,662 190,662 190,582 1,142,494 Other State/Local Mutual Benefit - - - - - - -Amtrak Internal Cash 66,691 479,930 295,193 443,678 484,735 411,005 2,181,233 Financing Proceeds Applied 278,483 182,400 91,200 - 592,800 - 1,144,883 Other Capital and Special Grants (incl., state/local sources) 262,906 632,474 783,100 729,874 626,335 625,032 3,659,721 

OTHER SOURCES SUBTOTAL 885,413 1,571,297 1,445,711 1,450,248 1,980,158 1,304,085 8,636,912 

Federal Grants to Amtrak Prior Year Carryover Grant Funds 1,513,036 316,437 32,245 1,790 - - 1,863,509 Current Year FAST Sec 11101 Grants - -Operating 821,315 755,314 786,192 816,462 854,825 861,956 4,896,064 Capital 1,270,244 1,699,203 1,670,438 1,583,761 1,625,106 1,586,358 9,435,110 IIJA Supplemental 837,694 2,646,069 2,953,514 2,301,022 2,306,632 2,350,147 13,395,078 IIJA Discretionary 1,030,309 2,069,037 3,431,595 3,487,662 3,511,404 3,614,547 17,144,554 Other Federal Grants (incl., FRA/OST, FTA, DHS) 10,200 8,350 6,350 6,350 6,350 4,350 41,950 

FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK SUBTOTAL 5,482,799 7,494,409 8,880,334 8,197,048 8,304,317 8,417,358 46,776,264 

TOTAL FINANCIAL SOURCES 10,064,720 13,046,241 14,515,660 14,077,530 14,932,752 14,514,432 81,151,335 

FINANCIAL USES (OPERATING) 

Service Line Management 36,981 37,212 38,481 39,737 41,135 42,963 236,509 Transportation 1,570,350 1,603,203 1,665,088 1,725,929 1,792,188 1,829,009 10,185,767 Equipment 894,944 919,409 955,963 991,732 1,029,508 1,050,959 5,842,515 Infrastructure 551,259 601,645 624,747 647,148 670,836 685,440 3,781,075 Stations 321,700 338,566 351,526 364,242 378,307 385,721 2,140,062 National Assets and Corporate Services 946,560 1,014,160 1,053,762 1,092,088 1,133,048 1,155,477 6,395,094 

TOTAL OPERATING USES 4,321,794 4,514,195 4,689,566 4,860,876 5,045,022 5,149,568 28,581,022 

OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT 

(OPERATING SOURCES - OPERATING USES) (625,285) (533,661) (499,951) (430,642) (396,746) (356,578) (2,842,863) 

AVAILABLE FOR CAPITAL USES 

(CAPITAL SOURCES + FEDERAL GRANTS TO AMTRAK + OPERATING SURPLUS/DEFICIT - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS ) 

5,742,926 8,532,046 9,826,093 9,216,654 9,887,730 9,364,864 52,570,313 

FINANCIAL USES (CAPITAL) 

Service Line Management - - - - - - -Transportation 50,885 66,524 58,658 39,960 30,880 11,620 258,526 Equipment 1,225,497 2,522,724 2,178,052 1,512,342 2,397,884 2,048,371 11,884,870 Infrastructure 3,205,377 4,193,929 5,241,954 4,850,200 4,131,315 3,933,533 25,556,307 Stations 634,231 1,040,263 1,559,887 1,888,609 2,360,062 2,381,039 9,864,091 National Assets and Corporate Services 430,907 465,597 479,947 518,369 488,154 463,569 2,846,542 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 5,546,897 8,289,037 9,518,497 8,809,479 9,408,295 8,838,132 50,410,337 

Debt Repayments 127,513 242,810 164,129 157,934 158,325 159,178 1,009,890 

TOTAL CAPITAL USES 5,674,410 8,531,848 9,682,626 8,967,414 9,566,620 8,997,310 51,420,227 

REMAINING CARRYOVER BALANCE 68,517 198 143,467 249,240 321,110 367,554 1,150,086 162 Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans FY24−29 

Amtrak's Keystone Service crosses over the Hell's Gate Bridge. Photo by Amtrak/Mar c Glucksman. 

## Amtrak’s FY24-29 Five-Year Plans 

# Ridership Projections 15 Ridership Projections  163 

FY24 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  3,080.5  534.0  348.3  185.7  60.3 

Northest Regional  9,961.1  898.5  649.8  248.7  25.0 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  4.7  (2.3)  -

NEC Total  13,041.6  1,435.0  1,002.8  432.2  33.1 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  108.3  6.1  7.8  (1.7)  (15.5) 

Vermonter  105.9  9.4  13.6  (4.2)  (39.3) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  447.7  39.4  36.5  2.9  6.5 

Downeaster  535.9  19.8  17.3  2.5  4.7 

Berkshire Flyer  1.5  0.1  0.2  (0.2)  (112.2) 

New Haven-Springfield  517.8  22.3  59.9  (37.6)  (72.6) 

Keystone Service  1,443.2  35.0  70.6  (35.6)  (24.7) 

Empire South  1,287.7  75.7  95.5  (19.8)  (15.4) 

Lincoln Service  619.0  37.7  46.8  (9.1)  (14.6) 

Hiawatha  670.8  20.4  24.9  (4.5)  (6.6) 

Wolverine  493.8  32.7  56.3  (23.6)  (47.8) 

Illini/Saluki  318.5  22.7  21.0  1.7  5.2 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  190.5  15.7  16.3  (0.6)  (3.4) 

Heartland Flyer  68.6  7.2  12.7  (5.5)  (80.2) 

Pacific Surfliner  2,425.1  126.3  145.6  (19.3)  (7.9) 

Cascades  945.3  69.6  79.7  (10.1)  (10.7) 

Capitol Corridor  1,188.5  64.9  76.0  (11.1)  (9.3) 

San Joaquins  1,051.1  106.1  114.2  (8.1)  (7.7) 

Adirondack  80.3  7.0  15.6  (8.6)  (106.8) 

Blue Water  169.8  14.0  14.2  (0.3)  (1.6) 

Washington-Roanoke  346.0  13.8  12.3  1.5  4.3 

Washington-Newport News  358.3  18.8  15.1  3.7  10.4 

Washington-Norfolk  481.9  10.6  20.9  (10.2)  (21.2) 

Washington-Richmond  134.0  2.9  6.6  (3.8)  (28.2) 

Missouri River Runner  199.9  16.0  11.6  4.4  22.0 

Pennsylvanian  197.0  15.3  21.4  (6.1)  -

Pere Marquette  97.0  6.7  6.9  (0.2)  (2.0) 

Carolinian  318.3  21.6  24.0  (2.4)  (7.4) 

Piedmont  342.4  11.3  15.2  (4.0)  (11.5) 

New Routes  217.7  28.4  6.8  21.6  99.1 

Unallocated Buses  - - - -

Non Nec Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.4  6.6  (4.3)  -

15,361.8  880.0  1,072.2  (192.2)  (12.5) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  422.2  45.8  105.5  (59.8)  (141.5) 

Cardinal  94.0  9.7  27.7  (18.0)  (191.2) 

Silver Meteor  331.7  46.4  72.7  (26.3)  (79.4) 

Empire Builder  409.7  69.6  138.1  (68.5)  (167.2) 

Capitol Limited  175.6  22.7  42.5  (19.8)  (112.9) 

California Zephyr  386.9  66.6  144.4  (77.8)  (201.1) 

Southwest Chief  256.3  46.8  140.6  (93.8)  (366.2) 

City of New Orleans  257.6  22.1  47.6  (25.4)  (98.8) 

Texas Eagle  327.8  29.7  65.8  (36.2)  (110.4) 

Sunset Limited  82.3  12.5  64.8  (52.3)  (635.4) 

Coast Starlight  358.7  49.7  100.7  (51.0)  (142.1) 

Lake Shore Limited  404.8  39.5  65.5  (26.0)  (64.1) 

Palmetto  305.4  27.0  33.5  (6.5)  (21.3) 

Crescent  311.2  39.8  88.0  (48.2)  (154.8) 

Auto Train  302.2  133.9  104.6  29.3  96.9 

Long Distance Adjustments  0.0  1.5  (1.5)  -

4,426.4  661.7  1,243.4  (581.7)  (0.1) 

NTS Total  32,829.8  2,976.6  3,318.4  (341.8)  20.5 

Ancillary  458.2  438.2  20.0 

Infrastructure  261.7  565.2  (303.5) 

AMTRAK TOTAL  32,829.8  $ 3,696.5  $ 4,321.8  $ (625.3)  $ 20.5 

State Supported Total 

Long Distance Total 164  Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans  FY24−29 

FY25 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  3,716.8  $647.9  $452.3  $195.7  $52.6 

Northest Regional  10,504.5  930.0  $671.8  258.2  24.6 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  2.5  $5.3  (2.8)  -

NEC Total  14,221.3  $1,580.4  $1,129.3  $451.1  $31.7 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  109.6  $9.1  $10.8  $(1.6)  $(14.8) 

Vermonter  107.1  10.5  13.5  (3.0)  (28.2) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  451.0  42.9  39.3  3.6  8.0 

Downeaster  542.7  21.0  17.2  3.8  6.9 

Berkshire Flyer  1.5  0.2  0.2  (0.0)  (11.1) 

New Haven-Springfield  522.5  25.8  62.6  (36.8)  (70.4) 

Keystone Service  1,462.3  38.3  69.3  (31.0)  (21.2) 

Empire South  1,316.7  67.6  86.0  (18.4)  (14.0) 

Lincoln Service  623.9  46.1  56.6  (10.5)  (16.8) 

Hiawatha  689.4  30.6  34.8  (4.1)  (6.0) 

Wolverine  496.7  48.1  70.1  (22.0)  (44.3) 

Illini/Saluki  321.1  23.5  19.9  3.6  11.3 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  191.4  21.9  22.2  (0.3)  (1.7) 

Heartland Flyer  69.2  2.1  6.7  (4.6)  (66.5) 

Pacific Surfliner  2,700.8  83.3  102.9  (19.7)  (7.3) 

Cascades  953.2  41.2  52.4  (11.1)  (11.7) 

Capitol Corridor  1,295.6  72.6  83.7  (11.0)  (8.5) 

San Joaquins  1,070.6  104.6  112.7  (8.1)  (7.5) 

Adirondack  81.8  8.5  16.5  (8.0)  (98.0) 

Blue Water  170.8  20.1  20.2  (0.0)  (0.2) 

Washington-Roanoke  352.1  17.2  14.2  2.9  8.3 

Washington-Newport News  363.7  19.9  14.0  5.8  16.1 

Washington-Norfolk  489.5  21.5  28.8  (7.3)  (14.9) 

Washington-Richmond  136.3  8.3  8.6  (0.3)  (2.5) 

Hoosier State  - (1.4)  (1.4)  - -

Missouri River Runner  202.9  22.2  16.6  5.6  27.8 

Pennsylvanian  199.3  18.0  23.3  (5.3)  (26.6) 

Pere Marquette  97.7  9.4  9.9  (0.5)  (5.3) 

Carolinian  324.9  17.9  19.9  (1.9)  (5.9) 

Piedmont  355.3  13.4  14.2  (0.8)  (2.3) 

New Routes  239.5  11.9  13.8  (1.9)  (8.0) 

Unallocated Busses  - 4.4  8.0  (3.7)  -

Non-NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  (0.0)  2.5  -

State Supported Total  15,939.1  $883.4  $1,067.6  $(184.2)  $(11.6) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  425.7  $47.0  $100.4  $(53.4)  $(125.4) 

Cardinal  94.6  10.3  23.7  (13.4)  (141.5) 

Silver Meteor  335.5  48.1  67.5  (19.4)  (57.8) 

Empire Builder  442.6  72.0  131.0  (59.0)  (133.4) 

Capitol Limited  197.0  27.5  45.4  (17.9)  (90.7) 

California Zephyr  399.5  71.2  136.8  (65.6)  (164.1) 

Southwest Chief  311.5  60.3  142.4  (82.1)  (263.4) 

City of New Orleans  259.4  23.4  51.1  (27.8)  (107.1) 

Texas Eagle  246.9  26.2  56.3  (30.0)  (121.6) 

Sunset Limited  89.6  13.6  60.1  (46.6)  (519.9) 

Coast Starlight  376.4  56.8  104.8  (48.0)  (127.5) 

Lake Shore Limited  407.9  41.9  63.7  (21.8)  (53.4) 

Palmetto  315.5  28.4  32.7  (4.3)  (13.7) 

Crescent  313.4  42.0  86.1  (44.1)  (140.7) 

Auto Train  304.4  140.3  107.1  33.2  109.1 

Long Distance Adjustments  - - (5.6)  5.6  -

Long Distance Total  4,519.9  $709.1  $1,203.6  $(494.5)  $(109.4) 

NTS Total  34,680.3  $3,172.9  $3,400.5  $(227.7)  $(6.6) 

Ancillary  506.8  453.9  52.9  -

Infrastructure  300.9  659.9  (358.9)  -

AMTRAK TOTAL  34,680.3  $ 3,980.5  $ 4,514.2  $ (533.7)  $ (15.4) Ridership Projections  165 

FY26 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  4,244.5  $743.5  $500.6  $242.8  $57.2 

Northest Regional  10,583.4  $956.2  $676.0  280.2  26.5 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  $2.5  $5.6  (3.0)  -

NEC Total  14,827.9  $1,702.2  $1,182.2  $520.0  $35.1 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  111.4  $9.3  $11.1  $(1.8)  $(16.0) 

Vermonter  108.5  10.7  14.1  (3.4)  (31.4) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  455.4  43.7  40.8  2.9  6.3 

Downeaster  550.6  21.4  17.9  3.5  6.4 

Berkshire Flyer  1.5  0.2  0.2  (0.0)  (15.9) 

New Haven-Springfield  528.6  26.2  64.1  (37.9)  (71.6) 

Keystone Service  1,486.3  39.5  72.2  (32.7)  (22.0) 

Empire South  1,335.6  70.5  88.9  (18.4)  (13.8) 

Lincoln Service  630.2  46.8  58.5  (11.6)  (18.5) 

Hiawatha  721.1  31.9  35.8  (3.9)  (5.4) 

Wolverine  500.7  48.9  71.4  (22.5)  (44.9) 

Illini/Saluki  324.3  23.9  20.8  3.1  9.7 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  192.9  22.1  22.9  (0.8)  (4.0) 

Heartland Flyer  69.9  2.1  7.2  (5.1)  (72.3) 

Pacific Surfliner  2,958.2  93.3  108.8  (15.5)  (5.2) 

Cascades  963.2  42.5  55.6  (13.1)  (13.6) 

Capitol Corridor  1,322.6  74.0  86.7  (12.7)  (9.6) 

San Joaquins  1,246.8  111.5  119.3  (7.8)  (6.3) 

Adirondack  83.3  8.6  17.2  (8.5)  (102.4) 

Blue Water  172.3  20.4  20.8  (0.4)  (2.0) 

Washington-Roanoke  359.1  17.7  14.7  3.0  8.3 

Washington-Newport News  370.3  20.6  14.6  5.9  16.0 

Washington-Norfolk  498.4  22.2  29.6  (7.4)  (14.8) 

Washington-Richmond  138.9  8.4  9.9  (1.4)  (10.4) 

Hoosier State  - (1.4)  (1.4)  (0.0)  -

Missouri River Runner  206.4  22.5  16.0  6.5  31.5 

Pennsylvanian  202.2  18.5  23.2  (4.7)  (23.3) 

Pere Marquette  98.5  9.5  10.2  (0.7)  (6.7) 

Carolinian  332.5  18.7  21.8  (3.1)  (9.3) 

Piedmont  426.4  15.1  14.8  0.3  0.7 

New Routes  255.5  12.6  17.1  (4.5)  (17.4) 

Unallocated Busses  - 4.4  8.3  (3.9)  -

Non-NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  (2.0)  4.5  -

State Supported Total  16,651.6  $919.1  $1,111.0  $(191.9)  $(11.5) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  429.9  $48.4  $102.6  $(54.1)  $(125.9) 

Cardinal  95.6  10.6  28.3  (17.7)  (185.0) 

Silver Meteor  338.9  49.5  70.8  (21.3)  (62.8) 

Empire Builder  447.0  74.2  132.6  (58.4)  (130.7) 

Capitol Limited  199.0  28.4  47.9  (19.5)  (97.8) 

California Zephyr  403.5  73.4  137.7  (64.3)  (159.4) 

Southwest Chief  314.6  62.2  143.5  (81.3)  (258.5) 

City of New Orleans  262.1  24.1  52.6  (28.5)  (108.6) 

Texas Eagle  249.3  27.0  59.8  (32.7)  (131.2) 

Sunset Limited  90.5  14.0  63.1  (49.1)  (542.6) 

Coast Starlight  380.1  58.5  109.6  (51.1)  (134.4) 

Lake Shore Limited  411.9  43.2  65.9  (22.7)  (55.1) 

Palmetto  318.7  29.3  34.9  (5.6)  (17.6) 

Crescent  316.6  43.3  90.8  (47.5)  (150.1) 

Auto Train  307.4  144.6  110.7  33.9  110.4 

Long Distance Adjustments  - - (5.5)  5.5  -

Long Distance Total  4,565.1  $730.8  $1,245.2  $(514.4)  $(112.7) 

NTS Total  36,044.6  $3,352.1  $3,538.4  $(186.3)  $(5.2) 

Ancillary  524.8  469.0  55.8  -

Infrastructure  312.8  682.2  (369.5)  -

AMTRAK TOTAL  36,044.6  $ 4,189.6  $ 4,689.6  $ (500.0)  $ (13.9) 166  Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans  FY24−29 

FY27 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  4,838.7  $867.7  $537.4  $330.3  $68.3 

Northest Regional  10,681.0  985.8  $687.3  298.5  27.9 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  2.5  $5.8  (3.3)  -

NEC Total  15,519.7  $1,856.0  $1,230.5  $625.5  $40.3 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  113.0  $9.4  $11.4  $(2.0)  $(17.4) 

Vermonter  109.9  10.8  14.7  (3.8)  (34.7) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  459.9  44.4  42.3  2.1  4.5 

Downeaster  558.7  21.9  18.6  3.3  5.8 

Berkshire Flyer  1.6  0.2  0.2  (0.0)  (20.3) 

New Haven-Springfield  534.7  26.5  66.5  (40.0)  (74.8) 

Keystone Service  1,510.6  40.7  75.1  (34.4)  (22.7) 

Empire South  1,354.7  73.6  92.8  (19.2)  (14.2) 

Lincoln Service  636.8  47.5  58.4  (10.9)  (17.1) 

Hiawatha  818.4  35.0  38.8  (3.8)  (4.6) 

Wolverine  504.8  49.6  72.7  (23.0)  (45.6) 

Illini/Saluki  327.6  24.2  21.6  2.6  8.0 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  194.3  22.3  22.6  (0.3)  (1.3) 

Heartland Flyer  70.6  2.2  7.7  (5.5)  (78.1) 

Pacific Surfliner  3,031.5  97.6  116.8  (19.3)  (6.4) 

Cascades  973.2  43.8  56.9  (13.0)  (13.4) 

Capitol Corridor  1,444.8  77.4  87.8  (10.5)  (7.2) 

San Joaquins  1,272.7  113.4  123.0  (9.6)  (7.6) 

Adirondack  85.0  8.7  17.8  (9.1)  (106.6) 

Blue Water  173.8  20.6  21.3  (0.7)  (4.0) 

Washington-Roanoke  366.2  18.3  15.2  3.1  8.4 

Washington-Newport News  376.8  21.3  15.3  6.0  16.0 

Washington-Norfolk  507.5  23.0  29.5  (6.5)  (12.8) 

Washington-Richmond  141.6  8.6  10.2  (1.6)  (11.0) 

Hoosier State  - (1.4)  (1.4)  - -

Missouri River Runner  209.9  22.9  16.5  6.3  30.2 

Pennsylvanian  344.1  27.8  32.1  (4.2)  (12.3) 

Pere Marquette  99.4  9.6  10.5  (0.8)  (8.2) 

Carolinian  340.3  19.5  21.8  (2.3)  (6.6) 

Piedmont  443.4  15.7  15.4  0.2  0.6 

New Routes  258.0  13.0  17.4  (4.3)  (16.9) 

Unallocated Busses  - 4.5  8.6  (4.1)  -

Non-NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  (3.0)  5.5  -

State Supported Total  17,263.8  $955.3  $1,155.0  $(199.7)  $(11.6) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  434.2  $49.9  $104.8  $(54.8)  $(126.3) 

Cardinal  96.5  10.9  32.9  (22.0)  (227.7) 

Silver Meteor  342.2  51.1  74.2  (23.1)  (67.6) 

Empire Builder  451.5  76.5  134.2  (57.7)  (127.9) 

Capitol Limited  201.0  29.3  50.3  (21.0)  (104.5) 

California Zephyr  407.5  75.6  138.6  (63.0)  (154.6) 

Southwest Chief  317.8  64.1  144.6  (80.6)  (253.5) 

City of New Orleans  264.7  24.8  54.0  (29.1)  (110.1) 

Texas Eagle  251.8  27.9  63.2  (35.4)  (140.5) 

Sunset Limited  91.4  14.4  66.0  (51.6)  (564.7) 

Coast Starlight  383.9  60.3  114.4  (54.1)  (140.9) 

Lake Shore Limited  416.1  44.6  68.1  (23.6)  (56.6) 

Palmetto  321.8  30.2  37.1  (6.9)  (21.3) 

Crescent  319.7  44.6  95.5  (50.9)  (159.1) 

Auto Train  310.4  149.0  114.2  34.8  112.1 

Long Distance Adjustments  - - (5.5)  5.5  -

Long Distance Total  4,610.5  $753.2  $1,286.7  $(533.5)  $(115.7) 

NTS Total  37,394.0  $3,564.6  $3,672.2  $(107.7)  $(2.9) 

Ancillary  543.5  484.5  59.0  -

Infrastructure  322.2  704.2  (382.0)  -

AMTRAK TOTAL  37,394.0  $ 4,430.2  $ 4,860.9  $ (430.6)  $ (11.5) Ridership Projections  167 

FY28 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  5,269.2  $967.5  $572.2  $395.3  $75.0 

Northest Regional  10,736.9  1,011.0  $694.8  316.2  29.5 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  2.5  $6.0  (3.5)  -

NEC Total  16,006.1  $1,981.0  $1,273.0  $708.0  $44.2 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  115.0  $9.8  $10.7  $(1.0)  $(8.5) 

Vermonter  111.5  11.2  15.3  (4.0)  (36.2) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  465.1  45.8  43.9  1.9  4.1 

Downeaster  568.1  22.7  19.4  3.3  5.8 

Berkshire Flyer  1.6  0.2  0.3  (0.0)  (22.0) 

New Haven-Springfield  542.0  27.4  68.2  (40.8)  (75.2) 

Keystone Service  1,539.7  42.3  78.2  (35.9)  (23.3) 

Empire South  1,377.1  76.3  96.1  (19.7)  (14.3) 

Lincoln Service  644.5  49.1  60.5  (11.4)  (17.6) 

Hiawatha  828.4  36.2  39.9  (3.7)  (4.5) 

Wolverine  509.8  51.3  75.2  (23.9)  (46.9) 

Illini/Saluki  331.6  25.0  22.5  2.5  7.5 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  196.1  23.1  23.3  (0.2)  (1.2) 

Heartland Flyer  99.6  2.8  8.3  (5.5)  (55.2) 

Pacific Surfliner  3,113.8  102.2  120.3  (18.0)  (5.8) 

Cascades  985.0  45.2  57.4  (12.2)  (12.3) 

Capitol Corridor  1,479.5  80.4  91.2  (10.8)  (7.3) 

San Joaquins  1,302.0  117.7  126.1  (8.4)  (6.4) 

Adirondack  86.7  9.1  18.5  (9.4)  (108.8) 

Blue Water  175.5  21.3  22.0  (0.6)  (3.7) 

Washington-Roanoke  374.4  19.1  15.8  3.3  8.7 

Washington-Newport News  384.3  22.1  15.9  6.2  16.2 

Washington-Norfolk  517.7  23.9  30.4  (6.5)  (12.6) 

Washington-Richmond  144.6  8.9  10.5  (1.5)  (10.6) 

Hoosier State  - (1.5)  (1.5)  - -

Missouri River Runner  213.9  23.7  17.0  6.6  31.1 

Pennsylvanian  349.7  28.8  33.0  (4.2)  (11.9) 

Pere Marquette  100.5  10.0  10.8  (0.8)  (8.0) 

Carolinian  348.8  20.4  22.9  (2.4)  (7.0) 

Piedmont  461.9  16.5  16.1  0.4  0.9 

New Routes  423.9  16.3  27.7  (11.4)  (26.8) 

Unallocated Busses  - 4.5  8.9  (4.4)  -

Non-NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  (2.0)  4.5  -

State Supported Total  17,792.3  $994.5  $1,202.7  $(208.2)  $(11.7) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  439.5  $51.6  $107.4  $(55.8)  $(127.0) 

Cardinal  97.7  11.3  38.5  (27.2)  (278.6) 

Silver Meteor  346.3  52.7  78.3  (25.5)  (73.7) 

Empire Builder  456.9  78.9  136.2  (57.2)  (125.2) 

Capitol Limited  203.4  30.2  53.2  (23.0)  (113.1) 

California Zephyr  412.5  78.1  139.8  (61.7)  (149.5) 

Southwest Chief  321.5  66.2  146.0  (79.8)  (248.3) 

City of New Orleans  267.8  25.7  55.7  (30.0)  (112.2) 

Texas Eagle  254.8  28.8  67.5  (38.7)  (151.9) 

Sunset Limited  92.6  14.9  69.6  (54.7)  (590.8) 

Coast Starlight  388.6  62.3  120.3  (58.0)  (149.3) 

Lake Shore Limited  421.0  46.0  70.8  (24.8)  (58.8) 

Palmetto  325.8  31.2  39.7  (8.5)  (26.1) 

Crescent  323.6  46.1  101.2  (55.1)  (170.3) 

Auto Train  314.5  153.9  118.5  35.5  112.7 

Long Distance Adjustments  - - (5.4)  5.4  -

Long Distance Total  4,666.5  $777.9  $1,337.2  $(559.2)  $(119.8) 

NTS Total  38,464.9  $3,753.5  $3,812.8  $(59.4)  $(1.5) 

Ancillary  562.9  500.9  62.0  -

Infrastructure  331.9  731.3  (399.4)  -

AMTRAK TOTAL  38,464.9  $4,648.3  $5,045.0  $(396.7)  $(10.3) 168  Amtrak’s Five-Year Plans  FY24−29 

FY29 Ridership Projections 

($s in Millions)  Ridership 

(000s) 

Allocated 

Operating Sources  Allocated Operating Uses  Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) 

Allocated Contribution/ 

(Loss) per Rider 

NEC 

Acela  5,391.5  $1,018.8  $599.0  $419.8  $77.9 

Northest Regional  10,618.9  1,025.5  $687.6  337.9  31.8 

NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  2.5  $6.1  (3.5)  -

NEC Total  16,010.4  $2,046.8  $1,292.6  $754.2  $47.1 

STATE SUPPORTED 

Ethan Allen Express  116.6  $9.7  $10.9  $(1.2)  $(10.6) 

Vermonter  112.8  11.1  14.6  (3.5)  (30.7) 

Empire West/Maple Leaf  468.8  45.8  43.9  2.0  4.2 

Downeaster  575.3  22.9  19.9  3.1  5.3 

Berkshire Flyer  1.6  0.2  0.3  (0.0)  (28.7) 

New Haven-Springfield  547.2  27.1  69.7  (42.6)  (77.8) 

Keystone Service  1,560.5  43.5  80.0  (36.5)  (23.4) 

Empire South  1,393.8  80.7  98.5  (17.8)  (12.8) 

Lincoln Service  649.8  48.9  60.6  (11.7)  (18.1) 

Hiawatha  835.1  36.6  39.5  (3.0)  (3.6) 

Wolverine  513.0  51.3  76.6  (25.3)  (49.4) 

Illini/Saluki  334.3  24.9  23.1  1.8  5.5 

Illinois Zephyr/Carl Sandburg  197.2  22.7  23.7  (1.1)  (5.4) 

Heartland Flyer  114.6  3.1  8.6  (5.5)  (47.6) 

Pacific Surfliner  3,183.8  107.3  125.0  (17.7)  (5.6) 

Cascades  993.6  46.8  59.4  (12.6)  (12.7) 

Capitol Corridor  1,505.6  80.3  91.2  (10.8)  (7.2) 

San Joaquins  1,326.3  117.3  128.0  (10.7)  (8.1) 

Adirondack  88.3  8.9  18.9  (9.9)  (112.6) 

Blue Water  176.6  21.1  22.3  (1.2)  (6.9) 

Washington-Roanoke  381.0  19.6  16.1  3.5  9.2 

Washington-Newport News  390.3  22.9  16.3  6.6  17.0 

Washington-Norfolk  526.1  24.7  31.0  (6.2)  (11.9) 

Washington-Richmond  147.1  8.9  9.6  (0.7)  (4.6) 

Hoosier State  - (1.4)  (1.4)  - -

Missouri River Runner  217.2  23.5  16.3  7.1  32.9 

Pennsylvanian  354.0  29.5  32.6  (3.1)  (8.6) 

Pere Marquette  101.2  9.9  9.9  (0.0)  (0.5) 

Carolinian  356.2  21.4  23.5  (2.1)  (5.8) 

Piedmont  479.5  17.0  16.5  0.5  1.0 

New Routes  779.8  23.5  37.9  (14.3)  (18.4) 

Unallocated Busses  - 4.6  9.0  (4.5)  -

Non-NEC Special Trains & Adjustments  - 2.5  (2.0)  4.5  -

State Supported Total  18,427.2  $1,017.0  $1,230.0  $(212.9438)  $(11.6) 

LONG DISTANCE 

Silver Star  443.0  $53.3  $108.8  $(55.5)  $(125.2) 

Cardinal  98.5  11.7  41.4  (29.8)  (302.0) 

Silver Meteor  349.1  54.5  80.4  (25.9)  (74.2) 

Empire Builder  460.6  81.6  137.2  (55.6)  (120.6) 

Capitol Limited  205.0  31.2  54.8  (23.5)  (114.8) 

California Zephyr  415.7  80.7  140.3  (59.6)  (143.5) 

Southwest Chief  324.1  68.3  146.7  (78.4)  (241.8) 

City of New Orleans  270.0  26.5  56.6  (30.1)  (111.3) 

Texas Eagle  256.8  29.8  69.7  (39.9)  (155.5) 

Sunset Limited  93.2  15.4  71.5  (56.1)  (601.7) 

Coast Starlight  391.6  64.4  123.3  (59.0)  (150.6) 

Lake Shore Limited  424.4  47.6  72.2  (24.6)  (57.9) 

Palmetto  328.3  32.3  41.1  (8.8)  (26.8) 

Crescent  326.1  47.7  104.2  (56.5)  (173.4) 

Auto Train  316.8  158.7  120.7  38.0  120.0 

Long Distance Adjustments  - - (5.4)  5.4  -

Long Distance Total  4,703.2  $803.7  $1,363.4  $(559.7)  $(119.0) 

NTS Total  39,140.8  $3,867.6  $3,886.1  $(18.5)  $(0.5) 

Ancillary  583.5  520.4  63.1  -

Infrastructure  341.9  743.2  (401.2)  -

AMTRAK TOTAL  39,140.8  $4,793.0  $5,149.6  $(356.6)  $(9.1) Amtrak is a registered service mark of the National Railroad Passenger Corporation. 

National Railroad Passenger Corporation 

1 Massachusetts Avenue NW Washington, DC 20001 

Amtrak.com
