Title: 

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/118/meeting/house/115294/documents/HHRG-118-FD00-20230209-SD028.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 01 Oct 2023 04:13:49 GMT

Markdown Content:
The press versus the president, 

# part one 

# Editor's Note  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-ed-note.php) 

# Part one  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-1.php) 

# Part two  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-2.php) 

# Part three  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-3.php) 

# Part four  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-4.php) 

INTRODUCTION: ‘I REALIZED EARLY ON I HAD TWO JOBS’ 

The end of the long inquiry into whether Donald Trump was colluding with Russia 

came in July 2019, when Robert Mueller III, the special counsel, took seven, 

sometimes painful, hours to essentially say no. 

“Holy shit, Bob Mueller is not going to do it,” is how Dean Baquet, then the 

executive editor of the  New York Times , described the moment his paper’s readers 

realized Mueller was not going to pursue Trump’s ouster. 

Baquet, speaking to his colleagues in a town hall meeting soon after the testimony 

concluded, acknowledged the  Times  had been caught “a little tiny bit flat-footed” by 

the outcome of Mueller’s investigation. 

That would prove to be more than an understatement. But neither Baquet nor his 

successor, nor any of the paper’s reporters, would offer anything like a postmortem 

of the paper’s Trump-Russia saga, unlike the examination the  Times  did of its 

coverage before the Iraq War. In fact, Baquet added, “I think we covered that story better than anyone else” and 

had the prizes to prove it, according to a tape of the event published by  Slate . In a 

statement to CJR, the  Times  continued to stand by its reporting, noting not only the 

prizes it had won but substantiation of the paper’s reporting by various 

investigations. The paper “thoroughly pursued credible claims, fact-checked, edited, 

and ultimately produced ground-breaking journalism that has proven true time and 

again,” the statement said. 

But outside of the  Times ’ own bubble, the damage to the credibility of the  Times  and 

its peers persists, three years on, and is likely to take on new energy as the nation 

faces yet another election season animated by antagonism toward the press. At its 

root was an undeclared war between an entrenched media, and a new kind of 

disruptive presidency, with its own hyperbolic version of the truth. (The 

Washington Post  has tracked thousands of Trump’s false or misleading statements.) 

At times, Trump seemed almost to be toying with the press, offering spontaneous 

answers to questions about Russia that seemed to point to darker narratives. When 

those storylines were authoritatively undercut, the follow ups were downplayed or 

ignored. 

Trump and his acolytes in the conservative media fueled the ensuing political storm, 

but the hottest flashpoints emerged from the work of mainstream journalism. The 

two most inflammatory, and enduring, slogans commandeered by Trump in this 

conflict were “fake news” and the news media as “the enemy of the American 

people.” They both grew out of stories in the first weeks of 2017 about Trump and 

Russia that wound up being significantly flawed or based on uncorroborated or 

debunked information, according to FBI documents that later became public. Both 

relied on anonymous sources. 

Before the 2016 election, most Americans trusted the traditional media and the 

trend was positive, according to the Edelman Trust Barometer. The phrase “fake 

news” was limited to a few reporters and a newly organized social media watchdog. 

The idea that the media were “enemies of the American people” was voiced only 

once, just before the election on an obscure podcast, and not by Trump, according 

to a Nexis search. Today, the US media has the lowest credibility—26 percent—among forty-six 

nations, according to a 2022 study by the Reuters Institute for the Study of 

Journalism. In 2021, 83 percent of Americans saw “fake news” as a “problem,” and 

56 percent mostly Republicans and independents agreed that the media were 

“truly the enemy of the American people,” according to Rasmussen Reports. 

Trump, years later, can’t stop looking back. In two interviews with CJR, he made it 

clear he remains furious over what he calls the “witch hunt” or “hoax” and remains 

obsessed with Mueller. His staff has compiled a short video, made up of what he 

sees as Mueller’s worst moments from his appearance before Congress, and he 

played it for me when I first went to interview him, just after Labor Day in 2021, at 

his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey. 

During my interview with Trump, he appeared tired as he sat behind his desk. He 

wore golf attire and his signature red MAGA hat, having just finished eighteen 

holes. But his energy and level of engagement kicked in when it came to questions 

about perceived enemies, mainly Mueller and the media. 

He made clear that in the early weeks of 2017, after initially hoping to “get along” 

with the press, he found himself inundated by a wave of Russia-related stories. He 

then realized that surviving, if not combating, the media was an integral part of his 

job. 

“I realized early on I had two jobs,” he said. “The first was to run the country, and 

the second was survival. I had to survive: the stories were unbelievably fake.” 

What follows is the story of Trump, Russia, and the press. Trump’s attacks against 

media outlets and individual reporters are a well-known theme of his campaigns. 

But news outlets and watchdogs haven’t been as forthright in examining their own 

Trump-Russia coverage, which includes serious flaws. Bob Woodward, of the  Post ,

told me that news coverage of the Russia inquiry ” wasn’t handled well” and that he 

thought viewers and readers had been “cheated.” He urged newsrooms to “walk 

down the painful road of introspection.” 

Over the past two years, I put questions to, and received answers from, Trump, as 

well as his enemies. The latter include Christopher Steele, the author of the so-

called dossier, financed by Hillary Clinton’s campaign, that claimed Trump was in service of the Kremlin, and Peter Strzok, the FBI official who opened and led the 

inquiry into possible collusion between Russia and Trump’s campaign before he was 

fired. I also sought interviews, often unsuccessfully, with scores of journalists— 

print, broadcast, and online—hoping they would cooperate with the same scrutiny 

they applied to Trump. And I pored through countless official documents, court 

records, books, and articles, a daunting task given that, over Mueller’s tenure, there 

were more than half a million news stories concerning Trump and Russia or 

Mueller. 

On the eve of a new era of intense political coverage, this is a look back at what the 

press got right, and what it got wrong, about the man who once again wants to be 

president. So far, few news organizations have reckoned seriously with what 

transpired between the press and the presidency during this period. That failure will 

almost certainly shape the coverage of what lies ahead. 

Chapter 1: A narrative takes hold 

Trump entered the presidential race on June 16, 2015. In his campaign speech, he 

offered a rambling analysis of global affairs that briefly touched on Russia and 

Vladimir Putin, noting “all our problems with Russia” and the need to modernize 

America’s outdated nuclear arsenal to better deter the Russian leader. 

The media covered his inflammatory comments about Mexico and China, and 

ignored Russia. The next day, Trump gave a long interview to Sean Hannity, the Fox 

News host and Trump supporter and friend, who would go on to become an 

informal adviser to the president. In the interview, Trump indicated he thought he 

could have good relations with Russia. Asked if he had any previous “contact” with 

Putin, Trump answered yes. When pressed by Hannity to elaborate, Trump replied, 

“I don’t want to say.” Trump, as he acknowledged at a debate in October 2016, 

didn’t know Putin. 

Three days before Trump’s presidential announcement, Hillary Clinton entered the 

race, and it was she, not Trump, who began her campaign facing scrutiny over 

Russia ties. Weeks earlier, the  Times  had collaborated with the conservative author 

of a best-selling book to explore various Clinton-Russia links, including a lucrative speech in Moscow by Bill Clinton, Russia-related donations to the Clinton family 

foundation, and Russia-friendly initiatives by the Obama administration while 

Hillary was secretary of state. The  Times  itself said it had an “exclusive agreement” 

with the author to “pursue the story lines found in the book” through “its own 

reporting.” An internal Clinton campaign poll, shared within the campaign the day 

of Trump’s announcement, showed that the Russia entanglements exposed in the 

book and the  Times  were the most worrisome “Clinton negative message,” 

according to campaign records. Robert Trout, Clinton’s campaign lawyer, declined 

to comment on the record after an exchange of emails. 

By 2016, as Trump’s political viability grew and he voiced admiration for Russia’s 

“strong leader,” Clinton and her campaign would secretly sponsor and publicly 

promote an unsubstantiated conspiracy theory that there was a secret alliance 

between Trump and Russia. The media would eventually play a role in all that, but 

at the outset, reporters viewed Trump and his candidacy as a sideshow. Maggie 

Haberman of the  Times,  a longtime Trump chronicler, burst into a boisterous laugh 

when a fellow panelist on a television news show suggested Trump might succeed at 

the polls. 

Fairly quickly, Trump started to gain traction with voters, and it was clear his 

candidacy was no longer a joke. His popularity drew large television audiences and 

online clicks, boosting media organizations’ revenues while generating free publicity 

for the candidate. The relationship would remain symbiotic throughout the Trump 

era. 

As Trump began to nail down the GOP nomination in 2016, he spoke critically 

about NATO. He focused mostly on America’s disproportionate share of the 

financial burden, though he occasionally called the alliance “obsolete” in an era of 

counterterrorism and voiced his hope to “get along” with Putin, prompting some 

concerns inside the national-security world. 

Those concerns would be supercharged by a small group of former journalists 

turned private investigators who operated out of a small office near Dupont Circle in 

Washington under the name Fusion GPS. In late May 2016, Glenn Simpson, a former  Wall Street Journal  reporter and a 

Fusion cofounder, flew to London to meet Steele, a former official within MI6, the 

British spy agency. Steele had his own investigative firm, Orbis Business 

Intelligence. By then, Fusion had assembled records on Trump’s business dealings 

and associates, some with Russia ties, from a previous, now terminated 

engagement. The client for the old job was the  Washington Free Beacon , a 

conservative online publication backed in part by Paul Singer, a hedge fund 

billionaire and a Republican Trump critic. Weeks before the trip to London, Fusion 

signed a new research contract with the law firm representing the Democratic 

National Committee and the Clinton campaign. 

Simpson not only had a new client, but Fusion’s mission had changed, from 

collection of public records to human intelligence gathering related to Russia. Over 

lasagna at an Italian restaurant at Heathrow Airport, Simpson told Steele about the 

project, indicating only that his client was a law firm, according to a book co-

authored by Simpson. The other author of the 2019 book,  Crime in Progress , was 

Peter Fritsch, also a former WSJ reporter and Fusion’s other cofounder. Soon after 

the London meeting, Steele agreed to probe Trump’s activities in Russia. Simpson 

and I exchanged emails over the course of several months. But he ultimately 

declined to respond to my last message, which had included extensive background 

and questions about Fusion’s actions. 

As that work was underway, in June 2016, the Russia cloud over the election 

darkened. First, the  Washington Post  broke the story that the Democratic National 

Committee had been hacked, a breach the party’s cyber experts attributed, in the 

story, to Russia. (The  Post  reporter, Ellen Nakashima, received “off the record” 

guidance from FBI cyber experts just prior to publication, according to FBI 

documents made public in 2022.) Soon, a purported Romanian hacker, Guccifer 

2.0, published DNC data, starting with the party’s negative research on Trump, 

followed by the DNC dossier on its own candidate, Clinton. 

The next week, the  Post  weighed in with a long piece, headlined “Inside Trump’s 

Financial Ties to Russia and His Unusual Flattery of Vladimir Putin.” It began with 

Trump’s trip to Moscow in 2013 for his Miss Universe pageant, quickly summarized 

Trump’s desire for a “new partnership” with Russia, coupled with a possible overhaul of NATO, and delved into a collection of Trump advisers with financial ties 

to Russia. The piece covered the dependence of Trump’s global real estate empire 

on wealthy Russians, as well as the “multiple” times Trump himself had tried and 

failed to do a real estate deal in Moscow. 

The lead author of the story, Tom Hamburger, was a former  Wall Street Journal 

reporter who had worked with Simpson; the two were friends, according to 

Simpson’s book. By 2022, emails between the two from the summer of 2016 

surfaced in court records, showing their frequent interactions on Trump-related 

matters. Hamburger, who recently retired from the  Post,  declined to comment. The 

Post  also declined to comment on Hamburger’s ties to Fusion. 

By July, Trump was poised to become the GOP nominee at the party’s convention in 

Cleveland. On July 18, the first day of the gathering, Josh Rogin, an opinion 

columnist for the  Washington Post , wrote a piece about the party’s platform 

position on Ukraine under the headline “Trump campaign guts GOP’s anti-Russian 

stance on Ukraine.” The story would turn out to be an overreach. Subsequent 

investigations found that the original draft of the platform was actually 

strengthened by adding language on tightening sanctions on Russia for Ukraine 

related actions, if warranted, and calling for “additional assistance” for Ukraine. 

What was rejected was a proposal to supply arms to Ukraine, something the Obama 

administration hadn’t done. 

Rogin’s piece nevertheless caught the attention of other journalists. Within a few 

days, Paul Krugman, in his  Times  column, called Trump the “Siberian candidate,” 

citing the “watering down” of the platform. Jeffrey Goldberg, the editor of  The 

Atlantic , labeled Trump a “de facto agent” of Putin. He cited the Rogin report and a 

recent interview Trump gave to the  Times  where he emphasized the importance of 

NATO members paying their bills and didn’t answer a question on whether nations 

in arrears could count on American support if Russia attacked them. 

But other journalists saw the Rogin piece differently, introducing a level of 

skepticism that most of the press would ignore. Masha Gessen, a Russian-American 

journalist and harsh Putin critic, writing in the  New York Review of Books  that 

month, said labeling Trump a Putin agent was “deeply flawed.” Gessen, in articles 

then and a few months later, said the accounts of the platform revisions were “slightly misleading” because sanctions, something the “Russians had hoped to see 

gone,” remained, while the proposal for lethal aid to Ukraine was, at the time, a step 

too far for most experts and the Obama administration. 

Matt Taibbi, who spent time as a journalist in Russia, also grew uneasy about the 

Trump Russia coverage. Eventually, he would compare the media’s performance to 

its failures during the run up to the Iraq War. “It was a career changing moment for 

me,” he said in an interview. The “more neutral approach” to reporting “went 

completely out the window once Trump got elected. Saying anything publicly about 

the story that did not align with the narrative—the repercussions were huge for any 

of us that did not go there. That is crazy.” 

Taibbi, as well as Glenn Greenwald, then at  The Intercept , and Aaron Mate, then at 

The Nation , left their publications and continue to be widely followed, though they 

are now independent journalists. All were publicly critical of the press’s Trump 

Russia narrative. (Taibbi, over the last month, surged back into the spotlight after 

Elon Musk, the new owner of Twitter, gave him access to the tech platform’s files.) 

At the end of July, the DNC held its nominating convention in Philadelphia. In 

attendance were legions of journalists, as well as Simpson and Fritsch. On the eve of 

the events, the hacked emails from the DNC were dumped, angering supporters of 

Bernie Sanders, who saw confirmation in the messages of their fears that the 

committee had favored Hillary. 

The disclosures, while not helpful to Clinton, energized the promotion of the Russia 

narrative to the media by her aides and Fusion investigators. On July 24, Robby 

Mook, Hillary’s campaign manager, told CNN and ABC that Trump himself had 

“changed the platform” to become “more pro-Russian” and that the hack and dump 

“was done by the Russians for the purpose of helping Donald Trump,” according to 

unnamed “experts.” 

Still, the campaign’s effort “did not succeed,” campaign spokeswoman Jennifer 

Palmieri would write in the  Washington Post  the next year. So, on July 26, the 

campaign allegedly upped the ante. Behind the scenes, Clinton was said to have 

approved a “proposal from one of her foreign-policy advisers to vilify Donald Trump by stirring up a scandal claiming interference by Russian security services,” 

according to notes, declassified in 2020, of a briefing CIA director John Brennan 

gave President Obama a few days later. 

Trump, unaware of any plan to tie him to the Kremlin, pumped life into the 

sputtering Russia narrative. Asked about the DNC hacks by reporters at his Trump 

National Doral Miami golf resort on July 27, he said, “Russia, if you’re listening, I 

hope you’re able to find the thirty thousand emails that are missing.” The quip was 

picked up everywhere. Clinton national-security aide Jake Sullivan quickly seized 

on the remarks, calling them “a national-security issue.” The comment became a 

major exhibit over the next several years for those who believed Trump had an 

untoward relationship with Russia. Clinton’s own Russia baggage, meantime, began 

to fade into the background. 

Hope Hicks, Trump’s press aide, later testified to Congress that she told Trump 

some in the media were taking his statement “quite literally” but that she believed it 

was “a joke.” 

I asked Trump what he meant. “If you look at the whole tape,” he said in an 

interview, “it is obvious that it was being said sarcastically,” a point he made at the 

time. 

I reviewed the tape. After several minutes of repeated questions about Russia, 

Trump’s facial demeanor evolved, to what seemed like his TV entertainer mode; 

that’s when, in response to a final Russia question, he said the widely quoted words. 

Then, appearing to be playful, he said the leakers “would probably be rewarded 

mightily by the press” if they found Clinton’s long-lost emails, because they 

contained “some beauties.” Trump, after talking with Hicks that day in Florida, 

sought to control the damage by tweeting that whoever had Clinton’s deleted emails 

“should share them with the FBI.” 

That didn’t mute the response. Sullivan immediately jumped in, saying the remarks 

at Doral encouraged “espionage.” 

On another track, Fusion became involved in an effort to promote another 

unproven conspiracy theory, that Trump’s company was involved in back-channel 

communications with a Russian bank. Clinton personally supported pitching a reporter to explore the story as the campaign was not “totally confident” of its 

accuracy, according to 2022 court testimony by Mook. The back-channel theory was 

pushed to the media and the FBI at the same time, though the campaign did not 

direct and was not aware of all the various efforts. 

Hundreds of emails were exchanged between Fusion employees and reporters for 

such outlets as ABC, the  Wall Street Journal , Yahoo, the  Washington Post , Slate ,

Reuters, and the  Times  during the last months of the campaign; they involved 

sharing of “raw” Trump-related information and hints to contact government and 

campaign officials to bolster the information’s credibility, according to a federal 

prosecutor’s court filings in 2022. The lawyer who hired Fusion, Marc Elias, 

testified, in 2022, that he would brief Sullivan and other Clinton campaign officials 

about Fusion’s findings, having been updated himself through regular meetings 

with Simpson and Fritsch. With Elias as the intermediary, the Fusion founders 

could write in 2019 that “no one in the company has ever met or spoken to” Clinton. 

In mid-August, after the  Times  published an investigation into the Ukrainian 

business dealings of Paul Manafort, Trump’s campaign chairman since May, the 

longtime Republican resigned. Manafort’s ties to business interests and a pro 

Russian political party in Ukraine were well known, but the  Times  obtained a 

“secret ledger” purporting to show cash payments of almost $13 million to 

Manafort. Manafort denied he dealt in cash and explained that the payments 

covered expenses for his whole team, but he nevertheless resigned from his post. (In 

a 2022 memoir, Manafort wrote that the amounts of money in the ledger were “in 

the range of what I had been paid” but “the cash angle was clearly wrong.”) 

Manafort’s finances and his work for Ukraine would eventually lead to his being 

convicted of multiple crimes, jailed, and then pardoned by Trump. (The Ukraine-

related cases were based on banking records and wire transfers, as opposed to 

cash.) The  Times  won a Pulitzer Prize for the work on Manafort. 

In late August, Nevada Democrat Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, wrote a 

letter to FBI director James Comey, hoping to prod the agency into probing Trump’s 

Russia ties and Russian election influence efforts. While not naming the Trump 

aide, Reid’s letter said “questions have been raised” about a volunteer foreign-policy 

adviser who had business ties in Russia, including their recent meetings with “high-ranking sanctioned individuals” in Russia. That fit the description of a recent, 

unsubstantiated Fusion/Steele dossier report, about Carter Page, a Trump volunteer 

with his own business dealings in Russia and previous contacts with Russian 

officials. 

Reid, who died in 2021, never publicly disclosed how he knew about that 

information, but in an interview for the HBO documentary  Agents of Chaos  a few 

years before his death, he said that he first heard about the dossier from two 

unidentified “men that worked in the press for a long time,” according to a 

transcript of the interview. 

By the time Reid wrote the letter, some reporters, aware of the dossier’s Page 

allegations, had pursued them, but no one had published the details. Hamburger, of 

the  Washington Post , told Simpson the Page allegations were found to be “bullshit” 

and “impossible” by the paper’s Moscow correspondent, according to court records. 

But not everyone held back. In late September, Michael Isikoff, chief investigative 

correspondent at Yahoo News, published a story about the allegation, confirmed 

that Reid was referring to Page, and added a new detail that he says was key: a 

senior law enforcement source said the Page matters were “being looked at.” That 

was accurate—the FBI was already investigating Steele’s dossier—but it would later 

emerge that the FBI clandestinely surveilled Page and those he communicated with 

on the campaign based on seriously flawed applications to the secret surveillance 

court. The applications not only relied heavily on the unsubstantiated dossier, but 

they left out exculpatory evidence, including Page’s previous cooperation with the 

CIA and more recent statements he made to an undercover FBI informant, 

according to a subsequent Justice Department inquiry. Page would quickly deny the 

allegations to other reporters and write a letter to Comey denouncing the 

“completely false media reports” and mentioning his “decades” of having 

“interacted” with the “FBI and CIA.” But, after the Yahoo piece, he stepped down 

from his volunteer position with the campaign. 

The Clinton campaign put out a statement on Twitter, linking to what it called the 

“bombshell report” on Yahoo, but did not disclose that the campaign secretly paid 

the researchers who pitched it to Isikoff. In essence, the campaign was boosting, 

through the press, a story line it had itself engineered. Isikoff says he first learned about the Page allegations when he met that September 

with Steele in Washington, a meeting arranged by Fusion. After being the first 

reporter to go public with Steele’s claims, Isikoff, by late 2018, began publicly 

casting doubt about their accuracy—earning praise from Trump—and had a falling-

out with Simpson, his former friend. In a 2022 interview, Isikoff pointed to his 

earlier description of the dossier as “third hand stuff” and added that, “in retrospect, 

it never should have been given the credence it was.” 

The 2016 dossier’s conspiracy claim was never corroborated by the media, and the 

supposed plot involving the Russian bank, Alfa Bank, didn’t fare much better. Still, 

that fall Fritsch made frantic efforts to persuade reporters from several outlets, 

including Isikoff, to publish the bank story. Their best hope appeared to be the 

Times .

The Clinton campaign, in mid-September, was eagerly anticipating a “bombshell” 

story on “Trump-Russia” from the  Times . It was causing a “Trump freak out,” 

headlined a private September 18 memo by Sidney Blumenthal, a longtime close 

Clinton confidant. His memo circulated among top campaign aides, the two Fusion 

leaders, Elias, and Michael Sussmann, then a partner in the same firm as Elias. (The 

memo was made public in 2022.) 

Two hours after Sussmann received the memo, he texted the private phone of James 

Baker, the general counsel of the FBI, seeking a meeting on a “sensitive” matter. 

They met the next afternoon, where Sussmann briefed him about the back-channel 

allegations. Sussmann upped the ante with Baker by pointing out that the media— 

soon understood to be the  Times —was about to publish something about the 

supposed secret Russian communication link. 

Sussmann later testified to Congress that he gave the story to a  Times  reporter, Eric 

Lichtblau. The reporter and the lawyer had started communicating at the beginning 

of September, according to emails filed in court. (Sussmann was acquitted in 2022 

of a charge that he had lied to Baker about who he was representing when he 

delivered the Alfa Bank allegations.) Lichtblau later paired up with Steven Lee Myers, a former Moscow hand for the 

Times . Whereas Myers, in an interview, said he saw some “red flags” in the Alfa 

Bank tip, Lichtblau, he added, “believed in the Alfa thing more than I did.” 

A few days after Sussmann’s meeting with Baker, Myers and Lichtblau met with the 

FBI, where officials, including Baker, asked them to hold off on publishing anything 

until the bureau could further investigate the allegation, according to the journalists 

and public records. The  Times  agreed, and the bureau quickly concluded “there was 

nothing there,” according to Baker’s testimony and other evidence at Sussmann’s 

trial. Once the  Times  learned of the dead end, the story went into remission as 

Baquet told the reporters, “You don’t have it yet,” according to Myers and other 

current and former  Times  journalists. 

In early October, the intelligence community put out a brief statement concluding 

that Russia had been behind the recent hacks, a pattern of behavior “not new to 

Moscow.” But, the report continued, it would be “extremely difficult,” even for a 

nation-state, to alter voter ballots or election data. 

The report was quickly lost in a frenzied news cycle. First, the  Post  published a tape 

recording of Trump bragging, in vulgar terms, about some of his sexual activities. 

Then WikiLeaks published the first of a weeks-long series of leaked emails from the 

email account of John Podesta, Clinton’s campaign chairman, causing more 

problems for her campaign. Two weeks later the  Times  would report that a private 

security group had concluded that the GRU, a Russian intelligence agency, was 

behind the Podesta hack. (The Justice Department, in 2018, charged twelve GRU 

officials for the Podesta and DNC hacks, but the charges have never been litigated.) 

As the election entered its final weeks, Lichtblau thought there was a bigger story 

beyond the FBI rejection of the Alfa Bank theory; the bureau, the paper had learned, 

was conducting a broader counterintelligence investigation into possible Russian 

ties to Trump aides. In mid-October, two  Times  reporters, Adam Goldman and Matt 

Apuzzo, were in California, where they met with a top federal official who cautioned 

them about the larger FBI inquiry, according to current and former  Times  reporters. 

(FBI records show that then–deputy director Andrew McCabe met the two reporters at the Broken Yoke Café in San Diego on October 16, during a conference there. I 

exchanged emails with McCabe in September, but after I sent him a detailed list of 

questions, he didn’t respond.) 

After Baquet heard the feedback from California, the story stayed on hold, according 

to current and former  Times  journalists. Finally, at the end of the month, the 

languishing story was published. The headline read “Investigating Donald Trump, 

FBI Sees No Clear Link to Russia.” The top of the piece dealt with the FBI’s doubts 

about the Alfa Bank allegation, and waited until the tenth paragraph to disclose the 

broader inquiry. It also noted the FBI believed the hacking operation “was aimed at 

disrupting the presidential election rather than electing Mr. Trump.” The piece 

mentioned a letter to Comey the day before from Senator Reid, who again was 

trying to spur the FBI to look into what he believed was “explosive information.” 

The letter, according to Myers, was an impetus for publishing the story. Another 

factor,  Times  journalists said, was the publication earlier that day of a piece about 

the Alfa-Trump allegation in  Slate , which wrote less critically about the supposed 

back channel at length, though the title framed it as a question. 

That piece’s author, Franklin Foer, worked closely with Fusion, forwarding drafts of 

his stories to the private investigative firm prior to their publication, according to 

court records. Foer, now at  The  Atlantic , declined to respond to an email seeking 

comment. 

Fusion’s co-founders would later call the  Times  story “a journalistic travesty.” 

Baquet, in April 2018, told Erik Wemple, the  Post ’s media critic, that the story was 

“not inaccurate based on what we knew at the time,” but, he added, the “headline 

was off.” A few weeks after Wemple’s column, the  Times  explained to its readers 

what Baquet meant: in a piece about the FBI inquiry, the reporters said the headline 

that October night “gave an air of finality to an investigation that was just 

beginning” and that “the story significantly played down the case” because unnamed 

law enforcement officials in 2016 had “cautioned against drawing any conclusions.” 

That Halloween night the Clinton campaign, anticipating the imminent publication 

of the Alfa Bank story, was prepared to “light it up,” Fritsch emailed a reporter that 

morning. Another story Fusion helped arrange appeared that day, too, in the left-

leaning magazine  Mother Jones . It said a “veteran spy” had provided the FBI information about an alleged five-year Russian operation to cultivate and 

coordinate with Trump. That came from Steele’s dossier. Within hours, the FBI 

contacted Steele, who “confirmed” he had been a source for the article. After 

working with the bureau for several months as a confidential informant on the 

Russia inquiry, he was terminated by the FBI, bureau documents show. 

Before the election, the author of the article, David Corn, provided a copy of the 

dossier to Baker, the FBI’s general counsel, a longtime acquaintance. “It was a 

standard journalistic ploy to try and get information out of them, because I knew 

they had the dossier,” Corn said in an interview. But, he added, “it didn’t work.” 

At 8:36 at night on October 31, the campaign lit up, as Fritsch promised, on Twitter. 

Hillary tweeted out a statement by Jake Sullivan about “Trump’s secret line of 

communication to Russia.” Her aide only cited the  Slate  story on Alfa Bank. 

Clinton had also been aware of the  Times ’ unpublished story. She hoped it “would 

push the Russia story onto the front burner of the election,” but was “crestfallen” 

when an aide showed her the headline, according to an account in  Merchants of 

Truth , a 2019 book about the news media by Jill Abramson, a former executive 

editor of the  Times . The story was a closely guarded secret, but campaign operatives 

had been pushing it with  Times  reporters and were aware of some internal 

deliberations, according to the book by Fusion’s founders. Moreover, the candidate 

herself was aware of efforts to push the Trump-Russia story to the media, according 

to court testimony. 

At the FBI, agents who debunked the Alfa Bank allegations appreciated the  Times ’

report: “made us look on top of our game,” one agent messaged another, according 

to court records. 

After the election that ushered Trump into office, the  Times  began to undertake 

some soul-searching about its Trump-Russia coverage. The intelligence community 

did its own assessment on Russia, including a new take by the FBI. 

Lichtblau left the  Times  in 2017, but continued to believe in the Alfa Bank story. He 

wrote a piece for  Time  magazine in 2019 about the supposed secret channel, even 

after the FBI, and other investigators, had debunked it. In December, President Obama secretly ordered a quick assessment by the 

intelligence community of Russia’s involvement in the election. Instead of the usual 

group of seventeen agencies, however, it was coordinated by the Director of 

National Intelligence and produced by the National Security Agency, which gathers 

electronic intercepts, the CIA, and the FBI. 

In mid-December the  Post  reported that the FBI now backed the CIA view that 

Russia aimed to help Trump win the election, compared with a broader set of 

motivations, as the  Times  had reported on October 31. Strzok, the FBI official 

running the probe, texted a colleague about the unprecedented wave of leaks: “our 

sisters have been leaking like mad,” he wrote, referring to intelligence agencies like 

the CIA. Strzok now believes the leaks originated elsewhere. “I now believe,” he told 

me in a 2022 interview, “that it is more likely they came not from the CIA but from 

senior levels of the US government or Congress.” 

Trump, unaware of the coming tornado, including the most salacious contents of 

the dossier, set out to form a government and make peace with the press. He made 

the rounds of news organizations, meeting with broadcast anchors, editors at Condé 

Nast magazines, and the  Times .

Trump’s longest sit-down after the election was with the  Times , including the then-

publisher, editors, and reporters. For seventy-five minutes Trump’s love/hate 

relationship with his hometown paper was on display. 

At the end, he called the  Times  a “world jewel.” 

He added, “I hope we can get along.” 

A note on disclosure 

In 2015–16, I was a senior reporter at  ProPublica . There, I reported on Hillary 

Clinton, Donald Trump, and Russian oligarchs, among other subjects. I helped 

ProPublica  decide whether to collaborate with a book that was critical of the 

Clintons’ involvement with Russia; the arrangement didn’t happen. Another of the projects I worked on, also involving Clinton, was published in the  Washington Post 

in 2016, where I shared a byline. Some of my other Clinton-related work was used 

in 2016 articles appearing in the  New York Times , my employer between 1976 and 

2005, but without my byline. Initially, the  Times  sought my assistance on a story 

about Hillary’s handling of Bill Clinton’s infidelity. Subsequently I approached the 

paper on my own about the Clinton family foundation. In both cases, I interacted 

with reporters and editors but was not involved in the writing or editing of the 

stories that used my reporting. During the second interaction, I expressed 

disappointment to one of the  Times  reporters about the final result. 

I left  ProPublica  in December 2016. That month I was approached by one of the 

cofounders of Fusion GPS, who sounded me out about joining a Trump-related 

project the firm was contemplating. The discussion did not lead to any 

collaboration. I had previously interacted with Fusion related to my reporting on 

Russian oligarchs. 

In the 2017–18 academic year I was a nonresident fellow at the Investigative 

Reporting Program, affiliated with the Graduate School of Journalism at the 

University of California, Berkeley. There, one of my projects involved looking into 

the dossier as part of preliminary research for a 2020 film the Investigative 

Reporting Program helped produce for HBO on Russian meddling. I was not on the 

film’s credits. 

At CJR, these stories have been edited by Kyle Pope, its editor and publisher. Kyle’s 

wife, Kate Kelly, is a reporter for the Washington bureau of the  New York Times .

CJR’s former board chair was Steve Adler, formerly the editor in chief of Reuters; its 

current board chair is Rebecca Blumenstein, a former deputy managing editor of 

the Times who recently became president of editorial for NBC News. 

Correction: An earlier version of this story misnamed Michael Sussmann. 

Je ff  Gerth is a freelance journalist who spent three decades as an investigative reporter at the 

New York Times .

> TOP IMAGE: US PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP SPEAKS TO THE PRESS AS HE DEPARTS THE WHITE HOUSE IN
> WASHINGTON, DC, ON SEPTEMBER 22, 2019. (PHOTO BY ALASTAIR PIKE / AFP) (PHOTO CREDIT SHOULD READ
> ALASTAIR PIKE /AFP/GETTY IMAGES)

The voice of journalism, since 1961 

About 

Mission  (/about_us/mission_statement.php) 

Masthead  (/about us/masthead.php) 

Privacy Policy  (/about_us/privacy_policy.php) 

Contact  (/about_us/contact.php) 

Support CJR 

Become a Member  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-mem&utm_source=cjr-org&utm medium cjr nav&utm campaign m land) 

Donate  (/about_us/donate.php) 

Subscribe  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-sub&utm_source=cjr-org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Advertise 

Contact Us  (/about us/advertise.php) 

Copyright 2023, Columbia Journalism Review The press versus the president, 

# part two 

# Editor's Note  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-ed-note.php) 

# Part one  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-1.php) 

# Part two  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-2.php) 

# Part three  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-3.php) 

# Part four  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-4.php) 

CHAPTER 2: THE ORIGINS OF FAKE NEWS 

In a windowless conference room at Trump Tower, on January 6, 2017, Comey 

briefed the president-elect about the dossier about him and Russia. Trump had 

heard, from aides, media “rumblings” about Russia, but, in an interview, he said he 

was unaware of the dossier until he met with Comey. 

Comey’s one-on-one with Trump came after the intelligence community briefed him 

on a new “Intelligence Community Assessment” (ICA) on Russian activities in 2016. 

The ICA claimed that Russia had mounted an “influence campaign” aimed at the 

election but had not targeted or compromised vote-tallying systems. Its most 

important, and controversial, finding was that “Putin and the Russian government 

developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump,” as opposed to Russia’s 

usual goal, which was generally sowing chaos in the United States. An unclassified 

version of the ICA was released the same day in Washington. The dossier, actually a 

series of reports in 2016, was included in the assessment, but it remained secret, 

temporarily, because a summary of it was attached as a classified appendix. “The only thing that really resonated,” Trump said about the briefing, “was when he 

said four hookers,” a reference to the unsubstantiated claim of a salacious encounter 

in Moscow. Trump’s immediate reaction was that “this is not going to be good for 

the family,” he recalled. But his wife, Melania, “did not believe it at all,” telling him, 

“That’s not your deal with the golden shower,” Trump recalled. 

Trump’s marriage might have survived but his hoped for honeymoon with the press 

was about to end. The dossier, largely suppressed by the media in 2016, was about 

to surface. 

But first came the ICA. It received massive, and largely uncritical coverage. 

Some other reporters weren’t convinced. Gessen called the ICA “flawed” because it 

was based on “conjecture” and incorporated “misreported or mistranslated” and 

“false” public statements. They criticized the major media, including the  New York 

Times,  for describing the ICA as a “strong statement.” 

In an interview, Gessen said that their skepticism left them isolated and they began 

to “lose confidence.” 

The dossier wound up in the ICA because the FBI pushed it, despite reservations at 

the CIA. Agency analysts saw it as an “internet rumor,” according to Justice 

Department documents. Two “senior managers in the CIA mission center 

responsible for Russia” also had reservations, according to a memoir by Brennan, 

the head of the agency at the time. Brennan testified that it didn’t inform the 

report’s analysis or judgments, though Adm. Mike Rogers, the head of the NSA, told 

the House Intelligence Committee it was “part of the overall ICA review/approval 

process.” Whatever its significance, the fact that top government officials were using 

the dossier in an official report and a presidential briefing was the news hook the 

media needed. 

On Sunday, January 8, McCabe, the FBI’s deputy director, sent a memo to the 

bureau’s leadership headlined “the flood is coming.” He noted that CNN was “close 

to” publishing a piece about the dossier, with the “trigger” being Comey’s brief and 

the dossier’s attachment to the ICA. The dam broke two days later when CNN disclosed the Comey briefing. Hours later, 

BuzzFeed News  posted the full dossier, with a warning that the material was 

“unverified and potentially unverifiable.” Both outlets cited the government use of 

the dossier to justify their going ahead. 

It was a twist to the symbiotic relationship between the media and the national 

security apparatus; usually, reporters use pending government action as a peg for 

their stories. In this case the government cited the media for its actions. Comey, in 

his 2018 book  A Higher Loyalty , wrote that CNN had “informed the FBI press office 

they were going to run with it as soon as the next day,” so “I could see no way out of” 

telling Trump. Comey also cited CNN’s imminent disclosure in a subsequent 

explanation to Trump, according to Comey’s notes. 

Ben Smith, then the editor of  BuzzFeed News , said in an interview the decision was 

a “journalistic no brainer,” especially since  BuzzFeed  was a “slightly fringy place.” A 

BuzzFeed  reporter, Ken Bensinger, got access to the dossier via David Kramer, a 

close associate of then-senator John McCain. He photographed the pages when 

Kramer was out of the room, according to Kramer’s testimony in a libel suit. Kramer 

also testified he would not have granted “access” to Bensinger if he knew “ BuzzFeed 

would publish.” (Kramer declined to comment after I sent him an email explaining 

what this article would say about him.) 

Bensinger had been vetting the dossier, but was on vacation at Disney World with 

his family when CNN aired its story. A  BuzzFeed  editor called him to say the 

publication planned to publish the entire document, a possibility that had not 

previously been discussed, Bensinger said in an interview. A few minutes later, in a 

call with Smith and other editors, Bensinger voiced his opposition to publishing the 

raw material but was told the decision had already been made. Smith declined to 

discuss Bensinger’s role, suggesting I ask him directly. (Bensinger joined the  New 

York Times  in August; Smith left last January, after two years as a media columnist, 

to co-found a new global media outlet,  Semafor .) 

Though many in the media later criticized Smith’s decision—some even called it 

“fake news”— Smith held his ground in our conversation. He said some publications 

had “problematic” and “secret” relationships with the dossier’s sponsor or author that prevented them from revealing the information. (CJR defended  BuzzFeed ’s 

decision at the time, but in 2021, with the dossier’s credibility crumbling, Kyle Pope, 

CJR’s editor, said that was a mistake.) 

Wolf Blitzer, a CNN host, said shortly after the story broke that “CNN would not 

have done a story about the dossier’s existence” if officials “hadn’t told Trump about 

it.” CNN, in its story, also said the sources used by the author of the report, 

described as a former British intelligence agent, soon to be outed as Steele, had been 

“checked out” over the past few months and found to be “credible enough.” 

It turns out that a few weeks after the FBI began checking out the dossier, in the fall 

of 2016, it offered Steele as much as $1 million if he could offer corroboration and 

he didn’t, according to court testimony by an FBI official in October. 

Steele, in response to my questions earlier this year, wrote that his “raw intelligence 

reports” were meant only “for client oral briefing, rather than a finished and 

assessed written intelligence product,” which would have contained “sourcing 

caveats.” Thus, Steele wrote, “the quality of the Dossier reports was fine imo.” He 

said only one minor detail had been “disproved,” with the rest either corroborated 

or unverified. 

In response to follow-up questions, he provided additional corroborative 

information, but it was mostly off the record. In a lengthy 2017 interview with the 

FBI, Steele attributed a large majority of the dossier to his “primary sub-source,” 

according to the FBI report. But, in response to my questions, he declined to discuss 

the work of his main source, Igor Danchenko, a Russian living in the US. CNN’s 

story claimed “his [Steele’s] investigations related to Mr. Trump were initially 

funded by groups and donors supporting Republican opponents of Mr. Trump 

during the GOP primaries.” But the sponsors of the dossier, writing in a book in 

2019, made clear the dossier came later, as a separate project, and the research 

trove commissioned by anti-Trump Republicans was never shared with Steele. 

Steele confirmed that in his response to my questions. (Other news outlets made the 

same mistake—and CNN repeated it in August 2018—though when the Associated 

Press got it wrong in February 2018 the news agency ran a correction the next day. 

CNN, in a deep dive into the dossier in November 2021, correctly described the dossier sponsors. The 2017 CNN story later won the Merriman Smith Award from 

the White House Correspondents’ Association; the citation noted how the network 

story made the dossier “part of the lexicon.”) 

But it would be the fallout from the dossier, even more than the document itself, 

that would be the most enduring legacy for Trump. At a news conference the next 

day, Trump said “I think it was Russia” that was behind the hacking and Putin 

“should not be doing it. He won’t be doing it. Russia will have greater respect for our 

country.” After Trump trashed CNN for its report, the network’s correspondent Jim 

Acosta interrupted Mara Liasson of NPR to ask a question as part of a response to 

Trump’s comments. Trump declined, saying “you are fake news,” the first time he 

had publicly labeled an individual journalist using those words. Trump would go on 

to make the words a hallmark of his presidency—about once a day in his first year 

alone—and the phrase became  Collier’s Dictionary ’s Word of the Year for 2017. 

Jonathan Karl, the ABC White House correspondent, in his 2020 book  Front Row 

at the Trump Show , wrote that “Acosta was, in fact, rudely interrupting Mara 

Liasson,” and most reporters saw it that way. More broadly, Karl said the media 

coverage of Trump was “relentlessly and exhaustively negative,” rather than 

“striving for fairness and objectivity,” and did “as much to undermine the credibility 

of the free press as the president’s taunts.” A year later, Karl wrote another Trump 

book,  Betrayal , that called out the former president’s “lying” and “incompetence,” 

culminating in “the betrayal of democracy at the end.” He acknowledged his 

criticism could make him “sound like a member of the opposition party,” but the 

ABC correspondent was okay with that: “so be it,” he added. 

It didn’t take long for Steele’s name to become public as the author of the dossier. 

Bradley Hope, then at the  Wall Street Journal , said in an interview that he 

discovered Steele’s name after talking to two people in the private intelligence 

world. They quickly told him the  BuzzFeed -published reports contained clues 

indicating they were Steele’s, including the “exact style” and “the shoddiness of it.” 

Other sources, he said, “verified” Steele’s role. 

Steele, in his response to me, accused one of the  Journal  coauthors, Alan Cullison, 

of a “breach of confidence” with Kramer, the McCain confidant who provided the 

dossier to  BuzzFeed . Steele went on to also attack Hope for what “looks like a post hoc cover story,” adding, in a subsequent reply, that his explanation “seems 

implausible” based on the formatting his company uses. Finally, Steele linked the 

story to a “politically partisan line taken against me” and others “by the WSJ to 

benefit Trump and the Republicans.” 

Hope, in an email, called Steele’s claim “100% false,” adding that Steele’s 

“conspiracy speculation” leads Hope “to doubt the whole analytical framework” 

Steele “uses to view the world.” Cullison, in an email, said “Kramer did not tell me” 

Steele’s identity and “the story of Steele’s identity was born of Bradley’s work.” 

Kramer declined to comment after I disclosed all sides of the dispute to him. 

The  Times  quickly weighed in after the  Journal  disclosure, first with an explainer 

that said it would not name the “research firm and the former British spy because of 

a confidential source agreement with  The New York Times .” Yet hours later, the 

paper did just that, publishing another story that identified Fusion as the firm that 

hired Steele. (The online version of the explainer was later altered to identify the 

parties but the newspaper never disclosed the change to readers.) 

The WSJ and the  Times  stories were not well received by Fusion. At first, they 

feared for Steele’s safety. Then they felt the  Times ’ behavior was “improper,” 

because it had “unilaterally” published material “it had learned off the record,” the 

founders wrote in their book. 

Hours after the  Times  story ran, the  Post  upped the temperature on Russia even 

more. Columnist David Ignatius disclosed that incoming national security adviser 

Michael Flynn had phoned Russia’s US ambassador “several times” at the end of the 

year, according to “a senior US government official.” Ignatius noted the talks had 

come on the day the Obama administration had expelled Russian diplomats in 

retaliation for the country’s hacking activities, so he questioned whether Flynn had 

“violated” the spirit of an “unenforced” law barring US citizens from trying to 

resolve “disputes.” 

Ignatius went on to write that it might be a “good thing” if Trump’s team was trying 

to de escalate the situation. But Ignatius didn’t know the substance of the 

conversations. Hours before his story went online, Ignatius appeared on MSNBC and, while not disclosing his upcoming Flynn exclusive, said “it was hard to argue” 

against the need to “improve relations with Russia.” 

The existence of Flynn’s talks with the ambassador was known by Adam Entous, a 

reporter then at the  Post , but he held off writing anything because the mere fact of a 

contact wasn’t enough to justify a story. “It could have been something innocent,” 

Entous, now with the  Times , said in an interview, “something he would be praised 

for.” 

On the heels of the Ignatius column, the FBI’s “investigative tempo increased,” 

according to FBI records, and the Senate intelligence panel announced an inquiry 

into Russia’s election activities. (The House Intelligence Committee announced a 

similar effort later that month.) 

Two days after the Senate announcement, Bob Woodward, appearing on Fox News, 

called the dossier a “garbage document” that “never should have” been part of an 

intelligence briefing. He later told me that the  Post  wasn’t interested in his harsh 

criticism of the dossier. After his remarks on Fox, Woodward said he “reached out 

to people who covered this” at the paper, identifying them only generically as 

“reporters,” to explain why he was so critical. Asked how they reacted, Woodward 

said: “To be honest, there was a lack of curiosity on the part of the people at the  Post 

about what I had said, why I said this, and I accepted that and I didn’t force it on 

anyone.” 

Trump at the time tweeted a “thank you” to Woodward and asked the media to 

“apologize.” That, of course, never happened. Trump’s relationship with the media, 

by then, had reached “the point of no return,” according to a former aide. 

As Trump prepared to take office, the possibility of another Watergate was on the 

mind of some reporters, several journalists told me, intensifying the competition. 

“There was a feeding frenzy to try and be first with the story,” Entous explained to 

me. 

The day before Trump’s inauguration, the  Times  featured a story: “Intercepted 

Russian Communications Part of Inquiry into Trump Associates.” The piece, once 

posted, evoked a strong reaction from Strzok, who was leading the FBI inquiry: “no substance and largely wrong,” he texted, adding “the press is going to undermine its 

credibility.” 

Hours later, Liz Spayd, the  Times’  public editor, posted a column criticizing the 

October 31 piece, which reported that the FBI had found no clear link between 

Trump and Russia. Spayd wrote that the story “downplayed its significance” and 

disclosed that the FBI had asked the paper to delay publication. Spayd also 

contrasted the paper’s “relentless” coverage of the Clinton email matter with its 

“timid” pursuit of the Russia investigation in 2016. Baquet defended his handling of 

the story to Spayd. 

After the column came out, Baquet quickly emailed several colleagues, saying 

Spayd’s piece was “really bad,” mainly for its disclosure of confidential information 

regarding deliberations about whether to publish the Alfa Bank matter. One year 

later, Baquet told the  Post ’s Wemple that “we would have cast that [October] story 

differently but it was never meant to give the Trump campaign a clean bill of 

health.” 

Spayd, in an email to me, complained that the  Times  had “two standards.” Before 

the election, she wrote, the October 31 piece was “downplayed” because the paper 

“didn’t know whether the allegations held up,” but after the election, “the  Times 

produced a steady stream of stories about whether Trump conspired with Russians 

to win the election without knowing whether the allegation was actually true.” 

Trump told me he noticed the difference in coverage once he took office. Not only 

did he have to run the country, he had to fight off “unbelievably fake” stories. Spayd, 

a former editor of CJR, left the  Times  a few months after the column was published, 

and the position of public editor was ultimately abolished. 

Even as those debates were unfolding in the  Times  newsroom, the paper was about 

to land what it thought was its bombshell. The paper was so sure of itself that it let a 

filmmaker capture internal deliberations, which wound up airing in a 2018 series on 

Showtime called  The Fourth Estate .

As the story is being edited, Mark Mazzetti, an investigative reporter in the 

Washington bureau who was also helping edit some of the Trump-Russia coverage, 

is shown telling senior editors he is “fairly sure members of Russian intelligence” were “having conversations with members of Trump’s campaign.” (The story would 

say the conversations were based on “phone records and intercepted calls” and 

involved “senior Russian intelligence officials.” ) He asks Baquet, “Are we feeding 

into a conspiracy” with the “recurring themes of contacts?” 

Baquet responded that he wanted the story, up high, to “show the range” and level 

of “contacts” and “meetings, some of which may be completely innocent” and not 

“sinister,” followed by a “nut” or summary “graph,” explaining why “this is 

something that continues to hobble them.” 

Baquet’s desire to flush out the details of supposed contacts is similar to his well-

founded skepticism in October 2016 about the supposed computer links between a 

Russian bank and the Trump organization. 

Mazzetti reports back that the story is “nailed down.” 

Baquet asks, “Can you pull it off?” 

“Oh yeah,” Mazzetti replies. 

So Baquet signs off, adding that it’s the “biggest story in years.” 

Elisabeth Bumiller, the Washington bureau chief, adds her seal of approval: 

“There’ll be hair on fire.” 

As for the specific details Baquet asked to be included in the story, the reporters 

simply wrote that their sources “would not disclose many details.” The piece did 

contain a disclaimer up high, noting that their sources, “so far,” had seen “no 

evidence” of the Trump campaign colluding with the Russians. 

But in the next paragraph it reported anonymous officials being “alarmed” about 

the supposed Russian-Trump contacts because they occurred while Trump made his 

comments in Florida in July 2016 wondering whether Russia could find Hillary’s 

missing emails. 

The story said “the FBI declined to comment.” In fact, the FBI was quickly ripping 

the piece to shreds, in a series of annotated comments by Strzok, who managed the 

Russia case. His analysis, prepared for his bosses, found numerous inaccuracies, 

including a categorical refutation of the lead and headline; “we are unaware,” Strzok wrote, “of ANY Trump advisers engaging in conversations with Russian intelligence 

officials.” Comey immediately checked with other intelligence agencies to see if they 

had any such evidence, came up empty, and relayed his findings to a closed Senate 

briefing, according to testimony at a Senate hearing months later. 

In the article’s discussion of the dossier, it described Steele as having “a credible 

track record” and noted the FBI had recently contacted “some” of Steele’s “sources.” 

Actually, the FBI had recently interviewed Steele’s “primary” source, a Russian 

working at a Washington think tank, who told them Steele’s reporting was 

“misstated or exaggerated” and the Russian’s own information was based on “rumor 

and speculation,” according to notes of the interview released later. The day the 

Times  piece appeared in print, Strzok emailed colleagues and reported that Steele 

“may not be in a position to judge the reliability” of his network of sources, 

according to Justice Department documents released in 2020. 

CNN quickly followed the  Times  story with a more modest account, noting Trump 

advisers had been in “constant communication during the campaign with Russians 

known to US intelligence.” The White House, a few days later, told reporters that 

the two top FBI officials, Comey and McCabe, had privately told the White House 

that the  Times  story was inaccurate, with McCabe calling it “bullshit.” This was 

consistent with Strzok’s analysis, but the FBI, following custom, stayed silent, 

according to the pool report for White House correspondents and a former 

government official. The White House had told the FBI it was getting “crushed” on 

the  Times  story, according to the pool report, which most media outlets ignored. 

Strzok, in an interview, said his analysis was done for senior FBI leadership, 

including “Comey, Andy, and Bill” Priestap, his supervisor, “to say there were 

problems there.” I emailed Comey’s lawyer and a close associate seeking an 

interview. Comey never responded. 

Trump allies put out a similar message about the  Times  piece. Devin Nunes, then 

the Republican chairman of the House intelligence panel, repeatedly reached out to 

reporters to try and knock it down, noting his investigation, which included access 

to FBI and other intelligence material, had seen no such evidence as cited by the Times . But reporters were skeptical. One asked Nunes if he was working with the 

White House in “some sort of coordinated effort to push back,” according to a 

transcript. 

Nunes, at one briefing in the wake of the  Times  piece, seemed to toss in the towel: “I 

can’t control what you guys write,” the transcript shows. It wasn’t until June, after 

there was a public rebuke of the story by Comey, that news outlets saw fit to 

question its reliability. 

The  Times  piece “was the peak of the frenzy” over Trump and Russia, Cullison, the 

Wall Street Journal  reporter who covered the issue, told me. “It’s kind of like the 

Watergate burglary,” Woodward said, because it helped “launch the issue.” The day 

after the story appeared in print, Trump held a press briefing where he called the 

Times  story “a joke” and “fake news.” 

He was asked whether his use of “fake news” wasn’t “undermining confidence in our 

news media.” 

“No, no,” he replied, he just wanted a more “honest” press. “The public doesn’t 

believe you people anymore,” and “now, maybe I had something to do with that.” 

After his contentious, seventy-seven-minute press briefing in the wake of the  Times 

story in February 2017, Trump left for Florida, believing that the  Times  story was 

“the final nail in the coffin,” according to an aide who went with him. 

Soon after his plane landed, he turned to Twitter and called the “FAKE NEWS 

media” the “enemy of the American people,” citing several news organizations, 

including the  Times  and CNN. 

The phrase was coined more than a decade ago by Pat Caddell, a Democratic 

pollster going back to the 1970s. Caddell, who died in 2019, became disillusioned 

with the party, and became an analyst on Fox News. He explained to  The  New 

Yorker  in 2017 why he wound up in Trump’s orbit: 

“People said he was just a clown,” he told the writer Jane Mayer, “but I’ve learned 

that you should always pay attention to successful ‘clowns.’” Mayer reported that 

Trump met with Caddell in South Carolina, on his way to Florida, and hours before 

the “enemies” tweet. It was a few days before the 2016 election when Caddell, appearing on a now defunct conservative podcast,  Media Madness , said the media 

was on a “political jihad against Trump” and “they’re making themselves the 

enemies of the American people.” 

It went unnoticed. But once Trump adopted, and turbocharged, Caddell’s slogan, 

the war between the president and the media had been officially declared and 

chances of a truce were slim. 

Marty Baron, the executive editor of the  Post  at the time, thought then that going 

forward, Trump “would vilify” the press, “actually dehumanize us,” he told the 

newspaper in 2021 upon his retirement. Just after the 2017 tweet, Baron offered a 

strong response from the press, even though Trump had not included the  Post  in his 

list of enemies: speaking at a conference, he said, “We’re not at war with the 

administration, we’re at work.” 

The  Times  had its own take on the tweet’s “escalating rhetoric” and Trump’s 

relationship with the Washington press corps. A story published one week later, 

coauthored by the paper’s White House correspondent, explained how Trump “has 

stumbled into the most conventional of Washington traps: believing he can master 

an entrenched political press corps with far deeper connections to the permanent 

government.” 

That echoes how NBC’s chief foreign correspondent, Richard Engel, described the 

leak of the dossier on MSNBC’s  Rachel Maddow Show , hours after it was posted in 

January. The “intelligence community,” Engel’s “senior intelligence source” had told 

him, had decided to “drop” the dossier “like a bomb” on Trump because they were 

“angry” and wanted to “put him on notice” that they needed answers to the Russia-

related questions swirling around him. 

For Trump and his allies, Engel’s remarks and the  Times  account describe what they 

saw as a “Deep State” out to get the president. In the days after Trump’s declaration, 

the  Times  surveyed its new digital subscribers, millions of whom flocked to the 

paper during his presidency, to better understand their motivations: the 

administration’s “vilification of the press,” one subscriber replied, in a typical 

response, according to “New Digital Subscribers Survey” data provided to me by a 

Times  staffer. Trump would often call the  Times  “failing,” including the day after the controversial 

story about Russia-Trump ties, but in fact the soaring digital-subscriber base 

throughout his presidency offset the steady fall in revenue from print subscribers 

and advertising. 

On March 1, 2017, the  Times  stood by the accuracy of its explosive story about 

Trump’s Russia connections but tried some clarification. Whereas the first story 

cited four anonymous sources, now the  Times  had found “more than a half dozen 

officials” said to have “confirmed contacts of various kinds.” Then, however, the 

story muddied the original question of whether Trump associates had contacted 

“senior Russian intelligence officials” by noting that “the label ‘intelligence official’ 

is not always cleanly applied in Russia.” 

FBI officials thought the story was a mess. Messages later made public from that 

day indicated the bureau thought the  Times  would try to “correct” its mistakes from 

a few weeks earlier and “save their reputation.” But, as Strzok saw it, the paper was 

“doubling down on the inaccuracies.” 

Strzok met with reporters from the paper the next day, according to FBI records. 

When I asked him about his dealings with them he said that “anytime I talked to the 

media it was at the direction of and with the participation of members of the FBI’s 

Office of Public Affairs.” 

Baquet’s original concerns in mid-February, about distinguishing between 

“innocent” and “sinister” contacts, were not addressed in the March 1 story. Then, 

two days later, another  Times  story—“Trump Team’s Links to Russia”—addressed 

the problem, while referencing the disputed February story. The article noted it 

would have been “absurd and contrary to American interests” to avoid meetings 

with Russians before or after the campaign and that the repeated Trump-related 

contacts involved “courtesy calls, policy discussions, and business contacts” and 

“nothing has emerged publicly indicating anything more sinister.” One of the 

writers interviewed Konstantin Kilimnik, the former Ukrainian business partner of 

Manafort’s, who ran Trump’s 2016 campaign for a few months and whose name 

appeared in the February story about Trump aides overheard talking to senior 

Russian intelligence officials. Kilimnik was described in the article as having been under investigation in Ukraine 

in 2016 “on suspicion of ties to Russian spy agencies,” but, the article said, no 

charges were brought. Kilimnik, born in Russia, told the  Times  that he had never 

been questioned. If he did have any such ties, “they would arrest me.” Kilimnik, in 

an email to me, said his interaction then with the  Times  arose because two  Times 

reporters joined a “background talk” at a “dinner with a friend.” As was often the 

case, the news cycle shifted within hours. Early on a Saturday morning, Trump 

tweeted that his predecessor, Barack Obama, “had my ‘wires tapped’ in Trump 

Tower” before the election. The claim was quickly denied by spokespersons for 

Obama and the federal government, and a new line of attack against Trump was 

opened. 

Trump says he based his tweet on something he saw on Fox News that morning. “I 

was watching Bret Baier Saturday morning,” he said in an interview, referring to an 

episode that ran the night before, “and he had used the words spying on my 

campaign.” Trump thought the tweet “was innocuous” until an aide told him, “Sir, 

the lines are lit up.” 

A transcript of Baier’s show,  Special Report , has him talking about a “wiretap at 

Trump Tower with some computer and Russian banks,” adding that “the Obama 

administration was pretty aggressive with a couple of FISAs.” 

Most media went big on the wiretapping flap. The next day, James Clapper, the 

former Director of National Intelligence under Obama, went on  Meet the Press  to 

say “there was no such wiretap activity.” He also said that during his time in office, 

which ended January 20, “we had no evidence of such collusion,” speaking of 

Trump’s campaign and Russia. 

The  Post  put the collusion denial at the end of its story, while the  Times  ignored it. 

On March 20, Comey appeared before the House Intelligence Committee and gave 

official blessing to the collusion narrative running rampant in the media. He 

testified that the FBI was “investigating the nature of any links between individuals 

associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government, and whether 

there was any coordination between the campaign and Russia’s efforts.” Before Comey’s testimony, Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat, read an opening 

statement in which he quoted from the dossier’s unsubstantiated allegation about 

Carter Page meeting with a sanctioned Russian official close to Putin in 2016 to 

discuss an extraordinarily lucrative business deal in exchange for the lifting of 

sanctions. The California Democrat would go on MSNBC two days later to state that 

there was “more than circumstantial evidence now” of collusion. He offered no 

substantiation. Schiff declined to comment through his press aide, Lauren French, 

who said, in an email, “this isn’t something we’re going to move forward on.” 

The  Post  did a major story a week later that seemed to burnish the dossier’s main 

conspiracy allegation. 

It didn’t hold up. Two weeks after that the  Post  followed with the disclosure of the 

Carter Page FISA surveillance, a story that turned out to have significant omissions. 

The  Post  landed a long story about Sergei Millian, a Belarusian-American 

businessman, on March 29. The top of the piece identified Millian as the source 

behind the dossier’s most serious allegation, a “well-developed conspiracy” between 

the Trump campaign and the Kremlin, the same ground covered by the  Wall Street 

Journal  and ABC in January. The claim that Millian was a key informant whose 

information was “central to the dossier” was stated without any attribution or 

sourcing. In 2021 the  Post  retracted the parts of the story describing Millian as a 

dossier source after John Durham, a special counsel looking into the origins of the 

Trump-Russia investigations, indicted Steele’s main source for lying to the FBI. 

Durham alleged the fact of Millian being a source had been “fabricated.” The  Post 

editor’s note explained that Durham’s indictment “contradicted” information in the 

March story, and additional reporting in 2021 further “undermined” the account. 

The  Post  also deleted parts of a few other stories that repeated the allegation that 

Millian was a dossier source. 

After the retractions, the  Post  editor who replaced Baron, Sally Buzbee, said to the 

Times  that the paper had been “very skeptical about the contents of the dossier.” 

Some  Post  reporters—though not the authors of the piece—had called the contents 

“garbage” and “bullshit.” Buzbee and other  Post  journalists declined my requests for an interview. A  Post  spokesperson said that the piece was part of an effort “to 

scrutinize the origins of the dossier” and that the paper had “made it clear how hard 

it was to verify the dossier.” 

In early April, the  Post  story on Page landed, calling the surveillance “the clearest 

evidence so far that the FBI had reason to believe during the 2016 presidential 

campaign that a Trump campaign adviser was in touch with Russian agents. Such 

contacts are now at the center of an investigation into whether the campaign 

coordinated with the Russian government to swing the election in Trump’s favor.” It 

noted Page’s “effusive praise” for Putin and mentioned Schiff’s congressional 

recitation of the Page allegations in the dossier. Relying on anonymous sources, it 

gave a vague update on the dossier’s credibility: “some of the information in the 

dossier had been verified by US intelligence agencies, and some of it hasn’t.” 

At the  Times , the newsroom was irked about getting beaten by the  Post.  “Times  is 

angry with us about the WP scoop,” Strzok texted to an FBI colleague, a few days 

later. 

But the  Post  scoop was incomplete. Its anonymous sources mirrored the FBI’s 

suspicions but left out the bureau’s missteps and exculpatory evidence, as 

subsequent investigations revealed. It turns out that the secret surveillance of Page 

was an effort to bring in heavier artillery to an FBI inquiry that, in the fall of 2016, 

wasn’t finding any nefarious links, as the  Times  reported back then. Agents were 

able to review “emails between Page and members of the Donald J. Trump for 

President Campaign concerning campaign related matters,” according to an inquiry 

in 2019 by the Justice Department Inspector General. FBI documents show the 

surveillance of Page targeted four facilities, two email, one cell, and one Skype. 

Still, even with the added surveillance capability, the investigation had not turned 

up evidence for any possible charges by the date of the  Post  piece, which came four 

days after the secret surveillance, called FISA, for the Foreign Intelligence 

Surveillance Act, was renewed for the second time. (Page was never charged.) 

The IG review also found that the FISA warrant process was deeply flawed. It relied 

heavily on the dossier, including the fabricated Millian allegation of a conspiracy, 

the IG found. Furthermore, the report said the warrants contained seventeen “significant errors and omissions,” such as leaving out exculpatory information 

about Page, including his previous work for the CIA and comments he made to an 

undercover FBI informant. And by the time of the  Post  piece, the dossier’s 

credibility was collapsing; the FBI knew the CIA called it “internet rumor,” and on 

its own the FBI “did not find corroboration for Steele’s election reporting,” 

according to the IG report. 

The  Post  spokesperson, who would only speak on background, said the article on 

Page was “fair and accurate” and meant to reflect “how deeply the FBI’s suspicions 

were about Page.” They acknowledged the story was incomplete, noting that “at that 

time there was a lot that was not publicly known.” 

Trump, by the spring of 2017, was more than uneasy with Comey. In one of his 

chats, he told the director his policies were “bad” for Russia because he wanted 

“more oil and more nukes” and the FBI inquiry was creating a “cloud” over his 

dealings with foreign leaders, according to Comey’s notes. 

Finally, he had enough. Trump met with senior officials, and his deputy counsel told 

him that firing Comey would prolong, not curb, the FBI investigation and possibly 

result in the appointment of a special counsel, according to lawyers briefed on the 

meeting. 

“The president acknowledged” the dire prognosis in the meeting, according to 

William Barr, who, as attorney general in 2019, oversaw the end of the Mueller 

inquiry. But the president didn’t care, declaring, according to Barr: “I’m still going 

to fire the son of a bitch.” 

He did just that. 

A note on disclosure 

In 2015 16, I was a senior reporter at  ProPublica . There, I reported on Hillary 

Clinton, Donald Trump, and Russian oligarchs, among other subjects. I helped 

ProPublica  decide whether to collaborate with a book that was critical of the Clintons’ involvement with Russia; the arrangement didn’t happen. Another of the 

projects I worked on, also involving Clinton, was published in the  Washington Post 

in 2016, where I shared a byline. Some of my other Clinton related work was used 

in 2016 articles appearing in the  New York Times , my employer between 1976 and 

2005, but without my byline. Initially, the  Times  sought my assistance on a story 

about Hillary’s handling of Bill Clinton’s infidelity. Subsequently I approached the 

paper on my own about the Clinton family foundation. In both cases, I interacted 

with reporters and editors but was not involved in the writing or editing of the 

stories that used my reporting. During the second interaction, I expressed 

disappointment to one of the  Times  reporters about the final result. 

I left  ProPublica  in December 2016. That month I was approached by one of the 

cofounders of Fusion GPS, who sounded me out about joining a Trump-related 

project the firm was contemplating. The discussion did not lead to any 

collaboration. I had previously interacted with Fusion related to my reporting on 

Russian oligarchs. 

In the 2017–18 academic year I was a nonresident fellow at the Investigative 

Reporting Program, affiliated with the Graduate School of Journalism at the 

University of California, Berkeley. There, one of my projects involved looking into 

the dossier as part of preliminary research for a 2020 film the Investigative 

Reporting Program helped produce for HBO on Russian meddling. I was not on the 

film’s credits. 

At CJR, these stories have been edited by Kyle Pope, its editor and publisher. Kyle’s 

wife, Kate Kelly, is a reporter for the Washington bureau of the  New York Times .

CJR’s former board chair was Steve Adler, formerly the editor in chief of Reuters; its 

current board chair is Rebecca Blumenstein, a former deputy managing editor of 

the Times who recently became president of editorial for NBC News. 

Je ff  Gerth is a freelance journalist who spent three decades as an investigative reporter at the 

New York Times .

> TOP IMAGE: FORMER PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP WALKS ON STAGE DURING AN EVENT FRIDAY, JULY 8, 2022, IN
> LAS VEGAS. (AP PHOTO/JOHN LOCHER)

The voice of journalism, since 1961 

About 

Mission  (/about_us/mission_statement.php) 

Masthead  (/about us/masthead.php) 

Privacy Policy  (/about_us/privacy_policy.php) 

Contact  (/about_us/contact.php) 

Support CJR 

Become a Member  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-mem&utm_source=cjr-org&utm medium cjr nav&utm campaign m land) 

Donate  (/about_us/donate.php) 

Subscribe  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-sub&utm_source=cjr-org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Advertise 

Contact Us  (/about us/advertise.php) 

Copyright 2023, Columbia Journalism Review The press versus the president, 

# part three 

# Editor's Note  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-ed-note.php) 

# Part one  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-1.php) 

# Part two  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-2.php) 

# Part three  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-3.php) 

# Part four  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-4.php) 

CHAPTER 3: A CONTESTED PULITZER 

Trump’s firing of Comey on May 9 was nothing like his hit TV show,  The 

Apprentice . The boss couldn’t move on to the next episode, nor would the ousted 

employee quietly walk away. 

The firestorm that erupted in the aftermath of Comey being axed required a do-

over, in part because of shifting White House explanations for his dismissal. So 

Trump sat down two days later for an interview with Lester Holt, the  Nightly News 

anchor for NBC. 

But instead of tamping down the controversy, it fanned the Russia flames for the 

media. A tweet from the show on May 11 set the narrative for the Holt interview: 

“Trump on firing Comey: ‘I said, you know, this Russia thing with Trump and 

Russia is a made-up story.’” Those few words, by suggesting Comey’s firing was 

aimed at getting the FBI inquiry off his back, provided fresh ammunition to anti-

Trumpers. The full interview, which was available online, presented a more nuanced story, and 

appeared to reflect what his advisers told him: firing Comey could prolong, not end, 

the investigation. Trump told Holt, soon after the controversial words, that the 

firing “might even lengthen out the investigation” and he expected the FBI “to 

continue the investigation,” to do it “properly,” and “to get to the bottom.” 

The media focused on the “Russia thing” quote; the  New York Times  did five stories 

over the next week citing the “Russia thing” remarks but leaving out the fuller 

context. The  Post  and CNN, by comparison, included additional language in their 

first-day story. The White House was upset and repeatedly asked reporters to look 

at the full transcript, according to a former Trump aide and two reporters. 

On the heels of the NBC interview came a leak of Comey’s notes of private 

conversations with Trump, including one at a dinner in January where Trump was 

said to have asked the FBI director to pledge loyalty to him. The  Times  piece 

reported that the inquiry into Trump and Russia “has since gained momentum as 

investigators have developed new evidence and leads.” 

Comey, once out of office, had his internal memos leaked to the  Times , hoping that 

might “help prompt” the appointment of a special counsel, he testified to Congress a 

few weeks later. At the same hearing, he criticized the paper’s story of February 14, 

one of whose authors was Michael Schmidt, the reporter who received his leaked 

memos. 

On June 8, at a Senate hearing, Comey was asked whether the  Times  story was 

“almost entirely wrong.” 

He said yes. 

He told a senator they were “correct” when they said he had “surveyed the 

intelligence community” after the article came out “to see whether you were missing 

something.” Comey also agreed he later told senators, in a closed briefing shortly 

after the  Times  piece was published, “I don’t know where this is coming from, but 

this is not the case.” Finally, in his own voice, Comey testified that the story “in the 

main, it was not true.” Back at the Washington bureau,  Times  journalists were uncomfortable, but 

confident, as captured by a filmmaker documenting the paper’s Russia coverage. 

Bumiller, the bureau chief, tells colleagues in New York, “The FBI won’t even tell us 

what’s wrong with the story, so we don’t know what Comey’s talking about.” 

Mazzetti, a reporter on the original story, remarks how “uncomfortable” it is to have 

the former FBI director “challenging aspects of our story” because “it became a way 

to bludgeon the press and discredit our reporting.” Still, he added, “we’re very 

confident of the story” after going back to “our sources.” 

“We were solid,” they told him. 

In response to queries by Wemple, who questioned many Russia-related dossier 

stories, the  Times  said a review “found no evidence that any prior reporting was 

inaccurate,” but if “more information” is provided by the FBI “we would review that 

as well.” (The detailed criticism by Strzok of the 2017 piece was released in 2020. 

The  Times  reported on it, on page 14, and quoted its own spokeswoman Eileen 

Murphy as saying “we stand by our reporting.”) 

Despite the criticism from Comey, the  Times  continued to aggressively report on 

Trump and Russia. On July 9 the paper landed a major scoop about a meeting in 

2016 between Donald Trump Jr. and a Russian lawyer, Natalia Veselnitskaya, that 

rekindled the collusion narrative. 

The meeting took place in June 2016 at Trump Tower, and it was prompted by an 

email from a British PR agent, acting on behalf of the son of a Russian businessman. 

The message promised incriminating information from the Russian government on 

Clinton. Trump’s son was eager to receive the dirt: “I love it,” he replied. The  Times 

obtained the material before it was turned over to Mueller. 

Hicks, Trump’s communications aide, told Trump the emails looked “really bad” 

and the reaction to them would be “massive,” but the president initially directed her 

to “leave it alone,” according to Mueller’s final report. Then, the report goes on, 

Trump dictated a statement to Hicks that left out the derogatory information 

promised in the emails. For the  Times , Trump’s mess was a pot of gold: two of the  Times  stories about the 

meeting and the emails were part of its winning Pulitzer Prize package. 

In the end, the “I love it” email showed a receptiveness by Trump’s world to dirt 

from Russia. But the meeting itself was a “flop,” wrote Barry Meier, a former  Times 

reporter, in his book about the Trump dossier,  Spooked .

Ironically, the only information given to the Trump delegation at the meeting was a 

memo, prepared by Fusion, the sponsor of the dossier, about some obscure Clinton 

donors mixed up in Russian business dealings. Fusion, it turns out, had worked for 

American lawyers representing a Russian real estate company, and Veselnitskaya 

was their Russian lawyer. 

A week after the Trump Tower story, the president conducted a serendipitous 

interview with three  Times  reporters, including Schmidt, who asked if Comey’s 

sharing of the dossier with Trump before his inauguration was “leverage.” Trump 

replied, “Yeah, I think so, in retrospect.” 

After the Oval Office sit-down, an aide, worried about the possibility of 

repercussions from an impromptu interview, sought Trump’s reaction. 

“I loved that,” the aide, who requested anonymity, recalled him saying. “It was 

better than therapy. I’ve never done therapy, but this was better.” 

Trump would later tell me it was “possible” he said what the aide remembered, but 

didn’t recall it. But, he added, “I’ll often sit down with hostile press, just to see if it’s 

possible to get them to write the truth. It almost never works. I do it almost as a 

chess game.” 

That summer the pieces on Mueller’s chess board were quietly shifting. By August, 

the collusion investigation had not panned out, according to 2020 testimony by Rod 

Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general who oversaw Mueller. Some reporters like 

Schmidt shifted gears, too, focusing instead on possible obstruction. 

By late October, the Republican-led House Intelligence Committee had obtained 

banking records showing Fusion’s client for the dossier was Marc Elias, the lawyer 

for the Clinton campaign and the DNC. The  Post  broke the story, citing “people familiar with the matter.” Ken Vogel, a 

Times  reporter, quickly tweeted that Elias had “pushed back vigorously” when Vogel 

had “tried to report this story,” telling the reporter he was “wrong.” Elias did not 

respond to an email seeking comment. 

A few weeks later Mueller reached a plea agreement with Michael Flynn, who left 

the job of national security adviser just a few weeks after Trump took office over his 

recollections of his transition contacts with the Russian ambassador. In the deal, 

Flynn pleaded guilty on December 1 to lying to the FBI about those conversations. 

Flynn’s guilty plea, along with those of others in the Trump orbit, served an 

important media role: vindicating the views of those in the press who suspected a 

wider conspiracy, and undercutting the push-back from those, some of them who 

even would become Trump critics, that the coverage had gone too far. 

Flynn later tried to withdraw his plea after a Justice Department review found 

exculpatory evidence, including the fact that the lead agent on his case wanted to 

shut it down in early January but was overruled by higher-ups. The Justice 

Department then moved to have the charges dismissed, but a federal judge wanted 

to know more, so Flynn was pardoned by Trump. 

The day after Flynn appeared in court, the  Times  reported that Strzok, the FBI’s 

manager of the Russia inquiry, had been “removed” months earlier by Mueller over 

“possible anti-Trump texts.” 

The story described Strzok—who was an anonymous source for the paper—as “one 

of the most experienced and trusted” investigators. The  Times  reported that Strzok 

was transferred back to the FBI because he reacted to news events “in ways that 

could appear critical of Mr. Trump,” according to unnamed “people briefed on the 

case.” 

Hundreds of Strzok’s texts later became public. Many were quite critical of Trump 

and his supporters. 

For example, one, from before the election, had Strzok responding to whether 

Trump would “ever become president” with this reply: “No. No he won’t. We’ll stop 

it.” Strzok, who was fired by the FBI in 2018, testified that his personal beliefs didn’t 

affect his official actions. And in 2019 the Justice Department’s Inspector General said he failed “to find documentary or testimonial evidence that political bias or 

improper motivation” influenced the opening of the investigation, which was done 

by Strzok. 

The  Times , and other outlets, reported on Strzok’s anti-Trump messages, though 

they received the most attention on outlets like Fox. 

The  Times  did not report on all of Strzok’s texts, including one that would come out 

in a few weeks; it might have helped readers better understand why Mueller failed 

to bring any criminal charges involving collusion or conspiracy with Russia. 

But before that omission, the  Times  exposed another piece of the FBI’s Russia 

puzzle. The paper landed a major story at the end of the year, in time to be included 

in its Pulitzer package that ultimately shared the prize for national reporting. 

The piece claimed to solve “one of the lingering mysteries of the past year” by 

focusing on a critical question: What prompted the FBI, in late July 2016, “to open a 

counterintelligence investigation into the Trump campaign?” The answer, the piece 

went on, citing anonymous sources, wasn’t the sensational, unsubstantiated dossier, 

but “firsthand information from one of America’s closest allies” that “so alarmed” 

the FBI. 

The three characters in this drama are a twenty eight year old campaign volunteer 

on energy issues, an Australian diplomat, and a Maltese professor living in the UK. 

Each has disputed aspects of what transpired. 

The events at issue boil down to a suggestion from the Trump aide, George 

Papadopoulos, relayed to the diplomat, Alexander Downer, at a London wine bar 

that traces back to another suggestion Papadopoulos heard a few weeks earlier from 

Joseph Mifsud, the academic, about the Russians allegedly having dirt on Hillary 

Clinton involving emails. 

Papadopoulos, two months before the  Times  article, had pleaded guilty to lying to 

the FBI about some of the details of his meeting with Mifsud, including the date of 

the meeting and his downplaying of what he “understood” were Mifsud’s 

“substantial connections to high-level Russian government officials.” Papadopoulos had tried, unsuccessfully, to broker meetings for the campaign with 

Russia. Before he disappeared in November, Mifsud gave interviews to journalists 

from Italy, the US, and Britain, denying he had worked for or with the Kremlin. The 

Times  story contained no denials by Mifsud, though the paper said in its statement 

that it reached out to him on “multiple occasions.” (Other papers writing about 

Mifsud, such as the  Washington Post , would quote his denials to reporters before he 

disappeared. It turned out that early on, the FBI checked with another government 

agency presumed to be the CIA and found no “derogatory” information on 

Mifsud, according to a subsequent report by the Inspector General of the Justice 

Department. And Mifsud told the FBI in early 2017, during an interview in 

Washington, that he had no advance knowledge of the DNC hacks and “did not 

make any offers or proffer any information to Papadopoulos,” who “must have 

misunderstood their conversation,” according to FBI documents. Mifsud was never 

charged with lying to the FBI.) 

Downer later tipped off the US about his London conversation, and the FBI, two 

days later, opened an investigation (named Crossfire Hurricane) based on his tip. 

“This investigation,” the document authorizing the inquiry reads, “is being opened 

to determine whether individual(s) associated with the Trump campaign are witting 

of and/or coordinating activities with the government of Russia.” The short 

document also spelled out the lack of direct evidence: it said that Papadopoulos had 

“suggested the Trump team had received some kind of suggestion from Russia.” 

Strzok, who wrote and approved the opening communication, described how he 

viewed it in an interview with me: “There never was a case opened on the Trump 

campaign—it was opened to identify whoever might have received the Russian 

offer.” 

In his 2020 memoir  Compromised , the former FBI official writes that interviewing 

the source (Downer) was crucial to getting “to the bottom” of the allegations, but 

McCabe, the second-ranking FBI official, directed the case be opened 

“immediately.” So the interview came days later. Downer was “never able to provide 

better clarity” to the “quite opaque” chat at the wine bar, according to a 2022 memoir by Barr. Strzok says Barr’s account is “inaccurate,” claiming, in an 

interview, that Downer’s conversations, first with Papadopoulos, and later with him, 

were “very clear and very detailed.” 

McCabe was asked in a congressional hearing in December 2017, two weeks before 

the  Times  article disclosing the opening of the inquiry, why the surveillance was 

done on Page, and not on Papadopoulos. 

His reply: The “Papadopoulos comment didn’t particularly indicate that he was the 

person that had had that was interacting with the Russians.” McCabe’s testimony 

would not become public until much later. 

Barr’s memoir,  One Damn Thing After Another , describes the opening of the 

investigation as a “travesty” because “it amounted to a “throwaway comment in a 

wine bar” that, in the end, “amounted to a ‘suggestion’ of a ‘suggestion.’” 

In December of 2017, Trump gave an end-of-the-year interview to Schmidt of the 

Times  at Mar-a-Lago. He told the paper the Mueller inquiry made the United States 

“look very bad.” He repeated the words “no collusion” more than a dozen times. 

Schmidt, speaking on camera to the film crew documenting the paper’s pursuit of 

the story, offered this assessment of Trump: “He may be demented, but he’s very 

transparent.” 

On January 24, more Strzok texts were released. One was written shortly after 

Mueller’s appointment; the man leading the FBI inquiry was weighing whether to 

join him. Strzok was hesitant, he wrote, because “there’s no big there, there.” Other 

FBI documents, released in 2020, reflect the same assessment: the inquiry into 

possible ties between the campaign and Russia, according to one of the agents 

involved in the case, “seemed to be winding down” then. 

Strzok’s message was cited dozens of times in news stories, including the lead of an 

article in the  Wall  Street Journal  and further down in a piece by the  Washington 

Post . The  Times , however, did not mention the message in a story—that day, or in 

the coming years. “We should have run it,” a former  Times  journalist who was involved in the Russia 

coverage said. In its statement, the  Times  said it had reported on the matter 

“thoroughly and in line with our editorial standards.” 

The  Journal , in its piece, noted Strzok’s “skepticism about the burgeoning 

investigation.” Gerard Baker, who was the  Journal ’s top editor at the time, said, in 

an email, that he was “initially skeptical but completely open minded about the 

Russian collusion story,” in light of “Trump’s evident sympathy for Putin” and the 

“slightly shady” background of Manafort, the former campaign chairman. In the 

end, Baker, now an editor-at-large for the paper, says he found the performance by 

the media in the Trump Russia saga, “for the most part,” to be “among the most 

disturbing, dishonest, and tendentious I’ve ever seen.” 

The day after the Strzok text release, the  Times  landed another scoop, coauthored 

by Schmidt. Schmidt had developed a relationship with White House Counsel 

Donald McGahn, who was already cooperating, at Trump’s request, with the special 

counsel. The story said Trump had “ordered” Mueller fired shortly after his 

appointment, “but ultimately backed down after the White House counsel 

threatened to resign rather than carry out the directive.” 

Trump called the piece “fake news,” which had become his go-to phrase to attack 

stories he didn’t like. 

McGahn didn’t return an email from me seeking an interview. He told the special 

counsel he had not told Trump of his plan to resign, “but said that the story was 

otherwise accurate,” according to the final report. McGahn also told investigators 

that “he never saw Mr. Trump go beyond his legal authorities,” according to a 

subsequent  Times  piece. 

Schmidt, in a 2020 book, acknowledged that the January 2018 piece left the 

impression, though it didn’t explicitly state, that McGahn’s threat to resign had been 

delivered directly to Trump. 

Meanwhile, one year into Trump’s presidency, the other investigations into possible 

collusion with the Russians were proceeding quietly in Congress. But the partisan 

divide over the issue came to the fore in February, when the GOP-led House intelligence panel released a memo of some preliminary findings about what it 

considered to be FBI abuses of the secret surveillance court to investigate Page. 

The memo asserted that the dossier formed an “essential part” of the surveillance 

warrant used against Page, and was “minimally corroborated” by the time of some 

of the renewals. 

At the  Times,  the coverage of the GOP memo was skeptical while a dueling memo, a 

few weeks later from the ranking Democrat on the committee, was portrayed more 

favorably. 

The  Times , at the start of the piece about the Republican memo, called it “politically 

charged”; noted, in the next sentence, how it “outraged Democrats”; and did not 

quote the memo’s allegation of the dossier’s “essential” role in the surveillance. The 

same day, in a separate piece, the  Times  again called the GOP memo “politically 

charged” and quoted the “scathing” criticism by Democrats. 

Later that month, the Democrats released their own memo. It said the surveillance 

warrant “made only narrow use of information from Steele’s sources.” The  Times 

story called it a “forceful rebuttal” to Trump’s complaints about the FBI’s inquiry. In 

the end, the allegations of abuse by Nunes were confirmed in 2019 when the 

Inspector General released a report that was a “scathing critique” of the FBI, as the 

Times  told readers at the time. 

In a statement to CJR, the  Times  said: “We stand behind the publication of this 

story,” referring to its reporting on the Nunes memo. 

In February 2018, the  Times  and  Post  shared a George Polk Award for “uncovering 

connections between Trump officials and well-connected Russians, which triggered 

the investigation by Robert Mueller III.” One of the articles in the  Times  package of 

twelve submitted for the prize was the February 2017 piece that had been strongly 

faulted by Comey and the FBI, according to a list “provided by Polk to  The 

Washington Times ,” the paper wrote a few weeks later. The administrator of the 

awards, John Darnton, a former  New York Times  correspondent, didn’t deny the 

accuracy of the  Washington Times  article, but, in an email to me, wrote that “we 

don’t go into the details of the submissions.” A few days later, a prize-winning journalist writing for the  New Yorker , Jane Mayer, 

wrote a lengthy piece about Steele and his work. Then she went on Rachel 

Maddow’s show on MSNBC to note how the dossier “was looking better and better 

every day, more and more credible,” but “somebody like Mueller” was the best bet 

to “really nail down a lot of the things that you need to know.” Mayer declined to 

comment for the record. 

In April, the winners of the most prestigious award in journalism, the Pulitzer Prize, 

were announced. 

Once again, the  Post  and  Times  shared an award for reporting on “Russian 

interference in the 2016 presidential election and its connection to the Trump 

campaign, the President-elect’s transition team and his eventual administration.” 

The  Times  package did not include the disputed piece that was part of the Polk 

submission. 

“I think the Pulitzers make a statement,” Baquet told the  Times  newsroom the day 

of the announcement. He compared the recent attacks against the paper to criticism 

of its coverage of civil rights and the Vietnam War. But even though the attacks 

“hurt us,” Baquet said, “the  New York Times  is still here.” 

Baron declined to be interviewed but, in an email to me, defended the  Post ’s 

coverage, writing that “the evidence showed that Russia intervened in the election, 

that the Trump campaign was aware of it, welcomed it and never alerted law 

enforcement or intelligence agencies to it. And reporting showed that Trump sought 

to impede the investigation into it.” 

A Post  spokesperson, in September 2022, cited the Pulitzer award in a brief general 

statement responding to a list of questions I submitted to Buzbee. The statement 

said the paper was “proud of our coverage of the investigation into Russia’s 

interference in the 2016 campaign, including our stories that were awarded the 

Pulitzer Prize for furthering the nation’s understanding of this consequential period. 

We approached this line of coverage with care and a great sense of responsibility. 

On the few occasions in which new information emerged that caused us to 

reexamine past reporting, we did so forthrightly.” The Pulitzer awards became the subject of criticism, most famously from Trump, 

but also from other journalists. One of those was Tom Kuntz, who worked for 

twenty eight years at the  Times , and now runs Real Clear Investigations, a nonprofit 

online news site that has featured articles critical of the Russia coverage by writers 

of varying political orientation, including Aaron Mate and Paul Sperry. Mate would 

later win the Izzy award from Ithaca College, named after the left-leaning journalist 

I.F. Stone, for his stories in  The Nation  “that exposed the hollowness and hyperbole 

of the so called Russiagate scandal.” 

In November 2021, Trump threatened to sue the Pulitzer board after the indictment 

of the dossier’s main collector. In short order, the  Post  retracted a significant 

section of an article about the dossier. Buzbee gave a statement to  Just the News , an 

online outlet, defending the paper’s award-winning coverage and pointing out, 

accurately, that the corrected article was not part of the award submission. Buzbee 

went on to note, like the  Times , that the paper’s disclosure of “contacts between 

certain members of Trump’s administration and Russian officials had been 

affirmed” by the Mueller report. 

In 2022, the Pulitzer board announced that it had commissioned two “independent” 

reviews of the 2018 awards to the  Post  and  Times ; they both found that “no 

passages or headlines, contentions or assertions in any of the winning submissions 

were discredited by facts that emerged subsequent to the conferral of the prizes,” so 

the awards “stand.” The board did not disclose the identity of the reviewers or post 

their actual findings. In December, Trump made his threat to sue the Pulitzer board 

a reality; he filed a defamation lawsuit against the board’s members in Okeechobee 

county, Florida. 

The  Times , in its statement to CJR, referenced the Pulitzer board’s upholding of the 

award, substantiation by Mueller’s report and an inquiry by the Senate intelligence 

panel, and the paper’s adherence to its own rigorous standards. “The mission—and 

responsibility—of  The New York Times  is to report thoroughly and impartially on 

matters of newsworthy importance. The foreign manipulation of the 2016 elections 

was among the most consequential and unprecedented in United States history. We reported on them with teams of people, who thoroughly pursued credible claims, 

fact-checked, edited and ultimately produced groundbreaking journalism that was 

proven true and true again.” 

Trump, in a statement, trashed the board’s decision to stand by the award, criticized 

the “veil of secrecy,” and lumped the decision in with the House panel looking into 

the events of January 6, saying he would continue to “right the wrong” he saw in 

each inquiry. 

The month after the Pulitzers were announced, Showtime aired the four part 

documentary film about the  Times’  pursuit of the Russia story,  The Fourth Estate .

Other films were in the works, including a few that would feature Steele’s work and 

efforts by reporters to delve into the Russia story. Some that involved Steele were 

dropped, according to journalists familiar with them, while Steele declined to 

comment, citing contractual obligations. 

One stalled project involved the  Washington Post  and Robert Redford’s production 

company, according to journalists familiar with the project, including Entous, the 

former  Post  reporter. They say the  Post  dropped out of the project in 2021; a  Post 

spokesperson, who would not talk on the record, said it was “correct” that the  Post 

had backed out some time ago but declined to discuss the proposed project. An 

email to the Redford founded Sundance Institute seeking comment went 

unanswered. 

A note on disclosure 

In 2015–16, I was a senior reporter at  ProPublica . There, I reported on Hillary 

Clinton, Donald Trump, and Russian oligarchs, among other subjects. I helped 

ProPublica  decide whether to collaborate with a book that was critical of the 

Clintons’ involvement with Russia; the arrangement didn’t happen. Another of the 

projects I worked on, also involving Clinton, was published in the  Washington Post 

in 2016, where I shared a byline. Some of my other Clinton-related work was used 

in 2016 articles appearing in the  New York Times , my employer between 1976 and 2005, but without my byline. Initially, the  Times  sought my assistance on a story 

about Hillary’s handling of Bill Clinton’s infidelity. Subsequently I approached the 

paper on my own about the Clinton family foundation. In both cases, I interacted 

with reporters and editors but was not involved in the writing or editing of the 

stories that used my reporting. During the second interaction, I expressed 

disappointment to one of the  Times  reporters about the final result. 

I left  ProPublica  in December 2016. That month I was approached by one of the 

cofounders of Fusion GPS, who sounded me out about joining a Trump-related 

project the firm was contemplating. The discussion did not lead to any 

collaboration. I had previously interacted with Fusion related to my reporting on 

Russian oligarchs. 

In the 2017–18 academic year I was a nonresident fellow at the Investigative 

Reporting Program, affiliated with the Graduate School of Journalism at the 

University of California, Berkeley. There, one of my projects involved looking into 

the dossier as part of preliminary research for a 2020 film the Investigative 

Reporting Program helped produce for HBO on Russian meddling. I was not on the 

film’s credits. 

At CJR, these stories have been edited by Kyle Pope, its editor and publisher. Kyle’s 

wife, Kate Kelly, is a reporter for the Washington bureau of the  New York Times .

CJR’s former board chair was Steve Adler, formerly the editor in chief of Reuters; its 

current board chair is Rebecca Blumenstein, a former deputy managing editor of 

the Times who recently became president of editorial for NBC News. 

Je ff  Gerth is a freelance journalist who spent three decades as an investigative reporter at the 

New York Times .

> TOP IMAGE: FORMER US PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP, CENTER, DURING AN ANNOUNCEMENT AT THE MAR-A-
> LAGO CLUB IN PALM BEACH, FLORIDA, US, ON TUESDAY, NOV. 15, 2022. TRUMP FORMALLY ENTERED THE 2024 US
> PRESIDENTIAL RACE , MAKING OFFICIAL WHAT HE'S BEEN TEASING FOR MONTHS JUST AS MANY REPUBLICANS
> ARE PREPARING TO MOVE AWAY FROM THEIR LONGTIME STANDARD BEARER. PHOTOGRAPHER: EVA MARIE
> UZCATEGUI/BLOOMBERG

The voice of journalism, since 1961 

About 

Mission  (/about_us/mission_statement.php) 

Masthead  (/about_us/masthead.php) 

Privacy Policy  (/about_us/privacy_policy.php) 

Contact  (/about_us/contact.php) 

Support CJR 

Become a Member  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-mem&utm_source=cjr-org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Donate  (/about_us/donate.php) 

Subscribe  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-sub&utm_source=cjr-org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Advertise 

Contact Us  (/about_us/advertise.php) 

Copyright 2023, 

Columbia Journalism Review The press versus the president, 

# part four 

# Editor's Note  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-ed-note.php) 

# Part one  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-1.php) 

# Part two  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-2.php) 

# Part three  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-3.php) 

# Part four  (https://www.cjr.org/special_report/trumped-up-press-versus-president-part-4.php) 

CHAPTER 4: HELSINKI AND THE $3,000 RUSSIAN DISINFORMATION 

CAMPAIGN 

Trump, in July 2018, finally had a summit meeting with Vladimir Putin, the man he 

mistakenly claimed in 2015 to have met years earlier and his supposed puppet 

master, according to Steele’s dossier. 

In advance of the summit, Trump met with his national security adviser, John 

Bolton, to discuss how to deal with Russian meddling. The president “remained 

unwilling or unable to admit any Russian meddling because he believed doing so 

would undercut the legitimacy of his election and the narrative of the witch hunt 

against him,” Bolton wrote in his 2020 memoir  The Room Where It Happened .

At a press briefing, the final question was whether US intelligence or Putin should 

be believed with regard to meddling in the 2016 election. After going on a tangent 

about the server at the DNC, Trump said, “I don’t see any reason why it would be” 

Russia that did it. Then, a bit later in his answer, he expressed “great confidence in 

my intelligence people.” The first remark received all the attention. Some outlets, like the  Times , didn’t 

include his comments about “great confidence” in US intelligence in their stories, 

while others, such as the  Post , did. 

Trump flew home to Washington, and when aides talked to him the next day about 

the reaction, he said he meant the opposite. 

A clarification was released, but the cleanup was not enough for critics such as 

Roger Cohen, then a columnist at the  Times , who wrote of the “disgusting spectacle 

of the American president kowtowing in Helsinki to Vladimir Putin.” 

Rachel Maddow, the MSNBC host, saw the day’s events as affirmation of her having 

covered the Trump Russia matter “more than anyone else,” because, as her blog 

pointed out, Americans were now “coming to grips with a worst-case scenario that 

the US president is compromised by a hostile foreign power.” 

For his part, Trump, when asked about Helsinki in my interview, blasted Bolton. 

“Bolton was one of the dumber people, but I loved him for the negotiations,” he 

said, because “all these countries,” aware of Bolton’s hawkish views, “thought we 

were going to blow them up” when Bolton sat in on the negotiations. (Bolton 

declined to comment.) 

Trump insisted to me that while “I said nice things” about Putin, “I killed them with 

Nord Stream,” the German/Russian pipeline his administration sanctioned in 2019 

until “Biden comes in and approves it.” (The Biden administration waived sanctions 

on the project in May 2021, and then, after Russia invaded Ukraine, reinstated the 

sanctions.) 

I tried to ask Trump what he thought about Russia’s nuclear capabilities. His former 

aides have publicly and privately said he was fixated on Moscow’s nuclear arsenal, 

including the large number of Russian nuclear weapons targeting the US. But 

Trump demurred, implying it involved classified information, and talked instead 

about his deceased uncle, who was a professor of engineering at MIT and did some 

research related to nuclear energy. Finally, when asked about his remarks at Helsinki that were seen by many as 

denigrating the American intelligence community, Trump didn’t say he had 

misspoken, as Kellyanne Conway, in her 2022 memoir, says he told her. Instead, he 

clarified his initial remarks in a different way. Trump said he wasn’t thinking of the 

entire intelligence community but rather his distrust of James Clapper, John 

Brennan, and James Comey, the former heads of the various intelligence agencies 

under President Obama: “These guys were terrible people,” he said. 

After Conway’s book came out, I asked Trump again about his remarks: he doubled 

down. 

“I was disparaging them; who would I trust more? Comey, Clapper, Brennan, and 

the American sleaze or Putin?” He added, “I don’t think we needed too much of a 

clarification.” 

In the aftermath of the summit, Trump’s critics believed the worst. A 

Yougov/ Economist  poll found that two thirds of Democrats were definitely or 

somewhat sure that “Russia tampered with vote tallies in order to get Donald 

Trump elected.” 

Despite the US intelligence community’s assessment in January 2017 that it 

couldn’t measure “the impact that Russian activities had on the outcome of the 2016 

election,” the  Times  weighed in, at over ten thousand words in September, with its 

own verdict: “The Plot to Subvert an Election,” the headline read. The first sentence 

described an obscure banner of Putin that unfurled on his birthday, a few weeks 

before the election, on a Manhattan bridge. The report quickly noted that the 

banner was promoted by a fake Twitter account that ultimately was traced back to 

the Internet Research Agency (IRA), a privately owned troll operation in Russia. 

This was part, the  Times  concluded in the fourth paragraph, of “the most effective 

foreign interference in an American election in history.” To help buttress its 

sweeping conclusion, the  Times  wrote that the Facebook posts by the IRA had an 

“eventual audience of 126 million Americans,” describing that as an “impressive” 

reach that almost matched the numbers of voters in the election. For most of the media, and official Washington, the impact of Russian activities on 

the 2016 election loomed large, though a number of rigorous academic studies that 

the media largely ignored painted a more benign footprint. 

Gareth Porter, a veteran journalist and historian, called the  Times’  description of 

the IRA’s “eventual audience” of 126 million “bogus” because Facebook had told 

Congress, and reporters, months earlier that the figure was only a potential 

audience for IRA content over two years, including nine months after the election. 

When Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg testified, several months before the piece, he 

said “approximately 126 million people may have been served content” from the 

IRA. 

Facebook data submitted to Congress about the IRA’s ads on its site further 

diminished their impact: more than half of the impressions associated with the 

IRA’s Facebook ads came after the election. 

Porter, writing in  Consortium News , said the  Times’  use of the 126 million audience 

number, plus the piece’s failure to reflect that Facebook users were exposed to 33 

trillion news feeds during the relevant period, “should vie in the annals of 

journalism as one of the most spectacularly misleading use of statistics of all time.” 

As for the IRA’s supposed “efficiency,” noted in the article, the  Times  piece didn’t 

include Facebook submissions to Congress that called the IRA’s targeting “relatively 

rudimentary,” with only a small fraction having anything to do with the election or 

specific geographic targets. 

Court filings in 2019 showed that the total value of the IRA’s Facebook ads that were 

deemed election-related amounted to $2,930, in a political cycle where billions of 

dollars were spent. The only reporter to write about that finding was Sperry, of Real 

Clear Investigations. 

Even before that, studies, largely ignored by the media, pointed to a more modest 

impact. A book by Harvard researchers,  Network Propaganda , published by Oxford 

University Press in October 2018, found “strong” evidence of Russian interference 

operations in America but noted that “evidence of its impact is scant.” A study by Danish and American scholars published by the National Academy of Science the 

following year found “no evidence” that interaction with the IRA accounts 

“substantially impacted” the “political attitudes and behaviors” of Twitter users. 

The deep dive by Harvard researchers warned that “overstating the impact” of 

Russian information operations “helps consolidate” the aim of the operations to 

“disorient American political communications.” 

Still, several years after the 2016 election, many voters believe Russian meddling 

had a big impact on those results, and the mainstream narrative in journalism was 

that it had. A study by Rasmussen in April 2022 found that 47 percent of voters, 

including 72 percent of Democrats, think Russian interference likely changed the 

outcome of the 2016 race. 

Legal developments involving people in Trump’s orbit kept the Russia narrative 

simmering. In late November 2018, Michael Cohen, Trump’s former lawyer, 

pleaded guilty to lying to Congress about attempts by Trump to conduct a real estate 

deal in Moscow. Cohen had told both intelligence committees of Congress that “the 

Moscow Project ended in January 2016,” but documents show he was in 

communication with others, though not Trump, about the project through June of 

2016, according to the criminal information filed by the special counsel. 

The project never happened, but the media viewed the attempt as more evidence of 

Russian ties. After all, Cohen was once a Trump insider, so many in the press saw 

his cooperation with Mueller as a chance to fill in some of the missing pieces of the 

puzzle. Did Cohen really go to Prague in 2016 as part of the campaign’s conspiracy 

with Russia, as the dossier had alleged? Cohen had always denied it, and the press, 

except for the McClatchy News Service, had basically dismissed it as a tall tale, after 

considerable efforts to verify it. 

Cohen, even as a cooperating witness, continued to deny it. McClatchy, in 2019, ran 

an editor’s note saying Mueller’s report “states that Mr. Cohen was not in Prague,” 

but was “silent” on whether Cohen’s phone “pinged in or near Prague, as McClatchy 

reported,” according to an account in the  Washington Examiner . Mate, writing in 

The Nation  in 2021, called the note “tepid.” (Susan Firey, a spokesperson for the 

newspaper chain, did not reply to an email.) As 2019 arrived,  BuzzFeed , the outlet that posted the dossier two years earlier, 

dropped a seeming bombshell: Trump had directed Cohen to lie to Congress about 

the Moscow Project. The story was attributed to two anonymous law enforcement 

sources. The special counsel’s office issued a rare denunciation of the  BuzzFeed 

story the next day, calling it “not accurate.” 

Mueller’s final report said that Trump “knew Cohen provided false testimony to 

Congress” but the evidence obtained by investigators “does not establish the 

president directed or aided Cohen’s false testimony.” After the report was released, 

BuzzFeed ’s then–editor in chief, Ben Smith, insisted in a post that his reporters’ 

anonymous sources saw it differently: they “interpreted the evidence Cohen 

presented as meaning that the president ‘directed’ Cohen to lie.” 

When the original story was posted and then denounced, Greenwald, the cofounder 

of  The  Intercept , used the brushback to list the “Ten Worst, Most Embarrassing US 

Media Failures on the Trump Russia Story.” He pointed out that all the “errors” 

went in the same direction: “exaggerating the grave threat posed by Moscow and the 

Trump circle’s connections to it.” 

Meanwhile, the Mueller investigation was winding down. The inquiry had issued 

more than 2,800 subpoenas, interviewed 500 witnesses, and generated enormous 

interest. There were 533,000 news articles published involving Russia and Trump 

or Mueller, between Mueller’s appointment and the release of his report, according 

to a study by NewsWhip, a media analytics company. The articles led to 245 million 

interactions on social media, the study, funded by the media site Axios, also found. 

With the release of the findings imminent, Barr was briefed on the inquiry, sat down 

with Mueller and his colleagues, and learned of their two overarching conclusions: 

no case of conspiracy or collusion between the Russians and Trump—though there 

had been offers from Russian-affiliated individuals to help the Trump campaign— 

and ten episodes that raised possible obstruction of justice issues but no analysis or 

determination of whether they constituted a crime. 

Barr asked Mueller and his team to promptly deliver their final report with the 

proper redactions, such as classified or grand jury information. The lengthy two 

volumes came back without the redactions, so Barr, unfamiliar with the details, went about writing a letter to inform Congress of the topline results. 

Barr sent his letter to Congress on March 24. It said it was meant to “summarize the 

principal conclusions reached” by Mueller. With regard to possible obstruction, the 

letter noted the report “presented evidence on both sides of the question” but left 

unresolved what Mueller had called “difficult issues.” The report specifically said it 

“does not exonerate” Trump, which Barr quoted in his letter. 

The three page letter was released. Those hoping for Trump’s downfall were 

disappointed. The president declared victory, tweeting bombastically about 

“complete and total exoneration.” And Mueller and his team cried foul: their beef, it 

turns out, was, at least in part, with the media. 

Mueller’s team wanted more information to be released. So did the media: one 

Times  article wondered “what Barr might have left out.” Mueller’s team forwarded 

summaries to Barr and attached a letter from Mueller stating that Barr’s 

communiqué three days earlier “did not fully capture the context, nature and 

substance of this office’s work and conclusions.” The letter quickly leaked to the 

Washington  Post  and was covered extensively by the media, which highlighted 

concerns that Barr had left out “more damaging” material, as the  Times  wrote. 

The blowback pissed Barr off. He finally got Mueller on the phone, after the special 

counsel returned from a haircut the morning of March 28. Over speakerphone, 

Mueller agreed that Barr’s letter was “not factually wrong” but explained his 

concern to the attorney general: “without more context, there is a vacuum that the 

press is filling with misrepresentations. It is the way the press is covering it that is 

the problem, not what you said,” according to Barr’s book. Two of Mueller’s top 

aides, Aaron Zebley and James Quarles, did not respond to emails seeking 

comment. 

The next day, Barr wrote another letter to Congress noting that “some media reports 

and other public statements” had mischaracterized his first letter as a “summary” of 

Mueller’s “investigation and report,” when it was only a summary of the “principal 

conclusions.” He asked people to wait to read the whole report “on their own” and 

not in “piecemeal fashion.” Barr was now a villain to some, but not others. And new schisms in the media 

emerged over prior coverage. 

Isikoff had previously begun having doubts about the credibility of the dossier, but 

Barr’s letter pushed him further down that road. He went on MSNBC soon after the 

letter’s release and criticized the network for its coverage of the dossier, including 

its being “endorsed multiple times” and having “people saying it’s more and more 

proving to be true. And it wasn’t.” A few months later, on his own podcast, the 

Yahoo journalist pressed Rachel Maddow about coverage of Russia and Steele’s 

dossier. She was not happy: “You’re trying to litigate the Steele dossier through me 

as if I am the embodiment of the Steele dossier, which I think is creepy, and I think 

it’s unwarranted.” 

Isikoff says he’s only been on MSNBC a few times since 2019, but before that he 

“was a semi regular” guest. 

A few weeks after Barr’s letter, Mueller’s report, now redacted and coming in at over 

four hundred pages, was released. It consisted of two volumes: the first spelled out 

Russian meddling and links or contacts between Russians and Trump’s universe, 

while the second contained the ten instances of possible obstruction. 

The report found “multiple links between Trump Campaign officials and individuals 

tied to the Russian government,” including “Russian offers of assistance to the 

Campaign,” which were sometimes welcomed and sometimes declined. In the end, 

“the investigation did not establish that the Campaign coordinated or conspired 

with the Russian government” in its election activities. 

The report mentions the 2018 indictment of twelve Russian intelligence officials 

charged with hacking data related to the Democratic Party and the Clinton 

campaign in 2016, though the report is far from definitive. First, it notes that the 

charged officers “appear to have stolen thousands of emails and attachments.” The 

report also says the investigators “could not rule out that stolen documents were 

transferred to WikiLeaks through intermediaries.” (The case has never been 

brought to trial.) The first volume of the report also notes that the Russian government intervened in 

the 2016 election in “sweeping and systemic fashion,” through two activities, the 

hacking and dumping operation involving Clinton campaign related emails and a 

social media campaign run by a Russian entity, the IRA. The report implied the IRA 

was a government-controlled body by writing that it was part of an “active 

measures” campaign, “typically” done by “Russian security services.” 

For the most part the media, having already learned that there was no overarching 

conspiracy, fleshed out the new details, including the more than a hundred “links” 

cited by Mueller. The most troubling contact involved Manafort, Trump’s campaign 

chairman for part of 2016, and Kilimnik, who ran Manafort’s consulting business 

office in Ukraine. On August 2, 2016, the two men met in Manhattan, where 

Manafort shared campaign polling data, some private and some public, with 

Kilimnik. The Mueller report said Kilimnik is someone that the “FBI assesses to 

have ties to Russian intelligence.” (Mueller indicted Kilimnik in 2018 for 

obstruction of justice, unrelated to the 2016 election, but the case has never gone 

forward.) 

Andrew Weissmann, one of Mueller’s prosecutors, went on CNN after the release of 

the Mueller report to say that August meeting “was the heart” of the investigation. 

Steele, in response to my questions, cites the Manafort-Kilimnik relationship as 

confirming and/or corroborating the “Russian collusion efforts with the Trump 

campaign.” 

The fifth and final report of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, released in 

August 2020, highlighted the connection as the “single most important direct tie 

between senior Trump Campaign officials and the Russian intelligence services” and 

labeled it “a grave counterintelligence threat” to the United States. Some of the 

Democratic members of the panel, in an addendum, wrote that Manafort’s sharing 

of campaign data “is what collusion looks like.” 

But the evidence of Kilimnik’s Kremlin ties is far from certain, and the question of 

whether Manafort’s dealings with him were personal or campaign-related are even 

murkier. As for Kilimnik possibly being a Russian spy, the only known official inquiry, by 

Ukraine in 2016, didn’t result in charges. More recent claims that he worked for the 

Russians, by the Senate intelligence panel in 2020 and the Treasury Department in 

2021, offered no evidence. Conversely, there are FBI and State Department 

documents showing Kilimnik was a “sensitive source” for the latter. (The documents 

were disclosed a few years ago by John Solomon, founder of the  Just the News 

website. Kilimnik, in an email to me, confirmed his ties with State.) 

With regard to the motivation for sharing the polling data, Mueller’s report said it 

“could not reliably determine” why the data was shared or what happened with it. 

The two Americans involved in the arrangement, Manafort and his deputy, both 

told Mueller’s team that the data was passed on to help Manafort’s personal 

finances, including a business dispute with Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch, who 

has had ties to Moscow as well as the FBI. Kilimnik told a similar version to Mate. 

But Treasury, without any supporting evidence, went further in 2021, saying the 

data was shared with Russian intelligence. 

Chapter 5: The scandal that never ends 

The  Times , for many years, has cited the Kilimnik-Manafort relationship to defend 

its controversial story of February 2017 about Trump-Russia ties, noting, as recently 

as 2021, that the Senate and Treasury statements “confirm the article’s findings.” 

Kilimnik was not quoted in the article, one of several  Times  articles in recent years 

mentioning his possible Russian intelligence ties but failing to report his denials. 

(The  Times ’ guidelines call for reporters to “seek and publish a response from 

anyone criticized in our pages.”) The  Times , in response to my questions, said it 

“reached out to Kilimnik for comment on multiple occasions since 2017.” 

The Mueller report’s implication that the IRA was part of a “sweeping” Russian 

government meddling campaign in 2016 was later rebuked by a federal Judge 

handling an IRA-related case. The indictment of the IRA, the judge found, alleged 

“only private conduct by private actors” and “does not link the [IRA] to the Russian 

government.” The prosecutors made clear they were not prepared to show that the 

IRA efforts were a government operation. Mueller’s report does refer to “ties” between Putin and the owner of the IRA—he is sometimes referred to as “Putin’s 

Cook”—and the fact that “the two have appeared together in public photographs.” 

Mueller’s source for that was an article in the  Times .

As for the extent of the troll farm’s activity, Mueller’s report cites a review by 

Twitter of tweets from accounts “associated with the IRA,” in the ten weeks before 

the 2016 election, which found that “approximately 8.4%” were “election related.” 

Only the St. Louis Post Dispatch covered that part of the report, according to a 

Nexis search. 

(One criminal case involving Russian trolling that was prosecuted was dropped by 

the Justice Department in March 2020. The  Times , in its story about the decision, 

only quoted the prosecutor, while the  Wall Street Journal  and  Washington Post 

also included quotes from the Russian company’s American lawyer.) 

While some critics, on both the right and the left, felt the Russia coverage was 

overblown and reminiscent of earlier media failures, others did not. 

Margaret Sullivan, then the media columnist for the  Washington Post , wrote that 

the reporting “was not invalidated” by the report, and “this is no time to retreat.” 

Trump’s Democratic opponents in Congress were in no mood to retreat either, and 

many Americans, mostly Democrats, agreed. An Ipsos/Reuters poll showed 48 

percent of Americans 84 percent of Democrats and 17 percent of Republicans still 

believed Trump or his campaign “worked with Russia to influence the 2016 

election.” Congressional Democrats saw Mueller’s report, specifically the second 

volume on possible obstruction of justice, as a template to impeach the president. 

Their star witness would be McGahn, the former White House counsel who became 

the most cited witness in Mueller’s final report. 

McGahn’s account of Trump directing him to fire Mueller was featured in the 

report. So were two high profile examples that Mueller, according to Barr, “relied 

on” to launch his obstruction probe: the president’s firing of Comey in May 2017 

and Trump’s remarks to Comey in February 2017, the day after Flynn resigned, that 

“I hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting Flynn go.” From a criminal perspective, the cases had complications, especially proving Trump 

acted with “corrupt intent,” according to Barr, who, with other senior attorneys at 

Justice, reviewed the evidence and found it insufficient. 

In the case of McGahn, Barr, in an interview, said that “a lot of witnesses, including 

McGahn and others, tried to convey that no one took a lot of Trump’s bloviating 

seriously. They thought that he was letting off steam.” McGahn himself had told 

Mueller’s investigators “he believed the president never obstructed justice,” the 

Times  would later report. 

Schmidt, perhaps the reporter with the best insight into Mueller’s operation, found 

the report’s section on possible obstruction to be hard to decipher; “they took 

everything and threw it out on the sidewalk,” he told the Virginia Bar Association in 

early 2020, according to a video recording. 

The Democrat-controlled Congress, however, thought it might be able to pick up 

those disparate pieces and fashion an impeachment case. They decided to push a 

reluctant Mueller to come testify himself, hoping he might help make their case. 

Mueller appeared in late July before the House Judiciary Committee. Schmidt was 

contemporaneously posting analysis on the  Times  website about Mueller’s 

testimony. At just past eight in the morning, he signed in: “Can’t wait to hear 

Mueller talk about Volume II on obstruction.” As Mueller began answering 

questions, Schmidt noted how he kept asking for them to be repeated. Then a few 

hours later, he posted this: “the Democrats say it was indeed obstruction and 

Mueller declines to back them up.” 

Mueller’s “halting” testimony, as noted by the  Times  and many other outlets, was 

likely the final chapter in his lengthy public life. 

Woodward told me the Mueller report was a “fizzle” but reporters were “never going 

to declare it’s going to end up dry.” 

The following morning, less than eighteen hours after Mueller left the congressional 

hearing, a more confident Trump had his phone call with Ukrainian president 

Volodymyr Zelensky in which he asked him for help in digging up dirt on Joe and 

Hunter Biden. What Trump thought was a “perfect” phone chat turned out to be the impeachment 

vehicle Democrats so desperately wanted after Mueller’s far-from-perfect 

performance. A new media frenzy was about to begin. 

Chapter 6: The two January 6ths 

Even with Mueller finished, the ongoing probes into Trump’s activities were giving 

the press the fodder to keep the drumbeat going. 

First was the appointment in May 2019 of John Durham, a career prosecutor, once 

praised by his home-state Democratic senators in Connecticut, to examine the 

origins of the various Trump inquiries. Then came a lengthy, and critical, report, 

released in December 2019 by Inspector General Michael Horowitz, into the secret 

surveillance of former Trump adviser Carter Page. And in early 2020 Barr asked 

Jeffrey Jensen, a former FBI agent and the US Attorney in Missouri, to review the 

Flynn inquiry. 

Durham, stalled by the pandemic, has brought three cases: a guilty plea by an FBI 

lawyer, an indictment (and eventual acquittal) of Democratic lawyer Michael 

Sussmann for lying to the FBI, and an indictment (and eventual acquittal), on 

multiple charges of lying to the FBI, of the main information collector for the 

dossier authored by Steele. 

The few cases, however, yielded a trove of new information. Durham’s filings last 

February described monitoring done at Trump Tower, a Trump apartment building 

in Manhattan, and the Executive Office of the Presidency by private researchers, 

who were working with a technology executive. The executive, according to the 

filing, tasked them “to mine internet data to establish ‘an inference’ and ‘narrative’ 

tying then candidate Trump to Russia.” The businessman did not work for any 

campaign, but his lawyer, Sussmann, was a well-known Democratic attorney who 

billed both the DNC and the Clinton campaign in 2016, according to court filings. 

Fox News was the first to pick up the filing, and its headline—“Clinton campaign 

paid to ‘infiltrate’ Trump Tower, White House servers to link Trump to Russia, 

Durham Finds”—conflated Durham’s disclosure with a quote by someone who used the word “infiltrate” to characterize the activities. Before long, Trump claimed the 

filing vindicated his 2017 claim of spying—the tweet about Obama having his “wires 

tapped” at Trump Tower—also drawn from a Fox News report. And he criticized the 

press for refusing to “even mention the major crime that took place.” 

At that point the  Times  weighed in, headlining the “Furor in Right-Wing Outlets” 

whose “Narrative Is Off Track.” It accurately noted that neither “infiltrate” nor 

evidence of the Clinton campaign paying the tech executive appeared in the court 

filing. The Fox News journalist who wrote the story, Brooke Singman, and a 

spokesperson for the network did not respond to an email. (Singman was the first 

journalist Trump spoke to after the unannounced search of his Mar-a-Lago 

residence by the FBI in August.) 

One result of Durham’s investigation has been to further discredit the dossier in the 

eyes of many in the media. It prompted the  Washington Post  to retract large chunks 

of a 2017 article in November 2021, and to follow with a long review of Steele’s 

sources and methods. The  Wall Street Journal  and CNN did similar looks back. 

The  Times  has offered no such retraction, though the paper and other news 

organizations were quick to highlight the lack of firsthand evidence for many of the 

dossier’s substantive allegations; “third hand stuff” is what Isikoff now calls them. 

But they rarely, if ever, pointed out that the origin of the FBI inquiry was itself third 

hand information, at best. The supposed original source of the information, Mifsud, 

the Maltese academic, disappeared, leaving behind many questions. So, in the fall of 

2019, Barr and Durham went to Italy to look into Mifsud after Barr told Congress he 

wanted to know whether the FBI inquiry was “properly predicated.” 

The  Times  story called the trip “unusual” and a possible attempt to bolster a Trump 

“conspiracy theory.” The  Daily Beast  reported that the two men were given access 

to evidence gathered by the Italian authorities, including a taped deposition made 

by Mifsud when he sought police protection after disappearing from the university 

where he worked. 

By the end of the year Barr answered his own question: no, the FBI inquiry was not 

properly predicated. He and Durham wound up in an unusual public spat that 

December with Horowitz, as he released his long-awaited report on the FBI’s handling of its Russia investigation. Horowitz found the tip from Australia was 

enough to trigger an inquiry—“given the low threshold for predication” in 

department guidelines—and that the opening was not influenced by “political bias,” 

countering Trump’s frequent cries that he was the victim of a political “witch hunt.” 

But the IG also found seventeen significant errors and omissions by the FBI in its 

four applications to a secret court to monitor Page, who the bureau believed was 

spying for Russia; the  Times  called the IG’s finding “scathing.” 

Eventually the FBI declared that at least two of the four applications were no longer 

valid. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) found that all four 

applications had “violations of the government’s duty of candor.” Horowitz also 

referred an FBI attorney, Kevin Clinesmith, to Durham for possibly falsifying 

evidence in one of the court applications. Clinesmith later pleaded guilty to failing 

to disclose Page’s previous work with the CIA in the FBI’s application to the FISC; 

he received probation. 

Barr and Durham put out statements disagreeing with the IG’s finding of there 

being sufficient evidence to open the inquiry. Strzok, in an interview last July, called 

Durham’s remarks “wildly irresponsible and wrong.” Durham did not respond to an 

email seeking comment, but in arguments before a jury last October, speaking about 

the Trump-Russia investigation, he said, “The FBI failed here.” 

Strzok also said he was only involved in the first FISA warrant against Page, having 

“supervisory responsibility,” but the “drafting and approval process was below my 

level of responsibility.” (In an October 2016 text message, he wrote that he was 

“fighting” with the Justice Department over the warrant.) 

In the years that followed, some in the media would wonder why more questions 

weren’t asked about Durham’s evidence, while others continued to dismiss the 

notion that the FBI acted improperly when it opened an investigation that involved 

a presidential campaign. 

On his way out the door as attorney general, Barr told a  Wall Street Journal 

columnist that the inquiry shouldn’t have been opened because “there wasn’t any 

evidence.” The  Times  dismissed those remarks. After quoting Barr, the paper wrote 

that the FBI inquiry has “fueled similar unfounded accusations that a so-called deep state of government officials were working together to hobble Mr. Trump’s 

campaign and the administration.” A few months later, the  Times  wrote that 

Durham “appears to be retreading ground” explored by Horowitz or pursuing 

“Trumpian conspiracy theories and grievances,” citing unnamed “people familiar 

with the investigation.” 

Wemple focused on the IG’s dossier-related revelations and the reluctance of some 

in the media to look back. In an interview, he said he was “horrified” over its 

“devastating” portrayal of the dossier. He wound up writing more than a dozen 

columns on the subject, praising Adam Goldman of the  New York Times  but taking 

aim at McClatchy, CNN, and MSNBC, among others. “What most dismayed me,” he 

went on, “was the failure of MSNBC and CNN to counter and properly address the 

questions I was asking them.” CNN, in November 2021, did a long examination— 

what it called a “reckoning”—of the dossier. A spokesman for NBC declined to 

comment. 

In May 2020, the Justice Department dropped the case against Flynn for lying to 

the FBI after a review by Jensen, the US Attorney in St. Louis. The department cited 

the FBI’s “frail and shifting justifications for its ongoing probe of Mr. Flynn” and 

said that the FBI interview of Flynn was “conducted without any legitimate 

investigative basis.” 

Flynn was eventually pardoned by President Trump after the election. Trump also 

commuted the sentence of Roger Stone, a Trump associate, who was convicted on 

false-statement and obstruction charges related to his efforts in 2016 to serve as an 

intermediary between the campaign and WikiLeaks. Mueller “failed to resolve” the 

question of whether Stone had “directly communicated” with Julian Assange, the 

site’s founder, before the election, according to the  Times .

In 2020, the 966-page report by the Senate intelligence panel went a little further. It 

said that WikiLeaks “very likely knew it was assisting a Russian intelligence 

influence effort” when it acquired and made public in 2016 emails from the DNC. A 

few months after the report was released, new information surfaced showing why 

the special counsel, with greater investigative powers than the Senate panel, 

couldn’t bring a case. The newly unredacted documents were obtained by  BuzzFeed ,

via a Freedom of Information Act request. The Mueller team, the documents show, determined that while Russian hacking efforts were underway at the time of the 

releases by WikiLeaks in July 2016, “the Office did not develop sufficient admissible 

evidence that WikiLeaks knew of—or even was willfully blind to—that fact.” The 

Senate report also suggests Stone had greater involvement with the dissemination 

of hacked material released by WikiLeaks. 

The Flynn release was part of a months-long effort by the Justice Department to 

declassify and release documents related to the Trump-Russia inquiries. One 

revelation concerned the dossier’s primary source: he himself had been the subject 

of an earlier counterintelligence investigation by the FBI into his ties to Russia. 

Nothing came of that inquiry, and the FBI documents, sent to Republicans in 

Congress, redacted his name. 

But internet sleuths used the new documents and other clues to identify him as 

Danchenko. The  Times  was interested in the “unmasking.” Its headline in late July 

read “The FBI Pledged to Keep a Source Anonymous. Trump Allies Aided His 

Unmasking.” Then, in October, the paper got an exclusive interview with 

Danchenko, saying he “wants to clear his name.” The top of the story featured the 

salacious sex tape allegation—the item Comey told Trump about on January 6, 2017 

—and Danchenko’s supposed backup for it: “rumors from two sources” and “more 

nebulous information from two hotel employees he took as corroborative.” 

The day after the  Times  article, Danchenko and his friends used the piece to help a 

GoFundMe campaign on his behalf. (Danchenko was found not guilty of lying to the 

FBI last October.) Then a mirror image of the Trump-Russia story surfaced, after 

the  New York Post  ran a series of stories disclosing “raunchy” details of Hunter 

Biden’s private life, as well as inside correspondence related to his business dealings 

in Ukraine and China. It came from the contents of his laptop, said to have been 

abandoned in 2019 at a computer repair shop in Delaware. The first story included 

photos of a federal grand jury subpoena seeking production of the laptop and an 

external hard drive. 

Reporters who ferreted out the details of the FBI inquiry into Trump’s campaign 

couldn’t, or wouldn’t, confirm the Justice Department investigation into the future 

president’s son. Whereas the specter of purported Russian ties to Trump spurred an explosion of social media and journalistic interest, this time Twitter and Facebook 

temporarily curbed the reach of the  Post  story. 

The  Post  stories said the laptop “had been seized by the FBI,” but “a copy of its 

contents” had been made by the owner of the computer repair shop where Biden 

had dropped it off but had “never retrieved” it. The material wound up with Rudy 

Giuliani, the former New York City mayor and Trump confidant, and he had 

“shared” it with the newspaper. 

Hunter Biden’s attorney, in a statement to the  Post , didn’t deny the contents of the 

laptop but attacked Giuliani, who had helped Trump in the Mueller inquiry and his 

impeachment over Ukraine. “He has been pushing widely discredited conspiracy 

theories about the Biden family, openly relying on actors tied to Russian 

intelligence,” the lawyer, George Mesires, told the New York tabloid. 

In short order, Clapper, Obama’s former head of national intelligence, told CNN, 

where he is a national security analyst, that the laptop saga “is just classic textbook 

Soviet Russian tradecraft at work.” 

Most outlets wrote stories about the matter, but, unable to obtain or verify copies of 

the laptop data, eschewed deep dives into the underlying transactions and 

relationships. The  Times  did explore one proposed deal with a Chinese energy 

company that had been the focus of a  Times  report in 2018. But Tom Friedman, a 

Times  columnist, told CNBC’s  Squawk Box  last July that the paper believed it didn’t 

do enough: “I know the NYT felt it didn’t pursue it originally as much as it wanted 

to,” he said, but “then it followed up, as I recall.” The  Times  said in its statement, 

“Dating back years and more recently, the  Times  has reported consistently and 

fairly on Hunter Biden and his personal and financial entanglements.” 

In the wake of the  New York  Post  story, Schiff went on CNN to claim “the origins of 

this whole smear are from the Kremlin.” Around this time, a group of more than 

fifty former intelligence and national-security officials were preparing a statement 

linking the laptop story to Russia, saying it “has all the classic hallmarks of a 

Russian information operation.” In short order, the letter, was given to Natasha Bertrand, then a  Politico  reporter 

and now at CNN, by Nick Shapiro, a former aide to Brennan, Obama’s last CIA 

director. (Brennan signed the letter. I left a message on Brennan’s cellphone. 

Shapiro returned the call. Neither would comment on the record.) The headline on 

Bertrand’s story read “Hunter Biden story is Russian disinfo, dozens of former intel 

officials say.” 

The letter, and Bertrand’s story, made clear the signers were relying on their 

“experience,” not evidence: “we do not have evidence of Russian involvement,” they 

wrote. But it was good enough to be picked up in dozens of news reports, tweeted by 

Biden’s campaign, and cited by Biden himself in his final debate with Trump, which 

attracted sixty three million television viewers. The two candidates sparred over 

Russia, with Trump comparing his “tougher” record on Russia, such as sanctions, to 

that of his predecessor, when Biden was vice president. Biden shot back, telling 

Trump “Russia is paying you a lot.” Trump brought up “the laptop from hell,” which 

prompted Biden to cite the letter from the former intelligence officials, saying they 

called his accusation “a Russian plan” and “a bunch of garbage.” 

“You mean the laptop is now another Russia, Russia, Russia hoax?” Trump asked 

his opponent. Biden replied, “That’s exactly what that is exactly what we’ve been 

told.” Trump ended the brouhaha by saying, “Here we go again with Russia.” 

A majority of Americans told pollsters that the media did a poor job of covering the 

Hunter Biden affair, according to a December 2020 survey by Rasmussen Reports 

and a poll last year by the New Jersey–based Technometrica Institute of Policy and 

Politics. 

After the election, Trump refused to acknowledge the results, seeing them as the 

latest chapter in the “hoax,” or “witch hunt,” that began with Russia. He also 

stopped listening to advisers, like Barr, who wrote in his book that “Trump thought 

I was to blame” for Biden’s “deception” at the debate about Hunter’s laptop. Barr, 

once the whipping boy for Democrats for what they thought was too much fealty to 

Trump, was a star witness against the former president in some of the hearings into 

January 6. As Trump became more isolated and undeterred by court rulings and news accounts 

that shot down his claims the election was rigged, he listened to people who, like 

him, had been caught up in the Russia inquiry. One was Giuliani and another was 

Flynn. 

The  Times  would soon provide its own take on Flynn’s journey. “It was the story of 

the Russia investigation as a malevolent plot that first began priming tens of 

millions of Americans to believe Mr. Trump’s conspiracy theories about the deep 

state,” the paper wrote shortly after Trump left office. “As one of the heroes of that 

narrative Mr. Flynn became an ideal messenger when it was refashioned into the 

demonstrably false claim that Democrats and their deep state allies had rigged the 

election.” (A message seeking an interview with Flynn, sent to America’s Future, the 

Florida-based group he chairs, went unanswered.) 

On January 6, 2021, Trump’s legacy, in most of the media and elsewhere, was 

sealed. Some of Trump’s most devoted supporters—who also believed in his 

unsubstantiated claims of a rigged election— went wild, as Trump had predicted in 

a December tweet, leaving a dark stain on the Capitol, and the country. 

A member of the Hawai‘i Proud Boys group scratched “Murder the Media” on the 

Capitol’s Memorial Door, while others chanted “CNN sucks.” A photographer was 

thrown to the floor and had her camera ripped away after people in the crowd saw 

that she worked for the  New York Times . Eleven protesters have been charged in 

connection with assaults on journalists or destruction of their equipment, according 

to the  Washington Post . The  Times  photographer, Erin Schaff, feared for her life, 

describing her attackers as “really angry” in an account she wrote for the paper. 

Trump, in an interview in early August last year, said he “never wanted to see that 

happen,” referring to the violence that day, when I asked him if he had any regrets 

about January 6. 

The attack came four years to the day after the fateful briefing by Comey, where he 

recounted the most salacious allegation in the now discredited dossier. I raised with 

Trump the coincidence of January 6 being bookends, of a sort, to his tenure. His 

face lit up: “That was a famous day,” he said. “The sixth seems to be a big thing.” When I asked what mistakes he made, he paused before offering two examples: the 

first traces back to the Russia probe and the second to the 2020 election. 

“Jeff Sessions was a mistake,” he said, referring to his first attorney general, who 

recused himself from the Russia inquiry. He explained he had been to Washington 

“only seventeen times in my life, and I never stayed over,” so “when I got there, I 

didn’t know any people in Washington.” As a result, he made some poor personnel 

decisions, such as Sessions. 

“What I do regret,” he went on, “is that the Republicans didn’t have the apparatus to 

stop the crooked vote” in 2020. 

As I left his office, Trump insisted I take an account of an audit of Arizona’s votes in 

2020, which he told me was “finding all these ballots and phantom votes.” 

On my way out he made a last minute call to ensure he was getting french fries with 

his dinner. I headed to my car, past the Secret Service detail, along the beautiful, 

lush contours of his golf course, and watched the darkness begin to descend. 

AFTERWORD 

I’ve avoided opining in my more than fifty years as a reporter. This time, however, I 

felt obligated to weigh in. Why? Because I am worried about journalism’s declining 

credibility and society’s increasing polarization. The two trends, I believe, are 

intertwined. 

My main conclusion is that journalism’s primary missions, informing the public and 

holding powerful interests accountable, have been undermined by the erosion of 

journalistic norms and the media’s own lack of transparency about its work. This 

combination adds to people’s distrust about the media and exacerbates frayed 

political and social differences. 

One traditional journalistic standard that wasn’t always followed in the Trump-

Russia coverage is the need to report facts that run counter to the prevailing 

narrative. In January 2018, for example, the  New York Times  ignored a publicly 

available document showing that the FBI’s lead investigator didn’t think, after ten months of inquiry into possible Trump-Russia ties, that there was much there. This 

omission disserved  Times  readers. The paper says its reporting was thorough and 

“in line with our editorial standards.” 

My last reporting project for the  Times , in 2005, was an inquiry into US propaganda 

efforts abroad. I interviewed a former top CIA expert on behavior and propaganda, 

Jerrold Post, who told me that leaving important information out of a broadcast or 

story lowers public trust in the messenger because consumers inevitably find the 

missing information somewhere else. (And Post, who died a few years ago, spoke 

before the arrival of social media.) 

Another axiom of journalism that was sometimes neglected in the Trump-Russia 

coverage was the failure to seek and reflect comment from people who are the 

subject of serious criticism. The  Times  guidelines call it a “special obligation.” Yet in 

stories by the  Times  involving such disparate figures as Joseph Mifsud (the Maltese 

academic who supposedly started the whole FBI inquiry), Christopher Steele (the 

former British spy who authored the dossier), and Konstantin Kilimnik (the 

consultant cited by some as the best evidence of collusion between Russia and 

Trump), the paper’s reporters failed to include comment from the person being 

criticized. The  Times , in a statement, says some of the subjects were approached on 

occasion, yet the paper’s guidelines also call for their comments to be published. 

Another exhibit is a familiar target: anonymous sources. I’ve used them myself, 

including, sparsely, in this piece. What’s different in the Trump era, however, is 

both the volume of anonymous sources and the misleading way they’re often 

described. 

One frequent and vague catchphrase—“people (or person) familiar with”—is widely 

used by many journalists: the  Times  used it over a thousand times in stories 

involving Trump and Russia between October 2016 and the end of his presidency, 

according to a Nexis search. The last executive editor I worked for, Bill Keller, 

frowned on its use. He told the staff repeatedly the phrase was “so vague it could 

even mean the reporter.” The  Times , in a statement to CJR, said, “We have strong 

rules in place governing the use of anonymous sources.” Other outlets mentioned in 

this piece declined to discuss their anonymous-sourcing practices. Another anonymous-sourcing convention that was turbocharged in the Trump era 

was the use of more neutral descriptors like “government official” or “intelligence 

official” or “American official” to mask congressional leakers. A few reporters 

admitted that to me, but, of course, only anonymously. Here’s how it works. First, a 

federal agency like the CIA or FBI secretly briefs Congress. Then Democrats or 

Republicans selectively leak snippets. Finally, the story comes out, using vague 

attribution. “It was a problem for us,” Mike Kortan, the former FBI spokesman until 

2018, told me. Kortan, who also worked in Congress, added: “We would brief 

Congress, try and give them a full picture with the negative stuff, and then a 

member of Congress can cherry-pick the information and the reporter doesn’t know 

they’ve been cherry-picked.” The typical reader or viewer is clueless. 

My final concern, and frustration, was the lack of transparency by media 

organizations in responding to my questions. I reached out to more than sixty 

journalists; only about half responded. Of those who did, more than a dozen agreed 

to be interviewed on the record. However, not a single major news organization 

made available a newsroom leader to talk about their coverage. 

My reporting has been criticized by journalists, from the editorial pages of the  Wall 

Street Journal , in the 1980s, to  Harper’s  magazine in the 1990s and the  Daily Beast 

in the 2000s. When I’ve had the opportunity to respond, which hasn’t always been 

the case, I’ve tried to engage. On a few occasions, I concluded the inquiring reporter 

wasn’t really open to what I had to say, so l let my story speak for itself. 

But during this time, when the media is under extraordinary attack and widely 

distrusted, a transparent, unbiased, and accountable media is more needed than 

ever. It’s one of a journalist’s best tools to distinguish themselves from all the 

misinformation, gossip, and rumor that proliferates on the Web and then gets 

legitimized on occasion by politicians of all stripes, including Trump. 

Most Americans (60 percent) say they want unbiased news sources. Yet 86 percent 

think the media is biased. The consequences of this mismatch are all too obvious: 

83 percent of the audience for Fox News leans Republican while 91 percent of the 

readers of the  New York Times  lean Democratic. Jennifer Kavanagh, senior fellow in the American Statecraft Program of the 

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, told me of her concerns about news 

silos. 

“If you are only getting your news from one source, you are getting a skewed view,” 

which, she said, “increases polarization” and “crowds out the room for compromise, 

because people base their views on these siloed news sources.” She added: “People 

don’t have time to deal with nuance, so they settle on a position and everything else 

tends to become unacceptable.” 

Walter Lippmann wrote about these dangers in his 1920 book  Liberty and the 

News . Lippmann worried then that when journalists “arrogate to themselves the 

right to determine by their own consciences what shall be reported and for what 

purpose, democracy is unworkable.” 

A note on disclosure 

In 2015 16, I was a senior reporter at  ProPublica . There, I reported on Hillary 

Clinton, Donald Trump, and Russian oligarchs, among other subjects. I helped 

ProPublica  decide whether to collaborate with a book that was critical of the 

Clintons’ involvement with Russia; the arrangement didn’t happen. Another of the 

projects I worked on, also involving Clinton, was published in the  Washington Post 

in 2016, where I shared a byline. Some of my other Clinton related work was used 

in 2016 articles appearing in the  New York Times , my employer between 1976 and 

2005, but without my byline. Initially, the  Times  sought my assistance on a story 

about Hillary’s handling of Bill Clinton’s infidelity. Subsequently I approached the 

paper on my own about the Clinton family foundation. In both cases, I interacted 

with reporters and editors but was not involved in the writing or editing of the 

stories that used my reporting. During the second interaction, I expressed 

disappointment to one of the  Times  reporters about the final result. I left  ProPublica  in December 2016. That month I was approached by one of the 

cofounders of Fusion GPS, who sounded me out about joining a Trump-related 

project the firm was contemplating. The discussion did not lead to any 

collaboration. I had previously interacted with Fusion related to my reporting on 

Russian oligarchs. 

In the 2017 18 academic year I was a nonresident fellow at the Investigative 

Reporting Program, affiliated with the Graduate School of Journalism at the 

University of California, Berkeley. There, one of my projects involved looking into 

the dossier as part of preliminary research for a 2020 film the Investigative 

Reporting Program helped produce for HBO on Russian meddling. I was not on the 

film’s credits. 

At CJR, these stories have been edited by Kyle Pope, its editor and publisher. Kyle’s 

wife, Kate Kelly, is a reporter for the Washington bureau of the  New York Times .

CJR’s former board chair was Steve Adler, formerly the editor in chief of Reuters; its 

current board chair is Rebecca Blumenstein, a former deputy managing editor of 

the Times who recently became president of editorial for NBC News. 

Je ff  Gerth is a freelance journalist who spent three decades as an investigative reporter at the 

New York Times .

> TOP IMAGE: PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP LOOKS AWAY WHILE ANSWERING A QUESTION FROM JONATHAN KARL ,
> ABC NEWS CHIEF WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT, DURING A NEWS CONFERENCE WITH THE ITALIAN
> PRESIDENT SERGIO MATTARELLA AT THE WHITE HOUSE IN WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, OCT. 16, 2019. (AP
> PHOTO/PABLO MARTINEZ MONSIVAIS)

The voice of journalism, since 1961 

About 

Mission  (/about_us/mission_statement.php) 

Masthead  (/about_us/masthead.php) 

Privacy Policy  (/about_us/privacy_policy.php) 

Contact  (/about us/contact.php) 

Support CJR 

Become a Member  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a=nav-foot-mem&utm_source=cjr-org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Donate  (/about_us/donate.php) 

Subscribe  (https://members.cjr.org/member/?a nav foot sub&utm source cjr org&utm_medium=cjr-nav&utm_campaign=m-land) 

Advertise 

Contact Us  (/about_us/advertise.php) 

Copyright 2023, 

Columbia Journalism Review
