Title: Former Fox News Host Jeanine Pirro Confirmed as US Attorney for DC

URL Source: https://www.thewellnews.com/in-the-news/former-fox-news-host-jeanine-pirro-confirmed-as-us-attorney-for-dc/

Markdown Content:
WASHINGTON — Former Fox News host and New York judge Jeanine Pirro was confirmed by the U.S. Senate Saturday as the U.S. attorney for Washington, D.C.

She was appointed by President Donald Trump in May but was serving in an interim role until the Senate confirmation. Pirro is known as a staunch Trump supporter.

Pirro was confirmed by a 50-45 vote along party lines before Congress recessed for its August break. All Democrats who participated voted against her.

Pirro, 74, is best known as co-host of “The Five” on Fox News. It is a talk show of five rotating television personalities who discuss hot topics of the day, spanning politics to pop culture.

She started with “The Five” in 2022 and resigned in May to accept Trump’s appointment to the U.S. attorney post.

The U.S. attorney’s office for the District of Columbia is arguably the most powerful among the 93 U.S. attorney offices nationwide. It employs more than 330 assistant U.S. attorneys and 350 support personnel on a budget of nearly $157 million this year.

They prosecute everything from minor federal financial crimes to murders to major political scandals. Trump was in the crosshairs of its prosecutors after the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the Capitol before they dropped the case.

Pirro’s loyalty to Trump was a major stumbling block that split the vote on her nomination.

She repeated many of Trump’s debunked claims about the 2020 election being stolen from him. Her statements became part of the evidence that led Fox News to settle a defamation lawsuit by Dominion Voting Systems for $787 million.

Trump and his supporters had accused Dominion of rigging voting machines to make him lose the election.

Pirro was asked about her role in the lawsuit during her Senate confirmation hearing. She declined to answer, saying she could not discuss the case because of “ongoing litigation.”

Allegations of evasiveness by Democrats led Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois, the Senate Judiciary Committee’s ranking member, to say, “She still won’t answer the question: Who won the 2020 election? With her large platform on the mothership, Fox News, she repeated falsehoods about the 2020 election leading to Fox News paying nearly $800 million to settle defamation claims brought by Dominion Voting Systems.”

He also said, “Her record makes it clear that she will prioritize President Trump’s MAGA agenda, not the rule of law.”

Pirro started to earn a reputation in law first as an assistant district attorney in 1975 and later as district attorney for Westchester County in New York. She prosecuted several high-profile cases involving domestic abuse and crimes against the elderly.

She was elected as a Westchester County judge in 1990.

She briefly tried to win the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate to run against Hillary Clinton in 2006 but dropped out to accept the nomination for New York attorney general. She lost in the general election to Democrat Andrew Cuomo.

Pirro started her national television career in 2008 by hosting a weekday show called “Judge Jeanine Pirro” on the CW Network. For 11 years beginning in 2011, she hosted “Justice With Judge Jeanine” on Fox News before moving to “The Five.”

She has authored seven books, including two with conservative themes that brought her to the attention of Trump. One is entitled “Liars, Leakers and Liberals” and the other is “The Case Against the Anti-Trump Conspiracy.”

Pirro’s former husband, Albert, was convicted on tax evasion charges in 2000 while they still were married. He served 17 months in prison but was pardoned by Trump in 2021.

Pirro was Trump’s second nominee for the U.S. attorney’s job. The first, Ed Martin, failed to win Senate approval after revelations of his advocacy for Jan. 6 Capitol riot defendants charged with assaulting police officers.

_You can reach us at editors@thewellnews.com and follow us on_ _Facebook_ _and_ _X_

We're proud to make our journalism accessible to everyone, but producing high-quality journalism comes at a cost. That's why we need your help. By making a contribution today, you'll be supporting TWN and ensuring that we can keep providing our journalism for free to the public.

Donate now and help us continue to publish TWN’s distinctive journalism. Thank you for your support!

Support TWN Journalism
