Title: Peru will be the new port hub in Latin America - Fresh Baez

URL Source: https://freshbaez.com/en/2021/08/peru-new-port-hub-by-2024/

Published Time: 2021-08-12T17:55:27+00:00

Markdown Content:
Excellent news for Peruvian exports after the recent demonstrations by the Peruvian Ministry of Transport and Communications. The institution's spokesperson, Eduardo González, commented that thanks to the Public-Private Partnerships, new infrastructures are being built that will position Peru in the region's port hub by 2024.

Aerial view container ship carrying container in import export business logistic and transportation of international by container ship in the open sea, with copy space.

González stated that with these constructions, the port of Callao will double its capacity in the period between 2024 and 2025, receiving a greater number of cargoes and ships, turning Peru into a hub as long as no more problems arise within the projects that have been drawn up. Public - Private Associations.

The prompt completion of this project depends on the alliance between associations and the port system outlined, for example, the operation of the Callao ports in the north and south docks linked to the APM Terminals and DP World consortium, which has worked wonderfully since the agreement .

Other ports with emphasis in these coming years are the Salaverry Port of the La Libertad region, which continues to grow rapidly, there are also the ports of Paita in Piura and Pisco in Ica, as well as the construction of the new port terminal in Chancay thanks also to the Public - Private Associations.

**Rise in Peruvian exports this year**

Until a year ago, Peruvian exports were expected to grow by 21.4%. Today, economists from the Focus Economics Consensus Forecast Latin Focus stated that this projection has increased to 22.3% thanks to the expansion of shipments throughout Latin America, exceeding the average in the next 3 years.

In this way, it is expected that Peru's sales to the world will be higher than those of neighboring countries that so far have projections with smaller and less constant increases than Peru.
