Title: Trump disavows supporters pushing Jeffrey Epstein 'bulls---': 'I don't want their support anymore!'

URL Source: https://nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/trump-disavows-supporters-pushing-jeffrey-epstein-bulls-dont-want-supp-rcna219078

Published Time: 2025-07-16T15:17:53.339Z

Markdown Content:
President Donald Trump disowned his supporters who have called for the release of files related to Jeffrey Epstein, chiding them Wednesday as "weaklings" who "bought into this bulls---."

The lengthy post on Truth Social represents the clearest split from the faction of his MAGA base that has questioned the Justice Department’s handling of the case.

My "PAST supporters have bought into this ‘bulls---’ hook, line, and sinker," he said in the post, adding, "Let these weaklings continue forward and do the Democrats work, don’t even think about talking of our incredible and unprecedented success, because I don’t want their support anymore!"

Jeffrey Epstein and Donald Trump at the Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Fla., in 1997.Davidoff Studios Photography / Getty Images file

The Justice Department published a memo this month determining that there was no evidence of an “incriminating ‘client list,’” prompting renewed consternation in MAGA world.

Attorney General Pam Bondi in particular has faced criticism over her handling of the case. Asked in a February Fox News interview about a potential client list, Bondi said that“it’s sitting on my desk right now to review.” During a Cabinet meeting last week, Bondi clarified that she had been referring to a file related to Epstein.

Trump has strongly defended Bondi from that criticism.

"Pam Bondi, I really think that she’s done very good," he told reporters Wednesday. "She says 'I gave you all the credible information,' and if she finds any more credible information, she’ll give that, too. What more can she do than that? I mean, honestly, what more can she do? And we do have bigger problems."

Pressed about his Truth Social post, Trump said, "I've lost a lot of faith in certain people ... because they got duped by the Democrats."

The White House did not reply to a request for comment. In recent days, several Republican members of Congress and other prominent Trump supporters have pushed for more transparency over files related to Epstein.

“I’m for transparency,” House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La., said in an interview with conservative commentator Benny Johnson. “It’s a very delicate subject, but we should put everything out there and let the people decide.”

Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, R-Ga., said last week in an all-caps post on X that the Justice Department should "release the Epstein client list."

Asked to comment on Trump’s post, Johnson’s office pointed NBC News to Johnson’s statement Tuesday night about a Democratic effort to attach an amendment about the Epstein documents to the House cryptocurrency bill.

“All House Republicans are for truth and transparency,” the statement said in part. “And we know President Trump can be trusted to make the right decisions, to stand for justice, and to protect the innocent.”

Greene did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Minutes after Trump’s Truth Social post Wednesday, she posted on X: “My blind loyalty and faith is ONLY in God and Jesus Christ my savior. That is what will guide my decisions, actions, and votes."

02:42

Trump's post was bombarded with dozens of replies criticizing his remarks and the administration's handling of Epstein.

Debate over Epstein, the convicted sex offender whose death in 2019 was ruled a suicide, has emerged as a fault line in MAGA world. Trump and his allies have for years peddled theories about Epstein, only for Trump in recent days to question why the case "would be of interest to anybody."

"It’s pretty boring stuff. It’s sordid, but it’s boring, and I don’t understand why it keeps going," Trump told reporters Tuesday evening.

Trump was acquainted with Epstein, and he told New York Magazine in 2002 that Epstein was a "terrific guy." After Epstein was arrested, Trump said he had a falling-out with him "a long time ago."

Epstein's death in jail was ruled a suicide, and conspiracy theories quickly spread afterward that he was murdered as part of a plot to protect his wealthy and powerful inner circle.

Megan Lebowitz

Megan Lebowitz is a politics reporter for NBC News.

Jason Abbruzzese

contributed

.
