Title: Microsoft Word - Lessig edited.doc

URL Source: https://www.wesleyan.edu/allbritton/cspl/events/Lawrence%20Lessig.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 23 Oct 2025 20:35:13 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

THE 19 TH ANNUAL HUGO L. BLACK LECTURE ON FREEDOM OF 

EXPRESSION 

SPEECH AND INDEPENDENCE: THE WRONGS OF CORPORATE 

SPEECH 

Delivered by 

Lawrence Lessig 

Director of the Edmond J. Safra Foundation Center for Ethics at Harvard University and 

Profess or of Law at Harvard Law School. 

April 7, 2010 

8 p.m. 

Memorial Chapel 

Wesleyan University 

Middletown, Connecticut 

Commentary by 

Leonard S. Halpert ’44 2

Free Speech – Real and Virtual: Free at Last? 

Profess or Lawrence Lessig is an American scholar and political activist. He is known as a 

proponent of reduced legal restrictions on copyright, trademark, and radio frequency spectrum, 

particularly in technology applications. 1 He has written extensively about the new world of 

communications in cyberspace. 

He has much to tell us about how the originally free area of cyberspace will develop and be 

restrained by government and by the “non -governmental” persons and entities. This he calls the 

CODE.” 2 He sees these ev ents as tending to weaken free speech values in cyberspace. Herein 

will be discussed how he sees free speech faring in this “brave new world” and, most 

importantly, what he believes should be the acceptable perimeters of a cyberspace code. 

Before discussi ng his views on free speech, it is useful to know his views on the Constitution 

and its interpretation. 

As to a written constitution’s purpose and source, Lessig cites Francis Lieber, a Berliner who 

Lessig says was the first great constitutional scholar i n America: “a written constitution of any 

value always presupposes the existence of an unwritten one.” He continues, “in Lieber’s view, 

this unwritten constitution [is] a set of norms, or understandings, latent within a political 

culture. They were constit uted by practices, and by a history, that formed the ordinary ways of a 

people. They were constructed, but not plastic; describable, but not expressed. Without these 

“unwritten” norms, a written constitution was, “worthless .” 3 [emphasis supplied] 

So, too, cyberspace has a constitution with a set of institutions and practices, and an even richer 

set of understandings among its users that together are relatively unplastic, and constitute life in 

that space. And more importantly, cyberspace has an architectur e, which itself embeds values 

and practices that constitute life in that space. 4     

> 1Wikipedia/Lessig
> 2CODE , pp. 6, 88. “CODE” is defined as the freedoms and controls of
> cy berspace as built by us mortals.
> 3Lessig, Cyberspace’s Constitution, Draft 1.1,Lecture at the American Academy, Berlin, Germany,February 10, 2000,
> p.1
> 4Ibid . p. 1

3

Today our Supreme Court is deeply divided over the appropriate concept to be used in 

interpreting provisions of the Constitution. The majority, led by Justice Scalia, apply a doctrine 

called “original intent”, or variants thereof, of the Founding Fathers. In determining what they 

intended by the words they adopted, the Court needs to determine what the general public then 

understood such words to mean. 5 The Court’s present min ority, to a varying degree, follows a 

different path: that interpretation needs to be “transformative”. 6

Lessig summarizes the majority’s approach as “what was the liberty or right to be protected as 

understood by the founders —this governs whether a curr ent situation is covered if it was 

something unknown to them and therefore not protected.” He sides with a more assertive 

concept of “transformative” interpretation. He says the “history of the Supreme Court’s 

treatment of such questions lacks a perfectly clear pattern, but we can identify two distinct 

strategies competing for the Court’s attention. One strategy is focused on what the framers 

would have done —the strategy of one -step originalism. The second strategy aims at finding a 

current reading of the o riginal Constitution that preserves its original meaning in the present 

context —a strategy that [he] calls translation.” 7

Both strategies are present in the Olmstead wiretapping case. Lessig quotes Brandeis’s dissent 

in Olmstead v. United States :

“The pr otection guaranteed by the amendments is much broader in scope. The makers of our 

Constitution undertook to secure conditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness. They 

recognized the significance of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings and of his inte llect. They 

knew that only a part of the pain, pleasure and satisfactions of life are to be found in material 

things. They sought to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts, their emotions and 

their sensations. They conferred, as against the gov ernment, the right to be let alone —the 

most comprehensive of rights and the right most valued by civilized men. To protect that 

right every unjustifiable intrusion by the government upon the privacy of the individual, 

whatever the means employed, must be d eemed a violation of the Fourth Amendment ”8.

[emphasis supplied] 

And Lessig emphasizes the differences in the competing views: 

“Brandeis acknowledged that the Fourth Amendment, as originally written, applied only to           

> 5American Constitutional Law (3 rd ed.) pp. 38 -39 by Kommers, Finn & Jacobson
> 6Defi ned by the The New Oxform American Dictionary : “make a thorough or dramtic change in character” of the
> meaning.
> 7CODE , p. 160
> 8Olmstead , p.479. Although it should be noted that Brandeis’ was speaking to the meaning of the 4 th Amendment, his
> interpreta tional tool is equally applicable to the 1 st Amendment. NOTE: In this Commentary here material in quotations
> contains footnote references, these have been omitted.

4

trespass. But it did so, he argued, bec ause when it was written trespass was the technology 

for invading privacy. That was the framers’ presupposition, but that presupposition had now 

changed. Given this change, Brandeis argued, it was the Court’s responsibility to read the 

amendment in a way that preserved its meaning, changed circumstances notwithstanding. 

The aim must be to translate the original protections into a context in which the technology 

for invading privacy had changed.*** [The essence of what was the difference between the 

Court’s majority (Taft) and the minority view (Brandeis)]: Brandeis’s method accounted for 

the changed presupposition. He offered a reading that changed the scope of the amendment in 

order to maintain the amendment’s protection of privacy. Taft, on the other hand , offered a 

reading that maintained the scope of the amendment but changed its protection of privacy. 

Each reading kept something constant; each also changed something .” 9

“Brandeis wanted to read the amendment so that it protected the 90 percent it origin ally 

protected —even though doing so required that it protect against more than simple trespass. 

He wanted to read it differently, we could say, so that it protected the same. This form of 

argument is common in our constitutional history, and it is central to the best in our 

constitutional tradition. It is an argument that responds to changed circumstances by 

proposing a reading that neutralizes those changes and preserves an original meaning. It is an 

argument invoked by justices on both the right and the l eft, and it is a way to keep life in a 

constitutional provision —to make certain that changes in the world do not change the 

meaning of the Constitution’s text. It is an argument, we can say, that aims at translating the 

protections that the Fourth Amendmen t gave in 1791 into the same set of protections at any 

time later in our history. It acknowledges that to do this the Court may have to read the 

amendment differently, but it is not reading the amendment differently to improve the 

amendment or to add to it s protections. It is reading the amendment differently to 

accommodate the changes in protection that have resulted from changes in technology. It is 

translation to preserve meaning.” 10 

LESSIG’S GLOBAL VIEW OF FREE SPEECH PERIMETERS 

Most scholarly discus sion of the borders of free speech liberty dwells primarily on the legal 

aspect —the jurisprudence of free speech. Lessig takes an all -encompassing view that considers 

the interaction between the law and other factors. This interaction is illustrated in the following 

figure.       

> 9CODE , p. 161
> 10 CODE , 162 -63. Taft’s opinion became law and his narrow view of the
> Fourt h Amendment prevailed. It took forty years for the Supreme Court
> to embrace Brandeis’s picture of the Fourth Amendment overruling Olmstead in Katz v. United States , 389 U.S. 347
> (1967)

5

“In the center is the object regulated —the pathetic [center]. Surrounding the individual now 

is a shield of protection, the net of law/norms/market/architecture that limits the constraints 

these modalities would otherwise place on th e individual. [he has] not separated the four in 

the sphere of the shield because obviously there is no direct match between the modality of 6

constraint and the modality of protection. When law as protector conflicts with law as 

constraint, constitutional l aw overrides ordinary law.” 11 

“The right to free speech is not the right to speak for free. It is not the right to free access to 

television [Market], or the right that people will not hate you for what you have to say 

[Norms]. Strictly speaking —legally speaking —the right to free speech in the United States 

means the right to be free from punishment by the government in retaliation for at least some 

(probably most) speech [Law]. You cannot be jailed for criticizing the President, though you 

can be jailed for threatening him [Law]; you cannot be fined for promoting segregation 

[Law], though you will be shunned if you do [Norms]. You cannot be stopped from speaking 

in a public place [Law], though you can be stopped from speaking with an FM transmitter 

[Law]. Speech in the United States is protected —in a complex, and, at times convoluted, 

way —but its constitutional protection is a protection against the government. Nevertheless, a 

constitutional account of free speech that thought only of government would be r adically 

incomplete. Two societies could have the same ‘First Amendment’ —the same protections 

against government’s wrath —but if within one dissenters are tolerated while in the other they 

are shunned, the two societies would be very different free -speech s ocieties. More than 

government constrains speech, and more than government protects it. A complete account of 

this —and any —right must consider the full range of burdens and protections.” 12 

“Thus, the effective protection for controversial speech is more con ditional than a view of the 

law alone would suggest. Put differently, when more than law is reckoned, the right to be a 

dissenter is less protected than it could be. *** “ 13 

Lessig explains: 

“The ‘right’ to promote the decriminalization of drugs in the pre sent context of the war on 

drugs is an example. The law protects your right to advocate the decriminalization of drugs. 

The state cannot lock you up if, like George Soros, you start a campaign for the           

> 11 CODE , Appendix pp. 340 -42 Lessig defines the four modalities as fol lows: (1) Law is a command backed up by the
> threat of a sanction, a legislative expression of community values, rules that constitute or regulate structures of
> government, or establish rights that individuals can invoke against their own government; (2) So cial norms are those
> normative constraints imposed not through the organized or centralized actions of a state, but through the many slight and
> sometimes forceful sanctions that members of a community impose on each other. and govern socially salient behav ior,
> deviation from which makes you socially abnormal; (3) The Market constrains through price. A price signals the point at
> which a resource can be transferred from one person to another; and (4) Architecture —the way the world around us is, or
> the ways spe cific aspects of it are. These taken together are the Code. By code, he simply means the software and
> hardware that constitutes cyberspace as it is —the set of protocols, the set of rules, implemented, or codified, in the
> software of cyberspace itself, that determine how people interact, or exist, in this space. This code, like architecture in real
> space, sets the terms upon which one enters, or exists in cyberspace.
> 12 CODE , p. 235
> 13

Ibid , p.235 7

decriminalization of marijuana or if, like the Nobel Pr ize –winning economist Milton 

Friedman or the federal judge Richard Posner, you write articles suggesting it. If the First 

Amendment means anything, it means that the state cannot criminalize speech about law 

reform [Law]. 

“But that legal protection does no t mean that I would suffer no consequences for promoting 

legalization of drugs. My hometown neighbors would be appalled at the idea, and some no 

doubt would shun me [Norms]. Nor would the market necessarily support me. It is essentially 

impossible to buy t ime on television for a speech advocating such a reform [Market]. 

Television stations have the right to select their ads (within some limits); mine would most 

likely be deemed too controversial. Stations also have the FCC —an active combatant in the 

war on drugs —looking over their shoulders. And even if I were permitted to advertise, I am 

not George Soros. I do not have millions to spend on such a campaign. I might manage a few 

off -hour spots on a local station. 

“Finally, architecture wouldn’t protect my sp eech very well either. In the United States at 

least, there are few places where you can stand before the public and address them about 

some matter of public import without most people thinking you a nut or a nuisance. There is 

no speakers’ corner in every city; most towns have no town meeting. ‘America offline,’ in 

this sense, is very much like America Online —not designed to give individuals access to a 

wide audience to address public matters. Only professionals get to address Americans on 

public issues —po liticians, scholars, celebrities, journalists, and activists, most of whom are 

confined to single issues. The rest of us have a choice —listen, or be dispatched to the gulag 

of social lunacy. Thus, the effective protection for controversial speech is more c onditional 

than a view of the law alone would suggest. Put differently, when more than law is reckoned, 

the right to be a dissenter is less protected than it could be .” 14 [emphasis supplied] 15 

The foregoing comments were made in reference to “real space”. A re the rules of the road 

different in cyberspace, which stretches around the world and across national borders? “ As in 

real space, then, these four modalities regulate cyberspace.” 16 The same balance exists, but local 

national differences in the modalities modify the protection given to sp eech. 

As to Law: In the U.S., the right of “advocacy” is broadly protected, but in Germany more 

limited. In the U.S. one can promote the Nazi Party and its tenets, but in Germany it is illegal. 17 

As to Norms: “With the r elative anonymity of Cyberspace and its growing size, norms do not       

> 14 Ibid , pp. 235 -36
> 15 Ibid , p.235
> 16 Ibid , p.125
> 17 Ibid , p. 235 -36

8

function well there [to restrict speech].” Where there are large distances between people “they 

are likely to be more tolerant of dissident views.” 18 

As to Market: Cyberspace provides a maj or protection of speech relative to real space, because 

the low cost of publishing is longer a barrier. 19 

Architecture: “[I]t is the real ‘First amendment’ in cyberspace.” The best protection in 

cyberspace because of its relative anonymity, decentralized d istribution and multiple point of 

access, no necessary tie to geography, no simple system to identify content, tools of encryption, 

and the consequences of the Internet protocol “make it difficult to control speech”. 20 

Lessig is lyrical on the potential of free speech in cyberspace: 

“Just think about what this means. For over 60 years the United States has been the exporter 

of a certain political ideology, at its core a conception of free speech. Many have criticized 

this conception: Some found it too extre me, others not extreme enough. Repressive 

regimes —China, North Korea —rejected it directly; tolerant regimes —France, Hungary —

complained of cultural decay; egalitarian regimes —the Scandinavian countries —puzzled 

over how we could think of ourselves as free wh en only the rich can speak and pornography 

is repressed.” 21 

“This debate has gone on at the political level for a long time. And yet, as if under cover of 

night, we have now wired these nations with an architecture of communication that builds 

within thei r borders a far stronger First Amendment than our ideology ever advanced. 

Nations wake up to find that their telephone lines are tools of free expression, that e -mail 

carries news of their repression far beyond their borders, that images are no longer the 

monopoly of state -run television stations but can be transmitted from simple modem. We 

have exported to the world, through the architecture of the Internet, a First Amendment more 

extreme in code than our own First Amendment in law.” 22 

What of this bright new world —does it really signal the dawn of an era of unfettered flow of 

communication? Alas, Lessig warns us of the pitfalls ahead. “Politics” is the key word. 

“[He] says ‘politics’ because this building is not over. As [he has] argued (over and over 

aga in), there is no single architecture for cyberspace; there is no given or necessary structure 

to its design. The first -generation Internet might well have breached walls of control. But       

> 18 Ibid , p. 236
> 19 Ibid, p. 236
> 20 Ibid , p. 236
> 21 Ibid , p. 236
> 22 Ibid , p. 236

9

there is no reason to believe that architects of the second generation will do so, or not to 

expect a second generation to rebuild control. There is no reason to think, in other words, that 

this initial flash of freedom will not be short -lived. And there is certainly no justification for 

acting as if it will not.” 

He contin ues: 

“We can already see the beginnings of this reconstruction. The architecture is being remade to 

re -regulate what real -space architecture before made regulable. Already the Net is changing 

from free to controlled space. Some of these steps to re -regu late are inevitable; some shift back 

is unavoidable. Before the change is complete, however, we must understand the freedoms the 

Net now provides and determine which freedoms we mean to preserve. *** And not just 

preserve. The architecture of the Internet, as it is right now, is perhaps the most important 

model of free speech since the founding. This model has implications far beyond e -mail and 

web pages. Two hundred years after the framers ratified the Constitution, the Net has taught us 

what the First Ame ndment means. If we take this meaning seriously, then the First Amendment 

will require a fairly radical restructuring of the architectures of speech off the Net as well .” 23 

He illustrates how technology of cyberspace interacts with law to create policy wit h respect to 

free speech, which concept he says is the dynamic at the core of the argument of his book. 

Several important areas on the battleground to maintain free speech in cyberspace (are the 

issues of blocking publication, anonymity, neutrality, and privacy. Three groups of players are 

identified: (1) the creator or publisher, (2) the transmitter or carrier (“server” or “browser”), and 

(3) the receiver of the material. At any one time a person could find oneself in anyone of the 

groups. 

To illustrate the problems and Lessig’s suggested solutions two subject areas are examined 

which many users of the Net confront daily: “porn”, as it targets children, and “spam”. 24 In 

these areas, how do the four modalities impinge on free speech? 

HOW AND WHO REGULATES SPEECH 

For the most part, presently no one regulates the Net. In real space there is a large body of law 

that delineates the perimeters of what is protected speech under the First Amendment. At law,     

> 23 Ibid , p. 237
> 24 Ibid , p. 246. He defines “porn” as that which the Supreme Court calls sexually explicit speech that is “harmful to
> minors]”, and “spam” as unsolicited commercial e -mail sent in bulk. “Unsolicited,” in the sense that there’s no
> relationship between the sender and recipient; “commercial” in a sense that excludes political e -mail; “e -mail” in the sense
> not restricted to e -mail, but that includes every medi um of interaction in cyberspace(in cluding blogs); and “bulk”
> meaning many missives sent at once.

10 

“prior restraint” has been a major avenue for blocking of publication by seeking a court order to 

restrain it. A cardinal principle of free speech denying this avenue to the government was firmly 

established in the Pentagon Papers case. 

There the Supreme Court held there can be n o prior restraint on publication unless the 

government can show “grave and irreparable injury to the public interest.” 25 Lessig calls 

attention to the reality that in cyberspace that decision has little or no force. He cites Floyd 

Abrams, who represented th e New York Times . After the dawn of the Net, Abrams asked, “ Is 

the case really important any more? Or has technology rendered this protection of the First 

Amendment unnecessary?” It is pointed out that now the Times could leak the information to a 

number o f Net venues, which would provide immediate worldwide publication. With the “news 

out”, any Times publication could not be shown to create any grave and irreparable injury to the 

public interest, and therefore, there would be no basis for the issuance of a n injunction. Lessig 

emphasizes that the Net, not the courts, is the driving vehicle that prevents the hiding of the 

truth. 26 

Thus, technology of cyberspace has interacted with law to assure a “value” of free speech and 

thwarts “the ability of the “regula tors” of free speech to accomplish blocking truth when they 

deem it “necessary or in their best interest”. 

REGULATIONS OF SPEECH: SPAM AND PORN 

IN REAL AND CYBER -SPACE 27 

Candidly speaking, Lessig says “[f]or all our talk about lovi ng free speech, most of us, deep 

down, wouldn’t mind a bit of healthy speech regulation, at least in some contexts. Or at least,  

> 25

New York Times Co v. United States , 403 U.S. 713 (1971). The decision per curiam held that the government had not 

over come the heavy burden of a presumpti on of unconstitutionality of a prior restraint on publication of the classified 

information. The invocation of the “clear and present danger” concept by Justices Stewart and White was sufficient to 

gain a six man majority to deny the issuance of an injunct ion against publication.  

> 26

Ibid, p. 239 -41  

> 27

Lessig.org, unpublished paper, What Things Regulate Speech Draft 3.01: May 12, 1998. [At p. 13] “For our purposes 

here, we can understand free speech law to divide speech into three classes. One class is speech that everyone has the right 

to. Over this class, the state’s power is quite slight: The state may effect reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions, 

but no more. The paradigm is political speech, but in effect it includes any speech not described in the next two classes. A 

second class is speech that no one has the right to. The model here is obscene speech, or more strongly, child 

pornography. Here the state’s power is practically unlimited. With child porn at least, the state can ban the production, 

distribution, and consumption of such speech; and with obscene speech, the state can for example ban production and 

distribution. The third class is speech that people over the age of 17 have a right to, while people and under do not. This 

is sometimes, and unhelpfully called, “indecent” speech, but that moniker is plainly too broad. A more precise description 

would be speech that is “obscene community determined by age rather than geography. 11 

more of us would be eager for speech regulation today than would have been in 1996. This 

change is because of two categories of speech that have become the bane of existence to many 

on the Net —spam and porn.” 28 For him, “this is not an abandonment of the values of free 

speech, but a recognition that the Net, by its architecture, has changed the reality of how the 

current real space rules of free speech can be adapted to utterances of spam and porn.” 

“Spam” and “porn” need to be treated differently. Lessig points out the four ways we can 

control speech in cyberspace: architecture, norms, law, or the market. We could change the 

code through (1) programs that filter out objectionable speech and encryption, which would 

allow us to isolate domains of objectionable speech; (2) norms like etiquette or moral duties 

(tell the truth) that represent the ideal way since good behavior would be g enerated from within 

the agents rather than be imposed on them from above; (3) the pricing (market) would restrict 

access to those willing and able to pay for it; and finally, (4) the legal option, such as has been 

pursued through legislation seeking to co ntrol speech, establishing a framework for anti -

defamation suits, and fine tunings such as John Doe suits designed to pierce speaker anonymity. 

> LEGISLATION CONCERNING PORN

Congress responded in 1996 with the Communications Decency Act (CDA). A law of 

ext raordinary stupidity, it practically impaled itself on the First Amendment. The law made it a 

felony to transmit “indecent” material on the Net to a minor or to a place where a minor could 

observe it. But it gave speakers on the Net a defense —if they took good -faith, “reasonable, 

effective” steps to screen out children, then they could speak “indecently”. The CDA suffered 

from (1) overbreadth in that it outlawed some speech which the Supreme Court has held can not 

be regulated, with some exceptions, and (2) vagueness. 29 

The CDA was quickly followed by the Child Online Protection Act (COPA) of 1998. Lessig 

says that this statute was better tailored to the constitutional requirements. It aimed at regulating 

speech that was harmful to minors. It allowed commer cial websites to provide such speech so 

long as the website verified the viewer’s age. Yet in June 2003, the Supreme Court enjoined 

enforcement of the statute. He emphasizes that both statutes respond to a legitimate and 

important concern —parents certainly have the right to protect their kids from this form of 

speech, and it is perfectly understandable that Congress would want to help parents secure this 

protection. It is his view that both statutes were unconstitutional —not, as some suggest, because 

there is no way that Congress could help parents. Instead both are unconstitutional “because the 

particular way that Congress has tried to help parents puts more of a burden on legitimate   

> 28 CODE , p.245
> 29 Ibid , p. 249

12 

speech (for adults, that is) than is necessary.” 30 

Lessig sets out the ind icia of a law which should pass constitutional scrutiny: “Establish a class 

of speech that adults have a right to but that children do not: “States can regulate that class to 

ensure that such speech is channeled to the proper user and blocked from the impr oper user”. 

Conceptually, for such a regulation to work, two questions must be answered: (1) Is the speaker 

uttering “regulable” speech —meaning speech “harmful to minors”? (2) Is the listener entitled to 

consume this speech —meaning is he a minor? With yes answers to these questions, then 

provisions blocking access to minors may be provided. He concludes that the least burdensome 

is for the speaker to answer “1” and the listening minor “2”. 31 In his view, there is a perfectly 

constitutional statute that Congr ess could pass that would have an important effect on protecting 

kids from porn, and still protect speech that is not regulable. 

But first, he poses the issue: Which is the better road to take —governmental regulation or 

action by non -governmental persons or agencies? Lessig emphasizes that key civil rights 

organizations have taken too long to recognize the latter private threat to free -speech values. 

The tradition of civil rights is focused directly on government action alone. He would be the last 

to say that there’s not great danger from government misbehavior, but there is also danger to 

free speech from private misbehavior. An obsessive refusal to even consider the one and not the 

other does not serve the values promoted by the First Amendment. 32 

He ass erts that the “focus should be on the liberty to speak, not just on the government’s role in 

restricting speech. Thus, between two ‘solutions’ to a particular speech problem, one that 

involves the government and suppresses speech narrowly, and one that doe sn’t involve the 

government but suppresses speech broadly, constitutional values should tilt us to favor the 

former. First Amendment values (even if not the First Amendment directly) should lead to 

favoring a speech regulation system that is thin and accou ntable, and in which the government’s 

action or inaction leads only to the suppression of speech the government has a legitimate 

interest in suppressing.” 33 

REGULATING “PORN” 

Lessig’s proposal is as follows: by law the speaker is required to tag the cont ent which would 

be hidden from the ordinary user —unless that user looks for it, or wants to filter that content. 

Speakers would not be required to block access; or to verify age. All the speaker would be      

> 30 Ibid, p. 250
> 31 CODE , p. 251
> 32 Ibid , p. 256
> 33 Ibid , p. 255

13 

required to do is to tag content deemed “harmful to minors” with the proper tag. With the law in 

place, browser manufacturers would build a browser that recognizes this tag, thus enabling 

parents to activate platforms to control where their kids go on the Internet. The only burden 

created by this solution i s on the speaker; this solution does not burden the rightful consumer of 

porn at all. To that consumer, there is no change in the way the Web is experienced, because 

without activating a browser that looks for the such material the tag is invisible to the consumer. 

Lessig finds it “hard to see why it would be unconstitutional, since in real space a speaker must 

filter content ‘harmful to minors’”. No doubt there’s a burden. But the question isn’t whether 

there’s a burden. The constitutional question is whet her there is a less burdensome way to 

achieve this important state interest. 34 The consumer’s control over international sites could be 

handled by the same browser that filters out such domestic material. It could subscribe to an IP 

mapping service to enabl e access to American sites only. 35 

REGULATING “SPAM” 

Lessig’s broad view as to how spam should be handled: Spam is an economic activity. People 

send it to make money. Spam is perhaps the most theorized problem on the Net. There are 

scores of books addres sing how best to deal with the problem, but they ignore the one important 

tool with which the problem of spam could be addressed: the law. The key to good policy in 

cyberspace is a proper mix of modalities, not a single silver bullet. The idea that code al one 

could fix the problem of spam is silly —code can always be coded around, and, unless the 

circumventers are not otherwise motivated, they will code around it. The law is a tool to change 

incentives, and it should be a tool used here as well. 36 The aim her e, as with porn, should be 

to regulate in order to assure what we could call “consensual communication.” That is, the 

only purpose of the regulation should be to block nonconsensual communication, and 

enable consensual communication. He does not believe th at purpose is valid in every 

speech context. In this context —private e ‐mail, or blogs, with limited bandwidth 

resources, with the costs of the speech born by the listener —it is completely appropriate 

to regulate to enable individuals to block commercial co mmunications that they don’t 

want to receive. 37 

“The present techniques for controlling spam are non -governmental code -based regulation by 

way of (1) filters or by (2) the ‘server’, who is forwarding the message, blocking it. [He says] 

these do not effecti vely work because clever spammers can defeat the filters and the creation     

> 34 Ibid , pp. 253 -54
> 35 Ibid , p.254
> 36 Ibid , p. 262
> 37 Ibid , p. 263

14 

of ‘blacklists’ of servers by rules of ‘vigilantes’ set up to rate the servers. [He says] that if 

either or both of these techniques were actually working to stop spam, [he] would ac cept 

them. [He is] particularly troubled by the process -less blocking of ‘blacklists’. The only 

federal legislative response, the CAN ‐SPAM Act, while preempting many innovative state 

solutions, is not having any significant effect.” 38 

“Not only are these t echniques not blocking spam, they are also blocking legitimate bulk 

e‐mail that isn’t spam. The most important example is political e ‐mail. One great virtue 

of e ‐mail was that it would lower the costs of social and political communication. Thus, 

both becau se regulation through code alone has failed, and because it is actually doing 

harm to at least one important value that the network originally served, we should 

consider alternatives to code regulation alone.” 39 

To save the day, Lessig offers alternate ave nues of regulation to regulate spam —tagging 

commercial e ‐mail and a “bounty system.” Here again, then, the solution is a mixed 

modality strategy. A LAW creates the incentive for a certain change in the CODE of spam 

(it now comes labeled). That law is enfor ced through a complex set of MARKET and 

NORM ‐based incentives —both the incentive to be a bounty hunter, which is both financial 

and normative (people really think spammers are acting badly), as well as the incentive to 

produce bounty credit cards. If done right, the mix of these modalities would change the 

incentives spammers face. And, if done right, the change could be enough to drive most 

spammers into different businesses. 40 

Lessig argues that such regimes to handle “porn” and “free speech” issues retai n the values of 

the First Amendment: 

“The first is a point about perspective: to say whether a regulation ‘abridg[es] the freedom of 

speech, or of the press’ we need a baseline for comparison. The regulations [he describes] in 

this section are designed to restore the effective regulation of real space. In that sense, in [his 

view, they don’t ‘abridge’ speech. Second, these examples show how doing nothing can be 

worse for free speech values than regulating speech. The consequence of no legal regulation 

to c hannel porn is an explosion of bad code regulation to deal with porn. The consequence of 

no effective legal regulation to deal with spam is an explosion of bad code that has broken e -

mail. No law, in other words, sometimes produces bad code. [L]aw and soft ware together 

define the regulatory condition. Less law does not necessarily mean more freedom’ As code 

and law are both regulators (even if different sorts of regulators) we should be avoiding bad 

regulation of whatever sort. Third, these examples evince the mixed modality strategy that    

> 38 Ibid , p. 263
> 39 Ibid , p. 264
> 40 Ibid , pp. 264 -66

15 

regulating cyberspace always is. There is no silver bullet. There is instead a mix of 

techniques —modalities that must be balanced to achieve a particular regulatory end. That 

mix must reckon the interaction among regulators . The question is for an equilibrium. But the 

law has an important role in tweaking that mix to assure the balance that advances a 

particular policy. Here, by regulating smartly, we could avoid the destructive code -based 

regulation that would fill the regu latory gap. That would, in turn, advance free speech 

interest.” 41 

NEUTRALITY, ANONYMITY, AND PRIVACY/KEY CONCEPTS AFFECTING THE 

ROLE AND DEVELOPMENT OF CYBERSPACE COMMUNICATION 

The Net, originally conceived as an avenue of unfettered distribution of expre ssion and 

information, had three keystones: “neutrality”, “anonymity”, and “privacy”. 42 

“Neutrality is “important: when the users were allowed to use the telephone for whatever use 

they wanted, and not the use the owner wanted —then users were free to conne ct to the 

Internet; free to connect to any one of the thousands of ISPs ***[and be fed by] them the 

Internet. A neutral platform created this; the government created the neutral platform.” A 

handful of massive companies [are trying to] control access and d istribution of content, 

deciding what you get to see [on the Net] and how much it costs.” 43 

The battle for who controls continues before the FCC and in Congress. 

There is no “anonymity” now. To use the Net one must go through a server and one is given an 

IP Address by which your computer can be identified. As Lessig puts it, “If you want 

anonymity use a pay phone.” 44 

For purposes of this commentary “privacy” is an issue because it impinges on “free speech”. 

Both ideas are important liberties in a democrat ic society. Considering the words of the First 

and Fourth Amendment on their face, it seems fair to conclude that the First’s free speech is 

near to absolute in its command of no governmental action to abridge it. Whereas, the privacy 

protected by the Four th is a limited freedom not from all or most searches, but only from 

“unreasonable search and seizures”. Lessig states the difference pointedly by going to the 

values behind the Amendments’ words. “The values of speech are different from the      

> 41 Ibid , pp. 267 -68
> 42 Lessig, Cyberspace’s Consitution , p. 9. “Perfect liberty. The original net was an unregulable place. Behavior, if
> controlled, was controlled by the norms of the net. The architect made possible no greater control.”
> 43 Washington Post op. Ed, Lessig & McChesney , June 8, 2006
> 44 Ibid , p. 261

16 

values of priv acy; the control we want to vest over speech is less than the control we want 

to vest over privacy. We should disable some of the control over speech. A little bit of 

messiness or friction in the context of speech is a value, not a cost.” 45 

He adds. “But a re these values different just because I say they are? No. They are only different 

if we say they are different. In real space we treat them as different. [Since the Net is in flux] 

my core argument is that we [can] choose how we want to treat them in cybe rspace. My point is 

that if we rely upon private action alone, more speech will be blocked than if the government 

acted wisely and efficiently.” 46 

CITIZENS UNITED V. F EDERAL ELECTIONS COM MISSION 47 

From the title Professor Lessig has chosen for his lecture , it appears that the Citizens United 

case will be a focal point of the content. In anticipation his published views thereon seem 

relevant. 

He has said: 

“We can disagree with the Court's view of the Framers (and I do); we can criticize its 

application of stare decisis (as any honest lawyer should); and we can stand dumbfounded by 

its tone -deaf understanding of the nature of corruption (as anyone living in the real world of 

politics must).” 48 

It seems obvious that Lessig supports the view of the four dissent ers in Citizens Union that 

corporations are fictitious entities with rights specifically given them by law, but do not have 

the constitutional personal liberty of free speech protected by the First Amendment. He 

emphasizes, “of course I think corporations ought to have certain rights, [but] where all of a 

sudden the rights that they have are not the rights that we give them, but rights that they have, 

[include] certain inalienable rights as the Declaration of Independence put it. They've magically 

been give n.” 49 

CONCLUSION 

Professor Lessig’s message to us is that that free speech at the birth of the Net provided 

unfettered flow of informational content available to all that had the equipment to enter 

cyberspace. Time and intervention of four m odalities, LAW, ARCHITECTURE, NORMS, and        

> 45 Ibid . p. 261
> 46 Ibid , p. 261
> 47 Supreme Court, Case 08 -205 Ja nuary 21, 2010
> 48 Transcript Bill Moyers Jounal , PBS 02/05/2010
> 49 Ibid .

17 

MARKET have eroded, and continue to erode, the Net’s freedom. 

Nevertheless, there still remains vastly more free speech on the Net than exists in real space. It 

still remains in our hands, as members of our democr atic society, how free the informational 

flow will remain. 

His bottom baseline for cyberspace speech are the boundaries now existing in real space free 

speech. He believes that by marshalling our forces we can bring about through legislation the 

retentio n of much of present Net freedom. If such is accomplished, we will broaden the present 

borders of real space speech by court and legislative adoption thereof. He also emphasizes that 

greater free speech depends not only on the facial words of the First Ame ndment but court 

interpretation thereof and new legislation which gives a full and robust meaning to the ideas and 

ideals behind the words.
