Title: China floods wreak havoc, block roads and railways; more rain due

URL Source: https://www.arabnews.pk/node/1338601/world

Published Time: 2018-07-14 01:58:58

Markdown Content:
Updated 14 July 2018

Reuters

July 14, 2018 01:58

42

China floods wreak havoc, block roads and railways; more rain due
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*   Floods in the province had caused damage to the tune of about 2.4 billion yuan ($358.74 million) by Thursday
*   The National Meteorological Center said rainfall could exceed 80 mm per hour in some regions on Saturday

Updated 14 July 2018

Reuters

July 14, 2018 01:58

SHANGHAI: Heavy rain and thunderstorms are wreaking havoc across China, with floods along major rivers destroying bridges, blocking roads and railways and forcing thousands of residents to evacuate, state media reported on Saturday.

 Weather authorities are forecasting more downpours throughout the country on Saturday, with floods and landslides expected in the southwestern province of Sichuan.

 Heavy rain and flooding hits much of China this time every year, often with hundreds killed, but the number of casualties this year has been relatively low, at least in the early summer, with one province reporting 12 dead and another three.

 The National Meteorological Center said rainfall could exceed 80 mm per hour in some regions on Saturday. It also warned of floods in the northeast and called on authorities to halt outdoor activities and watch out for collapsing structures.

 The flood-prone Yangtze river, which runs from Yunnan in the southwest to Jiangsu and Shanghai on the east coast, has seen a massive increase in water volumes, causing flooding in many of its tributaries and bringing water volumes in the giant Three Gorges reservoir close to record levels.

 State news agency Xinhua reported on Friday that more than 10 highways in Sichuan were inaccessible as a result of flooding, and a bridge across Sichuan’s Min river, a Yangtze tributary, had collapsed.

 Floods in the province had caused damage to the tune of about 2.4 billion yuan ($358.74 million) by Thursday, according to the Ministry of Emergency Management.

 Meanwhile, the nearby city of Chongqing had evacuated more than 80,000 residents by Friday, Xinhua reported.

 Heavy rain has also caused the Yellow River, which runs through northern China, to burst its banks, blocking a section of a railway line in the northwest province of Shaanxi.

 Gansu province, also in the northwest, reported 12 people killed and more than 1 million affected by a week of heavy rain and flooding, the official China Daily said on Saturday.

 The normally arid region of Inner Mongolia, which had suffered weeks of drought, also issued a flood warning on Friday. ($1 = 6.6900 yuan)

France to open consulate in Greenland in February
-------------------------------------------------

Updated 3 sec ago

AFP

January 14, 2026 08:30

3

France to open consulate in Greenland in February
-------------------------------------------------

*   The comments came on the day that Denmark’s top diplomat is to meet senior US officials at the White House for talks over Greenland

Updated 3 sec ago

AFP

January 14, 2026 08:30

PARIS: France will open a consulate in Greenland on February 6, the foreign minister said Wednesday, calling the move a “political signal” over the strategic Danish territory, which US President Donald Trump has vowed to seize.

 The comments came on the day that Denmark’s top diplomat is to meet senior US officials at the White House for talks over the future of vast, mineral-rich Arctic island.

 Since returning to office nearly a year ago, Trump has repeatedly mused about taking over Greenland from longtime ally and European Union member Denmark.

 French Foreign Minister Jean-Noel Barrot told French RTL broadcaster that the decision to open the consulate was taken last summer, when President Emmanuel Macron visited Greenland in a show of support.

 “For my part, I went there at the end of August to plan the consulate, which will open on February 6,” he said.

 “It’s a political signal that’s associated with a desire to be more present in Greenland, including in the scientific field.”

 “Greenland does not want to be owned, governed... or integrated into the United States. Greenland has made the choice of Denmark, NATO, (European) Union,” he said.

 Greenland’s leader has said that the island would choose to remain an autonomous territory of Denmark over the United States.

 Trump has said the United States needs Greenland due to the threat of a takeover by Russia or China.

 The two rival powers have both stepped up activity in the Arctic, where ice is melting due to climate change, but neither claims Greenland, where the United States has long had a military base.
