Title: Trump's 2025 Executive Orders | Holland & Knight

URL Source: https://www.hklaw.com/en/general-pages/trumps-2025-executive-orders-chart

Markdown Content:
### Holland & Knight’s Public Policy & Regulation team members are actively monitoring and reviewing President Trump's executive orders and other actions. This chart provides brief overviews of the numerous orders published by the Trump Administration. Click the title of each executive order to learn more.

**Executive Order****Date Issued****Practice Area/Topic****Short/Executive Summary**
Adjusting Imports of Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicles, Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicle Parts, and Buses Into the United States 10/17/2025 This proclamation incentives domestic medium- and heavy-duty truck production by offering an offset to a portion of tariffs for medium- and heavy-duty truck parts equal to 3.75 percent of the aggregate value of all trucks assembled in the U.S. from 2025 to 2030. The proclamation also imposes 25 percent tariffs on imports of medium- and heavy-duty trucks and truck parts, as well as a 10 percent tariff on imports of buses. The tariffs begin on Nov. 1, 2025.
Ensuring Continued Accountability in Federal Hiring 10/15/2025 This executive order clarifies the policies and procedures that govern federal hiring. All executive departments and agencies may not fill any vacant federal civilian position or create new positions. Each agency head shall establish a strategic hiring committee to approve the creation or filling of each vacancy within their agency. The committee will ensure that agency hiring is consistent with the merit hiring plan, national interest, agency needs and priorities of the Trump Administration. Agencies shall also prepare an annual staffing plan to eliminate duplicative functions and positions, as well as ensure new career appointments are in the highest-need areas and aligned with the Trump Administration's priorities.
National Security Presidential Memorandum/NSPM-8 10/15/2025 This memorandum directs the U.S. Department of Defense secretary to use any funds the U.S. Congress appropriated that remain available for expenditure in fiscal year (FY) 2026 to accomplish the scheduled disbursement of military pay and allowances for active-duty military personnel. The Defense secretary shall use funds that have a reasonable and logical relationship to the pay and allowances of military personnel.
The Trump Declaration for Enduring Peace and Prosperity 10/13/2025 This proclamation announces the Trump Peace Agreement, which aims to end more than two years of conflict in Gaza. Co-signed by Egypt President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, Qatar Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani and Turkey President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the statement affirms a shared commitment to dismantling extremism and resolving future disputes through diplomatic engagement diplomacy rather than force. The signatories emphasize cooperation, mutual respect and a vision for a peaceful and prosperous Middle East.
Unlocking Cures for Pediatric Cancer with Artificial Intelligence 9/30/2025 This executive order aims to prioritize investment in AI-enabled science, build world-class scientific datasets and empower researchers and clinicians with the tools needed to translate data and AI capabilities into improved care. The Make America Healthy Again (MAHA) Commission plans to work alongside the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) secretary, Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and Special Advisor for AI and Crypto, as well as in alignment with the implementation of America's AI Action Plan, to develop innovative ways to utilize advance technologies to unlock improved diagnoses, treatments, cures and prevention strategies for pediatric cancer. The order also directs agencies to accelerate the progress of AI-driven solutions at the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) to improve data infrastructure through the use of AI, enhance data analysis of complex biologic systems with AI tools, and improve clinical trial design, access and outcomes for patients by incorporating multimodal data and using AI strategically to maximize the utilization of the information from clinical trials.
Adjusting Imports of Timber, Lumber, and their Derivative Products into the United States 9/29/2025 This proclamation invokes Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act to impose tariffs on certain wood imports and establishes a framework for adjusting import levels to protect U.S. economic and security interests. It states that the tariff rate on originating wood production of the European Union and Japan shall not exceed 15 percent. All other imports of softwood timber and lumber shall be subject to a 10 percent _ad valorem_ duty rate.
Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees 9/29/2025 This executive order extends the operation of 22 federal advisory committees through Sept. 30, 2027. The advisory committees that were extended include, but are not limited to, the 1) Committee for the Preservation of the White House, 2) President's Commission on White House Fellowships, 3) President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee, 4) National Industrial Security Program Policy Advisory Committee, 5) Trade and Environment Policy Advisory Committee, 6) Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS, 7) President's Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities, 8) President's Board of Advisors on Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 9) President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, as well as multiple other National Monument advisory committees.
Assuring the Security of the State of Qatar 9/29/2025 This executive order aims to guarantee the security and territorial integrity of Qatar against external attacks. The U.S. will deem any armed attack on the territory, sovereignty or critical infrastructure of Qatar as a threat to the peace and security of the U.S., taking lawful and appropriate measures to defend the interests of the two countries. The U.S. Department of War secretary will collaborate with the U.S. Department of State secretary and Director of National Intelligence to ensure a rapid response to any foreign aggression against Qatar.
Saving TikTok While Protecting National Security 9/25/2025 This executive order states that TikTok's divestiture outlined in the proposed framework agreement is a qualified divestiture. Under the framework agreement, TikTok's U.S. application will be operated by a new joint venture company based in the U.S. It will be majority-owned by U.S. investors, and ByteDance will hold less than 20 percent of stock. Oracle, a U.S. technology company, will independently monitor TikTok's operations. By removing China's majority share in TikTok, the proposed divestiture resolves the national security concerns and compiles with the Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act (H.R.8038).
Designating Antifa as a Domestic Terrorist Organization 9/22/2025 This executive order declares Antifa to be a terrorist threat due to their illegal organizations and campaigns of violence to obstruct enforcement of federal laws, doxing and calls for the overthrow of the U.S. government. This order seeks to utilize all relevant departments and agencies to investigate, disrupt and dismantle all illegal operations conducted by Antifa.
Restriction on Entry of Certain Nonimmigrant Workers 9/19/2025 This proclamation mandates a $100,000 payment to accompany H-1B petitions for workers currently outside the U.S. Exceptions may be granted if employers or their industry are deemed in the national interest. The restriction is set to last for one year, from Sept. 21, 2025, to Sept. 20, 2026. It may be extended based on recommendations from relevant federal agencies. For a detailed analysis, see Holland & Knight's previous alert, "Summary of Presidential Proclamation: Restriction on Entry of Certain Nonimmigrant Workers," Sept. 20, 2025.
The Gold Card 9/19/2025 This executive order establishes a "Gold Card" program by the U.S. Department of Commerce secretary in coordination with the secretaries for the U.S. Departments of State and Homeland Security. This program allows applicants who make an unrestricted gift to the Commerce Department to be eligible for an immigrant visa using an expedited process. This gift shall be $1 million for an individual donating on their own behalf and $2 million for a corporation/entity donating on behalf of the individual. The money will be used to promote commerce and American industry. If a Gold Card applicant is sponsored by a corporation that meets the exceptional business ability and national benefit standard, they can be eligible for a national-interest waiver under 8 U.S.C. 1153 and thus exempt from the fee.
Further Extending the TikTok Enforcement Delay 9/16/2025 This executive order further extends the TikTok enforcement delay until Dec. 16, 2025.
Establishing an Emergency Board to Investigate Disputes Between the Long Island Rail Road Company and Certain of its Employees Represented by Certain Labor Organizations 9/16/2025 This executive order establishes a board appointed by the president whose purpose is to investigate and report on disputes between the Long Island Rail Road Company and its employees. The employees involved in the dispute are represented by the Transportation Communications Union, Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen, Brotherhood of Railroad Signalmen, International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, and International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. The board will report to the president within 30 days of its creation.
Strengthening Efforts to Protect U.S. Nationals from Wrongful Detention Abroad 9/5/2025 This executive order directs the U.S. Department of State secretary to designate any foreign country whose government engages or is complicit in the wrongful detention of a U.S. national as a State Sponsor of Wrongful Detention. To deter the wrongful detention, the Secretary of State shall impose sanctions, ban foreign officials from entering the U.S., prohibit immigration from the country, restrict U.S. travel to the designated country or limit exports.
Modifying The Scope of Reciprocal Tariffs and Establishing Procedures for Implementing Trade and Security Agreements 9/5/2025 This executive order amends the reciprocal tariffs system established in April 2025. The order revises Annex II, adding critical minerals, pharmaceutical compounds and bullion-related items to the list of goods exempt from tariffs. In contrast, aluminum hydroxide, resins and silicone products have been removed from Annex II and are now subject to tariffs. Additionally, this order introduces the Potential Tariff Adjustments for Aligned Partners framework, which lists the products eligible for Most Favored-Nation tariff rates, contingent on a country signing a reciprocal trade and security agreement. Among the eligible items are aircrafts, generic pharmaceuticals, agricultural goods not sufficiently produced domestically and strategic minerals such as nickel, graphite and neodymium magnets.
Restoring the United States Department of War 9/5/2025 This executive order revives the name "Department of War" as a secondary title for the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The order authorizes the Defense secretary to be referred to as Secretary of War in official communications, ceremonies and internal documents. Within 60 days of this order, the Secretary of War shall submit a recommendation for the appropriate actions, including legislative and executive actions, necessary to permanently rename the DOD to the Department of War.
Implementing the United States–Japan Agreement 9/4/2025 This executive order formalizes a framework trade agreement between the U.S. and Japan, imposing a baseline 15 percent tariffs on nearly all Japanese imports. Tariffs will not apply to Japanese products that are natural resources unavailable in the U.S., along with generic pharmaceuticals, generic pharmaceutical ingredients and generic pharmaceutical chemical precursors. Japan will invest $550 billion in investments selected by the U.S., expedite $8 billion per year in the implementation of U.S. rice procurements and accept U.S.-manufactured commercial aircrafts without additional testing.
Making Federal Architecture Beautiful Again 8/28/2025 This executive order establishes classical architecture as the preferred and default architecture for federal public buildings. When planning the design of a federal public building, builders should seek the advice of classical or traditional architects and choose the building site in cooperation with local agencies. The final design of federal public buildings should include fine art and a generous development of landscape. When renovating, reducing or expanding federal public buildings, redesigning the building in the classical architectural style should be given substantial consideration. The order directs the administrator of the General Services Administration (GSA) to incorporate such policies and priorities when overseeing construction and redesign of federal architecture.
Further Exclusions from the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program 8/28/2025 This executive order lists federal agencies and subdivisions that are determined to be vital to intelligence, counterintelligence, investigative or national security work, and thus are excluded from the collective bargaining rights established under the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program. Such agencies or subdivisions include the International Trade Administration (ITA), Office of the Commissioner for Patents and subordinate units of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO), National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS), National Weather Service (NWS), NASA and U.S. Agency for Global Media (USAGM).
Taking Steps to End Cashless Bail to Protect Americans 8/25/2025 This executive order intends to ensure federal resources are not used to support jurisdictions with cashless bail policies. The U.S. attorney general shall compile a list of states and local jurisdictions that have eliminated cash bail as a potential condition of pretrial release from custody. The heads of each executive department and agency shall identify federal funds that may be suspended or terminated of those jurisdictions that have eliminated cash bail.
Measures to End Cashless Bail and Enforce the Law in the District of Columbia 8/25/2025 This executive order aims to end cashless bail policies in Washington, D.C. Federal law enforcement agencies who are members of the D.C. Safe and Beautiful Task Force shall ensure criminal defendants who pose a threat to public safety are not released from custody prior to trial. This order directs the U.S. attorney general to review the Metropolitan Police Department General Orders to identify policies and practices that may result in the pretrial release of criminal defendants. If the District of Columbia does not permit cash bail as a potential condition of pretrial release, the attorney general may amend federal funding decisions or the provision of federal services and approvals.
Prosecuting Burning of the American Flag 8/25/2025 This executive order establishes measures to combat the desecration of the American flag. Given the U.S. Supreme Court has held that First Amendment protections extend to American flag burnings, the order directs the U.S. attorney general to prioritize prosecuting flag desecration when it is tied to other crimes such as violent crimes, hate crimes, illegal discrimination against American citizens and crimes against property and peace. The attorney general may pursue litigation to clarify the scope of the First Amendment as it relates to American flag desecration. The attorney general, along with the U.S. Departments of Homeland Security and State secretaries, shall deny, prohibit, terminate or revoke vias, residence permits, naturalization proceedings and other immigration benefits if a foreign national is found to have desecrated the American flag.
Additional Measures to Address the Crime Emergency in the District of Columbia 8/25/2025 This executive order expands upon EO 14333, "Declaring a Crime Emergency in the District of Columbia." This order directs the director of the National Park Service to hire additional Park Police; U.S. Attorney General to hire additional prosecutors to focus on violent and property crimes; and U.S. Department of Defense secretary to establish a specialized unit within the District of Columbia National Guard. The Defense secretary shall also ensure each state's Army National Guard and Air National Guard are given resources and training and are available for rapid nationwide deployment. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development secretary shall investigate non-compliance with crime-prevention and safety requirements by the District of Columbia Housing Authority and any landlord in D.C. The Transportation secretary shall conduct additional inspections, audits and examinations to ensure conditions in federally funded transit services do not endanger transit workers. The D.C. Safe and Beautiful Task Force shall establish an online portal to solicit applications for federal law enforcement entities and create a specialized law enforcement unit that can be deployed in D.C. and other cities where public safety has been compromised. Finally, this order requests that the D.C. mayor review and modify the Metropolitan Police Department General Orders to better ensure public order.
Improving Our Nation Through Better Design 8/21/2025 This executive order establishes the "America by Design" initiative to improve the visual presentation and usability of the digital and physical spaces where the public interacts with federal services. The order creates a new position, chief design officer, to direct the beautification effort within the White House's National Design Studio. The chief design officer shall prioritize improving websites and physical sites that have a major impact on Americans' daily lives.
Revocation of Executive Order on Competition 8/13/2025 This executive order revokes EO 14036, "Promoting Competition in the American Economy." The revoked order affirmed that the Biden Administration was dedicated to enforcing antitrust laws to combat monopolies, supporting legislative reforms that would lower prescription drug prices and furthering the enactment of a public health insurance option.
Enabling Competition in the Commercial Space Industry 8/13/2025 This executive order streamlines commercial license and permit approvals for U.S.-based operators of commercial and novel space activities. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) secretary shall establish a position that is dedicated to fostering innovation and deregulation in the commercial space transportation industry. The DOT secretary shall also eliminate or expedite the department's launch and reentry licenses and permits, and reevaluate, amend or rescind the regulations at Part 450 of Title 14, C.F.R., to ensure regulatory requirements do not impede launch and reentry vehicles that possess a flight termination system, automated flight system or that hold valid Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness certificates. The order directs federal agencies to reform regulatory barriers – such as the Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA) and National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) – to support the next generation of spaceport infrastructure. Finally, the Commerce secretary shall propose a process to expedite and streamline individualized mission authorizations for activities covered by Article VI of the Outer Space Treaty of 1967.
Ensuring American Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Resilience by Filling the Strategic Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Reserve 8/13/2025 This executive order directs the Office of the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) to develop a list of approximately 26 drugs that are especially critical to U.S. health and security. The ASPR shall also identify the existing, available funds that can be used to finance the preparation of the opening of the Strategic Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Reserve (SAPIR) so that it can stockpile active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) that are needed to make the identified critical drugs. To ensure SAPIR resilience, ASPR will update its list of 86 essential medicines and medical countermeasures, as well as establish a plan to obtain those medicines from domestic manufacturers and store a six-month supply of APIs for drugs on the updated essential medicines list.
Further Modifying Reciprocal Tariff Rates to Reflect Ongoing Discussions with The People's Republic of China 8/11/2025 This executive order continues the suspension established by EO 14298, the specific ad valorem duties on imports from the People's Republic of China, until 12:01 a.m. EST on Nov. 10, 2025. Relevant agency and department heads are directed to follow the suspensions in this order while taking all appropriate measures within its authority to implement the order.
Declaring a Crime Emergency in the District of Columbia 8/11/2025 This executive order directs the mayor of the District of Columbia to provide the services of the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia for federal purposes – such as protecting federal property and maintaining law and order – for the maximum period permitted under Section 740 of the Home Rule Act. It also delegates operational control of the department to the U.S. attorney general through the current special conditions of an emergency nature, directs the attorney general to regularly report to the president regarding the emergency status and make recommendations for further actions or the termination of the order.
Improving Oversight of Federal Grantmaking 8/7/2025 This executive order aims to streamline federal grantmaking by increasing oversight and ensuring greater accountability of public tax dollars. Each agency head will designate a senior appointee who will be charged with creating a review process for new funding opportunity announcements while reviewing past discretionary grants. Scientific research discretionary grants must be reviewed by at least one subject matter expert in the field. Discretionary awards will not be designated for any racial preference grant recipient, undocumented immigrant grant recipient, transgender grant recipient or any other initiatives that "compromise public safety or promote anti-American values." All discretionary awards and applicants will commit to achieving Gold Standard Science, with agencies prioritizing an institution's commitment to scholarship over an institution's historical reputation or perceived prestige.
Guaranteeing Fair Banking for All Americans 8/7/2025 This executive order aims to ensure all Americans have access to financial services, no matter their protected beliefs, affiliations or political views. Each appropriate federal banking regulator will remove the use of reputation risk or similar practices. Federal banking regulators will also review data to identify any financial institutions engaged in unlawful debanking on the basis of religion and refer such matters to the U.S. attorney general for appropriate civil action. The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) will make efforts to reinstate any former clients who were denied services through a politicized or unlawful debanking action and identify all potential clients to provide notice of a renewed option to engage in services previously denied. The U.S. Department of the Treasury secretary, along with the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, will create a strategy for further measures to combat political or unlawful debanking activities.
Democratizing Access to Alternative Assets for 401(K) Investors 8/7/2025 This executive order expands 401(K) investments' access to alternative asset investments, including private market, real estate, investment funds, commodities, infrastructure and risk-sharing investments. It calls for the U.S. Department of Labor to reexamine Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) guidance on fiduciary duties in alternative asset investments, asks the Labor secretary to consider rescinding the department's 2021 Supplemental Private Equity Statement and aims to reduce future lawsuit and litigation risk. It also calls on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to expand accreditor investor and qualified purchases status eligibility rules, broadening access to alternative investments.
Addressing Threats to the United States by the Government of the Russian Federation 8/6/2025 This executive order imposes an additional 25 percent ad valorem duty on imports from India in response to its direct or indirect importation of Russian Federation oil. The order identifies which articles are subject to the duty and authorizes the president to modify the order in response to foreign retaliation or if the Russian Federation government or another country takes significant steps to address the national emergency. Executive agencies are directed to monitor foreign imports of Russian Federation oil and any acts of retaliation and to recommend further actions to the president.
Establishing the White House Task Force on the 2028 Summer Olympics 8/5/2025 This executive order establishes a White House task force on the 2028 Summer Olympics in preparation for the U.S. hosting the Games. It designates the president as chair and the vice president as vice chair, along with other designated members. The task force is responsible for coordinating federal planning and response to security and transportation; identifying legal, logistical and regulatory barriers to federal support; assisting with visa processing for foreign athletes, coaches and media personnel; and ensuring operational readiness across law enforcement, counterterrorism, transportation and emergency response functions.
President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, and the Re-Establishment of the Presidential Fitness Test 7/31/2025 This executive order establishes the Presidential Fitness Test, which will be administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) secretary with the support of the U.S. Department of Education secretary. This order also revitalizes the President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, which will consist of 30 members appointed by the president, and the president will designate an executive director of the council that will oversee engagement with executive departments and agencies, athletic institutions and community partners. The council will recommend reestablishing the Presidential Fitness Test, promotion of school-based programs focused on physical education, campaigns and events that elevate American sports, military readiness, health traditions, and strategies to address the growing national security threat posed by the increasing rates of childhood obesity, chronic diseases and sedentary lifestyles, which threaten the future readiness of the U.S. workforce and military.
Further Modifying the Reciprocal Tariff Rates 7/31/2025 This executive order builds on the national emergency declared in EO 14257, "Regulating Imports With a Reciprocal Tariff to Rectify Trade Practices that Contribute to Large and Persistent Annual United States Goods Trade Deficits," on April 2, 2025. This order revises and expands tariff rates on imports from certain countries, with the exception of countries in negotiations with the U.S. A key enforcement mechanism of this order targets transshipment, which is when goods are rerouted through third-party countries to evade tariffs. If U.S. Customs and Border Protection determines transshipment has occurred, those goods may face a 40 percent tariff, as well as other additional penalties. Implementation of this tariff is delegated to the U.S. Departments of Commerce and Homeland Security, along with the U.S. Trade Representative in consultation with the U.S. Departments of State and Treasury secretaries, Assistant to the President for Economic Policy, Assistant to the President and Senior Counselor for Trade and Manufacturing, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and chair of the International Trade Commission. They may enforce the order through temporary suspension or amendment of regulations or notices in the Federal Register and by adopting rules, regulations or guidance, and employ all powers granted to the president by International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA).
Amendment to Duties to Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border 7/31/2025 This executive order references the national emergency declared in EO 14193, "Imposing Duties To Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border," from February 2025, which imposed an ad valorem rate of duty of 25 percent on certain articles that are products of Canada and an additional ad valorem rate of duty of 10 percent on certain energy or energy resources that are products of Canada. By March 6, 2025, President Trump issued EO 14231, "Amendment to Duties To Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border," which exempted products of Canada that qualify for duty-free entry under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), and President Trump reduced the additional ad valorem rate of duty on potash from 25 percent to 10 percent. Due to the Trump Administration's concerns of Canada's lack of cooperation in stemming the flood of fentanyl and other illicit drugs across the northern border, the 25 percent tariff was raised to a 35 percent tariff, effective 12:01 a.m. ET on Aug. 1, 2025.
Addressing Threats to the United States by the Government of Brazil 7/30/2025 This executive order imposes an additional ad valorem duty rate of 40 percent on certain products of Brazil, in response to a national emergency with respect to the threat of actions taken by the government of Brazil that violate the free expression rights of U.S. citizens, interfere with the U.S. economy and subvert the interest of the U.S. in protecting its citizens and companies. The rate of duty is in addition to any other duties applicable to such imports and does not apply to articles excepted by 50 U.S.C. 1702(b) or articles including certain silicon metal, pig iron, civil aircraft, metallurgical grade alumina, tin ore, wood pulp, precious metals, energy and fertilizers. Within the order, the president declares the potential for future modification to ensure the national emergency is adequately dealt with.
Suspending Duty-Free De Minimis Treatment for All Countries 7/30/2025 This executive order suspends the duty-free de minimis exemption provided under 19 U.S.C. 1321(a)(2)(C) to any shipment of articles not covered by 50 U.S.C. 1702(b), regardless of value, country of origin, mode of transportation or method of entry, which means that all non-postal shipments are now subject to duties, taxes and fees. Such shipments must be properly entered through the Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) by a qualified party. Shipments sent through the international postal network that would otherwise qualify for the de minimis exemption will pass free of any duties except those specified in the order and will not require formal customs entry until U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) establishes a new process. It explains that transportation carriers must collect and remit duties on international postal shipments by either using an ad valorem method based on the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) tariff rate or a flat-rate method tied to the IEEPA rate, with the latter option only being available for six months before transportation carriers must follow the former methodology. The order then overrides Section 2 of EO 14256, directs the of U.S. Department of Homeland Security secretary to implement the order and coordinate regulatory chances with other relevant agencies, as well as authorizes CBP to require import and carrier bonds to ensure duties are paid on low-value and postal shipments. It also defines the term "effective IEEPA tariff rate" and specifies that the suspension of duty-free de minimis will not be affected if any other provisions in the order are deemed invalid. Lastly, it notes that duty-free de minimis will remain available for postal systems until the Homeland Security secretary confirms that systems are in place to collect duties, after which the exemption for those shipments will end as well.
Saving College Sports 7/24/2025 This executive order aims to preserve a diverse range of college sports. The order places emphasis on the protection of non-revenue sports and provides clarity on separating college sports from professional sports. The updated policy separates collegiate athletic departments into categories instructing schools to take actions to increase or sustain scholarship opportunities in women's and non-revenue sports. The order specifies that any revenue sharing permitted between a university and collegiate athlete should be in a manner that expands or preserves scholarships as well as opportunities in women's and non-revenue sports.
Ending Crime and Disorder on America's Streets 7/24/2025 This executive order seeks to shift homeless individuals into long-term institutional settings for humane treatment through the appropriate use of civil commitment to ensure safety and public order in American cities. The order directs the U.S. Attorney General, in consultation with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) secretary, to seek the reversal of precedents and consent decrees that limit any level of government from promoting civil commitment of individuals with mental illness and provide state and local governments resources to implement flexible civil commitment, institutional treatment and "step-down" treatment standards. It also calls for the assessment of discretionary grant programs and determination of which states and municipalities are meeting criteria to be prioritized in grant allocation and redirects federal resources toward effective methods of addressing homelessness. Lastly, the order aims to increase the accountability and safety in America's homelessness programs by ending support for "housing first" policies, broadening the applicant pool of grantees and holding grantees to higher standards of effectiveness in reducing homelessness and increasing public safety.
Promoting the Export of the American AI Technology Stack 7/23/2025 This executive order aims to establish the U.S. as a leader in developing general-purpose and frontier AI capabilities and ensure American AI technologies, standards and governance models are adopted worldwide. The order directs the Commerce secretary, as well as the U.S. Secretary of State and Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) director, to establish and implement the American AI Exports Program to support the development and deployment of U.S. full-stack AI export packages. Additionally, the Economic Diplomacy Action Group (EDAG) is directed to coordinate mobilization of federal financing tools in support of priority AI export packages.
Accelerating Federal Permitting of Data Center Infrastructure 7/23/2025 This executive order aims to accelerate AI data centers and power infrastructure. It focuses on "qualifying projects" that provide over 100 megawatts (MW) of power directed at AI-related facilities, require at least $500 million in capital investments, protect national security or those otherwise designated by the U.S. Departments of Defense (DOD), the Interior, Commerce or Energy secretaries as qualifying. The order works to encourage qualifying projects via financial support initiatives, headed by the Commerce secretary and Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) director, including loans, loan guarantees, grants, tax incentives and offtake agreements. It also streamlines environmental reviews, allows for listing of projects on the Permitting Dashboard established under Section 41003(b) of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act (FAST-41) and streamlines the permitting review process via the EPA for qualifying projects. The order also calls for the prioritization of federal land use for new projects. Finally, the order revokes previous EO 14141 that imposed certain climate and diversity-related requirements for new AI infrastructure projects.
Preventing Woke AI in the Federal Government 7/23/2025 This executive order aims to promote the innovation and use of trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) by removing ideological biases and social agendas built into AI models. Agency heads are directed to procure large language models (LLMs) that are developed in accordance with two unbiased AI principles: truth-seeking and ideological neutrality. These principles emphasize that LLMs should provide truthful responses, prioritize historical accuracy and objectivity, maintain neutrality and nonpartisanship, and avoid manipulating responses in favor of "ideological dogmas such as DEI." The order also asserts that developers should not intentionally encode partisan or ideological judgments into an LLMs output, unless they are prompted by the user.
Regulatory Relief for Certain Stationary Sources to Promote American Iron Ore Processing Security 7/17/2025 This proclamation issues a two-year exemption for compliance with the Taconite Rule. Initially published by the EPA on March 6, 2024, the Taconite Rule imposed emissions-control requirements on taconite iron ore processing facilities. The Trump Administration believes that technology is not available to implement the Taconite Rule, and this proclamation applies to all compliance deadlines formerly issued under the rule.
Regulatory Relief for Certain Stationary Sources to Promote American Chemical Manufacturing Security 7/17/2025 This proclamation grants a two year exemption from compliance with the EPA's Hazardous Organic National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (HON) Rule for 25 chemical manufacturing facilities. The facilities are exempt from compliance sections of the HON Rule that were promulgated under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act. The HON rule was issued on May 16, 2024, to impose emissions-control requirements on the synthetic organic chemical manufacturing industry, along with the Group I and Group II polymers and resins industry.
Regulatory Relief for Certain Stationary Sources to Further Promote American Energy 7/17/2025 This proclamation establishes exemptions for certain stationary sources for a period of two years to the EPA's rule titled "National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units Review of the Residual Risk and Technology Review." The proclamation issues the exemption because the rule requires compliance with standards that do not exist in a commercially viable form, and its compliance timeline risks the shutdown of many coal-fired power plants. During the two-year period of the exemption, the stationary sources are still subject to the compliance obligations they are currently subject to under the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) rule.
Regulatory Relief for Certain Stationary Sources to Promote American Security with Respect to Sterile Medical Equipment 7/17/2025 This proclamation establishes exemptions for certain stationary sources for a period of two years to the EPA's rule titled "National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Ethylene Oxide Emissions Standards for Sterilization Facilities Residual Risk and Technology Review" (EtO Rule). Because the current compliance timeline in the EtO Rule would likely force existing sterilization facilities to close down – disrupting the supply of medical equipment – and the technology to implement to EtO Rule is not available, the proclamation issues the exemption. During the two-year period of the exemption, the stationary sources will remain subject to the emissions and compliance obligations that were in effect prior to the EtO Rule.
Creating Schedule G in the Expected Service 7/17/2025 This executive order creates a new Schedule G in the excepted service for non-career positions of a policymaking or policy-advocating character that are normally subject to change with a presidential transition. The U.S. Department of Veterans' Affairs secretary shall make appointments to positions in Schedule G of the excepted service. The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) shall adopt regulations that are necessary to implement this order.
Ending Market Distorting Subsidies for Unreliable, Foreign‑Controlled Energy Sources 7/7/2025 This executive order repeals wind, solar and other "green" energy tax credits in the megabill. The U.S. Department of the Treasury secretary shall terminate clean electricity production and investment tax credits for wind and solar facilities. The U.S. Department of the Interior secretary shall also review regulations, guidance, policies and practices to identify and eliminate preferential treatment for wind and solar facilities over dispatchable energy sources.
Extending the Modification of the Reciprocal Tariff Rates 7/7/2025 This executive order extends the suspension of the additional 10 percent ad valorem rate of duties for products of foreign trading partners until Aug. 1, 2025. For the People's Republic of China, the separate tariff suspension established by EO 14298 (Modifying Reciprocal Tariff Rates to Reflect Discussions with the People's Republic of China) remains in effect and unaltered.
Making America Beautiful Again by Improving Our National Parks 7/3/2025 This executive order increases entry fees to America's national parks for foreign tourists, improves the affordability of the parks for U.S. residents and expands opportunities to enjoy the parks. The U.S. Department of the Interior Secretary shall increase the cost of entrance fees, recreation passes and regional multi-entity passes for nonresidents in areas of the National Park System, which will fund improvements to park infrastructure. The Interior Secretary shall also improve affordability for U.S. residents, encourage international tourism and implement the National Parks and Public Land Restoration Fund.
Establishing the President’s Make America Beautiful Again Commission 7/3/2025 This executive order announces the Trump Administration's prioritization of responsible conservation and restoration of America's lands and waters. All federal land management agencies shall ensure that their policies promote responsible stewardship of natural resources while driving economic growth; expand access to public lands and waters for recreation, hunting and fishing; encourage responsible, voluntary conservation efforts; cut bureaucratic delays that hinder effective environmental management; and recover fish and wildlife populations through proactive, voluntary and collaborative conservation efforts. This order also establishes the Make America Beautiful Again Commission that shall advise the president on how best to conserve America's national parks and natural resources.
Providing for the Revocation of Syria Sanctions 6/30/2025 This executive order removes sanctions and issues waivers that permit the relaxation of export controls and other restrictions on Syria. It waives the restriction of foreign assistance, U.S. government credit or financial assistance, national security sensitive goods and technology, and U.S. bank loans or credit to the government of Syria that were previously imposed for the prior use of chemical weapons under the former Bashar al-Assad regime. The U.S. Secretary of State shall impose sanctions upon any person who is responsible for or complicit in, has directly or indirectly engaged in, or attempted to engage in, or financed the obstruction, disruption or prevention of efforts to promote a stable, unified and peaceful Syria. The order also expands the amount of individuals subject to sanctions established in EO 13894 (Blocking Property and Suspending Entry of Certain Persons Contributing to the Situation in Syria) to include persons involved or complicit in actions that threaten the peace, security, stability or territorial integrity of Syria, former government officials of the former Bashar al-Assad regime and those involved in the disappearance of a U.S. national in Syria during the former al-Assad regime.
Further Extending the TikTok Enforcement Delay 6/19/2025 This executive order further extends the TikTok enforcement delay until Sept. 17, 2025.
Implementing the General Terms of The United States of America-United Kingdom Economic Prosperity Deal 6/16/2025 This executive order announces the General Terms for the United States of America and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Economic Prosperity Deal. The deal creates an annual quota of 100,000 vehicles for U.K. automotive imports at a 10 percent tariff rate. The U.K. must meet American requirements for the security of the supply chains of steel and aluminum products intended for export to the U.S. When the requirements are met, the U.S. will construct a quota at most-favored-nations rates for the U.K.'s steel and aluminum articles and certain derivative steel and aluminum articles. After an investigation of pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical ingredients under Section 232, the U.S. and U.K. shall negotiate U.S. preferential treatment on pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical ingredients that are products of the U.K. The U.S. and U.K. shall establish tariff-free bilateral trade for certain aerospace products to strengthen aerospace and aircraft manufacturing supply chains.
Regarding the Proposed Acquisition of United States Steel Corporation by Nippon Steel Corporation 6/13/2025 This executive order states that the acquisition of United States Steel Corporation by Nippon Steel Corporations is prohibited. Any similar transaction between the two parties through shareholders, partners, subsidiaries or affiliates is also prohibited. If the parties remain in compliance with a national security agreement, the threatened impairment to the national security of the U.S. can be adequately mitigated.
Empowering Commonsense Wildfire Prevention and Response 6/12/2025 This executive order seeks to streamline federal wildfire capabilities to improve their effectiveness and promote technology-enabled local strategies for land management and wildfire response and mitigation. The order directs the secretaries of the U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of the Interior to achieve the most efficient use of wildland fire offices and facilitate partnerships between federal, state, local, Tribal and community-driven land management entities to reduce wildfire risk. They also shall establish a comprehensive technology roadmap that includes artificial intelligence (AI), data sharing and innovative modeling to identify wildland fire ignitions and weather forecasts to inform response and evacuation. The order directs agencies to remove barriers to preventing and responding to wildfires through year-round response readiness and better forest health. The defense secretary shall declassify historical satellite datasets to improve wildfire prediction models. The agriculture secretary and interior secretary shall develop performance metrics for wildfire response.
Leading the World in Supersonic Flight 6/6/2025 This executive order reestablishes the U.S. as the leader in high-speed aviation by updating standings and embracing modern technology. Section 2 contains regulatory reform for supersonic flight, directing the FAA to repeal the prohibition on overland supersonic flight within 180 days, remove regulatory barriers that hinder the advancement of supersonic aviation technology in the U.S., redefine acceptable noise thresholds, en-route supersonic operation, and specify a process for periodic review and update of the rule. Section 3 directs the director of the Office of Science and Technology (OSTP), in consultation with the heads of relevant executive departments and agencies, to coordinate supersonic research and development through the National Science and Technology Council. Section 4 aims to promote international engagement on civil supersonic flight regulations, directing the secretary of transportation along with others to engage the International Civil Aviation Organization and key foreign partners to seek global alignment regarding supersonic regulatory approaches.
Restoring American Airspace Sovereignty 6/6/2025 This executive order aims to address threats posed by UAS. It establishes the federal task force to restore American airspace sovereignty, which will be chaired by the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (APNSA) or a designee, in order to develop solutions to such threats. The order also directs the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to submit a notice of proposed rulemaking to the OMB and the task force that lays out a procedure for restricting drone flights over fixed site facilities. To further reinforce these measures, the attorney general will take steps to enforce civil and criminal laws pertinent to situations in which drone operators endanger the public, violate airspace restrictions or operate a drone in conjunction with another crime. The order, furthermore, directs executive departments and agencies to utilize equipment to recognize, track, and identify drones and drone signals. The Attorney General and secretary of DHS will explore integration of counter-UAS operational responses into Joint Terrorism Task Forces as well.
Unleashing American Drone Dominance 6/6/2025 This executive order aims to accelerate the testing, domestic production and export of American-manufactured Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), otherwise known as drones, to global markets. This order directs the Secretary of Transportation to issue a rule enabling routine Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations for UAS and establish clear metrics for assessing the performance and safety of BVLOS operations. The Secretary of Transportation shall also identify regulatory barriers to BVLOS implementation, initiate the deployment of AI to expedite the review of UAS waiver applications, eliminate onerous requirements to manned aircrafts engaging in international navigation and publish a roadmap for the integration of civil UAS into the National Airspace system. The Secretary of Transportation shall establish the Electric Vertical Takeoff and Landing (eVTOL) Pilot Program and, within 90 days, select at least five pilot projects. The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) shall prioritize the procurement of drones by U.S. companies over those made by all other companies.
Sustaining Select Efforts to Strengthen the Nation's Cybersecurity and Amending Executive Order 13694 and Executive Order 14144 6/6/2025 This executive order replaces the phrase "any person" with "any foreign person" in EO 13694, titled Blocking the Property of Certain Persons Engaging in Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled Activities. This EO also amends EO 14144, titled Strengthening and Promoting Innovation in the Nation's Cybersecurity, in order to improve cybersecurity and defend digital infrastructure. The Director of Commerce shall establish a consortium with industry at the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, update NIST Special Publication 800-53, publish an update to the Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF) and ensure existing datasets for cyber defense research have been made accessible to the broader academic community. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) shall release and update product categories that support postquantum cryptography and incorporate additional artificial intelligence (AI) vulnerability management to existing processes. Within a year of this order, the Secretary of Commerce, secretary of DHS and the director of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall establish a pilot program of the rules-as-code approach for machine-readable versions of policy. The Federal Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) Council shall require vendors of consumer Internet-of-Things products to carry the U.S. Cyber Trust Mark label when selling to the federal government.
Reinvigorating the Nuclear Industrial Base 5/23/2025 Energy This executive order aims to revitalize America's nuclear energy industrial base in order to safeguard national and economic security. It advances the production and operation of nuclear energy to ensure an affordable, reliable, safe and secure energy source while supporting advanced nuclear reactor technologies. Additionally, the order aims to strengthen nuclear supply chains in order to secure America's global industrial and digital dominance, achieve energy independence, protect national security and optimize nuclear fuel efficiency.
Ordering the Reform of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 5/23/2025 This executive order alters the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's (NRC) regulatory process in order to more efficiently promote a safe and abundant nuclear energy industry. To achieve this regulatory efficiency, the order makes several key changes. It expands the NRC's mission to bolster nuclear technology development while also ensuring reactor safety. It also reforms the structure of the NRC to remove regulatory barriers and expedite the processing of license applications and the implementation of new innovative technologies. This reorganization includes force reductions and establishes a team of at least 20 officials to draft new regulations as ordered. Other reforms include the establishment of fixed deadlines in NRC licensing processes, the adoption of science-based radiation limits, an expedited reactor design approval pathway and overall streamlining of the regulatory process. Finally, the order aims to facilitate the expansion of U.S. nuclear energy capacity from 100 gigawatts (GW) in 2024 to 400 GW by 2050.
Reforming Nuclear Reactor Testing at the Department of Energy 5/23/2025 Energy This executive order is designed to promote nuclear innovation and accelerate the domestic production of advanced nuclear technologies to provide reliable, diversified energy that supports the development of advanced technologies, manufacturing, transportation, agriculture, defense and national security. It addresses previous federal barriers that have hindered the use of advanced reactors critical to sectors such as data centers, microchip manufacturing, petrochemical production, healthcare, desalination and hydrogen generation. The order directs the U.S. Department of Energy secretary to issue guidance on defining qualified test reactors, launch a pilot program for reactor construction and operation outside the National Laboratories, and reform the department's regulations for compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Ordering the Reform of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 5/23/2025 Energy This executive order aims to reform the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to reestablish the U.S. as the global leader in nuclear energy. It states that the NRC has an outdated and overly risk-averse mindset, hindering the country's ability to be energy-independent and support energy-intensive industries due to a general lack of authorization, prolonged timelines and application fees, preventing the construction and operation of reactors. The order promises to increase deployment of nuclear reactor technologies and employ emerging technology to approve new reactor designs, quadrupling the energy capacity by 2050. The NRC shall also work alongside the U.S. Department of Government Efficiency to reduce internal headcount and revise its regulations to expedite processing of license applications and the adoption of innovative technology.
Deploying Advanced Nuclear Reactor Technologies for National Security 5/23/2025 This executive order seeks to establish a program of record for the utilization of nuclear energy for installation and operational energy. The U.S. Department of Defense secretary shall operate a nuclear reactor at a domestic military base or installation no later than Sept. 30, 2028. The U.S. Department of Energy Secretary shall start designating artificial intelligence (AI) data centers within the 48 contiguous states and District of Columbia to operate as critical defense facilities and support national security missions, which will operate for the purpose of powering AI infrastructure, critical or national security needs, supply chain items or on-site infrastructure. The Energy secretary shall also identify all useful uranium and plutonium material within the Department's inventories that could be recycled or processed into nuclear fuel for reactors. After identifying the useful uranium, the Energy Secretary shall release not less than 20 metric tons of high assay low-enriched uranium for any private sector project that is related to powering AI or other infrastructure at the department. The Energy secretary shall retain fuel that is necessary for tritium production, naval propulsion and nuclear weapons in a stockpile. The U.S. Department of State secretary's designee shall aggressively review and renegotiate agreements with other countries to promote the U.S. nuclear industry. The U.S. Department of the Treasury secretary shall leverage U.S. participation in the multilateral development banks to promote the generation and distribution of U.S. nuclear energy.
Restoring Gold Standard Science 5/23/2025 This executive order aims to spur innovation and ensure American strength and leadership in technology. The order details a plan to do this, which includes restoring a "gold standard for science to ensure that federally funded research is transparent, rigorous, and impactful, and that Federal decisions are informed by the most credible, reliable, and impartial scientific evidence available" as well as to restore "scientific integrity policies." The order directs the director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) to issue guidance for agencies on how to implement "Gold Standard Science." Upon receipt of the guidance, federal agencies are directed to promptly update applicable agency policies. The order also directs federal agencies to implement new rules and guidance regarding the use, interpretation and communication of scientific data.
Modifying Reciprocal Tariff Rates to Reflect Discussions With the People's Republic Of China 5/12/2025 This executive order adjusts and suspends tariffs on Chinese imports to facilitate ongoing trade negotiations addressing trade imbalances and national security concerns. Starting May 14, 2025, all goods imported from the People's Republic of China (PRC), including Hong Kong and Macau, will be subject to an additional 10 percent ad valorem duty. The order also reduces the ad valorem duty rate for specific Chinese products, as listed in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, from 125 percent to 34 percent. Furthermore, duties imposed under EO 14259 and EO 14266 on Chinese imports are suspended for 90 days. The duty rate on low-value imports is also reduced from 120 percent to 54 percent, and the $100 per postal item duty on low-value imports remains in effect until June 1, 2025.
Delivering Most-Favored-Nation Prescription Drug Pricing to American Patients 5/12/2025 This executive order directs the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to take "immediate" steps to end so-called "global freeloading" and ensure the U.S. receives a Most Favored Nation (MFN) price for prescription drugs. The EO also instructs the U.S. Trade Representative and U.S. Department of Commerce to take action to end global freeloading and address related national security concerns. Additionally, the EO requests the U.S. Food and Drug Administration permit drug importation. If no progress is made, the HHS secretary will pursue rulemaking to impose MFN pricing. Notably, the Trump Administration previously attempted to advance similar policies during the first term, but those efforts were blocked by the courts due to procedural issues. It is very likely this effort will again face legal challenges from the pharmaceutical industry.
Keeping Promises to Veterans and Establishing a National Center for Warrior Independence 5/9/2025 This executive order directs the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) secretary to take all appropriate action to designate a National Center for Warrior Independence on the West Los Angeles VA Campus in which homeless veterans in the Los Angeles metropolitan area and around the nation can seek and receive the care, benefits and services to which they are entitled.
Fighting Overcriminalization of Federal Regulations 5/9/2025 This executive order discourages criminal enforcement of regulatory offenses, prioritizing prosecutions only for those who knowingly violate regulations and cause significant harm. Strict liability offenses, which don't require proof of bad intent, are generally disfavored. The order requires each agency, in consultation with the U.S. attorney general, to provide to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) a list of all enforceable criminal regulatory offenses, the range of potential criminal penalties and applicable state of mind required for liability. Agencies must post these reports publicly and update them annually.
Increasing the Efficiency of the Federal Register 5/9/2025 This executive order directs that the Archivist of the United States and Office of the Federal Register review current practices, modernize and streamline processes to reduce delays and ensure that costs at the Federal Register are limited to actual costs.
Improving the Safety and Security of Biological Research 5/5/2025 This executive order directs the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) to prohibit federal funding for gain-of-function research, including research conducted by foreign entities in certain countries, and establish guidance to place restrictions on gain-of-function research. Gain-of-function research is a broad area of scientific inquiry that examines how and why an organism gains a new property or an existing property is altered. The terms gain of function and loss of function refer to any genetic mutation in an organism that, respectively, confers a new or enhanced ability or causes the loss of an ability, which can also often occur naturally.
Regulatory Relief to Promote Domestic Production of Critical Medicines 5/5/2025 This executive order directs the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to, within 180 days, take steps to eliminate duplicative or unnecessary regulations or guidance to streamline the approval of domestic manufacturing plants for pharmaceutical products. The EO also directs the FDA Commissioner to, within 90 days, enhance the inspection of foreign manufacturing facilities. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is also directed to streamline reviews of permits to expand domestic manufacturing capacity in the U.S.
Establishment of the Religious Liberty Commission 5/1/2025 This executive order establishes the Religious Liberty Commission as a federal advisory body within the executive branch. The commission is tasked with promoting awareness of federal protections for religious liberty and advising on strategies to uphold and enhance those protections. It is directed to produce a comprehensive report addressing the foundations of religious liberty in the U.S., its impact on American society, current threats, strategies to preserve it and programs to celebrate religious pluralism.

The order includes First Amendment rights of religious leaders and institutions, attacks on houses of worship, denial of financial services to religious entities, conscience protections in healthcare and vaccine mandates, parental rights related to religious education, voluntary religious activity in public schools, religious imagery in government displays and the general right to freely exercise faith without government retaliation.

The commission will consist of up to 14 members appointed by the president, drawn from sectors including the private sector, education, religious communities and state governments. It will also include ex officio members: the U.S. Attorney General, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy. The commission is supported by three advisory boards and the attorney general; it is administratively supported by the U.S. Department of Justice and will operate in accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act. The commission is scheduled to sunset on July 4, 2026, unless extended by the president.
Ending Taxpayer Subsidization Of Biased Media 5/1/2025 This executive order directs the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) board of directors, executive departments and agencies to cease federal funding for the National Public Radio (NPR) and Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The order requires the CPB board of directors to ensure licensees and permittees of public radio and television stations do not use Federal funds for NPR and PBS. The CPB board of directors and the heads of all agencies shall also minimize or eliminate indirect funding of NPR and PBS. The order directs the Health and Human Services secretary to determine if PBS and NPR comply with the statutory mandate that "no person shall be subjected to discrimination in employment...on the grounds of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex." 47 U.S.C. 397(15), 398(b).
Addressing Certain Tariffs on Imported Articles 4/29/2025 This executive order establishes a procedure for applying tariffs to imported articles that fall under multiple trade actions, thereby preventing the compounding of duties. It clarifies that if an article is subject to overlapping tariffs listed in the order – including those concerning imports of automobiles, border-related duties and imports of aluminum and steel – only the applicable tariff with the highest priority shall be imposed. However, tariffs from these listed actions may still be cumulative with duties imposed under other authorities not covered in the order. These changes must be implemented by May 16, 2025, and will apply retroactively to goods entered on or after March 4, 2025.
Strengthening and Unleashing America's Law Enforcement to Pursue Criminals and Protect Innocent Citizens 4/28/2025 This executive order aims to augment the tools and resources that allow law enforcement to prevent criminal activity. The administration is firm in its empowerment of local and state enforcement agencies and looks to provide legal and financial resources to officers incurring expenses from legal challenges following actions taken during their service. The order also directs the U.S. attorney general to augment law enforcement capabilities by increasing pay and benefits for officers, lengthening criminal sentences, investing in larger prisons and enhancing criminal data collection. Likewise, the U.S. Department of Defense secretary shall increase resources meant to expand the presence of military and national law enforcement in states and local jurisdictions. To further reinforce these measures, the attorney general is directed to prosecute those elected officials in localities who obstruct the duties of law enforcement officials and the implementation of criminal law, including under the guise of diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives.
Protecting American Communities from Criminal Aliens 4/28/2025 This executive order targets states and local jurisdictions that obstruct the enforcement of federal immigration laws. The Trump Administration reiterates its concern that illegal aliens represent an inherent public safety and national security risk, thereby exacerbating the presence of transnational criminal organizations, terrorists and other malign actors within the U.S. The order directs the U.S. attorney general to publish a list of designated "sanctuary" jurisdictions and immediately suspend or terminate all federal funds, including grants and contracts, to these states or localities. Moreover, the order instructs the U.S. Department of Homeland Security secretary to appropriately verify that federal public benefits are received exclusively by American citizens. All state and local laws that provide illegal aliens with preferential treatment, including reduced tuition for higher education and lenient criminal sentencing, shall no longer be enforced.
Enforcing Commonsense Rules of the Road for America's Truck Drivers 4/28/2025 This executive order aims to enforce English-language proficiency requirements for those driving commercial motor vehicles. The administration intends to protect the safety of American drivers by ensuring that everyone operating a vehicle can understand highway traffic signs and signals, respond to official inquiries and make entries on reports and records. If a commercial driver violates the commonsense English-language proficiency requirements, they shall be placed out of service. The U.S. Department of Transportation secretary is further instructed to properly review all nondomiciled commercial driver's licenses for unusual patter
Strengthening Probationary Periods in the Federal Service 4/24/2025 Government Administration This executive order strengthens the use of probationary and trial periods for new federal employees to ensure only high-performing individuals are granted tenure. Recognizing that agencies have often failed to remove underperformers during these periods, the order mandates that agencies must affirmatively certify that an employee's continued service in the federal government is in the public interest before finalizing appointments. It replaces outdated regulations with a new Civil Service Rule XI, outlining the conditions, timelines and standards for probationary and trial periods. Agencies must actively review employees' performance, conduct meetings and make formal written certifications before probationary or trial periods end.
Unleashing America's Offshore Critical Minerals and Resources 4/24/2025 Energy; Environment This executive order aims to accelerate the development of seabed mineral resources and develop American leadership in associated extraction and processing technologies in order to secure supply chains in the defense, infrastructure and energy sectors.
Reforming Accreditation to Strengthen Higher Education 4/23/2025 This executive order aims to reform the accreditation system for universities and higher education institutions. The order cites the accreditors reviewing undergraduate, law schools and medical schools as the three large accreditation processes that violate discrimination policies. The secretary of education will increase accountability of accreditors through denial, monitoring, suspension or termination of accreditation recognition. The order focuses on any diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) requirements by accreditors and will suspend or terminate the accreditor's status if they continue these DEI policies. The order outlines a new set of principles for a student-oriented accreditation process, including but not limited to prioritizing intellectual diversity, reducing credential inflation and removing barriers that limit institutions from adopting practices that advance credential and degree completion and spur new models of education.
White House Initiative to Promote Excellence and Innovation at Historically Black Colleges and Universities 4/23/2025 This executive order describes a policy to increase the capacity of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to provide the highest-quality education to an increasing number of students. The main goals of the order are to increase the private sector's role and enhance the capability of HBCUs. The order describes strengthening HBCUs' institutional planning and development, upgrading institutional infrastructure and providing professional development opportunities. The order supports the implementation of the HBCU PARTNERS Act, fostering public-private partnerships and increasing efforts to promote student success and retention. The order lists other policy implementations to achieve the main goals, mainly focusing on public and private relationships with HBCUs and increasing federal government's involvement.
Advancing Artificial Intelligence Education for American Youth 4/23/2025 This executive order establishes a White House Task Force on Artificial Intelligence Education. Within 90 to 120 days, the Task Force and various federal agencies are directed to launch a Presidential Artificial Intelligence (AI) Challenge that promotes student and educator innovation, encourages interdisciplinary learning and fosters collaboration across sectors. Agencies will support K-12 AI education by developing public-private partnerships to create online resources and training opportunities and leveraging existing federal funding mechanisms. Moreover, the U.S. National Science Foundation, along with the U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Labor, will prioritize research and training initiatives to expand AI use in education and workforce development, promoting AI-related apprenticeships and youth training. Across all relevant agencies, AI will be considered a priority in education grants, fellowships and scholarship programs.
Restoring Equality of Opportunity and Meritocracy 4/23/2025 This executive order revokes prior presidential approvals of specific U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) Title VI regulations that supported the use of disparate-impact liability – a legal theory holding entities accountable for practices that disproportionately affect protected groups, even without discriminatory intent. Citing limited agency resources and the view that disparate-impact liability is unlawful, the order directs federal agencies to deprioritize enforcing such regulations. The U.S. attorney general is instructed to begin repealing or amending related Title VI regulations and report on all federal and state laws relying on disparate-impact theories. Within 45 days, federal agencies must review ongoing investigations and proceedings that involve disparate-impact claims across civil rights, housing, credit and consumer protection laws. Furthermore, the attorney general should assess whether federal authority preempts conflicting state laws and issue guidance to help employers expand access to jobs, regardless of educational background.
Preparing Americans for High-Paying Skilled Trade Jobs of the Future 4/23/2025 This executive order aims to accelerate America's reindustrialization and economic growth by streamlining federal workforce development programs that will provide Americans with well-paying and high-demand jobs. The order also strives to protect and strengthen Registered Apprenticeships and build on their successes.
Reinstating Common-Sense School Discipline Policies 4/23/2025 This executive order directs the secretary of education to issue guidance within 30 days to ensure that school discipline policies comply with Title VI protections against racial discrimination. Enforcement actions will be taken against noncompliant agencies, and coordination with state leaders will begin within 60 days. The secretary of education must report to the president on the status of discriminatory discipline practices, influence of federally funded nonprofits and propose model policies that are nondiscriminatory and aligned with traditional values. The secretary of defense must also revise discipline codes for military families' schools.
Transparency Regarding Foreign Influence at American Universities 4/23/2025 This executive order aims to increase transparency regarding foreign money given to American higher education and research institutions in order to protect educational, cultural and national security interests. The secretary of education will work to ensure universities disclose details about foreign funding such as the source and purpose, rescind actions by the prior administration that allow universities to maintain improper secrecy about foreign funding and make information about foreign funding to higher education institutions more accessible to the public.
Restoring American Seafood Competitiveness 4/17/2025 Environment This executive order seeks to reform the overregulation and unfair trade practices within the U.S. fishing industry as part of a broader effort to reduce the seafood trade deficit. The order sets forth the U.S.' policy to 1) support the sustainable harvest of domestic seafood, 2) ease burdensome regulations on commercial fishermen, 3) combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and 4) protect U.S. seafood markets from unfair foreign trade practices. The U.S. Department of Commerce secretary, in consultation with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services secretary and with input from the U.S. fishing industry, is directed to revise, suspend or rescind regulations that burden commercial fishing, aquaculture and fish processing industries at the fishery-specific level.
Ensuring Commercial, Cost-Effective Solutions in Federal Contracts 4/15/2025 This executive order aims to enforce existing laws directing the federal government to utilize the competitive marketplace and the innovations of private enterprise to provide cost-effective services to taxpayers. Under this order, agencies will procure commercially available products and services, including those pursuant to the federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994. The director of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will review and assess the validity of the proposal, notifying the approval authority whether the OMB director recommends that the proposal be approved or denied.
Restoring Common Sense to Federal Office Space Management 4/15/2025 This executive order aims to remove regulations to allow federal agencies to select cost-effective facilities. This executive order revokes EO 12072 and EO 13006. The administrator of the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) will initiate a process to amend the regulations at Title 41, Parts 102-79 and 102-83, Code of Federal Regulations and any other necessary steps. Agencies that acquire or utilize federally owned or leased spaces will conform to the provisions of this order.
Ensuring National Security and Economic Resilience Through Section 232 Actions on Processed Critical Minerals and Derivative Products 4/15/2025 This executive order plans on securing the supply of process critical minerals. An investigation under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 states that "domestic production for national defense" and "impacts of foreign competition" on economic welfare of domestic industries is necessary to determine whether import of processed critical minerals and their derivative products threaten to impair national security. The secretary of commerce shall initiate the investigation under Section 232 assessing the factors set forth, along with other factors.
Restoring Common Sense to Federal Procurement 4/15/2025 This executive order strives to make the United States' procurement system as agile, effective and efficient as possible to reduce costs and barriers for federal government acquisition. The order directs agency officials to locate and remove regulations that are not required by statute or do not advance the national interest from the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR).
Lowering Drug Prices by Once Again Putting Americans First 4/15/2025 This executive order seeks to optimize federal healthcare programs, intellectual property protections and safety regulation to provide prescription drugs at a lower cost to Americans. It directs the secretary of health and human services and other agency officials to provide recommendations on how to accomplish the goals.
Modifying Reciprocal Tariff Rates to Reflect Trading Partner Retaliation and Alignment 4/9/2025 This executive order modifies several tariff provisions previously enforced. Enforcement of the second paragraph of Section 3(a) of EO 14257's provisions regarding goods entered for consumption or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption are suspended until July 9, 2025, but will be subject to an additional 10 percent ad valorem rate of duty unless under applicable exception. However, tariffs on products originating from the PRC, including Hong Kong and Macau, and entered for consumption or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption on April 10, 2025, will be raised from 84 percent to 125 percent. In addition, the administration will raise EO 14256's ad valorem rates of duty from 90 percent to 120 percent, per postal item containing goods duty in Section 2(c)(ii) from $75 to $100 from May 2, 2025, until June 1, 2025, and eventually raise the latter's duty from $150 to $200 beginning June 1, 2025. The secretaries of commerce and homeland security, along with the U.S. Trade Representative, will consult with relevant trade and national security officials to ensure full implementation of this executive order.
Modernizing Defense Acquisitions and Spurring Innovation in the Defense Industrial Base 4/9/2025 This executive order aims to reform the DOD's acquisition processes to accelerate the procurement of advanced technologies and revitalize the defense industrial base. Key aspects include prioritizing commercial solutions, streamlining decision-making and encouraging innovation within the defense sector.
Restoring America's Maritime Dominance 4/9/2025 This executive order promotes investment in advanced shipbuilding technologies, smart ports and automation through mechanisms such as the Maritime Action Plan (MAP) and Maritime Prosperity Zones. It also extensively discusses deregulatory actions to reduce unnecessary costs and clear barriers to emerging technology and related efficiencies.
Reducing Anti-Competitive Regulatory Barriers 4/9/2025 This executive order aims to eliminate federal regulations that hinder market competition and innovation. The order directs federal agencies to review and identify regulations that create monopolies, unnecessarily obstruct new market entrants, or impose undue licensure requirements limiting competition.
Zero-Based Regulatory Budgeting to Unleash American Energy 4/9/2025 This executive order aims to reduce regulations in the energy sector in order to promote innovation and economic growth. The order directs certain federal agencies to implement sunset provisions for their regulations governing energy production, thus compelling those agencies to periodically reexamine their regulations and ensure they serve the public good.
Reforming Foreign Defense Sales to Improve Speed and Accountability 4/9/2025 This executive order reinforces approaches to enhance U.S. warfighting capabilities by fostering healthy American supply chains, domestic production levels and technological development. The order instructs the U.S. Department of State and U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) to identify priority partners and defense items for expedited transfer, with the goal of strengthening international alliances and invigorating the U.S. defense industrial base.
Maintaining Acceptable Water Pressure in Showerheads 4/9/2025 This executive order aims to reduce regulations restricting water flow and directs the secretary of energy to rescind Energy Conservation Program: Definition of Showerhead, 86 Fed. Reg. 71797 (Dec. 20, 2021), including the definition of "showerhead" codified at 10 C.F.R. 430.2.
Amendment to Reciprocal Tariffs and Updated Duties as Applied to Low-Value Imports from the People's Republic of China 4/8/2025 This executive order responds to the People's Republic of China's (PRC) 34 percent retaliatory tariff and amends EO 14257, "Regulating Imports with a Reciprocal Tariff to Rectify Trade Practices that Contribute to Large and Persistent Annual United States Goods Trade Deficits," by increasing the duties imposed on several categories of PRC goods. Beginning April 9, 2025, duties on goods entered for consumption or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption will be raised from 34 percent to 84 percent. In addition, EO 14256's ad valorem duty rate will be increased from 30 percent to 90 percent, increase the per postal item containing goods duty in EO 14256 from $25 to $75 between May 2, 2025, and June 1, 2025, and enact a final increase of the latter category's goods duty from $50 to $150 beginning on June 1, 2025. The secretaries of commerce and homeland security, along with the U.S. Trade Representative, will consult with relevant national security and trade appointees to ensure full implementation of the order.
Reinvigorating America's Beautiful Clean Coal Industry and Amending Executive Order 14241 4/8/2025 This executive order directs several secretaries and agencies to revitalize the U.S. coal industry by revoking federal regulations and limits on coal production and coal-fired electricity generation, identifying coal resources on federal lands and negotiating export agreements with foreign entities. The order cites increased electricity demand caused by recent boosts in domestic manufacturing and the establishment of artificial intelligence data processing centers as justifications for the order. Furthermore, EO 14241, "Immediate Measures to Increase American Mineral Production," will be modified to classify coal as a mineral.
Protecting American Energy From State Overreach 4/8/2025 This executive order directs the U.S. attorney general to identify and stop all unconstitutional state and local laws that burden the identification, development, siting, production or use of domestic energy resources. This includes state laws purporting to address climate change or involving environmental, social and governance (ESG) initiatives, environmental justice, carbon or greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and funds to collect carbon penalties or carbon taxes.
Strengthening the Reliability and Security of the United States Electric Grid 4/8/2025 This executive order calls to utilize all available power generation sources to address the increased demand for electricity, existing capacity challenges and the national emergency declared pursuant to Executive Order 14156 of Jan. 20, 2025 (Declaring a National Energy Emergency). During periods when the relevant grid operator forecasts a temporary interruption of electricity supply is necessary to prevent a complete grid failure, the secretary of energy will streamline, systemize and expedite the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE) processes for issuing orders under Section 202(c) of the Federal Power Act.
Extending the TikTok Enforcement Delay 4/4/2025 This executive order extends the enforcement delay in Section 2(a) of Executive Order 14166 of Jan. 20, 2025 (Application of Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act to TikTok), until June 19, 2025. During this period, the U.S. Department of Justice is prohibited from taking action to enforce the act or imposing any penalties against an entity that does not comply with the act.
Further Amendment to Duties Addressing the Synthetic Opioid Supply Chain in the People's Republic of China as Applied to Low-Value Imports 4/2/2025 This executive order addresses significant U.S. goods trade deficits by implementing reciprocal tariffs on imports. This order will adjust U.S. tariffs on imports to match those imposed by trading partners to promote fair trade and challenge past trade agreements asserting that they failed to create fair and reciprocal conditions. This order will reduce trade imbalances, support domestic production and correct disparities in tariff rates and nontariff barriers that have favored foreign competitors in the past.
Regulating Imports with a Reciprocal Tariff to Rectify Trade Practices that Contribute to Large and Persistent Annual United States Goods Trade Deficits 4/2/2025 This executive order declares a national emergency due to the persistent U.S. goods trade deficits. The order emphasizes the deficits that have weakened U.S. manufacturing, undermined supply chains and threatened national security. The order will impose reciprocal tariffs on imports in order to balance trade relationships and encourage domestic manufacturing. Additionally, the U.S. trade representative, secretary of state, secretary of the treasury, secretary of commerce, secretary of homeland security, assistant to the president for economic policy, senior counselor for trade and manufacturing, and assistant to the president for national security affairs will all submit recurring and final reports to Congress on the national emergency declared in this order.
Combating Unfair Practices in the Live Entertainment Market 3/31/2025 This executive order aims to address ticket reselling by directing the U.S. attorney general and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to enforce competition laws and promote transparency in the concert and entertainment industry. The FTC will enforce the Better Online Tickets Sales Act, ensure price transparency at all stages of the ticket-purchase process and prevent unfair, deceptive and anti-competitive conduct in the secondary ticketing market. The treasury secretary and attorney general will ensure that ticket sellers are operating in full compliance with the Internal Revenue Code and other applicable law.
Establishing the United States Investment Accelerator 3/31/2025 This executive order establishes the U.S. Investment Accelerator office within the U.S. Department of Commerce in order to modernize its processes and attract more domestic and foreign investments in the U.S. The Investment Accelerator will facilitate and accelerate investments above $1 billion in the U.S. by assisting investors as they navigate government regulatory processes, streamline the regulatory processes, facilitate research collaborations with national labs and increase foreign and domestic investments in the U.S.
Making the District of Columbia Safe and Beautiful 3/28/2025 This executive order institutes a federal‐local partnership to enhance public safety across Washington, D.C. It establishes the D.C. Safe and Beautiful Task Force, chaired by the president's homeland security advisor and composed of representatives from key federal and local law enforcement and legal agencies. This task force is charged with coordinating efforts such as strict enforcement of federal immigration laws; monitoring the District's sanctuary‐city status; accrediting the D.C. forensic crime lab; boosting Metropolitan Police resources and presence, especially in high-traffic federal areas; increasing access to concealed-carry permits; strengthening pretrial detention policies; and curbing Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) fare evasion.

To complement these safety measures, the order directs the Interior secretary, in consultation with the U.S. Attorney General, Transportation secretary, U.S. Attorney for D.C., general services administrator, National Capital Planning Commission and other officials, to launch a comprehensive beautification initiative. Key elements include a coordinated plan for federal and local facilities, parks and roadways; restoration of damaged or defaced monuments and memorials; graffiti removal; initiatives to uplift public spaces and foster civic pride; joint federal-local cleanliness efforts; and private-sector participation in clean-up projects. The Interior secretary must also immediately instruct the National Park Service to clear homeless encampments and graffiti from federal lands in D.C. to the fullest extent permitted by law.
Exclusions from Federal Labor-Management Relations Programs 3/27/2025 This executive order excludes various federal departments and agencies from federal labor-management relations protections under Chapter 71 of Title 5 of the U.S. Code if those departments and agencies are determined to have as a primary function intelligence, counterintelligence, investigative or national security work. Departments and agencies excluded include U.S. Departments of Defense, State, the Treasury, Veterans Affairs, Justice, Health and Human Services agencies (e.g., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases), Homeland Security agencies (e.g., U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, Federal Emergency Management Agency, U.S. Coast Guard), Commerce, Agriculture, Energy, the Interior, as well as U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Agency for International Development, Nuclear Regulatory Commission, National Science Foundation, Federal Communications Commission, U.S. General Services Administration and subdivisions with information technology and cybersecurity responsibilities across all executive departments.
Restoring Truth and Sanity to American History 3/27/2025 This executive order directs an overhaul of how American history is presented in federal institutions, with a primary focus on the Smithsonian Institution. The vice president, serving on the Smithsonian Board of Regents, is tasked with ensuring that all Smithsonian properties are free from what the order deems "improper ideology." In collaboration with the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the vice president is instructed to work with Congress to ensure that future appropriations prohibit funding for exhibits or programs that degrade shared American values, divide Americans by race or promote ideologies inconsistent with federal law or policy. The order explicitly mandates that the American Women's History Museum must celebrate the achievements of women and not recognize men as women in any respect. Additionally, the OMB director and the U.S. Department of the Interior secretary are empowered to take further measures to advance these policies, and the vice president is to work with Congressional leaders to appoint citizen members to the Smithsonian Board of Regents who are committed to this vision.

Beyond the Smithsonian, the order addresses other key historical sites. The Interior secretary is directed to provide sufficient funding to improve the infrastructure of Independence National Historical Park, with completion targeted for July 4, 2026. The Interior secretary is also charged with reviewing all public monuments, memorials, statues, markers and similar properties within the Interior Department's jurisdiction to determine if, since Jan. 1, 2020, any have been removed or altered to perpetuate a "false reconstruction" of American history. Where necessary, the Interior secretary must take action to reinstate pre-existing monuments and ensure that all such properties do not contain content that inappropriately disparages Americans, past or present. Instead, these sites are to focus on the progress of the American people, aiming to foster a unified and affirmative national narrative.
Addressing Risks From WilmerHale 3/27/2025 This executive order directs a coordinated federal review of WilmerHale LLP's access to classified information, eligibility for federal contracts and interactions with government personnel, stating concerns about the firm's alignment with U.S. national security priorities. The order declares that WilmerHale has abused its pro bono privileges and engaged in employment practices that contradict core U.S. objectives, including election integrity and nondiscrimination standards regarding race. Agencies were instructed to suspend security clearances for all affiliated WilmerHale employees pending review, identify and restrict access to government resources and facilities, and assess contracts involving the firm or entities with substantial business ties to it. According to the order, all contracts involving WilmerHale will be terminated; the order imposes hiring restrictions on WilmerHale employees entering government service absent a formal waiver and directs all agencies to end official contact with the firm where national interests may be implicated. Government contractors are required to disclose any business relationships with WilmerHale, including whether the business is related to a federal contract. Agencies must review these disclosures and take appropriate steps, including contract termination. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is instructed to collect assessments from all agencies within 30 days regarding contract reviews and actions taken. The order also instructs agencies to identify any Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities (SCIFs) or other government materials and services made available to WilmerHale and to cease their provision where legally permissible. Agencies are further directed to provide guidance limiting access to federal buildings by WilmerHale employees and restrict official engagement with firm personnel. The order permits a waiver process for hiring former WilmerHale employees, which must be approved by an agency head in consultation with the OMB director.
Executive Grant of Clemency for Devon Archer 3/26/2025 This executive order grants Devon Archer a full and unconditional pardon for offenses listed in the case of United States v. Archer (I:16-cr-371), effectively forgiving any related fines, penalties, forfeitures or restitution.
Addressing Risks from Jenner & Block 3/25/2025 This executive order addresses the risks associated with "Big Law" firms, particularly Jenner and Block LLP, that engage in harmful actions detrimental to U.S. interests. The EO asserts that Jenner & Block engages in partisan political activities, discriminates against its employees and supports attacks against women and children based on a refusal to accept the biological reality of sex. It also claims the firm backs efforts to obstruct measures aimed at preventing criminal activities and drug trafficking committed by illegal immigrants. The EO instructs the U.S. attorney general and director of national intelligence to suspend active security clearances for Jenner & Block employees and directs government contracting agencies to review and, if necessary, terminate contracts with Jenner & Block or entities that do business with the firm. It also restricts access to federal buildings for Jenner & Block employees and advises agency officials to refrain from hiring employees of Jenner & Block.
Modernizing Payments To and From America's Bank Account 3/25/2025 This executive order mandates the transition from paper-based federal payments to electronic transactions to improve efficiency, reduce costs, and enhance security. this order aims to protect against financial fraud and improper payments and reduce costs. the promotion of operational efficiency is ensured by mandating the transition to electronic payments for all Federal disbursements and receipts by digitizing payments. Under this order, all executive departments and agencies will comply with this directive by transition to EFT methods, including direct deposit, prepaid card accounts, and other digital payment options.
Protecting America's Bank Account Against Fraud, Waste, and Abuse 3/25/2025 This executive order aims to strengthen financial integrity, improve efficiency and enhance oversight of federal disbursements. This order addresses financial fraud, improper payments and fragmented financial management systems across agencies. The secretary of the treasury will develop a plan to centralize and manage all previously disbursed funds by Non-Treasury Disbursing Officers (NTDOs) and establish a transition plan for agencies operating at NTDOs.
Preserving and Protecting the Integrity of American Elections 3/25/2025 This executive order aims to strengthen election security and integrity, asserting that the U.S. fails to enforce basic and necessary election protections employed by other modern, developed nations. The order declares that the Trump Administration will uphold the statutes that establish a uniform Election Day and require votes be cast and received by the election date established in law. In order to enforce the federal prohibition on foreign nationals voting in federal elections, the order mandates the verification of U.S. citizenship for voter registration, including documentary proof, and calls for improved systems to identify unqualified voters. Federal agencies will assist states in determining whether individuals are eligible to register and vote, the Election Assistance Commission is directed to ensure voting systems meet integrity standards, and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) is directed to prioritize the prosecution of election-related crimes and coordinate information sharing with state officials. Furthermore, the order directs the U.S. attorney general and the secretary of homeland security to prevent noncitizens from being involved in the administration of any federal election in order to improve the security of voting equipment used to cast ballots and tabulate votes.
Imposing Tariffs on Countries Importing Venezuelan Oil 3/24/2025 This executive order invokes the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), National Emergencies Act and previous Venezuela-related EOs to impose 25 percent tariffs on all goods originating from countries importing Venezuelan oil, either directly or indirectly, beginning April 2, 2025. The order defines "Venezuelan oil" as "crude oil or petroleum products extracted, refined, or exported from Venezuela, regardless of the nationality of the entity involved in the production or sale" of mentioned products.
Stopping Waste, Fraud, and Abuse by Eliminating Information Silos 3/20/2025 Government Administration This executive order aims to promote interagency data sharing by removing barriers that prevent federal employees from accessing government data. Agency leaders must take steps to ensure federal officials have full access to all unclassified government data and systems and review information policies to ensure materials are not unnecessarily classified. The order also allows the federal government full access to data from all state programs that receive federal funding.
Improving Education Outcomes by Empowering Parents, States, and Communities 3/20/2025 This executive order calls for the education secretary to begin dismantling the DOE and returning authority to the states and local communities. The education secretary will allocate all federal DOE funds to organizations that comply with federal law and Trump Administration policy.
Immediate Measures to Increase American Mineral Production 3/20/2025 This executive order aims to reduce reliance on foreign nations for critical minerals, enhancing national security and creating jobs. The order directs federal agencies to expedite the permitting process for mineral projects, prioritize mineral production on federal lands and use the Defense Production Act.
Eliminating Waste and Saving Taxpayer Dollars by Consolidating Procurement 3/20/2025 This executive order will consolidate domestic federal procurement under the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA), specifically by requiring all agency senior procurement officials to submit domestic procurement proposals to the GSA administrator for review and approval within 30 days. The EO also establishes the GSA administrator as the executive agent for all government acquisition contracts for information technology.
Achieving Efficiency Through State and Local Preparedness 3/19/2025 Government Administration This executive order empowers infrastructure prioritization. Within 90 days of this order, a National Resilience Strategy will be published on ways to advance the resilience of the nation and will be reviewed at least every four years. Within 180 days of this order, heads of relevant agencies will review both critical infrastructure policies and national continuity policies and recommend revisions, rescissions and replacements to the president. The following policies will be reviewed and recommended for modification: National Security Memorandum 16, 22, and 32, as well as Executive Orders 14017, 14123, 13618, 13961 and 14146. Within 240 days of this order, heads of relevant agencies will review all national preparedness and response policies and implement the National Resilience Strategy. The following policies will be reviewed and recommended for modification: Executive Order 12656, Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 and Presidential Policy Directives 8, 22 and 44. Within 240 days of this order, heads of relevant agencies will coordinate the development of a National Risk Register. Within one year of this order, the secretary of homeland security will propose changes to policies regarding national preparedness and improved communication between state, local and federal governments.
Invocation of the Alien Enemies Act Regarding the Invasion of The United States by Tren De Aragua 3/15/2025 Immigration This executive order invokes the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 in response to national security threats posed by Venezuelan-designated foreign terrorist organization Tren de Aragua (TdA). The order cites TdA's clandestine crimes in the U.S., including drug and weapons trafficking, murder, kidnapping, extortion and infiltration of migration routes as justification for the order. In response, all Venezuelan citizens who are 14 years old or older, identified as TdA members and are not naturalized or lack non-permanent residency in the U.S. will be liable to immediate apprehension, restraint, securement and removal as alien enemies per the invoked act. The U.S. attorney general and secretary of homeland security will be tasked with effectuating the executive order consistent with applicable law.
Continuing the Reduction of the Federal Bureaucracy 3/14/2025 Government Administration This executive order targets reducing federal bureaucracy deemed unnecessary by the president. The following governmental entities and programs will be eliminated to the maximum extent consistent with applicable law: the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, United States Agency for Global Media, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in the Smithsonian Institution, Institute of Museum and Library Services, United States Interagency Council on Homelessness, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund and Minority Business Development Agency. Within seven days of this order, the head of each governmental entity above will submit a report to the director of the Office of Management and Budget to ensure completion. All grant requests by the governmental entities listed above will be rejected and terminated.
Addressing Risks from Paul Weiss 3/14/2025 Government Administration This executive order revokes EO 14237, which declared that law firms like Paul Weiss undermine the judicial process and destroy American principles. A series of firm policy changes such as adopting political neutrality, dedicating $40 million in pro bono services and committing to merit-based hiring contributed to the decision.
Additional Rescissions of Harmful Executive Orders and Actions 3/14/2025 Government Administration This executive order rescinds 18 executive orders (EOs) issued during the Biden Administration and continues President Trump's efforts to reverse presidential actions deemed harmful to U.S. interests. Rescinded EOs discussed the advancement of LGBTQ+ rights, environmentally sustainable defense practices, defense acquisition processes, labor standards for federal employees and tribal policy.
Restoring Public Service Loan Forgiveness 3/7/2025 Government Administration This executive order aims to reform the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program. The secretaries of education and treasury will propose revisions to the program and ensure "public service" excludes organizations that engage in activities that have a substantial illegal purpose.
Establishment of the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve and United States Digital Asset Stockpile 3/7/2025 Technology This executive order plans to establish a Strategic Bitcoin Reserve and a Digital Assets Stockpile. The secretary of the treasury will create an office in charge of all the bitcoin (BTC) held by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. The treasury secretary shall also create an office to oversee the custodial accounts known as the "United States Digital Assets Stockpile." This stockpile will be, with all digital assets, owned by the Treasury Department other than BTC. Within 30 days of the order, each agency will transfer all BTC held to the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve. They will also transfer any stockpile assets to the United States Digital Assets Stockpile. Within 30 days, each agency will provide the treasury secretary and the President's Working Group on Digital Asset markets with a full accounting of their Government Digital Assets. This BTC in the reserve will not be sold and kept as reserve assets of the U.S. The secretaries of the treasury and commerce will develop strategies for acquiring more government BTC that are budget neutral. Within 60 days of this order, the treasury secretary will evaluate the Strategic Bitcoin Reserve and United States Digital Asset Stockpile, along with the logistics of the two offices moving forward.
Addressing Risks from Perkins Coie LLP 3/6/2025 Social Issues This executive order suspends security clearances of all Perkins Coie LLP employees, requires all federal contractors to disclose subcontracting agreements with the law firm, terminates existing contracts, orders the chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and U.S. attorney general to review the firm's hiring practices and limits Perkins Coie LLP employees' access to federal buildings and ability to speak with federal employees. The administration cites the organization's alleged unethical practices during the 2016 election, race-based and sex-based discriminatory hiring practices under diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) initiatives, and risks to national security as justification for the order.
Amendment to Duties to Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border 3/6/2025 Trade This executive order amends Executive Order 14193 by removing the tariffs from Executive Order 14193 on any articles that are entered free of duty as a good of Canada. It also reduces the tariffs on potash from 25 percent to 10 percent.
Further Amendment to Duties Addressing the Synthetic Opioid Supply Chain in the People's Republic of China 3/3/2025 Trade This executive order increases tariffs on all products from China from 10 percent to 20 percent in response to China not taking adequate steps to alleviate the influx of synthetic opioids into the U.S.
Amendment to Duties to Address the Situation at Our Southern Border 3/2/2025 Trade This executive order amends Executive Order 14194 (Imposing Duties to Address the Situation at Our Southern Border) and Executive Order 14198 (Progress on the Situation at Our Southern Border), which address duties on goods crossing the southern border. Certain goods can continue to receive duty-free treatment under 19 U.S.C. 1321 until the secretary of commerce finds an adequate system to collect tariff revenue.
Amendment to Duties to Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border 3/2/2025 Trade This executive order amends Executive Order 14193 (Imposing Duties to Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our Northern Border) and Executive Order 14197 (Progress on the Situation at Our Northern Border), which address duties on goods crossing the northern border. Certain goods can continue to receive duty-free treatment under 19 U.S.C. 1321 until the secretary of commerce finds an adequate system to collect tariff revenue.
Addressing the Threat to National Security from Imports of Timber, Lumber 3/1/2025 Trade This executive order initiates an investigation under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act to determine the effects on the national security of imports of timber, lumber and their derivative products. The order aims to determine the limits and feasibility of domestic timber production meeting national demands and the role that foreign supply chains play in meeting these demands. The policy of the U.S. is to ensure reliable, secure and resilient domestic supply chains of timber, lumber and their derivative products.
Immediate Expansion of American Timber Production 3/1/2025 Industry, Trade This executive order commits the U.S. to increasing domestic timber production by reversing forest regulation policies and implementing policies that expand timber production and sound forest management. The order calls for an improvement in the speed of approving forestry projects and streamlining the Endangered Species Act consultations. The order further streamlines the approval process by requiring agencies to suspend, revise or rescind all existing regulations applicable that pose an undue burden on timber production.
Designating English as the Official Language of the United States 3/1/2025 Social Issues, Government Administration This executive order declares English to be the official language of the U.S. to reinforce shared national values and create a more cohesive society. The order also revokes Executive Order 13166 asking agencies to improve services for limited English proficient people and instructs the U.S. attorney general to rescind policy guidance issued pursuant to the order.
Implementing the President's "Department of Government Efficiency" Cost Efficiency Initiative 2/26/2025 Government Administration This executive order pushes to increase transparency for government spending and government employee accountability. The order states that each agency head, with assistance as requested from the agency's U.S. Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) team lead, will build a centralized technological system to record every payment issued by the agency. This system will include a mechanism for the agency head to pause and rapidly review any payment for which the approving employee has not submitted a brief, written justification within the technological system. Each agency head, along with the agency's DOGE team lead, shall review all existing covered contracts and grants and, where appropriate and consistent with applicable law, terminate or modify. This process will start immediately and prioritize the review of funds disbursed under covered contracts and grants to educational institutions and foreign entities for waste, fraud and abuse. This review shall be completed within 30 days of this order. Each agency head with the agency's DOGE team lead will issue guidance on signing new contracts or modifying existing contracts. DOGE team leads will provide the administrator with monthly informational reports on contracting activities.
Making America Healthy Again by Empowering Patients with Clear, Accurate and Actionable Healthcare Pricing Information 2/25/2025 Health This executive order declares it the policy of the U.S. to put patients first and ensure they have information to make well-informed healthcare decisions by promoting access to clear and accurate healthcare prices and improving and increasing enforcement of price transparency requirements. The order instructs the secretaries of treasury, labor, and health and human services to implement Executive Order 13877 within 90 days, which requires the disclosure of actual healthcare prices and the secretaries to issue guidance.
Addressing the Threat to National Security from Imports of Copper 2/25/2025 Trade This executive order aims to promote a reliable, secure and resilient domestic copper supply chain. The secretary of commerce will have an investigation on the effects on national security of imports of copper in all forms. The investigation will review current and projected demand for copper, the extent of domestic production, the role of foreign supply chains, concentrated imports from a small number of suppliers, the economic impact of artificially suppressed copper prices, potential export restrictions by foreign nations, feasibility of increasing domestic copper mining and the impact of current trade policies. The secretary of commerce will consult the secretaries of defense, interior, energy and other relevant executive department heads. Within 270 days of this report, the secretary of commerce will submit a report to the president on the findings on whether the U.S. dependence on copper imports threatens national security and any recommendations on actions to mitigate such threats. The report will also include policy recommendations for strengthening the U.S. copper supply chain.
Suspension of Security Clearances and Evaluation of Government Contracts 2/25/2025 This executive order strips security clearances from Peter Koski and all members, partners and employees of Covington & Burling LLP who assisted former Special Counsel Jack Smith during his time as special counsel. The order also calls for the U.S. attorney general and heads of agencies to terminate engagement with Covington & Burling LLP to the maximum extent possible.
President Trump Takes Decisive Action to Deliver Relief to Kentucky 2/25/2025 President Trump issued a major disaster declaration for the Commonwealth of Kentucky to help address severe storms and flooding. This declaration provides federal funding to individuals and businesses in impacted areas to help them recover through finding temporary housing and other programs. Federal funding will also be distributed to the state and local governments and certain nonprofit organizations.
America First Investment Policy 2/21/2025 This executive order aims to reduce the negative effects of investment in and by the People's Republic of China. The order plans to implement several policies such as sanctions, restrictions on inbound and outbound investment, and the potential suspension or termination of the 1984 United States-People's Republic of China Income Tax Convention to prevent investment in China's military-industrial complex and reduce China's influence and exploitation in the U.S. The order also implements a "fast track" process based on objective standards to facilitate greater investment from specified allied and partner sources in U.S. businesses and advanced technology. The administration intends to stop using "mitigation" agreements for foreign adversary countries but will continue to welcome and encourage passive investments from foreign persons.
Ensuring Lawful Governance and Implementing the President's "Department of Government Efficiency" Deregulatory Initiative 2/19/2025 Government Administration This executive order focuses on combating federal overreach. Agency heads, along with their U.S. Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) team leads and the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), will initiate a process to review all regulations. Within 60 days of this order, agency heads, with consultation from the U.S. attorney general, will identify and classify different regulations. Within 60 days of this order, agency heads will provide the administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) within the OMB a list of all regulations identified by class. The administrator of OIRA will consult with agency heads to create a Unified Regulatory Agenda to rescind or modify these regulations. Agency heads, with consultation from the OMB director, shall direct the termination of all such enforcement proceedings that do not comply with the U.S. Constitution, laws or administration policy.
Commencing the Reduction of the Federal Bureaucracy 2/19/2025 Government Administration This executive order aims to reduce the size of the federal government to increase accountability and efficiency, reduce inflation and promote American freedom and innovation. The order calls for the elimination or severe reduction of the Presidio Trust, Inter-American Foundation, U.S. African Development Foundation and U.S. Institute of Peace, and revokes the Presidential Memorandum of November 13, 1961 (Need for Greater Coordination of Regional and Field Activities of the Government). The head of each agency must submit a report to the director of the Office of Management and Budget, who will evaluate all unnecessary funding requests. The order also calls of the elimination of several federal advisory committees across agencies, including the Advisory Committee on Voluntary Foreign Aid, Advisory Committee on Long COVID and Health Equity Advisory Committee.
Ending Taxpayer Subsidization of Open Borders 2/19/2025 Immigration This executive order aims at stopping taxpayer resources being used by illegal aliens. The head of each executive department or agency will identify all federally funded programs that currently permit illegal aliens to obtain any cash or non-cash public benefit and take all appropriate actions to align such programs with this order and applicable federal law. They will also ensure that federal payments to states and localities do not facilitate the subsidization or promotion of illegal immigration or sanctuary policies that seek to shield illegal aliens from deportation while enhancing eligibility verification systems. Within 30 days of this order, the director of the Office of Management and Budget and the administrator of the U.S. DOGE Service, with the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, will identify all other sources of federal funding for illegal aliens and recommend additional agency actions to align federal spending. Agencies will refer any improper receipt or use of federal benefits to the U.S. Departments of Justice and the Homeland Security.
Expanding Access to In Vitro Fertilization 2/18/2025 Health This executive order aims to make it easier for mothers and fathers to have children through the use of in vitro fertilization (IVF). To support American families, the White House aims to ensure reliable access to IVF treatment by easing unnecessary statutory or regulatory burdens to make IVF treatment more affordable. The assistant to the president for domestic policy will submit policy recommendation to the president, making efforts to protect IVF access and aggressively reduce out-of-pocket and health plan costs for IVF treatment.
Radical Transparency About Wasteful Spending 2/18/2025 Government Administration This memorandum directs the heads of executive departments and agencies to take all appropriate actions to make public the complete details of every terminated program, cancelled contract, terminated grant or any other discontinued obligation of federal funds. It then directs agencies to ensure that such publication occurs in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and the terms and conditions of the underlying contract, grant or other award.
Ensuring Accountability for All Agencies 2/18/2025 Government Administration This executive order attempts to increase regulatory official's accountability to the American people. The director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will review independent regulatory agencies' obligations for consistency with the president's policies and priorities. The director will also consult with independent regulatory agency chairs and adjust agencies' apportionments by activity, function, project or object, as necessary and appropriate, to advance the president's policies and priorities. These adjustments may prohibit independent regulatory agencies from expending appropriations on particular aspects, so long as such restrictions are consistent with law. The heads of independent regulatory agencies shall establish a White House liaison and submit agency strategic plans to the OMB director for clearance prior to finalization. No employee of the executive branch acting in their official capacity may advance an interpretation of the law as the position of the U.S. that contravenes the president or the U.S. attorney general's opinion on a matter of law, including but not limited to the issuance of regulations, guidance and positions advanced in litigation, unless authorized to do so by the president or in writing by the attorney general.
Keeping Education Accessible and Ending COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates in Schools 2/15/2025 Education, Health This executive order directs the federal government to stop providing discretionary fundings to support or subsidize an educational service agency, state educational agency, local educational agency, elementary school, secondary school or institution of higher education that requires students to have received a COVID-19 vaccination to attend any in-person education program.
Establishing the National Energy Dominance Council 2/14/2025 This executive order establishes the National Energy Dominance Council. The council is chaired by the U.S. Department of the Interior secretary, and the U.S. Department of Energy secretary will serve as vice chair. The council will also be composed of other secretaries and high-level executive officials. The council will advise the president on his authority to produce more energy to make America energy dominant, improving the processes for permitting in all aspects, and recommendations to produce more energy. The council will also assist the president in facilitating cooperation among the federal government and domestic private sector energy partners. Within 100 days of the date of this order, the chair of the council will recommend to the president a plan to raise awareness of matters related to energy dominance and advice regarding the actions of each agency to prioritize energy dominance. The chair will also provide a review of markets and advise the president regarding incentives to attract and retain private-sector energy production investments. The chair will consult with officials from state, local and Tribal governments and private-sector individuals on how to best expand energy production while advising the president on practices that raise the cost of energy. The chair will also serve as a standing member of the National Security Council.
Establishing the President's Make America Healthy Again Commission 2/13/2025 Healthcare This executive order will push to empower Americans with transparency and open-source data for all federally funded health research. The order will also make sure the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and other related research funded by the federal government prioritizes gold-standard research. Agencies will work with farmers to improve U.S. food. Agencies shall also ensure the availability of expanded treatment options and flexibility for health insurance coverage. The order will also establish the Make America Health Again Commission, chaired by the secretary of health and human services, with the assistant to the president for domestic policy serving as executive director. The Commission includes multiple secretaries and other high-level officials. The initial mission of the Commission is to advise and assist the president to address the childhood chronic disease crisis, including studying the scope of childhood chronic diseases and any potential contributing causes. The Commission will also advise and assist the president on information about the American people using transparent and clear facts, and will provide government-wide recommendations on policy and strategy addressing the contributing causes and ending the childhood chronic disease crisis. Within 100 days of this order, the Commission will submit a report to the president identifying, assessing and evaluating the different aspects of childhood chronic disease in America and the federal government's role. Within 180 days of this order, the Commission chair will submit a strategy based on the report's findings that will address restructuring the federal government's response to the childhood chronic disease crisis.
One Voice for America's Foreign Relations 2/12/2025 Foreign Policy This executive order mandates all officers and employees responsible for implementing U.S. foreign policy to act within the direction of the president or risk professional discipline, including separation. The secretary of state shall ensure "faithful and effective implementation" of the president's foreign policy agenda and will have sole and exclusive discretion to report any performance or conduct that warrants a personnel action. Such reforms may include changes to recruitment, evaluation and retention procedures, as well as the revision, additional or removal of employee manuals, textbooks and other materials.
Adjusting Imports of Aluminum into the United States 2/11/2025 Trade This proclamation subjects aluminum and derivative aluminum articles from previously exempt entities such as Canada, Mexico, the European Union and the United Kingdom to a heightened 25 percent _ad valorem_ duty. Russian aluminum imports remain under a 200 percent tariff. For items outside Chapter 76 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule, duties apply only to the aluminum content. The exclusion process is terminated, and importers must now disclose aluminum origin details to U.S. Customs and Border Protection, which is tasked with stricter enforcement and penalties for misclassification or evasion. The secretary of commerce is directed to create a process within 90 days to evaluate and include more derivative aluminum products based on requests from domestic producers and industry associations.
Implementing the President's "Department of Government Efficiency" Workforce Optimization Initiative 2/11/2025 Government Administration This executive order calls for the implementation of a plan to reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy through the U.S. Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE). The plan is to be submitted by the director of office of management and budget and shall include provisions to reduce hiring and remove positions and agencies that are deemed unnecessary. The order requires agencies to hire no more than one employee for every four employees that depart and calls for the elimination of agency diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) initiatives, agencies deemed non-essential by the Trump Administration and agencies that are not deemed essential when appropriations lapse. Exemptions are made for immigration enforcement, law enforcement and other positions relating to national security, homeland security and public safety.
Adjusting Imports of Steel into the United States 2/10/2025 Trade This executive order reaffirms Section 232 authority under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, declaring that steel and derivate steel imports threaten U.S. national security. It imposes a 25 percent _ad valorem_ duty on steel and derivative steel articles from all countries, ending prior exclusions or exemptions with allies such as Australia, Canada, the European Union, Japan, South Korea and Ukraine. The order also outlines a process for including additional derivatives steel articles within the scope of the _ad valorem_ duty in the future. U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall monitor and enforce correct classification and duty payment, with penalties for misclassification.
Pausing Foreign Corrupt Practices Act Enforcement to Further American Economic and National Security 2/10/2025 Foreign Policy This executive order instructs the attorney general to review guidelines and policies governing investigations and enforcement actions under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) for 180 days following the order. During this period, the attorney general will cease any new FCPA investigations or enforcement actions unless determined by the attorney general that it should be made. The attorney general will also issue updated guidelines or policies to promote the president's Article II authority to conduct foreign affairs and prioritize American interests, American economic competitiveness and efficient use of federal law enforcement resources. The attorney general can extend the review period for an additional 180 days if determined appropriate. After the revised guidelines or policies are issued, the attorney general shall determine whether further actions are required and recommend such actions to the president.
Eliminating the Federal Executive Institute 2/10/2025 Government Administration This executive order tasks the director of the office of personnel management to take all necessary steps to eliminate the Federal Executive Institute. Any presidential or executive branch documents establishing or requiring the existence of the Federal Executive Institute are hereby revoked.
Ending Procurement and Forced Use of Paper Straws 2/10/2025 Government Administration, Environment This executive order instructs heads of agencies and apartments to remove paper straws within agency buildings. The agencies will also take actions to eliminate any policy disfavoring plastic straws issued to further Executive Order 14057. By March 27, 2025, the assistant to the president for domestic policy, along with relevant agencies, will issue a National Strategy to End the Use of Paper Straws. The strategy will eliminate all policies within the executive branch that are designed to disfavor plastic straws, contract policies and terms with entities, including states that ban or penalize plastic straw purchase or use.
Addressing Egregious Actions of the Republic of South Africa 2/7/2025 Foreign Policy This executive order prohibits aid from being given to South Africa and promotes the resettlement of African refugees. All executive departments and agencies that include the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) shall halt all foreign aid or assistance to South Africa allowed by law. The secretaries of state and homeland security will prioritize humanitarian relief – including admission and resettlement through the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program – for Afrikaners. This plan will be submitted to the president through the assistant to the president and homeland security advisor.
Protecting Second Amendment Rights 2/7/2025 This executive order protects the Second Amendment right of all Americans. The White House aims to maintain the rights for all American people to protect themselves, their families and their freedoms. In ensuring the execution of this order, the attorney general will lead the examination of all orders and other actions to assess any ongoing infringements of the Second Amendment rights of citizens. Additionally, the attorney general will present a proposed plan of action to the president through the domestic policy advisor.
Establishment of The White House Faith Office 2/7/2025 Government Administration This executive order creates the White House Faith Office. It amends any past executive order renaming the "Center for Faith-based and Community Initiatives" to "Center for Faith," along with "Centers for Faith" to "Centers for Faith-based and Community Initiatives." The White House Faith Office will consult with experts and businesses and make policy recommendations to the president, through the assistant to the president for domestic policy, and work with agencies to ensure religious liberty and implementation of trainings, identifying grant opportunities for nonprofit faith-based entities and support. In addition, the office will work with the attorney general to identify concerns and enforce protection for religious liberty while identifying and proposing practices to reduce burdens on the free exercise of religion, including legislative, regulatory and any other barriers.
Imposing Sanctions on the International Criminal Court 2/6/2025 Foreign Policy This executive order imposes sanctions on the International Criminal Court (ICC) and its personnel responsible for investigating and prosecuting alleged war crimes committed by the U.S. and Israel. The order asserts that the ICC acted outside of its jurisdiction by issuing arrest warrants for U.S. military personnel, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former Israel Defense Minister Yoav Gallant due to the U.S. and Israel not being parties to the Rome Statute. Any ICC officials, employees and agents involved in efforts to investigate, arrest, detain or prosecute protected persons are now subject to property and asset blockages and suspension of U.S. entry, along with their immediate family members. The secretaries of the treasury and state will bear responsibility for implementing the order.
Eradicating Anti-Christian Bias 2/6/2025 This executive order establishes a federal policy aimed at protecting religious freedom, specifically focusing on addressing and eliminating what it describes as anti-Christian bias in government actions and policies. It asserts that the previous administration engaged in practices that unfairly targeted Christian individuals and organizations, citing criminal prosecutions of pro-life demonstrators, perceived under-enforcement of laws protecting religious institutions from violence, and administrative actions viewed as hostile to religious liberty. To address these concerns, the order creates the Task Force to Eradicate Anti-Christian Bias, housed in the U.S. Department of Justice and chaired by the U.S. Attorney General. The task force includes senior officials from major federal departments and agencies. Its responsibilities include reviewing agency actions, recommending policy reversals, advising new protections for religious liberty and engaging with faith-based stakeholders. The task force is required to produce periodic reports on its findings and recommendations, with an initial report due within 120 days, a follow-up within one year and a final report upon its termination. The order stipulates that the task force will dissolve after two years unless otherwise extended.
Keeping Men Out of Women's Sports 2/5/2025 Government Administration This executive order states that it shall be the policy of the U.S. to ban transgender females in women's sports. The order applies the definition used in Executive Order 14168. All executive departments and agencies are to review grants to educational programs and potentially rescind funding if they fail to comply with the policies of this order. The secretary of education will use Title IX enforcement actions against education institutions, including athletic associations composed or governed by such institutions, that allow transgender women to compete in women's categories or to appear unclothed before them. The order aims to promote policy changes of transgender women allowed to compete if they reduce levels of their testosterone to provide documentation of "sincerely held" gender identity. To accomplish change in policy, the assistant to the president for domestic policy will create meetings with female athletes harmed by these policies and major athletic organizations by April 6, 2025. The assistant to the president for domestic policy will also work with state attorneys general on how to define and enforce equal opportunities for women in sports and educate about stories of those harmed by April 6, 2025. The secretary of state and representative of the U.S. to the United Nations (UN) will not support or participate in sports where the female category is based on identity and not sex, and they will promote rule changes at the UN and international athletic associations. The secretaries of state and homeland security will review policies and adjust if needed of permitting transgender women who want to participate in women's sports into the U.S. and will issue guidance preventing these entries. The secretary of state shall also work to amend the standards of the International Olympic Committee to promote fairness, safety and the best interest of female athletes by ensuring that participation is based on sex and not identity or testosterone.
Withdrawing the United States from and Ending Funding to Certain United Nations Organizations and Reviewing United States Support to All International Organizations 2/4/2025 Foreign Policy This executive order states that the U.S. will not participate in the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and will not seek election to that body. The secretary of state will conduct a review of the U.S.'s membership in the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) within 90 days of the order, specifically including analysis of any anti-Semitism or anti-Israel sentiment within the UNESCO. The U.S. will also not use any funds for the U.N. Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Within 180 days of the order, the secretary of state and the U.N. Ambassador will review all international intergovernmental organizations the U.S. is a part of and provide types of funding or support. The review will assess if these organizations, conventions and treaties are contrary to the interests of the U.S. and whether they can be reformed. The secretary of state will also inform the U.N. secretary general and leadership of the UNRWA and U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights that the U.S. is no longer funding the UNRWA or UNHRC, and the U.S. also will not satisfy any claim to pay 2025 assessments or prior arrears by these organizations.
A Plan for Establishing a United States Sovereign Wealth Fund 2/3/2025 Finance, Government Administration This executive order directs the federal government to establish a sovereign wealth fund, aiming to promote fiscal sustainability and lessen the burden of taxpayers. The order tasks the secretaries of treasury and commerce and the president's economic policy advisor to develop a plan, including recommendations for funding mechanisms, investment strategies, fund structure and a governance model. The plan should also include an evaluation of the legal considerations of establishing the fund.
Progress on the Situation at Our Northen Border 2/3/2025 Trade This executive order revises the administration's previous imposition of 25 percent ad valorem rates of duty and 10 percent ad valorem rates of duty as to energy products on Canada. Given the Canadian government's immediate actions to cooperate on immigration and drug trade policy with the U.S., the administration decided to pause the tariffs until March 4, 2025.
Progress on the Situation at Our Southern Border 2/3/2025 Trade This executive order temporarily pauses the 25 percent ad valorem rates of duty on the Government of Mexico until March 4, 2025, due to Mexico's agreement to combat illegal immigration and illicit drug trafficking. During this period, the administration will assess whether Mexico has taken sufficient action to warrant a continued pause on tariffs.
Imposing Duties to Address the Situation at Our Southern Border 2/1/2025 Trade This executive order declares a national emergency due to the continued influx of illegal immigration and illicit drugs, particularly fentanyl, across the U.S.-Mexico border. Citing the Mexican government's failure to curb drug trafficking and human smuggling, the order imposes a 25 percent _ad valorem_ tariff on all goods imported from Mexico, effective Feb. 4, 2025. The order invokes the Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and National Emergencies Act (NEA), asserting that Mexico's inaction poses an extraordinary threat to U.S. national security and public health. The order outlines conditions under which the tariffs may be lifted, which includes demonstrable cooperation from Mexico in addressing the crisis.
Imposing Duties to Address the Synthetic Opioid Supply Chain in the People's Republic of China 2/1/2025 Trade This executive order expands the scope of the previously established national emergency at the Southern border (Proclamation 10886) to specifically apply to fentanyl and synthetic opioid products imported from the People's Republic of China (PRC). The order asserts that the PRC government has been unwilling to take action to address the global opioid epidemic or impede the supply chains of transnational criminal organizations (TCOs). Effective Feb. 4, 2025, it imposes an additional 10 percent _ad valorem_ rate of duty on all products originating from the PRC. These tariffs are established in addition to pre-existing duties and trade policies, and a provision of the order establishes the president's ability to further expand the scope of tariffs should the PRC retaliate, as well as the U.S. Department of Homeland Security secretary's authority to make necessary modifications to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS).
President Donald J. Trump Imposes Tariffs on Imports from Canada, Mexico and China 2/1/2025 Trade This executive order establishes 25 percent tariffs on all products from Canada and Mexico, and a 10 percent tariff on all products from China. The one exception listed is energy resources from Canada, which will have a decreased 10 percent tariff. These tariffs are applied based on national emergency powers under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and states that these tariffs are until the fentanyl crisis is alleviated. The tariff placed on China is in response to intellectual property theft, forced technology transfer and other unreasonable behavior. The order states that tariffs will be more beneficial than harmful, given that the other countries have a higher percentage of trade in their respective gross domestic products.
Imposing Duties to Address the Flow of Illicit Drugs Across Our National Border 2/1/2025 Trade This executive order expands the scope of a previously declared national emergency to address the increasing flow of illicit drugs, particularly fentanyl, into the U.S. from Canada. The order cites the growing involvement of drug trafficking organizations (DTOs) and Mexican cartels operating synthesis labs in Canada, asserting that Canadian authorities have failed to provide sufficient attention or meaningful cooperation with U.S. law enforcement to reduce the number of narcotics entering across the northern border. Although public focus has primarily been on the southern border, the president declares that the northern border has also become a dangerously effective conduit for synthetic opioids, with recent data indicating that enough fentanyl crossed from Canada in 2024 to potentially kill more than 9.5 million Americans. The order highlights Canada's de minimis export practices, which allow small shipments to enter the U.S. duty-free, as a vulnerability exploited by traffickers sending drugs through international mail. To combat this threat, the president invokes his authority under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and the National Emergencies Act (NEA) to impose economic penalties on Canadian imports. Effective Feb. 4, 2025, all Canadian goods covered by the order will face a 25 percent ad valorem tariff, while Canadian energy products will be subject to a 10 percent ad valorem tariff. These duties aim to pressure Canada into taking stronger cooperative enforcement actions to dismantle drug production and smuggling networks.
President Donald J. Trump Launches Massive 10-to-1 Deregulation Initiative 1/31/2025 Government Administration This executive order establishes that the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will ensure that for every new rule, regulation or guidance issued, that agency must identify at least 10 existing rules, regulations or guidance documents to be repealed. This initiative builds upon the directive during President Trump's first term, which required two existing rules, regulations or guidance documents to be repealed for every new rule, regulation or guidance issued. Furthermore, this order requires that, for the fiscal year 2025, the total incremental cost of new regulations, including repealed, be significantly less than zero.
Limiting Lame-Duck Collective Bargaining Agreements That Improperly Attempt to Constrain the New President 1/31/2025 Government Administration This executive order establishes new limits on collective bargaining agreements (CBAs) negotiated during the final 30 days of a presidential administration. Lame-duck CBAs negotiated shortly before a presidential transition are deemed undemocratic and obstructive, as they can impose inefficient policies on a new administration. The order aims to prevent outgoing administrations from binding incoming presidents to last-minute agreements that may hinder their policy agenda or executive authority.
Additional Measures to Combat Anti-Semitism 1/29/2025 This executive order seeks to vigorously combat anti-Semitism by building upon Executive Order 13899, issued by President Trump in 2019 that helped enforce civil rights laws to ensure that American Jews are equally protected under the law. The Hamas terrorist attacks of Oct. 7, 2023, against the people of Israel sparked a wave of anti-Semitic discrimination, vandalism and violence against Jewish citizens, particularly in schools and campuses. This order seeks to hold perpetrators of anti-Semitic harassment and violence accountable and calls for the use of all necessary legal tools to prosecute and remove individuals involved in such actions.
Expanding Migrant Operations Center at Naval Station Guantanamo Bay to Full Capacity 1/29/2025 Immigration, Defense This executive order directs the secretaries of defense and homeland security to operate the Migrant Operations Center at Naval Station Guantanamo Bay at full capacity to provide additional detention space for high-priority criminal aliens unlawfully present in the U.S., as well as address attendant immigration enforcement needs identified by the U.S. Departments of Defense and Homeland Security. These actions are intended to prevent further border crossings, combat criminal cartels and restore national sovereignty.
Celebrating America's 250th Birthday 1/29/2025 Government Administration This executive order aims to provide a grand celebration for the 250th anniversary of American Independence on July 4, 2026, and take other actions to honor the history of the nation. It first establishes the White House Task Force on Celebrating America's 250th Birthday (Task Force 250), assigning the positions of chair to the president and vice-chair to the vice president and designating its composing members. It notes that the task force will be housed in the U.S. Department of Defense, which will provide its funding and administrative support, and directs agencies to report to the task force regarding their planning. The order then directs the assistant to the president for domestic policy to recommend the president additional historically significant Americans for inclusion in the National Garden of American Heroes to bring the number of heroes to 250. Lastly, it aims to protect America's monuments from vandalism by reinstating Executive Order 13933 of June 26, 2020 (Protecting American Monuments, Memorials, and Statues and Combatting Recent Criminal Violence) as it was prior to the issuance of Executive Order 14029 of May 14, 2021 (Revocation of Certain Presidential Actions and Technical Amendment).
Ending Radical Indoctrination in K-12 Schooling 1/29/2025 Education This executive order emphasizes the importance of schools providing a patriotic education that fosters admiration for American values. It also addresses the concern that schools are indoctrinating children with radical gender and race theories that force children to adopt victim or oppressor identities based on characteristics such as skin color, as well as question their gender identity and undergo irreversible procedures without parental consent. These practices undermine personal identity, family unity and parental authority, and often violate anti-discrimination civil rights laws. This order calls for the rescinding of federal funding for illegal and discriminatory practices in K-12 schools, ensures the protection of parental rights and promotes the advancement of patriotic education.
Expanding Educational Freedom and Opportunity for Families 1/29/2025 Education This executive order aims to strengthen education-freedom programs in order to improve student achievement and foster competition among nearby public schools. The current educational system has had a devastating impact on families, communities and national competition. Seventy percent of 8th graders are below proficiency in reading and math, and school assignments based on geography drive up housing costs in districts with preferred schools. This order allows families to choose the best educational setting and school type for their children in order to address these issues.
Protecting Children from Chemical and Surgical Mutilation 1/28/2025 Social Issues, Health This executive order declares it the policy of the U.S. to not fund, sponsor, promote, assist or support people under 19 years old in transitioning their sex. The executive order directs heads of certain executive departments, agencies and offices to take steps to prevent sex transitions by people under 19 years old.
Reinstating Service Members Discharged Under the Military's COVID-19 Vaccination Mandate 1/27/2025 Defense, Health The secretary of defense issued a mandate on Aug. 24, 2021, requiring all service members to receive the COVID-19 vaccine. This executive order allows for the reinstatement of military personnel who were discharged for refusing the vaccine or left the service in response to the mandate. It allows these service members to return to their former rank and receive appropriate compensation. This action aims to address the unfair treatment of those who were unjustly discharged.
Restoring America's Fighting Force 1/27/2025 Defense This executive order orders the cessation of all diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) programs within the U.S. Armed Forces to ensure impacted departments and military branches commit to the administration's goals of promoting meritocracy and eliminate race-based and sex-based discrimination. All DEI offices within impacted departments are to be abolished, and the secretary of defense will review all DEI practices and identify instances of discrimination, if necessary.
Prioritizing Military Excellence and Readiness 1/27/2025 Defense This executive order directs the U.S. Department of Defense to adhere to military service medical exemption standards by excluding individuals afflicted with physical or mental disorders from military service. Servicemen diagnosed with gender dysphoria and/or express a gender identity different than their sex assigned at birth via medical treatment and pronoun changes are named as specific subjects of this order. This order also directs the U.S. Armed Forces to prohibit biological males from using or sharing sleeping, changing or bathing facilities with their biological female counterparts.
The Iron Dome for America 1/27/2025 Defense This executive order directs the secretary of defense to develop an architectural plan for a missile defense shield, similar to the Iron Dome in Israel, to deter foreign aerial attacks and ensure second-strike capability. While developing an architectural plan for the system, the secretary is tasked with implementing next-generation technology to defend from a variety of missiles, develop a sensory layer and ensure a secure supply chain. This order also encourages U.S. allies to increase bilateral and multilateral cooperation on missile defense capabilities.
The National Day of Remembrance of the 80th Anniversary of the Liberation of Auschwitz, 2025 1/27/2025 This executive order proclaims Jan. 27, 2025, as a National Day of Remembrance of the 80th Anniversary of the Liberation of Auschwitz. President Trump calls on Americans to observe this day with programs, ceremonies and prayers commemorating the victims of the Holocaust and honor the sacrifices of those who helped liberate Auschwitz survivors. This order intends to combat anti-Semitism and religious bigotry.
Memorandum for the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Administrator of the United States for International Development 1/24/2025 Defense This memorandum revokes the Protecting Women's Health at Home and Abroad Presidential Memorandum (Jan. 28, 2021) and reinstates The Mexico City Policy, Presidential Memorandum (Jan. 23, 2017). This directs the secretaries of state and health and human services to extend the requirements of this reinstated memorandum to global health assistance. This order also directs the secretary of state to ensure the U.S. does not fund organizations or programs that are a part of the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization.
Enforcing the Hyde Amendment 1/24/2025 Healthcare This executive order reestablishes the Hyde Amendment by revoking the Biden Administration's Executive Orders 14076 and 14079. The director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall create guidance for the implementation of the Hyde Amendment, which prevents federal funding of elective abortions.
Emergency Measures to Provide Water Resources in California and Improve Disaster Response in Certain Areas 1/24/2025 Government Administration This executive order implements review and revision of federal and state programs to improve land and water management regarding the wildfires in Southern California. The Attorney General, along with the secretaries of defense, homeland security, commerce, interior and agriculture, will all ensure efficient use of water resources in Southern California and will report their authorities to the president within 15 days (by Feb. 8, 2025). The secretary of the interior, using the Bureau of Reclamation, shall increase water delivery and hydropower. The interior and commerce secretaries will designate a federal official to review state and federal laws that impede this project within 30 days (by Feb. 23, 2025) and create a proposal to handle the impediments. The director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will review all state and federal programs in water management and land management to ensure sensible practices. This order will expedite options for housing relief, waste removal and using grants to improve fire preparedness. Finally, the order will house displaced families, clear and rebuild roads and bridges, and increase funds to help rebuild areas affected by Hurricane Helene in North Carolina.
Council to Assess the Federal Emergency Management Agency 1/24/2025 Government Administration This executive order establishes the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Review Council to assess and recommend operations, efficacy and impartiality improvements to disaster response. Recent disasters such as Hurricane Helene exposed shortcomings in FEMA's ability to provide timely and equitable aid despite significant federal spending. Key objectives include evaluating FEMA's effectiveness, analyzing federal-state dynamics and identifying reform opportunities. The council will include up to 20 members chaired by the secretaries of defense and homeland security and submit a detailed report on potential FEMA reforms to the president within 180 days of its first meeting.
Removing Barriers to American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence 1/23/2025 Emerging Technology This executive order calls for the development of an "Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Plan" to establish a policy agenda to ensure the U.S. maintains and strengthens its global AI dominance. It aims to promote economic competitiveness, bolster national security and prioritize AI systems free from "ideological bias and engineered social agendas." The order directs White House officials to review and modify or revoke existing policies and directives that inhibit AI innovation and leadership. The order follows an executive order issued by the Trump Administration on Jan. 20, 2025, rescinding the Biden Administration's Executive Order 14110 of Oct. 30, 2023 (Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence) (the Biden AI EO).
Federal Recognition of the Lumbee Tribe of North Carolina 1/23/2025 Native American Affairs This executive order directs the U.S. government to advance the full federal recognition of the Lumbee Tribe of North Carolina, acknowledging their historical significance, cultural heritage and longstanding pursuit of federal acknowledgment. The secretary of the interior is tasked with developing a plan within 90 days to facilitate federal recognition of the Lumbee Tribe and must analyze legal pathways, consult tribal leadership and deliver strategies to ensure eligibility for federal benefits. While they have had recognition from the state of North Carolina since 1885 and partial recognition by the federal government under the 1956 Lumbee Act, the Lumbee Tribe has been denied full federal benefits associated with such recognition.
Keeping Americans Safe in Aviation 1/21/2025 Social Issues, Transportation This executive order suspends all diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) initiatives, including those pertaining to recruitment and hiring, within the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). It aims to establish capability, achievement and dedication as the basis for hiring and promoting practices within these federal agencies.
Unleashing Alaska's Extraordinary Resource Potential 1/20/2025 This executive order facilitates the development and production of natural resources on federal and state lands in Alaska, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and prioritizes the development of liquified natural gas (LNG) and its transport from Alaska to other regions of the U.S. While virtually all of its actions focus on the development of oil, gas, critical mineral and timber resources in Alaska, the order also requires the secretary of the interior to "review all Interior guidance regarding the taking of … land into trust" for the benefit of Alaska Natives and "all Public Land Orders withdrawing lands for selection of Alaska Native Corporations to determine if any such agency action should be revoked" as inconsistent with the Alaska Statehood Act and other federal statutes that specifically apply to Alaska. The order also directs the interior secretary to deny a request pending before the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to establish an Indigenous sacred site in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, rescind the National Park Service's final rule entitled "Alaska; Hunting and Trapping in National Preserves" (July 3, 2024), and review the framework of hunting, fishing and subsistence rights in Alaska.
Guaranteeing the States Protection Against Invasion 1/20/2025 Immigration This executive order suspends entry into the U.S. through the southern border by individuals who fail to provide federal officials with sufficient medical information, criminal history and background information before entering the country until further notice. Nothing in this proclamation will affect the authority of an executive department/agency or the functions of the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) relating to budgetary, administrative or legislative proposals.
Designating Cartels and Other Organizations as Foreign Terrorist Organizations and Specially Designated Global Terrorists 1/20/2025 Foreign Policy, Defense This executive order initiates the process of designating certain international cartels as Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs) to address the rise in violence and terror across the western hemisphere and the proliferation of dangerous drugs, criminals and gangs into the U.S. through the southern border. The order declares a national emergency, under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to address the threat from cartels.
Ending Radical and Wasteful Government DEI Programs and Preferencing 1/20/2025 Social Issues, Government Administration This executive order eliminates any and all "Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion" programs throughout the federal government. The termination includes "Chief Diversity Officers," "Equity Action Plans," "environmental justice" offices, equity-related grants/contracts, as well as Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI)/Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility (DEIA) performance requirements. The removal of these programs will be carried out by the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), with assistance from the attorney general and the director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Each agency, department or commission head will complete these actions within 60 days (by March 21, 2025). This order seeks to increase public relations between the federal government and the American people by cutting programs deemed wasteful and discriminatory.
Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government 1/20/2025 Social Issues This executive order directs federal agencies and federal employees to interpret "sex" solely as an immutable binary biological classification determined at conception. The order also requires all federal agencies to enforce sex-based rights, protections and accommodations using this definition of "sex." The presidential assistant for legislative affairs is directed to draft a "proposed codification" of the seven definitions as defined in the order. The order further directs the secretary of state and secretary of homeland security, along with the director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), to require that all government-issued identification documents, including passports and federal employment records, reflect only biological "sex" as defined in the order.The order also instructs agencies to "evaluate grant conditions and grantee preferences" to ensure federal funds are not used to "promote gender ideology." It also instructs the secretary of housing and urban development (HUD) to prepare policies protecting women seeking single-sex rape shelters and requires the Bureau of Prisons to revise its medical care policies to correspond with the order's definition of sex. Agencies shall also ensure that intimate spaces designated for women/girls/females (or men/boys/males) are designated by the order's definition of sex and not identity.
Establishing and Implementing the President’s Department of Government Efficiency 1/20/2025 Government Administration This executive order establishes the U.S. Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) as an official federal agency, rather than a non-governmental advisory group as President Donald Trump initially announced. It outlines the president's DOGE agenda to modernize federal technology and improve governmental efficiency, as well as institutes new structures and initiatives focused on software modernization and interagency coordination while aiming to promote efficiency and innovation through the creation of cross-agency DOGE teams.
Protecting the United States from Foreign Terrorists and Other National Security and Public Safety Threats 1/20/2025 Defense This executive order increases vigilance in vetting and screening standards concerning immigration and visa-issuance across federal agencies. The secretary of state, U.S. attorney general, secretary of homeland security and director of national intelligence shall identify countries that warrant suspension of admission from its nationals and re-evaluate immigration programs to create stricter uniform baseline rules that protect the safety and security of the American people. Nothing in this order will affect the authority of an executive department/agency or the functions of the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) relating to budgetary, administrative or legislative proposals.
Temporary Withdrawal of All Areas on the Outer Continental Shelf from Offshore Wind Leasing and Review of the Federal Government’s Leasing and Permitting Practices for Wind Projects 1/20/2025 Energy This executive order temporarily halts all offshore wind energy leasing within the Offshore Continental Shelf (OCS). It aims to address concerns related to marine life, ocean currents, wind patterns, energy costs and the fishing industry by directing a full review of existing federal leasing and permitting practices for both onshore and offshore wind projects. Federal agencies are instructed to pause issuing new or renewed approvals, permits, leases or loans for wind projects.
Declaring a National Energy Emergency 1/20/2025 Energy This executive order declares a national energy emergency and seeks to address this emergency by expediting energy and infrastructure projects; facilitating the supply, refinement and transportation of energy; and assessing vulnerabilities in the domestic energy sector. It aims to utilize domestic energy resources and international alliances to create more jobs, improve the energy trade balance and safeguard the U.S. against potential threats. Within this order, the term "energy resources" includes crude oil, natural gas, lease condensates, natural gas liquids, refined petroleum products, uranium, coal, biofuels, geothermal heat, hydropower and critical minerals, but neither solar nor wind resources are included.
Restoring the Death Penalty and Protecting Public Safety 1/20/2025 Law Enforcement This executive order directs the U.S. attorney general to pursue the death penalty for capital crimes and encourages state attorneys general and district attorneys to pursue capital punishment when applicable. The attorney general is also instructed to pursue federal jurisdiction and seek the death penalty regardless of other factors for every federal capital crime involving the murder of a law enforcement officer or a capital crime committed by an alien illegally present in the U.S. It also seeks to limit any hindrances to capital punishment by seeking the overruling of U.S. Supreme Court precedents that limit capital punishment authority.
Putting People Over Fish: Stopping Radical Environmentalism to Provide Water to Southern California 1/20/2025 Environment This executive order directs the secretary of commerce and secretary of the interior to resume previous Trump Administration efforts to redirect water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta to Central and Southern California. It prioritizes the urgent need for reliable water supplies and improved vegetation management. This order aims to allow rainwater in Northern California and water flowing from northern snow melt to be more beneficial in the Central Valley and Southern California.
Securing Our Borders 1/20/2025 Immigration This executive order establishes a federal immigration agenda to secure the U.S. borders and address the threats posed by an unsecured border through new policy actions. These actions aim to secure the borders by implementing barriers, deterring illegal immigration, removing individuals who violate federal law and obtaining complete operational control of the borders.
Protecting the Meaning and Value of American Citizenship 1/20/2025 Immigration This executive order establishes a federal immigration agenda to preserve American citizenship by establishing a new policy agenda. These policy actions seek to withhold automatic American citizenship from individuals born in the U.S.: 1) when that person's mother was unlawfully present in the U.S. and the father was not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident at the time of said person's birth or 2) when that person's mother's presence in the U.S. at the time of said person's birth was lawful but temporary (such as but not limited to visiting the U.S. under the auspices of the Visa Waiver Program or visiting on a student, work or tourist visa) and the father was not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident at the time of said person's birth.
Realigning the United States Refugee Admissions Program 1/20/2025 Foreign Policy, Immigration This executive order suspends the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) until it is determined that the further entry of refugees aligns with the interests of the U.S. The order aims to strengthen the country's capabilities to handle threats to the safety, security and resources of Americans, as well as threats to the appropriate assimilation of refugees.
Clarifying the Military’s Role in Protecting the Territorial Integrity of the United States 1/20/2025 Defense This executive order clarifies the military's role in securing the U.S. borders against threats of invasion, unlawful forays by foreign nationals into the U.S. and other transnational criminal activities that threaten the nation's peace, harmony and tranquility. The order outlines actions for the secretary of defense and U.S. Armed Forces to take to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the U.S. along its national borders. This order shall not affect the authority of executive departments or agencies granted by law or the functions of the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) relating to budgetary, administrative or legislative proposals.
Declaring a National Emergency at the Southern Border of the United States 1/20/2025 Immigration This executive order declares a national emergency at the southern border of the U.S. due to the presence of threats, including cartels, criminal gangs, known terrorists, human traffickers, smugglers and unvetted military-age males from adversarial countries. It requires the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) and the U.S. Armed Forces to determine and order the necessary amount of troops and resources to support the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in its effort to secure the southern border.
Withdrawing the United States from the World Health Organization 1/20/2025 Healthcare This executive order withdraws the U.S. from the World Health Organization (WHO). The U.S. withdrew from the WHO in 2020 in response to what the president viewed as mishandling of global health crises such as COVID-19, failure to implement reforms, its inability to remain independent of negative political influence and unjust financial demands. The actions outlined by this order seek to improve public health and secure U.S. independence from the WHO by suspending support to the WHO, assigning new personnel to take over the activities previously handled by the WHO and establishing new U.S. leadership positions.
Putting America First in International Environmental Agreements 1/20/2025 Energy, Environment This executive order directs the U.S. to formally withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement and any related agreements or pacts under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). It outlines steps to rescind financial and policy commitments to international climate initiatives with the goal of reorienting the country's focus towards economic efficiency and American prosperity in future international energy engagements. The executive order should not affect the authority of executive departments or agencies granted by law or the functions of the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) relating to budgetary, administrative or legislative proposals.
Delivering Emergency Price Relief for American Families and Defeating the Cost-of-Living Crisis 1/20/2025 Environment This executive order directs the heads of all executive departments and agencies to deliver emergency price relief to the American people by pursuing action to reduce the cost of housing, dismantle policies that drive up prices and promote job opportunities. These actions seek to restore American purchasing power and improve the quality of life for Americans. The assistant to the president for economic policy will report to the president every 30 days on the status of the implementation of this memorandum.
Hiring Freeze 1/20/2025 Government Administration This executive order freezes the hiring of federal civilian employees in the executive branch. Any federal civilian position that is vacant at noon on Jan. 20, 2025, may not be filled, and no new position may be created except as otherwise provided for in this executive order. However, this order does not apply to military personnel of the armed forces or positions related to immigration enforcement, national security or public safety. Nothing in this order shall adversely impact the provision of Social Security, Medicare, or veterans benefits. This order does not limit the nomination and appointment of officials by the president and the U.S. Senate or appointments to various non-career positions.
Regulatory Freeze Pending Review 1/20/2025 All This executive order issues a regulatory freeze on all executive departments and agencies to review pending and existing laws and regulations. The freeze mandates that unpublished rules be withdrawn and unenacted rules be delayed. During this postponement, the rules will be reviewed, and stakeholders will have the opportunity to provide comments on issues of fact, law and policy raised by the rules. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB), in addition to department and agency heads appointed by the president, will oversee the review process.
Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship 1/20/2025 Social Issues, Telecommunications This executive order establishes policies to prevent government interference in expressing constitutionally protected speech. It responds to concerns about prior governmental overreach, particularly through influence on social media companies, to suppress speech. The order outlines measures to address past misconduct and prevent future violations.
Initial Rescissions of Harmful Executive Orders and Actions 1/20/2025 All This executive order revokes 78 actions and orders rolled out during the Biden Administration, intending to repair institutions and improve the economy under the policy plans of the Trump Administration.
Unleashing American Energy 1/20/2025 Energy, Environment This executive order puts forth a federal energy policy agenda that seeks to establish American energy dominance through a combination of new policy actions, as well as rescinding several executive orders from the Carter and Biden Administrations. These actions seek to support traditional energy exploration and production, reassess regulations that might hinder energy and economic development, revise the permitting process to fast-track traditional energy projects, promote domestic mining and processing of non-fuel minerals (including rare earth minerals), ensure adherence to legislation as it was written, and pause disbursement of funds made available under the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
