Title: Full text of "Landscapes Clear and Radiant: The Art of Wang Hui (1632�1717)"

URL Source: https://archive.org/stream/LandscapesClearandRadiantTheArtofWangHui16321717/LandscapesClearandRadiantTheArtofWangHui16321717_djvu.txt

Markdown Content:
See other formats
-----------------

Landscapes Clear and Radiant 

The Art of Wang Hut (l6jz-iyiy) 

THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART 

Landscapes Clear and Radiant 

The Art of Wang Hui (i6ji-iyiy) 

Landscapes Clear and Rad 

The Art of Wang Hui (i6jz-iyiy) 

Wen Fong, Chin-Sung Chang, 
and Maxwell K. Hearn 

Edited by Maxwell K. Hearn 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
Yale University Press, New Haven and London 

This publication accompanies the exhibition 

"Landscapes Clear and Radiant: The Art of Wang Hui (1632— 1717)/' 
held at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
from September 9, 2008, through January 4, 2009. 

The exhibition is made possible by The Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Foundation. 
The catalogue is made possible by the Joseph Hotung Fund and The Dillon Fund. 

Copyright © 2008 by The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers. 

Published by The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

John R O'Neill, Publisher and Editor in Chief 
Gwen Roginsky, General Manager of Publications 
Margaret Rennolds Chace, Managing Editor 
Margaret Donovan, Editor 
Bruce Campbell, Designer 
Christopher Zichello, Production Manager 
Robert Weisberg, Assistant Managing Editor 
Jayne Kuchna, Bibliographic Editor 

New photography by Oi-Cheong Lee and Rona Chang, 
the Photograph Studio, The Metropolitan Museum of Art 

Typeset in Monotype Centaur Dynalab and DF KaiShuHK (Chinese) 
Printed on New V Matte 

Printed and bound by Nissha Printing Co., Ltd., Kyoto, Japan 

Jacket illustration and frontispiece: Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and 
assistants. The Kan^xi Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Three: Jinan to 
Mount Tai, datable to 1698 (details, pi, 49) 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Wang, Hui, 1652— 1717. 

Landscapes clear and radiant: the art of Wang Hui (1632— 1717) / 
Wen C. Fong, Chin-Sung Chang, and Maxwell K. Hearn; edited by 
Maxwell K. Hearn. 
p. cm. 

Catalog of an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, 
Sept. 9, 2008— Jan, 4, 2009, 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978-1-58839-291-6 (Metropolitan Museum of Art [he]) ~ 
ISBN 978-0-300-14144-3 (Yale University Press [he]) 

1. Wang, Hui, 1632— 1717— Exhibitions. 2. Landscape in art— Exhibitions. 
I. Fong, Wen. II. Hearn, Maxwell K. III. Metropolitan Museum of Art 
(New York, N.Y) IV Title. 
ND1049.W363A4 2008 
759.95i-dc22 

2008025925 

Contents 

Director s Foreword Philippe de Montebello vii 

Acknowledgments Maxwell K, Hearn viii 

Lenders to the Exhibition x 

Preface Maxwell K. Hearn xi 

Wang Hui and Repossessing the Past 

WEN C. FONG 3 

Wang Hui: The Evolution of a Master Landscapist 

CHIN-SUNG CHANG 49 

Art Creates History: Wang Hui and 
The Kangxi Emperor^s Southern Inspection Tour 

MAXWELL K* HEARN IZ9 

Catalogue: Inscriptions, Signatures, and Seals 

SHI-YEE LIU 186 

Bibliography 215 

Index 223 

Photograph Credits 236 

Director s Foreword 

In a very real sense, this exhibition is the product 
of two generations of scholarship and curatorial 
practice. Its genesis is rooted in the 1960s, when 
Wen Fong, Edwards Sanford Professor of Art at 
Princeton University, began working with the 
New York collector Earl Morse to build a signifi- 
cant collection of Chinese painting. Professor 
Fong, who had long been engaged in the study of 
the seventeenth-century Chinese master Wang Hui 
along with other artists of the so-called Orthodox 
School, recognized that this group, although highly 
esteemed in China, was largely ignored by Western 
collectors. With Morse s support, in a few short years 
he was able to create the most significant concentra- 
tion ever assembled in this country of Orthodox 
masters' art, now divided between Princeton 
University and the Metropolitan Museum. 

The Morse-Fong initiative culminated in 1969 
with the Princeton exhibition **In Pursuit of 
Antiquity,** which was accompanied by a scholarly 
catalogue written by Princeton graduate student 
Roderick Whitfield and Professor Fong. Deeply 
committed to the importance of learning directly 
from objects, two years later Wen Fong accepted 
the consultative chairmanship of the Museum s 
Department of Asian Art (then called Far Eastern 
Art) as a way of expanding the scope of his collect- 
ing activities while at the same time retaining his 
professorship at Princeton. Since his retirement 
from Princeton in 1999 and the Metropolitan in 
2000, he has remained extremely active, publishing 
on painting and calligraphy both here and in China. 
We are most grateful, therefore, that he agreed to 
return to the topic of Wang Hui by contributing 
the introductory essay to this catalogue. 

Maxwell K. Hearn, who curated the exhibition 
as well as contributed to and edited the present 
volume, joined the Asian Art department in 1971. 
After a five-year hiatus to pursue graduate studies 
in Taiwan and at Princeton, he returned to the 
Metropolitan in 1979, the same year that the 
Museum acquired one scroll from The Kangxi 
Emperors Southern Inspection Tour by Wang Hui. 
Hearn chose that magnum opus as the subject 
of his doctoral thesis, and it is also the focus of 
his essay in this catalogue. 

Subsequent acquisitions of Wang Hui s paintings 
from Mr. and Mrs. Wan-go Weng and from Marie- 
Helene and Guy Weill have further enriched the 
Museum s holdings. However, it was another 
doctoral thesis, on Wang Hui s panoramic land- 
scapes by Chin-Sung Chang, a graduate student 
of Yale professor Richard Barnhart (himself an 
early Fong student), that inspired Dr. Hearn to 
undertake a reexamination of Wang Huis oeuvre. 
During a 2005—6 postdoctoral fellowship year at 
the Metropolitan, Dr. Chang began work on his 
important contribution to this catalogue. We are 
most grateful that he was able to complete his essay 
while simultaneously maintaining a busy teaching 
schedule at Seoul National University. 

Although the scholarship for this study is the 
product of some forty years of research and collect- 
ing, the realization of the first "one-man** exhibi- 
tion devoted to Wang Hui outside China would not 
have been possible without the unprecedented 
collaboration of an international group of lenders. 
It was their willingness to support the endeavor that 
made a detailed examination of the artist possible. 
We are immensely grateful to the directors and 
staffs of the National Palace Museum, Taipei; the 
Palace Museum, Beijing; the Shanghai Museum; the 
Princeton University Art Museum; the Asian Art 
Museum of San Francisco; the Joseph A. Skinner 
Museum, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, 
Massachusetts; the Mactaggart Art Collection, 
University of Alberta Museums, Edmonton; and 
The Cleveland Museum of Art; to the members of 
the P. Y and Kinmay W. Tang family; and to the 
staffs of Arts Exhibitions China and the State 
Administration of Cultural Heritage for entrusting 
us with these treasures and for helping to expedite 
their loan. 

The Museum is indebted to The Miriam and 
Ira D. Wallach Foundation for its support of the 
exhibition. We also gratefully acknowledge the Joseph 
Hotung Fund and The Dillon Fund for their help 
in making this important publication possible. 

Philippe de Montebello 
Director 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art 

vii 

Acknowledgments 

One of the greatest pleasures of working on an 
exhibition and catalogue is the privilege of thanking 
all the talented, dedicated people, brought together 
by a love for art and for museums, who make such 
an endeavor possible. 

Gathering works of art from venues across the 
country and around the globe is both a privilege 
and a responsibility, and I am profoundly grateful 
to the institutions that have entrusted their pre- 
cious works to the Metropolitan Museum for this 
exhibition* In particular, I would like to thank 
Director Chou Kung-shin of the National Palace 
Museum, Taipei, and the members of her staff, 
especially Deputy Director Lin Po-t*ing, Chief 
Curator Wang Yao-t'ing and Curator Ho Ch*uan- 
hsing, both in the Department of Painting and 
Calligraphy, and Tzuan Huang in the Department 
of Publications; Director Zheng Xinmiao of the 
Palace Museum, Beijing, and his staff, particularly 
Executive Deputy Director Li Ji, Deputy Director 
of Foreign Affairs Chen Lihua, Fu Hongzhan, 
Head of the Department of Ancient Painting and 
Calligraphy, Li Shaoyi, Head of the American and 
European Section in the Foreign Affairs Department, 
and Zhang Ying in the Image Services office of the 
Information Department; Director Chen Xiejun of 
the Shanghai Museum and his staff, most notably 
Curator of Paintings and Calligraphy Shan Guolin 
and his colleague Ling Lizhong as well as Chief 
Cultural Exchange Officer Zhou Yanqun; Acting 
Director Rebecca Sender of the Princeton University 
Art Museum and Curator of Asian Art Cary Liu; 
retired Director Emily Sano and her successor, Jay 
Xu, and his staff at the Asian Art Museum of San 
Francisco; Director Timothy Rub of The Cleveland 
Museum of Art and Associate Curator of Chinese 
Art Anita Chung; Director Marianne Doezema 
and Registrar Linda Best at the Joseph A, Skinner 
Museum, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, 
Massachusetts; Janine Andrews, Executive Director, 
Museums and Collections Services, and Frannie 
Blondheim, Manager, Communications Program, 
University of Alberta; and members of the R Y and 
Kinmay W Tang family. I also gratefully acknowledge 
the support of the State Administration of Cultural 
Heritage as well as that of Director Luo Bojian at 
Art Exhibitions China and his staff, specifically 

Deputy Director Yang Yang and Shang Xiaoyun, for 
coordinating the loans from Beijing and Shanghai. 

In addition to the loan of works of art, I have 
been the beneficiary of collegial support from a 
number of institutions that have contributed photo- 
graphic images and permissions for the numerous 
comparative illustrations in this catalogue. Among 
the many persons who gave of their time in respond- 
ing to our requests, I would like to mention with 
special gratitude Freda Murck, independent scholar, 
Beijing; Jun Tomita, Senior Manager of Collection 
Management, Tokyo National Museum; Haruka 
Takenami, Kurokawa Institute of Ancient Cultures; 
Yumino Takayuki, Curator, Osaka Municipal 
Museum of Art; Tina Hejtmanek, assistant to Brice 
Marden; and Ann Marie Kuder, assistant to Donald 
B. Marron. Finally, my thanks to Martin J. Heijdra, 
Chinese Bibliographer and Head of Public Services 
at The East Asian Library and the Gest Collection, 
Princeton University, who provided the catalogue 
with excellent reproductions of maps from the rare 
books in his care. 

This project has been greatly facilitated by the 
extraordinary staff of professionals at the Metro- 
politan Museum under the leadership of Director 
Philippe de Montebello, whose strong advocacy of 
scholarly exhibitions and publications stands behind 
this endeavor. In addition, James C Y. Watt, Brooke 
Russell Astor Chairman of the Department of 
Asian Art, has unstintingly backed this exhibition and 
its accompanying publication with both encourag- 
ing words and substantial departmental funds. I 
am also grateful to The Miriam and Ira D. Wallach 
Foundation, the Joseph Hotung Fund, and The 
Dillon Fund for their support of the exhibition 
and catalogue. 

The Museum s editorial team, expertly led by 
Publisher and Editor in Chief John P. O'Neill, has 
worked tirelessly to complete this complex publica- 
tion. Margaret Donovan masterfully edited the 
texts and gracefully synchronized the efforts of the 
editorial team. Bruce Campbell crafted the elegant 
design, Jayne Kuchna meticulously carried out the 
bibliographic research, Elaine Luthy compiled the 
index, Anandaroop Roy produced the maps with 
great care and accuracy, Robert Weisberg supervised 
the typesetting, Christopher Zichello coordinated the 

production, and General Manager of Publications 
Gwen Roginsky oversaw the color correction and 
printing at Nissha Printing in Kyoto, where Hiroyuki 
Nakao and Kazuo Nakae deserve special thanks for 
traveling to Taipei, Shanghai, and Beijing to make 
color corrections. Museum Photographers Oi-Cheong 
Lee and Rona Chang set a high standard with their 
superb images of the Metropolitans artworks. In 
the Department of Asian Art, Associate Curator 
Zhixin Jason Sun was especially helpful in commu- 
nicating with our counterparts in China; Admini- 
strator Judith Smith, Assistant Administrator Rebecca 
Grunberger, Collections Management Coordinator 
Hwai-ling Yeh-Lewis, Collections Management 
Associate Jillian Schultz, Collections Management 
Assistant Alison Clark, and volunteer Emily 
Silbergeld worked with good cheer and consummate 
professionalism on every aspect of the project; 
and Supervising Departmental Technician Beatrice 
Pinto, Senior Departmental Technician Imtikar 
Ally, and Departmental Technicians Lori Carrier 
and Luis Nunez capably handled all the demands 
of the exhibition installation. 

The catalogue was produced at the same time as 
loan agreements were being prepared and indemnifi- 
cation, insurance, and shipping arrangements made 
for the many loans that have so significantly enhanced 
both the exhibition and our understanding of Wang 
Hui s oeuvre. Here, too, the Metropolitans profes- 
sional staff has been extraordinary. I am particularly 
grateful to Assistant Counsel Kirstie Howard, Chief 
Registrar Aileen Chuk, and Martha Deese, Senior 
Assistant for Exhibitions and International Affairs, 
for their hard work. 

Long before works of art entered the building, 
the expertise of many specialists was engaged in 
planning for their proper presentation: Naomi 
Takafuchi in Communications, Dan Kershaw, Sophia 
Geronimus, and Andrey Kostiw in Design, Lighting 
Designers Clint CoUer and Rich Lichte, Pamela 
Barr in Editorial, Shaaron Marrero in Printing 
Services, Taylor Miller in Buildings, Joseph Loh in 
Education, and a number of colleagues in the Image 
Library, Website, Security, Visitor Services, and 
Merchandising departments, all coordinated by 
Manager for Special Exhibitions, Gallery Installations, 
and Design Linda Sylling and Assistant Manager 

Patricia Gilkison. The high standards and excel- 
lent work of such colleagues are what make the 
Museums exhibitions so exemplary. 

Paintings from the collection and outside loans 
often require restoration or remounting prior to 
their exhibition. The Metropolitan is fortunate to 
have an expert East Asian Conservation team, 
including Conservator Yuan-Li Hou, who worked 
on several pieces for this exhibition with the 
assistance of Christine Lam. 

Most of all, I am gratefial for the scholarly contri- 
butions of my esteemed coauthors. Wen Fong, 
Chin-Sung Chang, and Shi-yee Liu. 

In his dual capacity as Princeton professor 
(1954—99) and Metropolitan curator (1971— 2000) 
and through his numerous publications, Wen Fong 
has done more than anyone to further understanding 
of Wang Hui in the West. During my studies and 
work under Wens guidance, including the completion 
of a doctoral thesis on Wang Hui, I have benefited 
immensely from his insights, scholarship, and 
connoisseurship. There was no question, at the 
inception of this project, that a contribution from 
him was essential to any serious treatment of the 
subject. Wens essay greatly enhances the level of 
discourse on Wang Hui s significance to Chinese art. 

I first became acquainted with Dr. Chin-Sung 
Chang through his excellent Yale doctoral thesis on 
Wang Hui s panoramic landscapes. Impressed by 
his scholarship, I encouraged him to apply for a 
postdoctoral fellowship at the Metropolitan in 
hopes that we could work together on planning an 
exhibition. After Chin-Sung was awarded a full- 
year fellowship in 2005—6, he devoted a significant 
portion of his time here to formulating a basic 
outline for the project. Chin-Sung s essay, the core 
of the present catalogue, outlines Wang Hui s 
artistic development and his expanding network of 
artistic sources and patrons, which culminated in 
the artist s selection as the director of The Kangxi 
Emperors Southern Inspection Tour project. Chin-sung 
completed his writing after his appointment as 
assistant professor at Seoul National University. 
To simultaneously take up a new teaching position 
while completing a major manuscript is a tremen- 
dous challenge, and I am immensely grateful to him 
for his steadfast commitment. 

ix 

Dr. Shi-yee Liu, Research Associate in the 
Department of Asian Art, has done the bulk of the 
work on the catalogue entries. In addition, she has 
reviewed translations in the essays, tracked down 
information for the captions, and has been an 
invaluable assistant in communicating with Chinese 
institutions regarding loan agreements and photo- 
graphy requests. Her meticulous work was cor- 
roborated by Zheng Wei, an independent scholar 
who was engaged to check all the Chinese texts in 
the entries. 

Finally, gratitude goes to my wife, Vera, who in 
sharing life s adventures, traced with me in 1986 

much of the Kangxi emperors Southern Inspection 
Tour route as well as accompanying me on viewings 
of many of Wang Hui s paintings. Thanks, too, to 
our sons, Garrett and Alex, who at this writing are 
on their own exploratory tour of Beijing. 

To all these dedicated people and many others too 
numerous to name, my heartfelt thanks. The merits 
of this publication arise from their hard work. 

Maxwell K. Hearn 
Douglas Dillon Curator 
Department of Asian Art 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art 

Lenders to the Exhibition 

Asian Art Museum of San Francisco: cat. 6 

Mactaggart Art Collection, University of Alberta 
Museums, University of Alberta, Edmonton: 
cat. 24 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York: 
cats. 3, 8, 9, 15, 23 

National Palace Museum, Taipei: cats. 10, 11, 12, 21, 

25, 26 

Princeton University Art Museum, Princeton, 
New Jersey: cats, i, 4, 13, 14, 16 

Shanghai Museum: cats. 17, 18, 19 

Joseph A. Skinner Museum, Mount Holyoke 
College, South Hadley, Massachusetts: cat. 22 

P. Y. and Kinmay W. Tang Family Collection, on 
loan to The Metropolitan Museum of Art: 
cat. 27 

Palace Museum, Beijing: cats. 2, 5, 7, 20 

Preface 

Hailed by the prominent scholar- artist Wang Shimin 
(1592— 1680) as "the kind of painter who has not been 
seen for five hundred years," Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
was widely regarded during his lifetime as a "paint- 
ing sage*' who had attained the Orthodox ideal of 
integrating all the styles of the Tang, Song, and 
Yuan dynasties (618—1368) in a Great Synthesis* 
Wang was acknowledged as the master landscape 
painter of his generation, and his stature was fully 
confirmed in 1691, when he was summoned to the 
capital to fulfill the first important imperial com- 
mission of the Manchu Qing dynasty (1644— 1911)* 
He had been selected to produce a pictorial record 
of the triumphant 1689 tour made by the Kangxi 
emperor (r. 1662— 1722) from Beijing to the empire s 
cultural heartland, the Yangzi Delta region of 
southeastern China, Wang s successful completion 
of this project culminated in an audience with the 
emperor, during which Kangxi bestowed upon him 
the encomium "Landscapes Clear and Radiant" 

Wang s having been assigned the task of docu- 
menting this journey suggests that he was an accom- 
plished recorder of the natural world, but nothing 
could be further from the truth. Landscape painting 
in later Chinese art was not rooted in mimesis, nor 
was inspiration dependent upon the observation of 
actual scenery. In the words of the late Ming artist 
and theorist Dong Qichang (1555— 1636), "If one 
considers the uniqueness of scenery, then a painting 
is not the equal of real landscape; but if one consid- 
ers the wonderful excellence of brush and ink, then 
landscape can never equal painting." Dong s early 
Qing followers, most notably Wang Hui and his 
mentors, Wang Shimin and Wang Jian (1598— 1677), 
are known today as the Orthodox, or True Heritage 
(Zhengzong), School. Instead of basing their art 
on direct encounters with nature, these artists strove 
to transform their own styles in order to achieve a 
spiritual resonance with a canonical lineage of great 
masters. This transformation required that they 
imitate nature "not in appearance but in operation" 
by channeling its creative energy (^qishi) through 
forceful brushwork and dynamic compositional 
structures. In this way, Orthodox painters did not 
merely reinvigorate the past, they reinvented it. 

This approach to painting is analogous to that 
adopted by calligraphers. Students begin by imitating 

a specific set of earlier models, then gradually expand 
their repertoire until they are able to incorporate 
stylistic influences from various masters, eventually 
arriving at a personal synthesis that is uniquely 
their own. For Orthodox painters, each great master 
was similarly envisioned as a set of "ideographic 
form-types" — foliage and texture patterns and 
compositional solutions — that defined that artist s 
style. The competent replication of these solutions 
was only the beginning, the ultimate goal being the 
attainment of what Dong Qichang called a "spiri- 
tual correspondence with the model through 
creative metamorphosis." 

Wang Huis purpose was thus neither to "describe" 
a real place nor to "replicate" an earlier prototype. 
And not until his imperial commission was he 
concerned with fulfilling a narrative or iconographic 
program. Instead, Wang engaged in an inventive 
dialogue with the past, evoking the stylistic personae 
of earlier masters while making works that were 
distinctly his own. Acts of supreme self-confidence, 
Wang s paintings not only pay homage to his gifted 
predecessors but also demand to be judged in 
comparison with them. 

Traditional accounts of Wang Hui present him 
as a virtual reincarnation of the ancient masters, yet 
in modern times this tribute has not been viewed as 
a compliment. As revolutionary China increasingly 
rejected its past and idealized the new, Wang s art 
was criticized as backward-looking and circum- 
scribed by convention. Some Western scholars have 
adopted the same view, labeling Wang s paintings as 
"art-historical art" and disparaging the Orthodox 
masters as mere copyists whose works only restate 
earlier pictorial ideas. But Wang Hui s art is not 
merely derivative. His sources are too diverse, and 
he combines disparate stylistic influences in totally 
new and inspired ways. Like a master calligrapher 
whose writing is a personal synthesis of earlier 
models, Wang makes each "performance" spontane- 
ous and fresh. So while his sources are recognizable, 
his evocations are never dry or stale; they always 
depart from their model by ingeniously modifying 
the composition, reworking the structure, and 
revitalizing the brushwork in ways that are sophisti- 
cated and bold. Cognoscenti take pleasure not only 
in recognizing Wang s artistic references but in 

marveling at how he was able to transform and even 
surpass his models. 

This exhibition and catalogue seek to reassess 
Wang Hui s reputation by tracing his development as 
an artist from his late twenties until his late sixties — 
the most creative period of a career that continued 
for another twenty years* They track Wang s mete- 
oric rise from his precocious youth, during which 
he was schooled by his family, local artists, and the 
Orthodox masters Wang Shimin and Wang Jian, 
through his growing fame among prominent collec- 
tors in the Yangzi Delta region, to national recogni- 
tion and elevation to the leading artist of his day 
with the commission to depict the emperors tour. 
Kangxi had embarked on the tour as part of an effort 
to renew and reintegrate a society fragmented by the 
collapse of the Ming dynasty and the subsequent 
conquest of the Chinese homeland by the Manchus. 
In a way, Wang Hui s ambition to achieve a Great 
Synthesis of earlier styles and modes of expression 
represented a similar goal. Seen from this perspec- 
tive, the artists achievement was no less successful 

than the emperor s, and it had a similar effect. Just 
as Kangxi established patterns of rulership that both 
the Yongzheng (r. 1723—35) and Qianlong (r. 1736—95) 
emperors perpetuated, Wang established a paradigm 
for court artists and literati alike that was imitated 
and elaborated upon but never surpassed. 

To appreciate the art of Wang Hui is to grasp 
the fundamentally Chinese view of history as a 
spiral in which every age produces thinkers, poets, 
and artists who are inspired and renewed through 
creative reexamination of the works of past paragons. 
Keenly aware of an artistic heritage that extended 
back hundreds of years, Wang Hui sought to be a 
worthy successor to a lineage of masters, all of 
whom embodied a single truth, even though each 
expression of that truth was unique. Wang saw 
himself as an inheritor of that mantle. He was 
not enchained by the past, but found liberation in 
reenvisioning its fundamental verities and engaging 
with it as an equal. 

Maxwell K. Hearn 

xii 

Landscapes Clear and Radiant 
The Art of Wang Hui (i6^z-iyiy) 

Wang Hui and Repossessing the Past 

Wen Fong 

In 1691 the early Qing Orthodox School painter Wang Hui (1632— 1717) was sum- 
moned to the imperial court in Beijing to supervise the production of The Kangxi 
Emperors Southern Inspection Tour (see pis* 47—57). This series of twelve monumental 
landscape handscroUs, each more than two feet high and forty-six feet long, was made 
from 1691 to 1698 to commemorate the emperors 1689 inspection tour through newly 
pacified southern China.^ The foreground of each scroll, displaying a multitude of 
figures and much pageantry, was executed by studio assistants, Wang Hui reserved for 
himself the portrayal of the mountains and rivers that compose the backdrop, which 
he carried out in a **Great Synthesis*' (iacheng) of paradigmatic Northern Song land- 
scape styles.^ The magnificence of the creative imagination that integrated all the 
known Chinese classical landscape styles earned Hui a reputation as the greatest 
painter since at least the early Yuan literati polymath Zhao Mengfu (1254—1322).^ 
The Manchu emperor Kangxi (r. 1662— 1722), eager to possess all of newly conquered 
China s cultural past and recognizing, moreover, that Wang Hui s peaks rising to 
crescendos could be interpreted as symbolizing the favor of heaven bestowed on 
himself, the Manchu Son of Heaven, expressed his gratification in 1698 by conferring 
on the sixty-six sui (sixty-five-year-old) painter an encomium reading Shanshui Qinghuit 
or ^'Landscapes Clear and Radiant,** The word '*clear** was represented by the character 
qing, the name of the dynasty (1644— 1911), thereby officially designating Wang Hui the 
premier Orthodox School master of his time** 

After the fall of the Manchu-Qing dynasty in 1911, the vicissitudes of Wang Huis 
reputation — along with that of the so-called Orthodox School Four Wangs, the 
others being Wang Shimin (1592— 1680), Wang Jian (1598— 1677), and Wang Yuanqi 
(1642—1715) — reflected China*s protracted struggle for modernization under the 
impact of Western culture, which appeared to threaten the very continuity of the 
country's ancient system of artistic representation. In a thoughtful essay, "The Tour 
Wangs* during the Twentieth Century** (1993), Lang Shaojun gives a lucid account of 
how the Four Wangs in particular, and the literati (wenren) painting tradition in gen- 
eral, have been vilified in modern Chinese art historiography/ In summing up the 
various critiques of the Four Wangs during the past century, Lang points out that **the 
PL I. Wang Hui (1632-1717). Land^ evaluation of the Four Wangs is a topic for ancient art history; it is equally [impor- 

scape in the Style of Wu Zhen, dated 1675 01 

(detail, pL 12) tant] for twentieth-century [Chinese] art history** and challenges us to draw our own 

Fig. I. Zhang Hong 
(1577— ca. 1652). Mount 
Qixia, dated 1634, 
Hanging scroll, ink and 
color on paper, 11 ft. 
2 Vi in. X 40 in. 
(341.9 X 101.8 cm). 
National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

conclusions from the works of the Four Wangs 
themselves as well as from their critiques.^ If, indeed, 
the development of Chinese art and culture seems 
inextricably bound to Chinese art historiography of 
the past, what lessons does Wang Hui s art hold for 
contemporary Chinese painting and its future? 

The most serious obstacle to modern understand- 
ing of post-Song Chinese painting is its claim to 
return to ancient masters, as expressed in the term 
Jugu, **revival," or qu gu, "in pursuit of antiquity,*' 
which may best be glossed as "repossessing the past/' 
The word "orthodox" or "orthodoxy" (^zhengzong), 
stressing the "correctness" of such an approach, has 
an unfortunate ring to the modern ear, in both the 
East and the West. Just as revolutionary China easily 
dismissed the Manchu-Qing Orthodox School as 
"feudal" and reactionary, the average Western viewer 
today finds early Qing Individualist masters, such as 
Bada Shanren (1626— 1705) and Shitao (1642— 1707), 
more readily accessible than the Orthodox Four 
Wangs, By contrasting the "fragmentation" of the late 
Ming dynasty (1368— 1644) with the "reintegration" of 
the early Qing, the historian Jonathan Spence has 
contextualized the terms "orthodox" and "individual- 
ist" in the early Qing period: he suggests that "in 
Wang Hui s time, with Ming fragmentation a part of 
history, the orthodox were those who accepted the 
early Qing as a period of reintegration; the individual- 
ists were the unconvinced, those who chose to pursue 
their personal reintegration in a still fragmented 
world "^ Ju-hsi Chou delves further into the two terms 
in his essay "In Defense of Qing Orthodoxy": 

It may he that the terms orthodox and orthodoxy as 
conceived today, connote authority and rigidity in a doctrinaire 
or even reactionary sense. In the original Chinese^ zhengzong 
suggests the correct' and ^Hrue" "way. Orthodoxy in painting 
had the further connotation of being mainstream. Against this, 
the individualists and the Eccentrics were virtually com- 
ets. . . . Because of their brilliance, extending recognition to 
them is reasonable, but doing so one need not ignore the larger 
heavenly system of which they were apart.^ 

FROM DONG QICHANG TO WANG SHIMIN 
AND OTHERS 

As expounded earlier by the late Ming scholar- or 
literati-painter and critic Dong Qichang (1555—1636), 
the new orthodoxy of early-seventeenth-century 
Chinese painting was first and foremost a revolution- 
ary theory of artistic renewal, or reintegration, during 
a period in which the extreme factionalism of Ming 
court politics resulted in rancorous literary and artistic 

4 

debates among different schools of scholar-officials.^ 
A fundamental distinction separated those who 
worked as painters by profession (hangjid) from the 
literati-amateurs (lijiay who painted as an avocation. 
Literati-painting criticism sought to restore to paint- 
ing its ancient simplicity and truthfulness by **writing" 
the rock and tree forms calligraphically — with seal, 
clerical, and cursive brush techniques/^ 

Dong wrote, "When a scholar turns to painting, 
he applies to it the methods of writing unusual 
characters in grass or clerical scripts, making his trees 
resemble curved iron bars and his mountains look as 
if they were drawn in the sand. The easy path of the 
sweet and vulgar must be resolutely avoided. His 
painting will then have a scholarly breath [qi]. 
Otherwise, however competent a work may be, it 
already falls into the pernicious ways of professional 
artisans.** Technically, Dong equated painting with 
calligraphy by insisting that in painting, brushwork 
and form superseded mimetic representation: *'If one 
considers the uniqueness of scenery, then a painting 
is not the equal of real landscape; but if one consid- 
ers the wonderful excellence of brush and ink, then 
landscape can never equal painting/* 

As the leading literati-painting critic, Dong com- 
plained that when compared with ancient works, late 
Ming professional painting appeared to him ''sweet 
and vulgar** (^tiansuy ''fragmented" (^xisut)^ and flat: 

Ancient critics used to say that in applying the brush to paintings 
the brushwork must show concave and convex [three-' 
dimensional] forms. This is most difficult to explain! . . . 
Painters nowadays build hits and pieces ^suichuj into a great 
mountain^ which is the worst mistake! When facing a large 
hanging scroll, ancient masters deployed only three or four 
large %pening^and^closing^^ [fenhe or kaihe; or qifu^ ^^rising- 
and-falling^^] movements to complete its composition. . . . In 
ancient paintings forms do not grow in one direction, which is 
a secret now lost to us. This is why we can no longer achieve 
an ^^eight-sided wondrous effecf^ /^bamian linglong zhi 

qiaoj in painting. If a painter can both open and close a 
composition, and if through his texture method he is able to carry 
out all that he intends, then his painting will be successful . . . 
[and] by always weighing the void against the solid carefully 
with feeling his painting will be naturally exciting^^ 

A splendid example of what Dong Qichang saw as 
the "pernicious way** (moxie; literally, "deviFs way'*) of 
painting in the overly "ripe** late Ming professional 
style is Mount Qixia by Zhang Hong (1577— ca. 1652), a 
brilliant decorative hanging scroll more than eleven feet 
(341.9 centimeters) high that depicts the famous 
Buddhist tourist site with the Thousand Buddha Cliff, 
near Nanjing (fig. i).^^ During the sixteenth and early 
seventeenth centuries, an increase in tourism made 
realistic depictions of scenic landscape popular. 
Zhang Hong, a Wu School professional painter, 
recorded in his inscription that he had painted the 
scene after visiting it "in the rain." Following the Wu 
School convention of framing a steep valley in a 
narrow and tall format, Zhang showed layered details 
bathed in luminous color washes indicating the effect 
of rain, with sharply foreshortened buildings and a 
girdle wall marking the precipitous climb toward the 
summit. Yet, among literati critics, who cherished 
ancient expressive values, Zhang Hong s compelling 
new realism attracted little attention. 

Dong*s new "orthodox" theory of landscape art 
was closely linked to his efforts to reenvision an 
ancient "true** and "correct** lineage of what he 
called the Southern School of painting — namely, the 
southern Han-Chinese tradition of amateur-literati 
painting of the Mongol- Yuan period, beginning with 
Zhao Mengfu and followed by the Four Great Late 
Yuan Masters: Huang Gongwang (1269— 1354), Wu 
Zhen (1280—1354), Ni Zan (1306— 1374), and Wang 
Meng (1308—1385).^^ In his theory of the Northern 
and Southern Schools of painting, Dong viewed 
Wang Wei (701—761) of the Tang dynasty, the 
legendary poet and scholar-amateur painter of 

Fig. 2. Unidentified art- 
ist, formerly attributed to 
Wang Wei (701—761). 
Rivers and Mountains after 
Snow (detail), ca. iioo (?). 
HandscroU, ink on silk, 
II Ve X 67 V2 in. (28.4 X 
171.5 cm). Ogawa Collec- 
tion, Kyoto 

5 

Fig. 3. Dong Yuan 
(active 930s— 60s). Wintry 
Groves and Layered Banks 
(detail). Hanging scroll, 
ink and light color on 
silk, 71 V2 X 45 % in. 
(181.5 ^ "6-5 cm). 
Kurokawa Institute of 
Ancient Cultures, 
Ashiya, Japan 

Taiyuan, in the northern province of Shanxi, as the 
founding "patriarch'' of the Southern School In 1595 
Dong had the opportunity to see the handscroll 
Rivers and Mountains after Snow, formerly attributed to 
Wang Wei (fig. 2), which he took as an original work 
by the Tang master/^ That scrolls linear technique of 
swelling contour lines with thin hooklike modeling 
strokes reminded him of "a small Snow Scene by [the 
Yuan dynasty southern painter] Zhao Mengfu" that 
he once knew/* 

This "discovery'' enabled Dong to trace the 
"origin" of his Southern Schools stylistic lineage 
back to the Tang period (618—906). He theorized that 
the tradition had begun with Wang Wei in northern 
China, then was developed by the Southern Tang 
painters Dong Yuan (active 930s— 60s; fig. 3) and Juran 
(active ca. 960—85) in the south, who were followed 

II 

■ t 

by Zhao Mengfia and the Four Late Yuan Masters, also 
in the south. In a long colophon, dated 1596 and 
attached to the end of the Rivers and Mountains after 
Snow scroll, Dong argued, "When it came to texture 
[cun~\ patterns, every master from the Tang through 
the Song periods had followed a special tradition. . . . 
It was like the five branches of Chan Buddhism: as 
soon as you heard a single word or phrase, you knew 
immediately to which branch the speaker belonged." 
In a colophon dating to the 1610s about the same 
painting, he added, "Beginning with Wang Wei, 
landscape painters employed both texture strokes and 
ink washes. . . . Once the basic method was formu- 
lated, it was not difficult [for later painters] to follow 

1 • • ffZO 

and improvise. 

In reconstructing the so-called Southern School 
stylistic tradition, Dong took the round, parallel 
ropelike "hemp-fiber" (jptma^ texture patterns^^ of the 
late Yuan southern master Huang Gongwang as its 
principal technical marker, which he described as 
follows, "In painting mountains, one must show 
concave and convex forms. One begins by outlining 
mountain forms first according to their outward 
shapes and momentum [5^/], then proceeds within 
the outlined forms by applying straight and parallel 
texture strokes. This is the method of Zijiu [Huang 
Gongwang]. "^^ In Huang's masterpiece, Dwelling in the 
Fuchun Mountains, dated 1350 (figs. 4, 123), a painting 
Dong had acquired in 1596,^^ the fourteenth-century 
master transformed the abstract calligraphic rhythms 

6 

Fig. 5. Dong Qichang 
(1555—1636). River and 
Mountains on a Clear 
Autumn Day, ca. 1624—27. 
Handscroll, ink on 
paper, 15 V» x 53% in. 
(38,4 X 136.8 cm). The 
Cleveland Museum of 
Art, Purchase from the 
J. H. Wade Fund 
(1959.46) 

of his "hemp-fiber" texture patterns into writhing, 
pulsating, "rising-and-falling" mountain "veins," 
introducing a new dynamic physicality into late Yuan 
landscape painting. In Dong s own short handscroll 
after Huang Gongwang, River and Mountains on a Clear 
Autumn Day, of about 1624—27 (fig* 5), Huang s 
"hemp-fiber" texture (^ima cun) pattern is simplified 
into a calligraphic formula of "[filling] concave and 
convex forms , , . [with] straight and parallel texture 
strokes." The resulting cubistic rock forms are ranged 
diagonally in three ascending distances of the near, 
the middle, and the far, with "rising-and-falling" and 
" opening- and-closing" movements in space. As an 
overall concept, Dong used the ancient calligraphic 
principle of kinesthetic "momentum" (shi) to describe 
the "breath-movements" {qisht) of the landscape forms 
circulating throughout his composition. 

Art historically, the different southern and north- 
ern landscape styles had their tentative beginnings in 
two contrasting types of texture patterns (cunja) for 
modeling rocks. The "earthen mountain" (tushan) 
mode — identified with Dong Yuan and Juran in the 
south — showed softly rubbed parallel "hemp-fiber" 
brushstrokes in the shaded crevices of gently rolling 
mountain form. The "rocky mountain" {shishan) 
mode — developed by Jing Hao (active ca. 870— ca. 930), 
Guan Tong (active ca. 907—23), and Fan Kuan 
(ca. 960— ca. 1030) in the north — used a stippling 
technique to model billowing (^uimian, "devil-face") 
rock contours with jagged corners. Guo Xi 
(ca. 1000— ca. 1090), the late Northern Song land- 
scape master and theorist, was the first to identify 
these two landscape modes: "Some mountains are 
covered with earth; others with rocks. On earthen 

7 

mountains that are covered with rocks, the forests 
and trees are lean and tall; on rocky mountains that 
are covered with earth, the forests and trees are low 
and luxuriant 

The beginnings of the southern-style texture 
pattern can best be seen in the large hanging scroll 
Wintry Groves and Layered Banks by Dong Yuan,^^ which 
also found its way into Dong Qichang s collection 
(fig. 3). It was near the end of the eleventh century 
that the late Northern Song amateur-painter Mi Fu 
(1052— 1107) first rediscovered Dong Yuans *'plain and 
natural'* (jtingdan tianzhen) style, which depicted the 
softly rolling **earthen mountains" with parallel folds 
and the river-and-valley scenery of the Jiangnan 
region in southern China.^^ During the late thir- 
teenth and early fourteenth centuries. Wintry Groves 
and Layered Banks was one of the two principal models 
for the revival of the Dong Yuan style in the Yuan 
period (1271—1368),^^ 

In Zhao Mengfu s Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Hua 
Mountains, dated 1296 (fig. 7), Dongs **hemp-fiber ' 
pattern (fig* 6) was transformed into the round and 
centered, ropelike calligraphic brushstrokes (fig. 8) 
that became the model for the calligraphic revolution 
in Yuan landscape art*^^ From Dong Qichang s 
vantage point, his own River and Mountains on a Clear 

Autumn Day (fig. 5), which reflected the tripartite 
division of Dong Yuans Wintry Groves composition 
(fig. 3), wrought a second revolution in late Ming 
painting. By replacing mimetic representation with 
a self-conscious mode of artistic practice and by 
incorporating the painters bodily gesture and mark 
in **opening-and-closing shi' (fenhe shi) compositional 
principles, Dong s own landscape painting became 
the physical presentation of the painter s Self In Dong s 
paintings, we see the origins of both the great 
Orthodox and great Individualist masters of the early 
Qing period. 

My forthcoming essay **Chinese Calligraphy 
as Presenting the Self studies how Chinese artists 
have explored the possibility of self-expression 
and abstraction beyond mimetic representation or 
semiology.^^ Ancient Chinese figure painting, in the 
words of Gu Kaizhi (ca. 344— ca. 406), captures 
the spirit [_shen'\ through the form [xm^]'' (yixing 
xiesheri) — that is, through *Torm-likeness" {xingsi, or 
what the eye sees), an image achieves a heightened 
^'magical likeness'' (shensi)^^ And the devout early- 
fifth-century Buddhist layman Zong Bing (375—443) 
saw the ''reflections and traces" of nature captured 
in landscape painting as the spiritual emanations of 
real mountains and rivers.^ ^ For the critic Xie He 

8 

^ K n .;i *i 4f 

(active ca, 479—502), the First Principle in painting 
was "breath-resonance Hfe-motion" (^qiyun sheng- 
iong) — that is, the ''breath** of the artist (or the Self) 
that animates and motivates all things in nature,^^ 
Finally, the eighth-century Tang landscape master 
Zhang Zao (active ca. 766—78) described his work 
as "a reaching outward to imitate Creation, / and a 
turning inward to master the Mind"^^ By this 
dualistic way of thinking, Chinese painting had 
always been, at one and the same time, representing the 
Object (or imitating Creation) and presenting the Self 
(mastering the Mind). 

The key to Chinese painting, therefore, was its 
calligraphic brushwork. The subject of a calligraphic 

painting was known as the **trace of brush or ink** 
(hiji or moji) — that is, an extension of the artist*s 
bodily presence, his Self By the late seventeenth 
century, however, the Mustard Seed Garden Manual^ a 
technical guide for painters published in 1679, substi- 
tuted an earlier term used by Xie, yun, or "resonance,** 
with a homophone meaning "movement/*^^ While 
Xie*s term had described the painters affective 
response to the represented object as a kind of 
sympathetic magic, this modification referred to the 
movement of the artist*s body as his medium of 
expression* The new phrase "breath-movement 
life-motion** describes perfectly Dong Qichang*s 
calligraphically kinesthetic landscape painting. 

Fig. 7. Zhao Mengfu 
(1254—1322). Kutumn Col- 
ors on the Qiao and Hua 
Mountains, dated 1296. 
Handscroll, ink and color 
on paper, n '/« x 36 % in. 
(28.4 X 93.2 cm). National 
Palace Museum, Taipei 

Fig. 8. Detail, fig. 7 

9 

Fig. 9. Dong Qichang 
(1555— 1636). The Qinghian 
Mountains, dated 1617. 
Hanging scroll, ink on 
paper, 88 % x 26 Vz in. 
(224.5 X 67.2 cm). The 
Cleveland Museum of 
Art, Leonard C. Hanna, 
Jr. Bequest (1980.10) 

Fig. 10. Wang Meng 
(1308— 1385). Hermitage in 
the Qingbian Mountains, 
dated 1366. Flanging 
scroll, ink on paper, 
55 Vz X 16 % in. (141 X 
42.2 cm). Shanghai 
Museum 

10 

Dong Qichang s life and achievements have been 
well documented in modern scholarship* Born in 1555 
in Huating, Songjiang (modern Shanghai Municipal 
District), "to an obscure branch of the family, whose 
most notable members had for some generations 
achieved a mild prominence/*^^ Dong enjoyed a career 
that spanned four and a half decades, in which his 
ambition to win for himself high official positions 
and honors was surpassed only by his relentless 
pursuit of ancient masterworks as a connoisseur and 
art collector* Although Dong s artistic achievements 
were closely bound to his study of ancient works of 
art, his genius lay in his ability to achieve correspon- 
dence" (he) with ancient principles by critically 
"transforming*' (bian) his models* 

Of calligraphy Dong wrote, "The calligraphic 
styles of Wang Xizhi [303—361] and his son [Wang 
Xianzhi, 344—388] were exhausted by the Qi and 
Liang periods* In the early Tang, by which time Yu 
Shinan [558—638], Chu Suiliang [596—658], and 
others had 'transformed* the methods of the two 
Wangs, new 'correspondences* with the ancients were 
discovered* Wang Xizhi and his son were brought to 
life again***^^ And of painting, "While copying or 
tracing [a style] is easy, spiritual communion [with 
the ancients] is difficult. Juran followed Dong Yuan; 
Mi Fu followed Dong Yuan; Huang Gongwang 
followed Dong Yuan; and Ni Zan followed Dong 
Yuan* Although they all followed the same Dong 
Yuan, each produced something different. When an 
ordinary painter makes a copy, what he produces 
looks like every other copy. How can such a work be 
treasured by future generations?"^^ After acquiring 
Huang Gongwang s Fuchun scroll (fig. 4), for example, 
Dong wrote in a colophon dated 1596, "My master, 
my master! From the smallest hills to five Cosmic 
Peaks, all are contained within this painting!** Later, 
on his own River and Mountains on a Clear Autumn Day 
(fig. 5), he added, "Huang Gongwang*s River and 
Mountains on a Clear Autumn Day is like this. I only 
regret that the ancient master cannot see this painting 
or mmel 

Soon after earning his metropolitan jinshi (advanced 
civil service) degree in 1589, Dong began to collect 
Song and Yuan paintings with astonishing success* In 
1590 he acquired his first major Song work. River Village 
on a Clear Summer Day by Zhao Lingrang (active 
ca. 1070— after iioo), now in the Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston*"*^ In 1597, a year after obtaining Huang 
Gongwang*s Fuchun scroll, he quickly added to his 
collection two important attributions to Dong Yuan, 
Xiao and Xiang Rivers (Palace Museum, Beijing)^^ and 
Residents of the Capital (National Palace Museum, 

Taipei).^^ In his own Qinghian Mountains, dated 1617 
(fig. 9) — which closely follows Wang Meng*s simi- 
larly titled Hermitage in the Qinghian Mountains, dated 
1366 (fig* 10) — Dong reached back to recapture the 
"manner of Dong Yuan** as the source of the famous 
earlier work.^^ 

Up to this moment, Chinese landscape painting 
had seen a systematic diminution of elements piled 
up vertically in the picture plane*^'* After the spatial 
integration of elements was achieved by a unified 
ground plane during the Yuan period, Ming painters 
had turned back to the flat, decorative picture surface. 
Dong Qichang*s radical transformation of painting 
in calligraphic abstraction fundamentally altered 
landscape composition. In Dong*s Qinghian Mountains, 
the rising-and- falling, opening- and-closing rock 
forms and the optically fused foliage patterns jump 
back and forth within the two-dimensional planar Fig. n. Detail, fig. 9 

1 1 

Fig. 12. Dong Qichang (1555— 1636). Landscape in the Style of Dong Yuan, from 
Landscapes, dated 1630. Leaf A in an album of eight paintings, ink on paper, 9 % x 
6 % in. (24.5 X 16 cm). The Metropohtan Museum of Art, New York, Edward 
Elliott Family Collection, Gift of Douglas Dillon, 1986 (1986.266.5) 

Fig. 13. Dong Qichang (1555—1636). Landscape in the Styk ofNi Zan, from Landscapes, dated 
1630. Leaf B in an album of eight paintings (see fig. 12) 

surface structure (fig. 11). Elements of the near, the 
middle, and the far are collapsed together into 
palpably undulating breath-movements that circulate 
through interconnected landscape forms. 

An important theme of Dong Qichang s late work, 
executed after 1630, was his search for a Great Synthe- 
sis of northern and southern landscape styles in the 
works of the quintessential Individualist painter Ni 
Zan. In the album Landscapes, dated 1630 (figs. 12, 13), 
Dong begins by contrasting Ni s two foundational 
(what he calls "bone marrow" [sui~\) styles: the round, 
earthen ("southern") mode of Dong Yuan and Juran 
and the angular, rocky ("northern") mode of Guan 
Tong and Fan Kuan. In successive leaves, Dong 
juxtaposes various "earthen" and "rocky" themes by 
Juran, Mi Fu, and others in order to evoke different 
paradigmatic styles of the Northern Song period.^^ 

Then, in Landscape in the Manner ofNi Zan (fig. 14), which 
is dated March 14, 1634, a month after his eightieth-5w/ 

birthday, Dong celebrated his own Great Synthesis 
of northern and southern styles. Containing both 
parallel round texture strokes and crisp angular ones, 
the tightly packed, diagonally ranged rectilinear rock 
forms evoke Northern Song monumentality by 
winding back across the taU picture format in a 
powerful S-curve.^^ Described by Wang Yuanqi as 
longmai, or the "dragon vein," this serpentine move- 
ment became an important compositional principle in 
later seventeenth-century landscape painting.^^ Dong 
expressed his satisfaction in a colophon on this 
painting: "Mount Xi in Wuxi is [the same as Mount] 
Wubing, / 1 regret that Ni Zan is no longer with 
us. /There are misty rosy clouds filling in among the 
bone marrows [of the landscape]. /You must know 
that my methods and yours are the same." 

Back in 1598, through the efforts of his mentor, 
Wang Xijue (1534— 1611), senior grand secretary to the 
Ming Wanli emperor, Dong Qichang was appointed a 

12 

tutor to the heir apparent. To avoid jealousy at the 
court aroused by his influence with the crown prince, 
Dong chose to retire in 1599 to his hometown, 
Huating, to tend to artistic pursuits and family 
interests. In 1605 he became tutor inTaicang to the 
retired grand secretary's grandson Wang Shimin 
(born 1592, the eldest of the Four Wangs), a fortu- 
nate young man whose passion for collecting ancient 
paintings with Dong s help was encouraged and 
supported by his grandfather. 

A giant album of twenty-two reduced copies of 
Song and Yuan masterpieces, with its title piece 
bearing four large characters, Xiao Zhong Xian Da 
(To See Large within Small), written by Dong in the 
late 1620s (National Palace Museum, Taipei; fig. 15), 
answers the description of an oversize album of Song 
and Yuan model compositions that Wang Shimin was 
said to have commissioned and to have carried 
around with him: "[Shimin] once selected some of 
the most successful ancient works in methods and in 
breath [qi], twenty-four in all, and had reduced copies 
of them made and mounted in a giant album. He 
took this album with him wherever he went to serve 
as his model book. Thus in his works, every composi- 
tional detail, every outline, texture, and ink wash had 
its origins in ancient sources.""*^ Judging from the five 
original compositions still extant — including Travelers 
amid Streams and Mountains by Fan Kuan (fig. 16) and 
Snow Sceney formerly attributed to Juran (fig. 18)^^ — 
the reduced paintings are meticulously exact copies 
of the originals (figs. 17, 19). 

In helping the younger man, Dong had passed on 
many of the finest works from his own collection. In 
eighteen of the album s extant twenty-two reduced 
copies, the painting on the right-hand leaf is accom- 
panied on the left-hand leaf by a colophon signed 
and sealed by Dong, Exact transcriptions of inscrip- 
tions he had written earlier on the original works, 
these colophons give the title and attribution of the 
original composition, argue for its attribution, and 
comment on stylistic sources and provenance, thus 
providing a veritable record of Dong s collecting 
activities from the late 1590s onward.^^ Presumably by 
1627, the latest date mentioned in the colophons, all 
the paintings shown in the album had entered Wang 
Shimins collection, and Shimins famous album was 
made shortly thereafter. 

By the 1 660s and 1670s, owing to the declining 
Wang family fortune after the fall of the Ming 
dynasty in 1644, Shimin had lost most of his ancient 
Song and Yuan art collections. The To See Large within 
Small album of "reduced copies," one of Wang s most 
valued remaining treasures, thus provided the primary 

Fig. 14. Dong Qichang 
(1555— 1636). Landscape in the 
Manner ofNi Zan, dated 
1654. Hanging scroll, ink 
on paper, 39 V2 x loY^ in. 
(100.4 X 26.4 cm). Private 
collection, New York 

13 

Fig. 15. Dong Qichang (1555—1636). 
Frontispiece to To See Large 
Within Small (^Xiao Zhong Xian 
Da), album by Chen Lian 
(ca. 1590S— ca. 1640s), late 1620s. 
Ink on paper, 16 % x 26 % in. 
(42.8 X 66.8 cm). National 
Palace Museum, Taipei 

V? 

h 

Fig. 16. Fan Kuan (ca. 960— 
ca. 1030). Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains, 
ca. 1000. Hanging scroll, 
ink and color on silk, 
B1V4 X 40% in. (206.3 ^ 
103.3 National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

Fig. 17. Chen Lian (ca. 1590s— 
ca, 1640s). Landscape after Fan Kuans 
"Travelers amid Streams and Moun^ 
tains" Leaf B in To See Large within 
Small, late 1620s. Ink and light 
color on silk, 22 % x 13 % in. 
(57.5 X 34.9 cm). National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

14 

Fig. i8. Unidentified artist, formerly attributed to Juran 
(active ca. 960—85). Snow Scene, ca. iioo (?). Hanging scroll, 
ink on silk, 40% x 20^8 in. (103.6 x 52.5 cm). National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

Fig. 19. Chen Lian 
(ca. 1590S— ca. 1640s). 
Landscape after Juran s 
"Snow Scene,*' Leaf E in 
To See Large within Small, 
late 1620S. Ink on silk, 
21% X 11 in. (55.5 X 
27.8 cm). National 
Palace Museum, 
Taipei 

source materials for the formation of the early Qing 
Orthodox School of painting during the second 
half of the seventeenth century. Through the great 
international loan exhibition "The Century of Tung 
Ch'i-ch'ang [Dong Qichang], 1555— 1636** (1992), a 
number of exact copies of some of the paintings in 
the album, most notably those by Wang Jian, Wang 
Hui, and Wu Li (1632— 1718), have surfaced and 
received careful scholarly examination/^ A rich 
tapestry of complex interactions between a coterie 
of creative spirits — artists and art collectors — of 
diverse backgrounds in what might modestly be 
termed the Taicang (Wang Shimin s hometown) 
Creative Arts Project now begins to emerge. 

First and foremost, there is the question of the 
authorship of Wang Shimin s album. Following 

eighteenth-century palace records, the official 
designation of the album (^zhongho 431—38) at the 
National Palace Museum, Taipei, reads: **Ming 
[Dynasty] Dong Qichangs Colophons to Reduced 
Copies of Works by Song and Yuan Masters" 
(Ming Dong Qichangfang Song Yuan ren suohen huahay^^ 
Because they are very close replicas and Dong never 
"copied" ancient works, it was first thought that 
young Wang Shimin himself might have made 
these paintings.^^ But Shimins brushwork, being 
strongly influenced by Dongs, was likewise literati- 
calligraphic and abstract. In Landscape in the Style of 
Huang Gongwang, dated 1666 (fig. 20), Shimin fol- 
lowed Dongs dictum of "[filling] concave and 
convex forms . . . [with] straight and parallel texture 
strokes." It seems that the very "antique brusque 

15 

Fig. 20. Wang Shimin 
(1592— 1680). Landscape 
in the Style of Huang 
Gongwang, dated 1666. 
Hanging scroll, ink on 
paper, 53 x 22 !4 in. 
(134.6 X 56.5 cm). The 
Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York, Ex 
coll.: C. C. Wang Fam- 
ily, Gift of Douglas 
Dillon, 1980 (1980.426.2) 

Fig. 21. Chen Lian 
(ca. 1590S— ca. 1640s). 
Landscape Dedicated to Wang 
Shimin (detail), dated 
1624. Handscroll, ink on 
paper, 8 % in. x 12 ft. 
4 in. (22.4 x 375.8 cm). 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

1 4 i 

If* 

If 

I 

elegance" (^uzhuo) of Shimin s brush technique 
disquahfies him as a Hkely candidate for the 
chameleon-hke mimicry so ably, and aptly, exhibited 
by these works/^ 

In 1962 Qi Gong first proposed the little-known 
Songjiang School professional painter Chen Lian 
(ca. 1590S— ca* 1640s) as the author of Wang Shimins 
album.^^ Wang Jians Copies of an Album of Song and Yuan 
Landscapes in Wang Shimins Collection (Shanghai Museum) 
bears a colophon by Jian, dated 1663, that reads: 

Master Yanke [Wang Shimin] of Taiyuanfrom the district 
of Lou [Taicang] . . , once asked an old acquaintance Chen 
Mingqing [Chen Lian] from Huating to make a reduced^size 
album of Song and Yuan masterpieces in his collection that he 
could carry with him to enjoy at leisure. ... I have now 
made copies of Chens copies to present to [my fraternal elder 
WenshuJ. . . . May Wenshu kindly forgive their shortcomings 
and accept them for what they are^^ 

Chen Lian was a pupil of Zhao Zuo (ca. 1570— after 
1633), a Songjiang professional painter who, along 
with his colleague Shen Shichong (active ca. 1607—40), 
had become famous in late Ming painting lore for 
being among Dong Qichang s many acknowledged 
ghost painters (Jiaibi; literally, "substitute brushes ").^^ 
In Landscape Dedicated to Wang Shimin^ dated 1624 (fig. 21), 
Chen Lian painted in a smooth, disciplined, and 
representationally successful style with delicate 
outlines and a soft, ink-washed modeling technique 
ideally suited for "copying** ancient masterworks. This 
supports Wang Jians evidence of Chen Lian as "an 
old acquaintance . . . from Huating" to whom Wang 
Shimin had turned to create this most valuable album. 

In Landscape after Fan Kuans ^'Travelers amid Streams and 
Mountains" Leaf B of the To See Large within Small album 
(fig. 17), Chen Lian faced the difficult challenge of 
reducing Fans monumental composition (fig. 16), 

16 

Fig. 22. Wang Jian 
(1598— 1677). Landscape after 
Juran's "Snow Scene," dated 
1670. First in a set of 
twelve hanging scrolls, 
ink and color on silk, 
each scroll 78 % x 22 % in, 
(200.4 ^ 5^-5 '^^y Shang- 
hai Museum 

Fig. 23. Wang Jian 
(1598— 1677). Landscape after 
Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains," 
dated 1670. Tenth in a set 
of twelve hanging scrolls, 
ink and color on silk, 
each scroll 78 Vs x 22 % in. 
(200.4 ^ 5^*5 Shang- 
hai Museum 

7 

which is nearly seven feet high (206.3 centimeters), to 
about one-third of its original size. In Fans land- 
scape, individual elements large or small are seen 
frontally, one by one, as discretely conceived images; 
the very conceptual separateness of such imagery 
effects a psychological remove from the viewing 
subject. This early Northern Song **high-distance** 
{gaoyuanf^ view is divided vertically into three 

superimposed sections. The near and middle-distance 
elements occupy only a little more than the bottom 
third of the picture plane, while the remainder is 
dominated by a towering monolith flanked by two 
subsidiary side peaks that abruptly soar from an 
ocean of unfathomable mist below. The viewer s eye 
is thus made to leap forward in a three-step progres- 
sion from the foreground, across to the middle 

Fig. 25. Zhao Mengfu 
(1254— 1322). The Mind 
Landscape ofXie Youyu 
(detail), ca. 1290. 
Handscroll, ink and 
color on silk, 10 x 
46 Ys in. (27.4 X 117 cm). 
Princeton University 
Art Museum, Edward 
L, Elliott Family 
Collection, Museum 
purchase, Fowler 
McCormick, Class of 
1921, Fund (yi984-i3) 

18 

Fig. 26. Wang Jian (1598— 1677). 
Landscape after Zhao Mengfus "Mind 
Landscape ofXie Youyu," ca. 1670s. 
Album leaf, ink and color on 
paper, 13 x loVs in. (33.1 x 25.7 cm). 
Private collection, New York 

distance, then upward to the dizzying heights above. 
In his reduced copy, Chen Lian brought the land- 
scape forward and closer to the spectator by tying 
the near, middle, and far elements into a diagonally 
zigzag surface pattern* Likewise, in tackling the 
Snow Scene formerly attributed to Juran (fig. 18), which 
is compartmentalized into three separate sections, 
Chen clung to late Ming surface design by piling up 
elements vertically in the picture plane (fig. 19). 

As mentioned earlier, there exists a large corpus of 
close copies as well as free imitations of the To See 
Large mthin Small album, dating from the 1660s 
through the 1670s. Among those who painted such 
works was the second of the Four Wangs, named 
Jian, who was also born in Taicang, in 1598. Jians 
great-grandfather Wang Shizhen (1526— 1590) was a 
literary luminary whose theories had greatly influ- 
enced Dong Qichang s thought. Joining Wang 
Shimins Taicang experiment in putting Dong s new 
Orthodox theory into practice, Wang Jian worked 
toward a Great Synthesis of the paradigmatic Song 

and Yuan styles. Eight of the twelve compositions in 
Jians Copies of 1663 originated in the To See Large within 
Small album.^^ And in Landscapes in the Styles of Old 
Masters, 2l set of twelve tall but narrow hanging scrolls, 
dated 1670 (figs, zz, 23), Jian turned Chen Lians Travelers 
and Snow Scene (figs. 17, 19) into two dramatically 
elongated vertical compositions that illustrate his Great 
Synthesis — the former executed in southern ''hemp- 
fiber** texture strokes in monochrome ink wash; the 
latter, in northern "raindrop** (yudian) texture dots 
finished with a light **blue-and-green** color wash. 

Wang Jians synthesis of the two landscape styles 
may be traced back to Dong Qichang*s early colo- 
phon, dated 1595, written on Rivers and Mountains after 
Snow, formerly attributed to Wang Wei (fig. 2), which 
linked Zhao Mengfu*s stylistic origin to that earlier 
master: **Once at the capital, in the collection of the 
Gaoyu general Yang, I saw a small Snow Scene by Zhao 
Mengfu using gold-dust [and blue-green] colors, 
whose distant elegance distinguished it from all 
ordinary works. I thought immediately that [Zhao] 

Fig. 27. Wang Hui (1632-1717), Copy after Chen Lian's Landscape after Fan Kuans Fig. 28. Wang Hui (1632-1717). Copy after Chen Lian's Landscape after 

"Travelers amid Streams and Mountains/' from To See Large within Small, dated 1672. Leaf Juran's ''Snow Scene," from To See Large within Small, dated 1672. Leaf C 

D in an album of twenty-one paintings with two leaves of calligraphy, ink and in an album of twenty-one paintings (see fig, 27) 
color on paper or silk, average 21 % x 13 % in. (55.5 x 34.5 cm). Shanghai Museum 

had learned this style from Wang Wei. . . * When I 
perused this scroll [by Wang Wei], I found exactly 
what I saw in that small scroll by Wuxing [Zhao]I''^° 
A comparison of the rock and tree forms of Rivers 
and Mountains after Snow (fig, 24) with those of Zhao 
Mengfu s early archaistic blue-and-green work The 
Mind Landscape of Xie Youyu, of about 1290 (fig. 25), 
reveals similarities in linear technique: each defines 
layered crevices of rounded boulders with thin, swelling 
contour lines and parallel modeling strokes. In Wang 
Jians album leaf Landscape after Zhao Men^us 'Mind 
Landscape of Xie Youyu^^ from about the 1670s (fig. 26), 
the swelling, convoluted rock contours with parallel 
interior modeling strokes provide the technical clue 
for Jians Great Synthesis of the northern and 
southern styles. 

Finally, the To See Large 'within Small album by Wang 
Hui (the third of the Four Wangs), dated summer 
167Z (figs. 27, 28), contains exact facsimilies of Chen 
Lians copies (figs. 17, 19).^^ In his signed colophon, 
dated 1702 (fig. 29), Hui states: 

In the Tcnziyear [t6yz] I was invited to [Master Wang 
Shimins] villa at Xitian to spend the summer with him. . . . He 
brought out all his collected works [Chen Lians To See Large 
within Small album] . . . and asked me to paint this album 
[Wang Hui^s own reproduction of To See Large within 
SmallJ. , . . It is now more than thirty years later As I now 
look through this album it is like meeting again with my old 
friend, as I can almost hear [him] coughing and laughing in front 
of me! . . . On the twenty fourth day of the fifth [lunar] month 
of the guiwei jy^ar [ijoz] Wang Hui ofHaiyu [Yushan].^^ 

Fig. 29. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Colophon, dated 1702, to To See 
Large within Small (see figs. 27, 28) 

By 1672 Wang Shimin had lost most of his original 
Song and Yuan collections. It remained for Wang 
Hui, who worked under Wang Shimins close super- 
vision in the 1660s through the 1670s, to complete the 
Taicang project of creating a Great Synthesis of Song 
and Yuan styles for the early Qing Orthodox School 
of painting. 

WANG HUl's GREAT SYNTHESIS, OR 

^'repossessing the past** 

Born in 1632 in Yushan (Mount Yu), a village near 
Changshu, north of Suzhou (modern Jiangsu 
Province), Wang Hui came from a long line of 
professional painters of humble means.^^ At the age 
of sixteen sui (fifteen years old) in 1647, he began 

studying with a local painter named Zhang Ke (active 
mid-seventeeth century). Discovered by Wang Jian in 
1651, young Hui was introduced by Jian to the great 
Loudong master Wang Shimin in Taicang. The latter 
was so impressed by Hui s brilliance that he promptly 
invited Hui to study and copy all the ancient master- 
works at Xitian, his family villa in the western suburb 
of Taicang. 

Wang Hui s virtuoso performance during the 
1 660s and 1670S dazzled his admirers, as noted by his 
closest friend, the painter Yun Shouping (1633— 1690): 
"I have witnessed Wang Hui s painting undergo 
several metamorphoses. . . . With each metamorpho- 
sis, it arrived at a new summit."^"* In Landscape in the 
Style of Huang Gongwang, dated 1660 (pis. 2, 15), the 
youthful Hui (at the age of twenty-eight) begins by 
following Dong Qichang s calligraphic formulation 
of Huang s style: he fills the concave and convex rock 
contours with parallel texture strokes and ink dots. 
While a close view of Hui s brushwork shows his 
natural proclivity for fluency and charm, the overall 
composition is formal and restrained. The dedicatory 
inscription in the upper right corner of the painting 
(see pi. 15), which was presented as a birthday gift 
to "the venerable old gentleman Yu," starts with a 
four-word couplet (fig. 30): '^Mountains and streams 
round and fiall; / Grass and trees resplendent and lush" 
(Shanchuan hunhou / Caomu huazt)* Wang took these two 
lines, originally written by Zhang Yu (1283— 1350) in 
praise of a painting by Huang Gongwang, from 
Dong Qichang s colophon on Chen Lians To See Large 
within Small album, Leaf H (fig. 31).^^ In comparing 
the recipients good health to luxuriant mountains 
and streams, the felicitous eulogy — perhaps an 
intimation of the future master of Landscapes 
Clear and Radiant" — resonates with pride and 
satisfaction in the peaceful, prosperous world of 
the early Qing. 

Wang made use of the same couplet in his 
dedication to Landscape in the Style of Juran, dated 1664 
(pi. 3). Hui s composition in this painting reflects 
that of the Snow Scene formerly attributed to Juran 
(fig. 18), but his immediate model was Chen Lians 
Landscape after Juran^s ^^Snow Scene" (fig. 19), Leaf E of 
the To See Large within Small album. Freely adapting 
elements from Chens composition, Hui enlarged the 
group of pine trees in the left foreground, linking it 
diagonally with the smaller pine forests in the middle 
distance, which in turn he related rhythmically to the 
great serpentine movement of the central mountain 
peak in the background. By turning ropelike "hemp- 
fiber" texture strokes into kinetic carriers of life and 
energy, he made it possible for individual brushstrokes 

to grow and expand until the whole becomes a great 
billowing pattern of undulating eddies and counter- 
eddies of "breath-force'' movements. Wang Hui 
observed, "I must use the brush and ink of the Yuan 
to move the peaks and valleys of the Song, and infuse 
them with the breath-resonance of the Tang. I will 
then have a work of the Great Synthesis/* 

Wang Hui did not believe, however, that calli- 
graphic abstraction should displace mimetic repre- 
sentation in painting. Disagreeing with Dong 
Qichangs dictum that "in painting it is better to be 
[descriptively] obscure [an~\ than obvious [ming]!'^^ 
he wrote: "Painting has its 'obvious' and 'obscure' 
aspects. These are like the two wings of a bird; 
neither could be used singly at the expense of the 
other. When the obvious and the obscure are equally 
perfected, a spirited 'breath' will emerge ."^^ In Snow 
Clearings after Li Cheng, dated to the spring of 1669 
(pi. 4), Hui's study of the early Northern Song 
master, who lived from 919 to 967, represents a 
radical departure from Dong Qichang's narrow range 
of Southern School idioms — as represented by Dong 
Yuan, Juran, and Huang Gongwang — of "[filling] 
concave and convex forms . . . with parallel texture 
strokes.** Li Cheng's "rocky mountain" idiom of 
northeastern China, with its jagged "devil-face" rock 
formation and spiky "crab-claw" (^xiezhao) wintry trees, 
demanded of the artist representational skill more 

Opposite: PL 2. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Land- 
scape in the Styk of Huang Gongwang, dated 1660 
(detail, pi. 15) 

Fig. 30. Wang Hui (1632—1717). Colophon, 
dated 1660, to Landscape in the Styk of Huang 
Gongwang (detail, pi. 15) 

f 4^ "I 

4 ! T ^ /I 

than mere calligraphic strength. Here, Wang Hui 
displayed his lyrical talent for describing snow-clad 
peaks in enchanted stillness. Through filigreed 
patterns of wintry branches perching over a frozen 
stream, temple structures and cottages are seen 
nestled in mountain folds winding into the far 
distance. Tints of reddish brown scattered among 
banks and cliffs suggest vestiges of fall that also 
foretell the coming of spring. 

Fig, 31. Dong Qichang (1555—1636). Colophon 
(detail of Leaf H) to Chen Lian (ca. 1590s— 
ca. 1640s), To See Large within Small, late 1620s. 
Ink on paper, 19 ^2 x 11 in. (49.5 x 29.9 cm). 
National Palace Museum, Taipei 

n 

n 

"t 
If 

I 

4^ 

4 

t 

It 

V 

m 

If 

PL 3 (cat. 4). Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Landscape in the 
Style of Juran, dated 1664. 
Hanging scroll, ink on 
paper, 51 % x 25 % in. (131 x 
65.5 cm). Princeton Univer- 
sity Art Museum, Gift of 
Mr, and Mrs. Earl Morse 
(71979-O 

24 

PL 4 (cat. 9). Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Snow Clearing, 
after Li Cheng, dated 1669, 
Hanging scroll, ink and 
color on paper, 43 % x 14 in. 
(110.8 X 35.5 cm). The Met- 
ropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York, Ex coll.: C. C. 
Wang Family, Gift of 
Mr. and Mrs. Earl Morse, 
in honor of Professor 
Wen Pong, 1978 (1978.13) 

^5 

And in The Colors of Mount Taihang, dated to the 
autumn of 1669 (pis. 5, 39A,b), the young Orthodox 
master recaptured the style in which Guan Tong and 
Fan Kuan depicted the Taihang Mountains in north- 
ern China by combining the craggy rock contours 
with a stippled "raindrop** dotting pattern. Hui s 
inscription on the painting reads, "In Guangling 
[modern Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province], at the home 
of a noble person, I once saw a small scroll by Guan 
Tong. With its cloudy peaks racing together in an 
oppressive and dense atmosphere, it pierced my heart 
and shook up my eyes. Today ... I follow its method 
and paint this Colors of Taihang. I hope it exhibits some 
of the deep and heroic atmosphere of the north 
country, rather than merely posturing with pretty 
details.** The contemporary scholar Chin-Sung Chang 
has proposed that this "noble person** in Yangzhou 
was Li Zongkong (161 8— 1701), who had earned his 
jinshi degree in 1647, and has suggested a connection 
between Wang Hui and Autumn Mountains at Dusk, 
formerly attributed to Guan Tong (see fig. 66), which 
Li had once owned.^^ 

In adapting Guan Tong*s vertical composition to a 
hands croll format, Hui turned the convoluted rock 
contours with stippled "raindrops** into a giant, 
billowing mountain form, known as the "dragon 
vein** or "artery** (longmai^, that runs throughout the 
painting.^^ Wang Yuanqi (the youngest of the Four 
Wangs) credited Hui with the discovery of this 
so-called dragon-vein principle in seventeenth- 
century landscape composition: 

Although dragon veins that open and close^ rise and fall in a 
composition have been present in ancient paintings^ they were 
never explicitly pointed out. Now that Wang Hui has made 
them clear J all students know what to follow. . . . The dragon 
vein marks the hreath-force of a painting; its starting point 
may he oblique or symmetrical^ rounded or fragmented^ broken 
or continuous^ hidden or apparent. . . . If the dragon, in its 
many oblique or frontal, unified or broken manifestations . . . 
is lively and vivid, the painting will be true!^^ 

Wang Hui*s Mist Floating on a Distant Peak, in Imitation 
of Juran, dated 1672 (pi. 6), features a great, heaving 
"dragon- vein** mountain mass with round calli- 
graphic brushstrokes in interlocking patterns com- 
posed of arcs, circles, and dots. Colophons inscribed 
at the top of the painting by Hui and by his teachers 
Wang Shimin and Wang Jian describe the painting as 
an exciting new stylistic discovery.^^ Hui points out, 
"This painting by Juran does not make use of any 

PI. 5. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). The Colors of Mount Taihang, dated 1669 
(detail, pi. 39A,b) 

paths, streams, buildings, boats, or bridges. It depends 
solely on broad and heroic compositional forces 
[5^/].** Wang Shimin marvels at the way "a primal 
breath [yuanqi] fills the composition. A feeling of 
joyful exhilaration moves freely in it, and the texture 
strokes are divinely inspired**; Wang Jian sees it as 
"a living reincarnation of Juran!**^^ Hui*s composi- 
tion reflects lessons learned from his encounter in 
1672 with Seeking the Dao in Autumn Mountains, formerly 
attributed to Juran (fig. 32). This particular model 
taught Hui how the "dragon- vein** principle, unfet- 
tered by superfluous descriptive details, could trans- 
form landscape painting into an orchestration of 
pure calligraphic brushstrokes in abstract space. 

The year renzi (1672) is important for our under- 
standing of Wang Hui's thriving artistic enterprises 
during the 1660s and 1670s. In 1672, as previously 
mentioned, he was invited to Wang Shimins villa at 
Xitian and asked to paint his copy of Chen Lian*s lb 
See Large within Small album, which was still owned by 
Shimin. The Qing government's punishing fiscal 
policies in the Jiangnan area in the i66os had forced 
Shimin to sell his collections of ancient art to pay his 
family*s grain taxes.^^ As Hui*s fame as a painter grew 
and his works were increasingly sought by collectors, 
Shimin was in a position to exploit his protege for 
additional income.^^ There exists a series of letters 
firom him to both his own son and to Hui, dating to 
1666 and later, in which he complains about Wang 
Hui*s reluctance to "lift his brush for any social 
occasion** and begs, cajoles, and pressures the artist for 
better service.^^ As early as 1669, the well-known art 
patron and critic Zhou Lianggong (1612— 1672) noted 
that the "people of Wu [Suzhou] asked [Wang Hui] 
to paint, then mounted his works as antique paintings 
to deceive collectors,** adding matter-of-factly that 
Wang*s work "could easily compete with those of 
ancient masters.**^^ 

A famous forgery made after Fan Kuans master- 
piece Travelers amid Streams and Mountains (fig. 16), 
known simply as "Fan Kuans Travelers' (pi. 7), was 
perpetrated by Wang Shimin and Wang Hui in 1671.^^ 
The present mounting of the forged painting shows 
two colophons, one by Wang Shimin, dated 1671, and 
another by Song Junye (ca. 1662— 1713), a pupil of 
Wang Hui, dating from a quarter of a century later. 
Shimins inscription (fig. 33) reads: 

Of the Song and Yuan masterpieces in my family s collection, 
two fifths were acquired in the capital and the other three^ 
fifths came from Dong Qichang. . . . With the passage of 
time . . . only one^ or two-tenths of what I once owned still 
remains. Recently, going through an old trunk, I brought out 

PL 6 (cat. 13). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Mist Floating on a Distant Peak, in Imita- 
tion of Juran, dated 1672. Hanging 
scroll, ink on silk, 76 x 28 % in. (193 x 
71.5 cm). Princeton University Art 
Museum, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Earl 
Morse (yi973-9) 

PI. 7 (cat. ii). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers 
amid Streams and Mountains," ca. 1671. 
Hanging scroll, ink and color on 
silk, 61 Vs X 29 K in. (155.3 ^ 744 
National Palace Museum, Taipei 

30 

Fig. 33. Wang Shimin (1592— 1680). 
Colophon, dated 1671, to Wang Hui's 
Landscape after Fan Kuans "Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains" (see Catalogue, 
no. 11) 

Fig. 34. Song Junye (ca. 1662— 1713). Colo- 
phon, dated 1696, to Wang Hui's Landscape 
after Fan Kuan's '^Travelers amid Streams and 
Mountains' (see Catalogue, no, 11) 

this Fan [Kuan] Travelers. Its silk in perfect condition^ 
the radiantly brilliant work is truly a divine object! I am 
now in my eightieth year. Retired from worldly affairs^ I 
devote myself to studying ancient masterworks for amuse^ 
ment. Having remounted this scroll^ I mark the occasion with 
these words. 

Song Junye s inscription, dated 1696 (fig. 34), 
sixteen years after Shimin died, recounts how Song 
had viewed this "Fan Kuans Travelers" in Wang Hui's 
presence in Wang Shimins old studio in Taicang. 
Moved by Song s appreciation of "this authentic 
work by Fan Kuan, a rare treasure of the world . . . 
filled with mist and clouds and thickly amassed trees," 
Wang Hui graciously made a reduced copy of it and 
"presented [it to Song] to reward [his] enthusiasm/*^^ 
The fact that Fan Kuans Travelers amid Streams and 
Mountains bears the seals of the famous collector 
Liang Qingbiao (1620—1691)^*^ suggests that Wang 
Shimin had already sold Fan Kuans original to Liang 
by 1671, when he commissioned Hui to create a 
replica that he named "Fan Kuans Travelers!' Thus at 
Shimins old home, in 1696, Song Junye could have 
seen only the replica and not the original Fan Kuan. 

It is also clear that Wang Hui had himself never 
seen the original Fan Kuan, the immediate model for 
his "replica** being Chen Lians Landscape after Fan 

Kuan^s ^^ravelers amid Streams and Mountains!^ Leaf B of 
Chens To See Large within Small album (fig. 17). In 
making a facsimile of Chens reduced copies at 
Shimins behest in 1672 (fig. 27),^^ Hui copied his 
model faithfully stroke for stroke. But when faced 
with the problem of enlarging from Chens painting 
to recreate "Fan Kuans Travelers" which measures 
61 % by 29 V4 inches (155.3 by 74.4 centimeters), Hui 
wisely avoided following the former s simplified 
outlines and rock forms. Instead, he reinvented his 
Fan Kuan "replica" with energized "raindrop" 
texture patterns and billowing rock contours to 
fashion a monumental "dragon- vein" mountain 
composition (pi. 7). 

A clear indication of how brilliantly Wang Hui s 
forgeries had succeeded was that more than half a 
century later, when both Fan Kuans original and his 
" Travelers' had entered the imperial collection of the 
Qianlong emperor (r. 1736—95), it was the "replica" 
that won the emperors encomium, written on the 
painting itself: 

The mountains more heroic than elegant^ 

And waterfalls more rapid than wide, 

Such is the scenery of our Northern land, 

Where travelers sing, '^How difficult is the road ahead!" 

Gusts make ten thousand leaves fly, 

Pis. 8-II (cat. 14). 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
In Pursuit of Antiquity: 
Landscapes after Song and 
Yuan Masters, dated 
1673. Leaves A Qhis page, 
above), D Qbis page, hehw), 
E (^opposite, above), and 
F (opposite, below) in an 
album of twelve paint- 
ings, nine in ink on 
paper and three in ink 
and color on paper, 
6%-8% X Iiy4-i3y4 in. 
(17.6—22.6 X 29.8—33.5 cm). 
Princeton University 
Art Museum, Gift of 
Mr, and Mrs. Earl 
Morse (yi973-67) 

Where clouds rise through distant peaks 

How the simpler methods of the Four [Yuan] Masters^ 

All follows this painting as their noble ancestor!^^ 

The last line, of course, also reveals the Qianlong 
emperors own art-historiographic misperception. As 
half a dozen more authenticated works by Wang Hui 
in Qianlong s collections so clearly indicate, Hui s 
creative "replicas'' of Song and Yuan masterworks 
succeeded precisely because he neither **copied'' nor 

''imitated Instead, the Orthodox master recast his 
"replicas" quite deliberately, it seems, with as many 
individualistic features as he did in paintings made 
and signed under his own name. 

As discussed above, it was in Mist Floating on a 
Distant Peak^ in Imitation of Juran dated 1672 (pL 6), that 
Wang Hui discovered his calligraphic Juran formula 
of a "dragon- vein'' mountain mass of round inter- 
locking brush patterns of circles and dots. In an 
album entitled In Pursuit of Antiquity (Qu gu), painted 

32 

for Wang Shimin and dated 1673 (pis, 8— 11, 31—38), 
Hui presents a Great Synthesis of his ''two wings'' of 
painting, the "obscure** and the ''obvious,'' in the 
Song and Yuan styles,^^ The album opens with a 
representationally "obscure** calligraphic abstraction 
of a "host** mountain flanked by two "guest** peaks 
(pL 8) — reflecting the ancient ideograph (ii^ shan 
(Jj, or "mountain"). Not a single tree or blade of 
grass mars the pure formal design, and its parallel 
hemp-fiber texture pattern echoes Dong Qichang's 

"Huang Gongwang'* formula of "concave and convex 
forms . . . [with] parallel texture strokes/* Expanding 
on this archetypal Southern School brush idiom, 
Hui recreates a series of related texture patterns in 
representing the styles and compositions of Huang 
Gongwang (pL 9), Cao Zhibo (1272— 1355; pi. 10), 
Wang Meng (pL 11), and Dong Yuan, Mi Fu, and Gao 
Kegong (1248— 1310) (see pis. 31, 33, 35). Then, turning 
to more descriptive idioms, he illustrates the Northern 
School styles of Li Cheng and Guo Xi (see pis. 36—38), 

PL 12 (cat. i6). Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Landscape in the 
Style of Wu Zhen, dated 
1675. Hanging scroll, ink 
on paper, 26 V2 x 15 Vz in. 
(67.2 X 39.3 cm). Prince- 
ton University Art 
Museum, Gift of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse (yig'j<^-z) 

34 

as well as designing two softly colored lyrical com- 
positions reminiscent of the styles of Wang Shen 
(ca. 1048— 1103) and Southern Song Academic 
painting (see pis. 32, 34). 

The world of Kangxi, in which Wang Hui lived, 
was one of reconstruction after the fragmentation of 
the late Ming. As Zhang Geng, author of Painters of 
the Qing Dynasty {Guochao huazheng lu, preface dated 
1735), pointed out, "Many scholar-officials of the 
[early] Qing court took up painting landscapes, 
flowers, and plants, or orchids and bamboo. Some 
specialized in the methods of the Song or the Yuan; 
others followed Shen [Zhou; 1427— 1509] or Dong 
Qichang."^^ Widely recognized as the most gifted of 
the early Qing Orthodox masters, Wang Hui was 
referred to as the ^'painting sage." Through his 
synthesis, Yun Shouping observed, a new unity was 
achieved "even [among] styles that had always been 
considered incompatible."^^ Fully conscious of his 
artistic experiments, Wang Hui described his method 
in two of the seals on his paintings. In the lower left 
corner of Landscape in the Style of Juran (pi. 3), Hui s 
seal reads, "I travel up and down through past and 
present" (Shangxia gujin), while one of his seals at the 
top of Mist Floating on a Distant Peak, in Imitation of Juran 
(pi. 6) states, "Why not this way?" (You he huke). Just 
as the creation of the great encyclopedic art collec- 
tions during that time served as a powerful tool for 
cultural reintegration, so did Wang Hui s Great 
Synthesis, his "repossessing the past," proclaim the 
beginning of a new universal art. 

A small hanging scroll entitled Landscape in the Style 
of Wu Zhen, dated 1675 (pis. i, 12), is a fully realized 
masterpiece in this style. The brushwork — round, 
energetic lines in circular rhythmic patterns — is 
highly abstract. The tip of every brushstroke is 
carefully centered and tucked in, or "hidden," within 
each stroke,^^ and the ink tones are rich and lumi- 
nous. The design seems to have been spun out of a 
single revolving breath. The lively, pulsating "dragon 
vein" dominates. At the sides, rocks, trees, and even 
houses are tilted as if pulled toward the center by a 
tremendous centripetal force, creating a great vortex 
in the lower half of the painting. The outer circle 
of this pattern continues upward and turns into a 
greater counterwhorl in the mountain peak above. In 
the upper right corner, Wang Jian wrote an apprecia- 
tive colophon: 

Dong Qichang often said to me: "Painters v^ho possess the 
qualities of beauty and elegance may yet lack roundness and 
fullness; and those wio have power and strength may yet he 
partly lacking in style and resonance/^ As for Wang Hui, all 

of the desirable qualities seem to be present. It may be said 
that not a single hair in his painting is to be regretted. This 
painting is deep and calm and quietly aloof The primal breath 
seems to flow magically through it. It is one of the great 
masterpieces and should be carefully treasured^^ 

the orthodox versus the 
individualist master: 
''method'' or **no-method'' 

In contrasting the works of the early Qing Orthodox 
Four Wangs with those of the Individualist master 
Shitao, James Cahill has summed up their different 
approaches as the "culmination of method and 
no-method." On the one hand, Cahill sees the Four 
Wangs' method of imitating ancient styles as an 
assumption of what W. Jackson Bate has called the 
"burden of the past."^^ On the other, he considers 
Shitao s "no-method" as being "responsible for much 
of the weakening to be seen in [Shitao s] last 
works — the doctrine of no-method, that is, drove 
him at last into an ultimately destructive renunciation 
of the very disciplines that had sustained Chinese 
painting through the centuries."^^ Cahill concludes 
that "the magnificent failure of [Shitao] to bring 
about single-handedly the emancipation of painting 
from the weight of the past marks the end of the age 
in which that interaction of theorizing and painting 
had been most pervasive and productive, the most 
intensely self-conscious time of this most reflective 
of artistic traditions. "^^ 

Cahill based his interpretation of Shitao s 
approach on the artists own words. Shitao inscribed 
the last leaf of his famous album Painted for the Old 
Daoist Yuy dating to the late 1690s, with the statement 
"Shfafeifaj jicheng Wofa'/ which Cahill translates as "this 
method is no method — herein lies my method." An 
alternative meaning of this sentence (quite purposely 
intended by Shitao), however, reads, "This method is 
no [ordinary] method — herein lies my method." In 
an album dated 1694, Shitao declared, "In this dao 
those who entered through the proper Gate \men^ or 
School] are nothing special."^"^ Those he refers to are 
the painters tutored in the Orthodox School, who 
learned to paint by imitating the styles of ancient 
masters. As a self-taught itinerant monk-painter who 
despised the Gate (or Orthodox School), Shitao had 
insisted on developing his own method. 

Much ink has been spilled on Shitao s mystic tract. 
Recorded Sayings on Painting (Huayu lu, ca. 1700), which is 
both technically informative and critically brilliant.^^ 
According to Zhu Liangzhi, Shitao s definition of his 

35 

own "method'' (fd) reflects one of the tenets of the 
Diamond Sutras Mahayana-Buddhist doctrine, which 
states, in the words of the Buddha, '*What I call 
method [wo shuofa] is no ordinary method [jifiifa\ 
therefore [it] is the method [_shi weifay*^^ In Recorded 
Sayings, Shitao begins by describing his method of 
yihua — literally, **one-stroke painting" — which Ju-hsi 
Chou (1969) has translated as the "Primordial Line'':^^ 

Primeval Antiquity ^taiguj had no method [wufa.] for as 
long as Primeval Simplicity [t^iipuj remained intact. When 
Primeval Simplicity disappeared^ method [h] was established. 
How is the method estahlishedF It begins with the Primordial 
Line [yih.u3ij %ne^stroke painting which as the basis oj all 
things is at the root of the myriad phenomena [of nature], . . . 
This method of the Primordial Line originates in my Self 
[Wo] . . . because painting springs from [my J Mind [xin^ 
or ^^heart^^J. . . . This Primordial Line^ which encompasses 
Creations infinity ^ . . . awaits man to grasp and draw from 
it. If man knows how to use this Primordial Line in concrete 
but small ways . . . he shall not understand how painting 
becomes painting or how nothing can go against the dictates of 
his Mind. This is because when Primeval Simplicity disap^ 
pears, the method of the Primordial Line is established!'^^ 

To put it simply, rather than laying claims to a return 
to ancient masters, Shitao s method was to express 
affective responses to all the myriad aspects of nature 
in his own Mind, or, as the word xin also denotes, in 
his heart. 

Born Prince Zhu Ruoji (in 1642) in Guilin, 
Guangxi Province, in southwestern China, Shitao 
was a scion of the Ming imperial family, which fell 
to the Manchu conquest in 1644. In the face of 
advancing Manchu troops, young Ruoji s father, Zhu 
Hengjia, made the fatal mistake of proclaiming 
himself a "Protector of the Realm," which resulted 
in his execution in 1645 by a rival pretender, Prince 
Tang of Fuzhou, The future artist was saved by a 
family servant and subsequently hid behind his 
Buddhist name, Yuanji; he was also known by his 
sobriquet, Shitao.^^ By 1650 Shitao, now a mendicant 
Buddhist monk accompanied by his faithful com- 
panion, Hetao, arrived in the Jiangnan area after 
traveling on foot and by boat northeast along the 
Xiang River and turning east through northern 
Hunan, Jiangxi, and Anhui. His formal Buddhist 
training, which began in 1662 under the powerful 
Chan master Lii'an Benyue (d. 1676), led his life and 
art in a new direction/^^ 

During early Qing times, Buddhism was seriously 
split between Ming loyalist and pro-Qing factions* 
Young Shitao was spurned by the loyalist camp, led 
by Abbot Lingyan Jiqi (1605— 1672), whose supporters 

included former aides from the court of Prince Tang. 
Both Lii'an Benyue and Lii'ans master, Muchen 
Daomin (1596— 1674), w^*^ ^ bitter enemy of 
Lingyan Jiqi, had faithfully served the first Manchu 
emperor, Shunzhi (n 1644—61), in Beijing from 1659 
to 1661. In becoming a disciple of Lu*an Benyue, the 
dispossessed former Ming prince found himself 
squarely in the pro-Manchu camp/*'^ 

Shitao s idea of "one-stroke painting" probably 
originated in a discussion between Lu*an and another 
Chan master, Xiu from the Baoen Temple in Nanjing. 
"Take the word one \ji, written as a single horizontal 
stroke] and add no more to it," Xiu reportedly asked. 
"What do you have?" Master Lilian answered, "The 
design is complete." Since the character jyi denotes 
"unity," this exchange indicated harmonization of 
opposites, which, in the political context of the time, 
meant reconciling Ming loyalism with Qing unifica- 
tion. Shitao s life and art, therefore, necessitated the 
reimposition of order, or reintegration, through a 
lifetime of chaos and struggle. As an artist who 
intuited the Oneness of creation, both as an integer 
and an integral whole, through "one-stroke painting," 
he produced his own Great Synthesis by expanding 
this method into a broad range of complex and 
difficult techniques. Shitao quoted Confucius at the 
close of his chapter on yihua: "My Dao is that of an 
all-encompassing Oneness [WuDao Yiyi guanzhi~\r^^^ 

The Sixteen Luohans, a large handscroU dated 
1667, painted by Shitao at the age of twenty-five 
(figs. 35, 36), presents a Chan Buddhist apocalyptic 
vision inspired by the canonical Buddhist text Record 
on the Duration of the Law (Fuzhu ji), in which sixteen 
guardians of the Law, known as luohans, are ordered 
by the Buddha to remain in the mountains to await 
the coming of Maitreya, the Future Buddha. In the 
middle section of the scroll, four luohans accompa- 
nied by a mountain sprite watch, transfixed, as a 
wildly threatening dragon-demon is released from a 
vial held by one of them. How will the guardians 
return the dreadful monster to the magical vial? 
Shitao s powerfully built beast with its hate-filled 
humanoid eyes is realistically threatening. Its long, 
flapping, snakelike tail whips up a tidal wave of 
cosmic vibrations: rising ocean breakers, angry spi- 
dery tree branches, and massive rock outcroppings 
with throbbing contour lines and struggling "veins" 
or "arteries," all caught up in a vortex of whirlwind- 
like tumbleweeds in a desert storm. In the midst of 
this tumult appear the finely drawn faces, calm and 

Fig. 35. Shitao (Zhu Ruoji, 1642—1707). The 
Sixteen Luohans, dated 1667 (detail, fig. 36) 

Fig. 36. Shitao (Zhu 
Ruoji, 1642— 1707). The 
Sixteen Luohans (detail), 
dated 1667. Handscroll, 
ink on paper, 18 V* in. x 
19 ft. 7% in. (46.4 X 
597.8 cm). The Metro- 
politan Museum of Art, 
New York, Gift of 
Douglas Dillon, 1985 
(1985.227.1) 

Fig. 37. Mei Qing 
(1625— 1697). Colophon 
to Shitao, The Sixteen 
Luohans (detail, fig. 36) 

1 

T 

V 

^ 

iiHMiaiiitfli 

focused, of two wise and all-compassionate luohans 
conversing with each other (fig. 35), no doubt eluci- 
dating, in Buddhist cosmological terms, this man- 
made psychovisual end-of-the-world drama. 

In a colophon at the end of Th Sixteen LuohanSy Mei 
Qing (1623— 1697), a close friend of Shitao, identifies 
Li Gonglin (ca. 1041— 1106) as the source of the artists 
"monochrome-outline" (baimiao) technique (fig. 37). 
But Shitao probably never saw an original work by a 
real Song master. Unlike the socially privileged Jiangnan 
scholar-artists and collectors who valorized Song and 
Yuan masterworks, the poor mendicant monk-artist 
was self-taught. His earlier models were popular late 

Ming woodblock illustrations or paintings by Chen 
Hongshou (1599— 1652), Wu Bin (active ca. 1583— 1626), 
and Ding Yunpeng (1547— ca. 1621). Using his dynamic 
*'one-stroke" painting with its round, porous, and 
centered brushwork, Shitao transformed Wu Bins 
typical late Ming "iron- wire" drawings (tiexian miao) 
with their flat surface patterns (fig. 38). This was 
Shitao s own invention: as he noted in Recorded Sayings, 
"The beards and eyebrows of the ancients do not 
grow on my face." Thus, "this method is no [ordi- 
nary] method — herein lies my method.'' 

During the 1670s and 1680s, while the Orthodox 
master Wang Hui was creating his Great Synthesis by 

38 

returning to the styles of early masters, the Individu- 
alist Shitao proceeded in the opposite direction — by 
converting his own "one-stroke" method into a 
myriad of related forms. In A Secluded Dwelling hy a 
Mountain Chasm, dated 1682—83 (%• 39)^ Shitao s 
vibrating round texture strokes and moss dots create 
a giant semicircular ** dragon- vein" movement that 
echoes — independently, to be sure — Wang Hui s 
great compositional discovery of the early 1670s, as 
reflected in Mist Floating on a Distant Peak^ in Imitation of 

Juran (pL 6), In Recorded Sayings, Shitao names thirteen 
texture patterns (cunjd), including curling clouds" 
(juanyun), **ax-cut" (Jupi), "hemp-fiber" (^ima^ 
^'unraveled rope" (jiesuo^ and **devil-face" (guimian). 
He explains: "One must base oneself on real moun- 
tain peaks in order to create new mountain faces; real 
mountains must become texture patterns that grow 
like real mountains. . . . Without becoming real 
mountain peaks, how can texture patterns show their 
transformations? Without becoming texture patterns, 

Fig. 38. Wu Bin (active 
ca. 1583— 1626). The Six- 
teen Luohans (detail), 
dated 1591. HandscroU, 
ink and color on paper, 
12% in, X 13 ft. y'/a in. 
(32 X 414.3 cm). The 
Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York, 
Edward Elliott Family 
Collection, Gift of 
Douglas Dillon, 1986 
(1986.266.4) 

3^ 

how can real mountain peaks manifest themselves in 
painting?" After describing how he draws "trees 
mostly like rocks . . . mountains like the sea and sea 
like the mountains/' Shitao concludes th^t yihua, 
"one-stroke painting," should "embody calligraphy" 
(jianzi), for the simple reason that "the Primordial 
Line [yihua] lies at the basis of both calligraphy and 
painting, which, in turn, manifest the rules and 
exceptions of the Primordial Line"^*'^ 

Finally, in Man in the Mountain^ dating from the late 
1690s (fig. 40), Shitao makes an intuitive leap backward 
to recapture the ancient belief in the mystic union 
of calligraphy and painting and of brush and ink 
through his "one-stroke" painting. In the final decades 
of his life, Shitao learned to regard painting as, in the 
words of the Tang master Zhang Zao, "a reaching 
outward to imitate Creation, / and a turning inward 
to master the Mind "^^^ The subject of Shitao s 
calligraphic painting is his own Selfhood — that is, 
the "traces" of his brush and ink as an extension of 
his bodily presence. Here, the visual structure of 
his landscape is distinctly more calligraphic than 
pictorial, with its thickening-and-thinning brush- 
strokes animating the material ground of the flat 
paper surface. Such calligraphically embodied 
"one-stroke" painting was inspired by the words 
attributed to the Eastern Han scholar Cai Yong 

Fig, 39. Shitao (Zhu 
Ruoji, 1642— 1707). A 
Secluded Dwelling by a 
Mountain Chasm^ from 
Album of Landscapes and 
Flowers, dated 1682—83. 
Leaf G in an album of 
ten leaves, ink on paper. 
Location unknown, for- 
merly Zhang Daqian 
Collection 

Fig. 40. Shitao (Zhu 
Ruoji, 1642— 1707). Man 
in the Mountain, from 
Alhumfor the Daoist Yu, 
late 1690S. Leaf L in an 
album of twelve leaves, 
ink and color on paper, 
9 ^/^ X II in. (24,1 X 
27.9 cm). The C. C. 
Wang Family Collec- 
tion, New York 

40 

(131— 19^ C.E»): "Calligraphy derives from Nature. 
When Nature was established, there appeared yin and 
yang. When yin and yang appeared, forms and forces 
emerged. By 'tucking in the head' [cfl/igrow] and 
'protecting the tail' [of each ''round" brush- 

stroke], the calligrapher stores power in each form; 
and in applying his brush and transmitting power 
through it, he creates beautiful muscle and skin [in 
each brushstroke]." 

'*alexandrianism'* or 

TRANSFORMATIONS (bI^n)? 

It would be helpful now to return to Wang Hui s 
concept of qu gu, or "repossessing the past." In the 
mid-twentieth century, when modernism was in full 
force, the critic Clement Greenberg saw "motionless 
Alexandrianism" or "mandarin verse" — his syn- 
onyms for decadence and decline — as "surrender- 
ing [artistic] ambition and returning to a stale 
past."^^^ In Chinese art historiography, however, 
revival (fugu) has always been a progressive response 
for combating latter-day banalities and decline 
rather than a mere doctrinaire justification for the 
status quo. 

In "The Arts and the 'Theorizing Mode' of the 
Civilization," Frederick W Mote wrote powerfully of 
Chinas "inexorable past": 

There is an apparent anomaly in Chinese civilization with 
regard to the uses of the past: the defining criteria for value 
were inescapably governed hy past models^ not by present 
experience or by future ideal states of existence. Yet the entire 
purpose of civilization and mens individual lives was to 
realize the maximum from this present moment^ not to blindly 
repeat some past nor to forgo the present in preparation for 
some anticipated future. All Chinese intellectual traditions 
shared this fundamental attitude^ and foreign value systems 
buckled before it. It transformed Buddhism in China and it 
frustrated Christianity. It is not irrelevant to the problems of 
modernization and socialist change}^^ 

And in a similar vein, Craig Clunas pointed out: 

The surviving literary and physical remains of the Greek and 
Roman worlds exercised a fascination over the minds of early 
modern European intellectuals, and enjoyed a prestige every hit 
as great as did ''High Antiquity^^ with their contemporaries in 
China, There can be little or no justification for seeing what 
was happening in [Renaissance] Europe as a dynamic 
"rebirth" while what was happening in Suzhou at the same 
time is considered so radically different that concepts such as 
'originality, creativity and orthodoxy" might well need a 
major redefinition}^^ 

Perhaps the best way to evaluate Wang Hui and his 
lifework is by redefining such concepts as "original- 
ity, creativity and orthodoxy." 

In studying Wen Zhengming (1470— 1559), a painter 
of the mid-Ming period, Clunas borrows the anthro- 
pologist Alfred Gells idea of a "fractal, contextual 
personhood" to describe how Wen (and other post- 
Yuan literati painters) had "worked in what in our 
eyes are so many different 'styles' [of ancient mas- 
ters]." Cell uses the Polynesian image The Fractal 
God, A^a from Ruruta in the Austral Isles (fig. 41), 
"in which the features of the God are represented by 
little figures which repeat, in miniature, the overall 
form of the God as a whole," in order to illustrate 
how the idea of a fractal personhood was designed 
"to overcome the typically 'Western oppositions 
between individual (ego) and society, parts and wholes, 
singular and plural." Gell observes that "the notion of 
genealogy ... is the key trope for making plurality 
singular and singularity plural."^ ^"^Traditional Chinese 
genealogical art historiography, in particular Wang 
Hui's Great Synthesis, fits well with Clunas s idea of a 
Chinese painter's "fractal, contextual personhood," as 
seen through its "material and visual traces." 

Fig. 41. Unidentified 
artist (Polynesian; 
Ruruta, Austral Isles). 
The Fractal God, A'a, 
before 1821. Wood, 
H. 46 in, (116.8 cm). 
The Trustees of the 
British Museum, 
London 

41 

Fig. 42. Brice Marden 
(b. 1938). The Propitious 
Garden of Plane Images, 
Third Version, 2000—2006. 
Six panels, oil on linen, 
6 X 24 ft. (182.9 ^ 
731.5 cm). The Museum 
of Modem Art, New 
York, promised Gift 
of Donald B. and 
Catherine C. Marron, 
2006 

The nature of the Chinese concept of Self is 
important in this regard, since the word is also 
subject to question on historical and psychological 
grounds in Western art criticism. What is the calli- 
graphic character of the Chinese painters Self, as 
expressed in the individual marks of his brushwork? 
In applying calligraphic techniques to painting, 
post-Song literati painters developed a new pictorial 
language that used style as a subject matter to allude 
to history and to connote meanings. Traditional 
Chinese art history emphasized individual ''transfor- 
mations" rather than historical development* Just as 
Dong Qichang imitated" the fourteenth-century Ni 
Zan (fig. 14) by way of a work by the tenth- century 
Dong Yuan or Juran (which he thought had inspired 
Ni), Shitao had argued that his powerful Waterfall at 
Mount Lu, of about 1697 (Sumitomo Collection, 
Kyoto, Japan), might as well be viewed as the work of 
the eleventh-century master Guo Xi himself/ 

The historical pattern seen by Chinese artists was 
not one of progress, in which the new replaced the 
old; it was, rather, an enduring effort on the part of 
succeeding generations of artists to gain or restore 
life and truth to art. Ancient masters were perceived 
in a nonhistorical continuum in which later masters, 
in achieving Self-realization through inner responses 
to both nature and art, emerge as their equals ("plu- 
rality [made] singular," in Cells term) rather than as 
mere followers. They, too, became ancestors! During 
the 1660s and 1670s, young Wang Huis **creativity" — 
described as bian, or ''transformations" — so astonished 
his teachers and friends that he was praised as "the 
kind of painter who has not been seen for 500 years!" 
In the 1680S and 1690s, however, Hui s transformations 
had visibly relaxed, as the leading master seemed to 
have yielded to the temptation of imitating himself. 

There is something at once seemingly bland but 
utterly uncompromising about the circular argu- 
ments of both Dong Qichangs "correspondence" 
(he) and "transformation" (hian) and Shitao s 
"method" (fa) and "no-method" (feifa). The reason 
lies in the very Chinese definition of image-making, 
both in calligraphy and in painting, as graphic signs 
(tuzai) or cultural conventions.^ Unlike Western 
pictorial representations since the Renaissance, 
which strove to make paintings essential "copies" 
of nature, Chinese brush paintings express nature 
through conventionalized graphic "signs" (cunfa, 
"texture patterns") and schemata. Thus in "picturing 
nature s forms" (tuxing), all Chinese paintings could 
be said to be "copies" of older "pictures" in the 
sense that they are based on preexisting graphic 
"signs" that each generation of artists must reacti- 
vate with meanings — that is, create new "transfor- 
mations." Nature and art are viewed as inseparable in 
Chinese landscape painting: the painter must appre- 
hend at once the "external" realities of Nature while 
expressing his "interior" Mind or Self As Shitao put 
it so beautifully, "Without becoming real mountain 
peaks, how can texture patterns show their trans- 
formations? Without becoming texture patterns, 
how can real mountain peaks manifest themselves 
m pamtmg? 

In expressing himself through the visual vocabu- 
lary of graphic signs, a Chinese painter must ask, in 
Nietzsche s words, "Can Nature be subdued to art s 
constraint?" Here, what we see in Dong Qichangs 
and Shitao s paintings neatly parallels the modernist 
movement in Western painting as described by 
Clement Greenberg: "Realistic, illusionist art had 
dissembled the medium, using art to conceal art. 
Modernism used art to call attention to art. The 

42 

limitations that constitute the medium of painting — 
the flat surface . . . the properties of color — were 
treated by the Old Masters as negative factors that 
could be acknowledged only implicitly or indirectly. 
Modernist painting has come to regard these same 
limitations as positive factors that are to be acknowl- 
edged openly "^^^ In turning to calligraphy, Dong 
Qichang and his followers — ^Wang Hui and Shitao 
included — emphasized spontaneously executed 
brushwork in the planar structure of the flat picture 
surface, using not only brush, ink, and paper but also 
the human body itself as their expressive media. 

In the United States, in the immediate decades 
following World War II, there was a great surge of 
interest in Sinology and Chinese art history, in 
particular, Chinese paintings of the Ming and Qing 
periods (1368— 1911). In "A New Approach to Chinese 
Painting'' (1950), Jean-Pierre Dubosc attacked the 
then prevalent Western preference for Song-style 
paintings (or copies and imitations thereof) as "a 
symbol of the taste and of the ignorance of a past 
generation "^^"^ Quoting Andre Malraux, Dubosc 
wrote, 'If . . . present sensibility is far from being 
favourable to Song painting/ as Malraux points out 
with reason, *it is, in fact, because this [Song-style] 
painting does not answer to anything that really 
torments us!*'^^^ He characterized the works of 
Dong Qichang and Wang Yuanqi as '**Theme and 
Variations' . . , [that] remind us in fact of Cezanne 
[who represented] the new vision . . . [of] a more 
analytical study of form . . . the realization/ in a 
Cezannian sense, of a certain motif.'* By comparing 
Dong Qichang with Cezanne, Dubosc implicitly 
suggested a parallel between early Qing Chinese 
painting and the twentieth-century modernist 
movement in Western art/^^ 

In the early 1960s George Kubler, the esteemed 
specialist in Precolumbian art, observed that "a 
recent phenomenon in Europe and America, perhaps 
not antedating 1950, is the approaching exhaustion 
of the possibility of new discoveries of major types 
in the history of [Western] art/* He noted that 
"the recent advent of Western action painting has 
prompted the revaluation of a similar tradition in 
Chinese painting since the ninth century — a tradi- 
tion to which the West was insensitive until recent 
years/' When the Earl Morse collection of Wang 
Hui's paintings was first shown in 1969, in an exhibi- 
tion entitled "In Pursuit of Antiquity/' the critic 
Katharine Kuh wrote: 

These words [describing Wang Hms calligraphic paintings] 
seem vaguely familiar. Not so long ago they might have 
described certain Abstract Expressionist canvases, especially 

Fig. 43. Brice Marden 
(b. 1938). Grove IV, 1976. 
Two panels, oil and 
beeswax on canvas, 6 x 
9 ft. (182.9 ^ ^74*3 c^)- 
Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum, New York. 
Purchased with funds 
contributed by the 
National Endowment 
for the Arts, in Wash- 
ington, D.C., a Federal 
agency, matching funds 
contributed by Sidney 
Singer, 1976 (77.2288) 

Fig. 44. Brice Marden 
(b. 1938). Cold Mountain 1 
(Path), 1988-89. Oil on 
linen, 9 x 12 ft. (274.3 ^ 
365.8 cm). Private 
collection 

43 

Fig. 45. Brice Marden 
(b. 1938). Study for "Epi- 
taph Painting z" 1996. 
Rubbing of an epitaph 
cover, Tang dynasty 
(791 C.E.), with nota- 
tions by the artist. Ink 
on paper, cover 24 % x 
24 % in. (62.9 X 62.9 cm). 
Collection of Melia and 
Mirabelle Marden. The 
inscription reads, "Epi- 
taph of Mr. Cui of 
Qinghe and his wife, 
Madame Wang of Tai- 
yuan, of the Tang 
[dynasty]." Marden 
transcribed the four cen- 
tral characters as the 
basis for his Epitaph 
Painting 2 (figs. 46—48) 

Figs. 46—48. Brice Marden (b. 1938). Epitaph Painting 2, 1996—97. 
Oil on linen, 94 x 93 Yz in. (238.8 x 237.5 cm). First state (ahove), 
third state (opposite, left), and final state (opposite, eighty Courtesy 
Agnes Gund Collection, New York 

those of Jackson Pollock and Franz Kline who also felt that 
the kinesthetic act became the deed. Possibly they knew about 
that eighth^ century Chinese master who laid silk on the Jloor^ 
splattered ink on it at wil\ and^ then with the addition of a 
few lines^ turned his accidental composition into a recogniZ'- 
able landscape. The Americans differed from him [Wang 
Hui] only because the landscapes they produced were limited 
to their own immediate emotional reactions. His were open to 
wider involvements. 

In The Shape of Time (1962), Kubler thematizes the 
notion of "belatedness*' in art-historical writing by 
likening the gaze of the art historian to that of the 
astronomer. Defining works of art as ''signals ♦ . * as 
categorical commotions of varying magnitudes of 
which the occurrence is declared by inbuilt signals 
analogous to those kinetic energies impounded in 
masses prevented from falling," Kubler proposes: 

Knowing the past is as astonishing a performance as knowing 
the stars. Astronomers look only at old light. There is no other 
light for them to look at. . . . Many historical events^ like 
astronomical bodies^ also occur long before they appear^ such 
as secret treaties; aide-memoires^ or important works of art 
made for ruling personages. . . . Hence astronomers and [art] 
historians have this in common: both are concerned with 
appearances noted in the present but occurring in the past} '^^ 

And at the end of his widely admired small volume, 
Kubler shows an incipient sense of the possible end 
of the avant-garde* 

Radical artistic innovations may perhaps not continue to 
appear with the frequency we have come to expect in the past 
century. . . . [Human] invention has always had to halt at 
the gate of perception where the narrowing of the way allows 
much less to pass than the importance of the messages or the 
need of the recipients would justify. How can we increase the 
inbound traffic at the gate?^^^ 

In the wake of contemporary art since the 1960s, 
the effects of photography and performance and 
installation art, as well as the readymade and the 
wide availability of mechanically reproduced objects, 
have served to undermine conservative art-historical 
notions of originality/* Postmodern pure art 
theories, in seeking to bring art close to the praxis of 
life, view the artwork as an object and not an indi- 
vidual personal expression; they leave out the formal 
analysis of the artistic practice of the painterly "mark," 
as in the Chinese brushstroke, that lies at the heart 
of the aesthetic encounter, the phenomenological 
transformation that is art/^^ 

In Chronophobia (2004), Pamela Lee examines Kubler s 
prescient volume in the context of the intersection 
during the 1960s of art and science (in particular, 
Robert Smithsons work and Norbert Wiener s 
Cyberneticsy Another of Lee s concerns is the current 
globalizing impulse in art history, as reflected in her 
analysis of the nomadic artists David Medalla and 
On Kawara/^^ From a cross-cultural point of view, it 
is significant how, most recently, the contemporary 

44 

American painter Brice Marden (K 1938) has reinvented 
Abstract Expressionism through his encounter with 
Chinese calligraphy. In the 2006 Marden retrospec- 
tive at the Museum of Modern Art, the museum s 
most important recent acquisition, a six-panel, twenty- 
four-foot-long painting, The Propitious Garden of Plane 
Images^ Third Version (fig. 42), proved an enormous 
triumph for the renowned modernist How The 
Propitious Garden of Plane Images series (2000— 
2006) developed from Marden the Minimalist s severe 
monochromatic rectangles (for example, Grove IV, 
inspired by the Aegean Sea; fig. 43) of thirty years 
earlier has been hailed by the critic Richard Dorment 
as "one of the great stories of American art in our 

»I33 

time. 

In Mardens Minimalist work of the late 1970s, 
Dorment writes, "though [the artist] intended to 
eliminate depth and representation from the picture, 
the viewer reads the line formed where the two 
canvases meet as a horizon, with the green canvas 
below as the sea, and the blue expanse above as the 
sky. And the moment the eye sees the picture as a 
seascape, it also sees the green panel as receding into 
endless space, even though it knows it is actually 
looking at a flat plane.*' Then, in the early 1980s, 
Marden "suffered a mid-life crisis. ... In his desire to 
lose control in making art, to act simply as a receiver 
and transmitter of the energy of nature, [he] 
aspire [d] to a Daoist attitude.** He found in a 
bookstore The Collected Songs of Cold Mountain (presum- 
ably by an eighth-century Chinese Buddhist monk- 
poet named Hanshan), translated from the Chinese 
by Red Pine, in which the English and the Chinese 
are printed in paralleL^^^ Marden did not read 
Chinese, but he became intrigued by the idea of 
creating of a free personal style based on characters 

that are composed strictly according to a grid. Thus 
started his Cold Mountain series (fig. 44), in which 
each painting consists of four couplets, five charac- 
ters deep, arranged vertically across the surface in a 
grid. Linking the forms together, Marden worked 
toward achieving "an all-over unity, a nexus of figures 
which communicate with each other in a multiplicity 
or ways. 

As Marden himself has made clear in interviews 
since the early 1990s, the catalyst for this stunning 
change was his discovery in the 1980s and 1990s of 
Chinese calligraphy and landscape painting, which 
show three-dimensional movements in the flat picture 
plane. Marden paints with a three-foot-long stick 
of ailanthus, so that he is distanced from the picture 
surface, and "the whole movement of [his] body is 
involved with the structure of the image.** The 
slowness of Mardens lines, however, makes them 
different from true Chinese calligraphic movements. 
In an interview with Marden in May 1997, Jonathan 
Hay asked about this "slow movement.** Marden 
replied, "My painting has to do with the presence of 
the image. ... As I worked with the more figural 
ideas, the paintings became much more about the 
movement of the body, making the gesture.'* He also 
noted that "one of the interesting things to emerge 
from the Cold Mountain paintings was how they started 
out looking as if they were based on calligraphy, and 
ended up looking as if they were based on Chinese 
[landscape] painting.** Then, in another interview 
in October 1997, Marden added, "My paintings tend 
to be slow. . . . It*s a quiet hum that builds. ... I dont 
aim for impact. . . . The Cold Mountain paintings 
were about resolving the paintings I had been doing 
for five years before that, which I think needed a . . . 
push toward a resolution.** 

Mardens interest in what he calls the "glyph** also 
led him to study Chinese grave stele epitaphs (fig. 45). 
Through a rigorous interrogation of the ''glyph'* — a 
family of images, including Chinese calligraphy, that 
comprises strongly angular, geometric forms based on 
a grid^^^ — Marden the draftsman-fwm-colorist synthe- 
sizes the rhythms of nature with an insistence on the 
primacy of the opaque picture plane, producing a 
"meditative object" of dense "presence** that rewards 
repeated viewing (figs. 46—48). It is part of the artist*s 
search for an idiom or convention that will endow 
what he paints with the sense of sheer rightness or 
"presentness** — the prior logic, natural or transcen- 
dental — shared by all great works of art. "What really 
interests me is energy,** emphasizes Marden. "I still 
adhere to this definition of a work of art as a con- 
stantly renewable source of energy. When anyone 
looks at it and begins to comprehend it, they*re 
energized. . . . It's like having the Qi come up through 
your body and [be] translated onto the paper.** 

Thus, in the final decade of the twentieth century, 
Marden was reeled back into the modernist frame of 
reference through the ancient Chinese qi, the primor- 
dial concept of life*s "breath** or energy. By displac- 
ing mimetic representation with a self-conscious 
mode of artistic practice, and by incorporating the 
painter*s bodily gesture and mark into the material 
painting surface, modern abstract painting becomes 
the physical presentation of the painter himself, just as 
the calligraphic brushstroke declares the physical 
presence of the artist in Chinese painting history. 

I am grateful to the Mellon Foundation Emeritus Fellowship at 
Princeton University for supporting my scholarly writings from the 
years 2004 to 2008. 1 also wish to thank Professor David Rosand of 
Columbia University and Professor Jerome Silbergeld of Princeton 
for offering helpful comments and suggestions on this essay and 
Lory Frankel and Margaret Donovan for editing the manuscript. 

1. Hearn 1990. 

2. For Wang Hui's "Great Synthesis," see Whitfield 1969. 

3. See Fong 1967. 

4. Chang Chin-Sung 2004. 

5. Lang Shaojun 1993. See also Fong 2001, pp. 12—18, 24—26, 90—94. 

6. Lang Shaojun 1993, pp. 836, 867. 

7. Spence 1976, p. 148. 

8. Chou 1994, p. 35. 

9. See Huang 1990, pp. i49fF.; and Fong 1996a. See also Fong 
1968; Ho, Wai-kam 1976; and Fong 1992b. 

10. See Fong forthcoming b. 

11. Dong Qichang, Random Notes from the Painting Chan Studio 
(Huachanshi suihi^ ca. 1620), in Zhongguo hualun leihian 1973, vol. 2, 
p. 720. 

12. Ibid. 

13. Ibid., pp. 726, 712, jz6—zj. 

14. For a brilliant comparison of the paintings of Zhang Hong and 
Dong Qichang, see Cahill 1982a, pp. 1—69. See also Fong 1986. 

15. In Zhang Geng, Guochao huazheng lu (1956 ed.), for example, the 
biography of Zhang Hong contains less than two lines. 

16. Cahill 1992; and Fong 1992b. 

17. Fong 1976—77. 

18. See ibid., p. 15. 

19. See ibid. 

20. Dong Qichang, Huayan (1962 ed.), p. 10; see also Fong 
1976-77, pp. 17-18. 

21. For the origin of the technical term pima cun, see Han Zhuo, 
Collection of Chunquans Essays on Landscape Fainting (Shanshui 
Chunquan jt), in Zhongguo hualun leihian 1973, vol. 2, p. 667; see 
also Maeda 1970, p. 25. 

22. Dong Qichang, Huayan (1962 ed.), p. 21. 

23. Riely 1974-75. 

24. Guo Xi, Lofty Ambition in Forests and Streams (Linquan gaozhi^ 
compiled by his son Guo Si, in Zhongguo hualun leihian 1973, 
vol. I, p. 642. 

25. For a full documentation of this important work by Dong 
Yuan, see Barnhart 1970, p. 31, n. 71. 

26. Mi Fu, Painting History (Hua shi), in Zhongguo hualun leihian 1973, 
vol. 2, p. 653. 

27. The other was Riverhank, by Dong Yuan; see Fong 1999. 

28. Fong forthcoming a. 

29. Fong forthcoming b. 

30. For Gu Kaizhi, see Zhang Yanyuan, Lidai minghuaji {1963 ed.), 
chap. 5, pp. 70—71. 

31. For Zong Bing, Introduction to Landscape Painting (Hua shanshui xm), 
see Bush 1983, pp. 132—64 (quotation on p. 145). 

32. See Fong 1966. 

33. For Zhang Zao, see Zhang Yanyuan, Lidai minghuaji (1963 ed.), 
chap. 10, p. 121. 

34. Fong 1966. 

35. Riely 1992, p. 387. 

36. Dong Qichang, Huayan (1962 ed.), p. 40. 

37. Ibid. 

38. See Riely 1974—75, p. 58. 

39. See Century of Tung Ch'i-^ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, p. 66, no. 53. 

40. See Dong Qichang, Huayan (1962 ed.), pp. 37—38. 

41. Ibid., pp. 36—37. 

42. Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 2, chap. 5, pp. 17—19. 

43. See Richard Vinograd's entry on this painting in Century of 
Tung Ch'i-ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, pp. 43—44, no. 32. Vinograd points 
out that Wang Meng's painting, which bears a colophon by 
Dong Qichang describing it as the "supreme Wang Shu-ming 
[Wang Meng] painting in the world," had been in the possession 
of the renowned collector Xiang Yuanbian (1525— 1590), a fact well 
known to Dong in his youth in Huating. 

44. See Fong 2003, pp. 272—76. 

45. See Maxwell Hearn's entry in Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang 1992, 
vol. 2, pp. 78—79, no, 62. See also Fong 1984, pp. 174—77. 

46. See Richard Vinograd's entry in Century of Tung Ch'i-cVang 
1992, vol. 2, p. 83, no. 66. 

47. See Bush 1962. 

48. See Zhang Geng, Guochao huazheng lu (1956 ed.), p. ib. 

49. See Barnhart 1970—71. 

50. See Fong 1984, pp. 178—79. 

51. See Century of Tung ChU-ch^ang 1992. 

52. Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 3, chap. 6, pp. 68—72, 

53. See Lee, Sherman E., and Fong 1955, p. 10, esp. n. 17. See also Xu 
Bangda 1984, juan xia, pp. 152—55; and Xu Bangda 1993, p. 498. 

54. See Fong 1996c, pp. 474—76, For various views concerning the 
authorship of this famous album, see esp. Chang Joseph 1993; 
and Xu Bangda 1993. 

55. Reprinted in Qi Gong 1981, pp. 161—63. 

56. See the entry by Roderick Whitfield in Century of Tung 
Ch'i-ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, pp. 137—38, no. 125. 

57. Fong 1962, pp. loi— 2. 

58. For a discussion of the Northern Song "three-distant views," 
see Guo Xi in his Lofty Ambition in Forests and Streams (Linquan 

gaozhi), compiled by his son Guo Si, in Zhon^uo hualun leihian 
1973, vol. I, p. 639. 

59. See Century of Tung Ch'i-chang 1992, vol. i, pp. 356—59, pi. 125, 
I— 12. 

60. See Fong 1976—77, p. 15. 

61. Chang Joseph 1993. 

62. See the entry by Roderick Whitfield in Century of Tung 
Ck'i'ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, pp. 183—85, no. 164. 

63. See Liu Yiping 1993; and Shen Deqian, "Wang Hui muzhi- 
ming" (1966 ed.). 

64. Yun Shouping, Colophons of [Yun Shoufing'sJ Ouxiang Studio 
(Ouxiang Guan huaha) in Huaxue xinyin 1968, chap. 5, p. 23a. 

65. See Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 3, chap. 6, p. 70. 

66. Wang Hui, Wang Hui's Colophons on Fainting (Qinghui huaha), in 
Huaxue xinyin 1968, chap. 4, p. 100. 

67. Dong Qichang, Huayan (1962 ed.), p, 45. 

68. Wang Hui, Wang Hui's Colophons on Painting (Qinghui huaha), in 
Huaxue xinyin 1968, chap. 4, p. 100. 

69. Chang Chin-Sung 2004, pp. 138—41. 

70. See Bush 1962. 

71. Wang Yuanqi, Jottings Beside a Rain-Splashed Window (Yuchuang 
manhi^ in Huaxue xinyin 1968, chap. 7, pp. 165—66. 

72. See Whitfield 1969, pp. 114— 16. Whitfield had misjudged this 
painting (in 1969) as 'a very early replica of Wang Hui s 
painting of this subject" (p. 114). 

73. Translations modified from ibid., p. 115. 

74. See Jiang Chun 1962, p. 313. 

75. See Fong 1996c, pp. 479—82. 

76. For a transcript of these letters, see Jiang Chun 1962, 
pp. 309-13. 

77. Zhou Lianggong, Duhua lu (1968 ed.), p. 20. 

78. Fong 1996c, pp. 482—84, 

79. Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 2, chap. 5, p. 37. 

80. For Liang Qingbiao's seals on Fan Kuan s Travelers amid Streams 
and Mountains, see ibid., p. 36. 

81. See above, p. 20. 

82. See Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 2, chap. 5, p. 37, where the 
Qianlong emperor's encomium is left recorded. 

83. See Fong 1984, pp. 190—92. 

84. See above, p. 23. 

85. Zhang Geng, Guochao huazheng lu (1956 ed.), chap, i, p. 11. 

86. Ibid., chap. 2, pp. la— ib. 

87. See below, p. 41. 

88. Whitfield 1969, p. 143, no. 17. 

89. See Cahill 1982a, chap. 6, "Wang Yuan-ch'i [Wang Yuanqi] 
and Tao-ch'i [Shitao]: The Culmination of Method and 
No-Method," pp. 184—225. 

90. See ibid., p. 216. 

91. Ibid., p. 219. 

92. Ibid., p. 225. 

93. Ibid., p. 218. For a careful reading of this sentence, see Zhu 
Liangzhi 2005, pp. 35—36. 

94. See Shitao, Alhum Painted for Master Mingliu (Leaf E), dated 1694, 
Los Angeles County Museum of Art. See Fu, Marilyn, and 
Fu, Shen 1973, pp. 52—53, fig. 18, 

95. See Yu Jianhua 1962. 

96. Zhu Liangzhi 2005, pp. 35—36. 

97. Chou 1969, p. 108. 

98. See ibid., pp. 109—17. 

99. See Zhu Liangzhi 2005, p. 158. 

100. Ibid., p. 147. 

101. See Fong 1976, pp. i7fF. 

102. See Zheng Zhuo-lu 1961, pp. 49—50. 

103. Shitao, Huayu lu (1989 ed.), p. 93. 

104. See Fong 1958. 

105. Shitao, Huayu /w (1989 ed.), p. 95. 

106. "Biyinfengzhi tiyi,fengzhi miansheng; fengyu cunhe, cunzi fengsheng. . . . 
Bude qifeng heyihian? Bude qicun heyixianF" Ibid., pp. 98—99. 

107. "Yihua zke zihua xianyou zhigenhenye; Zihuazhe yihua houtian zhi 
jingquanye!* Ibid., p. 103. 

108. See n. 33, above. 

109. Cai Yong, Jiu shi (1708 ed.). 

no. Greenberg 1939, pp. 34-35; and Greenberg 1940, p. 310. 
in. Mote 1976, p. 6. 

112. Clunas 1991, pp. 91—92. 

113. Clunas 2002, p. 251. 

114. Gell 1998, pp. 137, 139—40. 

115. For traditional Chinese genealogical art historiography and 
what Zhang Yanyuan (active mid-ninth century) called "the 
transmission of teaching and schools \_shizhi chuanshou^'* see 
Fong 2003. 

116. See Clunas 2002, p. 251. 

117. See Fu, Marilyn, and Fu, Shen 1973, p. 47. 

118. See Fong 1967, p. 133. 

119. See Fong forthcoming b. 

120. See above, pp. 39—40. 

121. Nietzsche, Sherz^ List und Rache (Leipzig, 1895), quoted in 
Gombrich i960, p. 86. 

122. Greenberg 1965, p. 194. 

123. Dubosc 1950, p. 57. 

124. Andre Malraux, Psychologie de Vart: Le Musk imaginaire (Geneva, 
1947), p. 50, quoted in Dubosc 1950, p. 56. 

125. Dubosc 1950, pp. 51, 53, 54. 

126. Kubler 1962, pp. 11, 123; see also p. 127. For a literary descrip- 
tion of "splattered-ink" landscapes by the eighth-century 
"untrammeled" artist Wang Mo, see Shimada Shujiro 
1961—64. 

127. Kuh 1969, p. 61. 

128. Kubler 1962, pp. 19, 20. 

129. Ibid., pp. 123-24. 

130. See Harrison 2006. 

131. For recent Western discussions of the artist's "mark," see 
Rosand 1988; and Rosand 2002. 

132. See Lee, Pamela M. 2004; and Meyer 2006. 

133. See Dorment 2006, p. 8. 

134. Ibid., p. 12. 

135. See Lewison 1992, pp. 46, 52. 

136. Collected Songs of Cold Mountain 1983. 

137. Lewison 1992, p. 53. 

138. Interview with Wen Fong at The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, 1991; Hay 1997; Zhang, Yiguo 1998. 

139. See Hay 1997, p, 19. 

140. Ibid., pp. 20, 26. 

141. Zhang, Yiguo 1998, pp. 131, 132; see also p. 129. 

142. See Kertess 1992, pp. 41—49. 

143. Zhang, Yiguo 1998, p. 131. 

Wang Hui: The Evolution of a Master Landscapist 

Chin-Sung Chang 

EMULATING THE ANCIENTS: THE FORMATIVE YEARS 

o; 

.ne of the most celebrated painters in late imperial China, Wang Hui emerged 
from a humble background. He wzs born in 163Z into a commoner family in 
Yushan (Mount Yu), a village near Changshu in present-day Jiangsu Province (map i)/ 
Members of his family had been renowned local professional painters for generations. 
His great-grandfather Wang Bochen, grandfather Wang Zaishi, father Wang Huanlong, 
and uncle Wang Huan'ao all made their living by producing landscapes and bird-and- 
flow^er paintings in Yushan.^ Wang Hui undoubtedly received his early training through 
the family business, and his precocious interest in painting is confirmed by the story 
that even as a child he drew^ on v\^alls with a reed. 

Wang Hui is also recorded as having studied painting under the guidance of the 
local painter Zhang Ke (active mid-seventeenth century), who followed the regional 
tradition of the late Yuan master Huang Gongwang (1269—1354)^ and gained renown 
in the area for his *'myriad mountains, layered peaks, tall trees, and deep forests/*^ 
Firmly rooted in the painting practice of the region," the artistic legacy of Huang 
Gongwang was most eloquently expressed in a poem written by Wang Jiazhen to Wang 
Hui in 1692: "There were many painter- immortals in our Wu region. The greatest 
of all was certainly Yifeng [Huang Gongwang]. His sketches were all of Yushan.''^ 
Zhang Ke was no exception in emulating Huang. His style name, Small Fool from 
the Green Mountains (Bishan Xiaochi), was inspired by Huang s style name. Great 
Fool (Dachi).^ As Zhang Ke s student, Wang Hui must have devoted much time to 
learning Huang s pictorial idiom. 

In 1651 the nineteen-year-old Wang Huis fortunes changed dramatically when he 
met the Orthodox School painter Wang Jian (1598— 1677), ^ grandson of the literary 
luminary Wang Shizhen (1526— 1590) and a former governor-general of Yanzhou. Some 
forty years later, Wang Hui recalled this crucial turning point in his career: 

From childhoodj I have loved ink and paper. Whenever I encountered an ancient masterworkj I 
immediately copied it and tried to grasp its essence. I always wanted to follow the Orthodox path^ hut 
could not attain it. At just that time^ my [future] teacher Wang Yanzhou [Wang Jian J visited Yushan 
from Loudong [Taicang]. Upon seeing my fan painting of a small landscape^ he expressed astonishment 
PI 13 Wang Hui (1632-1717) Land- ^^P^ painting in his sleeve. That evenings Magistrate Sun [Chaorang] hosted a banquet at a 

scape after Wu Zhen's "Mountain Passes on a mountain vaviUon. There wcrc scorcs of puests. As ftutc music and sonp enlivened the mood, Master 

Char Autumn Day," dated 1686 (detail, ^ J i> J <b 

pi. 25) Wang pulled my fan painting out of his sleeve and gazed at it intently^ unable to put it down. Happily 

49 

inebriated^ he shouted the painting to the other guests and 
praised my work more than it deserved. Everyone was 
astonished. Master Wang then asked them to acknowledge me 
with applause. Expressing my courtesy and respect^ I decided 
to become his student. Later^ I showed Master Wang a long 
handscroll by Dong Qichang /"^JJJ— 2636J and commented 
on its qualities. Shortly thereajter^ I parted from my teacher 
[Wangjian] with appropriate words of farewell J 

This anecdote makes clear that while Wang Hui 
was considered a child prodigy in Yushan, in 1651 he 
was still unknown in the neighboring town of Taicang, 
And while he strove to emulate the ancient masters, 
his source of inspiration was the art and theories of 
the influential late Ming painter and theorist Dong 
Qichang, whom Wang Jian also followed. Indeed, 
showing Wang Jian his respect for Dong Qichang 
must have been a calculated gesture to win the older 
masters approval.^ 

LIFE AT TAICANG 

In 1652 Wang Jian wrote a letter to Wang Hui 
inviting him to his new villa in Taicang, the 
Fragrance-Tinged Hermitage (Ranxiang An), 
Soon after his arrival, Wang Hui was introduced 
to the eminent collector and painter Wang Shimin 

(1592— 1680), who played a leading role in perpetuat- 
ing Dong Qichang s theory and practice of painting. 
Wang Shimin encouraged the young painter to study 
the Song and Yuan paintings in his collection at the 
Hall of Humble Refinements (Zhuoxiu Tang). It is 
generally assumed that Wang Hui became **painter- 
in-residence" at the Wang Shimin household and 
was provided with accommodations and a certain 
amount of money in return for producing paintings. 
But the view that *'Wang Hui worked for almost 30 
years under the direction of the two elder Wangs 
[Shimin and Jian], reaching his prime during the 
1670s and i68os"^ overstates his dependence on these 
mentors. Nevertheless, Wang Hui s intensive study 
of Wang Shimin s collection was of great signifi- 
cance in the formation of his early art. All his early 
patrons — Tang Yuzhao (1602— 1672), Gu Mei 
(1633— after 1671), Qian Qianyi (1582— 1664), and Wu 
Weiye (1609— 1671) — were close friends of Wang 
Shimin. The elder artist was also a key figure in 
promoting the younger s reputation in the south, as 
evidenced by the numerous colophons, inscriptions, 
and titles that he added to Wang Huis paintings. 

No paintings survive from those Wang Hui made 
in the 1650s for Wang Shimin and Wang Jian. How- 
ever, his early masterwork Landscape after Wu Zhens 

50 

'^Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day" ddXtd 1655 
(fig. 49)/^ was painted for a friend of Wang Shimin, 
the noted Changzhou (Piling) collector Tang 
Yuzhao/^ Furthermore, Wang s painting is closely 
modeled on a work preserved in Wang Shimins 
collection as a reduced-size copy in To See Large within 
Small (^Xiaozhong xianda^, an album of twenty-two 
copies of compositions by old masters, with Dong 
Qichangs inscriptions (National Palace Museum, 
Taipei; fig» 50). Although this album was traditionally 
attributed to Wang Shimin and is currently reattrib- 
uted to Chen Lian (ca. 1590s— ca. 1640s), its author- 
ship is still disputed/^ In his inscription Wang Hui 
mentions that **Wu Zhen once painted a picture in 
the style of Dong Yuans Mountain Passes on a Clear 

Fig. 49. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Landscape after Wu Zhen's "Mountain 
Passes on a Clear Autumn Day" dated 1655. Hanging scroll, ink 
on paper Q), H. ca. 78 H in. (200 cm). Location unknown 

Fig. 50, Chen Lian (ca. 1590s— ca. 1640s). Landscape after Wu Zhen's ^^Moun- 
tain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day" Leaf K in To See Large within Small, late 
1620S, Ink and light color on silk, 22 '/a x 13% in. (56.3 x 34.8 cm). 
National Palace Museum, Taipei 

Autumn Day. In the ninth [lunar] month of the yiwei 
year [1655], I imitated this painting, following his 
idea, and asked the venerable Mr. Kongming [Tang 
Yuzhao] to evaluate it!' Wang Hui s reputation as a 
skilled copyist remained an important feature of 
his careen The renowned Taicang poet and scholar- 
official Huang Yujian (1623— 1704) later asked the 
painter to create another copy of the same composi- 
tion/^ Wang Huis Landscape after Wu Zhens ^^Mountain 
Passes on a Char Autumn Day" dated 1688 (pis* 13, 25), is 
almost identical in size and composition to his 1655 
version for Tang Yuzhao. In his inscription, Wang 
Hui makes it clear he based this impressive landscape 
on the reduced-copy version in the To See Large within 
Small album/ ^ 

PL 14 (cat. 3). Wang Hui (1632— 
1717). Charing after Rain over Streams 
and Mountains, dated 1662. Hanging 
scroll, ink on paper, 44 V2 x 17% in. 
(113 X 45.1 cm). The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York, 
Bequest of John M. Crawford Jr., 
1988 (1989. 363. 141) 

52 

Although it is likely that Wang Shimin introduced 
Tang Yuzhao to Wang Hui and provided him with 
the model from his collection, the younger artist was 
clearly expanding his contacts with other important 
collectors. Decades later, in 1684, the prominent 
scholar Gu Zuyu (1631— 1692) recalled how Wang Hui 
had initially studied Song and Yuan paintings under 
Wang Shimin s special guidance/^ According to Gu, 
while Wang Shimin continued to provide enthusiastic 
support, Wang Hui received many invitations from 
clients and traveled frequently to various towns both 
in the region and beyond* Often, it was even difficult 
for Wang Shimin to see Wang Hui/^ Gu further 
noted that Wang Hui s replicas of the Song and Yuan 
paintings in Wang Shimins collection were indistin- 
guishable from the originals, and his paintings 
became enormously appealing to many collectors 
and clients/^ Gus account of Wang Hui suggests 
that he rapidly progressed from Wang Shimin s 
painter-in-residence to one of the most sought-after 
painters of the time, and his painting for Tang Yuzhao 
implies that he had already become an artist of 
independent means by 1655. 

THE TWO WANGS AND HUANG 
GONGWANG 

As Gu Zuyu suggested, Wang Shimins collection was 
one of the primary resources for studying Song and 
Yuan paintings in the Jiangnan ("South of the [Yangzi] 
River") area/^ Its sources are elucidated in Wang 
Shimins colophon, dated 1671, to Wang Hui s replica 
of Fan Kuans Travelers amid Streams and Mountains (see 
pL 7, fig. 33): ''Of the Song and Yuan masterpieces in 
my family collection, two-fifths were acquired in the 
capital and the other three-fifths came from Dong 
Qichang. I loved them no less than essential parts of 
my own body* With the passage of time and as 
circumstances have changed, only one- or two-tenths 
of what I once owned still remains/'^^ 

Beginning in 1605, as tutor to Wang Shimin, Dong 
Qichang helped Wang acquire works from his own 
renowned collection and also advised him on the 
purchase of others. The Taipei To See Large within Small 
album documents many of the Song and Yuan 
masterworks that Wang Shimin had acquired by the 
late i62os/^ This album, one of the most important 
sources for Song and Yuan models throughout the 
seventeenth century, was accessible to only a few 
painters.^^ That Wang Hui was permitted to make 
replicas of it, as evidenced by his own To See Large 
within Small album, dated 1672 (Shanghai Museum), 
attests to his privileged status (see figs. 27, 28).^^ And 

his early paintings were largely concerned with 
grasping the essential pictorial vocabularies of these 
ancient masters. 

Clearing after Rain over Streams and Mountains, dated 
1662 (pi. 14), shows Wang Hui attempting to create a 
new landscape style by freely adapting elements from 
the To See Large within Small album. According to 
Wang s inscription, the painting is in the style of 
Juran (active ca. 960—85). The tall trees in the fore- 
ground, the cluster of hills in the middle ground, and 
the angular distant mountains in the background all 
recall Landscape after Juran s '^Snow Scene ^ in the Taipei 
album (see fig. 19). But Wang Hui does not simply 
imitate the Song composition. Reducing its outlines 
and texture strokes, he presents a serene landscape of 
hills and mountains depicted in thin outlines and 
subtle ink washes. The wet surfaces he imparts to 
the mountain forms enliven the composition. The 
seamless progression of repeated triangular hills from 
front to back reveals Wang s efforts to transform the 
Song painting s tripartite spatial arrangement into an 
illusion of continuous recession by uniting all the 
pictorial units. 

Landscape in the Style oj Juran, dated 1664 (see pi. 3), 
further reveals Wang Hui s reinterpretation of 
Landscape after Juran s ^^Snow Scene!^ In order to empha- 
size the monumentality of his model, Wang links 
the foreground trees and hills with the towering 
mountains in the background, fusing the composi- 
tional units into a single mass animated by the 
vibrant rhythm of his calligraphic hemp-fiber 
texture. The lush brushwork gives life and energy to 
the mountain forms, while the continuous recession 
from the foreground to the far distance creates an 
organic pictorial structure in which the intercon- 
nected compositional parts achieve balance and 
harmony. The monumental structure of the land- 
scape and the active use of energetic brushwork in 
Landscape in the Style of Juran coalesce into a device that 
came to be called the "dragon vein," a composi- 
tional innovation marking a great transition in 
Wang Hui s stylistic development.'^^ 

In addition to copying the varied Song and Yuan 
masterworks in the To See Large within Small album 
during his stay with Wang Shimin, Wang Hui devoted 
himself to mastering the style of Huang Gongwang. 
Wang Shimins own preference for this artist is clearly 
expressed in one of his inscriptions: ''Of all the 
masters, I prize Zijiu [Huang Gongwang] the most 
because his painting goes beyond brush and ink; it has 
a kind of wild, primordial spirit, almost derived from 
Heavenly Creation itself This is definitely not some- 
thing one can reach through skill and exertion. . . . My 

Fig. 51. Wang Jian (1598— 
i6yyy Landscape after Huang 
Gong\^ang's "Floating Mists 
and Distant Peaks" dated 
1675. Hanging scroll, ink 
and color on silk, 53 % x 
31 in. (134.9 ^ 7^-^ '^"^)- 
National Palace Museum, 
Taipei 

Fig. 52. Wang Jian 
(1598— 1677). Landscape in 
the Styk of Huang Gongwang, 
dated 1660. Hanging 
scroll, ink and color on 
silk, 48 V4 X 24 /4 in. 
(122.5 ^ 61.5 cm). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

collection has always had one or two of his paint- 
ings which I copied day and night> I have done this 
until I am old, but I am still without one bit of 
enlightenment/'^^ In the same inscription, Wang 
Shimin acknowledges that he was obsessed with 
seeking out works by Huang Gongwang and that he 
had seen more than twenty of his paintings by 1648*^^ 
Among those that Wang Shimin had either seen or 
collected, Deep Forest in a Steep Valley^ Floating Mists and 
Warm Greenery, Summer Mountains^ after Dong Yuan, and 
Autumn Mountains are most frequently referred to in 
his inscriptions and colophons or repeatedly drawn 
upon for his own paintings*^^ 

Huang s Deep Forest in a Steep Valley is no longer 
extant, but a reduced copy of the original is in To See 
Large within SmalL^^ Despite its inclusion in the album, 
it seems that neither Dong Qichang nor Wang Shimin 
owned the painting, which had been in the collection 
of Gu Zhengyi (active ca. 1575—97).^^ Wang Shimin 

and Wang Jian equally admired Floating Mists and Warm 
Greenery, a painting that does not appear in To See Large 
within Small In his colophon to Landscape after Dong 
Yuans '^Summer Mountains" howtwen, Dong Qichang 
states that it was once in the collection of Xiang 
Xuandu (Xiang Dehong; active ca. late sixteenth- 
early seventeenth century) and was, along with Summer 
Mountains^ after Dong Yuan, one of two Huang Gong- 
wang paintings done after Dong Yuan/^ Wang Jians 
Landscape after Huang Gongwang^s ^Floating Mists and Distant 
Peaks" provides a suggestion of what the original must 
have looked like (fig. 51)/^ 

That Autumn Mountains was the Huang Gongwang 
painting most admired and coveted by Wang Shimin 
is revealed by his inscription on his own evocation of 
the composition:^^ 

Formerly^ in Jingkou at the home of Zhang Xiuyu [Zhang 
Jinchen]^ I saw Dachi^s [Huang Gongwangs] Autumn 

54 

Mountains in color. I studied and enjoyed it all day, and 
could not leave it. Afterward I could not get it out of my 
mind; every time I passed there I had to stop again to look at 
it. But because Xiuyu has taken it to his bamboo retreat^ I 
can no longer see it. In the third [lunar Jmonth of 16^1^1 v^as 
in a boat heading north to my post with nothing to do but play 
with brush and ink^ and I imitated his [Huang s J intent. It 
was finished in three days. My brushwork was weak and 
immature and I was embarrassed. I stored it in a box and 
never opened it. 

Despite his obsessive longing for Autumn Mountains^ 
Wang Shimin never acquired it/^ The owner, Zhang 
Jinchen (active i6ios— 30s), was a close friend of Dong 
Qichang.^^ Wang Shimin carried Dong Qichang s 
letter of introduction when he visited Zhang s 
residence in Jingkou (present-day Zhenjiang, 
Jiangsu Province), where he saw Autumn Mountainsj^^ 
(Wang Jian was also familiar with this work, as he 
had seen it together with Dong Qichang about 
1630,)^^ The painter Yun Shouping (1633—1690) 
reported that, unlike most of Huang Gongwang s 
extant works, which are monochromatic, Autumn 
Mountains "used blue-and-green coloration, and the 
red leaves of the forest are rendered bright as fire, 
being dotted with ground vermilion 

Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang, dated 1660 
(pL 15), exemplifies Wang Hui s early preoccupation 
with mastering Huang s pictorial idiom. The colo- 
phon by Wu Hufan (1894— 1968), mounted above 
the painting (see Catalogue, no, i), tells in detail of 
Wang Hui s study of the artist during his stay with 
Wang Shimin: 

When Shiguzi [Wang Hui] was a young man^ he served his 
teachers^ the two Wangs, and received from them all the secrets 
[of painting]. [In his art J both the form and the spirit are 
complete. This painting is a copy by Shigu^ at the age of 
twenty ^nine sui^ ofXiangbi^s [Wangfians] composition in 
the style of Chiweng [Huang Gongwang], Not only are the 
brush and ink used with great skill, but also if it were placed 
among Xian^i^s paintings of his middle years there would not 
be [seen] the slimiest difference^"^ 

Wang Jian s Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang, 
dated 1660 (fig. 52), is probably the painting that 
Wu Hufan believed Wang Hui had consulted in 
the creation of his work. The two hanging scrolls, 
painted in the winter of 1660, both show a level- 
distance vista that draws the viewer deep into a 
mountain valley, as tall peaks in the background 
provide a sense of dominance and stability. But there 
are marked differences between the two works. Wang 
Jians composition lacks a sense of depth or move- 
ment; his forms are two-dimensional, his brushwork 

PI. 15 (cat. i). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Landscape in the Styk of Huang Gongwang, dated 1660. Hanging 
scroll, ink on paper, 68 Vz x 35 K in. (174 x 89.6 cm). Princeton University Art Museum, Gift of 
Mr. and Mrs, Earl Morse, in honor of Wen C. Fong, Class of 1951 and Graduate School Class of 
1958, and Constance Tang Fong (yi969-7o) 

schematic. In Wang Hui s painting, the complex, 
vigorous brushwork vividly describes the overlapping 
folds of mountains and hills. Distant peaks are built 
up of vibrant hemp-fiber texture strokes and rich ink 
washes. Trees, rocks, banks, and hills are meticulously 
detailed. Wang Hui also reorganized the composition 

55 

Fig, 53. Chen Lian 
(ca. 1590S— ca. 1640s). 
Landscape after Huang 
Gongwang's "Summer Momm- 
tains, after Dong Yuan" 
Leaf I in To See Large 
within Small, late 1620s. 
Ink and color on silk, 
20 V2 X 13 Vz in. (52.2 X 
34.2 cm). National Pal- 
ace Museum, Taipei 

Fig. 54. Huang Gong- 
wang (1269— 1354). Stone 
Cliff at the Fond of Heaven, 
dated 1341. Hanging 
scroll, ink and color on 
silk, 54 Vs X 22 Vz in. 
(139.4 ^ 57-3 Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

^i^fi^ t^HnH^^'^-- 
^ ^ ^ ^* ^ * 

Mit- 

I 

by moving the foreground bank with tall trees to the 
bottom right corner in order to open up the view 
and enhance the sense of spatial depth and open- 
ness. Furthermore, by introducing a strong zigzag 
movement to the flow of the stream, he imbued his 
composition with kinetic rhythms. 

As both Roderick Whitfield and Wen Fong have 
observed, Wang Hui is experimenting in this work 
with how to integrate the openings-and-closings, 
risings -and-fallings of his pictorial "dragon- vein" 
structure in order to create a unified compositional 
movement that is charged with breath-force/^ While 
the overall composition remains orderly and stable, 
Wangs rhythmic brushwork and undulating landscape 
forms are constantly interacting to create pulsing 
arteries of graphic energy.^^ His tightly structured 
composition of interlocking rocks and mountains 
also indicates a deep understanding of Dong 
Qichangs style. 

Landscape in the Style of Huang Qongwang seems to 
have been further modeled on another painting 
that was greatly admired by Wang Shimin and Wang 
Jian — Huang Gongwang s Summer Mountains, after 
Dong Yuan, a reduced copy of which is included in the 
Taipei To See Large within Small album (fig. 53).^^ Wang 
Jian was clearly influenced by this painting in the 
creation of his Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang. 

the distant peaks along the left side of the composi- 
tion, the foreground banks with tall trees, and the 
rounded monumental peaks are all based on Summer 
Mountains J after Dong Yuan, But Wang Jian transformed 
his model by moving the tall peaks to the background 
and counterbalancing them with clusters of rocks 
and hills on the right. Wang Hui further trans- 
formed Wang Jian s composition through an inte- 
grated construction of interlocking landscape forms 
that generates veins of kinetic energy. Wang Hui s 
inventiveness in transforming borrowed landscape 
elements into a unified composition is eloquently 
manifested here. As Whitfield has observed, Wang 

56 

Hui s painting copies neither Huang Gongwang's 
nor Wang Jians; rather, it is a highly inventive work 
that shows off his own genius and virtuosity/^ 

Wang Hui continued to draw inspiration from 
Huang Gongwangs style throughout the i66os. 
Another of his reinterpretations is Autumn Forests at 
Yushan, dated 1668 (pis. 16, 17). Wang Hui made this 
painting for Gu Mei (1633— after 1671), one of the Ten 
Talents of Taicang (Taicang Shizi) and a close friend 
of Wang Shimin/"^ In his inscription, Wang Hui 
mentioned that when Gu Mei visited him at Yushan 
in the tenth lunar month of the wushen year [1668], 
he was deeply impressed by the autumnal beauty of 
the maple trees and asked Wang Hui to paint this 
work. In a recorded inscription no longer attached 
to the painting, Gu compliments Wang Hui for his 
innovative revival of Huang Gongwang s style: 

Monumental peaks and mountains cast cold air 
onto the branches. Icy leaves colored in sweet red 
are appealing to the traveler. Surely you were Huang 
Gongwang in your previous life! I asked the lake 
bridge this question while returning home with a 
bottle of wine."^^ 

Autumn Forests at Yushan strongly recalls Huang 
Gongwang s Stone Cliff at the Pond of Heaven, dated 1341 
(fig. 54).^^ Although the rock formations in Autumn 
Forests are not as tactile and massive as those in Stone 
Cliff, Wang s central mountain, built up of dynami- 
cally interconnected hills, boulders, plateaus, and 
trees, conveys a similar sense of structural organiza- 
tion. The clusters of trees in the foreground are 
tightly connected to the mountain masses in the 
background. The tiny human figure, crossing the 
bridge in the lower right corner, stands in marked 
contrast to the enormous mountain above. While 
adhering to Huang Gongwangs method of building 
simple, repeated shapes into a complex whole, Wang 
Hui has introduced a "dragon vein'' into his compo- 
sition, thereby imbuing it with serpentine, kinetic 
movement. This "life-carrying artery of the land- 
scape composition,*' which begins in the lower left 
corner and moves slowly up to the summit like a 
winding snake, integrates the disparate landscape 
elements into an organic unity."^^ Wang Hui s use 
of ink and color also displays his artistic virtuosity. 
The rocks, hills, and trees are meticulously drawn 
and enriched with delicate tonal gradations such as 
the subtle red and orange used to describe the 
autumn foliage. 

PI. 16 (cat. 7). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Autumn Forests at Yushan, dated 
1668. Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 57 Vz x 24 % in. (146.2 x 
61.7 cm). Palace Museum, Beijing 

57 

PI. 17. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Autumn 
Forests at Yushan, dated 
1668 (detail, pi. 16) 

THE STUDIO OF WESTERN FRAGRANCE 

Wang Shimins role in advancing Wang Hui s early 
career in the Jiangnan region cannot be overesti- 
mated. During the 1660s, however, Wang Hui became 
increasingly independent of Wang Shimin s influence 
and actively pursued his own career as a professional 
painter. By 1663 he had established his own studio, 
which he called the Studio of Western Fragrance 
(Xishuang Zhai), A landscape dated that year bears 
the artist s inscription stating that it was painted 
there (Beijing Antique and Curio Store), while a 
similar statement appears on Blue Mountains and White 
Clouds, a small fan painting dated 1669 (Palace 
Museum, Beijing),^^ 

A further sign of Wang Hui s independence is 
revealed in a letter by Wang Shimin, dated 1666, to 
one of his sons: 

On the seventeenth [day] of the sixth [lunar] month [of 
l666]j Hui came and stayed for fifty days. He began five 
long scrolls. Then a letter arrived from his home^ and he 
made excuses to return to attend to grain taxes. Most of the 
scrolls remained unfinished. At first he promised to he hack in 
t'wo daySj hut twenty days passed without a word. While this 
gentleman s art is superb^ he is too keen about money. I 
imagine that the gift I made him of only eight taels of silver 
was a great disappointment ^ so that he took his time coming 
back. Only after I wrote him many letters did he finally 
reappear — but I noticed that he was not pleased. He has 
now been here for more than ten days. Every day he toils 
among his brushes and inkstones^ counting the days and 
keeping track of his time. He has firmly refused to lift his 
brush for any social occasion — would not make an exception 
even for a small fan painting. . . . Art dealers from all over^ 
eager to have him make copies of ancient works^ compete in 
their offers of handsome payments. As their invitations 
continue to pour in^ I expect I shall not he able to keep him 
caged here for much longer! 

By 1666, then, new patrons had emerged who were 
rich enough to spend large amounts of money for 
Wang Hui s paintings, and he had become so success- 
ful that he could afford to keep Wang Shimin waiting. 
In a poem written for Wang Hui in the same year, a 
certain Xu Xu further confirmed that Wang had 
already established himself as one of the most 
celebrated painters in the south: * As soon as your 
small scroll was completed, many people vied with 
each other to buy it. They were fully prepared to 
spend ten thousand copper cash to acquire your work. 
Now we have too many collectors in Jiangnan.'' 

Wang Shimins complaints about Wang Hui s active 
pursuit of money reveal his indignation and jealousy 

toward both the artist and his new patrons: "Recently I 
have heard that there are a number of people in Jinsha 
[Yixing] and Jingkou [Zhenjiang] who construct nice 
pavilions and invite Wang Hui so as to keep him as 
long as they wish/*^^ Clearly, the rise of new wealthy 
clients had begun to affect the master-disciple relation- 
ship between the two men. As Wang Hui s reputation 
grew, he became increasingly reluctant to part with his 
paintings at low prices, even for his teacher, preferring 
instead to travel to other towns to produce expensive 
paintings for wealthier patrons. 

Wang Hui s emergence as a painter-entrepreneur 
is evident in Wang Shimins observation that "he has 
firmly refused to lift his brush for any social occa- 
sion . . . even for a small fan painting." Indeed, Wang 
Hui rarely gave away paintings, even to his closest 
friends. For example, Yun Shouping, one of his best 
friends, found it extremely difficult to obtain a 
painting from him.^^ It was Wang Hui s careful 
management of his reputation as a painter and its 
pecuniary rewards that enabled him to become 
independent of Wang Shimin. 

Wang Shimin s waning influence over Wang Hui 
was directly related to the loss of most of his 
properties because of a drastic reform of the tax 
code. In 1661 the Qing government, led by Oboi 
(d. 1669) and three other regents, announced a new 
set of tax regulations intended to increase revenues 
by retracting the exemption privilege enjoyed by the 
southern elite.^"^ The new edict mandated specific 
punishments for officials who failed to fulfill their 
tax quotas. As a result, privileged degree-holding 
landlords were forced to pay huge outstanding 
property taxes in order to avoid reprisals. The new 
edict mainly affected four major Jiangnan prefec- 
tures — Suzhou, Changzhou, Zhenjiang, and Song- 
jiang — that were regarded as havens for numerous 
officials and degree holders thought to have assisted 
the troops led by Zheng Chenggong (1624—1662) in 
the anti-Manchu campaign of 1659. The tax edict of 
1 66 1 was thus politically motivated, aiming to 
dissolve local leadership and secure absolute obedi- 
ence to Manchu rule in the south.^^ 

The taxes imposed on these four prefectures were 
several times the amount exacted from other areas. In 
addition to the loss of their property, many of the 
literati forfeited examination degrees, official ranks, 
and government posts under the accusation of tax 
evasion. Some were even arrested and beaten. The 
heavy taxes left few unaffected, including Wang 
Shimin. In a letter to one of his sons, Wang reveals 
his fear of bankruptcy as a result of the government s 
relentless collection campaign.^^ He writes that a tax 

58 

of forty or fifty thousand taels of silver had been 
imposed on the prefecture, that fifteen townsmen 
had already been beaten almost to death by large 
cudgels, and that more were due to be arrested for 
delinquent tax payment* In addition, he reports that 
an edict designed to collect twenty percent of 
everyone s income would soon be issued and an 
additional forty percent surcharge imposed. In 
despair, he continues: 

Our family has a lot of land, so it is only appropriate that 
voz contribute something toward the needs of the community. 
I have asked around to gather support^ hut all of my brothers 
have gone bankrupt^ and thus at present I have been unable to 
get any help. , . , There is no way for me to deal with taxes. 
I regret that I can only fold my arms and do nothing about 
the plight of the people. This grave situation is pushing me into 
a corner The governor will certainly not allow me a grace 
period. How can I sustain myself? In many places^ the tax 
collecting edicts are so strict and pressing that people have had 
only a few days before being forced to pay. I am afraid that 
I cannot avoid disaster. I am very worried^^ 

In an inscription on his painting for Fang Aixian 
(active second half seventeenth century), Wang 
Shimin again conveys his deep concern about taxes 
and the loss of his painting collection: "Ever since I 
was young and vigorous, I have been excessively fond 
of paintings, and in my family collection there were 
one or two of [Huang Gongwangs paintings]. . . . 
Since the years wushen andj'ryow [1668—69] ^ ^^^^ been 
beset by tax increases, and in my poverty I have not 
been able to hold onto my collection, which has been 
sold to other collectors 

Wang Shimins financial crisis resulted in the loss 
of most of his collection by 1672. In his colophon 
of 1671 to Wang Hui s copy after Fan Kuans Travelers 
amid Streams and Mountains (see fig. 33), he says that 
"only one- or two-tenths of what I once owned still 
remains." Another of his colophons, to Wang 
Jians Album of Reduced Copies of Famous Song and Yuan 
Paintings, states, "I have been assailed by illness, old 
age, poor harvests, and anxiety over taxes. As a 
result, there are no paintings left in my house."^^ 
Wang Shimin was in such despair that he described 
himself as "a blind man who, having lost his staflF, 
wanders with nothing to rely upon."^^ Wang Hui s 
emergence as a celebrated independent painter 
occurred in the mid-i66os, precisely when Wang 
Shimin began to suffer from straitened financial 
circumstances. When Wang Shimin could no longer 
aflFord to compete with wealthier collectors for 
Wang Hui s paintings, his talented pupil turned his 
attention elsewhere. 

TANG YUZHAO 

The reclusive scholar and collector Tang Yuzhao 
(1602— 1672), one of Wang Huis most important 
patrons in the early 1660s, was extremely influential in 
advancing Wang s career as an independent artist and, 
in fact, continued to provide enthusiastic support for 
him until his death. Tang was also very close to Yun 
Shouping, a fellow native of Changzhou who was 
famous for his flower paintings and who made a 
number of works for Tang and his family members. 
Tangs son Tang Guang (Tang Yuguang, 1626— 1690), 
himself a flower painter, became a lifelong friend 
to Yun and even collaborated with him.^^ Like Yun, 
Tang excelled at the colorful style of painting flowers 
that was known as "boneless," that is, without ink 
outlines, and was particularly renowned for his lotus 
paintings, which Wang Shimin lauded in 1672 as 
"the most excellent in our land."^^ Red Lotuses, a 
collaboration between Yun Shouping and Tang 
Guang, dated 1671 (Palace Museum, Beijing), was 
painted to celebrate Wang Hui s fortieth birthday. It 
bears inscriptions by Wang Shimin, Wang Jian, Yun 
Shouping, and the Zhenjiang collector Da Chong- 
guang (Da Zhongguang, 1623— 1692), all of whom 
were intimates of the Tang family.^"' 

Wang Hui had already established a close relation- 
ship with Tang Yuzhao by 1655, when he painted 
Landscape after Wu Zhens '^Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn 
Day^^ioT him (fig. 49). Tang later added an inscription 
on Wang Hui s Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang, 
dated 1661 (Berkeley Art Museum, University of 
California at Berkeley), in which he expressed admira- 
tion for the young painter s creative reinterpretations 
of the earlier master s style.^'* In 1662 Wang Hui 
visited Tang Yuzhao s Half Garden (Ban Yuan) at 
Changzhou and painted Water Village^ after Zhao Danian 
(pis. 18, 19).^^ This beautifijl blue-and-green landscape 
in the style of the Northern Song painter Zhao 
Lingrang (Zhao Danian, active ca. 1070— after 1100) 
was made for Wang s friend Zitang, the brother-in-law 
of Tang Yuzhao. The painting presents a level-distance 
view of low-lying hills and villages along a river. In 
recreating Zhao Lingrang s style, Wang has revived the 
ancient tripartite division of the picture space into 
discrete foreground, middle ground, and far-distance 
passages, each with a different ground plane. Thus, 
while the jumps in scale convey a sense of recession, 
the separately composed landscape elements work 
against spatial continuity.^^ 

An even more important source for this painting can 
be found in the works of Zhao Mengfii (1254— 1322), 
most notably Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Hua 

Mountains, dated 1296 (see fig. 7), and Water Village, 
date d 1302 (fig. 55). Both paintings depict an expan- 
sive marshy landscape backed by low hills and dotted 
with willows, pines, houses, and fishermen. Yun 
Shouping s inscription on Wang Hui s painting after 
Zhao Mengfu s Autumn Colors, a leaf from an album 
dated 1686 (Suzhou Museum), mentions that Wang 
had made a replica of the Yuan masterwork before 
that time.^^ Furthermore, in 1662 the Nanjing col- 
lector Zhou Lianggong (1612— 1672) had written a 
colophon to Wang Shimins copy of Zhao Mengfu s 
Autumn Cclors,^^ It would not be surprising if, when 
Wang Shimin copied the work, Wang Hui also did 
so and then painted this striking archaic landscape 
reflecting his stylistic indebtedness to Zhao Mengfu. 

Wang Hui s Landscapes after Ancient Masters, an album 
dated 1662 (Palace Museum, Beijing), provides further 
evidence of his association with Tang Yuzhao.^^ 
Wang painted the album at the Half-Cloud Resi- 
dence (Banyun Ju), the home of Yang Zhaolu (jinshi, 
1652), another Changzhou native and a close friend 
of Tang, who added colophons to the album. One 
leaf from the album. Landscape after Huang Gongwang, 
derives mainly from a leaf in the Taipei To See Large 
within Small album. According to Wang s inscription, 
the painting was modeled on a Huang Gongwang 
painting of Mount Hua that he saw at Wang 
Shimins home in the winter of 1660. But other 
features of the painting — the round, distant moun- 
tains modeled with hemp-fiber strokes, the villages 
nestled in the valley or set along the riverbank, and 
the stable spatial arrangement — all appear to come 
from a now-lost version of Huang Gongwang s 
Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains (see figs. 4, 123) that 
was in Tang Yuzhao s collection. Wang Hui s study of 
this handscroU significantly enhanced his fame as a 
gifted copyist; indeed, he was the only painter given 
the privilege of copying it. During his career, Wang 
Hui created six or seven copies of this version of 
Huang Gongwang s Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains/^ 

Wang made his first copy for Tang Yuzhao during 
the summer of 1662 while residing at Wang Shimins 
Hall of Humble Refinements.^^ Yet curiously, Wang 
Shimin never saw the original or the copy, as is clear 
from his colophon of 1673 to Wang Hui s second 
copy of the scroll, made for Da Chongguang and 
dated 1672 (figs. 56, 57): 

I have seen more than twenty genuine paintings by Zijiu 
[Huang Gongwang]; there were two or four in the family 

PL 18 (cat. 2). Wang Hui (1632—1717). Water Village^ after Zhao Danian, 
dated 1662. Hanging scroll, ink and light color on paper, 51 Vz x 20 in. 
(130.8 X 50.7 cm). Palace Museum, Beijing 

61 

Fig. 55. Zhao Mengfu (1254— 1322). Water Village (detail), dated 1302. Handscroll, ink on paper, 9% x 47 Vz in. (24,9 x 120.5 cm). Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 56. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Copy after Huang Gongwang s Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains (detail), dated 1672. Handscroll, ink and color on paper, 15 y» in. x 24 ft. 4 Vz in. 
(38.4 X 743 cm). Freer Gallery of Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., Purchase (F1950.19) 

collection^ hut they are now all lost. I recall that Dong 
Wenmin [Dong Qichang] said^ ''Of all Huangs paintings^ 
which added up to reams ofpaper^ the Fuchun ranks first" 
It is a regret that I have never set eyes on it Several years ago^ 
I heard that Shigu [Wang Hui] had painted a picture [after 
the Fuchxxnjfor Mr Tang [Tang Yuzhao] of Jinling 
[ChangzhouJ. That picture I also did not see. . . . Although 
I admire the paintings I dare not ask for any favors, Shigu 
honors me by promising to paint one for me. Furthermore^ he 
intends to ask the Provincial Censor [Da ChongguangJ to 
write a colophon on it for meJ^ 

Wang Hui s reluctance to show Wang Shimin his 
copy of Dwelling for Tang Yuzhao in 1662 and his 
subsequent failure to make the promised copy for 
Wang Shimin demonstrate how Wang Hui s relation- 
ship with his mentor had already begun to change by 
the early 1660s/** 

At the same time, Wang Hui expanded his focus 
beyond the paintings of Huang Gongwang to encom- 
pass the works of another of the Four Masters of the 
late Yuan period, Wang Meng (1308— 1385), This new 
interest was closely related to Wang s contact with 

I £ 

- .4 f € 

f J * T '/^ 

1^ 

fft * U 4 

A 

4^ 

:ii ^ Z Sf- ^ M ^ ^ Mf ^ 

Fig. 57. Wang Shimin 
(1592— 1680). Colophon, 
dated 1673, to fig. 56 

Opposite: PI. 19. Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Water 
Village, after Zhao Danian, 
dated 1662 (detail, pi. 18 

63 

Fig. 58. Wang Meng 
(1308— 1385). Dwelling in 
the Mountains on a Summer 
Day, dated 1368. Hanging 
scroll, ink on paper, 
46 V2 X 14 % in. (118. 1 X 
36.2 cm). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

;^ -ft. 

■X, 

i4s 

fli^^ttP if' 

Fig. 59. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Myriad Valleys and Thousand Cliffs, dated 
1662. Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 69% x 38 ^^ in. (177.5 ^ 
98.4 cm). Capital Museum, Beijing 

Tang Yuzhao* During his stay with Tang in 1662, Wang 
must have studied Wang Meng s Dwelling in the Moun- 
tains on a Summer Day, dated 1368 (fig. 58), then in 
Tang s collection, as evidenced by his Myriad Valleys and 
Thousand Cliffs, dated 1662 (fig. 59)/^* The pine trees in 
the foreground, the stream flowing firom a distant 
mountain valley, and the mountains with slanted tops 
in the background all derive fi:om Dwelling in the 
Mountains on a Summer Day, 

Reading Next to the Window in the Mountains, dated 
1666 (pL 20), demonstrates Wang Hui s continued 
engagement with Wang Meng s style throughout the 
1660S. Painted to celebrate the successful examina- 
tion results attained by Wang Shimins eighth son, 
Wang Shan (1645—1728), who later became one of 
the highest officials at the Kangxi court,^^ this 
monumental mountainscape, crowded with power- 
ful, densely textured forms, shows Wang Hui s 
thorough understanding of Wang Meng s style. 
The compact spatial organization and dynamic 

64 

integration of landscape elements — notably, the tall 
foreground pines and massive central mountains — 
are indicative of Wang Hui s skillful reinterpretation 
of Dwelling in the Mountains on a Summer Day, Wang 
Hui successfully recaptures Wang Meng s character- 
istically restless brushwork, unstable mountain 
forms, and powerful compositional movements. 
His rich and vigorous brushwork, a mixture of 
hemp-fiber strokes and foliage dots, fills the land- 
scape with kinetic energy. 

Wang Hui s rapid rise to prominence in the late 
1660s was largely due to his exceptional skill in 
reproducing ancient masterpieces. His replicas of 
Song and Yuan paintings were regarded as almost as 
precious as the originals. Indeed, Wang Shimin had 
become fascinated with Wang Hui because of his 
outstanding ability as a copyist: 

When Wang Shigu [Wang Hui] arose he again introduced 
the great masters of the Tang^ Song, and Yuan dynasties by 
imitating and copying them very closely. As soon as one 
opens a scroll of his, one is impressed by the strong and rich 
colouring, and whatever the design or the ^^short cuts" may 
be, they are quite in keeping with those of the old masters, 
and in his brushwork and spirit^resonance he is superior to 
them. Furthermore, when he imitates a master of old, he is 
entirely like this particular model and does not do it by 
introducing elements from various masters. If the picture is 
not signed, it cannot be distinguished from the originalJ^ 

Zhou Lianggong also lauded Wang Hui for his 
ability to make exact copies of ancient masterworks: 
**Shigus [Wang Huis] copies after Song and Yuan 
masters are absolutely faithful to the originals. The 
people in Wu used to ask him to paint, and then 
they mounted his paintings in the fashion of old 
masters* works, so as to fool connoisseurs. Even 
those who were good at connoisseurship could not 
tell that these paintings were done by a contempo- 
rary artist.** 

Wang Hui s reputation as an exceptional copyist 
of Song and Yuan paintings spread so quickly that 
collectors in neighboring towns, most notably Tang 
Yuzhao, competed with one another to provide 
lodging for him.^^ He thus gained access to many of 
the most famous collections in the south, a privilege 
no other painter of his time enjoyed. Through such 
work, his knowledge of ancient styles was greatly 
enhanced, while his growing reputation as a copyist 
during the 1660s and 1670s brought him both fame 
and wealth.^^ The asking price for Wang Hui s finest 
copy of a famous Song painting was sixteen to 
twenty-five times as high as that for one of his other 
landscape paintings.^*^ Because of the extraordinary 

PI. 20 (cat. 5). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Reading 
Next to the Window in the 
Mountains, dated 1666. 
Hanging scroll, ink and 
light color on paper, 63 x 
16 Vi in. (160 X 42 cm). 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

65 

PL 21. Wang Hui (1632- 
1717). Summer Mountains^ 
Misty Rain, dated 1668 
(detail, pi. 22) 

monetary value of his copies, Wang continued to 
make exact replicas, freehand copies, and imitations 
of Song and Yuan paintings throughout his career. 

ZHOU LIANGGONG 

By the late 1660s, having successfully built his reputa- 
tion as the preeminent copyist of ancient paintings, 
Wang Hui began to seek patrons beyond his native 
region. The most famous of these was Zhou Liang- 
gong of Nanjing.^^ Zhou s greatest accomplishment 
is his Lives of Painters (Dubua lu, ca. 1673), a firsthand 
account of seventy-seven contemporary artists who 
contributed to his collection and one of the most 
authoritative primary sources concerning painters born 
or active in Nanjing during the tumultuous years of 
the Ming-Qing transition.^^ 

No other artist in the Lives of Painters is more 
celebrated than Wang Hui,^^ w^hom Zhou Lianggong 
regarded as the most distinguished painter in the 
south. Zhou s fame as a collector and chronicler made 
him an important person for Wang Hui to cultivate 
as he sought to expand his career and establish his 
independence from Wang Shimin and Wang Jian. 
Sometime betv^een 1661 and 1664, therefore, Wang 
Hui asked the noted scholar Qian Qianyi to write a 
letter of introduction to Zhou, to which Wang added 
one of his paintings. At the time, Zhou was serving 
in an official post in Qingzhen, Shandong Province, 
so Wang did not actually meet with him until long 
after Zhou s return to Nanjing in 1666. The amateur- 
painter and Nanjing native Ni Can (1627— 1688), 
writing in about 1685, recalled the friendship between 
Zhou Lianggong and Wang Hui: 

/ have been a friend of Shigu [Wang Hui] for thirty years. 
In the pastj when Master Zhou Liyuan [Zhou Lianggong] 
was in Nanzhong [Nanjing]^ Wang Shigu frequently visited 
and stayed with him day and night. I have deeply admired 
Wang Shigus sincerity^ loftiness^ and solitary disposition. His 
attitude is open^ easy^ and generous. If people merely see him 
through his painting, their knowledge of him is only skin^-deep. 
Wang Shigu always thinks most highly of the value of friendship 
so that he would not change his mind easily because of such 
worldly matters as Ife, death, success, and poverty. 

While Ni Cans account may be exaggerated, 
another contemporary report, by Wang Pian (active 
second half seventeenth century), notes that Zhou 
did send several letters to Wang inviting him to come 
visit. But the two men apparently did not meet until 
1669,^^ a conclusion supported by two pieces of 
evidence. In his inscription on Ten Thousand Miles of the 
Yangzi River, dated 1699 (Wan-go H. C. Weng 

Collection, Lyme, New Hampshire), Wang Hui 
recalled that it was approximately thirty years earlier 
that he had lodged at Zhou Lianggong s residence, 
where he saw Landscape of the Yangzi River by Yan Wengui 
(active ca. 970—1030).^^ Zhous own account is further 
confirmation: "In xkt jiyou year [1669], when I had 
returned from my official post, he [Wang Hui] came 
to visit me in Nanjing. He lived in the Xudeng 
temple and painted sixteen pictures for me. In my old 
age and amidst all my troubles I found great pleasure 
m these paintings. 

After their initial meeting, Wang Hui and Zhou 
Lianggong remained close. Zhou wrote a poem to 
celebrate Wang s fortieth birthday in 1671 as well as 
a letter asking him to paint a promised work that 
had long been delayed.^^ Wang s album of sixteen 
paintings for Zhou has not survived. The most 
concrete monument to their early relationship is 
Summer Mountains, Misty Rain, dated 1668, a hands croU 
with a long colophon by Wang Shimin, which Wang 
presented to Zhou on his 1669 visit to Nanjing 
(pis. 21, 22A,b).^^ Around the same time, Wang also 
contributed a painting entitled Mountains after Snowfall 
in the Style of Li Cheng to a collaborative album for 
Zhou. On the facing page is a colophon dated 1670 
by Wang Shizhen (1634— 1711) that expresses support 
for Zhou after his having been wrongly accused of 
mishandling government funds in the eighth lunar 
month of 1669.^^ When Wang Hui came to Nanjing 
with Summer Mountains, Misty Rain, the corruption case 
had just begun.^^ 

Summer Mountains, Misty Rain, Wang Hui s earliest 
extant handscroU, is also one of his most ambitious 
works of the 1660s, combining past styles and 
classical themes in an impressive landscape panorama. 
The painting opens with a view of broad lowlands 
receding to layered distant mountains silhouetted 
against a gloomy sky. Imposing middle-ground peaks 
built up of multitiered trees and clusters of boulders 
suddenly interrupt this spacious view. Thick layers of 
cloud emerge from behind these peaks. The natural 
drama of towering mountains and dense mist ends 
abruptly with a large marshy expanse where two 
fishing boats ply the still water and two woodcutters 
return to a village nestled behind tall trees. Beyond 
the stream, distant mountains recede into the dark, 
shimmering sky. The scroll concludes with a fore- 
ground view of tall trees and large rocks that coun- 
terbalance the preceding turbulent landscape. With 
its rich and vigorous brushwork and color carefully 
applied to enhance the pensive mood, the painting 
represents a superb integration of Wang Hui s mind, 
hand, and eye. 

66 

PL 22A (cat. 6). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Summer 
Mountains, Misty Rain, 
dated 1668. HandscroU, 
ink and color on paper, 
16 Vz X 97 in. (41.8 X 
246.4 cm). Asian Art 
Museum of San Fran- 
cisco, Gift of the Tang 
Foundation, presented 
by Leslie, Martin, and 
Nadine Tang in cele- 
bration of Jack C. C. 
Tang's sixtieth birthday 
(B87D8) 

Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain is also a remarkable 
synthesis of various earlier pictorial sources* Its 
opening level-distance view set off by large fore- 
ground rocks derives from the works of Li Cheng 
(919—967) and Guo Xi (ca* 1000— ca* 1090)/'^ The use 
of bold outlines and layered ink washes also recalls 
Guo Xi s landscape style. Other references to Li 
Cheng include the birds in flight over the trees and 
the dark sky in the beginning section, motifs that 
also appear in Wintry Grove on Ancient Banks^ after Li 
Cheng, a leaf from the album that Wang Hui painted 
in 1674 for Wang Shimin (see Catalogue, no, 15).^'' 
The masterful interplay of an expansive level distance 
and high mountains also recalls two of the earliest 
extant works in the Yan Wengui tradition of "moun- 
tains and rivers without end": Pavilions and Mansions hy 
Rivers and Mountains^ attributed to Yan Wengui (fig. 60), 
and Summer Mountains, attributed to Yans follower Qu 
Ding (active ca. 1023— ca. 1056) (see fig. 75)*^^ 

The clouds hovering in the deep mountain valley 
of Wang Huis work are also found in his White Clouds 
and Green Mountains, a fan in the style of the Yuan 
painter Gao Kegong (1248— 1310), also painted in 
1668.^^ The watery lowland passage in the last section 
recalls Zhao Mengfu s Autumn Colors on the Qiao and 
Hua Mountains (see fig. 7), which then belonged to 

Zhang Yingjia (active second half seventeenth 
century).^^ Zhou Lianggong's admiration for that 
painting is evidenced by his 1662 colophon to 
Wang Shimins copy of Autumn Colors^'^ The fisher- 
men in their skiffs, the marshy land dotted with 
clusters of grass and shrubs, the parallel rows of 
distant trees, the half-hidden water village, and the 
prominent use of hemp-fiber strokes all echo ele- 
ments in Autumn Colors. 

The most important pictorial source for Summer 
Mountains^ Misty Rain is, however, a hanging scroll of 
the same title by Wu Zhen (1280—1354). While the 
location of this painting is currently unknown, a fine 
copy by the early Ming painter Liu Jue (1410— 1472) 
probably preserves its fundamental features (fig. 61).^^ 
Liu Jue s monumental landscape features an imposing 
central mountain flanked on the right by clouds and a 
cascade and on the left by a village. A simplified copy 
of this composition, entitled Autumn Clearing in the 
Mountain Pass, is included in the Taipei lb See Large within 
Small album.^^ Wang Hui knew Wu Zhens painting 
very well. He copied it in 1655 for Tang Yuzhao^^^ and 
included another copy in his To See Large within Small 
album, dated 1672 (Shanghai Museum). The poet 
Huang Yujian also wrote Wang Hui a letter express- 
ing his eagerness to possess a copy/*^^ 

68 

Fig. 60. Attributed to 
Yan Wengui (active 
ca. 970—1030). Pavilions 
and Mansions by Rivers 
and Mountains (detail). 
HandscroU, ink and 
color on paper, 10 V* x 
53% in. (26 X 135 cm). 
Osaka Municipal 
Museum of Art 

Wang Hui s version for Zhou Lianggong skillfully 
adapted the major pictorial elements of Wu Zhens 
hanging scroll into the handscroU format: the high 
peaks and wafting clouds are placed in the middle of 
the scroll, without sacrificing their monumentality 
and centrality, and the dense foreground trees and 
shrubbery animate the surface of the mountains. 
At the same time, the laterally arrayed landmasses 
and parallel rows of trees convey a strong sense of 
horizontality, and the thick layers of clouds/ moving 
slowly to the left, carry the viewers eye to the distant 
peaks at the end of the scroll. The transition from 
scene to scene is smooth and gradual, as the scroll 

successfully melds landscape elements into a continu- 
ous horizontal sequence. 

Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain presents an almost 
magical composite of earlier styles and compositions, 
demonstrating Wang Hui s masterful virtuosity in 
synthesizing Song pictorial elements with Yuan 
calligraphic brushwork. In addition, it marks the 
beginning of his experiments with the pictorial 
potential of the handscroU format for creating vast 
panoramic landscapes. The painting thus represents a 
significant turning point in Wang Hui s development, 
foreshadowing the direction his landscape art would 
take in later years. Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain has 

69 

further significance in that it reflects Wang Hui s 
determination not only to establish himself as a 
skillful copyist but also to pursue the loftier goal of 
inventing a new type of landscape, one enriched by 
thematic allusions and complex human emotions. In 
fact, this particular work, with its bleak and chilly 
atmosphere, may allude to Zhou Lianggong s emo- 
tionally turbulent life, which was racked by a series of 
precarious political setbacks. The flock of birds flying 
into the dark sky reinforces this association and 
serves to clarify the thematic allusions of the scroll. 

Wang Hui s early paintings for Zhou Lianggong 
were all winterscapes/^^ Two months after he had 
presented Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain to "Zhou in 
the eighth lunar month of 1669, Wang made Snow 
Clearings after Li Cheng (see pL 4). Although Wang did 
not name the recipient of this work, that it was 
painted for Zhou Lianggong is supported by a letter 
from Zhou to Wang, thought to have been written 
in the winter of 1669, in which Zhou apologizes for 
not having paid Wang properly for a commissioned 
painting. Zhou also mentions that he had been 
dismissed from office and was facing an impending 
trial.'"^ It was precisely at this time, as Wang Hui 
returned to Nanjing after a brief visit to Chang- 
zhou, that Zhou was accused of mishandling 

government funds (a capital offense) and was 
relieved of his official post. During the same period, 
as noted earlier, the artist also contributed to a 
collective album for Zhou; his painting, entitled 
Mountains after Snowfall^ in the Style of Li Cheng, faced a 
page inscribed by Wang Shizhen with a sympathetic 
message regarding Zhou s situation/^"^ 

Wangs decision to paint two winters capes in 
the style of Li Cheng for Zhou was clearly signifi- 
cant, for those works by the older master had long 
been considered emblems of survival in the face of 
adversity. Wang probably meant the paintings to 
express his sympathy for Zhou s plight and to 
encourage him during his ordeal. The bleak spirit 
of these winter landscapes, which mirrored so well 
Zhou s perilous circumstances, must have been 
particularly resonant for Zhou. In a letter to Wang 
Hui, Zhou referred to the shocks and cold sweats 
that he had experienced during the succession of 
accusations and trials. Already having endured 
years of banishment and imprisonment over charges 
between 1654 and 1661, Zhou was once again plunged 
into a chilling situation by these new accusations. In 
addition to depicting the cold atmosphere of winter, 
Wang Huis landscapes after Li Cheng were thus 
intended to evoke a deeper layer of human emotion. 

70 

In many respects, Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain 
may also be seen as an intensely personal narrative 
of Zhou Lianggongs life. Its opening section, with 
the threatening sky, gray water, and flight of birds, 
recalls the first bleak period of political turmoil, 
which culminated in 1661 with Zhou s sudden pardon. 
The tall peaks that rise from the middle section 
offer a powerful counterpoint to these somber images. 
Evoking centrality, power, and order, the high moun- 
tains may be read as emblems of Zhou s moral 
authority and integrity, while the towering evergreens 
symbolize his upright character as a virtuous man. 
The last section, depicting a land of peaceful retreat 
free from political turmoil, foreshadows Zhou s 
retirement. The presence of the two fishermen and 
returning woodcutters highlights the pleasure of 
shunning the official world, in which Zhou had been 
so much involved. The wafting, heavy clouds end 
with the opening-up of an expansive space where 
tranquillity prevails. 

In 1669, shortly after Wang Hui met Zhou Liang- 
gong, Zhou was to face another round of accusations. 
But in Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain, Wang Hui seems 
to be urging Zhou to embrace a new life in retire- 
ment. Yet the ultimate significance of Wang s imagery 
remains ambiguous. The scroll is neither a copy after 

Fig. 61. Liu Jue (1410— 
1472). Copy of Wu 
Zhen's Summer Mountains, 
Misty Rain. Hanging 
scroll, ink on silk, 65 V* x 
37 % in. (165.7 X 95 cm). 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

71 

an earlier painting nor a typical landscape of summer 
mountains on a rainy day. Its strange bleakness and 
elegiac mood, unusual in a summer scene, give it an 
enigmatic character that defies easy interpretation. 
What is certain is that Wang Hui had created a 
highly original work that is charged with meaning, 
both art-historical and personal, 

COPYING THE OLD MASTERS 

As Wang Hui s fame spread, a widening circle of 
prominent collectors in the south competed with 
one another to obtain his ser vices/^^ Through these 
contacts, Wang Hui made replicas of a large number 
of Song and Yuan paintings, enriching his knowledge 
of such works while establishing himself as the most 
renowned copyist of his day/^^ One of his major 
patrons from the late i68os onward was Song Luo 
(Song Lao, 1634— 1713), who asked the artist in 1698 
to make a copy of Snowy Mountains by Fan Kuan 
(ca. 960— ca, 1030; pL 23)/°^ Song had inherited the 
work from his father, the high official Song Quan 
(1598— 1652), who had received it as a token of impe- 
rial favor from the Shunzhi emperor (r, 1644—61) for 
his contributions to the Manchu conquest of China, 
Wang Hui s replica vividly suggests the monumental 
grandeur and chilling beauty of the original.^ 

Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass (pi, 24), formerly 
attributed to Xu Daoning (ca, 970— ca, 1052), is 
probably one of Wang Hui s copies that, in the 
words of Zhou Lianggong, was "mounted , , , in 
the fashion of old masters' works, so as to fool 
connoisseurs." It is likely that Suzhou dealers of 
the time added false signatures and seals to Wang 
Huis paintings and sold them at high prices, The 
painting bears a signature, "Xu Daoning s study of 
Li Xianxi s [Li Cheng s] Dense Snow on the Mountain 
Pass!' as well as spurious seals of the Song emperor 
Huizong (r, iioi— 25), Jin emperor Zhangzong 
(r, 1189—1208), Shen Zhou (1427— 1509), and Hua 
Xia (ca, 1465— 1566), Bian Yongyu (1645— 1712), Wang 
Hui s younger contemporary and a noted collector, 
acquired Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass and recorded 
it as the work of Xu Daoning in his Compilation of 
Writings on Calligraphy and Painting from the Shigu Hall 
(Shigu Tang shuhua huikaoy^^^ 

Typical of Wang Hui is the way in which the 
layered banks and deeply creviced, shaded boulders 
are set against a vista of receding rivers and distant 
mountains to emphasize the mountains* mass. White 
pigment applied to the surfaces of the branches, 
foliage, and rocks powerfully conveys the physical 

appearance of a recent snowfall. But most character- 
istic of Wang Hui are the convoluted rock forms and 
twisting trees that undulate and pulse with graphic 
energy, creating a "dragon vein" of continuous 
compositional movement. Although Dense Snow on the 
Mountain Pass has been labeled a Wang Hui forgery, 
it is equally possible that the painting was a legiti- 
mate evocation of a landscape in the style of Li 
Cheng, which was later given a false attribution,"^ 

Wang Hui s brilliance in copying ancient master- 
works is once again demonstrated in Landscape after Wu 
Zhens ^^Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Dajy/Mated 
1686, now in the Palace Museum, Beijing (pis, 13, 25), 
This meticulous copy of a now-lost Wu Zhen 
original was once in the collection of Wang Shimin, 
As noted earlier, in 1655 Wang Hui made a copy of 
the same painting for Tang Yuzhao,"^ the current 
location of which is also unknown. The Palace 
Museum version is an imposing landscape in which 
tall, layered peaks with rounded earthen foothills, 
alum-head boulders, and numerous trees and bushes 
are placed in a vast panorama of mountains and 
rivers. Painted some thirty years after he created his 
first copy, this painting shows that, even in his later 
years, Wang never lost his technical facility and 
unfailing confidence in copying ancient paintings, 

Wang Hui s unrivaled ability in accurately repli- 
cating his models is further highlighted by his To 
See Large within Small album, dated 1672, now in the 
Shanghai Museum (see figs, 27, 28), Nineteen 
paintings in this twenty-one-leaf album are stylisti- 
cally identical with those in the Taipei To See Large 
within Small album, "^Throughout his career, Wang 
Hui s To See Large within Small album served as a 
sourcebook for his replicas of ancient paintings. An 
excellent example is provided by the hanging scroll 
entitled Landscape after Wang Meng^s ''Travelers amid 
Autumn Mountains" which is based on the leaf of 
the same title in the album but which converts the 
painting back into its original format (pi, 26), 
The composition is otherwise identical to that 
of the Shanghai album leaf (fig, 62), In terms of 
brushwork, however, the loosely applied hemp-fiber 
texture strokes, the repetitive ink dots, and the 
mechanically executed tree forms of the scroll lack 
the energy and creative variation of Wang s early 
period, suggesting that this is a later work, probably 
painted after 1700, Despite the absence of dramatic 
brushwork. Landscape after Wang Meng^s ''Travelers amid 
Autumn Mountains^^ reveals not only that Wang Hui 
continued to create replicas of ancient masterworks, 
but that the Shanghai album proved to be an endur- 
ing source for him. It also offers an insight into the 

PI. 23 (cat. 25). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717), Land- 
scape after Fan Kuan's 
"Snowy Mountains" 
dated 1698. Hanging 
scroll, ink and light 
color on silk, 73 % x 
45^2 in. (187.7 X 
1 15.5 cm). National 
Palace Museum, Taipei 

73 

Opposite: PI. 24 (cat. 26), Wang Hui 
(1632—1717), formerly attributed to 
Xu Daoning (ca. 970— ca. 1052). 
Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass. Hang- 
ing scroll, ink and color on silk, 
47^4 X 32 in. (121.3 ^ ^^-3 *^"^)- 
National Palace Museum, Taipei 

PL 25 (cat. 20). Wang Hui (1632-1717). 
Landscape after Wu Zhen's ^%ountain Passes 
on a Clear Autumn Day" dated 1686. 
Hanging scroll, ink on silk, 85 x 
44 ^^ in. (215.9 X 113,8 cm). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

75 

PL 26 (cat. 27). Wang Hui 
(1632—1717). Landscape after 
Wang Meng's "Travelers amid 
Autumn Mountains" Hanging 
scroll, ink on silk, 23 % x 
10 Vi in. (58.7 X 26.7 cm). 
The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York, Lent by 
the P. Y. and Kinmay W. 
Tang Family Collection 
(L.2007.13) 

76 

aging yet hardworking painter, seeking to reconnect 
with his early years and recapture the spirit and 
energy embodied in the Shanghai album lea£ The 
painter has grown older, yet his passion for returning 
to the past remains almost unchanged. 

In the late i66os and early 1670s, Wang Hui s close 
copies of ancient masterworks were crucial in building 
his career and earning him material wealth. Accord- 
ing to a later account, his clients were high officials 
and rich collectors who treasured his paintings for 
being as precious as pearls/ Although the evidence 
concerning the prices paid for Wang s paintings is 
only scattered and indirect, it suggests that he was the 
best-paid painter of his day."^ His ordinary land- 
scapes, painted quickly to respond to commissions, 
sometimes cost as little as four taels of silver/ His 
faithful copies of antique paintings were, however, 
almost always priced at the highest level. His replica 
of Juran's Mist Floating on a Distant Peak for example, cost 
200 taels of silver, while such works by his contempo- 
raries usually sold for fewer than six taels. A list left 
by the important collector Gao Shiqi (1645— 1704) 
of prices for the paintings he had collected by 1704 
includes useful information on the cost of paintings, 
both ancient and contemporary, during the late 
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. The 
highest-priced works in Gao Shiqi s collection were 
The Xiao and Xiang Rivers and The Shu River by Li 
Gonglin (ca. 1041— 1106), a set of two handscroUs 
mounted together that cost 400 taels.^^^ Wang Huis 
replica of Jurans Mist Floating on a Distant Peak was thus 
equivalent in price to one of Li Gonglins scrolls and 
had fetched an even higher price than Delight in Cloudy 
Mountains, attributed to Mi Youren (1074— 1151), which 
was purchased for 160 taels.^^^ 

While Wang Hui s replica no longer survives, 
another work, entitled Mist Floating on a Distant Peak^ 
in Imitation of Juran and dated 1672 (pi. 27; see also 
pi. 6), with copied inscriptions by Wang Shimin, 
Wang Jian, and Wang Hui, gives some idea of the 
originals appearance. The lack of momentum and 
structural force in the composition, the inconsistent 
hemp-fiber strokes, the repetitive ink dots, and the 
two-dimensional rocks and mountains all indicate 
that this painting may not be from the hand of the 
master. But the copy of Wang Hui s inscription 
reveals that in 1672 he used Jurans Mist Floating on a 
Distant Peak then in the collection of Changzhou 
painter and collector Zhuang Jiongsheng (1627—1679), 
to make a copy for Da Chongguang. The Princeton 
painting thus enables us to identify Da Chongguang 
as the purchaser of one of the highest-priced 
paintings of the early 1670s. This work and an 

Fig. 62. Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Landscape after Wang Meng's '^Travelers ami 
Autumn Mountains" from To See Large within Small, dated 1672. Leaf B 
in an album of twenty-one paintings with two leaves of calligraphy, 
ink or ink and color on paper or silk, average 21% x 13 ys in. (55.5 x 
34.5 cm). Shanghai Museum 

almost identical one in the collection of the Fuji 
Yurinkan, Kyoto (fig. 63), also considered a replica 
of Wang Hui s original, demonstrate that the 
artist s replicas were so popular that they them- 
selves were soon also copied. 

Wang Hui s renown as a copyist was due in 
part to a renewal of antiquarianism at the time. 
During the Ming-Qing transition, Song and Yuan 
paintings in the imperial collection were dispersed 
among private collections and frequently changed 
ownership. Since very few people could gain access 
to these ancient masterpieces, either at the collec- 
tor s residences or on the market, replicas were one 

Left: PI. 27 (cat. 13). 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Mist Floating on a Distant 
Peak, in Imitation of Juran, 
dated 1672. Hanging 
scroll, ink on silk, 76 x 
28 Va in. (193 X 71.5 cm). 
Princeton University 
Art Museum, Gift of 
Mr. and Mrs. Earl 
Morse (jigjyg) 

Right: Fig. 63, Unidenti- 
fied artist (17th century 
or later). Copy after 
Wang Hui s Landscape after 
Juran's ^^ist Floating on a 
Distant Peak." Hanging 
scroll, ink on silk, dimen- 
sions unknown. Fuji 
Yurinkan, Kyoto 

way to meet the growing demand for such paint- 
ings/^^ Wang Huis success as a copyist was further 
facihtated by the contemporary notion that perfect 
replicas could be as marvelous as the originals, 

Wang Hui actually made a very limited number of 
careful replicas. Although he painted six or seven 
copies of Huang Gongwangs Dwelling in the Fuchun 
Mountains during his lifetime (see, for example, fig. 56), 
he was reluctant to accept requests for any more.^^^ 
Indeed, although Wang Hui promised to make one for 
Wang Shimin, he never did, probably because Wang 
Shimin could not have afforded the price. Although 
the cost of Wang Hui s replicas of the Huang Gong- 
wang is unknown, it would presumably have been close 
to the 200 taels of silver paid for his copy of Jurans 
Mist Floating on a Distant Peak^^^ By the mid-i67os, Wang 
Hui had made copies of Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains 
only for Tang Yuzhao, Da Chongguang, and Pan 
Yuanbo (active 1660—770),^^^ all wealthy and influen- 
tial individuals in their native towns of Changzhou, 
Zhenjiang, and Yixing, respectively. 

Wang Hui exercised careful control over the 
volume of his artistic production as a way of assert- 
ing the value of his work and enhancing his reputa- 
tion. Shen Shouhong (1645—1722), a famous Taicang 
poet, offered an interesting account in this regard: "A 
small hanging scroll from Shigu [Wang Hui] costs 
14 bolts of regular silk. The price of a large hanging 
scroll is 100 bolts of the finest silk. His paintings 
now dominate the world. Shigu never lifts his brush 
until he receives a handsome offer. I have tried to 
acquire a painting from him for many years, but to 
no avail. So my thatched hut is dark and empty, with 
no yunyan [**clouds and mists," i.e., paintings]/* 
Wang Hui is confirmed here as an artist-entrepreneur 
who painted only for high commissions. 

Sometimes Wang Hui intentionally delayed the 
completion of requested work in order to increase 
the value of his artistic labor. Expressions such as 
"ten days to draw a river, five days to draw a rock" or 
"ten days to paint a rock, five days to paint a stone" 
are often found in clients* remarks concerning the 
way Wang worked on their requested paintings. ^"^^ 
Such phrases, derived from lines that the Tang poet 
Du Fu (712—770) playfully wrote on a landscape 
painting by his contemporary Wang Zai, suggest that 
an excellent artist should not rush the creation of a 
painting but should instead take the utmost care with 
its execution. ^''^ Wang Hui clearly sought to represent 
himself as an innovative and learned artist rather 
than a professional painter and to establish that his 
exceptional talent deserved a commensurate level of 
recognition and compensation. 

According to Wang Shimin, Wang Hui was like 
"a solitary pine, lofty and prominent, that did not 
mingle with ordinary trees." He was not willing 
to accept commissions for routine paintings and 
often turned down casual requests for his work in 
order to fashion himself as an inaccessible artist 
whose works were available only to a very few 
special clients. He took full advantage of his 
reputation in negotiating prices. When he accepted 
a commission, he insisted on working at his own 
pace. This strategy was obviously successful. Wang 
Shimin observed that Wang Hui s reputation increased 
more than a hundredfold after he developed this 
method of working. 

Wang Hui s self-promotional strategies were also 
referred to by Dai Liucong (active ca. second half 
seventeenth century) in a 1671 poem commemorating 
the artist s fortieth birthday: "Mr. Wang s reputation 
has been spoken of from his early years. He always 
paints a rock in ten days and a [body of] water in 
five days. He is smart enough to make excuses to 
avoid the pressing requests for his paintings and is 
proud of completing commissioned works five times 
as late as their promised dates." ^^'^^ A certain Yuan 
Qixu (active ca. second half seventeenth century) 
wrote, "Lovers of Wang Huis landscapes did not 
regret spending one thousand taels of silver for one 
of his paintings, which they thought surpassed in 
quality those by Jing Hao and Guan Tong and 
were equal to those by Dong Yuan and Juran."^^^ 
Yuans hyperbolic account reinforces the image of 
Wang Hui as one of the most celebrated painters 
of his time. 

Given the great demand for his work, some of 
Wang Hui s clients may have worried that he 
employed assistants to help complete his commis- 
sions.^^^ Evidence for the widespread use of appren- 
tices among professional painters is found in a letter 
from Zhang Yingjia to Wang Hui in which Zhang 
insists that his commission — an album of sixteen 
paintings after Song and Yuan masters and a copy 
of Huang Gongwangs Dwelling in the Fuchun Moun- 
tains — must be accomplished by the painter him- 
self. ^"^^ There is no evidence, however, that Wang 
Hui employed assistants early in his career. This 
may have changed during the 1680s, when the scale 
of his commissions grew significantly. And it is 
certain that in the 1690s, when Wang was working 
on the Southern Inspection Tour commission, he enlisted 
a number of assistants to help complete this 
monumental work. This practice was clearly com- 
mon knowledge, as indicated by a letter to Wang 
from Song Zhi (1656— 1726), the son of Song 

78 

79 

Luo, that mandated that his commission, a large 
multipanel screen, must be done not by "ghost 
painters" but by the artist himself/^^ 

Wang Hui s entrepreneurial attitude is revealed in 
the colophons on Autumn Mountains^ Red Trees, dated 
1670 (pL 28)/^^ An inscription by Wang Shimin notes 
that Wang Hui resisted his teacher s desire to obtain 
the painting, presumably because he could sell it to 
another for a higher price: **On a spring night, Wang 
Hui, passing through Loudong [Taicang], brought 
this painting to show me. I wanted to keep it but, 
noticing Wang s reluctance to give it up, did not 
insist, though I was sorely disappointed/' ^^^Yun 
Shouping also hoped to acquire the painting but was 
similarly disappointed, as he reveals in a second 
inscription indicating that, after he and Wang Shimin 
had added their encomiums, the painting passed to a 
certain Mr. Xu, who immediately transferred it to 
Pan Yuanbo, also a recipient of one of Wang Hui s 
replicas of Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains: 

I happened to stop by the water pavilion of the Xu family and 
found that this painting had been acquired by Mr. Pan [Pan 
Yuanbo] of Jinsha [Yixing], I felt surprised and jealous. . . . 
Could it be that Xilus [Wang Shimin s] and my own 
appreciation of art do not compare with Mr Pans! ... I 
wonder how Shigu [Wang Hui] will face our mockery upon 
meeting Xilu or me in the future}"^^ 

To his teacher and to his friend, Wang Hui s 
unwillingness to part freely with his paintings was 
an increasing annoyance. They came to resent the 
artists solicitation of their inscriptions, which 
enhanced the value of his paintings, as well as the 
many commissions he received from wealthy 
clients. Tang Yuzhao, for example, mentions in a 
letter to Wang Hui that '^several friends in Jinsha 
have been desperately looking for you. . . . They 
have already asked me three times about your well- 
being/' To Yun Shouping, Wang s commercial 
success appeared to contradict completely the amateur 
ideal, which for centuries had aimed at removing 
the taint of vulgar commercialism from the produc- 
tion and exchange of works of art.^^^ In another 
inscription for one of Wang Huis paintings, Yun 
told of how Su Shi (1037— 1101), after receiving a 
request from Wang Shen (ca. 1048— 1103), took some 
Chengxin Tang paper to make a piece of calligra- 
phy and presented it to Wang Shen as a gift with- 
out thinking of its monetary value. The story was 
intended to remind Wang Hui of the ideal of giving 
away paintings as tokens of friendship among fellow 
literati. At the end of the inscription, Yun Shou- 

ping adopted a sarcastic tone to admonish Wang for 
his relentless pursuit of material gain: 

Nantiansheng [Yun Shouping] and Shiguzi [Wang Hui] have 
been good friends for twenty years^ yet in my bamboo chest there 
are just a few of his small paintings^ yet his casual acquaint 
tances own many of his large paintings. The year before last^ I 
took out an inkstonefrom my collection to trade for a fan 
painting by Shigu. And sOj Shigu in his warm-heartedness 
does not yet know when he can complete our story ofPoweng 
[Su Shi] who wrote the ^^Huangni Bo^^ [Huangni Ban] 
poem on the Tengxin Tang [sic] [Chengxin Tang] paper^"^^ 

Because wealthy clients did not balk at spending high 
sums to acquire his works, Wang Hui became acutely 
aware of the value of his artistry and reserved his 
best work for high-priced commissions. As competi- 
tion among collectors caused Wang Hui s prices to 
soar, he became increasingly unwilling to make 
paintings for friends. 

In addition to its valuable colophons, Autumn 
Mountains^ Red Trees marks a significant moment in 
Wang Hui s artistic development, when he began 
to formulate a method of achieving a stylistic 
synthesis out of disparate pictorial sources. In the 
eyes of his contemporaries, Wang s genius lay in his 
ability to revitalize past styles through a creative 
"Great Synthesis" (^dacheng) of earlier models. This 
landscape s extensive use of the pictorial idioms 
of Wang Meng was acknowledged by Wang Hui 
himself, as recounted in Yun Shouping s inscription 
mounted above the painting: 

Wumu Shanren [Wang Hui] once told me^ "1 have seen no 
fewer than twenty genuine works by Wang Shuming [Wang 
Meng] in my life. Among them there are three that are most 
extraordinary. From Thatched Hall in Autumn Moun- 
tains / came to understand his methods. I saw Summer 
Mountains at Tang [Yuzhao^s] in Piling [Changzhou] 
and grasped his subtle taste. Finally I viewed Buddhist 
Temple and Mountain Passes. It opened my eyes and 
enlightened my mind. I investigated all the transformations 
he made. . . . 

According to Wang Shimins inscription, "While 
this painting by Wang Hui follows Wang Meng s 
idiom, its brushwork and design are completely 
indebted to that of Wang Wei. Accordingly, the 
lofty and fantastic influence of [Wang Wei] has 
helped Wang Hui move beyond the confines of 
Wang Mengs style." ^"^^ In Autumn Mountains^ Red Trees, 
Wang Hui has revitalized Wang Meng s pictorial 
idioms with his own creativity and made the old 
forms astonishingly new. 

80 

PI. 29. Wang Hui (1632— 
1717). Clearing after Snow 
at Shanyin^ after Wang Wei, 
dated 1671 (detail, pL 30) 

THE ''GREAT SYNTHESIS/^ 
1670 — 1680 

In his early career, Wang Hui was successful in 
building his reputation as the most talented copyist 
and highest-paid painter in the south. As he enjoyed 
greater wealth and fame, he began self-consciously 
to fashion his own artistic identity. In an inscription 
on a painting given to Zhou Lianggong, datable 
to 1669, he pointedly criticized the contemporary 
art scene: 

Alas^ how the art of painting has declined nowadays! The 
decline started in recent times when a number of separate 
schools branched off and developed corrupt practices. Gu Kaizhi 
[of the Eastern Jin dynasty]^ Lu Tanwei and Zhang Sengyou 
[of the Northern and Southern dynasties]^ and Wu Daozi [of 
the Tang] J how remote they are today! From the time of the 
Senior and Junior Generals Li [Li Sixun and Li Zhaodao] 
and Wang Wei [of the Tang], Jing Hao [of the Five Dynas^ 
ties] to that of Li Cheng and Fan Kuan [of the Northern 
Song], Dong Yuan and Juran [if the Five Dynasties], and the 
four great masters of the Yuan [Huang Gongwang, Ni Zan, 
Wu Zhen, and Wang Meng], each generation had its own 
heritage and tradition, and each enjoyed a high reputation. They 
did not simply live on the leavings <f their predecessors or follow 
trends. Thus, Huang Gongwang^s manner was hoary and rich, 
Ni Zans plain and quiet, Wu Zhen^s deep and strong, and 
Wang Mengs dense and refined. Although they all followed 
Dong Yuan, they transformed his art so that they were all 
different. This is the way in which a master could serve as a 
model for many generations without any ill eff^ects.^^^ 

Wang Hui not only extolled the uniqueness and 
merit of each ancient master s style, but also empha- 
sized the equal value of every style for later painters, 
remarking that ''each has served as a model for many 
generations/* In his view, the current decline in 
painting was largely due to the partisan practice of 

local schools asserting the superiority of some 
masters over others. Wang Hui further stated: 

But recently the manners and taste of painters have increase 
ingly declined, their habits have become low and subservient, 
and a controversy over the various schools has arisen. After 
Dai Jin [lj88—i^6z] and Wu Wei [l^jg—ijo8], the 
Zhe [Hangzhou] School was firmly established; after Shen 
Zhou [l^zy-ijog] and Wen Zhengming [l^yo—ijjg], 
the Wu [Suzhou] School flourished. Dong Qichang 
[^JJJ~^^3^] revitalized a period of decline and grasped the 
essence of Dongas [Dong Yuans] and Jus [Juran s] art. 
Later artists, following the fad [of Dong Qichang], willfully 
claimed they belonged to the Yunjian [Songjiang] School The 
two Master Wangs [Shimin and Jian] are rooted in the arts 
of the Song and Yuan periods; their paintings are equal to those 
(f their great predecessors. Painters near and far competed 
eagerly in imitating these masters, and thus the Loudong 
[Taicang] School was started. There have been many minor 
currents as well Every painter started his own school, until 
they became more numerous than can be counted on the 
fingers. Most of them perpetuated bad habits and mistakes 
until elegant flair disappeared completely. . . . I, for years, 
was constrained by these vulgar minor schools and did not 
know how to free myself from them. Those who sided with 
the Yunjian School severely criticized the Zhe School, and 
those who followed the Loudong School slandered the Wu 
School Thus, I was at a loss about how to paint, my 
limited understanding could not discern the subtle points. . . . 
I took all these [schools] into my heart and practiced 
[them] with my hand, and I am glad that I can no longer 
be led astray by the current schools and may feel some 
self ^confidence. 

Wang Hui s awareness of the contradictory views 
and factional practices of each school led him to seek 
a new mode of landscape painting. Although a stu- 
dent of Wang Shimin and Wang Jian, the leaders of 
the Loudong School, he was also critical of their 

82 

Fig. 64. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Landscape 
after Li Cheng's "Clearing 
after Snow" (detail), 
dated 1667 Ink and 
color on paper, 8 V* in. x 
9 ft. 1 in. (22.2 X 
277.9 Location 
unknown, formerly 
private collection, Osaka 

parochial attitude toward other schools ♦ His solution 
was to focus on fundamental issues rather than petty 
differences. Seeking to transcend the conflicting views 
of contemporary painters, he proclaimed his own 
theory of painting: "I must use the brush and ink of 
the Yuan to move the peaks and valleys of the Song, 
and infuse them with the breath-resonance of the Tang. 
I will then have a work of the Great Synthesis/* The 
theoretical implications of this terse statement are 
profound. Wang Hui was proposing nothing less than 
an entirely new approach to landscape painting, one 
that was grounded in Song compositions, modeled 
with rich calligraphic Yuan brushwork, and infused 
with the hoary spirit of the Tang. 

By revitalizing and integrating the great achieve- 
ments of earlier landscape painting styles, Wang 
Hui sought to achieve an all-inclusive synthesis that 
embraced the entire spectrum of painting models 
from the Tang to the Yuan, ranging from the abstract 
and calligraphic to the descriptive and decorative. 
As Wen Fong has argued, Wang Hui s theory of a 
Great Synthesis was more than a mere personal 
statement on the theoretical foundations of his own 
landscape painting. It was, in fact, an ambitious 
proclamation intended not only to put an end to the 
fragmentation of the art world but also to lay the 
foundations for a new, universal landscape art.^^^ 
Unlike his teachers and other contemporaries who 
advocated Dong Qichang s theory and practice of 
literati painting, Wang Hui gave equal emphasis to a 
range of past styles and models without privileging 
one over the other. 

In contrast to another contemporary, Shitao 
(1642— 1707), who utterly rejected the imitation of 
past masters in favor of change and innovation, Wang 
Hui asserted the great value of previous models. ^^"^ 
Seeing the past as something that could be infinitely 
reinterpreted, Wang sought to forge a vital inter- 
dependence between tradition and innovation by 

internalizing and reinterpreting prior models. His 
acceptance of all past models as valid implicitly 
challenged the hierarchy of historical styles estab- 
lished by Dong Qichang, a hierarchy that placed 
literati painting and Yuan masters above professional 
painting and Song painters. ^^'^ For Wang Hui, Song 
and Yuan paintings were equally important sources 
of inspiration, as were both professional and literati 
painting. Thus, there could be no hierarchical 
distinction between Song naturalism. Yuan brush- 
work, and Tang breath-resonance. 

An early indication of Wang Hui s desire to 
rediscover the antique roots of the Orthodox style 
is evidenced in Clearing after Snow at Shanyin^ after 
Wang Wei (pis. 29, 30), in which he creatively reinter- 
prets the archaic style associated with the eighth- 
century master whom Dong Qichang considered 
to be the patriarch of his Orthodox lineage of 
'^southern masters.'' The painting is also an impor- 
tant early example of how Wang Hui drew upon 
ancient precedents to revive long handscroll 
compositions. In style, theme, and composition, it 
is extremely close to Wang Hui s Landscape after Li 
Cheng's "Clearing after Snov^" of 1667 (fig. 64). By 
linking the style of these two works, Wang affirmed 
the Orthodox lineage first asserted by Dong 
Qichang, in which the origins of Li Cheng's style 
are traced back to Wang Wei (701—761) and his 
groundbreaking winter landscape paintings. 

In Clearing after Snow, the composition opens with a 
broad panoramic river view, then abruptly shifts to a 
range of massive boulders, large trees, and twisting 
and turning rocks. The abrupt change from horizontal 
to vertical imagery, from an open, expansive vista to a 
close-up of near-ground trees or mountains, is one of 
the most important compositional devices that Wang 
Hui used to enhance the drama of his handscroll 
compositions. By 1667 Wang's genius for creating 
spatial tension through surprising alternations of 

8? 

PL 30 (cat. 12). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717), Ckar- 
ing after 5«ow at Shanyin, 
after Wang Wei, dated 
1671. Handscroll, ink 
and color on silk, 
8% in. X 8 ft. iiysin. 

(21.2 X 273.5 

National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

84 

Pis. 31—33 (cat. 14). 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
In Pursuit of Antiquity: 
Landscapes after Song and 
Yuan Masters, dated 1673. 
Leaves B (this page, above), 
C (opposite, above), and G 
{opposite, belovS) from an 
album of twelve paint- 
ings, nine in ink on paper 
and three in ink and 
color on paper, 6 8 % x 
ii%—i3 % in. (17.6—22.6 X 
29.8—33.5 cm). Princeton 
University Art Museum, 
Gift of Mr. and Mrs. 
Earl Morse (yi973-67) 

Fig. 65. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Verdant Peaks 
and a Hundred Ranges, 
dated 1673. Hanging 
scroll, ink on paper, 
47 % X 23 Vs in. (120 X 
60.6 cm). Shanghai 
Museum 

^'rising- and- falling'' and "opening-and-closing** 
movements and kinesthetic momentum (^sht) is 
already clear/ Although the styles of Li Cheng 
and Wang Wei were primary sources of inspiration 
for Wang Hui s winter landscapes, the artist revital- 
ized the past tradition with his own genius and 
creative power. 

The importance of this handscroU is attested 
to by the presence of a colophon by the well- 
known collector Da Chongguang. Da, a native of 
Dantu (Zhenjiang), received his jinshi degree in 
1652. He later rose to the rank of governor of 
Jiangsu after having spent years as a censor in 
ofEce* At the end of his life, he became a student 
of Daoism, retiring to Mount Mao (Maoshan), 
south of Nanjing/^^ Da built a fine collection of 
paintings and calligraphy, including Admonitions of 
the Instructress to the Court Ladies, attributed to Gu 
Kaizhi (ca. 344— ca. 406) (British Museum), and 
Delight in Cloudy Mountains^ attributed to Mi Youren 
(National Palace Museum, Taipei)/ During the 
1670s and early 1680s Da became a major supporter 
and patron of Wang Hui and provided numerous 
colophons and inscriptions for the painters 
works/^^ These inscriptions, like those of Wang 
Shimin, enhanced the value of Wang Hui s paint- 
ings and helped to promote his reputation in the 

T- ■ 159 

Jiangnan region. 

86 

3^ 

LI ZONGKONG 

Wang Hui s Great Synthesis was a direct result of 
his encounters during the late i66os with certain 
monumental northern landscapes of the Five 
Dynasties and Northern Song periods. His extensive 
study of these works had a profound impact on his 
painting practice, prompting him to challenge the 

Orthodox teachings of Dong Qichang and Wang 
Shimin, which stressed the supreme value of Yuan 
literati landscape painting* Although Wang Hui 
considered Yuan brushwork and Tang breath-resonance 
to be essential components of his painting, he now 
gave new importance to the *'peaks and valleys of the 
Song" At the heart of the painters deepening interest 
in northern landscapes was his association with the 

OverkaJ: PI. 34 (cat. 14). 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Leaf H from In Pursuit of 
Antiquity: Landscapes after Song 
and Yuan Masters, dated 1673 

87 

Pis. 35-38 (cat. 14). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Leaves I 
Qhis page, above), J (^this page, 
below), K (^opposite, above), 
and L (^opposite, helow) 
from In Pursuit of Antiquity: 
Landscapes after Song and 
Yuan Masters, dated 1673 

hitherto unrecognized collector Li Zongkong (161 8— 
1701), whose patronage fundamentally changed the 
course of Wang Huis painting and laid the ground- 
work for the landscapes of his later years* 

Li Zongkong was born in Taixing, Jiangsu Province, 
and later moved to Jiangdu (Yangzhou)/^'^ He had two 

style names, Shuyun (Book of Clouds) and Shulou 
(Book Pavilion)/^^ Li obtained Sijinsbi degree in 1647, 
later became a censor (yushi), and was subsequently 
promoted to supervising secretary (jishizhong or jijian) in 
the Board of Civil Office/^^ His stature as a scholar is 
confirmed by the fact that he was one of the court 

90 

38 

officials empowered to recommend candidates for the conjunction with his third Southern Tour of the same 

Boxue hongci of 1679/^^ This court-directed special year, the Kangxi emperor bestowed calligraphic works 

examination was created in order to recruit promi- on members of the imperial family and on several high 

nent Ming-loyalist scholars and literary talents to officials including Li Zongkong, who received two 

participate in the compilation of the official history such pieces/^^This honor demonstrates that Lis 

of the Ming dynasty (Mingsht). Moreover, in 1699, in political power at court was not insignificant, and 

91 

PL 39A (cat. 8). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). The 
Colors of Mount Taihang, 
dated 1669. Handscroll, 
ink and color on silk, 
10 X 82 Vz in. (25.3 X 
209.4 *^"^)- The Metro- 
politan Museum of Art, 
New York, Ex coll.: 
C. C. Wang Family, Gift 
of Douglas Dillon, 1978 
(1978.423) 

indeed records indicate that he sent more than forty 
confidential letters to the emperor/^^ Eminent officials 
and scholars frequently enjoyed evening banquets at his 
Beijing residence, which boasted a beautiful garden/ 

Although Li Zongkong s collection has yet to be 
reconstructed, he was evidently one of Yangzhou s 
leading collectors* Two of the most important paint- 
ings he owned were Fure Withdrawal in a Secluded Grove, 
dated 1350, attributed to Wang Meng (National 
Palace Museum, Taipei),^^^ and Birds and Flowers, a 
beautifijl handscroll by Qian Xuan (ca» 1235— 1301 
or later), dated 1294 (Tianjin Museum)/^^ Li also 
possessed several famous pieces of calligraphy, includ- 
ing Short Essay Beginning with Xiaozi by Huang Ting jian 
(1045— 1105) and a series of the Letters by Mi Fu 
(1052—1107), now mounted as a set of nine hand- 
scrolls, eight of which bear Lis seals/^^ 

The earliest record of Li Zongkong s connection 
with Wang Hui appears in Wang s album In Pursuit 
of Antiquity: Landscapes after Song and Yuan Masters, painted 
for Wang Shimin in 1673 (see pis. 8— 11, 31—38).^^^ 
In his inscription, Wang Hui mentions that he 
painted this work "at the Mi Yuan [Secret Garden] 
of Mn Li [Zongkong] of Weiyang [present-day 
Yangzhou]** (pL 37).^^^ Li also added colophons to 
two leaves from the album (see Catalogue, no, 14)/^^ 
Another such work, executed about the same time, 
is Verdant Peaks and a Hundred Ranges (fig. 65), which 
Wang Hui painted while staying at "the Pavilion 
of Planting Pines [Zhongsong Xuan] of Mr. Li 
[Zongkong] of Guangling [Yangzhou].** This 
landscape, which combines the styles of Juran, 

Wu Zhen, and Huang Gongwang, bears inscriptions 
by Wang Shimin, Liu Yu (1620— after 1689), Zhou 
Eryan (active second half seventeenth century), and 
others. Li Zongkong, Liu Yu, and Zhou Eryan also 
contributed colophons to In Pursuit of Antiquity. 

In Pursuit of Antiquity exemplifies Wang Hui*s 
passionate exploration of the styles of various Song 
and Yuan masters including some, such as Guo Xi 
(pis. 36, 38), whom he had never before emulated. In 
addition, as Whitfield has noted, most of the paint- 
ings in the album are not direct copies of surviving 
paintings but Wang Hui*s creative reinterpretations of 
past masters* styles.^^^ In a leaf that Yun Shouping says 
in his colophon is done in the manner of Dong Yuan, 
for example (pi. 31), there is no sign of Dong*s stylistic 
hallmarks. The painting is clearly Wang*s own reinter- 
pretation and transformation of Dong*s style. Aware 
of Wang*s bold reworking, Yun goes on to state that 
Wang Hui*s "metamorphosis is divine and brilliant.** 

The album opens with a landscape in the manner 
of Juran (see pi. 8) that is drawn from the upper 
part of the Princeton painting Mist Floating on a 
Distant Peak^ in Imitation of Juran (pL 27). The same 
calligraphic brushwork and abstract design, charac- 
teristic of Dong Qichang*s so-called Southern 
School style, are also evident in the landscape of 
cloudy mountains after Mi Fu (1052— 1107; pi. 33). 
Two leaves executed in color, however, suggest that 
Wang Hui paid equal attention to more descriptive 
and decorative styles, which were largely excluded 
from Dong Qichang*s Orthodox canon. One, derived 
from the style of the Southern Song Academician Li 

92 

Di (active ca. 1113— after 1197), for example, shows a 
bucolic scene of a herdboy and his buffalo painted in 
subtle ink washes and soft colors (pL 32), while another 
presents a late autumnal landscape executed in the rich 
palette of the blue-and-green painting tradition (pi. 34). 
Despite the colorftil style of this leaf, Wang Hui s 
disciplined, calligraphic brushwork transforms this 
decorative mode into a composition of ornamental 
splendor and poetic suggestiveness. In Pursuit of Antiquity 
presents clear evidence that Wang Hui had not only 
expanded his knowledge of past masters' compositions 
but also transformed them, melding disparate styles 
that ranged from the purely abstract and calligraphic 
to the ornamental and descriptive. Moving beyond the 
stylistic confines of the Orthodox School, he had 
taken a crucial step toward the invention of a new type 
of landscape painting through his Great Synthesis. 

GUAN TONG AND THE MONUMENTAL 
LANDSCAPE 

The Colors of Mount Taihang (pL 39A,b), a handscroU 
painted in 1669, documents Wang Hui s shift in 
interest from the Yuan literati styles of Huang 
Gongwang and Wang Meng to the monumental 
landscape manner of the Five Dynasties and North- 
ern Song.^^^ Judging from his surviving works, Wang 
Hui had never before painted a landscape such as 
this, inspired by Guan Tong (active ca. 907—23), as 
revealed in his inscription: 

Once at Guanoing [Yangzhou], in the home of a noble 
family J 1 saw a small scroll hy Guan Tong, '^Cloudy Peaks 

Fig. 66. Unidentified artist, 
formerly attributed to Guan 
Tong (active ca. 907—23). 
Autumn Mountains at Dusk, nth 
century. Hanging scroll, ink on 
silk, 55 ya X 22 V2 in. (140.5 X 
57.3 cm). National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

93 

PL 39B (cat. 8). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). The 
Colors of Mount Taihang, 
dated 1669 

Racing Together^ In spirit it was luxuriant and dense, truly, 
it might "fierce the heart and startle the eye/' Even today, 
I remember one or two tenths of it: accordingly I have 
imitated its method and made this "Colors of Mt. Taihang/' 
[The painting] must have the deep and heroic atmosphere of 
the Northern land, and not become attractive with pretty 
details. The year jiyou [i66g], three days after the 
mid-autumn festival, Wang Hui of Yushan [made] and 
inscribed [this painting] .^^^ 

That the '^noble family** referred to was undoubtedly 
Li Zongkong s is corroborated by an almost identical 
inscription by Wang on an album of landscapes in 
the manner of ancient masters, dated 1675: **Once at 
Guangling, in the home of Supervising Secretary Li, 
I saw a small scroll by GuanTong/'^^^ Among Wang 
Hui s early friends and patrons, no one other than Li 
Zongkong had both the surname Li and the official 
title Supervising Secretary. 

Li Zongkong also owned one of the key monu- 
ments of early Chinese landscape painting, Autumn 
Mountains at Dusk, formerly attributed to Guan Tong 
(fig. 66)/^^ Before entering Li s collection, this work 
had been in the Ming imperial collection and had 
also been owned by the connoisseur Wang Duo 
(1592—1652)/^^ Although Wang Hui claimed that his 
Colors of Mount Taihang was modeled on Cloudy Peaks 
Racing Together, it may have also been influenced by 
Autumn Mountains, The imposing cliff that overhangs 
a small stream at the beginning of Colors bears a 
striking resemblance to the massive foreground 
boulder in Autumn Mountains. The similarity is even 
greater when Autumn Mountains is viewed horizon- 
tally like a hands crolL The basic pictorial ele- 
ments — high mountains, cascades in a mountain 
valley, streams running below an overhanging cliff, a 
small bridge under a boulder, and heavy clouds 
nestled in the mountains — all appear in both 

Fig. 67. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Mount Lu 
Shrouded in White Clouds, 
dated 1697. Handscroll, 
ink and color on paper, 
13 % X 48 % in. (35 X 
124 cm). Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

94 

paintings. Even a small mountaintop pagoda in 
Autumn Mountains is replicated in the middle section 
of Colors, 

While adopting the basic composition of Autumn 
Mountains for his scroll, Wang Hui added travelers 
crossing the bridge, a densely forested promontory, a 
small temple complex silhouetted against the clouds, 
and a final expanse of clouds and water. More 
important, he also endowed his scroll with a powerful 
**dragon-vein'' sense of movement. The pulsating 
rhythms of the mountains and cliffs, with their 
diagonal thrusts and counterthrusts, create a grand 
vision of a dynamic landscape in which all the ele- 
ments are in a state of transition and transformation. 
This sense of metamorphosis, enhanced by constant 
shifts of viewpoint, is even more effectively drama- 
tized by the sudden opening of a vast expanse of 
water and clouds that recedes toward a distant range 
of mountains at the end of the scroll. 

Wang Huis fascination with the "deep and heroic 
atmosphere'* of Guan Tong s northern landscapes 
began to take shape in the late i66os according to 
his inscription on his scroll Mount Lu Shrouded in 
White Clouds, dated 1697 (fig. 67). The artist mentions 
there that he had seen a Guan Tong handscroU with 
the same title and with a colophon by Dong Qichang 
thirty years earlier at a friends studio in Nanjing. 
A 1698 colophon by Jiang Chenying (1628— 1699) on 
the same work indicates that it was based on a 
faithful copy (linhen) Wang made in his youth.^^^ 

The Colors of Mount Taihang not only manifests 
Wang Hui s innovative revival of the Guan Tong 

manner, but also marks a significant step toward 
his reinvention of Five Dynasties and Northern 
Song panoramic landscape compositions. Working 
in a mode that Michael Sullivan referred to as 
"monumental intimisme ^^"^ Wsmg Hui experimented 
here with compressing myriad peaks, huge boul- 
ders, and a vast river into a small handscroU. This 
ability to miniaturize heroic landscapes into the 
handscroU format led Wang to develop ever-longer 
panoramas, which became a defining feature of his 
personal style. 

The Colors of Mount Taihang presents an astonishing 
landscape panorama of this mountain range as it 
extends to the Yellow River. Stretching southward 
from the highlands of Shanxi to meet the Yellow 
River, the mountains then proceed farther south 
until they reach the immense flatlands of northern 
Henan. Because of their high peaks, steep slopes, 
narrow valleys, and deep ravines, they appear in 
most literary descriptions as dangers encountered 
by travelers. In his poem "A First Visit to the 
Taihang Mountains,** Bai Juyi (772—846) describes 
the treacherous terrain: 

On a cold day without sun 
The Taihang Mountains stand dark and lush. 
I once heard that the place was full of danger^ 
But now I come alone. 

My horse treads on the frigid and slippery ground 
Of winding narrow paths difficult to climb. 
Yet if you compare this road with the society we live in, 
It is as fiat as the palm of your hand. . . 

PL 40 (cat. 17). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Land^ 
scape after Guan Tongas 
"Streams and Mountains 
Clearing after Mist" dated 
1678, Handscroll, ink 
and color on paper, 
II Vz in, X II ft, 7 in, 
(29.3 X 353 cm). Shang- 
hai Museum 

A poem by the scholar Zhao Zhixin (1662— 1744), 
entitled Looking Down at the Yellow River from atop 
Mount Taihang/' offers another dramatic description: 

At dawn as the mountain turns red^ 

People are already roaming through the foothills. 

A wide range of towering peaks stretches to the sky; 

Hanging clouds still make it bitterly cold. 

Winter is deep; ice and snow cover the land, 

I am afraid that my horse cannot go through. 

In front of me, the landscape suddenly becomes overwhelming: 

A thousand ranks of trees and mist spread along two rivers. 

Where the mist parts and the trees diminish, 

The blue and yellow streaks [of the rivers] stretch to the horizon. 

At first sight, it appears like colorful clouds blown by the wind 

Or like a rainbow rising in the east. . . 

Like the poems by Bai Juyi and Zhao Zhixin, 
Wang Hui s Colors of Mount Taihang conveys something 
of the mountains sublime wildness: the dark and 
threatening mountain passes suddenly part to reveal a 
view across the vast expanse of the Yellow River. 

Wang s meticulous depiction of granite rocks, eroded 
terrain, varied cloud formations, and dense foliage 
shows his acute awareness of the topography of 
Mount Taihang. But his aim was not merely to 
describe its physical features but also to convey the 
cosmic grandeur of nature — the same goal pursued 
by the landscape painters of the Northern Song. For 
Wang, Autumn Mountains at Dusk and other works then 
attributed to Guan Tong epitomized the life- force 
and the powerful '^breath-resonance of the Tang." 

''the two wings of a bird** 

Wang Hui continued to draw inspiration from the 
Guan Tong style and the "breath-resonance of the 
Tang" in his Landscape after Guan Tongas "Streams and 
Mountains Clearing after Mist^^ of 1678 (pis. 40, 41). 
This painting shares many compositional features 
and motifs with The Colors of Mount Taihang. The 
scroll opens with a mountain village nestled amid 
clusters of rocks and trees. The next section shows 

96 

overhanging and protruding boulders stretching 
diagonally toward a mist-filled mountain range 
dotted with rocks, tall trees, and Buddhist temples. 
The composition then abruptly opens up with a view 
across a broad marshland, where a solitary fisherman 
sits in his boat, to rounded mountains in the distance. 
Employing Fan Kuans raindrop dotting patterns to 
animate the surface of his painting, Wang counterbal- 
ances his vigorous brushwork with an extensive use 
of ink and color washes to delineate the rocks and 
distant mountains (pL 41), His blue and green hues, 
evocative of the blue-and-green manner of the Tang 
period, were undoubtedly intended to refer to the 
"breath-resonance of the Tang/' 

Wang Hui s interest in Guan Tong— style land- 
scapes and, more broadly, in the monumental 
landscapes of the Five Dynasties and Northern Song 
was of great significance in the formation of his 
mature style. His rediscovery of the patriarchs of 
northern landscape in turn led him to challenge the 
teachings of the Orthodox School and Dong 

Qichang s prioritization of Southern School masters, 
such as Wang Wei, Dong Yuan, and Huang Gong- 
wang, in his historical genealogy of literati amateur- 
In a conversation with Yun Shouping, Wang 

ism. 

raised questions about Dong Qichang s theory, as 
Yun reported: 

Dong Qichang once said^ ^% paintings it is better to he 
obscure than to he obvious/^ Whereas Wang Hui said, 
^Tainting has its ^ohvious^ and ^obscure^ aspects. These are like 
the two wings of a birdj neither could be used singly at the 
expense of the other. When the obvious and the obscure are 
equally perfected^ a spirited ^breath' will emerge.'^ I think the 
two masters^ principles are contradictory. I have to ask Wang 
Shimin whether these principles can be reconciled in order to 
find a better solution.^^^ 

Dong Qichang was an enthusiastic advocate of 
the superiority of abstract, calligraphic Yuan brush- 
work over Song naturalism. For Dong, favoring the 
"obscure** meant favoring abstraction over descriptive 
representation. For Wang Hui, however, brushwork 

Overleaf: PL 41. Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Land- 
scape after Guan Tongs 
"Streams and Mountains 
Clearing after Mist" dated 
1678 (detail, pi. 40) 

97 

PL 42 (cat. 15). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Pavilion 
amid Woods and Verdant 
Peaks, Following the Brush 
Ideas of Guan Tong, dated 
1674. Leaf D in Land- 
scapes after Ancient Masters. 
Ink and color on paper, 
8 % X 13 V4 in. (22 X 
33.8 cm). The Metro- 
politan Museum of Art, 
New York, Purchase, 
The Dillon Fund Gift, 
1989 (1989.141.4) 

100 

lOI 

and representation should be equally emphasized. 
These "two wings of a bird" were closely related to 
his theory of a Great Synthesis, in which the brush 
and ink of the Yuan are united with the peaks and 
valleys of the Song. 

The differences between Wang Hui s and Dong 
Qichang s approaches to landscape painting become 
clearer when The Colors of Mount Taihang is compared 
with Dongs River and Mountains on a Clear Autumn Day 
(see fig. 5). In the former, Wang combines vigorous 
brushwork, dynamic compositional structures, and 
meticulous detail to create a visually exciting land- 
scape capturing the mimetic qualities of the Song.^^^ 
In the latter, Dong sacrifices naturalism in favor of an 
abstract rendering of forms and austere linear brush- 
work that is nearly devoid of tactile appeal. As James 
Cahill has observed, Dong Qichangs abstract style 
was devised by the most minimal adherence to 
natural appearances. Wang Huis theory of a Great 
Synthesis and his balancing of the obscure and the 
obvious were intended to challenge Dongs purely 
formalist concerns by fusing Song techniques of 
descriptive representation with Yuan calligraphic 
idioms, thus revitalizing the monumental styles of 
Five Dynasties and Northern Song masters. Wang s 
association with Li Zongkong during the late 1660s 
and his encounter with works attributed to Guan 
Tong enabled him to break free from his earlier 
education and begin to formulate a new mode of 
panoramic landscape. 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters, an album of twelve 
leaves, dated 1674 and 1677 (see Catalogue, no. 15), 
epitomizes Wang s departure from the Orthodox 
principles established by Dong Qichang and docu- 
ments his move toward the Great Synthesis. The 
album combines ten leaves from an original album 
of twelve painted by Wang Hui for Wang Shimin in 
the spring of 1674 with two leaves from a second 
album of twelve painted by Wang Shimin between 
1674 ^^77 response to Wang Hui s album. In 
this work, Wang Hui presented his own reinterpreta- 
tions of the painting styles of past masters from 
the Tang, Song, and Yuan, including Wang Wei, Li 
Cheng, Guan Tong, Juran, Zhao Lingrang, Zhao 
Mengfu, Gao Kegong, Huang Gongwang, and Wang 
Meng. Not surprisingly, one leaf, Pavilion amid Woods 
and Verdant Peaks^ Following the Brush Ideas of Guan Tong 
(pi. 42), shows his continued interest in the Guan 
Tong style. Together with In Pursuit of Antiquity, 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters elucidates how Wang 
Hui accomplished a new unity among seemingly 
incompatible models through his creative transfor- 
mation of his sources. 

Wang Hui s virtuosic condensing and reshaping 
of large compositions into a miniature format in 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters anticipates the defining 
characteristic of his landscape panoramas of the 1680s 
and 1690s. By successfully adapting the large-scale 
compositions of Five Dynasties and Northern Song 
landscape painting to the handscroll format without 
losing any sense of comprehensiveness and monu- 
mentality, Wang achieved the Northern Song ideal of 
"sweeping ten-thousand miles into a square foot."^^^ 

STREAMS AND MOUNTAINS 
WITHOUT END: 1680-1700 

After the suppression of the Revolt of the Three 
Feudatories in 1681 and the annexation of Taiwan in 
1683, the Kangxi reign entered a time of peace and 
prosperity. The Kangxi emperor (r. 1662—1722) 
embarked in 1684 on his first Southern Inspection 
Tour, which, despite its proclaimed purpose of river 
inspections, was actually designed to consolidate 
Manchu rule over the south as well as to celebrate 
the beginning of a new era/^^ Wang Hui responded 
rapidly to the changed political and cultural environ- 
ment of the early 1680s. His mentors and promoters 
Wang Jian and Wang Shimin had died in 1677 and in 
1680, respectively, after having helped to establish him 
as one of the most celebrated painters in the south. 
Wang Hui now began to seek new patrons to expand 
his reputation even further. 

SINGDE AND XU QIANXUE 

One of the most crucial moments in Wang Hui s 
career came in 1685, when the Manchu dignitary 
Singde (1654— 1685), imperial bodyguard, promi- 
nent scholar-poet, and confidant of Kangxi, invited 
Wang Hui to Beijing shortly after accompanying the 
emperor on his first Southern Tour.^^^ Although no 
firsthand account exists detailing what motivated 
Singde to bring Wang Hui to the capital, an exami- 
nation of Singde s political and cultural life there 
sheds important light on how this connection 
benefited the artist. 

Singde was the eldest son of Mingju (1635— 1708), 
one of the most powerful Manchu officials of the 
period. Closely related by marriage to the imperial 
clan, Mingju and members of his family became high 
officials in the early Qing period, he himself being 
one of the emperors closest confidants. Singde s 
successful career as an official and cultural luminary 
was, above all, due to his fathers position. Like his 

father, Singde began his career as an officer in the 
imperial bodyguard, a post he held until his death.^^^ 
He took his juren degree in 1672 and passed the 
palace examination in 1676. But Singde was also 
highly cultured. His poetry, appreciated for its 
melancholic sensibility, was widely acclaimed by his 
contemporaries; today he is regarded as the most 
distinguished ci poet of the early Qing period.^^^ 
Although Singde was precocious and extremely 
gifted in literature, his talent was further cultivated 
by the tutoring he received from the renowned 
scholar-official Xu Qianxue (1631— 1694). The Portrait 
of Singde by Yu Zhiding (1647— 1716), probably painted 
shortly before the sitters death, depicts this cultured 
Manchu as a noble scholar seated cross-legged on a 
couch with a wine cup in his hand (fig. 68). 

Singde also formed a distinguished collection of 
paintings and calligraphy, a large part of which appears 
to have come from his father.^^^ Two of his most 
notable acquisitions were by Zhao Mengfia, Autumn 
Colors on the Qiao and Hua Mountains of 1296,^°^ and Water 
Village of 1302 (see figs. 7, 55). Other prominent works 
in his collection included Summer Heat by Yang Ningshi 
(873—954) (Palace Museum, Beijing); a Song-period 
rubbing of the Dingwu version of Lanting Gathering by 
Wang Xizhi (303—361); and Foems Written at Huangzhou on 
the Cold^Food Festival by Su Shi (1037— iioi), datable to 
1082 (National Palace Museum, Taipei).^^'^ Shortly 
before Singde died in 1685, he also acquired River Temple 
in the Long Summer by Li Tang (ca. 1070s— ca. 1150s), a 
blue-and-green landscape in the manner of Li Sixun 
(651—716) (Palace Museum, Beijing).^°^ 

Although there exists no textual evidence detailing 
the personal relationship between Singde and Wang 
Hui, an account by Xu Qianxue s eldest son, Xu 
Shugu (jinshi, 1685), offers an insight into why Singde 
invited the artist to Beijing: 

Mr, Wang Shigu^s [Wang Hui^s] reputation in the art world 
has been established for more than thirty years. Yanke [Wang 
Shimin], Meicun [Wu Weiye], and Liyuan [Zhou Liang- 
gongj all praised his outstanding ability in painting as surpass- 
ing that of the masters^ both ancient and present. Acquiring 
one of his paintings now is as difficult as possessing a heavenly 
pearl or a precious jade. . . . Imperial Bodyguard Cheng 
[Singde] from Mount Changhai once visited my fathers studio^ 
where he saw a brush and ink [painting] by Mr Wang. He 
thought that the painting was a treasure equal to the Udumbara 
flower^ which one encounters only once in a thousand years. He 
felt sorry that Mr Wang was so far from the capital that it 
was impossible to shorten the distance and shake hands. Later^ 
he asked my father to convey his letter to Mr Wang. He also 
requested that my father forward his letters to both Mr Wang 

♦r *f 4 

a « 

rat ^ * 

I 
tl 

J- ■-■ 

% A 

A I ^1 

'1 i 

M IS- 

and the prefectural offices in Jiangnan in order to invite 
Mr Wang to the capital^^^ 

From this report, it is clear that Singde encoun- 
tered Wang Hui s art at the residence of his tutor 
Xu Qianxue.^^^ Xu and his younger brothers, Xu 
Bingyi (1633—1711) and Xu Yuanwen (1634— 1691), 
were renowned for their scholarship and political 
success. They were called the Three Xus from 
Kunshan, and collectively they exerted an enormous 
influence over court politics in the i68os.^^^ Xu 
Qianxue s political success began with his appoint- 
ment as director of the Ming History project, for 
which he recruited many Chinese scholars from the 
south who later became members of his faction. 
When Singde invited Wang Hui to the capital in 
1685, Xu Qianxue was the most influential Chinese 
official at court, and it was through Xu that the 
artist met a number of important patrons, all of 
whom belonged to the Xu Qianxue— Mingju politi- 
cal faction, which was then at the apex of its power. 

Given this enormously favorable situation, Wang 
Hui arrived in the capital hoping to find a presti- 
gious position in the Beijing art world, one in which 
painting and politics were closely intertwined. In fact, 
his stay proved to be short, because Singde suddenly 
died shortly before his arrival. Singde s invitation 
did lead, however, to Wang Hui s forging connections 
with several powerful court officials, who were to 

Fig. 68. Yu Zhiding 
(1647— 1716). Portrait of 
Singde, before 1685. Hang- 
ing scroll, ink and color 
on paper, 23 y» x 14 % in. 
(59.5 X 36.4 cm). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

103 

Fig. 69. Unidentified artist. Copy after Wang Hui s Midautumn Eve, 
dated 1686. Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 22% x 16 in. (56.9 x 40.5 cm). 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Bequest of John M. 
Crawford Jr., 1988 (1989.363.143) 

Fig. 70, Wang Hui (1632— 1717). In a Wutong Grove on an Early Autumn 
Evening, dated 1686. Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 30 % x 16 Vs in. 
(76.8 X 41 cm). Palace Museum, Beijing 

well documented in an account by Grand Secretary 
Wang Xi (1628— 1703): 

Shigus [Wang Hms] method of fainting v^as renowned 
throughout the world. Thus^ Yongruo^ Secretary Cheng 
[Singde], recognized Shigus reputation and cordially invited 
him to come to the capital. He sent letters to the prefectural 
offices along the Yellow and Yangzi Rivers and asked them to 
make Shigus travel to the capital easy and convenient. When 

Fig. 71. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Travelers 
amid Streams and Moun- 
tains, after Ean Kuan 
(detail), dated 1688, 
Handscroll, ink and 
color on silk, 11 % in. x 
20 ft. 6 V2 in. (30.1 X 
626 cm). Location 
unknown, formerly 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

become major patrons* In fact, Wang Hui s time in 
Beijing fundamentally altered his life and art, eventu- 
ally propelling him to the status of a nationally 
established artist. The contacts he made there 
directly influenced his being imperially favored 
several years later with the commission to create a 
grand pictorial record of the emperors 1689 South- 
ern Inspection Toun The high officials who sup- 
ported Wang Hui during his stay in Beijing are 

104 

Shigu arrived^ he found that Secretary Cheng had just passed 
away. Shigu cried in deep grief and decided to whip [his] 
horse hack and immediately return home. My follow offi- 
cials, the grand secretary foom Hanyang [Wu Zhengzhi, 
l6l8—l6gi]j the minister of war foom Zhending [Liang 
Qinghiaojj and the suhchancellor in the Grand Secretariat 
foom Kunshan [Xu Qianxue] all made efforts to keep Shigu 
in the capital They fob, however, that it was impossible to do 
so [because he insisted upon returning to the south]. They all 
thought highly of his noble personality and moral virtues and 
composed laudatory poems for him to take home. Recently, 
Hanyang [Wu Zhengzhi] ceremoniously hid farewell to Shigu 
at a party. I wrote this as a promise of ^Hrimming the 
candlewick together by the west window^^ in anticipation of 
seeing him again in thefuture.^^^ 

The men who welcomed Wang Hui to the capital 
were some of the most influential officials at the 
court, Wang Xi, ajinshi of 1647, rose to the position 
of grand secretary in 1682 and remained a powerful 
figure at court until his retirement in 1701.'^^^ But it 
was the southerner Xu Qianxue whose acquaintance 
with Wang Hui predated Wang s visit to the capital.^^^ 
None of Wangs paintings for Xu have survived, but 
the earliest extant record of their acquaintance can be 
traced back to 1671, when both men attended a party 
celebrating the seventieth birthday of Tang Yuzhao* 
Xu composed a laudatory poem for Wang Hui and 
acclaimed him a true literati painter in the lineage of 
Wang Wei and Mi Youren. At the end of the poem, 
Xu praised Wang as an emerging cultural luminary, 
likening him to "the Southern Pole Star shining 
through the dark night "^^^ When Xu helped Wang 
Hui to come to Beijing on Singdes request, their 
friendship entered its most significant period. Wang 
Huis brilliant emergence into the Beijing art world 
was closely related to Xu Qianxue s support. 

Midautumn Eve, dated 1686, a copy of which is now 
in The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fig. 69), serves 
to highlight Wang Hui s relationship with Xu Qianxue 
subsequent to 1685. After he returned to Yushan from 
Beijing, Wang Hui often visited Xu Qianxue s family 
estate at Kunshan. In the seventh lunar month of 
1686, Wang andYun Shouping went to Kunshan and 
stayed at the Jade Peak Garden (Yufeng Yuanchi), 
part of the Northern Garden (Yufeng Beiyuan) of 
the Xu family.^^'' While drinking wine in the shade 
of a wutong tree grove, Wang and Yun did ink plays 
and discussed painting. Wang Hui s In a Wutong Grove 
on an Early Autumn Evening, dated 1686 (fig. 70), is 
perhaps one of these ink plays and has a long inscrip- 
tion by Yun Shouping telling of the two artists* 
leisurely activities in Kunshan. 

Midautumn Eve is directly related to Wang and Yuns 
second visit to the Xu family garden around the 
middle of the ninth lunar month.^^^ Zhang Yunzhang 
(1648— 1726), Gu Zuyu, and others- joined them at a 
gathering in the Northern Garden to celebrate the 
midautumn festival.^^^ To commemorate the occasion, 
the guests composed poems and paintings under the 
cinnamon trees in the bright moonlight. Yun Shou- 
ping painted Looking at the Cinnamon Trees in the Northern 
Garden (location unknown) for Xu Qianxue s second 
son, Xu Jiong (jinshi, 1682), who later became the 
intendant of the Dongzhou-Yongping Circuit in Zhili 
(1715—16).^^^ Wang painted Midautumn Eve shortly after 
this event took place. In his inscription, he mentioned 
that he watched the fiall moon with Yun Shouping at 
the Jade Peak on the fourteenth of the ninth lunar 
month. Both then remembered Zhang Yunzhang, for 
whom Yun composed a poem and Wang painted a 
landscape. The painting, a landscape largely based on 
the styles of Huang Gongwang and Ni Zan, helps 
document Wang s close ties to the Xu family. 

During his stay at the Northern Garden in the fall 
of 1686, Wang Hui made a copy for the Xu family of 
Huang Gongwang s Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains 
that is now in the Liaoning Provincial Museum, 
Shenyang.^ According to Xu Zhongling, the open- 
ing section of Wang Huis replica was lost; only the 
middle and end sections of the scroll and the colo- 
phons by Wang Shu (1668— 1743) and Ruan Yuan 
(1764—1849) have survived.^^^ In his inscription, Wang 
Hui mentioned when he made the copy and that he 
was then staying in a pavilion near a pond at the Jade 
Peak Garden.^^^ The artist s intimate association with 
the Xu family is further evidenced by his Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains, after Fan Kuan (fig. 71), a hand- 
scroll executed while escaping the summer heat at the 
Northern Garden of the Jade Peak in 1688, when Xu 
Qianxue was at the height of his power. The master- 
work that inspired this scroll was then in the collec- 
tion of Liang Qingbiao (see fig. 16) and had been 
copied years earlier by Wang Hui (see pi. 7). Wangs 
frequent visits to the Xu family estate were perhaps 
part of his efforts to use Xu Qianxue s power to gain 
imperial favor, and he would, in fact, be summoned 
to the court three years later. 

THE WU BROTHERS 

During the 1680s, Wang Hui produced a number of 
long panoramic landscape handscroUs that were 
crucial to his being chosen in 1691 to direct the 
creation of the Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection 
Tour^^^ Gathered Peaks in Spring Dew, dated 1680 

PL 43A (cat. 18). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Cath- 
ered Peaks in Spring Dew, 
dated 1680. Handscroll, 
ink and color on silk, 
10 V4 in. X 14 ft. 8 Vs in. 
(26 X 449.2 cm). 
Shanghai Museum 

(pL 43A,b), is an important example of Wangs early 
experiments with the handscroll format for making 
landscape panoramas. This masterfully painted 
blue-and-green landscape after Zhao Mengfu pre- 
sents a great range of massive mountains and piled 
boulders in a long lateral composition. The opening 
section, showing two boatmen fishing on a vast 
mist-filled river lined with willows, strongly recalls 
Zhao s Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Hua Mountains 
(see fig. 7). Zhao s influence is also apparent in the 
spectacular level- distance view of broad lowlands 

silhouetted against an endless expanse of water* A 
long range of verdant mountain peaks and craggy 
boulders emerging from and receding behind wafting 
clouds and mists follows this opening section. 

Wang Hui s pictorial craftsmanship is clearly 
demonstrated throughout the scroll. The composi- 
tion is monumental in conception, yet the landscape 
elements are described in fine detail. The brushwork 
is consistent and confident. Hemp-fiber texture 
strokes, raindrop stippling, and moss dots combine 
to model the mountains and rocks. The figures and 

106 

buildings, interspersed throughout and depicted with 
care, add human interest. Shades of blue and green 
are expertly employed to capture subtle atmospheric 
effects and evoke a seasonal mood. In sum, Wang Hui 
has successfully accommodated towering peaks and 
thrusting rocks into a horizontal format, presenting a 
panoramic landscape in which the rugged terrain 
twists and turns in a constantly rising-and-falling 
**dragon vein " The effective use of shifting viewpoints 
further enriches this visually compelling landscape. 
Wang Hui s strategy of sweeping ten-thousand miles 

into a square foot'' by assimilating high mountain- 
scapes into a long continuous composition became 
the foundation of his landscape panoramas, 

Wang Hui s development of his long landscape 
handscroUs was greatly facilitated by the support 
he received from two high officials in Beijing, the 
brothers Wu Zhengzhi (1618— 1691) and Wu Kaizhi 
(active 1680—90). All accounts of the artists arrival in 
Beijing in 1685 mention Wu Zhengzhi, the "grand 
secretary from Hanyang,'* as one of his most enthusi- 
astic supporters. Wang Xi himself states that Wu had 

PL 43B (cat. 18). Wang 
Hui (1632— 1717). Gath- 
ered Peaks in Spring Dew, 
dated 1680 

been an old friend of Wang Hui, while Xu Shugu 
also mentions Wu s long-standing friendship with 
Wang.^^^ One of the most powerful Chinese court 
officials of the time,^^^ Wu Zhengzhi obtained his 
jinshi degree in 1648 and became the president of the 
Censorate in 1660. Like his fellow Chinese officials 
Wang Xi, Feng Pu (1609— 1692), Huang Ji (d* 1686), 
and Du Lide (1611— 1691), all of whom became grand 
secretaries in the early 1680s, Wu Zhengzhi was one 
of the emperor s favorites.^^^ He was promoted to a 
grand secretary of the Wuying Palace in 1681 and 

participated in various imperial publication projects 
such as the Chronicles of Nurhaci (^Qing Taizu Gao Hmngdi 
shilu) and the Collected Statutes of the Great Qing Dynasty 
(Da Qing huiiiari)^^'^ He remained at the center of 
power until his death in 1691, 

In a poem written about 1685, Wu Zhengzhi 
mentioned his personal relationship with Wang Hui: 

My friendship with Wang Shigu [Wang Hui] has lasted for 
a long time. . . . In the past^ when Shigu came to the capital 
[Beijing] at the invitation of Cheng [Singde], I was happy to 

108 

provide a gathering for celebrating his arrival . , . I was 
really sorry that he stayed only a few days in the capital and 
had to return home. [When he was about to leave] many 
officials and I strongly urged him to stay longer^ but he refused 
to do so. His insistence on principled behavior is beyond the 
reach of ordinary people. IfNalan [Singde] had been alive, he 
would have told Shigu not to feel responsible for honoring 
Singde s memory in this way^^^ 

In a letter, Wu expressed his extreme affection for 
painting and calligraphy and evaluated Wang s 

artistic excellence as far above that of Shen Zhou or 
Wang Shimin*^^^ 

It is clear from the 1685 poem that Wu Zhengzhi 
and Wang Hui had established close relations before 
the latter s arrival in Beijing. Interestingly, the earliest 
record of Wang s association with Wu is found in a 
letter from the renowned Nanjing painter Gong Xian 
(1619— 1689) to Wang Hui, datable to 1681.^^^ This 
letter, in which Gong requested that Wang paint a 
landscape depicting his Half- Acre Garden (Banmu 
Yuan), was sent through "Grand Secretary Wu [Wu 

Fig. 72. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717), Landscape 
after Yan Wengui's '^Multiple 
Peaks of Mount Wuyi" 
dated 1684, Handscroll, 
ink on paper, 15 % in. x 
9 ft, 6 Vi in, (39.8 X 
290.8 cm). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 73. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717). Panoramic 
Views of Mountains and 
Rivers (detail), dated 
1684. Handscroll, ink 
and light color on paper, 
19 % in. X 51 ft. 5 in. 
(50.5 cm X 15.7 m). Tokyo 
National Museum 

Zhengzhi]."^^^ After receiving the painting, Gong 
subsequently wrote a letter of gratitude to Wang.^^^ 
This episode suggests that Wang Hui and Wu 
Zhengzhi were already acquainted by 16 81. 

Wu Zhengzhi s younger brother Wu Kaizhi 
became Wang Hui s major patron in the mid-i68os*^^° 
Little is known of Wu Kaizhi s life, but two of his 
letters to Wang Hui have survived, and his seals 
appear on several of Wangs landscapes,^^^ In one 
letter, Wu Kaizhi expressed his appreciation for Wang 
Hui s paintings, which had become his "family 
treasures" (jiacang zhihao).^^^ Probably in the summer 
of 1684, Wu Zhengzhi asked the painter for a copy 
of Zhao Mengfu s Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Hua 
Mountains and another of a detailed painting (xihua) 
by Yan Wengui, as well as for one or two smaller 
hanging scrolls,^^^ Wu Kaizhi soon followed with his 
own requests for paintings. From the seventh to the 
tenth lunar month of 1684, Wang executed four 
landscape handscroUs for him, three of which have 
survived: Landscape after Yan Wengui s ^^Multiple Peaks of 
Mount Wuyi^ (fig* yz), Panoramic Views of Mountains and 
Rivers, a scroll more than fifty-one feet (almost sixteen 
meters) long (fig. 73), and Enjoyment of Life, 3l painting 
inspired by the "Essay on the Enjoyment of Life" 
written by Zhongchang Tong (active ca. 180— ca. 220), 

which touches on the joys experienced by a Daoist 
recluse-farmer.^^^ Yet another landscape panorama 
made for Wu Kaizhi and datable to approximately the 
same time is Mountains and Rivers Clearing after Snow, in 
the Style of Li Cheng (fig. 74). 

Up to this time, most of Wang Hui s handscroUs 
were less than twenty-six feet (eight meters) long, but 
with these commissions from the Wu brothers he 
began to paint on a larger scale. The culmination of 
this new interest is represented by Layered Rivers and 
Tiered Peaks (see pi. 44A,b), a landscape panorama 
more than sixty-one feet (eighteen meters) long 
commissioned by Wu Zhengzhi in the summer of 
1684, which is almost nine times as long as such 
earlier scrolls as The Colors of Mount Taihang (see 
pi. 39A,b). This remarkable change reveals much about 
Wang s ambition to create scrolls capable of illustrat- 
ing one of the Kangxi emperors tours. 

In these scrolls, Wang Hui was aiming to revive 
the magnificent Five Dynasties and Northern Song 
landscape styles of Li Cheng, Fan Kuan, Juran, and Yan 
Wengui. His reinterpretations of these ancient masters, 
which explored all-embracing visions of mountains 
and rivers, came to define the distinctive character of 
his landscape art. Crucial to this effort was Wang 
Hui s rediscovery of the inexhaustible potential of 

1 10 

^ ^ -1 »^ * * * I* * 

■i 

the handscroU format, as embodied in Five Dynasties 
and Northern Song examples,^^^ particularly those of 
Yan Wengui, the patriarch of the landscape tradition 
known as "mountains and rivers without end/'"^^^ 

Wangs ambitious revival of Yans panoramic 
landscape style arose in response to increased demand 
for such works. From the i68os on, collectors showed 
a renewed interest in works by or after Yan Wengui. 
Wu Zhengzhi, for example, wrote Wang to ask him 
for a picture after a painting by Yan Wengui.^^^ Wu 
also possessed Multiple Peaks of Mount WuyU a now- 
lost painting attributed to Yan, on which Wang Hui 
based his Landscape after Yan Wenguis ^'Multiple Peaks of 
Mount Wuyi'^ made for Wu Kaizhi (see fig. 72). Wang 
Hongxu (1645— 1723), one of the highest officials at 
court, also asked Wang Hui to appraise the Yan 
Wengui landscape that had come into his possession. 
In a letter asking Wang Hui to produce a replica of 
Huang Gongwang s Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains^ 
Wang Hongxu made detailed inquiries about the 
authenticity and quality of the Yan Wengui land- 
scape.^^^ Xu Shugu also expressed his gratitude to 
Wang Hui for having given him a genuine painting 
by Yan Wengui.^^^ 

The growing interest among collectors in Yan 
Wengui and Yan Wengui— style landscapes is of great 

significance in understanding why Wang Hui began 
to paint numerous landscapes derived from the 
classical genre of '^mountains and rivers without 
end!' Wang s long hands croUs reflect that he was 
keenly aware of changing tastes and collecting 
patterns as well as of his patrons* expectations. The 
noted collector Liang Qingbiao, one of Wang s 
supporters in Beijing, possessed some of the most 
famous landscape panoramas related to Yan Wengui, 
including Summer Mountains^ attributed to his follower 
Qu Ding (fig. 75), and Streams and Mountains without End 
(fig. 76), by an anonymous artist clearly influenced by 
him.^^° Wang Hui could have seen these two monu- 
ments of early panoramic landscape while staying in 
Beijing in 1685. When Liang received a landscape from 
Wang in the combined styles of several Northern 
Song masters, he praised Wang s ability to achieve a 
synthesis of various painting methods. Unfortunately, 
Liang s letter to Wang is the only surviving evidence 
detailing the relationship between the two.^"^^ 

Wang Huis enterprise of making long scrolls for 
the Wu brothers, largely inspired by Yan Wengui and 
the mountains and rivers without end'' genre, not 
only established him as a master of panoramic 
landscapes but also contributed significantly to his 
gaining imperial sponsorship and becoming the most 

Fig. 74. Wang Hui (1632— 
1717). Mountains and Rivers 
Clearing after Snow^ in the 
Style of Li Cheng (detail). 
Handscroll, ink and light 
color on silk, uYa x 
26 ft. 2 y* in. (29.9 X 
799.5 cm). Osaka 
Municipal Museum 
of Art 

I I I 

Fig. 75. Attributed to 
Qu Ding (active 
ca. 1023— ca. 1056). Sum- 
mer Mountains. Hand- 
scroll, ink and light 
color on silk, 17 % x 
45% in. (45.3 X 1 1 5. 2 cm). 
The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New 
York. Ex coll.: C, C. 
Wang Family, Gift of 
The Dillon Fund, 1973 
(1973.120.1) 

Fig. 76, Unidentified 
artist. Streams and 
Mountains without End, 
ca. iioi— 50. HandscroU, 
ink and light color on 
silk, 13 % X 83 % in. (35.1 x 
213 cm). The Cleveland 
Museum of Art, Gift of 
the Hanna Fund, 1953.126 

celebrated painter at the court* When he arrived in 
Beijing in 1685, Wang seems to have taken advantage 
of his friendships with Wu Zhengzhi, a powerful 
official with regular access to the emperor, as well as 
with Wang Xi, Xu Qianxue, and Liang Qingbiao, Just 
as the emperor returned from his first tour of the 
south, Wang Hui gained entree into the political 
world of the capital and made his reputation. 

About 1684, Wu Zhengzhi sent a letter and a 
poem to Wang Hui, who was then staying in Nan- 
jing, mentioning how much he appreciated Wang s 
painting Teaching the ^^Book of Changes^' in the Autumn Forest 
(location unknown), executed for him in the previ- 
ous year. He further complimented Wang Hui as a 
painting hermit (huiyin). In the letter, Wu suggested 
obliquely that Wang make another painting for him: 

This year's summer in the capital is too swelteringly hot. My 
younger brother Pingyu [Wu Kaizhi] sent me a letter and 
said that it was really hot in the south as well I thought it 
was not [as hot as here]. Someone^ however^ read my mind. 

I saidj ^'l heard recently that Old Man Wang Shigu [Wang 
Hui] had whiled away the summer in a small studio in 
Moling [Nanjing] and treated guests and friends with his 
paintings day and night. How could it be thus impossible for 
him to forget the summer heat?'' I playfully wrote a prose 
poem and am now sending it to you.^^^ 

Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks (pL 44A,b) may well 
have been the landscape that Wu Zhengzhi received 
in response to his letter. Except for the seals of the 
Qianlong emperor (r. 1736—95) and the painter, the 
work bears only two others: "Painting and Calligra- 
phy Seal of Master Wu from Hanyang'* (^Hanyang Wu 
shi cang shuhua yinji^ and "Master Wu from Hanyang" 
(^Hanyang Wu shi), which almost certainly belong to 
Wu Zhengzhi.^^"* Furthermore, Wang Hui s inscrip- 
tion states that he painted the scroll near the Qinhuai 
River in Nanjing during the summer of 1684. 

The most ambitious of Wang Hui s landscape 
panoramas. Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks was acclaimed 
by the Qianlong emperor as ''the finest handscroU 

1 12 

of our dynasty and Wang Hui s finest/'^^^ No other 
landscape panorama by Wang is comparable in either 
length or complexity. In his inscription, the artist 
mentions that, in creating the scroll, he imitated 
Jurans brushwork and consulted the styles of Fan 
Kuan and Yan Wengui, He further states that "I 
painted for three [lunar] months to complete it* 
In the past, Yifeng Daoren [Huang Gongwang] 
painted a handscroU of the Fuchun Mountains. 
In his inscription he said it took him seven years 
to complete. But I have done this in a perfunctory 
manner, and it goes without saying that my brush- 
work and ink are far inferior. I write this to express 
my shame.'''^'*^ Despite his disingenuous expression 
of regret, Wang Hui actually reveals his pride in 
making this enormous handscroU in such a short 
period. And his comparison of the work to Huang 
Gongwang s masterpiece further implies that he had 
reached the same level of artistic excellence as that 
fourteenth-century master. 

In Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks, Wang Hui references 
the styles of Juran, Fan Kuan, and Yan Wengui to 
create a panoramic landscape in which myriad moun- 
tains and far-reaching rivers are encompassed in a 
continuous composition. The brushwork is rich and 
extravagant, while intricate pictorial effects are achieved 
through a combination of various texture patterns 
and brush styles. The constant alternation of moun- 
tainscapes and riverscapes, openings-and-closings, 
solids and voids results in an organically complex 
composition. Although Wang Hui employed the 
brush manners of Fan Kuan and Juran, his ultimate 
source of inspiration here is the miniaturist style of 
Yan Wengui, which is clearly echoed in the opening 
and closing sections, with their craggy mountains set 
off against a broad river.^^^ Layered Rivers and Tiered 
Peaks marked a significant moment in Wang Hui s 
synthesis of Five Dynasties and early Northern Song 

styles and demonstrates his mastery of the *'moun- 
tains and rivers without end'' genre. 

^'landscapes clear and radiant** 

Wang Huis close contacts during the mid-i68os with 
such distinguished court officials as Xu Qianxue, 
Liang Qingbiao, and Wu Zhengzhi undoubtedly led 
to his selection to depict the Kangxi emperor s 
second Southern Inspection Tour of 1689. Although 
some of his enthusiastic supporters had died by the 
time he returned to Beijing in 1691, there were still 
many other high officials to help him advance at 
court. The early-twentieth-century critic Pei Jingfu 
provides an interesting account of how Wang was 
called to the court in 1691 and who assisted him in 
receiving imperial favor: 

In the thirtieth year [xinwti year] of the Kangxi reign 
[i6gi]j Wang Hui arrived in the capital. Grand Mentor 
Mingju and the chancellor of the Hanlin Academy Gao Shiqi 
successively submitted memorials to the emperor^ recounting 
Wang Hms supreme ability as a painter^ which surpassed 
even that of the great masters of the past. Thus, be was capable 
of work that would depict the emperor^s great achievements. 
When Wang Hui was called to the Endeavor and Diligence 
Hall [Maoqin Dian] and dedicated his paintings to the 
emperor^ he received imperial compliments. Song Muzhong 
[Song Luo]^ in a poem on a painting entitled Nine Friends 
in Paintings observed that ''Wang Hui^ his hair already gray^ 
spent several years respectfully serving the imperial order.^^ 
Yuyang [Wang Shizhen] composed a poem, ''Song for Wumu 
Shanren [Wang Hui]/^ stating that "he heard once again the 
emperors summons to the Great Unity [Datong] HalV^^"^^ 

According to this record, both Mingju, Singde s 
father and a friend of Wu Zhengzhi, and Gao Shiqi, 
then a political ally of Xu Qianxue, recommended 
Wang Hui to be the artist-in-charge of painting The 

PL 44A (cat. 19). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks, dated 1684. 
HandscroU, ink and color on paper, 
20 V» in. X 61 ft, 6 Vi in. (51,1 cm x 18.7 m). 
Shanghai Museum 

1 14 

PL 44B (cat. 19). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks, dated 1684 

116 

117 

ii8 

Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour. While the 
reliability of Pei s early-twentieth-century account has 
yet to be determined, it does suggest how Wang Hui 
may have enjoyed the strong support of influential 
figures at court. 

After the second Southern Inspection Tour in 
1689, the Kangxi emperor agreed to the creation of a 
comprehensive pictorial record of his journey in order 
to announce that his reign had achieved prosperity 
and a "broad peace" {guangping). According to Tang 
Sunhua (1634— 1723), no one dared to undertake this 
enormous task except Song Junye (ca* 1662— 1713), who 
confidently indicated to the emperor that under his 
leadership the painting project would be successfully 
completed*^^^ As director-in-charge, Song not only 
oversaw the entire process of the scrolls' production 
but also selected Wang Hui and other painters to 
execute it.^^^ Song s central administrative role is 

PL 45 (cat. 21). Wang Hm (1632— 1717). A Thousand Peaks and Myriad 
Ravines, dated 1693. Hanging scroll, ink and light color on paper, 
100 X 40 Vi in. (254.1 X 103 cm). National Palace Museum, Taipei 

Fig. 77. Unidentified artist, formerly attributed to Jing Hao (active 
ca. 870— ca. 930). Mount Kuanglu, late 12th— early 13th century (?). 
Hanging scroll, ink on silk, 73 '/a x 42 in. (185.8 x 106.8 cm). National 
Palace Museum, Taipei 

confirmed by various contemporary accounts.^^*^ 
Wang Hui made it clear that it was Song who invited 
him to the capital as the master painter; Tang Sunhua 
and Chen Jianlong (active second half seventeenth 
century) further verified this fact."^^^ 

Wang Hui moved to the capital in early 1691 to 
begin work on the scrolls (see pis. 47—57).^^^ His 
choice by the court was definitely predicated upon his 
prior experience with long landscape panoramas. In 
fact, at the time, he was the only painter with the 
ability to accomplish such a monumental task. Wang 
Huis reception in Beijing, during the years of the 
Southern Inspection Tour (1691—98), gave a new direction 
to his life. He himself regarded the completion of 
the scrolls as the pinnacle of his success, the ultimate 
that a commoner (buyu literally, non— degree holder) 
could expect to achieve.^^^ 

Wang Hui put all his considerable painting skills, 
artistic ambitions, knowledge of painting history, and 
views of current politics into this large-scale project. 

In order to enhance the image of the Kangxi emperor, 
the Southern Inspection Tour highlights images of politi- 
cal stability and economic affluence against a back- 
ground of monumental landscapes portrayed in rich 
geographical detail. The emperor and his entourage, 
escorted by the imperial bodyguard, are shown 
processing through various regions of the empire, 
starting from Beijing and going on to such thriving 
southern cities as Suzhou and Nanjing. Every figure 
and landscape is carefully chosen to represent the age 
of *'grand peace** Qaiping) that Kangxi had established 
after the tumultuous years of dynastic transition.^^^ 
It is no coincidence that the Southern Inspection Tour 
was considered an "image of grand peace** or an 
"image of all under heaven** by Wang Hui*s contempo- 
raries.^^^ Xu Shixiao (active second half seventeenth 
century), a native of Yushan and a friend of the artist, 
compared Kangxi*s Southern Tour to the great achieve- 
ments of the legendary ancient sage-rulers Yao and 
Shun. According to Xu, the Southern Inspection Tour, filled 

Fig. 78. Unidentified 
artist, formerly attrib- 
uted to Guan Tong 
(active ca. 907—23). 
Travelers at the Mountain 
Pass, ca. 1050. Hanging 
scroll, ink and light 
color on silk, 56 % x 
22 % in. (144.4 ^ 
56.8 cm). National 
Palace Museum, 
Taipei 

Fig. 79. Unidentified 
artist. Landscape in the Style 
of Fan Kuan, early 12th 
century. Hanging scroll, 
ink and light color on 
silk, 65 % X 40 Va in. 
(165.8 X 103.8 cm). The 
Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York, Gift 
of Irene and Earl Morse, 
1956 (56.151) 

119 

PL 46 (cat. 22). Wang Hui (1632— 1717). Spring Morning at Swalhw Cliff, ca. 1690— 1700. Handscroll, ink and light color on silk, 15 Vi x 79 K in. (39.4 x 201.3 *^^)- Joseph A. Skinner 
Museum, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts 

Fig. 80. Fan Qi (1616— after 1694). Swallow Cliff, from Landscapes, Fig. 81, Wang Hui (1632—1717) and assistants. Swallow Cliff, from The Kangxi Emperor's Southern 

dated 1646. Leaf H in an album of eight paintings, ink and color Inspection Tour, Scroll Eleven: Navigating the Yangzi; Nanjing to Zhenjiang, datable to 1698. Handscroll, 

on paper, 6 % x 8 in. (16.8 x 20.3 cm). The Metropolitan Museum ink and color on silk, 26 % in. x 75 ft. 9 Vz in. (67.8 cm x 23.1 m). Palace Museum, Beijing 
of Art, New York, The Sadder Fund, 1969 (69.242.8—15) 

120 

with images of * grand normality** Qaichang), repre- 
sented Kangxi s pacification and reintegration of the 
empire after the social fragmentation of dynastic 
change,^^^ Wang Hui, aware of Kangxi s political vision 
for the empire, presented a grand pictorial narrative of 
the peace and prosperity that resonated with Kangxi s 
vision of a world of "Great Unity under the Qing 
dynasty" (Da Qingyitong)^^^ 

The pacifying and unifying aims of the Southern 
Inspection Tour are also implied in the commendation 
that Kangxi bestowed upon Wang Hui when Wang 
was about to return home in 1698* In a personal 
audience, Kangxi gave him the title Landscapes Clear 
and Radiant (Shanshui Qinghui), presumably not 
only to honor what Wang Hui had accomplished in 
the scroUs^^^ but also to signify the enduring peace 
and prosperity of the Qing dynasty. These words, 

taken from a poem by Xie Lingyun (385—433) entitled 
Written on the Lake on My Way Back to the 
Retreat at Stone Cliff,"^^^ evoke images associated 
with monumental landscapes glittering in blue and 
gold. As Tokura Hidemi has suggested, they conjure 
up the type of large screen painting with multiple 
panels depicting towering mountains and numerous 
peaks that rise and fall along a vast expanse of 
water.^^^ Wang Hui seems to have consciously revived 
this tradition in his extensive use of the blue-and- 
green color scheme in the Southern Inspection Tour. In 
Scroll Three, for example, the myriad peaks painted 
in Fan Kuan— inspired raindrop strokes and in deep 
blue-and-green colors culminate in a vision of the 
sacred Mount Tai, where emperors had traditionally 
offered the Feng and Shan sacrifices to demonstrate 
their possession of Heavens Mandate (see pL 51). 

121 

While directing the painting of the Southern 
Inspection Tour, Wang Hui also produced some impres- 
sive landscapes, including A Thousand Peaks and Myriad 
Ravines, dated 1693 (pi. 45). In this tall hanging scroll, 
the grand vision of 'landscapes clear and radiant" is 
once again dramatically presented. Wang Hui employs 
the pictorial idioms of Juran, Huang Gongwang, and 
Wang Meng to describe the splendors of towering 
mountains stacked in parallel vertical planes. Rising 
row upon row from a river valley, the superimposed 
peaks present a confident image of centrality and 
dominance. The use of '*dragon-vein" movements 
transforms the monumental mountains into an 
organically intertwined, large reptilelike mass. The 
vertical composition is counterbalanced at the right 
by a rolling panoramic view, filled with a long stretch 
of water that meanders through the deep valley and 
overlaps distant peaks wreathed in clouds and mist. 
Fishermen, wayfarers, temples, pavilions, and moun- 
tain villages interject a human presence in this 
otherwise austere landscape. 

The tall peaks rising to fill the vertical picture 
plane in A Thousand Peaks and Myriad Ravines recall such 
monuments of Song landscape painting as Mount 
Kuanglu (fig. 77), previously attributed to Jing Hao 
(active ca. Sjo—csl. 930), and Travelers at the Mountain 
Pass (fig. 78), formerly attributed to Guan Tong, in 
which the stacked mountain forms merge into the 
towering massif at the top of the scrolL^^^ A more 
direct stylistic source, however, seems to have been 
Tandscape in the Style of Fan Kuan (fig. 79), a large hanging 
scroll by an anonymous early-twelfth-century painter, 
in which enormous mountains are piled up at the 
right and a panoramic level-distance view with 
winding streams and rivers and cloud- and mist- 
filled peaks fades into the distance at the left. The 
two works show almost the same composition, 
developing diagonally from front to back in a 
continuous sequence and effectively combining 
vertical and horizontal elements. Interestingly, the 
foreground of each scroll even has boatmen near 
the foot of a tree-covered bluff with a pavilion. 

A Thousand Peaks and Myriad Ravines is a powerful 
evocation of the heroic vision expressed in Song 
monumental landscapes. In this work, Wang Hui 
combines his characteristically creative reinterpreta- 
tion of ancient sources with brilliant imagination and 
technical virtuosity. The scroll exemplifies his ambi- 
tion to surpass past masters, in both conception and 
technique, and to develop further his own style 
marked by monumental vision and grand scale. 

About or shortly after this time, Wang Hui 
painted Spring Morning at Swallow Cliff (pi. 46), a short 

hands croU depicting a massive promontory located 
along the Yangzi River, northwest of Nanjing. One of 
the most famous scenic sites of the city, in the early 
Qing period it was included as one of the "Forty- 
Eight Views of Jinling [Nanjing]** and became a 
subject for painters and poets.^^^ The Nanjing 
painter Fan Qi (1616— after 1694) included a view of 
Swallow Cliff in an album of eight paintings, dated 
1646 (fig. 80).^^^ Another Nanjing painter, Wu Hong 
(active ca. 1637—83), featured the site in a handscroll 
(see fig. 82) that depicts the topography from 
Guanyin Gate to Swallow Cliff.^^^ 

Wang Hui first painted Swallow Cliff in 1677 in 
the last section of his Ten-Thousand Miks of the Yangzi 
River, a handscroll that is currently mounted as a 
suite of twelve hanging scroUs.^^^ In Spring Morning 
at Swallow Cliff, Wang Hui again presents a pan- 
oramic view of the south shore of the Yangzi River 
extending from the Magnanimous Salvation Temple 
(Hongji Si) past Guanyin Gate to Swallow Cliff^^^ 
These sites are connected by a sweeping arc of land 
that draws closest to the foreground at the scroll s 
midpoint and then recedes to the final promontory. 
The scroll ends just beyond this point with a view 
of water, clouds, and sky, with no horizon line to 
detract from the sense of a limitless expanse. The 
landscape is further animated by a sequence of 
bulging rock formations that are unified into a single 
serpentine "dragon vein'* with a pathway running 
along its spine. Wang Hui featured a very similar 
treatment of this landscape in Scroll Eleven of his 
Southern Inspection Tour (fig. 81). 

Wang Hui returned home in the fall of 1698 after 
his audience with Kangxi. He built the Clear and 
Radiant Hall (Qinghui Tang) to commemorate the 
honorary title granted him by the emperor and had 
the characters for "landscapes clear and radiant** 
carved onto a plaque. He also began to use the style 
names Clear and Radiant Old Man (Qinghui Laoren) 
and Master of the Hall of the Clear and Radiant 
(Qinghui Tang Zhuren) to reflect his status as an 
imperially acknowledged painter.^^^ 

1. The family background is detailed in Liu Yiping 1993, 
pp. 115-17. 

2. Ibid. See also Chen Liisheng 1996, pp. 2—3. 

3. A brief entry on Zhang Ke appears in Jia Lunkui, Yushan hmzhi 
(1996 ed.), p. 1012. 

4. Ibid. 

5. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 879. 

6. Liu Yiping 1993, p. 117. 

7. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 815. 

8. For the relationship between Dong Qichang and the 
formation of the Orthodox School in Taicang, see Cahill 
1976b. See also Wicks 1983. 

9- Whitfield 1996, p. 842. 

10. Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), pp. 923—28, 931, 934, 
n. The present location of this work is unknown. According to 
Victoria Contag, the painting was in a private collection in 
China in the mid-i94os, when she photographed it. For 
details, see Contag 1970, pp. 33, 49. 

12. Tang Yuzhao's letters to Wang Hui appear in Qinghui Ge zengyi 
chidu 1911, chap, i, pp. iia— 14a. 

13. On the To See Large within Small album and its authorship, see 
Wen Fong's discussion in this volume. See also Fong 1984, 
pp. 177—79; Chang Joseph 1995; and Fong 1996c, pp. 474—76. 
Another version of this album by Wang Hui, dated 1672 
(Shanghai Museum), includes a reduced copy of Wu Zhens 
Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day. 

14. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 191 1, chap, i, p. 17a. 

15. Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997— > vol. 24 (2000), p. 18. 

16. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 191 1, chap, i, p. lob. Gu Zuyu, who was 
perhaps the most famous geographer of his day, was a friend 
of both Wang Hui and Yun Shouping, Among his works 
was the Essentials of Historical Geography (Dushijangyu jiyao), an 
encyclopedic study of historical, administrative, and natural 
geography that set the standard for later geographical and 
cartographical studies. On Gu Zuyu, see "Ku Tsu-yii" by Tu 
Lien-che in Hummel 1943—44, pp. 419—20. 

17. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, p. lob. 

18. Ibid. 

19. Ibid. 

20. Translation adapted from Fong 1996c, p. 482. 

21. Fong 1984, pp. 177—78; and Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang 1992, 
vol. 2, p. 134. 

22. Fong 1984, p. 179. 

23. This album is reproduced in color in Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang 
1992, vol. I, pp. 437—48, pi. 164, leaves i— 21. 

24. Adapted from Fong 1984, pp. 183—84. For the meaning of 
"dragon veins," see Bush 1962. 

25. Translation from Wicks 1983, p. 272. 

26. Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), p. 917. 

27. Ibid., pp. 915, 923, 926—29. 

28. Chang Joseph 1995, pp. 35—37. 

29. Ibid., p. 35. 

30. Ibid., p. 38. Xiang Xuandu was the fifth son of the prominent 
late Ming collector Xiang Yuanbian (1525— 1590). On Xiang 
Xuandu, see Zheng Yinshu 1984, pp. 15—16. 

31. Fong 1996c, p. 480, pi. 276. 

32. Autumn Mountains and Wang Shimin's copies of the painting 
are mentioned in Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), 
pp. 915—16, 926—27. 

33. Translation from Wicks 1982, p. 12. 

34. For details, see Chang Joseph 1995, pp. 89—90. 

35. On Zhang Jinchen, see Riely 1995, p. 90. Zhang Jinchen s 
collection also included Shen Zhou's Eastern Villa (Nanjing 
Museum) and a copy of Mist and Rain over Wuzhou, attributed to 
Mi Youren (Wan-go H. C. Weng Collection, Lyme, New 
Hampshire). For the former, see Cahill 1998, p. 184, and no. 
196. For the latter, see Sturman 1989, p. 472. 

36. Chang Joseph 1995, p. 89. 

37. For details, see ibid., p. 90. 

38. Quoted in Chang Joseph 1995, p. 89. See Yun Shouping, 
Ouxiang Guanji (n.d.), Buyi huaha (supplementary colophons), 
p. 13a. 

39. Translation after Whitfield 1969, p. 103. 

40. Ibid., p. 41; and Fong 1970, pp. 41—42. On the dragon veins, 
openings-and-closings, and risings-and-fallings, see Bush 1962. 

41. Fong 1970, pp. 41—42. 

42. Chang Joseph 1995, pp. 37—38. 

43. Whitfield 1969, p. 41. 

44. Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), p. 914; and Wang 
Jiansheng 2000, pp. 35— 37* 

45. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 872. Gu Mei's inscription is not 
found on Autumn Forests at Yushan, It seems to have been 

written separately to express his gratitude to Wang Hui for 
the painting. 

46. On Stone Cliff at the Pond of Heaven, see Cahill 1976a, pp. 90, iii. 

47. See Bush 1962, p. 120. 

48. Chen Liisheng 1996, p. loi; Si Wang Wu Yun huihua 1996, p. 89. 

49. Translation from Fong 1996c, pp. 479, 481. 

50. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 821. 

51. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 191 1, vol. i, p. 6b. 

52. Tong 1983, p. 47. 

53. For details, see Meng Sen 1980. 

54. Dennerline 1981, pp. 323—31; and Oxnam 1975, pp. loi— 8. 

55. Published in Jiang Chun 1962, p. 313. 

56. Ibid. 

57. Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed,), p. 931; and Chang 
Joseph 1995, p. 112. 

58. Fong 1996c, p. 482. 

59. Chang Joseph 1995, p. iii. See Wang Shimin s "Inscription on 
My Painting Given to Sir Fang Aixian," in Wang Shimin, 
Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), p. 931. 

60. See Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), p. 931. 

61. The friendship between Tang Guang and Yun Shouping is 
discussed in detail in Chung 1983, pp. 20—22. For Tang Guang s 
flower paintings, see Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997—, vol. 25 (2001), 
pis. 1—4. 

62. Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.), p. 928. 

63. Si Wang Wu Yun huihua 1996, p. 256. 

64. Kohara 1979, p. 153. 

65. Chen Liisheng 1996, p. 100. 

66. For the stylistic features of early landscape painting, see Fong 
1984, p. 20. 

67. Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997— vol. 24 (2000), p. 64, pi. 72. 

68. Midian zhulin Shiqu haoji sanhian (1969 ed.), vol. 5, p. 2140; and 
Kim 1985, voL 1, p. 173. 

69. The album, which was done for a certain Hanxie, whose 
identity remains unknown, is reproduced in Xu Bangda and 
Xue Yongnian 1999, pi. 8. 

70. For details, see Xu Zhongling 1995. 

71. Ibid., p. 66. 

72. Translation from Lovell 1970, p. 218; the full translation of 
the colophon is found on pp. 217—19. 

73. By the mid-i67os, Wang Hui had painted a third copy of 
Dwelling for the Yixing collector Pan Yuanbo (Pan Yuanbai, 
active ca. 1660—70). For details, see Yun Shouping, Nantian 
huaha (1994 ed.), p. 979. 

74. Wu Li saw Dwelling in the Mountains on a Summer Day in 1668, 
when he visited Tang Yuzhao's residence. See Wu Li, Mojing 
huaha (1994 ed.), p. 970. 

75. See "Wang Shan" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, 
pp. 830-31. 

76. Translation from Siren 1956—58, vol. 5, p. 103. 

77. Translation from Kim 1996, pp. 131—32. 

78. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 191 1, chap, i, pp. iib— 12a, 13b. Wang Hui 
mentioned that he spent several years at Tang's residence and 
studied the masterworks in the collection. See Qinghui zengyan 
1994, p. 885. 

79. Wang Hui claimed that he had seen as many as one hundred 
Tang and Song paintings by about 1669. See Wang Hui, 
Qinghui huaha (1974 ed.), p. 315. 

80. See letters by Zhang Yingjia and Jiang Chenxi in Qinghui 
Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, pp. 19b— 20b. Zhang Yingjia paid 
200 taels of silver for a replica of Juran's Mist Floating on a 
Distant Peak while Jian Chenxi offered 12 taels of silver for a 
Wang Hui painting. Two of Wang Hui's handscrolls are 
recorded as "purchased at 4 taels" in Gao Shiqi, Jiangcun 
shuhua mu (1994 ed.), pp. 1075—76. 

81. On Zhou Lianggong, see "Chou Liang-kung" by Fang 
Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, PP* i73~74* 

82. For details of Zhou's Lives of Painters, see Kim 1996, 
pp. 113-46. 

83. Ibid., p. 121. 

84. Qinghui zmgyan 1994, p. 855. Translation adapted from Kim 
1985, vol. 1, p. 199. Qian Qianyi s letter of introduction is 
translated and discussed in Kim 1996, pp. 125—26. For Qian's 
support of Wang Hui, see Chang Chin-Sung 2004, pp. 37—41. 

85. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 855. 

86. For details, see Kohara 1979, p. 161. 

87. See Siren 1956—58, vol. 5, p. 176. 

88. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 875; Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, 
pp. i5b-i7a. 

89. For details, see Kim 1996, pp. 130—31. 

90. Ibid., pp. 163—64. 

91. Ibid., p. 141. 

92. For a discussion of Old Trees, Level Distance, see Fong 1992a, 
pp. 93-97. 

93. For details of this album, see Hearn 1996, pp. 154—55. 

94. Lee, Sherman E., and Fong 1955 is an excellent study of the 
importance of the "mountains and rivers without end" theme 
in the formation of early Chinese landscape painting. For a 
close study of Summer Mountains and an overview of the Yan 
Wengui tradition in Chinese landscape painting, see Fong 
1975. For a recent study of Pavilions and Mansions hy Rivers and 
Mountains, see Torma 2002. 

95. Si Wang Wu Yun huihua 1996, p. 89, pi. 47. 

96. For a discussion of Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Hua Mountains, 
see Li, Chu-tsing 1965. 

97. See note 68. 

98. For a discussion of Liu Jue s copy, see Stanley-Baker 1995, 
p. 399. 

99. Its accompanying inscription mentions that the original Wu 
Zhen belonged to the early Ming collector Xu Da (1332— 1385), 
Duke of Wei, in Nanjing. Whether both Liu Jues copy and 
the copy in the Taipei album were replicas of the same Wu 
Zhen original is difficult to tell. Even the accounts of Wu 
Zhen s Autumn Clearing in the Mountain Pass by Wu Sheng (early 
eighteenth century) and Gu Fu (late seventeenth century) do 
not match the basic features of the Taipei copy. Autumn 
Clearing in the Mountain Pass was thus probably a later copy of 
Summer Mountains, Misty Rain. Chang Joseph 1995, p. 46. 

100. For details, see Contag 1970, p. 33. 

101. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, p. 17a. 

102. Zhou Lianggong once asked Wang Hui to paint Clearing after 
Snow in the Mountains and Rivers, after Wang Wei for him. Qinghui Ge 
zengyi chidu 191 1, chap. 2, pp. ib— 2a. 

103. The letter is translated and discussed in Kim 1985, vol. i, p. 202. 

104. Kim 1996, pp. 163—64. 

105. Barnhart 1972, p. 16. 

106. Kim 1985, vol. I, p. 202. 

107. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, pp. nb— 12a, 13b. 

108. See Wang Hui, Qinghui huaha (1974 ed,), p. 315. 

109. On Song Luo [Song Lao], see "Sung Lao" by Tu Lien-che in 
Hummel 1943—44, pp. 689—90. Included in his collection 
were such Song masterworks as Misty Rivers and Layered Peaks by 
Wang Shen (ca. 1048— 1103) (Shanghai Museum) and Streams 
and Mountains, Pure and Remote by Xia Gui (active ca. 1 195— 1230) 
(National Palace Museum, Taipei). 

Two of the most famous works created by Wang Hui for 
Song Luo are the album entitled Six Landscapes of the Western 
Slope, dated 1688 (Art Museum, Tianjin), and Six Landscapes, a 
set of six handscrolls dated 1700 (Shanghai Museum). 

110. The present location of the Song original is unknown. 

HI. Translation from Kim 1996, p. 131. The painting is reproduced 
and documented in Guse 2004, pp. 216, 260—61, fig. 111-81. See 
also Gugong shuhua tulu 1989—, vol. i (1989), pp. 187—88. It is 
discussed in Loehr 1980, p. 144; and Fong 1984, p. 190. 

112. Cahill 1994, p. 136, 

113. See Bian Yongyu, Shigu Tang shuhua huikao (1994 ed.), vol. 6, 
p. 941. Bian describes the medium, color, composition, and 
inscription but none of the spurious seals, which suggests that 
the painting was further altered after it left his collection. 

114. Fong 1984, p. 190. 

115. For the problem of copies and forgeries in Chinese paintings, 
see Ztircher 1955; and Fong 1962. 

116. See note 11 above. 

117. Joseph Chang has questioned the authenticity of Wang Hui s 
To See Large within Small album because the record compiled by 
Pei Jingfu (1854— 1926) does not mention the seals of either 
Wang Hui or the later collector An Qi (ca. 1683— after 1744); 
Chang Joseph 1995, pp. 97—114; and Pei Jingfu 2006, vol. 2, 
pp. 467—69. Chang has concluded that the album was copied 
from the Taipei album by a follower of Wang Hui during or 
slightly after Wang Hui s time, and that the seals of Wang 
Hui and An Qi were added in the late nineteenth century 
after the album left Pei Jingfu s hands. As Roderick Whitfield 
has argued, however, it is certain that this album was copied 
directly from the Taipei album since all but two of its leaves 
have identical counterparts in the latter and since, in every 
case, the artist was successful in preserving the original 
proportions through flawless replication; see Whitfield's 
entry for the Shanghai To See Large within Small album in Century 
of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, p. 185. The differences between 
the textual record and the actual Shanghai album do not 
mean that Wang Hui himself did not paint it, because such 
discrepancies are not unusual in Chinese painting studies. In 
addition, it is possible that Pei Jingfu's account refers to a 
different album. Finally, even if the seals on the Shanghai 
album were added later, its high level of pictorial mastery and 
exactitude in copying the Taipei album leaves no doubt that 
the work is an early masterpiece by Wang Hui. 

118. See Lin, Xiaoping 2001, p. 158. 

119. For a discussion of the prices of Wang Hui s paintings, see 
Kim 1989, pp. 197—202. 

120. Ibid., p. 197; and Gao Shiqi, Jiangcun shuhua mu (1994 ed.), 
pp. 1075-76. 

121. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 19 11, chap, i, p. 19b. For prices of 
late-seventeenth- and early-eighteenth-century Chinese 
paintings, see Hsii 1991; and Hay 2001, pp. 164—66. 

122. Gao Shiqi, Jiangcun shuhua mu (1994 ed.), p. 1073. 

123. Ibid. On Delight in Cloudy Mountains, which is now in the 
National Palace Museum, Taipei, see Sturman 1989, pp. 478—84. 

124. When this landscape was first shown as part of the "In 
Pursuit of Antiquity" exhibition (Princeton University Art 
Museum, 1969), it was thought to be a very early replica of 
Wang Hui s painting of the same subject. See Whitfield 1969, 
pp. 114—18, no. 15. 

125. For details, see Li, Wai-yee 1995. 

126. Xu Zhongling 1995. 

127. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, p. 19b. 

128. Yun Shouping, Nantian huaha (1994 ed.), p. 979. 

129. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 832. The term "clouds and mists," 
referring to a work of art or painting, derives from Su Shi's 
comments concerning Wang Shen's collection of paintings. 
For details, see Bush and Shih 1985, p. 234. The most notable 
usage of the term is found in the Record of Clouds and Mist Passing 
before One's Eyes (Yunyan guoyan Iti) by Zhou Mi (1232— 1308). For 
details of Zhou Mi's work, see Weitz 2002. 

130. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 827, 830, 834, 850. 

131. For details of Du Fu's lines, see Hung 1952, pp. 169—70; and 
Bush and Shih 1985, p. 69. 

132. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, p. 8b. 

133. Ibid. 

134. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 875—76. 

135. Ibid., p. 834. 

136. The studio mode of collaborative production was common 
during the seventeenth century. For details, see Cahill 1994, 
pp. 71—112, esp. pp. 102—12. 

137. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap. 2, pp. 24a— 24b. For a 
brief discussion of Zhang's commission, see Cahill 1994, 
p. 136. 

138. Qingbui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap. 2, p. 15b. On Song Zhi, see 
under the entry "Sung Lao" by Tu Lien-che in Hummel 
1943-44, p. 690. 

139. Fong 1996c, p. 479. 

140. Translation from ibid. 

141. Translation by Shi-yee Liu. See also Kohara 1979, p. 152. 

142. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap. 1, pp. iib, 13b. 

143. Cahill 1994, p. 9. 

144. For details, see Tong 1983, pp. 47—48. 

145. Ibid., p. 48. See Yun Shouping, Ouxiang Guanji (n.d.), chap. 12, 
p. 3a. 

146. Translation by Shi-yee Liu. The complete transcription of 
Yun's inscription is found in Kohara 1979, p. 152. 

147. Ibid. 

148. Modified after Kim 1985, vol. 2, p. 91. 

149. Modified after ibid., pp. 91—92. 

150. Translation from Fong 1984, p. 184. 

151. Fong 1970, p. 43, 

152. Ibid., p. 41. 

153. For details of Shitao's aspiration to artistic autonomy and 
independence, see Hay 2001, pp. 272—81. 

154. On Dong Qichang's theories of painting, see Cahill 1987. 

155. For the compositional principle of the "rising-and-falling" 
and "opening-and-closing" movements that appear m Wang 
Hui's landscapes, see Bush 1962. 

156. On Da Chongguang, see Tong 1983, pp. 83—86; and Little 
2003, p. 242. 

157. On Da Chongguang s ownership of these scrolls, see Sturman 
1989, pp. 478—81; and Little 2003, p. 242. 

158. Among the most important of Das inscriptions are those he 
provided for Wang Hui's album In Pursuit of Antiquity. See 
Whitfield 1969, pp. H9-20, 122, 126 (Leaves AA, BB, CC, FF, JJ). 

159. For Da's inscriptions and colophons for Wang Hui's paintings, 
see Xu Bangda and Xue Yongnian 1999, pis. 13—16, 27; and 
Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997— vol. 24 (2000), pis. 30, 45, 145. 

160. A brief biography of Li Zongkong appears in Jiangsu yiwen zhi 
1995, vol. 2, p. 1117; and Zhongguo lidai renming dacidian 1999, 
vol. I, p. 990. 

161. Jiangsu yiwen zhi 1995, vol. 2, p. 1117. The Shuyun seal after his 
style name is found on a leaf from In Pursuit of Antiquity, See 
Whitfield 1969, no. i6, leaf HH. 

162. ]iangsu yiwen zhi 1995, vol. 2, p. 1117. 

163. For details of this special examination, see Wilhelm 1951; and 
Kessler 1976. 

164. Chen Jiexian 1999, pp. 12—14. On the political functions of Qing 
imperial gifts of calligraphy, see Hay 2005, esp. pp. 326—31. 

165. Jiangsu yiwen zhi 1995, vol, 2, p. 1117; and Fu Shan, Shuanghong Kan 
ji (1985 ed.), vol. 2, p. 1332. 

166. Wang Hongxu, Hengyun Shanrenji (1972 ed.), vol. i, p. 511. 

167. This painting is now thought to be a copy painted by a 
sixteenth-century Suzhou follower of Wen Zhengming. See 
Cahill 1980, p. 338. 

168. Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997— vol. 7 (1999)1 pis. 8, 9. 

169. Now in the Shanghai Museum, the Huang Tingjian was 
originally an album but is currently mounted as a handscroll. 
Li's Shuyun seal is impressed in the lower left corner. I am 
grateful to Qianshen Bai of Boston University for bringing 
this work to my attention. For the Mi Fu letters, see Lin 
Po-t*ing 2007, pp. 334—45, esp. p. 342. 

170. This album is most widely known through Roderick 
Whitfield's exhibition and its accompanying catalogue. See 
Whitfield 1969, pp. 119—42, no. 16. 

171. Ibid., no. 16, p. 128. 

172. Ibid., no. 16, p. 123, Leaf HH, and p. 126, Leaf K. 

173. On Liu Yu and his relationship with Wang Hui, see Hearn 
2002, pp. 25—45, ^sp* PP- ^7—31- 

174. See Whitfield's entry in Century of Tung Ch'i^ch'ang, 1992, vol. 2, 
pp. 185—86, no. 165. 

175. Translation from Whitfield 1969, p. 120. 

176. For discussions of the painting, see Fong 1984, pp. 188—90; 
and Hearn 1996, p. 162. 

177. Translation from Whitfield 1969, p. 108. 

178. Chen Ltisheng 1996, p. 116. The location of this album is 
currently unknown. 

179. In the surviving inscriptions and colophons by Wang Hui, 
as well as in the relevant textual records, Li Zongkong is 
referred to as "Mr. Li of Weiyang []4^e/yfl«^ Li shi'\" "Mr. Li of 
Guangling [Guangling Li sW]!* "Supervising Secretary Li from 
Guangling [Guangling Li Jijian^'* or "Supervising Secretary Li 
from Weiyang [14^^ry£i«g Lijijian^!' See Qinghui zengyan 1994, 

p. 863; Zhongguo gudai shuhua tumu 1986—2001, vol. 4 (1990), p. 382, 
pi. 1-2865; Bangda and Xue Yongnian 1999, pis. 16, 17. 

180. James Cahill considered the painting a late-eleventh-century 
work originally executed as a panel of a screen. See Cahill 
1980, p. 39. 

181. The Ming imperial "half" seal, Wang Duo's seal, three of Li 
Zongkong's seals, and an unidentified seal, along with the 
Qing imperial seals, are found on the painting. It also bears 
Wang Duo's inscription, dated 1649, written on the left 
border. For documentation of the painting, see Gugong shuhua 
tulu 1989—, vol. 1 (1989), p. 58. Richard Barnhart suggested that 
Autumn Mountains at Dusk could be the pictorial equivalent of 
an ancient poem describing hard journeys, such as Li Bai's 
"The Road to Shu Is Hard." See Barnhart 1997, p. 93. 

182. Si Wang Wu Yun huihua 1996, p. 113, 

183. Ibid., p. 117. 

184. Michael Sullivan used the term "monumental intimisme" in 
reference to a landscape panorama by Zhao Boju (d. ca. 1162), 
Autumn Colors on Rivers and Mountains, (Palace Museum, Beijing) 
that depicts a great range of spectacular mountains and 
landmasses in the intimate format of a handscroll. See 
Sullivan 1999, p. 170. 

185. Cressey 1934, pp. 39—40, 183—84; and Rong Bin and Xia 
Han'ning 1992, pp. 131—34. 

186. Translation modified from Alley 1983, p. 203. 

187. On Zhao Zhixin, see "Chao Chih-hsin" by Fang Chao-ying in 
Hummel 1943—44, p. 71; and Lo and Schultz 1986, pp. 161—62. 

188. Zhao Weizhi and Liu Yuxin 1983, p. 18. 

189. For Dong's theory of the Southern and Northern Schools, see 
Ho, Wai-kam 1976; Cahill 1982b, pp. 13—27; and Fong 1992b. 

190. Yun Shouping, Ouxiang Guanji (n.d.), chap. 12, p. 23a. The 
abridged version is recorded in Wang Hui, Qinghui huaha (1974 
ed.), p. 317. Translation adapted from Fong 1984, p. 184. 

191. Richard Barnhart has observed that Song painters were 
deeply engaged with the direct exploration of nature. Arguing 
that their experiments with truthfully copying nature lay at 
the very foundation of Song landscape painting, he termed 
the achievement of mimesis in landscape painting the "Song 
miracle." Barnhart 2001. 

192. Cahill 1982b, p. 102. 

193. For a discussion of this album, see Hearn 1996, pp. 154-55. 

194. For the origin of the expression "sweeping ten-thousand miles 
into a square foot," see Lachman 1989, pp. 53, 58. 

195. For a historical overview of the Kangxi era, see Spence 2002. 

196. For discussions of Kangxi 's Southern Inspection Tours, see 
Spence 1966, pp. 124—38; and Hearn 1990, pp. 10—54. 

197. Singde s full name is Nalan Xingde, but he has also been 
called Nalan Chengde and Nalan Singde. The familiar form 
"Singde" is the name most known in the West, and I have 
adopted it in this text. On Singde, see "Singde" by Fang 
Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, pp. 662—63. 

198. See "Mingju" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, 
pp. 577—78; and Yan Chongnian 1989. 

199. For details, see Oxnam 1975, pp. 68—69. 

200. See "Singde" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, P- 

201. For discussions of Singde's literary career, see McCraw 1990, 
pp. 117—43; Zhang Jiasheng 1993, pp. 333—67; and Zhuo 
Qingfen 1999. 

Z02. On Singde's collection, see Zhang Yimin 1988. 

203. Li, Chu-tsing 1965, p. 33, 

204. Zhang Yimin 1988. 

205. For an illustration and discussion of River Temple in the Long 
Summer, see Barnhart 1997, pp. 129—30. 

206. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 853. 

207. Xu Qianxue also mentioned that Singde greatly admired 
Wang Hui s landscapes. See ibid. 

208. For the Xu brothers' role in court politics, see Struve 1982; 
and Wang Jiajian 1994. The Xu family was the most powerful 
one in Kunshan. Most of its members became jinshi, and 
because they were wealthy landowners, they were able to 
remain influential in the local area for two or three genera- 
tions. For details, see Ho, Ping-ti 1962, p. 145. 

209. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 852. The expression "trimming the 
candlewick together by the west window" (xichuang jianzhu) 
comes from the poem "Lines To Be Sent Home, Written on a 
Rainy Night" by Li Shangyin (813?— 858) and alludes to the 
anticipation of a happy reunion with one who is now absent. 
For details, see Liu, James J. Y. 1969, p. 150, On Wang Xi, see 
"Wang Hsi" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, p- ^^9- 

210. See "Wang Hsi" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, 
p. 819. Xu Shugu provides a more detailed account of Wang 
Hui's arrival in Beijing and Singdes sudden death. He includes 
Wang Xi in the company of high officials who offered the artist 
a warm welcome. For details, see Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 854. 

211. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 854. 

212. Ibid., p. 902. 

213. This is confirmed by Qin Yuan (active second half seven- 
teenth century), who, in an undated poem, made it clear that 
Wang Hui once stayed in the Northern Garden of the Xu 
Family at Deer City (Kunshan). Ibid., p. 833. 

214. Yun Shouping, Ouxiang Guanji (n.d.), chap. 9, pp. i^l—isl. 

215. Ibid., p. la; and Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 833. A native of Jiading, 
Zhang Yunzhang had established friendships with Wang Hui 
and Yun Shouping as well as with Xu Qianxue and Xu 
Yuanwen. His erudition in the Confucian classics made him a 
welcome guest at Xu Qianxue s residence, where the two 
worked together on the Commentaries on Confucian Classics of the 
Song and Yuan Dynasties (Song Yuan jingjie). The most detailed 
biography of Zhang Yunzhang is found in Fang Bao, "Zhang 
Pucun muzhiming" (1983 ed.). Because of his encyclopedic 
geographical knowledge, Gu Zuyu was asked in 1690 to join Xu 
Qianxue s large court-commissioned project, the Comprehensive 
Geography of the Great Qing Dynasty (Da Qingyitong zhi). For details, 
see Struve 1982, p. 253; and Elman 1984, p. 102. 

216. For details, see Lu Shihua, Wu Yue suojian shuhua lu (1994 
ed.), pp. 1139—40. On Xu Jiong, see under the entry "Hsii 
Ch'ien-hsueh" by Tu Lien-che in Hummel 1943—44, p. 311. 
Yun seems to have been closely associated with Xu Qianxue s 
sons. He painted a picture and composed four poems about a 
beautiful orchid in "Xu Shugu s garden," presumably the 
Northern Garden. See Yun Shouping, Ouxiang Guan ji (n.d,), 
chap. 10, pp. i6a— i6b. 

217. Xu Zhongling 1995, p. 66. 

218. Ibid. 

219. Ibid. 

220. On the Southern Inspection Tour, see Hearn 1990. 

221. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 852, 854. 

222. On Wu Zhengzhi, see Qingdai heizhuan quanji 1987, vol. i, 
pp. 69—70; "Wu Cheng-chih" by Tu Lien-che in Hummel 
1943—44, PP- S63— 64; and Qingdai renwu zhuan gao 1987, 

pp. 138-42. 

223. Oxnam 1975, p. 193. In 1671 Wang Xi, Feng Pu, and Huang Ji 
were among the first appointed to participate in the jingyan 
(periodic lectures for the emperor); they further advanced 
their careers through their personal closeness to Kangxi. See 
Miller 1974, p. 123. On Feng Pu, see "Feng P u" by Tu 
Lien-che in Hummel 1943—44, P* ^43^ Huang Ji, see 

"Huang Chi" by Dean R. Wickes, ibid., p. 337; and on Du 
Lide, see "Tu Li-te" by Tu Lien-che, ibid., p. 778. 

224. For details, see Qingdai heizhuan quanji 1987, vol. i, pp. 69—70; 
"Wu Cheng-chih" by Tu Lien-che in Hummel 1943—44, 
pp. 863—64; and Qing shi liezhuan igSz, vol. 9, p. 30. 

225. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 852—53. 

226. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, pp. 23b— 24a. 

227. This letter is translated and discussed in Silbergeld 1974, 
pp. 44, 152. 

228. Gong Xian s letter, written sometime in the i68os, refers to 
Wu Zhengzhi as "Grand Secretary Wu" (Wu Xiangguo). 
Wu s appointment as a grand secretary in 1681 suggests a date 
for the letter. 

229. Hua Derong 1988, p. 157. 

230. In a poem datable to 1684, Wu Zhengzhi refers to Wu Kaizhi 
as his younger brother (jiadi). See Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 838. 

231. For Wu's letters to Wang, see Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 191 1, chap, i, 
pp. 24a— 24b, vol. 2, pp. i6a— i6b. Wu's seals, "Wu Kaizhi yin," 
"Yizi Pingyu," "Wu Meixi jianding," "Yizhu ting," "Zunwen 
zhai tushu ji," and "Yiqing lou zhenshang yin," appear on 
such Wang Hui paintings as Mountains and Rivers Clearing after 
5/iow, in the Style of Li Cheng (fig. 74), Landscape after Yan Wengms 
"Multiple Peaks of Mount Wuyi" (fig, 72), Panoramic Views of 
Mountains and Rivers (fig. 73), Thatched Cottage in the Autumn 
Mountains, in the Style oj Wang Meng (Princeton University Art 
Museum), and Travelers amid Streams and Mountains, after Fan Kuan 
(fig. 71). For details, see Kohara 1979, pp. 156—58. 

232. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap. 2, p. i6a. 

233. Ibid., pp. 23b— 24a. 

234. The scroll that has not survived is Landscape after Jurans "Summer 
Mountains." Set Utsumi 1972, p. 41; and Fang Junyi 1998, p. 319. 
The Enjoyment of Life scroll is currently in the Palace Museum, 
Beijing, but has never been published. See Zhongguo gudai shuhua 
tumu 1986— 2001, vol. 22 (2001), p. 421. On Zhongchang Tong 
and the "Essay on the Enjoyment of Life," see Holzman 1996, 
pp. 70—73, which translates the title as "Essay on Good Cheer." 

235. For a brief introduction to the handscroll format as an 
artistic medium, see Silbergeld 1982, pp. 12—13; Wu Hung 
1996, pp. 57-71. 

236. For the development of the "mountains and rivers without 
end" theme in Northern Song painting, see Lee, Sherman E., 
and Fong 1955. For Yan Wengui, see Fong 1975; Shimada 
Hidemasa 1976; and Torma 2002. 

237. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, i, p. 24a. 

238. Ibid., vol. 2, pp. 5b— 6a. 

239. Ibid., p. 13b. 

240. On Liang Qingbiao, see Chen Yaolin 1988. For selected 
paintings from Liang's collection, see Lee, Sherman E., and 
Fong 1955, pp. I— 15. For a detailed study of Summer Mountains, 
see Fong 1975. 

241. Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911, chap, 2, pp. la— ib, 

242. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 838. 

243. Zhao Mengfu's Water Village (fig. 55) bears the "Hanyang Wu 
shi cang shuhua yinji" seal, which indicates that the scroll 
was owned by Wu Zhengzhi either before or after it belonged 
to Singde. See Midian zhulin Shiqu haoji xuhian (1971 ed.), vol. i, 

p. 585. 

244. Ibid, 

245. Translation by Shi-yee Liu. 

246. Wang Hui may also have been influenced by two twelfth- 
century scrolls in the collection of Liang Qingbiao that were 
continuations of Yan Wengui's style: Streams and Mountains 
without End (fig. 76) and Wang Ximeng's A Thousand Miles of 
Rivers and Mountains (Palace Museum, Beijing). 

247. Pei Jingfu 2006, vol. 2, p. 488. On Gao Shiqi, see "Kao 
Shih-ch'i" by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, PP* 4^~^' 

248. Tang Sunhua, Dongjiang shi chao (i^^jg ed.), vol. 2, pp. 12b— 13b, 
128a— 30b. 

249. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 817. 

250. Other sources also name Wang Shan as having taken 
administrative responsibility for the Southern Inspection Tour 
project. See Hearn 1990, pp. 55—56. 

251. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 815, 817—18. 

252. For a detailed discussion of the Southern Inspection Tour project, 
see Heilesen 1980b; Hearn 1988, p. 94; and Hearn 1990. 

253. Qinghui zengyan 1994, p. 815. 

254. Jiang Tingxi, in a poem for Wang Hui's sixtieth birthday 
dated 1691, celebrated the Southern Inspection Tour as images of 
the "grand peace." See ibid., p. 878. 

255. Ibid., pp. 878, 883. 

256. For an insightful discussion of the cultural politics of the 
Kangxi period, see Spence 1976, 

257. On Kangxi s "Great Unity" (Datong) politics, see Hearn 1990, 
pp. 267-72. 

258. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 815, 818. 

259. Frodsham 1967, vol. i, p. 138; and Tokura 1988, p. 163. 

260. See Tokura 1988, pp. 163—69; and Tokura 1996. Wang Ximeng's 
visionary blue-and-green landscape, A Thousand Miles of Rivers 
and Mountains (see note 246 above), exemplified this poetic 
imagery. 

261. For stylistic features of landscapes associated with Jing Hao 
and Guan Tong, see Fong 1984, pp. 27—33; Fong 1996b, 
pp. 121—22. 

262. Chang Chin-Sung 2004, pp. 197—212. 

263. On Fan Qi and his works, see Vinograd 2003. 

264. On Wu Hong, see Rogers and Lee, Sherman E. 1988, 
pp. 171—72, no. 17. 

265. For details, see Chang Chin-Sung 2004, pp. 159-75, 191-97. 

266. For a detailed description of this area as depicted in the Kangxi 
Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour, see Hearn 1990, pp. 161—62. 

267. Qinghui zengyan 1994, pp. 815, 818. 

Art Creates History: Wang Hui and 
The Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour 

Maxwell Hearn 

Wang Hui s chef d'oeuvre arose from a commission to illustrate the Kangxi 
emperor s second Southern Inspection Tour, conducted in 1689* This epic 
undertaking not only affected the painter s career but also marked a watershed in the 
contemporary political landscape. In addition, as the earliest large-scale painting 
project commissioned by a Qing emperor, the work established a precedent for court- 
sponsored commemorative art during Chinas last imperial dynasty (1644— 1911)* 

Begun within two years of Kangxi s triumphant completion of his journey, the 
pictorial documentation of the second Southern Tour (pis* 47—57) reflects the same 
spirit of buoyant confidence that characterizes the account of Kangxi s journey in the 
imperial Diaries.^ Indeed, the painting was envisioned as a complement to the official 
chronicles, and its vivid amplification of the written record makes it a powerfial histo- 
riographic document. As a work created under the supervision of artists and officials 
from Jiangnan ("South of the [Yangzi] River*'), it also testified to the emperor s 
success in recruiting southern scholars and enhanced his image as a patron of the arts 
and devotee of southern culture* 

THE HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TOURS 

The Kangxi emperor (r. 1662— 1722), the second Manchu ruler to govern the former 
Ming dynasty, came to the throne at the age of seven, only eighteen years after the 
Manchus had occupied the Ming capital of Beijing, In his first two decades of rule, 
he was faced with the tasks of asserting his independence from powerfial regents and 
building a base of support that would enable him to control Manchu factionalism* 
Most pressing, however, was the need to exercise his authority over a newly con- 
quered empire* Forcefully demonstrating the Manchus* tenuous control, the Revolt 
of the Three Feudatories (1673—83) threatened both the physical unification of the 
Chinese state and, even more important, its social cohesion and the loyalty of the 
emperors subjects* 

One of Kangxi s greatest challeriges was reshaping perceptions concerning Manchu 
rule* The Manchus wished to present the fall of the Ming royal house and the estab- 
lishment of their own Qing ("Pure**) dynasty as an affirmation of a natural cycle of 
change in which the new dynasty*s legitimacy stemmed from its rightful inheritance of 
Heavens mandate* Since the collapse of a ruling house was traditionally attributed to 

PI. 47. Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and 
assistants. The Kangxi Emperor's 
Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Three, 
datable to 1698. Kangxi s departure 
from Jinan (detail, pi. 49) 

its loss of virtue, a new dynasty could justifiably 
claim that moral renewal and the restoration of 
virtuous rulership were implicit in its political 
success. Yet the reality must have seemed quite 
different at the time. The Manchus, a non-Chinese 
people with their own language and customs rooted 
in a nomadic tradition, were perceived as barbarians. 
Their brutal conquest of southern China, in which 
the populations of whole cities were massacred, only 
deepened the enmity felt toward the invaders, while 
their inflexible requirement that all Chinese men 
adopt the Manchu queue must have underlined the 
threat to Chinese culture that their rulership implied,^ 
As hopes of a Ming restoration evaporated, the 
double-stafSng (Manchu and Chinese) of official 
positions, the new styles in clothing, and the lack of 
linguistic skills and cultural sophistication displayed 
by the first-generation Manchu overlords must have 
left the scholar class in shock. From the Manchu 
point of view, the myth of their military might must 
have been precariously balanced by the reality of 
Chinas vast size and the staggering numerical 
superiority of its population. 

The emperor found it necessary for his own sur- 
vival to draw support from southern Chinese scholars 
as a means of counterbalancing the power held by 
the leaders of the Manchu banners (the military 
units under which the Qing army was organized). To 
recruit able scholars to join his government, Kangxi 
presented himself as a worthy Confucian monarch. 
Imperial tours of inspection, undertaken by Chinese 
emperors since ancient times, were a significant means 
for him to enhance his image as a legitimate ruler 
while also extending his political control. Through 
such journeys, Kangxi could implement a personal 
style of government, familiarize himself with local 
conditions, check on the effectiveness of provincial 
bureaucrats, broaden his contacts with officials, 
scholars, and gentry outside the circumscribed politi- 
cal sphere of the capital, and practice a "hands-on" 
involvement in local affairs.^ At the same time, the 
tours served as a grandiose stage for ceremonial 
pronouncements and ritual acts that emphasized his 
commitment to Chinese modes of rulership and 
his identification with traditional Confucian ideals, 
which enabled him to assert his legitimacy as ruler 
of "all under Heaven." 

While Kangxi also made inspection tours to the 
north, east, and west, the most important by far were 
his six tours of the South in 1684, 1689, 1699, 1703, 
1705, and 1707,^ These tours through the Yangzi Delta 
area, the economic and cultural heart of the empire, 
encompassed the key urban centers of present-day 

Jiangsu and northern Zhejiang Provinces, A large 
portion of the empire s yearly tax revenues came 
from this area, and Jiangnan (modern Jiangsu and 
Anhui Provinces) consistently led all other provinces 
in the number of successful metropolitan degree 
(jinshi) candidates,^ In spite of the regions financial 
and scholarly importance, however, during the first 
thirty years of the Qing dynasty, Yangzi Delta men 
were excluded from significant political power.^ After 
Yangzi Delta resources and manpower proved crucial 
in suppressing the Revolt of the Three Feudatories, 
however, the need to integrate this region into the 
Qing empire became apparent. Just as the region 
traded loyal support for political power, Kangxi 
effectively utilized Jiangnan as a source of political 
and scholarly talent to help him overcome the 
powerful Manchu and northern Chinese factions that 
dominated the metropolitan bureaucracy during the 
early years of his reign.^ 

The first two Southern Tours coincided with 
major shake-ups in factional alignments within the 
bureaucratic power structure. Kangxi embarked on 
the first tour shortly after the dissolution of the 
influential Manchu Plain Yellow Banner faction led 
by Songgotu (d. 1703), Songgotu s dismissal from 
office on April 4, 1683, marked a watershed in 
Kangxi s career, the twenty-nine-year-old emperor 
emerging as a significant political force in his own 
right. The second Southern Tour followed the fall 
from power of Mingju (1635— 1708) and his North- 
ern Faction in 1689.^ Coming at moments of relative 
stability before new factional alignments could 
crystallize, the tours gave Kangxi the opportunity to 
assess conditions outside the confines of the Beijing 
bureaucracy and recruit fresh support while placing 
himself in the position of mediator between conflict- 
ing interest groups. 

The first Southern Tour was conceived as part 
of a program of inspections that were eventually to 
include the west, north, and east as well.^ These tours, 
which featured visits to Mount Wutai, the sacred 
Buddhist mountain in the west, and Mount Tai, the 
Eastern Sacred Peak, were in part pilgrimages of 
thanksgiving following Kangxi s military triumph over 
Wu Sangui (1612— 1678) and the Three Feudatories 
rebels as well as his political victory over Songgotu. 
On November 5, 1684, Kangxi began what was 
initially called an Eastern Tour, but when he crossed 
the Yellow River, heading south, this sojourn offi- 
cially became the first Southern Tour," 

The principal feature of Kangxi s first tour into 
Shandong Province was his ascent of Mount Tai and 
performance of a Heaven- worshiping ceremony, 

130 

.Kaifeng 
Zhcngzhou 

H 1^ N .^ N 

'Xuzhou 

T I a;n g s u 

Cii'vojfJVGaoyoti 

.Taizhou 

Yangsfihou 
jurong' 

Wuxi 

.Wuhu 

Yellow Sea 

Y'mn^^ : ^^Suzhoir' Shanghai 

II I! ft I: 

Wuhan ^ 

^'■^ Xuancheng^ 

I Tour 

TOO KM 

J49iint Huang^ 

Shcxiaii 

«Songjtang 

Hangzhot/t 

^.Shaoxing 

^Ningbo 

Map 2. Route of 
Kangxi's 1689 Southern 
Inspection Tour, show- 
ing modern political 
boundaries 

From the Qin dynasty (221—207 B.C.E.) onward, 
Mount Tai had been an important objective of 
imperial pilgrimages/^ Emperors traveled there in 
order to perform the Feng and Shan ceremonies, by 
which they reported to Heaven and Earth on the 
status of the empire and olfered thanks. The suc- 
cessful execution of these ceremonies was a potent 
sign that the monarch possessed Heavens mandate. 

Although the offering Kangxi made during this tour 
is not identified by name, its ritual importance was 
not lost on the members of his retinue, one of whom 
proposed that he take this opportunity to proclaim 
the beginning of a new reign era/"* From Mount Tai, 
Kangxi continued southward overland to the Yellow 
River, where he spent several days surveying the dikes 
and channels around the confluence of the Yellow 

131 

and Huai rivers. From the confluence point, he 
traveled by boat down the Grand Canal to Yangzhou 
and Suzhou; he also made an excursion to Nanjing, 
Kangxi arrived back in Beijing on January 4, 1685, 
scarcely one month before the lunar New Year. 

This first Southern Tour, made less than a year 
after the defeat of rebel forces, resembled a scouting 
party more than a triumphal procession. Although 
Kangxi showed a keen interest in river conservation 
work and made a show of inquiring after local 
conditions, his most important objectives must have 
been to gauge the feelings of southern gentry, to gain 
their acceptance, and to enlist their support. Through- 
out the tour Kangxi made every effort to play the role 
of a traditional Confucian monarch and to make 
gestures of reconciliation toward Ming loyalists. In 
Nanjing he personally offered libations at the tomb 
of the Hongwu emperor (r. 1368—98), the first ruler 
of the Ming dynasty. 

On January 28, 1689, the emperor left Beijing on 
his second inspection tour of the South (map 2). 
His journey encompassed Mount Tai, the Yangzi 
and Yellow rivers, the Grand Canal, and the most 
important urban centers of the empire. He arrived 
back in the capital on April 8, one day after his 
thirty-fifth birthday (thirty-six 5wi). 

By all accounts, Kangxi s seventy-one-day sojourn 
was a tremendous success. Not only did he accom- 
plish his proclaimed objectives "to review river work, 
examine local customs, and inquire about civil 
administration/'^^ but his attentive observation of 
traditional protocol and ritual, along with well-timed 
appeals to the self-interest of the populace through 
tax remissions, audiences, and the bestowal of gifts 
upon institutions and individuals, won tumultuous 
public approval. His tour became a triumphal 
procession during which he rode a wave of public 
gratitude for returning the empire to peace and 
prosperity. At least this is how it is presented in 
contemporary official chronicles. 

The 1689 journey also established the basic 
pattern for all subsequent Southern Tours. On each 
day of travel the emperor covered about fifteen miles 
(twenty-five kilometers) on land or thirty miles (fifty 
kilometers) on water, the entire tour encompassing a 
distance of roughly 2,000 miles (3,300 kilometers).^^ 
Traversing the entire length of the Grand Canal as 
well as the overland route connecting the Manchu 
capital to the South, this tour enabled the emperor 
to inspect the most vital economic and communica- 
tions arteries of the empire. More important, the 
various functions and ritual ceremonies that Kangxi 
enacted — even his very presence among the popu- 

lace — served to confirm his legitimacy and demon- 
strate his intention to rule his Chinese subjects as a 
Chinese-style monarch. On this tour he again led 
his officials in a ritual sacrifice to the deity of 
Mount Tai and personally offered libations at the 
tomb of the first Ming emperor. In addition, he 
made a special excursion from Hangzhou to the 
Temple of the Great Yu in Shaoxing in order to 
carry out a ceremony honoring the legendary tamer 
of the floodwaters and founder of the Xia dynasty 
(ca. 2100— 1600 B.C.E.). 

THE SELECTION OF WANG HUI 

Kangxi clearly appreciated the value of traditional 
historiographic institutions for fostering the appear- 
ance of political legitimacy. Once the Southern Inspection 
Tour project was proposed, he must have recognized 
its potential benefit as an instrument of statecraft. 
Indeed, the content and appearance of the Southern 
Inspection Tour paintings were governed as much by 
inherited traditions and past models as they were by 
actual events. Wang Hui s artistry proved to encom- 
pass not merely the creation of a beautiful landscape 
painting but also the ability to mold the raw material 
of the tour, as recorded in various written accounts, 
into a culturally significant narrative. 

The choice of Wang Hui, the preeminent artist 
of the day, as director of the project insured that 
awareness of the painting would have been wide- 
spread.^^ Already in the early i68os Wang Hui had 
embarked on a series of ambitious panoramic 
landscape handscroUs the main purpose of which, 
as Chin-Sung Chang has suggested in his essay in 
this volume, was to demonstrate his qualifications 
to depict an imperial inspection tour. Chang has 
shown that Wang Hui produced several long pan- 
oramic landscapes for the Grand Secretary Wu 
Zhengzhi (1618— 1691) and his brother Wu Kaizhi 
(active 1680—90) in a conscious effort to win this 
commission. He has argued persuasively that Wang s 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks (pi. 44A,b), a handscroll 
measuring more than sixty-one feet (eighteen meters) 
in length, was painted for Wu Zhengzhi. It seems 
very likely that Wang hoped the work — completed 
in the seventh lunar month of 1684, just four months 
before Kangxi s visit to Nanjing on his first Southern 
Inspection Tour — might be presented to the court 
as a way of inspiring the emperor or his courtiers to 
commission a pictorial record of that tour. Chang has 
suggested that, but for the sudden death of the 
Manchu Singde (Nalan Xingde, 1654—1685), Wang 
Hui s chief advocate at this time, Wang may have 

gained a commission as early as 1685 to illustrate 
Kangxi s first tour* 

Five years later, when Kangxi made his second, 
even grander Southern Tour, Wang Hui s stature 
among influential officials in the capital was well 
established. While there is no record in the Diaries 
or the Veritable Records of the Kangxi Reign (Shilxi) of 
either the decision to initiate this project or the 
method of Wang Hui s selection, Wang Shan (1645— 
1728) and Song Junye (ca, 1662— 1713), the two high- 
ranking officials mentioned in connection with the 
project once it got under way, were both intimately 
connected to Wang Hui s circle. Wang Shan, who 
was later to become a grand secretary, was the eighth 
son of Wang Hui s mentor, Wang Shimin (1592— 
1680).^° Song Junye, an amateur artist who once 
studied painting with Wang Hui, was in attendance 
on the emperor in Suzhou during Kangxi s 1689 tour 
and subsequently enjoyed a long involvement with 
court-sponsored patronage of the arts.^^ Although 
Song s surviving works show him to be a very minor 
talent who could not possibly have produced the 
Southern Inspection Tour, his central administrative role 
in its creation is attested to by the Gazetteer of the Qing 
Dynasty (^Qingchao tongzhi), in which his name is the only 
one to appear under the entry for the painting.^^ 

In the absence of a clearly defined imperial paint- 
ing academy, Song Junye and Wang Shan apparently 
functioned as bureaucratic intermediaries between 
select artists and the throne. They are specifically 
mentioned as organizers responsible for recruiting 
painters in the biographies of Yang Jin (1644—1728) 
and Gu Fang (active ca. 1690— 1720), two of Wang 
Hui s disciples and collaborators on the project.'^'* 
This bureaucratic fimction is confirmed in a colo- 
phon, dated March 31, 1828, to the draft version of 
Scroll Seven written by a descendant of Song Junye 
named Song Xiang (1748— 1862), which reads in part 
as follows: 

The former official [Song] Junye was summoned to attend 
the emperor in the South Library [Nan Shufang] in the 
gtngwu year of Kangxi [i6go]. There he respectfully 
received the command to paint the Magnificent Record of 
the Southern Tour [Nanxun shengdian]. Consequently^ he 
invited Wang Shigu [Wang Hui] and other famous masters 
to gather at his residence in the capital^ where they resided^ 
deliberated^ and laid out [their work] until the yihsiiyear 
[l6gj]^ when he announced the completion of altogether 
twelve [drcft] handscrolls [depicting the route] from the capi- 
tal to Zhejiang^"^ 

Song Junye s involvement is fiarther confirmed by 
the text of the title strip on the draft for Scroll 

Ten: "Draft of the first scroll illustrating the South- 
ern Tour Return Journey of the Shengzu Ren 
Huangdi [the Kangxi emperor]; presented by 
Song Junye, executed by Wang Hui" (fig. 83).^^ 
Although Song Xiang s colophon tactfially 
suggests that Kangxi gave the order for the commis- 
sion, it is unlikely that this would have come about 
without a concrete proposal from Wang Shan and 
Song Junye. As intimates of the emperor, they would 
have had many opportunities to discuss the project 
in detail, explaining how it would be administered 
and who would do the work. Their close connection 
to Wang Hui made his selection as artistic director 
almost inevitable. 

Fig. 83. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717) and assis- 
tants. The Kangxi Emperor's 
Southern Inspection Tour, 
Draft Scroll Ten (detail, 
title strip), datable to 
1694—95. Handscroll, 
ink and light color on 
paper, 26 in, x 80 ft. 
5 in. (66.1 cm X 24.5 m). 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

133 

PI. 48. The Kangxi Emper- 
or's Southern Inspection Tour, 
Scroll Three. Rolled 
handscroll with its jade 
clasp, satin damask 
wrapper, and lacquer box 

ARTISTIC AND POLITICAL GOALS 

The appointment of Wang Hui guaranteed that the 
Southern Inspection Tour would be much more than a 
literal depiction of Kangxi s journey. From a practical 
point of view, since the artist had not accompanied 
the emperor on the tour and did not arrive in Beijing 
to begin work on the project until two years after the 
trip was completed, he could hardly be expected to 
reconstruct all the actual events just as they hap- 
pened. Instead, he had the task of conceptualizing 
the tour: combining references to the important 
places Kangxi visited with the major events that took 
place* The painting is an interpretation of what 
mattered about the trip, what made it significant to 
the emperor and to his subjects. It is also a work of 

art with its own compositional and dramatic con- 
straints and conventions. For practical, political, and 
artistic reasons, therefore, a literal depiction of 
Kangxi s journey was impossible. 

In constructing his narrative, Wang Hui inge- 
niously drew upon traditional precedents. His 
descriptions of places and events were inevitably 
filtered through the thick lens of dramatic and 
pictorial convention. Like the composer of a literary 
epic, Wang Hui had to take the disparate details of 
the journey and develop them into a coherent, unified 
whole. In literary terms, his final pictorial narrative 
combines elements of the historical chronicle with an 
allegorical narrative. Because its basic framework was 
dictated by the specific places and events recorded in 
the Diaries, the painting exhibits features of both 

134 

traditional topographic depictions and episodic 
history paintings. At the same time, it functions as a 
novel in that the narrative possesses several layers of 
meaning. The Southern Inspection Tour shows Kangxi on 
his journey, but it manipulates the setting and 
content to elevate him above the mundane factual 
world, placing him on an allegorical plane where his 
deeds reflect his conformity to traditional cultural 
archetypes of rulership.^^ On this stage, Kangxi is 
presented as a sage-king. What mattered most in the 
Southern Inspection Tour was that the cultural resonances 
of Kangxi s deeds be manifested and made clear; that 
as the hero of the narrative, Kangxi would be seen to 
behave in the same manner as the loftiest rulers and 
culture heroes of the past. The comparison of Kangxi 
to earlier culture heroes was not merely flattery on 

the part of Wang Hui: throughout his trip the 
emperor consciously sought to present himself as an 
ideal ruler, while his officials and subjects never tired 
of comparing him to the sage-kings of antiquity. 

This aspect of the painting raises the issue of the 
audience for whom it was created. Never catalogued 
as part of the regular painting collection, it was 
apparently kept in a separate imperial archive, such 
as those devoted to portraits and maps. Since very 
few people ever saw the Southern Inspection Tour^ the 
painting s intended audience may well have been the 
future generations of monarchs and historians who 
would ultimately pass judgment upon the Kangxi 
emperor. Yet the work certainly had a tremendous 
impact on contemporary society, a significance that 
lay more in the act of creation than in the viewing. 
The prominence accorded to the project in all of 
Wang Hui s biographies demonstrates that knowl- 
edge of the imperial commission was widespread. 
Moreover, as the first major imperial commission 
promulgated by a Manchu emperor, its effect on 
artists of the time is unmistakable. 

For Kangxi to be a patron of the arts redounded 
to the glory of both emperor and subject by demon- 
strating that an appreciation of Chinese cultural 
forms was necessary to successfully rule the empire. 
As with Kangxi s adoption of the institutions of 
the court diarist, court lecturer, and scholars of 
the South Library, the creation of the Southern 
Inspection Tour reveals a sensitivity to the power of 
historiography in molding contemporary as well 
as future opinion. The lesson was not lost on the 
Qianlong emperor (r. 1736—95), Kangxis grandson, 
who was deeply influenced by Kangxi s Southern 
Tours and the use of art as an implement for 
shaping history.^^ 

PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION 

The twelve long handscroUs that collectively make 
up the Picture of the Kangxi Southern Inspection Tour 
(^Kangxi nanxuntu) were dispersed sometime before 
1949. Ten of the twelve finished silk paintings and 
five of the preliminary drafts on paper are currently 
known (table i). By their very size and material 
opulence, the scrolls proclaim the majesty and 
magnificence of the Kangxi emperor. Not only does 
the set epitomize the highest standard of early Qing 
craftsmanship, it also constitutes the largest and most 
lavish surviving example of handscroU art. The very 
act of uncovering and unrolling one of these scrolls 
entails a lengthy ritual that provides numerous 
reminders of Kangxi s imperial stature. 

The viewers first encounter with a Southern Inspect 
Hon Tour scroll is with an imposing black-and-gold 
lacquer casket embellished with incised patterns of 
five-claw dragons amid waves and clouds (pL 48)* 
Inside, the scroll is swaddled in an imperial yellow 
satin-damask wrapping decorated on the outside with 
two types of five-claw dragons in warp-float rondels 
and lined with salmon-pink silk figured with a diaper 
of clouds amid scrolling floral vines. The roUed-up 
handscroll is further secured with a wide purple-and- 
white ribbon fastened by an immense jade clasp, 
while the two roller ends are capped with cloisonne 
medallions, A title strip mounted along the "eye- 
brow" stave is inscribed with the title, scroll number, 
and contents. Each immense handscroll weighs over 
seven pounds and measures almost twenty-seven 
inches (seventy centimeters) in height and more 
than four inches (ten centimeters) in diameter. At 
the beginning of each there is a frontispiece inscribed 
with a text summarizing the dramatic high points of 
the ensuing painting. The paintings are all 26 % inches 
(67,8 centimeters) in height and range from forty- 
six to eighty-six feet (fourteen to twenty-six meters) 
in length. For imperial viewings, the scrolls would 
probably have been handled by two assistants, one 
at either side of the unrolled portion, 

THE THEMATIC PROGRAM OF THE 

SOUTHERN INSPECTION TOUR 

In condensing Kangxis journey into twelve long 
handscrolls, Wang Hui had to abbreviate or omit 
those portions of the tour that had little dramatic 
interest. Each scroll focuses on one important theme 
connected with the tour — a political event, a ritual 
act performed by Kangxi, or a significant site that he 
visited. Scroll One takes the pomp and ceremony 
surrounding Kangxi s departure from the capital as 
its subject. Scroll Two illustrates Kangxi s entry into 
Jinan, the provincial capital of Shandong Province, 
and his subjects' displays of gratitude for his remis- 
sion of taxes. Scroll Three depicts the tour route 
through the spectacular mountain scenery of central 
Shandong Province, focusing on Mount Tai, where 
Kangxi performed a ceremony honoring the deity of 
the mountain. In Scroll Four the emperors support 
of river conservation work and of efforts to bring the 
Yellow River under control is highlighted. 

Scroll Five is presently missing, but written 
accounts indicate that the most important events 
in this segment of the tour were Kangxi s remission 
of taxes in Jiangnan Province and his visit to the 
commercial metropolis of Yangzhou; the retinues 

shift from horseback to canal boat would likely have 
been a third narrative focus. The major event com- 
memorated in Scroll Six must have been Kangxi s 
crossing of the Yangzi River. Of this scroll, only the 
final section is extant, and it illustrates a portion of 
the Grand Canal culminating with the city of Chang- 
zhou. Scroll Seven celebrates Kangxi s entrance into 
the great metropolis of Suzhou, the economic and 
cultural capital of the empire. The location of the 
final version of Scroll Eight is unknown, but the 
extant paper drafi: chronicles the tour route firom 
Suzhou to the outskirts of Hangzhou, focusing 
on the pomp and ceremony that accompanied the 
emperors crossing the provincial boundary between 
Jiangnan and Zhejiang. 

Scroll Nine dramatizes Kangxi s excursion from 
Hangzhou to Shaoxing to perform a special sacrifice 
at the Temple of the Great Yu, The most important 
event of Kangxi s return journey — his visit to the 
former Ming "Southern Capital/* Nanjing — is 
chronicled in Scroll Ten, which emphasizes Kangxi s 
ritual actions in Nanjing as well as the prosperity of 
the city. Scroll Eleven highlights Nanjing s strategic 
importance and the value of maintaining a powerful 
naval force by depicting Kangxi s two-day sail down 
the Yangzi River from Nanjing to the mouth of the 
Grand Canal, The final painting in the series. Scroll 
Twelve, focuses on the ritual ceremony welcoming 
Kangxi back to Beijing. Omitting the entire route 
from the Yangzi River to the outskirts of Beijing, a 
distance the entourage took two weeks to cover, it 
depicts Kangxi s grand entrance into the capital and 
palace precincts,^^ 

WANG HUI AND A NEW COURT STYLE 

Prior to the creation of the Southern Inspection Tour^ not 
only was there no formal painting academy to define 
Qing-court style, there was little indication of what 
constituted Manchu taste. When Wang Hui arrived 
in Beijing in 1691 to begin work on the project, his 
first challenge was to formulate a style appropriate 
to the task, one that would accommodate his own 
artistic heritage while also fulfilling the narrative and 
decorative demands of imperial historiography. 

Wang Hui s career had prepared him well for this 
task. By the time of his commission he had achieved 
an unparalleled reputation in the South, where he was 
celebrated as the "painting sage'' who had realized 
the Orthodox ideal expounded by Dong Qichang 
(1555— 1636) of achieving a "Great Synthesis" of all 
the earlier styles of the Song (960—1279) and Yuan 
(1271— 1368) periods. After mastering various classical 

Table I, The Extant Scrolls from The Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour 

ScroU 

Route Depicted 

Dates 

Distance Depicted 
Miles (Kilometers) 

Collection 

Length 

Feet (Meters)^ 

One 

Beijing (Yongding 
Gate) to Nan Yuan 

January 28 

6(10) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

51(15.6) 

Two 

Pingyuan to Ji'nan 

February 3—5 

56(90) 

Musee Guimet, Paris 

45(13.8) 

Three 

Ji*nan to Mount Tai to 
Mengyin 

February 5—8 

1 24 (200) 

Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York 

46 (13,9) 

Four 

Shandong-Jiangsu 
border (Honghuapu) 
to confluence of Yel- 
low and Huai Rivers 

February 12—13 

96 (155) 

Musee Guimet, Paris 

51(15.6) 

Five*^ 

( Yangzhou to Yangzi 
River?) 

(Zhenjiang?) to Ben- 
niu to Changzhou 

February 19—20 

12+ (20+) 

Private Collection, 
Phoenix 

16+ (4.8+) 

Seven^ 

Wuxi to Suzhou and 
Tiger Hill 

February 22—23 

31 (50) 

University of Alberta, 
Mactaggart Art Col- 
lection, Edmonton 

72 (21.9) 

Eight^ 

Suzhou to Tangqi 

February 25—27 

87(140) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

64(19,7) 

Nine 

Qiantang River to 
Shaoxing andYu 
Temple 

March 4—5 

37(60) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

73 (2^-3) 

Ten 

Jurong to Nanjing; 
military inspection 

March 1 6— 20 

28 (45) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

84 (25.6) 

Eleven 

Nanjing to Jin Shan 

March 21, 22 

53(85) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

76 (23,1) 

Twelve 

Beijing: Yongding 
Gate to Hall of Su- 
preme Harmony 

April 8 

3(5) 

Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

86 (26a) 

Total 

71 Days 

533(860) 

ca. 664 (ca. 2024)^ 

a. The width of the scrolls is 26 -finches (67.8 centimeters). 

b. The present location of this scroll is unknown. 

c. Only a portion of the original scroll is extant. 

d. Draft versions also exist for Scroll Seven (Jiangsu Provincial Museum, Nanjing), Scroll Eleven (Shenyang Palace Museum), and Scrolls Eight, Ten, and Twelve (all 
Palace Museum, Beijing). 

e. Scroll Eight survives only in a paper draft version. Its width, 25 Vs inches (65.7 centimeters), makes it slightly narrower than the finished silk version. 

f Assuming that the lost silk version of Scroll Eight is no shorter than the draft and that Scrolls Five and Six each measure at least forty-six feet (fourteen meters), the 
total length of the twelve scrolls would exceed 738 feet (225 meters). 

Figs. 84, 85. Wang Hui 
(1632— 1717) and follow- 
ers. Landscapes after Ancient 
Masters, dated 1692. Two 
leaves in an album of 
sixteen paintings, ink or 
ink and color on paper, 
each leaf 11 x 12 % in. 
(28 X 30.7 cm). The 
Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York, Gift 
of Marie-Helene and 
Guy A. Weill, 2000 
(2000.665.2) 

This page: Xu Min (active 
ca. 1690— 1722). Leaf B, 
Water Village, after Zhao 
Lingrang, ink and color 
on paper 

Opposite: Gu Fang (active 
ca. 1690-1720). Leaf M, 
Pavilion by a Stream with 
Distant Mountains, after 
Wang Fu, ink on paper 

A 

models, in the 1680s Wang made major strides toward 
recreating a monumental landscape manner in a series 
of long handscrolls incorporating Northern Song 
idioms* Combining this landscape mode with the 
narrative sty^le epitomized by the early-twelfth-century 
painter Zhang Zeduan in Spring Festival on the River (see 
figs. 118, 122), Wang provided himself with a pictorial 
structure that could harmoniously accommodate both 
dramatic landscape scenery (see pi. 49) and detailed 
cityscapes (see pL 52A— e). He transformed these Song 
motifs with calligraphic brushwork and compositional 
conventions derived from Yuan and Ming scholar- 
artists. Wang further enriched his landscape passages 
with the blue-and-green palette that had been associ- 
ated since Song times with visions of paradise or an 
antique golden age. This synthesis, incorporating 
elements of the academic tradition but based primarily 
upon literati ideals of expressive brushwork, estab- 
lished a new court orthodoxy that wotJd become the 
basis for most later imperially sponsored Qing painting. 

Wang Hui s choice of Song dynasty models reflects 
something of the spirit of the times, which witnessed 
a revival of the Northern Song monumental land- 
scape manner. Like his Song predecessors, Wang 
sought to present an encyclopedic vision, to encom- 
pass the vastness and multiplicity of the natural and 
man-made worlds through a minutely observed, 
intricately described painting style. Their shared goal 
was to create an idealized rather than a literal image 
of life. Wang s narrative, in all its manifestations, 
aimed for *'truth'' rather than "reality,** for the arche- 
type rather than the particular and mundane. Whereas 
Song painters described physical appearances to 
capture paradigmatic images of nature, Wang worked 
on a higher level of abstraction that also conveyed his 
command of earlier painting styles. Expressive brush- 
work and abstract compositional patterns were more 
important than precise descriptive detail. 

In addition, Wang Hui gready expanded the scale of 
his work to encompass a new, programmatic approach. 

138 

The immense size of the paintings and their staggering 
amount of detail — including more than thirty-seven 
thousand figures — overwhelm the viewer with the gran- 
deur and magnitude of Kangxis Second Tour, but they 
also call attention to Wang Hui s mastery in creating 
such a painting. Dividing the journey into twelve scrolls, 
Wang systematically explored the different landscapes 
and cityscapes encompassed by the tour as well as the 
various roles of the emperor and the changing deploy- 
ment and formations of his military escort and official 
retinue. His ambition in the Southern Inspection Tour was 
to encompass a microcosm of the Chinese world, but a 
world that was transformed through his art 

DRAFT AND FINISHED VERSIONS, MASTER 

AND workshop: the technical stages 

OF CREATION 

To create a suitably grand vision of Kangxi s tour, 
Wang Hui had to enlist the help of a team of 

assistants who would accept his artistic leadership 
and subordinate their own stylistic identities to his. 
In part this was a question of the division of labor: 
how could Wang best utilize the special talents of the 
other artists available to work on the project? Ulti- 
mately, however, Wang Hui had to transform his 
personal style into conventions that assistants could 
imitate but that preserved something of his artistic 
identity and standards. 

Since the finished paintings bear no artists* 
signatures, seals, or other identifying information, 
more circumstantial evidence must be examined to 
determine which artists were then in the capital who 
might have assisted Wang Hui in this project. A 
concentration of collaborative works by Wang and a 
number of other southern painters dated to the years 
1691—95 makes it clear that he recruited students and 
younger professionals from his home region to accom- 
pany him to Beijing.^^ Yang Jin and Gu Fang, his most 
frequent collaborators in these group works, were also 

tmmMM 

his two most prominent followers. Their role in the 
Southern Inspection Tour is confirmed by their biogra- 
phies*^*^ The other artists who participated in these 
collaborative works were all minor professional 
painters from the South: Wang Yun (1652— after 1735), 
a specialist in figures, architecture, and intricately 
detailed landscapes from Yangzhou;^^ Xu Min (active 
ca. 1690— 1722), a figure and flower painter from Suzhou 
who later collaborated on The Kangxi Etnperor^s Sixtieth 
Birthday Cekbrationf^ Yu Yuan (active ca. 1681— 1715), a 
specialist in bird-and-flower painting from Yangzhou 
who made his home in Changshu and was a pupil of 
Wang Hui;^^ and Wu Zang, an otherwise unknown 
artist. The fact that Song Junye was also a frequent 
contributor adds to the likelihood that these collabora- 
tive works were an outgrowth of this group s participa- 
tion in the Southern Inspection Tour project. 

Collaborative works were one way in which Wang 
Hui could develop the skills of his assistants and 
foster a more cohesive painting style. Landscapes after 
Ancient Masters, an album of sixteen paintings dated to 
the seventh lunar month of 1692, elucidates how 
Wang and his disciples worked together. The album, 
which includes leaves by Wang Hui, Yang Jin, Xu Min 
(fig. 84), Gu Fang (fig. 85), and Wang Yun, shows the 
artists studying and copying a specific corpus of 
models.^^ In this way Wang Hui molded his disciples' 
artistic development and defined a uniform stylistic 
standard for the Southern Inspection Tour, 

While many artists contributed to the Southern 
Inspection Tour, it is clear from Wang Hui s biography 
that he served as the master artist who supervised and 
coordinated the others: 

From everywhere lofty talents and skilled artists were 
assembled in the capital. All mixed ink^ moistened their 
hrushtips^ spread out the silk^ looked at each other and racked 
their brains^ not daring to start painting and waiting for 
Mr Wang to speak. The master^ dressed in hermit's garb ^ sat 

Fig, 86. Draft Scroll Ten: detail, underdrawing for mules. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 87. Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and assistants. The Kangxi Empero/s 
Southern Inspection Tour, Draft Scroll Eight, datable to 1694—95. Detail, 
emperors presence indicated by parasol. Handscroll, ink and light 
color on paper, 25% in. x 64 ft. 5% in. (65.7 cm x 19.6 m). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 88. Draft Scroll Ten: detail, repainted horse. Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

Fig. 89. Draft Scroll Eight: detail, amended figures. Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

140 

on a dais and assumed leadership. He stared straight ahead^ 
concentrated jor a long time^ and finally specified composition 
and execution^ saying: ^'Here voe place towns^ there we place 
mountains and rivers^ here people are waiting for the imperial 
traveler^ the entourage looks like this^ imperial resting places 
like that J and here is the emperor himself in procession/^ 
Mr Wang led the work^ painted here and there over the 
whole stretch of varied landscapes until the entire work was 
ready. The artists followed his directions^ and now and again 
Mr Wang added some strokes of extraordinary beauty. When 
the pictures were finished^ they were shown to the emperor.^^ 

The suggestion in the biography that Wang Hui s 
primary task was laying out the composition and 
providing styHstic guideKnes for his assistants is 
confirmed by several extant draft scrolls (^dinghen or 
fuhen^ done on paper prior to the execution of the 
finished scrolls on silk.**^ These drafts constitute the 
earliest and fullest evidence of the way in which 
important large-scale imperial commissions were 
carried out. 

In spite of their high degree of finish, the draft 
scrolls provided only a general guideline for the 
finished paintings. Differences in composition and 
content reflect a continued process of refinement 
and embellishment on the part of Wang Hui and 
his assistants. Some changes may also represent the 
artists* response to the wishes of their patrons. 

The draft scrolls are almost as large as the finished 
versions but are executed in ink and pale colors on 
paper. The blank sheets of paper were first mounted 
together to facilitate the creation of a continuous 
composition.'^^ Major elements of the composition 
were initially sketched in charcoal or light ink. Once 
the outlines were laid out, ink and color washes were 
used to depict the landscape. Important landscape 
passages — major rock formations and trees — were 
painted by Wang Hui himself, less important pas- 
sages probably by assistants. Figures were added 
next. A detail of the mule train approaching the city 
gate of Jurong (fig. 86) shows that they were often 
sketched in charcoal before being drawn in ink. 
These figures do not resemble the ones in Wang Hui s 
signed paintings and are thus probably also the work 
of assistants. Serving primarily as placeholders, they 
are mostly stock types that lack the variations of 

Fig. 90. Draft Scroll Eight: detail, cutout of a boat pasted onto the 
scroll. Palace Museum, Beijing 

Figs. 91, 92. Draft Scroll Eight: details of left and right borders of 
replaced section, indicating different hands on either side of seam 
lines. Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 93. Scroll Three: underdrawing for landscape (detail, pL 49) 

Fig. 94. Scroll Three: underdrawing for figures (detail, pi. 49) 

pose, costume, and color characteristic of figures in 
the finished version. The emperor is not depicted at 
all, his position being denoted only by the royal 
parasol (fig. 87). 

The presence of additions and corrections to 
these drafts indicates that one or more artistic 
supervisors continued to review and amend the 
character of the work as it progressed. In the draft 
of Scroll Ten the figure of a horse has been redone 
by masking out the original image with white paint 
and drawing over it (fig. 88). In the one for Scroll 
Eight figures have been amended (fig. 89) and boats 
added (fig. 90) by pasting the new images on top of 
the original drawing. Site names were inserted the 
same way using inscribed slips of yellow paper. For 
larger changes, entire segments of the composition 
could be redone. One short section of the Scroll 
Eight draft is a replacement drawn by a diflferent 
artist from the one who executed the landscape 
passages to either side (figs. 91, 92). 

Once Kangxi or Song Junye had approved the final 
drafts, Wang Hui and his assistants could proceed 
with the execution of the finished version (zhen^en). 
First the main components of the design had to be 
sketched in charcoal onto the blank silk (fig. 93). 
Even figures were sometimes sketched out prior to 
being finished in ink and color (fig. 94). Wang may 

Fig. 95. Draft Scroll Ten: detail, trees in courtyard. Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

Fig. 96. Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and assistants. The Kangxi Emperor's 
Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Ten (detail, trees in street), datable to 
1698, Handscroll, ink and colors on silk, 26^/4 in. x 83 ft. u% in. 
(67.8 cm X 25.6 m). Palace Museum, Beijing 

have himself painted key features, which became 
spatial markers for his assistants as they filled in the 
rest of the landscape or cityscape. The consistency 
with which the finished version follows the draft in 
the placement and depiction of trees shows that these 
elements were among the first to be painted in the 
finished scroll. Sometimes such spatial markers are 
not perfectly integrated with other elements: in Scroll 
Ten, a pair of tall trees located within an interior 
courtyard in the draft (fig. 95) ends up in the street in 
the finished scroll (fig. 96). 

The treatment of space is consistently simpler 
and clearer in the finished version. In Scroll Ten, for 
example, the triangular pattern of streets between 
the Tong ji Gate and the Qinhuai River is common 
to both versions, but the jumble of roofs and houses 
in the draft (fig. 97) has been tied together into a 
smaller number of interrelated compounds in the 
finished scroll (fig. 98). The change is especially 
noticeable in the handling of the large garden at 
the center of the triangle. A tall garden rock, barely 

visible in the draft (fig. 99), has become the unifying 
center of the compound in the finished version — 
a vivid azurite accent surrounded by an array of 
logically connected halls that reads as a single 
complex (fig. 100). 

The simplification and patternization of the 
setting in the finished version focus attention on 
the figures, the main bearers of the narrative. This 
emphasis on figures is often reinforced by an up- 
turned ground plane. In the cityscape described 
above, the degree of uplifting is most apparent 
along the left-hand edge of the triangle: in the draft 
the Qinhuai River extends into the distance as far as 
the Lishe Bridge (fig. 97); in the finished version the 
bridge is out of sight beyond the upper margin of 
the painting (fig. 98). 

The draft scrolls still show traces of the process 
by which Wang Hui fit together the separate images 
provided by his various sources, while the finished 
version is consistently more polished. The composi- 
tion is more coherent, individual sites are better 

Top left: Fig. 97. Draft 
Scroll Ten: detail of 
Nanjing, nearTongji 
Gate. Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

Bottom left: Fig. 98. Scroll 
Ten: detail of Nanjing, 
nearTongji Gate. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Top right: Fig, 99. Draft 
Scroll Ten: detail, gar- 
den with rock. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Bottom right: Fig. 100. 
Scroll Ten: detail, gar- 
den with rock. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

143 

integrated into the painting, and the production 
process is less apparent. In the draft of Scroll Ten the 
temple on Cockcrow Mountain, shown in a diagram- 
matic fashion, reflects the conventional site plan that 
served as Wang Hui s initial model (fig* loi). But this 
view of the temple, as if seen from a lofty vantage 
point, is inconsistent with the draft s more frontal 
depiction of foreground houses. In the finished 
version, the disjunction in the representation of space 

has been corrected (fig. 102). The temple has been 
elevated and shown from a more level perspective, 
while the near-ground scene is presented as if seen 
from a high vantage point to allow more room for 
the dramatically important figures. 

Thus, compositional changes between the draft 
and finished version occur not only to clarify spatial 
relationships but also to intensify the drama. In the 
final section of Scroll Eleven, which depicts Kangxi s 
journey down the Yangzi River to the island temple 
of Jin Shan, the draft shows Jin Shan surrounded by 
other sites (fig. 103),^^ but the finished version ends 
with a far more dramatic view of Jin Shan in isola- 
tion, silhouetted against a vast expanse of water 
(fig. 104). 

Occasionally, significant changes in content occur 
between the draft and finished version. In the depic- 
tion of the Parade Field in Scroll Ten, the draft 
shows the archery competition taking place among 
foot soldiers (fig. 105), as the event is described in the 
Diaries,^^ In the finished version, however, mounted 
archers demonstrate their skills (fig. 106). Kangxi did 
sponsor a mounted archery competition in Hang- 
zhou, so this change represents a conflation of events; 
the artists simply distorted reality to maximize 
pictorial drama. The finished version consistently 
provides a greater range of visual information, as 
Wang Hui was able to take advantage of his assis- 
tants* skills to enrich the basic narrative presented in 
the draft. The Parade Field featured in Scroll Ten is 
significantly bigger in the finished version and has 
been embellished with a larger audience. 

The negative impact of Wang Hui s assistants is 
apparent in the many differences between the draft 
and the finished version in the style and quality of 
execution of landscape details. Wang Hui s draft, 
drawn on paper not silk, is freer and more spontane- 
ous. Wang achieves a personal, sketchlike appearance 
by employing a wide range of dry and wet ink tones 
and by fully exploiting the calligraphic potential of 
the brush. Ink tonalities are less varied in the finished 
version, and there is a marked hardening of line. 
Contours become more emphatic and texture strokes 
more mechanical. In the draft tree trunks and foliage 
dots are built up to suggest the organic structure and 
texture of living trees (fig. 107); in the finished version 
trees often appear schematic, becoming flat space 
fiUers that lack any sense of three-dimensionality 
(fig. 108). Rock outcrops in the draft are structured 
from contour lines that are overlain with light and 
dark texture strokes and moss dots to create a rich 
sense of faceted, weathered stone (fig. 109)* Although 
the outcrops preserve their basic configuration in the 

144 

Fig. 103. Wang Hui (1632-1717) and assistants. The Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour, Draft Scroll Eleven (detail, Jin Shan), datable to 1694-95. Handscroll, ink and light 
color on paper, 26 Vs in. x 66 ft. 7 % in. (67 cm x 20.3 m). Shenyang Palace Museum 

Fig. 104. Wang Hui (1632-1717) and assistants. The Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Eleven (detail, Jin Shan), datable to 1698. Handscroll, ink and colors on silk, 
26 % in. X 75 ft. 10 % in. (67.8 cm x 23.1 m). Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 105. Draft Scroll Ten: detail showing parade field with archers. Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 107. Draft Scroll Ten: 
detail, foliage dots. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

146 

finished version, their contour Hnes become stifFer, 
often reinforced by the repetitive appKcation of moss 
dots that give the outlines a hard, carved appearance. 
The sense of surface textures — gritty faceted stones 
and earthen slopes — in the draft is replaced by a 
patternized skein of intersecting contour lines or flat 
applications of w^ash or mineral color (fig. no). The 
blurry ink- wash texture dots of the draft (fig. iii) 
have been transformed into tighter, more mechanical 
lines arrayed like the parallel grooves of a w^ashboard 
(fig. iiz). Such changes reflect the transformation 
of Wang Hui s personal style into a series of brush 
conventions that could be readily repeated by his 
assistants. The result is that forms become more 
abstract: energized individual brushstrokes are 
replaced by flat pattern. 

While Wang Hui s landscape style suffers from 
formalization and homogenization in its workshop 
interpretation, the participation of skilled craftsmen 
benefited the labor-intensive depictions of architec- 
ture and figures, which are finished with great techni- 
cal virtuosity. Figures in the draft scrolls are limited 

Fig. no. Scroll Three: texture 
strokes (detail, pi. 49) 

Fig. 112. Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
and assistants. The Kangxi 
Emperor^s Southern Inspection Tour, 
Scroll Nine (detail, mechani- 
cal contour lines), datable to 
1698. HandscroU, ink and 
colors on silk, 26 % in. x 73 ft. 
I in. (67.8 cm X 22.3 m). Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

to only two or three basic poses and lack distinctive 
features (fig. 113), The finished version remedies 
this by employing smaller figural groups whose 
interactions are meaningfial and who are distin- 
guished by variations in costume, age, pose, and 
the variety of burdens they carry (fig. 114). In the 
draft the figures interact in a limited way; minimal 
effort is expended in enriching narrative content 
(fig. 115). In the finished scrolls subsidiary dramatic 
situations are well developed (fig. 116), and keenly 
observed details of daily life abound (fig. 117). The 
varied costumes and color schemes of the figures 
make them more lively, more solid, less like card- 
board cutouts. Compared with the figures in Song 
models such as Zhang Zeduans Spring Festival on the 
River (fig. 118), these are conventionalized and car- 
toonlike, but the exaggeration in stance and gesture 
gives them tremendous energy and liveliness: not 
one is static or frozen in space. Movement and spirit 
are implicit in every pose. 

The diagrammatic, sketchy architectural complexes 
of the drafts are similarly transformed in the finished 
scrolls into intricately detailed structures organized 
into abstract surface patterns. Typical is the cluster of 
houses inside the Jurong city wall in Scroll Ten. Both 
the draft (fig. 119) and the finished version (fig. 120) 
show seven houses in the left-hand corner of the 
town, but the spacing between them has been regular- 
ized in the finished version: the five fronting on the 
street are aligned in echelon so that the roofline of 
each is clearly silhouetted against the white wall of 
the preceding structure. The draft reflects the scholar- 
amateur approach to architecture, which is informal 
and even careless. The finished version is meticulous 
in the execution of these elements, but still mirrors 
scholarly taste and attitudes in the heightened 
abstraction of forms and diminished interest in 
realism. These shared concerns are apparent when 
the Southern Inspection Tour is compared with Zhang s 
Spring Festival Song painting strives for spatial clarity; 
it pursues the creation of a convincing illusion of 
recession. Qing painting seeks compositional clarity; 
it visualizes space in terms of surface organization. 

Fig. 113. Draft Scroll Ten: detail, figure "types." Palace Museum, Beijing 
Fig. 114. Scroll Ten: detail, varied figures. Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 115. Draft Scroll Ten: detail reflecting minimal narrative content. 
Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 116. Scroll Ten: detail reflecting well-developed narrative. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

148 

THE SOURCES OF CREATION 

Wang Hui made draft scrolls of the Southern Inspection 
Tour to gain the approval of his patrons and guide his 
team of assistants. But these final drafts, incorporat- 
ing solutions to most of the basic pictorial problems 
posed by the commission, could not have been the 
first step in the creation of the Southern Inspection Tour. 
Before the final draft, Wang Hui must have utilized a 
stage of rough sketches to conceptualize the form 
and appearance of the emperor s various activities, 
the changing configuration of his retinue, the sites he 
visited, the landscape through which he passed, and 
the cities where he stayed. Although these earliest 
drafts (jaoben) do not survive, the initial stages of 
Wang s creative process can be reconstructed by 
examining the sources to which the artist himself 
must have turned for inspiration. 

Wang s first challenge was to divide the emperor s 
itinerary into manageable pictorial units. The basic 
narrative structure of the painting was established 
by the sequence of dates and places in the Diaries 
account, but Wang superimposed his own dramatic 
structure upon the simple time and space coordi- 
nates given there. Taking the principal activities of 
Kangxi as his starting point, he divided the journey 
into twelve scrolls Once the dramatic focus of each 
scroll had been determined, Wang could then manipu- 
late the remainder of the itinerary — emphasizing or 
abbreviating portions of the route — to enhance each 
scroll s dramatic impact while preserving the illusion 
of comprehensive coverage. The spatial and temporal 
frames of each scroll were determined primarily by 
the need to highlight the emperor and his actions. As 
a result, scrolls do not encompass equal units of time 
or distance, but vary in the amount of the itinerary 
they cover from half a day and a few miles to four or 
five days and nearly 124 miles (200 kilometers). 

After Wang had apportioned the route among his 
twelve scrolls, he needed to visualize the journey, a 
task that involved the integration of several layers of 
information. First and foremost, Wang had to create 
a coherent narrative structure that would focus on 

Fig. 117, Scroll Ten: detail, street life. Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 118. Zhang Zeduan (active early 12th century). Spring Festival on the 
River (detail, street life). Handscroll, ink and color on silk, 9 % in. x 
17 ft. 4 in, (24.8 X 528.7 cm). Palace Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 119. Draft Scroll Ten: detail, cluster of houses, Jurong. Palace 
Museum, Beijing 

Fig. 120. Scroll Ten: detail, cluster of houses, Jurong. Palace Museum, 
Beijing 

149 

Fig. 121. Unidentified 
artist (Southern Song 
dynasty, 13th century). 
Ten Thousand Miles along 
the Yangzi River (detail, 
opening section). Hand- 
scroll, ink on silk, 
17 '/4 in. X 54 ft. 3 54 in. 
(43.7 cm X 16.5 m). Freer 
Gallery of Art, Smith- 
sonian Institution, 
Washington, D.C., Gift 
of Charles Lang Freer 
(F1911.168) 

Kangxi s principal activities during his tour. This 
structure is manifested in the painting by the series 
of labeled sites identifying Kangxi s stopping places 
and the major landmarks he passed. 

Second, Wang Hui had to conceptualize the land- 
scape of the tour route in a way that would maintain 
the illusion of topographic verisimilitude. Unlike his 
imaginary landscapes, which had no need to conform 
to actual locales, the Southern Tour scrolls had to convinc- 
ingly represent a vast segment of the Chinese empire. 
And, while the emperor s diary might provide the name 
of each night s stopping place, it gave few clues as to 
the nature of the scenery. To construct a plausible 
topographic structure, Wang Hui had to conflate four 
types of available information: the Diaries account of 
the emperor s stopping places, features of various 
regional terrains, political boundaries, and distinctive 
landmarks. The need for a certain level of specificity 
in recording details of the route meant that Wang 
Hui must have turned to cartographic and topographic 
images to fill in the lacunae left by the diary s terse 
account. Primary among these would have been earlier 
maps or woodblock illustrations found in gazetteers 
and pictorial encyclopedias. To further insure their 
recognizability, each important site in the painting 
was identified by a label and each scroll contained a 
preface summarizing the emperors whereabouts and 
principal activities in that segment of his journey. 

Third, Wang Hui had to provide a temporal 
structure for the journey. To accomplish this, he 
introduced numerous seasonal markers that give the 
illusion of a uniform progression of time and form 
a backdrop to the human activity chronicled in the 
scrolls. The Southern Inspection Tour presents a temporal 
continuum that moves from the bleak, leafless 

scenery of the New Year to the blossoms and new 
life of late spring, from the cold dry scenery of the 
North to the verdant, well-watered landscape of the 
Jiangnan region. 

Once the narrative, topographic, and temporal 
requirements of the painting were worked out, Wang 
had to subsume them within a coherent and dramatic 
pictorial structure. Individual sites were first given 
pictorial form and next arranged as a sequence of 
vignettes or narrative episodes, which were then 
connected with passages of generalized landscape 
scenery. The resulting structure of specific sites 
embedded within a broader topographic matrix was 
organized within a larger compositional pattern, 
usually the tripartite schema of classical landscape 
painting. This is where Wang s experience in creating 
panoramic landscapes was invaluable. Each scroll 
could be a variation on a theme: a mountainscape, a 
rivers cape, or a cityscape unified by the tour route — 
a road, a river, or the canal. For each landscape type 
Wang could rely on earlier models. Attributions to 
the eleventh-century master YanWengui (active 
ca. 970—1030) provided the quintessential prototypes 
for mountainscapes, with their winding paths and 
tiny travelers to guide one through the landscape 
(see fig. 60). Several extant early depictions of the 
Yangzi River would have provided examples of 
riverscapes. One such painting. Ten Thousand Miles 
along the Yangzi River ^ a long handscroU datable to the 
thirteenth century that follows the course of the river 
from Sichuan to Zhenjiang, even has one of Wang 
Hui s seals (fig. 121). As with the Southern Inspection 
Tour, this scroll bears numerous labels identifying 
landscape features and towns. Finally, Zhang Zeduans 
Spring Testival on the River (figs. 118, 122), or one of its 

150 

many later imitations, would have been a useful 
source for cityscapes/^ 

SCROLL three: the eternal landscape 

Among the twelve scrolls that make up the Southern 
Inspection Tour, Scroll Three, which depicts the tour 
route from the capital of Shandong Province past 
Mount Tai to Mengyin, comes closest to being a pure 
depiction of landscape (pL 49). The Diaries account 
of the action depicted in the scroll is brief It notes 
that, after arriving in Jinan on the morning of 
February 5, Kangxi viewed some of the towns scenic 
sights, then departed that afternoon and traveled 
another sixteen miles (twenty-five kilometers) to the 
village of Zhangxia, where he spent the night. The 
next day the emperor arrived at Mount Tai, where he 
once again displayed his veneration for this sacred 
deity by leading "civil and military officials in perform- 
ing a ceremony" at the Eastern Peak Temple (Dong 
Yue Miao) in the town of Tai'an,^^ After leaving 
Tai' an, Kangxi passed the next five days uneventfully 
as he proceeded southward toward the Yellow Riven 

The preface to Scroll Three magnifies those 
aspects of the tour that show Kangxi to be a virtuous 
monarch: the rejoicing people of Jinan and Taiwan and 
the auspicious signs surrounding his ritual homage to 
Mount Tai: 

The third scroll respectfully depicts His Majesty during his 
stopover in Jinan, when he ascended the city wall to make his 
inspection. The entire populace raised their hands to their 
foreheads in salutation and rejoiced to behold the imperial 
countenance. Next, the imperial procession traveled on by 
mountain roads until it arrived at Taiwan Prefecture. His 

Majesty then specially led all of the officials in his retinue in a 
ceremony to honor Mount Tai. At that time, the spirit of the 
mountain mamfested auspicious signs: the serried peaks stood 
forth and the cloud-cloaked trees presented an elegant scene, 
while the elders of Tai an filled the streets with song and dance. 
The grandeur of Mount Tai, with the incredible winding 
mountain paths of this area of Lu, is only roughly sketched 
here in "red and green] regrettably, we lack the ability to 
describe even a minute part of its magnificence. 

Neither the Diaries nor the preface account provides 
much information that would help Wang Hui to 
visualize the landscape. To create a "recognizable" 
topographic structure, he relied heavily on the carto- 
graphic features recorded by contemporary maps of 
Shandong Province (map 3) and Changqing District 
(map 4). According to the provincial map, the moun- 
tainous region of central Shandong begins just south 
of Jinan, three rivers bisect the region between Jinan 
and Taiwan, and Mount Tai is situated directly north 
of the prefectural city. The district map adds more 
information: it shows a slightly different configura- 
tion of rivers, indicates the main route between Jinan 
and Tai'an, and includes the principal settlements 
along the way. The landscape features in Wang Hui s 
painting reflect the disposition of towns, rivers, and 
mountainous terrain presented in these maps. 

The painting opens with a "level-distance" {^ping- 
yuan, ^iS) view over the rooftops of Jinan and the 
marshy countryside to the north. While this is a 
typical beginning for a panoramic landscape, it also 
reflects the actual topography of the area north of 
Jinan as shown on the provincial map, which includes 
the town of Pingyuan (Level Plain, -f->^>), through 
which Kangxi had passed on the preceding day A group 

Fig. 122. Zhang Zcduan 
(active early 12th cen- 
tury). Spring Festival on the 
River, detail (see fig. ii8) 

151 

of oxen, including a mother licking a newborn calf, 
and the pale red dots of leaf buds sprouting from the 
lowland trees are harbingers of warmer weather as well 
as indications of the processions progress toward a 
more southerly clime. In the foreground, members of 
Kangxi s military escort are saddling up in preparation 
for their imminent departure. Groups of villagers 
have left their houses and are gazing toward the city 
wall, where Kangxi, accompanied by his bodyguards 
in yellow tunics, surveys the city from horseback. The 
last members of his vanguard emerge from Jinans 
South Gate and proceed into the mountains. 

Where the roadway enters the mountains, the 
perspective abruptly shifts from the "level-distance" 
view of Jinan to a "high-distance" Qaoyuati) vista of 
towering peaks, a change in terrain confirmed by both 
the provincial and district maps. Wang Hui shows the 
roadway out of town passing a temple and a cluster of 
houses beside a watchtower (the Huangshan Dian and 
Fogong Dian of the district map?) before coming to 
a river spanned by a bridge. Beyond the river, the first 

depicted on the maps, the route passes through a village 
in which a small shrine is labeled as the Opening in 
the Mountains Temple (Kaishan Si), clearly identifying 
it with the town of Kaishan on the district map (pL 50). 
Members of the emperor s advance party file through 
the town accompanied by three camels laden with 
the poles, staves, and gear used in constructing his 
tent — a reminder that whenever no suitable accom- 
modations could be found, Kangxi could provide his 
own. A large river spanned by a camelback bridge, a 
typical southern construction that is a curious 
anomaly in the high mountains, fianctions as a link 
between two rocky prominences and, by extension, 
the two halves of this compositional section. 

Passing over the river, the party next encounters a 
mountain settlement (Gushan?) with a stream flowing 
into the foreground, then skirts around another 
village (Shiwo?), and crosses another river before 
entering the township of Zhangxia, where Kangxi 
spent the night of February Except for the 
addition of two extra streams, this configuration of 

towns and waterways corresponds closely to what is 
shown on the maps* In Zhangxia, members of the 
vanguard share the road with mule drivers and porters. 
Inside the town one rider pauses to accept a cup of 
water while his horse drinks from a wooden trough. 
Everywhere people have moved altar tables into the 
roadway to welcome the emperor* 

Beyond Zhangxia a large river valley bisects the 
scroll while a mountain stream flows out of the 
background near the place where the roadway emerges 
in front of Mount Tai (pL 51). The provincial map 
shows one crossing, the district map two, between 
Zhangxia and Taiwan. No bridge spans this gulf The 
roadway disappears below the lower margin of the 
painting; when it emerges on the other side, it is 
already some distance above the level of the river. The 
momentary absence of road and figures removes the 
need to shift into a larger, foreground scale and allows 
the middle-ground and far-distance peaks to domi- 
nate the composition. The viewer remains at a 
high and somewhat distant vantage point that is 

appropriate for taking in the full enormity of the 
mountains to come. 

Figures are now greatly reduced in scale to accen- 
tuate Mount Tai s immensity. As the roadway again 
passes out of sight along a rocky defile, the viewer 
encounters a scene from which all reference to human 
scale has vanished. One range of mountains follows 
another, climbing ever higher until, for the first time, 
the highest peaks touch or extend beyond the paint- 
ing s upper margin. Only then do human figures 
reappear as the roadway reemerges from a mist-filled 
ravine at the very bottom of the composition. 

Mount Tai now confronts the viewer in all its 
majesty, stretching upward the fiall height of the scroll 
and spreading outward for more than six feet, nearly 
the full length of what might normally be unrolled at 
one time. The mountains tremendous size is empha- 
sized by the changing scale of the pilgrims making 
the ascent. The figures decrease in height from about 
I inch (2.5 centimeters) at the base of the mountain 
to less than % inch (.6 centimeters) near the summit. 

Mengyin 

PI. 49 (cat. 23). The Kangxi Etnpero/s Southern 
Inspection Tour, Scroll Three: Jinan to Mount Tai, dat- 
able to 1698. HandscroU, ink and color on 
silk, 26 % in. X 45 ft. 8 % in. (67.8 cm x 13.9 m). 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New 
York, Purchase, The Dillon Fund Gift, 1979 
(1979-5) 

Tai'an Mount Tat 

155 

PL 50. Scroll Three: detail, Opening in the 
Mountains Temple 

156 

PI. 51. Scroll Three: detail, Mount Tai andTai'an 

158 

159 

Fig. 123. Huang Gong- 
wang (1269-1354). 
Dwelling in the Fuchun 
Mountains (detail), dated 
1350. Handscroll, ink on 
paper, 13 in. x 20 ft. 
10 in. (33 X 636.9 cm). 
National Palace 
Museum, Taipei 

Up to this point, the right-to-left horizontal 
movement of the scroll corresponds to a north-to- 
south movement on the maps. Following this pattern, 
Mount Tai should appear first in the scroll, followed by 
Taiwan, which lies on the south side of the mountain. 
But Wang Hui s desire to present a frontal view of the 
sacred peak demanded that he rotate the north-south 
axis of the painting so that it is momentarily perpen- 
dicular to the lateral axis. In this way, the mountain 
could be visualized from its most characteristic **fron- 
tal" face, with Taiwan at its feet. To permit this pictorial 
license, Wang isolated his reoriented mountain with 
banks of mist that indicate a spatial discontinuity. 

Schematically presented as a rectangular com- 
pound, the city of Tai'an appears toylike before the 
looming mountain. Inside the city wall another walled 
compound enclosing an elaborate hall represents the 
Temple to the Deity of Mount Tai (Dai Miao), where 
Kangxi conducted his ceremony reverencing the spirit 
of the Eastern Sacred Peak.^^ In spite of the temple s 
importance to the narrative, both it and the city of 
Tai'an are merely token presences beside the towering 
mountain. At the archway marking the starting point 
of the sacred way leading to the summit, a welcoming 
committee of Daoist priests has gathered around an 
altar, as members of the vanguard confer with local 
officials and bearers stand ready to carry people up 
the mountain in open palanquins.^^ 

Mount Tai is the finale of Scroll Three; beyond 
the mountain, the route is radically truncated. It 
took Kangxi two more days to travel from Tai' an to 
Mengyin, but this segment of the journey is reduced 
to a brief coda following the crescendo of Mount Tai. 
The final city to appear in the scroll, Mengyin, stands 
beside a river, just as it does on the provincial map, but 
Xintai, where Kangxi spent the previous night, is 
omitted. Clearly, the length of Wang Hui s painting 
does not correspond to the actual distances covered. 
Space is expanded or contracted as needed to highlight 
important sites or to enhance the narrative and pictorial 
drama. The scroll ends with a broad watery expanse 
that may correspond to the rivers flowing southward 

from Mengyin toward Honghuapu, the starting point 
of Scroll Four. The landscape features in the last 
section of the scroll have more to do, however, with 
how to end a monumental landscape panorama than 
with the actual topography of the tour. Thus, once 
Wang Hui anchored his composition within a 
cartographic framework, he was free to elaborate 
landscape passages to enhance the drama of his 
narrative. And Wang seized this opportunity to sum 
up all that he had learned about the monumental 
landscape style of the Northern Song (960—1127), 
combining the brush idioms of Juran, Fan Kuan, and 
Yan Wengui with the archaic "blue-and-green" style 
associated with Tang dynasty painters. 

In the final section Wang Hui introduces a new 
idea. The image of Mount Meng rising all by itself 
from a low plain, coupled with a vista of receding 
hills arching around an expanse of water, vividly 
recalls the ending of Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains, 
painted in 1350 by Huang Gongwang (1269— 1354) 
(fig. 123), a quintessential depiction of the Jiangnan 
landscape. This reference to a southern landscape by 
a southern artist, coming as it does after Wang s 
interpretation of the classic northern monumental 
landscape manner, celebrates the ascendancy of 
southern culture and artists that began in the late 
Song and Yuan periods. It also anticipates the 
powerful impact of this heritage on Kangxi as he 
traveled deeper into the heartland of this region. 

Just as styles are conflated, space and time are again 
manipulated to suit Wang Hui s dramatic structure. 
The painting encompasses about 124 miles (200 kilo- 
meters) of the tour route, a distance that Kangxi 
covered in three and a half days, but the first half- 
day s travel from Jinan to Zhangxia occupies more 
than two-thirds of the scroll s length. This gives Wang 
a maximum amount of space in which to demon- 
strate his virtuosity as he builds up to Mount Tai, the 
scroll s finale. The great Eastern Peak dominates the 
last third of the painting; consequently, the second 
half of Kangxi s journey from Taiwan to Mengyin is 
compressed into one-eighth of the scrolls length. 

160 

Mount Tai, the tallest point in eastern China, is 
the archetypal mountain form encompassed in the 
Southern Inspection Tour. Because of its cosmic stature 
and its symbolic importance for Kangxi, its depiction 
in the Southern Inspection Tour presented a great chal- 
lenge. Wang Hui was not merely representing a 
mountain, he was portraying a paradigm for all 
mountains. Its appearance had to be not only majes- 
tic and dramatic but also iconographically accurate. 
To meet the latter requirement, Wang Hui certainly 
would have sought out earlier illustrations of the 
peak. The schematic character of his depiction and 
its similarity to earlier woodblock illustrations 
indicate that he took one or more of these images as 
a model. There were many such models in earlier 
pictorial sources such as the History of Mount Tai (Dai 
shi) of 1587 (fig. 124) and the Pictorial Encyclopedia of the 
Three Realms (Sancai tuhui) of 1607 (fig- i^s)** the much 
later Gazetteer of Mount Tai (Tai Shan zht) of 1898 also 
included one (fig. 126). All three of these sources 
present Mount Tai as a broad, triangular configura- 
tion of peaks, with the walled city of Taiwan at its 
base, a winding path up the middle, and water 
courses flowing out of the right and left (east and 
west) sides. Wang Hui s interpretation contains each 
of these general features. 

Mount Tai s appearance in Scroll Three is arrest- 
ing. Wang s blue-and-green palette, while evoking 
visions of paradise or an idyllic golden age, is also 
iconographically appropriate for the depiction of 
Tai, which is sometimes referred to as the Green 
Mountain because of the association of that color 
with the eastern quadrant. Facing south in a frontal 
view, the mountain is "posed'* as a formal portrait of 
the emperor would be. After the lateral progression 
of mountains and valleys in the first half of the 
scroll, this frontal image brings leftward movement 
momentarily to a halt. The serpentine roadway that 
weaves around the axis connecting the Dai Temple at 
the foot of the mountain with the temple at its 
summit only serves to reinforce its importance. The 
southward orientation and axial centrality of this 
view stress the mountains cosmic stature. Tai'an 
follows the standard cartographic schema for a city, 
in which the north and south gates and the major 
structures are presented in frontal elevation while the 
elevations of the side gates face inward. 

Although Wang relied on a woodblock model to 
give his image iconographic accuracy, he returned to 
the monumental landscape vernacular of the North- 
ern Song master Fan Kuan (ca. 960— ca. 1030) to 
describe the flesh and skin of the mountain. Wang did 
not, however, merely copy the simplified outlines of 

Fig. 124. "Single-frame"-mode woodblock illustration of Mount Tai. From History of Mount 
Tai (Dai shi), preface dated 1587; reprinted with recut blocks in 1654 

Fig. 125. "Single-frame"-mode woodblock illustration of Mount Tai. From Pictorial Encyclope- 
dia of the Three Realms (^Sancai tuhui), facsimile reproduction of 1607 edition, dili (geography), 
chap. 8, pp. 3—4 

Fig. 126. *'Single-frame**-mode woodblock illustration of Mount Tai. From Gazetteer of Mount 
Tai (Tai Shan zht), preface dated 1898, chap. 4, pp. 2b— 3a 

the woodblock then fill them in with Fan Kuan— style 
**raindrop" texture dots (yuiian). To invigorate the 
flat surface pattern of his model, he had to reinter- 
pret the diagram: he literally rebuilt the mountain 
by piling up small dynamic rock forms into a single, 
coherent design known as a dragon vein** (longmai).^^ 
In Fan Kuans Travelers amid Streams and Mountains 
(see fig* i6), picture elements are segregated into 
compositionally distinct foreground, middle-ground, 
and far-distance components. While Wang Hui 
alludes to this classic "three distances" formula in 
the progressively smaller scale of his trees and figures, 
he makes almost no attempt to create an illusion of 
recession* His energized brushwork and assertive 
landscape forms simultaneously suggest three- 
dimensional form and sit flatly on the picture sur- 
face, resulting in an image that pulses with abstract 
kinetic force. The great S-shaped contour of the 
roadway and central ridgeline form the "dragon 
vein" of the mountain — the integrating composi- 
tional pattern that ties the competing landscape 
forms into a single, sweeping movement drawing 
the eye upward to the summit. 

By using this method to build up his mountain, 
Wang Hui was able to greatly expand the scale of 
Mount Tai and emphasize its iconic character by 
giving it three distinct peaks, a configuration that 
recalls the most ancient pictographic form of shan 
(UJ> "mountain"), which shows a "host" peak 
flanked by two subsidiary "guest" peaks. 

SCROLL seven: the urban-agrarian 

CONTINUUM OF JIANGNAN 

In contrast to Scroll Three, with its mountainous 
landscape. Scroll Seven treats the watery lowlands 
and cityscapes of Jiangnan, culminating with the 
great metropolis of Suzhou, the economic and 
cultural capital of Kangxi s empire (pi. 52A— e). 
Suzhou s tradition as an intellectual center made it a 
key city for the recruitment of officials; its great 
wealth significantly subsidized government revenues, 
both through general taxes and through the income 
generated for the imperial household by its silk 
monopoly. Scroll Seven celebrates this major urban 
center.'*'' The preface focuses on the tumultuous 
reception that Kangxi received in the city: 

The seventh scroll respectfully depicts His Majesty s travels 
from Wuxi through Hushuguan to the Chang Gate of 
Suzhou^ where, seeing the throngs of people crowding the streets 
and narrow waterways^ he specially reduced the size of the 
honor guard [accompanying him] into the city. Officials, 
gentry, and commoners, even white-chaired old men and small 
children, all were moved by the emperor s great favor; happily 
beating drums, burning incense, and hanging up bunting, they 
prostrated themselves on both sides of the streets to welcome 
him. The emperor^s stopover gave them a chance to behold [the 
personification of] a flourishing age; the sincerity of their love 
for him was clearly visible. Again and again, the people 
detained the emperor, offering him wine and fruit and singing 
hymns of praise. In painting this picture, it has been difficult 

i6z 

4 

t 

# 

it 

w 

m 

ifc. 

' ^ 

•HI 

fir 

■t 

slit; 

"1 

il 

m 

>- 

M. 

r/ 

m 

:^ 

At, 

13 

41: 

% 

IE. 

AM. 

■f 

'A 

.*iL 

ik 

-it 

it 

^1 

PI. 52A (cat 24). 
Yjingxi Emperors Southern 
Inspection Tour, Scroll Seven: 
Wuxi to Suzhou, datable 
to 1698 (preface and 
opening section). 
Handscroll, ink and 
color on silk, 26 % in. x 
72 ft. V2 in. (67.9 cm X 
21.9 m). Mactaggart 
Art Collection, Uni- 
versity of Alberta 
Museums, University 
of Alberta, Edmonton 

to convey all these details. This is because our emperor has 
compassion for the people of Wu^ remitting taxes^ canceling 
rents^ and so much more^ thereby creating boundless goodwill 
in people^s hearts. As for the fact that on a small prominence 
on Tiger Hill the people erected a pavilion to commemorate his 
largess and wish him longevity^ it was also recorded [in this 
painting] with brush and silk. 

The composition of Scroll Seven is divided into 
four sections corresponding to the four major sites 
visited by Kangxi on this segment of his tour: Wuxi, 
Hushuguan (a variant pronounciation is Xushuguan), 
Tiger Hill, and Suzhou. The first three sections, in 
which Wang Hui conveys something of the tremen- 
dous prosperity and abundance of the region sur- 
rounding Suzhou, form a long preamble to the 
emperor s climactic arrival in the great city. 

The scroll opens just north of Wuxi with a 
view of the island temple of Huangpodun (present- 
day Huangbudun), where Kangxi spent the night 
of February 21. The next day, according to the 
travel diary of the high official Zhang Ying (1683— 
1708), Kangxi first made an excursion to the Qin 
Family Garden and the Huishan Spring before 
traveling thirty miles (forty-eight kilometers) to 
Suzhou.^^ Wang Hui was evidently familiar with 
Zhang s account because his painting features 
the Qin Garden, Huishan Temple, and Tin Moun- 
tain, topped by a tall pagoda in the distance 
behind Huangpodun, 

Wuxi, schematically represented by a gateway, city 
wall, and two bridges leading into the suburbs, has 
been tremendously simplified in the painting, but it 
retains a recognizable "cartographic'' identity. Wang 
Hui s depiction compares closely with a contempo- 
rary map of the city that shows the Grand Canal 
passing Huangbudun, then curving around the 
western side of Wuxi s city wall and flowing beneath 
two bridges located near the west and south gates.'^^ 

Between Wuxi and Hushuguan, Wang shows the 
canal making a wide bend around the villages of 
Xin an and Wangting. This arbitrary curve, which 
introduces a rural interlude between built-up urban 
areas and also divides the first two sections of the 
composition, is not an accurate topographic feature 
but a convention signaling a warping of time and 
space. Within this curve Wang Hui covers three- 
quarters of the distance between Wuxi and Suzhou 
in one- tenth of the length of the painting: Xin an, 
located about a quarter of the way between Wuxi 
and Suzhou, is shown on the same peninsula with 
Wangting, which is located about halfway between 
the two cities; Hushuguan, three-quarters of the 
way to Suzhou, begins just beyond the peninsula on 
the other side of the canal. To disguise this compres- 
sion of space, the line of travelers carrying the 
narrative thread is intentionally interrupted. The 
roadway leads the viewer back to a far-distance 
wasteland and then abandons the viewer, who is 
forced to wander through rural villages and along 

163 

164 

Wuxj 

Huangbudun 

Wangttng 

Xifi'an 

backwaters, discovering the simple pleasures of 
country life almost at random. On the far side of the 
bend, roadways reappear on both sides of the canal 
to focus the viewer s attention on the next town. 

Hushuguan (literally, "Riverbank Villa Customs 
Barrier**) is centered on the large customs station 
strategically located near the junction of the Grand 
Canal and three subsidiary waterways.^^ Bridges 
connect the various neighborhoods created by the 
canals and direct the viewers attention in a circular 
motion through the busy thoroughfares, heightening 
the sense of a bustling, urban environment. The 
imposing three-arch bridge at the far end of town, 
for example, draws the eye into the foreground, where 
a blind beggar woman clutching a baby walks with 
the help of a stick and dog (pi. 53). Juxtaposed with 
this candid reminder of real destitution is a file of 
monks begging for alms. This procession, which 
parodies the recent passage of the emperor s retinue, 
moves rightward, opposite to the direction in which 
the scroll unrolls, leading the viewer back into town. 

A bend in the canal just beyond Hushuguan marks 
the end of the second compositional section and 
signals another warping of time and space. As the 
canal recedes into the distance, it flows past the Maple 
Bridge and Hanshan Temple, which appear through the 
veiling atmosphere like ghostly apparitions. Situated 
on the outskirts of Suzhou, these famous sites provide 
the first hint of the city's proximity; their sudden 
appearance intensifies the anticipation of the viewer, 
who is lured into the mist. Neither the bridge nor the 
temple is an imposing structure, and the painting does 
not accord them much attention. Their inscribed 
names, however, embody intense literary associations 
that are far more compelling than any visual image.^^ 
In a sense, no picture could do them justice, but their 
very names are enough to evoke the poetic imagery of 
countless literary visitors. The mist encourages a mood 
of poetic reverie and distracts the viewer from the shifi: 
in time and space that is taking place. 

Within the curve of the canal, Wang Hui gives 
additional indications that real time has been suspended. 

165 

Tiger Hill 

PL 52C (cat. 24). Scroll 
Seven: detail, Maple 
Bridge to Tiger Hill 

Shantang 

Hanshan Temple Maple Bridge 

Isolated in the mist is a promontory where a fisher- 
man beneath a bank of flowering trees and an idyllic 
farmyard unmistakably recall the paradise evoked in 
the poem ''Peach Blossom Spring'' by Tao Qian 
(365—427), in which time and aging have come to a 
halt/^ Just beyond this scene, a dramatic performance 
staged entirely on boats further interrupts the main 
narrative. 

Wang Hui s use of mist to obscure the canal and 
interrupt the flow of the narrative functions as a 
cinematic "dissolve/* blurring a shift in time and 
space. The mist and the idyllic scenery it encapsulates 
mark a break in the continuity of the scroll s coverage 
of the route. Before entering the mist, the viewer is 
traveling southeastward along the Grand Canal 
toward Suzhou. Upon reemerging, the viewer is on 
the Shantang Canal moving westward from Suzhou 
to Tiger Hill. 

Kangxi made his outing to Tiger Hill on the day 
after his arrival in Suzhou; in the painting, however, 
Wang Hui has conflated two days' activities into 
one, integrating Tiger Hill into the flow of the main 
narrative. Kangxi s actual route into Suzhou followed 
the Grand Canal past Maple Bridge and Hanshan 
Temple to the Chang Gate. Had Wang Hui followed 
this route, Tiger Hill would be left in the distance 
and would appear too insignificant. Wang suggests 
the actual route by showing the Grand Canal heading 
toward the bridge and temple before it disappears. 
On the far side of Tiger Hill, the Grand Canal 
reappears and the main narrative resumes as the 
viewer is guided into Suzhou. 

Tiger Hill has been minutely and accurately 
described (pi. 54). A wide alley leads from the canal 
up the hill to Thousand-Man Rock, a natural plaza 
ringed with pavilions, halls, and scenic sites that 
include the Longevity Pavilion mentioned in the 

preface.^"* The Northern Song pagoda of the Yunyan 
Temple, the climax of any pilgrimage to Tiger Hill 
and its most renowned landmark, crowns the hilltop 
and reaches the upper edge of the painting. Beyond 
the pagoda, the hill drops ofl^ precipitously as the 
landscape opens up into a wide expanse of fields and 
wetlands. This deep-distance view, marking the end 
of the third section, provides a dramatic break 
between Tiger Hill and the painting s finale, 

A great vortex of converging streets, waterways, 
boats, and people heightens the drama surrounding 
Kangxi s arrival at the Chang Gate of Suzhou. The 
painting fiinnels all movement toward the foreground, 
where Kangxi is seated placidly in a barge decorated 
with five-clawed dragons on the hull, a yellow canopy, 
and a yellow pennant hanging from the mast (pi. 55).^^ 
With its projecting battlements and high walls, the 
massive gate arrests all leftward movement and creates 
a frame in which the formation of bodyguards, 
members of the mounted retinue, kneeling officials, 
and hundreds of onlookers magnifies and prolongs 
this exciting moment. Gathered before the gate is 
Kangxi s entire waterborne retinue; onshore, members 
of his mounted escort await his arrival. The emper- 
or s sword-bearer, parasol bearer, and several imperial 
bodyguards are in attendance, while two open skiffs 
nearby carry other bodyguards. More than twenty 
additional boats flying yellow pennants represent the 
vessels attached to his entourage. 

Although Kangxi s disembarkation is the dramatic 
climax of the scroll, it is only the beginning of the 
final section of the painting, which continues another 
twenty feet (six meters) through the streets of Suzhou 
to the Silk Commissioner s Residence, where Kangxi 
spent the night. The city is schematically represented 
as a grid with diagonal streets cutting across thorough- 
fares that run parallel to the longitudinal axis of the 

Opposite: Map 5. Suzhou 
and its environs. After 
Newly Measured Map of the 
Suzhou District (Sujing xince 
fw). Suzhou: Pingze- 
dongyang Tang, 1931 

Overleaf: PI. 54. Scroll Seven: 
detail shovi^ing Tiger Hill 

167 

170 

Chang Gate 

scroll. Bands of mist obscuring large portions of the 
city serve both to simplify the painters* task and to 
suggest the onset of evening. 

Streets and intersections filled with festive crowds 
recall the description in the preface of how the 
emperors progress was interrupted several times by 
enthusiastic inhabitants. The two main thoroughfares 
extending leftward from the Yellow Oriole District 
and Gao bridges form a parallelogram that leads the 
viewer in a circuitous path through the town, stretch- 
ing out the sense of elapsed time and distance. The 
rich sampling of crafts and merchandise presented 
along these avenues — among them, cloth shoes, 
multitiered boxes, pewterware, ceramics, dumplings, 
hats, sleeves, antiques, mats, tobacco, and umbrellas — 
also slows down the viewers progress. 

Beyond the parallelogram the festooned streets 
disappear and the view opens up into a level-distance 
vista of roofs and trees. A zigzag line of mist stretch- 
ing from the top to the bottom of the painting 
interrupts the horizontal flow of the scroll and 
divides the composition like a river valley between 
two ranges of mountains. This empty stretch, similar 
to the earlier dissolution of the canal into mist, 
suggests a shift in time and space that conveys an 
idea of the extent of the city without actually 
depicting it all. It also offers a pause between areas 
of more intense activity. The multistoried Miluo 
Pavilion of the Daoist Xuanmiao Monastery, tower- 
ing above the surrounding cityscape, locates this area 
as the central district of Suzhou.^^ 

On the other side of this mist-filled gap, houses 
and cross streets have been reoriented to face right- 
ward, an alteration that corresponds to a shift in 
vantage point. Thus far, as the scroll has unrolled 
eastward across the width of the city, Suzhou has 
been seen from a southward-facing perspective; this 
shift enables Wang Hui to present a northward- 
facing, frontal view of the Silk Commissioner s 
Residence (pi. 56). The principal audience halls of 
the residence are axially aligned behind a forecourt, 
where two flagpoles are hung with orange banners. 
Spread out on either side of these main halls, the 
remainder of the complex includes courtyards filled 
with ornamental rocks and flowering trees, elegantly 
fiarnished private apartments, and workrooms housing 
looms and spools of silk thread. The painting comes 
to an end a short distance beyond the residence as 
the city once again dissolves in an enveloping bank 
of mist. 

Scroll Seven provides the first complete opportu- 
nity to see a new dramatic device introduced in Scroll 
Six. Continuity in these two paintings does not rely 
upon an extended treatment of the retinue, which is 
not even apparent throughout most of Scroll Seven. 
The altars and bunting set out by the inhabitants 
supply a constant reminder of the emperors recent 
passage, but it is the bustling life along the streets and 
thoroughfares that captures and directs the viewer s 
attention. When the retinue does appear, it is for one 
concentrated moment in which it serves as a frame 
for Kangxi s arrival. 

PL 52D (cat. 24). Scroll 
Seven: detail showing 
Chang Gate, Suzhou 

Opposite: PL 55. Scroll 
Seven: detail showing 
Kangxi's disembarkation 
at the Chang Gate 

171 

Silk Commissioners Residence 

PL 52E (cat. 24). Scroll 
Seven: detail, Yellow 
Oriole District to Silk 
Commissioners 
Residence 

Much of the painting closely adheres to the route 
of the Grand Canal, but for all its prominence this 
watery highway is not the principal path followed 
by the viewer s eye* The compelling narrative thread 
comes from the endless variety of travelers and 
residents moving along the roadways bordering the 
canal. Compared with this intensity of action, the 
canal remains a kind of negative space* Yet composi- 

tionally, it acts as an important unifying feature. 
Banks of mist and subsidiary waterways often denote 
temporal or spatial divisions in the painting. These 
punctuation marks reveal the discrete space cells out 
of which Wang Hui composed his pictorial structure, 
each cell corresponding to one important site. The 
canal (or roadway) serves to integrate these scenic 
episodes within a continuous landscape setting. 

172 

Gao Bridge 

Yellow Oriole District 

MiluO PdVlllQII 

The general scheme of Scroll Seven relates closely 
to that of Zhang Zeduans Spring Festival on the River 
(figs, ii8, 122), Both paintings move from countryside 
to cityscape, w^ith a waterway forming a prominent 
part of the first half of the composition and urban 
streets dominating the second half In both pictures 
the narrative thread is sustained by a wealth of genre 
detail. Although Wang Hui may not have seen the 

twelfth-century original, he must have been familiar 
with late Ming copies of the painting.^^ 

The compression of time and space in the scroll 
not only intensifies the dramatic flow of the painting, 
but also enables Wang Hui to show important sites 
from their most favorable angle. The hills around 
Wuxi and the wall of the city are viewed from the 
northeastern side of the Grand Canal looking 

Overkaf: PL 56. Scroll 
Seven: detail showing 
the Silk Commissioners 
Residence, Suzhou 

Figs. 127, 128. Li Tang 
(ca. 1070S— ca. 1150s). 
Duke Wen of Jin Recover- 
ing His State (details: 
above, Journey to Chu; 
opposite, Return to Jin). 
Handscroll, ink and 
color on silk, 11 % in. x 
27 ft. I % in. (29.5 X 
827 cm). The Metro- 
politan Museum of 
Art, New York, Ex 
coll.: C. C. Wang Fam- 
ily, Gift of The Dillon 
Fund, 1973 (1973.120.2) 

southwest. At Tiger Hill, this vantage point is 
reversed, the hill being approached from a direction 
opposite to the line of travel from Wuxi — an approach 
that allows Wang Hui to view Tiger Hill from its 
most characteristic angle, from which all its sights 
would be visible, Wang Hui introduces another shift 
in viewpoint inside Suzhou: while the Chang Gate 
and city streets are seen from the north looking 
south, the Silk Conmiissioner s Residence is depicted 
from the south looking north. In each case the shift 
enables the artist to show these important sites in 
their fullest form, much as they would be laid out 
in a diagram or site plan. The cityscape, in particu- 
lar, combines features of a map with a panoramic 
view. The underlying principle is the easy identifica- 
tion of the key sites that will orient the viewer 
within the narrative. 

The keenly observed details of daily life portrayed 
in Scroll Seven reflect the familiarity of the artists 
with their native region. Only Nanjing, depicted in 
Scrolls Ten and Eleven, rivals Suzhou in scale, number 
of figures, and range of activities shown. Coming at 
the halfway point in the documentation of the tour, 
Scroll Seven represents a peak of sustained imagina- 
tion and keen observation. Its emphasis is on people 
and sights — there were no important ritual functions 
performed by the emperor here — and the painting 
celebrates the scenery and grand reception offered by 
the wealthiest city in the empire, 

TOUR SCROLL ARCHETYPES 

The Southern Inspection Tour represents a major revival 
of narrative art, for in seeking to give meaning to 
Kangxi s tour, Wang Hui visualized the present in 
terms of the past. Faced with the first important 
historiographic commission of the Qing court, 
he turned to past models in order to formulate a 
narrative style that would allow him to portray 
Kangxi in terms of appropriate traditional arche- 
types. The most striking parallel to Wang s commis- 
sion was the other great imperially sponsored revival 

of narrative painting: the use of history paintings by 
the Song emperor Gaozong (r, 1127—62) to further 
the cause of his "dynastic revival'* (^zhongxing). Like 
Kangxi, Gaozong turned to cultural pursuits as a 
means to enhance his image as a legitimate mon- 
arch,^^ Drawing on the talents of scholars and artists 
associated with the Imperial Painting Academy, he 
sponsored several large-scale narrative cycles related 
to this theme: Duke Wen of Jin Recovering His State 
(figs, 127, 128), by Li Tang (ca, 1070s— ca. 1150s); 
Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute: The Story of Lady Wenji 
(fig, 129), by an anonymous court painter; and the 
Odes of the State of Bin from the ^^Book of Poetry (fig, 130), 
by Ma Hezhi (active ca, 1130—80),^^ 

In his formal treatment of the Southern Inspection 
Tour, Wang Hui followed the prototypes established 
by his Song predecessors. As in the Gaozong cycles, the 
narrative is divided into a series of text-and-picture 
units. The Gaozong format, combining an episodic 
structure with a tight focus on the central figure of 
the drama, ideally suited Wang Hui s task. Where 
Wang departs from this formula is in the scale of his 
painting: in the Southern Inspection Tour each text-and- 
picture unit has been enlarged into a separate scroll, 

A second archetypal structure common to both 
the Southern Inspection Tour and the paintings in the 
Gaozong cycle is the convention of illustrating an 
official progress in terms of its ''going forth" (^chuxing) 
and its "return" (huihi)!"^ The Southern Inspection Tour is 
presented as an extended excursion that begins with a 
formal exodus from the capital in ScroU One and 
ends with Kangxi s return in Scroll Twelve, And the 
same pattern is reiterated within each scroll. Every 
segment of the journey is framed by a point of 
departure and a destination, while Kangxi is usually 
shown as either setting forth (pi, 49) or arriving 
(pi, 55), This manner of representing ritual proces- 
sions dates back at least to Han times,^^ In at least 
two of Gaozong s narrative cycles, Thike Wen of Jin 
Recovering His State and Eighteen Songs of a Nomad FlutCy 
the travels of the protagonists are also conceived as 
outward and return journeys. 

176 

177 

PI. 57. Scroll Three: 
figures (detail, pi. 49) 

The most striking innovation of the Southern 
Inspection Tour is Wang Hui s merging of the mono- 
scenic narrative mode with the monumental land- 
scape format* By transforming each illustrative unit 
into a full-length landscape, Wang attained a new 
grandeur of scale that significantly altered the 
character of his narrative. In this new structure, the 
scale and importance of individual figures are dimin- 
ished, but the scope of the narrative is tremendously 
expanded to permit a comprehensive cataloguing of 
styles, architectural and landscape motifs, professions, 
and figure types. The painting is an extraordinary 
essaying of the entire theme of an emperors journey, 
one that depicts not only the paradigmatic actions of 
the ruler but also the full route, modes of travel, 
topography, rural and urban scenery, and the everyday 
activities of his subjects. Wang Hui s ambition in this 
work — to achieve a comprehensive, encyclopedic 
treatment of Kangxi's journey — mirrors the contem- 
porary belief that all knowledge could be systemati- 
cally surveyed, classified, and summarized, as evidenced 
in the numerous Qing annotated compilations, 
compendiums, and encyclopedias, many of which 
received imperial sponsorship.^"^ 

In the Southern Inspection Tour, Wang Hui integrated 
the many layers of the subject within a single, 

coherent pictorial structure, expanded its scale and 
scope by merging traditional narrative and landscape 
formats, and developed a bold synthesis of scholar- 
amateur and academic painting styles. Taken together, 
these innovations constituted a new classical formula- 
tion of narrative art that became the model for all 
later court-sponsored works in this genre. Although 
in most respects the Qing followed Ming precedents 
in government, in court painting they did not 
continue the style of the Ming Painting Academy. 
Wang Hui s neoclassicism, based on a painting style 
that had previously defined itself as the antithesis of 
the courtly tradition, represented a major innovation 
in the tradition of imperially sponsored arts. The 
revolutionary outcome of Wang s achievement was to 
establish a painting style based on literati prototypes 
as the model for painters employed by the court. 

The scale and scope of the Southern Inspection Tour 
also inspired a new genre of grandiose historiographic 
paintings. Kangxi himself sponsored two other 
large-scale narrative paintings. Illustrations of Agriculture 
and Sericulture (Gengzhi tvi) and 27?^ Kangxi Emperors Sixtieth 
Birthday Celebration (^Kangxi liuxun wanshou qingdian tu).^^ 
During the reign of the Qianlong emperor, the 
production of historiographic paintings increased 
exponentially. A twelve-scroll Qianlong Emperors Southern 

178 

Fig. 131. Xu Yang (active ca. 1750—75) and assistants. The Qianlong Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Four: The Confluence of the Huai and Yellow Rivers 
(detail, Qianlong and attendants), dated 1770, Handscroll, ink and color on silk, 27 V» in, x 35 ft. 11 % in. (68.8 cm x 10.9 m). The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York, Purchase, The Dillon Fund Gift, 1984 (1984.16) 

Fig. 132. Xu Yang (active ca. 1750—75) and assistants. The Qianlong Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour, Scroll Four. Detail showing the confluence of the 
Huai and Yellow rivers 

179 

Fig. 133. Xu Yang (active 
ca, 1750—75 ) and assis- 
tants. The Qianlong Etnper^ 
Of 5 Southern Inspection Tour^ 
Scroll Six: Entering Suzhou 
along the Grand Canal 
(detail, Tiger Hill), dated 
1770. Handscroll, ink and 
color on silk, 27 % in, x 
65 ft. 4 Vz in. (68.8 cm x 
19.9 m). The Metropoli- 
tan Museum of Art, 
New York, Purchase, 
The Dillon Fund Gift, 
1988 (1988.350) 

Inspection Tour, painted in 1770 by the Suzhou artist 
Xu Yang (active ca. 1750—75), was modeled directly 
upon Wang Hui s creation.^^ In spite of the stylistic 
afl&nities of this and other Qianlong productions 
to Wang s Southern Inspection Tour, however, none rivals 
Wangs scrolls in either descriptive richness or the 
integration of landscape and narrative elements* 

A comparison of the Kangxi and Qianlong 
Southern Tour scrolls highlights the distinct qualities 
of each and reveals a significant shift in taste during 
the eighteenth century. Xu Yangs scrolls fuse a 
simplified version of Wang Huis landscape style 
with a new, Western-influenced descriptive verisi- 
militude introduced to China by European Jesuit 
missionaries and greatly favored by the Qianlong 
emperor. Qianlong no doubt found European 
realism, particularly in the art of portraiture, to be 
an effective way of documenting his exploits in a 
visually convincing manner. Consequently, he 
promoted a synthesis of Chinese and European 
pictorial techniques in many court-sponsored 
commemorative works. 

The impact of this new approach on Xu Yangs 
Southern Inspection Tour is profound. As the figures of 
the emperor and his subjects became more three- 
dimensional and anatomically accurate, the space 
around them had likewise to become more illusionisti- 
cally convincing. Since Xu was forced to maintain a 
consistent and measurable scale in his paintings, the 
distance he was able to depict was greatly reduced. 
Although a typical Qianlong tour scroll is more than 
sixty-one feet (eighteen meters) long, the portion of the 
tour route depicted in each scroll is limited to one or 

two miles (1.6—3.2 kilometers). In place of the enor- 
mous distances encompassed in Wang Hui s paintings, 
which often covered more than 120 miles (200 kilome- 
ters) in a single scroll, Xu Yangs scrolls are monoscenic 
in conception: each illustration is reduced to a unified 
panorama centered on the figure of Qianlong. 

Ironically, this shift toward greater illusionistic 
realism had a stultifying effect. To animate his more 
accurately rendered, three-dimensionally convincing 
figures, Xu had to make their poses and gestures 
more theatrical. In contrast to the schematic, almost 
cartoonlike figures in the Kangxi scrolls, whose 
stylized, abstracted forms are charged with expressive 
energy (pi. 57), Xu Yang s figures appear like rigidly 
posed mannequins — recalling those in many Rococo 
paintings, in which the protagonists appear to be 
frozen in stiffly dramatic poses within stagelike 
tableaux (fig. 131). 

The same is true of Xu Yang s compositions. In 
representing architecture, for example, the Kangxi 
Southern Tour paintings arrange buildings in a way that 
enhances compositional drama, with no effort to 
show a systematic diminution in scale or recession 
toward a single vanishing point. In Scroll Seven, for 
example, buildings are arrayed in a sweeping curve 
that draws the viewer toward the scrolls dramatic 
climax — the arrival of Kangxi at Suzhou s great 
Chang Gate (see pi. 52D). In the Qianlong scrolls, the 
modified use of Western-style linear perspective 
results in more static pictorial structures that inhibit 
the horizontal flow of the handscroll format (fig. 132). 

A final limitation resulting from Xu Yang s 
adherence to Western conventions of spatial realism 

180 

is apparent in how key landmarks are presented. 
Because space is malleable in the Kangxi scrolls, 
landmarks are reoriented as needed in order to show 
them in their most characteristic "frontal" view. But 
in Xus paintings, the commitment to maintaining a 
consistent point of view forces him to abandon this 
convention. In his representation of the Grand Canal 
and the route of the Qianlong emperor into Suzhou, 
for example, the canal is presented as though the 
viewer were invariably looking from the east toward 
the west. In order to maintain the consistency of this 
viewpoint, however, Xu Yang had to portray Tiger 
Hill from the back (fig. 133). In Scroll Seven of the 
Kangxi set, on the other hand, Wang Hui had no 
problem reorienting the mountain to present it from 
its most characteristic, frontal view (pi. 54). Similarly, 
the Silk Commissioner s Residence in Suzhou is seen 
from the front in the Kangxi scroll (pi. 56) but from 
the rear in the Qianlong set (fig. 134). Thus, while 
European-style realism added a certain representa- 
tional verisimilitude to the depiction of Qianlong on 
his tour, it detracted from the artist s ability to 
suggest the vast scale of the journey or to highlight 
the important sites that the emperor visited. 

As the product of imperial patronage, Wang Hui s 
Southern Inspection Tour necessarily reflects the documen- 
tary, didactic, and commemorative (today one might 
say propagandistic) requirements of Kangxi and his 
court — showing Kangxi as an exemplary Confucian 
ruler who adhered to inherited paradigms of imperial 
behavior. Wang Hui was eminently successful at 
reading his patrons mind and at advancing the 
interests of the cultural establishment, of which he 
was a part. His linking of Kangxi s tour to earlier 
patterns of dynastic revival also suggests that he saw 
his commission as one aspect of a larger process in 
which painting served not merely as official historiog- 
raphy but as a didactic model that would promote 

the goals of cultural continuity and orthodoxy. For 
Wang Hui, who was mindful of the parallels between 
his role and that of earlier scholar-artists who had 
championed cultural renewal when traditional values 
were threatened, the ultimate purpose of the Southern 
Inspection Tour may have been to influence the course 
of history by bringing the present into alignment 
with the established verities of the past. His striving 
to achieve iacheng, a "Great Synthesis," in art lent 
support to the larger goal of integrating cultural and 
political spheres to effect iatong, "great unity." 

1. The Diaries of Activity and Repose of the Kangxi Emperor (Kangxi 
qijuzhu) is referred to hereafter as Diaries. The official diarists 
in attendance on the second Southern Tour were Kulena, Li 
Guangdi (1642— 1718), Hong'edai, and Wang Bin (Boxue hongru 
exam, 1679). For Li Guangdi, see "Li Kuang-ti" by Fang 
Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, pp. 473—75; for Wang Bin, 
see under the entry for his son, "Wang Chin-ch'i" by Fang 
Chao-ying, in ibid., p. 812. 

2. For an eyewitness account of the Manchu destruction of 
Yangzhou in 1645, see Record of Ten Days in Yangzhou (Yangzhou 
shirt ji). Wang s account has been translated in Mao 1937. See 
also Wakeman 1985, vol. i, pp. 556—63. On the Manchu 
command that male Han Chinese shave their heads and wear 
a queue, see ibid., pp. 646—50. 

3. In addition to standard memorials and audiences — the 
regular channels of communication — Kangxi utilized tours, 
censors (the "ears and eyes" of the emperor), imperial 
commissioners, bond servants, and, beginning in 1693, 
confidential palace memorials, to keep informed and exercise 
direct control over the affairs of the empire. See Wu, Silas 
H. L. 1970, esp. pp. 21—26. 

4. Xiao Yishan 1962—63, vol. i, pp. 792—93, provides a brief 
overview of Kangxi s various tours. For a summary of all six 
Southern Tours, see Spence 1966, pp. 124—51. See also Wu, 
Silas H. L, 1979. 

5. See Miller 1974, p. 118, for a table ofjinshi degrees divided by 
province for the years 1655—82 based on lists in Ming Qing like 
jinshi timing beilu 1969. 

6. The Yangzi Delta elite repeatedly met with harsh treatment, 
suspicion, and prejudice during the early years of the dynasty, 
most notably with respect to tax collection and recruitment 
for office. Despite the high achievement of Jiangnan scholars 
in the metropolitan examinations, before 1673 the highest 

Fig. 134. Xu Yang 
(active ca. 1750—75 ) 
and assistants. The 
Qianlong Emperor's South- 
ern Inspection Tour, Scroll 
Six, Detail, Silk Com- 

missioners 

Reside 

181 

positions in the imperial bureaucracy were almost totally 
dominated by northern Chinese (see Miller 1974, p. 117). In 
the tax case of 1661, some 13,800 Jiangsu gentry were punished 
for tax delinquency with loss of degrees, imprisonment, and 
other penalties (see ibid., p. 70). 

7. For a discussion of Jiangnans role in the rebellion and 
Kangxi's use of southerners as a counterbalance to the 
metropolitan bureaucracy, which was dominated by Manchus 
and northern Chinese, see ibid., esp. pp. 59—99, 117—32. 

8. See "Mingju * by Fang Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, 
pp, 577—78; and Miller 1974, pp. 133-73. 

9. See Spence 1966, p. 125. 

10. For Wu Sangui, see "Wu San-kuei" by Fang Chao-ying in 
Hummel 1943—44, PP* 877—80. Although the suppression of 
the Three Feudatories rebellion was completed in 1681, the 
rebel forces in Taiwan were not finally defeated until 
October 3, 1683; see under "Shih Lang" by Earl Swisher in 
ibid., p. 653. 

11. See Diaries, pp. 1236—57; and Spence 1966, p. 125, n. 6. 

12. On Kangxi s visit to Mount Tai, see Chavannes 19 10, pp. 59, 
392—93; and Diaries, pp. 1238—39. 

13. For a list of emperors who visited Mount Tai, see Baker 1925, 
pp. 195—201. 

14. See "Treatise on the Feng and Shan Sacrifices" in Sima Qian, 
Shiji (1959 ed.), vol. 4, pp. 1355— 1404; and Chavannes 1910, 

pp. 16—19. ^^^^ Spence 1966, p. 126. 

15. See Diaries, pp. 1246—47. 

16. Ibid., p. 1842. 

17. This sense of triumph is evident in the Diaries commentary 
for April 7, Kangxi s birthday and the penultimate day of his 
tour; see ibid., p. 1850. 

18. For the emperor's itinerary, with his daily stopping places and 
a breakdown of which segments of the tour were illustrated 
by Wang Hui, see Hearn 1990, pp. 20—22. 

19. Wang Hui's imminent departure for the capital to begin 
work on the painting was acclaimed by numerous literati at a 
celebration of his sixtieth (sut) birthday in 1691; see Qinghui 
zengyan 1994, pp. 876—79. 

20. The meaningful links between Wang Shan and Wang Hui 
have been suggested by Jonathan Spence in Spence 1976. For 
Wang Shan's biography, see under "Wang Shan" by Fang 
Chao-ying in Hummel 1943—44, pp. 830—31; and Guochao qixian 
leizheng chuhian 1966, pp. 2383—87. 

21. For Song Junye, see under "Song Deyi" in Guochao qixian 
leizheng chuhian 1966, pp. 2268—69, Song's presence on the 
1689 tour, see Suzhoufuzhi iSS^, juanshou i, p. 11. Song continued 
to supervise imperially sponsored artistic projects. In 1705 he 
and four other officials, including the painter Wang Yuanqi, 
were ordered to compile a comprehensive collection of 
commentaries on painting and calligraphy, which was 
published in 1708 under the title Manual of Calligraphy and 
Painting of the Studio for Admiring Culture (Peiwen Zhai shuhua pu). 
See under "Wang Yiian-ch'i" by }. C. Yang in Hummel 
1943-44, p. 844. 

22. See Qingchao tongzhi 1965, chap. 113, p. 7387. 

23. Yang Jin's biography states, "When Vice President Song 
Jianzhai [Junye] of Changzhou [Suzhou] and Grand 
Secretary Wang Zhuan'an [Shan] of Taicang received the 
command to paint the Southern Inspection Tour, they invited 
[Yang Jin] to accompany his master [Wang Hui] to the 
capital. The project took three years. When the picture was 
completed, it entered the imperial [collection] and [Yang 
Jin's] fame increased ninefold. [Song Junye] borrowed 
authentic Tang, Song, Yuan, and Ming masterpieces from 
the imperial collection and invited [Yang] to make copies, 
which he presented to the emperor. They were good enough 
to be mistaken for the originals." See Yu Yi, Haiyu huayuan 
liie (1963 ed.), pp. 17—18. Gu Fang's biography states that 
"early in his career [Gu] went to the capital, where Song 

Junye assembled famous artists to paint the Southern Inspection 
Tour, ordering Wang Hui to direct the project." See Feng 
Jinbo and Wu Jin, Guochao huashi (1941 ed.), chap. 7, p. 7b. 

24. The draft of this scroll has not been published; the transla- 
tion is based on my own transcription; see Hearn 1990, App. C. 

25. The draft for Scroll Ten is here accurately identified as the first 
scroll to illustrate Kangxi's homeward-bound direction of travel. 

26. For a discussion of the role of allegory and archetypes in 
Chinese culture, see Plaks 1976. 

27. See Hearn 1988. 

28. It is revealing to see how Wang Hui's painting departs from 
the actual events of Kangxi's return. When the emperor 
entered the city, he made a special detour to visit the residence 
of Prince An, who had recently died. But this detail did not 
serve the larger purpose of the scrolls, which was to present an 
idealized record of how the emperor should have been received 
back into the capital by the full court. In order to make his 
painting conform to the archetypal image of an imperial 
return and maintain a symmetrical relationship to Scroll One, 
Wang Hui drew upon the precedent of the 1684 Southern Tour. 
There, the emperor reentered the capital from the imperial 
preserve at Nan Yuan and was properly received by the full 
court as he made his grand entrance along the axial way. Yang 
Xin makes this point in Yang Xin 1981, p. 23. For the brief 
record of Kangxi's return from his 1684 tour, see Diaries, p. 1257. 

29. At least ten collaborative works by Wang Hui and his students 
are extant from the period 1691—95; see Hearn 1990, p. 179, n. 3. 

30. For Yang Jin's biography, see Yu Yi, Haiyu huayuan liie (1963 ed.), 
pp. 17—18. For Gu Fang's biography, see Feng Jinbo and Wu 
Jin, Guochao huashi (1941 ed.), chap. 7, p. 7b. Translations of the 
relevant passages appear in Hearn 1990, pp. 57—58, n. 7. 

31. For biographical information on Wang Yun, see Li Yufen 1921, 
chap. I, p. 15a; and Qin Zuyong 1967, p. 113. See also Ho, 
Wai-kam, et al. 1980. 

32. For biographical information on Xu Min, see Zhang Geng, 
Guochao huazheng lu (1963 ed.), chap. 2, pp. 39—40; Hu Jing, 
Guochao yuanhua lu (1963 ed.), chap. 2, p. 65; and Qin Zuyong 
1967, p. 116. For an illustration and discussion of The Kangxi 
Emperor's Sixtieth Birthday Celebration, see Maxwell K. Hearn in 
Rawski and Rawson 2005, pp. 391—92, no. 24. 

33. For biographical information on Yu Yuan, see Qin Zuyong 
1967, p. 114; and Zhang Geng and Hu Zhenzu, Guochao huazheng 
xulu (1963 ed.), chap. 1, p. 89, 

34. See Hearn 2002, pp. 80—107, pis. 6a— p. 

35. Guochao qixian leizheng chuhian 1966, p. 12948. Translation modified 
from Heilesen 1980b, pp. 92—93. 

36. Drafts survive for Scrolls Seven, Eight, Ten, Eleven, and 
Twelve. The draft version of Scroll Seven has recently entered 
the collection of the Jiangsu Provincial Museum in Nanjing 
from descendants of Song Junye living in Suzhou. Appended 
to the end of that scroll are two rough sketches — possibly 
evidence of an earlier stage of painting — and a fragment of 
another draft painting as well as colophons by members of 
the Song family. The drafts of Scrolls Eight, Ten, and Twelve 
are now in the collection of the Palace Museum, Beijing. The 
draft of Scroll Eleven is in the collection of the Shenyang 
Palace Museum; a modern copy of this draft is in the 
collection of the Jiangsu Provincial Museum. 

37. The compositions of the draft scrolls do not break down into 
uniform sections corresponding to individual sheets of paper 
but flow over joins in the paper, indicating that the separate 
sheets were mounted together before painting began, 

38. Portions of Draft Scroll Eleven have been published in Shenyang 
Gugong howuyuan 2006, vol. i, pi, 77, 

39. Diaries, p. 1843. 

40. Wang Hui's division of the tour into a series of twelve 
handscrolls not only was appropriate for the subject matter, 
but also reflected numerological conventions. There was a 
well-established precedent for the use of this number among 

182 

sets of hanging scrolls and album leaves, while its calendrical 
associations — twelve months in a year — conveyed a sense 
of totality or completeness that suited Wang s comprehen- 
sive approach. 

41. For a complete reproduction of Zhang Zeduans Spring Festival 
on the Kiver, see Zhu Jiajin 1986, pp. 98—101. 

42. Diaries, p. 1826. 

43. That the character zhang (4^) on the painting is different from 
the zhang (ffe) used in the Diaries and on the maps suggests that 
it was erroneously transcribed in the Southern Inspection Tour. 

44. For the cult of Mount Tai, see Chavannes 1910, pp. 2—43. In 
the painting, the temple is accurately placed in the northwest 
quadrant of the city. 

45. The identification of the priests is supported by the fact that, 
although the mountain is sacred to Confucians, Buddhists, 
and Daoists alike, its principal temples are Daoist; in 
addition, none of the figures depicted in the painting wear 
Buddhist robes or have completely shaven heads. For a full 
description of the pilgrimage route up Mount Tai, see ibid., 
pp. 44—157; a useful summary of Chavannes appears in China 
1974, pp. 713-40- 

46. Wang Hui followed the same process of reinterpretation in 
making a large-scale copy of Fan Kuan s Travelers amid Streams 
and Mountains (see pi. 7). His copy, painted about 1671 for 
Wang Shimin (1592-1680), was based upon the reduced copy 
of Fan's masterpiece in the album To See Large within Small (set 
fig. 17). Wang Hui's unsigned copy was so successful that 
Song Junye, who saw the work in 1696 while visiting Wang 
Shimin s old residence in Changshu with Wang Hui, added 
an inscription on the mounting that praised it as an original 
work by Fan Kuan. See Gugong shuhua lu 1965, vol. 3, chap. 5, 
pp. 41—42; and Fong 1984, pp. 187—90. 

47. Publications featuring Scroll Seven include Heilesen 1980a; 
Heilesen 1980b; Moss 1984, pp. 76—81, no. 18; and Hearn 1988, 
pp. no, 121—22, figs. 4, 10, II. The scroll is cinematically 
documented in A Day on the Grand Canal with the Emperor of China 
or Surface Is Illusion hut So Is Depth, a forty-six-minute film 
written and narrated by David Hockney and produced and 
directed by Philip Haas. See Day on the Grand Canal 1988. 

48. See Zhang Ying, Nanxun hucongjilue (1968 ed.), pp. 6b— 7a. For 
Zhang Ying, see "Chang Ying" by Fang Chao-ying in 
Hummel 1943—44, pp. 64—65. 

49. See Changzhoufuzhi 1618. See also Hearn 1990, map vi. 

50. First established in 1429, the customs station is identified by 
two tall flagpoles with orange banners. Gateways located at 
either side of the entrance serve as checkpoints across the 
roadway, while a bridge made from two barges controls river 
traffic. See Suzhoufuzhi 1883, chap. 22, pp. 43b— 44a. 

51. For a discussion of how the literary associations of a site 
outlive its physical remains, see Mote 1973, 

52. For a discussion of the poem and an English translation, see 
Hightower 1970, pp. 254—58. 

53. Other identifiable sites in the painting include Sword-Testing 
Rock, a boulder with a crack along the top face, Ancient 
Crane Torrent, Nodding Rock, Sword Pool, and Daxiongbao 
Hall. A brief history of Tiger Hill and a description of these 
sites appear in the Suzhoufuzhi 1883, chap. 7, pp. 4b— 7a. The 
gazetteer (p. 5a) mentions that a Longevity Pavilion was 
erected to the right of the main temple hall in 1689. 

54. A full account of Kangxi's visit to Tiger Hill appears in the 
Suzhoufuzhi 1883, juanshou i, pp. 9b— iia; the pagoda was 
dedicated in 959 C.E. 

55. The Chang Gate and most of the city wall have been torn 
down, but the configuration of waterways and roadways 
remains unchanged. 

56. This celebrated temple was founded during the Xianning 
reign period (275—79) of the Jin dynasty, but did not become 
known as Xuanmiao Monastery until the Yuan dynasty 
(1271— 1368). Its name is changed to Yuanmiao Monastery 

on the scroll to avoid using the character xuan, which also 
appears in Kangxi's personal name, Xuanyeh. The three- 
storied Miluo Pavilion was one of the temple s most 
prominent landmarks. Constructed during the Zhengtong 
reign (1436—49), it was destroyed in 1602 but rebuilt in the 
early years of the Kangxi era. For a brief summary of the 
temple s history, see Suzhoufuzhi 1883, chap. 41, pp. i6a— 20a. 

57. For a discussion of Zhang Zeduan's masterpiece and the 
many later versions of the work, see Whitfield 1965. 

58. See Wen Fong's discussion of dynastic revival in Fong 1992a, 
pp. 194—222, and Julia Murray's discussion of Gaozong's 
cultural pursuits and patronage in Murray 1986. 

59. Additional illustrations of these paintings appear in Fong 
1992a, pis. 26—29. ^ ^"11 discussion of the various extant 
versions of the Book of Poetry, see Murray 1993, pp. 104—47. 

60. A number of Gaozong-sponsored paintings feature images of 
processions, including Auspicious Omens for Dynastic Revival and 
Welcoming the Imperial Carriage. See Murray 1985, figs. 1, 3, 9, and 
pp. 18—21, 

61. See, for example, images of processions in the Wu Family 
Shrines (ca. 150-160 C.E.). For a convincing reconstruction of 
the structure and decorative program of these shrines, see 
Fairbank 1972, esp. pp. 70—71, a discussion of the procession. 

62. Among the Kangxi-era imperially sponsored compilations 
inspired by the same desire for comprehensive documentation 
are the Classified Encyclopedia of Prof ound Knowledge (Yuanjian leihan, 
completed in 1702), compiled under Wang Shizhen (1634— 
1711); the Complete Tang Poems (Quan Tang shi, completed in 1706), 
compiled under Cao Yin (1658— 1712); the Peiwen Zhai shuhua 

pu (completed in 1708; see note 21 above), compiled under 
Song Junye and Wang Yuanqi (1642— 1715); the Rhyme Dictionary 
of the Appreciating Cultural Studio (Peiwen yunfu, completed in 
1711), compiled under Zhang Yushu (1642— 1711); the Kangxi 
Dictionary (Kangxi zidian, commissioned in 17 10, completed in 
1716), begun under the direction of Zhang Yushu; and the 
Synthesis of Books and Illustrations of Ancient and Modern Times (Gujin 
tushu jicheng, completed ca. 1722, published in 1728), compiled 
under the direction of Chen Menglei (1651— ca. 1723) in 10,000 
juan (chapters). 

63. For Illustrations of Agriculture and Sericulture, see Yu zhigeng zhi tu 
(1697). This printed book was based on a set of paintings 
completed in 1696, with texts written out by Kangxi and 
accompanying illustrations by Jiao Bingzhen (active 

ca. 1680—1720). The illustrations are based directly upon a 
didactic painting sponsored by the Song emperor Gaozong. 
The compositions of Jiao Bingzhen's Illustrations are preserved 
in the 1697 and 1739 printed editions of the Gengzhi tu; see Siren 
1956—58, vol. 6, pi. 331. The Gaozong-era prototype for Jiao's 
painting was executed by Lou Shu (active first half of twelfth 
century). A version of this work survives in the collection of 
the Freer Gallery of Art; see Lawton 1973, pp. 54-57, nos. 7, 8. 

The Kangxi Emperor's Sixtieth Birthday Celebration depicts the 
festivities held along the nine-mile (fifteen-kilometer) route 
that Kangxi followed from the Garden of Exhilarating Spring 
(Chang Chun Yuan) in the northwestern suburbs of Beijing to 
the Forbidden City on the day before his sixtieth birthday, 
April 12, 17 13. This immense handscroU, nearly 260 feet 
(80 meters) in length, was created under the supervision of Song 
Junye and Wang Yuanqi, the grandson of Wang Hui's mentor, 
Wang Shimin. A collaborative work, the painting was completed 
in 1717. The original painting does not survive, but its 
appearance is preserved in the form of woodblock illustra- 
tions included in the Magnificent Record of Longevity, First Collection 
(Wanshou shengdian quji), published in 1717 (see "Wang Yiian-ch'i" 
by J. C. Yang in Hummel 1943—44, P* ^45)* ^ painted 

reproduction created during the Qianlong period (1736—95) and 
now in the collection of the Palace Museum, Beijing. For a 
partial reproduction of the Qianlong version, see n. 32 above. 

64. See Hearn 1988. 

Catalogue: Inscriptions, Signatures, and Seals 

Shi-yee Liu 

I ph. z, ij 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang 

Fang Huang Gongwang shanshui 
Dated 1660 

Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 68 V2 x 35 % in. (174 x 
89.6 cm) 

Princeton University Art Museum, Gift of Mr. and 
Mrs, Earl Morse, in honor of Wen C. Fong, Class 
of 1951 and Graduate School Class of 1958, and 
Constance Tang Fong (yi969-7o) 

artist's inscription and signature 
(6 columns in running script) 

Mountains and streams round and full; 

Grass and trees resplendent and lush. 

The gengzi ytAt [1660], winter, following the brush 
manner of Zijiu [Huang Gongwang]. [Painted] 
for the birthday of the venerable old gentleman 
Yu. Wang Hui^ 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin i ¥ -t. (Seal of Wang Hui) 

Shigu (Stone Valley) 

Mochan (Ink Meditation) 

Shangxia gujin Jl.'Y'^^ (I travel up and down 

through past and present) 

COLOPHON 

WuHufan ^'M¥l (1894-1968), dated 1938 
(18 columns in standard script) 

The Orthodox Lineage of Chiweng [Huang Gong- 
wang] 

Zhang Juqu [Zhang Yu, 1283— 1350] inscribed a paint- 
ing by Huangchi [Huang Gongwang] with the words: 
"Mountains and streams round and full; Grass and 
trees resplendent and lush." The two Wangs of Lou- 
dong [Wang Shimin and Wang Jian] spent their entire 
lives in study, that they might transmit the true tradi- 
tion. When Shiguzi [Wang Hui] was a young man, he 
served his teachers, the two Wangs, and received from 
them all the secrets [of painting]. [In his art,] both 
the form and the spirit are complete. This painting is 
a copy by Shigu, at the age of twenty-nine sui, of 
Xiangbis [Wang Jians] composition in the style of 
Chiweng [Huang Gongwang]. Not only are the brush 
and ink used with great skill, but also if it were placed 
among Xiangbi's paintings of his middle years, there 
would not be [seen] the slightest difference. The 
year wMjym [1938], on a winter day, elder brother 
Sun Bangrui, having newly acquired [this painting], 
showed it to me. I am delighted that it has found its 
rightful home, and have therefore recorded its origins. 
Wu Hufan examined and inscribed. 

COLOPHON WRITER S SEALS 

Hufan xuyue M^^fs^ 
WuHufan yin ^}^m.^P 

collector's SEALS 

Sun Bangrui -^-^P^ (1902— 1950) 
Bangrui jiancang Jfe S ^ 
Jiyang Sun shi ^ f^-ll> ^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Fong 1969, pp. 178, 179; Whitfield 1969, pp. 102—4, 
no. 12 

1. Translation modified from Whitfield 1969, p. 103. 

2. Ibid. 

Z ph. iS, ig 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Water Village, after Zhao Danian 

Fang Zhao Danian shuicun 
Dated 1662 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 51 Vz x 20 in. 
(130.8 X 50.7 cm) 

Palace Museum, Beijing 

artist's INSCRIPTIONS AND SIGNATURES 

(14 columns in standard script) 

In the second [lunar] month of the renyin year 
[1662], Shigu Wang Hui from Yushan painted this 
work after Water Village by Zhao Danian [Zhao 
Lingrang, active ca. 1070— after iioo] for Mr. Zitang 
at the Half Garden [Ban Yuan] of the Tang family 
in Piling [Changzhou]. 

I painted this work for a friend in Piling thirty-five 
years ago. After my old friend died, my paintings 
[for him] have been scattered. I can no longer remem- 
ber them all. Mr. Yang Jifu encountered this at the 
Temple of Compassion and Benevolence [Ciren Si] 
and purchased it to show me. It feels like a lifetime 
ago. In the past Li Gongze [Li Chang, 1027— 1090] 
loved the poetry of Su Wenzhong [Su Shi, 1037— iioi]. 
He would even mount [Su's] fragmented manuscripts 
together into scrolls to show him, but Su had forgot- 
ten when he had written them. My painting is far 
inferior to Su's poetry. But Mr. Yang's enthusiasm is 
no less than Gongze's. Therefore I have inscribed this 
painting [again] and returned it to him. On the 
twenty- fifth day of the second [lunar] month of the 
dingchou year [March 17, 1697], the thirty-sixth year in 
the Kangxi era, the Mist-Plowing Idler [Gengyan 
Sanren], Wang Hui^ 

186 

artist's seals 
WangHui if 
WangHuizhiyin i^^^^P 
Shigu 

Shiguzi JG^-J- (Master Stone Valley) 

Qinghui 8^ (Pure Radiance) 

Gengyan Sanren (Mist-Plowing Idler) 

Chenghuai Guanyin >^t^^^P (Seal of the Hall of 

Lucid Mind) 

Yi zai Danqiu Huanghe Baishi Qingteng zhi jian 
-6i^$^>S'fr0-^fB^ (Integrating the ways of 
Danqiu [Ke Jiusi], Huanghe [Wang Meng], Baishi 
[Shen Zhou], and Qingteng [Xu Wei]) 
Cangjiang baifa /^S^^^ 

INSCRIPTION 

TangYuzhao M^^^ (1602-1672) 
(6 columns in running-standard script) 

An expanse of rivers and lakes fills the eye, undis- 
turbed by wind or waves. 

How I wish to move my home and spend my life in 
such a painting! 

Old age and laziness are my excuses for perusing it 
day and night. 

How could dream journeys not bring great joy! 

My nephew Zitang waited for Shigu [Wang Hui] 
to complete this painting so he could bring it to 
Pingling. I kept it a whole day to appreciate it 
and inscribed this. Zhao of the Half Garden 
[Ban Yuan] 

INSCRIPTION writer's SEALS 

Ban Yuan 4" IS 

Piling Kongming vHk^^^L^H 

collectors' SEALS 

SheNong (1847-?) 
Tiefeng shi shangjian ^^'^'^^ 

Li Songyun ^fe*^ (active late nineteenth century) 
Wuxing Songyun zhencang ^ ■R-fe' l| ^ 

PangYuanji ^iti^ (1864—1949) 
Xu Zhai shending M.^^^ 

Unidentified 

Jingzhi zhi zhang ^2^^^$^ 

Qimhuangyin Fang zhencang ^"M^^^^ 

Illegible (one) 

PUBLISHED REFERENCE 

Zhongguo gudai shuhua tumu 1986— 2001, vol. 22 (2000), 
p. 208, Jing 1-4388 

1. Unless otherwise stated, all translations in this Catalogue 
section are by Shi-yee Liu. 

2. Several Chinese towns have been named Pingling in the 
past and thus it cannot be determined to which Tang Yuzhao 
referred in his colophon. See Dai Junliang 2005, vol. 1, p. 782. 

3 pi H 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Clearing after Rain over Streams and Mountains 

Xishan yuji 
Dated 1662 

Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 44 V2 x 17 % in. (113 x 
45.1 cm) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Bequest of John M. Crawford Jr., 1988 (1989.363.141) 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(3 columns in standard script) 

In the first decade of the fifth month of the renyin 
year [June 16—25, 1662], [I painted] Clearing after Rain 
over Streams and Mountains in the style of Juran. Wang 
Hui from Yushan 

artist's SEAL 

Wang Hui zhi yin i^f^^P 

LABEL STRIP 

Zhang Daqian ^A'T" (1899— 1983) 
(i column in running-standard script) 

Wang Shigu s [Wang Hui's] Clearing after Rain over 
Streams and Mountains, in the collection of the Hall of 
Great Wind [Dafeng Tang] 

collectors' SEALS 

Zhang Daqian ^ A'f' (1899— 1983) 
Dafeng Tang zhenwan AMi^J^^ 

John M. Crawford, Jr. (1913-1988) 
Hanguang Ge zhu Gu Luofu jian cang Zhongguo gudai 
shuhua zhi zhang W t ® ^^"^ 

♦ t^* 

Hanguang Ge ^31 tIq ^ 
Gu Luofu ^}^^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Zhang Daqian 1955—56, vol. 4, pi. 39; Aschwin Lippe 
in Collection of John M. Crawford, Jr. 1962, p. 163, no. 81; 
Collection of John M. Crawford, Jr 1965, pp. 39—40, no. 65; 
Dix Siecles de peinture chinoise 1966, no. 57; Weng 1978, 
pp. XXV, 124—25, no. 57; John M. Crawford, Jr., Collection 
1984, p. 44, no. 150 

4 pl-3 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Landscape in the Style of Juran 

Fang Juran shanshui 
Dated 1664 

Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 51*78 x i^Vi in. (131 x 65.5 cm) 

Princeton University Art Museum, Gift of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse (yi979-i) 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(4 columns in standard script) 

Mountains and streams round and full; 

Grass and trees resplendent and lush. 

In the spring of tht jiachen year [1664], follow- 
ing the brushwork of Juran, [painted] for the 
venerable Xiu on the old gentleman's birthday, 
Wang Hui^ 

187 

ARTIST S SEALS 

Wang Hui X ¥ 
Shangxia gujin jLTfi'^ 

COLOPHON 

WuHufan ^T^^Jl (1894-1968) 
(above the painting; i horizontal hne of 4 large char- 
acters and 4 columns in standard script) 

Light transmitted from Huanghe [Wang Meng, 
1308-1385] 

This painting s brush method may be traced back to 
that of master Ju[ran, active ca. 960—85] through 
that of Wang Shuming [Wang Meng], therefore, its 
"breath and soul" are heroic and full, and it may be 
reckoned a masterpiece by Qinghui [Wang Hui]. 
Wu Hufan inscribed. 

COLOPHON writer's SEALS 

Meijing Shuwu ^ ^ ^ ^ 
WuHufan ^Mm. 

collectors' seals 

Wang Jiqian i^ij (C. C. Wang, 1907—2003) 
Wang shi Jiqian zhencang zhiyin i^^-s^J^^^^^P 

Earl Morse (1908-1988) 
Musi shoucang mingji ^ ^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Tseng 1956, no. 48; Fong 1969, p. 179; Whitfield 1969, 
pp. 105—7, no. 13 

I. Translation modified from Whitfield 1969, p. 105. 

5 pi 10 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Reading Next to the Winiovo in the Mountains 

Shan chuang dushu 
Dated 1666 

Hanging scroll, ink and light color on paper, 63 x 
16 Vz in, (160 X 42 cm) 

Palace Museum, Beijing 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(2 columns in standard script) 

Reading Next to the Window in the Mountains 
Respectfully painted for Mr. Zaoru [Wang Shan, 
1645— 1728] in celebration of his receiving recommen- 
dation [to office] this autumn.^ On the ninth day of 

the ninth [lunar] month in the hingwu year [October 
6, 1666], Wang Hui fromYushan 

ARTIST S SEAL 

Wang Hui zhi yin i^-^^P 

PUBLISHED REFERENCE 

Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997—, vol. 24 (2000), p. 12, pi. 13 

I. Wang Shan was the eighth son of Wang Shimin (1592-1680). 
He later played a role in recruiting Wang Hui to undertake the 
project of painting the emperor's second Southern Inspection 
Tour. For his biography, see "Wang Shan" by Fang Chao-ying 
in Hummel 1943—44, pp. 830—31. 

6 fls. 11, 11A,B 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain 

Xiashan yanyu 
Dated 1668 

HandscroU, ink and color on paper, 16 V2 x 97 in. 
(41.8 X 246.4 cm) 

Asian Art Museum of San Francesco, Gift of the 
Tang Foundation, presented by Leslie, Martin, and 
Nadine Tang in celebration of Jack C. C. Tang s 
sixtieth birthday (B87D8) 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(4 columns m standard script) 
Summer Mountains, Misty Rain 

During the first decade of the eighth [lunar] month 
in the wushen year [September 6—15, 1668], the Moun- 
tain Man of Mount Wumu [Wumu Shanzhongren], 
Wang Hui, painted this while a guest in Suzhou. 

artist's seal 

Wang Hui zhi yin i ^ 41 

COLOPHON 

Wang Shimin i (1592— 1680), dated 1669 

(18 columns in standard script) 

Calligraphy and painting have sometimes flourished, 
sometimes declined, but rarely has the world seen 
masterpieces that rival those of Zhong You [151—230] 
and Wang Xizhi [303—361]. Students of painting in 
later times have tried to follow the superior path of 
Dong Yuan [active 930s— 60s] and Juran [active 
ca. 960-85], but although the mountains and rivers 
inspired them with beauty, they were nevertheless 
dependent on the fashions of the time. 

After the Tang and Song periods the Orthodox 
lineage in painting continued from the four great 
masters of the Yuan period and Zhao Mengfu to 
men of my region of Wu [Suzhou]. There were 
men like Shen Zhou [1427— 1509], Wen Zhengming 
[1470-1559], Tang Yin [1470-1523], Qiu Ying 
[ca. 1495— 1552], and finally Dong Wenmin [Dong 
Qichang, 1555— 1636]. Although each of them had 
his own brush style, they all derived inspiration 
from the old masters and expressed themselves in 
a like manner. 

But in recent times the way of painting has 
declined; the ancient methods have been lost. As most 
people have tried to express new ideas, misconcep- 
tions have arisen and been spread, leading irrevocably 
to dead ends. 

6 

Now Shigu [Wang Hui] has come and is reviving 
this tradition. He has closely followed the great mas- 
ters of the Tang, Song, and Yuan [dynasties]. Even 
when casually done, his works radiate the ancient 
spirit. Not only do the compositions and individual 
motifs resemble the ancients', but the spirit-resonance 
of his brushwork also captures the essence of theirs. 
Furthermore, when he follows a particular old master, 
his painting looks entirely like his model with no trace 
of other masters* works. Without his inscription, even 
a discerning connoisseur cannot tell the difference. 
Such ability is unprecedented. Even Shen Zhou, Wen 
Zhengming, and the others like them cannot rival 
him. As I once said, it is a pity that Shigu was born a 
little too late to meet Master Wenmin [Dong 
Qichang], and had Wenmin met him, how greatly he 
would have been amazed. Shigu himself also deplores 
missing the opportunity, being filled with regret every 
now and then. 

This scroll, in which clouds and mist drift over 
dense woods, was painted entirely in the brush man- 
ner of Yingqiu [Li Cheng, 919—967] and Juran, with a 
rich variety of small scenes that is characteristic of 
Yan Wengui [active ca. 970—1030]. It is a particularly 
great work in his oeuvre. This autumn he will go to 
visit Vice Minister of Revenue Liweng [Zhou Liang- 
gong, 1612— 1672] at his mvitation and will bring this 
painting as a present. Therefore, he showed it to me 
and asked me to inscribe it. Elegant and erudite, 
Liweng is the leader of scholar-officials and the patri- 
arch of connoisseurs. He is a great admirer of Shigu. 
Naturally he will feel a joyful affinity upon meeting 
him. As for Shigu, who is devoted to someone who 
appreciates his talent, he will exhaust his brilliant 
mind and marvelous fingers to create numerous mas- 
terpieces to be treasured in a clean, secluded scholar's 
studio. It is like the old saying, "Thanks to Con- 
fucius 's [praise], [Boyi and Shuqi, both active eleventh 
century B.C.E.] became more renowned."^ Although he 
could not meet Wenmin, to now be appreciated by the 
vice minister is the opportunity of a lifetime. What is 
there to regret about being born in a different time? 

Two days after the first day of autumn [liqiu] in the 
jiyou year of the Kangxi reign [July 50, 1669], the Old 
Man of the Western Cottage [Xilu Laoren], Wang 
Shimin, inscribed this at the age of seventy-eight. 

' -^tff^M^^t • ^^^^ 

COLOPHON writer's SEALS 

Cuicun If ^ 

Wang Shimin yin iB^^^p 
Xi'lw Laoren >^ ^ A 

collectors' seals 

Zhou Lianggong ill '^-^ (1612— 1672) 

Yuqing Zhai zhuren zhang '/"f" ^ i A ^ 

Laigu Tang #1 4 

Li Yuan # M 

Unidentified 

Ducun qingshang ^i'feP >"i" 

Xi'nan Wu shijianshang >^ i^J 

published reference 

Kim 1996, pp. 130—31, fig. 61, pp. 186—87, rio- 

. This statement comes from the biography of Boyi in Sima 
Qian, Skip (1959 ed.), vol, 7, chap. 61, p. 21 zy. 

7 pk 16, ly 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Autumn Forests at Yushan 

Yushan fenglin 
Dated 1668 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 57 Vi x 24 Vs in. 
(146.2 X 61.7 cm) 

Palace Museum, Beijing 

artist's inscription and signature 
Dated 1668 

(5 columns in standard script) 

On the sixteenth day of the tenth [lunar] month in 
the wushen year [November 19, 1668] the venerable 
Yiren [Gu Mei, 1633— after 1671] came to Yushan to 
see the maple leaves. He honored me with a visit to 
my humble studio and told me of his pleasure in 
visiting this beautiful place. Upon his departure, he 
asked me to paint its scenery. I therefore painted this 
scroll to present to him. On the third day after the 
winter solstice [December 21], your junior, Wang 
Hui from Yushan 

artist s seal 

Wang Hui zhi yin i^^lHp 

LABEL strip 

Unidentified 

(2 columns in standard script) 

A genuine work of Wang Gengyan's [Wang Hui's] 
Autumn Forests at Yushan in the style of Dachi [Huang 
Gongwang, 1269— 1354] 

[Painted] for Gu Yiren [Gu Mei], Wu Meicun 
[Wu Weiye] inscribed. In the collection of Zhuchi 
[Sun Di, active mid-seventeenth century] 

i A# ;t mfr ffl * Sir 

inscription 

Wu Weiye ^^'tM (1609— 1671), dated 1669 
(4 columns in running script) 

The scenery of early winter has not yet turned 
desolate; 

The red leaves and green hills are still vivid. 
The sight naturally becomes a painting 
With Buddhist temples and aged mountain bridges. 
I inscribed this painting for my venerable colleague 
Yiren [Gu Mei] in the twelfth [lunar] month of 
the wushen year [January 2—31, 1669], Wu Weiye. 

inscription writer's seals 
Wu Weiye ^itt. 
Meihua An ^tb^ 

189 

collector's seals 

WanChengji ^7^$Z (1766-1826) 

Zhiyuantang zhenshang ^^^'^^'f 

Hezhou suocang -^l^fr^/f^ 

Zixue Shanfang jiancang shuhua yin ^ S uLr ^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Chen Liisheng 1996, pi. 2; Zhongguo huihua quanji 
1997—, vol. 24 (2000), p. 13, pi. 14 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
The Colors of Mount Taihang 

Taihang shanse 
Dated 1669 

HandscroU, ink and color on silk, 10 x 82 V2 in. (25.3 x 
209.4 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Ex coll.: C. C. Wang Family, Gift of Douglas Dillon, 

1978 (1978,423) 

artist's inscription and signature 
(6 columns in running script) 

Once in the home of a noble family in Guangling 
[Yangzhou], I saw a small scroll by GuanTong 
[active ca. 907—23], [In it] clouds and peaks race 
together with a luxuriant and dense air. Truly, it 
pierced my heart and startled my eyes. Even today 
I remember a few things from it. Accordingly I have 
followed its method and made this Colors of Mount 
Taihang, I hope it exhibits some of the deep and 
heroic atmosphere of the north country, rather than 
merely posturing with pretty details. Three days after 
the Midautumn Festival in the jiyou year [September 
12, 1669], Wang Hui of Yushan [made] and inscribed 
[this painting],^ 

ARTIST S SEALS 

Shigu ^ ^ 

Chen Hui £ t (Hui, your servitor) 

LABEL STRIP 

Ziweng M ^ (unidentified, nineteenth century?) 
(i column in standard script) 

Shigu s [Wang Huis] handscroll. The Colors of Mount 
Taihang, Divine class. In the Zhou family collection in 
Changsha [Hunan Province]. Ziweng inscribed. 

frontispiece 

Pan Yijun 7^^% (1740— 1830), dated 1816 

(4 characters in large clerical script, 9 columns in 

standard script) 

A divine class [work] by Shigu [Wang Hui]. 

In the hingzi year of the Jiaqing reign era on the 
sixth day of the third decade of the fourth [lunar] 
month [May 22, 1816], [Pan] Yijun inscribed at the 
Hall of Three Pines. 

frontispiece writer's seals 
Huaqiao Laopu ^ IS 
Pan Yijun yin m ^ 

Yi hu Mulan liang deng Tai Dai zaiyou Huanghai san su 
Wutai ->t^S|i^^*Uv#^*^*-^^5:J: 

inscription 

Wang Shimin i (1592-1680), dated 1673 

(i column in large clerical script, i column in 
standard script) 

The Colors of Mount Taihang 

In the late spring of the guichou year [1673], Wang 
Shimin of Loudong [Taicang] viewed [this painting] 
and therefore inscribed it. 

inscription writer's seals 
Wang Shimin yin i & 
Yanke 

colophons 

Chen Chongben 1?^ ^ (active ca. 1775— after 1815) 
(4 columns in running script) 

Fan Zhongli's [Fan Kuan's, ca. 960— ca. 1030] large 
hanging scroll. Traveling in Snowy Mountains, which I 
once owned, has long since entered the imperial col- 
lection. Its brushwork and that of this scroll are 
extremely similar. One may thus know that in his 
breast Gengyan [Wang Hui] had deeply attained the 
hills and valleys of the ancients. Therefore, when he 
put his brush [to silk, the result was] like this, 
extremely full. At the beginning is a title by Xilu 
Laoren [Wang Shimin], from which one may gather 
his delight in it. [Chen] Chongben recorded.^ 

Chen Chongben, dated 1815 
(5 columns in running script) 

I recently obtained some imitations of the ancients 
by Gengyan [Wang Hui], four paintings [each mea- 
suring] about three feet [ninety-one centimeters] 
square. Perhaps he intended them for a small stand- 
ing screen showing the four seasons, but the silk, 
after more than a hundred years, has not yet been 
mounted. For the painting of the autumn scene he 
followed the same draft as for this Colors of Mount 
Taihang. I shall mount [the four paintings] on two 
hanging scrolls to preserve them for my enjoyment. 
In the Jiaqing [reign era], the yihai year, seventh 
[lunar] month, second day [August 6, 1815], recorde 
[Chen] Chongben*^ 

colophon writer's seal 
Bogong suo cang ^^^S* 

collectors' seals 

Wang Shimin i B$ & (1592— 1680) 

Xilu Laoren 2& ^ A 

Yanke zhenshang M^Jlt 

WangWenbo i^'f^ (active ca. 1662— 1722) 
Guxianglou canghao "ir $ 
Haiti shending zhenji ^ ^ 

Haiti shouding ^ ^ 

^ I i ^ 
f 4. ^ * 

'I ^ 

■t i- - 

m » *\ 

I f K 

190 

Chen Chongben f^^^ (active ca. 1775— after 1815) 
Chonghen pingsheng zhenshang ^ !^%'^ 
Shangqiu Chen Chongben kaocang yin -^P ^ ^ 5fc ^ 
Shangqh 

XuNaipu ^75f- (jinshi, 1S20) 
KanxiZhai iiJ-f- 
Diansheng suocang >%i.^fi^ 
Kanxi Zhai shuhua yin ift -S- # ♦ t 
Diansheng Naipu }$z^7b % 
Chen XuNaipu £^75 f" 

ChenKuilin FJ^^^ (1855-1928) 
Chen Shaoshi xinhai hou jiancang f^'}^ ^ 

Zhang Daqian fft.A^ (1899— 1983) 

Dafeng Tang zhencang yin A Mi ^ J^^M ^P 

Nan hei dong xi zhiyou xiangsui wu hieli 1^ :^b ^ J> ^ 

Zhang Yuan 
Daqian xi 1 

Wang Jiqian i ^ ^ (C. C. Wang, 1907—2003) 
Wang Jiqian haiwai suojian mingji i ^ ^ ^/f A» ^ 
Wangshi Jiqian zhencang zhi yin i 1^ ^ £p 
ZhuliCuan 

Ceng cang Wang Jiqian chu 

Earl Morse (1908-1988) 

Musi shoucang mingji ^| ^ i^^^M' 

Musi zhencang ^^'^^ 

Unidentified 

Shuotang zhenwan ^ '^^^ 
Yu shi suocang ^^^^ 
Yizisun 

Yuan Shi Ju TL-tiC 
Hanlin xueshi 

Fuxuan miji zhi yin % ^^^^^^V 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Chen Kuihn 1915, chap. 2, p. 20; Zhang Dayong 1932, 
chap. 4, p. 18; Fong 1969, p. 179; Whitfield 1969, 
pp. 108—13, H> Chow 1970, pp. 152—53; Fong 1984, 
pp. 188—90, fig. 156; Chen Ltisheng 1996, p. 106; 
Hearn in Barnhart, Fong, and Hearn 1996, p. 226, 
no. 33; Hearn 1996, p. 162, ill. pp. 164—65, pL 33 

1. Translation modified firom Whitfield 1969, p. 108, and Wen 
Fong's essay in this volume (p. 27). 

2. Translation modified from Whitfield 1969, p. 109. 

3. Ibid. 

9 pl4 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Snow Clearing, after Li Cheng 

Fang Li Cheng xueji 
Dated 1669 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 43 % x 14 in. 
(110.8 X 35.5 cm) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Ex 
coll.: C. C. Wang Family, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Earl 
Morse, in honor of Professor Wen Fong, 1978 
(1978.13) 

ARTISTS INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(2 columns in standard script) 

On the twenty-second day of xiaochun [the tenth 
lunar month] in the ;VyoM year [November 15, 1669], 
just before setting out for Boxia [Nanjing] and while 
my boat was anchored at Piling [Changzhou], I 
painted this Snow Clearing, after Li Cheng under 
candlelight. The Mountain Man of Mount Wumu 
[Wumu Shanren], Master Stone Valley [Shiguzi], 
Wang Hui inscribed.' 

artist's SEALS 

Wumu Shanqiao Mo B ih^, (Wood-Gatherer of 

Mount Wumu) 

Wang Hui zhi yin i^^^P 

collectors' SEALS 

Wang Jiqian i^-ij (C, C. Wang, 1907-2003) 
Wang Jiqian haiwai suojian mingji i ^ 2^ ^/f A* 
Yinliixuan shuhua yin ^ ^ t 

Earl Morse (1908—1988) 
Musi zhencang 

Musi shoucang mingji ^ ^^k^iSi^^^"" (on mounting, 
not illustrated) 

Unidentified 

Zhuxue Ting sheng 'ft S ^ 

Songjiang Li shi Zhongji zhencang yin fe'^I- $ ^ 4* .^^^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Fong 1969, pp. 178—79; Marilyn Fu and Shen Fu i 
Whitfield 1969, pp. 196—98, no. 30 

. Translation modified from Whitfield 1969, p. 196. 

10 pi zS 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Autumn Mountains J Red Trees 

Xishan hongshu 
Dated 1670 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 44 14 x 15 Vz in. 
(112.4 x 39.5 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

NO artist's inscription or SIGNATURE 
ARTISTS SEALS 

Wang Hui zhi yin if^^P 
Shigu ^ ^ 

You he huke ^ ^ ^ (Why not this way?) 
inscription 

Wang Shimin i (1592-1680), dated 1670 

(8 columns in running-standard script) 

191 

While this painting by Wang Hui follows the idiom 
of Wang Meng [1308— 1385], its brushwork and design 
can be traced back to Wang Wei [701— 761]. The com- 
position, after the ancients, is quite different from 
that of Wang Meng. On a spring night, Wang Hui, 
passing through Loudong [Taicang], brought this 
painting to show me. I wanted to keep it but, notic- 
ing Wang's reluctance to give it up, did not insist, 
though I was sorely disappointed. At the time, I was 
suffering from a bad cough, but after enjoying the 
painting for several days I suddenly recovered. How 
true is the saying that pleasant stimulation can drive 
away a mans head coldl^ On the day after the grains 
sprouted in the rain [^wjyw] in the gengxu year [May 5, 
1670], the Old Man of the Western Cottage [Xilu 
Laoren], Wang Shimin, inscribed. 

INSCRIPTION writer's SEALS 

Zhenji 
Yanke 

Wang Shimin yin iBfl^L^p 

COLOPHONS 

YunShouping (1633— 1690) 

(14 columns and 5 columns in running-standard 
script, on paper mounted above the painting), 
dated 1670 

Wumu Shanren [Wang Hui] once told me, "I have 
seen no fewer than twenty genuine works by Wang 
Shuming [Wang Meng] in my life. Among them there 
are three that are most extraordinary. From Thatched 
Hall in Autumn Mountains I came to understand his 
methods. I saw Summer Mountains at Tang [Yuzhao s] in 
Piling [Changzhou] and grasped his subtle taste. 
Finally I viewed Buddhist Temple and Mountain Passes. It 
opened my eyes and enlightened my mind. I investigated 
all the transformations he made and fully realized that 
Autumn Mountains has a natural delicacy and moistness. 
Summer Mountains appears ponderously dense and 
ancient, and Mountain Passes, though fragmentary in 
terms of structure, exhibits an extraordinary untram- 
meled flair that cannot be judged in the usual way." 

Thus, Mr. Wang s art advanced, knowing that his 
former works modeled after Shanqiao [Wang Meng] 
were done without true understanding. After some 
long and deep thought, Shigu [Wang Hui] playfully 
blended the brush methods of the three paintings into 
one composition at his leisure. He rid himself of old 
mannerisms and developed fresh ideas. [The painting] 
is energetic and free, capturing the lasting flavor of 
Shanqiao s work in its entirety. 

When Shigu came from Suzhou this summer, I 
searched his luggage and found this scroll. It abso- 
lutely amazed me. Shigu, too, took great pride in it 
and would not, it seemed, even exchange it for fifteen 
towns. I placed it on my desk. Having perused it for 
more than ten days, I inscribed these few remarks 
before returning it to him. Even to Xilu Laoren 
[Wang Shimin], who truly treasured and appreciated 
art, Shigu could not let go of this beloved work. How 
could people like me presume to keep it long for pri- 
vate enjoyment! In the fifth [lunar] month in the 

summer of the gengxu year [1670], Nantian Caoyi 
Yun Ge from Piling inscribed in the Studio of Quiet 
Chanting [Jingxiao Ge]. 

I happened to stop by the water pavilion of the 
Xu family and found that this painting had been 
acquired by Mr. Pan [Pan Yuanbo, active 1660—70] 
of Jinsha [Yixing], I felt surprised and very jealous. 
Without a listener who understands music, an instru- 
ment loses its power. Could it be that Xilu's [Wang 
Shimins] and my own appreciation of art do not 
compare with Mr. Pan's! Crazy Mi [Mi Fu, 
1052— 1107] would shout [for joy when looking at 
artworks] on his boat. This is understandable and 
worthy of emulation! I wonder how Shigu [Wang 
Hui] will face our mockery upon meeting Xilu or 
me in the future. In winter, the tenth [lunar] month, 
Nantian Yun Ge again inscribed. 

COLOPHON WRITER S SEALS 

Zhengshu SL-^ 
Shouping 

Natian caoyi ^^^^ 

COLLECTORS* SEALS 

Qianlong emperor ^fi"^ (r. 1736—95) 
Qianlong yulan zhi hao $t Il:#P K ff 
Qianlong jianshang ft, "X* 
Shiqu haoji Ife J ft 
Yizisun 

Sanxi Tang jingjian xi ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Shiqu dingjian >S ^ ^ 

Baoji chonghian ft 1 

Yu Shufang jiancang hao 'f^P 4- S- Mi 

Jiaqing emperor ^^'^ (r. 1796— 1820) 
Jiaqing yulan zhi hao ^^^^^^^ 

Xuantong emperor m.^*^ (r. 1909— ii) 
Xuantong yulan zhi hao m. ^ 'f^P ^ ¥ 
Xuantong jianshang 'S.^^'t 
Wuyi Zhai jingjian xi ^ 3% ^ H- S 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Wang Hui hualu 1970, pp. 27—30, no, 5; Gugong shuhua 
tulu 1989—, vol. 10 (1992), p. 177; Chen Liisheng 1996, 
p. 48; Fong 1996c, pp. 479, 481, pi. 277 

I. Translation from Fong 1996c, p. 479. 

II pi 7 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Landscape after Fan Kuan^s ^^Travelers amid 

Streams and Mountains'^ 

Fang Fan Kuan Xishan xinglu 
Ca. 1671 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on silk, 61 V& x 29 % in. 
(155.3 X 744 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

NO artist's INSCRIPTION, SIGNATURE, OR SEAL 
INSCRIPTION 

Qianlong emperor ^Ll^'^* (r. 1736—95), dated 1757 
(6 columns in running script) 

The mountains more heroic than elegant. 
And waterfalls more rapid than wide. 
Such IS the scenery of our northern land. 
Where travelers sing, "How difficult is the road ahead!" 
Gusts make ten thousand leaves fly, 
Where clouds rise through distant peaks. 
How the simpler methods of the Four [Yuan] Masters, 
All follow this painting as their noble ancestor!^ 
In the third [lunar] month of the dingchou year in 
the Qianlong reign era [April 18— May 17, 1757], 
the emperor inscribed. 

INSCRIPTION writer's SEALS 

Qianlong chenhan itfi:!^^ 
Jixialinchi ^^i^yt 

COLOPHONS 

Wang Shimin -J- (1592— 1680), dated 1671 

(6 columns in standard script) 

Of the Song and Yuan masterpieces in my family 
collection, two-fifths were acquired in the capital and 
the other three-fifths were acquired from Dong 
Qichang [1555— 1636]. I loved them no less than essen- 
tial parts of my own body. With the passage of time 
and as circumstances have changed, only one- or two- 
tenths of what I once owned still remains. Recently, 
going through an old trunk, I brought out this Fan 
Huayuan [Fan Kuan, ca. 960— ca. 1030] Travelers, Its 
silk in perfect condition, the radiantly brilliant work is 
truly a divine object! I am now in my eightieth year. 
Retired from worldly affairs, I devote myself to study- 
ing ancient masterworks for amusement. Having 
remounted this scroll, I mark the occasion with these 
words.^ On the Midautumn Day [fifteenth of the 
eighth lunar month] of the xinhai year [September 17, 
1671], Xilu Laoren Wang Shimin inscribed. 

192 

Songjunye (ca. 1662— 1713), dated 1696 

(6 columns in standard script) 

At Xitian by the Lou River is a bamboo cottage with 
paper-paned windows. It is the place where Mr. Yanke 
[Wang Shimin] keeps the paintings and calligraphies in 
his collection. On his desk I had the opportunity to 
view this genuine work of Fan Huayuan [Fan Kuan], a 
scarcely seen rarity. With pervasive mist and clouds and 
groves of dense trees, it caught my attention and over- 
whelmed me. Only then did I realize how extraordinary 
was the ancients' brushwork, which inspired my utmost 
admiration. Shiguzi [Wang Hui] was there at the time. 
He spent a whole day making a copy of it in reduced 
size to give me so that I might enjoy a virtual Huayuan 
painting. I inscribed these few casual remarks to express 
my joy. On the sixteenth of the third [lunar] month in 
the hingzi year during the Kangxi reign [April 17, 1696], 
your junior colleague, Song Jianye 

m - mm'imti^M$r^ • ^m^^ <■ ft® 

COLOPHON writers' SEALS 

Wang Shimin i B$ & (1592— 1680) 
Zhenqu 

Xilu Laoren >ft A 
Wang Shimin 

Songjunye 5^-.^^ (ca. 1662— 1713) 
Illegible (one) 

collectors' seals 

Wang Shimin 5- (1592-1680) 

Yanke jiancang ^ ^ 

Taiyuan Wang Xunzhi shi shoucang tushu 

Wang Xunzhi shuhua ji i 41 ^ 1 12, 

WangYuanqi (1642-1715) 
Saohua An 

BianYongyu "F":7jc^ (1645— 1712) 
Shigu Tang shuhua ^ "ir !^ ^ t 

Qianlong emperor $tjfk'r^ (r. 1736—95) 
Qianlong yulan zhi hao |i 5E ^ f 
Qianlong jianshang ^ttf^^*^ 
Shiqu baoji >S Ift ^ 
Yizisun 

Sanxi Tangjingjian xi ^^^^^l?- S 
Shiqu dingjian ^ 
Baoji chonghian ^ 4 
Cuxi tianzi ^ ^ 

Wufuwudai Tang guxi tianzi hao 3~^3.i\'^'^ ^ 
Shou ^ 

Bazheng maonian zhi hao i ife^ W 

Jiaqing emperor ^^'^ (r. 1796— 1820) 
Jiaqing yulan zhi hao iSr ^ -f^P 5E ^ 

Xuantong emperor m.^"^ (r. 1909— n) 
Xuantong yulan zhi hao v^-f^ 5t V 

Xuantong jianshang !^ ^ It 
Wuyi Zhai jingjian xi ^ 3^ ^ # ^ 

Unidentified 

Huafeng Zhuren jianding ^ •'^^ i. A 1^ ^£ 
Yiqing Lou zhenshang yin "fr ^J-^^ It 
Shanyin Xu Yi'an zhencang ^^t^M. 

published references 

Cugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 2, chap. 5, pp. 37—38; Gugong 
shuhua tulu 1989—, vol. i (1989), pp. 169—70; Fong 
1996c, pp. 482—84, fig. 163 and pi. 278 

1. Translation by Wen C. Fong. 

2. Ibid. 

12 pk ig, JO 

Wang Hui (1632-1717) 

Clearing after 5now at Shanyin^ after Wang Wei 

Fang Wang Wei Shanyin jixue 
Dated 1671 

Handscroll, ink and color on silk, 8 in. x 8 ft. 
11% in. (21.2 X 273.5 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

artist's inscription and signature 
(3 columns in standard script) 

Clearing after Snow at Shanyin 

On a winter day in the xinhai year [1671], the Moun- 
tain Man of Mount Wumu [Wumu Shanzhongren], 
Master Stone Valley [Shiguzi], Wang Hui, painted in 
the manner of Youcheng [Wang Wei, 701—761]. 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin if^^P 

Shigu 

Youhehuke ^H^"^ 
colophon 

Da Chongguang 4 4 (1623— 1692) 
(11 columns in running-cursive script) 

Life away from the remote mountains can be hectic. 
In my mind I long for the liberation of roaming in snow. 
How could I expect that through Wang Wei's hand 
My vision would be transported to the woody hills?' 
Inscribing Wang Shigu's [Wang Hui's] Clearing after 
Snow? at Shanyin, after Wang Wei at the Jin Garden of 
Mr. Yang [Yang Zhaolu, ym5^)i, 1652] in Jinling 
[Changzhou], Jiangshang Waishi Da Chongguang 

colophon writer's seals 
Jiangshang Waishi >-I-_L^hi 
Da Chongguang yin ^ 4 ^fe^P 
EchiCe ^>iLf^ 

5 i 

f t * 

.•& 

collectors' seals 

Qianlong emperor ^ (r. 1736—95) 

Qianlong yulan zhi bao $tfi^k%^f 

Qianlong jianshang ^t* ^ 

Shiqu baoji ^ 

Yizisun t^it 

Sanxi Tang jingjian xi 'sl^^ 
Shiqu dingjian ^5 Ift ^ |^ 
Baoji chonghian W 1 
Yangxin Dian jiancang bao 

Jiaqing emperor (r. 1796— 1820) 

Jiaqing yulan zhi bao ^ /S ^^P K ^ 

Xuantong emperor ^ (r. 1909— 11) 
Xuantong yulan zhi bao S .^L'f^P 

Unidentified 

Tanqinfu changxiao 5^ ^ ^S. -fe 

Donglaijun shoucang shuhua yinji 1K ^J^^ ^ t 

Lu Fangjia yin 

Kiting ® *?* 

Weichuan xianguan >H ^'1 

Nanyang i^J 1^ 

Zhongsa n liuy in 't' ^m. ^ 

Fangqing qiuhuo ^'f^^^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Wang Hui hualu 1970, pp, 31—34, no. 6; Xu Bangda and 
Xue Yongnian 1999, pi. 14; Gugong shuhua tulu 1989—, 
vol. 20 (2001), pp. 151—56 

I. Yugang, translated here as "woody hills," is also Da Chong- 
guangs style name. 

13 ph. 6j 27 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Mist Floating on a Distant Peak^ in Imitation of 

Juran 

Fang Juran yanfu yuanxiu 
Dated 1672 

Hanging scroll, ink on silk, 76 x 28 Va in. (193 x 71.5 cm) 

Princeton University Art Museum, Gift of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse (71973-9) 

artist's inscriptions and signatures 
(6 columns in standard script and 4 columns in stan- 
dard script) 

Juran 5 Mist Floating on a Distant Peak Inscribed by the 
Huizong emperor of the Song dynasty [Jurans] hang- 
ing scroll, famous throughout the land, is in the col- 
lection of the Hanlin Academician Zhuang Dan' an 
[Zhuang Jiongsheng, 1627— 1679] of Piling [Chang- 
zhou]. If any work may be compared with Residents of 
the Capital [Longsu jiaomin'] by Beiyuan [Dong Yuan, 
active 930s— 60s] and be worth a thousand pieces of 
silver, then this is the one. The Shiyu [Censor] Jiang- 
shang [Da Chongguang, 1623— 1692] and I had the 
good fortune of seeing it in the autumn of the renzi 
year [1672]. Jiangshang, an expert connoisseur, asked 
me to imitate it. Although my clumsy brushwork 
cannot compare with that of the ancient master in 
structure and spirit-resonance, I have managed to 
approximate it. The Man under Mount Wumu 
[Wumu Shanxiaren], Wang Hui 

^mm^i^i^m ^^^^ 

This painting by Juran does not make use of any 
paths, streams, buildings, boats, or bridges. It depends 
solely on broad and heroic compositional forces [s/>i]. 
Deep in the mountains, where even woodcutters and 
shepherds do not reach, one often encounters true 
scenery such as this. This is the real style of Master 
Ju. It may be termed a work of the untrammeled class 
[yipin]. New Year's Day of the guichou year [February 
17, 1673], Wang Hui made a second record.^ 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin i !^ (square, reHef) 

Wang Hui zhi yin i If (square, intaglio) 
Wumu Shanqiao @ tli ^> 

ZiShigu ^;s^ 

Youhebuke ^H^"^ 
inscriptions 

Wang Shimin i B^^^L (1592—1680) 
(10 columns in standard script) 

I had longed my entire life to admire Juran's Mist Float- 
ing on a Distant Peak, but had never set eyes on it until 
the autumn of the xinhai year [1671], when I finally 
saw it in the Garden of the Inept Administrator 

194 

[Zhuozheng Yuan]. Unfortunately, it was like the 
visions that Qingxi [Ananda, one of Buddha's princi- 
pal disciples] had of the Buddha preaching, for after 
seeing it once, I never saw it again. Toward the end of 
the renzi year [1672], brother Shigu [Wang Hui], on 
his way back from Jingkou, turned his boat aside to 
pay me a visit. He told me that he had made a copy 
for the Censor Zaiweng [Da Chongguang], He hap- 
pened to have the painting in his bag and brought it 
out to show me. As I unroll and examine it, I find the 
ink lustrous and brilliant, and a primal breath [yuanqi] 
fills the composition. A feeling of joyful exhilaration 
moves freely in it, and the texture strokes are divinely 
inspired. Since [this painting] has already opened a 
new life for Master Ju, why should I want the origi- 
nal? Shilao [Wang Hui] is certainly an artist whose 
craft competes with creation itself; yet without Zai- 
wengs connoisseurship and deep friendship, how 
could such a masterpiece be produced? For myself, 
aged and infirm, the very opportunity to exclaim over 
such a scroll may be considered a remarkable coinci- 
dence. Thus, I especially inscribe this above the 
painting to mark an important event in the history 
of art and also to note my own good fortune. An 
eighty-one-year-old man of Loudong [Taicang], 
Wang Shimin 

Wangjian (1598-1677) 
(8 columns in running script) 

When Zhuang Danweng [Zhuang Jiongsheng] first 
acquired [the original] painting by Juran, he especially 
brought it to Wumen [Suzhou] to show me. That was 
nearly twenty years ago. I have often seen it in my 
dreams. This winter, brother Shigu [Wang Hui], on 
his way through Lou[dong], showed me this scroll, 
which he has made for the Censor Zaiweng, In its 
distant and subtle effects it almost surpasses the origi- 
nal. Even though the brilliant metamorphosis of the 
brushwork comes from Wang Hui s natural gifts, 
might he not have tossed away this pearl that glows in 
the night [^j^gwang] had he not met Zaiweng s discern- 
ing eye? I would like to congratulate myself privately 
on encountering three great happy events in one day: 
I have actually seen a living reincarnation of Juran; 
I have admired at a distance the cultured air of Zai- 
weng; and I have come into close contact with Shigu's 
personal manner. At the close of the year, impover- 
ished and sorrowed, to obtain this suffices to comfort 
me. Inscribed by Wang Jian of the Fragrance-Tinged 
Studio [Ranxiang An] 

INSCRIPTION writers' SEALS 

Wang Shimin i8^& (1592-1680) 

Wang Shimin yin 

Yanke 

Zhenji %^ 

Wang Jian (1598— 1677) 

Wang Jian zhi yin i 
Langye 

COLLECTORS* SEALS^ 

Unidentified (two) 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Fong 1969, p. 179; Whitfield 1969, pp. 114— 18, no. 15 

1. Translations of Wang Hui's two inscriptions modified from 
Whitfield 1969, pp. 114, 115. 

2. Translations of Wang Shimin's and Wang Jians inscriptions 
modified from ibid., pp. 114—15. 

J. This painting, formerly in the Saito Collection, Osaka, is 
accompanied by a box with an inscription by Naito Konan 
(1866-1934). Por a translation of Naitos text, see ibid., p. 116. 

14 6-2/,j/-j6 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
In Pursuit of Antiquity: Landscapes after Song 
and Yuan Masters 

Qu^u 
Dated 1673 

Album of twelve paintings, nine in ink on paper and 
three in ink and color on paper, 6%— 8% x ii^/i— 13 V* in. 
(17.6—22.6 x 29.8—33.5 cm) 

Princeton University Art Museum, Gift of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse (yi973-67a— 1) 

artist's inscription and signature' 
(4 columns in standard script, on Leaf L) 

In thtguichou year [1673], ninth [lunar] month, 
autumn, visiting at the Secret Garden [Mi Yuan] of 
Mr. Li [Zongkong, 1618— 1701] of Weiyang [Yang- 
zhou], I imitated a number of Song and Yuan styles 
in small paintings, to be sent to my revered master, the 
Vice Minister of the Court of Imperial Sacrifices 
Yanweng [Wang Shimin, 1592—1680], to wish him a 
happy life, and also to take the place of waiting on 
him in person. His student, Wang Hui 

artist's seals 

Shiguzi ^ [A, B, D, J, K, L] 

Wang Shigu [C, H] 

Wang Hui zhi yin if 4:.^^ [F, G] 

note on brocade cover 

Shen Bingcheng >ifc^^ (1823— 1895) 

(6 columns in running script) 

Twelve leaves painted by the Mist-Plowing Idler 
[Gengyan Sanren (Wang Hui)] as a gift for the Vice 
Minister of the Court of Imperial Sacrifices Yanke 
[Wang Shimin] — small works after Song and Yuan. 

Yanke personally inscribed the two characters, 
Qu gu, "In Pursuit of Antiquity," on one leaf 

Yun Nantian [Yun Shouping, 1633—1690] inscribed 
successive leaves. 

Da Jiangshang [Da Chongguang, 1623-1692] and 
other noted men, eleven in all, wrote inscriptions. 

Recorded by the Studio of Flatfish and Ink Stone 
[Dieyan Lu (Shen Bingcheng, 1823— 1895)], 

note writer's seal 

Dieyan Lu zhencang 0^^Jt^^ 

title 

Bi Long -P- jfl (active 1736—96) 

(1 horizontal line and 2 columns in standard script) 

Authentic works by Wang Gengyan after Song and 
Yuan [masters], presented to Master Yanke 

TITLE writer's SEAL 

Zhuchi miwan 

13 

4f it. 4 

i <* *f I 

"-Sit 

♦ 

A. 

i 
f 

1^ 

il- i 
it. ♦ 

FRONTISPIECE 

Wang Shimin i 9^1^ (1592-1680) 
(2 columns in mixed scripts) 

In pursuit of antiquity [Qu gu], Shimin 

FRONTISPIECE WRITEr's SEALS 

Wang Shimin yin 

Xilu Laoren ^M.^^ 

COLOPHONS 

J* f ^ ^ H 

1u 

« 

Opening to this leaf, I suddenly find myself in a 
lonely and uninhabited world of wild cliffs and deep 
valleys. The trees cast somber shadows, while moun- 
tain torrents and paths wind their way around them. 
The scene fills less than one foot \c})i\, yet one can 
roam in it with endless enjoyment. [A painter] must 
concentrate his spirit, reflect in solitude, cleanse [his 
mind], and emit a supernatural breath [so that] the 
powers of his miraculous brush may describe qualities 
beyond outward appearances, or he will not easily 
achieve such excellence. Shiguzi [Wang Hui] painted 
for Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin] this small scene 
in the style of Beiyuan [Dong Yuan, active 930s— 60s]. 
Truly, the metamorphosis is divine and brilliant. It is 
a masterpiece of the first order. Shouping inscribed. 

Da Chongguang ^ t tIc* 
(6 columns in running script) 

The sky is blue, the clouds white, the trees deep deep 
green. 

A grass hut, a sparse fence, beside a wild bank; 
A pair of herdboys firmly astride their buffaloes, 
Playing their flutes in the glow of the setting sun. 

Written for Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin] to 

raise a laugh, Chongguang 

^♦f • 

Da Chongguang !^ t (1623— 1692) 
(6 columns in running script) 

Too lazy to imitate the Apology [Jiechao] of Yang Xiong 

[55 B.C.E.-18 C.E.], 
Burning incense, I muse over the diagrams of the 

Changes. 

Cares of the world touch not my place of leisurely rest, 
The blue mountains are my only faithful friends. 

Written for Master Yanweng s [Wang Shimin s] 

correction, [Da] Chongguang 

LEAF B 

Yun Shouping (1633— 1690) 

(4 columns in running-standard script) 

Da Chongguang ^ 4 ^fe 
(4 columns in running script) 

A bamboo mat is perfect for a clear day, 

My light robe lets in a cool breeze; 

Upon his refusal to take the cash left on the road. 

How could Yanling [Ji Zha, sixth century B.C.E.] have 

known the old man in sheepskin? 

Master Woody Hills [Yugangsheng] inscribed 

it Jiat^;!^^ ' 

LEAF C 

LiuYu #pit (1620-after 1689) 
(3 columns in running script) 

The willows first touched with green 

Rustling far from the water village. 

The east wind wafts along as it will, 

Not lingering about the Eternal Gate [Changmen] 

Palace. 

LiuYu 

-fen 

LEAF D 

Yun Shouping 'f^-^-^ 

(5 columns in standard script) 

In the style of Chiweng [Huang Gongwang, 
1269— 1354] the location of peaks and valleys can be 
learned with success, but beyond the brush and ink 
there is also a certain rustic and hoary feeling that 
cannot be successfully learned. This is why in studying 
Chiweng one frequently falls short of attaining excel- 
lence. Only the Vice Minister of the Court of Impe- 
rial Sacrifices of Loudong [Wang Shimin] and Master 
Stone Valley of Yushan [Wang Hui] have been able to 
reach this degree. Shouping respectfully records this. 

196 

Chen Cheng P^t^ (active second half seventeenth 
century) 

(3 columns in standard script) 

In [our] love of brush and ink we are of one heart; 
When busy we visit in thought, at leisure we seek each 
other. 

Deep into the night, by a shaded lamp, I watch you 
painting, 

I know not whence comes that limpid sound. 

Inscribed on a small scene after Chiweng by the 
Mountain Man of Mount Wumu [Wumu Shan- 
ren] [Wang Hui]. Chen Cheng of Jinling [Nanjing] 

LEAF E 

Yun Shouping '|^^-^ 

(2 columns in running-standard script) 

Shiguzi [Wang Hui] imitating the bamboo, rocks, and 
dead branches of Yunxi [Cao Zhibo, 1272— 1355], He 
has a fresh and spirited flavor that one may enjoy 
without tiring. There is a saying that "even in a 
spoonflil of water there are curves; even in a chip of 
stone there are hollows." This painting has attained 
that quality. Yun Shouping inscribed. 

LEAF F 

Yun Shouping 

(3 columns in standard script) 

When painting, one should sit cross-legged with loos- 
ened clothing, as if no one were around. Only then 
will one hold the powers of metamorphosis in one s 
hand, and the primal breath [jyMiifj^i] will abound. 
Unfettered by earlier masters, one will then be able to 
roam beyond the established rules. Shouping inscribed. 

I judge that this painting by Wumu Wang Shanren 
[Wang Hui] after Shuming [Wang Meng, 1308— 1385] 
is truly enough to frighten away the flock of common 
painters. It is a treasure that pierces the heart and 
startles the eye. Inscribed again on the following day. 

LEAF FF 

Da Chongguang S 4 it 
(4 columns in running script) 

After the rain, spring bamboo fills the forest; 
There are also cherries, every one of them round. 
I believe that in the mountains things are tasteful; 
It makes me sad to think about the feast of the 
five lords."* 

Written to be corrected by Master Yanweng 
[Wang Shimin]. Chongguang 

Yun Shouping 'f^^-^, dated 1680 
(9 columns in running script) 

The mountaintops are black, sunlit but still wet; 
At the brush tip the spring clouds are dark and do not 
open. 

The ink-flowers drip, breaking the green mountains. 
Leaning on my desk, I suddenly hear the rain coming 
in the hills. 

In early summer of the gengshen year [1680], 
Nantian Shouping wrote this under the bamboo 
at the Hall of Visiting Cranes [HelaiTang]. 

Mi father and son [Mi Fu, 1052— 1107, and Mi Youren, 
1074— 1151] Shangshu [Gao Kegong, 1248— 1310] 

each went his separate way, as did Wang Xi and Xian 
[Wang Xizhi, 303—361, and his son Wang Xianzhi, 
344-388], who rode together with Zhong Yuanchang 
[ZhongYou, 151— 230]. Their ways have diflFerences and 
yet are the same; they have similarities and yet are 
different. Shouping 

LEAF H 

Zhou Eryan M^^t (active second half seventeenth 
century) 

(3 columns in running-standard script) 

The oak leaves are turning yellow, the maple leaves 
are red, 

Walking along, I search for the right phrase; sitting 

down, I look at the scenery. 
Feeling thirsty, I purchase a strained, clear wine. 
But before I reach the mountains ahead, the exhilaration 

is gone. 

Zhou Eryan of Jintan [in Changzhou] inscribed 
for Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin] 

Yun Shouping 

(2 columns in running-standard script) 

Dense forests and large boulders act as hosts and 
guests. Beyond the hills, on a fiat plain, a man returning 
travels the only road. 

197 

This composition gives the impression of great 
distance. The brushwork evokes the feeling of a Tang 
master. I feel that [by comparison] even Wang Jinqing 
[Wang Shen, ca. 1048— 1103] suffered from the ills of 
"carved painting" \_kehua]f 

LEAF HH 

Li Zongkong $ ^ -^L (1618— 1701) 
(4 columns in standard script) 

Beyond the world of dust, the autumnal glow has a 

leisure of its own, 
Quiet man in a quiet scene, each is concerned only 

with the other. 
Who says that all along the road the scenery looks 

just like a painting? 
The painting is found between the red cliffs and the 

green trees. 

Written on Shigus [Wang Huis] small painting 
for Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin], Li Zongkong 

Cheng Sui (1605— 1691) 

(5 columns in running script) 

Opening this painting satisfies the wish to discover 

the beginning [of the road]. 
In clear dreams, I often roam with Creation; 
Without form, without limit, without end, 
Beyond the divine continent there are more divine 

continents. 

Wumuzi [Wang Hui] painted for Master Yanweng 
[Wang Shimin] this small album that catches all 
the principles and qualities of past and present. 
In the wielding of the axe it is supernatural and 
extraordinary. I have lived with it for ten days, 
and wrote this for [the Master's] correction. 
Cheng Sui 

LiuYu ^?piS 

(7 columns in standard script) 

The grass and trees are covered with frost and dew, 
Red and yellow play one against the other. 
Below, the trees look down on the curve of a green 
stream, 

Above, they are on a level with the cold mountains. 
The woodcutter finds his way home. 
How randomly the wine shops are placed! 
Wisps of cloud cling to the roUing cliffs 
And a scarlet flag is propped at the corner of a 
building. 

In the morning one foUows the brilliandy bright 
scenery, 

In the evening one lives with the beauty of the misty 
glow. 

A rustling stream sweeps along the fallen leaves, 
A cool breeze sings on a high plateau. 

198 

Leaning on a staff, I often pass such a scene. 
Chanting and singing make me only more melancholy. 
The world luxuriates in ornamental splendor. 
While heroes lose their youthful appearance. 
I believe, as a matter of course, that there is still a 
Dao, 

I urge you to think of [the ancient sages] Xuanyuan 
[the Yellow Emperor] and Qibao. 

Of Shiguzi's [Wang Huis] paintings, I am 
especially fond of those in the school of Ni [Zan, 
1306— 1374], Huang [Gongwang], and Cao Zhibo. 
The fine and ornate [^om^/(] ones, however, lean in 
an entirely different direction. If these too can be 
included in the Southern Tradition of Youcheng 
[Wang Wei, 701—761], what more can one ask? 

Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin] searches for 
the Great Synthesis \_dackeng] of painting. His opin- 
ions must be out of the ordinary! Liu Yu of Baimen 
[Nanjing] 

Tower of Rising Clouds [Yunqi Lou] named 
after this painting. 

Shigu has used the same idea in creating this 
small picture. It is as if he had himself listened to 
the immortals' flute music at the Yueyang Tower 
[Yueyang Lou], and all mundane thoughts had sud- 
denly vanished from his mind. Thus under his brush a 
supernatural breath rises like dense steam. The cloud- 
mountains which he has painted here are completely 
different from those before [on Leaf G]. Yuanke 
Shouping recorded this so that those who "under- 
stand the music" may appreciate the painting with 
him. The guichou year, summer, the sixteenth day of 
the sixth [lunar] month [July 29, 1673], under lamp- 
light, while visiting Jingxi 

%m.M^i: "ill^-afflj • ili^illliS" ' *^ 

rf/. ro 
i 1 * > 

i i f ^ * 

^ It 

LEAF I 

Yun Shouping 'l^-^-f^ 

(5 colunms in standard script) 

In the autumn of the renzi year [1672], Shigu [Wang 
Hui] and I examined together a large scroll by Mi 
Nangong [Mi Fu] at Mr. Yang's Water Pavilion. On 
it was an inscription by Song Huimiao [Emperor 
Huizong, r. iioi— 25], which read: "Heaven bestows 
a timely rain, mountains and rivers appear through 
the clouds." Dong Zongbo [Dong Qichang, 1555— 1636] 
authenticated it as "the finest painting by Mi." It 
was in the collection of the Minister of the Court 
of Imperial Entertainments Wu [Wu Zhengzhi, 
1618— 1691] of Jingxi [Yixing, Jiangsu]. Mr. Wu had a 

LEAF JJ 

RuanYuxuan Bt3^^ (active mid-seventeenth 
century) 

(5 columns in running script) 

Green rides, blue peaks, a hundred strange folds. 
The glow of the clear sky and the colors of the rain 

are matched in perfect harmony. 
For the man of leisure, there is endless relish, 
But it would be foolish to talk about this to a busy 

man of the world. 

Inscribed on Wangzi Shigu's [Wang Huis] paint- 
ing after Sailing Back along Many Rivers [Chongjiang 
guizhao tu] by Guo Heyang [Guo Xi, ca. 1000— 
ca, 1090] to beg for the correction of the old 
gentleman, Yanweng [Wang Shimin], RuanYuxuan 

Da Chongguang S 4 7^ 
(5 columns in running script) 

Weeping willows decorate a distant sandbank, 
A fishing boat idly drifts by the rivers edge. 
No one is drunk and asleep at the cabin window, 
He must be at the wine shop, refilling his ewer. 

Inscribed for Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin] to 

raise a laugh. Da Chongguang 

LEAF K 

Li Zongkong $ ^ -^L 

(2 columns in standard script) 

I gaze out at a range of mountains, pure and snowy 
white, 

Dividing the bends of the crystalline river. 
The fisherman drifting toward me is in a happy 
mood, 

But I should know that he is not returning from 
Yanxi. 

Li Zongkong inscribed. 

LEAF KK 

Ye Rong H ^ (active second half seventeenth 
century) 

(9 columns in running script) 

I once sailed on the Xiang River in late summer and 
early autumn and saw the cloud patterns in the vast 
sky take many strange and unusual shapes. They 
looked very much like the snow-capped mountain 
forms of Guo Heyang [Guo Xi], Although all 
ancient painters were supposed to have heaven and 
earth as their teachers, Guo Xi was especially known 
for his cleverness [in painting natures strange forms]. 
Now, seeing this album by Shigu [Wang Hui], I feel 
as if the strange clouds of the Xiang River were once 
more vividly before my eyes. Who says that the 
ancients cannot be equaled by modern painters? I 
wrote this to query Master Yanweng [Wang Shimin]. 

Perhaps he will say that my words are not false. 
Ye Rong of Xinan writes this. 

LEAF L 

Yun Shouping 'f?^-^ 

(3 columns in standard script) 

Judging by this painting, Shigu [Wang Hui] has truly 
grasped the unconscious achievements of the ancient 
master. In a land of tumbled mountains and wilder- 
ness, a single boat is adrift. How can such scenery be 
found in the bosom of an ordinary man? Nantian 
Caoyi [Yun Shouping] 

Zhou Eryan M^^^f 

(2 columns in running-standard script) 

The river mist is thick and a fine drizzle whispers, 
The traveler is lonely, for with whom can he converse? 
In his small boat, carrying a crane, whither does he return? 
It must be to the Village of Yellow Leaves in Yushan 

[Wang Huis hometown]. 

[Zhou Er]yan. 

LEAF LL 

ZhaShibiao 4tb# (1615-1698) 
(8 columns in running script) 

Even worms eating away at wood may happen to form 
patterns, 

Yet who can equal Heyang [Guo Xi], who made rocks 

like clouds? 
Do not say that all painters are clever. 
The best of them, past and present, will bow to you. 

All things successful have their special resources, 
With family teaching and a master's legacy, the 
accomplishments will be doubly extraordinary. 

Inheriting the mantle from Dong [Yuan] and Ju[ran, 
active ca. 960-85], the Orthodox succession is yours, 

Your reputation will equal theirs for a thousand 
autumns. 

Inscribed on Shigu's [Wang Hui s] painting for 
Master Yanweng's [Wang Shimins] correction. 
Zha Shibiao 

COLOPHON WRITERS* SEALS 

Da Chongguang ^ 4 ^fe (1623-1692) 
Jiangshan^ waishi Jl^H 5t [AA] 
Yanglian [BB] 
Da Chongguang [BB, CC] 

Yugangjushi #ISl>&dr [CC] 
Jiangshang waishi >X_h^|-i [E. JJ] 
Chongguang [FF] 
Juqu Shanzhuang ^ ^ di^ [FF] 

Yun Shouping (1633— 1690) 

Yun Shouping yin ff#^^P [B] 

Zhengshu [D] 

Shouping [E, F] 

Nantian xiaoyin ^W^hf% [F] 

Shouping #-f^ [GG] 

Yun Zhengshu 'WJi-U [GG] 

Nantian ife ® [GG] 

Yuanke ffi^ [H, I] 

Yun Shouping yin 'W^-^^P [I] 

Shouping -^-^ [L] 

Shuzi 7k -f [L] 

LiuYu ^^Pif (1620-after 1689) 
Liu Yu #:fcf [C] 
LiuYuzhiyin ^^P^tf^^P [HH] 
Yugu [HH] 

Chen Cheng F^l^ (active second half seventeenth 

century) 

Ziai S ± [D] 

Chen Cheng f^l^ [D] 

Li Zongkong $ ^ -fL (1618— 1701) 

Qinlai [HH] 

Li Zongkong yin *^^L^P [HH] 

Shu yun t 'S [HH] 

Li Zongkong ^'$^1 [K] 

Heshou M# [K] 

Cheng Sui (1605— 1691) 

Cheng Sui ^iSL [HH] 

Zhou Eryan M^^^l (active second half seventeenth 
century) 

Eryan zhi yin ^^f^^P [H] 
Zhou Eryan yin J^r^^T^P [L] 

Ruan Yuxuan l^'tilS (active mid-seventeenth century) 
Ruan Yuxuan siyin Bt^^^^P [JJ] 

ZhaShibiao (1615-1698) 
Erzhan [LL] 
Shihiao i# [LL] 

199 

collectors' seals 

Hou Quan "f^ It: (active ca. 1662—72) 

Bingheng changshou ^W"^-^ [F] 

Bi Long -P- /It (active 1736—96) 

Loudong Bi Long Jianfei shi cang /^i '/fal ^ 

[title page] 

Bi Jianfei mijiyin ^MMU^^P [L] 

Zhang Jixiong fR^^^I (1803-1886) 

Jiaxing Zhang Jixiong zhencang yin ^ ^ ^ ^ 

[final page] 

Shen Bingcheng V^t*^^ (1823-1895) 

Dieyan Lu zhencang ^^^^^^ [title page and A— L] 

Zhu Dingfii ^ >C ^ (active mid-nineteenth century) 
ZhuDingfu [D] 
Dingfu xinshang ^jSC'^m" [H] 

Wang Shixin (active twentieth century) 

Changzhou Wang Shixin Yuexuan suocang i 3^ ^ 

M^^si. [L] 

Wumen Wang Yuexuan zhencang shuhua ji ^ f ^ i ^ 
^^♦tte. [final page] 

Unidentified 

XiangcaoAn [A] 

Da Jinshan jiacang yin ^ ^5. Jj ^ M. [E] 

Pingsheng you shuhua pi ^ ^t^^ [L] 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Mostra d'arte cinese 1954, p- 241, no. 867; Fong 1969, 
p. 179; Whitfield 1969, pp. 119—42, no. 16; Suzuki 
1982—83, vol. I, pp. 121—22, no. A16-058; Century of 
Tung Ch'i'ch'ang iggz, vol. i, pp. 449—50, no. 165, 
Leaves i— 12, vol. 2, pp. 185—86, no. 165 (entry by 
Roderick Whitfield) 

1. Translations of inscriptions and colophons in this entry modi- 
fied from Whitfield 1969, pp. 119-29. 

2. The Changmen Palace has symbolized the sorrow of separa- 
tion since Sima Xiangru (179—117 b.c.e.) wrote his "Rhapsody 
on the Changmen Palace" ("Changmen fu"), describing the 
sadness of Empress Chen at her separation from the Han 
emperor Wu (r. 140—87 b.c.e.). 

3. Five members of the Wang family enfeoffed by the Han emperor 
Chengdi (r. 33—7 b.c.e.) were constandy quarreling, but at a feast 
to which all were invited their host succeeded in resolving one 
of their disputes. After watching them fight over choice deli- 
cacies, he threw everything into a pot and cooked it together. 

4. "Kehua" refers to painting that is still and lifeless because of an 
excessively strict attention to technique and detail. 

15 pi 41 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and Wang Shimin 

(1592— 1680) 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters 

Fanggu shanshui 
Dated 1674 and 1677 

Album of twelve paintings, ink and color on paper; 
ten paintings by Wang Hui, each 8 % x 13 K in. (22 x 
33.8 cm); two paintings by Wang Shimin, each 10 x 
13 in. (25.4 X 32.9 cm) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Pur- 
chase, The Dillon Fund Gift, 1989 (1989,141.4) 

ALBUM COVER AND TITLE STRIP 

Zhang Zeren fftj^'f— (active mid-nineteenth century) 
(4 columns in standard script) 

An album of landscapes by the Mountain Man of 
Mount Wumu [Wumu Shanren (Wang Hui)] in the 
manner of ten masters of the Tang, Song, and Yuan 
dynasties. This fine, authentic work was acquired by the 
master of the Western Garden [Xi Yuan Zhuren (Li 
Moyuan, active mid-nineteenth century)] in the fourth 
year of the Tongzhi reign era, the eighth [lunar] month 
of the yichou year [September 20— October 19, 1865], 
Guyu [Zhang Zeren] inscribed the label. 

Also included are two leaves [of paintings] after old 
masters by Xilu Laoren [Wang Shimin] 

TITLE STRIP writer's SEAL 

Guyu ^ 

artists' INSCRIPTIONS AND SIGNATURES^ 

1 

LEAF a: Wang Hui, Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evenings 

after Zhao Mengfu 

(2 columns in standard script) 

Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evenings after Ouho Laoren 
[Zhao Mengfu, 1254— 1322] 

LEAF b: Wang Hui, Sand Banks and Rocks, after Huang 
Gongwang 

(1 column in standard script) 

Sand Banks and Rocks, after Chiweng [Huang Gongwang, 
1269-1354] 

LEAF c: Wang Hui, Shady Summer Woods, after Wang 
Meng 

(2 columns in standard script) 

Shady Summer Woods, after Shuming [Wang Meng, 
1308-1385] 

LEAF d: Wang Hui, Pavilion amid Woods and Verdant 
Peaks, Following the Brush Ldeas of Guan Tong 
(3 columns in standard script) 

Clouds girdle a thousand green peaks; 

A single pavilion amid the autumn-tipped trees. 

Following the brush ideas of Guan Tong [active 

ca. 907-23] 

200 

r 

LEAF e: Wang Hui, Deserted Mountain^ Old Trees, and 

Village, after Juran 

(4 columns in standard script) 

Mountain torrent and deserted mountain path 
Through old trees to a villages bramble gate. 
Using the brush manner of Juran [active 
ca. 960—85] to evoke the poetic ideas of Shaoling 
[Du Fu, 712—770] 

LEAF f: Wang Hui, Cloudy Mountains, after Cao Kegong 
(4 columns in standard script) 

When mountains put forth clouds, clouds put forth 
mountains, 

Transformed into continuous rain, they encompass all 
mankind; 

From this one knows that the gods' assembled banners 

and pennants 
Are not in golden halls or rooms of jade. 

After Minister Gao [Kegong, 1248— 13 10] 

leaf g: Wang Hui, Peach Blossom Spring, after Zhao 
Mengfu 

(3 columns in standard script) 

When spring comes, peach blossom waters are every- 
where; 

If this is not an immortal's spring, what place is? 
Following Recipient of Edicts Zhao's [Zhao 
Mengfu's] methods of using colors. 

leaf h: Wang Hui, Level Vista with Trees and Water 

Buffalo, after Zhao Lingrang 

(2 columns in standard script) 

Level Vista with Trees and Water Buffalo, after Zhao Danian 
[Zhao Lingrang, active ca. 1070— after iioo] 

ki III iffi ■iiittiittiilliihliiB^ 

LEAF i: Wang Hui, Wintry Grove on Ancient Banks, after 
Li Cheng 

(2 columns in standard script) 

Wintry Grove on Ancient Banks, after Li Xianxi [Li 
Cheng, 919-967] 

^^^^ ' M*Ase 

LEAF j: Wang Hui, Mountain Village after Snow, after 
Wang Wei 

(12 columns in standard script) 

Mountain Village after Snow, after Vice Minister Wang 
[Wang Wei, 701—761] 

Yanweng Laoren [Wang Shimin] gave me a blank 
album and asked for some paintings. At the time I was 
traveling in Weiyang [Yangzhou] and was not able to 
comply. This spring I received an urgent letter [from 
him] so I quickly did these small scenes after various 
masters. Your disciple's embarrassing brush and ink is 
not worthy of entering your collection. Done by a 
rainy window on the fifth day of the second [lunar] 
month of the jiayin year [March 5, 1674]. Your pupil, 
Wang Hui of Yushan 

LEAF k: Wang Shimin, Landscape after Li Cheng s 
"Wintry Grove'' 

(i column in standard script): 

After Li Xianxi 's [Li Cheng's] "Wintry Grove" 

LEAF l: Wang Shimin, Shady Summer Woods, after Zhao 
Mengfu 

(10 columns in standard script) 

After Recipient of Edicts Zhao's [Zhao Mengfu's] "Shady 
Summer Woods" 

This album in the manner of various famous masters' 
brush styles was begun in the midautumn of 1674. 
I stopped, then completed the last four leaves three 
years later. Altogether there are twelve paintings. Now 

201 

it is the sixth day of the fourth [lunar] month of the 
din^si year [May 7, 1677]. Written by Wang Shimin 

— »- ■ *\ 

■ 

1 iS 

a f !? ^ ^ 

.. . j 

LEAF m: Wang Huis colophon, dated 1714 
(5 columns in standard script) 

In 1674, when master Fengchang [Wang Shimin] asked 
me to do this album, he was just eighty-three sui 
[eighty-two years old]. That was forty years ago; now 
I am eighty- three \_sui]. The masters grandson Qiuya 
has taken this out to show me. Examining again my 
earlier inscriptions done so many years ago I am over- 
whelmed with sadness and feel that the bonds of 
brush and ink that connect me with three generations 
of the Wang family cannot have been an accident. The 
eighth day of the tenth [lunar] month [November 14, 
1714]. 

LEAF NtLuShihua I^Mf'fb (1714-1779) 
(2 columns in standard script) 

Wang Shigus [Wang Huis] interpretations of the 
ancients 

Vice Minister Wang s [Wang Shimin s] interpretations 
of the ancients 

artists' seals 

Wang Hui i ^ (1632-1717) 

Shiguzi ;5^-f [A, C, D, F, G, I J (twice)] 

Wang Hui zhiyin if-^^P [B, C, U E, F, G, J 

(twice)] 

LeafN 

Wang Hui zhiyin if^^P [M] 
WangShigu i;5^ [D,H] 

Shangxia qiannian -LT^^ [M] (Moving back and 
forth through a thousand years) 
Cengyan Sanren shi nian hashi you san ^^t"!^'^ AH^^ 
[M] (The Mist-Plowing Idler at the age 
of eighty-three [suij) 

Wang Shimin iH^^ (1592-1680) 

Yanke [K] 

Wang Shimin yin iSf&^P [L] 

colophons 

leaf o 

Li Moyuan ^ ^ (active mid-nineteenth century), 
dated 1865 

(21 columns in running script) 

Shigu [Wang Hui] did this album in the second 
[lunar] month of the jiayin year of the Kangxi reign 
period [1674]; at the time he was exactly forty-three 
[sui, forty-two years old]. With a keen spirit he pur- 
sued the essential character and boundless spirit of all 
the great masters of the Tang, Song, Yuan, and Ming 
until he got it just right. Since he did this album at 
the request of Yanweng [Wang Shimin], he put all his 
energies into it; it is not something one can talk about 
in the same year as common works. There are alto- 
gether twelve paintings with interpretations of ten 
masters [in this album]. Yanke [Wang Shimin] trea- 
sured them to the extent that in the midautumn of 
the same year he began [his own] twelve interpreta- 
tions, which he completed three years later and kept 
in his collection. After his estate was divided, these 
albums were passed on to Wang Shimins fourth son. 
[Wang Shimins] grandson, Qiuya, who is mentioned 
in Wang Hui s colophon, is the son of this fourth son. 

After I acquired this album, my friend Zhang 
Guyu [Zeren] saw it and remarked that it was a trea- 
sure that had been handed dovra within the Wang 
family. In another gentleman's record of the division 
of caUigraphies and paintings [from Wang Shimins 
estate], a record one can trust, it states that of the 

fifteen scrolls and albums by Wang Hui in the list, this 
album was given to the fourth son; it further states 
that the title of the first leaf was Buddhist Temple on a 
Clear Evening. Happily, my album contains [a] painting 
[with the same title]. Furthermore, the division [of 
the estate] was in 1680 and Wang Hui inscribed this 
album again in 1714, some thirty years later, when 
Qiuya brought it out for him to see. This matches 
perfectly the [elapsed] time since the estates division, 
so there can be no doubt that this is the same album 
treasured by several generations. 

Unforttmately, only two leaves remain from Wang 
Shimins twelve paintings, while two of Wang Hui's 
twelve paintings — those in the manner of Fan Kuan 
and Huang Gongwang — were taken by Zhang Zeren, 
so that, alas, the original creation is no longer com- 
plete. But this kind of treasure is watched over by 
ghosts and spirits and jealously guarded by heaven and 
earth. If you survey all the collectors* seals from the 
time it was acquired by the Lu [Shihua] family of 
Taicang, [it is evident that] in no more than a few 
decades it has already changed owners three times 
[from Lu Shihua to Cheng Zhenyi to Zhang Zhiwan 
and, finally, to Li Moyuan]. During that time there 
was also civil unrest, and it might easily have been 
destroyed. It makes one frightened to think of it. 
Indeed, who am I to possess this? In seeking to return 
the album to its original perfection, so as to avoid 
arousing the jealousy of the gods, I have returned 
Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evening to its old position at 
the beginning [of the album] and placed the two 
leaves by Wang Shimin at the end in order to show 
how our forebearers learned from one another. 

On the twenty-first day of the chrysanthemum 
[eighth lunar] month of th.tyiqiu cyclical year, the 
fourth year in theTongzhi reign period [November 9, 
1865] the Master of the Western Garden [Xi Yuan 
Zhuren] wrote this at the Studio of Great Su [Shi, 
1037— iioi] and Little Mi [Youren, 1074— 1151]. 

The two title strips are an early Qing mans brush 
and ink, so I have mounted them on the first page; the 
two-character seal [on each title strip] Listening to Pines 
[Tingsong^ was cut by Mr. Lu Runzhi [Shihua], who 
was the inscriber. 

'Ml 

5l 

1 * »*- f -4 

f i 1 2ti 

* «* .* s 5 

*335 

^ .'J A « 

1 tJt 

3 t * 

i 

5 f 'J 
*5 

^ « i 

^ ^ J* ^ 

^ i 

Li Moyuan ^ .5-^, dated 1870 
(22 columns in running script) 

On the day of the Duanyang [spring] festival in the 
gengwu cyclical year, the ninth year of the Tongzhi 
reign period [June 3, 1870], my friend Zhu Dingfu 
brought by an album of ten leaves by Wang Shimin 
for me to see, saying that it was the remaining [leaves 
from the album to which] mine belonged. Upon 
examining the small scenes interpreting various mas- 
ters, [I realized that] they were nearly identical with 
those by Wang Hui; moreover, the hoary and old 
[style of the] inscriptions and the indistinct seals were 
no different from [those on my two leaves by Wang 
Shimin]. But at the back of this album [Wang Shimin 
had] inscribed several lines in a different month from 
those on the final painting [in my set], so I could not be 
absolutely certain [they were from the same album]. 
So I took my Wang Hui album and compared it with 
this one; then I could see that these two sages' works 
were in complete agreement. 

Judging by the year and month [of their execution], 
it was Wang Hui who first made interpretations of 
the ancients for Wang Shimin and then Wang Shimin 
who made twelve interpretations after [Wang Hui]. 
Because of [Wang Shimin's] advanced years and dim 
eyesight, he could not follow the finer passages. There- 
fore, there are only six leaves that he copied closely, 
while for the rest he used the original composition but 
modified it or even followed some other model. 

Among his interpretations, six leaves — Buddhist 
Temple on a Clear Evening, after Zhao Mengfu [Leaf A], 
Sand Banks and Rocks [Leaf B] and Evening Colors on Pure 
Peaks [not in present album], both after Huang Gong- 
wang. Deserted Mountain and Old Trees, after Juran [Leaf 
E], Level Vista with Trees and Water Buffalo, after Zhao 
Lingrang [Leaf H], and Wintry Grove, after Li Cheng 
[Leaf I] — are the same. But even among these there 
are small differences. In Buddhist Temple on a Clear Eve- 
ning the rocks and banks on the right side [of Wang 
Shimin's version] lack several layers, he did not paint 
two fishing boats below the central peak, and the blue- 
and-green coloring is heavier. In Sand Banks and Rocks 
the deep red color is applied more thickly. In the 
painting after Juran the trees and village in the lower 
right are less detailed. Level Vista with Trees and Water 
Buffalo has been changed to a spring scene, with the 
flying birds omitted and the water done in thick ink, 
while Wintry Grove has been changed into a snowscape. 

Among the remaining six paintings, Shady Summer 
Woods, after Wang Meng has been changed to a picture 
of bamboo, the painting in the manner of Guan Tong 
[active ca. 907—23] has been changed to a picture of 
cranes after Jing Hao [active ca. 870— ca. 930] and 
Guan Tong in the freely sketched [xi>y(] style of brush 
and ink, and in Cloudy Mountains, after Gao Kegong the 
clouds have become more vaporous and the blue-and- 
green color thicker. Peach Blossom Spring, after Zhao 
Mengfu has been changed to Shady Summer Woods, after 
Zhao Mengfu, with colors applied in the freely sketched 
manner. [Wang Hui's] paintings after Fan Kuan and 
Wang Wei have been replaced by Pavilion amid Streams 
and Mountains, after Ni Zan and Tree and Rock, after Wu 
Zhen, This is all part of making creative transforma- 
tions in the process of imitation. 

When the two albums are viewed together, one is 
so elegant you can taste it, one possesses the free- 
ranging quality of an old mans brush; truly they show 
the fully realized genius of these two masters. Would 
it not be wonderful if both could be returned to one 
man! The Wang Shimin album is now in the collection 
of Zhang Xianbo [active mid-nineteenth century] of 
Jiaxing. This man is a descendant of Zhang Shuwei 
[Tingji, 1768— 1848] and also knows about collecting. 
He is young, but he is well-off; I am afraid at present 
the two albums cannot be reunited. But he has only 
ten leaves; Wintry Grove and Summer Woods are mine. 
But my Wang Hui album also is missing two leaves, 
which is a big imperfection in the world. 

Appended here is [a transcription] of Yanke's [Wang 
Shimin's] inscription at the end [of his original 
album]: 

Since my energy declined, I have put away my brushes 
and ink stones and have for a long time neglected to 
paint grand landscapes. On top of it, my weakening 
eyesight makes it even more difficult to paint. Occa- 
sionally, when the weather has been lovely, I have been 
inspired by the moment to paint small scenes after old 
masters to amuse myself After a period of time they 
have accumulated into an album, in which I take great 
delight. When my grandson, [Wang] Yuanqi [1642— 
1715], was recommended for service in the capital, 
[his father,] my son [Wang] Kui [jinshi, 1655], eagerly 
asked for it for Mr. Xueweng, whose family and mine 
have been friends for generations, thinking that the 
young man would benefit from viewing it. I therefore 
gave the album to him for his generous correction, as 
if receiving his instructions personally. I knew that 
[my work] was too bad even for a laugh. During the 
Kangxi reign era, in the summer, the fifth [lunar] 
month, of the dingsi year [May 31— June 29, 1677], 
Shimin again inscribed at the age of eighty-six. 

15] ^ ^ A. ^ >t ^ It a A A « * ^'J ^ ^ 
Jfe* ° ' ^^^^ 

4 o >j.>^t-tl^&«t?t ° i^^H-^%y^-T¥[ 

LEAF Q 

collector's seal 

Cheng Zhenyi ^1^^ $L (active early to mid- 
nineteenth century) 

Wuzhong Cheng Zhenyi Xinho shi miqie tushu ^^^M.^ 

LEAF R 

Li Qingduo $ ^ (active late nineteenth century), 
dated 1881 

(15 columns in standard script on green ruled paper) 

This large album of twelve leaves by Wang Hui and 
Wang Shimin is an authentic and outstanding work. 

203 

In the beginning it was a treasure transmitted within 
the Wang family of Taicang. Next it was in the collec- 
tions of Lu Shihua and Cheng Zhenyi. 

At the beginning of the fifth [lunar] month in the 
fourth year of the Tongzhi reign period [May 1865] 
[our family] acquired this in Jiangsu Province. Guyu, 
Zhang Zeren, the county magistrate, saw it and liked 
it so much he wanted it for his own collection. He 
even wrote several letters asking for it. 

My father, Moyuan, placed it on the left side of 
his table, and every time he was not busy he would go 
over it several times. He is responsible for all the 
investigations recorded on the first two leaves. 

This album of fine interpretations after various 
masters of the Tang, Song, and Yuan is incomplete, 
but one cannot feel badly, for it still contains the 
majority of the leaves and that is enough to feel 
satisfied about. In the spring of the twelfth year 
[of the Tongzhi reign period (1873)] my maternal 
great-uncle Zhang Younong took the album to sell. 
Everyone who saw it said that [the album] was with- 
out a doubt authentic and furthermore that it was 
one of the best works by these two gentlemen. After 
this, [Zhang] treasured the album and kept it in his 
collection. Not only would he not sell it, but he 
would not return it to its owner. I suppose that 
paintings by famous men are public property and 
even if you take it forcibly from somebody it is dif- 
ficult to keep it for yourself. Therefore, whenever I 
wrote a letter asking for it back, he always said it was 
inconvenient. And so I had to ask my brother-in-law, 
Zhang Yongnan, to travel south of the mountains to 
Haifeng County [in Guangdong Province], over a 
thousand li from the capital [Beijing]. That he was 
covered with dust and suffered every kind of hard- 
ship goes without saying. Furthermore his round- 
trip cost over twenty pieces of gold. Finally, on the 
twelfth day of the fourth lunar month of the sev- 
enth year of the Guangxu reign period [May 9, 1881] 
it was returned. 

When you carefully examine the album, it is like a 
fresh breeze coming into the sitting room or like 
meeting an old friend; moreover, owning it is a great 
piece of luck. This album was in the Li family collec- 
tion, but since it nearly did not return from a long 
leave, it nearly was lost by the Li family. 

The original album has come back, but it certainly 
was a close caU and a great piece of good fortune. 
Now I realize that in this world everything has its 
rightful owner. He who wanted to sell it on consign- 
ment hid it; what a wasted effort to no avail. 

On the twenty-third day of the fourth [lunar] 
month of the seventh year of the Guangxu reign 
period [May 20, 1881], written by Li Jisong 
[Qingduo] of Luhe [in Hebei or Shanxi], 

tt*^ ' ^^^^ 

WengTonghe ^^M- (1830-1904), datable to 1882 
(5 columns in standard script) 

I bought this album in the first [lunar] month of the 
spring of the renshen year [siV] in the Guangxu era. The 
dealer asked for a high price, and I purchased it with 
the money for my living costs. I have loved Lutai s 
[Wang Yuanqis] painting all my life, but do not find 
Gengyans [Wang Hui's] work very satisfactory, con- 
sidering it inflicted with painterly mannerisms. In my 
collection, however, there are more great pieces by 
Gengyan, such as this album and the scroU Ten Thou^ 
sand Miles of the Yangzi River. Weng Tonghe recorded on 
the twenty-first day of this month. 

COLLECTORS* SEALS 

Lu Shihua I^Of^'fb (1714— 1779) 

LuRunzhicang ^M^k [H] 

Runzhi zhen shang yfA^M:'^ [L] 

Runzhi suocang }^^PJJ^ [M] 

Huaiyan Ge Lu shi zhencang shuhuayin fel 

^tt^P [P] 

Tingsong Hfe' [N] (twice) 

Lu Yuqing 1^ S. (active late eighteenth century) 
Loudong Lu Yuqing Yuanwu shi miqie tushu ^-^I^ 

^^^^#tilt [M] 

Yuanwu miwan ^^^^ [P] 

Zhang Zhiwan f^-^J^ (active early to mid- 
nineteenth century) 
Zhiwan shending [A, E, M] 

Ziqing ^-fr [C,H] 
Zhiwan [I, J] 

Zhiwan (double seal) [K, L] 

Cheng Zhenyi A (active early to mid- 

nineteenth century) 

Xinbozhenmi [A, C, E, F, J, K] 

Zhenyi zhen shang ^ik^t [B, D, G, H, I, L] 

Cheng shi haowan ^^^^ [M] 

Zhenyi jiancang ^ikM.^ [M] 

Shushi Shuzhuang cang yin ^ [P] 

Cheng shi Xinho shending ^^'^^^^ [P] 

Zhang Zeren fftj^^f— (active mid-nineteenth century) 
Guyu i' ^ [album cover title strip] 

Li Moyuan $ ^ (active mid-nineteenth century) 
Xi Yuan wushang zhi pin © ® ^ Ji 00 [A] 
Yunhu wushang zhi pin M^^^X^on [A-H, J, L] 
Yunhusuode ^'MP^^ [I] 

Luhe Li shi Yunhu suocang [K, M] 

Da Su xiao MizhiZhai A^^h^^^ [O] 
Wafuleiming'^^t''^ [O] 

Li Qingduo ^ >S ^ (active late nineteenth century) 
Li shi Jisong shuhua zhi yin $]^^^i-t^^P 
[A-M, P, R] 

XiYuanhouren ^ffl^^A [M, O] 
Li Qingduo yin $>t^^P [O, P, R] 

SunYuwen ^k-^oX. (active mid-nineteenth century) 
Laishan zhenshang ^\h^'^ [A-M] 

WengTonghe ^1^^ (1830—1904) 
Changshu Weng Tonghe mosuo shending *$" S^i ^ 
[A-L] 

Shuping suocang V^'^] 
Weng Tonghe yin M^U^? [RR] 

Li Darong (jinshi, 
XuTangyumu B.^'^B [M] 

Weng Wange (Wan-go Weng, b. 1918) 

Weng Wange jianshang ^j^^M'X' [A— L] 
Weng Wange cang [M, O, P] 

Unidentified 

LuPoyeyulao l^^fhS^ft^* [E] 

Qingchuang yiri jihui kan flj"^'" 9 ^IhJ^ [M] 

Tong Chen Weihan miufu si wen R ^Wi^^fi^^X 

[O] 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Suzuki 1982—83, vol. I, pp. 62—63, A13-002; Yiyuan 
duoying 34 (January 1987), ill. pp. 33—34, inside back 
cover, and back cover; Maxwell K. Hearn in "Recent 
Acquisitions" 1989, p. 83 (Leaves G and L ill.); Hearn 
in Barnhart, Fong, and Hearn 1996, p. 226, no. 32; 
Hearn 1996, p. 162, ill. pp, 156—61, pis. 32a— h; Chen 
Liisheng 1996, pp. 21, 26, 268 

1. Translations in this entry by Maxwell K. Hearn. 

2. This character, jing, was omitted from the colophon by mistake 
and added here by the writer; a mark in the body of the text 
indicates where it should have been inserted. 

16 pis. 1, IZ 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Landscape in the Style of Wu Zhen 

Fang Wu Zhen shanshui 
Dated 1675 

Hanging scroll, ink on paper, 26 Vz x 15 Vz in. (67.2 x 
39.3 cm) 

Princeton University Art Museum, Gifi: of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse (yi979-2) 

204 

artist's inscription and signature 
(2 columns in standard script) 

The yimao year [1675], late spring, imitating the Mas- 
ter of the Plum Blossom Retreats [Meihua An Zhu 
(Wu Zhens)] Summer Mountains; I ask the criticism of 
Master Luansheng. The Wood-Gatherer of Mount 
Wumu [Wumu Shan Zhong Qiaozhe], Wang Hui^ 

artist's seals 

Ziyiyue M 'K* (For my own enjoyment) 
Shiguzi ^ ^-f' 
WangHuizhiyin if 

Laiqing Ge ^ "j" ^ (Wearing Greenery Studio) 

INSCRIPTION 

Wangjian ilM (1598— 1677) 
(5 columns in running script) 

Dong Wenmin [Dong Qichang, 1555—1636] often said 
to me: "Painters who possess the qualities of beauty 
and elegance [wenxiu zhi qi'] may yet lack roundness 
and fullness [hunhou~\; and those who have power and 
strength [qiujin zhi li] may yet be partly lacking in style 
and resonance [fengyun]!' As for Shigu [Wang Hui], 
all of the desirable qualities seem to be present. It may 
be said that not a single hair in his painting is to be 
regretted. This painting is deep and calm and quietly 
aloof The primal breath [yuanqi] seems to flow magi- 
cally through it. It is one of the great masterpieces, 
and should be carefully treasured. Wang Jian of 
Loushui [Taicang] inscribed.'^ 

INSCRIPTION writer's SEALS 

Laiyun Guan 

Wang Jian zhi yin i ^1^ 
Xianghi J^B^ 

collector's SEAL 

Earl Morse (1908-1988) 

Musi shoucang mingji ^| ^^^i^^,^ (on mounting, 
not illustrated) 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Fong 1969, p. 179; Whitfield 1969, pp. 143—45, no. 17 

1. Translation from Whitfield 1969, p. 143. 

2. Ibid. 

17 pis. 40, 4/ 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Landscape after Guan Tongas "Streams and 
Mountains Clearing after Mist^^ 

Fang Guan Tong Xishan qingai 
Dated 1678 

HandscroU, ink and color on paper, 11 V2 in. x n ft. 

7 in. (29.3 X 353 cm) 

Shanghai Museum 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(2 columns in standard script) 

In the first decade of the fourth [lunar] month of the 
wuwu year [May 20—29, 1^7^]- 1 painted this after 

Guan Tongs [active ca. 907—23] Streams and Mountains 
Clearing after Mist, the Man of Mount Wumu [Wumu 
Shanzhongren], Wang Hui. 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin il^^fp 

Shiguzi 

FRONTISPIECE 

WuHufan (1894-1968) 
(6 columns in seal script) 

Wang Shiga's [Wang Hui*s] Landscape after Guan Tong's 
"Streams and Mountains Clearing after Mist" 

frontispiece note 

WuHufan ^M^H, (1894-1968), dated 1938 
(3 columns in standard script) 

This painting by Wang Shigu [Wang Hui] in the col- 
lection of the Wu family's Plum Vista Studio [Meijing 
Shuwu] belongs to the divine class, unsurpassed by 
any. It is one of the twin scrolls modeled after Guan 
Tong and Juran [active ca. 960—85] of the Five Dynas- 
ties, one featuring a sunny landscape and the other a 
rainy one. Now it has gone to the precious collection 
of my senior, [Sun] Bangrui [1902— 1950]. In the 
autumn of the wuyin year [1938], Wu Hufan inscribed. 

COLOPHONS 

Wu Hufan (1894-1968), dated 1938 

(12 columns in standard script) 

I have seen about forty-odd paintings by Shigu [Wang 
Hui] in the last twenty years. Among them seventeen 
or eighteen are very refined and detailed, and this 
handscroll modeled after Guan Tong's Streams and 
Mountains Clearing after Mist is the best. It is known 
that, after being instructed by Yanke [Wang Shimin, 
1592— 1680] to copy the masterpieces of the Song 
and Yuan dynasties around the age of forty, Shigu 
achieved the Great Synthesis in his art. Therefore, the 
finest of Shigu's paintings were done between the ages 
of forty and fifty, and his works modeled after ancient 
masters are particularly good. He excelled in painting 
in the Song manner, but was less interested in imitat- 
ing the Yuan masters. His skill is superior to his 
expression of spiritual resonance; his works in color 
are better than those in ink monochrome. 

This scroll was executed in the brush manner of 
Guan Tong at forty-seven sui. Not only is it the great- 
est work of Shigu's whole life, but it also could not 
have been done by anyone else of the Ming and Qing 
periods or later. Judging from what I have seen, 
among the Song masters, Shigu's imitations of the 
styles of Guan Tong and Fan Kuan [ca. 960— ca. 1030] 
are his best and the most marvelous. Occasionally I 
had seen a couple of them in albums, but had not 
seen any long handscrolls or huge hanging scrolls. 
Then I saw this work twenty years ago. For years I 
could not forget it. Now I have it again. It is indeed 
like the line in the ci poem by Yan Yuanxian [Yan Shu, 
991—1055], "As if they once knew me, swallows 
return." In midautumn of the wuyin year [1938], I 
asked for the opinion of Sun Bangrui, my senior. 

whether he agrees with me. Wu Hufan inscribed in 
the Plum Vista Studio. 

.^^^^* + -t/V;^ ' 'I*aitb*^;3rM^^ia4Bt 
+ + ' ° J-;5 

Wu Zheng (1878—1949), dated 1939 

(i column in running script) 

In the eighth month, autumn, of the jimao year [1939], 
Baojuan Jushi, Wu Zheng, viewed [this scroll] in a 
village cottage at Siming, to the west of Shanghai. 

Zhao Shuru ^^IS (1874—1945), dated 1940 
(i column in running script) 

In the winter of the gengcben year [1940], Zhao Shigang 
[Zhao Shuru] of Yin [Xian, in Zhejiang Province] 
respectfully viewed [this scroll]. 

colophon writers' seals 
Wu Hufan ^ ji^ tH. (1894-1968) 
Wu Hufan yin ^>^m.^P 
WuHufan ^Mm. 

Wu Zheng ^'4i (1878-1949) 
Daiqiu 

Zhao Shuru M.'^-^ (1874—1945) 

Zhao Shuru changnian dajiyou rili A^ X 

collectors' seals 

Prince Yi 'foUti (Yunxiang, 1686-1730) 
Yiqinwang hao toMi ^ 

Mingshan Tang zhencang shuhua yin ji M-'^^^'t 

Panjingshu (1892— 1939) 

Jingshu haocang ^ ^ 

Shuangxiu Ge tushu ji ^i§r W ffl # si 

WuHufan (1894-1968) 

Wu Hufan zhencang yin ^ 'MW^^^? 

Meijing Shuwu ^'^^ M. 

Mingxin juep in ^ oa 

Wu Hufan Pan Jingshu zhencang yin 

Sun Bangrui •f.^.^P^ (1902— 1950) 
Sun Bangrui zhencang yin ^^^^^^^ 

Unidentified 

Cheng'an zhenwan ^^^^ 
Mianxue Tang shihao M^^"^^ 

published reference 

Zhongguo huihua quanji iggj—, vol. 24 (2000), pp. 36—37, 
pis. 39, 40 

18 pi 4^A,B 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Gathered Peaks in Spring Dew 

Qunjeng chunai 
Dated 1680 

Handscroll, ink and color on silk, 10 % in. x 14 ft, 
8 % in. (26 X 449.2 cm) 

Shanghai Museum 

artist's inscription and signature 
(4 columns in standard script) 

Gathered Peaks in Spring Dew by Zhao Wenmin [Zhao 
Mengfu, 1254—1322] 

In the third [lunar] month of the gengshen year [1680], 
I saw the original work in a government office in 
Pingjiang [in Hunan Province] and modeled this 
painting on it. 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin if^^P 

Shiguzi ^ ^'f' 

LABEL strip 

Yanshan Zhuren ^ lir i A (unidentified) 
(1 column in standard script) 

Wang Shigu's [Wang Huis] Gathered Peaks in Spring 
Dfw, Yanshan Zhuren [Master of Mount Yan] 
inscribed the label. 

label strip writer's seal 
Illegible (one) 

inscription 

Yun Shouping 'W-^-^ (1633—1690), dated 1680 
(6 columns in running-standard script) 

Blue-and-green landscape painting underwent a 
transformation in the hands of Zhao Wuxing [Zhao 
Mengfu]. Eschewing the meticulous descriptive 
brushwork of Song painters, he endowed [his paint- 
ing] with a firm, profound quality and sensuous, 
elegant appearance. It is neither too heavy nor too 
light, with a spiritual air that penetrates the eye. It 
embodies the saying that the splendid, upon reaching 
its highest level, turns into the natural. It teaches 
later painters without saying a word. Quietly seeking 
enlightenment for ten years, Master Wang Shigu 
[Wang Hui] finally felt his mind clear and was able 
to understand subtlety in the application of color. I 
saw the way in which he applied ink washes and col- 
ors. It could really make the ancients sing and smile 
wholeheartedly. There has been no one [like him] in 
the last three hundred years. This handscroll is 
painted entirely with Zhao's method. Indeed, Zhao 
had synthesized the styles of various masters and 
could almost reach the divine. One cannot bypass 
Zhao and go elsewhere. In the early summer of the 
gengshen year [1680], Yun Shouping from Piling 
[Changzhou] inscribed. 

206 

Jiilt!!. • S.S^m^^'b ' 4b4^^tt>* • s. 

INSCRIPTION writer's SEALS 

Nantian xiao yin ® 'J^ 
Shoupng -^-^ 
Zhengshu JLtN. 

I 

COLOPHONS 

RuanYuan R't^ (1764— 1849) 
YunYuding tfMifri (jm5^)U889) 

COLOPHON writers' SEALS 

Ruan Yuan H^t (1764— 1849) 

Kuan Yuan Boyuanju yin 7C'f6 7C ^ 

Wenxuan Lou jL ^^^t 

YunYuding t^iH iff! (j'm^k 1889) 

collectors* SEALS 

Unidentified 

Zk«^ Renfu yin iS^ 

PUBLISHED REFERENCE 

Zhongguo huihm quanji i^^-j—, vol. 24 (2000), 
pp. 44-47, pis. 46-49 

I. This information is taken from Zhon^o huihua quanji 1997-, 
vol. 24 (2000), p. 14, pis. 46—49. Complete images of the 
colophons and seals are currently unavailable. 

19 pL ^4A,B 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks 

Chongjiang iiezhang 
Dated 1684 

Handscroll, ink and color on paper, 20 Vs in. x 
61 ft. 6 in. (5 1. 1 cm x 18.7 m) 

Shanghai Museum 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(4 columns in standard script) 

On the fifteenth day of the fourth [lunar] month in 
the shangyuan jiazi year [May 28, 1684], I was by the 
Qinhuai River [in present-day Nanjing].^ The lovely 
scenery of Zhongling [Mount Zhong], which I saw 
every day, seemed to exist between my desk and 
shelves. I therefore imitated the brushwork of Juran 
[active ca. 960—85], mixed it with the method of 
Huayuan [Fan Kuan, ca. 960— ca. 1030], and painted 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks. For the details of the 
river village, I loosely followed YanWengui [active 
ca. 970—1030]. As I became inspired, technique or the 
lack thereof was no longer on my mind. I painted for 
three months to complete it. In the past, Yifeng Daoren 
[Huang Gongwang, 1269— 1354] painted a handscroll 
of the Fuchun Mountains. In his inscription he said it 
took him seven years to complete. But I have done this 
in a perfunctory manner, and it goes without saying 
that my brushwork and ink are far inferior. I write this 
to express my shame. Shiguzi, Wang Hui, from Yushan 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin i.^^^P 

Shiguzi ^ ^-f- 

label strip 

Qianlong emperor It* 1^ (r. 1736—95) 
(i column in standard script) 

Wang Hui's Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks 
The best of the divine class 

INSCRIPTIONS 

Qianlong emperor ^fk'r^ (r. 1736—95) 
(i horizontal line in standard script) 

The finest handscroll of our dynasty and Wang Hui s 
finest 

(2 columns in running script) 

Its supreme expression of flair and charm cannot 
be precisely determined despite one's concentrated 
meditation, 

(12 columns in running script) 

The lovely scenery of Zhongling appears before my 
table and mat. 

207 

19 

The long painting done with the heart is like a grand 

piece of literature. 
It is beyond comparison with other masters; 
One should know that the creator uses it to boast of 

his feat. 

The Layered Rivers was done in about three months, 
Whereas the [FucbunJ Mountains took a lengthy seven 
years. 

[The experience of] reading ten thousand books and 
traveling ten thousand miles 

Is naturally reflected in his painting. 

In the first decade of the first [lunar] month of 
thtguimao year [February 2—11, 1783], the emperor 
inscribed. 

COLOPHON 

ChenBaochen F^f^ (1848-1935), dated 1934 
(12 columns in standard script) 

Gengyan [Wang Hui] once said, "If one can build 
the hills and valleys of Song painters with the 

208 

brush work of Yuan painters and enrich the work with 
the spiritual resonance of Tang painters, then one can 
achieve a Great Synthesis." This scroll was painted in 
Wangs middle age and with his utmost attention to 
probing the profound and the subtle. Even [his teach- 
ers] Fengchang [Wang Shimin, 1592—1680] and Lian- 
zhou [Wang Jian, 1598— 1677], had they seen it, would 
have shown their respect and acknowledged his superi- 
ority. All the more a person such as I. Yu Ling [the 
Qianlong emperor] designated it the finest scroll in 
his dynasty, which is a conclusive judgment. It was 
kept in the Chonghua Palace. In leisure moments 
until the time of his abdication, it was never far 
from him [as evidenced by] its eleven [sic] imperial 
seals. In recent years, the Imperial Consort Ronghui 
[1856— 1933] moved into that palace and took it. She 
then gave it to some gentleman in her family. Surveil- 
lance Commissioner [Zhou] Xiangyun [1878— after 
1934] purchased it at a high price and showed it to me. 
In the past I was ordered by the emperor to examine 
the paintings and calligraphies in the imperial collec- 
tion. After the chaos in the jiazi year [1924] all of them 
were plundered, taken away in heaps. Their where- 
abouts can no longer be traced. I did not see this 
scroll when I examined the collection. Fortunately it 
has survived. Getting old and still hanging around, I 
have unexpectedly been able to see it, which is my good 
fortune. Xiangyun had already acquired the junior 
Mis [Mi Youren's, 1074— 115 1] Xiao and Xiang Rivers. 
Both that scroll and this one are masterworks that 
were recorded in the Qing imperial catalogue [Shiqu 
haoji]. Now he will really stand out among his peers 
in the arts. In the fourth lunar month of the jiaxu year 
[1934], Chen Baochen from Min [Fujian Province] 
viewed and inscribed this at the age of eighty-seven. 

COLOPHON writer's SEALS 

Chen Baochen yin PJ^V^^P 

ChenBoqian H^^6 ?# 

Yuci qio nglin renru i 'f^P ^ 4 ^ A ^fe 

collectors' seals 

WuZhengzhi -^JE-/'^ (1618-1691) 

Hanyang Wu shi cang shuhm yinji /H 1^ ^ ^ ^ ^ t 12* 

Hanyang Wu shi jJI ^ i?^ 

Qianlong emperor ^ (r. 1736—95) 
Sanxi Tangjingjian xi '^^^ ^ ^ 

Yizism Jl^^I 
Qianlong yuhi $tfk^^^ 
Guxi tianzi zhi hao ^-f'^^ 
You ri zizi M 9 -^-^ (twice) 
Guxi tianzi "i'^A-f" (twice) 
Qianlong chenhan I^T ^ ^ 

Wiifuwudai Tang guxi tianzi hao S-^S-^'^i'^^ 

Bazheng maonian zhi hao ^Vffit^fe^f 

Taishang huangdi zhi hao /t^-t- i.'^^f 

Yuyi yuwu S ^fe 

Qianlong yulan zhi hao $tfk^^%^f 

Jishi duo suo xin ^ ^fff\k 

Bihua chunyu ^^^^^ 

Shiqu haoji ^ Ift W 

Shiqu haojian Ift ^ 

Baoji chongbian ^ t 

Qianlong jianshang ^ft^'^ 

Yangxin Dian jiancang hao ^''^^S-^^ 

Jiaqing emperor ^fe-^S (r. 1796— 1820) 
Jiaqing yulan zhi hao iSr vft -f^P 5t W 

Zhou Xiangyun M 5 (1878— after 1934) 

Gujin Zhou shi Bao Mi Shi miji yin "i" Jt 1^ W ^ S 

Unidentified 

Xue An mingxin juepin S 'Ct 00 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Midian zhulin Shiqu haoji xuhian (1971 ed.), vol. 2, p. 1154; 
Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997—, vol. 24 (2000), pp. 136—39, 
pis. 147-152 

1. Ancient Chinese calendarians and astrologers divided a 
180-year cycle into three parts: shangyuan jiazi, zhongjuan jiazi, 
and xiayuan jiazi. The terms refer to the first, the second, and 
the third sixty years. See Zhongwen dacidian 1993, vol. i, p. 310. 
The shangyuan jiazi year, being the beginning of a new 180-year 
cycle, is considered auspicious. It fell in 1684 during Wang 
Hui s lifetime. 

2. Shiqu haoji refers to three series of catalogues of paintings and 
calligraphies in the Qing imperial collection, completed in 
1745, 1793, and 1 8 16, respectively. 

ZO pL ij, 2J 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Landscape after Wu Zhen^s "Mountain Masses on a 

Clear Autumn Day^^ 

Fang Wu Zhen Guanshan qiuji 
Dated 1686 

Hanging scroll, ink on silk, 85 x 44^/4 in. (215,9 x 
113.8 cm) 

Palace Museum, Beijing 

artist's inscription and signature 
(3 columns in standard script) 

The large painting by the Plum Daoist [Mei Daoren 
(Wu Zhen, 1280— 1354)], Mountain Passes on a Clear 
Autumn Day, is in the collection of the Wang family in 
Loudong [Taicang]. It has an inscription by Dong 
Zongbo [Dong Qichang, 1555— 1636], saying that it 
ranks between the divine and the untrammeled classes 
of painting. In the midwinter of the hingyin year 
[1686], Wang Hui fromYushan 

artist s seals 
Wang Hui zhi yin if 
Shiguzi ^ ^-f" 

collectors' seals 
Unidentified 

Hanlu Zhaijinshi shuhuayin # t 

[Yang?] shi jianshang zhi zhang IH "S" -^L ^ 

published reference 

zhongguo huihua quanji 1997—, vol. 24 (2000), p. 63, pL 70 

21 pi 4J 

Wang Hui (1632—1717) 

A Thousand Peaks and Myriad Ravines 

Qianyan wanhuo 
Dated 1693 

Hanging scroll, ink and light color on paper, 100 x 
40 Vz in. (254.1 X 103 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

artist's inscription and signature 
(4 columns in standard script) 

Moss on rocks, mist above water, 
Rustling sound in front of the temple gate. 
A thousand peaks and myriad ravines spread out. 
While flower petals drift into the heavenly caves. 
In the fourth [lunar] month of the guiyou year 
[1693] in my lodging in the capital, I used the 
methods of Dong Yuan [active 930s— 60s] and 
Juran [active ca. 960—85] to express the idea of a 
Tang poem in this painting. The Man of Mount 
Wumu [Wumu Shanzhongren], Shigu, Wang Hui' 

209 

21 

artist's seals 
Taiyuan 

Wang Hut zhiyin if^^P 
Gengyan sanren 
Shiguzi ^ ^-i" 

Yi zai danqiu huanghe haishi qingteng zhijian ^ -^L ^ 

INSCRIPTION 

Qianlong emperor ^tfi*^ (r. 1736—95), dated 1757 
(7 columns in running script) 

Sunshine illuminates layers of peaks and hovers over 
green mist; 

His spirit enters the painting before it is done. 
Empty forest, pillared pavilion, banners quiet in the 
wind, 

Such is the realm of ultimate enlightenment. 

The emperor inscribed in the dingcbou year [1757]. 

INSCRIPTION WRITER S SEAL 

Qianlong It (double seal) 

collectors' seals 

Qianlong emperor ^fi'^ (r. 1736—95) 

Qianlong yulan zhi hao ^fi:^^%^t 

Qianlong jianshang $t f^M^ 

Shiqu baoji ^ ^ W ft 

Yizisun JCi^^i 

Sanxi Tangjingjian xi -H.^ X S 

Shiqu dingjian >S ^ ^ 

Baoji chongbian ft t 

Leshou Tang jiancang bao ^^"^^^^ 

Guxi tianzi ^ -?* 

Wi^itwudaTang^ixitimzibao 

Bazheng maonian zbi hao ^^WlM^I^^ W 

Taishang huangdi zbi bao _L ^ *$* ^ 

Xuantong emperor S ^ (r. 1909— 11) 
Xuantong yulan zbi bao M.^^!^?^^^ 

Unidentified 
Sbuangxi ^}$: 

PUBLISHED references 

Gugong shuhua lu 1956, vol. 2, chap. 5, pp. 450—51; Wang 
Hui bualu 1970, pp. 87—88, no. 24; Gugong shuhua tulu 
1989—, vol. 10 (1992), p. 135 

1. The poem transcribed is "Flowing Stream at the Dongling 
Temple" by Li Ying (Jinshi, 856). 

22 pi zf6 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Spring Morning at Swallo\v Cliff 

Yanji chunxiao 
Ca. 1690—1700 

HandscroU, ink and light color on silk, 15 !4 x 79 in. 
(39.4 X 201.3 cm) 

Joseph A. Skinner Museum, Mount Holyoke College, 
South Hadley, Massachusetts 

artist's INSCRIPTION AND SIGNATURE 

(2 columns in running-standard script) 
Spring Morning at Swallow Cliff 

Painted by the Woodcutter at Sword Gate [Jian Men 
Qiaoke], Wang Hui. 

artist's seals 
Shigu >S ^ 

Wang Hui zhi yin if^^^P 

collectors' seals 

Wang Shu i/W (1668-1743) 

Ruolin cengguan ^^^^ 

Dong Gao 1 1% (1740— 1818) 

Fuchun Dong shi shoucang shuhua ji t ^ 4 'JiC ^ ^ 1 12. 

WengTonghe ^f^^ (1830— 1904) 
WengTongheyin ^fl^^^P 
Shuping huajian ^fet-^t^ 
Junzhai shoucang ^rj ^ 'l^ 

Unidentified 

[Fu long xian xun WlM^^^^ 

Baoqin Tang shuhua yin ?f Jfe ^ t 

Cai Weigong zhenwan 

Jiuhu Ge zhu M i 

Pingjie jianshang zhi zbang ^^k^"^ 

Shi sheng zhencang ^ !^^^ 

Xue Hong shending [—] l^^^l* □ 

[ — '\ jianshang DIZI^'^ 

PUBLISHED references 

Young 1973, pp. 78, 189—90, no. 55; Harris 1984, 
p. 85 

23 pkzfy-p.jj 
Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and assistants 
The Kangxi Etnperor^s Southern Inspection Tour^ 
Scroll Three: Jinan to Mount Tai 

Kangxi nanxuHj juan san: Jinan zhi Taishan 
Datable to 1698 

Handscroll, ink and color on silk, 26 ^ in. x 45 ft. 
8 % in. (67.8 cm x 13.9 m) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Pur- 
chase, The Dillon Fund Gift, 1979 (1979.5) 

NO artist's inscription or signature 

label strip 
Unidentified 

(i column in standard script, affixed to the brocade 
flap) 

22 

2? 

Scroll Number Three of the Illustrations of the 
Tour of the South, from Jinan Prefecture to Tai'an 
Township, and the performance of the ceremony on 
Mount Tai 

FRONTISPIECE 

(8 columns in standard script) 

The third scroll respectfully depicts His Majesty 
during his stopover in Jinan, when he ascended the 
city wall to make his inspection. The entire populace 
raised their hands to their foreheads in salutation 
and rejoiced to behold the imperial countenance. 
Next, the imperial procession traveled on by moun- 
tain roads until it arrived at Tai'an Prefecture. His 
Majesty then specially led all of the officials in his 
retinue in a ceremony to honor Mount Tai. At that 
time, the spirit of the mountain manifested auspi- 
cious signs: the serried peaks stood forth and the 
cloud-cloaked trees presented an elegant scene, while 
the elders of Tai'an filled the streets with song and 
dance. The grandeur of Mount Tai, with the incred- 
ible winding mountain paths of this area of Lu, is 
only roughly sketched here in "red and green"; 

regrettably, we lack the ability to describe even a 
minute part of its magnificence. 

SITE NAMES INSCRIBED ON PAINTING 

Jinan Prefecture City l^^J^^ 

Kaishan Temple ^ Jj ^ 

Zhangxia ^J. 

Mount Tai ^dt 

Tai' an Township ^ $ i^ 

Mengyin District 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Julia K. Murray in Metropolitan Museum 1979, 
pp. 85—86; Fong and Hearn 1981—82, pp. 64—69, 
no. 48; Hearn 1988; Hearn 1990; Hearn 2009 

I. Translation by Maxwell K. Hearn. 

24 pis. jZA-E, j^-j6 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and assistants 

The Kangxi Etnperor^s Southern Inspection Tour, 

Scroll Seven: Wuxi to Suzhou 

Kangxi nanxun^ juan qi: Wuxi zhi Suzhou 
Datable to 1698 

HandscroU, ink and color on silk, 26 in. x 
72 ft. V2 in. (67.8 cm X 21.9 m) 

Mactaggart Art Collection, University of Alberta 
Museums, University of Alberta, Edmonton 

NO artist's INSCRIPTION OR SIGNATURE 
LABEL STRIP 

Unidentified 

(i column in standard script, affixed to the brocade 
flap) 

Scroll Number Seven of the Illustrations of the Tour 
of the South, from Wuxi to Suzhou 

211 

24 

212 

FRONTISPIECE 

(13 columns in standard script) 

The seventh scroll respectfully depicts His Majesty's 
travels from Wuxi through Hushuguan to the Chang 
Gate of Suzhou, where, seeing the throngs of peo- 
ple crowding the streets and narrow waterways, he 
specially reduced the size of the honor guard [accom- 
panying him] into the city. Officials, gentry, and 
commoners, even white-haired old men and small 
children, all were moved by the emperors great favor; 
happily beating drums, burning incense, and hanging 
up bunting, they prostrated themselves on both sides 
of the streets to welcome him. The emperor's stop- 
over gave them a chance to behold [the personifica- 
tion of] a flourishing age; the sincerity of their love 
for him was clearly visible. Again and again, the peo- 
ple detained the emperor, offering him wine and 
fruit and singing hymns of praise. In painting this 
picture, it has been difficult to convey all these 
details. This is because our emperor has compassion 
for the people of Wu, remitting taxes, canceling 
rents, and so much more, thereby creating boundless 
goodwill in people's hearts. As for the fact that on a 
small prominence on Tiger Hill the people erected a 
pavilion to commemorate his largess and wish him 
longevity, it was also recorded [in this painting] with 
brush and silk.^ 

SITE NAMES INSCRIBED ON PAINTING 

Fangsheng Chi ^ i >liL 
Jiulong Shan yiiflliir 
QmYuan 

Huishan Si ih ^ 
XiShan 

Huangpodun ^^^li 
WuxiXian ^^f| 
Yaotou 
Xin'an 

Wangting ^ 'f' 
Hushuguan jttSM 
WenchangGe X^f^ 
Shedu *f>t 
Feng Qiao 
Hanshan Si ^ Jj 
Bantang Si 

GuandiDian M'^'^ 
Shantang J-i ^ 
Zhenzhuo Qiao ^Sfl^i^ 
Hu Qiu jfe^ 
Qianren Shi 
Guhejian -^^M 
Diantou Shi ,f ^ 1^ ^ 
WanshouTing 3^-^^ 
Daxiong Baodian V ^ 

JianChi M^t 

Suzhou Fu Chang Men E ^ S PI 
Huangli Fang 
Gao Qiao 

MiluoGe ?iftP^ 
Yuanmiao Guan 81 
ZhizaoFu ,^it;ft 

PUBLISHED REFERENCES 

Heilesen 1980a; Heilesen 1980b; Moss 1984, 
pp. 76—81, no. 18; Day on the Grand Canal 1988; 
Hearn 1988, pp. no, 121—22, figs. 4, 10, 11; Hearn 
1990; Hearn 2005, pp. 80—82, figs. 3a— d 

I. Translation by Maxwell K. Hearn. 

25 pi 23 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Landscape after Fan Kuan^s ^^Snowy Mountains*^ 

Lin Fan Kuan Xueshan 
Dated 1698 

Hanging scroll, ink and light color on silk, 73 % x 
45 V2 in. (187.7 X 115.5 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

artist's inscription and signature 
(2 columns in standard script) 

Snowy Mountains by Fan Zhongli [Fan Kuan, 
ca. 960— ca. 1030] 

In thtjiaping [twelfth lunar] month of the wuyin year 
[1698] during the Kangxi reign, Wang Hui from 
Haiyu [Yushan] copied. 

artist's seals 
Shigu >S ^ 

Wang Hui zhiyin i^^Hp 

collectors seals 

Qianlong emperor ^f^'r^ (r. 1736— 95) 

Caozong Chunhuangdi baoxi i% ^ i If S 

Qianlong yulan zhi hao It I1:#P 5E ^ ? 

Qianlong jianshang fki^ 

Shiqu baoji ^ ^ ^ 

Yizisun 

Sanxi Tangjingjian xi '^^S" S 

Jiaqing emperor ^M."^ (r. 1796— 1820) 
Jiaqing jianshang ^^^'^ 
Jiaqing yulan zhi hao ^fe^ "f^P 5E. W 
Baoji sanhian ^ 

Xuantong emperor m.^^"^ (r. 1909— 11) 
Xuantong yulan zhi bao !£ I^^^P 

published references 

Cugong shuhua lu 1956, vol, 2, chap. 5, p. 458; Wang Hui 
hualu 1970, pp. 103—4, 3^' ^^iP^i shuhua tulu 
1989-, vol. 10 (1992), pp. 105-6; Xu Bangda and Xue 
Yongnian 1999, pi. 42 

26 pi Z/f 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 

Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass 

Guanshan mixue 
Undated 

Hanging scroll, ink and color on silk, 47 x 32 in. 
(121.3 X 81.3 cm) 

National Palace Museum, Taipei 

artist's inscription and signature 
(i column in standard script) [spurious] 

Xu Daoning's [ca. 970— ca. 1052] study of Dense Snow 
on the Mountain Pass by Li Xianxi [Li Cheng, 919—967] 

COLLECTORS* SEALS 

Huizong emperor (r. 1 101—25) 

Zhenghe [spurious] 

Zhangzong emperor ^ ^ (r. 1190— 1208) 
Mingchang yulan [spurious] 

Shen Zhou >iti^ (1427—1509) 

Shen Zhou haowan Ml ^JtL [spurious] 

Qi'nan 

Hua Xia # I (ca. 1465-1566) 
Hm Bu'an ski ^^^^ [spurious] 

Liu Bingtu ^'J M M (seventeenth century?) 
Liu Bingtu yin f'JMffl^P 

BianYongyu 'f":'^^ (1645— 1712) 
Bian Lingzhi jianding 'I*" ^ ¥ ^ 
Lingzhi 4"-^ 
Xianke i^^- 
Shigu Tang ^ "^T 

Shigu Tang shuhua yin ^ "^T ^ t 
Shigu Tang shuhua ^ "^r ^ ^ J 

Qianlong emperor $tfk'^ (r. 1736—95) 
Qianlong yulan zhi bao ^ Sr tp K ^ f 
Shiqu haoji >5 Ift ^ 
Yushufang jiancang hao ^^P ^ ^ ^ 

Jiaqing emperor (r. 1796— 1820) 

Jiaqing yulan zhi bao 'f^P ^ ^ 

Xuantong emperor !a *$* (r. 1909— 11) 
Xuantong yulan zhi hao !a ^^^-f^P ^ ^ 
Xuantong jianshang M» 8 
PFwjyi Z^fl/ jingjian xi M:^^^^ S. 

PUBLISHED REFERENCE 

Cugong shuhua tulu 1989— vol. i (1989), p. 187 

27 pi 26 

Wang Hui (1632— 1717) 
Landscape after Wang Meng^s "Travelers amid 
Autumn Mountains" 

Lin Wang Meng Qiushan xinglii 

Hanging scroll, ink on silk, 23 Va x 10 V2 in. (58.7 x 
26.7 cm) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Lent 
by the P. Y. and Kinmay W. Tang Family Collection 
(L.200713) 

NO artist's signature or inscription 

artist's seals 

Wang Hui zhi yin if^^P 

Shiguzi ^'f' 

COLOPHONS 

Zhang Daqian fft.A^ (1899— 1983), dated 1945 
(6 columns in running script) 

A genuine work of Shiguzi's [Wang Hui's] copy of 
Wang Shuming's [Wang Meng's, 1308— 1385] imitation 
of Dong Yuan's [active 930s— 60s] Travelers amid 
Autumn Mountains. In the jiaping [twelfth lunar] month 
of thtyiyou year [1945] at Lake Kunming, Daqian 
Zhang Yuan inscribed. 

Huang Binhong '^'fkL (1865— 1955), dated 1945 
(3 columns in running script) 

Wang Qinghui [Wang Hui] used the brushwork of 
Yuan painters to build mountains and valleys [in the 
style] of the Tang and Song periods. In this work, 
mountams and streams are round and full, while grass 
and trees are resplendent and lush.^ Though copied 
from Huanghe Shanqiao's [Wang Mengs] painting, it 
actually captures the spirit of Dong Beiyuan [Dong 
Yuan], It was because, by studying a wide range of 
ancient masters, he was well grounded in the tradition. 
Those who examine this painting should treasure it 
with great care. In the early spring of the yiyou year 
[1945], Huang Binhong inscribed. 

Yang Gengu ^^^^ (active first half twentieth 

century), dated 1945 

(4 columns in running script) 

Zhang Qiaoye [Zhang Yinhuan, d. 1900] had a 
hundred-odd paintings by Shigu [Wang Hui] in his 
collection. He acquired Shouldering a Spear after losing 
his fortune, which presaged his future exile to the 
frontiers. His collection was dispersed after the gengzi 
year [1900]. This painting of a water village must be 
one of those hundred. On the Lantern Festival [the 
fifteenth of the first lunar month] of the yiyou year 
[February 27, 1945], Yang Gengu inscribed. 

Wang Rong (i 896-1 972) 

(4 columns in running script) 

Wang Yanke [Wang Shimin, 1592— 1680] once com- 
mented that Shiguzi's [Wang Hui's] painting was the 
best in the world. Such was his admiration! In this 
work I am viewing, within the rather limited picture 
space the scenery encompasses a thousand miles. It 
was actually accomplished by delving into the quintes- 
sence of the art of Dong Yuan and Juran [active 
ca. 960—85], unlike anything commonly seen. Out of 
adoration, I inscribed a few remarks for its owner. 
Manchuan Wang Rong 

COLOPHON writers' SEALS 

Zhang Daqian fft (1899— 1983) 

Zhang Yuan zhi yin 

Daqian 

Huang Binhong ^^^-^(1865-1955) 
Huang Binhong ^ ^ jfcn 

Yang Gengu ^^R^ (active first half twentieth century) 
Guo Yuan i^B 

Wang Rong (1896— 1972) 

Shensheng changshou '1%^-^^ 
Wang Rong shuhua ^ t 

collectors' SEALS 

Zhou Huaimin M te R (1906—1996) 
Zhou shi Huaimin jiancang 

Guo Chunpu (active second half twentieth 

century) 

Chunpu zhen cang ^^M^^ 

PUBLISHED references 

Fong 1999, p. 46 and p. 44, fig. 37; Levenson 2007, 
p. 314, no. c-30 

I. Translation of this line quoted from Whitfield 1969, p. 103. 

214 

Bibliography 

Alley 1983 

Bai ]uyi. Bai Juyi: zoo Selected Pofm5. Translated by Rewi 
Alley. Beijing: New World Press, 1983. 

Baker 1925 

Dwight Condo Baker. Tai Shan: An Account of the Sacred 
Eastern Peak of China. Shanghai: Commercial Press, 1925. 

Barnhart 1970 

Richard M. Barnhart. Marriage of the Lord of the River: A 
Lost Landscape by Tung Yiian. Artibus Asiae, Supplemen- 
tum 27. Ascona: Artibus Asiae, 1970. 

Barnhart 1970—71 

Richard M. Barnhart. "The 'Snowscape* Attributed to 
Chii-jan." Archives of Asian Art 24 (1970—71), pp. 6—22. 

Barnhart 1972 

Richard M. Barnhart. Wintry Forests, Old Trees: Some 
Landscape Themes in Chinese Painting, Exh. cat. New York: 
China Institute in America, 1972. 

Barnhart 1997 

Richard M. Barnhart. "The Five Dynasties (907—960) 
and the Song Period (960—1279)." In Richard M. 
Barnhart, James Cahill, Wu Hung, Yang Xin, Nie 
Chongzheng, and Lang Shaojun, Three Thousand Years 
of Chinese Painting, pp. 87—137, 360— 61. The Culture and 
Civilization of China. New Haven: Yale University 
Press; Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1997. 

Barnhart 2001 

Richard M, Barnhart. "The Song Experiment with 
Mimesis,*' Paper delivered at the symposium "South- 
ern Song Mind and Culture," held November 3, 2001, 
at the China Institute Gallery, New York. 

Barnhart, Pong, and Hearn 1996 
Richard M. Barnhart, Wen C. Fong, and Maxwell K. 
Hearn. Mandate of Heaven, Emperors and Artists in China: 
Chinese Painting and Calligraphy from The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York Exh. cat. Zurich: Museum 
Reitberg, 1996. 

Bian Yongyu, Shigu Tang shuhua huikao (1994 ed.) 

Bian Yongyu. Shigu Tang shuhua huikao (Compilation of 
Writings on Calligraphy and Painting from the Shigu 
Hall). [Preface dated 1682.] In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu 
(Collection of Writings on Chinese Calligraphy and 
Painting), edited by Lu Fusheng, vol. 6, pp. i— 1081, 
and vol. 7, pp. 1—243. Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua 
Chubanshe, 1994. 

Bush 1962 

Susan Bush. "Lung-mo, K'ai-ho, and Ch'i-fu: Some 
Implications of Wang Yiian-ch'is Three Composi- 
tional Terms." Oriental Art, n.s., 8, no. 3 (Autumn 
1962), pp. 120—27. 

Bush 1983 

Susan Bush. "Tsung Ping's Essay on Painting 

Landscape and the 'Landscape Buddhism' of Mount 
Lu." In Theories of the Arts in China, edited by Susan 
Bush and Christian F. Murck, pp. 132—64. Papers pre- 
sented at a conference sponsored by the Committee 
on Studies of Chinese Civilization of the American 
Council of Learned Societies, held June 6—12, 1979, 
at the Breckinridge Public Affairs Center, Bowdoin 
College, York, Maine. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1983. 

Bush and Shih 1985 

Susan Bush and Hsio-yen Shih, comps. and eds. 
Early Chinese Texts on Painting. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1985. 

Cahill 1976a 

James Cahill. Hills heyond a River: Chinese Painting of the 
Yuan Dynasty, iiyg—i^6S. A History of Later Chinese 
Painting, 1279— 1950, vol. i. New York: Weatherhill, 1976. 

Cahill 1976b 

James Cahill. "The Orthodox Movement in Early 
Ch'ing Painting." In Artists and Traditions: Uses of the 
Past in Chinese Culture, edited by Christian F. Murck, 
pp. 169—81. Princeton: Art Museum, Princeton 
University, 1976. 

Cahill 1980 

James Cahill. An Index of Early Chinese Painters and 
Paintings. [Vol. i]. Tang, Sung, and Yuan. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1980. 

Cahill 1982a 

James Cahill. The Compelling Image: Nature and Style in 
Seventeenth-Century Chinese Painting.The Charles Eliot 
Norton Lectures, 1978— 1979. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1982. 

Cahill 1982b 

James Cahill. The Distant Mountains: Chinese Painting 
of the Late Ming Dynasty, ljyo—i6^^. A History of 
Later Chinese Painting, 1279—1950, vol, 3, New York: 
Weatherhill, 1982. 

Cahill 1987 

James Cahill. "Tung Ch'i-ch'ang's 'Southern and 
Northern Schools' in the History and Theory of 
Painting: A Reconsideration." In Sudden and Gradual: 
Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought, edited 
by Peter N. Gregory, pp. 429-46. Studies in East 
Asian Buddhism 5. Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press, 1987. 

Cahill 1992 

James Cahill. "Tung Ch'i-ch'ang's Painting Style: Its 
Sources and Transformations." In Century of Tung 
Ch'i^ch'ang 1992, vol. i, pp. 55—79. 

Cahill 1994 

James Cahill. The Painter^s Practice: How Artists Lived 
and Worked in Traditional China. Bampton Lectures 

in America 29. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1994. 

Cahill 1998 

James Cahill. "Chinese Painting: Innovation after 
'Progress* Ends." In China, j,000 Years: Innovation 
and Transformation in the Arts, edited by Sherman E. 
Lee, pp. 174—92. Exh. cat. New York: Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 1998. 

Cai Yong, Jiu shi (1708 ed.) 

Cai Yong./m shi (Nine Forces). [Recorded in Chen Si 
(active 13th century), Shuyuan jinghua (Essential Writ- 
ings on Calligraphy), chap. 19.] In Peiwen Zhai shuhua 
pu (Manual of CaUigraphy and Painting of the Studio 
for Admiring Culture), compiled under Song Junye 
and Wang Yuanqi, chap. 3, p. la. Beijing, 1708. 

Century of Tung CFi-ch*ang 1992 

The Century of Tung Ch'i-ch'ang, ^JJ^- ?6j6. Edited by 
Wai-kam Ho and Judith G, Smith. With contribu- 
tions by Wai-kam Ho et al. 2 vols. Exh. cat. Kansas 
City: Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, 1992. 

Chang Chin-Sung 2004 

Chang Chin-Sung. "Mountains and River, Pure and 
Splendid: Wang Hui (1632— 1717) and the Making of 
Landscape Panoramas in Early Qing China." Ph.D. 
diss., Yale University, 2004. 

Chang Joseph 1993 

Joseph Chang [Zhang Zining], "Xiaozhong xianda 
xiyi" (An Analysis of To See Large within Small). In 
Qing chu Si Wang huapai yanjiu lunwen ji (Studies on the 
Four Wangs of the Early Qing Dynasty), pp. 505-82. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1993. 

Chang Joseph 1995 

Joseph Chang [Zhang Zining]. "A Study of Large Emerg- 
ingfrom Small in the Collection of the National Palace 
Museum, Taibei." Ph,D. diss,, University of Kansas, 1995. 

Changzhoufuzhi 161 8 

Changzhou fuzhi (Gazetteer of Changzhou Prefecture). 
Preface dated 1618. Edited by Tang Hezheng. [China, 
1618.] 

Chavannes 1910 

Edouard Chavannes. Le T'ai chan: Essai de monographie 
d'un culte chinois. Annales du Musee Guimet, Biblio- 
theque d'etudes 21. Paris: E. Leroux, 1910. 

Chen Jiexian 1999 

Chen Jiexian. "Kangxi huangdi yu shufa" (The 
Emperor Kangxi and Calligraphy). Gugong xueshu 
jikan 17, no. i (Autumn 1999), pp. i— 18. 

Chen Kuilin 1915 

Chen Kuilin. Baoyu Ge shuhua lu (Catalogue of Callig- 
raphy and Painting in the Baoyu Studio). 4 vols. 
Shanghai, 191 5. 

215 

Chen Liisheng 1996 

Chen Liisheng. Wang Shigu (Wang Hui). Ming 
Qing Zhongguo hua dashi yanjiu congshu (Collec- 
tion of Studies of Great Painters of the Ming 
and Qing Dynasties). Changchun: Jilin Meishu 
Chubanshe, 1996. 

Chen Yaolin 1988 

Chen Yaolin. "Liang Qingbiao congtan" (On Liang 
Qingbiao). Qugong howuymn yuankan, 1988, no. 3, 
pp. 56-67. 

China 1974 

China. 3rd ed. Nagels Encyclopedia-Guide. Geneva: 
Nagel, 1974. 

Chou 1969 

Ju-hsi Chou. "In Quest of the Primordial Line: 
The Genesis and Content of Tao-chi's Hua^yu-lu." 
Ph.D. diss., Princeton University, 1969. 

Chou 1994 

Ju-hsi Chou. "In Defense of Qing Orthodoxy." In 
The Jade Studio: Master-pieces of Ming and Qing Painting 
and Calligraphy from the Wong Nan-pUng Collection, 
pp. 35—42. Exh. cat. New Haven: Yale University 
Art Gallery, 1994. 

Chow 1970 

Fong Chow. "Chinese Paintings of the Fifteenth to 
Eighteenth Centuries from the Collection of Mr. and 
Mrs. Earl Morse." The Metropolitan Museum oj Art 
Bulletin, n.s., 29, no. 3 (November 1970), pp. 151—55. 

Chung 1983 

Saehyang P. Chung. "Yiin Shou-p'ing (1633— 1690) and 
the Orthodox Tradition of Chinese Bird-and-Flower 
Painting." Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1983. 

Clunas 1991 

Craig Clunas. Superfluous Things: Material Culture and 
Social Status in Early Modern China, Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press, 1991. 

Clunas 2002 

Craig Clunas. "Commodity and Context: The Work 
of Wen Zhengming in the Late Ming Art Market." 
In Taiwan lOOi: International Conference on the History 
of Painting in East Asia, pp. 236—58. Taipei: National 
Taiwan University, 2002. 

Collected Songs of Cold Mountain 1983 

The Collected Songs of Cold Mountain, [Poems attributed 
to the eighth-century Chinese monk Hanshan.] Trans- 
lated by Red Pine. Port Townsend, Wash.: Copper 
Canyon Press, 1983. 

Collection of John M Crawford, Jr. 1962 

Chinese Calligraphy and Painting in the Collection of John M. 
Crawford, Jr. Edited by Laurence Sickman, James Cahill, 
Richard Edwards, Aschwin Lippe, and Max Loehr. 
Exh. cat. New York: Pierpont Morgan Library, 1962. 

Collection of John M. Crawford, Jr, 1965 

Chinese Painting and Calligraphy from the Collection of 
John M. Crawford, Jr Introduction by Laurence 
Sickman. Exh. cat., Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London. [London]: Arts Council of Great Britain, 
1965. 

Contag 1970 

Victoria Contag. Chinese Masters of the Seventeenth 
Century, Translated by Michael Bullock. Rutland, 
Vt.: Charles E. Turtle Company, 1970. 

Cressey 1934 

George Babcock Cressey. China's Geographic Foundations: 
A Survey of the Land and Its People, New York: McGraw- 
Hill Book Company; Shanghai: United Book & 
Stationery Co., 1934. 

Dai Junliang 2005 

Dai Junliang. Zhongguo gujin diming dacidian (Dictionary 
of Place Names, from Ancient to Present). 3 vols. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Cishu Chubanshe, 2005. 

T)ay on the Grand Canal 1988 

A Day on the Grand Canal with the Emperor of China or 
Surface Is Illusion hut So Is Depth, Forty-six-minute 
film. Written and narrated by David Hockney. 
Produced and directed by Philip Haas. The Program 
for Art on Film. New York: The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art; Malibu: J. Paul Getty Trust, 1988. 

Dennerline 1981 

Jerry Dennerline. The Chia-ting Loyalists: Confucian 
Leadership and Social Change in Seventeenth- Century China, 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1981. 

Diaries 

Kangxi qijuzhu (Diaries of Activity and Repose of the 
Kangxi Emperor). 3 vols. Beijing: Zhongua Shuju, 
1984. 

Dix Siecles de peinture chinoise 1966 

Dix Siecles de peinture chinoise: Peintures et calligraphies de la 
collection de John M, Crawford, Jr Exh. cat. Paris: Musee 
Cernuschi, 1966. 

Dong Qichang, Hua yan (1962 ed.) 
Dong Qichang. Hua yan (The "Eye" of Painting). 
[Before 1636.] In Yishu conghian (Collected Works on 
the Arts), ist ser., vol. 12. Taipei: Shijie Shuju, 1962. 

Dorment 2006 

Richard Dorment. "Journey from 'Nebraska,'" 
Review of Plane Image: A Brice Marden Retrospective, 
by Gary Garrels. New York Review of Books 53, no. 20 
(December 21, 2006), pp. 8—14. 

Dubosc 1950 

Jean-Pierre Dubosc. "A New Approach to Chinese 
Painting." Oriental Art 3, no. 2 (1950), pp. 50—57 

Elman 1984 

Benjamin A. Elman. From Philosophy to Philology: Intel- 
lectual and Social Aspects of Change in Late Imperial China. 
Harvard East Asian Monographs no. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Council on East Asian Studies, Harvard 
University, 1984. 

Fairbank 1972 

Wilma Fairbank. Adventures in Retrieval: Han Murals 
and Shang Bronze Molds, Harvard- Yenching Institute 
Studies 28. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1972. 

Fang Bao, "Zhang Pucim muzhiming" (1983 ed») 

Fang Bao. "Zhang Pucun muzhiming (Tombstone 

Epitaph for Zhang Pucun [Zhang Yunzhang])." 
[First half of the eighteenth century.] In Fang Bao 
ji (Collected Works of Fang Bao), vol. i, pp. 291—92. 
Zhongguo gudian wenxue congshu (Compendium 
of Chinese Classical Literature). Shanghai: Shanghai 
Guji Chubanshe, 1983. 

Fang Junyi 1998 

Fang Junyi. Mengyuan skuhua lu (Catalogue of Calligra- 
phy and Painting in the Dream Garden). In Zhongguo 
shuhua quanshu (Collection of Writings on Chinese 
Calligraphy and Painting), edited by Lu Fusheng, 
vol. 12, pp. 173—373. Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua 
Chubanshe, 1998. [ist ed., Dingyuan: Fang Shi Jin 
Cheng Bo, 1877.] 

Feng Jinbo and Wu Jin, Guochao huashi (1941 ed.) 

Feng Jinbo and Wu Jin. Guochao huashi (Record of 
Qing Painters). [Late eighteenth century.] Shanghai: 
Zhonghua Shuju, 1941. [Reprint of 1831 ed.] 

Fong 1958 

Wen C. Fong. The Lohans and a Bridge to Heaven, Occa- 
sional Papers (Freer Gallery of Art), vol. 3, no, i. 
Washington, D.C: Smithsonian Institution, 1958, 

Fong 1962 

Wen C. Fong. "The Problem of Forgeries in Chinese 
Painting." Artibus Asiae 25, nos. 2—3 (1962), pp. 95—140. 

Fong 1966 

Wen C. Fong. "Ch'i-yiin-sheng-tung: 'Vitality, 
Harmonious Manner and Aliveness.' " Oriental Art, 
n.s., 12, no. 3 (Autumn 1966), pp. 159—64. 

Fong 1967 

Wen C. Fong. "The Orthodox Master." Art News 
Annual 33 (1967), pp, 133—39. [Volume titled The 
Academy: Five Centuries of Grandeur and Misery, from 
the Carracci to Mao Tse-tung, edited by Thomas B. Hess 
and John Ashbery.] 

Fong 1968 

Wen C, Fong, *'Tung Ch'i-ch'ang and the Orthodox 
Theory of Painting." National Palace Museum 
Quarterly 2, no. 3 (January 1968), pp. 1—26. 

Fong 1969 

Wen C. Fong. "Wang Hui, Wang Ytian-ch'i and Wu 
Li." In Whitfield 1969, pp. 175—94. 

Fong 1970 

Wen C. Fong. "Orthodoxy and Change in Early- 
Ch'ing Landscape Painting." Oriental Art, n.s., 16, 
no. I (Spring 1970), pp. 38-44. 

Fong 1975 

Wen C. Fong. Summer Mountains: The Timeless 
Landscape, New York: The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 1975. 

Fong 1976 

Wen C. Fong. Returning Home: Tao-chVs Album of Land- 
scape and Flowers, New York: George Braziller, 1976. 

Fong 1976-77 

Wen C. Fong. "Rivers and Mountains after Snow {Chiang- 
shan hsiieh-chi), Attributed to Wang Wei (a.D. 699—759)." 
Archives of Asian Art 30 (1976—77), pp. 6—33. 

216 

Fong 1984 

Wen C. Fong. "Images of the Mind." In Wen C. 
Fong, Alfreda Murck, Shou-chien Shih, Pao-chen 
Ch'en, and Jan Stuart, Images of the Mind: Selections from 
the Edward L. Elliott Family and John B. Elliott Collection 
of Chinese Calligraphy and Painting at the Art Museum, 
Princeton University, pp. i— 212. Exh. cat. Princeton: 
Art Museum, Princeton University, 1984. 

Fong 1986 

Wen C. Fong. Review of The Compelling Image: Nature 
and Style in Seventeenth-- Century Chinese Painting, by James 
Cahill. Art Bulletin 68, no. 3 (September 1986), pp. 504—8. 

Fong 1992a 

Wen C. Fong. Beyond Representation: Chinese Painting 
and Calligraphy, 8th—l^th Century, New York: The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1992. 

Fong 1992b 

Wen C. Fong, "Tung Ch'i-ch'ang and Artistic 
Renewal." In Century of Tung Ch'i^chang 1992, vol. i, 
pp. 43-54. 

Fong 1996a 

Wen C. Fong. "Creating a Synthesis." In Wen C. Fong 
and James C. Y. Watt, with contributions by Chang 
Lin-sheng, James Cahill, Wai-kam Ho, Maxwell K. 
Hearn, and Richard M. Barnhart, Possessing the Past: 
Treasures from the National Palace Museum, Taipei, pp. 419—25. 
Exh. cat. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art; 
Taipei: National Palace Museum, 1996. 

Fong 1996b 

Wen C. Fong, "Monumental Landscape Painting." In 
Wen C. Fong and James C. Y. Watt, with contribu- 
tions by Chang Lin-sheng, James Cahill, Wai-kam 
Ho, Maxwell K, Hearn, and Richard M. Barnhart, 
Possessing the Past: Treasures from the National Palace 
Museum, Taipei, pp. 121—37. Exh. cat. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art; Taipei: National 
Palace Museum, 1996. 

Fong 1996c 

Wen C. Fong. "The Orthodox School of Painting." 
In Wen C. Fong and James C. Y. Watt, with contri- 
butions by Chang Lin-sheng, James Cahill, Wai-kam 
Ho, Maxwell K, Hearn, and Richard M. Barnhart, 
Possessing the Past: Treasures from the National Palace 
Museum, Taipei, pp. 473—91. Exh. cat. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art; Taipei: National 
Palace Museum, 1996. 

Fong 1999 

Wen C, Fong. "Riverbank." In Maxwell K. Hearn and 
Wen C. Fong, Along the Riverbank: Chinese Paintings from 
the C. C. Wang Family Collection, pp. 2—57. Exh, cat. 
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1999. 

Fong 2001 

Wen C, Fong. Between Two Cultures: Late^Nineteenth- 
and Twentieth-Century Chinese Painting from the Robert H. 
Ellsworth Collection in The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
Exh. cat. New York: The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 2001. 

2003 

Wen C. Fong. "Why Chinese Painting Is History." Art 
Bulletin 85, no. 2 (June 2003), pp. 258—80. 

Fong forthcoming a 

Wen C. Fong. "Deconstructing Paradigms: Calligra- 
phy as Landscape Painting." In Founding Paradigms: 
The Art and Culture of the Northern Song Dynasty, Taipei: 
National Palace Museum. Forthcoming. 

Fong forthcoming b 

Wen C. Fong. "Prologue: Chinese Calligraphy as 
Presenting the Self." In Chinese Calligraphy. The 
Culture and Civilization of China. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. Forthcoming. 

Fong and Hearn 1981-82 

Wen C. Fong and Maxwell K. Hearn. "Silent Poetry: 
Chinese Paintings in the Douglas Dillon Galleries." 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, n.s., 39, no. 3 
(Winter 1981-82). 

Frodsham 1967 

J, D, Frodsham. The Murmuring Stream: The Life 
and Works of the Chinese Nature Poet Hsieh Ling-yiin 
(365— ^jj)^ Duke ofK'angAo, 2 vols. Kuala Lumpur: 
University of Malaya Press, 1967. 

Fu, Marilyn, and Fu, Shen 1973 

Marilyn Fu and Shen Fu, Studies in Connoisseur ship: 
Chinese Paintings from the Arthur M, Sackler Collection 
in New York and Princeton, Exh. cat. Princeton: Art 
Museum, Princeton University, 1973, 

Fu Shan, Shuanghong Kan ji (1985 ed.) 

Fu Shan. Shuanghong Kan ji (Collected Works of the 
Shanghong Pagoda). [Late seventeenth century.] 
2 vols, Taiyuan: Shanxi Renmin Chubanshe, 1985. 
[Reprint of 1911 ed., (China).] 

Gao Shiqi, Jiangcun shuhua mu (1994 ed.) 

Gao Shiqi. Jiangcun shuhua mu (List of Calligraphy 
and Painting Possessed by River Village [Gao Shiqi]). 
[After 1705.] Reprinted in Zhongguo shuhua quanshu 
(Collection of Writings on Chinese Calligraphy and 
Painting), edited by Lu Fusheng, vol. 7, pp. 1068—78. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1994. 

Gell 1998 

Alfred Gell. Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998. 

Gombrich i960 

E. H. Gombrich. Art and Illusion: A Study in the 
Psychology of Pictorial Representation. The A. W. Mellon 
Lectures in the Fine Arts, 1956. Bollingen Series 35, 5. 
New York: Pantheon Books, 1960. 

Greenberg 1939 

Clement Greenberg. "Avant-Garde and Kitsch." Parti- 
san Review 6, no. 5 (Fall 1939), pp. 34—49. [Reprinted 
in Pollock and After: The Critical Debate, edited by Francis 
Frascina, pp. 21—33. New York: Harper & Row, 1985.] 

Greenberg 1940 

Clement Greenberg. "Towards a Newer Laocoon." 
Partisan Review 7, no 4 (July— August 1940), pp. 296—310. 
[Reprinted in Pollock and After: The Critical Debate, 
edited by Francis Frascina, pp. 35—46. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1985,] 

Greenberg 1965 

Clement Greenberg, "Modernist Painting." Art and 

Literature, no. 4 (Spring 1965), pp. 193—201. [Reprinted 
in Modern Art and Modernism: A Critical Anthology, edited 
by Francis Frascina and Charles Harrison, pp. 5—10. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1982.] 

Gugong shuhua lu 1956 

National Palace Museum, ed. Gugong shuhua lu 
(Catalogue of Calligraphy and Painting in the Palace 
Museum). 3 vols. Taipei: National Palace Museum, 1956, 

Gugong shuhua lu 1965 

National Palace Museum, ed. Gugong shuhua lu 
(Catalogue of Calligraphy and Painting in the 
Palace Museum). 4 vols. Taipei: National Palace 
Museum, 1965. 

Gugong shuhua tulu 1989— 

National Palace Museum, ed. Gugong shuhua tulu 
(Illustrated Catalogue of Calligraphy and Painting in 
the Palace Museum), 25 vols, to date. Taipei; National 
Palace Museum, 1989—. 

Guochao qixian leizheng chulian 1966 

Guochao qixian leizheng chubian (Biographies of Notables 
of the Qing Dynasty). Compiled by Li Huan. 24 vols. 
Taipei: Wenhai Chubanshe, 1966. [Reprint of 1884—90 
ed., (China).] 

Guse 2004 

Guse: Shiliu zhi shiha shijiyishu defanggufeng (Through 
the Prism of the Past: Antiquarian Trends in Chinese 
Art of the Sixteenth to Eighteenth Century). Exh. cat. 
Taipei: National Palace Museum, 2004. 

Harris 1984 

Jean C. Harris, ed. Handbook of the Collection. 
South Hadley, Mass.: Mount Holyoke College 
Art Museum, 1984. 

Harrison 2006 

Charles Harrison. "After the Fall." Review of Art since 
igoO: Modernism, Antimodernism, Postmodernism, by Hal 
Foster, Rosalind Kraus, Yve-Alain Bois, and Benjamin 
H. D. Buchloh. Art Journal 65, no. r (Spring 2006), 
pp. 116— 19. 

Hay 1997 

Jonathan Hay. "An Interview with Brice Marden." 
In Brice Marden: Chinese Work, pp. 19—31. Exh. cat. 
New York: Matthew Marks Gallery, 1997. 

Hay 2001 

Jonathan Hay. Shitao: Painting and Modernity in Early 
Qing China. RES Monographs in Anthropology 
and Aesthetics. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001. 

Hay 2005 

Jonathan Hay. "The Kangxi Emperor's Brush-Traces: 
Calligraphy, Writing, and the Art of Imperial Author- 
ity." In Body and Face in Chinese Visual Culture, edited 
by Wu Hung and Katherine R. Tsiang, pp. 311—34. 
Harvard East Asian Monographs 239. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center, 2005. 

Hearn 1988 

Maxwell K, Hearn. "Document and Portrait: The 
Southern Tour Paintings of Kangxi and Qianlong." 
Phoebus 6, no. i (1988), pp. 91—131. [Issue titled Chinese 

Fong 

217 

Painting under the Qianlong Emperor: The Symposium Papers, 
edited by Ju-hsi Chou and Claudia Brown, vol. i.] 

Hearn 1990 

Maxwell K. Hearn. "The Kangxi Southern Inspection 
Tour: A Narrative Program by Wang Hui." 2 vols. 
Ph,D, diss,, Princeton University, 1990. 

Hearn 1996 

Maxwell K. Hearn. "The Qing Synthesis." In 
Barnhart, Fong, and Hearn 1996, pp. 113—208, 
214-19. 

Hearn 2002 

Maxwell K. Hearn. Cultivated Landscapes: Chinese Paint-- 
ingsfrom the Collection of Marie^Helene and Guy Weill 
Exh. cat. New York: The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 2002. 

Hearn 2005 

Maxwell K. Hearn, "A Collection of Chinese 
Painting Comes to Canada." Orientations 36, no. 8 
(November— December 2005), pp. 77—83. 

Hearn 2009 

Maxwell K. Hearn. "Pictorial Maps, Panoramic 
Landscapes, and Topographic Paintings: Three Modes 
of Depicting Space during the Early Qing Dynasty." 
In Bridges to Heaven: Essays on East Asian Art in Honor of 
Professor Wen C. Fong. Princeton: P. Y. and Kinmay W, 
Tang Center for East Asian Art, Department of Art 
and Archaeology, Princeton University, in association 
with Princeton University Press, 2009. 

Heilesen 1980a 

Simon B. Heilesen. Nanxuntu^ malerier af Kangxi 
kejserens rejse i sydkina i l68g: En introduktion, 
Copenhagen: Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, 1980. 

Heilesen 1980b 

Simon B. Heilesen. "Southern Journey." Bulletin of the 
Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities (Ostasiatiska Museet), 
no. 52 (1980), pp. 89—144. 

Hightower 1970 

James Robert Hightower, trans, and ed. The Poetry of 
Vao CFien. The Oxford Library of East Asian Litera- 
tures. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970. 

Ho, Ping-ti 1962 

Ping-ti Ho. The Ladder of Success in Imperial China: 
Aspects of Social Mohilityj t^6S~igiL Studies of the East 
Asian Institute, Columbia University. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1962. [Reprint ed.. New 
York: Da Capo Press, 1976.] 

Ho, Wai-kam 1976 

Wai-kam Ho. "Tung Ch'i-ch'angs New Orthodoxy 
and the Southern School Theory." In Artists and 
Traditions: Uses of the Past in Chinese Culture, edited 
by Christian E Murck, pp. ii^—zg. Princeton: Art 
Museum, Princeton University, 1976. 

Ho, Wai-kam, et al. 1980 

Wai-kam Ho, Sherman E. Lee, Laurence Sickman, 
and Marc F. Wilson. Eight Dynasties of Chinese Painting: 
The Collections of the Nelson Gallery^Atkins Museum^ 
Kansas City, and the Cleveland Museum of Art. Exh. cat. 
Cleveland: Cleveland Museum of Art, 1980. 

Holzman 1996 

Donald Holzman. Landscape Appreciation in Ancient 
and Early Medieval China: The Birth of Landscape Poetry. 
Six Lectures Given at National Tsing Hua University^ 
February— March iggy. Hsin Chu Bank Endowed 
Lecture Series on Thought and Culture. Hsin Chu, 
Taiwan: Program for Research of Intellectual- Cultural 
History, College of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
National Tsing Hua University, 1996, 

Hsu 1991 

Ginger Cheng-chi Hsii. "Zheng Xie s Price List: 
Painting as a Source of Income in Yangzhou." 
Phoebus 6, no, 2 (1991), pp. 261—71, [Issue titled Chinese 
Painting under the Qianlong Emperor: The Symposium Papers, 
edited by Ju-hsi Chou and Claudia Brown, vol. 2.] 

Hu Jing, Guochao yuanhua lu (1963 ed.) 
Hu Jing. Guochao yuanhua lu (Record of Qing 
Court Painters). [1816.] In Hua shi congshu (Compen- 
dium of Painting Histories), edited by Yu Anlan, 
vol. 5, pp. 1—70, Shanghai: Renmin Meishu 
Chubanshe, 1963. 

Hua Derong 1988 

Hua Derong. Gong Xian yanjiu (Studies on Gong 
Xian). Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin Meishu 
Chubanshe, 1988, 

Huang 1990 

Ray Huang. China: A Macro History. Rev. ed. Armonk, 
N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1990. 

Huaxue xinyin 1968 

Huaxue xinyin (The Accord of the Mind in the Study 
of Painting). Edited by Qin Zuyong. Taipei: Taiwan 
Shangwu Yinshuguan, 1968, [Originally published 
ca. 1878.] 

Hummel 1943—44 

Arthur W. Hummel, ed. Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing 
Period 2 vols. Washington, DC: United 

States Government Printing Office, 1943—44. 

Hung 1952 

William Hung. Tu Fu: Chinas Greatest Poet. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1952. 

Jia Lunkui, Yushan huazhi (1996 ed,) 
Jia Lunkui. Yushan huazhi (Gazetteer of Painters from 
Yushan). [1819.] In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu (Collection 
of Writings on Chinese Calligraphy and Painting), 
edited by Lu Fusheng, vol. 10, pp. 1002—38. Shanghai: 
Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1996. 

Jiang Chun 1962 

Jiang Chun. "Wang Shimin yu Wang Hui di guanxi" 
(The Relationship between Wang Shimin and Wang 
Hui). In Yilin conglu (Collected Essays on Art), vol. 2, 
pp. 309—13. Hong Kong; Commercial Press, 1962. 

fiangsu yiwen zhi 1995 

fiangsu yiwen zhi: Yangzhou juan (Gazetteer of Art and 
Literature in Jiangsu Province; Yangzhou), 2 vols. 
Nanjing: Jiangsu Renmin Chubanshe, 1995. 

John M. Crawfbrd, Jr,, Collection 1984 

The John M. Crawford, Jr., Collection of Chinese Calligraphy 
and Painting in The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Checklist. 

Compiled by Shou-chien Shih, Maxwell K. Hearn, 
and Alfreda Murck. Published in connection with 
exhibitions of the Crawford Collection held at the 
Metropolitan Museum in 1984 and 1985. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1984. 

Kertess 1992 

Klaus Kertess. Brice Marden: Paintings and Drawings. 
New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1992. 

Kessler 1976 

Lawrence D. Kessler. Kang-hsi and the Consolidation 
ofChUng Rule, 1661— i6S^. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1976. 

Kim 1985 

Hongnam Kim. "Chou Liang-kung and His *Tu- 
hua-lu' (Lives of Painters): Patron Critic and Painters 
in Seventeenth Century China." 3 vols. Ph.D. diss., 
Yale University, 1985. 

Kim 1989 

Hongnam Kim. "Chou Liang-kung and His Tu-huaAu 
Painters." In Artists and Patrons: Some Social and Economic 
Aspects of Chinese Painting, edited by Chu-tsmg Li, 
pp. 189—207. Lawrence: Kress Foundation Department 
of Art History, University of Kansas; Kansas City: 
Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, 1989. 

Kim 1996 

Hongnam Kim. The Life of a Patron: Zhou Lianggong 
(i6iz—i6yi) and the Painters of Seventeenth- Century 
China. Exh, cat. New York: China Institute in 
America, 1996. 

Kohara 1979 

Kohara Hironobu. Un Juhei, OKi (Wang Hui and Yun 
Shouping). Bunjinga suihen (Selected Masterpieces of 
Literati Painting) 7. Tokyo: Chuokoronsha, 1979, 

Kubler 1962 

George Kubler. The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History 
of Things. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962. 

Kuh 1969 

Katharine Kuh. "In Pursuit of Antiquity." Saturday 
Review 52, no, 40 (October 4, 1969), pp. 60—62. 

Lachman 1989 

Charles Lachman, trans, and ed. Evaluations of Sung 
Dynasty Painters of Renown: Liu Tao-chuns "Sung-ch'ao 
ming-hua p'ing!*To\ing Pao, Monographic 16. Leiden: 
E. J. Brill, 1989. 

Lang Shaojun 1993 

Lang Shaojun. " *Si Wang* zai ershi shiji" (The "Four 
Wangs" during the Twentieth Century). In Qing chu 
Si Wang huapai yanjiu lunwen ji (Studies on the Four 
Wangs of the Early Qing Dynasty), pp. 835—67. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1993. 

Lawton 1973 

Thomas Lawton. Chinese Figure Painting. Freer Gallery 
of Art, Fiftieth Anniversary Exhibition, vol. 2. 
Washington, D.C., 1973. 

Lee, Pamela M. 2004 

Pamela M. Lee. Chronophobia: On Time in the Art of the 
ig6os. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004. 

218 

Lee, Sherman E., and Fong 1955 
Sherman E. Lee and Wen C. Fong. Streams and Moun- 
tains without End: A Northern Sung Handscroll and Its 
Significance in the History of Early Chinese Painting, 
Artibus Asiae, Supplementum 14. Ascona: Artibus 
Asiae, 1955. 

Levenson 2007 

Jay A. Levenson, ed. Encompassing the Globe: Portugal 
and the World in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. 
Exh. cat. Washington, D.C: Arthur M. Sackler 
Gallery, Smithsonian Institution, 2007. 

Lewison 1992 

Jeremy Lewison. Brice Harden: Prints, ig6i—iggi. A Cata^ 
logue Raisonne. Exh. cat. London: Tate Gallery, 1992. 

Li, Chu-tsing 1965 

Chu-tsing Li. The Autumn Colors on the Ch'iao and Hua 
Mountains: A Landscape by Chao Meng-fu. Artibus Asiae, 
Supplementum 21. Ascona: Artibus Asiae, 1965. 

Li, Wai-yee 1995 

Wai-yee Li. "The Collector, the Connoisseur, 
and Late-Ming Sensibility." Toung Pao 81 (1995), 
pp. 269—302. 

Li Yufen 1921 

Li Yufen. Ouboluo Shi shuhua guomu kao (Catalogue of 
Calligraphy and Painting Viewed by the Master of the 
Ouboluo Studio). Shanghai: Chaoji Shuzhuang, 1921. 
[Originally published 1894.] 

Lin Po-t*ing 2007 

Lin Po-t*ing, ed. Daguan: Bei-Song shuhua tezhan 
(Grand View: Special Exhibition of Northern 
Song Calligraphy and Painting). Taipei: National 
Palace Museum, 2007. 

Lin, Xiaoping 2001 

Xiaoping Lin. Wu Li (16^2- lyiS): His Life, His Paint- 
ings. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 2001. 

Little 2003 

Stephen Little. "A 'Cultural Biography' of the Admoni- 
tions Scroll: The Sixteenth, Seventeenth and Early 
Eighteenth Centuries." In Gu Kaizhi and the Admonitions 
Scroll, edited by Shane McCausland, pp. 219—48. 
Colloquies on Art and Archaeology in Asia 21. 
London: British Museum Press, 2003. 

Liu, James J. Y. 1969 

James J. Y. Liu. The Poetry of Li Shang-yin: Ninth-Century 
Baroque Chinese Poet. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1969. 

Liu Yiping 1993 

Liu Yiping. "Wang Hui nianpu" (Biographical Chro- 
nology of Wang Hui). Duoyun 2 (1993), pp. 115—40. 

Lo and Schultz 1986 

Irving Yucheng Lo and William Schultz, eds. Waiting 
for the Unicorn: Poems and Lyrics of China's Last Dynasty, 
iS/f^—igu. Chinese Literature in Translation. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986. 

Lochr 1980 

Max Loehr. The Great Painters of China. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1980. 

Lovell 1970 

Hin-cheung Lovell. "Wang Hui s 'Dwelling in 
the Fu-ch un Mountains': A Classical Theme, Its 
Origin and Variations." Ars Orientalis 8 (1970), 
pp. 217-42. 

Lu Shihua, Wu Yue suojian shuhua lu (1994 ed.) 
Lu Shihua. Wu Yue suojian shuhua lu (Record of 
Calligraphy and Painting Seen in the Wu and 
Yue Regions). [Preface dated 1776.] In Zhongguo 
shuhua quanshu (Collection of Writings on Chinese 
Calligraphy and Painting), edited by Lu Fusheng, 
vol. 8, pp. 961— 1175. Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua 
Chubanshe, 1994. 

Maeda 1970 

Robert J. Maeda. Two Twelfth Century Texts on Chinese 
Painting: Translations of the "Shan-shui chun-ch^iian chi^' 
by Han Cho and Chapters Nine and Ten of "Hua-chi" by 
Teng Ch'un. Michigan Papers in Chinese Studies 8. 
Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, University 
of Michigan, 1970. 

Mao 1937 

Lucien Mao, trans. 'A Memoir of a Ten Days' Mas- 
sacre in Yangchow by Wang Hsiu-ch'u." Tien hsia 4, 
no. 5 (May 1937), pp. 515-37 

McCraw 1990 

David R. McCraw. Chinese Lyricists of the Seventeenth 
Century. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1990. 

Meng Sen 1980 

Meng Sen. "Zouxiao an" (Taxation Case Reported to 
the Board of Revenue). In Meng Sen, Ming Qing shi 
lunzhu jikan (Collected Essays on Ming and Qing 
Histories), pp. Taipei: Shijie Shuju, 1980. 

[ist ed., 2 vols. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuchu, 1959.] 

Metropolitan Museimi 1979 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Notable Acquisitions, 
I9yj—i9y9' New York: The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, 1979. 

Meyer 2006 

James Meyer. Review of Chronophobia: On Time in the 
Art of the 1960s, by Pamela M. Lee. Art Bulletin 88, 
no. 4 (December 2006), pp. 781—83. 

Midian zhulin Shiqu haoji sanhian (1969 ed,) 

Midian zhulin Shiqu baoji sanhian (Treasured Boxes 
of the Stony Moat [Catalogue of Painting and 
Calligraphy in the Imperial Collection]). 3rd series. 
[1816.] Compiled by Hu Jing et al. 10 vols, Taipei: 
National Palace Museum, 1969. [Facsimile reprint 
of original manuscript.] 

Midian zhulin Shiqu baoji xuhian (1971 ed.) 

Midian zhulin Shiqu baoji xubian (Treasured Boxes 
of the Stony Moat [Catalogue of Painting and 
Calligraphy in the Imperial Collection]). 2nd series, 
[1793.] Compiled by Wang Jie et al. 8 vols. Taipei: 
National Palace Museum, 1971. [Facsimile reprint of 
original manuscript.] 

Miller 1974 

Harold Lyman Miller. "Factional Conflict and the 
Integration of Ch'ing Politics, 1661-1690." Ph.D. diss., 
George Washington University, 1974. 

Ming Qing likejinshi timing heilu 1969 

Ming Qing likejinshi timing beilu (Lists of ]inshi Degree 
Holders in Successive Ming and Qing Examinations). 
4 vols. Taipei: Huawen Shuju, 1969. [Reprint of 
volume published ca. 1900.] 

Moss 1984 

Paul Moss. Emperor, Scholar, Artisan, Monk: The Creative 
Personality in Chinese Works of Art. London: Sydney L. 
Moss Ltd., 1988. 

Mostra dearie cinese 1954 

Mostra d'arte cinese: Catalogo / Exhibition of Chinese Art: 
Catalogue. Edited by Jean-Pierre Dubosc. Exh. cat., 
Palazzo Ducale, Venice. Organized by the Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, Rome. 
Venice: Alfieri, 1954. 

Mote 1973 

Frederick W. Mote. "A Millennium of Chinese 
Urban History: Form, Time, and Space Concepts 
in Soochow." Rice University Studies 59, no. 4 (Fall 1973), 
pp. 35-65. 

Mote 1976 

Frederick W. Mote. "The Arts and the 'Theorizing 
Mode* of the Civilization." In Artists and Traditions: 
Uses of the Past in Chinese Culture, edited by Christian F. 
Murck, pp. 3—8. Princeton: Art Museum, Princeton 
University, 1976. 

Murray 1985 

Julia K. Murray. "Ts'ao Hsiin and Two Southern Sung 
History Scrolls." Ars Orientalis 15 (1985), pp. 1—29. 

Murray 1986 

Julia K. Murray. "The Role of Art in the Southern 
Sung Dynastic Revival." Bulletin of Sung-YUan Studies, 
no. 18 (1986), pp. 41—59. 

Murray 1993 

Julia K. Murray, Ma Hezhi and the Illustration of the 
"Book of 0^/«." Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993. 

Oxnam 1975 

Robert B, Oxnam. Ruling from Horseback: Manchu Politics 
in the Oboi Regency, 1661—1669. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1975. 

Pei Jingfii 2006 

Pei Jingfii, Zhuangtao Ge shuhua lu (Catalogue of Callig- 
raphy and Painting in the Zhuangtao Studio). 2 vols. 
Beijing: Xueyuan Chubanshe, 2006. [Reprint of 
ist ed., Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju, 1937.] 

Plaks 1976 

Andrew H. Plaks. Archetype and Allegory in the "Dream 
of the Red Chamber/' Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1976. 

Qi Gong 1981 

Qi Gong. Qi Gong congkao (Collection of Qi Gong's 
Writings). Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1981, 

Qin Zuyong 1967 

Qin Zuyong. Tong yin lun hua (Discussing Painting in 
the Shade of a Tong Tree). Taipei: WenguangTushu 
Gongsi, 1967. [Originally published 1864—82.] 

219 

Qing shi liezkuan 1962 

Qing shi liezhuan (Biographies of Famous Men 
from Qing History). 10 vols. Taipei: Zhonghua 
Shuju, 1962. [Reprint of 1928 ed., Shanghai: 
Zhonghua Shuju.] 

Qingchao tongzhi 1965 

Qingchao tongzhi (Gazetteer of the Qing Dynasty). 
[Vol. 6] of Shitong (Ten Gazetteers). Taipei: Xinxing 
Shuju, 1965. [Reprint of 1935 ed., Shanghai: Shangwu 
Yin Shuguan.] 

Qingdai heizhuan quanji 1987 

Shanghai Normal University Library, ed. Qingdai heizhuan 
quanji (Collection of Qing Stele Commemorative 
Writings). Reprint ed. 2 vols. Shanghai: Shanghai 
Guji Chubanshe, 1987. 

Qingdai renwu zhuan gao 1987 

Qing Shi Bianweihui, ed. Qingdai renwu zhuan gao 

(Draft Biographies of Eminent Men of the Qing 

Dynasty). Vol. i, pt. 5. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 

1987 

Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu 1911 

Qinghui Ge zengyi chidu (Collection of Letters Pre- 
sented to Wang Hui). [Late seventeenth century.] 
Shunde: Deng Shi Fengyulou; Shanghai: Shenzhou 
Guoguangshe Zongshou, 1911. 

Qinghui zengyan 1994 

Qinghui zengyan (Writings Presented to Wang Hui). 
[Prefaces dated 1713— 14.] Edited by Xu Yongxuan. 
In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu (Collection of Writings 
on Chinese Calligraphy and Painting), edited by Lu 
Fusheng, vol. 7, pp. 815—907. Shanghai: Shanghai 
Shuhua Chubanshe, 1994. 

Rawski and Rawson 2005 

Evelyn S. Rawski and Jessica Rawson, eds. China: 
The Three Emperors, t66z—iygj, Exh. cat. London: 
Royal Academy of Arts, 2005. 

"Recent Acquisitions" 1989 

"Recent Acquisitions: A Selection, 1988— 1989." 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, n.s., 47, no. 2 
(Fall 1989). 

Riely 1974-75 

Celia Carrington Riely. "Tung Ch'i-ch'ang's 
Ownership of Huang Kung-wang's 'Dwelling in 
the Fu-ch'un Mountains.'" Archives of Asian Art 28 
(1974-75). pp. 57-76. 

Riely 1992 

Celia Carrington Riely. "Tung Ch'i-ch'angs Life 
(1555— 1636)." In Century of Tung Ch'i^ch'ang 1992, vol. 2, 
pp. 387-457 

Riely 1995 

Celia Carrington Riely. "Tung Ch'i-ch'angs Life 
(1555— 1636): The Interplay of Politics and Art." Ph.D. 
diss., Harvard University, 1995. 

Rogers and Lee, Sherman E, 1988 

Howard Rogers and Sherman E. Lee. Master-works 
of Ming and Qing Paintingfrom the Forbidden City, 
Exh. cat. Lansdale, Pa.: International Arts Council, 
1988. 

Rong Bin and Xia Han*ning 1992 

Rong Bin and Xia Han ning, eds. Zhonghua mingsheng 
shilian jicui (Collection of Poems on Famous Sites 
in China). Beijing: Renmin Ribao Chubanshe, 
1992. 

Rosand 1988 

David Rosand. The Meaning of the Mark: Leonardo and 
Titian. The Franklin D. Murphy Lectures 8. Lawrence, 
Kans.: Spencer Museum of Art, University of Kansas, 
1988. 

Rosand 2002 

David Rosand. Drawing Acts: Studies in Graphic 
Expression and Representation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002. 

Shen Deqian, "Wang Hui muzhiming" (1966 ed.) 
Shen Deqian. "Wang Hui muzhiming" (Wang Hui s 
Tombstone Epitaph). [1717 or later.] In Guochao qixian 
leizheng chuhian (Biographies of Notables of the Qing 
Dynasty), ist ser., chap. 431, pp. 26a— 26b. Taipei: 
Wenhai Chubanshe, 1966. [Reprint of 1884—90 ed., 
(China): Xiangyin Li Shi.] 

Shenyang Gugong howuyuan 2006 

Shenyang Gugong howuyuan yuan cang wenwu jingcui: 
Huihua (The Prime Cultural Relics Collected 
by Shenyang Imperial Palace: Paintings). 2 vols. 
Shenyang: Wanjuan Chuban Gongsi, 2006. 

Shimada Hidemasa 1976 

Shimada Hidemasa. "En Bunki no densho-sakuhin 
to sono Hoku-So sansuiga-shi jo ni shimeru ichi ni 
tsuiteno ichi shiron" (Essay on Works Attributed to 
Yan Wengui and Their Position in the Landscape 
Painting of the Northern Song). Bijutsushi 26, no. i 
(1976), pp. 39-52. 

Shimada Shujiro 1961—64 

Shimada Shujiro. "Concerning the I-p'in Style of 
Painting." Translated by James Cahill. Oriental Art, 
n.s., 7, no. 2 (Summer 1961), pp. 66—74 (p^' 0» ^> 3 
(Autumn 1962), pp. 130—37 (pt, 2); 10, no. i (Spring 
1964), pp. 19-26 (pt. 3). 

Shitao, Huayu lu (1989 ed.) 

Shitao. Huayu lu (Recorded Sayings on Paintings). 
[Ca. 1700.] In Shitao, Enlightening Remarks on Painting, 
translated by Richard E. Strassberg, pp. 93—104. 
Pacific Asian Museum Monographs i. Pasadena: 
Pacific Asia Museum, 1989. 

Si Wang Wu Yun huihua 1996 

5( Wang Wu Yun huihua (Paintings by Wang Shimin, 
Wang Jian, Wang Hui, Wang Yuanqi, Wu Li, and 
Yun Shouping), Edited by Xiao Yanyi. Hong Kong: 
Shangwu Yinshuguan, 1996. 

Silbergeld 1974 

Jerome Leslie Silbergeld. "Political Symbolism in 
the Landscape Painting and Poetry of Kung Hsien 
(c. 1620— 1689)." Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 
1974. 

Silbergeld 1982 

Jerome Leslie Silbergeld. Chinese Painting Style: Media, 
Methods, and Principles of Form. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 1982. 

Sima Qian, Shiji (1959 ed.) 

Sima Qian. Shiji (Historical Records). [Before 86 B.C.E.] 
10 vols. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1959. 

Siren 1956—58 

Osvald Siren. Chinese Painting: Leading Masters and 
Principles. 7 vols. New York: Ronald Press Company; 
London: Percy Lund, Humphries and Company, 
1956-58. 

Spence 1966 

Jonathan D. Spence. Ts^ao Yin and the Kang^hsi Emperor: 
Bondservant and Master. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1966. 

Spence 1976 

Jonathan D. Spence. "The Wan-li Period vs. the 
K'ang-hsi Period: Fragmentation vs. Reintegration?" 
In Artists and Traditions: Uses of the Past in Chinese 
Culture, edited by Christian F. Murck, pp. 145—48. 
Princeton: Art Museum, Princeton University, 
1976. 

Spence 2002 

Jonathan D. Spence. "The K'ang-hsi Reign." In The 
Cambridge History of China, vol. 9, pt. i, The Ch'ing 
Empire to 1800, edited by Willard J. Peterson, pp. 120—82. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 

Stanley-Baker 1995 

Joan Stanley-Baker. Old Masters Repainted: Wu Zhen 
(liSo—l^j^), Prime Objects and Accretions. Hong Kong: 
Hong Kong University Press, 1995. 

Struve 1982 

Lynn A. Struve. "The Hsii Brothers and Semiofficial 
Patronage of Scholars in the K'ang-hsi Period." 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 42, no. i (June 1982), 
pp. 231—66. 

Sturman 1989 

Peter Charles Sturman. "Mi Youren and the Inherited 
Literati Tradition: Dimensions of Ink-Play." 3 vols. 
Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1989, 

Sullivan 1999 

Michael Sullivan. The Arts of China. 4th ed. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1999. 

Suzhoufuzhi 1883 

Suzhoufuzhi (Gazetteer of Suzhou Prefecture). 
[China], 1883. [Reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congshu 
(Compendium of Chinese Local Gazetteers). Taipei: 
Chengwen Chubanshe, 1970.] 

Suzuki 1982—83 

Suzuki Kei, comp. Chugoku kaiga scgb zuroku (Compre- 
hensive Illustrated Catalogue of Chinese Paintings). 
5 vols. Tokyo: Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai, 1982—83. 

Tang Sunhua, Dongjiang shi chao (1979 ed.) 

Tang Sunhua. Dongjiang shi chao (Selected Poems of 
East River [Tang Sunhua]). [1717.] 3 vols, in 1. Qing 
ren bie ji cong kan (Compendium of Collected 
Works of Qing People). Shanghai: Shanghai Guji 
Chubanshe, 1979. 

Tokura 1988 

Tokura Hidemi. Shijintachi nojikk Kanpu kara Toshi e 

ZZO 

(The Time and Space of Poets: From Han Rhapsody 
to Tang Poetry). Tokyo: Heibonsha, 1988, 

Tokura 1996 

Tokura Hidemi. "Aspects of the Infinite: Observa- 
tions on the Depiction of Landscape in the Poetry 
of the Six Dynasties and the T'ang." Acta Asiatica 70 
(1996), pp. 54-75. 

Tong 1983 

Ginger Mew Kuen Tong. " Yun Shou-p'ing 
(1633— 1690) and His Landscape Art." Ph.D. diss., 
Stanford University, 1983. 

Torma Z002 

Minna Torma. Landscape Experience as Visual Narra- 
tive: Northern Son£ Dynasty Landscape HandscroUs in 
the Li Cheng-Yan Wengui Tradition, Suomalaisen 
Tiedeakatemian toimituksia, Sarja Humaniora 318. 
Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica, 2002. 

Tseng 1956 

Hsien-Ch'i Tseng. Loan Exhibition of Chinese Paintings, 
Exh. cat. Toronto: Royal Ontario Museum of 
Archaeology, 1956. 

Utsumi 1972 

Utsumi Junko. "Wang Shigu yiji nianbiao" (The 
Chronology of Wang Hui's Works). M.A. thesis, 
Taiwan National University, 1972. 

Vinograd 2003 

Richard Vinograd. "Fan Ch'i (1616— after 1694): Palace 
Making and the Semiotics of Sight in Seventeenth- 
Century Nanching." Guoli Taiwan Daxue meishushi 
yanjiu jikan 14 (March 2003), pp. 129—57. 

Wakeman 1985 

Frederic Wakeman Jr. The Great Enterprise: The Manchu 
Reconstruction of Imperial Order in Seventeenth- Century 
China, 2 vols. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1985. 

Wang Hongxu, Hengyun Shanren ji (1972 ed.) 
Wang Hongxu. Liengyun Shanren ji (Collected Works 
of Hengyun Shanren [Wang Hongxu]). [Before 1723.] 
Qing ming jia ji hui kan (Compendium of Collected 
Works of Eminent Men of the Qing Dynasty). 
Reprint. 2 vols. Taipei: Hanhua Wenhua Shiye Gufen 
Youxian Gongsi, 1972. 

Wang Hui, Qinghui huaha (1974 ed.) 
Wang Hui. Qinghui huaha (Wang Hui s Colophons on 
Paintings). [1717 or earlier.] In Lidai lunhua mingzhu 
huihian (Collection of Famous Essays of Successive 
Dynasties on Painting), edited by Shen Zicheng, 
pp. 314— 17. Taipei: Shijie Shuju, 1974. 

Wang Hui hualu 1970 

National Palace Museum, ed. Wang Hui hualu 
(Catalogue of Paintings by Wang Hui). Taipei: 
National Palace Museum, 1970. [Reprint ed., 1972.] 

Wang Jiajian 1994 

Wang Jiajian. "Kunshan San-Xu yu Qingchu 
zhengzhi" (The Three Xus from Kunshan and Court 
Politics in Early Qing China). In Qing shi yanjiu lunsho 
(Collection of Essays on Qing History), pp. 333-63. 
Taipei: Wenshizhe Chubanshe, 1994. 

Wang Jiansheng 2000 

Wang Jiansheng. Zengding hen Wu Meichun yanjiu 
(Studies on Wu Meichun [WuWeiye], Revised 
Edition). Taipei: Wenjin Chubanshe Youxian 
Gongsi, 2000. 

Wang Shimin, Wang Fengchang (1994 ed.) 

Wang Shimin. Wang Fengchang shuhua tiha (Wang 
Shimins Colophons on Paintings). [1680 or earlier.] 
In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu (Collection of Writings 
on Chinese Calligraphy and Painting), edited by Lu 
Fusheng, vol, 7, pp. 908—36. Shanghai: Shanghai 
Shuhua Chubanshe, 1994. 

Weitz 2002 

Ankeney Weitz. Zhou Mi's "Record of Clouds and Mist 
Passing before One's Eyes": An Annotated Translation, Sinica 
Leidensia 54. Leiden: Brill, 2002. 

Weng 1978 

Wan-go Weng. Chinese Painting and Calligraphy^ a 
Pictorial Survey: Sixty-nine Fine Examples from the John M. 
Crawford, Jr., Collection, Preface by Thomas Lawton. 
New York: Dover Publications, 1978. 

Whitfield 1965 

Roderick Whitfield. "Chang Tse-tuan's Ch'ing-ming 
shang-ho tu," Ph.D. diss., Princeton University, 1965. 

Whitfield 1969 

Roderick Whitfield. In Pursuit of Antiquity: Chinese 
Paintings of the Ming and Ch'ing Dynasties from the 
Collection of Mr and Mrs. Earl Morse. Exh. cat. 
Princeton: Art Museum, Princeton University; 
Rutland, Vt.: Charles E. Turtle Company, 1969. 

Whitfield 1996 

Roderick Whitfield. "Wang Hui." In The Dictionary 
of Art, edited by Jane Turner, vol. 32, pp. 842-43. 
New York, 1996. 

Wicks 1982 

Ann Elizabeth Barrott Wicks. "Wang Shih-min 
(1592— 1680) and the Orthodox Theory of Art: 
The Six Famous Practitioners." Ph.D. diss., Cornell 
University, 1982. 

Wicks 1983 

Ann Elizabeth Barrott Wicks. "Wang Shimins 
Orthodoxy: Theory and Practice in Early Qing 
Painting." Oriental Art, n.s., 29, no. 3 (Autumn 1983), 
pp. 265-74. 

Wilhelm 1951 

Hellmut Wilhelm. "The Po-hsiieh Hung-ju Examina- 
tion of i6-/g!' Journal of the American Oriental Society 71, 
no. I ( January— March 1951), pp. 60—66. 

Wu Hung 1996 

Wu Hung. The Double Screen: Medium and Representation 
in Chinese Painting, Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1996. 

Wu Li, Mojing huaha (1994 ed.) 

Wu Li. Mojing huaha (Wu Li s Colophons on Paintings). 
[1718 or earlier.] In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu (Collection 
of Writings on Chinese Calligraphy and Painting), 
edited by Lu Fusheng, vol. 7, pp. 970—73. Shanghai: 
Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1994. 

Wu, Silas H. L. 1970 

Silas H. L. Wu. Communication and Imperial Control in 
China: Evolution of the Palace Memorial System, 169J— 173^. 
Harvard East Asian Series 51. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1970. 

Wu, Silas H. L. 1979 

Silas H. L. Wu. Passage to Power: K'ang-hsi and His 
Heir Apparent, 1661— lyiz. Harvard East Asian 
Series 91. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1979. 

Xiao Yishan 1962—63 

Xiao Yishan. Qingdai tongshi (History of the Qing 
Dynasty). 5 vols. Taipei: Shangwu Yinshuguan, 
1962—63. 

Xu Bangda 1984 

Xu Bangda. Gu shuhua wei e kaohian (Study of Forgeries 
in Ancient Calligraphy and Painting). Nanjing: 
Jiangsu Guji, 1984. 

Xu Bangda 1993 

Xu Bangda. "Wang Hui Xiaozhong Xianda ce zaikao" 
(Once Again on Wang Hui's "To See Large within 
Small" Album [in the Shanghai Museum]). In Qing 
chu Si Wang huapai yanjiu lunwen ji (Studies on the Four 
Wangs of the Early Qing Dynasty), pp. 497—504. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Shuhua Chubanshe, 1993. 

Xu Bangda and Xue Yongnian 1999 

Xu Bangda and Xue Yongnian, Wang Hui jingpin ji 
(Masterpieces by Wang Hui). Beijing: Renmin Meishu 
Chubanshe, 1999. 

Xu Zhongling 1995 

Xu Zhongling. "Wang Hui yu Fuchun shanju 
tu juan." Gugong Bowuyuan yuankan, 1995, no. i, 
pp. 66—69. 

Yan Chohgnian 1989 

Yan Chongnian. "Mingju lun" (On Mingju). In 
Yanhu ji (Collected Essays by Yanbu on Ming and 
Qing Histories), pp. 153—69. Beijing: Beijing Yanshan 
Chubanshe, 1989. 

Yang Xin 1981 

Yang Xin. "Luanjia hui jingshi: Kangxi Nanxuntu di shier 
juan jieshao" (The Imperial Carriage Returns to the 
Capital; An Introduction to Scroll Twelve of the Kangxi 
Southern Inspection Tour), Zijincheng 10 (1981), pp. 23—25. 

Young 1973 

Martie W. Young, Asian Art: A Collector's Selection, Exh. 
cat., Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York; and Munson-Williams- 
Proctor Institute, Utica, New York. Ithaca: Office of 
University Publications, Cornell University, 1973. 

Yu Jianhua 1962 

Yu Jianhua, ed. Shitao Huayu lu (Shitao s "Recorded 
Sayings on Painting"), Beijing: Renmin Meishu 
Chubanshe, 1962. 

Yu Yi, Haiyu huayuan lite (1963 ed.) 

Yu Yi. Haiyu huayuan liie (Painters from Yu Shan), In 
Hua shi congshu (Compendium of Painting Histories), 
edited by Yu Anlan, vol. 4, pp. 1—43. Shanghai: 
Renmin Meishu Chubanshe, 1963. 

221 

Yun Shouping, Nantian hmha (1994 ed.) 

Yun Shouping. Nantian huaha (Yun Shoupings 
Colophons on Paintings). [Seventeenth century.] 
In Zhongguo shuhua quanshu (Collection of Writings 
on Chinese Calligraphy and Painting), edited by Lu 
Fusheng, vol. 7, pp. 974—87. Shanghai: Shanghai 
Shuhua Chubanshe, 1994. 

Yiin Shouping, Ouxiang Guan ji (n.d.) 

Yun Shouping. Ouxiang Guan ji (Colophons of [Yun 
Shoupings] Ouxiang Studio). [Seventeenth century.] 
In Biexiazhai congshu (Compendium of Collected Works 
Published by the Biexia Studio), vols. 14—16. Shanghai: 
Saoye Shanfang, n.d. 

Zhang Daqian 1955—56 

Zhang Daqian. Dajeng Tang mingji (Masterpieces of 
Chinese Paintings from Dafeng Tang). 4 vols. Kyoto: 
Benrido , 1955—56. 

Zhang Dayong 1932 

Zhang Dayong. Ziyiyue Zhai shuhua lu (Catalogue 
of Calligraphy and Painting in the Ziyiyue Studio 
Collection). Zhenjiang: Jinzhang Shuju, 1932. 

Zhang Geng, Guochao kuazheng lu (1956 ed.) 

Zhang Ceng. Guochao huazheng lu (Painters of the 
Qing Dynasty). [Preface dated 1735.] Taipei: Xinxing 
Shuju, 1956. 

Zhang Geng, Guochao huazheng lu (1963 ed*) 

Zhang Geng. Guochao huazheng lu (Painters of the Qing 
Dynasty). [Preface dated 1735.] In Hua shi congshu 
(Compendium of Painting Histories), edited by 
Yu Anlan, vol. 3, pp. 1—78. Shanghai: Renmin 
Meishu Chubanshe, 1963. 

Zhang Geng and Hu Zhenzu, Guochao huazheng xulu 
(1963 ed.) 

Zhang Geng and Hu Zhenzu. Guochao huazheng xulu 
(Supplement to Painters of the Qing Dynasty). 
[Preface dated 1739.] In Hua shi congshu (Compendium 
of Painting Histories), edited by Yu Anlan, vol. 3, 
pp. 79—118. Shanghai: Renmin Meishu Chubanshe, 1963. 

Zhang Jiasheng 1993 

Zhang Jiasheng. Qingdai Manzu shici shilun (Ten Essays 

on Manchu Poetry during the Qing Dynasty). 
Shenyang: Liaoning Minzu Chubanshe, 1993. 

Zhang Yanyuan, Lidai minghua ji (1963 ed.) 
Zhang Yanyuan. Lidai minghua ji. [Ninth century.] 
In Hua shi congshu (Compendium of Painting 
Histories), edited by Yu Anlan, vol. i, pp. i— 126. 
Shanghai: Renmin Meishu Chubanshe, 1963. 

Zhang, Yiguo 1998 

Yiguo Zhang. "Brice Marden and Chinese Calligra- 
phy: An Interview.*' In Brushed Voices: Calligraphy in 
Contemporary China, pp. 125—32. Exh. cat. New York: 
Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia 
University, 1998. 

Zhang Yimin 1988 

Zhang Yimin. "Nalan Xingde shoucangguo de 
shuhua" (The Calligraphy and Painting in the 
Collection of Nalan Xingde). Manzu yanjiu, 1988, 
no. 2, pp. 61—63. 

Zhang Ying, Nanxun hucong jilue (1968 ed») 

Zhang Ying. Nanxun hucong jilue (Records from the 
Retinue of the [1689] Tour.] [Late seventeenth 
century.] Taipei: Guangwen Shuju, 1968. 

Zhang Zining: see Chang Joseph 

Zhao Weizhi and Liu Yuxin 1983 
Zhao Weizhi and Liu Yuxin, eds. Zhao Zhixin 
shixuan (Selected Poems of Zhao Zhixin). Jinan: 
Jilu Shushe, 1983. 

Zheng Yinshu 1984 

Zheng Yinshu. Xiang Yuanhian zhi shuhua shoucangyu 
yishu (Xiang Yuanbian's Calligraphy and Painting 
Collection and Art). Taipei: Wenshizhe Chubanshe, 
1984. 

Zheng Zhuo-lu 19 61 

Zheng Zhuo-lu. Shitao yanjiu (A Study of Shitao). 
Beijing: Remin Meishu Chubanshe, 1961. 

Zhongguo gudai shuhua tumu 1986— 2001 

Zhongguo gudai shuhua tumu (Illustrated Catalogue of 

Selected Works of Ancient Chinese Calligraphy 

and Painting). 24 vols. Beijing: Wenwu Chubanshe, 
1986—2001. 

Zhongguo hualun leihian 1973 

Zhongguo hualun leihian (Collection of Chinese Painting 
Criticism), Edited by Yu Jianhua. 2 vols. Hong Kong: 
Zhonghua Shuju, 1973. 

Zhongguo huihua quanji 1997— 

Zhongguo Gudai Shuhua Jiandingzu, ed. Zhongguo 
huihua quanji (Comprehensive Collection of Chinese 
Paintings). 30 vols, to date. Beijing: Wenwu 
Chubanshe, 1997—. 

Zhongguo lidai renming dacidian 1999 

Zhongguo lidai renming dacidian (Encyclopedic Dictio- 
nary of Chinese Biographical Names). Edited by 
Zhang Weizhi, Shen Qiwei, and Liu Dehong. 2 vols. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Guji Chubanshe, 1999. 

Zhongwen dacidian 1993 

Zhongwen dacidian (Encyclopedic Dictionary of the 
Chinese Language). 9th ed. 10 vols.Taipei: Zhongguo 
Wenhua Daxue Chubanbu, 1993. 

Zhou Lianggong, Duhua lu (1968 ed.) 

Zhou Lianggong. Duhua lu (Lives of Painters). [1669.] 
In Yishu congbian (Collected Works on the Arts), vol. 14, 
chap. I, pt. 2, pp. 1-51. Taipei: Shijie Shuju, 1968. 

Zhu Jiajin 1986 

Zhu Jiajin. Treasures of the Forbidden City. New York: 
Viking, 1986, 

Zhu Liangzhi 2005 

Zhu Liangzhi. Shitao yanjiu (A Study of Shitao). 
Beijing: Beijing Daxue Chubanshe, 2005. 

Zhuo Qingfen 1999 

Zhuo Qingfen. Nalan Xingde wenxue yanjiu (Research 
on Nalan Xingde s Literature). Taipei: Guoli 
Bianyiguan, 1999. 

Ziircher 1955 

E. Ziircher. "Imitation and Forgery in Ancient 
Chinese Painting and Calligraphy." Oriental Art, 
n.s., I, no. 4 (Winter 1955), pp. 141—46. 

222 

Index 

Page numbers in italic type refer to illustrations, 
including maps; page numbers in boldface type refer 
to main entries in the Catalogue section. The index 
uses word-by-word alphabetization (e.g., "Ananda" 
follows "An Qi"). 

A 

Abstract Expressionism, 43—44, 45 

action painting, 43 

"Alexandrianism," 41 

amateur ideal, in Chinese painting, 5, 80 

an 9^ ("obscure"), 23 

An, Prince -S'lai, 

An Qi ■^'''i (ca. 1683-after 1744), iz^niij 
Ananda F^lf^ (Qingxi Miir), 195 
Anhui -^-^ic Province, 130, 1^1 (map) 
anonymous works. See under unidentified artists 
anti-Manchu campaign of 1659, 5^ 
antiquarianism, renewal of, 77 
"antique brusque elegance" {guzhuo 'i'^iij), 15—16 
apprentices, 78 

Auspicious Omens Jor Dynastic Revival and Welcoming the 

Imperial Carriage, i83n6o 
avant-garde, 44 

"ax-cut" (Jupi texture, 39 

B 

Bada Shanren ^'^^ A. iXl A. (1626— 1705), 4 

Bai Juyi ^ >® ^ (772-846), "A First Visit to the 

Taihang Mountains," 95, 96 
haimiao 6 -jffl ("monochrome-outline") technique, 

38 

hamian linglong zhi qiao ("eight-sided 

wondrous effect"), 5 
Ban Yuan -=1^111 ("Half Garden" of Tang Yuzhao), 

Changzhou, 60, 186, 187 
BanmuYuan ^W^IS ("Half- Acre Garden" of Gong 

Xian), Nanjing, 109 
Bantang Si Suzhou, site in Kangxi emperors 

Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
Banyun Ju $ >^ ("Half-Cloud Residence" of 

Yang Zhaolu), Changzhou, 61 
Barnhart, Richard, iz5ni9i 
Bate, W. Jackson, 35 

Beijing :tb^, xi, 129, !ji (map), 136, 137 (table) 
Benniu ^ ^ , Jiangsu Province, 137 (table) 
Bi Long -p- ?|1 (active 1736—96), 195, 200 
hian ^ ("transforming," transformations," or "cre- 
ativity"), II, 42 
BianYongyu "K^X^ (1645— 1712), 72, I24nii3, 193, 
214; Compilation of Writings on Calligraphy and 
Paintingjrom the Shigu Hall (Shigu Tang shuhua 
huikao), 72, 124nii3 
hiji or mop 'S> W ("the trace of brush or 

ink"), 9 

Bishan Xiaochi ^ Jj ^J^ >i ("Small Fool from 

the Green Mountains"), style name of Zhang 
Ke, 49 

"bits and pieces" (^suichu ^^) style, 5 
blue-and-green manner, 19, 93, 97, 107, 121, 138, 160, 
161, 206 

"bone marrow" (jwi %) styles, 12 

"boneless" (mogu z^.*^) style, 60 

Boxue hongru exam i^^P^i^, 91 

Boyi ^6 ^ (active eleventh century b.c.e.), 189 

"breath" (qi $L), 5, 13, 46 

* * b reath-movemen ts ' ' (qishi 7, 12, 2:5, 27 

"breath-resonance life-motion" (^qiyun shengdong 

"breath-resonance of the Tang," 23, 83, 96, 97 
"broad peace" (guangping of Kan gXl, 115 

Buddha, 36, 195 

Buddhism, 6, 36—38, 41, i83n45 
huyi ^ ^ (commoner; literally, "non-degree 
holder"), 119 

c 

Cahill, James, 35, 102 
Cai Yong ^ ^ (131-192 c.e.), 40-41 
calligraphic brushwork, 9, 23, 138 
calligraphy: imperial gifts, 91; and painting, xi, 5, 
40-42, 45 

cangtou ("tucking in the head"), 41 

Cangzhou i?>i""i''1, Hebei Province, /jl (map) 
Cao Yin ^ ^ (1658-1712), i83n62 
Cao Zhibo ^ ^ (1272—1355), 33, 197, 198 
"carved painting" (kehua ^'J t), 198, 2oon4 
Cezanne, Paul, 43 

Chan Buddhism (Chan Zong ^ ^ ), 6, 36 
Chang, Chin-Sung, 27, 132 
Chang, Joseph, iz/^mij 

Changchun Yuan ^-^Bl ("Garden of Exhilarating 

Spring"), Beijing, i83n63 
Chang Gate Ffl Fl, Suzhou, 162, t66 (map), 167, 

ijo—jl (pi. 52D), 176, 180, i83n55, 213; Kangxis 

disembarkation at [pi. 55], 167, 270, 176 
Changmen (Eternal Gate) Palace -ft f 1 , Chang' an 

(Xi'an), 196, 2oon2 
Changqing District -fe>■^f^^, Shandong Province 

[map 4], 151, 152, 153, Ijj 
Changsha ^Y}^, Hunan Province, 190 
Changzhou (Piling), Jiangsu Province, jO 

(map), 58, 60, (map), 136, 191 
Chen (Han empress), 2oon2 
Chen Baochen ^ (1848-1935), 208-9 

Chen Cheng f^iM^ (active second half seventeenth 

century), 197, 199 
Chen Chongben (active ca. 1775— after 1815), 

190, 191 

Chen Hongshou ^ ^ (1599-1652), 36 

Chen Jianlong F-^^'Si* (active second half seven- 
teenth century), 119 
Chen Kuilin H^^J^ (1855-1928), 191 
Chen Lian f^M^ (Chen Mingqing) 
(ca. 1590S— ca. 1640s) 
Landscape Dedicated to Wang Shimin [fig. 21], 16, 16 
To See Large within Small (^Xiaozhong xianda 

^ A.) album (Taipei album; late 
1620s), 13—19, 20, 27, 51, 53, 54, 61, 72, I23ni3, 
I24nii7 

frontispiece by Dong Qichang [fig. 15], 13, 1^ 

Leaf B, Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains^^ [fig, 17], 13, J^, 
16—19, ^c>, 31, i83n46; Wang Hui s copy 
after [fig. 27], 20, 20, 31, 53, 72; Wang 
Hui s forgery based on, see Wang Hui: 
Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains" [pi. 7]; Wang Jian's 
landscape after [fig. 23], ly, 19 

Leaf E, Landscape after Juran's "Snow Scene" 

[fig. 19], 13, (J, 19, 20, 21, 53; Wang Huis 
copy after [fig. 28], 20, 20, 53, 72; Wang 
Jians landscape after [fig. 22], ij, 19 

Leaf H (detail), Dong Qichang's colophon 
[fig. 31], 21, 2J 

Leaf I, Landscape after Huang Gongwang's "Summer 
Mountains, after Dong Yuan" [fig. 53], 56, j6 

Leaf K, Landscape after Wu Zhens "Mountain Passes 
on a Clear Autumn Day" [fig. 50], 51, Ji; 
Wang Hui landscape modeled on (1655) 
[fig. 49], 50— 51, jl, 60, i23nii 

other leaves: Autumn Clearing in the Mountain Pass 
(^Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day), 
after Wu Zhen, 68, I24n99; copy after 
Huang Gongwang s painting of Mount 
Hua, 61; Deep Forest in a Steep Valley, after 
Huang Gongwang, 54 

For Wang Hui's copy of the album for Wang Shimin, 
5ff Wang Hui: To See Large within Small 
album (Shanghai album; 1672) 
Chen Menglei F^*^ ^ (1651— ca. 1723), compiled 

under the direction of. Synthesis of Books and 

Illustrations of Ancient and Modern Times (Gujin 

tushu jicheng), i83n62 
Chengdi ^ '$'(Han emperor; r. 33—7 b.c.e.), 2oon3 
Cheng Sui (1605— 1691), 198, 199 

Cheng Zhenyi ^^J^ ^ (active early to mid- 
nineteenth century), 202, 203, 204 
Chenghuai Guan yin J^t'lt^t^P ("Seal of the Hall of 

Lucid Mind"), a seal of Wang Hui, 187 
Chengxin Tang paper ^ 80 

Chonghua Palace 1 1^ Beijing, 209 
Chou, Ju-hsi, 4 

Chronicles ofNurhaci (^Qing Taizu Gao Huangdi shilu 

>f is.^j-f^i.'$-irit), 108 

223 

Chu Suiliang ^ (596—658), 11 

chuxing di fi" ("going forth"), 176 

ci (typ^ of Chinese lyric poetry), 103 

Classified Encyclopedia of Profound Knowledge (Yuanjian 

leihan l^), i83n62 

Clear and Radiant Hall (QinghuiTang >^"3^ !^), 

Yushan, 122 
Clear and Radiant Old Man (Qinghui Laoren 

^■f"^^ A.), style name of Wang Hui, 122 
"clouds and mists' '(yunyan S'J^), 78, I24ni29 
Clunas, Craig, 41 

Cockcrow Mountain, Nanjing [figs. loi, 102], 144, l^/f 
collaborative artistic production, I24ni36, 139—43 
Collected Statutes of the Great Qing Dynasty (Da Qing 

huidian A^^'t"^), 108 
commoner (buyi ^ literally, "non-degree 

holder"), 119 

Complete Tang Poems {Quan Tang shi '^M't^), i83n62 

Confucian tradition, 130, 181, i83n45 

Confucius, 36, 189 

"correspondence" (he ^), 11, 42 

"crab-claw" (xiezhao S/K) pattern, 23 

Crawford, John M., Jr. (1913-1988), 187 

Cui -fe, Mr., of Taiyuan, epitaph of [fig. 45], 

cun ^ (texture or "signs"), 6 

cunfa Ife/i" ("texture patterns"), 7, 39, 42 

"curling-clouds" (juanyun ^ S) pattern, 39 

D 

Da Chongguang S t tIg (Da Zhongguang) 

(1623— 1692), 60, 61, 63, 77, 78, 86, i25ni58, 193, 

194, i94ni, 195, 196, 197, 199 
Da Qingyitong ("Great Unity under the 

Qing dynasty"), 121 
dacheng Js.^ ("Great Synthesis"), term, 80, 181, 198. 

See also Great Synthesis 
Dachi ("Great Fool"), a style name of Huang 

Gongwang, 49 
DafengTang AS.'S (Hall of Great Wind), 187 
Dai Jin (1388-1462), 82 

Dai Liucong ^-^'J >^ (active second half seventeenth 
century), 78 

daihi "f"^ ^ (ghost painters; literally, "substitute 
brushes"), 16 

Danyang "^I^, Jiangsu Province, jO (map), ip (map) 

dao ("the Way"), 35, 36 

Daoism (Taoism), 86, 160, i83n45 

datong ("great unity"), 121, 181 

Daxiong Baodian J^ii^ ^ on Tiger Hill, near 

Suzhou, site in Kangxi emperors Southern 

Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
"detailed painting" (xihua ^ t ), no 
"devil-face" (guimian pattern, 7, 23, 39 

"devils way" (moxie ^?P), 5 
Dezhou ^ '^^\ , Shandong Province, iji (map), 252 

(map) 
Diamond Sutra, 36 

Diantou Shi M^S^^ > on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, 

site in Kangxi emperor's Southern Inspection 

Tour of 1689, 213 
Diaries of Activity and Repose of the Kangxi Emperor 

(Kangxi qijuzhu M ^^^^^ *'i), 129, 133, 134, 

144, 149, 150, 151, i8mi, i82m7 

Ding Yunpeng T" S M| (1547— ca. 1621), 38 
dinghen ^ ^ ovfuhen w'J ^ (final draft version), 
141 

Dong Gao (1740— 1818), 210 

Dong Qichang i B (Dong Wenmin; Dong 
Zongbo) (1555— 1636), xi, 4—6, 8, 9, 11—13, ^5' 
19-20, 21, 23, 27, 33, 35, 42, 43, 46n43, 50, 53, 54, 

55, 63, 82, 83, 87, 92, 95, 97—102, 136, 188, 189, 192, 

198, 205, 209 

colophon to Chen Lians To See Large within Small 

album [fig. 31], 21, 2j 
frontispiece to Chen Lian's To See Large within Small 

album [fig. 15], 13, 14 
Landscape in the Manner ofNi Zan (hanging scroll; 

1634) [fig. 14], 12, 13, 42 
Landscapes album (1630), 12; Leaf A, Landscape in the 

Style of Dong Yuan [fig. 12], 12, 12; Leaf B, 

Landscape in the Style ofNi Zan [fig. 13], 12, iz 
The Qinghian Mountains [figs. 9, 11], 10, u, 11— 12 
River and Mountains on a Clear Autumn Day [fig, 5], 7, 

y, 8, II, 102 

Dong Yuan i (Dong Beiyuan) (active 930s— 60s), 
6, 7, 8, II, 12, 23, 33, 42, 78, 82, 92, 97, 188, 196, 

199, 209 

Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day, Wu Zhens 

picture in the style of, 51 
Residents of the Capital, 11, 194 
Riverbank, ^Snzy 

Summer Mountains, Huang Gongwang's paintings 
after. See under Huang Gongwang: Landscape 
after Dong Yuan's '^Summer Mountains"; Summer 
Mountains, after Dong Yuan 

Travelers amid Autumn Mountains, Wang Hui's land- 
scape after Wang Meng's imitation of [pi. 26; 
cat. 27], 72—77, 76, 214 

Wintry Groves and Layered Banks [figs. 3, 6], j, 6, 
8,6 

Xiao and Xiang Rivers, 11 
DongYue Miao (Dai Miao 1&>^; Eastern 

Peak Temple), Tai'an, 151, 160, 161, i83n44 
Dongzhou-Yongping Circuit, Zhili, 105 
Dorment, Richard, 45 

drafts, finished (dinghen ^ ^ oxfuhen >^), 141 

drafts, preliminary (gaohen ^ ^), 149 

"dragon vein" (longmai "S*^), 12, 27, 31, 32, 35, 39, 53, 

56, 57, 72, 95, 107, 122, 162 

Du Fu (Shading) (712-770), 78, 201 

Du Lide ^^:iL% (1611-1691), 108 
Dubosc, Jean-Pierre, 43 
"dynastic revival" (zhongxing ^ ■^), 176, 181 

E 

"earthen" ("southern") mode, 12 
"earthen mountain" (tushan i ilj) mode, 7—8 
Eastern Jin dynasty (317—420 C.E.), 82 

Eastern Peak Temple (DongYue Miao )> 

Tai'an, 151, 160, 161, i83n44 
Eastern Sacred Peak. See Mount Tai 
Eccentrics, in Chinese art, 4 

"eight-sided wondrous effect" (hamian linglong zhi qiao 

Eternal Gate (Changmen •ft. f 1 ) Palace, 196, 2oon2 
European realism, 180, 181 

F 

fa /ir ("method"), 35—36, 42 
faithful copy (linhen S^^), 95 
Fan Kuan ^E^ X> (Fan Zhongli; Fan Huayuan) 

(ca. 960— ca. 1030), 7, 12, 27, 82, 97, 110, 113, 121, 
160, 161—62, 192, 193, 202, 203, 206, 207 
Snowy Mountains, 72, i24niio; Wang Hui's landscape 

after [pi. 23; cat. 25], 72, 73, 213 
Travelers amid Streams and Mountains [fig. 16], 13, 1^, 
16—19, ^7' i<^5' 
Chen Lian's landscape after, Leaf B in To See 
Large within Small album (late 1620s) 
[fig. 17], 13, i^, 16—19, i83n46 
Wang Hui's copy after Chen Lians landscape 
after, Leaf D in To See Large within Small 
album (1672) [fig. 27], 20, 20, 31, 53, 72 
Wang Hui's forgery after. 5^^ Wang Hui: 

Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid 
Streams and Mountains" (1670) 
Wang Hui's handscroU after (1688) [fig. 71], 1 04, 

105, I26n23i 
Wang Jian's landscape after [fig, 23], ?7, 19 
Traveling in Snowy Mountains, 190 
work in the style of, early twelfth century, Landscape 
in the Style of Fan Kuan [fig. 79], 11^, 122 
Fan Qi ^^ff (1616-after 1694), Swallow Cliff, Leaf H 

in Landscapes album (1646) [fig. 80], IZO, 122 
Fang Aixian ^ (active second half seventeenth 

century), 60 

Fangsheng Chi ^ i. /^ili, on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, 

site in Kangxi emperor's Southern Inspection 

Tour of 1689, 213 
feifa 4^ ("no method"), 35—36, 42 
Feng and Shan ceremonies 111, 131 

Feng Pu (1609—1692), 108, i26n223 

Feng Qiao M-f^ (Maple Bridge), Suzhou, site in 

Kangxi emperor's Southern Inspection Tour of 

1689, 213 

fengyun JUM ("resonance"), 205 

fenhe ^ ^ ("openings and closings"), 5 

fenhe shi ("opening-and-closing shi*'), 8 

finished work (zkenghen JE.;^), 142 

Five Dynasties period 5-^^ (907—59), 87, 93, 95, 97, 
102, 111, 113 

Fogong Dian i^'i^J^, Changqing District, 
Shangdong Province, 152, (map) 

Fong, Wen, 56, 83 

Forbidden City, Beijing, i83n63 

"form" (xing fl^), 8 

"form-likeness" (xingsi fl^ fe), 8 

"Forty-Eight Views of Jinling [Nanjing]," 122 

Four Great Late Yuan Masters, 5, 6, 32, 63, 82, 188, 192. 
See also Huang Gongwang; Ni Zan; Wang Meng; 
Wu Zhen 

Four Wangs, 3—4, 13, 19, 20, 27, 35, See Wang Hui; 

Wang Jian; Wang Shimin; Wang Yuanqi 
Fractal God, A a (Polynesian) [fig. 41], 41, 
Fragrance-Tinged Hermitage (Ranxiang An 

^^>^),Taicang, 50, 195 
"freely sketched" (xieyi ^ ^) style, 203 
fuhen w'J See dinghen otfuhen 
Fuchun River ^a^, Zhejiang Province, jo (map) 
fugu ^ "fr ("revival"), 4, 41 

224 

fupi ("ax-cut") texture, 39 

Fuyang Hebei Province, Ijl (map) 

G 

Gao Kegong t% (1248— 1310), 33, 68, 102, 197; 

work after, see Wang Hui: Cloudy MountainSj after 
Gao Kegong 

Gao Qiao (Gao Bridge Suzhou, site in Kangxi 

emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 

171, lyj [pL 52E], 213 
Gao Shiqi t% i (1645-1704), 77, 113 
gaoben ^ ^ (preliminary draft sketch), 149 
Gaoyou T^4P, Jiangsu Province, jo (map), iji (map) 
gaoyuan ifj 3^. ("high-distance*' view), 18—19, ^5^ 
Gaozong ^ 1^ ^ (Song emperor; r. 1127—62), 176, 

i83n6o, i83n63 
Garden of Exhilarating Spring (Changchun Yuan 

'^^S), Beijing, i83n63 
Gazetteer of Mount Tai (Tai Shan zhi ^ lU 4; 1808), 

illustration of Mount Tai [fig. 126], 161, ?6/ 
Gazetteer of the Qing Dynasty (Qingchao tongzhi 
133 

Gazetteer of Shandong Province (Shandong tongzhi 

Lb>|.3i,tN- 1915), map of Shandong Province 
[map 3], ZJ2 

Gell, Alfred, 41, 42 

Gengyan Sanren #^11 A ("Mist-Plowing Idler"), 
a signature and seal of Wang Hui, 186, 187, 195, 
202, 210 

Gengzhi tu B (^Illustrations of Agriculture and 

Sericulture), 178, i83n63 

ghost painters (^daibi ^), 16, 80 

"going forth" (chuxing ^T), 176 

Gong Xian $ S" (1619—1689), 109—10, i26n228 

gongli J-M. ("fine and ornate"), 198 

Grand Canal, jo (map), /J2 (map), 132, 136, 163, 165, 
166 (map), 167, 172, 173, 180 

"grand normality" (taichang ^ '^), 121 

"grand peace" (taifing i^.-^), 119, i27n254 

Great Synthesis (dacheng A^): of Dong Qichang, 12; 
of Shitao, 36; of Wang Hui, xi, xii, 3, 21—35, 
38—39, 41, 69, 80, 82—102, 136, 206, 209; of Wang 
Jian, 19—20; Wang Shimins search for, 21, 198 

"great unity" (datong ), 181 

"Great Unity under the Qing dynasty" (Da Qingyitong 
A>^"-^l^»), 121 

Great Yu j^iSf, Temple of, Shaoxing, 132, 136 

Greenberg, Clement, 41, 42—43 

Gu Fang W ^ (active ca. 1690—1720), 133, 139—40, 

i82n23; Pavilion by a Stream with Distant Mountains, 
after Wang Fu, Leaf M in Wang Hui and follow- 
ers, Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1692) 
[%• S5], 139, 140 

Gu Fu iS-fS. (active late seventeenth century), i24n99 

Gu Kaizhi ® '14^ (ca. 344— ca. 406), 8, 82; attrib- 
uted to. Admonitions of the Instructress to the Court 
Ladies, 86 

Gu Mei IS (Gu Yiren) (1633— after 1671), 50, 57, 
I23n45, 189 

Gu Zhengyi ^ILtiC (active ca. 1575—97), 54 
Gu Zuyu IS^i^ (1631— 1692), 53, 105, i23ni6, 

I26n2i5; Essentials of Historical Geography (Dushi 
fangyujiyao tt ^^^^C^), iz^ni6 

Guan Tong M 4^ or M (active ca. 907—23), 7, 12, 
27, 78, 93—96, 97, 102, 190, 206 
Cloudy Peaks Racing Together, 93—94, 190 
Mount Lu Shrouded in White Clouds, 95 
Streams and Mountains Clearing after Mist, Wang Hui's 

landscape after [pis. 40, 41; cat. 17], 96—97, 

96-97, 96-99, 205-6 
work following the brush ideas of, i^^Wang Hui: 

Pavilion amid Woods and Verdant Peaks, Following 

the Brush Ideas of Guan Tong [pi, 42] 
works formerly attributed to: Autumn Mountains at 

Dusk [fig. 66], 27, 9j, 94—95, 96, i25ni8o, 

I25ni8i; Travelers at the Mountain Pass [fig. 78], 

ng, 122 

Guandi Dian Rfl on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, 

site in Kangxi emperors Southern Inspection 
Tour of 1689, 213 

Guangling )^^. S^fYangzhou 

guangping ^ ("broad peace"), 118 

Guanyin Gate ^"i" F1, Nanjing, 122 

Gucheng S Hebei Province, 131 (map) 

Guhe Jian '^$^lifA, on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, site 
in Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour 
of 1689, 213 

guimian >fe S ("devil-face") pattern, 7, 39 

Guo Chunpu JP ^ M (active second half twentieth 
century), 214 

Guo Xi (Guo Heyang) (ca. 1000— ca. 1090), 

7—8, 33, 42, 68, 92, 199; Sailing Back along Many 
Rivers, Wang Hui*s painting after, Leaf JJ in In 
Pursuit of Antiquity album (1673) [cat. 14], 198 

Gushan § Jj , Changqing District, Shandong 
Province, 152, fjj (map) 

guzhuo ~^ ^ ("antique brusque elegance"), 16 

H 

Half- Acre Garden (Banmu Yuan 4" «^ Bl ), Nanjing, 
109 

Half-Cloud Residence (Banyun Ju 4 #>&), 

Changzhou, 61 
Half Garden (Ban Yuan SI ), Changzhou, 60, 186, 

187 

Hall of Great Wind (DafengTang 187 
Hall of Humble Refinements (Zhuoxiu Tang 

^{b'f^:^),Taicang, 50, 61 
Hall of Supreme Harmony (Taihe Dian ii^^^), 

Beijing, 137 (table) 
Han dynasty /H^? (206 b.c.e.— 220 c.e.), 176, 2oon2, 

2oon3 

handscroUs, long, revival of, 83 

hangjia ^ ^ (painters by profession), 5 

Hangzhou ^/L , Zhejiang Province, jo (map), 2J? 

(map), 132, 136; archery competition, 144; Zhe 

School, 82 

Hanshan ^ uU , The Collected Songs of Cold Mountain, 45 
Hanshan Temple (Hanshan Si ^ lij '^), Suzhou, 165, 

166 (map), 167, l6j (pL 52c), 213 
Hanxie (commissioner of Wang Hui album), 

I23n69 

he ^ ("correspondence"), 11, 42 
Heavens mandate, imperial quest to obtain, 121, 
129, 131 

Hejian f^l, Hebei Province, (31 (map) 

"hemp-fiber" {pima ^M-) texture patterns, 6-7, 8, 19, 

21, 33, 39, 55, 68 
Henan Province /"T ife , 95, i}l (i^^p) 
Hetao 36 

"high-distance" (gaoyuan rfj ^S) view, 18—19, ^5^ 
History of Mount Tai (Dai shi 1& i; 1587), illustration 

of Mount Tai [fig. 124], 161, i6i 
Hockney, David, A Day on the Grand Canal, i83n47 
Hong'edai ^^'^IS (active late seventeenth century), 

i8mi 

Honghuapu ^^^41^, Shandong Province, iji (map), 

ijz (map), 160 
Hong ji Si t'^^ (Magn animous Salvation 

Temple), Nanjing, 122 
Hongwu emperor (r. 1368—98), 132 

Hou Quan (active ca. 1662—72), 200 

Hu Qiu ^-6., on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, site in 

Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 

1689, 213 

Hua Xia ^ 5. (ca. 1465-1566), 72, 214 
Huai River (Huai He >'ft^/^), 131 (map), 132 
Huai'an Jiangsu Province, t^i (map) 

Huang Binhong ^ $ (1865—1955), 214 
Huang Gongwang ^ (Dachi; Zijui; Huangchi; 
Chiweng; Yifeng; Yifong Daoren) (1269—1354), 5, 
6, 11, 21, 23, 33, 49, 53—54, 57, 60, 61—63, 97' 
102, 113, 122, 186, 198 
Autumn Mountains, 54—55 
Deep Forest in a Steep Valley, 54 
Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains [figs. 4, 123], 6—7, 
6—7, II, 61, 63, III, 113, 160, 260, 207, 208; 
Wang Hui's copy of, for Da Chongguang 
[figs, 56, 57], 61—63, 6j> 78'* Wang Hui's other 
copies after, 61, 63, 78, 80, 105, iii, I23n73 
Floating Mists and Distant Peaks, Wang Jian's land- 
scape after [fig. 51], 54, J4 
Floating Mists and Warm Greenery, 54 
Landscape after Dong Yuans '^Summer Mountains" 54 
Stone Cliff at the Pond of Heaven [fig. 54], ^6, 57 
Summer Mountains, after Dong Yuan, 54, 56, 57; Chen 
Lian's landscape after, Leaf I in To See Large 
within Small [fig. 53], 56, j6 
works after, in (or formerly in) Wang Hui and 

Wang Shimins Landscapes after Ancient Masters 
(1674 and 1677): Wang Hui, Sand Banks and 
Rocks, after Huang Gongwang [cat. 15], 200; 
Wang Shimin, Evening in Pure Peaks, after 
Huang Gongwang, 202, 203 
works in the style of, 33, 57, 92, 93, 105, 189, 196, 197; 
Wang Shimins Landscape in the Style of Huang 
Gongwang [fig. 20], 15, /6. See also underV^ang 
Hui: Autumn Forests at Yushan [pis. 16, 17]; In 
Pursuit of Antiquity, Leaf D [pi. 9]; Landscape 
in the Style of Huang Gongwang [pis. 2, 15] 
Huang Ji (d. 1686), 108, i26n223 

Huang Tingjian ^)}k.^ (1045— 1105), Short Essay 

Beginning with Xiaozi, 92, I25ni69 
Huang Yujian "^H^ (1623-1704), 51, 68 
Huangbudun See Huangpodun 

Huangli Fang ^Ml^-^, Suzhou, site in Kangxi 

emperor's Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
Huangpodun "^^^li (formerly Huangbudun), 
Wuxi, 163, 165, l6j (pi. 52B), 213 

225 

Huangshan Dian \h JS , Changqing District, 

Shandong Province, 152, zjj (map) 
huihi ^ ("return"), 176 
Huishan Spring \h near Wuxi, 163 
Huishan Temple (Huishan Si A- uU '^), near Wuxi, 

163, 213 

huiyin ^^f% ("painting hermit"), 112 
Huizong emperor (r. noi— 25), 72, 194, 

198, 214 

hunhou ^^M- ("roundess and fullness"), 205 
Hushuguan /tf g %^ (Xushuguan; "Riverbank Villa 
Customs Barrier"), 162, 163, 16^ (pL 52B), 166 
(map), 213; customs station, 165, i83n5o 
huwei t%Mj ("protecting the tail"), 41 
Huzhou /^S ^"11 (Wuxing), Zhejiang Province, jo 
(map), 1^1 (map) 

I 

Illustrations of Agriculture and Sericulture (^Gengzhi tu 

#,^B|), 178, i83n63 
Imperial Painting Academy, 176 
"In Pursuit of Antiquity" exhibition (1969), 43 
Individualists, in Chinese painting, 4, 8, 35—41 
"iron-wire drawing" (^tiexian miao ^I^^^-Ib9), 38 

J 

Jade Peak Garden (Yufeng Yuanchi >^), 

Kunshan, 105 
Jesuit missionaries, 180 
Ji Zha 4L (sixth century bx.e.), 196 
Jiading ^ Jiangsu Province, jo (map) 
Jian Chi M'A, on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, site in 

Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 

1689, 213 

Jian Men Qiaoke :^'J F1 ^ ("Woodcutter at 

Sword Gate"), a signature of Wang Hui, 210 
Jiang Chenxi mm , i23n8o 
Jiang Chenying ^ >K ^ (1628— 1699), 95 
Jiang Tingxi t^^^, izjnz^^, 
Jiangnan l^J ("South of the [Yangzi] River") 

region, 27,^0 (map), 53, 58, 86, 129, 130, 136, 150, 
162, 181— 82n6 
Jiangsu Province , 86, 130, ijl (map), i82n6 

jianzi ^ ^ ("calligraphy embodied"), 40 
Jiao Bingzhen M, (active ca. 1680— 1720), illus- 

tration for Illustrations of Agriculture and Sericulture 
(Gengzhi tu), 178, i83n63 
Jiaqing emperor ■^^'^ (r. 1796— 1820), 192, 193, 194, 
209, 213, 214 

Jiaxing (Xiushui), Zhejiang Province, jo (map), 

rji (map) 

jiesuo ^ !^ ("unraveled-rope") pattern, 39 
jijian ,^t^ or jishizhong ^ (supervising secre- 

tary), 90 

Jin Shan Jj, Jiangsu Province [figs. 103, 104], 144, 

Jinan ?^i^J, Shandong Province, lz8 (pL 47), 1^1 

(map), 136, 151-52, ijz (map), 153 (map), ijj 

(pi. 49), 160, 211 
Jing Hao ^-'J >^ (active ca. 870— ca. 930), 7, 78, 82, 203; 

formerly attributed to, Mount Kuanglu [fig. 77], 

118, 122 

Jinghe Jiangsu Province, 1^1 (map) 

jingyan ^ (periodic lectures for the emperor), 
I26n223 

Jining Shandong Province, iji (map) 

Jinsha "^'/j^, 5ffYixing 

jinshi ^ "Jr (advanced civil service degree), 11, 130, 
i8m4 

jishizhong . See jijian or jishizhong 

Jiulong Shan ycfl, ub , near Wuxi, site in Kangxi 

emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
juanyun S ("curling clouds"), 39 
Juran E M (active ca. 960—85), 6, 7, 11, 12, 23, 27, 42, 

78, 82, 102, no, 113, 122, 160, 188, 199, 206, 207, 

209, 214 

Mist Floating on a Distant Peak, 27, 77, 194—95 
Wang Hui's landscape in imitation of [pi. 6; 
cat. 13], 27, 2<S, 32, 35, 39, 47n72, 77, 78, 
194-95 

Wang Hui's original replica, 77, 78, i23n8o; copy 
after, by an unidentified artist [fig. 63], 
77,79 

works formerly attributed to: 

Seeking the Dao in Autumn Mountains [fig. 32], 27, 29 

Snow Scene [fig. 18], 13, /j, 19, 21 

Chen Lians landscape after, Leaf E in To See 
Large within Small album (late 1620s) 
[fig- 19]. B> 19' 20, 21, 53 
Wang Hui's copy, after Chen Lian's landscape, 
Leaf D in To See Large within Small album 

(1672) [fig. 28], 20, 20, 53, 72 

Wang Jian's landscape after [fig. 22], 27, 19 
works in the style or manner of, 92, 189. See also 
underWsLUg Hui: Clearing after Rain over 
Streams and Mountains [pi. 14]; Deserted 
Mountain, Old Trees, and Village, after Juran; 
Landscape in the Style of Juran [pi. 3] 
juren ^ A. (provincial-level civil service degree), 103 
Jurong ^ S-, Jiangsu Province, jo (map), ijl (map), 
148, 149 (figs. 119, 120) 

K 

Kaifeng M M, Henan Province, iji (map) 
kaihe ^ ("openings and closings"), 5 
Kaishan Jj , Changqing District, Shandong 

Province, 152, Ijj (map) 
Kaishan Si uU ("Opening in the Mountains 

Temple"), 152, ijj (pi. 49), Ij6-jy (pi. 50), 211 
Kangxi emperor M ^ (Xuanye) (r. 1662—1722), 3, 
35, 64, 91—92, 112, 119—21, i26n223, 129—30, i8m3, 
183056, 183063 
as depicted in The Kangxi Emperors Southern 

Inspection Tour, 119, 136, l^o (fig. 87), 142, 149, 
150, 151, 152, 162, 167, 171, 176, 181, 211, 213; as 
the sage-king hero of the narrative, 135 
inspection tours, no, 130; first Southern Tour 
(1684), 102, 112, 130—33, i82n28; second 
Southern Tour (1689), 3, 113, 118, 119, 129, ijl 
(map), 132, 144, 151, 152, 160, 162, 163, 167, 
i8mi, i82ni7, i82n28; third Southern Tour 
(1699), 91, 130; fourth, fifth, and sixth 
Southern Tours (1703, 1705, 1707), 130 
title Shanshui Qinghui ("Landscapes Clear and 
Radiant") bestowed on Wang Hui by, xi, 3, 
21, 121, 122 

works sponsored by: compilations and compendi- 
ums, 178, i83n62; narrative paintings, 118, 135, 
142, 178 

Kangxi Emperors Sixtieth Birthday Celebration (^Kangxi 
liuxun wanshou qingdian tu M^^^ ^ i4 ^ 
140, 178, i83n63 

Kangxi Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour (^Kangxi nanxun 
M ^ Wang Hui and assistants, The 

Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour 

Kawara, On, 44 

Ke Jiusi ^'h^^ (Danqiu fl^-^:) ( 1290— 1343), 187 
kehua M t ("carved painting"), 198, 2oon4 
Kline, Franz, 44 
Kubler, George, 43, 44 
Kuh, Katharine, 43—44 

Kulena (active late seventeenth century) i8ini 
Kunshan ^ uU , Jiangsu Province, jO (map), i26n2o8 

L 

Laiqing Ge ("Hearing Greenery Studio"), a 

seal of Wang Hui, 205 
Lake Gaoyou vfj $P Jiangsu Province, jO (map), 

131 (map) 

Lake Hongze Jiangsu Province, 131 (map) 

LakeTai ii^^H, Jiangsu Province, jO (map), 131 (map) 
Lake Weishan ^lif y^^, ijl (map) 
"Landscapes Clear and Radiant" (Shanshui Qinghui 

Jj7jC>f B^), title given to Wang Hui by the 

Kangxi emperor, xi, 3, 21, 121, 122 
Lang Shaojun, 3—4 
Lee, Pamela, 44 

"level-distance" (pingyuan ^ iE) view, 151 
Li Bai $ ^ (701-762), "The Road to Shu Is Hard," 
i25ni8i 

Li Chang $ (Li Gongze) (1027— 1090), 186 
Li Cheng $ ^ (Li Xianxi; Yingqiu) (919—967), 23, 
33, 68, 82, 83, 86, 102, no, 189 
Clearing after Snow, Wang Hui's landscape after 

[fig. 64], 83, 83 
Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass, Wang Hui s land- 
scape after Xu Daoning's study of [pi. 24; 
cat. 26], 72, 7^, I24nii3, 213—14 
Wintry Grove, Wang Hui's and Wang Shimin's land- 
scapes after. Leaves I and K in Landscapes after 
Ancient Masters (1674 and 1677) [cat. 15], 68, 
201, 203 

See also underW^g Hui: Mountains and Rivers Clearing 
after Snow, in the Style of Li Cheng [fig. 74]; Snow 
Clearing, after Li Cheng [pi. 4] 
Li Darong $ Qinshi, 1835), 204 

Li Di $ (active ca. 113— after 1197), 92—93 
Li $ family collection, 204 
Li Gonglin $ (ca. 1041-1106), 38 

The Shu River, jj 
The Xiao and Xiang Rivers, 77 
Li Guangdi $ ^fe* JhIl (1642— 1718), i8mi 
Li Moyuan $ 'J ^ (Xi Yuan Zhuren) (active mid- 
nineteenth century), 200, 202—3, ^^4 
Li Qingduo $ >ft ^ (active late nineteenth century), 
203-4 

Li Shangyin # ^ ffi (8135-858), "L ines To Be Sent 

Home, Written on a Rainy Night," 1260209 
Li Sixun # StJl| (651-716), 82, 103 

226 

Li Songyun $ fc" (active late nineteenth century), 
187 

Li Tang ^ M' (ca. 1070s— ca. 1150$) 

Duke Wen of Jin Recovering His State, 176; details: 

Journey to Chu [fig. 127], 176, iy6; Return to Jin 
[fig, 128], 176, 177 
River Temple in the Long Summer, 103 
Li Ying $ W (jinshi, 856), "Flowing Stream at the 

Dongling Temple," 209, 2roni 
Li Zhaodao $ iS. (active ca. 700), 82 
Li Zongkong $ ^ (Shuyun; Shulou) (1618— 1701), 

27, 87—93, 94, 102, I25ni6r, r25ni69, 125ni79, 

i25ni8i, 195, 198, 199 
Liang period (502-557). II 

Liang Qingbiao ^/"fr^S (1620— 1691), 31, 105, 111, 112, 

113, i26n248 
lijia ^'J ^ (scholar- or literati-amateurs), 5 
linben ^ ^ (faithful copy), 95 
Lingyan Jiqi 'S.^^'^, Abbot (1605-1672), 36 
Linqing Sfe/^, Hebei Province, /Jl (map) 
Lishe Bridge ^'J '^P^, Nanjing, 143, 14^ (fig. 97) 
literati (wenren ^ A.) painting tradition, 3, 5, 83, 87, 

97. 178 

Liu Bingtu $'J Bl (active seventeenth century?), 214 
Liu Jue ^'J Si (1410— 1472), copy of Wu Zhens 

Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain [fig. 61], 68, jl, 

I24n99 

Liu Yu (1620-after 1689), 92, 196, 198, 199 

Longevity Pavilion (WanshouTing i^ ♦?*), on 

Tiger Hill, 167, i83n53 
longmai "tl,^ ("dragon vein"), term, 12, 27, 162. See 

also "dragon vein" 
Lou Shu 4^1^ (active first half twelfth century), 

i83n63 

Loudong ^■>^. 5«Taicang 

Loudong School 82-83 

Lu (ancient state in present-day Shandong 

Province), 151, 211 
Lu Shihua (1714— 1779), 202, 204 

LuTanwei 1^^^ (active ca. 465-72), 82 
Lu Yuqing 1% 3^. 9^ (active late eighteenth century), 

204 

Lii'an Benyue (d. 1676), 36 

Luansheng ^ ^ , Master (active mid-seventeenth 
century), 205 

luohans H /H (guardians of Buddhist law) [figs. 35, 
36], 36-38,37,36-39 

M 

Ma Hezhi -^^fo:^ (active ca. 1130-80), Odes of the State 
of Bin from the "Book of Poetry" [Rg, 130], 176, 277 

Magnanimous Salvation Temple (Hongji Si 
^?#^), Nanjing, 122 

Magnificent Record of Longevity, First Collection (^Wangshou 
shengdian chuji ^ ^-ft^TJ ^), 183063 

Magnificent Record of the Southern Tour (Nanxun shengdian 
lij 3*2.^^), 133. See Wang Hui and assis- 
tants, The Kangxi Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour 

Maitreya, 36 

Malraux, Andre, 43 

Manchu Plain Yellow Banner faction, 130 
Manchu-Qing dynasty (1644— 191 1). See Qing 

dynasty 

Manchu-Qing Orthodox School. See Orthodox 
School 

Manchus, xii, 3, 36, 58, 72, 102, 129, 130, i8m2, i82n7 
Manual of Calligraphy and Painting of the Studio for 
Admiring Culture (Peiwen Zhai shuhua pu 
M>C## t tf), i82n2i, i83n62 
Maple Bridge, Suzhou (Feng Qiao M^^), 165, 166 

(map), 167, i6y (pi. 52c) 
Marden, Brice (b. 1938), 45—46 

Cold Mountain series, 45; Cold Mountain I (Path) 

[fig. 44], 43, 45 
Epitaph Painting 2 [figs. 46—48], 44, ^j, 46; study for 

[fig. 45], 44, 46 
Grove IV [fig. 43} 43' 45 

The Propitious Garden of Plane Images series, 45; 
The Propitious Garden of Plane Images, Third 
Version [fig. 42], 42-43, 45 
Master of the Clear and Radiant Hall (Qinghui Tang 
Zhuren>f 0?:tiA), style name of Wang 
Hui, 122 
Master Stone Valley. See Shiguzi 
Medalla, David, 44 

Mei Qing ^ (1623-1697), 38; colophon to Shitao, 

The Sixteen Luohans [fig. 37], 38, 36 
men f 1 ("gate" [school]), 35 

Mengyin ^1^, Shandong Province, 13? (map), 151, 

iji (map), (pi. 49), 160, 211 
method and no-method (fa /i: ^ndfeifa ^^/i), 35—36, 

42 

Mi Fu (Mi Nangong) (1052— 1107), 8, 11, 33, 92, 

192, 197, 198; Letters, 92 
Mi Youren ^iLi^ (1074— 1151), 105, 197, 202 
Delist in Cloudy Mountains, jj, 86, 1240123 
Mist and Rain over Wuzhou, copy after, I23n35 
Xiao and Xiang Rivers, 209 
Mi Yuan S ("Secret Garden" of Li Zongkong), 

Yangzhou, 92, 195 
Miluo Pavilion ft M (Miluo Ge), Suzhou, 171, 

173 (pi. 52E), 183056, 213 
Mind (xm 'C*), 9, 36, 40, 42 
ming ("obvious"), 23 

Ming dynasty ^ (1368-1644), xii, 4, 43, 132; fall 
of, 13, 129 

Ming History (Mingshi ^) project, 91, 103 

Ming painting, 4, 5, 11, 138 

Ming Painting Academy, 178 

Ming-Qing transition, xii, 66, 77, 119, 129—30 

Mingju ^ (1635— 1708), 102—3, "3' ^3^0 

Mingshi it. See Ming History project 

Minimalism, 45 

mist, narrative use of, 167, 171, 172 

Mochan 3i ^ ("Ink Meditation"), a seal of Wang 

Hui, 186 
modernism, 41, 42—43 
moji 'S^. See hiji or moji 
Mongol- Yuan period. 5^^ Yuan period 
"monochrome-outline" (baimiao ^ im) technique, 38 
"monumental intimisme" mode, 95, I25ni84 
monumental landscape style, 93—96, 97, 138, 160, 176 
Morse, Earl (1908—1988), 43, 188, 191, 205 
Mote, Frederick W, 41 

Mount Huang ^ uU , Anhui Province, jO (map), 
131 (map) 

Mount Lingyan , near Suzhou, 166 (map) 

Mount Mao (Maoshan ^ Jj ), near Nanjing, 86 
Mount Meng ^ ib , near Mengyin, 160 
Mount Qixia S tU , near Nanjing, Zhang Hong's 

depiction of [fig. i], 4, 5 
Mount Tai (Tai Shan ^ lU ; Eastern Sacred Peak), 
Shandong Province, 121, 130—31, 131 (map), 132, 
136, 151, ijz (map), 153, 153-62, tjj (pi. 49), 
ijS—jg (pi. 51), r83n45, 211; woodblock illustra- 
tions of, of the type that served as models for 
Wang Hui [figs. 124, 125, 126], 161, 161 
Mount Taihang i^^xh, Shanxi-Henan Provinces. 

Wang Hui: The Colors of Mount Taihang [pis. 5, 
39A,b] 

Mount Tianmu \h, Zhejiang Province, jO 

(map) 

Mount Tianping Jj, near Suzhou, 166 (map) 

Mount Wutai 5.^: Jj, Shanxi Province, 130 
Mount Yu ^ lLt , Jiangsu Province, jo (map), for the 

village, see Yushan 
Mount Zhong M Jj (Zhongling), near Nanjing, 207 
"mountain" (^shan Jj ), pictograph for, 33, 162 
"mountains and rivers without end" tradition, 68, 111, 113 
moxie ^fP ("devil's way" or "pernicious way"), 5 
Muchen Daomin (1596-1674), 36 

Mustard Seed Garden Manual, 9 

N 

Naito Konan (1866—1934), 19503 
Nalan Xingde #9 SI See Siogde 

Nan Shufaog i^J ("South Library"), Beijiog, 
133' 135 

Nan Yuan I^J 9^, Hebei Province, i82n28 
Nanjing ife ^ (Jinling; Ming "Southern Capital"), 
Jiangsu Province, jO (map), 66, 119, 122, 13? 
(map), 132, 136, 173 
Nantong ife ij., Jiangsu Province, jO (map) 
"Nearing Greenery Studio" {Laiqing Ge "fr W ), a 

seal of Wang Hui, 205 
Ni Can i%M- (1627-1688), 66 
Ni Zan (1306— 1374), 5, II, 12, 82, 105, 198 

Dong Qichangs landscapes in the style of: (1630) 
album leaf [fig. 12], 12, li\ (1634) hanging 
scroll [fig. 14], 12, ?3, 42 
Wang Shimins leaf after. Pavilions and Streams and 
Mountains, after Ni Zan, 203 
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 42 
Ningbo -^y]^, Zhejiang Province, jO (map), Iji 

(map) 
Northern Faction, 130 

Northern Garden (Yufeng Beiyuan i.'^:Ib S) of 
the Xu family, Kunshan, 105, I26n2i3, I26n2i6 

"northern" mode, 7, 12 

Northern School of painting, 5, 33—35 

Northern Song period ^ (960—1127), painting 
styles, 3, 12, 18, 87, 93, 95, 96, 97, 102, III, 113, 
138, 160 

o 

Oboi (d. 1669), 58 

"obscure" and "obvious" (^an ^ and ming ^H) 

elements, 23, 33, 97—102 
"one" (yi '"), 36 

227 

"one-stroke method*' (yihua ' t), 38, 39, 40 
"opening-and-closing" (fenhe or kaihe ^) 

movements, 5, 7, 11, 56, 86 
" opening- and-closing shi" (Jenhe shi "o"^), 8 
Opening in the Mountains Temple (Kaishan Si 

Bfl ih 152, zjj (pi. 49), 156-J7 (pi. 50), 

211 

"originality," 44 

"orthodox" or "orthodoxy" (^zhengzong IE- ,^^), xi, 4 
Orthodox School, xi, 3—4, 8, 15, 19, 21, 35, 49, 83, 87, 

92, 93, 97, 136, 188, 199; versus the Individualists, 

4, 35-41 

P 

"painting hermit" (huiyin 112 

paintings, cost of, 77. See also Wang Hui: prices paid 

for his paintings 
Pan Jingshu ^"^jfe (1892-1939), 206 
Pan Yijun >l| "ft (1740—1830), 190 
Pan Yuanbo 7G^6 (active ca. 1660—70), 80, 192; 

Wang Hui s copy of Huang Gongwang s 

Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains for, 78, 80, 

I23n73 

Pang Yuanji .^TC?^ (1864-1949), 187 
Pavilion of Planting Pines (Zhongsong Xuan 

^t>^),Yangzhou, 92 
Pei Jingfu ^'^^ (1854— 1926), 113, 118, iz^nuy 
Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Three Realms (Sancai tuhui 

^ ffl 1607), illustration of Mount Tai 

[fig, 125], 161, i6i 
Picture of the Kangxi Southern Inspection Tour (Kangxi 

nanxuntu llj 3«< Bl ). See Wang Hui ana 

assistants. The Kangxi Emperor's Southern Inspection 

Tour 

"picturing natures forms" (^tuxing ffl ^^), 42 
pima ("hemp-fiber"), 6, 39 

pima cun ikM- 1& ("hemp-fiber texture"), 7 
pingdan tianzhen ^V^^^ ("plain and natural") 
style, 8 

Pingling ^ F^, unspecified place name mentioned in 

colophon, 187, i87n2 
pingyuan ("level distance"), 151 

Pingyuan -^v^ ("Level Plain"), Shandong Province, 

(map), 151, ijz (map) 
"plain and natural" (pingdan tianzhen -^/j^:^-^) 

style, 8 
Pollock, Jackson, 44 

"primal breath" (yuanqi 7L fc), 27, 195, 197, 205 
"primeval antiquity" (taigu ^"^T), 36 
"primeval simplicity" (taipu :^^), 36 
"Primordial Line" (yihua 4 ), 36, 40 
"protecting the tail" (huwei HM^), 41 

qi 0^ ("breath" or life energy), 5, 13, 46 
Qi Gong, 16 

Qi period (479-502), 11 

Qian Qianyi ^"^^ (1582— 1664), 50, 66 
Qian Xuan ^ 28 (ca. 1235-1301 or later), Birds and 
Flowers, 92 

Qianlong ^ft"^ emperor (Hongli) (r. 1736—95), 
xii, 31—32, 112—13, 135, 178—80, 181, 192, 193, 194, 
207—8, 209, 210, 213, 214 

Qianren Shi^A;5 , on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, 

site in Kangxi emperors Southern Inspection 

Tour of 1689, 213 
Qiantang River ^^^S" a^, Zhejiang Province, jO 

(map), zji (map) 
Qibo J^'i^ (ancient sage), 198 
qifu Mii^ ("rising and falling"), 5 
Qihe Shandong Province, 1^1 (map) 

Qin dynasty (221—207 bx.e.), 131 

Qin Family Garden (Qin Yuan SI ), near Wuxi, 

163, 213 

Qin Yuan (active second half seventeenth 

century), I26n2i3 
Qing dynasty $H (1644-1911), xi, 3, 4, 8, 35, 43, 58, 

121, 178 

Qing Orthodoxy, See Orthodox School 
Qing-court painting styles, 35, 129, 136—39, 178 
Qinghui 7^ ("Pure Radiance"), a seal of Wang 
Hui, 187, 188 

Qinghui Laoren >"S" 9? ^ A ("Clear and Radiant 

Old Man"), a style name of Wang Hui, 122 
Qinghui Tang }^ ("Clear and Radiant Hall"), 

Yushan, studio of Wang Hui, 122 
Qinghui Tang Zhuren 9? 4 i A ("Master of 

the Clear and Radiant Hall"), a style name of 

Wang Hui, 122 
Qingjiang 1/^^^, Jiangsu Province, ijl (map) 
Qingzhen, Shandong Province, 66 
Qinhuai River ^>^/^, Nanjing, 112, 143, 14J 

(figs. 97, 98), 207 
qishi ("breath-movements"), 7 

Qiu Ying ^^L^ (ca. 1495-1552), 188 

qtujtn zhili^^^^il C 

'power and strength"), 205 
Qiuya (grandson of Wang Shimin), 202 

qiyun shengdong ^L"!! ^ ftf ("breath-resonance life- 
motion"), 9 

Qu Ding ^ (active ca, 1023— ca. 1056), attributed 
to, Summer Mountains [fig. 75], 68, 111, uz 

qugu'^'^ ("in pursuit of antiquity" or "repossess- 
ing the past"), 4, 32, 41, 195 

Qufu A Shandong Province, ip (map) 

R 

"raindrop" (yudian ^M^) texture dots, 19, 27, 31, 
97. 162 

Ranxiang An ("Frag rance-Tinged 

Hermitage"), Taicang, 50, 195 
Record on the Duration oj the Law (Fazhuji 'fi t£*), 

36 

"repossessing the past" (qugu ^"i"), 4, 35, 41 
"resonance" (yun ^^), 9 
"return," of emperor (huibi W 176 
"revival" (fugu "i"), 4, 41 

Revolt of the Three Feudatories (1673—83), 102, 129, 
130, i82nio 

"rising-and-falling" (qifu ^"f:^) movements, 5, 7, 11, 
56, 86 

"rocky mountain" (shishan >S tU ) or "northern" 

mode, 7—8, 12, 23 
Ronghui ^ ift> (imperial consort; 1856—1933), 209 
Ruan Yuan l^tit (1764-1849), 105, 207 
RuanYuxuan Bt^^^ (active mid-seventeenth 

century), colophon, 198, 199 

s 

Scholars of the South Library, 135 

Secret Garden (Mi Yuan SI ) of Li Zongkong, 

Yangzhou, 92, 195 
Self (Wo 8-9, 36, 40, 42 
shan lb ("mountain"), pictograph for, 33, 162 
Shan 4^ ceremonies. See Feng and Shan ceremonies 
Shandong Province \h , 130, zji (map), 136, 151, 

153; detail [map 3], ijz 
Shanghai -L jO (map) 

Shangxia gujin Jl ~F "^T ^ ("I travel up and down 

through past and present"), a seal of Wang Hui, 
35, 186, 188 

Shangxia qiannian _L T" 'f" ("Moving back and 

forth through a thousand years"), a seal of 

Wang Hui, 202 
shangyuan jiazi Tt* T "7* year, 209ni 
Shanshui Qinghui iJ4^]^/^*9? ("Landscapes Clear 

and Radiant"), title given to Wang Hui by the 

Kangxi emperor, 3, 21, 121, 122 
Shantang Jj Suzhou, 166 (map 5), 267 (pi. 52c), 213 
Shantang Canal di^^/^, Suzhou, 167 
Shaoxing .^S-^, Zhejiang Province, 50 (map), iji 

(map), 136 
She Nong (1847-?)' 187 

Shedu M , Jiangsu Province, on Grand Canal, site 

in Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour 

of 1689, 213 
shen ("spirit"), 8 

Shen Bingcheng ^ ^ (1823-1895), 195, 200 
Shen Shichong i" ^ (active ca. 1607—40), 16 
Shen Shouhong ^ (1645-1722), 78 

Shen Zhou >^J?1 (Baishi) (1427-1509), 35, 72, 82, 

109, 187, 188, 189, 214; Eastern Villa, iz^n^^ 
shensi 4^ ("magical likeness"), 8 
Shexian Mif^>. (Huicheng), Anhui Province, jo 

(map), (map) 
shi ^ ("momentum" or "compositional force"), 6, 7, 

27, 86, 194 

Shigu >S ^ ("Stone Valley"), a signature and seal of 
Wang Hui, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 195, 
198, 199, 202, 205, 206, 209, 210, 213 
Shiguzi ^ ^-f' ("Master Stone Valley"), a signature 
and seal of Wang Hui, 186, 187, 191, 193, 195, 196, 
197, 202, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 214 
Shimen ^ f^, Zhejiang Province, ip (^^^p) 
Shiqiao >5 Changqing District, 2jj (map) 
Shiqu haoji ^ ^ W ^ (Qi"g imperial catalogue), 209, 
209n2 

shishan ^ \Xi ("rocky mountain") mode, 7—8, 12, 23 
Shitao ^ (Zhu Ruoji; Yuanji) (1642—1707), 4, 
35-36, 42, 43, 83 
Album for Daoist Yu (late 1690s): inscription on 
method, 35; Leaf L, Man in the Mountain 
[fig. 40], 40, 40 
Recorded Sayings on Painting (Huayu Iti), 35—36, 38, 
39-40 

A Secluded Dwelling by a Mountain Chasm, Leaf G 

from Album of Landscapes and Flowers [fig. 39], 
39-40, 40 

The Sixteen Luohans [figs. 35, 36], 36—38, 37, j5— J9; 

Mei Qings colophon to [fig. 37], 38, j6 
Waterfall at Mount Lu, 42 

228 

Shiwo >S f§ , Shandong Province, 152 

Shulou ("Book Pavilion"), style name of Li 

Zongkong, 90 
Shun ^ (ancient sage-ruler), 119 
Shunzhi -'•Ijl emperor (r. 1644—61), 36, 72 

Shuqi (active eleventh century b.c.e.), 189 

Shuyun 8 ("Book of Clouds"), style name of Li 

Zongkong, 90, 125ni6i, I25ni69 
Sichuan Province 1^9 J' 1 , 150 

Silk Commissioners Residence, Suzhou, 166 (map), 

167, 171, 172 (pi. 52E), 174-75 (pi. 56), 176, 181, 

iSi (fig. 154) 
Sima Xiangru ^ >^J -k^ (179—107 bx.e.), 

"Rhapsody on the Changmen Palace" 

("Changmen fli"), 2oon2 
Singde '14 (Nalan Xingde; Secretary Cheng) 

(1654— 1685), 102—3, 104—5, 108, 109, i25ni97, 

I26n207, 1260243, Zhidings portrait of 

[fig. 68], 103, 103 
sketch (^aohen ^ >^), 149 
Smithson, Robert, 44 

Song and Yuan paintings: dispersal in Ming-Qing 
transition, 77—78; Great Synthesis of styles, 
19—20, 21—35, 69, 136; scholar-artists' valorization 
of, 38; Wang Hui s study and copies of, 50, 53, 
65, 72—80, 206; Wang Shimins collection of, 27, 
50, 53. See also Song dynasty; Yuan dynasty 

Song dynasty ^ 4H (960—1279), painting in, xi, 6, 
43, 53, 83, 87, 122, I25ni9i, 136, 138, 148, 176, 206. 
See also Song and Yuan paintings 

Song Junye ^'^^ (ca. 1662— 1713), 27, 31, 133, 140, 
i82n2i, 182036, i83n46; colophon to Wang Hui s 
Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid Streams 
and Mountains'' [fig. 34], 31, ji, i83n46, 193; as 
director- in-charge of The Kangxi Emperors 
Southern Inspection Tour project, 118— 19, 133, 140, 
142, i82n23 

Song Junye ^^^^ , Wang Yuanqi i ^ P , and 

others: Kangxi Emperor's Sixtieth Birthday Celebration 
(^Kangxi liuxun qingdian tu M,^^"^ 'j' 
140, 178, 183063; Manual of Calligraphy and Painting 
of the Studio for Admiring Culture (Feiwen Zhai 
shuhua pu), 182021, 183062 

Song Luo ^ ^ (Song Lao; Song Muzhong) 
(1634— 1713), 72, 78—80, 113, i24nio9 

Song Quan (1598—1652), 72 

Song Xiang ^J^B (1748— 1862), 133 

Song Zhi (1656— 1726), 78— 8d 

Songgotu Bl (d. 1703), 130 

Songjiang fe^^I- (Huating), Shanghai Municipal 
District, 11,50 (map), 58, iji (map) 

Songjiang (Yunjian) fe-^X^I^ School, 16, 82 

South Library (Nan Shufang i^J ^ ), Beijing, 
133. 135 

Southern Inspection Tour. 5ff Wang Hui aod assistaots, 
The Kangxi Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour; Xu 
Yaog and assistants, The Qianlong Emperor's 
Southern Inspection Tour 

"southero" mode, 7—8, 12 

Southern School of painting, 5—7, 23, 33, 92, 97 

Southern Song Academic painting, 35 

Spence, Jonathan, 4 

"spirit" (shen ^), 8 

"spirit-resonance" {qiyun JL"§X), 65, 189 

"splattered ink" landscapes, 47ni26 

Studio of Western Fragrance (Xishuang Zhai 

S?^#),Yushan, 58-60 
Su Shi (1037— iioi), 80, iz^nizg, 186, 202; Poems 

Written at Huangzhou on the Cold-Food Festival, 103 
sui ^ ("bone marrow") styles, 12 
suichu ("bits and pieces") style, 5 

Sullivan, Michael, 95, 1250184 
Sun Bangrui •?/^% ^ (1902— 1950), 186, 206 
Sun Chaorang -f^^^H 49 
Sun Di ^^»^k. (Zhuchi) (active mid-seventeeoth 

ceotury), 189 

Sun Yuwen ^k-^^uX. (active mid-nineteenth century), 
204 

Suqian 3^, Jiangsu Province, 2j/ (map) 
Suzhou (Wu; Wumen), Jiangsu Province, 27, 

41, 49, JO (map), 58, 65, 72, 119, ijl (map), 132, 
136, 162, 163, 165, 167—71, 176, 181, 195, 213; map 
of the city and its eoviroos [map 5], 166 
Suzhou (Wu) School (■^)/)^, 82 
Suzhou Fu Chang Men ^ i^] Tsl f 1 . See Chaog 
Gate, Suzhou 

Swallow Cliff, Naojiog [pi, 46; figs. 80—82], 110— zi, 122 
"sweeping ten-thousand miles into a square foot," 
102, 107 

"sweet and vulgar" (^tiansu "^'fS"), 5 
Sword-Testing Rock, Tiger Hill, i83n53 

T 

Tai'an Changqiog District, Shaodoog Provioce, 

zjz (map), 151, ijz (map), 153, 253 (map), ijj 
(pi. 49), ijS—jg (pi. 51), 160, i6i, 211 
Taicaog ^ (Loudong), Jiangsu Province, 50, jO 

(map), 80, 192, 195 
Taicang Creative Arts Project, 15, 19, 21 
Taicang (Loudong) School i^^^i-M^y^)^, 82 
Taicaog Shizi jiv^^""?" (Ten Talents of Taicaog), 
57 

taichang ^ ("graod normality"), 121 

taigu "ir ("primeval antiquity"), 36 

Taihaog Mouotaios ^-fr^* 27, 95—96. See also Wsdig 

Hui: The Colors of Mount Taibang [pis. 5, 39A,b] 
Taihe Dian jl^'f^^ (Hall of Supreme Harmony), 

Beijing, 137 (table) 
tatpmg grand peace"), 119 

taipu ("primeval simplicity"), 36 

Taiwan i:>^, 102, i82nio 
Taixing ^-H-, Jiangsu Province, jo (map) 
Taiyuao Shaoxi Provioce, 6 

Taiyuan a seal of Waog Hui, 210 

Taizhou ^ , Jiaogsu Province, jO (map), 131 (map) 
Tan Xian ^Pf^v Shandong Province, 131 (map) 
Tang M'^, Prince, of Fuzhou, 36 
Tang dynasty $3 (618—907), painting in, xi, 6, 11, 

83, 160; breath-resonance in, 23, 83, 87, 96, 97 
Tang M' family of Chaogzhou, 60, 186 
Tang Sunhua M^^''^ (1634—1723), 118, 119 
Tang Yin M ^ (1470—1523), 188 
Tang Yuguang M'f'^ (Tang Guaog) (1626—1690), 60 
Tang Yuzhao M^^^ (Mr. Kongming) (1602—1672), 

50, 51, 53, 60—66, 68, 72, 78, 80, 105, i23n74, 

iz^njg, 187, 192 

Tangqi or -tSfe, Zhejiang Province, 137 (table) 

Tao Qian (365—427), "Peach Blossom Spring," 

167 

tax edict of 1661, 58—60, i82n6 

Temple of Compassion and Benevolence (Cireo Si 

M't^^), 186 
Temple of the Great Yu, Shaoxiog, 132, 136 
Temple to the Deity of Mount Tai (Dai Miao 1& M ; 

Dai Temple), Tai'an, 160, 161 
Ten Talents of Taicaog (Taicaog Shizi ^'^'l""?"), 

57 

texture patteros (cunfa M.^i), 7, 39—40, 42 
Thousand-Man Rock, on Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, 167 
"three distances" formula, 18, 60, 162 
Three Feudatories, Revolt of (1673—83), 102, 129, 130, 
182010 

Three Xus from Kunshan, 103 

Tianjin 1^1 (map) 

tiansu "Stf "fS- ("sweet and vulgar"), 5 

tiextan miao 'iron-wire drawing"), 38 

Tiger Hill (Hu Qiu ^J^), near Suzhou, site in 

Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour, 163, 
166 (pL 52c), 166 (map), 167 i6S-6g (pi. 54), 
176, iSo (fig. 133), 181, i83n53, i83n54, 213 
Tin Mouotaio (Xi Shao ^ ill ), oear Wuxi, site io 
Kaogxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 
1689, 163 

To See Large within Small (^Kiaozhong Xianda ^ A.) 
albums, 19. See also Chen Lian: To See Large within 
Small (Taipei album; late 1620s); Wang Hui: To 
See Large within Small (Shanghai album; 1672); 
Wang Jian: Copies oj an Album of Song and Yuan 
Landscapes in Wang Shimins Collection (1663) 

Tokura Hidemi, 121 

Tongji Gate i4?^P1, Nanjing [fig. 98], 
tour scrolls, archetypes for imperial, 176—81 
Tower of Rising Clouds (Yunqi Lou Sfe^i-), 198 
"trace of brush or ink" (biji or moji '5 W)i 

9, 40 

"transformation" (bian ^), 11, 42 
"tucking in the head" (^cangtou ^^), 41 
tushan i lU ("earthen mountain") mode, 7—8 
tuxing B fl^ ("picturing nature's forms"), 42 
tuzai ffi ("graphic signs"), 42 
Two Wangs of Loudoog, 186. See also Waog Jiao; Wang 
Shimin 

"two wings of a bird," 23, 33, 96—102 

u 

unidentified artists 

(nth century), formerly attributed to GuaoToog 
(active ca. 907—23), Autumn Mountains at 
Dusk [fig. 66], 27, 9j, 94—95, 96, 1250180, 
I25ni8i 

(ca. 1050), formerly attributed to Guan Tong (active 
ca. 907—23), Travelers at the Mountain Pass 
[fig. 78], 119, 122 

(ca. 1100?), formerly attributed to Juran (active 

ca. 960—85), Snow Scene [fig. 18], 13, ij, 19, 21 

(ca. noo?), formerly attributed to Wang Wei 

(701—761), Rivers and Mountains after Snow 
[figs. 2, 24], J, 6, iS, 20; Dong Qichang s 
colophons (1596, 1610), 6, 19—20 

229 

(early 12th century), Landscape in the Style of Fan Kuan 

[fig. 79I "9' 122 
(ca. noi— 50), Streams and Mountains without End 

[fig. 76], III, nz— zj, 1260246 
(late i2th— early 13th century?), formerly attributed 

to Jing Hao (active ca. 870— ca. 930), Mount 

Kuanglu [fig. 77], 118, 122 
(Southern Song dynasty, 13th century), Ten 

Thousand Miles along the Yangxi River [fig. 121], 

150, IjO 

(14th century?), fi^rmerly attributed to Juran (active 
ca. 960—85), Seeking the Dao in Autumn 
Mountains [fig. 32], 27, 29 

(early 15th century?), copy after a twelfth-century 
Southern Song Academy Painter, Eighteen 
Songs of a Nomad Flute: The Story of Lady Wenji, 
176; detail, the nomad band escorting Wenji 
onto the steppes [fig. 129], 176, 177 

(17th century or later), copy after Wang Hui s 

Landscape after Juran s "Mist Floating on a Distant 
Peak'' [fig. 63], 77 79 

(1686 or later), copy after Wang Hui s Midautumn 
Eve [fig, 69], 10^, 105 

(Polynesian; Ruruta, Austral Isles), The Fractal God, 
A'a [fig. 41], 41, 41 
"untrammeled" class (yipin i^^), 194, 209 

V 

Veritable Records of the Kangxi Reign (Kangxi shilu 

m^.tm). 133 

w 

Wan Cheng ji ^ (1766-1826), 190 

Wang Bin i~ ^ (Boxue hongru exam, 1679), i8ini 
Wang Bochen i ^6 6 (Wang Hui s great- 
grandfather), 49 
Wang, C. C, (Wang Jiqian i ^ ij) (1907—2003), 
188, 191 

Wang Duo (1592—1652), 94, I25ni8i 

Wang family of Taicang, 13, 2oon3, 202 , 204, 209 
Wang Fu i (1362— 1416), Gu Fang s painting after. 
Pavilion by a Stream with Distant Mountains, after 
Wang Fu [fig. 85], 139, 140 
Wang Hongxu ir^^,^ (1645— 1723), iii 
Wang Huan'ao i ^ ^ (Wang Hui s uncle), 49 
Wang Huanlong i^"!!, (Wang Huis father), 49 
Wang Hui i ¥ (1632-1717) 

as an artist-entrepreneur, 58, 78—80 

in Beijing: (1685), 102, 103—5, 107, 108—9, ^^^> 

i26n2io; (1691—98), 3, 113, 119, 134, 136, 139 
birth and family background, 21, 49 
birthdays: fortieth, 60, 66, 78; sixtieth, i27n254, 
i82ni9 

as a copyist, 50, 51, 61, 65—66, 72, 77—78, 82; for- 
geries and "replicas," 31—32, 65, 72 

Great Synthesis sought and achieved by, 3, 21—35, 
38—39, 41, 69, 80, 82—102, 136, 206, 209 

imperial honor and title "Landscapes Clear and 
Radiant*' (Shanshui Qinghui) bestowed on, 
3, 21, 121, 122 

patrons and clients, 50, 58, 77, 102, 111; Da 

Chongguang, 86; Li Zongkong, 60—66, 
90—93; Singde, 102—3; Song Luo, 72; Tang 

Yuzhao, 51, 53; Wang Shimin and friends, 
50—53, 58, 60; Wu Kaizhi, no 
prices paid for his paintings, 58, 65, 77, 78, i23n8o 
revival of long handscroU format with monumental 
panoramic landscapes, 66, 69, 83, 93—96, 102, 
106—7, no— II, 119, 132 
signatures, style names, and seals: Chenghuai Guan 
yin ("Seal of the Hall of Lucid Mind"), 
187; Gengyan Sanren ("Mist-Plowing Idler"), 
186, 187, 195, 202, 210; Jian Men Qiaoke 
("Woodcutter at Sword Gate"), 210; Mochan 
("Ink Meditation"), 186; Qinghui ("Pure 
Radiance"), 187, 188; Qinghui Laoren ("Clear 
and Radiant Old Man"), 122; Qinghui Tang 
Zhuren ("Master of the Hall of the Clear 
and Radiant"), 122; Shangxia gujin ("I travel 
up and down through past and present"), 35, 
186, 188; Shangxia qiannian ("Moving back and 
forth through a thousand years"), 202; Shigu 
("Stone Valley"), 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 195, 198, 199, 202, 205, 206, 209, 210, 213; 
Shiguzi ("Master Stone Valley"), 186, 187, 
191, 193, 195, 196, 197, 202, 205, 206, 207, 209, 
210, 214; Taiyuan, 210; Wumu Shan Zhong 
Qiaozhe ("Wood-Gatherer of Mount 
Wumu"), 205; Wumu Shanqiao ("Wood- 
Gatherer of Mount Wumu"), 191, 194; 
Wumu Shanren ("The Man of Mount 
Wumu"), 191, 192, 197, 200; Wumu 
Shanxiaren ("Man under Mount Wumu"), 
194; Wumu Shanzhongren ("The Man of 
Mount Wumu"), 193, 206, 209; Yi zai . . . zhi 
jian ("Integrating the ways of . . ."), 187, 210; 
You he buke ("Why not this way?"), 35, 191, 
193, 194 

studio and hall: Xishuang Zhai ("Studio of 

Western Fragrance"), 58—60; Qinghui Tang 
("Clear and Radiant Hall"), 122 

teachers and mentors, 49—50, 55, 102 

WORKS 

albums for Wang Shimin. SeeWsmg Hui: In Pursuit 
of Antiquity; Wsing Hui and Wang Shimin, 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters (1674 and 1677) 

Autumn Colors, after Zhao Mengfu: copy in album 
(1686) with Yun Shoupings inscription, 61; 
replica, 61 

Autumn Forests at Yushan [pis. 16, 17; cat, 7], 57, jy, 

jg, I23n45, 189—90 
Autumn Mountains, Red Trees [pi. 28; cat. 10], 80, Si, 

191—92 

Blue Mountains and White Clouds, 58 

Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evening, after Zhao Mengfu, 

Leaf A in Landscapes after Ancient Masters 

album (1674) [cat. 15], 200, 202, 203 
Clearing after Rain over Streams and Mountains [pi. 14; 

cat. 3], J2, 53, 187 
Clearing after Snow at Shanyin, after Wang Wei [pis. 29, 

30; cat. 12], 62, 83—86, 84— 8j, 193—94 
Clearing after Snow in the Mountains and Rivers, after 

Wang Wei, i24nio2 
Cloudy Mountains, after Gao Kegong, Leaf F in 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat. 15], 201 

The Colors of Mount Taihang [pis. 5, 39A,b; cat, 8], 26, 
27, 92.— g^, 93—96, 94— 9j, 102, 110, 190—91 

Dense Snow on the Mountain Pass (formerly attributed 
to Xu Daoning) [pi. 24; cat. 26], 72, 7^, 
i24nn3, 213—14 

Deserted Mountain, Old Trees, and Village, after Juran, 
Leaf E in Landscapes after Ancient Masters 
album (1674) [cat. 15], 201, 203 

Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains, various copies after 
a version of Huang Gongwang s painting in 
Tang Yuzhao s collection, 61—63, i23"73i' copy 
for Da Chongguang [fig, 56], 61, 6j, 78; copy 
for Xu family, 105; Wang Shimins colophon 
to copy for Da Chongguang [fig. 57], 61—63, 

65 

Enjoyment of Life, 110, I26n234 

Gathered Peaks in Spring Dew (after Zhao Mengfu) 

[pi. 43 A, B; cat. 18], 105-7 106-7, ^08-9, 

206—7 

In a Wutong Grove on an Early Autumn Evening 

[fig. 70], 104, 105 
In Pursuit of Antiquity: Landscapes after Song and Yuan 

Masters album (1673) [pis. 8— 11, 31—38; cat, 

14], 32-35, j2 (Leaves A,D), jj (E,F), 86 (B), 

8j (C,G), 88-89 (H> 90 (I,J), 91 (K,L), 

92—93, 102, i25ni58, i25m6i, i25ni7o, 195—200 
The Kangxi Emperor's Southern Inspection Tour. See 

Wang Hui and assistants 
Landscape after Fan Kuans "Snowy Mountains" [pi. 23; 

cat. 25], 72, 7J, 213 
Landscape after Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid Streams and 

Mountains" (hanging scroll; ca. 1671) [pi. 7; 

cat. u], 27—32, JO, 105, i83n46, 192—93; Song 

Junyes colophon to [fig. 34], 31, jl, i83n46, 

193; Wang Shimins colophon to [fig. 33], 

27—31, Ji, 53, 60, 192 
Landscape after Guan Tong's "Streams and Mountains 

Clearing after Mist" [pis. 40, 41; cat. 17], 

96—97, 96—97, 98—99, 205—6 
Landscape after Huang Gongwang, leaf from Landscapes 

after Ancient Masters album (1662) [cat. 15], 61 
Landscape after Juran's "Mist Floating on a Distant Peak," 

copy after, by unidentified artist [fig. 63], 77, 

79 

Landscape after Juran's "Southern Mountains," 126112^^, 
Landscape after Li Cheng's "Clearing after Snow" 

[fig. 64], 83, 83 

Landscape after Wang Meng's "Travelers amid Autumn 

Mountains," Leaf B in To See Large within Small 
album (1672) [fig, 62], 72—77, 77 

Landscape after Wang Meng's "Travelers amid Autumn 
Mountains" (hanging scroll, probably after 
1700) [pi. 26; cat, 27], jz—jj, 76, 214 

Landscape after Wu Zhen's "Mountain Passes on a Clear 
Autumn Day" (1655) [fig, 49], 50—51, JI, 60, 
i23nii 

Landscape after Wu Zhen's "Mountain Passes on a Clear 

Autumn Day" (1686) [pis, 13, 25; cat. 20], 4.8, 

51, 72, 7J, 209 
Landscape after Yan Wengui's "Multiple Peaks of Mount 

Wuyi"[^g. 72], 110, no. III, i26n23i 
Landscape in the Style of Huang Gongwang (1660) 

[pis. 2, 15; cat. i], 21, 12, jj, 55—57, 186; Wang 

230 

Hui's colophon to [fig. 30], 21, 23, 186; Wu 

Hufans colophon to, 55, 186 
Landscape in the Style of Huang Qongwang (1661), 60 
Landscape in the Style of Juran [pL 3; cat. 4], 21—23, 2^, 

35, 53, 187-88 
Landscape in the Style of Wu Zhen [pis. i, 12; cat. 16], 2, 

34' 35. 204-5 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1662), 61, 

I23n69; Landscape after Huang Gongwang, 61 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674). See 

Wang Hui and Wang Shimin, Landscapes after 

Ancient Masters (1674 and 1677) 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1692). See 

under Wang Hui and followers 
Layered Rivers and Tiered Peaks [pL 44A,b; cat. 19], 

no, 112—13, ''4~(J' n6~iy, i^z, 207—9 
Level Vista with Trees and Water Buffalo, after Zhao 

Lingrang, Leaf H in Landscapes after Ancient 

Masters album (1674) [cat. 15], 201, 203 
Midautumn Eve, 105; copy after, by unidentified artist 

[fig. 69], 10^, 105 
Mist Floating on a Distant Peak (replica of Juran), 77, 

78, i23n8o 

Mist Floating on a Distant Peak, in Imitation of furan 

[pis, 6, 27; cat. 13], 27, 28, 32, 35, 39, 47n72> 

77> 78, 79. 9^' i24ni24, 194-95 
Mount Lu Shrouded in White Clouds [fig. 67], 94, 95 
Mountain Village after Snow, after Wang Wei, Leaf J in 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat. 15], 201, 203 
Mountains after Snowfall, in the Style of Li Cheng, leaf 

in collaborative album for Zhou Lianggong, 

66, 70 

Mountains and Rivers Clearing after Snow, in the Style of 

Li Cheng [fig. 74], 110, ill, i26n23i 
Myriad Valleys and Thousand Cliffs [fig. 59], 64, 6^ 
Panoramic Views of Mountains and Rivers [fig. 73], no, 
llO, I26n23i 

Pavilion amid Woods and Verdant Peaks, Following the 

Brush Ideas of Guan Tong, Leaf D in Landscapes 

after Ancient Masters album (1674) [pi. 42; 

cat. 15], loo—ioi, 102, 200, 203 
Peach Blossom Spring, after Zhao Mengfu, Leaf G in 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat. 15], 201, 203 
Reading Next to the Window in the Mountains [pi. 20; 

cat. 5], 64—65, 6j, 188 
Sand Banks and Rocks, after Huang Gongwang, Leaf B 

in Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat. 15], 200, 203 
Shady Summer Woods, after Wang Meng, Leaf C in 

Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat, 15], 200 
Shouldering a Spear, 214 
Six Landscapes (1700), i24nio9 

Six Landscapes of the Western Slope album (1688), i24nio9 
Snow Clearing, after Li Cheng [pi, 4; cat. 9], 23, 2j, 70, 
191 

Spring Morning at Swallow Cliffy [pi. 46; cat. 22], 

lZO—21, 122, 210 
Summer Mountains, Misty Rain, copies after Wu 

Zhen: for Tang Yuzhao, 68; in To See Large 

wthin Small album, 68 

Summer Mountains, Misty Rain, for Zhou Lianggong 
[pis. 21, 22A,B; cat. 6], 66—70, 67, 66—69, 
70-72, 71-72, 188-89 

Teaching the "Book of Changes" in the Autumn Forest, 
111 

Ten-Thousand Miles of the Yangzi River (handscroU; 
1677), 122 

Ten Thousand Miles of the Yangzi River (handscroU; 

1699), 66, 204 
Thatched Cottage in the Autumn Mountains, in the Style of 

Wang Meng, I26n23i 
A Thousand Peaks and Myriad Ravines [pi. 45; cat. 21], 

iiS, 122, 209—10 
To See Large within Small album (Shanghai album; 
1672), 15, 20, 27, 53, 72, 123ni3, I24nii7 
colophon to (1702) [fig. 29], 20, 2t 
Leaf C, copy after Chen Lian's Landscape after 

furan's "Snow Scene [fig. 28], 20, 20, 53, 72 
Leaf D, copy after Chen Lian's Landscape after 
Fan Kuan's "Travelers amid Streams and 
Mountains" [fig. 27], 20, 20, 31, 53, 72 
other leaves: Landscape after Wang Meng's "Travelers 
amid Autumn Mountains," 72; Mountain 
Passes on a Clear Autumn Day (^Autumn 
Clearing in the Mountain Pass), after Wu Zhen, 
68, i23m3 

Travelers amid Streams and Mountains, after Fan Kuan 

[fig. 71], 10^, 105, I26n23i 
Verdant Peaks and a Hundred Ranges [fig. 65], 56, 92 
Water Village, after Zhao Danian [pis. 18, 19; cat. 2], 

60-61, 61, 61, 186-87 
White Clouds and Green Mountains, 68 
Wintry Grove on Ancient Banks, after Li Cheng, Leaf I 

in Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674) 

[cat. 15], 68, 201, 203 
Wang Hui and assistants, The Kangxi Emperors 
Southern Inspection Tour (Kangxi nanxun 
[pis. 47—57; cats. 23, 24], n9— 21, 122, 127n250, 
I27n254, 129—81, i88ni 
administration and staffing: selection of Wang Hui 

to supervise execution, xi, 3, 104, 105, 113— 19, 

132—33, 140—41, i82n23, i88n5:i; Song Junyes 

role, 118— 19, 133, 140, 142, i82n23; Wang Hui s 

collaborators and assistants, 3, 78—80, 133, 

139—43, i82n23 
draft scrolls, i37n(d), i37n(e), 141, 143, 149, i82n36, 

i82n37. See also Individual Scrolls section below 

in this entry 
intended audience, 135 

as a narrative interpretation, not literal depiction, 
of tour, 134, 160, i82n28 

physical aspects, 135—36; box, wrapper, and clasp 
[pi. 48], 3fJ4— JJ> 136; scrolls known to be 
extant, 135, 137 (table); size of paintings and 
scrolls, 135, 136, 137 (table), 139 

political meaning and goals, 119— 21, 132, 134—35 

Qing-court style defined by, 136—39 

sources and models, 149—51 

structural aspects: "going forth" (^chuxing) and 

"return" (^huibi) structure, 176; narrative divi- 
sion into twelve scrolls, 136, 139, 149, 
182— 83n4o; temporal structure, 150; topo- 
graphical structure, 150 

technical stages of creation, 139—48; architectural 
complexes, 148; figures, 143, 147-48; land- 
scape details, 144—47 

thematic program, 136 

and tour scroll archetypes, 176—81 

INDIVIDUAL SCROLLS (Note: Draft scrolls are listed at 
the end of this section) 

Scroll One: Beijing (Yongding Gate) to Nan Yuan, 136, 137 
(table), 176 

Scroll Two: Pingyuan to finan, 136, 137 (table) 

Scroll Three: finan to Mount Tai [pi. 49; cat. 23], 121, 
136, 137 (table), 138, 141, 151—62, ij^—JJ, 176, 
210-11 

details: figures [pi. 57], lyS, 180; Kangxi's 

departure from Jinan [pi. 47], 128; Mount 
Tai andTai'an [pi. 51], 121, 153, lj8—j^; 
Opening in the Mountains Temple 
[pi. 50], 152, ij6—jy; texture strokes 
[fig. 110], 147, i^y; underdrawing for fig- 
ures [fig. 94], 142, 1^2; underdrawing for 
landscape [fig. 93], 142, 1^2 
as a rolled handscroU with clasp, wrapper, and 
lacquer box [pi. 48], 'J^— JJ 
Scroll Four: Shandong-fiangsu border to confluence of 
Yellow and Huai rivers, 136, 137 (table), 160 
Scroll Five (missing; Yangzhou to Yangzi River?), 136, 
137 (table) 

Scroll Six: (Zhenjiang?) to Benniu to Changzhou, 136, 137 
(table), 171 

Scroll Seven: Wuxi to Suzhou [pis. 52A— e; cat. 24], 136, 
137 (table), 162—76, i83n47, 211—13 
Chang Gate, Suzhou [pi. 520], 138, 162, 167, 
170—72, 176, 180; detail, Kangxi's disem- 
barkation at the Chang Gate [pi. 55], 167, 
270, 176 
frontispiece, 213 

Huangbudun to Hushuguan [pi. 52B], 138, 162, 

163—65, 264—65; detail, blind beggar 

[pi. 53]. 164, 165 
Maple Bridge to Tiger HiU [pi. 52c], 138, 162, 

165-67, i66-6y\ detaU, Tiger HUI [pi. 54], 

167 266-69, 
preface and opening section [pi. 52A], 138, 162, 

262-63, ^^3 

Yellow Oriole District to Silk Commissioner's 
Residence [pi. 52E], 138, 162, 171, ^72-73; 
detail, Silk Commissioner's Residence 
[pi. 56], 171, 274-7J, 176 
Scroll Eight (missing), 136 

Scroll Nine: Qiantang River to Shaoxing and Yu Temple, 
136; detail, mechanical contour lines [fig. 112], 

147, m 

Scroll Ten:furong to Nanjing, 136, 137 (table), 176; 

details: cluster of houses [fig. 120], 148, 249; 
Cockcrow Mountain [fig. 102], 144, 244; 
garden with rock [fig. 100], 143, 243; Nanjing, 
nearTongji Gate [fig. 98], 143, 24J; parade 
field with mounted archers [fig. 106], 144, 
245; schematic trees [fig. 108], 144, 246; 
street life [fig. 117], 148, 249; trees in street 
[fig. 96], 242, 143; varied figures [fig. 114], 

148, 246; well-developed narrative [fig. n6], 
148, 246 

231 

Scroll Eleven: Nanjing to Zhenjiang, 136, 176; details: Jin 
Shan [fig. 104], 144, i^j; Swallow Cliff 
[fig. 81], 110-11, 122 

Scroll Twelve: Beijing: Yongding Gate to Hall of Supreme 
Harmony, 136, 137 (table), 176, 182028 

Draft Scroll Seven, 133, 182024, i^2.n^^ 

Draft Scroll Eight, 182036; details: amended figures 
[fig. 89], 1^0, 142; cutout of boat pasted 
onto scroll [fig. 90], i/fi, 142; emperors pres- 
ence indicated by parasol [fig. 87], 140, 142; 
ink-wash texture dots [fig. iii], 147, 1/j.y; left 
and right borders of replaced section 
[figs. 91, 92], i/fi, 142 

Draft Scroll Ten, 144, i82n25, 182036; details: clus- 
ter of houses [fig. 119], 148, !^9; Cockcrow 
Mountain [fig. loi], 144, l^^; figure "types" 
[fig. 113], 148, 1^8; foilage dots [fig. 107], 144, 
1^6; garden with rock [fig. 99], 143, /^j; 
Nanjing, oearTongji Gate [fig. 97], 143, z^j; 
narrative content, minimal [fig. 115], 148, 2^5; 
parade field with archers [fig. 105], 144, i^j; 
repainted horse [fig. 88], z^o, 142; texture 
strokes [fig. 109], 144, z^6; title strip [fig. 83], 
133, Zjj; trees in courtyard [fig. 95], Z^2, 143; 
underdrawing for mules [fig. 86], z^o, 141 

Drafi; Scroll Eleven, i82n36; detail, Jin Shan 
[fig. 103], 144, Z4jr 

Drafi: Scroll Twelve, i82n36 
Wang Hui and followers, collaborative works 

(1691—95), 140, i82n29; Landscapes after Ancient 
Masters album (1692), 140 

Leaf B, Xu Min, Water Village^ after Zhao Lingrang 
[fig. 84], 140 

Leaf M, Gu Fang, Pavilion by a Stream with Distant 
Mountains^ after Wang Fu [fig. 85], zjp, 140 
Wang Hui and Wang Shimin, Landscapes after Ancient 
Masters album (1674 and 1677) [cat. 15], 68, 102, 
200—204 

album cover and title strip, 200, 202 
colophons and seals, Leaves M— RR, 202—4 

BY WANG HUI (1674) 

Leaf A, Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evenings after Zhao 

Mengfu, 200, 202, 203 
Leaf B, Sand Banks and Rocks, after Huang Congwang, 

200, 203 

Leaf C, Shady Summer Woods, after Wang Meng, 200 
Leaf D, Pavilion amid Woods and Verdant Peaks, 

Following the Brush Ideas of Guan Long [pL 42], 

100— lOl, 102, 200 
Leaf E, Deserted Mountain, Old Trees, and Village, after 

Juran, 201, 203 
Leaf F, Cloudy Mountains, after Gao Kegong, 201 
Leaf G, Peach Blossom Spring, after Zhao Mengfu, 201, 

203 

Leaf H, Level Vista with Trees and Water Buffalo, after 

Zhao Lingrang, 201, 203 
Leaf I, Wintry Grove on Ancient Banks, after Li Cheng, 

68, 201, 203 

Leaf J, Mountain Village after Snow, after Wang Wei, 201 
two leaves not in present album, 202 

BY WANG SHIMIN (1677) 

Leaf K, Landscape after Li Cheng's "Wintry Grove," 

201, 203 

Leaf L, Shady Summer Woods, after Zhao Mengfu, 

201—2, 203 
ten leaves not io preseot album, 202, 203 
Wang Jian i 4S (Lianzhou; Xiangbi) (1598— 1677), 
xi, xii, 3, 15, 19, 20, 21, 27, 35, 49—50, 54, 55, 56, 60, 
66, 77, 82—83, 102, 186, 195, 205, 209 
Copies of an Album of Song and Yuan Landscapes in Wang 

Shimins Collection (1663), 16, 19, 60 
Landscape after Huang Gongwang's "Floating Mists and 

Distant Peaks" [fig. 51], 54, J4 
Landscape after Zhao Mengfu s "The Mind Landscape of 

Xie Youyu" [fig. 26], Z9, 20 
Landscape in the Style of Huang Congwang [fig, 52], j^, 

55, 56-57, 186 
Landscapes in the Style of Old Masters (set of twelve 
hanging scrolls, 1670), 19; Landscape after Fan 
Kuan^s "Travelers amid Streams and Mountains" 
[fig. 23], Z7, 19; Landscape after Juran s "Snow 
Scene" [fig. 22], Z7, 19 
Wang Jiazhen i ^ ^ (active mid-seventeenth 

century), 49 
Wang Kui i ^ (jinshi, 1655), 203 
Wang Meng i ^ (Shuming; Huanghe Shanqiao) 
(1308— 1385), 5, 33, 63—65, 80, 82, 93, 102, 122, 187, 
188, 192 

Buddhist Temple and Mountain Passes, 80, 192 
Dwelling in the Mountains on a Summer Day [fig. 58], 

64, 64, 65, I23n74 
Hermitage in the Qinghian Mountains [fig. 10], ZO, 11, 

46n43 

Summer Mountains, 80, 192 
Thatched Hall in Autumn Mountains, 80, 192 
Travelers amid Autumn Mountains, Wang Hui s land- 
scapes after: hanging scroll [pi. 26; cat. 27], 
72—77, 76, 214; Leaf B in To See Large within 
Small [fig. 62], 72—77, 77 
work attributed to, Pure Withdrawal in a Secluded 

Cove, 92, I25ni67 
works after or in the style of, by Wang Hui: In 

Pursuit of Antiquity, Leaf F [pi. 11; cat. 14], 33, 
jj, 197; Shady Summer Woods, after Wang Meng, 
Leaf C in Landscapes after Ancient Masters 
album (1674) [cat. 15], 200 
Wang Moi i (active eighth century), 47ni26 
Wang Pian 5- ^ft (active second half seventeenth 

century), 66 
Wang Rong /i/^- (1896— 1972), 214 
Wang Shao i^i^ (Mr. Zaoru) (1645-1728), 64, 

i27n25o, 133, 182023, i88ni 
Wang Shen -J- "tt* (Wang Jinqing) (ca. 1048— 1103), 35, 
80, I24ni29, 198; Misty Rivers and Layered Peaks, 
1240109 

Wang Shimin i (Yanke; Yanweng; Xilu 

Laoren; Fengchang) (1592— 1680), xi, xii, 3, 13, 
15—16, 19, 20, 21, 27, 33, 50, 53—55, 56, 57, 60, 
82—83, 87, 97, 102, 103, 109, 133, 186, i88ni, 196, 
197, 198, 199, 200, 209, 214 
album of copies commissioned by. See Chen Lian: 

To See Large within Small album 
colophons and inscriptions by, 53—54, 60, 92, 190; 
to works by Wang Hui: Autumn Mountains, 
Red Trees, 80, 191—92, 193; copy after Huang 
Gongwangs Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains 

[fig. 57], 61—63, Landscape after Fan Kuans 
"Travelers amid Streams and Mountains" [fig. 33], 
27—31, JZ, 53, 60; Mist Floating on a Distant 
Peak, in Imitation of Juran, jj, 194—95; Summer 
Mountains, Misty Rain, 66, 188—89 

grandsons of. See Qiuya; Wang Yuanqi 

loss of property by, 58—60 

painting collection of, 50, 53—54, 55, 60, 61, 72, 
i83n46, 192 

relationship with Wang Hui, 58, 60, 61, 63, 65, 66, 
78 

Wang Hui's albums for. See Wang Hui: In Pursuit of 
Antiquity, Wang Hui and Wang Shimin, 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters 

WORKS 

Autumn Colors, copy afi:er Zhao Mengfu, 61, 68 
frontispiece calligraphy for Wang Hui's In Pursuit of 

Antiquity {Qugu) album, 196 
Landscape in the Style of Huang Congwang [fig. 20], 15, 16 
leaves formerly in Wang Hui and Wang Shimins 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters album (1674 
and 1677), given to Li Moyuan, 203; Buddhist 
Temple on a Clear Evening, after Zhao Mengfu, 
203; Cloudy Mountains, after Gao Kegong, 203; 
Deserted Mountain and Old Trees, after Juran, 
203; Evening Colors on Pure Peaks, after Huang 
Congwang, 203; Level Vista and Trees and Water 
Buffalo, after Zhao Lingrang, 203; Pavilions amid 
Streams and Mountains, after Ni Zan, 203; Sand 
Banks and Rocks, after Huang Congwang, 203; 
Tree and Rock, after Wu Zhen, 203 
leaves presently in Wang Hui and Wang Shimin s 
Landscapes after Ancient Masters album [cat. 15], 
102, 202; Leaf K, Landscape after Li Cheng's 
"Wintry Grove," 201, 203; Leaf L, Shady Summer 
Woods, after Zhao Mengfu, 201—2, 203 
Wang Shixin iB^^ (active twentieth century), 200 
Wang Shizhen i 'fi" ^ (1526— 1590), 19, 49 
Wang Shizhen i (1634—1711), 66, 70 

compiled under. Classified Encyclopedia of Profound 

Knowledge (Yuanjian leihan), i83n62 
"Song for Wumu Shanren," 113 
Wang Shu i ^ (1668— 1743), 105, 210 
Wang Wei i (Youcheng) (701—761), 5—6, 19—20, 
80, 82, 83, 86, 97, 102, 105, 192, 193, 198; formerly 
attributed to. Rivers and Mountains after Snow 
[figs. 2, 24], j, 6, z6, 19—20. For works after, see 
underWscng Hui: Clearing after Snow at Shanyin, 
after Wang Wei [pis. 39, 40]; Clearing after Snow in 
the Mountains and Rivers, after Wang Wei; Mountain 
Village after Snow, after Wang Wei 
WangWenbo i!>C^6 (active 1662— 1722), 190 
Wang Xi i S& (1628— 1703), 104—5, 107—8, 112, 

i26n2io, I26n223 
Wang Xianzhi (344-388), 11, 197 

WangXijuei^^ (1534— 1611), 12 
Wang Ximeng i^^, A Thousand Miles of Rivers and 

Mountains, I26n246, izjm6o 
Wang Xizhi i (303—361), n, 188, 197; Lanting 

Gathering, 103 

Wang Yuanqi 4P (Lutai) (1642— 1715), 3, 12, 27, 

43, i82n2i, 193, 203, 204. See also Song Junye, 
Wang Yuanqi, and others 

232 

Wang Yun X S (1652-after 1735), 140 
Wang Zai i $ (active eighth century), 78 
Wang Zaishi i'S.'ft (Wang Huis grandfather), 49 
Wangting St Jiangsu Province, 163, l6j [pi. 52B], 
213 

Wanli emperor (r. 1573—1620), 12 

Wanshou Ting ^ (Longevity Pavilion), on 

Tiger Hill, near Suzhou, site in Kangxi emper- 
or's Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
Wen Zhengming Sl^Wi^B (1470-1559), 41, 82, 188, 

189; Suzhou follower of, i25ni67 
Wen' an SL^, Hebei Province, ly (map) 
Weng Wange (Wan-go Weng) (b. 1918), 66, 204 
WengTonghe ^I^^ (1830— 1904), 204, 210 
Wenchang Ge ]^ ^ M , on Grand Canal, site in 

Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 
1689, 213 
wenren >C>A^ ("literati"), 3 

wenxiu zhi qi >C ^ ("beauty and elegance"), 205 

Whitfield, Roderick, 56—57, iz^nny 
Wiener, Norbert, 44 

Wo ^ (Self, selfhood, or "interior Mind"), 36 
Woodcutter at Sword Gate (Jian Men Qiaoke), a 

signature of Wang Hui, 210 
Wu 49, 163, 213. See also Suzhou 
Wu ^ (Han emperor; r, 140—87 b.c.e.), 2oon2 
Wu Bin (active ca. 1583— 1626), 36; The Sixteen 

Luohans [fig. 38], 38, J9 
Wu ^ brothers, 105—13. See also Wu Kaizhi; Wu 

Zhengzhi 

Wu Daozi (active ca. 710—60), 82 

Wu family, 206 

Wu Family Shrines (ca. 150—60 c.e.), i83n6i 

Wu Hong ^ ^ (active ca. 1637—83), Swallow Cliff 

[fig. 82], 120, 122 
Wu Hufan ^i^H'^H (1894-1968), 55, 186, 188, 206 
Wu Kaizhi (Pingyu) (active 1680—90), 107, 

no, 112, i26n23o, i26n23i, 132 
Wu Li (1632-1718), 15, i23n74 

Wu Sangui -^-H-^^i (1612—1678), 130 
Wu (Suzhou) School, 5, 82 

Wu Sheng ff" (active early eighteenth century), 

i24n99 

Wu Wei ^ it (1459-1508), 82 
Wu Weiye -^"f^ ^ (Wu Meicun) (1609-1671), 50, 
103, 189 

Wu Zang ^ (active late seventeenth century), 
140 

Wu Zhen (Mei Daoren) (1280-1354), 5, 82, 92 

Mountain Passes on a Clear Autumn Day (in the style 
of Dong Yuan), 51, 72, i23ni3, I24n99, 209; 
Chen Lians landscape after, Leaf K in To See 
Large within Small [fig. 50], 51, ji; Wang Huis 
landscapes after: (1655) hanging scroll 
[fig. 49], 50—51, jl, 60, i23nii; (1672) leaf in 
To See Large within Small, i23ni3; (1686) hanging 
scroll [pis, 13, 25; cat. 20], ^S, 51, 72, 75, 209 
Summer Mountains, 205 

Summer Mountains^ Misty Rain, 68—69, 12,4^99' 

Jues copy of [fig. 6i], 68, yi, i24n99; Wang 
Hui s copies of, 68; Wang Hui s version for 
Zhou Lianggong [pis. 21, 22A,b; cat. 6], 
66-70, 67, 66-69, 70-7^ 71-72* 1S8-89 

works after or in the style of: Wang Hui s Landscape 
in the Style of Wu Zhen [pis. 1, 12; cat. 16], 2, j^, 
35, 204—5; Wang Shimins Tree and Rock, after 
Wu Zhen, 203 
Wu Zheng ^"4i (1878-1949), 206 
Wu Zhengzhi -^iE->a (Hanyang) (1618-1691), 105, 

107—10, 111, 112, 113, i26n228, 126n230, i26n243, 

132, 198, 209 
wufa ^ >ir ("no method"), 36 
Wuhan ^/H, Hubei Province, (map) 
Wuhu ^/^9, Anhui Province, jo (map), IJJ (map) 
Wujiang ^>^, Jiangsu Province, ijz (map) 
Wumu Shan Zhong Qiaozhe 

,^ S Oi ("Wood-Gath erer of Mount 

Wumu"), a signature of Wang Hui, 205 
Wumu Shanqiao S uU ^fe ("Wood-Gatherer of 

Mount Wumu"), a seal of Wang Hui, 191, 194 
Wumu Shanren @ Jj A ("The Man of Mount 

Wumu"), a signature of Wang Hui, 191, 192, 

197, 200 

Wumu Shanxiaren S Jj T" A ("Man under 

Mount Wumu"), a signature of Wang Hui, 194 

Wumu Shanzhongren ,^ S Uj t A ("The Man of 
Mount Wumu"), a signature of Wang Hui, 193, 
206, 209 

Wuqing ^>'^",Tianjin Municipal District, iji (map) 
Wuxi Jiangsu Province, on Grand Canal, site 

in Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour 
of 1689, JO (map), ijl (map), 162, 163, i6j 
(pi. 52B), 173, 176, 213 
Wuying Palace ^^^^y^, Beijing, 108 

X 

Xi Shan ^ uU (Tin Mountain), near Wuxi, on Grand 
Canal, site in Kangxi emperors Southern 
Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 

Xia dynasty (ca. 2100— 1600 b.c.e.), 132 

Xia Gui (active ca. 1195—1230), Streams and 

Mountains, Pure and Remote, i24nio9 

Xian Xian ^f^>, Hebei Province, ?j/ (map) 

Xiang River J^B a^, 199 

Xiang Xuandu ^ TG/ "ST >S. (Xiang Dehong) (active 
ca. late sixteenth— early seventeenth century), 54, 
i23n3o 

Xiang Yuanbian ^ TC/"}* (1525—1590), 46114^, i23n3o 

Xianning ^ ^ period (275—79), i83n56 

Xiaozhong Xianda 4^ 't' A ("To See Large within 

Small"), 13. See also To See Large within Small 

albums 

xichuang jianzhu ©^^^5 ("trimming the candle- 
wick together by the west window"), 105, 
I26n209 

Xie He tlt^ (active ca. 479—502), 8—9 
Xie Lingyun "lit S ^ (385-433), "Written on the 
Lake on My Way Back to the Retreat at Stone 

Cliff," 121 

xieyi ^ ^ ("freely sketched") style, 203 

xiezhao ^ I\\ ("crab-claw") pattern, 23 

xihua t ("detailed painting"), 110 

Xilu Laoren ® ^ A ("Old Man of the Western 

Cottage"), a style name of Wang Shimin, 189, 

190, 192, 193, 196, 200 
xin *<i (Mind or "heart"), 36 

Xinan *f "S", J iangsu Province, on Grand Canal, site 
in Kangxi emperor s Southern Inspection Tour 
of 1689, 163, i6j [pi. 52B], 213 

Xin an River ^ jO (map) 

xing fli^ ("form"), 8 

xingsi ^^iil. ("form-likeness" or "what the eye 
sees"), 8 

Xintai Shandong Province, ?ji (map), (52 

(map), 160 

XishuangZhai ("Studio of Western 

Fragrance"), Yushan, 58—60 
xisui ^ffl'^ ("fragmented"), 5 

Xitian ^ W (Wang family villa), Taicang, 21, 27, 193 
Xiu (Chan master, YulinTongxiu i#ii^), 36 
Xiu (venerable recipient of a painting by Wang 
Hui), 187 

Xiuning "f^^ ^ , Anhui Province, jo (map) 
Xu Bingyi ^ (1633-1711), 103 

Xu Da Duke of Wei (1332-1385), i24n99 

Xu Daoning "l^iS,^ (ca. 970— ca. 1052), formerly 
attributed to, Wang Hui's Dense Snow on the 
Mountain Pass [pi. 24; cat. 26], 72, 74, I24nii3, 
213-14 

Xu family, 105, i26n2o8, 192 

Xu Jiong (jinshi, 1682), 105 

Xu Min (active ca. 1690— 1722), 140; Water 

Village, after Zhao Lingrang, Leaf B in Wang Hui 
and followers. Landscapes after Ancient Masters 
[fig. 84], 140 

Xu Naipu t^7i ^ (jinshi, 1820), 191 

Xu Qianxue (1631-1694). 103, 105, 112, 113, 

I26n207, i26n2i5, I26n2i6; Comprehensive 
Geography of the Great Qing Dynasty (Da Qjng 
yitong zhi), I26n2i5 

Xu Qianxue and Zhang Yunzhang fft. $ 

Commentaries on Confucian Classics of the Song and 
Yuan Dynasties (Song Yuan jingjie ^ TC,^^^?-), 
I26n2i5 

Xu Qianxue— Mingju political faction, 103 
Xu Shixiao (active second half seventeenth 

century), 119 

Xu Shugu (jinshi, 1685), 103, 108, 111, i26n2io, 

I26n2i6 

XuWei ft'vM (Qingteng) (1521-1593), 187 
Xu Xu fflpM (active mid-seventeenth century), 58 
Xu Yang (active ca. 1750—75) and assistants, The 

Qianlong Emperors Southern Inspection Tour, 178—81 
Scroll Four: The Confluence of the Huai and Yellow 

Rivers, details: confluence of the Huai and 
Yellow rivers [fig. 132], 179, 180; Qianlong 
and attendants [fig. 131], 179, 180 
Scroll Six: Entering Suzhou along the Grand Canal, 
details: Silk Commissioner's Residence 
[fig. 134], 181, i<S?; Tiger Hill [fig. 133], 180, 181 
Xu Yuanwen ^TLSC^ (1634— 1691), 103, I26n2i5 
Xu Zhongling, 105 

Xuancheng 1^, Anhui Province, jO (map), /Ji 
(map) 

Xuanmiao 'S^^j^^j (Yuanmiao) Monastery, Suzhou, 

171, i83n56, 213 
Xuantong emperor 4«^'$* (r. 1909—11), 192, 193, 

194, 210, 213, 214 
Xudeng temple, Nanjing, 66 

233 

Xueweng ^ H", Mr., 203 
Xushuguan ^ S M . See Hushuguan 
Xuzhou , Jiangsu Province, zjz (map) 

Y 

Yan Shu (Yan Yuanxian) (991—1055), 206 

YanWengui ^>C'j' (active ca. 970—1030), 68, 110, 
III, 150, 160, 189, 207 
Landscape of the Yangzi River, 66 

Pavilions and Mansions by Rivers and Mountains [fig. 60], 
68, 69, 150 

work attributed to. Multiple Peaks of Mount Wuyi, 111; 
Wang Huis landscape after [fig. 72], no, no, 
III, 1260231 

works in the style of, in, 113; twelfth-century scroll, 
Streams and Mountains without End [fig. 76], in, 
ni—lj, 1260246 
yang 1^, 41 

Yang, general from Gaoyou ^ $P i^'ll tI^ , 19 

Yang Mr., Water Pavilion of, 198 

Yang Gengu ^^R.^ (active first half twentieth 

century), 214 
Yang Jifu 5ft ^P-f, 186 

Yang Jin ^ (1644— 1728), 133, 139—40, i82n23 
YangNingshi (873—954), Summer Heat, 103 

Yang Xiong (55 b.c.e.-iS c.e.), Apology Qiechao), 

196 

Yang Zhaolu ^ (jinshi, 1652), 61, 193 

Yangzhou i% (Guangling), Jiangsu Province, 27, 

JO (map), 92, 93, 94, IJJ (map), 132, 136, i8in2 
Yangzi Delta area, xi, 130, i8in6 
Yangzi River i^-f""^^, l^l (map), 132, 136, 144, 150, 

IjO (fig. 121) 

Yanke ® a style name of Wang Shimin, 190,192, 
193, 195, 202, 206 

Yanling ^ I^, Jiangsu province, 196 

Yanshan Zhuren ub i A. (unidentified), 206 

Yanzhou ^ , Jining, Shandong Province, 49 

Yao ^ (ancient sage-ruler), 119 

Yaotou ^ ^ , on Grand Cananl, site in Kangxi 

emperor s Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 

Ye Rong H ^ (active second half seventeenth cen- 
tury). 199 

yeguang ^ T^Q ("pearl that glows in the night''), 195 

Yellow Emperor (Xuanyuan), 198 

Yellow Oriole District Suzhou, on Grand 

Canal, site in Kangxi emperor's Southern 
Inspection Tour of 1689, 171, lyj (pi. 52E) 

Yellow River ^>^, 95, 96, 130, ij/ (map), 131—32, 
136, 151 

Yi to (Yunxiang), Prince (1686— 1730), 206 
yi ' ("one"; "unity"), 36 

Yi zai . . . zhijian S^S-. . fal ("Integrating the 
ways of . . . "), a seal of Wang Hui, 187, 210 

yihua ^ 4 ("one-stroke painting"; "Primordial 
Line"), 36 

yin fi, 41 

yipin 3^aa ("untrammeled class"), 194 

Yixing S ^ (Jinsha; Jingxi), Jiangsu Province, jo 

(map), 58, 80, 198 
yixing xieshen J'X ^ ^ 4^ ("captures the spirit 

through the form"), 8 
Yizhou //T , Shandong Province, iji (map) 

Yongding Gate Fl, Beijing, 137 (table) 

You he huke ^ ^ ^ ("Why not this way?"), a seal 

of Wang Hui, 35, 191, 193, 194 
Yu -Im. (recipient of Wang Hui painting), 21, 186 
Yu Miao 1^ ^ (Temple of the Great Yu), Shaoxing, 

132 

YuShinan >t-frf^| (558-638), 11 

Yu Yuan >7t (active ca. 1681-1715), 140 

Yu Zhiding 1^ ^ (1647— 1716), Portrait of Singde 

[fig. 68], 103, 103 
Yuan dynasty 7C^)! (1271— 1368), painting in, xi, xii, 5, 

8, 11, 53, 83, 87, 97, 136, 138, 160, 206. See also Song 

and Yuan paintings 
Yuan Qixu (active second half seventeenth 

century), 78 
Yuanmiao Guan iH ^^^^ (Yuanmiao Daoist 

Temple), Suzhou, site in Kangxi emperor's 

Southern Inspection Tour of 1689, 213. See also 

Xuanmiao Monastery 
yuanqi 7G ("primal breath"), 27, 195, 197, 205 
yudian P& %h ("raindrop" texture dots), 19, 27, 97, 162 
Yueyang Tower (Yueyang Lou -fel^^i^), Wuhan, 

Hebei Province, 198 
Yufeng Beiyuan i'^:Jb IS ("Northern Garden" of 

the Xu family), Kunshan, 105, izSnzi^, I26n2i6 
Yufeng Yuanchi SI ("Jade Peak Garden" of 

the Xu family), Kunshan, 105 
yun ^ ("movement"), 9 
yun resonance"), 9 

Yun Shouping 'f^^-^ (Yun Nantian; Nantian 

Caoyi) (1633—1690), 21, 35, 55, 58, 60, 61, 80, 92, 
97, 105, I23ni6, I26n2i5, I26n2i6, 192, 195, 196—98, 
199, 206—7; Looking at the Cinnamon Trees in the 
Northern Garden, 105 
Yun Shouping and Tang Guang ^» Red Lotuses, 60 
Yun Yuding ff#L^1{ (jinshi, 1889), 207 
Yunjian (Songjiang) School $ 82 
yunyan 'fS. ("clouds and mists"; a work of art or 

painting), 78, iz^niz<) 
Yunyan Temple S^"^, Tiger Hill, pagoda of, 167, 
i83n54 

Yushan ^ ih (Mount Yu), Jiangsu Province, 21, 49, 

50, 186, 189, 199 
yushi "fip i (censor), 90 

z 

ZhaShibiao S-i^^ (1615— 1698), 199 

Zhang Daqian 5ft A. ^ (1899—1983), 187, 191, 214 

Zhang Geng ?fty^ (1685—1760), Painters of the Qing 

Dynasty (Guochao huazhen lu), 35, 46ni5 
Zhang Hong fft^ (1577— ca. 1652), 5, 46ni5; Mount 

Qixia [fig. 1], 4, 5 
Zhang Jinchen fftSS.^ (Zhang Xiuyu) (active 

1610S— 30s), 54, 55, 123n35 
Zhang Jixiong fft (1803— 1886), 200 

Zhang Ke fftJ^ (Bishan Xiaochi) (active mid- 
seventeenth century), 21, 49 
Zhang Sengyou fft.{^ M> (active ca. 500—550), 82 
Zhang Tingji fS:^?# (1768-1848), 203 
Zhang Xianbo (active mid-nineteenth 

century), 203 
Zhang Yanyuan ^ (active mid-nineteenth 

century), 47nn5 

Zhang Ying (1683-1708), 163 

Zhang Yingjia T (active second half seven- 

teenth century), 68, 78, i23n8o 

Zhang Yinhuan (d. 1900), 214 

Zhang Yongnan , 204 

Zhang Younong M^, 204 

Zhang Yu fftl^ (Zhang Juqu) (1283— 1350), 21, 186 

Zhang Yunzhang ?R S (1648—1726), 105, i26n2i5 

Zhang Yushu ffti^ (1642— 1715), compiled under 
the direction of: Kangxi Dictionary (Kangxi 
zidian), i83n62; Rhyme Dictionary of the Appreciating 
Cultural Studio (Peiwen yunfu), i83n62 

Zhang Zao (active ca. 766—78), 9, 40 

Zhang Zeduan fft^^ (active early twelfth cen- 
tury), Spring Festival on the River [figs. 118, 122], 
138, 148, 249, 150—51, iji, 173 

Zhang Zeren fft/^'f^ (Guyu) (active mid-nineteenth 
century), 200, 202, 204 

Zhang Zhiwan ?ft^ i^ (active early to mid-nineteenth 
century), 202, 204 

Zhangxia fft X (written as I on Scroll Three of 
the Kangxi Emperors Southern Inspection Tour), 
Changqing District, Shandong Province, 151, 
152, ijz (map), 153, rjj (map), 254 (pi. 49), 160, 
161, 2n 

Zhangzong emperor ^ ^ (r. 1190—1208), 72, 
214 

Zhao Boju (d. ca. 1162), Autumn Colors on 

Rivers and Mountains, i25ni84 
Zhao Lingrang ^^^^ (Zhao Danian) (active 
ca. 1070— afi:er 1100), 102 
River Village on a Clear Summer Day, 11 
Water Village, 186; Wang Hui's painting in the style 
of [pis. 18, 19; cat. 2], 60-61, 61, 61, 186-87; 
Xu Min's painting after [fig. 84], 13S, 140 
See also Wang Hui: Level Vista with Trees and Water 
Buffalo, after Zhao Lingrang 
Zhao Mengfu ^i^i^ (Zhao Wenmin; Zhao 

Wuxing) (1254—1322), 3, 5, 6, 19—20, 60—61, 102, 
106, 188, 206 

Autumn Colors on the Qiao and Llua Mountains [figs. 7, 
8], 8, 9, 60—61, 68, 103, 106, no; Wang Hui's 
copies after, 61; Wang Shimin's copy after, 68 

Gathered Peaks in Spring Dew, 206; Wang Hui's hand- 
scroll after [pi. 43A,b; cat. 18], 105—7, 106— y, 
loS—g, Z06— 7 

The Mind Landscape oJXie Youyu [fig. 25], iS, 20; 
Wang Jian's landscape after [fig. 26], 19, 20 

Snow Scene, 6, 19 

Water Village [fig. 55], 61, 6j, 103, i26n243 
works after or in the manner of SeeWmg Hui and 
Wang Shimin, Landscapes after Ancient Masters: 
Leaf A, Buddhist Temple on a Clear Evenings after 
Zhao Mengfu; Leaf G, Peach Blossom Spring, 
after Zhao Mengfu; Leaf L, Shady Summer 
Woods, after Zhao Mengfu 
Zhao Shuru ^7^^ (1874-1945), 206 
Zhao Zhixin (1662— 1744), "Looking down 

at the Yellow River from atop Mount Taihang," 
96 

Zhao Zuo (ca. 1570- after 1633), 16 

Zhe (Hangzhou) School M 82 

Zhejiang Province ^^4" , jO (map), 130, 136 

234 

Zheng Chenggong W^^^ (1624-1662), 58 
zhenghen (finished work), 142 

Zhengtong iE.,^^, reign (1436—49), i83n56 
Zhengzhou , Henan Province, IJ/ (map) 
zhengzong iE- ^ (''orthodox"; "orthodoxy"; "the 

correct and true way"), 4 
Zhenji a seal of Wang Shimin, 192, 195 

Zhenjiang (Jingkou), Jiangsu Province, 54, 55, 

58, 60, JO (map), 2JZ (map) 
Zhenzhuo Qiao -SfS\J^% (Zhenzhou Bridge), 

Suzhou, site in Kangxi emperor's Southern 

Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
Zhizao Fu ,^3t^ (Silk Commissioners Residence), 

Suzhou, site in Kangxi emperors Southern 

Inspection Tour of 1689, 213 
Zhong You MC^^ (Zhong Yuanchang) (151-230), 

188, 197 

Zhongchang Tong "f't'-fe.M* (active ca. 180— ca. 220), 

"Essay on the Enjoyment of Life," no, i26n234 
Zhongsong Xuan ("Pavilion of Planting 

Pines" of Li Zongkong), Yangzhou, 92 
zhongxing t ^ ("dynastic revival"), 176 
Zhou Eryan M (active second half seventeenth 

century), 92, 197, 199 
Zhou M family collection, Changsha, 190 
Zhou Huaimin M fe Rt (1906— 1996), 214 
Zhou Lianggong M 'nl^ (Zhou Liyuan; Liweng) 

(1612— 1672), 27, 61, 65, 66—72, 82, 103, i24mo2, 

189; collaborative album for, 66, 70; Lives of 

Painters (Duhua lu), 66 
Zhou Mi (1232— 1308), Record of Clouds and 

Mists Passing One's Eyes (Yunyan guoyan lu), 

I24ni29 

Zhou Xiangyun ^ ^^9 S (1878-after 1934), 209 

Zhu Dingfu >K ^ ^ (active mid-nineteenth cen- 
tury), 200, 203 

Zhu Hengjia ^ (d. 1645), 36 

Zhu Liangzhi, 35—36 

Zhu Ruoji Prince. See Shitao 

Zhuang Jiongsheng & 1^ 4 (Zhuang Dan' an; 
Zhuang Danweng) (1627—1679), 77, 194, 195 

ZhuoxiuTang^difl-:^ ("Hall of Humble 

Refinements"), Taicang, location of Wang 
Shimin's early painting collection, 50, 61 

Zi Shigu ^ ^ a seal of Wang Hui, 194 

Zitang 'f"^ (active mid-seventeenth century), 60, 
186, 187 

Ziweng M ^(active nineteenth century?), 190 
Ziyiyue U 'fa'I^L ("For my own enjoyment"), a seal of 

Wang Hui, 205 
Zong Bing '$ M (375-443), 8 

^35 

Photograph Credits 

All rights are reserved. Photographs have 
been provided by the ov^^ners of the works 
and are reproduced with their permission; 
their courtesy is gratefully acknowledged. 
Additional information regarding copyrights 
and credits is provided below. 

© Asian Art Museum of San Francisco: 
pis. 21, 22A,b; cat. 6 

© Trustees of the British Museum: fig. 41 

© The Cleveland Museum of Art: 
figs. 5, 9, 76 

Courtesy of The East Asian Library and the 
Gest Collection, Princeton University: 
figs. 124, 125, 126; maps 3, 4 

Maxwell K. Hearn: figs. 83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
loi, 102, 105, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 
113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 120 

Tomioka Kenzo, Shi O Go Un (Osaka, 1919), 
pi. 12: fig. 64 

© 2008 Brice Marden/Artists Rights 

Society (ARS), New York: figs. 42, 43, 
44, 48 

Princeton University Art Museum, photo- 
graphed by Bruce M. White/© 2007 
Photo: Trustees of Princeton University: 
pis, I, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, n, 12, 15, 27, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38; cats. I, 4, 13, 14, 16; 
fig. 25 

© University of Alberta Museums: 
pis. 52A— E, 53, 54, 55, 56; cat. 24 

Bruce M. White: pis, 7, 28; cats. 10, 11 

Xu Bangda and Xue Yongnian, Wang Hui 
jingpin ji (Beijing, 1999), pi. 5: fig. 59 

236
