Title: Beijing Municipal Commission of Housing and Urban-Rural Development

URL Source: https://english.beijing.gov.cn/government/departments/202006/t20200627_1932964.html

Markdown Content:
Beijing Municipal Commission of Housing and Urban-Rural Development (hereinafter abbreviated as the municipal commission of housing and urban-rural development) is a bureau-level constituent authority of the municipal government. It also serves as the Housing Security Office of Beijing Municipality (abbreviated as the municipal housing security office).

Beijing Municipal Commission of Housing and Urban-Rural Development implements the guidelines, policies, decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee on housing and urban-rural development and relevant work requirements of the municipal Party committee, and adheres to and strengthens the centralized and unified leadership of the Party on housing and urban-rural development in the course of performing its duties.

The Commission's main responsibilities are as follows:

I.Implementing the laws, regulations, rules and policies of the state on housing and urban-rural development, studying and drawing up the drafts of relevant local regulations and government regulations of Beijing Municipality and organizing the implementation thereof. Studying the major issues on housing and urban-rural development, and putting forward policy recommendations.

II.Being responsible for guaranteeing the housing of urban low-income families in Beijing Municipality. Establishing and improving the housing security and administration system. Studying and formulating the medium-and long-term plans, annual plans and policies for housing security, protection of ancient capital features and renovation of dilapidated and old houses, and organizing the implementation thereof. Studying and formulating the policies for shantytown renovation. Being responsible for the coordination and administration of the construction of indemnificatory housing and the allocation of housing resources. Organizing and guiding the qualification examination and recordation administration of the objects targeted by the housing security system.

III.Being responsible for promoting the reform of Beijing's housing system. Studying and preparing policies related to the reform of the housing system. Being responsible for the direct administration of public-owned housing. Being responsible for administering the sale of public-owned housing, fund-raising for cooperative house-building and monetization of housing distribution.

IV.Being responsible for administering the construction of projects in Beijing Municipality. Being responsible for coordinating and supervising the construction of key projects and coordinating the expropriation, demolition and relocation work. Being responsible for supervising and administering the tendering and bidding of construction projects and the permits for projects construction. Being responsible for administering the registration, recordation and construction plans of the construction projects of the central organs of the state, troops stationed in Beijing, central government-owned enterprises and public institutions in Beijing, and providing coordination and services for key construction projects.

V.Being responsible for supervising and administering Beijing's construction market, regulating the market order and promoting the development of the construction industry. Studying and preparing the development plan of the construction industry and guiding its implementation. Being responsible for certifying, supervising and administering the qualifications of the construction market entities. Organizing the formulation of the methods for construction project cost valuation.

VI.Being responsible for supervising the quality of construction projects and construction safety in Beijing Municipality. Studying and formulating the rules and regulations for the quality and production safety of construction projects and organizing the implementation thereof. Being responsible for administering the qualification of the construction project quality testing institutions, and being responsible for administering the safe production permit of the construction enterprises. Being responsible for taking the lead in formulating dust control specifications for various construction sites. Participating in the investigation and handling of major construction project quality and construction safety accidents. Undertaking the specific work of Beijing Construction Project Emergency Response Headquarters.

VII.Being responsible for guiding the construction of building projects in villages and towns in Beijing Municipality. Being responsible for the technical service for the construction projects in villages and towns, and formulating technical standards for the construction projects in villages and towns. Organizing and guiding the renovation of dilapidated buildings in rural areas and the construction of earthquake-resistant and energy-saving rural houses.

VIII.Being responsible for promoting building energy conservation and scientific and technological development of the industry in Beijing. Studying and formulating plans and policies for the scientific and technological development in the construction industry and building energy conservation, formulating local standards for project construction, and promoting the scientific and technological progress and the transformation of achievements in housing and urban-rural development. Being responsible for the development and administration of building energy conservation, green building, prefabricated building, wall material innovation and bulk cement.

IX.Being responsible for supervising and administering Beijing's real estate market, regulating the market order and promoting the development of the real estate industry. Studying and formulating medium-and long-term plans and industrial policies for the development of the real estate industry and organizing the implementation thereof. Being responsible for supervising and administering real estate development, real estate transfer, housing lease and real estate intermediary services. Being responsible for monitoring and analyzing the real estate market. Being responsible for administering the qualification of the real estate development enterprises and administering the recordation of the real estate appraisal institutions.

X.Being responsible for the house administration in Beijing Municipality. Studying and formulating plan and annual plan for house expropriation, demolition and relocation. Being responsible for supervising and administering property services. Being responsible for supervising and administering the safety in urban housing use, and coordinating the work related to flood prevention of houses. Being responsible for the comprehensive renovation of old residential areas. Checking up on and coordinating the handling of problems left over from the history of private houses and other houses.

XI.Organizing the formulation of Beijing's talent development plan in the field of housing and urban-rural development and guiding the implementation thereof, and being responsible for administering the professional qualification and practice registration of all kinds of personnel in the construction and real estate industries.

XII.Completing other tasks assigned by the municipal Party committee and the municipal government.

XIII.Division of functions. The municipal commission of housing and urban-rural development shall further strengthen its housing security function and speed up the improvement of the housing security system encouraging both the rental and purchase of housing.

XIV.Division of responsibilities related to the construction of transportation infrastructure with the municipal commission of transport. The municipal commission of housing and urban-rural development shall be responsible for the construction permit, project completion acceptance recordation, quality safety supervision of urban roads and transportation hub station construction projects; the municipal commission of transport shall be responsible for organizing and advancing the urban roads and transportation hub station construction projects. The municipal commission of housing and urban-rural development shall be responsible for the safety management in the construction of urban rail transit projects; the municipal commission of transport shall be responsible for the safety management in the operation of urban rail transit.
