Title: In the Age of Trump, Are Americans Still Welcome in Europe?

URL Source: https://blog.ricksteves.com/cameron/2025/03/americans-welcome-europe-2025

Published Time: 2025-03-05T17:18:26-08:00

Markdown Content:
In the Age of Trump, Are Americans Still Welcome in Europe? – Camerons Travels | Rick Steves Europe

===============

Skip to content

Go!

*   Print
*   Smaller Text Larger Text

*   Home /
*   Blog: Cameron's Travels

*   About Rick
*   Explore Europe
*   Our Tours
*   Travel Tips
*   Watch, Read, Listen
    *   Rick's Travel Articles
    *   Watch the TV Show
    *   Monday Night Travel
    *   Travel Talks
    *   Travel News
    *   Travel Blogs
    *   Listen to the Radio Show
    *   Audio Europe App
    *   Audio Tours

*   Travel Forum
*   Shop Online

Rick Steves' Europe

Smaller text Larger text

*   Home /
*   Blog: Cameron's Travels

Posted on March 5, 2025 March 7, 2025 by Cameron Hewitt

In the Age of Trump, Are Americans Still Welcome in Europe?
===========================================================

If you’re an American traveling to Europe soon, you may be wondering: As Donald Trump reshapes the USA’s role in the world, are we still welcome abroad?

I’ve been asked this question many times in recent weeks. My short answer: Yes, I really think so. But be prepared for some interesting conversations.

If ever a topic deserved more than a “short answer,” this is the one. So let’s unpack it:

No matter who you voted for, there’s no question that the second Trump Administration is already having a huge impact abroad. And Europeans are, quite reasonably, concerned about how the global geopolitical landscape is shifting. In just the past couple of weeks, the American president had a very public argument with the leader of a country that was, until that moment, considered a close American ally; questioned the USA’s role in NATO; threatened to impose 25% tariffs on European countries, as he already has for Canada and Mexico; and stated that the European Union “was formed in order to screw the United States.” (It wasn’t. The EU was born as a peacekeeping project, in the ashes of World War II.)

All of this is leading many Europeans to wonder — for the first time in generations — whether the United States is a trustworthy partner. While some Europeans might admire Trump, many are frustrated… even angry.

So, then, what does this mean for American travelers in Europe?

Nobody has a crystal ball as we navigate the coming months. Europeans, like Americans, are not monolithic. And I may be telling a different story when I get home from this year’s travels. (I head to Europe in about a month.)

However, based on past travels and recent conversations with European friends, I’m optimistic that I’ll feel as welcome overseas as before — even if the people I meet have a few more follow-up questions.

My confidence is rooted partly in a series of conversations I recently enjoyed. On Inauguration Day, I hosted a special installment of our 2025 Travel Festival about this very topic. Along with my co-host, Ben Curtis — a political scientist and American expat living in Prague — we discussed our new political reality and spoke to our colleagues in France, Hungary, England, and Italy.

The conversation produced a wide range of perspectives and opinions. But one consistent idea resounded clearly. When I asked each of our guests whether Americans would still be welcome in their country, they all said the same thing: Yes, of course! Why on earth _wouldn’t_ Americans be welcome here? Some of them seemed perplexed, even offended, by the premise of the question.

I think that’s because, broadly speaking, Europeans have the wisdom to treat each individual traveler as just that — an individual — rather than an accomplice to their leader’s actions.

While the Trump phenomenon feels unprecedented to many Americans, much of the world has seen figures like him before. Many Europeans have had firsthand experience — whether recent or generational — of chafing under a leader whose politics they find outrageous. In recent years alone, we’ve seen the rise of right-wing politicians across Europe who can broadly be described as “Trump-like,” from Hungary’s Viktor Orbán to Italy’s Silvio Berlusconi and Giorgia Meloni, and from France’s Marine Le Pen to the Netherlands’ Geert Wilders. Trump is merely our local manifestation of a global trend.

While Americans tend to be idealistic, many Europeans are steely-eyed realists. A hard history has taught them that you can’t always judge a person by their current leader. And they recognize that more Americans voted against Trump than voted for him; even if they’re alarmed at the actions of America, they don’t paint all Americans with the same, broad brush.

Of course, Americans fretting about “how we’ll be treated abroad” is nothing new. To be honest, this persistent worry is a pet peeve of mine, mostly because it stands in such stark contrast to the reality I’ve always experienced in Europe. So what’s behind it?For some of us, maybe it’s that we’re terribly conscientious to avoid being “Ugly Americans” — which puts us on a hair-trigger for disapproval. Others may travel with a chip on their shoulder, having been assured our whole lives that we hail from the greatest country on earth — so naturally, people abroad must be jealous or resentful.

I recall this being a concern even on my earliest travels to Europe, back in the late 1990s, when I was a grubby backpacker bunking in hostels. In those budget dorms and shared kitchens, rumors and urban legends flew fast and furious: Don’t go to Poland on a night train, or you’ll get “gassed” and robbed! You can use an erasable pen to fill out your rail pass, and extend it as long as you want! And, of course: If an American wants to be treated better in Europe, we should sew a Canadian flag on our luggage!

All those nuggets of “travel wisdom,” of course, were specious and probably apocryphal. While everyone claimed to “know someone” who’d cosplayed as a Canadian, I never met anyone who actually did it. But it does reveal the deep insecurity we Yankees have always felt abroad. (And it begs the question: If we want to be treated like Canadians by the rest of the world… well, then, perhaps we should behave more like Canada?)

Since those earliest travels, I’ve spent more than a hundred days every year in Europe, through both highs and lows: the aftermath of 9/11; American wars in Afghanistan and Iraq; the economic crisis of 2008/2009; the giddy hope of the Obama years; Trump’s surprising, sobering first term; and the final stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. And looking back now, I can’t recall ever noticing that I was treated differently in Europe because of current events. In fact, quite the opposite: My experience as an American abroad has remained strikingly consistent.

Over that span, the time that felt most like our current situation came in 2002 and early 2003, when President George W. Bush began to pressure European allies to join the I-can’t-believe-we-actually-called-it-that “Coalition of the Willing” to invade Iraq, based on what turned out to be false claims. When France was reluctant to join our fight, the response of the American public was as immediate and intense as it was nonsensical. Many Americans, who insulted the French as “surrender monkeys,” pledged to rebrand French fries as “Freedom fries” and boycott French’s mustard… which is based in Rochester, New York. Sales of our tours and guidebooks in France took a significant hit.

At the time, I was appalled by how quickly Americans could turn on an entire country, just because of the policy of their elected leader — ironically, exactly the thing we’re so terrified they’ll do to us. And yet, traveling in France during that time, I never felt that I was treated badly because I was an American. The French refused to reciprocate our one-sided, snarky, reductive view; rather, they continued to welcome me as a visitor who happened to be from the USA, rather than sneer at me as a symptom of the USA’s disorder.

Soon after, in 2003, I was in Europe just as the horrifying news broke of torture at Iraq’s Abu Ghraib prison by American forces. I remember coming home from a busy day hiking in the Swiss Alps, turning on my hotel TV, seeing images of prisoners humiliated under my flag, and feeling mortified to be an American. But even at that low point — when, if I’m being honest, I would have felt that a less-than-warm welcome would be completely justifiable — I never sensed that I was mistreated because I’m an American.

“Because I’m an American” is a very important caveat. All around the world, most people are kind and generous… but some people are gruff, rude, or dismissive. I’ve noticed a tendency in my fellow American travelers to attribute any impoliteness to “because I’m an American.” But then, moments later, I might observe the same European interacting rudely with someone from another country, or even from their own country. There’s a certain narcissism in expecting to be received warmly by everyone, everywhere you go… isn’t there? Accept it: Sometimes, people are just jerks.

So, if you’re an American heading to Europe in 2025, what can you expect? Here are a few pointers.

First, it’s important to be mindful of how our homeland is perceived abroad. Keep up with the news — especially the European perspective. Get beyond your media bubble; try consuming European news coverage to get in the right mindset.

Then, be prepared to have some serious conversations about what’s going on back home. This varies by culture and by individual. But many Europeans tend to be more straightforward in talking politics, which can be jarring for an American traveler who might prefer to leave all of that at home. (On our Inauguration Special, Virginie Moré explained that French students are encouraged to ask probing, challenging questions. This is not rude; in fact, it’s expected.)

And so, when people realize you’re an American, they may have some thoughts to share. Perhaps you’ll get some raised eyebrows and a semi-good-natured “Trump, eh!” with some colorful gestures. You may even be on the receiving end of pointed questions about who, exactly, are the 49% of Americans who voted for Trump — even if you, personally, did not.

These conversations don’t have to be judgmental or antagonistic. But be patient; they are important. They are important because when we travel — in good times or bad, no matter who’s the president — we travel as ambassadors for our homeland.

Let me be clear: An “ambassador” does not have to be an apologist, who must defend or rationalize things we don’t agree with. Rather, we can be ambassadors for _our own_ American values — even (and, arguably, especially) if our values are in opposition to our president’s.

Why is being a good ambassador for the USA so important? Because, in the end, it’s those people-to-people connections that shape the world’s understanding of us.

Imagine that there are two layers to a person’s impressions of a foreign land: The outer, more superficial layer is based on the public view of that country — its status in the world, its popular culture, its symbols and slogans, and, yes, its head of state. But the inner, more impactful layer is a constellation of people-to-people interactions: The people you’ve met from that country, and how they carried themselves, and how they talked about the world, and how they made you feel. Those individual interactions really matter, much more than fleeting, superficial impressions.

I see each interaction I have in Europe as an opportunity to show that person what an American can be. Even if I’m jet-lagged, cranky, or overworked, this thought inspires me to put my best foot forward. I am representing the USA, and now more than ever, the USA needs representatives who bring out our nation’s best qualities.

You may be a fundamentally “apolitical” person — eager to just go on vacation and leave this baggage home. But international travelers have a responsibility to have these honest conversations. It’s just good global citizenship — an acknowledgment that, like it or not, in good times and in bad, we are members of the family of nations.

And what if you’re a Trump supporter? I believe that, yes, even Trump voters can have a good experience in Europe — provided that they travel with a spirit of empathy, curiosity, and open-mindedness. Your conversations may be a bit more, shall we say, spirited. You may, in a way, provide a real service to curious Europeans who are genuinely trying to understand Trump’s electoral appeal. And if you keep an open mind, you might benefit from hearing some different perspectives. (Some of my all-time-favorite conversations with Europeans — the ones that have taught me the most — challenged my most deeply held assumptions. After all, that’s why I travel.)

If, on the other hand, you travel to Europe with a chip on your shoulder — expecting to convince everyone of your righteousness as you do a victory lap around a humbled continent — then, frankly, you’re gonna have a bad time. Maybe leave the red MAGA cap at home; wearing one around the streets of Europe would be like strutting into a spit-and-sawdust sports pub wearing a rival soccer jersey. You’ll forfeit your credibility to come home and say, “Wow, Europeans are so rude! They just hate Americans.”

Based on a lifetime of travel, I can promise you: Europeans don’t hate Americans. In fact, they are very much inclined to like us. They find us a bit odd (as we do them), and are a little intimidated by the far-reaching influence of our country.At times, they may be perplexed and concerned by our leaders’ actions. But fundamentally, they want to connect with us as individuals, and to understand us better.

Of course, these are good guidelines for international in travel, regardless of the current politics. But it bears repeating, now more than ever: Travel with empathy, curiosity, and open-mindedness. Be an ambassador of _your_ American values. Focus on those priceless person-to-person interactions. Be prepared for tricky questions and challenging conversations, which can be constructive and mutually enlightening. Realize that some people are simply jerks, to everyone (not just Americans). Don’t be defensive. Keep an open mind — try to see things from the perspectives of the people you meet. If you feel your assumptions being challenged, lean into it and learn from it. And prepare to return home with what Rick has always called “the best souvenir”: a broader perspective.

One thing’s for sure: As an American, traveling in Europe just got a whole lot more interesting.

* * *

Let’s continue this conversation in the Comments.

Have any of you traveled to Europe since our new president took office? Share your experiences.

And if you’re a European, do you think I’ve fairly characterized what an American visitor might find upon visiting your country? Any other advice or insights to share? Anything I got wrong?

244 Replies to “In the Age of Trump, Are Americans Still Welcome in Europe?”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.   **Karen Naberhaus**says: March 6, 2025 at 7:57 am Hi Rick!

 I’m so glad I came across this. A group of 8 of us are traveling in Europe on a Viking Cruise in November. My gut tells me it won’t be the same no confrontational trip as when we travelled a couple of years ago all over Germany.

 With the way Ukraine is being treated how can they not be upset with America? I would think Europe’s past experiences would make them very uneasy and uncomfortable with Trump doing what he’s doing. ‍ 
    1.   **Steve H**says: March 7, 2025 at 1:00 pm The United States has given over 100 billion dollars to Ukraine, almost as much as the European countries combined. I’m no fan of Russia and I know the world needs to stand up to Putin, but we can’t keep funding an endless war. That’s a lot of money that could be better spent at home. 
        1.   **Sharon Gardner, Esq.**says: March 7, 2025 at 2:51 pm Steve H. You are sorely off the topic of the article. The topic is not whether or not the US should support Ukraine in its battle to defend and retain their sovereign nation against Putin or how much $ Europe has contributed to their battle. Perhaps you would be wise to contain your travel to the U.S. and your dollars as well. 
            1.   **Sheila Morrison**says: March 12, 2025 at 7:04 am Right! 
            2.   **Jerry**says: March 17, 2025 at 4:46 am Spot on. Reading comprehension lacking in his comment. 
            3.   **L B**says: March 25, 2025 at 11:51 am Why? I mean he is not off topic at all. He was very fair and respectful in his comment. Just because he brings up things that actually are important to think about, and you consider off the table, he should not travel abroad? How silly. Really. 

        2.   **Robert Kempisty**says: March 8, 2025 at 4:49 am What will it cost the world if Putin takes over Ukraine with his eyes set on Poland and…? We’ve seen this movie and it didn’t end well for some 60,000,000 people. Even if you deeply think that history won’t repeat, it seems like it’s an important investment in our children’s future. 
        3.   **Helen Brewster**says: March 8, 2025 at 5:29 am Suggestion for Steve H — It’ll ease your mind to know we didn’t send 100B to Ukraine – we sent old equipment purchased from US manufacturers which boosted sales and employment here at home. Easy enough for you to verify. 
            1.   **Helen Brewster**says: March 8, 2025 at 5:32 am Clarifying: We sent them old equipment and then refreshed our supply by buying new from our manufacturers here at home. Win/Win. 
                1.   **Max**says: March 18, 2025 at 3:35 pm My wife and I are planning a long getaway to the Nordic region and this is indeed a concern for us. The author’s words offer us some much needed peace of mind; after all, these are insights and tips born from firsthand experiences traveling abroad. As an independent voter who favored Trump over the alternative, not to mention a Think Tank director and podcaster, those pointed and intelligent questions will be welcomed. However, I won’t initiate it nor make pro-America commentary be it verbal or nonverbal. An expensive getaway to another country is as much about a calling to immerse oneself in and experience that country and its culture as it is a getaway from everything here in America. All this Trump nonsense—tariffs, talk of annexations, entitled dominance, use of public office for personal entitlements, narcissism, insecurity-born bravado and so on—at the top of the list. 

            2.   **Sandra Kyles**says: March 17, 2025 at 9:33 am Correct, Helen. 

        4.   **Cee Zeiher**says: March 8, 2025 at 6:11 pm Please understand that most of that money is spent right here at home. We build the weapons right here in the USA and then ship them overseas. The money stays right here, it just simply circulates around our country to different companies, right here. 
            1.   **SMM**says: March 13, 2025 at 10:58 am Your ignorance of defense logistics is apparent. We may be spending money to replace munitions but, those munitions did not have to be replaced, the money did not need to be spent. 

        5.   **Andrea H.**says: March 11, 2025 at 6:31 am It is much more complicated than that. It’s easy to say America is just giving money to Ukraine but there are much wider implications. They use that money to buy US military equipment through contracts which supports the US economy. Just recently the stock has greatly increased in Europe for military manufacturers. Ukraine will now be purchasing equipment from Europe. Essentially it is shrinking the US economy when we aren’t supporting Ukraine which is the indirect effect of decisions like this. 
        6.   **Bruce Harwood**says: March 11, 2025 at 5:47 pm You’re funny mate.

How many people in the USA compared to the whole EU?

About 342 million in USA compared with 449 million in the EU. Yes, a slightly higher spend per capita basis for the USA but a fair amount of that spent in the USA replacing/updating weapons for the USA military.

EU countries would be purchasing at some of their replenished stocks of weapons from the USA.

And others here have pointed out important facts. 
        7.   **Lynn Brevig**says: March 11, 2025 at 10:42 pm Yes, spent at home on social services, feeding the poor, education, pell grants, meals for kids, etc 
            1.   **Suzanne Needler**says: March 14, 2025 at 7:27 am Except that money would NOT be spent at home feeding the hungry or helping students with college tuition, because the US President is cutting or eliminating all programs that help regular Americans. Instead, he’s taking all those funds and giving them to the rich in the form of privatization & tax breaks. 
                1.   **Judy Judge**says: March 14, 2025 at 2:53 pm Yes, it seems that you are right on this point. Any money saved by this administration now is not going to the American people unfortunately. 
                2.   **PJ Feinson**says: March 22, 2025 at 6:29 pm Yes, indeed. Giving breaks to the people who don’t need them… 

        8.   **M**says: March 12, 2025 at 11:13 am Most of the aid has been in the form of military assistance—such as weapons, ammunition, and equipment—rather than cash. Some of it comes from the U.S. military’s existing stockpiles, while other aid includes new production contracts with defense companies.

There has also been financial aid in the form of budgetary support to the Ukrainian government, helping them cover essential services like salaries, pensions, and infrastructure repair. However, that financial aid is often structured as grants or loans through international mechanisms like the World Bank, rather than direct cash payments from the U.S. to Ukraine’s government.

So, while billions have been allocated and delivered, most of the value comes from military and logistical support rather than direct cash payments. The actual “money” changing hands is more limited compared to the value of the equipment and assistance provided. 
        9.   **Douglas Sabbag**says: March 13, 2025 at 3:11 am This is the attitude, based upon erroneous data, which is so frustrating to hear.

 If you’re going to visit Europe, or even if not, I would highly advise you to look into the facts.

 Along that learning path, you might run into the Holodomar genocide, wherein Stalin invaded Ukraine and took their food, which led to millions of deaths from starvation. You might learn about the US negotiations with Ukraine after the fall of the Soviet Union, to dismantle the left over ICBMs, wherein we promised to help in the defense, as long as they allowed the ICBMs to be dismantled.

 Without knowing the facts, you can’t formulate a valid opinion. 
            1.   **Jan Simone**says: March 17, 2025 at 8:33 pm Yes, and I believe most Europeans know this history (as I do). I have enjoyed getting to know European friends through serious conversation. The only time I found it frustrating was once when the group tired of speaking in English and my German was then non-existent. It humbled me that we were the same ages yet I was only fluent in one language. 

        10.   **Wendy**says: March 15, 2025 at 7:51 pm Home will be a different place if Putin wins. 
        11.   **Daniele Heinen**says: March 17, 2025 at 3:56 am Sorry Europe has given more, à lot being humanitarian. Check your figura. And Europe is not handing out a bill 
        12.   **Susie**says: March 17, 2025 at 6:32 am The US’s GDP is almost 2/3 larger than the EU’s, though. And a chunk of the military hardware sent there was going to be replaced anyway – better to send it to Ukraine than simply junk it. 
        13.   **Walter M.**says: March 17, 2025 at 10:08 am Today, 3/17, Rubio said the Trump administration will do what ever it takes to destroy the Houthis in Yemen, no matter how long it takes, and at any cost. US shipping in the Red Sea and Indian O is negligible compared to China et al. That doesn’t jibe with their desire to stop the fighting in Ukraine. Why aren’t the major shippers going after the Houthis? Why can the US police the Red Sea but not Eastern Europe? Stick to the freedom and principles that have guided our country for decades and not an unprincipled whim. 
        14.   **Niels**says: March 20, 2025 at 10:08 am Dutch guy here. With that opinion keep your dollars in the US and don’t come here anymore please.

The war is in its 3rd year. Much less than any other war the US has been involved in (in)directly.

This war is not about Ukraine it is about Western resolve. If you pull out now, our alliance is as good as over. 
        15.   **Niels**says: March 20, 2025 at 10:10 am Dutch guy here. With that opinion keep your dollars in the US and don’t come here anymore please.

The war is in its 3rd year. Much less than any other war the US has been involved in (in)directly.

This war is not about Ukraine it is about Western resolve. If you pull out now, our alliance is as good as over.

Your dollars are well spent. They are an investment in the US’ global position. Losing this critical security position is going to costs you dearly. Nobody will trust the US anymore, all the money spent so far, even prior to Ukraine invasion is POOF wasted. 

    2.   **Andrew Kleeger**says: March 7, 2025 at 1:16 pm Bingo! 
    3.   **Ed Forszt**says: March 7, 2025 at 1:18 pm I think Europeans are intelligent enough to realize that Americans do not necessarily hold the same values as their president, and will treat them with respect. Even if Trump decides to include the EU in his “tariff war” individual citizens are not at fault, and Europeans are sophisticated enough to understand this. I am travelling to Denmark and Norway this summer, and have no anxieties in this regard. 
        1.   **Roberta**says: March 19, 2025 at 12:50 pm I am also traveling to the Scandinavian countries this summer and expect that there might be a few discussions about global politics. My mindset is to be a respectful visitor who appreciates the opportunity to learn about Norway, Denmark and Sweden!! 

    4.   **Meme me**says: March 15, 2025 at 2:28 pm I am a Canadian visiting spain right now. I was in same area of spain 4 months ago. The difference in how Americans are viewed in this short time is shocking. As Canadians locals often mistake us.for Americans due to similar accent and we have been ignored somewhat for service in restaurants. When we say we are canadian spainish folk change their attitude towads us completely and are lovely to us. We were stopped on the bus by a European who saw our canadian lapel pins saying we stand with canada. 
        1.   **Wendy**says: March 15, 2025 at 7:59 pm HOWEVER, please do NOT wear a Canadian flag pin if you are NOT Canadian. If you want your image to change for the better, you must change it yourselves. Take the responsibility to learn about where you are travelling, some history, some language, some current affairs. Your major news programs do not give you any idea of what is happening in the world. It’s very easily accessed. The main complaint about Americans is their ignorance of the world at large. Fix that. Be an ambassador, be informed, be able to carry on an interesting conversation and be prepared to learn more about the country you are visiting and share less about your own. Everyone knows what’s going on in YOUR country and that doesn’t mean just now. It has always been that way. 
            1.   **Patricia Kraegel**says: March 19, 2025 at 1:39 pm Thank you, Wendy! You are absolutely correct, ignorance of the rest of the world has been America’s problem probably since our inception. 

        2.   **Christine**says: March 18, 2025 at 6:56 am Thank you for your info. We are Canadians travelling to Portugal in May and then boarding an American cruise ship. We have heard from friends how Americans have less welcoming in Florida and Myrtle Beach and have been rethinking our trip. We also are concerned how the ship will be received in Spain and France. 
        3.   **Tonia Beckler**says: March 22, 2025 at 6:19 am MemeMe, how are Americans received in Canada now? I’m appalled at what the Trump administration is doing, and treating other countries, especially Canada. As an American looking for an escape route, if, by midterm Americans have not taken back our country. 

    5.   **Denis OKeefe**says: March 22, 2025 at 7:30 am Be advised that the Common Market was a peacekeeping project, in the ashes of World War II. The EU is much different. 

2.   **JS**says: March 6, 2025 at 10:22 am In September we had a great chat with a German traveler in Barcelona.

While seated next to us at the counter of Bar Joan, in the Mercat de Santa Caterina

 (a great, down-home place for lunch btw), he smiled an struck up conversation

“Hello…please do not take offense…I do not mean to cause hard feelings

 …may I ask you a question? What is wrong with your government?!” :-)

We really enjoyed hearing his perspectives on what might be considered

 “our problems.” Everyone out there on the planet is a neighbor. We are all impacted by each other. We owe it to each other to be neighborly.

JS

 Schellville, CA USA 
    1.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 6, 2025 at 10:43 am JS, thanks for this anecdote! Yes, this is exactly the kind of conversation I would expect to have in Europe this year: curious…probing…but not necessarily angry or confrontational. 
        1.   **David H O'Reilly**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:14 pm I’m travelling to Portugal soon for a 3 week vacation. I look forward to meeting lots of interesting people. When the subject of politics comes up, I will proudly say “I am from Massachusetts so don’t blame me”! 
            1.   **Deborah S.**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:44 pm Yes , I plan to say, “I’m from Boston–it’s not at all like that here.” We’re as incredulous as you are at what is going on. 
                1.   **M. Baylis**says: March 7, 2025 at 3:36 pm I wouldn’t be so proud of your “sanctuary city” these days. Do you support the criminals who are part of Biden’s immigration revolving door? In spite of what your city and state condone, there are many of us all over the country who want this mass ILLEGAL migration to come to a halt. The country cannot afford to support 10 – 12 million illegal migrants! Come to a border state and live for a while and you liberals with the closed minds, will find a different world. I support LEGAL immigration – it’s how most of our ancestors came to America. But I live in Texas and have seen the other side of this issue. And you folks from New England and the great Northwest act like you have your heads buried in the sand. Sorry, but your Democratic party is lost and floundering, looking for a new leader! YOU are in the minority! And who in their right mind, would even think Kamala could have led this country forward? It’s sad to see that Liberals have lost any common sense, and I know many very well. It’s time to rid ourselves of government wasteful spending, fraud and abuse of taxpayer money. You may not like Trump’s methods, but he’s getting the job done. And we, the conservative majority, are very, very happy to envision our country with a brighter future. Since this topic is about European travel, then yes, I am traveling to Paris soon and plan to proudly say I love America, I love Texas, and I love interacting with people in Europe. I am polite, courteous, appreciative of their culture, and always make an attempt to learn and use another language other than English when I’m visiting foreign countries. And I don’t anticipate that my conservative values or support of our new president will impact my enjoyment of visiting Europe. 
                2.   **Douglas Sabbag**says: March 13, 2025 at 3:20 am Bravo Deborah! We’re living on our sailboat, currently docked in southern France, and we are very comfortable saying we’re from Boston, whenever asked where we’re from.

 We have found that Boston is well received by all the Europeans. Many appropriately recognize it as a more enlightened part of the US., or, especially in Croatia, the home of the Celtics. ;-)

 So, if you do visit Europe, you can be quite comfortable saying you’re from Boston. 

            2.   **Laura Laffond**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:34 pm My husband and I drove all over Portugal last September. Most Portuguese will not know MA from NY from VA from NC (I was raised in MA and have lived in the other states). However, when we spoke to people questioning us about the election, they knew who Trump was and overall were very scared that he would be elected. Portugal is a very poor country and the Communist party is very active. They feared that the economy would collapse and the US would pull out of NATO if Trump was elected. Very valid fears. There were a lot of Brits in Portugal and they expressed the same feelings. We told them how we felt and that many in the US felt the same way. We were traveling around Italy in September 2020 and had the same conversations. 
                1.   **M.Z. Figueroa**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:27 am I would not agree that Portugal is a “very poor country.” 
                2.   **Eileen**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:22 am Portugal is not a poor country. It is a social democracy much like Canada. It is not Communist, and their current government is working hard to keep far right parties out. It is a lovely country to visit. 
                3.   **L M Blondeau**says: March 8, 2025 at 2:57 pm Portugal is one of the most progressive countries in Europe. My definition of poor is not being able to afford basic health care as is the case in the USA. Also, the U.S. has a very high maternal death rate in comparison to other RICH countries 2x’s higher than Portugal. And you are wrong about Portugal being Communist it has a centre-right coalition government. 

            3.   **Cathy Cooper**says: March 17, 2025 at 3:48 am Massachusetts? Where’s that? Do you assume that people from all over the world know where that is? And how the population of that area voted in the last election? Do you know how the people of France in each of their provinces voted in their most recent and very important election? 
                1.   **Cathy Cooper**says: March 17, 2025 at 3:51 am How about Portugal? You will be there in three weeks. Who is the leader of the country? What are the most important social issues facing their country? How do the current changes in geopolitically affect the people you will be talking to? 
                2.   **Patricia Kraegel**says: March 19, 2025 at 1:47 pm That is the point! The rest of the world knows more about the US than US citizens know about our own country, let alone the rest of the world. 

            4.   **Nancy Zawacki**says: March 18, 2025 at 1:43 pm We were in Portugal at the end of October last year. Lovely people and qute friendly. 

        2.   **Michael j Mullineaux**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:34 am As an ex-pat living part-time in Aix-en-Provence, FR, the current “situation” in the US only comes up when talking to other ex-pats. The French seem to be concerned with their lives in France and will respond appropriately to world politics if it involves their well being. It’s that simple. 
            1.   **Jim Kirby**says: March 12, 2025 at 5:22 am Thanks for your comment. This is good to hear as my wife and I are spending 4 days in Aix this June. Looking forward to the Cezanne celebration. 

    2.   **Christine PerrinD Richard Perrin**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:57 am My husband and I sailed on the Queen Mary 2 on a 2-week Christmas/New Years voyage from New York to the Wayward and Leeward Islands in December. We had a wonderful time, meeting many folks from Germany (where the first leg of the voyage originated) and the UK and everywhere in-between.

Our voyage happened about 8 weeks after the Presidential election; we all know the outcome of that and what was to come. As a couple who DID NOT vote for the now-sitting President, we were mindful that we may possibly encounter those who would possibly blame us by association for voting in someone who was prepared to disrupt the current world order. Happily, we only experienced two instances:

1) A fellow American would stroll around the ship proudly wearing a red “Make America Great Again” hat, signaling his support for the current sitting President. It made us feel comfortable. After a couple of days we noticed that he was no longer wearing the hat; we would like to think that perhaps some spoke up in opposition and he either voluntarily stopped wearing it to avoid confrontation, or it was confiscated.

 2) We met a lovely older British couple in an elevator who, in the course of our conversation, asked us if we were Americans. We hesitated before answering that we were. The husband said, “You have our sympathy.” We told him “Thank you. Please know we did not vote for him.” I also said, “I apologize in advance for what may possibly come in the future.” They were so understanding, which made us feel much better.

We tentatively plan to travel to Europe again in 2026, and we have no idea what may happen in our country and the world between now and then, and how we Americans will be regarded. We of course have concerns of being in Europe and possibly encountering harassment simply because we are American and our current president is hell-bent on creating chaos. We are hoping for the best and staying optimistic that our long-planned trip will happen. Perhaps if anyone should ask, we’ll say that we are Canadian. ;) 
        1.   **AH from Calgary**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:26 am Don’t hide behind another nation’s flag. Find something at the grassroots level that you can do about it and tell people that. Excuses that you didn’t vote for the guy is a weak excuse. Undeserved wearing of the Maple Leaf is also weak. Do something about it. 
        2.   **Pauline**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:23 am You felt comfortable?

I’m referring to your sentence above:

 ” It made us feel comfortable.” A MAGA red ball cap ? Maybe this was a mis-spelling? An autocorrect? 
        3.   **TJ Bell**says: March 7, 2025 at 6:13 pm Advice from a proud and well travelled Canadian:

 1. Please don’t wear a MAGA hat while travelling in Europe or Canada. You can still be a proud American without telling the world who you voted for. Without it, you at least let Europeans/Canadians/Mexicans give you the benefit of the doubt as to what kind of visitor you are.

 2. Even if you say you’re Canadian or sew our Canadian flag on your backpack, Europeans and Canadians largely know you’re not being truthful. And for the love of Pete, don’t end your sentences with “Eh.”.You’ll just sound ridiculous.

 3. Don’t even kid about Canada being the 51st state- no one finds it funny. Correction – one old guy south of us does.

 4. Don’t be surprised if you see anti American sentiments like changing Americano coffees to Canadiano or calling the Gulf of Mexico, the Gulf of Mexico.

I think European countries and Canada will continue to warmly welcome anyone from any country, providing they are respectful. Enjoy your travels! 
            1.   **Nancy Zawacki**says: March 18, 2025 at 1:50 pm I agree with everything you said, with the caveat that #1 My son-in-law has dual US/Canadian citizenship, frequently ends a sentence with ‘eh?’ and therefore I have fallen into that habit, so if I happen to do it, I hope they’ll forgive me. I am (usually) proud to be American and would never pretend otherwise, and #2 The Gulf of Mexico is still the Gulf of Mexico and always will be the Gulf of Mexico. 

        4.   **Heather Adams**says: March 11, 2025 at 10:48 pm I think she was being ‘funny’, hence the :). 
            1.   **K. Cornell**says: March 12, 2025 at 5:32 am Stealing someone’s identity and then winking about it does not make it funny. Especially after your government leader has bullied and insulted and lied about them. 

        5.   **Douglas Sabbag**says: March 13, 2025 at 3:52 am As Rick Steves stated at great length in this article, as we are experiencing throughout Europe, you have absolutely nothing to fear about visiting over here.

 My wife and I are Americans with French ‘long stay visas’ and we reside in southern France. We travel around Europe, extensively. We visited Paris last weekend. Lisbon during Thanksgiving. Spain, before that. Scotland around the 4th of July. Mallorca, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, etc.

 And, throughout all of these visits, not once has anyone held it against us that Trump is a moron, doing terrible things in office.

 Rest assured that in fact, it is the US where you have a greater chance of being violently or aggressively attacked. Not here. 

    3.   **Helen Brewster**says: March 8, 2025 at 5:34 am LOVED Santa Caterina market – so much more neighborhood resource than the bigger one on the main drag. 
    4.   **Julie**says: March 12, 2025 at 6:17 pm That’s a question I ask every day since Trump was elected-what is wrong with our government?! 

3.   **AH from Calgary**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:27 pm From the blog “There’s a certain narcissism in expecting to be received warmly by everyone, everywhere you go… isn’t there?”

I have to think Americans get their knickers in a knot because they consistently feel the US is the centre of the universe. I see it often near home in Banff, Alberta where there are tourists from all over the world but it’s the Americans who make a point to announce themselves fully expecting I’ll know where there home town is. 
    1.   **Cannie**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:54 pm Taking a point from the article, some people are just unpleasant. The people you are complaining about aren’t jerks because they are American, they are jerks who are American. And you have a confirmation bias, you think Americans are clueless and arrogant so you remember every encounter that you judge to be clueless and arrogant. Look for the friendly, the polite, the thoughtful American travelers, there are many. I live very near the Peace Arch Crossing on the border. I’m closer to Vancouver, a stunningly beautiful city, than Seattle. We get lots of Canadian visitors and I hope they’ll continue to visit despite the current lunacy that’s taken hold of our country. 
    2.   **Larelle from Vermont**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:05 pm LOL, yes. I don’t know how to counteract this among my students, except to point out as much culture as I can but given that I teach complete novices French, our discussions cannot get very deep. I talk about the value of travel, if one has the luxury to do so. So many of them are just really naïve, and I can see the root of some of this, because they do see that a lot of American culture, like movies, music, etc., has spread. And I guess some of them transfer that notion onto the minutiae of where all the cities and states are located. 
    3.   **R.M. Cooke**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:23 am I don’t think all or even most Americans think the U.S. is “center of the universe.” Surely there are some, but I do not believe this is a view held by the majority. My friends and relatives certainly don’t see things this way. Most folks I know consider Canada our best friend in the world and are aghast at Trump’s actions related to Canada. Canada is a wonderful and beautiful country that has managed its relationships with the rest of the world in a much better fashion than has the U.S.A. Please don’t use such a broad brush, and please don’t assume most Americans support Trump’s actions. The Americans I know don’t. 
    4.   **Donald W Ferguson**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:38 am Only some of us are that way. I am appalled at Trump’s actions. 
        1.   **Cathy Cooper**says: March 17, 2025 at 3:38 am I understand. What we in the rest of the world are hoping is that you will do something about it 

4.   **Mary Keatley**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:37 pm I am British .English to be exact and have worked with Americans in Africa and Belgium . I have visited US and Canada many times staying with friends from those days.

 I found N.Americans friendly and hospitable whatever their politics.

 I am sure most Europeans will welcome Americans as always .

 The politics is always puzzling – how can the richest and one of the largest nations in the world have such a poor choice when it comes to electing presidents

 If course sometimes it worked well.

 How can someone with a criminal record be president …

 UK hasn’t had a brilliant choice either at times but we have far smaller numbers. 
    1.   **Christine Perrin**says: March 7, 2025 at 6:16 am Mary, the majority of us Americans are asking the same questions you are.

I DID NOT vote for the now-sitting President; in fact, I was among those who warned of the ramifications of voting for him while I full-throatedly campaigned for the Democratic candidate. Even though 31.78% voted for Trump, 30.84% voted for Vice President Kamala Harris and 1.06% voted Third Party, while 36.33% did not vote at all (shame on them), More Americans (31.90%) voted for someone other than Trump, and yet he still won.

The current President campaigned on empty promises in order to win the votes of his supporters. He was desperate to win back the White House in order to regain Presidential immunity and have all pending criminal cases against him be dismissed – which sadly happened. But he will always be a twice-impeached convicted felon, and I for the life of me still can’t understand why he was allowed to run and ultimately win his election. 

5.   **Glenn Ball - Tacoma, WA**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:38 pm Thanks for this very timely article. I think you are spot-on with your observations and suggestions about how to handle the “political” side of travel. While we try to avoid discussions about politics – especially American politics – we have found that it might be considered rude of us to try and skirt the issues when interacting with people in other countries. For me, this article is helpful as we prepare for to Scotland, England and Italy during 2026. At the end of the day, while I may not agree or support the current administration’s policies or actions, I’m still an American and proud of it. 
    1.   **Gary S**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:36 pm Glenn:

 Yes, and I agree with you. I’ve been wondering about these very issues the past couple months and welcome Cameron’s helpful comments. (Though I’m not returning to Europe until next year). I remember the day I first arrived in New Zealand – the day after Ronald Reagan was just elected President. Though I was warmly embraced as a “Yank”, I received lots of good-natured ribbing about having an actor as President. I arrived in Europe (Germany) the first time about a month after George W. Bush was re-elected. Because of the prior four years I was really concerned about how I would be treated as an American and the questions/comments/assumptions I might encounter. I was surprised to find a warm welcome, genuine questions, and wonderful connections. 

6.   **Susan and Doug S.**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:45 pm As Canadians during these turbulent times we have considered whether to cancel our upcoming Rick Steves tour. But from past experiences we know our fellow American travellers are kind and gracious “neighbours”, so Greece here we come! 
    1.   **Shelley Moore**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:19 am We are Canadian embarking on our first Rick Steve’s tour. The evolving circus in Washington had us concerned about taking our Greece tour with an American company, with mostly American travellers. We are overjoyed to read not only the blog by Mr Steves, but are delighted and relieved to read the thoughtful responses. Thank-you for the sensitivity to other countries who are being threatened by the current administration. Sadly, these actions will have long term consequences for all parties. But as one comment noted, it is up to each individual to represent the values of our countries and be open to learning how we are perceived outside of our bubble. We intend to being to learn about Greece, not only the history but also the current day issues facing the average citizen who, like us, is trying to live their lives. 
        1.   **Heather Adams**says: March 11, 2025 at 11:02 pm I’ve gone on 3 European tours and politics and religion weren’t ever discussed as people were there to learn about the culture of the country they were in. The other travellers may say kind things, like we did when we had an American couple who were so aghast at something their government had done that they almost left the tour, thinking the other tour mates would hate them. The few of is in the know, who had seen the news, hugged and reassured them to stay on, enjoy the tour. They did and they had a good rest of the tour. ( June 2002, I can’t remember what had happened) 
        2.   **Julie**says: March 12, 2025 at 6:22 pm I apologize for the actions of our government against Canada, our close friend & ally. I would say most Americans are baffled by these tariffs & it will ultimately fail. Mainly we’re just making all our friends around the world mad at us. Please know that many of us didn’t vote for him & are truly embarrassed by his actions to our neighbors. 
            1.   **SMM**says: March 13, 2025 at 10:53 am Why apologize? EVERY country has its own interest at first. We CAN get along but, it must be equal. 
                1.   **Ian**says: March 13, 2025 at 5:05 pm SMM, you really should watch a broader range of news programs. The nonsense coming out of Trump’s mouth about how unfair everyone is to the US has no basis in fact. HE negotiated the USMCA, HE signed it, and now he says it is the worst trade deal ever. Things are equal right now, but Trump wants to bully other nations to take advantage of them. And continuing to talk about taking over Canada is no longer a joke. 

7.   **Ana**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:48 pm I am American and live in Europe full time. In general, people feel sorry for us now. I know of no Americans living here in Portugal who support the Trump regime. We are all very afraid for Europe now 
    1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:46 am Don’t worry too much. What you see now are negotiation tactics for peace in a tough love manner. That’s all. (I voted, but not for either extreme). 

8.   **B&E**says: March 6, 2025 at 3:57 pm Hi Rick,

Thank you! We really needed to hear this. And, I hope you’re still feeling the same in a few months.

We traveled to Paris last month. (We’re told you stayed in the same hotel only a couple of weeks before us. We’re really sorry we missed you!) The Parisians were happy to see us, and we had a wonderful time. Our presence there, not coincidentally, during the inauguration was not lost on the people we encountered. More than one winked and seemed to share our pain.

We will be traveling to Sweden in a few months. An awful lot has happened in the short time since even our trip to Paris. I honestly wonder how much more the world can take, and whether we’ll be welcome by then. I truly hope you’re right that Europeans will continue to give us a pass for our transgressions.

Hope you’re doing well.

B&E 
9.   **Lisa**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:09 pm Thanks for this Cameron, good perspective to keep in mind, some folks are just rude to everyone.

Last year I was able to be in Europe twice, the UK in February and France in August. While in the UK my husband and I took to saying we were Californians which would break the ice a little before our table mates at the pub jumped into their political questions. Like you said, they were curious, not particularly judgmental — except about Meghan and Harry interestingly enough.

In France, we attended the wedding of my nephew to his French girlfriend. As the aunt and uncle, we were seated next to the bride’s father who immediately wanted our take on Trump vs. Harris (I think the California connection was important to him). It was an interesting conversation to say the least — especially hearing his perspective.

I’m hopeful that if we make it to Europe again this year we will encounter polite, friendly folks wherever we go. In fact, my guess is that Europeans are more polite to strangers than many of the Americans I’ve encountered traveling here in the States. 
10.   **Lynn macdonald**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:16 pm The Europeans, as well as many of us here in Canada, will likely have no problem taking your money, regardless of what we may think of your country at this point in time. 
11.   **Van from**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:25 pm The world order is changing very quickly, with Trump as President. With his devotion to Putin, you could find a lot of European countries cool or even cold to Americans as I suspect they will paint all Americans with the same brush, even if you aren’t Republican. Just be pleasant and respectful, and leave political discussions for back home.

 Enjoy your travels. 
    1.   **Pauline**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:44 am “Silence as a cancer grows”.

That refrain has been humming along as I read, watch, and try to understand why Americans have devolved so quickly into bullies who stand back and allow this insanity to continue. He’s a criminal yet he’s free to continue to attack your fellow citizens, the friends who were your champions. He’s tried one coup and now is accomplishing another with money and lies and threats.

So, no silence is not appropriate. Calm, logical gentle exploration of one’s personal beliefs is necessary. Think John McCaine who stopped a campaign to correct a misunderstanding about his rival, Obama.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JIjenjANqAk

Please speak out against lies and misinformation and disinformation whenever you get the chance. 
    2.   **C Jayne**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:16 pm Today Trump announced sanctions on Russia (hence no devotion, but in the know of their arms). He’s roughing up both sides to get them to the table for peace agreements. I’m very surprised more people aren’t apprised of basic high-stakes negotiation tactics – he’s keeping both sides off balance (Negotiations 101). The higher the stakes (WWIII), the bumpier the road and somebody has to have the guts to do it – because the methods employed during the last 3 years hasn’t worked. When, then there is peace, Europeans may not even be grateful for it. Big picture, not for the faint-of-heart. I look forward to conversations in Europe when Trump achieves peace. 
        1.   **Ray Harlan**says: March 9, 2025 at 8:14 pm Proposing — but not enacting– tariffs on the powerful aggressor, while cutting off arms and critical (and cheap) intelligence for the nation under attack is not “keeping both sides off balance.” If Trump had been president in 1940, he would have surrendered Europe to Hitler and praised him in the bargain. The Europeans that I know will be very grateful for peace achieved by Trump or Marcon or anyone. They will not be grateful for capitulation. Churchill is reputed to have said, “A country that chooses shame to avoid war will get both.” Great Republican presidents like Eisenhower and Reagan understood that concept. 

12.   **LJ**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:40 pm We were in Paris in early February, dining in a bistro, when a German fellow sitting next to us struck up a conversation. I really didn’t want to talk politics, but he asked about Trump in such a friendly manner, I felt like I had to answer him honestly. We ended up sharing our fears for the direction of our country, and he thanked us for giving us our honest perspective. My point to him was that, traditionally, that everyone on the political spectrum in the US might disagree on policy, but we all agreed on the fundamental rule of law. Now it is terrifying to see things dismantled at such a rapid and thoughtless pace for the benefit of billionaires. My experience has been, in the UK and France, that most people are very pleasant one-to-one. I hope that doesn’t change, but I can understand why it might. 
13.   **MaryCarla**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:45 pm We are traveling to Switzerland, Italy, France, and Austria in a few months. I felt heartened reading this article. I was afraid we would have to go on some sort of Trump Apology Tour, which I would be perfectly willing to do, but would rather not. Now I feel like I can a relax a bit. Thanks Cameron! 
14.   **Janet Sims**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:45 pm My husband loved speaking his rudimentary Italian with locals when we were there. One evening he got into a conversation with an Italian couple seated at an adjoining table. The three of them started talking politics. After a while, the Italian woman said (in Italian), “You have to remember that Silvio Berlusconi is not Italy and George Bush is not America.” That has stuck with me! Thanks for your perspective, Cameron. 
15.   **Eileen**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:45 pm This was a good article, however, speaking as a Canadian I don’t agree with the suggestion of putting a Canadian flag on your luggage or wearing a Canadian flag pin. We currently feel very disrespected and under attack by the new American administration. Perhaps I have been sensitized to this by Trump’s “51st state” comments and references to our Prime Minister as the “Governor” of Canada. I have done many tours with Rick Steves and have always had a wonderful time and enjoyed the Americans in our tour groups. Please leave emblems for true Canadians. Thank you! 
    1.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:01 pm Eileen, if you read it carefully, I agree with you! I think the “Canadian flag” idea is basically an urban legend and certainly not something I would recommend to anyone. But it is something that, for the past three decades of traveling in Europe, I’ve heard about here and there, repeatedly. 
        1.   **Eileen**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:48 pm Hi Cameron, you’re right. It is an urban legend and I have always found it humorous. Just feeling a bit touchy at this point in history. Hopefully we can soon be best friends and good neighbours again. Will just keep repeating “This too shall pass” 
            1.   **Sheila**says: March 6, 2025 at 7:24 pm As a proud Canadian I have done multiple Rick Steve’s tours and generally found the Americans I met to be delightful. However, I did meet one who said that she travelled as an American when she “behaved” , but said she was Canadian when she wanted to “misbehave”. I was not amused. That being said, I have travelled to South America with a wonderful American I met on one of Rick’s tours. We are back to Europe next month together despite the nasty rhetoric and policies emanating toward my country from the Oval Office. We are not letting divisive politics and attempts at empire building spoil our friendship. I look forward to meeting more such lovely American people on my travels. 

        2.   **Mary Valls**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:32 pm It was a loooong time ago, and I was a student in 1976 traveling to London with three other Americans. We were directed to a kiosk in Victoria Station where they acted as a clearing house for lodging. A Canadian woman traveling alone was paired with us – the booking required 4 people. Her backpack was literally covered in maple leaf flags sewn on as appliqués. I’d never seen that, so I inquired why she did that. “So people will know I’m not American” she replied very directly. I still remember her name, Bonnie. I never encountered that same situation again – she was certainly a pleasant and friendly enough “room mate”, although she did not associate with us during the day. I never assumed she represented “all Canadians”, however, she is a data point of one instance where the Canada flag display was “a thing”.

 Rick is correct, one American is not ALL Americans – each encounter is just that, an encounter with an individual. 
        3.   **Ray Harlan**says: March 9, 2025 at 8:18 pm As an alternative, I wonder about pinning on blue and yellow ribbons to show solidarity with Ukraine. 
            1.   **Ben**says: March 15, 2025 at 12:08 am If you were to visit France, you would find Ukrainian flags flying outside the Mairie of most towns and villages, along with the French flag, the EU flag, and the flag of the French région in which the town is located.

In some towns in western Normandy you may see a U.S. flag flying as well. I anticipate that will become more rare as the current administration continues its antics. 

16.   **Tom Predhome**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:50 pm I am an American living in Malta. I have had some of the probing conversations described in this article, not only with Maltese, but with the panoply of expats who live there from throughout Europe and elsewhere.

One interesting observation: Europeans may not quickly pick up on American cultural signals we take for granted. For example, I have had Europeans ask me if I voted for Trump, whereas in the U.S. this question would probably not be asked based on my dress, demeanor, and where in the United States I am from.

Not surprising, but an interesting study in non-verbal signaling that may not translate well. 
17.   **TERESA RICE**says: March 6, 2025 at 4:56 pm I voted for Trump. I am not offended by your remarks, but I do think you could afford to be a little more unbiased in your announcement of how other countries may view the current administration. 
    1.   **May Williams**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:14 pm I was offended by “if you voted for Trump” assumptions and stereotypes. Just like I would be by the many competing “If you voted for Harris” liberal assumptions and stereotypes. Extreme arrogance on both sides of the isle. 
        1.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:57 pm May, that’s not a stereotype; it’s good travel advice. The fact is, by and large, the majority of Europeans were supportive of Biden and Harris, and are very concerned about Trump. Of course, there are exceptions. But wearing a Harris for President T-shirt will get you a drastically different reaction in Europe than wearing a MAGA hat. 

    2.   **Peter Furnell**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:25 pm Teresa I can tell you how Canadians feel towards your current administration. They feel betrayed.

 We have always been your friends and your neighbours.

 But now we have an American leader who is suggesting that we will become the 51st state.

 Do you know how degrading that is to Canadians?

 My wife and I are shortly heading to the UK and where once we didn’t care if people thought we were Americans, now we do!

 We are Canadians! 
        1.   **AH from Calgary**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:40 pm Me too. I’m used to being asked if I’m American and I’ve always smiled amd politely said I’m Canadian. Next trip I’ll leave no doubt and will wear a Maple Leaf. 
            1.   **Mary**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:35 pm I’m from NYC born and bred. In your shoes, I would probably do the same. Stand strong Canada! Your are the best neighboring country anyone could ask for. 

18.   **Matt W**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:01 pm To clarify, it isn’t “49% of Americans” who voted for The Occupant. It’s “49% of those who voted at all.” So, since voter turnout in 2024 was 64%, and 49% of that number equals roughly 30% of the population, “49% of Americans” is not accurate.

I also like the insight that “In terms of the popular vote, more people voted for someone not named Trump for president than voted for Trump in 2024, and his margin of victory over Harris was 1.5 percentage points.”

Source: https://www.cfr.org/article/2024-election-numbers. 
    1.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:11 pm Matt, fair point! 49 percent of American *voters*. 

19.   **Richard Crimi**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:17 pm Never a better time than to “Travel As A Political Act”. 
20.   **Richard Davis**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:21 pm Cameron, I agree with your comments. My wife and I have traveled extensively around Europe and throughout the world for more than 40 years and have not had rude treatment that I would attribute to our being from the USA. Governments come and go and virtually every country we have ever traveled to has something in their history that make their citizens less than proud. The USA has had its share of questionable leaders throughout its history, but the USA has also done as much as any other country to improve the human condition at different stages of history. The citizens of all countries

 have to accept the good with the bad in their countries history and not be too thin skinned about criticism from outsiders. 
21.   **Kirk Gulden**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:33 pm While in Calw, Germany last September, I was helped by a local woman when I was clearly perplexed about how to use the public parking garage (it turns out they all have different in and out rules, but all are amazingly immaculate). When she heard my accent and confirmed that I was American, she expressed obvious concern about the near future “November 6”. At first I didn’t understand the reference, but soon understood she was referring to the upcoming election. We exchanged our respective opinions about the choices and the possible election results and went our separate ways. I was impressed by how much this one European was concerned about the implications of a possible Trump victory. 
22.   **Darla Mabery**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:38 pm A timely and reassuring blog- thank you! We’re heading to Copenhagen for a week before our usual 3 months in Greece for the summer. I think I can handle the Greeks. But I’m just crossing my fingers Trump doesn’t announce plans to annex all of Denmark before we arrive. 
23.   **Maggie Blondeau**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:56 pm I don’t think Americans realize how angry Canadians are by the disrespect and ignorance coming from your leader and his merry band of project 25 followers. We are a proud and sovereign nation and have no desire to be overtaken and forced to become the 51st state by your military or by economic pressure. Yes, there are many good American but until you stop the insanity gripping your country I, and the majority of Canadians will stop buying your products, stop visiting your country and stop welcoming trump followers to our country. And, yes when I visit Europe this spring I will proudly wear the maple leaf. 
    1.   **Carmen**says: March 6, 2025 at 7:46 pm Hi Maggie, you are right to be angry, many of us in America are angry on your behalf. I’m thinking of spending some winter vacation time in Canada skiing instead of certain ski hills here to support Canadians for a change. 
        1.   **Heather Adams**says: March 11, 2025 at 11:24 pm Go to Big White near Kelowna, British Columbia. We have an international airport. We’ll welcome you with open arms. The snow is great, champagne powder and your American dollars will go far. We have lots of people from the US who own chalets and condos there. Please come. 

    2.   **Davio**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:01 pm I’m militating to have Maine secede from the union and become either its own Maritime province, or to become South Quebec, new New Brunswick, or possibly Nova Gaulia. 
        1.   **Sheila Morrison**says: March 12, 2025 at 7:17 am As a Mainer, I’d love that! 
            1.   **Frank Carr**says: March 14, 2025 at 5:54 pm So you really want to be Canadian? 

    3.   **Mary V.**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:40 pm Maggie, this New Yorker totally agrees with and supports you. My husband was just griping that he should’ve bought some extra bottles of Kirkland Canadian Whiskey at our last Costco visit. Canadians should do whatever they need to in order to protect their sovereignty. To better times…. 
    4.   **Karen Eichensehr**says: March 8, 2025 at 5:22 am Maggie, I understand completely and I am in total favor of Canadian’s action in this regard. Please know there is a large coalition actively fighting our present government. The numbers are growing every day.

Cameron, Thank you for the article. I was searching for some guidance relating to my concerns regarding our travel to Ireland in late May. You have made me feel a little better about it, although a lot can happen between now and then. 

24.   **Lorraine Quinn**says: March 6, 2025 at 5:57 pm Good article Cameron. I am a very proud Canadian and I don’t understand why caring,intelligent Americans are not protesting this narcissistic and stupid behaviour that Trump is displaying toward Canada. We have always been good neighbours with the US and have many friends and family on both sides of the 49th parallel. Trump needs to hear what the citizens of your country expect. My husband and I have taken several Rick Steves tours and have met lovely Americans but feel very hurt and totally disrespected with recent events with your administration. I implore everyone to speak up against this insanity. 
    1.   **AH from Calgary**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:45 pm Quite frankly as much as I’ve always enjoyed the company of Americans I hope they feel uncomfortable in their travels. Maybe it’s a kick in the pants that even the good Americans need to actually do something about it instead of hiding their embarrassment and simply using the excuse that they didn’t vote for him. 
        1.   **KD**says: March 16, 2025 at 1:52 pm Hi AH,

Folks who work in public service (federal and state levels) have been severely limited in what they can say. We are cautioned that while we can speak in our private capacities, it could still be used against us. I am sure you are aware that people are losing their jobs.

I am trying to “do something.” I am writing letters. I am working hard to lead by example. I am consuming national and international media. I am serving people. And I am doing it in the face of the realization that it’s a very long game.

I don’t blame you—or any Canadian/Canadien for being angry. You have been betrayed. I would be beyond ashamed to wear a maple leaf, or feign that I am anything other than what I am: A person from a flawed country who is trying to work for something better.

I don’t blame 

    2.   **Chrissy from NY**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:21 am A lot of us are organizing, protesting, in constant contact with our elected officials, and trying to create safety and support for the most impacted communities. Sadly, that doesn’t make the international news cycle because it’s not as sensational as everything coming out of Washington. As Cameron says not to paint Europe with a broad brush, the resistance actions in the US can’t be summed up with the media’s painting of it. We aren’t all shrugging our shoulders. We are actively working to be good global citizens 
    3.   **Kathy P**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:48 am I remember Ukraine saying they do not believe Russia would invade their country for those same reasons, good friends and relatives on both sides. It is very sad to think what one dictator’s decision has done to Ukraine and right now I am afraid Canada is in the same position if no one stops him. 
    4.   **Becky from Oregon**says: March 15, 2025 at 9:34 am There are protest over his and Musk behaviors and treatments, they must not be getting news coverage. 

25.   **Phoebe**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:05 pm In Italy last November, we had several interesting conversations. Our trip was a week after the election, so everything was fresh news and many people were curious about who we voted for. The oddest conversation was with a museum employee in Milan, who took us aside to advise us that his legal studies taught students that only Texas was a safe state; they had real law and order. The rest of the US was a crime-filled wasteland! He was told all other states were lawless, and their leaders used bribery as a rule. We tried our best to assure him that the entire US was safe, but he seemed pretty unconvinced. 
26.   **Deborah Silverman**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:08 pm Cameron, your blog post was reassuring! My husband and I are making a return trip to London and Paris this summer after a visit last year, this time with our son on his first visit to Europe, and we have been worried about this very topic. I’ll look forward to those “interesting conversations” in both countries! 
27.   **Debra L Griffith**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:12 pm I feel like the world is in the book” The Winds of War” I truly am concerned about our trip to Germany. I’m scared.

 Should we go? It’s our first trip to Europe 
    1.   **Laura Laffond**says: March 6, 2025 at 6:52 pm Debra, definitely go. I have family in Germany and I can assure you that you are safe. I try to be humble in whatever country I am in and respect their customs and rules. Ask people about what they do and their families, what their favorite restaurants are, suggestions of what not to miss, etc. The big discussion may be about Musk’s influence on their election, but you can steer that conversation to something else if you want. Enjoy! 

28.   **Moses**says: March 6, 2025 at 7:10 pm Quite a ridiculous article, which half of Americans will disagree with, me included. Other countries – and their citizens – expect America and American taxpayers to adhere to their view of the world, and when we don’t, or when we put our country first, we are suddenly some twisted nation devoid of humanity and compassion. Politics and politicians are momentary and always changing. Quit acting like America has somehow become an evil nation because of an election. Each country should take a hard look in the mirror before they cry about America not living up to their expectations. There’s a reason Americans voted for Trump, whether you agree or not. Let’s stick to the commonality and community of travel and keep politics out of it; we get enough of that very day. 
    1.   **TC**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:18 am Thank you!! Well said. 
    2.   **Kathy**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:33 am Hmmm I guess that you haven’t heard of Rick’s presentation, “Travel as a political act?”

 All Cameron was trying to imply is travel with an open mind, follow some European news outlets before you travel and get their perspective on the world. There was absolutely nothing in his article which was offensive. 
    3.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:16 am Agree 100%! I love Rick Steves too! His books have helped us with many trips in the past and we have a tour planned this fall with Rick Steve’s tour group. Painting one party or voter maga or progressive with such a broad brush is not accurate or appropriate. Keep politics out of the travel business. I think it is also a fallacy to say all of Europe will have negative view of Trump because many of the European countries are moving to the right in their own policies on immigration and spending in a desire to increase their economic growth. Thinking Italy,Germany, Argentina. Our policy as travelers in foreign land is to not bring up politics at all. There are plenty of other topics with which to engage and share and learn. 
    4.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:46 am Moses, I do think you’re underestimating how unprecedented and aggressive Trump’s words and deeds feel to many Europeans. You may feel that Trump is justified in exercising his perceived mandate. I’m simply pointing out that those actions have consequences, including serious impacts on our (former?) friends and allies overseas. A nation that has, for a century, been considered a close friend has suddenly upended generations of cooperation, and is taking active actions that could have a direct, negative impact on the lives of everyday people across the Atlantic. You can choose to “disagree” with this, but I think you’re being naive, and if you do travel to Europe soon you may be in for a rude awakening. 

29.   **Daniel Letizia**says: March 6, 2025 at 7:36 pm My wife and I spend on average 6 weeks a year in Europe. There is nothing that gives us more joy than our interaction with locals and other international travelers. We have never had a problem being identified as Americans. If the topic comes up we tell our new friends that we never talk politics but if they insisted we would be happy to talk about religion or sex. We also let them know if we are interested in a political opinion piece we will either read the New York Times or watch CNN. In the meantime we will stick with Rick Steves for his valuable travel advice. 
30.   **Mark Craig**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:30 pm Hi Cameron,

 Thanks for another insightful, educational, and thoughtful response to a timely, relevant issue. I am taking the RSE Best of Poland tour later this year, but I’m not worried about being mistreated or spoken to harshly. I was stationed in Germany for five years during the George W Bush administration, and that was also an interesting time to travel in Europe. During that time, many people would come up to me and say “I hate your president”, to which I’d reply, “me too! Look, we have something in common!” and we would get a good laugh out of it. I learned back then that Europeans can separate their view of individual travelers from their view of that traveler’s home country and political leaders. I found that to be very refreshing; I’m not sure all Americans are as enlightened, as you pointed out with our use of the term “Freedom fries” and trying to ban French’s mustard. Thanks for reminding us of the RSE philosophy of “the best souvenir you can bring back is a broader perspective”. I learn so much every time I take an RSE tour and love learning about other cultures and meeting people from diverse backgrounds. We’re more alike than different, and travel helps reveal that to us. 
31.   **NT Near**says: March 6, 2025 at 8:45 pm I learned years ago on a semester in Germany that the young people in Europe were much better informed about international politics than their American counterparts. I was there toward the end of the Vietnam War, and people my age wherever I traveled were very upfront in asking why the US was still there. They were never rude or antagonistic towards me, but they were not shy about letting me know what they thought of our President and his administration’s policies. It was eye-opening for a naive midwesterner. And I came home much more willing to ask “why?” 
32.   **Angela from Cali**says: March 6, 2025 at 9:08 pm My husband and I are in Portugal right now. We purposely left the States 3 days before inauguration. We were in England on that day and visited a National Trust garden :-) We spent 3 weeks in Africa, have been in UK for 3 weeks, and will be in continental Europe until June. We have been treated with love, respect, and…pity. It has been humbling to be so warmly received. We have had amazing conversations and politics (ie Trump) is the first thing brought up when people discover we’re from the U.S. (by the way we say we’re from California, which is true, and everyone knows CA). We travel with humility, a willingness to learn, and a desire to contribute something positive wherever we go, and people immediately recognize that. It has been such an encouraging experience. People we met have said they’ve yet to meet a Trump supporter in person. I hope when/if they do, it’s a productive and mutually educational conversation. 
    1.   **Steve H**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:11 am There are 77 million of us who voted for Trump. We are everywhere (and yes even travel the world). They typical RS traveler must be living in a bubble. 
        1.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:19 am Exactly right.. 

33.   **Ruth Lee**says: March 6, 2025 at 9:25 pm When I have traveled internationally in the past I have often found people in other countries to be much more educated about our country and it’s leadership than I was about theirs. It humbled me, and led me to learn more about current political and cultural climates in the country I am visiting as well as old history. I was in Europe in January, including during Trump’s inauguration, and I was never treated negatively. There were a few questions, and some occasional commiseration. Generally we found common ground and recognized that we all wanted what was best for each other and for our families, and were seeking our best way to live. 
34.   **Ken**says: March 6, 2025 at 9:31 pm I am American. For a long time I have thought of putting Ukraine on my travel agenda. Ever since the Russian invasion in 2022, I have promised myself to visit after the war is over. But now, after seeing Trump cozy up to Putin and get ready to throw Zelensky under a bus, I wonder if I should ever dare show up in Ukraine. 
35.   **Ann Randall**says: March 6, 2025 at 10:04 pm We’re currently travelling in Germany, Paris Sicily and Puglia, Italy for six weeks. Your blog has described our experience. We’ve attended three Carnivals while here where politicians of all persuasions (including the Italian, Russian and US presidents and Musk) were the subjects of satirical floats. Without exception we’ve been welcomed. Its been the experience of the few other Americans we’ve met travelling during the off-season. 
36.   **Cynthia**says: March 6, 2025 at 10:07 pm Excellent post, Cameron, I think you’ve nailed it.

 Reminds me of my two Egyptian hostel roommates I had while backpacking around in 2006. As soon as niceties were out of the way: “So… why did you [Americans] all vote for him [Bush] *again*??” Led to such good and insightful conversations between us about our two governments. Such is the beauty of being an open-minded traveler. 
37.   **Elaine Bush**says: March 7, 2025 at 1:39 am Learning just now about US closing some consulates in and plans to deport Ukrainian refugees, I’ve become even more anxious about my upcoming April river cruise in the Netherlands and Belgium.This article popped up in a search. It has helped me feel a bit more comfortable. I anticipate many of these conversations with my fellow cruisers, as I’m traveling on a line that caters mostly to Austrians and Germans. No escaping politics, on this trip, I’m afraid. I do like the attitude of being a good ambassador for sane Americans. I’ll do my best! 
38.   **Anna Lára Friðriksdóttir**says: March 7, 2025 at 3:15 am I have been working as a guide for 20 years in Iceland. When having conversation with my Italian customers, while Silvio Berlusconi was at his best, No One ever admitted to have ever voted for him. My thought was that maybe the ones that did so, were not the ones that travelled and kept opening their minds…. I am thinking maybe it’s the same now with voters for Trump? 
39.   **Kat**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:13 am There are almost 200 countries in the world, and people from all over the world visit Europe. We Americans are most interesting only to ourselves. 
    1.   **Cheryl**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:18 am I think it’s the myth of American exceptionalism that we’re so eager to believe.

I’ve found it interesting that without some respondents saying, you can tell who they voted for by the tone of their response and their readiness to take offense. That should serve them well while traveling. (I apologize for the sarcasm.)

I otherwise appreciate the information provided by Cameron, as I’m sure that any intelligent person would be concerned about possible reactions to Americans in Europe. This has helped allay my fears and I’m looking forward to planning yet another trip with a RS tour. 
    2.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:22 am Agree Kat! We’re not that special! 

40.   **Patrice**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:28 am Being an African American I’m treated a little hostile in Europe when trump is in office. I believe it’s because people know how he feels about people of color. I had a hard time in the germany airport and did not like the treatment I received. It was my sisters first time going to Europe, because of this treatment, she does not want to go back. I took another airline on my last trip last year to Europe. I don’t know if I’ll be doing too much traveling these next few years. 
41.   **Renee**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:45 am As a conservative Republican who voted for Trump I’ve always enjoyed travel and meeting and learning about different types of people. Frankly I haven’t been concerned about how I’ll be treated by Europeans but more so how my fellow Rick Steves travelers will treat me! Oh well. I think (hope) that courtesy and common sense will go a long way in both cases. 
    1.   **Steve H**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:13 am Yep! We have more to worry about from our fellow “tolerant” Americans than Europeans. 

42.   **Pauline**says: March 7, 2025 at 6:19 am I find that at home or abroad, being polite to everyone I have to deal with on planes, hotels, shops, cafes, etc. goes a long way. Just like at home, some don’t care where you’re from, they are just going to be grouchy and rude. I don’t take offense, but I have found that some people expect Americans to be pushy and rude, and are surprised and pleased (and very apt to be helpful) when one of us is patient and polite. 
43.   **Barbara ter Haar**says: March 7, 2025 at 6:21 am I was inspired by Rick’s words of wisdom and how well he scripted his concepts. Every sentence resonated with me, and it was affirming and professional. I loved his book “Travel as a political act”. This reminds me of the respect we should all have as we travel and Learn from our precious world when we have the opportunity to venture beyond our borders and expand our horizons! 
44.   **Jamey Frank**says: March 7, 2025 at 6:36 am My husband and I retired in Portugal two years ago and are so delighted to be here. Nearly every Portuguese person (including government officials) we’ve met has been friendly and kind, and often interested in why we moved here. When asked where I’m from I say “San Francisco”, and how much I appreciate being able to live in Lisbon.

 But with the recent U.S. government upheaval, the feeling expressed by friends here, England, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, and Czechia I would describe as “pity.” They’ve lived through horrific past government oppression and cannot fathom why the U.S. thinks that’s a good idea. The extreme right exists here, too, but is largely fended off.

 Unfortunately, trust in the U.S. has been broken, and may not recover, even with a future administration, since we oscillate between extremes so quickly. Europe knows it can’t rely on the U.S. as an ally anymore, maybe never.

 Let’s hope our alliances, which keep us all safe, get rebuilt. 
    1.   **Bonnie**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:54 am Hi there – my husband & are looking to spend time (2-3months) in Portugal next year – either Porto or Lisbon. Any advice to give about where to live?

 Just trying to gather as much info from different sources –

 Thanks! 

45.   **Gary Hoffman**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:27 am I really appreciate your thoughts on this, Caneron. Whenever I am traveling to Europe, I am worried that I will be asked about American politics or our current government. I shouldn’t be so worried. I should accept that Europeans are curious, or even concerned about things that are happening in the U. S., but that it is not personally directed at me. One of the best memories of my travel experiences are the conversations I have had with Europeans. I should remember that as I prepare to visit Europe. Thanks, Cameron, for giving me a fresh perspective! 
46.   **Bonnie**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:44 am We just returned from a wonderful tour of Sicily. The people we encountered were friendly and helpful. Not much mention of politics from the locals – they are all living their lives. However, the Canadians on our tour and a few we met on the way questioned us. We felt the need to apologize-and made it known we do not agree with the current administration. We live very close to Canada & love our Canadian friends & neighbors! 
    1.   **C Jayne**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:58 pm Likely the Sicilians know what is truly important in life, and it’s not politics. As well, as culture would have it there, they may know the importance of “picking your battles” as it might offend the wrong kind. Randomly introducing contention (accidentally or not) has consequences in some cultures, especially that one. 

47.   **Sheree Moss**says: March 7, 2025 at 7:54 am Thank you Cameron. I appreciate you answering my question. My husband and I plan on having a great time in Europe again. We always set our intentions to be open to new experiences… whatever that is. We so appreciate you and Rick, and all the team at R.S Travels. 
48.   **Kathy**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:20 am I travelled on a RS tour shortly after the first Trump term, the RS guide made a slight joke about Trump and about a third of the group were Trump supporters and took exception. After that she handled the political situation with grace and eloquence and politely declined any of their invitation to talk Trump. The tour was amazing, mostly because of her great knowledge and organization.

 It will be challenging for RS guides to navigate hot issues like the US now allied with Russia, but they are the cream of the crop and are trained by Rick’s philosophy and I have all the confidence in them! (Also some sympathy!) 
    1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:09 am Europe paid more for Russian energy products that they contributed to the defense of Ukraine. That could be construed that Europe is allied with Russia, so the effort goes forward to reset priorities. 
    2.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:32 am Agree Kathy that it will be challenge for tour guides to be neutral in their presentations. That is the mark of true professional in my opinion to keep politics out of a “fun” “educational” tour and hopefully recognizing that any given tour could be filled with both Trump or Kamala supporters. Why risk insulting your paying customers. All the travelers on tour have paid many dollars and are taking their precious vacation time to see the world and have chosen Rick Steve’s or another tour operator. The last thing we want is to have tour operator bringing politics into the tour bus. 

49.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 8:55 am I can’t imagine asking a European who is visiting here (America) about their political leanings, or asking “what’s wrong with your government?”. My interest would be “what types of things are you interested in seeing here?”, “can I help you with tips about fulfilling what you would like to see and do here?”, and similar questions so I can offer what we have here to make the most of their trip. So, when the situation is flipped eg when I visit Europe; I don’t sense the personal connections that mean the most to me to establish unconditional bonds between citizens of the earth- should politics be the focus of conversation. For example, I hired a night guide in Prague who was raised in communism. We simply said to each other ” I was taught bad things about your government/country when I was young”; laughed and said “here we are now as friends”. At risk is that I would’ve not had that moment if political conversations first occurred. Interest and listening to each other’s cultural uniqueness leads to the power that is compatibility. Individuals, not governments, rule overall and in the long run. Don’t let politics overtake your human spirit. Don’t forecast bad things before they happen and incite divisions. That’s the contribution each of us can make. 
    1.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:33 am Agree! C Jayne 
    2.   **Kathy**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:56 am You are a citizen of the most powerful country in the world, US IS (maybe was now) the leader of the free world. People all over the world love your movies and music. Your country is admired all over the world, to hold a US passport is a dream for millions, many countries you visit in Europe and everywhere for that matter, are a fraction of your size so your policies whether we like it or not affect every country around the world. For eighty years the US has allied itself with like minded democratic countries and enjoyed mutual alignment.

 Now we see your leader aligns himself with Putin, he is calling an ally like Zelensky a dictator and says Ukraine started the war, he has repeated his intentions to take over the Panama Canal and to annex Greenland and Canada (Like what Putin did to Ukraine). He is every day throwing around tariffs which will end up hurting, not him, but the ordinary US citizen.

 So when you say “don’t forecast bad things” how could we not?? As for inciting division, Trump is the master puppeteer for that 
        1.   **C Jayne**says: March 8, 2025 at 9:27 am He wants to rile you. Don’t let him. 

    3.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:56 am Jayne, I’m not sure that’s a reasonable expectation. Cultures are different; as noted, in some places (such as France), there are fewer taboos about being direct in discussing politics. When you travel somewhere —if you’re doing it right —you should expect to travel on their local terms. Perhaps I’m overstating things, and we’ll be able to eliminate politics from our international travels. But it’s worth going into this year’s travels aware that the landscape is shifting. 
        1.   **C Jayne**says: March 8, 2025 at 9:25 am France’s culture may endorse those discussions, however, each individual has a right to engage or not engage. I respect their culture and the cultures of every country, however, their expectation that a traveler must engage and appease their concerns; possibly demonstrate an either/or position is not my MO. I have a stance that is very effective by using boundaries: friendly but with limits. Quite effective, and have made friends with citizens of foreign countries via social media. I invite them to travel here and draw their own conclusions. By all means, if others want a political discussion, go for it but avoid generalities that all Americans have the same perspective 
            1.   **Mary R**says: March 14, 2025 at 6:21 am I live in Italy and discussion of politics (national and international) is as common as talking about the weather is said to be in England. Most adults partake in this by force of habit (perhaps wrongly assuming other nationalities might do the exact same thing). What I believe instead is that MOST American tourists will not interact with locals at any level beyond a sentence or two and mostly for things related to the tourists’ needs. I believe that an incredibly small amount of Americans ever actually have conversations with Europeans (aside from in the UK and Ireland) because of the language issue. Most of their interactions are with other Americans, including other tourists they meet on the trip. 

50.   **Kaydee**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:12 am We are Canadians. We were on a cruise out of Ft Lauderdale on the Presidential inauguration day in January and the smug MAGA hat wearers were unpleasant. My husband was wearing a San Francisco cap from a past holiday and was verbally attacked and sneered at by a man his age as being a Harris voter. We’re booked on a Rick Steeves tour in Europe in May and are apprehensive about sharing a bus and events with a group of Americans. We all know how Canada is being treated. The whole situation is very discouraging. 
    1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:08 am You’ll find most RSE travelers are on the liberal side. No worries if that’s your leaning. “We create what we fear”. 

51.   **Jill**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:21 am When I’m travelling, the last thing I want to do is immerse myself in political discussions. And unless I know you well, here in the US, I follow the same rule. That being said, it sounds as though these discussions may not be avoidable in the current pollical climate. This article suggests that every European you encounter is going to hate Trump. Yet, there have been many people in Europe who have voted for a similar agenda along with almost half of US voters. Obviously, this is not a black and white situation, as the media would have you believe. Neither side is perfect. So if you’re planning on engaging in these political discussions, I strongly suggest you understand the other side’s point of view and often “inconvenient” facts. Oscillating between two homes, one in a very conservative area and the other mostly liberal, I try to do just that. It might get me in trouble sometimes, but at least I am confident in my views and can understand where each side is coming from. And I love my family and neighbors, so it is imperative. 
    1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:09 am Appreciate this. 
    2.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:35 am Well said! 
    3.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:53 am Jill, I think that’s right on: Being able to respectfully “agree to disagree” is important, and I appreciate your ability to see it from different sides. The point I’m making is that, yes, while some Europeans like Trump, there are many who are shocked, frightened, and angry about some of his claims and threats. And even if “avoiding politics” is your preference, I suspect that will be much more difficult this year, as Europeans are adjusting to and trying to understand the way long-established geopolitics are being upended. They are concerned and trying to understand. And they may look to you, as a visiting American, to help them get their heads around how the results of an election thousands of miles away can have a huge impact on their own lives. 
        1.   **Jill**says: March 7, 2025 at 3:03 pm Thanks Cameron. Totally agree. I really feel for what the Europeans must be thinking at this point. It is truly a heated situation. I believe that if we can simply take a look at other points of view, and there aren’t just two, that we’ll be more likely to have calmer, more empathetic discussions. 

52.   **Rita Albrecht**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:55 am While on a Rick Steves tour in fall of 2023, my husband and I were thrilled to connect with relatives in Czech Republic. At the time they were worried about our elections and that Trump might be reelected. We assured them that he wouldn’t be. How naive we were! They could see the problems looming with a second Trump administration.

 In the small CZ town of Velky Jezov (near Tabor), they had lived through the German occupation and post-war decision to adopt Communism. Their homes and farms were collectivized.

 After the press conference (debacle) in front of the cameras with president Zelensky in the oval office, I wondered what our CZ family might think of us and of America.

 I sent a WhatsAp message to Zednek to say we are sorry about what happened, and we support Ukraine. His response was heartwarming, “I still believe in America” 
53.   **Peter Haase**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:16 am As a Canadian from Alberta, Canada I will not be travelling to the US for the foreseeable future. My wife and I had another great vacation in four corners region of the US last October. What a wonderful place to visit. But the Trade War and tariffs on Canada and the Threats of Annexation of Canada by the United States have us joining the boycott of US travel and products by Canadians. So over the next year or so we plan to travel to Japan, Mexico and Europe. Between us my wife and I have travelled to over 50 countries on five continents, so we have crossed many borders. Sadly, in our numerous travels to the US, it is by far the hardest border to cross, every time there seems to be some little issue and the bully at customs likes to make it difficult. There is just a different attitude at the US border. In our travels around the world, we have met many wonderful Americans and a few “Ugly Americans”. The wonderful Americans have an open mind, are educated and probably Democrats. Once in a while we meet one of those “ugly Americans” who travel with a chip on their shoulder, they think that America is the greatest country in the world, that everyone in the world wants to be an American and constantly complains how everything is better in America. Why did you travel then, stay in America, because it is so much better than anywhere else in the world. We don’t need you in Canada, Europe, Asia or wherever. Travel with some modesty and realize that in many places in the world, life is better than it is in America in many ways. If you do this you will be welcomed by most people in the world. 
54.   **LuAnn Cernak**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:37 am We have traveled throughout Europe for many years, usually spending 4-5 weeks on each trip to fully explore each country. Yes, we have had conversations about US politics, but far and away, the majority of conversations are about where the person is from and learning about their part of the world. However one very important thing that I have not seen addressed in this article nor other discussions about politics and travel, is the extreme bias in news coverage about the US throughout Europe. If I only followed CNN, BBC, etc., I’d have a very unfavorable view of the US too. As the legacy media dies in the US due to their lack of fairness and incredible liberal bias, perhaps there is hope that news coverage in Europe will follow suit and begin to educate our European friends that there are many other opinions as to what is going on here and why. BTW, we have an entire travel library based on RS books and have followed him for over 20 years, even though we are diametrically opposed to his political views, which hopefully reinforces my point that when all views are considered, there can be agreement on certain topics without the animosity that is expressed in the majority of the comments displayed here. 
    1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:44 pm Very well put, LuAnne. Rick is a travel genius and I would have not enjoyed travel near as much without RSE. I may not have even taken the travel plunge! I make a point of watching only Live Events where the politician themselves are speaking, a live broadcast of a Congressional hearing, etc – no third-party summary, interpretation, or claims. I, too, am concerned when I hear Europeans just repeating opinion “news”. We have begun to realize the detriments of opinion news and the majority now see it, and hope Europeans also will. 
    2.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 9:55 pm Spot on LuAnn! 

55.   **Bill**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:47 am In the late 1960s I travelled Europe with a young woman from Los Angeles. She invariably would portray herself as “Canadian” and wore a maple leaf pin. She said it was easier than explaining her country’s position on Viet Nam. Also it got her an occasional free drink at a bar!

It is unfortunate that idiosyncratic interactions colour one’s perceptions of an entire people. However two events will forever colour mine.

 1 In Rome, at a small cafe a woman entered and loudly proclaimed “I’m an American. Does anyone here speak English?”

 2 I wear a small (5X2.5 cm approx.) Canadian flag on my cap. In Portugal i was was berated by an older American who thought I was “showing up” Americans and making them look bad by wearing my country’s flag. The irony in this was he and his wife were decked out in American flag t-shirts With huge USA letters printed on them.

I will not speak for Europeans. However, I tire of American jingoism. Some suggestions for US travelers: Tone it down. Learn a little about the country you’re visiting. Revel in the differences. 
56.   **Jeff**says: March 7, 2025 at 10:57 am Regardless of what news source a person chooses to follow, bias does not exist when those news sources use video clips of Trump making his unfounded claims and consistent lies. He and his administration have done more damage to the reputation of the US in a few short weeks than I think any of us could have imagined so I do believe there will be some hostility towards Americans not only in Europe but worldwide. I am from Canada and his statements regarding the 51st state and calling our Prime Minister governor are extremely offensive. We have been to Europe 9 times and for the most part have not witnessed any issues with the locals regarding Americans. That said, when we were in the UK on 2 separate occasions when chatting with locals, they apologized to us for thinking we were Americans. Last year on a RS tour, our guide stated that even at that time prior to the election, some Americans were stating that they were Canadian when talking to locals. And by the way, unless you are in fact Canadian, please do not wear our flag. Save that for us Canadians to wear it proudly. 
57.   **Richard Jordan**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:06 am Interesting article and comments. I am an American with good friends in Germany, The Netherlands, and UK. Their comments to me back in 2017 and again since the 2024 election are quite unanimous: “We wish we had a Trump.” 
    1.   **Susan W**says: March 7, 2025 at 11:37 am Good perspective and addition to dialogue! 
    2.   **Lynn**says: March 8, 2025 at 4:02 pm Be careful what you wish for friends! 
    3.   **Andy**says: March 9, 2025 at 12:43 am I can assure you, you did not meet a representative sample 
        1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 9, 2025 at 9:31 am I have also met Europeans who endorse the new administration.. 

58.   **Paula D**says: March 7, 2025 at 12:51 pm I was just researching ideas for seeing Istanbul this fall and fell upon this discussion. We have had the opportunity to visit Europe through many administrations (since 1987) and I have never felt un-welcomed (even in the French countryside) and my husband and I actually like having these very conversations with the locals. We try to visit with our Uber drivers, waiters, guests sitting near us in group meals, friends we make along the way – you name it. It helps us keep an open mind and informs us their current realities. We are all curious by nature and the world is full of really really nice people, you just have to talk with them. 
59.   **Margaret Paschal**says: March 7, 2025 at 2:00 pm Americans don’t have to be loved or even liked. We just have to be polite. 
60.   **Sue Haller**says: March 7, 2025 at 3:30 pm I just returned from 10 days in Italy. My experience was as Cameron predicted: I was polite and friendly, and received nothing but the same treatment in return. Thanks to Cameron for this thoughtful piece. 
61.   **Cheryl rust**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:05 pm I appreciate your point of view regarding being a tourist in Europe. However, as an older white American female, there are 3 incidents that happened to me involving mistreatment or rudeness, call it what you will. Could not use restroom unless I ordered something even though my male companion had ordered a drink. Furthermore, I was asked to move away from an outside table as I waited for him to receive his order. I was yelled at in a shop but could not understand what was being said. Finally, a coffee shop employee wouldn’t serve me until he figured out I was very determined. There is another side and it would be helpful if you would address it. By the way this happened to me in Germany during Trump’s first presidency. 
62.   **Jill in Portland, OR**says: March 7, 2025 at 4:43 pm My spouse and I leave next week for another two months in Lisboa.

 I have just sewn a Ukrainian flag onto my little RS daypack. 
63.   **Robert J**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:20 pm I agree with Margaret P. We just have to be polite. When I encounter a traveler from Canada in the US I would never ask them about the high number of illegals (200,000 in 2024) encountered at the US Canada border or the 200% tariffs Canada places on American dairy products. Find a common ground and have a pleasant conversation. 
    1.   **Susie**says: March 17, 2025 at 6:54 am Just FYI – those tariffs on dairy products have never kicked in – they are on only over a certain level of imports, which is more than double we have ever shipped to Canada. Canada has thousands and thousands of “encounters” as well, of people coming from the US into Canada – lots of guns smuggled from the US into Canada; depending upon what province, 70-88% of illegal guns in Canada are from the US. 

64.   **Elizabeth B**says: March 7, 2025 at 5:46 pm My husband and I just returned from a 2 week trip to Portugal, and we got asked many questions about the current state of affairs in America and what our opinions on the current situation are. Fellow travelers that we chatted with from several different countries (U.K., Canada, Scotland, France) and quite a few locals politely, tentatively, and quietly wanted to ask us WTF??? But we never felt unwelcome, in fact it was just the opposite. They were happy to see that despite the current chaos Americans still want to travel. 
65.   **PW**says: March 8, 2025 at 10:16 am Overall, an interesting article and think “agree to disagree” should be a fair assess.

Regarding your statement that “more americans voted against Trump than voted for him”, I clicked on the link you provided and the numbers from the council on foreign relations link indicated that more voted for Trump than voted against him, opposite of what you indicated. Per your ask “did I get anything wrong?” the popular vote numbers were: Trump 77,284,118 vs Harris 74,999,166 
    1.   **David**says: March 8, 2025 at 2:03 pm You left out the other candidates. Trump got slightly less than 50% of the total vote, so more people did not vote for him than voted for him. 
    2.   **Cameron Hewitt**says: March 8, 2025 at 6:25 pm PW, final election numbers: Trump 77,284,118 votes; other candidates: 79,018,200. Among Americans who voted, fewer than half (let’s round to 49%) voted for Trump. 
        1.   **C Jayne R**says: March 9, 2025 at 10:30 am My source indicates Trump received 77,303,569 votes (49.71%); Harris 75,019,231 (48.24%).

While we’re at it, I understand that RFK Jr, who backed the Trump administration, earned 756,968 votes (0.49%).

I wouldn’t endorse adding RFK’s votes to Trump’s; but you could deduce a majority Trump platform sentiment.

Americans, Canadians, Europeans in all: you will be hearing more from the ‘dissatisfied’- at this point, anyway. Don’t seek consolation in numbers, don’t display bragging rights on the other hand either; move forward and hope for peace down a bumpy road.

If you think Trump’s words are bad, WWIII would be worse and please keep that in mind while he’s verbally attempting compromise and peace. He is situationally aware of Russia’s allies (China, Iran, North Korea, and more) and their armament capability. Too many people perceive this as favoring Russia, instead of his exercising caution. Both will need to give something up and he’s badgering them until they do. Better to do it with words than arms, he knows. It’s short-sighted if you don’t understand the big picture. 

66.   **David**says: March 8, 2025 at 2:05 pm You left out the other candidates. Trump got slightly less than 50% of the total vote, so more people did not vote for him than voted for him. 
    1.   **Tony**says: March 8, 2025 at 4:27 pm I’m scratching my head. Why do these Trumpers want to visit democracies in Western Europe when they could be vacationing in Belarus, Russia, North Korea, or Hungary? 

67.   **May**says: March 8, 2025 at 5:40 pm Touched a nerve, eh? 
68.   **May**says: March 8, 2025 at 6:01 pm CJR, you won’t get a response. Philip’s post was removed. 
69.   **Vanessa S.**says: March 8, 2025 at 6:06 pm It was June, 1971. We were in the throes of the Vietnam War. I was 18 and on an American group study/travel adventure to Europe. First stop was Paris where our group was heckled by Vietnam War protestors for American involvement. A few weeks later, we arrived in Strasbourg, France and we were greeted very warmly by an elderly French lady, smiling, patting us on our backs. She knew we were Americans and this was her way of thanking America for liberating her village during World War II. No matter where we stand on issues, we are representatives of our country’s current state of affairs. Engage in conversations and as RS will say… “build bridges, not walls!” 
70.   **May**says: March 8, 2025 at 6:12 pm Vanessa, outstanding post! 
71.   **Robin F.**says: March 9, 2025 at 1:13 pm We lived in Amsterdam for five years that included all of Trump’s first term in office and answered many questions from incredulous Europeans. I think they were surprised by the tone coming out of the White House, they had never seen behavior like that from an American elected official. So far, this time, it is much worse and I am sure we would have many more questions asked of us. We always tried to take the high road and reassure our friends that Americans on the whole are generous and kind people and we tried to model that behavior to those around us. As travelers around Europe, we always remembered that we were guests in other countries and so we were always respectful, kind and polite to everyone we came in contact with. Be a positive American role model-you will be rewarded with European kindness (mostly). 
72.   **Wynne**says: March 10, 2025 at 10:00 am I’m so relieved to read this, as I’ve been concerned since last year about traveling in Europe, given the inanity here in the US. Since the beginnings of my European travels in 2013, when I told people I was from New York City (Astoria, Queens – woohoo!), they seemed to perk up – everyone wants to know about NYC! And even though I moved back home to the Midwest last year, I’ll still likely say NYC vs. US when I travel there in the near-term. It’s just easier. 
73.   **Frank Bordash**says: March 10, 2025 at 1:14 pm “First, it’s important to be mindful of how our homeland is perceived abroad. Keep up with the news — especially the European perspective. Get beyond your media bubble; try consuming European news coverage to get in the right mindset.”

I add two experiences here: October 2023; Viking Mediterranean Cruise; Sea Day between Sicily and Crete. While doing some laundry, I turned on the laundry room TV, select a Mediterranean themed music channel. After a while, I needed to leave to retrieve hangers and stuff. Upon return the TV was tuned to Fox News! Please! We’re in the middle of the Mediterranean doing the most mundane thing (laundry) and one needs to have a US based TV channel on?

October 2024: Vienna for ten days. The room TV was on one evening only just to see what was available, a good mix of 150+ channels from all over the world. We made the conscious decision not to turn the TV on for the entire stay. Some would say we were burying our heads in the sand. We decided to enjoy our visit and experience the city. 
74.   **Dawn**says: March 11, 2025 at 4:48 pm We just booked our first Rick Steve’s tour. After reading these posts I’m beginning to question our trip. I don’t want to go on vacation and be stressed by US politics. I just want to go learn what I can about another country and culture. I hope this is all a super close up, disproportionate view of a small part of a RS tour. 
75.   **Carol**says: March 11, 2025 at 7:30 pm I don’t judge Russians by what I see Putin do and I hope others don’t judge me by what Donald Trump does. I try to leave politics out of my travel. I just want to see and learn . 
76.   **Kd Woods**says: March 12, 2025 at 10:03 am Thanks for writing this! I’m so embarrassed to be an American right now for the first time ever, was worried about traveling to europe. I’ve always been treated very well in the past, but our country’s politics are so ugly right now, I actually considered canceling my trip to Portugal for 5 weeks. You put my mind at ease, like so many other times Rick and crew, thank you! Bon voyage! 
77.   **The Palermino's**says: March 12, 2025 at 11:47 am My husband and I are embarking on a trip to Rome in 2 weeks. Although it did hearten me somewhat to read the comments above, things just keep devolving it seems. We will be staying in Rome for a week. Luckily, out last name is Italian, however that is usually not the initial conversation with others you meet. I read that the travel advisory is a level 2 currently due to possible terrorist attacks during the Jubilee Celebration. Can we share some updated opinions? If you felt pretty confident last week, is it still at that level of confidence for you? Just for keeping the conversation efficient, we have traveled to Rome multiple times and are respectful tourists. 
78.   **Moritz**says: March 13, 2025 at 9:12 am As a German I just want to say: Of course you are still welcome!

If you voted for Trump, things may be just a little more complicated. You’re choice in this case is causing us very serious problems, at least that’s what a lot of us think.

We (speaking for likeminded people here) will still treat you with the same respect as any other tourist. You will still have a great time! And of course (most) people will respect you’re right to elect the president of your very own country.

Nevertheless, you do yourself a favor here if you have understanding for the way we feel about this election and the problems it causes us.

 Also please mind, that the problems a lot see with this is not conservatism itself!

That being said, please enjoy your journey!! 
79.   **Susan S**says: March 13, 2025 at 1:08 pm To other Canadians trying to decide whether to book or cancel their tour with Rick Steves, we just received a very long, thoughtful email from Rick entitled “Oh Canada! Can we still be friends? He makes a lot of great points including that his company “proudly uses much of our profit to support philanthropic efforts that reflect Canadian values”. And, as Rick says, as individuals we can still be friends and this is more important than ever. We really appreciated the email, it’s still a tough decision though! 
80.   **May U**says: March 13, 2025 at 5:55 pm Susan, curious, what were the Canadian Values/Philanthropic efforts that Rick addressed? 
    1.   **Susan S**says: March 13, 2025 at 6:38 pm “addressing global climate change through climate-smart initiatives, to funding Bread for the World and other organizations that provide relief to poor people around the world, to supporting causes such as the ACLU which strives to keep the US government honest and accountable”. 

81.   **Leslie**says: March 14, 2025 at 9:33 am Sadly, the main take-away from this article is the Rick Steves and his staff are leftists who WILL judge you if you voted differently than they did. Typical, intolerant democrats with their little air of (laughable) superiority.

It is probably best to just book with another company if you wish a fun and relaxing trip to Europe.

I used to live in Europe and travel there almost every year now. I love going. In all of my many trips I have never had anyone except American leftists even mention politics. Not once. I behave graciously and get receive a reciprocal treatment from everyone else. Seems to work pretty well. 
    1.   **Nadya**says: March 16, 2025 at 8:57 am You have very divisive thinking. 

82.   **Susie Novack**says: March 14, 2025 at 10:10 am My sister, brother-n-law, nephew and I absolutely loved your Poland tour over the summer 2024. We took a side trip to beautiful Lithuania and completely enjoyed talking geo politics with our guide. Especially on the Baltics and Ukraine. In Poland we had a gentleman stop us in a hotel corridor to discuss US politics with the upcoming election. We all had our own political opinions and appreciated each other no matter – and rejoiced on those topics we did agree. During that trip we came within 20 miles from the Belarus border at one point. We all cried when the Ukrainian couple played music and sang during dinner. I never once felt out of place, never once felt in danger, and enjoyed every moment and experience. I am proud to be an American, with ancestors from Poland and Lithuania. ….and England, and Scotland, and Ireland, etc… And I love my President. Maybe the world needs a little shaking up. No matter, we all have much more in common than we have in differences. <3

By the way, folks – the Poland tour was magnificent! Highly recommend!!! 
83.   **Mick**says: March 14, 2025 at 12:25 pm I imagine as long as they are making money, most of the concerns will take care of themselves. 
84.   **kt Toenniessen-Innes**says: March 15, 2025 at 3:56 pm This thread is so disappointing .

 More adults arguing like children on a site meant for travel conversations.- ruining it for others

 I won’t be reading this again.

 I come here for travel info not back and forth about politics – no one listening to each other- each trying to prove themself right

I’ll look for travel info elsewhere sadly

 I so love Rick ‘s shows and travel tips 
85.   **Celeste MacCormack**says: March 16, 2025 at 2:32 am Thank you for publishing your article regarding how to handle being a tourist in Europe with so many political issues between the United and Europe. I felt like I needed to wear s shirt or hat that apologized for my country’s behavior. Your article has put a lot of my uncertainty to rest. Keeping my fingers crossed that they understand not all of us agree with the current views of our country. 
86.   **zoox**says: March 16, 2025 at 6:49 am You state …

And they recognize that more Americans voted against Trump than voted for him;

but your link shows …

The Popular Vote

 Trump won 77,284,118

 Harris won 74,999,166 
87.   **Steve**says: March 16, 2025 at 8:48 am Maybe Italy is atypical at least certain regions but I had a number of conversations while traveling in Tuscany last Fall, pre-election. I think in general the north of Italy is more conservative and they did elect Maloni. Maybe half of the people I spoke with thought Trump was a better choice (Biden was a “very sleepy” man), and they seemed to associate Harris as an extension of Biden. I did not vote for Trump btw – I hoped for the best after his election but so far it has been appalling in my opinion.

 Anyway, I will be returning next month and will see many of the same people so am ready for more interesting conversations- Italians tend to be pretty cynical about politics in general due to their history andwine always helps to smooth over differences. 
88.   **GeaVox**says: March 16, 2025 at 12:00 pm In my expeirnce Americans can be divided in three main camps”

 1) We are the top of the human pyramid and The Bosses of you all

 2) We are like anyone else, there’s good an bad everywhere

 3) We suck, I am ashamed of being American much of the time

In 2025 it seems there are 50% type 1 and 50% type 3.

 Type 2 has either been persuaded by MAGA to go 1)

 Type 2 have watched Trump’s antics and are cringingly become 3)

In time Type 1 will realise they are not welcome ANYWHERE and stay at home, while type 3 will increasingly move out of the USA, leaving it to its isolationist fate.

Type 1 are giving Europe and Canada reason (and probably Australia too) to draw much, much closer and sign trade pacts that edge the USA out of their supply chains.

Meanwhlie tariffs will kill the US economy, doing a huge favour to China, who will be able to supply most of the US’ former clientele.

And all because Trump sold out to Putin, pushed by the likes of Musk. 
    1.   **Charlotte**says: March 18, 2025 at 6:08 am As less than 2/3 of those eligible voted, only 1/3 can be assigned to group 1! 
    2.   **Teresa W.**says: March 21, 2025 at 8:50 pm GeaVox, I love what you just said. You are correct, at least, in my opinion. I have shrunk from a #2 down to a #3, as I am devastated since the election and aghast at what this US president is doing to our longtime friends and allies all over the world. When he announced that he was running for president again, I started downsizing my home and trying to make some type of viable plans to leave America, (in the event that he won the election) even though I’ve grown up here and lived here my entire life. I’ve been to Europe 3 times, Italy, and loved meeting people from all over the world. Every single one of them asked about our elections, and we engaged in meaningful conversations. I enjoyed asking questions about their culture, their healthcare systems, their political systems, their economy and educational systems. The problem is that I became a widow a few years ago, and it’s scary for me to make this move all by myself. Any ideas? I’m already in my 70’s. 

89.   **KD**says: March 16, 2025 at 2:32 pm Thank you, Cameron, for this important read. I’d been trying to decide if I should keep my trip to Spain and France this May.

I have been fortunate to have been going to Europe for (gulp) 40 years. You’re right—people are curious about Americans and our politics. I learned that at 15 in Normandy when I spoke with a restauranteur in my high school French who wanted to tell me about the Americans in Normandy in WWII.

I learned in in my 30s when I got lost in rural France when George W. Bush was president during the Iraq War. I’d pulled over to look at a map near where some people were having a picnic. They offered to help me, and asked me directly about American politics. In my broken French we talked about the war. We exchanged letters for a few years after that. Also on that same trip in the Basque region, a couple at the table next to me asked if I was American, and said they were glad I was there, even though they disagreed with my government.

I learned it watching the sunset over the Alhambra in 2016 with dozens of people from all over. Some people asked other Americans about Trump—my sense was they were just curious.

I learned it last May in southern France when both Uber drivers and Airbnb hosts shared with me that they didn’t like either Biden or Trump, and asked me how we ended up with those candidates.

I guess what I am saying is that people ARE curious, and I was game to try to converse in a language that isn’t my own. Travel is a political act! And although I recognize this year might be different, I also know that I will be respectful, be engaged, be humble, and be ready to learn.

To my Canadian friends, I wouldn’t dream of pretending to be Canadian. I would be ashamed and besides, I need to own my place in the world. I probably will wear a pin that supports democracy. I will also wear my best attitude, as Rick has taught me.

Thank you again, Cameron. Time to go book my hotels! 
90.   **CAM**says: March 16, 2025 at 6:10 pm I traveled to Nice France last fall and I struck up a conversation with a group of Canadians from Montreal. They asked me what was wrong the orange candidate. They said he seemed deranged and could not understand how a convicted felon and convicted sex offender was allowed to run for president. I explained how he was able to get on the ballot. They were understandably dumbfounded.

Then they asked me what was wrong with his supporters. We chatted about what type of person might be swayed into his orbit. I told them I thought it was angry folks who misplaced their anger at whatever orange said to be angry at, that they would follow his lead. He says he loves the uneducated. And to extrapolate on that idea, I think he loves it when people do not check the facts because he can then control their narrative and build upon that with layers of lies. And ignorant people seem happy to give up their power in order to make themselves feel like heroes in their own lives.

Orange calls his followers “bottom-dwellers,” and he tells them that he doesn’t care about them that he just wants their vote. And those “bottom-dwellers” eat it up. The behavior of maga people is akin to those in a cult. No matter how you lay out the facts, most maga people will not listen. I don’t understand how someone can allow such a greedy, hateful, childish felon control their lives. But, here we are. 
    1.   **Moses**says: March 17, 2025 at 6:53 pm Please fact check yourself. 
    2.   **Elizabeth**says: March 21, 2025 at 8:17 am I like the answers you provided them. Well put. 
    3.   **Teresa W.**says: March 21, 2025 at 8:54 pm CAM, yes, my same sentiments. It’s mind-boggling, isn’t it? Hateful sorts, racists, some of them, and above all, selfish people who don’t feel the need for a rich nation like ours to give aid to other ailing nations, or to make alliances with countries all over the world for the sake of security. I just don’t get it—yes, they belong to a cult. 

91.   **Bronwen Hook**says: March 17, 2025 at 7:44 am Another possible reaction to united statesians travelling abroad is disinterest. A person from the US is not necessarily particularly interesting. 
92.   **Charlotte**says: March 18, 2025 at 6:02 am I plan to be honest about where I am from (USA). I’ve never been treated with hostility in Europe. I have had long conversations with Europeans about world views in the past, under the Bush, Obama, Trump, and Biden administrations. We choose to avoid large hotels, and spend time or have meals with those whom we meet while travelling, when there is an opportunity. Mature adults understand that the leader and the constituents are not one. I would never assume that a Russian citizen is aligned with or responsible for the actions of Putin. None of us chose our parents or countries of birth. We sometimes get to dispel a myth about either culture (sometimes humorous), but mostly find that we share ideals regarding family, decency, fairness, and justice. 
93.   **Mary S.**says: March 18, 2025 at 8:30 am We just returned from a 3-week trip to Denmark, western Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands. We had some very good discussions about what is happening in the US and the countries we visited. The people we met were kind – some of them talked about struggles in their own countries with the political winds. Listening and understanding are key. 
94.   **Jon Morgan**says: March 20, 2025 at 1:40 am As a resident of the UK I will only speak for myself.

 If you avoid politics then I will treat you with respect.

 If you choose to apologise for the actions of your current President I will thank you and sympathise.

 If you choose to wear your MAGA hat I will question your sanity, I will tell you that you are the reason USA will take over a generation to gain the respect (and even longer gain the trust) of the rest of the civilised world and I will tell you to go home before turning my back on you.

 Sorry but that’s the way it is 
95.   **George Warren**says: March 20, 2025 at 4:35 pm My wife and I are traveling in Japan right now. We’re in parts of the country where very little English is spoken, so it’s difficult to have any meaningful conversations with the locals.

I’ve learned a couple dozen key words/phrases to show respect for their language and I force myself to not be in a hurry or get impatient if I don’t understand a situation. Even though my wife is of Japanese ancestry they know in an instant we’re Americans.

A slight bow and simple greeting in an elevator elicits a smile from seemingly stoic Japanese. Americans traveling abroad are, like it or not, representing their country in every interaction. Please do your best to leave a good impression! 
96.   **Peter Johnson**says: March 21, 2025 at 7:39 am The US is hostile to Europe. I simply do not understand why US Americans travel to Europe. What do they expect? What do they want here? It’s naive to believe we welcome them. They are that nation. Stay in MAGA land! 
    1.   **Craig**says: March 21, 2025 at 11:53 am Wow, your attitude sounds just like them! You show nothing but intolerance and hate for a group of people you know nothing about because of the actions of a few. Be careful, that’s how it starts.

 The current president and the republican party are NOT the US. Like many of us, I despise the actions they are taking, continuously write my representatives in Congress to oppose them, and vote against them every opportunity I get. I do feel sorry for you for whatever has made you such an angry hypocrite. Fortunately, it sounds like most Europeans are more open minded than you and can recognize individuals over extreme stereotypes. 

97.   **Teresa W.**says: March 21, 2025 at 8:59 pm Craig, Exactly, as an American, I’m appalled at the actions of this President. I won’t call him my president because he isn’t. Most of us do not support him, nor did we vote for him. 
98.   **Michael Hannon**says: March 22, 2025 at 8:27 am Great article and some thoughtful comments. Six of us will be walking the Central Camino in April, and we’re all really looking forward to the journey. Like many, we’re upset and concerned about how President Trump has introduced his vision of how the world should be — one that feels divisive and isolating. I could go on, but I won’t.

What we are looking forward to is the Camino itself — the chance to slow down, reflect, and most of all, connect with people from all over the world. That’s the beauty of the Camino: it breaks down barriers and reminds us of our shared humanity. We know people may have questions, and we’ll do our best to answer with honesty and openness.

We just hope that those we meet can see past Trump’s worldview and recognize the values we personally carry: kindness, empathy, and a desire for understanding.

Buen Camino to all who walk. 
99.   **CarolAnn Murphy**says: March 24, 2025 at 5:27 am Unfortunately, trump and Republicans have destroyed America’s global status by mirroring the racist, bigoted cruelty of their master, Putin. Our nation is devolving into a pariah because of conservatives’ hate and anti-democracy ideology. We aren’t trusted or admired anywhere, anymore since “electing” the GOP destroyers. When I travel internationally, I always proclaim my anti-trump, anti-rightwing, anti-fascism up front. The world would be a much better place without rightwing hate. I prefer humans who care about other humans and their wellbeing. 

Comments are closed.

Post navigation
---------------

Previous Post Previous Balkans Travel Tips

Next Post Next Top Ten Polish Experiences

Browse by Destination or Date

Blog Subscription Center

Cameron on Facebook

RSS

Recent Posts
------------

*   Andalucía: The Land that Time Forgot… Until It Remembers
*   24 Fascinating Factoids About Europe
*   Wonderfully Weird: Legos, Doorbells, and Anne Frank
*   One Dozen Europe Travel Hacks
*   So, Are Americans Still Welcome in Europe? —A Trip Report

### About Us

*   Contact Information
*   What We Do
*   Meet the Staff
*   Social Responsibility
*   Climate Smart
*   Jobs

### Travel Help

*   FAQ
*   Tours FAQ
*   Ask Us
*   Travel Classes
*   Visit the Travel Center
*   Guidebook Updates
*   Submit Book Feedback

### Publications

*   Travel News Email
*   Tour News Email
*   Subscription Center

### Media Partners

*   TV Programmers
*   Radio Programmers
*   Syndicated Content
*   Press Room

### Contact Us

*   email
*   phone
*   map

### Follow Us

*   Facebook
*   Instagram
*   YouTube
*   TikTok
*   Pinterest
*   Twitter

©2025 Rick Steves' Europe, Inc. | CST# 2086743 | Terms of Service | Privacy
