Title: 

URL Source: https://www.nass.org/sites/default/files/reports/summary-ballot-access-laws-president-072924.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jul 2024 02:36:06 GMT

Markdown Content:
> Updated July 2024
> SUMMARY: STATE LAWS REGARDING PRESIDENTIAL BALLOT ACCESS FOR THE GENERAL ELECTION

The information in this document is based on a NASS review of relevant state ballot access requirements. Th e document provides a general summary of the laws in 

each state relevant to the placement of a candidate for president on the general election ballot, and the requirements for a presidential candidate to run as a write -

in candidate. Generally, a presidential candidate nominated by a political party that meets certain criteria is placed on the general election ballot. Th e criteria is 

often based on a threshold number of votes cast at a recent election for a particular office or offices. A number of states p rovide an alternative mechanism for an 

organization to qualify in order to nominate cand idates, for example by filing a petition or having a certain number of voters affiliated with the organization. 

Additionally, all states have a procedure for independent candidates, and in some cases individual presidential candidates of a political organization, to obtain 

ballot access. Most states also permit a presidential candidate to be a write -in candidate, and many of these states require that the candidate file a notice prior to 

the election. 

The summary for each state include s the timeframe s for certifying the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential 

electors; the requirements for a political party to be eligible to nominate a presidential candidate; the number of signatures required on a petition in order for a 

presidential candidate to obtain ballot access ; a description of any additional ballot access methods where applicable; and the timeframes required for filing a 

notice in order to be a write -in candidate for president. 

Please note that this document is intended for informational purposes only. State ballot access laws can be complex, and t his document is not intended as an 

interpretation of the laws summarized in the document . There are a variety of filings and other requirements pertaining to the ballot access process that may not 

be reflected in this document . B allot access laws are subject to change base d on new state laws , court decisions , emergency orders, etc . and this document may 

not reflect the current status of those laws. Candidate, c ampaigns, researchers, and other individuals seeking guidance on state ballot a ccess requirements 

should contact the relevant election officials for the most up -to -date and accurate information. State 

Alabama Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than the 74 days before the election the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the 

names of the presidential electors .

A political party is an organization of electors which received more than 20% of the entire vote cast in the state at the las t general election. 

An organization may also qualify as a political party by filing with the secretary of state on the date of the first primary election a petition 

containing the number of signatures equal to or exceeding 3% of electors who cast ballots for the office of governor in the last general 

election .

Petition 

An independent candidate for president may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

82 days before the election a petition containing the signatures of at least 5,000 qualified electors . The petition must be accompanied by a 

list of presidential electors. 

Write -In 

In all non -municipal elections a voter may write -in the name of any person not included on the ballot. 

(Alabama Code § § 17 -6-22, 17 -6-27, 17 -6-28 , 17 -13 -40, 17 -13 -50 , 17 -14 -31 ).

Alaska Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A recognized pol itical 

party must certify to the division of elections no later than September 1 st the name of the candidates for president and vice -president and 

the names of the party’s nominees for presidential electors. A recognized political party is an organized group of voters that represents a political program and has at least 5,000 registered voters in 

the state; beginning with the results of the 2030 decennial federal census, following each decennial federal census, the divi sion shall by 

regulation adjust this number by the percentage of the change to the population of the state since the 2020 decennial federal census, 

rounded to the nearest 500 .

A limited political party may be organized for the purpose of selecting candidates for presidential electors by filing with the director of 

elections at least 90 days before a presidential election a petition signed by a number of qualified voters equal to at least 1% of the 

number of votes cast for president at the last presidential election. 

Independent Candidate Petition 

An independent candidate for president may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the director of elections no later 

than the 90th day before a presidential election a petition containing the signature of qualified voters equal to at least 1% of the number 

of votes cast for president at the last general election. The candidate s must certify to the director of election s no later than September 1 st 

the name of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write in candidate for president must file a letter of intent with the director of elections at least 5 days before the general election. 

(Alaska Stat. § § 15 -25 -105 , 15.30.020 , 15.30.025 ; 15.30.026 ; 15.80.010 , Alaska 2024 Election Calendar )

Arizona Political Party Nomination 

The presidential candidate nominated at the national convention and vice -presidential running mate will appear on the general election 

ballot provided that the state political party timely appoints 11 presidential electors. The chairman of a qualified political party must 

appoint candidates for the office of presidential elector and file the required information with the Secretary of State no later than ten days 

after the primary election, by 5:00 p.m. on the last day for fili ng. 

A recognized political party is a political organization that received at least 5% of the total votes cast for governor or pr esidential electors 

at the last preceding general election, or a political organization entitled to continued representation by having registered voters equal to 

at least 2/3 of 1% of the total number of registered voters in the state. 

A political organization may also become eligible for recognition as a political party by filing with the secretary of state no less than 250 

days before the primary election, or no less than 150 days prior to the presidential preference election, a petition containing the signatures of at least 1 and 1/3% of the total votes cast for governor at the last preceding general election. The petition must include 

signatures from electors in at least 5 different counties, and at least 10% of the signatures must be from electors in counti es with 

populations less than 500,000. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate who is not a member of a recognized political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with 

the secretary of state no less than 80 days before the general election nomination papers and a petition containing the number of 

signatures equal to 3% of the registered independent voters in the state. The petition must include the names of the presidential electors. 

Each of the electors must also file nomination papers. 

Write -In 

A w rite -in candidate for president must file nomination papers with the secretary of state no later than the 40th day prior to the el ection. 

Each of the presidential electors must also file nomination papers. 

(Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 16 -243, 16 -244, 16 -312 , 16 -341, 16 -344 , 16 -801 , 16 -803, 16 -804) 

Arkansas Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than September 15 th the names of the presidential electors . The names of the candidates for president and vice -

president will be printed on the ballot. 

A political party is a group of voters whose candidate for governor or nominee for presidential electors at the last precedin g general 

election received at least 3% of the en tire vote cast for the office. A new political party may be formed by filing with the secretary of state 

no later than 3 weeks before the preferential primary election a petition containing the signatures of at least 10,000 registered voters in 

the state. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate of a political group may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later 

than the first Monday of August a petition containing the names of 5,000 qualified electors. The group must file with the secretary of state 

no later than the 75th day before the election a certificat e stating the nam e of the candidates for president and vice -president and must 

certify to the secretary of state no later than September 15 th a list of presidential electors. An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the first Monday in August a petition containing the names of 5,000 qualified electors and certifying to the secretary of state no later than 

September 15 th a list of the presidential electors. 

(Ark. Code Ann. §§ 7-1-101 , 7-7-205, 7-8-302 )

California Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party qualified 

to participate in the election must notify the Secretary of State of the names of that party’s nominees for the offices of Pr esident and Vice 

President of the United States no later than 75 days before the election . If a qualifie d political party has not held its national convention by 

this day, the party must notify the Secretary of State of the names of the party’s apparent nominees for the offices of President and Vice 

President of the United States. 

A qualified political party generally must certify to the secretary of state no later than October 1st the names of the presidential electors. 

A qualified political party is a political party that received for any of its candidates for statewide office at the last preceding gubernatorial 

election at least 2% of the entire vote statewide. 

A group may also qualify as a political party if on or before the 123rd day before a presidential election a number of registered voters 

equal to at least .33 % of the total number of registered voters have declared their preference for that party ; or, if it files with the secretary 

of state no later than 135 days prior to the presidential election a petition signed by the number of voters equal to at least 10% of the 

entire vote of the state at the last gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with county election officials no later 

than 88 days before the election a declaration of candidacy for each of the presidential electors and nomination papers signed by the 

number of voters equal to at least 1% of the entire number of registered voters in the state. The nomination papers must incl ude the 

name of the presidential electors, and may include the name of the candidates for president and vice -president .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must have each of the presidential electors file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the secretary of 

state no later than 14 days before the election. The declaration of write -in candidacy must include the names of the candidates for 

President and Vice President. 

(California Elections Code Ann. §§ 338 , 51 51 , 6901, 7100, 7300, 8303, 8400, 840 3, 8650, 8651, 8652 )Colorado Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A political party 

nominating candidates by party assembly or convention must nominate the candidates of the party and make such nominations public not 

later than seventy -five days before the general election 

Political parties must file with the secretary of state no later than 60 da ys before the general election a certificate of nomination for 

presidential electors. The name of the presidential candidate may be added to the certificate. 

A major political party is a political party that that was represented on the ballot at the last preceding gubernatorial elec tion by a political 

party candidate or individual nominee who received at least 10% of the total gubernatorial votes cast. 

A minor political party is a political party that had a candidate for statewide office in either of the last two preceding ge neral election 

receive at least 1% of the total votes cast for any statewide office, or has 1,000 or more registered electors affiliated wit h the party prior to 

July 1 st in either of the last two preceding general elections. 

A political party may also qualify as a minor political party through any of the following methods: 

- the party had a candidate for statewide office in either of the last two prec eding general elections receive at least five percent of 

the t otal votes cast for such office; 

- one thousand or more registered electors are affiliated with the minor political party prior to July 1 st of the election year for which 

the minor party seeks to nominate candidates; or 

- the party files with the secretary of state no later than the second Friday of January a petition containing the signatures of 10,000 

registered electors 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 90 th day before the election a petition contain ing the signatures of at least 5,000 eligible electors and a notice of acceptance of the 

nomination from the presidential candidate and each of the electors .

Fee 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 90 

days before the election a statement of inten t and a $500 fee. Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate must file with the secretary of state an affidavit of intent no later than the 110th day prior to the election. 

(Colo. Rev. Stat. §§ 1-1-104 , 1-3-100.3 , 1-4-302, 1 -4-303, 1 -4-502; 1 -4-701, 1 -4-802 ; 1-4-1101, 1 -4-1102 , 1-4-1302, 1 -4-1303, 1 -4-1304 )

Connecticut Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. When a political party 

nominates candidates for President and Vice President of the United States, and presidential electors for the candidate s have been 

nominated the party , the Secretary of the State must place the names of the candidates for President and Vice -President on the ballot. 

Political parties must file with the secretary of state the names of the nominees for presidential electors upon the close of the state 

convention . A minor political party must certify the names of nominees to the secretary of state no later than the 62 nd day prior to the 

election. 

A major political party is a political party whose candidate for governor at the last preceding election for governor received at least 20% of 

the whole number of votes cast for all candidates for governor, or, whose enrolled membership is at least 20% of the total number of 

enrolled members of all political parties in the state. 

A minor political party is a political party whose candidate for the office i n question received at the last preceding regular election at least 

1% of the whole number of votes cast for all candidates for that office. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate who does not receive a nomination from a minor or major political party may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 9 7th day prior to the election a petition containing the number of signatures 

of qualified electors equal to the lesser of 1% of the votes cast for the office at the last election, or 7,500. The names of the presidential 

electors must be included on the petition. The name s of the candidates for president and vice -president must be fi led with the secretary of 

state at the time a petition form is requested. 

Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate must register with the secretary of state and submit the names of the presidential electors no later than 4

o’clock pm of the 14th day preceding the election. 

(Conn. Gen. Stat. § § 9-175 , 9-372, 9-388, 9-452 , 9-453 b, 9 -453d, 9 -453i )

Delaware Political Party Nomination A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each eligible political party 

must submit certificates of nomination for electors of President and Vice -President together with the name of the candidates for President 

and Vice -President to the State Election Commissione r. If a party holds a national nominating convention, the certificate must be filed by 

the earlier of the Tuesday following the convention, or September 15 th .

A political party is a political organization which nominates candidates for presidential electors, or nominates candidates f or offices do be 

decided at the general election. A political party is eligible for general election ballot access if 21 days prior to the primary election the 

number of registered voters in the name of the party is equal to at least 1 0/100 of 1% of the total number of voters registered in the state 

as of December 31 st of the year immediately preceding the general election. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the state election co mmissioner no 

later than September 1 st a sworn declaration of non -affiliation and a nominating petition signed by at least 1% of the total number of 

registered voters as of December 31 st of the year immediately preceding the general election. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a write -in candidate declaration with the state election commissioner no later than September 

20 th. 

(Del. Code Ann. tit. 15, §§ 101 , 3001, 3002, 3301 , 3303 , 3402 )

Florida Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The governor must nomin ate the 

presidential electors for each political party and certify the names of the electors to the department of state no later than August 24 th . A 

minor political party affiliated with a national party holding a nominating convention must certify to the department of stat e no later than 

August 24 th the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Note : political parties must certify to the Secretary of State the names of the candidates nominated for President and Vice -

President no later than ballot certification (see Presidential Electors/Electoral College , Florida Division of Elections). 

A m inor political party is any group which on January 1 st preceding a primary election does not have registered as members 5 % of the total 

registered electors of the state. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate, and a presidential candidate of a minor political party that is not affiliated with a national party holding a nominating convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the department of state no later than July 

15 th a petition signed by 1% of the registered electors of the state. The party or candidate must file with the department of stat e no later 

than August 24 th the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an oath with the department of state and must certify the names of the presidential elec tors 

no later than the 49th day prior to the primary election in the presidential election year. 

(Fla. Stat. §§ 97.021, 103.021 , 103.022 )

Georgia Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party or a political body may be placed on the general election ballot. Political bodies 

that nominate presidential electors by convention must hold the convention at least 150 days prior to the general election, o r, in years 

following the release of a decennial census, 120 days before the election. 

A political party is a political organization that nominated a candidate for governor at the last general election and the ca ndidate received 

at least 20% of the votes cast in the state for that office; or nominated a candidate for president at the last presidential election and the 

candidate received at least 20% of the vote cast for that office. 

A political body is any political organization other than a political party. A political body is eligible to nominate candida tes for the general 

election by convention if the political body nominated a candidate for statewide office at the preceding general election and the candidate 

received the number of votes equal to at least 1% of the total number of registered voters for that election; or, if the political body files 

with the secretary of state no later than the second Tuesday in July a petition signed by the number of voters equal to 1% of the regi stered 

voters in the preceding general election. The nominating petition and notice of candidacy must be filed by the second Tuesday in July. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candidate of a political body, presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for 

the general election by submitting to the secretary of state no later than no later than the second Tuesday in July a nominating petition 

signed by 7500 registered voters eligible to vote in the last presidential election. 

The candidate must file with the secretary of state no later than the second Tuesday in July a notice of candidacy and a qualifying fee equal 

to 3% of the annual fee of the office . In a general election year following the release of a decennial census, the notice of candidacy and 

qualifying fee must be filed no later than the Friday following the last Monday in July .

An independent candidate for the office of President or Vice President must file with the Secretary of State no later than the Friday before 

the opening of qualifying for the office a slate of candidates for the office of presidential elector which the independent candidate has certified as being the presidential electors for the independent candidate. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate must file intention of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than the Tuesday after the first Monday in 

September prior to the election and must publish notice of the candidacy in a newspaper of general circulation. 

(Ga. Code Ann. § § 21 -2-2, 21 -2-130, 21 -2-131, 21 -2-132, 21 -2-133 , 21 -2-170, 21 -2-172 , 21 -2-180 , 21 -2-185, 21-2-187, 21 -2-285 )

Hawaii Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Qualified pol itical parties 

must file with the chief election officer no later than the 60 th day prior to the election a certification of the party’s nominees for electors, 

and a sworn application that includes the name of the party’s candidates for president and vice -president and a statement that the 

candidate is the chosen candidate of both the state and national party. A national party is one that is admitted to the ballot in at least one 

state other than Hawaii or one which is determined by the chief election officer to be making a bona fide effort to become a national 

party. If there is no national party or the national and state parties do not agree on the presidential candidate , the chief election officer 

may d etermine which candidate’s name shall be placed on the ballot or may leave the candidate’s name off the ballot. 

A qualified political party is an association of voters which had candidates running for election at the last general election for any of the 

statewide offices whose terms had expired, and the party received: 

- at least 10% of all votes cast for any statewide office or in at least 50% of the congressional districts, or; 

- at least 4% of the votes cast for all the offices of state senator statewide, or; 

- at least 4% of the votes cast for all the office of state representative statewide, or; 

- at least 2% of the votes cast for all the offices of state senate and all the offices of state representative combined statew ide 

A group of persons may qualify as a political party by filing with the chief state election officer no later than the 170 th day before the next 

primary election a petition containing the signatures of at least 1/10 of 1% of the total registered voters in the state as o f the last 

preceding election. 

Petition 

An individual presidential candidate or the p residential candidate of a party our group that is not a qualified political party may obtain 

ballot access for the general election by filing with the chief e lection officer no later than the 90 th day prior to the general election a

petition containing the signatures of at least 1% of the number of votes cast in the state at the last presidential election .(H.R.S. §§ 11 -61b, 11 -62, 11 -113, 14 -21 )

Idaho Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party mu st certify to the 

secretary of state no later than September 1 st the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the 

presidential electors, unless a 5-day extension is granted by the secretary of state .

A political party is an organization of electors that had 3 or more candidates for state or national office listed under the party name at the 

last general election, or had a candidate for state or national office at the last general election receive at least 3% of the aggregate vote 

cast for go vernor or presidential electors. 

An affiliation of new electors may form a new political party by filing with the secretary of state no later than August 30 th in even 

numbered years a petition containing the signatures of qualified electors equal to at least 2% of the aggregate vote cast for presidential 

electors in the state at the previous general election at the last presidential election .

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state between the 

12 th Monday before the primary election and the 10 th Friday before the primary election, a petition signed by 1,000 qualified electors. The 

candidate must file with the secretary of state no later than September 1 st the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the secretary of state no later than 9th Friday before the election. 

(Idaho Code §§ 34 -501, 34 -702 A, 34 -708A , 34 -711 ; 34 -711A) 

Illinois Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each estab lished 

political party must certify to the state board of election within 2 days of the state nominating convention the names of the party’s 

nominees for presidential electors. 

An established political party is a political party whose candidate for governor at the last general election for state and county offices 

received more than 5% of the entire vote cast for governor. A political party that received more than 5% of the entire vote cast in the state 

at the general election next preceding a primary is also an established political party. 

Petition An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candidate of a new political party , may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the state board of elections no less than 134 prior to the election a petition signed by 1% of the number of voters 

who voted at the next preceding statewide general election or 25,000 qualif ied voters, whichever is less. The petition must include the 

names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the each county clerk and board of commissioners in the sta te no 

later than 61 days prior to the election. 

(10 Ill. Comp. Stat. §§ 5/7/2, 5/7 -9, 5/10 -2, 5/10 -3, 5/10 -6, 5/17 -16.1 , 5/18 -9.1 )

Indiana Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party or other qualified political party may be placed on the general e lection 

ballot. Political parties must certify to the elections division no later than the second Tuesday in September the name s of the nominee s for 

president and vice -president and the names of the nominees for presidential electors. 

A major political party refers to either of the two political parties whose nominee for secretary of state in the last election received the 

highest and second highest number of votes statewide for that office. A political party also qualifies to nominate candidate for presidential 

electors if its nominee for secretary of state at the last election received at least 2% of the total votes cast for that off ice. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate or a presidential candidate of a minor political party not qualified to nominate by con vention may 

obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the elections division no later than July 15 a written consent form and a petition 

containing the signatures of registered voters equal to 2% of the votes cast at the last election for secretary of state. The name of the 

candidates for president and vice -president and the names of presidential electors must be filed with the secretary of state no later than 

the second Tuesday in September. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the division of elections no later than July 3rd prior to t he election. 

(Ind . Code §§ 3-5-2-26.6 , 3-5-2-30 , 3-8-2-2.5, 3 -8-2-4, 3 -8-2-5, 3-8-4-1, 3-8-4-2, 3-8-4-10 , 3-8-6-10, 3 -8-6-12 , 3-10 -4-1, 3 -10 -4-5)

Iowa Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify to the secretary of state no later than the 81 st day before the election the name s of the candidate for president and vice -president and the name s

of the presidential electors. If the national nominating convention of a political party adjourns later than 89 days before the general 

election the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president must be certified within 5 days after adjournment. As an alternative 

to certification by the state central committee of the political party, the certificate of nomination issued by the political party’s national 

nominating convention may be used to certify the name of the party’s candidates for president and vice -president .

A political party is a party whose candidate for president at the last presidential election, or candidate for governor at th e last 

gubernatorial election, received at least 2% of the total vote cast for all candidate for that office at that election. 

A political organization that is not a political party may hold a convention or caucus to nominate a presidential candidate i f a minimum of 

500 eligible electors attends, including at least one from each of 25 counties. The organization must certify to the secretar y of state no 

later than the 73rd day before the general election the name of the candidates for president and vice -president, the names of the 

presidential electors, and the names of the delegates in attendance at the convention or caucus. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candidate of a political organization that does not hold a nominatin g caucus or 

convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 73rd da y before the 

general election an affidavit of candidacy and a petition signed by at least 3500 eligible electors, including at least 100 r esiding in each of 

19 counties of the state. The filing must include the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate. 

(Iowa Code §§ 44.1, 44.2, 43.2, 44.4, 44.17, 45.1 ,45.4, 49.99 , 54.5 )

Kansas Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Recognized p olitical 

parties must certify to the secretary of state the names of the presidential electors on or before September 1 st . The certification may also 

include the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president. 

A recognized political party is a political party which nominates a person for at least one statewide office at any general e lection, and 

whose nominee for any statewide office receives at least 1% of the votes cast for the office at the election. 

A political party may obtain official recognition by filing with the secretary of state no later than June 1 st prior to the primary election a 

petition containing the signatures of at least 2% of the total vote s cast for all candidates for the office of governor in the state in the last preceding general election .

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the Monday preceding the primary election a petition signed by at least 5,000 qualified voters. The petition must include the name of the 

candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. The candidate must file with the secretary of state 

an affidavit of candidacy no later than the 2nd Monday preceding the general election. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an affidavit of intent with the secretary of state no later than the second Monday prece ding 

the election. 

(Kan. Stat. Ann. §§ 25 -202, 25 -301, 25 -302 a, 302b, 25 -303, 25 -304, 25 -305 , 25 -305b , 25 -804 )

Kentucky Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party or political organization may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political 

party or political organization must certify to the secretary of state no later than the Friday following the first Tuesday i n September the 

name of the presidential candidate and the names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is an organization of electors whose candidate received at least 20% of the total vote cast at the last pre ceding election for 

presidential electors . A political organization is a group not constituting a political party whose candidate received 2% or more of the vote 

at the last preceding election for presidential electors. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, a political group presidential candidate, and a presidential candidate of a political organization not 

entitled to nominate by convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state n o later than the 

Friday following the first Tuesday in September a nominating petition signed by at least 5,000 registered voters. The petitio n must include 

the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent and a list of presidential elector s with the secretary of state no later 

than the fourth Friday in October preceding the election. 

(Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § § 117.265 , 118.015, 11 8.305, 118.315, 118.325, 118.365) Louisiana Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each recogni zed political 

party must file with the secretary of state a certificate of nomination containing the names of the candidate for President and Vice 

President and the names of the presidential electors. If the state party does not file the certificate with the secretary of state by the third 

Tuesday in August , the national chairman of the party must certify the names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state no later 

than the first Friday following the third Tuesday in August .

A political party may qualify as a recognized political party if at least 1,000 registered voters are registered as affiliate d with the party 

ninety days prior to the opening of the qualifying period; or, if any candidate of the party for presidential elector at the last presidential 

election received at least 5% of the votes cast or any candidate of the party for any statewide office in any primary or gene ral election 

received at least 5% of the votes cast for the office. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the first Friday following the first Tuesday in September a notice of candidacy, affidavit of each elector, and a petition containing at least 

5,000 signatures of registered voters, at least 500 of which must be obtained in each of the congressional d istricts. The petition must 

include the name of the presidential candidate and the names of the presidential electors. 

Fee 

An i ndependent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by paying a $500 fee and filing notice of the 

presidential electors. 

(Louisiana Rev. Statutes §§ 18 -441, 18:464(A) , 18 -465, 18 -1253, 18 -1254, 18 -1255) 

Maine Political Party Nomination 

A p residential candidates nominated by a qualif ied political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each qualified political 

party nominates presidential electors. 

A qualified political party is a party that was listed on the ballot at either of the 2 preceding general elections ; held municipal caucuses and 

state contentions as required by statute; and the party’s candidate for governor or president received at least 5% of the total votes cast for 

governor or president in the last gubernatorial or presidential election, or at least 5,000 voters were enrolled in the party as of the last 

general election. 

A political party may also qualify if it had a candidate for g overn or or for p resident in the last preceding general election who was nominated by petition receive 5% or more of the total vote cast in the state for governor or for p resident , or; 10 or more voters not 

enrolled in a quali fied political party file with the secretary of state on the 180 th day before the primary election a petition containing the 

signatures of voters equal in number to at least 5% of the total vote cast in the s tate for g overnor at the last preceding gubernatorial 

election .

Petition 

A presidential candidate that is not nominated by a political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the 

secretary of state no later than August 15 th a petition signed by at least 4,000 and not more than 6,000 vote rs. The petition must include 

the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than the 45th day prior 

to the election. 

(21 -A Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. § § 301 , 302, 303 , 321, 351, 354 )

Maryland Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Qualified political parties 

must file a certificate of nomination for President and Vice -President with the State Board of Elections within 5 days after the conclusion of 

the national party convention . Political parties must certify the names of the electors to the State Board of Elections 30 days before the 

General Election. 

A qualified political party is a political party that has nominated a candidate for the highest office on the ballot in a sta tewide general 

election and the candidate received at least 1% of the total vote for that office, or; if state voter registration totals as of December 31 st 

show that at least 1% of the state’s registered voters are affiliated with the political party. 

A group of voters may form a new qualified political party by filing with the state board of election no later than the first Monday in August 

containing the signatures of at least 10,000 registered voters. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate that is not affiliated with a political party may obtain ballot access by submitting a petition with the state board of 

election no later than the first Monday in August a certificate of candidacy and a petition containing the signatures of at least 10,000 

registers voters of the state. The candidate must certify to the state board of election no later than 30 days before the ele ction the names 

of the presidential electors. Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of candidacy with the state board of elections no later than the Wednesday before 

the election. 

(Md. Ann. Code Art. 33, § § 1 -101, 4-102, 4-103, 5 -301, 5-303 , 5-701, 7-503, 5-704 , 8-503 )

Massachusetts Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than the second Tuesday of September the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the 

names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is any party whose candidate for any statewide office at the last general election received at least 3% of the vote cast for 

that office, or, a party with a number of enrolled voters equal to or greater than 1% of the entire voters registered in the state. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate not running as the candidate of a political party may obtain ballot access by submitting to the secretary of state 

no later than the second Tuesday of September nomination papers containing the signatures of at least 10,000 voters. The nomination 

papers must include the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the name s of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file the name of the candidate for president and the names of the candidates for presidential 

electors with the secretary of state no later than 60 days prior to the election. 

(Mass. Gen. Laws § § 50 -1, 53 -1, 53 -6, 53 -8, 53 -10, 54 -78A )

Michigan Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party that qualifies for general election ballot access may be placed on the general 

election ballot. Each political party must certify to the secretary of state no later than 1 business day after the conclusio n of the state 

convention the names of the candidates for presidential electors. Each political party must certify to the secretary of state not more than 1 

business day after the state or national convention of the party, whichever is later, the name s of the candidates for president and vice -

president .

A political party qualifies for ballot access at the general election if any of the party’s candidate s at the last preceding general election received at least 1% of the total number of votes cast for the successful candidate for the office of secretary of state at the last p receding 

general election in which a secretary of state was elected. 

A group may form a new political party by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 100 th day before the general election a 

petition containing the signatures of registered and qualified electors equal to not less than 1% of the total number of votes cast for all 

candidates for governor at the last election in which a gov ernor was elected. The petition must be signed by at least 100 registered 

electors in each of at least 1/2 of the congressional districts of the state. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate not affiliated with a political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of 

state no later than the 110 th day before the election a petition signed by a number of qualified and registered electors of the state equal to 

not less than 1% of the total number of votes cast for all candidates for governor at the last election in which a governor w as elected .

[note: see Michigan Secretary of State Ballot Access Information for Presidential Candidates which states that the number of valid 

signatures required is 30,000]. The petition must be signed by at least 100 registered electors in each of at least 1/2 of the congressional 

districts of the state. The candidate must certify to the secretary of state no later than 66 days before the election the names of the 

presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the secretary of state no later than the second Friday imme diately 

preceding the election. 

( Mich. Comp. Laws § § 168.16, 168.42, 168.532, 168.544f , 168. 560a , 168.590b , 168.590c, 168.590d, 168.591, 168 .68 5, 168.686, 168.686a ,

168.737a) 

Minnesota Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each major political party 

must certify to the secretary of state the names of the presidential electors and the names of the candidates for president and vice -

president at least 71 days before the general election. 

To qualify as a major political party, a political party must :

- file a certification indicating that: (1) the party has complied with its rules and constitution, (2) final authority over th e party is 

vested in a state convention held at least every general election; (3) general management of the party is vested in the state 

central committee; (4) administration of party’s affairs is vested in the state executive committee; (5) a copy of the party’ s

constitution has been filed with the secretary of state; and (6) the party’s rules requires conventions be held in each congressional district and at least 45 counties or legislative districts; and 

- present at least one candidate for constitutional office at the last general election for these offices, or presidential elector or 

U.S. senator at the last presidential election, who received votes in each county, received at least 8% of the total votes in that 

election; or 

- present at least 45 candidates for state representative, 23 candidates for state senator, 4 candidates for representative in 

Congress, and 1 candidate for each constitutional office, at the last general election for these offices; or 

file a nominating petition with the secretary of state prior to the close of filing for the state primary containing the signatures of party 

members that equal at least 5% of the total votes at the last state general election. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate of a minor political party or other party, and independent presidential candidates, may obtain ballo t access by 

filing with the secretary of state no later than 77 days before the general election a petition containing the signatures of at least 2,000 

eligible voters. The petition must include the names of the presidential electors. 

A minor political party is a party that has filed a certification indicating that it has adopted a state constitution; designated a state party 

chair; and held a state convention in the last two years, and: 

- presented at least one candidate for constitutional office at the last general election for these offices, or presidential elector or 

U.S. senator at the last presidential election, who received votes in each county in the aggregate equal to at least 1% of the 

total number of individuals who voted in the election; or, 

- filed with the secretary of state no later than the close of filing for the state primary a nominating petition containing th e

signatures of party members equal in number to at least 1% of the total number of individuals who voted in the preceding 

general election. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file with the secretary of state a written request to have their write -in votes tallied and must 

include the name of the vice president and the name of a least one candidate for presidential elector no later than the 7th day before 

the election. 

(Minn. Stat. §§ 200.02, 204B.07, 204B.08, 204B.09, 208.03 )

Mississippi Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a n organized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must certify the names of the candidate for president and vice president and presidential electors to the secretary of state no less than 60 days 

prior to the election .

Petition 

An independent p residential candidate may o btain ballot access by filing with the secretary of state no less than 60 days before the 

election a petition containing the signatures of 1,000 qualified electors. The petition must be accompanie d by the names of the individual 

who will serve as presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in vote will be counted in the event of the death, resignation, withdrawal, or removal of any candidate whose name was printe d

on the official ballot 

(Miss. Code. Ann. §§ 23 -15 -365 , 23 -15 -539 , 23 -15 -781, 23 -15 -785 , 23 -15 -1063 )

Missouri Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each established 

political party must certify the name s of its nominee s for president and vice -president to the secretary of state no later than the 12 th 

Tuesday prior to the election, or within 7 working days after choosing it s nominee for president, whichever is later. Each established 

political party must certify to the secretary of state no later than the 3rd Tuesday prior to the election, the names of its nominees for 

presidential elector. 

To qualify as an established political party, a political party’s candidate for statewide office at either of the last two ge neral elections must 

have received more than 2% of the entire vote cast for the office. 

A group may form a new political party and nominate a presidential candidate to be placed on the general election ballot if t he group files 

with the secretary of state no later than the 15th Monday immediately preceding the general election a petition containing the signatures 

of at least 10,000 registered voters. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 15th Monday immediately preceding the general election a declaration of candidacy and petition containing the signatures of at least 

10,000 registered voters . The petition must include the names of the presidential electors and the names of the candidates for president 

and vice -president .

Write -In A write -in candidate for president must submit a declaration of intent and the names of the nominees for presidential electors with t he 

secretary of state no later than the second Friday immediately preceding the election. 

(Mo. Rev. Stat. § § 115.013, , 115.315, 115 .317, 115.321, 115.329 , 115.399 , 1 15 -453 )

Montana Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each qualifie d political party 

must certify to the Secretary of State by the date prescribed by the Secretary of State the names of the nominees for presidential electors .

A political party is qualified if it had a candidate for a statewide office in either of the last two general elections receive 5% or more of the 

total votes cast for the most recent successful candidate for governor. A political party may also qualify by filing with the secretary of state 

no later than 95 days before the date of the primary a petition containing the number of signatures of registered voters equal to 5% or 

more of the votes cast for the successful candidate for governor at the last general election, or 5,000 electors, whichever i s less. The 

number must include the registered voters in more than 1/3 of the legislative districts equal to 5% or more of the total votes cast for the 

successful candidate for governor at the last general election in those districts or 150 electors in those districts, whichev er is less. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate or a presidential candidate of a political party that does not qualify may obtain ballot access for the 

general election by filing with the secretary of state 76 days prior to the general election a petition containing the signatures of electors 

equal to 5% or more of the total votes cast for the successful candidate for governor at the last general election , or 5,000 electors, 

whichever is less. The names of the candidates for presidential electors must be certified to the secretary of state no later than 76 days 

before the election 

Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate for president must submit a declaration of intent with the secretary of state no later than the 10th day 

before absentee ballots must be made available 

(Mont. Code. Ann. § § 13 -10 -504, 13 -10 -601, 13 -25 -101 , 13 -10 -211 )

Nebraska Political Party Nomination 

A presid ential candidate nominated by a political party that meets state requirements for partisan ballot access may be placed on the 

general election ballot. The officers of the various national political party conventions must certify to the secretary of state no later than 

September 8 th (statutory date) the names of the candidates for president and vice -president . Each political party must hold a state convention no later than September 1 st to select presidential electors and must certify the names of the electors to the secretary of state. 

A political party meets state requirements for partisan ballot access if a candidate nominated by the political party at one of the two 

immediately preceding statewide general elections received at least 5% of the vote in a statewide race, or if a combination o f candidates 

nominated by the political party for a combination of districts that encompass all of the voters of the entire state polled at least 5% of the 

vote in each of their respective districts. 

Petition 

Presidential candidates of a newly formed political party, and non partisan presidential candidate s, may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the secretary of state no later than September 1 st a petition containing the signatures of at least 2500 registered 

voters . The petition must include the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

A group may form a new political party by filing with the secretary of state no later than August 1 st a petition containing signatures equal 

to at least 1% of the total votes cast for governor at the most recent general election for that office. The petition signatu res must be 

distributed to include registered voters totaling at least 1% of the votes cast in the most recent gubernatorial election in each of the 3 

congressional districts in the state. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an affidavit of intent and the required filing fee with the secretary of state no later than 10 

days prior to the election. 

(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32 -610, 32 -615 , 32 -617, 32 -620, 32 -621, 32 -710, 32 -712, 32 -716, 32 -813 )

Nevada Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot . Each major 

and minor party must certify the names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state. Each major political party must provide the 

names of the party’s candidates for President and Vice President to the Secretary of State no later than 5 p.m. on the first business day of 

September of the year of a presidential election. A minor party must certify to the secretary of state no later than the last Tuesday in 

August the names of the candidates for president and vice -president .

To qual ify as a major political party :

- the party must be designated as a political party on the voter registration applications of at least 10% of the registered voters in 

the state on January 1st preceding any primary election, or; 

- the party must file a petition with the secretary of state no later than the last Friday in February before any primary election containing the signatures of registered voters equal to or more than 10% of the total number of vote s cast at the last preceding 

general election for the office of representative in congress. 

To qual ify as a minor political party: 

- any of the party’s candidates for partisan office at the last general election must have received at least 1% of the total nu mber of 

the total votes cast for the offic e of representative in congress; 

- on January 1 st preceding a primary election, the party must have been designated as the political party on the voter registration 

applications of at least 1% of the total number of registered voters in the state; or 

- the party must file a petition with the secretary of state no later than the 3 rd Friday in May preceding the general election 

containing the signatures of registered voters equal to at least 1% of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding g eneral 

election for the office of representative in congress 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the second Friday in August a declaration of candidacy , a filing fee of $250 , and a petition containing the signatures of registered voters 

equal to at least 1% of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding general election for the office of representativ e in congress. The 

candidate must also file with the secretary of state the names of the individuals who will serve as presidential electors. 

(Nev. Rev. Stat. § § 293.128, 293.1715 , 293.1725, 298.035, 298.109 ; LCB File No. R010 -23)

New Hampshire Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than the last Tuesday of October the names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is any political organization which received at least 4% of the total number of votes cast for governor or United States 

senators at the preceding state general election. 

A political organization may also nominate a presidential candidate for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later 

than the Wednesday one week before the primary nomination papers containing the signatures of registered voters equal to 3% o f the 

votes cast at the previous state general election. The name of the candidate and a declaration of candidacy must be submitted to the 

secretary of state no later than the day of the primary. Petition 

A presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing a declaration of intent between the firs t Wednesday in 

June and the Friday of the following week, and submitting to the secretary of state no later than the Wednesday one week befo re the 

primary nomination papers containing the signatures of 3,000 registered voters, 1,500 from each United States congressional d istrict in 

the state. The candidate must also pay a fee of $250. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate on the ballot. 

(N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 652:11, 65 5:40a , 655:40b, 655:42, 655:43, 655:53, 655:54, 659:17 , 667:21 )

New Jersey Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify the 

names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state within 1 week after the electors are nominated at a state conven tion which 

must be held within 1 week following the closing of the party’s national convention. The certificate may include the names of the 

candidates for president and vice -president .

A p olitical party is a party which, at the election held for all of the members of the general a ssembly next preceding the holding of any 

primary election , polled for members of the general a ssembly at least 10% of the total vote cast in the state .

Petition 

A presidential candidate who is not nominated by a political party, and independent presidential candidate, may obtain ballot access for 

the general election by filing a petition with the secretary of state no later than the 99 th day before the general election a petition 

containing the signatures of 800 legally qualified voters of the state. The names of the presidential electors may be included in the 

petition. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate. 

(N.J. Stat. Ann. §§ 19:1 -1, 19:5 -1, 19:13 -2, 19:13 -1, 19:13 -3, 19:13 -4, 19:13 -5, 19:13 -9, 19:13 -15 , 19:53A5 )

New Mexico Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A qualified political party 

must certify the names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state no less than 63 days prior to the election. The secretary of must certify to the county clerks the names of persons nominated by each qualified political party for the offices of president an d vice 

president of the United States. 

Note: New Mexico follows major party rules for the selection of presidential candidates and, as long as they meet the ballot 

deadline of August 27, 2024 (per NMSA 1 -8-8), whoever is nominated for president at the upcoming Democratic Convention will 

appear on New Mexico’s General Election ballot (New Mexico Secretary of State Press Release, July 22 nd , 2024) 

A qualified political party is a political party that has a candidate on the ballot in at least one of the two previous gener al elections, or if the 

party has a candidate for governor or president in a general election, the candidate receives at least 1% of the total votes cast for the 

office. 

A political party may qualify as a political party by filing with the secretary of state petition containing the signatures of at least ½ of 1% of 

the total votes cast for the office of governor at t he preceding general election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state on the 21st 

day following the primary election a declaration of candidacy and a nominating petition contain ing the number of voter signatures equal 

to at least 3% of the total vote cast for governor at the last preceding general election for that office. The petition must include the names 

of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

Write -in candidates for President are not allowed. 

(N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ 1-1-10, 1 -7-2, 1-8-1, 1-8-49, 1 -8-51, 1 -8-52, 1 -15 -3; New Mexico Secretary of State FAQs )

New York Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify to the 

state board of elections no later than 73 days after the primary the names of the nominees for presidential electors. 

A political party is any political organization whose candidate for governor at the last preceding election received at least 2% of the total 

votes cast, or 130,000 votes, whichever is greater, and at least 2% percent of the total votes cast for its candidate for president, or one 

130,000 , whichever is greater, in a year when a president is elected. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for th e general election by filing with the state board of elections a

petition containing 45,000 signatures, or 1% of the total votes cast for the office of governor at the last gubernatorial election, whichever is less, with at least 500 signatures or 1% of enrolled voters, whichever is less, coming from each of ½ of the congressional districts in the 

state. The petition must include the names of the presidential electors. The candidate must f ile an acknowledgment of acceptance of the 

nomination no later than the 3rd day after the last day to file the petition. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of candidacy and a list of presidential electors with the state board of e lections no 

later than the third Tuesday before the general election 

(N.Y. Election Law §§ 1-104, 6 -102, 6-128, 6-142, 6 -146, 6-153 , 6-158 )

North Carolina Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must file the names 

of the presidential electors with the secretary of state . The names of the candidates for president and vice -president will be printed on the 

ballot .

A political party is any group whose candidate for governor or presidential electors at the last preceding general election r eceived at least 

2% of the entire vote cast in the state for governor or presidential electors. 

A group may form a new political party by filing with the state board of election no later than the 1 st day of June preceding the general 

election a petition containing the number of signatures of registered voters equal to ¼ of 1 % of the total number of voters who voted in 

the most recent general election for governor. The petition must be signed by at least 200 registered voters from each of the 4

congressional districts in the state. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the state board of el ections no later 

than the last Friday in June preceding the general election a petition containing the number signatures of registered voters equal to 1.5 %

of the total number of voters who voted in the most recent general election for governor. The petition must be signed by at l east 200 

registered voters from each of the 4 congressional districts in the state. The candidate must certify to the secretary of state no later t han 

the first Friday in August the name of the candidate for vice -president and the nam es of the presidential electors .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file with the state board of election no later than 90 days before the election a declaration of 

intent and a petition containing the signatures of 500 qualified voters. (N.C. Gen. Stat. §§ 163 -1, 163 -96, 163 -122, 163 -123 , 163 -209 , 163 -213 )

North Dakota Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established political party may be placed on the general election ballot . The names of the 

nominated presidential electors and the candidates for president and vice president must be certified by the party to the secretary of state 

by the 64 th day before the general election .

An established political party is a political organization that had candidates for presidential electors, a candidate for governor, a candidate 

for attorney general, or a candidate for secretary of state on the last general election ballot and the candidates received a t least 5% of the 

total vote cast for the office. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate of a party that is not established, or an independent presidential candidate, may obtain ballot acce ss for the 

general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 6 4th day before the general election an affidavit of candidacy, a 

statement of interests, and a petition containing the signatures of 4,000 qualified electors. The names of the presidential electors must be 

filed with the petition. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of write -in candidacy and the names of the presidential electors with the secretary 

of state no later than the 21st day before the election 

(N.D. Cent. Code §§ 16.1 -03 -14 , 16.1 -03 -19, 16.1 -06 -07.1 , 16.1 -12 -02 , 16.1 -12 -02.2 )

Ohio Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Major political parties must certify to 

the secretary of state on or before the 90th day before the election names of the candidates for president and vice -president . Major 

parties must nominate presidential electors no later than 40 days prior to the general election and must certify the names of the electors 

to the s ecretary of state within 5 days. Minor parties must certify to the secretary of state on or before the 90th day before the election 

the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors .

Note: Ohio 2024 Special Session law (HB2) provides the following for the 2024 election: 

A major political party shall certify to the Secretary of State in writing the names of its candidates for president and vice -president 

nominated by its national convention pursuant to section 3505.10 of the Revised Code not later than the sixty -fifth day before the 2024 general election .

A political party is any party whose candidate for governor or nominees for presidential electors at the most recent general election 

received at least 5% of the ent ire vote cast for that office. 

A group may also obtain political party status by petition ( Ohio Secretary of State Directive 2007 -09 ). 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 90 th day before the general election a petition containing the signatures of at least 5,000 qualified electors. The candidate must file a 

statement of candidacy and the names of presidential electors with the petition. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent and a list of presidential electors with the secretary of state no later 

than the 72nd day before the election. 

(Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §§ 3505.10, 3513. 11, 3513.041 , 3513.257, 3517.01) 

Oklahoma Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A recognized political 

party must certify its nominees for President of the United States and Vice President of the United States to the Secretary o f the State 

Election Board no later than 75 days prior to the date of the General Election. The nominees for Presidential Electors must b e certified to 

the Secretary of the State Election Board no later than July 15 of a presidential election year. 

A group may form a recognized political party by filing with the State Election Board any time, except between March 1st and November 

15th of an even -numbered year, a petition containing the signature of registered voters equal to at least 3% of the total votes cast in the 

last general election for governor. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candidate nominated by an unrecognized political party, may obtain b allot access 

for the general election by submitting a Statement of Candidacy with the names and residence addresses of the candidate’s pre sidential 

electors, and the required filing fee or petition containing the signatures of registered voters equal to at least 3% of the total votes cast in 

the last general election for governor. The Statement of Candidacy and names and addresses of the candidate’s presidential el ectors must 

be submitted no later than July 15. 

The candidate must certify to the Secretary of the S tate Election Board no later than 75 days prior to the date of the General Election its nominees for President and Vice President of the United States. 

(Oklahoma Statutes §§ 26 -1-108, 26 -1-109, 26 -10 -101, 26 -10 -101.1, 26 -10 -101.2) 

Oregon Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must 

certify to the secretary of state no later than the 70th day before the election the names of the presidential electors. 

A political party qualifies as a major political party if a number of electors equal to at least 5% of the number of register ed electors in the 

state are registered as members of the party no later than the 275 th day before the date of a primary election. 

A political party qualifies as a minor political party if: 

- an affiliation of electors files with the secretary of state no later than two years after filing a prospective a petition a petition 

containing the signatures of electors equal to 1 ½ % of the total votes cast for all candidates for governor at the most rece nt 

election at which a candidate governor was elected to a full term; 

- the candidate of an affiliation of electors receives at least 1% of the total votes cast for presidential electors at the las t

presidential election, or receives 1% of the votes cast for any state offices for which nominations by political parties are permitted 

at the most recent election for those offices 

Petition 

A nonaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 70 th day before the general election a petition containing the signatures of individual electors equal to not less than 1% of the total 

votes cast for all candidates for presidential electors at the last general election. The names of the presidential electors must be filed with 

the petition. 

Assembly of Electors 

A nonaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election through nomination by an assembly of at least 

1,000 electors gathered in one place for no longer than 12 hours. The signatures of the assembly members and a certificate of nomination 

must be filed with the secretary of state no later than the 70 th day before the general election. The names of the presidential electors must 

be filed with the certificate of nomination. 

Write -In A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate. 

(Or. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 248.006, 248.008 , 248.315 , 248.355 , 249.705, 249.722 , 249.735, 249.740 , 254.500, 254.548 )

Pennsylvania Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party (commonly known as a “major” political party) may be placed on the general 

election ballot. The nominee of each political party must certify to the Secretary of the Commonwealth within thirty days after the national 

convention of the party the names of the presidential electors .

A political party is any party or political body whose candidates at the general election next preceding the primary received in each of at 

least ten counties in the state no less than 2% of the largest entire vote cast in each of the counties for any elected candi date, and received 

a total vote in the state equal to at least 2% of the largest entire vote cast in the state for any elected candidate. 

If that political party has at least 15% of Pennsylvania voters registered in that party, it is a “major” political party. 

Petition 

Presidential candidates of minor parties and political bodies may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the Secretary of 

the Commonwealth , no later than August 1 st , an affidavit of candidacy, a $200 fee , and n omination papers containing the signatures of 

5000 qualified electors .

If a political body meets the 2% votes cast threshold, but not the voter registration threshold, it is a “minor” political pa rty. If a political 

body does not meet the voter registration threshold, or the vote total threshold, it is a “political body.” 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate on the ballot. 

(25 Pa. Stat. §§ 2831, 2878 , 2872.2 , 2873, 2911, 2913, 2914 , 3031.12 ); Constitution Party of P a. v. Cortés , no. 12 -2726 ( E.D. Pa. February 1, 

2018) ; Libertarian Party v. Davis , No. 84 -26 (E.D. Pa. June 13, 1984) 

Rhode Island Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election. Political parties must certify the names of 

individuals nominated as candidates for president and vice president to the Elections Division no later than 54 days before the election. 

Political parties must nominate presidential electors at a meeting to be held no later than October 14 th .A political party is any political organization that: 

- nominated a candidate for governor at the next preceding general election for general officers who received at least 5% of the 

entire vote cast for governor, or; 

- nominated a candidate for president at the next preceding presidential election who received at least 5% of the entire vote c ast in 

the state for president 

A political organization may also obtain political party status by filing with the local boards of canvassers no later than A ugust 1 st petition 

forms containing the signatures of registered qualified voters equal to 5% of the entire vote cast in the state for governor or pre sident in 

the immediately preceding general election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate or presidential candidates seeking to establish a political party may obtain ballot acc ess by filing 

nomination papers containing the signatures of 1000 voters. The candidate must file a declaration of candidacy, and, where ap plicable, a 

notice of intent to establish a political party, no later than the last day for filing with the secretary of state for congre ssional and statewide 

offices. The nomination papers must be filed with local boards of election no later than 60 days before the election. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate on the ballot. 

(R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 17 -1-2, 17 -12 -13, 17 -12 -15 , 17 -14 -7, 17 -14 -11, 17 -14 -12 , 17 -19 -31 )

South Carolina Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election . Political parties nominate presidential 

electors, and must certify names of the candidates for president and vice -president to the state election commission no later than the first 

Tuesday following the first Monday in September .

A political party is a political party, organization, o r association certified by the state election c ommission . An organization may obtain 

certification as a political party by filing with the state election commission no later than 6 months prior to the election a petition 

containing the signatures of 10,000 or more registered electors. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the state election commission no la ter than July 

15 th a petition containing the signatures of at least 5% of qualified registered electors, provided that the petition candidate is not requir ed to furnish more than 10,000 signatures. The names of the presidential electors must be filed with the secretary of state. 

Write -In 

Write -in votes for president are not allowed. 

(S.C. Code Ann. §§ 7-7-120, 7-9-10, 7-9-90 , 7-11 -10, 7-11 -70, 7-13 -320, 7-13 -350, 7 -13 -351 , 7-13 -360 , 7-19 -70 )

South Dakota Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The chairperson of the national 

convention of each political party must certify to the secretary of state immediately following the convention the names of the candidates 

for president and vice -president . Each political party must certify to the secretary of state the nominees for presidential electors within 

three days of the state convention, and no later than the 2 nd Tuesday in August. 

A political party is a party whose candidate for governor at the last preceding general election for governor received at lea st 1 percent of 

the total votes cast for governor. 

A new political party may be formed by filing with the secretary of state no later than the last Tuesday of March prior to th e date of the 

primary election a written declaration signed by at least 2 ½ percent of the voters in the state as shown by the total vote c ast for governor 

at the last preceding gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the first Tuesday in August prior to the election a certificate of nomination containing the number of signatures equal to at least 1% of the 

total combined vote cast for governor at the last certified gubernatorial election. The candidate must file a declaration of candidacy and 

certify the name of a candidate for vice -president prior to circulation the nominating petition 

(S.D. Codified Laws §§ 12 -1-3, 12 -5-3.16 , 12 -5-1, 12 -5-21 , 12 -5-22, 12 -7-7) 

Tennessee Political Party Nomination 

The chair of a nominating body of a statewide political party or recognized minor political party must certify the party’s nominees for 

president and vice president to the coordinator of elections no later than the first business day in September. 

A statewide political party is a political party that had at least 1 candidate for an office to be elected by voters of the e ntire state in the 

past 4 years who receive d a number of votes equal to at least 5% of the total number of votes cast or gubernatorial candidate in the most 

recent election for governor. A minor political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing a petition no later than 90 days prior to the general 

election with the coordinator of elections containing the signature of registered voters equal to at least 2.5% of the total number of votes 

cast for gubernatorial candidates in the most recent election for governor. 

Petition 

An ind ependent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access by filing wit h the coordinator of elections no later than the 3 rd Thursday in 

August a petition containing the signatures of 25 or more registered voters for each elector allotted to the state , which totals 275 valid 

signatures . The candidate must also file the names of the presidential electors and the Vice Presidential nominee .

Write -In 

Write -in candidates must file a notice with the appropriate election official no later than 50 days before the election , and must also submit 

elector information .

(Tenn. Code. Ann. §§ 2-1-104, 2-5-101, 2-7-133 , 2-13 -201, 2-13 -203 , § 2 -1-104(a)(31)(a), (a)(24), 2 -13 -107(a), 2 -5-101(a)(1), 2 -15 -101, 2 -15 -

102, 2 -7-133(i) ; 2012 Tenn. Pub. Acts ch. 55 )

Texas Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify the 

names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors before the later of the 7 1st day before 

the presidential election, or the first business day after the date of final adjournment of a party’s national nominating con vention. 

A political party that is authorized or required to nominate candidates by primary election is entitled to have its nominee for president 

placed on the general election ballot . A political party is authorized to nominate by primary if the party’s nominee for governor in the most 

recent gubernatorial general election received at least 2% of the total number of votes received by all candidates for governor in the 

election ; a political party is required to nominate by primary if that candidate received more than 20% of the vote. 

A political party that nominates candidates by convention is entitled to have its nominee for president placed on the general election 

ballot if the party had a nominee for statewide office at the last general election receive a number of votes equal to at least 5% of the total 

number of voters received by all candidates for that office. 

A political party that nominates by convention may also qualify to place a presidential candidate on the general election bal lot if the party 

files with the secretary of state no later than the 75 th day after precinct conventions a list of convention participant’s indicating that the 

number of participants equals at least 1% of the total number of votes received by all candidates for governor in the most re cent 

gubernatorial general election. If the number of convention participants is fewer than the number required, the party may qualify for 

ballot access at the general election by filing a petition with secretary of state containing a number of signatures that when added to the number of convention participants on the list equals at least 1% of the total number of voters received by all candidates for governor in 

the most recent gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 2 nd Monday in May an application and a petition containing the number of signatures equal to at least 1% of the total vote received in 

the state by all candidates for president in the most recent presidential election. The application must include the names of the 

presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy and the names of the presidential electors with the 

secretary of state no later than the 78th day before the election. 

(Tex . Elections Code Ann. §§ 146.023, 146.025 , 172.002, 181.005, 181.006, 192.003, 192.032, 192.033 )

Utah Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a registered political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each registe red political 

party must certify the names of the candidates for president and vice -president to the lieutenant governor no later than August 31 st , or 

provide written authorization for the lieutenant governor to accept the certification a candidate for president from the nati onal office of 

the registered party. Each registered party must certify to the lieutenant governor no later than August 31st the names of the presidential 

electors. 

To qualify as a registered political party an organization must have participated in the last general election and in at least one of the last 

two regular general elections received for any of its candidates for any office a total vote equal to 2% or more of the total votes cast for all 

candidates for the United States House of Representative in the same election. 

An organization may become a registered political party by filing with the lieutenant governor no later than November 30 th of the year in 

which a regular general election will be held a petition containing the signatures of at least 2,000 registered voters. If a newly registered 

political party does not hold a national party convention the party may designate the names of its candidate for president an d the names 

of the presidential electors to the lieutenant governor by August 15 th .

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the lieutenant governor a certificate 

of nomination and a nominating petition containing the signatures of 1,000 registered voters no later than the 4th business day after the filing period begins on January 2 nd of the year in which the next regular general election is held. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the lieutenant governor no later than 65 days before 

the election. 

(Utah Code Ann. §§ 20A -8-101 , 20A -8-103 , 20A -8-106 , 20A -9-202, 20A -9-502, 20A -9-503 , 20A -9-601 , 20A -13 -301 )

Vermont Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each major political part y must 

certify to the secretary of state the names of the party’s nominee s for president and vice -presiden t no later than the 65th day before the 

day of the general election. Major political parties must certify the names of the presidential electors promptly after the electors are 

nominated at a party convention held no later than the 4 th Tuesday in September. 

A presidential candidate may be nominated by a minor political party and placed on the general election ballot if the party has town 

committees organized in at least 10 towns in the state and files a statement of nomination with the secretary of state no lat er than the 

second Thursday after the first Monday in June preceding the primary election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the second Thursday after the first Monday in June preceding the primary election a statement of nomination containing the signatures of 

1,000 registered voters and a consent form from each nominee for presidential elector. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate on the ballot. 

(Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 17, § § 2103 , 2319, 2356, 2381, 2382, 2385, 2386, 2387, 2402, 2587 , 2403, 2716, 2721, 2722 )

Virginia Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party mu st provide to 

the state board of elections no later than the 74 th day before the election the names of the presidential electors selected at the party’s 

convention and the names of the candidates for president and vice -president . A political party whose national convention is scheduled to 

be held after the 74 th day before the election must file with the state board of election no later than the 74 th day before the election the 

certification of the presidential electors and a certification of the persons expected to be nominated for president at its n ational convention. The party must certify the names of the candidates for president and vice -president nominated at the national party 

convention no later than the 60 th day before the election. 

A political party is an organization which received at least 10% of the total vote cast for any statewide office at either of the two preceding 

statewide general elections. 

Petition 

A group of qualified voters not constituting a political party may obtain ballot access for a presidential candidate by filin g with the state 

board of elections no later than the 74 th day before the election a petition containing the signatures of at least 5,000 qualified voters 

including signatures of at least 400 qualified voters from each congressional district. The petition must include the names of the candidates 

for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the state board of elections no later than 10 days before t he 

election. 

(Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2 -101 , 24.2 -542 , 24.2 -542.1 , 24.2 -543 , 24.2 -614 , 24.2 -644 )

Washington Political Party Nomination 

The secretary of state must certify to the general election ballot the names of all candidates for president and vice president who , no later 

than the third Tuesday in August, have been nominated by a major political party, a minor political party, or as independent candidates, 

and have certified a slate of electors to the secretary of stat e. 

Note : the Washington Secretary of State’s office has indicated that it will accept a provisional certification for the candidate 

nominated by the DNC, provided the provisional certification is submitted by August 20 th , 2024 (What Biden’s Exit means for WA 

Ballot , The Seattle Times , July 21 st 2024) 

A major political party is a political party that had at least one nominee for president, vice president, united state senato r, or a statewide 

office receive at least 5% of the total vote cast at the last preceding state general election. 

Petition/ Convention 

A presidential candidate that is not nominated by a major political party, including minor party candidates and independent c andidates, 

may be placed on the general election ballot by holding a convention attended by at least one hundred registered voters no earlier than 

the first Saturday in May and no later than the fourth Saturday in July . The candidate must file with the secretary of state no later than the 

first Friday of August a certificate of nomination accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of at least 1,000 registered voters .and must file with the secretary of state no later than ten da ys after the convention is held a list of presidential electors .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than 8:00 PM on 

Election Day. 

(Wash. Rev. Code §§ 29A.04.097 , 29A.04.086 , 29A.24.311 , 29A.56.320, 29A.56.360 , 29A.56.500 , 29A.56.610 , 29A.56.640 , 29A.56.66 0)

West Virginia Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties nominate the 

candidates for presidential electors at a state convention in June, July, or August and must certify the names of the elector s to the 

secretary of state within fifteen days. 

A political party is an organization whose candidate for governor at the last preceding general election received at least 1% of the total 

number of votes cast for all candidates in the state for that office. 

Petition 

A group of citizens that is not a political party (minor party and independent candidates) may obtain ballot access for a presidential 

candidate by filing with the secretary of state no later than August 1st preceding the general election a certificate of nomination containing 

the number of signatures of registered voters equal to at least 1% of the entire vote cast for president in the last preceding presidential 

election. The candidates for president and vice president must also pay a fee equivalent to 1% of the annual salary of the of fice, provided 

that the filing fee for president or vice president must not exceed $2500. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of announcement with the secretary of state no later than the close of business on 

the 49th day before the election. 

(W. Va. Code §§ 3-1-8, 3-5-8, 3-5-21 , 3-5-23 , 3-5-24 , 3-6-4a )

Wisconsin The names of candidates for President and Vice President are placed on the General Election ballot in Wisconsin by one of the following 

methods: 

Political organizations that have attained ballot status currently are the Democratic, Republican, Libertarian, and Constitution parties. 

This is subject to change if a party petitions the Commission for ballot status. The names of candidates for President and Vi ce President for 

these parties are placed on the General Election ballot when their names are certified by the state or national chairperson t o the Wisconsin Election Commission no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in September . Wis. Stat. § 8.16(7). Each certified candidate 

must file a Declaration of Candidacy (EL -162) with the Wisconsin Election Commission no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in 

September . Wis. Stat. § 8.21(1). 

Political organizations that have not attained ballot status may file a Petition for Ballot Status (EL -171) with the Wisconsin Elections 

Commission. The first day for circulating this petition is January 1, and the deadline for filing this petition is 5:00 p.m. on April 1. Wis. 

Stat. § 5.62(2)(a). This petition must contain valid signatures of at least 10,000 Wisconsin electors, including at least 1,0 00 signatures of 

electors residing in each of at least 3 different congressional districts. Wis. Stat. § 5.62(2)(a). If the Commission finds t he petition to be 

sufficient, the political organization may have its candidates for President and Vice President printed on the General Electi on ballot. Also, 

the party is entitled to a separate ballot for all partisan offices at the August Partisan Primary and for all other offices at the November 

General Election. The names of candidates for President and Vice President are selected by the organization's nominating comm ittee or 

convention and placed on the General Election ballot when the committee certifies their names to the Wisconsin Elections Comm ission no 

later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in September . Each certified candidate must file a Declaration of Candidacy (EL -162) with the 

Wisconsin Elections Commission no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in September . Wis. Stat. §§ 8.16(7), 8.21(1). 

Independent Candidates for President and Vice President circulate and file nomination papers (EL -167). The first day for circulating 

nomination papers is July 1 , and the deadline for filing with the Wisconsin Election Commission is 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in 

August . Wis. Stat. § 8.20(8)(am). The nomination papers must contain at least 2,000 and no more than 4,000 signatures of Wisconsin 

electors. In addition to filing nomination papers, an independent candidate is required to file a Declaration of Candidacy (E L-162) with the 

Wisconsin Election Commission no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in August . Wis. Stats. §§ 8.20(8)(am), 8.21. Independent 

candidates appear on the November General Election ballot only. 

Wyoming Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The poli tical parties 

must nominate presidential electors at a state convention and certify the names of the electors to the secretary of state no later than 30 

days following termination of the state convention. 

A major political party is a political organization whose candidate for united state representative, governor, or secretary o f state, received 

not less than 10% of the total votes cast for that office in the most recent general election. A minor political party is a p olitical organization 

whose candidate for united states representative, governor, or secretary of state received not less than 2% nor more than 10% of the total 

votes cast for that office in the most recent general election. 

A group may form a new political party and obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of stat e no later than June 1 st in a general election year a petition containing the signatures of registered electors equal in number to no less than 2% of the total 

number of votes cast for the office of united state representative in the last general election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

70 days before a general election a petition containing the signatures of registered electors numbering not less than 2% of t he total 

number of votes cast for united states representative in the last general election. The petition must be accompanied by a $20 0 fee. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate must file an application of candidacy and the required fee with the appropriate filing officer no later than 2 d ays after 

the election. 

(Wyo. Stat. Ann. § § 22 -1-102, 22 -4-118, 22 -4-120, 22 -4-303, 22 -4-306 , 22 -4-402 , 22 -5-101, ,22 -5-208, 22 -5-301 , 22 -5-304 , 22 -5-306, 22 -5-

307, 22 -5-501 , 22 -19 -102 )
