Title: Common Disaster-Related Rumors

URL Source: https://www.fema.gov/disaster/recover/rumor-response

Published Time: Mon, 12 Jan 2026 08:42:20 GMT

Markdown Content:
In general, crowdfunding proceeds or other gifts do not factor into how much funding a survivor will receive from FEMA. For example, FEMA would not consider a general “help me raise money for my recovery” on a crowd sourcing platform as a duplication of benefit under our laws, regulations, and policy.

By law FEMA cannot duplicate benefits a survivor receives from any other program, insurance, or any other source. If survivors receive money from a GoFundMe page for a specific disaster-related expense, they may not be able to receive FEMA assistance for the same, specific expense.

For example, if a survivor received money via crowdfunding for “hotel costs” and the survivor also requested money from FEMA for hotel costs, FEMA would need to consider the funding received via crowdfunding before processing the assistance for lodging expense reimbursement.

There are no "magic words" to use on crowdfunding sites, but FEMA would recommend just keeping the campaigns general to avoid duplications of federal benefits.

January 30, 2025

This is false. FEMA reviews each disaster assistance application individually to determine the types of assistance you are eligible to receive. Your unique situation determines the amount of assistance you may receive.

There are often misleading claims that FEMA will only provide a set amount of assistance to every person who applies. Amounts commonly stated in these misleading claims include $500, $750, and $1,000. It’s important to remember that FEMA assistance is not one-size-fits-all and the assistance you receive is based on the information you provide when you apply. You may even receive multiple checks from FEMA of varying amounts ranging from several hundred dollars to several thousand dollars.

Many scams also claim that you can call a phone number to receive a cash payment from FEMA. Be careful of these scams as they are often designed to steal your money by pretending to be FEMA. FEMA’s official disaster assistance helpline is 1-800-621-3362.

January 11, 2025

This is false. FEMA cannot seize your property or land. Applying for disaster assistance does not grant FEMA or the federal government authority or ownership of your property or land.

When you apply for disaster assistance a FEMA inspector may be sent to verify the damage on your home. This is one of many factors reviewed to determine what kind of assistance you may be eligible for.

If the results of the inspection state your home is uninhabitable, that information is only used to determine the amount of FEMA assistance you may receive to make your home safe, sanitary and functional.

January 11, 2025

This is false. FEMA does not hand out vouchers for disaster assistance.

It is common after disasters for rumors to circulate online and through text messages claiming FEMA will be at certain locations handing out vouchers for hotel stays, rental assistance, food, or other disaster services.

To receive FEMA assistance, you must first submit an application on DisasterAssistance.gov, by calling 1-800-621-3362, or in-person at a Disaster Recovery Center. Applying through these official channels will ensure your information is secure.

You only need to apply once and the information you provide in that application will help FEMA determine what assistance you are eligible for out of the many types of disaster assistance.

Learn more about protecting yourself against disaster-related scams.

January 11, 2025

You are not able to request hotel room payment assistance from FEMA by calling any number.

However, FEMA may reimburse lodging expenses to eligible individuals and families. To see if this assistance is available to you, apply at DisasterAssistance.gov.

August 18, 2023

This is not true. FEMA will never ask you to pay to apply for assistance or receive an inspection.

If you have knowledge of fraud, waste or abuse you can report it anonymously by calling the FEMA Disaster Fraud Hotline at 866-720-5721. You can also email StopFEMAfraud@fema.dhs.gov.

August 18, 2023

This is false. FEMA is not paying people weekly to assist with cleanup.

However, during some disasters FEMA may provide a one-time grant to individuals to help them clean up their home. To find out if you qualify, apply on DisasterAssistance.gov.

October 5, 2022

This is not true. Just five inches of water can cause over $25,000 worth of damage.

Visit the National Flood Insurance Program page for more information.

September 30, 2022

This is not true. If you have insurance, you can apply for FEMA assistance but you must file an insurance claim as well. FEMA cannot help with expenses your insurance might cover until you send us your insurance settlement or denial, but FEMA may able to assist with other losses insurance won’t cover. If insurance does not cover the entire cost of disaster-related expenses and your settlement was less than the maximum amount of money FEMA can provide for that loss, you may be eligible for FEMA assistance.

Visit the FAQ page for more information.

September 30, 2022

This is not true. Homeowner insurance policies do not normally cover flood damage. Flood insurance is typically a separate policy.

Visit the National Flood Insurance Program page to purchase flood insurance or find out more.

September 30, 2022
