Title: Fairground shut after 3 thrown from ride - China

URL Source: https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2013-09/17/content_16974506.htm

Markdown Content:
Feng Jie, 14, the youngest among three people injured at a fairground in Xi'an, is loaded into an ambulance for transportation to a hospital on Sunday. Dou Yiming / for China Daily

The work safety agency in Xi'an, Shaanxi province, urged safety inspections on recreational facilities on Monday after three people were seriously injured in an accident on Sunday.

Wang Limin, deputy director of the Xi'an work safety bureau, said the bureau has issued a bulletin calling for exhaustive inspections to eliminate hidden dangers and ensure the safe operation of recreational sites in the city.

"Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day are coming, and we must give great attention to safety in recreational places because many tourists will visit them during the holidays," Wang said.

On Sunday, an accident occurred at the Xi'an Qinling fairground, in which three people were seriously injured when they were thrown to the ground from a swing ride at about 1:40 pm.

A female bystander was hit by one of the falling people and slightly injured, a park employee who declined to give his name said on Monday.

Ren Yafeng, 23, a male university student; Wei Miao, 22, a female migrant worker; and Feng Jie, 14, a male junior high school student, were "seriously injured" in the incident, said a doctor named Sui who treated them at a hospital. They had multiple fractures and organ damage, but were all in stable condition, Sui said.

"They will need further treatment when their condition improves," Sui said.

Wang Hang, a friend of Wei Miao who was also on the ride, said he found his seatbelt was loose after the ride began and he had to tightly hold a pole for safety.

"The ride went up and down and then a man was thrown out of his seat, but the machine didn't stop - it continued for a minute before it stopped," said Wang, who got off the ride safely.

After the accident, the work safety bureau closed all facilities at the fairground. Preliminary investigations by the bureau and police indicated that the accident was caused by mechanical failure.

According to Xue Yazhou, director of Luanzhen township office in the city's Chang'an district, where the fairground is located, the ride could reach as high as 17.5 meters from the ground.

The family members of the injured people said treatment costs were being paid by the fairground and they would discuss compensation with the fairground after the injured people recover.

_malie@chinadaily.com.cn_
