Title: Michael Moore

URL Source: https://www.facebook.com/mmflint/posts/70-years-ago-on-february-24-1955-in-san-francisco-california-a-son-was-born-to-a/1151052139725722/

Markdown Content:
70 years ago, on February 24, 1955, in San Francisco, California, a son was born to Abdulfattah Jandali, a Syrian Muslim who had entered the United States and enrolled at the University of Wisconsin.

All reactions:

635 comments

378 shares

Like

Comment

Most relevant

Kamar Wheeler

Syrian heritage run through the world of technology and innovation. Steve Jobs whose father was Syrian, planted the seed for much what shapes our digital world today.

So, while his ancestry is Syria, his achievements were shaped by his environment and experience in Silicon Valley.

25

View all 13 replies

Connor Rorick

Can we not idolize billionaires? Thanks

76

View all 26 replies

Jay Nayar

America was built on the blood & sweat of immigrants. That is what makes America great!!

4

View all 3 replies

Mar Elene

It’s Steve Jobs. You’re welcome

28

View all 5 replies

11

Kjell Børresen

In 1909, my grandmothers eldest sister left Norway in search of a good life in the USA. She met a guy who was born in Minnesota of norwegian immigrants. They had 7 kids. One of them, born in 1917 went to a norwegian school in a norwegian town in Minnesota, he didnt learn to speak english until he was 17. He and 3 of his brothers took part in the d.day landings in Normandy in 1944. He was commander of a armored vehicle (small tank), and was one of those who liberated the concentration camp of Dachau. He was a true american veteran. He loved his country - but under the present administration, he would probably have his citizenship revoked ! What is happening in Washington is truly sad, but what is really frightening is that the republicans in congress have absolutely NO backbone ! They have NO clue on how to properly run a decent country. Just sad !

62

View all 4 replies

Phil Reisman

Not unlike Albert Einstein. A Jew who fled Hitler's Germany.

Perhaps the greatest physicist to live in the past 100 years (though a case can be made for Neil DeGrasse Tyson too).

6

View all 3 replies

Petr Zelenak

Yes! America are incestors of all nations. Thanks to President Trump, I feel my incestors are proud again. Thanks to him the World is changing and we feel it in Europe. God bless and Biden, go to hell!

4

View 1 reply

Fred Sharif

I worked with Mr. Jandali for great 7 years. He was very well educated, honest , knowledgeable and hard working.

2

View all 3 replies

Alain Dubois

Genius may be, but not so good of a Dad ! Similarly with Musk unfortunately

10

View all 13 replies
