Title: 

URL Source: https://www.cspi.org/sites/default/files/attachment/six_arguments_high.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 30 Jul 2021 13:35:17 GMT

Markdown Content:
This careful examination of scientific studies finds that eating more 

## plant foods and fewer fatty animal products can lead to extra years 

## of healthy living. Happily, that same diet leads to much less food 

## poisoning, water pollution, air pollution, and global warming. And, 

## because fewer cows, pigs, and chickens would need to be raised, there 

## would be less suffering on factory farms and in slaughterhouses.  

> $14.95 (Canada: $21)

ISBN 0-89329-049-1 

Michael F. Jacobson, Ph.D. , is co-founder and executive director of the Center for Science in 

the Public Interest (CSPI), the nonprofit health advocacy organization that publishes the world’s 

largest-circulation nutrition newsletter,  Nutrition Action Healthletter.  CSPI advocates nutritious 

and safe diets and campaigns for policies to protect the public health and environment. It led the 

campaigns for laws requiring Nutrition Facts and trans-fat labeling on packaged foods, requiring 

health warnings on alcoholic beverages, and defining “organic” foods. It publishes attention-getting 

studies, including exposés of the nutritional quality of restaurant meals and movie theater popcorn. 

Michael Jacobson is the author/co-author of  Restaurant Confidential , Marketing Madness , What 

Are We Feeding Our Kids? , and  The Fast-Food Guide .

## www.EatingGreen.org 

## “Six Arguments  is a great description of the links between our diet and 

## serious environmental and health problems. I hope that readers and policy 

## makers will implement the book’s many recommendations.”  Walter Willett, M.D. 

> Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health

## “While there are serious differences of opinion about issues relating to the 

## animal foods component of the American diet, the provocative policy 

## discussions in this book should be must reading for anyone interested in 

## the future of food and agriculture.”  Dan Glickman 

> former Secretary, U.S. Department of Agriculture

## “Six Arguments for a Greener Diet  is a great guide to the powerful impact 

## that our dietary choices—especially high meat consumption—have on our 

## environmental footprint.”  Robert S. Lawrence, M.D. 

> Director, Center for a Livable Future, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health
> Cover design by Debra Brink; book design by Nita Congress

# Six Arguments for a Greener Diet Six Arguments for a Greener Diet How a More Plant-Based Diet Could Save Your Health and the Environment Center for Science in the Public Interest Copyright © 2006 by Center for Science in the Public Interest First Printing, July 2006 2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1 

The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI), founded in 1971, is a nonprofit 

organization that conducts innovative education, research, and advocacy programs in the area of nutrition, food safety, environment, and alcoholic beverages. CSPI is supported by the 900,000 subscribers in the United States and Canada to its 

Nutrition Action Healthletter and by foundation grants. Center for Science in the Public Interest 1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW, #300 Washington, DC 20009 Tel: 202-332-9110; fax: 202-265-4954 Email: cspi@cspinet.org; Internet: www.cspinet.org ISBN 0-89329-049-1 Visit CSPI’s Eating Green web site: www.EatingGreen.org. Ground-

wate r

depletio n

Air , soil 

& wate r

pollution  Risks to 

farmers  &

wildlife 

Soil 

erosion 

Health  &

ecological 

risk s

Food 

poisonin g Cancer  Hear t

disease 

Soil 

pollution  Wa te r

pollution 

Air 

pollution 

Global 

warmin g

(methane) 

Meat, 

dairy ,

eggs 

Manure 

Animal 

cruelt y

Fe rtilizer 

Antibiotics, 

hormone s

# The W eb of  Animal-Based 

# Foods and Problems 

Anima l

fee d

Irrigation 

water 

Natur al gas, 

ores  Pe sticides Eating Green: By the Numbers 

> (All figures apply to the United States, except where noted, and are approximate. See text for sources.)

## Health 3 years: how much longer vegetarian Seventh-day Adventists live than non-vegetarian Seventh-day Adventists 

4.9 servings: the servings of fruits and vegetables consumed daily, compared to the recommended 5 to 10 

16  percent: the decreased mortality from heart disease associated with eating one additional serving of fruits or vegetables each day 

24  percent: how much lower the rate of fatal heart attacks is in vegetarians com-pared to non-vegetarians 

25  percent: the proportion of food-poisoning deaths due to pathogens from ani-mals or their manure 

33  percent: the decrease in beef consumption since 1976 

50 percent: how much less dietary fiber Americans consume than is recommended 

51  percent: the reduction in risk of heart attack for people eating nuts five or more times per week compared to less than once a week 

90  percent: the proportion of chickens contaminated with Campylobacter bacteria 

100  percent: how much fattier meat is from a typical steer that’s fed grain rather than grass 

199 pounds: the combined amount of meat, poultry, and seafood produced per American (2003) 

1,100: the mortalities due each year to foodborne illnesses linked to meat, poul-try, dairy, and egg products 

46,000: the number of illnesses due annually to antibiotic-resistant strains of Sal-monella and Campylobacter 

63,000: the number of deaths from coronary heart disease caused annually by the fat and cholesterol in meat, dairy, poultry, and eggs 

$7 billion: the annual medical and related costs of foodborne illnesses 

$37 billion: the annual cost of drugs to treat high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes 

$50 billion: the annual cost of coronary bypass operations and angioplasties Environment 1 pound: the amount of fertilizer needed to produce 3 pounds of cooked beef 

5 times as much: the irrigation water used to grow feed grains compared to fruits and vegetables 

5 tons: the soil lost annually to erosion on an average acre of cropland 

7 pounds: the amount of corn needed to add 1 pound of weight to feedlot cattle (some of that weight gain is not edible meat) 

19  percent: the proportion of all methane, a greenhouse gas, emitted by cattle and other livestock 

41  percent: the share of irrigated land planted in livestock feed crops 

66  percent: the proportion of grain that ends up as livestock feed at home or abroad 

331: the number of odor-causing chemicals in hog manure 

4,500 gallons: the rain and irrigation water needed to produce a quarter-pound of raw beef 

8,500 square miles: the size of the “dead zone” created in the Gulf of Mexico by fertilizer runoff carried by the Mississippi from the upper Midwest 

33 million: the number of cars needed to produce the same level of global warm-ing as is caused by the methane gas emitted by livestock and their manure 

22 billion pounds: the amount of fertilizer used annually to grow feed grains for American livestock 

3.3 trillion pounds: the amount of livestock manure produced annually 

17 trillion gallons: the amount of irrigation water used annually to produce feed for U.S. livestock 

## Animal Welfare 0.5 square feet: the amount of space allotted to the average layer hen 

30: the number of chickens and turkeys consumed annually by the average American 

13,200: the number of chickens killed each hour in a modern slaughterhouse 

50,000: the number of broiler chickens in the largest growing sheds 

140 million: the number of cattle, pigs, and sheep slaughtered each year i

# Contents 

Acknowledgments   ii i

Abbreviations   v

Preface:  Greener Diets for a Healthier World   vi i

## The Context 

The Fatted Stee r  3

## The  Argument s

#1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health   17 

#2.  Less Foodborne Illnes s  59 

#3.  Better Soil   73

#4.  More and Cleaner Water   87

#5.  Cleaner Air   103

#6.  Less Animal Suffering   113

## Making Change 

Changing Your Own Diet   143

Changing Government Policies   151 ii  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

## Appendixes and Notes 

Appendix A.  A Bestiary of Foodborne Pathogens   171 

Appendix B.  Eating Green Internet Resources   177

Notes   181 

Photo Credits   223

Index   225iii 

# Acknowledgments 

# This book is a publication of the Center for Science in the Public Inter -

est’s (CSPI’s) Eating Green project, which advocates a more plant-

based diet to protect both health and the environment. Asher Wolf 

drafted the chapters on foodborne illness, soil, water, air, and animal wel -

fare; Reed Mangels wrote the chapter on chronic disease; and Michael F. 

Jacobson wrote several other chapters and edited the entire manuscript. 

Michael Kisielewski contributed valuable editing and research; Moira 

Donahue, Judy Jacobs, Phyllis Machta, Tyler Martz, Jonathan Morgan, and 

Carol Touhey helped with proofreading and fact checking. Nita  Congress 

provided invaluable advice while she edited and designed the book. CSPI’s 

Debra Brink designed the cover and several graphic displays. 

Numerous experts in government, academe, and nonprofit organiza -

tions generously provided data, advice, and reviews of entire chapters. 

Those people include Tamar Barlam, Aaron Blair, Navis Bermudez, Law -

rence Cahoon, Winston Craig, Karen Florini, Tom Gegax, Noel Gollehon, 

Michael Greger, Robert Hadad, Ed Hopkins, Dennis Keeney, Ronald Lace -

well, Alice Lichtenstein, Robbin Marks, Roy Moore, Mark Muller, Frensch 

Niegermeier, David Pimentel, Nancy Rabalais, Darryl Ray, Steven Roach, 

Bernard Rollin, Gail Rose, Joe Rudek, Daniel Rule, Frank Sacks, Jennifer 

Sass, Paul Shapiro, Parke Wilde, and George Wuerthner. In addition, CSPI iv  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

staffers Caroline Smith DeWaal, Bonnie Liebman, and David Schardt 

reviewed chapters and offered much useful advice. Notwithstanding all 

that assistance, this book might still contain factual errors and inappropri -

ate characterizations, for which the editor, Michael F. Jacobson, deserves 

the dubious credit. Finally, we are grateful to John Robbins for writing his 

ground-breaking  Diet for a New America , which helped inspire our work. 

CSPI extends its sincere gratitude to the Freed Foundation, Tom and 

Mary Gegax, the Shared Earth Foundation, Lucy Waletzky, and the Wallace 

Genetic Foundation for their generous support of the Eating Green project 

and the preparation of this book. v

# Abbreviations 

AMR  advanced meat recovery 

BMI  body mass index 

BSE  bovine spongiform encephalopathy 

CAFO  concentrated animal feeding operation 

CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

CHIP  Coronary Health Improvement Project 

CLA  conjugated linoleic acid 

CRP  Conservation Reserve Program 

CSPI  Center for Science in the Public Interest 

DASH  Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension 

DHA  docosahexaenoic acid 

EDC  endocrine-disrupting compound 

EPA  eicosapentaenoic acid 

EPA  Environmental Protection Agency 

EPIC  European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 

EQIP  Environmental Quality Incentives Program 

EWG  Environmental Working Group 

FDA  Food and Drug Administration 

HCA  heterocyclic amine 

HDL  high-density lipoprotein vi  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

LDL  low-density lipoprotein 

PAH  polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 

PBDE  polybrominated diphenyl ether 

PCB  polychlorinated biphenyl 

PETA  People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 

ppm  parts per million 

rBST  recombinant bovine somatotropin 

SDA  Seventh-day Adventist 

USDA  U.S. Department of Agriculture 

USGS  U.S. Geological Survey 

vCJD  variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 

VOC  volatile organic compound 

WIC  Women, Infants, and Children vii 

# Greener Diets for a Healthier World 

# Americans eat what might be called an all-consuming diet. Together, 

we represent over 40 billion pounds of protoplasm that each day 

needs to be fed over 1 billion pounds and 1 trillion calories of food. 

Our agricultural system consumes enormous quantities of fuel, fertilizers, 

and pesticides to produce the grains, meat and poultry, and fruits and vege -

tables that feed a nation of 300 million people. It consumes enormous tracts 

of land and quantities of water—not only for growing food for people, but 

also for producing food for livestock. And ultimately it consumes the con -

sumer: Diet-related 

diseases account for 

hundreds of thou -

sands of premature 

deaths each year. 

Six Arguments for a 

Greener Diet  analyzes 

the multitudinous and 

far-reaching effects of 

livestock production 

and consumption. On 

the health front, most 

## Preface: viii  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

consumers probably know that the saturated fat and cholesterol in fatty 

beef and dairy products and eggs promote heart disease. Fewer people are 

aware that beef has been linked to colon cancer and milk to prostate cancer. 

Adding to the toll are the toxic chemicals, such as polychlorinated biphenyls 

(PCBs), that animals tend to accumulate in their muscle fat and milk. In all, 

animal foods may be responsible for 50,000 to 100,000 premature deaths 

each year. (Not surprisingly, vegetarians tend to be healthier than the rest 

of us.) 

While heart disease and cancer generally take decades to develop, 

meat, poultry, and eggs are major causes of food poisoning, which shows 

up quickly. Over 1,000 people die each year from livestock-related food -

borne illnesses caused by bacteria such as  Salmonella  and  E. coli . In fact, 

many foodborne illnesses traced to fruits and vegetables actually are due to 

animal manure that gets onto crops. Some foodborne germs are especially 

harmful because they defy the usual antibiotic treatment. Such antibiotic 

resistance results, in part, from the feeding of small amounts of antibiotics 

to cattle, hogs, and poultry to fatten the animals faster or compensate for the 

dirty, crowded conditions in which they live. 

Consuming large quantities of animal products has inevitable envi -

ronmental consequences. Beef cattle typically live out their last several 

months in huge, densely populated feedlots. The 50,000 cattle that reside in 

a large feedlot at a given time produce as much manure as a city of several 

million people. Not surprisingly, they create a stench that undermines the 

quality of life for everyone who lives or works nearby. Even grazing can be 

problematic. In some parts of the West, cattle graze on ecologically sensitive 

land, which can destroy normal vegetation. Industrial-scale hog production 

relies on pond-sized cesspools (euphemistically called lagoons by agribusi -

ness) of manure. Stench aside, cesspools sometimes break open and pollute 

local streams and rivers. 

A high  percentage of the grains and hay grown on our nation’s farms 

feeds animals, not humans. Producing the vast quantities of corn, soybean 

meal, alfalfa, and other ingredients of livestock feed consumes vast quanti -

ties of natural resources and requires thousands of square miles of land. 

Much of the Midwest’s grasslands and forests have been replaced by grain 

farms. In the arid West and Great Plains, large amounts of irrigation water, 

which might otherwise be used as drinking water or in more productive 

commercial enterprises, are needed to produce feed grains. Although shift -

ing to grass-fed beef would solve some of the environmental problems, 

as well as provide leaner meat, one serious problem would remain: Cattle 

naturally emit methane, a potent greenhouse gas. Preface: Greener Diets for a Healthier World  • ix 

The chemical fertilizers that farmers use to help maximize grain pro -

duction take a great deal of energy to produce, and they pollute waterways 

and drinking water. Because of all the fertilizer that washes down the 

Mississippi River, the Gulf of Mexico has a poorly oxygenated “dead zone” 

the size of New Jersey. Using chemical pesticides to protect crops from 

insects and other pests frequently results in those chemicals contaminat -

ing drinking water in rural areas, as well as endangering farmworkers and 

wildlife. The small amounts that we consume when we eat both plant and 

animal foods are unwelcome, if not demonstrably harmful. 

## 

Among the questions this book seeks to answer are “What is the cost to the 

environment of raising so many food animals?” and “What is the cost to our 

bodies of eating them?” We also ask “What is the cost to the animals?” If 

an animal is treated well, can exhibit its natural behaviors, and has a quick 

and painless death, then killing and eating it is easier to justify. However, 

most food animals are not so lucky. Hogs’ tails and chickens’ beaks are par -

tially cut off. Egg-laying hens are squeezed into small cages. Broiler chick -

ens spend their entire short lives in sheds crammed with tens of thousands 

of birds, never getting a glimpse of the outdoors or pecking for insects in 

the ground. Steers are often branded with hot irons, and bulls are castrated  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

without sedatives. Animal welfare activists have documented egregious examples of mistreatment of animals prior to slaughter, with chickens 

being smashed against walls and cattle having their throats slit and being hung by their legs without first being rendered unconscious. 

## 

In this era of global warming, researchers have cited the overall energy 

and pollution costs of different diets as an important reason to eat less 

meat. University of Chicago geophysicists Gidon Eshel and Pamela Mar-tin calculate that it takes about 500 calories of fossil-fuel energy inputs to produce 100 calories’ worth of chicken or milk; producing 100 calories’ worth of grain-fed beef requires almost 1,600 calories. But producing 100 calories’ worth of plant foods requires only 50 calories from fossil fuels. In terms of global warming, eating a typical American diet instead of an all-plant diet has a greater impact than driving a Toyota Camry instead of a gas-frugal Toyota Prius. 1 And that difference translates into an annual 

430  million tons of carbon dioxide, 6  percent of the nation’s total emis-sions of greenhouse gases. Nutrition researchers in Germany have examined the ecological impacts of three kinds of diets: typical Western, low meat, and lacto-ovo vegetarian. 2Compared to a typical diet, a low-meat diet uses 41  percent less energy and generates 37  percent less carbon dioxide equivalents (greenhouse gases) and 50  percent less sulfur dioxide equivalents (respiratory problems, acid 

Greenhouse Gases  

> Global warming is occurring because increased amounts of carbon dioxide and other gases in the atmosphere trap extra heat and gradually warm our planet. While automobiles and fossil-fuel power plants are the biggest contributors to global warming, agriculture also plays a role. Livestock (mostly cattle) plus the manure lagoons on factory farms (mostly hog) generate an amount of methane that promotes about as much global warming as the release of carbon dioxide from 33 million automobiles. Methane is 23 times as potent as an equal amount of carbon dioxide. Nitrous oxide—which comes from degradation of manure and from fertilizer applied to cropland—is 300 times as potent as carbon dioxide in promoting global warming and accounts for 6 percent of the greenhouse effect in the lower atmosphere. Manufacturing fertilizer generates both carbon dioxide and nitrogen-containing greenhouse gases.
> Preface: Greener Diets for a Healthier World • xi

rain).  For a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet, the savings are even greater: 54  per-cent less energy, 52  percent less carbon dioxide equivalents, and 66  percent less sulfur dioxide equivalents. Eating less meat and dairy products could greatly improve health, the environment, and animal welfare—especially if people replaced some of those foods with vegetables, beans, fruits, nuts, and whole grains (see “Changing Your Own Diet,” p. 143). Most minimally processed plant foods are low in saturated fat and cholesterol and high in vitamins, minerals, and 

dietary fiber, and they are the only source of diverse phytonutrients. While 

producing more grains, vegetables, and fruits would require land, water, pesticides, and fertilizers, the amounts used would be small compared to the amounts saved by producing less animal-based foods. Even without 

cutting back on beef and dairy foods, just shifting the cattle industry away from feedlots and toward leaner grass-fed beef and getting the dairy indus -

try to cut the saturated-fat content of milk would yield big dividends. 

This pro-plant message, however, has one important caveat: Animal products do not have a monopoly on causing harm. Diets rich in salt, par-

tially hydrogenated vegetable oils (with their trans fat), refined sugars, and refined flour also cause major health problems—heart disease, strokes, obe -  

> Different gases have stronger or weaker effects on pollution. It is customary to convert them into equivalents of carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide so their effects may be compared
> or combined. xii •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

sity, and tooth decay, to name 

a few. And certain crops—such 

as sugar cane in Florida and, 

indeed, almost any row crop 

grown in monoculture on 

large farms—wreak serious 

environmental damage. 

While moving in a more 

vegetarian direction offers 

many benefits to health and 

the environment, a more 

omnivorous option is advo -

cated eloquently by University 

of California journalism professor Michael Pollan in his recent book,  The 

Omnivore’s Dilemma . Pollan describes the multiple virtues of small farms 

that humanely and ecologically raise cattle, pigs, and chickens on pastures 

and in woodlands and sell their meat, milk, and eggs locally. 3 There’s little 

room for factory farms, Wal-Marts, or Burger Kings in that vision, though 

the consumption of animal products could be at unhealthy levels. A more (or 

totally) plant-based diet could be as compatible with sustainable agriculture 

as diets that include animal products, but comparing the two approaches 

is a good reminder that no path is perfect: Each has its own compromises 

related to taste, cost, convenience, cultural values, health, ecology, animal 

welfare, and the vitality of rural America. Ultimately, what you eat is your 

choice. 

Despite the well-recognized benefits of diets higher in healthy plant-

based foods and lower in animal products (especially those produced on 

factory farms), relatively few people will change their diets (and few farm -

ers will change their growing practices) without encouragement from new 

government policies.  Six Arguments , therefore, suggests a range of policy 

options and programs (see “Changing Government Policies,” p. 151). Some 

of our proposals would directly promote a healthier, more environmentally 

sound diet. Others might reduce consumption by increasing the price of 

animal products. And some would improve the lives of farm animals. 

## 

That’s what  Six Arguments for a Greener Diet  is about. Now a few words about 

what it is  not  about.  Six Arguments  focuses on the United States, though the 

same logic applies to every other nation. The United States and other indus -

trialized nations have largely passed through the “nutrition transition,” 

meaning that diets that were once based largely on starchy grains and pota -Preface: Greener Diets for a Healthier World  • xiii 

toes now include much greater amounts of meat. Hundreds of millions of 

people in India, China, Indonesia, and other developing nations are follow -

ing our footsteps toward the meat counter. As Lester Brown, president of 

the Earth Policy Institute and a long-time analyst of global agriculture poli -

cies, has noted, the animal-rich American diet requires the production of 

four times as much grain per person as the average Indian diet. 4 If the entire 

world’s population were to eat as much meat as Westerners, two-thirds more 

land would be needed than is currently farmed. 5 The increased demand 

for water, fertilizer, and pesticides and the concomitant increased pollution 

would be unsustainable and ultimately devastating to our planet. 

Six Arguments for a Greener Diet  puts the health, environmental, and 

animal welfare consequences of raising and eating livestock under the 

microscope, but does not delve into the whys and wherefores of the situ -

ation. Why are so many animals allowed to be raised in miserable condi -

tions? Why are restaurants permitted to market fatty hamburgers and other 

unhealthy foods to young children? Why are livestock operations that raise 

thousands or tens of thousands of chickens, pigs, and cattle allowed to pollute 

waterways and the atmosphere with tons of smelly, drug-tainted manure 

and global-warming pollutants? Why are huge soybean and grain farms 

allowed to use such large amounts of fertilizer and pesticides that the run -

off pollutes rivers, lakes, and even oceans? Why do farmers who grow crops 

to feed livestock receive billions of dollars in annual subsidies, hundreds xiv  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

of times as much as fruit and 

vegetable growers receive? Why 

does the federal government not 

shape its farm and health policies 

around its sensible  Dietary Guide -

lines for Americans  and the vitality 

of rural communities? 

It’s questions like those that 

activate dozens of agribusiness, 

food industry, environmental, 

health, and consumer groups 

at the local, state, and national 

levels. The answers to the “why” 

questions are matters of politics, 

not science, and typically revolve 

around money and livelihoods. 

The makers of pesticides, fertil -

izer, and animal drugs; the cattle, 

hog, poultry, and dairy indus -

tries; the large grain companies 

and grain farmers—they all defend the status quo. They pour millions 

of dollars each year into campaign contributions, lobbyists’ salaries, and 

advertising campaigns. They wine and dine politicians—often over fatty 

steaks—and use hardball tactics to rein in any rare elected official who dares 

stray from the proper path. (Senators will long remember how, in 1980, the 

cattle industry successfully campaigned to defeat South Dakota senator 

George McGovern because he dared recommend that people eat less beef.) 

And, by making use of the “revolving door,” top officials from the cattle, 

pork, dairy, and other food- and agriculture-related industries become top 

officials in the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and many former legislators 

and Department of Agriculture officials enjoy more lucrative, and no less 

influential, careers on Washington’s K Street, where they lobby for those 

industries. 

Getting the “why” questions answered in a way that protects humans, 

animals, and the environment will require the involvement of thousands of 

concerned citizens, nonprofit organizations, concerned farmers and com -

panies, legislators, and government officials at the local, state, and national 

levels. Considering how important these matters are, now is the time to 

start. Meanwhile, each of us can quietly do our part—in our kitchens, gro -

cery stores, farmers’ markets, and backyard gardens. The Context 3

# The Fatted Steer 

# Grain-fed beef.  Since the 1950s, that term has conjured up thoughts of 

tender, juicy, delicious meat. Grain-fed beef is advertised by super -

markets and featured by restaurants. Omaha Steaks, a national 

retail and mail order company, pro -

claims: “We select the finest grain-fed 

beef for superior marbling, flavor and 

tenderness.” Morton’s, the high-end 

steakhouse chain, “serves only the 

finest USDA prime-aged, Midwest 

grain-fed beef.” And the latest epicu -

rean delicacy, Kobe beef—advertised 

as the “most flavorful and tender 

beef on the Planet”—is fed grain (and 

often beer). 1 The implication is that 

beef from cattle that were not grain-

fed is tough, tasteless, and simply not 

worth eating. 

In truth, grain-fed beef, which 

accounts for some 85  percent of 

American beef, epitomizes much of 

Grain-fed beef is rich in saturated 

fat and cholesterol, which promote 

heart disease. 

Growing corn and other crops for cat -

tle feed requires enormous amounts 

of fertilizer, water, pesticides, land, 

and fossil fuel. 

Feedlot cattle eat a grain-rich diet 

that can cause digestive, hoof, and 

liver diseases and necessitates the 

continuous feeding of antibiotics. 

Grass-fed cattle are less harmful to 

the environment and provide leaner 

beef, but still generate air pollution. 

Any kind of beef increases the risk of 

colon cancer. 







4 • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

what is wrong with both the American “factory” approach to livestock 

production and the American diet. They eat a diet that sickens them. They 

generate air and water pollution. They pack on fattier meat. And, to top it 

off, grain-fed beef doesn’t necessarily taste better than grass-fed beef. 

A sensible argument for raising cattle and other ruminants is that their 

manure fertilizes grasslands, and they can convert into meat or milk the 

nutrient- and fiber-rich plant matter—grasses, cornstalks, and the like—that 

humans cannot digest. Raising cattle that way, though not without prob -

lems of its own, expands the food supply. However, in the United States, 

that rationale for including beef in the diet is undercut by the fact that the 

great majority of beef cattle spend months in feedlots eating grain, getting 

fat, and generating pollution. 

## The Objective: Cheap and Tender Beef 

Restaurateur and former professional football player Dave Shula’s “Views 

on Great Beef” include the note that “A great steak is all about flavorful, juicy 

and tender beef.” 2 And an animal physiologist with the U.S. Department of 

Agriculture (USDA), discussing why he studies cattle proteins and genes, 

explains that “Tenderness is the most important trait to consumers.” 3

The cattle industry certainly wants to satisfy consumers’ desires—and 

maximize its profits. Fortunately for the industry, techniques that produce 

tasty meat also turn out to be the cheapest way to raise cattle. The high-

energy diets dished out at feedlots speed the animals’ growth, with much of 

the increased weight taking the form of fat. Much like a restaurant that tries 

to “turn” its tables as quickly as possible, the faster growth rate gets the cattle 

to market sooner. So with both gastronomic and financial motives in place, 

cattle producers have adopted practices that yield a very fatted steer indeed. 

## Choosing to Produce Lean or Fatty Beef 

For thousands of years, farmers have employed such factors as breeding and 

feed to shape the nature and yield of the meat (or milk or pork or chicken). In 

recent decades, scientists and agribusiness firms have turned the art of meat 

production into a science, with careful research supplanting happenstance. 

Unfortunately, the practices that lead to the fastest production and 

cheapest prices are not what’s best for the consumer’s health. 

They Are What Their Parents Are 

Breed is a major determinant of cattle’s fat content. Angus, Hereford, and 

crosses with other breeds are the most popular breeds in the United States, 

not least because they are among the fattiest. They have the largest amounts The Fatted Steer  • 5

of external fat and the highest marbling scores, and they provide the high -

est  percentages of Choice meat (see figure 1). The Limousin and Chianina 

breeds are far leaner. In Italy, in fact, the Chianina breed is prized for its 

lean meat. In the United States, it is often crossbred with other cattle—such 

as the Hereford—to increase marbling in the Chianina or decrease back fat 

in the Hereford. 

They Are What They Eat 

What cattle are fed greatly influences how fatty their meat will be. In a study 

at Ontario’s University of Guelph, Ira Mandell and his colleagues let Limou -

sin calves graze for eight months. 9 The cattle were then fed either grain or 

mostly alfalfa hay for seven months (see table 1). The average carcass weight 

of the grain-fed steers was 45 pounds more than that of the hay-fed steers, 

reflecting faster growth on a high-energy diet. The layer of back fat over the 

longissimus muscle (the main muscle in rib and strip loin cuts) was twice as 

thick in the grain-fed steers. And meat from the grain-fed steers contained 

almost twice as much intramuscular fat. The hay-fed steers, on the other 

hand, produced more lean meat than their grain-fed counterparts. 

Quality and Yield: Understanding USDA Meat Grades 

Because fat content is important to beef purchasers, the U.S. Department of Agri -

culture has established a complex grading system that gives high grades to beef 

that is well-marbled with intramuscular fat. 4 About 80  percent of all beef cattle 

and cows are graded by visual inspection at the slaughterhouse. The fattiest meat 

(8  percent marbling or higher) rates as Prime, the next fattiest (5 to 7  percent 

marbling) as Choice, and the leanest meat (3 to 4  percent marbling) as Select. 

In recent years, about 40  percent of cattle were graded as Select, 60  percent as 

Choice, and 2 to 3  percent as Prime. 5 Restaurants and supermarkets pay a pre -

mium for that fatty Prime meat. Producers also receive a premium for such special 

USDA grading programs as “Certified Angus Beef” or “Certified Hereford Beef,” 

which are breeds that yield mostly high-Choice beef (see figure 1). 6

“External” fat—that is, fat outside of the edible beef used as steaks—is reflected 

in USDA’s “yield grades.” The lower the grade on a scale of 1 to 5, the less fat. 7 Of 

meat that is graded, 85  percent is USDA yield grade 2 or 3. Although some producers 

argue that the quantity of external fat is unimportant because most of it is trimmed 

from beef cuts, much of that fat eventually ends up back in the food supply when it 

is blended with lean ground beef or used as shortening in baked goods. 8 

> An even leaner grade of beef, Standard, represents only 0.3 percent of all meat
> that is graded.

6 • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

While some breeds are inherently higher in fat, they will be leaner if 

they graze on pasture. In a study conducted at North Carolina State Uni -

versity, Angus steers were kept on pasture or fed corn until they weighed 

about 1,200 pounds (see table 2). 11  The grass-fed steers took about 1½ months 

longer to reach that weight, and their meat contained much less fat marbling 

than that from the grain-fed steers: Grass-fed beef was on the lean side of 

USDA Select, while grain-fed beef was on the high side of USDA Choice. 

Although the average carcass weight of the grass-fed steers was 75 pounds 

less than that of the grain-fed steers, the area of their longissimus muscle 

was almost as large as that of the grain-fed steers—a sign that grass-fed 

cattle can yield almost as much edible meat as grain-fed cattle. Moreover, 

Table 1.  Carcass traits of Limousin steers fed grain or hay for 209 days 12             

> Carcass trait Grain-fed steers Grass-fed steers
> Carcass weight 720 lb 674 lb
> Total fat 27% 19%
> Intramuscular fat 4.0% 2.7%
> Back fat over longissimus muscle at slaughter 0.4 in 0.2 in
> Lean meat 395 lb 409 lb

Figure 1.  Percentage of fattier meat in selected cattle breeds 10   

> Notes: All carcass weights were about 700 pounds.
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Breed
> USDA Choice (% of meat)
> Shorthorn
> Chianina
> Hereford-Angus
> Charolais
> Maine  Anjou
> Gelbv ieh
> Salers
> Limousin
> Simmental

The Fatted Steer  • 7

the lower yield grade indicates that the grass-fed beef had less low-value 

external fat. 

An animal’s diet can override the effect of breed. Feeding grain to a 

leaner breed of cattle over longer periods can result in meat that is as fatty 

as that produced by a fattier breed. The University of Guelph researchers 

compared the Red Angus breed with the leaner Simmental. 14  Both groups 

of animals were finished with a high-grain diet and slaughtered when they 

reached the same back-fat thickness (about 0.4 inches, determined by ultra -

sound). The Simmental took about 2½ months longer than the Red Angus 

to reach the same amount of back fat and, thus, spent substantially more 

time on feed grains. The Simmental outweighed the Red Angus at slaugh -

ter by 45 pounds, and, despite its “lean” reputation, had a slightly higher 

marbling score and total (external and internal) fat content. So, just because 

meat comes from a normally lean breed does not automatically mean that 

the meat is lean. 

Younger Is Leaner 

The age at which cattle are slaughtered strongly affects fat content. In a 

study led by Susan Duckett at the Oklahoma State University Meat Lab -

oratory, grain-fed Hereford-Angus cattle were slaughtered after 28-day 

intervals on high-energy diets. 15  After periods longer than 84 days, cattle 

progressively accumulated wasteful, external fat without increases in the 

palatability (taste, juiciness, and tenderness) of their meat. Between 84 and 

Table 2.  Carcass traits of Angus steers fed grain or grass and slaughtered at 

similar weights 13 

Carcass trait  Grain-fed steers  Grass-fed steers 

Days on diet  91  133 

Weight at beginning of experiment  896 lb  909 lb 

Slaughter weight  1,260 lb  1,190 lb 

Carcass weight  750 lb  675 lb 

Marbling score*  6.2  4.5 

USDA quality grade † 17.5  15 

USDA yield grade ‡ 3 2.2 

Longissimus muscle area  13.1 sq in  11.9 sq in        

> *Scoring system designed by researchers to match USDA’s scoring system: 4 = slight degree of
> marbling; 5 = small; 6 = modest; 7 = high.
> †Scoring system designed by researchers to match USDA’s scoring system: 16 = Select; 17 = Choice;
> 18 =High Choice.
> ‡Yield grade is measured on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 containing the highest amount of waste fat. 8•Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

112 days on feed grains, the cattle experienced the largest increase in exter -

nal fat and marbling. During that period, the content of intramuscular fat 

more than doubled, moving the meat from USDA Select to Choice. Those 

results suggest that limiting grain feeding to 84 days—many cattle are on 

feed for up to 190 days—could provide much more healthful meat. 

## Fatty Meat Clogs Arteries… 

Fattening cattle on grain is the quickest way to get them to market, but the 

higher fat content of feedlot beef is life threatening. Beef is a major source of 

saturated fat and cholesterol, which increase levels of the harmful kind of 

cholesterol in our blood. That clogs arteries and increases the risk of heart 

attacks, the nation’s number-one cause of death. While consumers can eas -

ily cut away the outside fat on steaks, they can’t remove the fat that marbles 

steaks or the fat in hamburgers and meatloaf. 

Grass-fed beef is usually lower in fat and less conducive to heart dis -

ease. 16  But, as we will discover in the next chapter, any kind of beef—espe -

cially processed meats such as sausages—promotes colon cancer. 

## …And Doesn’t Necessarily Taste Better 

Americans have been trained to salivate at the mention of grain-fed beef. 

“This creates well-marbled, tender, flavorful steaks. Marbling is the easiest 

way to spot a high quality steak,” says Iowa Corn Fed, a mail-order com -

pany that charges as much as $35 a pound for a steak. 17  One study found 

that pasture-raised beef sometimes has a “grassy” off-flavor. A Univer -

sity of Nebraska study found that half the taste testers preferred corn-fed 

beef, but the other half either preferred Argentinian grass-fed beef or were 

undecided. 18 

Taste experts agree that corn-fed beef tastes  different  from grass-fed 

beef, but not necessarily better. Corby Kummer, food editor for the  Atlan -

tic Monthly , says “Grass-fed beef tastes better than corn-fed beef: meatier, 

purer, far less fatty, the way we imagine beef tasted before feedlots and 

farm subsidies changed ranchers and cattle.” 19  Careful, moist cooking, such 

as using marinades, helps reduce any stringiness. 

Many studies dispute Kummer, presumably because taste is subjec -

tive and tasters bring with them their expectations of what tastes good. 20 

But some of the studies make a case for grass-fed beef. Mandell and his 

colleagues at the University of Guelph compared meat from the popular 

Hereford breed and the leaner Simmental breed. Cattle of each breed were 

fed mostly grass or mostly grain. A trained taste panel judged meat from 

both breeds—whether they ate grain or grass—to be equally palatable. 21 The Fatted Steer  • 9

Another study—spon -

sored in part by the National 

Cattlemen’s Beef Association— 

found that among top loin, top 

sirloin, and top round steaks, 

consumers showed barely 

any preference for the fattier 

Choice grade over Select. 22 

The study, conducted by Texas 

A&M University researchers, 

found that the more often 

consumers purchased leaner 

meat, the less able they were 

to distinguish among quality 

grades. They concluded that 

the “USDA quality grade may 

be limited” in indicating the 

taste of a steak. Taste is more 

culturally determined than 

genetically determined. It’s no 

surprise, then, that people prefer the kinds of beef they grew up with: fatty 

grain-fed in the United States and lean grass-fed in Argentina (the biggest 

beef-consuming country in the world). But we suspect that many more con -

sumers would enjoy grass-fed beef if they both tasted it and were told of its 

health and environmental advantages. 

Although beef production is geared to delivering fattier Choice or 

Prime meat, some health-conscious consumers are seeking leaner meat. 

Some companies, such as Laura’s Lean Beef, pay ranchers a premium for 

cattle that yield leaner Select grade beef. Other ranchers, such as Maver -

ick Ranch and Coleman, market grass-fed or organic beef, which is often 

leaner than regular beef, and are getting a premium for it. For example, 

Hawthorne Valley Farms, which boasts several hundred acres of lush pas -

tureland, charges up to $20 per pound for grass-fed tenderloin steaks at 

local farmers’ markets. 23  In response to this growing consumer demand, 

even the Cattlemen’s Beef Board sometimes highlights the low fat content 

of certain steaks. 24 

## Raising Cattle Harms the Environment… 

Raising tens of millions of cattle not only provides meat that promotes 

heart disease and sometimes causes food poisoning (see Arguments #1 10  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

and #2), but also wreaks environmental havoc, as detailed in Arguments #3, 

#4, and #5. A mid-sized feedlot with 10,000 cattle churns out half a million 

pounds of manure each day—equivalent to a city such as Washington, D.C., 

with 500,000 residents. That mountain of fragrant manure pollutes the air 

and sometimes pollutes streams and rivers, killing plants and animals. The 

methane that cattle and their manure produce has a global-warming effect 

equal to that of 33 million automobiles. 

Grass-Fed Beef: Better, but Not a Health Food 

Grass-fed beef is typically leaner than feedlot beef, a major advantage; and graz -

ing on pasture spares the need for about 5,000 pounds of grain per animal. Beyond 

that, some advocates maintain 

that grass-fed beef is rich in two 

special kinds of fat—conjugated 

linoleic acid (CLA) and omega-3 

fatty acids—that confer health 

benefits. One purveyor, Ameri -

can Grass Fed Beef, emphasizes 

that its “grass fed beef is high 

in heart friendly essential fatty 

acids.” 25  As yet, however, the evidence for such benefits is scanty, and even lean 

beef modestly increases the risk of heart disease and promotes colon cancer. 

Conjugated Linoleic Acid 

In the early 1980s, scientists suggested that CLA in beef might help fight obesity 

and prevent cancer. However, studies over the past two decades generally have 

been unsuccessful in linking the consumption of grass-fed beef to those “near-

magical” (as one skeptical scientist stated) results. 

Weight gain.  Michael Pariza—the University of Wisconsin scientist who first iden -

tified CLA in beef and heralded its possible benefits—found that CLA reduces 

weight gain in laboratory mice, with possibly smaller benefits in other lab ani -

mals. 26  However, Pariza notes that the fat mostly reduces future weight gain, not 

the initial weight. An industry-sponsored study suggests that CLA might lower the 

percentage of body fat, but not weight. 27  An added complexity is that meat and 

dairy products contain one form of CLA, while dietary supplements contain an 

additional form. Only the form in supplements affects weight in animals. 

The bottom line is that human studies have not shown a benefit, 28  and some 

research indicates that supplements may increase the risk of diabetes, heart 

disease, and other problems. 29  In 2002, the Institute of Medicine, a part of the 

The Fatted Steer  • 11 

National Academy of Sciences, stated that “research on the effects of CLA on 

body composition in humans has provided conflicting results” and declined to 

set a recommended intake level. 30  Overweight individuals should run—but not to 

grocery stores for grass-fed beef or drug stores for supplements. 

Cancer.  When female rats predisposed to mammary (breast) tumors were fed a 

diet containing 0.5  percent to 1  percent CLA, existing tumors grew more slowly 

or stopped growing, and fewer new tumors developed. Also, the tumors did not 

spread to other organs. 31  In 1989,  USA Today  opined that beef “aids [the] war on 

cancer” and could “be made into a drug” if CLA proved beneficial to humans. 32 

But the Institute of Medicine threw cold water on that notion, too, saying that 

“to date, there are insufficient data in humans to recommend a level of CLA 

at which beneficial health effects may occur.” 33  Even if beef’s CLA turns out to 

protect against cancer, grass-fed beef’s lower fat content—its real health advan -

tage—would reduce the benefits from the higher content of CLA in its fat. 34 

Overall, the evidence that CLA offers health benefits is skimpy. And if CLA ever were 

proven to offer benefits, doctors certainly would prescribe pills, not burgers. 

Omega-3 Fatty Acids 

Some people claim that grass-fed beef is especially healthful because it contains 

about five times as much omega-3 fatty acids as grain-fed beef. 35  Those are the same 

fatty acids—eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)—that are 

found in fish oil and appear to prevent heart attacks and possibly strokes. 36  Beef also 

contains small amounts of alpha-linolenic acid, some of which the body can convert 

to EPA and DHA. 37  But the amounts of all of those fatty acids are small. 

The American Heart Association recommends that people without heart disease 

eat fish twice a week, as well as flaxseed, canola, and soybean oils. People with 

heart disease should consume about 1 gram of EPA and DHA per day. 38  To get 

that amount from grass-fed beef would mean eating about 5 to 10 pounds of rib 

steaks. 39  Clearly, fish and dietary supplements are better sources: Three ounces 

of bluefin tuna provide 1.5 grams of the fatty acids; 3 ounces of Atlantic salmon 

provide 1.9 grams. 40 



Feeding grain to cattle makes a bad situation worse. It takes about 

7 pounds of corn to put on 1 pound of weight. That’s why over 200 million 

acres of land are devoted to producing grains, oilseeds, pasture, and hay for 

livestock. 41  Moreover, cultivation of those crops requires 181 million pounds 

of pesticides, 22 billion pounds of fertilizer, and 17 trillion gallons of irriga -

tion water per year. The fertilizer and pesticides pollute the air, water, and 

soil, while irrigation depletes natural aquifers built up over millennia. 12  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

## …And the Cattle, Too 

One measure of our humanity is how well we treat animals. While pets, 

of course, are often pampered almost like children, livestock are another 

story. Aside from sometimes being branded with a burning hot iron and, 

in the case of males, castrated without the benefit of sedation or painkill -

ers, beef cattle have a pretty good life for their first year or so, living on the 

range. But then virtually all cattle are shipped in crowded trucks—exposed 

to the elements and banged about—to feedlots, where they dwell for up to 

six months in manure-befouled pens and eat a high-energy corn-based diet 

that sometimes causes liver, hoof, and gastrointestinal illnesses and occa -

sionally even fatal bloating. (Shipping the animals to the feed is cheaper 

than hauling the feed to them. Indeed, in the case of chickens, corn and soy -

bean meal account for 60 percent of the cost of production. 44 )

When they’ve reached market weight, feedlot cattle (along with small 

numbers of pasture-raised cattle) are shipped for the final time to a slaugh -

terhouse where they have a small, but real, risk of a slow, painful death. 

From that point on, the cattle exact a sort of posthumous revenge: First to 

suffer are the workers in slaughterhouses and meat processing plants who 

experience everything from repetitive movement injuries to knife wounds. 

Next are the unwitting consumers, who may suffer foodborne illness in the 

short term or fatal heart attacks in the long term. 

## What It All Means 

Raising cattle provides valuable nutrients, leather, and by-products used by 

the food and drug and other industries. But considering how most cattle 

are raised, those positives are outweighed by a host of negatives. To protect 

our own health and our country’s environment, the best thing we could 

do would be to eat less, leaner, or no beef. Should that happen on a large 

enough scale, vast areas of cropland could be freed up, allowing the land to 

Grazing’s Pluses and Minuses     

> Grazing is better in many ways than feeding grain to cattle, but it still exacts
> environmental costs. Cattle that eat grass and roughage release more methane (a
> gas that causes global warming and is 23 times more potent than carbon dioxide)
> than cattle on a high-energy feedlot diet, because grass-fed cattle take about
> 10 to 20 percent longer to reach market weight. 42 Those longer lives also mean
> more manure—about 3,500 to 5,000 pounds per animal (60 pounds per day). That
> manure, though, is dispersed widely on pastureland, enriching the soil and nour -
> ishing the growth of plant life. 43 The Fatted Steer •13

regain much of its original fertility and biodiversity or to be planted in more 

healthful fruit and vegetable crops or crops that would provide biofuel. 

But as long as people  do  eat beef, raising cattle on pastureland—instead 

of feeding them grain—would dramatically reduce the fat content of beef, 

the waste and pollution of water and the fouling of air caused by manure 

and agricultural chemicals, and the misery experienced by the cattle con -

signed to feedlots. The Arguments 17 

# Less Chronic Disease and Better 

# Overall Health 

## Our Diet Is Killing Us 

At least one of every six deaths in the United States—upwards of 340,000 

each year—is linked to a poor diet and sedentary lifestyle. 1 The average 

American is about as likely to die 

from a disease related to diet and 

physical inactivity as from smoking 

tobacco—and far likelier to die from 

diet and inactivity than from an auto -

mobile accident, homicide, or infec -

tious disease such as pneumonia. 2

Among nonsmokers, the combina -

tion of diet and physical inactivity is 

the  single  largest cause of death. 

The specific diet-related diseases 

that fell so many of us include heart 

disease, certain cancers, stroke, and 

diabetes. Those and other chronic dis -

eases (so called because they develop 

## Argument #1. 

The saturated fat and cholesterol in 

beef, pork, dairy foods, poultry, and 

eggs cause about 63,000 fatal heart 

attacks annually. 

Less than a quarter of all adults eat 

the recommended number of daily 

servings of fruits and vegetables— 

foods that reduce the risk of heart 

disease and cancer. 

Vegetarians enjoy lower levels of 

blood cholesterol, less obesity, 

less hypertension, and fewer other 

problems than people whose diet 

includes meat. 





18 • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

and progress over many years) are caused in part by diets too poor in healthy plant-based foods and too rich in unhealthy animal-based foods. 

We Eat Too Much of What’s Bad for Us… 

Obesity, which is directly linked to diet and a sedentary lifestyle, mark-edly increases a person’s risk of heart disease, hypertension (high blood pressure), diabetes, and some cancers. Rates of obesity have doubled in chil-dren and adults and tripled in teen-agers since the late 1970s, which is not surprising, since—thanks to ubiqui-tous high-calorie foods—the average adult eats 100 to 500 calories more per day and—thanks to modern conveniences—exercises less. 3 The additional 

calories have come mainly from the least healthy foods: white flour, added fats and oils, and refined sugars. 4

Moreover, Americans are eating more flesh foods—beef, pork, chicken, 

turkey, and seafood. In 2003, for instance, Americans ate more of each of 

those foods than they did a half-century earlier (see figure 1 and table  1). 

Fortunately, the biggest increase was for poultry, which is not directly linked 

to chronic disease. However, a lot of that chicken—and fish too—is not 

baked or grilled, but deep fried in partially hydrogenated oil. That oil con-tains trans fat, one of the most potent causes of heart disease. Meanwhile, Americans cut their consumption of beef by 33  percent since 1976; that is likely due both to health concerns and lower chicken prices. 

Our inconsistent efforts to eat 

healthy diets extend to non-meat foods as well. Although we are eat-ing one-third fewer eggs—the yolks of which are our biggest source of cholesterol and thus contribute to heart disease—than we did in 1953, we are eating four times as much cheese—which is high in saturated fat and promotes heart disease (see table  1).   

> Figure 1. Major sources of animal protein produced in the United States 5
> Eggs 1.4 billion Pork 2.3 billion Beef 3.3 billion Milk 5.6 billion Poultry 5.8 billion
> 18.4 billion pounds per year

Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 19 

Looking at other non-animal-derived portions of our diet, we are con -

suming massive amounts of nutritionally poor plant-based foods, notably: 

refined grains (white bread, white pasta, and white rice), which are 

stripped of much of their nutrients and dietary fiber; 

soft drinks and other foods high in refined sugars (including high-

fructose corn syrup), which replace more healthful foods and promote 

obesity; and 

baked goods and fried foods made with partially hydrogenated vege -

table oil and palm, palm kernel, and coconut oils, which promote heart 

disease. 

Finally, there’s salt. The large amounts of salt in most packaged and restau -

rant foods and processed meats increase blood pressure, which increases 

the risk of heart attacks and strokes. 

…And Not Enough Whole Grains, 

Fruits, and Vegetables 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture 

(USDA) estimates that the average adult 

eats only one serving of whole grains 

daily. 7 In contrast, the  Dietary Guide -

lines for Americans  recommends that 

at least half of our 6 to 10 daily grain 

servings should be whole grain. 8 The 







Table 1.  Per capita availability of major sources of meat, poultry, and seafood; 

dairy foods; and eggs 6

1909  56  41  10  1 10*  34  4 293 

1953  61  39  15  4 11  37  7 379 

1976  92  41  29  7 13  30  16  270 

2003  62  49  58  14  16  23  31  253  

> Notes: Figures for meat, poultry, and seafood represent the numbers of trimmed (edible) pounds
> per capita that were available in the food supply; the remaining figures represent the per capita
> numbers of gallons (milk and yogurt), pounds (cheese), or eggs that were available in the food
> supply. Due to waste and spoilage, actual consumption is lower. Beef consumption peaked in 1976.
> *Figure is for 1929, the first year for which data are available.
> Year
> Beef & veal
> Pork
> Chicken
> Turkey
> Eggs
> Cheese
> Milk &
> yogurt
> Fish &
> shellfish

20  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

The Cardiovascular Benefit of Eating Less Meat and Dairy 

Probably the biggest health benefit from eating less animal products (other than 

fish) is a lower risk of heart disease. The Center for Science in the Public Interest 

estimated the approximate benefit based on the: 

amounts of different fatty acids and cholesterol that are supplied by various 

animal products, 

impact of saturated fat and cholesterol on blood cholesterol levels, and 

relationship between blood cholesterol and heart disease. 

We first estimated how our consumption of fats and cholesterol would change if all 

the beef, pork, milk and cheese, poultry, and eggs were removed from the average 

diet and either not replaced or replaced with foods that did not affect the risk of 

heart disease. 9 Next, we projected how those changes in fat and cholesterol intake 

would affect blood cholesterol levels by averaging the results from formulas devel -

oped by several leading researchers. 10  We then assumed that a 1  percent increase 

in blood cholesterol—total or low-density lipoprotein (LDL, or “bad” cholesterol) 

increases heart disease mortality by 2  percent. 11 

Those calculations indicate 

that avoiding animal fats 

would save about 63,000 lives 

per year (see figure). 12  Because 

that estimate is based on inex -

act assumptions, the true total 

might easily be 25,000 more 

or fewer lives per year . The 

number of lives saved would 

be dramatically greater if one 

assumed that people replaced 

much of the meat and dairy 

products with healthier plant-

based foods or fish. The eco -

nomic benefit of avoiding the 

fat would be about $100 billion 

a year or in excess of $1 trillion over 20 years. 13  On the other hand, the same 

methodology indicates that the healthy unsaturated fats in salad oils currently 

save about 7,000 lives a year. 

Of course, we could reap some of those benefits by switching to lower-fat ani -

mal products—such as from beef to chicken or even buffalo and to low-fat dairy 

foods. 







> The fat and cholesterol in meat, dairy ,
> poultry , and egg products cause about
> 63,000 deaths from heart disease each year .
> 16,000
> deaths
> 5,000
> deaths
> 18,000 deaths
> 19,000
> deaths
> 5,000 deaths
> Da ir y
> Eg gs
> Po rk
> Po ul tr y
> Beef

Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 21 

USDA also estimates that we are eating 1.2 servings of fruit and 3.7 serv -

ings of vegetables per day, considerably less than the recommended 5 to 10 

daily servings. 19  And, disappointingly, potato chips and French fries (which 

are often cooked in partially hydrogenated shortening) here count as “veg -

etables.” Indeed, one-third of the vegetables that we eat are iceberg lettuce 

and potatoes, two of the least nutritious. We are consuming only one-third 

the recommended amount of the most nutritious vegetables: deep yellow 

and dark leafy green vegetables, and beans. 20 

According to the USDA, we’re very slowly increasing our consump -

tion of vegetables: Fresh vegetables are up 33 percent, and total vegetables 

are up 25 percent, since 1970. Surprisingly, though, fruit consumption is up 

only 12  percent over that period and has not increased at all in 20 years. 21 

As our diets have been buffeted by cultural, economic, and other fac -

tors, the evidence that certain dietary changes can reduce our risk of chronic 

disease has become much stronger. Much of the research shows that people 

who eat more plant-based diets, such as those traditionally eaten in Medi -

terranean or Asian countries, are generally healthier than those eating the 

typical American, Canadian, or northern European diet. 

## How Do We Know? 

Study after study points to meat and dairy products, especially fatty ones, 

as causes of chronic diseases. The harm results both from specific constit -

uents in animal products (such as saturated fat and cholesterol) and from 

pushing healthier nutrient-rich plant foods out of the diet. This section 

The Economic Benefits of a More Plant-Based Diet      

> Diseases related to a diet too poor in plant foods and too rich in animal foods
> contribute to skyrocketing health-care costs. The annual cost of angioplasties and
> coronary bypass operations is about $50 billion, with statin heart-disease drugs
> adding $15 billion. 14 Spending to treat high blood pressure (including $15 billion for
> drugs 15 ), stroke, diabetes (another $7 billion for drugs), and cancer add additional
> billions. 16 And, of course, on top of the medical costs are the incalculable amounts
> of pain and suffering (of both the people with the diseases and their friends and
> relatives) and lost productivity.
> Eating a more plant-based diet wouldn’t eliminate all those costs, but would cer -
> tainly move us well along in the right direction. One study estimated that going
> vegetarian would save the nation $39 billion to $84 billion annually. 17 If obesity—
> which is much less common in vegetarians than others—were eliminated, we could
> save about $73 billion a year. 18 22 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

presents the science behind the (by now) commonly accepted premise that 

eating too many of the wrong animal products and too few of the healthiest 

plant foods does tremendous harm to our health. Again, a common-sense 

caveat: Modest amounts of fatty fish and low-fat dairy, meat, and poultry 

products—even an occasional hot dog or cheeseburger—certainly can fit 

into a healthy diet. The problems arise from immoderation. 

One approach to understanding the influence of diet on health is to 

compare groups of people who eat very different diets. Such “observational” 

studies can provide important insights into what constitutes a health-

promoting diet, though they cannot determine with certainty the particular 

elements in the diets—or other aspects of the subjects’ lives—that are 

responsible for the better health. We review those studies first, then examine 

“intervention” studies, which are better able to identify causes and effects. 

Finally, we examine the health effects of specific foods and nutrients. 

Observational Studies Show That Vegetarians Live Longer and Are 

Less Prone to Chronic Diseases 

Studies that compare disease patterns in people with different kinds of 

diets help identify factors that cause or prevent diseases. For example, dif -

ferences in disease 

rates between veg -

etarians (or vegans, 

who abstain from 

all animal products, 

including dairy and 

eggs) and non-vege -

tarians can help iden -

tify the effects of meat 

and other animal 

products. The weak -

ness of this “observa -

tional” approach is 

that factors other than 

diet—such as physical 

activity, air pollution, 

use of legal and illegal 

drugs, and cigarette 

smoking—affect dis -

ease rates as well. Scientists try to account for those kinds of factors, but it is 

impossible to know about and account for everything.    

> Meatless meals offer an incredible variety of tastes, textures, and
> smells. Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health •23

Seventh-day Adventists Eat a More Plant-Based Diet and Live Longer and 

Healthier Lives 

Seventh-day Adventists (SDAs), whose religion advocates abstinence from 

meat and poultry as well as alcohol and tobacco, have provided invalu -

able evidence on lifestyle and health. 22  About half of American SDAs fol -

low a vegetarian diet or eat meat less than once a week.  About one-quarter 

of SDAs follow a meatless lacto-ovo vegetarian diet, which includes dairy 

products and eggs, and about 3  percent are vegan. Generally, even non-veg -

etarian SDAs eat less meat than does the average American. Vegetarian or 

not, SDAs also tend to be physically active and eschew tobacco and alco -

hol. So, by comparing vegetarian and non-vegetarian SDAs and adjusting 

for factors such as smoking, physical activity, and alcohol, the effects of a 

vegetarian diet can be teased out. Vegetarian SDAs may also be compared 

to the general population to shed light on the health effects of a lacto-ovo 

vegetarian diet. 

SDAs, on average, consume less saturated fat and cholesterol and more 

dietary fiber than the average American. 23  They eat more fruit, green salads, 

whole wheat bread, and margarine and less meat, cream, coffee, butter, and 

white bread. The same is true of vegetarian SDAs compared to non-vegetar -

ian SDAs. 24 

Key findings from studies of SDAs include the following: 

Longevity.  Vegetarian SDA women live 2.5 years longer than non-

vegetarian SDA women; vegetarian SDA men live 3.2 years longer than 

their non-vegetarian counterparts. 25 

Heart attacks.  Non-vegetarian SDA men have twice the rate of fatal heart 

attacks as vegetarian SDA men. 26  Similarly, the risk of fatal heart disease 

is more than twice as high for men who eat beef more than three times a 

week as for vegetarians. 27  However, beef consumption or vegetarianism 

does not clearly affect the risk of heart disease in women. 28 

Stroke.  SDAs in the Netherlands have about a 45  percent lower death rate 

from strokes than the total Dutch population. 29 

Cholesterol.  Among African American SDAs, LDL (“bad”) cholesterol and 

triglycerides (the most common fat found in blood) were lower in vegans 

than in lacto-ovo vegetarians. 30  Both of those fatty substances promote 

heart attacks. 

Hypertension.  Hypertension, which increases the risk of heart attacks 

and strokes, is twice as common in non-vegetarian SDAs as in vegetar -

ians; semi-vegetarians (those who eat fish and poultry less than once a 

week) had intermediate rates. 31  Those findings apply to both men and 

women. When hypertension was defined as “taking antihypertensive 









24  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

medication” (those with more severe hypertension), non-vegetarians 

had almost three times the rate of hypertension as vegetarians. 32 

Diabetes.  Diabetes is twice as common in non-vegetarian SDAs, whether 

male or female, as in vegetarians, with semi-vegetarians having an inter -

mediate prevalence. 33 

Cancer.  Prostate cancer is 54  percent, and colon cancer is 88 percent, more 

common in non-vegetarian than in vegetarian SDAs. 34 

Some of those health benefits may be due not to particular nutrients in 

plant foods, but to the fact that bulky plant-based diets help reduce body 

weight. For example, for the average 5’10” male SDA, non-vegetarians weigh 

an average of 14 pounds more than vegetarians. For 5’4” female SDAs, non-

vegetarians weigh 12 pounds more than vegetarians. 35 

Vegetarians Have Less Heart Disease, Hypertension, and Diabetes 

Studies of non-SDA vegetarians yield similar results. For example, the USDA’s 

1994–95 Continuing Survey of Food Intake by Individuals asked more than 

13,000 people whether they considered themselves to be vegetarian. 36  Self-

defined vegetarians whose diets did not include meat made up 0.9  percent 

of this nationally representative sample. Compared to non-vegetarians, 

the self-defined vegetarians tended to consume less fat, saturated fat, and 

cholesterol and more fiber. Self-defined vegetarians also ate more grains, 

legumes, vegetables, and fruit. In addition, they consumed fewer calories 

and had lower BMIs (body mass index, which combines height and weight) 

than non-vegetarians. 37 

Several large studies in Europe have examined the health of vegetar -

ians. The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 

(EPIC) is an ongoing study involving over 500,000 people in 10 countries. 

The part of that study being conducted in the United Kingdom (EPIC-

Oxford) involves more than 34,000 non-vegetarians and close to 33,000 

non-meat-eaters (including people who eat fish, lacto-ovo vegetarians, and 

vegans). 38  Another British study, the Oxford Vegetarian Study, compared 

6,000 vegetarians to 5,000 non-vegetarians. 39  (More than half of the non-

vegetarian subjects in that study did not eat meat daily and, therefore, were 

not typical of the general British population.) Findings from those studies 

and similar ones include the following: 

Cholesterol.  Vegans have 28  percent lower LDL cholesterol levels than 

meat-eaters. Lacto-ovo vegetarians and fish-eaters have levels between 

those of vegans and meat-eaters. 40  Based on blood cholesterol levels, the 

researchers estimated that heart disease rates would be 24  percent lower 





Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 25 

in lifelong vegetarians and 57  percent lower in lifelong vegans than in 

meat-eaters. 

Heart disease.  Vegetarians have a 28  percent lower death rate from heart 

disease than meat-eaters. 41 

Blood pressure.  Vegetarians have lower blood pressure and a lower rate of 

hypertension than non-vegetarians. Vegans have the lowest blood pres -

sure and the least hypertension, followed by vegetarians and fish-eat -

ers; non-vegetarians have the highest rates of hypertension. 42  (Differ -

ences in body weight were responsible for about half of the variation in 

blood pressure; alcohol consumption and vigorous exercise accounted 

for some of the variation in men. 43 ) The EPIC-Oxford study found hyper -

tension rates of 9  percent in lacto-ovo vegetarians and 13  percent in 

non-vegetarians. 44 

Diabetes.  Mortality from diabetes is markedly lower for vegetarians (and 

for health-conscious non-vegetarians) than for the general population. 45 

As with the SDAs, some of the European vegetarians’ health advan -

tages are likely due to lower rates of obesity. 46  For instance, in the Oxford 

Vegetarian Study,  overweight or obesity (BMI  > 25) was twice as common in 

non-vegetarian men, and 1½ times more common in non-vegetarian women, 

as in vegetarians. 47  In a Swedish study of middle-aged women, the risk of 

obesity was 65  percent lower in vegans, 46  percent lower in lacto-vegetar -

ians (those who avoid meat, fish, poultry, and eggs), and 48  percent lower 

in semi-vegetarians compared to non-vegetarians. 48  On average, vegetar -

ians are leaner than their non-vegetarian counterparts by about 1  BMI unit 







Meta-Analysis Find Vegetarians Have Less Heart Disease         

> Meta-analysis is a powerful statistical technique that combines the results from
> a number of similar studies into a single, large analysis. If done properly, such an
> analysis can provide more conclusive results than any single study. A meta-analysis
> of five studies (the Adventist Mortality Study, Health Food Shoppers Study, Adven -
> tist Health Study, Heidelberg Study, and Oxford Vegetarian Study) included a total
> of 76,172 vegetarians (both lacto-ovo vegetarians and vegans) and non-vegetarians
> with similar lifestyles. 49 The vegetarians had a 24 percent lower rate of fatal heart
> attacks than non-vegetarians. When compared to people who ate meat at least
> weekly, mortality from heart disease was 20 percent lower in occasional meat-
> eaters, 34 percent lower in those who ate fish but not meat, 34 percent lower in
> lacto-ovo vegetarians, and 26 percent lower in vegans. (The data on vegans may
> not be reliable, because the meta-analysis included only 753 vegans.) The meta-
> analysis did not find any difference in death rates from stroke or cancer between
> the vegetarians and non-vegetarians. 26 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

(roughly 6 pounds). 50  Differences in rates of obesity and BMI may be due to 

vegetarians’ higher intake of fiber and lower intake of animal fat, although 

other unknown factors also appear to be involved. 51 

In sum, several large studies have found that vegetarians enjoy lower 

risks of major chronic diseases and longer lives than non-vegetarians. That 

is not surprising, considering that vegetarians have lower rates of obesity, 

lower saturated fat and cholesterol intakes, higher fiber intakes, and lower 

total and LDL cholesterol levels. Vegetarians’ somewhat greater physical 

activity also plays a role. Smoking clearly is an important risk factor, but 

most recent studies adjust for it, as well as for age, alcohol use, and other 

readily identified factors. It is always possible, of course, that vegetarians 

may differ from other people in ways not accounted for in the studies. 

Though the numbers of vegans in the studies are small, they tend 

to have lower serum total and LDL cholesterol, less hypertension, and a 

lower prevalence of obesity than lacto-ovo vegetarians. However, there 

is no evidence that vegans live longer than lacto-ovo vegetarians and 

semi-vegetarians. 52 

Followers of a “Prudent” Diet Are Less Likely to Have Heart Disease 

Other major studies have found important connections between dietary 

patterns and heart disease. The ongoing Nurses’ Health Study, which is 

managed by the Harvard School of Public Health, compared a “prudent” 

diet, with higher intakes of fruits, vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish, 

and poultry, to the “Western” pattern, which is high in red and processed 

(sausage, bacon, and the like) meats, sweets, desserts, fried foods, and refined 

grains. After 12 years, among the more than 69,000 participants, the women 

who ate prudent diets were 36  percent less likely to develop heart disease 

than those who ate typical Western diets. 53  In a similar study of almost 45,000 

male health professionals, a prudent diet was associated with about a 30  per -

cent lower risk of developing heart disease or of dying from a heart attack. 54 

Intervention Studies Demonstrate Benefits of Low-Fat Vegetarian Diets 

The bottom line from observational studies is that diets based more on plant 

foods—and that means carrots, not carrot cake—pay big health dividends. 

But the limitation of those studies is that vegetarians and other health-

conscious individuals might be doing things besides eating more plant 

foods and fewer animal products that are the real reasons for their better 

health. Intervention studies overcome that limitation. 

The best way to study the effect of diet on chronic disease is to assign 

participants randomly to two or more different diets. Such “intervention” Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 27 

studies include those in which subjects were placed on vegetarian or other 

kinds of diets, thus allowing researchers to evaluate the diets’ relative 

strengths and weaknesses. 

Low-Fat Vegetarian Diets Can Lower Blood Pressure and Decrease the 

Risk of Heart Disease 

Vegetarian diets have proven to be remarkably beneficial for people who 

have cardiovascular disease. For instance, switching from ordinary omniv -

orous diets to a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet with similar sodium content but 

more fiber, calcium, and potassium reduced the blood pressure in subjects 

who had either normal or high blood pressure. 55  Differences in the kinds of 

fat, as well as the levels of minerals, in the vegetarian and non-vegetarian 

diets may have accounted for some of the differences in blood pressure. 56 

Several recent intervention studies examined the effect of a near-vegan 

diet high in phytosterols and soluble fiber on blood cholesterol levels. 57 

Phytosterols are plant-based substances with a chemical structure related to 

cholesterol; they are added to some margarines, yogurts, and orange juice to 

reduce cholesterol absorption.  The soluble fiber in such foods as oats, barley, 

psyllium, eggplant, and okra forms thick, sticky solutions that increase the 

excretion from the body of bile acids and lower blood cholesterol levels. 

David Jenkins and colleagues at the University of Toronto placed people 

with high blood cholesterol levels on either (1) a near-vegan diet high in 

phytosterols, soluble fiber, and soy protein; (2) a low-saturated-fat lacto-ovo 

vegetarian diet; or (3) the latter diet along with a cholesterol-lowering statin 

drug. The diet that included phytosterols, soluble fiber, and soy protein 

improved cholesterol levels just as much as the lacto-ovo vegetarian diet 

plus the statin. Judging from 

the subjects’ changes in cho -

lesterol levels, blood pressure, 

and other measures, the near-

vegan diet led to a 32  percent 

lower risk of heart disease 

than the lacto-ovo vegetarian 

diet. The near-vegan diet pre -

sumably had a greater effect 

because of the soluble fiber, 

phytosterols, and possibly soy 

protein (but see “Soy Foods: 

No Health Miracle,” on p. 39). 

Jenkins notes, “There is hope  Morale-boosting communal dinners likely contribute to the 

> success of the CHIP heart-health program (see next page).

28  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

that these diets may provide a non-pharmacologic treatment option for 

selected individuals at increased risk of cardiovascular disease.” 58 

Based in part on the Toronto studies, the National Cholesterol Educa -

tion Program, a part of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, rec -

ommended a combination of statins and dietary modifications for patients 

with high LDL cholesterol levels (above 130 milligrams per deciliter). 59 

Hans Diehl, a health educator at the Lifestyle Medical Institute in 

Loma Linda, California, has developed a community-based Coronary 

Health Improvement Project (CHIP) that involves hundreds of people at 

a time. CHIP encourages participants to switch to a near-vegan, low-fat 

diet (though most participants make more modest changes) and engage 

in walking or other physical activities. 60  After only a few weeks on the 

The DASH and Mediterranean Diets 

The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) intervention study used a 

more plant-based, but not vegetarian, diet. DASH examined the effects of a diet 

that includes twice the average daily consumption of fruits, vegetables, and low-

fat dairy products; one-third the usual intake of red meat; half the typical use of 

fats, oils, and salad dressings; and one-quarter the typical number of unhealthy 

snacks and sweets. It emphasizes whole grains and severely limits salt (see “Chang -

ing Your Own Diet,” p. 143, for more about this diet). Compared to a typical Ameri -

can diet, the DASH diet lowers blood cholesterol, blood pressure, and the risk of 

cardiovascular disease. 61  A major strength of this study was that the subjects were 

given all their meals, so the researchers knew exactly what they were eating. 

A prominent French study, the Lyon Diet Heart Study, tested the effect on heart 

disease of a Mediterranean-type diet that emphasizes fruits, vegetables, bread 

and other grains, potatoes, beans, nuts, seeds, and olive oil and contains only 

modest amounts of animal products. In subjects who had already had a heart 

attack, the Mediterranean diet led to 50 to 70  percent fewer deaths, strokes, and 

other complications compared to those following a “prudent” Western-type diet. 62 

Interestingly, blood cholesterol levels and cigarette use were similar in the two 

groups, indicating that other factors—possibly the threefold higher level of alpha-

linolenic acid, an omega-3 fatty acid, in the experimental group—play important 

health roles. Also, weight loss was not responsible for the dramatic benefit—a 

finding unlike those in some other studies. Harvard Medical School professor Alex -

ander Leaf commented that this “well-conducted” study showed that “relatively 

simple dietary changes achieved greater reductions in risk of all-cause and coro -

nary heart disease mortality in a secondary prevention trial than any of the cho -

lesterol-lowering [drug] studies to date.” 63  He also noted that the subjects readily 

adhered to this diet. Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 29 

program, participants typically eat more fruits and vegetables and less 

saturated fat and cholesterol than a control group. In one study, compared 

to the controls, the participants’ average LDL cholesterol  level declined by 

14  percent. 64  Subjects who changed their diets also lost an average of 7 ½

pounds, and their rate of hypertension dropped in half. The CHIP study 

shows that a health-promotion program can provide enormous benefits to 

large groups of people in a cost-effective way. 

Diet and Exercise Can Reverse Heart Disease 

Dean Ornish, of the University of California in San Francisco, and his col -

leagues have done ground-breaking studies in patients with moderate to 

severe heart disease. The researchers prescribe a very-low-fat vegetarian 

diet (containing no animal products except nonfat dairy products and egg 

whites), along with moderate aerobic exercise, smoking cessation, and stress 

reduction. That regimen significantly 

improved cholesterol levels, at least 

temporarily. It also began unclogging 

arteries and preventing angina (the 

chest pain that occurs when the heart 

muscle does not get enough blood) 

and heart attacks. 65  Lipid-lowering 

statin drugs were not needed. The 

lifestyle changes were as effective as 

coronary bypass surgery in reducing 

angina. The subjects who ate the low-

fat vegetarian diet and made other 

lifestyle changes lost an average of 

24  pounds, which was undoubtedly 

an important factor in their improved 

health. 

In another study by Ornish’s 

research group, 440 men and women 

with coronary artery disease ate 

the same largely vegetarian diet 

and made the prescribed lifestyle 

changes. 66  After one year, the subjects 

enjoyed reduced blood lipids (13  per -

cent lower LDL cholesterol in men, 

16  percent lower in women), blood pressure (1 to 2  percent reduction in sys -

tolic blood pressure), and weight (5  percent in men, 7  percent in women). 

Fighting Prostate Cancer 

with Lifestyle                

> Prostate cancer, which kills 30,000
> American men each year, may be
> controlled with lifestyle changes,
> including a low-fat vegan diet. Dean
> Ornish and his colleagues at the Uni -
> versity of California “treated” with
> diet, fish oil and other supplements,
> exercise, and other lifestyle changes
> half of a group of 93 volunteers with
> early prostate cancer. The other
> half received the usual care. After
> one year, prostate-specific anti -
> gen, one index of prostate cancer,
> decreased 4 percent in the treat -
> ment group but increased 6 percent
> in the control group. The cancer
> progressed sufficiently in six men in
> the control group, but in none in the
> experimental group, to warrant con -
> ventional medical therapy. 67

30  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

In a smaller but much 

longer study, Caldwell 

Esselstyn of the Cleve -

land Clinic monitored 

18 patients with severe 

coronary artery disease. 68 

Most of them had suf -

fered coronary problems 

after a previous bypass 

surgery or angioplasty. 

All of those who ate an 

almost entirely plant-

based diet had no recurrence of coronary events over 12 years (a few patients 

took low doses of statin drugs some of the time). One patient who “fell off 

the wagon” had a heart attack and then resumed the program. The coronary 

arteries of 70  percent of the patients studied became less clogged. In Dr.  Es -

selstyn’s words, his patients had become “virtually heart-attack proof.” 

One concern about diets high in carbohydrates is that they tend to raise 

triglycerides and lower high-density lipoprotein (HDL, or “good” choles -

terol), a prescription for heart disease. However, in China and Japan, where 

traditional diets are very high in carbohydrates, heart disease is almost 

nonexistent. That’s probably because most Chinese and Japanese people 

have been lean and active—very different from the typical American. In 

addition, studies by Dean Ornish and David Jenkins of North Americans 

are reassuring. They found that diets high in carbohydrates from whole 

grains and beans, but low in white flour and sugar, led to major reduc -

tions in LDL cholesterol but had little or no effect on triglycerides and HDL 

cholesterol. The fact that Ornish’s subjects were moderately active and lost 

weight undoubtedly helped. Ornish speculates that even when high-carbo -

hydrate diets lower HDL cholesterol, that does not increase the risk of heart 

disease, while the low HDL cholesterol levels seen in people whose diets 

are high in refined sugars and starches do promote heart disease. 69 

A More Plant-Based Diet Can Treat Type 2 Diabetes 

Low-fat vegetarian diets can treat type 2 diabetes, a terrible and increas -

ingly common disease that causes everything from blindness to gangrene 

(and amputations) to heart disease. In one 26-day study of 652 people with 

diabetes, more than one-third of the insulin-using subjects who adopted a 

low-fat vegetarian diet were able to discontinue the insulin. Close to three-

quarters of those on the vegetarian diet who were taking oral hypoglycemic    

> Decades of eating fatty meat and dairy products can turn healthy
> arteries (like the opened and flattened human aorta at left) into
> ones afflicted with severe atherosclerosis (right). Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health •31

medicines were able to stop taking them. 70  The vegetarian diet also yielded 

a 22  percent reduction in serum cholesterol and a 33  percent reduction in 

triglycerides. Some of those benefits were likely due to the subjects’ losing 

an average of 8 pounds. 

A study that combined a low-fat, high-fiber vegan diet with daily 

exercise and weight loss (11 pounds in 25 days) was also highly successful 

in treating type 2 diabetes. 71  The lifestyle changes eliminated the pain 

related to diabetes-caused nerve damage in most of the subjects. It also 

reduced fasting blood glucose levels, blood pressure, and the need for 

medications. 

The results of intervention studies strongly indicate that a largely plant-

based diet provides tremendous benefits—sometimes even as great as those 

achieved by powerful prescription drugs or surgery. Though some of those 

studies also involved relaxation, exercise, or low levels of drugs, diets con -

sisting mostly of nutritious plant-based foods clearly are extremely effective 

at preventing or treating chronic diseases. The benefits include reductions 

in blood pressure, total and LDL cholesterol, blood glucose, clogging of 

arteries, and—most importantly—less cardiovascular disease and type  2

diabetes. 

Building on that body of research, leading health agencies in the United 

States and abroad have developed quite similar dietary advice (see table 2). 

They stress the benefits from beans, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and 

seafood, along with physical activity, and the harm that is associated with 

fatty meat and dairy products. 

## What Specific Foods Should 

## We Be Eating—and Avoiding? 

The studies we have discussed com -

pared the health effects of widely dif -

ferent  diets . Researchers also have 

studied the health benefits and risks of 

specific  food groups , such as fruits and 

vegetables, and meat. 

Fruits and Vegetables 

Americans are eating slightly more 

fruits and vegetables today than the 

paltry amounts we ate 35 years ago, 

but still far less than the recommended 

5 to 10 servings per day. Fruits and 32  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Table 2.  Health experts’ advice on diet, physical activity, and chronic disease 72 

Disease  What increases risk  What decreases risk 

Heart 

disease 

Saturated fat (especially meat and 

dairy) DG, WHO 

Cholesterol (meat, dairy fat, egg 

yolks) DG, WHO 

Trans fat DG, WHO 

Salt DG, WHO 

Obesity/overweight DG, WHO 

Sedentary lifestyle DG, WHO 













Vegetables, fruits DG, WHO 

Whole grains DG, WHO 

Legumes WHO 

Fish, fish oil DG, WHO 

Fiber DG, WHO 

Linoleic acid WHO 

Alpha-linolenic acid WHO 

Oleic acid WHO 

Nuts (unsalted) WHO 

Physical activity DG, WHO 

Potassium WHO 

Plant sterols/stanols WHO 

Folate WHO 



























Cancer* 

Obesity/overweight ACS, DG, WHO 

Alcohol ACS, DG, WHO 

Meat (fresh and preserved) ACS, WHO 

Dairy products (high-fat †)ACS 

Sedentary lifestyle DG 











Vegetables, fruits ACS, DG, WHO 

Increased fluid ACS 

Physical activity ACS, DG, WHO 







Stroke 

Salt DG 

Obesity/overweight DG 

Alcohol WHO 







Vegetables, fruits DG 

Potassium WHO 





Type 2 

diabetes 

Obesity/overweight DG, WHO 

Saturated fat (meat, dairy products) WHO 

Sedentary lifestyle DG, WHO 







Vegetables, fruits DG 

Whole grains WHO 

Legumes WHO 

Physical activity DG, WHO 

Dietary fiber WHO 











Hyper-

tension 

Salt DG 

Obesity/overweight DG 

Sedentary lifestyle DG 

Alcohol DG 









Vegetables, fruits WHO 

Legumes WHO 

Potassium DG 

Physical activity DG 









Obesity 

Sedentary lifestyle DG, WHO 

Empty-calorie foods, such as sugar-

sweetened soft drinks and fruit drinks 

(high in calories, low in nutrients) DG, WHO 

Added sugars DG 







Physical activity DG, WHO 

Dietary fiber DG, WHO 

Whole grains DG 







Note:  Experts are the American Cancer Society (ACS),  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  (DG), and 

the World Health Organization (WHO). 

* Varies by site. See table 3, p. 34, for details.  

> †

See “…But Linked to Heart Disease and Various Cancers,” p. 44, for updated information about 

dairy foods and prostate cancer. Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 33 

vegetables not only are loaded with nutrients, but they also help push less 

nutritious foods out of our diets. 

Help Fight Heart Disease and Stroke 

Several studies have found that both men and women who consume the 

most fruits and vegetables have the lowest levels of bad cholesterol and 

a reduced incidence of cardiovascular disease—generally 5 to 30  percent 

lower than those consuming the smallest amounts. 73  Of course, when peo -

ple eat more produce, they inevitably eat less of something else, possibly 

meat or another source of saturated fat and cholesterol. Yet fruits and veg -

etables have benefits on their own, 

judging from studies that adjusted for 

meat intake. 74 

A Finnish study found that mid -

dle-aged men who ate the most fruits 

and vegetables had a 41  percent lower 

risk of dying from heart disease than 

those who ate the fewest. 75  Similarly, 

a U.S. study found a 27  percent lower 

mortality from cardiovascular disease 

in adults eating fruits and vegetables 

three or more times daily compared 

to those eating them less than once 

a day. 76  A meta-analysis (see “Meta-Analysis Find Vegetarians Have Less 

Heart Disease,” p. 25) of 14 studies found that each increase in fruit and 

vegetable intake of about 5 ounces—one generous serving—per day was 

associated with a 16  percent lower mortality from cardiovascular disease. 77 

One way that fruits and vegetables fight cardiovascular disease is by 

lowering blood pressure. 78  A 15-year-long study of more than 4,000 young 

men and women found that people who ate more plant foods, especially 

fruit, were less likely to develop elevated blood pressure.  In a meta-analysis 

that combined seven long-term studies, each additional serving of fruit was 

associated with an 11  percent decrease in the risk of stroke. Vegetables had 

a similar effect. 

Play a Role in Cancer Prevention 

Fruits and vegetables appear to play a modest role in cancer prevention. 79 

Eating more of those foods probably reduces the risk of mouth, esophageal, 

and stomach cancers. 80  The World Health Organization recommends con -

suming at least 14 ounces (about four servings) per day of fruits and veg -34  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

etables to reduce the risk of cancer. 81  The National Cancer Institute’s 5  A

Day for Better Health Program urges people to eat between five and nine 

servings of fruits and vegetables a day, depending on sex and age. Experts’ 

conclusions about the effect of what we eat on various kinds of cancer are 

summarized in table 3. In general, fruits, vegetables, and physical activity 

are associated with lower risks of certain cancers, while alcohol, a seden -

tary lifestyle, and red meat and dairy foods appear to increase the risk of 

certain cancers. 

Table 3.  Health experts’ advice on diet, physical activity, and cancer 82 

Cancer site  What increases risk  What decreases risk 

Bladder  Increased fluid intake ACS 



Breast 

Overweight or obesity in 

postmenopausal women ACS, WHO 

Alcohol ACS, DG, WHO 





Physical activity ACS 



Colon, rectum 

Overweight or obesity ACS, WHO 

Preserved/processed  meat WHO 

Red meat ACS 

Alcohol ACS 









Physical activity ACS, DG, WHO 



Endometrium  Overweight or obesity ACS, WHO 

 Physical activity ACS 



Esophagus  Alcohol ACS, DG, WHO 

Overweight or obesity ACS, WHO 





Vegetables, fruits ACS, DG, WHO 



Gall bladder  Overweight or obesity ACS 



Kidney  Overweight or obesity ACS, WHO 



Larynx  Alcohol ACS, WHO 

 Vegetables, fruits DG 



Liver  Alcohol ACS, WHO 



Mouth  Alcohol ACS, DG, WHO 

 Vegetables, fruits ACS, DG, WHO 



Ovary  Vegetables, fruits ACS 



Pancreas  Overweight or obesity ACS 

 Vegetables, fruits ACS 



Pharynx  Alcohol ACS, WHO 

 Vegetables, fruits DG 



Prostate 

Dairy products (high-fat*) ACS 

High calcium intake mainly 

through supplements ACS 





Stomach  Vegetables, fruits DG, WHO 



Notes:  Experts are the American Cancer Society (ACS),  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  (DG), and 

the World Health Organization (WHO). Stronger associations are in  boldface .

 See “…But Linked to Heart Disease and Various Cancers,” p. 44, for updated information about 

dairy foods and prostate cancer. Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 35 

Walter Willett, chair of the nutrition department at the Harvard School 

of Public Health, sums up the evidence this way:   

> Advice to eat five servings per day of fruits and vegetables …remains
> sound because a modest reduction in cancer risk is likely, and benefits for
> cardiovascular disease have become even better established. However, no
> one should expect substantial reductions in cancer incidence from eating
> more fruits and vegetables without attention to cigarette smoking, weight
> control, and regular physical activity. 83

Help in Weight Loss 

With obesity such a major problem in industrialized, and even many devel -

oping, nations, scientists have tried to identify the foods that contribute to 

or prevent weight gain. Intervention studies indicate that substituting fruits 

and vegetables for foods with higher-calorie densities—such as fatty meats, 

cheese, and candy—can help with weight loss. 84  Beth Carlton Tohill, of the 

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, notes that “Dietary inter -

ventions of low ED [energy-density] diets (low fat and high in fruits and 

vegetables) led to spontaneous weight loss.” 85 

Longer-term observational studies also indicate that eating more 

produce can fend off weight gain. Four studies involving more than 

100,000  adults in all reported an association between higher fruit and 

vegetable intake and lower weight. 86  Similarly, a survey of more than 

420,000  American adults found that people with a normal weight consume 

more fruits and vegetables than people 

who are overweight or obese. 87  (Some 

studies unfortunately count fried pota -

toes and fruit juice, which are high in 

calories, along with “real” fruits and 

vegetables, obscuring links between 

the healthiest fruits and vegetables 

and body weight. 88 )

Boast Other Health Benefits 

Some studies suggest that diets high 

in fruits and vegetables are associ -

ated with a reduced risk of type 2 dia -

betes and greater bone density. 89  The 

World Health Organization notes that 

such nutrients as vitamin K, potas -

sium, manganese, and boron, all 36  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

found in fruits and vegetables, are associated with a decreased risk of bone 

fracture. 94 

The 2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee concluded: 

Greater consumption of fruits and vegetables (5–13 servings or 2½–6½  cups 

per day depending on calorie needs) is associated with a reduced risk of 

stroke and perhaps other cardiovascular diseases, with a reduced risk of 

cancers in certain sites (oral cavity and pharynx, larynx, lung, esophagus, 

stomach, and colon-rectum), and with a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes 

(vegetables more than fruit). Moreover, increased consumption of fruits 

and vegetables may be a useful component of programs designed to 

achieve and sustain weight loss. 95 

Those conclusions led to these key recommendations in the  Dietary Guide -

lines for Americans :

Consume a sufficient amount of fruits and vegetables while staying within 

energy needs. Two cups of fruit and 2½ cups of vegetables per day are 

recommended for a reference 2,000-calorie intake, with higher or lower 

amounts depending on the calorie level. 

Super-Star Fruits and Vegetables 

It is possible that only specific fruits and vegetables, rather than those entire food 

groups, reduce cancer risks. For example: 

Tomatoes, possibly because of their 

carotenoid lycopene, are associated 

with a reduced risk of prostate cancer. 90 

Citrus fruits and other sources of the 

carotenoid beta-cryptoxanthin may 

reduce the risk of lung cancer. 91 

Cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli 

and cauliflower may protect against 

bladder cancer. 92 

Such findings have led researchers to 

urge people to focus especially on eating 

more of certain vegetables and fruits. 93 

For instance, the  Dietary Guidelines 

for Americans , the U.S. government’s 

authoritative nutrition advice, recommends increased consumption of dark green 

vegetables, orange vegetables, and legumes. Just eating more French fries and 

iceberg lettuce won’t help. 





Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 37 

> Choose a variety of fruits and vegetables each day. In particular, select from
> all five vegetable subgroups (dark green, orange, legumes, starchy veg -
> etables, and other vegetables) several times a week. 96

Whole Grains 

Whole grains are grains that have not been processed to remove the high-

fiber bran and germ, which contain much of the protein, vitamins, and min -

erals. Whole grains are excellent sources of B vitamins, vitamin E, fiber, 

zinc, iron, other minerals, and a multitude of phytochemicals; these last 

are naturally occurring chemicals in plants. Many of those substances are 

largely lost when grain is refined, leaving mostly starch behind. In the 

United States, four of 

the B vitamins and 

iron are added back 

to “enriched” grains, 

but that does not fully 

compensate for the 

losses. 

While the aver -

age American eats 

11 servings of grains 

daily, only 1 of those 

servings is whole 

grain. Only 7  percent of Americans eat at least three  servings a day of 

whole grains. 97  Instead, virtually all of the grain foods we eat (bread, pasta, 

cereals, crackers, cookies) are made from white flour, rice is usually white 

rice, and corn meal is usually degermed. 

Decrease the Risk of Cardiovascular Disease 

Eating more whole grains appears to reduce the risk of both heart disease 

and stroke. 98  James W. Anderson, at the Metabolic Research Center at the 

University of Kentucky, did a meta-analysis of 13 epidemiology studies and 

concluded that people who ate the most whole grains had a 29  percent lower 

risk for heart disease than those who ate the least. Even more impressive 

was the benefit of whole grains in women who never smoked. The Nurses’ 

Health Study found that non-smokers who consumed about three servings 

of whole grains a day had only half the risk of developing heart disease as 

women who almost never ate whole grains. In addition, eating more whole 

grains was associated with a one-third lower risk of ischemic stroke—the 

kind of stroke that occurs when a blood clot blocks an artery in the brain. 38  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Decrease the Risk of Diabetes 

Three large epidemiology studies indicated that whole grains strongly 

protect against diabetes. 99  The risk of diabetes was about 25  percent lower 

for people who ate the most whole grains. Another study found that over -

weight adults who ate 6 to 10 servings of whole grains a day had lower 

insulin levels than when they ate refined grains. 100  Lower insulin levels can 

reduce the risk of both diabetes and heart disease. 

Clean Out the System 

Finally, eating more whole-grain foods could spare millions of people from 

constipation and other gastrointestinal problems. The fiber in whole grains 

reduces constipation by increasing fecal bulk, softening stools, and speed -

ing the passage of food through the intestinal tract. 101  In contrast, low-fiber 

diets lead to hard stools that require a great deal of straining to pass. That 

straining can lead to increased pressure in the colon and result in diverticu -

lar disease (diverticulosis and diverticulitis) and hemorrhoids. 102 

While fiber-rich whole grains were once thought to prevent colon can -

cer, recent studies indicate that that is unlikely. 

Nuts—Protect Against Heart Disease 

Several studies strongly suggest that nuts (including peanuts,  which 

account for two-thirds of all the nuts Americans consume) protect against 

heart disease. 103  In one study, individuals who ate nuts one to four times 

weekly had a 22  percent lower risk of heart attack than those eating nuts 

less than once a week. Eating nuts five or more times per week was associ -

ated with a 51  percent lower risk. Those results were consistent in men and 

women and in younger and older people. In other studies, both walnuts 

and almonds had a cholesterol-lowering effect when they replaced meat, 

cheese, or other dairy products. 

Nuts’ health benefits are likely due, in part, to their monounsaturated 

and polyunsaturated fatty acid content; those fats lower LDL cholesterol. 104 

Other factors may be involved as well, because, as Penny Kris-Etherton and 

her colleagues at Penn State University found, the effects of nuts on blood 

cholesterol are greater than predicted on the basis of their fat composition. 

Other compounds in nuts that may protect against heart disease include 

dietary fiber, vitamin E, folic acid, copper, magnesium, potassium, arginine, 

phytochemicals, and plant sterols. The Food and Drug Administration 

(FDA) has concluded that “Scientific evidence suggests but does not prove 

> Peanuts technically are legumes, which are discussed below.

Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 39 

that eating 1.5 ounces per day of most nuts as part of a diet low in saturated 

fat and cholesterol may reduce the risk of heart disease.” The main concern 

about nuts is their high calorie content. It’s easy to eat too many nuts, which 

could lead to weight gain. 

Legumes (Beans)—Lower the Risk of Heart Disease 

Legumes include dried beans and peas, such as pinto beans, kidney beans, 

chickpeas, soybeans, and peanuts. (Peanuts account for almost half of all 

the legumes Americans eat. 105 ) Legumes are nutritional powerhouses, and 

greater consumption of them 

is strongly associated with a 

lower risk of heart disease. 106 

James W. Anderson and his 

colleagues at the University 

of Kentucky and the Veterans 

Administration Medical Cen -

ter in Lexington, Kentucky, 

reviewed 11 clinical trials 

that examined the effects of 

legumes (not including soy -

beans and peanuts) on blood 

lipids. They found that total blood cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels 

dropped by 6 to 7  percent when 1 ½ to 5 ounces per day of navy beans, pinto 

beans, chickpeas, kidney beans, or lentils were included in the usual diet. 107 

(In some studies, legumes replaced pasta or other starchy foods, while in 

others they were just added to the diet.) The Kentucky researchers specu -

lated that legumes’ soluble fiber, vegetable protein, folic acid, thiamin, oli -

gosaccharides, and antioxidants may all play a role. 

Researchers at the Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropi -

cal Medicine found that men and women who ate legumes four or more 

Soy Foods: No Health Miracle    

> Some people claim that soybeans—a dietary staple in China, Japan, and certain
> other Asian countries—reduce the risk of heart disease, cancer, osteoporosis, and
> other conditions. However, recent studies indicate that the effect of soy prod -
> ucts on LDL (bad) cholesterol levels and blood pressure is trivial. 108 It is not clear
> whether they protect against cancer. 109 Soy foods also do not appear to benefit
> postmenopausal women in terms of bone density and cognitive function. 110 Soy
> products’ main health benefit may be that those foods can replace animal prod -
> ucts that are high in saturated fat and cholesterol.

40  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

times per week had a 22  percent lower risk of heart disease than people 

who ate legumes less than once a week. 111  The reduced risk of heart disease 

was not just due to the bean-eaters’ eating less meat and poultry. Another 

study, this involving people in Japan, Sweden, Greece, and Australia, found 

that every 20-gram increase in daily legume consumption was associated 

with about a 7  percent lower risk of death. 112 

Beef and Other Red Meat 

Beef is a rich source of important nutrients, including protein, vitamin B12 

and other B vitamins, iron, and zinc. Heme iron, the form of iron found in 

meat, fish, and poultry, is easily absorbed and can help maintain iron status 

and prevent anemia. Zinc is also well absorbed from meat. Unfortunately, 

those nutrients—which can also be obtained from plant sources, fortified 

foods, or dietary supplements—are often accompanied by hefty amounts of 

saturated fat and cholesterol. Nutritionally, that is beef’s Achilles’ heel. 

The Fatty Flaws of Meat and Dairy Foods 

Saturated Fat 

Animal products account for at least half of the saturated fat Americans eat every 

day (palm oil also is high in saturated fat). The figure shows the top 10 sources of 

saturated fat by percentage. 113 

Saturated fat boosts LDL cholesterol 

in blood, thereby increasing the risk 

of heart disease. 114  Some studies also 

link saturated fat to diabetes. 115  In 

contrast, unsaturated fats from liquid 

vegetable oils protect against heart 

disease. 

Since even small amounts of satu -

rated fat increase the risk of heart 

disease, and there is no need for that 

fat in the diet, the Institute of Medi -

cine of the National Academy of Sciences did not set a “safe” intake level. 116  How -

ever, because small amounts of saturated fat occur in everything from corn oil 

to whole wheat bread, it is impossible and even undesirable for people to try to 

reduce their intake to zero. The  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommends 

that healthy people consume no more than 10  percent (compared to the current 

11  percent) of their calories from saturated fat. People with elevated LDL choles -    

> Sa la ddres si ng s,
> mayonnaise
> Chee se
> Be ef
> 12 %
> Milk 8%
> Oi ls
> 5%
> Ic ecr ea m
> 5%
> Ca ke s
> 5%
> Bu tte r
> 5%
> Ot her fa ts
> 4%
> 4%
> Po ul tr y4%
> Ot her
> 35 %
> 13 %

Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 41 

Raise the Risks of Heart Attack and Hypertension 

Some studies have linked high meat consumption to an increased risk of 

chronic disease. For example, Frank Sacks and his colleagues at Harvard 

and the Framingham Heart Study added about 8 ounces of beef to the daily 

diet of strict vegetarians (vegans) in place of an amount of grains that pro -

vided the same number of calories. After four weeks, the subjects’ average 

blood cholesterol level rose 19  percent. 121  Presumably, beef’s saturated fat 

and cholesterol were the culprits. Lean beef likely would have had a smaller 

effect. 

Beef’s role in causing heart disease was also indicated in a study of 

Seventh-day Adventists, as noted earlier. Men who consumed beef three or 

more times per week had more than twice the risk of a fatal heart attack as 

men who never ate beef. 122 

Beef consumption also boosts blood pressure. 123  Sacks’s clinical study 

mentioned above found that replacing grains with beef increased the sub -

terol are advised to limit their intake to 7  percent of their calories (that is actually 

good advice for everyone). 117  The best way to cut back is to eat less fatty dairy 

products and meat. 

Cholesterol 

Cholesterol occurs only in animal products, including egg yolks, dairy products, 

shellfish and fish, and meat. The figure shows the top 10 sources of cholesterol by 

percentage. Cholesterol is in both the lean and fatty parts of meat, so choosing 

lean meat helps lower saturated 

fat, but not cholesterol, intake. 

Our bodies produce all the cho -

lesterol they need. 

Dietary cholesterol increases 

LDL cholesterol levels in blood 

and the risk of heart disease. 118 

The average cholesterol intake 

for middle-aged (19–50 years 

old) men is around 350 milli -

grams and for women 210 mil -

ligrams. 119  While official recom -

mendations 120  are to limit cholesterol to 300 milligrams daily—200 milligrams or 

less for people with elevated LDL cholesterol—the less cholesterol consumed, the 

better. However, small amounts—from poached salmon, skinless chicken, or even 

an occasional egg yolk—are not a problem.      

> Ca ke s, cookies
> Fi sh ,
> shellfis h
> Eg gs 29 %
> Be ef
> 16 %
> Po ul tr y
> 12 %Chees e
> 6%
> Milk 5%
> 4%
> Po rk 3%
> Ic ecr ea m3%
> Saus ag e2%
> Ot her
> 17%
> 3%

42  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

jects’ systolic blood pressure by 3  percent in just four weeks.  When thou -

sands of women were monitored for several years in the Nurses’ Health 

Study, eating more beef and processed meats was associated with a higher 

systolic blood pressure. Furthermore, a study of several thousand young 

adults found that people who ate more beef and pork were likelier to 

develop elevated blood pressure. 

Raise the Risk of Cancer 

According to the American Cancer Society, red meat may increase the risk 

of cancer of the colon and rectum. 124  Similarly, the World Health Organi -

zation advises that high intakes of red and processed meats “probably” 

increase the risk of those cancers. 

A major study by the American Cancer Society examined more than 

148,000 adults who had provided dietary information 9 and 19 years ear -

lier. 125  People who ate the most beef and pork at both points in time had the 

highest risk of rectal cancer. Those who ate the most processed meat—such 

as ham and bacon—also had a higher risk of cancer in the part of the large 

intestine closest to the rectum. 

In other studies, Seventh-day Adventist men and women who ate red 

meat one or more times a week had almost twice the risk of colon cancer 

as those who never ate red meat. 126  The EPIC study, which is tracking diet 

and disease in half a million Europeans, found that eating more red meat 

and processed meat increases 

the risk of colorectal cancer. 127 

Eating more than about 7

ounces per day of those meats 

was associated with a one-

third increase in colon cancer. 

Processed meat appears to be 

more harmful than red meat. 

A meta-analysis of almost 

two dozen studies indicated 

a 35  percent increased risk of 

colon cancer in people who 

ate red meat and a 31  percent 

increase in people who ate processed meat compared to those who ate little 

or no meat. 128  Every 3½-ounce-per-day increase in consumption of red meat 

was associated with about a 15  percent increased risk of colon cancer, while 

every 1-ounce increase in daily consumption of processed meat was associ -

ated with almost a 49  percent higher risk. 129 

> Consumption of red meat—especially processed meats—
> increases the risk of colon cancer and possibly cancer of
> the pancreas.

Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 43 

New research suggests that red meat—especially processed red meat— 

also increases the risk of pancreatic cancer. 130  Whether it’s the meat itself or 

contaminants or additives introduced into the meat during processing is 

not yet known. 

Increase the Risk of Diabetes 

The Harvard School of Public Health’s study of over 40,000 male health pro -

fessionals found that processed meat appears to increase the risk of dia -

betes. Harvard’s parallel Nurses’ Health Study, involving almost 70,000 

women, found that diabetes was linked strongly to consumption of bacon, 

and less strongly to hot dogs, other processed meats, and red meat. 131 

Poultry 

Fortunately, considering how much of it we are eating these days, poultry 

does not appear to contribute directly to chronic disease. Indeed, poultry 

is usually lower in fat and saturated fat than red meat, so it is much health -

ier to eat in terms of heart disease. On the other hand, much of the chicken 

Americans eat has been deep-fried by restaurants in partially hydroge -

nated oil, the major source of heart-damaging trans fat, and heavily salted. 

That’s plain old junk food. 

Dairy Products 

Healthy, to a Point… 

Dairy products are excellent sources of calcium, and fluid milk is an excel -

lent source of vitamin D. Those nutrients, along with potassium, are needed 

to build and maintain bones at all ages. A number of studies have found 

that people who consume more dairy products have stronger, denser bones, 

and thus a lower risk of developing osteoporosis (“brittle bone” disease) or 

of fracturing a bone. 132  The protective effect of dairy products is strongest 

in younger women and less significant in women over 50. (There is lim -

Replacing Elsie Healthfully   

> Dairy products are Americans’ biggest sources of calcium, vitamin D, and potas -
> sium. But people who choose to eat little or no dairy foods can get calcium from
> green leafy vegetables, tortillas processed with lime, fortified foods, and supple -
> ments. They can get vitamin D from fortified foods (soymilk, breakfast cereals),
> supplements, or exposure to sunlight. Potassium is widely distributed in fruits and
> vegetables. That said, dairy foods may contain unique compounds that people who
> eschew those foods would miss out on. 133 44 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

ited information on the benefits to men’s bone health of eating more dairy 

products. 134 )

Dairy products also appear to help the body regulate blood pressure, 

thereby reducing the incidence of hypertension. 135  Adding three servings 

per day of low-fat dairy products to a healthy diet (low in saturated fat and 

total fat and high in fruits and vegetables) reduces blood pressure. Con -

sistent with that, dairy products have been associated with a reduced risk 

of stroke and metabolic syndrome (a group of symptoms including obesity 

and insulin resistance that increases the risk for heart disease and type 2 

diabetes). 

…But Linked to Heart Disease and Various Cancers 

Whole milk and many cheeses are major sources of saturated fat and cho -

lesterol, which cause heart disease. Milk and cheese account for 21  percent 

of the saturated fat and 11  percent of the cholesterol in the American diet. 136 

Cheese is now the single greatest source of saturated fat. Considering that 

whole milk has been a major (though declining) source of saturated fat in 

the American diet, it is no surprise that studies have correlated higher con -

sumption with heart attacks. In the Nurses’ Health Study, women who 

drank two or more glasses of whole milk a day had a two-thirds greater 

risk of fatal and nonfatal heart attacks than women who drank less than 

one glass a week. 137 

People could (and should) switch to fat-free dairy products. However, 

from a public health perspective, that doesn’t lower the overall risk of heart 

disease, because the milkfat ends up in cheaper butter or in cream, pre -

mium ice cream, and other high-fat foods. Suggestions for ways to lower 

the fat or saturated fat content of cow’s milk are discussed in “Reduce the 

Fat Content of Milk,” p. 154. 

Dairy products also have been associated with increased or decreased 

risks of certain cancers. 138  Eight of 11 studies that monitored large groups Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 45 

of men over a number of years linked dairy foods to an increased risk of 

prostate cancer. Researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health stated 

that the association between dairy products and prostate cancer is one of 

the more consistent dietary predictors for prostate cancer. According to one 

estimate, eating three servings per day of dairy products is associated with 

a 9  percent greater risk of prostate cancer—or 20,000 more cases per year. 139 

(Note, however, that most men actually consume about half that many 

servings. 140 )

Just what it is in dairy products that might promote prostate cancer is 

not known. The fat does not appear to be the problem, because several stud -

ies linked skim and low-fat milk to prostate cancer. 141  Several studies have 

suggested that calcium is the culprit, although others dispute this. 142 

While dairy foods might promote prostate cancer, they also might 

reduce the risk of other cancers. Some studies have found a modestly lower 

risk of col orectal cancer in people who consumed more milk. 143  (Cheese and 

yogurt did not appear to protect against cancer.) And dairy products may 

reduce the risk of breast cancer in premenopausal women, but the evidence 

is inconsistent. 144  But while we await more research, we need to eat. Consid -

ering dairy products’ pluses and minuses, it makes sense to consume two 

or three servings of them a day, but not go overboard with five or six. 

Eggs 

Keep the Whites, Toss the Yolks… 

The main health concern with eggs is their effect on heart disease. The 

problem is not whole eggs, but the yolks. Egg yolks supply close to 30  per -

cent of the 270 milligrams of cholesterol in the average adult’s daily diet. 145 

While 270 milligrams is within the “less than 300 mg per day” guideline, 

the 2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee states that “cholesterol 

intake should be kept as low as possible, within a nutritionally adequate 

diet.” 146  Dietary cholesterol increases LDL cholesterol in blood, which, in 

turn, increases the risk of heart disease. 147  Egg whites, in contrast, are rich 

in protein and free of cholesterol. 

…To Reduce the Risk of Heart Disease 

The high cholesterol content of egg yolks implies that egg-rich diets would 

increase the risk of heart disease—and studies of populations indicate that 

eggs do exactly that. For example, the Oxford Vegetarian Study found that 

eating eggs more frequently was associated with a substantial increase in 

the risk of death from heart disease. 148  Dutch researchers conducted a meta-

analysis of 17 well-controlled studies on the effect of dietary cholesterol 46  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

from eggs on the ratio of total blood cholesterol to HDL (good) choles -

terol. 149  Many experts consider that ratio to be one of the best indicators 

of heart-disease risk, with higher ratios indicating greater risks. In all but 

one of the studies examined, the researchers found that increased egg 

consumption was associated with higher ratios. Finally, men and women 

with diabetes have an increased risk of heart disease as their egg con -

sumption increases. 150  The bottom line is that we should eat fewer egg 

yolks. 

Fish 

Decreases Risk of Heart Disease and Cancer 

Fish is generally quite healthful, notwithstanding several concerns dis -

cussed below. Eating fish reduces the risk of heart disease. A meta-analy -

sis of studies involving a total of more than 200,000 people found that those 

who ate fish at least once a week had a 15  percent lower risk of dying from 

coronary heart disease than those who ate fish less than once a month. Peo -

ple who ate fish five or more times per week had almost a 40  percent lower 

risk. 151  Of course, frying fish in partially hydrogenated oil—as restaurants 

often do—turns a dietary plus into a minus. 

The health benefits of fish probably come from a favorable mix of fatty 

acids, including low levels of saturated fat and high levels (in some species) 

of two omega-3 fatty acids: eicosap -

entaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahex -

aenoic acid (DHA). Those omega-3s 

are thought to prevent heart attacks 

and strokes. 152  The World Health 

Organization, American Heart Asso -

ciation, and  2005 Dietary Guidelines for 

Americans  all recommend eating at 

least two servings of fish per week. 153 

Eating fish may also protect 

against cancer. The large EPIC study 

in Europe found that people who ate 

more than 2.8 ounces of fish per day 

had a one-third lower risk of colorec -

tal cancer than those eating little or 

no fish (under 0.3 ounces). 154  Further -

more, several studies indicate that 

fish may reduce the risk of prostate 

cancer. 155 

Not Enough Fish                            

> While health experts are encourag -
> ing people to eat more fish, over -
> fishing is driving some species to
> the brink of extinction. Populations
> of Pacific cod, Atlantic sturgeon,
> shark, monkfish, numerous variet -
> ies of rockfish, and others are all
> in trouble. Even aquaculture is a
> problem, because some farmed fish,
> such as salmon, are fed meal made
> from small ocean-dwelling fish that
> would otherwise provide food for
> diverse wild species. Before head -
> ing for the seafood counter, visit the
> Monterey Bay Aquarium’s Seafood
> Watch (www.mbayaq.org/). Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health •47

Some Seafood Contains Dangerous 

Contaminants 

Not everything about fish is salubri -

ous. Contamination of certain species 

of fish by mercury, polychlorinated 

biphenyls (PCBs), and dioxins 

detracts from fish’s healthfulness, 

at least for pregnant and nursing 

women, infants, and young children. 

Those pollutants—in fish and other 

animal products—are discussed 

later in this chapter (see “What in 

Animal Foods Harms Us,” p. 52). In 

addition, natural toxins—ciguatoxin 

and scombrotoxin—in finfish and 

potentially deadly  Vibrio  bacteria in 

Gulf of Mexico shellfish cause food 

poisoning. 

## What Actually Nourishes Us 

A variety of well-known substances in foods contribute to their healthful -

ness: fiber, antioxidants, folate, and potassium, to name a few. In addition, 

plants contain thousands of other phytochemicals that may have health 

benefits. Some of the substances, such as potassium, that are found in plants 

also occur in animal foods; others, such as fiber and vitamin C, occur only 

in, or are more abundant in, plants. 

Dietary Fiber 

All minimally processed plant-based foods contain fiber. Highly processed 

plant-based foods, such as white flour, sugar, and vegetable oil provide lit -

tle or no fiber. Animal products—meat, dairy, eggs, and seafood—provide 

no fiber at all. 

Fiber actually encompasses a multitude of different substances. These 

are typically divided into two broad groups: 

Soluble (or viscous) fiber, commonly found in fruits, oats, barley, and 

dried beans, dissolves in water and can slow the rate at which food 

leaves the stomach, which may help with weight control as well as reduce 

blood glucose levels. 156  Soluble fiber also interferes with the absorption of 

dietary cholesterol and reduces LDL cholesterol in blood. 157 

48  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Insoluble fiber, which occurs in 

whole grains, nuts, and some fruits 

and vegetables, does not dissolve 

in water. Cellulose, some hemicel -

luloses, and lignins are the most 

common insoluble fibers. Insolu -

ble fiber increases stool bulk, alle -

viates constipation, and reduces 

the risk of diverticular disease. 158 

Fiber—especially soluble fiber 

and fiber from grain products—has 

been consistently linked to a lower 

risk of heart disease. 162  A long-term Harvard study of male health profes -

sionals found that men who ate an average of 29  grams of total fiber per day 

had half the risk of fatal heart disease as those who ate half as much fiber. 163 

A subsequent study conducted by Tulane University scientists found that 

men and women who consumed about 6 grams of soluble fiber per day had 

a 24  percent lower risk of dying from heart disease and a 12  percent lower 

mortality from all causes compared to those who consumed about 1  gram 

per day. 164  Cereal fiber was more closely associated with the reduced risk than 

was fiber from fruits and vegetables. In women, eating 5 grams per day more 

cereal fiber—equivalent to two or three slices of whole wheat bread—was 

associated with a 37  percent lower risk of heart attack and stroke. 165 

A meta-analysis found that each 10-gram increase in dietary fiber 

was associated with a 14  percent lower risk of all coronary events and a 

27  percent lower risk of death from heart disease. Fiber from cereal and 

fruit appeared to provide the most benefit, while fiber from vegetables had 

little effect. 166  The results were similar for men and women. 

At a time when millions of people are seeking cures for obesity, it is 

important to note that people who eat the most fiber tend to weigh less. 167 

Dietary fiber helps control weight in several ways: 

Fiber-rich foods have to be chewed more, which slows eating speed. 

Fiber-rich foods take up a relatively large volume in the stomach, mak -

ing people feel full sooner. 168 

Soluble fiber slows stomach emptying, which keeps people feeling full 

for a longer time. 169 

The World Health Organization and others have identified diets high in 

dietary fiber—that is, rich in whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and beans—as 

an important means of preventing obesity. 170 









What Fiber Does  Not  Do    

> Fiber is not a panacea. Researchers
> at the National Cancer Institute and
> elsewhere long thought that dietary
> fiber helped prevent colon cancer. 159
> However, several important epide -
> miology studies and three interven -
> tion trials did not find a benefit. 160
> Fiber also does not appear to pre -
> vent pre- or postmenopausal breast
> cancer. 161 Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health •49

One final virtue of fiber—and a most valuable one—is that it acts as 

a laxative, leading to softer, bulkier stools. Fiber from wheat bran has the 

greatest effect, followed closely by fiber from fruits and vegetables. 171 

The Institute of Medicine, a unit of the National Academy of Sciences, 

recommends that middle-aged (19–50 years old) men consume 38 grams of 

fiber per day and women 25 grams per day. 172  Currently, the average man 

and woman consume only half that much. In contrast, American and British 

vegetarians consume much more: Lacto-ovo vegetarians average 23  grams 

per day, while vegans average 35 grams per day. 173 

Folate 

Folate is a B vitamin found in green vegetables, orange juice, fortified 

grains, and dried beans. Among other things, this important vitamin helps 

the body make new proteins, DNA, and red and white blood cells. Con -

suming too little folate during early pregnancy increases the risk of neural 

tube defect, a serious birth defect in which the neural tube fails to encase 

the spinal cord. Folate also may reduce the risk of colon cancer, but more 

research is needed. 174 

Since 1998, the FDA has required that white flour for bread and pasta, 

white rice, and breakfast cereals made with refined flours be fortified with 

folic acid. Previously, adults consumed only about two-thirds of the recom -

mended amount of folate. 175  Fortification has almost doubled Americans’ 

folate intake. 176  Happily, the incidence of spina bifida (one type of neural 

tube defect) has declined by 20  percent. 177 

Because plant-based foods are rich in folate, vegetarians tend to consume 

more of the vitamin than non-vegetarians. 178  In 1994–96 (before white flour 

and white rice were fortified), the average American consumed 262  micro -

grams of folate per day. 179  The average vegetarian likely consumed at least 

half again more. 180  Post-fortification comparisons have not been conducted. 

Despite a higher level of folate, white flour is poorer in many other nutrients 

and dietary fiber than whole wheat flour. People would be better off eating 

foods made with whole-grain flour, plus a multivitamin supplement. 

Potassium 

The mineral potassium is abundant in fruits, vegetables, and beans, as 

well as in milk and seafood. The median potassium intake of U.S. adults 

is about 3 grams per day for men and just over 2 grams for women. That is 

well below the “adequate” level of 4.7 grams per day, generally because of 

our limited consumption of fruits and vegetables. Some of the richest food 

sources of potassium are spinach, cantaloupe, almonds, Brussels sprouts, 50  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

and bananas, 181  but the biggest sources in the American diet are milk, pota -

toes, coffee, and beef. 182 

Potassium plays an important role in regulating blood pressure. 183  A

higher intake of potassium is associated with a lower blood pressure, and 

increasing potassium can reduce blood pressure in people with or without 

hypertension.  Higher potassium intakes, judging from several studies, 

lower the risk of stroke. 

Consuming more potassium has been associated with greater bone 

density and less age-related decline in bone density. 184  In addition, a higher 

potassium intake may well reduce the risk of kidney stones. 185 

Unsaturated Oils 

Most fats and oils in plants, including soy, corn, canola, safflower, olive, and 

sunflower oils, contain beneficial mono- and polyunsaturated fatty acids. 

Those unsaturated fats lower the bad cholesterol in our blood. 186  (In con -

trast, of course, animal fats are relatively high in saturated fat and low in 

unsaturated fatty acids and raise the bad cholesterol.) Based on a study of 

more than 80,000 women, Harvard researchers estimated that substituting 

unsaturated fat for 

about one-third of the 

saturated fat in a typi -

cal diet would reduce 

the risk of heart dis -

ease by a hefty 42  per -

cent. 187  Indeed, Amer -

icans are consuming 

three times as much 

salad and cooking oils 

as they were 40 years 

ago, a dietary change 

that almost certainly 

has prevented thousands of fatal heart attacks every year (see “The Cardio -

vascular Benefit of Eating Less Meat and Dairy,” p. 20). 188 

Omega-3 Fatty Acids 

Omega-3 fatty acids are a family of polyunsaturated fatty acids that occur 

in fatty fish, some vegetable oils, soy products, walnuts, and certain other 

foods. As noted above, the omega-3s probably contribute to the association 

between eating fish and a lower risk of cardiovascular disease. Plants con -

tain not the EPA or DHA omega-3s that occur in fish, but another omega -3,    

> Canola plants have beautiful flowers, as well as seeds that are rich
> in healthy monounsaturated oil. Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health •51

alpha-linolenic acid. Unfortunately, the body converts only a small fraction 

of that to EPA. 189  (The body can then convert a small fraction of the EPA 

to DHA.) It is unclear whether the alpha-linolenic acid reduces the risk of 

heart disease. 

The Institute of Medicine recommends that men consume 1.6 grams of 

alpha-linolenic acid daily and that women consume 1.1 grams. Anyone who 

doesn’t eat much fish should consume adequate alpha-linolenic acid from 

flaxseed, flaxseed oil, canola oil, tofu, soybeans, soybean oil, and walnuts 

and should consider taking a fish-oil or DHA supplement. 190 

Antioxidants 

Antioxidants include such nutrients as vitamin C, beta-carotene, vita -

min E, and selenium. Fruits and vegetables are especially rich sources of 

many antioxidants. Researchers have 

long hypothesized that antioxidants 

help protect against harmful oxidizing 

agents, which can damage body pro -

teins, DNA, and fats. While research -

ers have speculated that antioxidants 

contribute to the ability of fruits and 

vegetables to reduce the risk of chronic 

disease, intervention studies with vita -

min C, vitamin E, and beta-carotene 

have not found any benefits. 191  In fact, 

smokers who took beta-carotene sup -

plements actually had a  greater  risk of lung cancer. 192 

Intervention studies with selenium have been more promising. Several 

studies found that the mineral lowers the risk of prostate cancer and possi -

bly other cancers, especially in people with low blood levels of selenium. 193 

Antioxidants probably are best acquired from whole foods rather than 

from dietary supplements. 194  It may turn out that it is not antioxidants but 

other constituents of plants that are the truly beneficial substances. 

Phytochemicals 

Phytochemicals can be loosely defined as any chemicals that are naturally 

present in plants. Scores of different phytochemicals have been identified 

in fruits, vegetables, legumes, whole grains, and nuts. General categories of 

phytochemicals include carotenoids, flavonoids, isoflavones, lignans (not to 

be confused with lignins, which are plant fibers), and phytosterols. Many 

of them have no effect at all on health, but initial studies suggest that some       

> Fruits and vegetables contain antioxidants
> that may provide health benefits. 52 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

reduce the risk of heart disease, cancer, stroke, cataracts, and other dis -

eases. 195  While researchers work out the details, consumers should just eat 

plenty of a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and nuts and not 

bother taking supplements that are costly and contain just a few cheap and 

convenient phytochemicals. Much exciting new research is exploring the 

exact role of phytochemicals in disease prevention. 

## What in Animal Foods Harms Us 

Although some animal products are rich sources of protein, calcium, iron, 

zinc, and other essential nutrients, many also are rich sources of potentially 

harmful components, including saturated fat and cholesterol (see “The Fatty 

Flaws of Meat and Dairy Foods,” p. 40). In addition, chemical by-products 

of cooking and environmental toxins—such as heterocyclic amines (HCAs), 

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), PCBs, and pesticides—often 

occur in fatty animal products and may be harmful. 

Heterocyclic Amines and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 

HCAs form when meat, poultry, fish, and eggs are cooked at high temper -

atures, especially by grilling or frying. HCAs are potent mutagens (agents 

that cause genetic mutations) that cause cancer in animals. 196 

Another group of chemicals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, form 

when fat from meat, poultry, and fish drips onto hot coals or a flame. PAHs 

are created and then rise with the smoke, contaminating the food. 197  The 

nutrition-oriented World Cancer Research Foundation identified grilled 

and barbecued meats and fish as possible causes of stomach and colon can -

cer. 198  The National Toxicology Program of the U.S. Department of Health 

and Human Services says that PAHs and four HCAs are “reasonably antici -

pated to be human carcinogens.” 199  As with other carcinogens, the more of 

those substances that are consumed, the greater the risk, but the risk from 

using the backyard grill a few times over the summer is trivial. 

Environmental Contaminants 

Environmental contaminants, including pesticides (see “Risks from Pesti -

cides,” next page), industrial chemicals, and various pollutants, often accu -

mulate in animal fat. That is why meat, full-fat dairy products, and fatty fish 

tend to be the major sources of those contaminants. Fat-soluble contami -

nants persist for many years in human (or other animals’) fatty tissue and 

occur in breast milk. Some of the contaminants cause cancer in experimen -

tal animals and appear to cause behavioral abnormalities in humans. Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 53 

Risks from Pesticides 

Pesticides are widely 

used to control insects, 

weeds, and fungi on 

cropland and crops. Of 

the 511 million pounds 

of pesticides used 

in 2001, 181 million 

pounds were used on 

crops for livestock. 200 

The vast majority—167 

million pounds—was 

used for feed grains, 

with the remainder 

for hay and pasture. 

It is difficult to deter -

mine the health effects 

of pesticides on con -

sumers, because the 

levels of pesticide 

residues in food and 

water are minuscule 

and the effects may 

be rare or subtle. No 

one expects there to 

be a trail of sick peo -

ple leading from the 

dinner table to the hospital. Rather, the concern is that long-term exposure to low 

levels of numerous pesticides may cause diseases ranging from autism to cancer 

or impair the immune system. 201 

Animal Studies: Raising Concerns 

Many pesticides, including alachlor, acetochlor, and atrazine—herbicides widely 

applied to animal feed crops—have caused tumors in laboratory animals, includ -

ing stomach tumors in male rats and stomach, lung, and mammary tumors in 

female rats. 202  When a chemical causes tumors in animals, it is presumed to 

pose a cancer threat to humans. Other pesticides, such as c arbaryl and methyl -

phenoxyacetic acid,  when tested at high doses  suppressed the immune systems of 

lab animals and may cause autoimmune disorders; they also damaged the spleens, 

livers, kidneys, and nervous systems of the animals. 203  While those results are 54  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

intriguing, if not downright scary, epidemiology studies can help clarify whether 

the chemicals actually harm humans. 

Farmers: The Canary in the Coal Mine 

Farmers, not by choice, serve as important indicators of health risks from pesti -

cides. And some of the studies on farmers who regularly apply pesticides suggest 

significant risks. While farmers have lower overall rates of cancer than the general 

population, due to factors such as less smoking, they have higher rates of several 

cancers (see figure). 204 

Many factors contribute to the higher cancer rates among farmers. For instance, the 

higher rate of melanoma, a serious form of skin cancer, may be from working long 

hours in direct sunlight. Pesticide exposure also appears to be a significant factor. 

California researchers Paul K. Mills and Richard Yang concluded that the higher 

risk of prostate cancer in Hispanic farmworkers was related to their exposure 

to certain herbicides. 206 

The National Cancer Institute’s Agricultural Health Study, which involves nearly 

90,000 participants in Iowa and North Carolina, associated an increased risk of 

prostate cancer with six different pesticides. 207 

Nebraska farmers who applied 2,4–dichlorophenoxy acetic acid more than 

20  days a year were three times as likely to develop non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 

as farmers not exposed to the pesticide. 208  That herbicide is often applied to 

almost every major grain and roughage crop fed to livestock. 209 





  

> Note: Results are based on surveys of farmers in the United States and abroad. 205 Increases are
> statistically significant.

Increased risk of cancer among farmers compared to the gener al population 

0% 

20% 

40% 

60% 

80% 

100% 

120% 

Leukemia  Pr ostate  Stomach  Multiple 

myeloma 

Melanoma  Hodgkin’ s

lymphoma 

Lip Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 55 

Polychlorinated biphenyls are highly toxic industrial chemicals that 

are “reasonably anticipated to be human carcinogens.” 217  In addition, PCBs 

endanger fetuses and young children because they can affect the develop -

ing brain. The contaminant concentrates in animal fat and enters our diets 

and bodies through fish, cheese, eggs, and other foods. A 2003 report by 

the nonprofit Environmental Working Group found that samples of farmed 

salmon from the East and West Coasts of the United States contained three 

That said, some studies did not find clear links between two widely used herbi -

cides—atrazine and glyphosate—and cancer. 210 

Organophosphate pesticides are highly neurotoxic, causing weakness and even 

paralysis. 211  They make up nearly half of all insecticides (some also serve as her -

bicides and fungicides) used in the United States, with some 5 million pounds 

annually applied to corn, hay, soybean, wheat, pasture, and other crops. 212  Heavy 

exposure of farmworkers (and others) to organophosphates has been linked to 

memory loss, confusion, limb paralysis, and behavioral abnormalities, as well as 

paralysis of the lungs (which causes death by suffocation). 213  One study linked 

the now-banned soil fumigant 1,2–dibromo-3–chloropropane to reduced or absent 

sperm production in farmworkers. 214 

Health Effects in Consumers: The Big Question Mark 

Consumers are exposed to far lower levels of pesticides than farmers and pesticide 

applicators, so the risks to them are far smaller. However, children are particularly 

vulnerable, because they metabolize certain pesticides differently from adults 

and they consume higher concentrations of pesticides relative to their weight. 215 

Subtle impairment of IQ or behavior would be of great import, but undetectable. 

While most consumers are especially concerned about pesticide residues on fruits 

and vegetables, which are directly sprayed, fat-soluble pesticides in animal prod -

ucts actually pose the bigger risk. That’s because livestock are fed large amounts 

of pesticide-tainted feed grains and accumulate pesticide residues in their fat. 

Agricultural pesticides may well be causing the same problems in consumers as 

they cause in lab animals and farmworkers, albeit at a much lower frequency 

and severity. Much of the concern focuses on weakening the immune system, 

which might lead to higher rates of infectious diseases and cancer. That is espe -

cially true for people, such as Inuit children, whose diets contain high levels of 

pesticides and toxic chemicals. 216  However, actually proving that the average 

consumer is harmed may be impossible. Consumers could reduce their exposure 

to pesticides by purchasing foods produced on organic farms or farms that use 

integrated pest management and by eating less meat, poultry, dairy, and egg 

products overall. 56  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

times as much PCBs as typical commercial seafood and about four times 

more PCBs than beef. 218 

PCBs in farmed salmon are a problem for children and pregnant women, 

but less so for others. For the average adult the cardiovascular benefit from 

omega-3 fatty acids in salmon far outweighs the cancer risk from PCBs. The 

Center for Science in the Public Interest estimates that if 100,000 people ate 

one serving of farmed salmon per week, one person would develop cancer, 

but 1,500 people would be spared death from cardiac arrest. 219 

Another fat-soluble industrial contaminant that lurks in food—and 

human blood and breast milk—is polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs). 

According to Arnold Schechter and his colleagues at the University of Texas 

Health Science Center in Dallas, “food is a major route of intake for PBDEs,” 

with fish, cheese, butter, and poultry being the most contaminated. 220  These 

chemicals, which are used as flame retardants in everything from furniture 

foam to plastics in personal computers, are chemically and toxicologically 

similar to PCBs. The Environmental Protection Agency has reported that 

PBDEs cause liver and thyroid toxicity, as well as neurodevelopmental 

problems. 221  The agency banned the most toxic types of PBDEs in 2005, but 

residues of these chemicals will persist in the environment—and food sup -

ply—for many years to come. 

Mercury 

Mercury is a toxic metal spewed into the air by coal-burning power plants 

and carried around the globe. It accumulates in the tissues of fish, especially 

large predatory fish. Like PCBs, mercury is especially toxic to fetuses and 

young children and can cause irreversible neurological damage. That’s why 

the Environmental Protection Agency and the FDA recommend that women 

who are or may become pregnant, nursing women, and young children com -

pletely avoid shark, swordfish, and king mackerel. Other fish and shellfish 

should be limited to 12  ounces (6 ounces for albacore tuna) per week. 222 

## What It All Means 

Over the past half-century, hundreds of studies—animal, clinical, epide -

miological, and intervention—have examined the effect of diet on health 

from every conceivable angle. They provide strong, consistent evidence 

that diets rich in animal foods (except fish)—especially fatty meat and dairy 

products—and poor in healthy plant-based foods contribute to hyperten -

sion, stroke, heart disease, cancer, obesity, and diabetes. That rich body of 

research has led the world’s leading health experts to emphasize the ben -

efits of plant-based diets. The World Health Organization, the U.S. govern -Argument #1.  Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health  • 57 

ment’s  2005 Dietary Guidelines for Americans , the American Academy of Pedi -

atrics, the American Heart Association, the American Cancer Society, and 

many other authoritative health agencies all recommend that people eat 

more fruits, vegetables, and whole grains and modest amounts of non-fried 

seafood and poultry, low-fat dairy products, and lean meat. 223  Most health 

experts also strongly recommend that people cut back on salt, refined sug -

ars, and partially hydrogenated oils. Eating more of the healthy foods pro -

vides essential nutrients  and  squeezes less-healthy foods off the plate. In 

“Changing Your Own Diet” (p. 143), we provide more specific advice on 

what precisely a healthy diet should include, along with a scorecard for 

evaluating your diet. 

> Meatless burgers are being made of everything from chickpeas (above) to mushrooms and oats to
> soybeans.

59 

# Less Foodborne Illness 

# Apotent case of food poisoning, with its nausea, vomiting, and 

I-think-I’m-going-to-die misery, is unforgettable. Some of the 

most common causes of food poisoning are the bacteria and 

viruses carried by farm animals 

and that are abundant in their 

manure. Many common germs live 

harmlessly in animals but can make 

people deathly ill. Those patho -

gens can jump from animals to peo -

ple through tainted food, air, soil, 

water, or direct contact between 

people and livestock. 

Although diet-related chronic 

diseases, such as heart disease and 

various kinds of cancer, kill many 

more people than food poisoning, 

the sudden onset of food poisoning 

and the fact that it can be traced 

to particular foods add urgency to 

efforts to control it. 

More than 1,000 Americans die each 

year from foodborne illnesses linked 

to meat, poultry, dairy, and egg 

products. 

The annual medical and related 

costs of foodborne illnesses in the 

United States are at least $7 bil -

lion. 

Fruits and vegetables are a major 

cause of food poisoning thanks, in 

part, to contamination from live -

stock manure. 

Raising large numbers of poultry and 

pigs increases the risk of deadly flu 

epidemics. 









## Argument #2. 60 • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

## The Scope and Costs of Foodborne Illness 

Foodborne illnesses are caused by such well-known bacteria as Campylo-bacter jejuni , the deadly O157:H7 strain of Escherichia coli (E. coli ), and several types of Salmonella , as well as by such little-known germs as Norwalk-like 

viruses. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) esti-

mates that pathogens in food cause about 76 million illnesses, 325,000 hos -

pitalizations, and 5,200 deaths each year (see table 1). 1 Norwalk-like viruses, which cause gastrointestinal distress, are the most common source of ill -

nesses whose causes have been identified. Typically, they are transferred to food by poor sanitary practices during preparation. Although bacteria cause fewer illnesses than viruses, they are more likely to be fatal. In fact, 

listeriosis, caused by Listeria monocytogenes, is fatal in 20  percent of the peo -

ple it infects. Germs, such as E. coli and Salmonella , associated with food ani-

mals accounted for at least 1,100 of the deaths (and probably many more in the “unknown” category). 

Table 1. Major causes and costs of foodborne illnesses and deaths in the United States (annual estimates) 2

Pathogen Illnesses Deaths Cost (medical, lost productivity, premature death) 

Bacteria 

Campylobacter 2,000,000 100 $1.2 billion 

Salmonella 1,300,000 550 $2.4 billion 

Clostridium perfringens 249,000 7 Not available 

Staphylococcus 185,000 2 $1.2 billion 

E. coli* 94,000 80 $1.0 billion 

Listeria 2,500 500 $2.3 billion Parasites 

Cryptosporidium parvum 300,000 7 Not available 

Giardia † 200,000 1 $0.5 billion 

Toxoplasma gondii 113,000 380 Not available Viruses Norwalk-like viruses 9,200,000 120 Not available Unknown 62,000,000 3,200 Not available Total ‡ 76,300,000 5,207 $6.9 billion * The estimate covers only O157:H7 and other shiga toxin-producing strains of E. coli . Other strains of E. coli cause additional illnesses. † Although cattle carry Giardia , it is unclear whether they carry strains that can infect humans. The deaths may be due to Giardia from wildlife or other sources. ‡ Figures do not sum to totals because data are limited to those pathogens causing in excess of 100,000 illnesses or 80 deaths. See source for complete listings. Moreover, $6.9 billion probably is an underestimate because the costs of many major foodborne illnesses never have been calculated; this total covers only about 9  percent of the estimated 76 million foodborne illnesses suffered each year. Argument #2.  Less Foodborne Illness  • 61 

The causes of food poisonings are rarely tracked down, because it is not 

worth the effort and cost when only single individuals are affected. Instead, 

public health experts focus on outbreaks affecting dozens or hundreds of 

people. The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) has compiled a 

database of 3,810 outbreaks caused by germs (plus another 700 caused by 

toxins in fish) and for which the contaminated food was  identified. 3 Though 

the database covers only a small  percentage of foodborne illnesses, it indi -

cates which foods pose the greatest risks. 

Red meat and poultry—including luncheon meats—caused more than 

1,200 of the outbreaks in CSPI’s database (see table 2). Americans eat far less 

seafood than meat and poultry, yet seafood was linked to more than 300 of 

the outbreaks. Fruits and vegetables, normally thought of as being perfectly 

safe, caused over 500 of the identified outbreaks. However, about one-third 

of those outbreaks actually were caused by germs normally associated with 

animal manure, as were two-thirds in the “other” category. Dairy was the 

safest major category in the database, causing about 150 of the identified 

outbreaks, but the largest outbreaks on record were caused by dairy foods. 4

In 1985, milk contaminated with  Salmonella  sickened over 16,000 people in 

the Chicago area and killed 2. In 1994, 224,000 people around the country 

were sickened by ice cream made from ingredients contaminated with  Sal -

monella  that was in dirty tanker trucks. All told, 58 percent of the outbreaks 

were associated with animal products or germs normally associated with 

livestock. 

Considering how much of our food is contaminated, it is remarkable 

that foodborne illnesses do  not strike more people. In 2002,  Consumer Reports 

Table 2.  Sources of foodborne illness outbreaks in the United States linked 

to microbial hazards, 1990–2003 5                                  

> Food
> Outbreaks People sickened
> Number Percent Number Percent
> Meat, poultry, luncheon meats 1,221 31 38,284 28
> Seafood* 306 86,609 5
> Vegetables and fruits 529 14 28,108 20
> Eggs 329 910,849 8
> Dairy 151 45,145 4
> Other (sandwiches, pasta, salads, ethnic
> foods, etc.) 1,274 33 49,667 36
> Total †3,810 100 138,662 100
> *Includes only microbial-linked outbreaks, not those due to scombroid or ciguatera toxins in fish.
> †Percentages do not total 100 because of rounding.

62  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

magazine found that 1  percent of ground beef samples bought at grocery 

stores had significant levels of fecal contamination and 4  percent were on 

the brink of spoilage. 6 The magazine’s tests of almost 500 fresh chickens 

from 25 cities found that 42  percent were contaminated with  Campylobacter 

and 12  percent with  Salmonella .7 Overall, 49  percent of the chickens were 

contaminated with one or both 

bacteria. Adding to the risk, 

90  percent of the  Campylobacter 

and one-third of the  Salmonella 

were resistant to at least one 

antibiotic. The U.S. Depart -

ment of Agriculture (USDA) 

found an even bigger prob -

lem: 90 percent of birds tested 

positive for  Campylobacter .8

Government data also show 

that about 2.3  million eggs are 

contaminated with  Salmonella 

each year. 9 Although thorough 

cooking kills the  Campylobacter 

and  Salmonella  in infected meat, poultry, and eggs, the contaminated raw 

foods may infect consumers who touch them or eat them undercooked. 

Foodborne illnesses typically occur shortly after tainted foods are eaten 

and, while causing real misery, are short-lived. But they sometimes have 

long-term consequences. Guillain-Barré Syndrome, an autoimmune disor -

der caused by  Campylobacter  infection, is one such lingering result. Reiter’s 

Syndrome is a type of arthritis caused by  Salmonella . Even more disturb -

ing than those relatively rare events is what a study at the Statens Serum 

Institute in Denmark found. These scientists tracked 49,000 people who had 

suffered gastrointestinal infections and compared them to individuals who 

had not. The findings? People who had had food poisoning were more than 

three times as likely to die in the following year. 10  In other words, individu -

als who contract foodborne illnesses are either already in poor health—or 

foodborne illnesses may be much more harmful than anyone thought. 

## Our Food System Increases Certain 

## Food-Safety Risks 

Food poisoning has afflicted humans since time immemorial and was con -

sidered an inevitable part of life. Health officials and industry have improved 

the safety of the food supply through the use of refrigeration, pasteuriza -          

> Salmonella is the main culprit in egg-related food
> poisonings and is a common contaminant in chicken and
> meat. Shown here (pink) growing on cultured cells. Argument #2. Less Foodborne Illness •63

tion, and other technologies. But in some ways we are going backward. At 

least four aspects of large-scale industrial agriculture and food processing 

have increased the risk of major food-poisoning outbreaks: 

Germs can be dispersed nationally and internationally with incredible rapid -

ity. 12  On a typical day, 24,000 hogs are shipped from North Carolina to 

27  states, as well as to Puerto Rico, Mexico, Canada, and South America. 

Severe crowding on industrial factory farms helps livestock-borne pathogens 

spread from animal to animal.  Half a century ago, a single chicken carry -

ing a pathogen such as influenza might infect 100 others on the same 

farm; now that same bird might infect 50,000 others sharing its football 

field-sized shed. And when some mutant strains of viruses and bacte -

ria would have only infected highly vulnerable animals, a particularly 

infectious agent would have died out quickly in a small flock or herd 

composed of mostly healthy animals. Today’s huge factory farms, on the 

other hand, increase the chances of a germ’s finding weakened animals 

that can act as reservoirs. 

The widespread use of antibiotics to mitigate problems caused by crowding on fac -

tory farms adds a new dimension to food-poisoning risks.  The regular admin -

istration of low doses of antibiotics promotes the growth of antibiotic-

resistant bacteria (see “Factory Farming’s Antibiotic Crutch,” p.  68). Thus, 

mutant bacteria that infect humans may be tougher to treat. 

Industrial processing of meat allows pathogens from a small number of animals 

to contaminate large amounts of food.  As Eric Schlosser reminds us in  Fast 

Food Nation , butchers used to provide consumers with ground beef made 

from a single cut. Now that large meatpacking plants have taken over, 

“there are hundreds or even thousands of animals that have contributed 

to a single hamburger,” as one expert at the CDC noted. 13  Consequently, 









Death by Hamburger     

> On July 31, 2001, healthy two-year-old Kevin Kowal -
> cyk woke up with diarrhea and a slight fever. Three
> days later, his kidneys began to fail and his symptoms
> worsened. Over the following week, he was kept alive
> by a ventilator and a dialysis machine. Twelve days
> after he became ill—and to the shock of his parents
> and even his doctors—Kevin died. The cause? The
> deadly O157:H7 strain of the bacterium Escherichia
> coli ,11 almost certainly from a contaminated ham -
> burger. 64 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

a foodborne illness that once might have affected only one family now 

might affect scores of families. 

Industry, of course, doesn’t want to poison its customers and, under 

pressure from government, consumer groups, and the media, has been 

slowly testing and instituting new measures to prevent contamination 

on farms or to kill the germs at slaughterhouses. But there is a constant 

tension between wanting to raise and process as many animals as rapidly 

and cheaply as possible and ensuring that the food is as safe as possible. 

Compromises are always made. 

## Animal Pathogens Can Sicken Even Vegetarians 

The hazards created by livestock production increasingly jeopardize not only 

the safety of meat, but also of fruits and vegetables. About 30  percent of the 

food-poisoning outbreaks traced to produce actually are caused by pathogens 

of animal origin. 14  Fruits and vegetables can be contaminated by tainted irri -

gation water, manure used as fertilizer, or cross-contamination from meat 

during transport or in the kitchen. Foods as diverse as parsley, scallions, 

cantaloupes, lettuce, bean and alfalfa sprouts, orange juice, and beans have 

caused outbreaks due to microbes characteristic of animal agriculture. 15 

While cooking kills most pathogens in meat, poultry, and some veg -

etables, other vegetables and fruit are not cooked. Who wants to cook one’s 

salad to be sure it’s safe? 

In lettuce plants,  E. coli  O157:H7 can be drawn up by the roots and migrate 

into the interior of the leaf, where the germs cannot be removed by wash -

ing. In 1996, lettuce contaminated with that bacterium caused a large out -

break of illnesses across Illinois, Connecticut, and New York. One victim 

was a three-year-old girl who needed surgery to remove a pool of blood 

from her brain and was left with damaged vision. Federal health officials 

discovered that cattle were penned next to the barn where the lettuce 

was processed and were the likely source of the contamination. 16 

Between 1995 and 2002, 15 outbreaks were traced to  Salmonella -contami -

nated sprouts. In one case, alfalfa sprouts harvested in Idaho from a field 

adjacent to a cattle feedlot caused outbreaks in Michigan and Virginia. 

The problem was so serious the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 

(FDA) warned in 2002 that sprouts were only safe to eat after cooking. 17 

In 1991,  Salmonella —presumably from animal manure on cantaloupes— 

caused a major outbreak, leaving a trail of illnesses across 23 states and 

into Canada. In 2002,  Salmonella  contaminated over 500,000 pounds of 

canned kale and turnip greens. 18 





Argument #2.  Less Foodborne Illness  • 65 

Washing produce helps, but as long as animal manure is anywhere 

near fields and packinghouses, pathogens may be a threat. 

## Manure: How Many Pathogens Get Spread 

Manure is one means by which germs in livestock enter the food supply 

and infect humans. 19  Most of the germs cause gastrointestinal problems, 

but  E. coli  O157:H7 causes hideously painful and sometimes fatal kidney 

problems (hemolytic uremic syndrome). 

In a 1999–2000 USDA study of 73 cattle feedlots, 50  percent tested posi -

tive for  Salmonella .20  Eleven percent of samples contained  E. coli  O157:H7, and 

every feedlot had at least one positive sample in the course of the study. 

The biggest risk to humans is probably from the fecal matter on animal 

hides and from intestines that contaminates meat and poultry at slaughter -

houses. But pathogens in livestock manure also contaminate pools, lakes, 

and streams. Outbreaks of gastroenteritis (inflammation of the lining of 

the intestines or the 

stomach) traced to 

contaminated recre -

ational water doubled 

between 1997–98 and 

1999–2000. 21  Crypto -

sp oridium parvum  and 

E.  coli  O157:H7 account 

for nearly 90  percent 

of such outbreaks. A 

remarkable 60  percent 

of gastroenteritis from 

recreational water use 

occurred in  treated 

water, such as swimming pools. If manure is not adequately treated,  E. coli 

can leach into water—especially if a rainstorm occurs shortly after applica -

tion to cropland—and even get into well water. 22  Of the outbreaks caused by 

contaminated drinking water in 1999–2000 where the cause was identified, 

the majority resulted from animal-borne pathogens. 23 

Farmers can compost manure to decrease the populations of bacteria 

enough to allow it to be spread as fertilizer, but they must control the tem -

perature and aeration, which can be difficult and costly given the massive 

quantities of manure generated by large animal feeding operations. Bac -

teria can survive in the lagoons of liquefied livestock waste, which mimic 

the moist, oxygen-poor climate of the intestines in which they thrive. Thus, 

> Spraying manure onto cropland also sprays bacteria.

66  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

when lagoon liquid is sprayed onto fields, bacteria are sprayed, too. 24  Dry -

ing mounds of manure before application—another popular technique—is 

better than lagoon storage for eliminating bacteria, but serious risks remain. 

The hardy  E. coli  O157:H7 can survive for 21 months in an unaerated manure 

pile and for 4 months in an aerated pile. Even harsh winters cannot eradi -

cate the germ: It can survive 100 days in frozen manure. 25 

One researcher discovered the tenacity of pathogens while studying a 

variety of vegetables grown in soil that was fertilized with manure inocu -

lated with  Salmonella  and  E. coli . Both of those bacteria were found on the 

harvested produce, and they also survived in the soil even after repeated 

cycles of freezing and thawing. 26  Furthermore, although cattle typically 

remain positive for  E. coli  O157:H7 for only a month, keeping a herd in a 

feedlot or grazing them on a field 

where their manure has been used 

as fertilizer may lead animals to be 

continually infected. 27 

In recent years, poultry lit -

ter—ground-up feces, feathers, bed -

ding, and spilled feed—has been fed 

to cattle. That practice creates a cycle 

that may infect those cattle with mad 

cow disease, because chickens are 

sometimes fed processed cattle prod -

ucts—pulverized bone and meat. 

If that chicken feed is excreted or 

spilled onto the floor by poultry, it 

may become part of cattle feed. The initial route through which mad cow 

disease was spread was the feeding of processed cattle products to cattle. So 

far, however, the cattle-chicken-cattle feeding cycle has not been proven to 

spread the disease. (For more on mad cow disease, see appendix A, p. 174.) 

## Diseases Direct from Livestock to You 

In addition to hosting  foodborne  pathogens, farm animals carry numerous 

microbes that can infect people  directly . An estimated 200 different diseases 

can be transferred from animals to people, and that number is growing. 28  Of 

156 emerging diseases around the world, such as pfiesteria, hantavirus, and 

West Nile virus, 73  percent inhabit animals for part of their life cycles. 29 

Microbes from livestock can also reach people through the environment. 

Numerous pathogens—including antibiotic-resistant strains from livestock— 

are found in the air, though their impact on surrounding communities is    

> An artist’s rendering of a prion, a small protein
> molecule that wreaks havoc in the brain, causing
> mad cow disease and the human equivalent,
> variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Argument #2. Less Foodborne Illness •67

unknown. 30  The air inside one swine barn contained  Staphylococcus , Pseu -

domonas , Bacillus , Listeria , and other bacteria at worrisome levels. 31  Streams, 

too, could infect swimmers, boaters, and fishers. More research is needed to 

determine just how big a problem environmental contamination is. 

The Most Threatening Animal-Borne Disease: Influenza 

Influenza is the single biggest animal-borne threat, and public health offi -

cials around the globe are beginning to safeguard against possible pan -

demics. University of Minnesota professor Michael Osterholm warns: “Pan -

demics are not a question of [whether] they will happen. … The question we 

really have before us is how big, how bad, and when will it start.” 32 

Chickens, ducks, and pigs serve as major reservoirs for flu viruses. 

Because pigs can become infected with both human and avian strains of 

a given virus, the viruses may swap genes, creating a new harmful strain 

to which humans may be susceptible.  That process may be facilitated by 

mixing pigs from different farms or regions—a common event at livestock 

auctions or during shipping. Innocuous influenza viruses in wild birds 

may infect poultry, where they could undergo mutations that enable them 

to infect and kill humans. The gravest risk arises when flu viruses gain the 

ability to spread directly from person 

to person. 33 

Various gradually changing 

strains of influenza virus are endemic 

and cause annual nationwide out -

breaks in the United States. In an 

average year, 10 to 20  percent of the 

population gets the flu, with 114,000 

requiring hospitalization and 36,000 

dying. 34  Of course, those figures are 

dwarfed by the massive 1918–19 flu 

pandemic, which killed more people 

faster than any disease ever. 35  While 

“only” 500,000 Americans died, some countries lost half their popula -

tions. 36  Globally, as many as 50 million people died. That strain of flu 

likely came from birds and then spread to humans. If a similar strain of 

flu struck today, some experts estimate that 1.8 million Americans would 

die. 37 

Poultry-related influenza outbreaks have been much in the headlines 

in recent years. In 1997 in Hong Kong, a strain of avian influenza (“bird 

flu”) H5N1 leapt from poultry to humans, infecting 18 people. 38  Six people 

> Avian influenza virus A H5N1 (gold) is growing in
> cultured cells (green).

68  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Factory Farming’s Antibiotic Crutch 

Food poisoning is bad enough when you’re infected with ordinary germs. But when 

those germs are resistant to customary antibiotics, ordinary illnesses may become 

life threatening. We’re courting disaster when we allow farmers to use penicillin, 

erythromycin, and other important antibiotics for economic—not medical— 

reasons. 

Antibiotics, the first true miracle drugs, have saved countless lives over the past 

half-century. But far greater quantities of antibiotics are used in farm animals than 

in humans. 39  The drugs are sometimes used to treat sick animals, but mostly they 

are administered at low, non-therapeutic levels to whole flocks and herds to pro -

mote growth and counteract the dirty, crowded conditions in which most animals 

are raised. 

Antibiotic Use Breeds Resistance 

Using low levels of antibiotics day in and day out on millions of animals greatly 

increases the chances that bacteria—including those that cause foodborne ill -

nesses—will develop antibiotic resistance. The problem arises when a germ hap -

pens to mutate in one of several ways that reduces the antibiotic’s effectiveness. 

The tougher new bacteria: 

pump the antibiotic out of their cells, 

degrade the antibiotic, 

change the antibiotic’s chemical structure, or 

modify target molecules to “fool” the antibiotic. 

The ant ibiotic kills off all but the resistant germs, which then flourish. If people 

are infected by those bacteria via contaminated food, they can suffer illnesses 

that may only be cured by the newest, most powerful (and expensive) antibiotics. 

Farmers and others in direct contact with livestock can also be infected by the 

resistant bacteria. 40 

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has recognized that “Antimicro -

bial resistance among foodborne bacteria, primarily  Salmonella  and  Campylobacter ,

may cause prolonged duration of illness, and increased rates of bacteremia (bac -

teria in the blood), hospitalization, and death.” 41  Antibiotic-resistant  Salmonella ,

a common foodborne pathogen, causes at least 29,000 extra illnesses, 342 extra 

hospitalizations, and 12 extra deaths per year. 42  The ultimate danger is that bacteria 

will develop resistance to all the common antibiotics and cause a deadly epidemic. 

A 2001 U.S. Food and Drug Administration study of ground meat and poultry found 

that 20  percent of the samples contained  Salmonella , and over half of those bac -

teria were resistant to at least three important antibiotics. 43  Even more alarming, 

some strains of  Salmonella  and other foodborne pathogens were resistant to a 







Argument #2.  Less Foodborne Illness  • 69 

dozen different antibiotics. The livestock industry’s profligate use of antibiotics 

almost certainly selects for those “superbugs.” 44 

In 1995, the FDA—over the objections of the Centers for Disease Control and Pre -

vention—allowed chicken farmers to treat whole flocks with fluoroquinolones, a 

family of powerful new antibiotics, even if only a few birds were sick. Predict -

ably, rates of resistance in  Campylobacter  quickly soared from virtually zero to 

20  percent. 45  That spurred the FDA, in 2000, to reverse course and propose barring 

flock-wide use of fluoroquinolones. 46  Two years later, the agency estimated that 

fluoroquinolone-resistant infections were causing over 17,000 additional cases of 

food poisoning, leading to 95 hospitalizations. 47  Only two companies marketed the 

antibiotics: Abbott Laboratories immediately stopped marketing its product, but 

it took five years to overcome Bayer Corporation’s opposition and to stop farmers’ 

use of its similar drug. 48 

Growing Opposition to a Dangerous Practice 

Livestock producers and the animal-drug industry insist that giving animals low 

doses of antibiotics is safe. 49  But public health experts counter that it is senseless 

to endanger the effectiveness of vital human medicines—especially when they are 

not essential to farmers. The American Medical Association, American Public Health 

Association, and other health groups have opposed unnecessary uses of antibiotics 

on farms. The American Academy of Pediatrics found that “children are at an increased 

risk” from antibiotic-resistant infections rooted in non-therapeutic uses of antibiot -

ics in food-pro -

ducing animals. 

And a study by 

the Institute of 

Medicine con -

cluded that the 

“FDA should ban 

the use of anti -

microbials for 

growth promo -

tion in animals 

if those classes 

of antimicro -

bials are also used in humans.” The World Health Organization made a similar 

plea. More than 300 local and national organizations, including the medical, public 

health, and pediatrician organizations mentioned above, have supported legisla -

tion to limit the use of antibiotics in livestock. 50 

Industry maintains that antibiotics help healthy animals grow faster and at a lower 

cost. But a committee of the National Academy of Sciences emphasized that the 

> Antibiotics are widely used in crowded, dirty animal facilities to prevent or
> treat bacterial infections.

70  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

“beneficial effects of subtherapeutic drug use are found to be greatest in poor 

sanitary conditions.” 51  Just as public health experts finally figured out that clean -

ing up the water and the air drastically reduced infectious diseases in people, so 

agribusiness should look to use different approaches to prevent illnesses in their 

animals. If they cleaned up their hog sheds, gave their chickens more room to 

roam around, stopped feeding cattle an unnatural grain-rich diet, and bred ani -

mals not just to grow fast but to have strong immune systems, farmers could both 

raise healthier animals and protect the effectiveness of precious antibiotics. 

The European Union began phasing out the use of medically important antibiotics 

in healthy animals in 1999 and banned that use completely on January 1, 2006. 52 

Denmark, the world’s largest exporter of pork, moved even faster. In 1998 it insti -

tuted a virtual ban (through a $2 tax on treated pigs) on using growth-promoting 

antibiotics in pigs after weaning. 53  In 2004, farmers were not using any antibiotics 

to promote growth, though more antibiotics were being used to treat illnesses. 

The total poundage used is dramatically lower than before the ban, and the preva -

lence of both resistant and nonresistant foodborne pathogens plummeted in hogs 

and their meat. 54  Moreover, Danish economists estimate that the cost of producing 

pork will rise just 1  percent. 55 

Change is coming, if more slowly, in the United States. 56  Tyson Foods, the nation’s 

largest chicken producer, reduced its use of antibiotics by 93  percent between 

1997 and 2004, and three other major companies say they have stopped using 

antibiotics on healthy animals. The Iowa Pork Producers Association is now urging 

“all Iowa pork producers to voluntarily discontinue use of all growth-promoting 

antibiotics” in the feed of pigs that weigh more than about 50 pounds. And a rap -

idly growing number of organic livestock producers do not administer any drugs 

at all (they treat sick animals, but then do not market them as organic). Probably 

reflecting such developments, between 1999 and 2004 the volume of antibiotics 

used in animals declined by 10  percent, despite a 5  percent increase in livestock 

production. 57  Unfortunately, there is no similar progress in the cattle industry. 

died—a fatality rate of 33  percent. Hong Kong officials responded by order -

ing the slaughter of 1.4 million birds. Luckily, the disease did not spread 

easily from person to person, so control measures were effective. Since 1997, 

however, four more outbreaks of avian influenza have occurred in Hong 

Kong, prompting the government to respond with such preventive measures 

as poultry vaccinations and new restrictions on imported poultry. Between 

2003 and 2006, bird flu spread to other parts of Asia and countries in Europe 

and Africa. It has killed over 100 people and prompted the slaughter of more 

than 150 million poultry, costing the industry billions of dollars. 58 

The CDC says that “The avian influenza  … outbreak in Asia is not 

expected to diminish significantly in the short term.” 59  In 2004 in North Argument #2.  Less Foodborne Illness  • 71 

America, a milder strain of avian influenza emerged in Canada and Texas. 

No human deaths were reported, although two poultry workers became 

ill. 60  Some 17  million chickens, turkeys, and ducks were culled to prevent the 

virus from spreading. In 2006, veterinary and health experts in North Amer -

ica and elsewhere were bracing for a new round of infections. Tara O’Toole, 

director of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center’s Center for Biosecu -

rity, speculated that a highly infectious bird flu virus could kill as many as 40 

million Americans. 61 

While the most dire 

predictions are likely 

overblow n—par t ly 

because mutations are 

expected to weaken 

the virus if it “learns” 

to spread from person 

to person—the pos -

sibility of epidemics is 

enormously enhanced 

by the widespread 

raising of large num -

bers of livestock. 

## Weak Safeguards Endanger Consumers 

All of the problems mentioned above are exacerbated by the federal gov -

ernment’s incomplete and fragmented food-safety system. For starters, the 

United States does not have a system that tracks animals and meat from 

the farm to the slaughterhouse to the table. That prevents health officials 

from tracing the cause of a food-poisoning outbreak back to the farm. Also, 

the government cannot require food processors to recall products that are 

suspected of causing outbreaks; instead, they must ask and negotiate with 

companies—while people are getting sick. The USDA cannot fine compa -

nies for violating the law, and the FDA can only fine a company $1,000 and 

threaten officials with a year in jail. Those agencies’ real power comes from 

their authority to seize products on store shelves and generate bad public -

ity. As for imported foods, the USDA has the power to inspect foreign pro -

cessing plants, but the FDA does not. 

Most of the responsibility for ensuring a safe food supply rests with the 

USDA and the FDA, with almost a dozen other agencies playing smaller 

roles. The USDA oversees the safety of meat, poultry, pasteurized eggs, 

and processed foods containing meat or poultry, while the FDA oversees             

> In huge poultry sheds, germs from one bird can easily infect
> thousands of other birds. 72 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

everything else, including 

produce, eggs in their shells, 

seafood, and processed foods 

that contain little or no meat or 

poultry. That division creates 

some bizarre situations. For 

example, the USDA regulates 

dehydrated chicken soup, but 

the FDA oversees dehydrated 

beef soup. Peculiarly, though, 

the FDA regulates chicken 

broth, but the USDA regulates 

beef broth. (The government 

is looking to correct that 

particular bit of bureaucratic 

craziness.) 

More importantly, federal funding priorities are misguided. CSPI’s 

food safety director Caroline Smith DeWaal emphasizes that while FDA-

regulated foods cause two-thirds of all outbreaks, the FDA receives only 

38  percent of food-safety funding. As a result, that agency performs too 

few inspections of the facilities it oversees. The USDA inspects meat and 

poultry plants daily; the FDA inspects other operations only about once 

every five years on average. 62 

## What It All Means 

Animal products cause many foodborne infections in the United States, 

and livestock are the source of other infectious diseases, such as the flu, 

that are spread by vehicles other than food. Sicknesses and deaths aside, 

those illnesses generate enormous health-care and other costs. Some of the 

production systems that animal agriculture uses promote the spread of 

dangerous pathogens from animals to meat to humans and from animal 

manure to fruits and vegetables. Industry is well aware of the food-safety 

problem and has been attacking it with new technologies, ranging from 

steam-treating and acid-washing beef carcasses to vaccinating poultry to 

irradiating cuts of meat. Still, foodborne and farm animal–related illnesses 

likely will never be eliminated totally. Meanwhile, the government’s food-

safety system, which includes programs that are perpetually underfunded 

and riddled with holes, has proved inadequate in fulfilling its public health 

mission. With a large  percentage of foodborne illnesses caused by animal 

products, one personal solution is obvious: eat fewer animal products—and 

wash your fruits and vegetables.      

> USDA microbiologists obtain samples for microbial
> analysis from a washed carcass.

73 

## Argument #3. 

# Better Soil 

“Soybean production is killing us,” notes Larry 

Gates of the Minnesota Department of Natural Re -

sources. Southeast Minnesota, which once boasted 

clean rivers and streams, is increasingly inhospi -

table to healthy and diverse aquatic life—as well 

as to the people who flocked to those waters to 

fish and swim. Encouraged by Farm Bill incentives, 

Minnesota farmers have been converting their pas -

tures and grasslands to soybean fields. That simple 

switch has had a profound impact, as endless rows 

of soybean plants have led to unprecedented lev -

els of erosion. Load upon load of sediment has been washed into the river. 

As a result, brown trout populations, which had been rising for decades, are 

declining to the point where hundreds of thousands of young trout will have 

to be placed in the river if the population is to be maintained. 1

# Producing food animals, and the grains and soybeans that speed their 

growth, takes a tremendous toll on farmland—particularly its pre -

cious topsoil. Growing crops for animal feed frequently erodes the 74  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

soil, as does overgrazing of grasses 

by livestock. Further, cattle’s constant 

trampling of vulnerable rangeland 

can almost irreparably damage the 

environment. The immense quantities 

of fertilizers—including old-fashioned 

manure, urban processed sewage 

sludge, and conventional chemicals— 

and pesticides used to grow feed 

grains contain nutrients and toxins 

that disrupt the soil ecosystem, poison 

wildlife, and pollute local and far-off 

waterways. 

Agriculture has an enormous 

impact on soil and soil quality: Graz -

ing land and cropland are the second-

and third-largest uses of land in the 

United States (forests are the largest), 

together accounting for just under 

half of America’s total acreage. 2 In 

contrast, urbanization and sprawl 

affect only about 3 to 5  percent of the U.S. land area. 3

## Importance of Good Topsoil 

Soil, along with water and sunlight, is one of the three fundamental ele -

ments of crop production. A thick layer of topsoil, rich in such nutrients 

as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, absorbs and holds rainwater well 

and provides the best environment for growing crops. 

But topsoil can be lost, leached away by water or blown away by wind. 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimates that almost 2 billion 

tons of topsoil eroded from cropland in 2001. 4 That’s a huge amount, but 

represents a 40  percent decline since 1982. The main cause of erosion is the 

lack of plants that hold the soil in place. Native meadow grasses, hay, and 

small grains such as wheat help protect topsoil by providing a solid cover 

over a field. 5 Many large farms, however, plant livestock feed crops, such as 

corn and soybeans, that are grown in rows and endanger topsoil since the 

bare patches between each row are relatively susceptible to erosion. The 

loss of topsoil reduces fertility, 6 which increases the need for chemical fer -

tilizers. And the switch from healthy natural topsoil to artificial nutrients 

leads to a whole host of problems—nutrient imbalances, runoff, and water 

pollution—detailed later in this chapter.                                  

> Raising almost 100 million acres of
> feed crops for livestock production
> depletes topsoil of nutrients and
> causes erosion.
> About 22 billion pounds of fertilizer—
> about half of all fertilizer applied in
> the United States—are applied to
> lands used to grow feed grains for
> American livestock annually. The
> energy needed to manufacture that
> fertilizer could provide ayear’s
> worth of power for about 1 million
> Americans.
> Livestock may damage the land they
> graze on by compacting the soil,
> making it difficult for the soil to
> absorb water.
> Soil—and crops—can be contami -
> nated with cadmium, lead, and
> other heavy metals in sewage sludge
> and chemical fertilizers.
> 
> 
> 
> 

Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 75 

Livestock’s Demand on Soil 

Feeding grain to livestock and then eating the livestock (or their eggs or 

milk) needs a lot more land than just eating the grains themselves. Raising 

livestock creates a huge demand for corn, soybeans, and a few other crops. 

About 66 percent of U.S. grain ends up as livestock feed at home or abroad. 7

While pigs and chickens consume a good share of that grain, cattle at feed -

lots are the biggest consumers, in part because they are the least efficient con -

verters of grain to meat. Outside the United States, livestock consume only 21 

percent of total grain 

production, with the 

vast majority of grain 

consumed directly 

by people. But as 

nations’ incomes rise, 

so does their appetite 

for pork, chicken, and 

grain-fed beef. 

Frequently, farm -

ers respond to the 

huge demand for feed 

grains by turning to 

monocropping—rais -

ing single crops over 

huge areas—or they 

use limited rotations, 

where two crops des -

tined for livestock feed 

are raised in alternat -

ing years. About 16 

percent of corn—over 

12 million acres—is raised without any rotation at all, though the majority 

of corn—59 percent—is rotated with soybeans. 8 Meadow grasses and small 

grains (such as wheat), both vital to the preservation of topsoil, are included 

in only 8 percent of corn rotations, according to the USDA. 9

Good soil health depends on several factors, including maintaining 

nutrient and organic matter content and avoiding topsoil loss. 10  Robust 

crop variation—including seasons when land remains fallow altogether—is 

critical to maintaining optimal soil health. Including soybeans in a rota -

tion helps maintain nutrient levels because soybeans and other legumes 

can “fix” nitrogen (the process by which bacteria convert nitrogen from its 

> It’s much more efficient in terms of land, water, and other resources
> for people to eat grains, such as the wheat grown on this Utah farm,
> than for people to eat foods from animals that ate the grain.

76  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

relatively inert gaseous form in the atmosphere into compounds useful 

as nutrients, such as nitrate). However, soybeans, because they leave little 

residue on the field after harvest, are even less protective of topsoil loss 

than corn. 11 

Erosion 

A typical acre of U.S. cropland loses 5 tons of soil each year. 12  About 20  per -

cent of cropland—some 65 million acres—erodes at a rate that actually 

decreases its productivity. 13  The resulting nutrient losses and lowered yields 

cost almost $10 billion per year (see table 1). And soil’s reduced water-hold -

ing capacity is not only costly (an estimated $3.2 billion per year) but self-

perpetuating. It increases the rate of further erosion because unabsorbed 

water flows over the soil, with less water remaining for plants. Eroded soils 

therefore likely need more irrigation than “healthy” land—but irrigation, in 

turn, promotes more erosion. 

The problems caused by cropland erosion extend well beyond the farm. 

Soil carried away by wind creates dust and haze and causes respiratory ill -

nesses and property damage, which together cost over $14 billion per year. 14 

Impaired water quality, due to sediment damage from agricultural runoff, 

accounts for about one-third of the cost of erosion. When soil is deposited 

into water, the suspended particles block sunlight, impairing the growth of 

Eroded Soil, Eroded Yields       

> Row crops such as corn and soybeans are vulnerable to erosion because of the
> naked patches of land that lie between the rows. Some soil-building innovations,
> such as planting cover crops after the main crop has been harvested, 15 almost keep
> pace with erosion, but they are not universally used.
> Comparing cropland to other land uses demonstrates how damaging row-crop pro -
> duction is to topsoil. Erosion reduces the productivity of more than 20 percent
> of cropland. That compares to
> only 6 percent of private pas -
> tureland—or fewer than 8 mil -
> lion acres. 16 Because respon -
> sibly grazed pastureland typi -
> cally has limited exposed soil,
> only about 1 ton of soil is lost
> per acre of pasture per year,
> in contrast to the 5 tons for
> cropland.

Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 77 

aquatic plants and depriving animals that feed on them of food. Sediment 

can also raise water temperatures, disrupting the habitats of aquatic spe -

cies. But perhaps the greatest harm is not from the soil itself, but from fertil -

izers and pesticides that attach to soil particles. 18  The cost of water pollution 

from erosion is estimated at $14 billion per year—and that doesn’t take into 

account the health and environmental harm from runoff from agricultural 

chemicals. 19 

Table 1.  The cost of erosion on all U.S. cropland (2004 $) 17 

Location  Problem 

Cost per ton of 

eroded topsoil 

Total cost per 

year (billions) 

Cropland  Nutrient losses and reduced yields  5.16  9.8 

Reduced water-holding capacity  1.69  3.2 

Offsite (off 

cropland) 

Impaired water quality  7.44  14.1 

Property damage  3.89  7.4 

Health effects from air pollution  3.72  7.1 

Total  $21.90  $41.6                                            

> “Erosion is one of those problems that nickels and dimes you to death: One rainstorm can wash away
> 1millimeter of dirt. It doesn’t sound like much, but when you consider ahectare (2.5 acres), it would take 13
> tons of topsoil—or 20 years if left to natural processes—to replace that loss.… Yet controlling soil erosion is
> really quite simple: The soil can be protected with cover crops when the land is not being used to grow crops.”
> —David Pimentel, professor of ecology, Cornell University 20 78 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

Compaction 

Compaction occurs when topsoil—particularly when it is wet—is subjected 

to the intense weight of the heavy machinery farmers use to cultivate, plant, 

and harvest fields and of large livestock such as cattle—though machin -

ery typically is the more damaging. 21  Compaction makes soil too dense for 

plant roots to penetrate easily, reducing the rates of plant growth and crop 

yields. 22  It also reduces soil’s ability to absorb water. The American Society 

of Agricultural Engineers found that pasture grazed by cattle for 10 years 

absorbs less than one-fifth as much water as ungrazed pasture. 23  One con -

sequence of compaction is erosion, because water that is not absorbed runs 

off, carrying topsoil with it. 

Soil compaction is a major problem on western rangelands where cattle 

congregate in the biologically rich areas along the banks of waterways or in 

wetlands. That compaction reduces the capacity of those wetlands and soil 

to hold water, which leads to greater flooding and inhibits the recharging 

of water tables. 

Compaction poses a different, but not a lesser, problem in the arid and 

semiarid regions of the West. Few grasses, bushes, and other plants grow 

on these lands. Instead, the main soil covering is an interconnected com -

munity—collectively referred to as  microbiotic crust —of mosses, lichens, 

and cyanobacteria. (This last is an unusual form of bacterium that uses 

chlorophyll and other pigments to capture light for photosynthesis.) Crusts 

help hold soil nutrients, control water absorption, and create a medium for 

plant growth. Although tough enough to support life in some of the hottest, 

driest climates in the United States, crusts are quite vulnerable to physical 

disturbances. Because the crusts are only 1 to 4 millimeters thick (less than 

one-sixth of an inch), compaction and grazing by cattle can easily destroy 

them. And that destruction inevitably leads to erosion, water loss, and 

harm to native plant species. Moreover, crust recovers extremely slowly. 

Full regeneration takes 50 to 250 years, depending on the extent of damage, 

according to government scientists. 24 

Another Problem: Exotics 

> Heavy grazing by livestock promotes the spread of exotic, invasive weeds. Those
> plants provide less-suitable land cover and do not hold soil together as well as
> native plants. Cattle contribute to the spread of such weeds in three ways:
> They graze on native species, ignoring exotic weeds, which can then proliferate.
> They spread the seeds of exotic plants.
> Trampling by animal hooves makes ideal seedbeds for exotic plants. 25
> 
> 
> 

Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 79 

New Practices Help, but More Help Is Needed 

Over the past two decades, farmers have used various measures to better 

conserve farmland. And that has paid off: In 1982, 3 billion tons of topsoil 

eroded from cropland. By 1997, that figure was reduced by 40  percent to just 

under 2 billion tons. 26  But in some areas, soil losses remain well above lev -

els of sustainability. 

Several factors account for the dramatic improvement in soil conser -

vation. For starters, the USDA’s Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) has 

paid tens of thousands of farmers to idle their most erodible lands, thereby 

dramatically improving soil health.  The CRP idles about 35 million acres 

of land. 27  Only about 1  percent of CRP land, fewer than 1 million acres, is 

eroding at an unsustainable rate. 28,  That success is impressive, particularly 

since most of the land included in the program was experiencing serious 

erosion. The CRP shows that even in extreme cases, strong (though expen -

sive) measures can protect the land. 

Farmers also have reduced erosion by using  conservation tillage  or  reduced 

tillage  on roughly half the nation’s cropland. That practice cuts back on plowing 

and leaves crop residue (such as 

cornstalks) on the ground after 

harvest to prevent erosion. 29 

“No-till” agriculture, which 

is facilitated by genetically 

engineered herbicide-tolerant 

soybean and corn varieties, 

barely disturbs soil from plant -

ing to harvest time. 30  Farmers 

also have been planting buffer 

strips or terracing land to help 

reduce erosion. 

Topsoil losses persist nonetheless. Reducing or eliminating the 

need for corn, soybeans, wheat, and other grains for livestock feed— 

especially for cattle—could further reduce erosion. In theory, ceasing  

> CRP land may be grazed or cut for hay under emergency conditions such as drought or
> an animal feed shortage, but it otherwise remains fallow.
> Though the vast majority of acres enrolled in the CRP are “highly erodible land,” other
> lands are also enrolled to protect wildlife habitats and water quality and to address other
> environmental problems. Inclusion of those acres lowers the average rate of erosion on CRP
> land.
> Wind erosion still occurs on about 420,000 acres of CRP land and water erosion on
> 365,000 acres, with some land experiencing both types of erosion. However, even if there
> were no overlap, only 2.4 percent of all CRP land would experience erosion-induced produc -
> tivity losses.
> No-till soybean crops minimize soil erosion.

80  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

grain production for livestock 

would allow close to 100 million 

acres to lie fallow and revert to 

natural grasslands and wood -

lands. 31  That shift could save 

as much as 700  million tons 

of topsoil per year. In reality, 

though, much of that land 

would be used to grow crops 

for export or for conversion 

to gasohol, high-fructose corn 

syrup, and other products, and 

some would be planted in crops that would replace some of the meat in our diet. 

## Effects of What We’re Putting on the Soil 

Loss of topsoil decreases productivity, so to compensate for that farmers 

add soil nutrients. That means applying fertilizer—and lots of it—in the 

form of chemicals, manure, or treated sewage sludge. 

Chemical Fertilizers 

Fertilizer causes environmental problems primarily because farmers often 

apply too much to their land. Because about half of all fertilizer applied 

in the United States 

is used solely for 

raising feed grains 

for animals, reduc -

ing that usage could 

reduce environmental 

degradation. 32 

Even when not 

over-applied, nitrogen 

fertilizer causes seri -

ous environmental 

problems. That fertil -

izer is usually applied 

as ammonium nitrate, 

which can react with oxygen in the air and release ammonia. Ammonia can 

damage local ecosystems, including the plant life on the fertilized land. 33 

When carried by wind and rain, the ammonia may be deposited in water -

ways and affect distant ecosystems (see “Ammonia,” p.  104, for further 

details). 

> Alternating strips of alfalfa with corn on the contour
> helps reduce soil erosion on this Iowa farm.

Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 81 

When the oxygen content of soil is low, nitrogen fertilizer undergoes a 

process called  denitrification , which yields a variety of nitrogen-containing 

gases, including nitrogen gas, nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are 

together known as NO x,, since, in the presence of sunlight, they rapidly 

interconvert), and nitrous oxide.  The harmless nitrogen gas simply returns 

The fact that oxygen-containing species are produced may seem strange considering 

that the reaction takes place in the absence of oxygen. What actually happens is that in oxy -

gen-poor conditions, anaerobic bacteria strip the oxygen from nitrogen dioxide (which occurs 

naturally in soil or is deposited by acid rain), releasing nitrogen gas and nitric oxide into 

Fertilizer Used to Produce Meat, Poultry, Eggs, and Milk 

Producing different animal products requires very different amounts of fertilizer. 34 

In all, 22 billion pounds of fertilizer are used per year. 

Hogs are the least fertilizer-efficient of major farm animals, partly because, 

unlike cattle, they eat grains their entire lives. It takes about a pound of fertil -

izer to produce 2 ½ pounds of cooked pork. 

Producing beef requires large amounts of fertilizer, in large part because cattle 

are inefficient converters of feed to meat. One pound of fertilizer is needed to 

produce 3 pounds of cooked beef. 

Chicken and egg production require less than half as much fertilizer per pound 

as beef or pork. 







Fe rtilizer nutrients used per year (billion pounds )

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Po rk  Beef  Chicken  Eggs  Milk               

> Fe rt iliz er nu tr ie nt srequ ir ed per pound of food (pounds)
> 0
> 0. 05
> 0. 10
> 0. 15
> 0. 20
> 0. 25
> 0. 30
> 0. 35
> 0. 40
> 0. 45
> Po rk Be ef Ch ic ke nEgg sMil k
> Notes: Inset chart is for cooked food, except for milk. Data exclude exported crops and food. 82 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

to the atmosphere. However, NO x destroys ozone, impairs lung function, 

and contributes to fog and acid rain. 35  It also travels even farther from its 

source than ammonia. 36  Nitrous oxide is a destructive greenhouse gas 

300  times more potent than carbon dioxide (for more on this topic, see 

“Nitrous Oxide” and “Nitric Oxide and Nitrogen Dioxide,” pp. 107 and 

108). 37  Agriculture contributes about 37  percent of all nitrous oxide releases 

in the United States, with much of that coming from fertilizer. 

Besides polluting the air, fertilizers also increase the acidity of soil. 38 

That reduces the soil’s ability to hold nutrients and can permanently reduce 

soil productivity. Acidification ordinarily is controlled by applying even 

more chemicals, such as lime (calcium carbonate). 

Heavy Metals in Chemical Fertilizer 

The potash and phosphate ores used to produce chemical fertilizers fre -

quently contain heavy metals that may contaminate the soils on which they 

are used. Those contaminants can be absorbed into the grains grown in 

the soil, the livestock that consume those grains, and eventually the peo -

ple who consume the resulting meat and dairy products. 39  The U.S. Envi -

ronmental Protection Agency recognizes that cadmium, lead, arsenic, zinc, 

and other minerals sometimes contaminate fertilizer. 40  With intensive 

application of nitrogen, phosphate, and potassium fertilizers, cadmium and 

lead levels in soil can double in a dozen years. 41  Liming materials, such as 

sludge from water treatment facilities (see “‘Biosolids’ Fertilizer: Processed 

Sludge,” p.  84), also contain a potpourri of heavy metals, including mer -

cury. 42  So when liming materials are used to reduce the acidity of soil, they 

also may pollute it. 

A 1999 study of toxic waste in California by the nonprofit Environmen -

tal Working Group found that one in six samples of commercial fertilizers 

exceeded the state’s criteria for what constitutes hazardous waste. Among 

the heavy metals detected, lead and arsenic were present in the greatest 

amounts. 43 

The concentrations of metals may be even greater in manure than in 

chemical fertilizers, and transferring them to soil may lead to higher lev -

els in food crops. 44  In fact, many poultry farmers add to feed an arsenic-

containing drug, roxarsone, to kill parasites that slow the animals’ growth. 

The U.S. Geological Survey states that each year the poultry litter that is 

spread onto nearby fields contains 2 million pounds of roxarsone and 

“could result in localized arsenic pollution.” 45  Johns Hopkins University 

> the atmosphere. Oxygen in the atmosphere readily recombines with those gases to produce
> nitrous oxide and NO x.

Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 83 

Manure—Excess of Riches 

In 2000, livestock in the United States produced about 3 trillion pounds 46  of manure 

(including feces, urine, and poultry litter). That’s 10 times as much as people pro -

duced. 47  Cattle accounted for about three-fourths of the manure (see figure). 48 

In 1997, farms produced 1.5 bil -

lion pounds more manure nitrogen 

and almost 1  billion pounds more 

manure phosphorus than could be 

used on fields. 49  However, much 

cattle manure is deposited harm -

lessly (or beneficially) on pasture -

land. 

Farmers typically deal with that 

over-abundance of manure by spraying it on nearby fields as fertilizer. That adds 

organic matter to soil, increasing the soil’s water-holding capacity and fertility. 

It also spares the considerable resources needed to manufacture chemical fertil -

izers. 50 

But using manure as fertilizer has severe limitations. For starters, the nutrients 

occur primarily in an organic form and are relatively unusable by plants, which 

prefer inorganic nutrients. Also, manure may be difficult to collect, expensive 

to store and transport, and not have the desired proportions of nutrients. 51  The 

University of Maryland Agricultural Extension Service states, “Typically if a farmer 

uses manure to fulfill a crop’s nitrogen requirements, he is overfertilizing for 

phosphorus and potassium. If manure is used to meet phosphorus or potassium 

requirements, additional nitrogen will be required from other sources.” 52  Also, the 

release of nutrients from manure to the soil cannot be timed to match the needs 

of plants, as it can with chemicals. 

Faced with mountains of manure from 

intensive feeding operations, research -

ers are exploring new solutions. Dried 

manure can be burned as an energy 

source, be added to aquaculture ponds 

to induce algal growth (which would pro -

vide food for fish), or even be used as a 

building material. Of course, one obvi -

ous way to reduce the 3–trillion-pound 

annual load of animal manure would be to reduce animal populations and rely less 

on cattle feedlots. Eating less meat, especially from animals raised in confine -

ment, would encourage farmers to do that.    

> Annual manure production (billion pounds )
> 0
> 500
> 1,000
> 1,500
> 2,000
> 2,500
> Cattle Chicke n
> & turkeys
> Hog s84 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

researchers warn that “If animal waste were classified as hazardous waste, 

it would be prohibited from land disposal based solely on its concentrations 

of leachable arsenic.” 53 

“Biosolids” Fertilizer: Processed Sludge 

To address their waste-disposal problems, cities sell treated sewage sludge— 

biosolids—to farmers cheaply as fertilizer. Sixty  percent of processed urban 

sewage sludge—3.4 million tons per year—is now applied as fertilizer. In 

theory, that approach is mutually beneficial, because it enables cities to dis -

pose of their waste, while providing farmers with affordable fertilizer. The 

one problem—and it’s a significant one—is that sewage can be tainted with 

industrial waste and pathogens. 54  Government regulations are supposed to 

restrict levels of heavy metals; volatile organic chemicals; and pathogenic 

bacteria, viruses, and parasites. 55  But the controls sometimes fail. In 2003, 

hundreds of cows at Georgia dairy farms died after they ate hay grown on 

fields fertilized by processed sewage sludge. 56 

Currently, fertilizer manufacturers are not required to disclose 

heavy-metal content on product labels, so the full extent of the problem is 

unknown. To date, only Washington and Texas limit heavy-metal contami -

nants (including those from industrial sludge) in fertilizer. 57 

Pesticides: Gauging the Health Risk 

Large amounts of pesticides—and potentially dangerous (and misnamed) 

inert chemicals included in pesticide products—continue to be applied to 

soil, though the current volume is 40  percent less than was used in the late 

1970s and early 1980s. 58  Pesticides can unintentionally harm plants and ani -

mals; organisms living in the soil; and fish and other animals, plants, and 

microorganisms in the waterways into which the chemicals are carried. 

Because they adhere to particles in soil, pesticides can be carried long dis -

tances on dust and then tracked into homes and public spaces. 

Glyphosate (marketed under the name Roundup) and atrazine are the 

two most widely used herbicides, helping control weeds on millions of 

acres of soybeans, corn, and other crops. Over 100 million pounds of those 

two pesticides are used every year. Even though their half-lives are moder -

ate (between 30 and 100 days, depending on environmental conditions 59 ), 

significant residues still may be present in soil after a year. 

Because of their widespread use, scientists have explored the possible 

environmental and health effects of glyphosate and atrazine. Both have 

been implicated in the decreases in amphibian populations seen in the 

upper Midwest and elsewhere around the world. University of Pittsburgh Argument #3.  Better Soil  • 85 

researchers have discovered 

that a supposedly inert ingre -

dient in glyphosate endangers 

amphibians. 60  Rick Relyea and 

two colleagues studied the 

detergent (polyethoxylated tal -

lowamine) that helps glypho -

sate get into plant leaves. At 

doses that are likely to occur 

in nature, the detergent kills 

tadpoles and frogs. Relyea 

considers Roundup “extremely 

lethal to amphibians.” 

Atrazine, used by most 

corn farmers, also affects 

amphibians. Tyrone Hayes and his colleagues at the University of Califor -

nia at Berkeley exposed frogs to levels of atrazine lower than what is per -

mitted in drinking water and found that the herbicide caused gonadal and 

limb abnormalities and hermaphroditism. 61  Hayes uses the term “chemical 

castration,” and says, “because the hormones that are being interfered with 

occur in all vertebrates, maybe they’re telling us it’s just a matter of time” 

before atrazine is found to harm humans. 62 

Pesticides eventually are broken down in the soil by microorganisms 

or through chemical reactions, or they are carried into groundwater or 

streams. Some of the harm they can cause there is discussed in “Pesticides 

Wash Off of Farmland,” p. 100. 

## What It All Means 

Healthy topsoil is crucial to producing crops, but modern agriculture has 

placed extraordinary demands on cropland. The enormous quantities of 

feed grains that farmers produce help satisfy our desire for inexpensive 

meat and dairy products—but at great cost to topsoil, the environment, and 

even human health. The row crops that stretch from one end of the horizon 

to the other in many parts of the United States provide less anchorage for 

topsoil, increasing erosion. The chemical and biosolids fertilizers applied to 

farmland sometimes upset the balance of nutrients, as well as release into 

the atmosphere gases that harm human health and the environment. And 

the pesticides applied to the land and crops disrupt ecosystems, harm wild -

life, and—as discussed in “Risks from Pesticides,” p.  53—endanger farm -

workers and possibly consumers.                 

> The gray tree frog (on top) and American toad (on
> bottom) are both harmed by an ingredient in the
> herbicide Roundup.

87 

## Argument #4. 

# More and Cleaner Water 

Lake McConaughy, which receives most of its water from the North Platte 

River, was once considered “Nebraska’s ocean” and was a haven for migrating 

eagles and other birds. But times have changed. After years of heavy irriga -

tion by farmers raising animal feed grains such as soybeans and corn, fully 

half the water the lake can hold has been lost, especially during dry summers. 

Consequently, water supplies for hydroelectric power are on the wane, and 

the Central Nebraska Public Power and Irrigation District, the lake’s owner, 

is severely rationing water for farmers and ranchers. Although that might 

help future conditions, irrigation has, in the words of local resident Ruth 

Clark, taken “a beautiful, majestic lake and turned it into a mud hole.” 1

# Raising livestock requires enormous amounts of water. Although the 

United States is blessed with water 

supplies far exceeding consumption, 

water is not distributed evenly throughout 

the country. In large swaths of the West, 

demand from farmers who want to irrigate 

their crops and the thirst of soaring urban 

populations often outstrip the supply. Cities 88  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

such as Albuquerque, Denver, and 

Phoenix, all of which draw water 

from the Colorado River, face 

water shortages and water-quality 

problems due to local farmers (who 

were there first). 2 Farms, especially 

those growing feed grains and 

cotton and raising livestock, are 

using up groundwater and surface 

water—permanently. At the same 

time, those farms cause soil erosion 

and dump fertilizer, manure, 

pesticides, and topsoil into nearby 

rivers and streams. The end result in 

some places is water so polluted it is 

unsafe to drink and uninhabitable 

by various aquatic animals. 

## The Water Cost of Meat Production 

Producing meat takes large amounts of water (see figure 1). The ani -

mals themselves need water to drink and to cool themselves, and farm -

ers need vastly greater amounts of irrigation water to grow the grains 

and roughage that are fed to the animals. An average of about 1,000 gal -

Agriculture uses about 80  percent of 

all freshwater in the United States. 

It takes about 1,000 gallons of irri -

gation water to produce a quarter-

pound of animal protein. 

Half of all irrigation water is used to 

raise livestock. About 14 trillion gal -

lons annually water crops grown to 

feed U.S. livestock; another 1  trillion 

are used directly by livestock. 

The water used to irrigate just 

alfalfa and hay—7 trillion gallons per 

year—exceeds the irrigation needs 

of all the vegetables, berries, and 

fruit orchards combined. 

Farms pollute water with fertilizer, 

pesticides, manure, antibiotics, and 

eroded soil. 











Figure 1.  Water used to produce various crops, chicken, and beef 3   

> Note: Crops are expressed in dry weights. Chicken and beef are adjusted to edible portion; our
> adjustment assumes that 28 percent of beef cattle and 39 percent of chicken is edible. Figures
> include water from rain and irrigation.

Gallons/pound 

0

5,000 

10,000 

15,000 

20,000 

Po tatoes  Corn  Wheat  Alfalfa  Sorghum  Rice  Soy-

beans 

Chicken  Beef Argument #4. More and Cleaner Water • 89 

lons of irrigation water are needed to produce 1 pound of animal protein (more for beef, less for poultry). That irrigation water is supple-mented by larger amounts of rainwater, especially in big corn-growing states such as Illinois and Iowa. 4Together, irrigating feed crops and raising livestock consume over half of all 

freshwater (see figure 2). 5 In contrast, domestic uses—all 

showers taken, toilets flushed, 

cars washed, glasses drunk, and lawns watered—consume less than one-tenth as much water as agriculture. 

## Irreplaceable Groundwater Is Being Depleted 

About 90  percent of U.S. water is renewable, coming from rain, lakes, and rivers. The remainder largely is from nonrenewable underground aquifers (groundwater). 7 Agriculture accounts for about 80  percent of all freshwater consumption in the United Sates and over 60  percent of groundwater use. 8, Nationally, though many aquifers get recharged, the overall rate at which water is removed from aquifers exceeds the rate of replenishment 

by as much as 21  billion gallons per day .9 In the largest and perhaps most severely depleted aquifer—the Ogallala, which underlies parts of Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wyoming—water levels are falling several inches per year. 10 The Ogallala Aquifer is 1,000 feet deep in some parts of Nebraska, but in some parts of 

the Great Plains, it has dropped from 230 feet deep to only about 20 feet over the past 25 years. 11 The majority of water extracted from the Ogallala is used to irrigate crops. 12 Some farmers who depend on it may be facing high prices or dry wells in coming years. Both the U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Geological Survey estimate water 

> usage, but they use different measuring techniques and report somewhat different amounts. This chapter uses figures from both agencies as noted in the text and endnotes.

Figure 2. Water consumption in the United States, 1995 6  

> Total: 37 trillion gallons/year
> Commer-cial 3% Industrial 4% Thermo-electric 3% Domestic 5% Mining 1% Irrigation of feed crops for U.S. use 56% Livestock 0.5% Other irrigation 27% 90 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

When an aquifer shrinks in coastal areas—including those with farms 

nearby—saltwater replaces groundwater. That permanently diminishes 

the aquifer’s value. 13  Additionally, the loss of underlying groundwater 

sometimes causes land subsidence, a sinking of the Earth’s surface. Land 

subsidence has affected more than 17,000 square miles in 45 states—an 

area twice the size of New Jersey. 14  According to a 1991 estimate from the 

National Research Council, land subsidence causes flooding and damage 

to buildings, roads, and other structures, with the cost amounting to over 

$125 million per year. 15 

## Irrigation Water: Trillions of Gallons Wasted 

American farmers irrigate about 56 million acres of land, or 88,000 square 

miles. 16  Some 23 million of those acres—an area the size of Indiana—are 

devoted to crops destined for livestock feed. 17  The most frequently irrigated 

crops are feed corn (some is also used to produce ethanol fuel) and hay, 

with another 4 to 5 million acres each being planted in soybeans; sorghum, 

barley, and wheat; and cotton (cottonseed meal is used as livestock feed). 

In stark contrast, vegetables, 

vineyards, and fruit and nut-

tree orchards together occupy 

only 7 million acres of irri -

gated land. 18  (See figure 3.) 

The amount of water 

devoted to irrigating alfalfa 

and other hay—7  trillion 

gallons annually—exceeds 

the irrigation needs of all 

vegetables, berries, and fruit 

orchards  combined .20 

Of the roughly 28 trillion 

gallons of water used for irriga -

tion each year, about 14 trillion 

are applied to the grains, oil -

seeds, pasture, and hay that are fed to livestock in the United States, and an 

additional 3 trillion gallons are used to produce grains for food or export. 21 

Irrigation Methods Are Often Inefficient 

Efficient irrigation methods could help preserve scarce water supplies, but 

about half of the irrigated acres in the United States use wasteful systems. 22 

The least efficient ones either run water down furrows (trenches) or sim -    

> Figure 3. Irrigated area by crop type, 2000
> (acres) 19
> 10.2
> million
> 9.6
> million
> Orchards &
> vegetables
> Cotton
> Soybeans
> Sorghum,
> barley ,
> wheat
> Rice
> 10.3
> million
> Other Corn
> All
> hay
> 3.1 millio n
> 4.9 million
> 5.2
> million 5.3
> million
> 7.0
> million

Argument #4.  More and Cleaner Water  • 91 

ply flood fields. Roughly 45  percent of irrigated acres rely on more efficient 

systems, such as center-pivot sprinkler irrigation (creating those large cir -

cles that can be seen when flying over Nebraska and other Great Plains 

states). 23  But only 4  percent use highly efficient low-flow systems, such as 

drip irrigation. Though more expensive than flooding systems, drip irriga -

tion can reduce water use by 30 to 70  percent and increase crop yields by 

20 to 90  percent. 24  Adopting better conservation practices and more efficient 

technologies, which many farmers are now doing, could save tremendous 

amounts of water. 

The timing, as well as the method, of irrigation can waste water and 

result in “waterlogging, increased soil salinity, erosion, and surface and 

groundwater quality problems associated with nutrients, pesticides, and 

pathogens,” according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 25  In 

2003, only 8  percent of farmers who irrigated their crops measured the mois -

ture content of their plants or soil before irrigating. 26  University of California 

at Berkeley researchers found that the use of computer models enabled farm -

ers to use 13  percent less water and increase crop yields by 8  percent. 27 

Irrigation May Be a Bad Investment 

Irrigated crops account for about one-half of all crop sales in the United 

States, even though they are harvested from only one-sixth of all cropland. 28 

> Level-basin flood irrigation is often used, as on this wheat field, where more-efficient drip irrigation
> is not appropriate.

92  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Using irrigation to increase yields means that less land is required to meet 

the same production goals (it also may contribute to over-production). 

In the case of feed crops, the USDA estimates that 100 gallons of irriga -

tion water generates only a few cents in increased farm revenue—hardly a 

great bargain. 34  The same water could be used for more lucrative purposes. 

For example, an irrigated acre of corn yields about 163 bushels, which in 

2002 was worth about $383. In contrast, 1 irrigated acre could produce 

about $2,400 worth of potatoes or $4,100 worth of apples. 35  The nonprofit 

Natural Resources Defense Council estimated that “a 60-acre alfalfa farm 

using 240 acre-feet of water would generate approximately $60,000 in 

sales. In contrast, a semiconductor plant using the same amount of water 

would generate 5,000 times as much, or $300 million.” 36,  While a 60-acre 

farm could employ as few as 2 workers, the semiconductor plant would 

> An acre-foot is the amount of water it takes to cover 1 acre of land to a depth of 1 foot.

Subsidizing—and Wasting—Water 

American taxpayers provide lavish funding for water projects, mostly benefiting 

large-scale agriculture and meat-eating consumers. In 1988, the Congressional 

Budget Office estimated that from 1902—when federal irrigation projects began— 

through the 1980s, federal subsidies totaled between $34 billion and $70 billion. 29 

The World Resources Institute estimates that the federal government—taxpayers— 

pays an average of 83  percent of the costs of irrigation projects. 30 

Taxpayers help farmers in two ways. First, tax dollars are used to build the sys -

tems, then farmers buy water from the projects at a fraction of the cost of pump -

ing or diverting the water. For example, the actual cost of water from the Central 

Arizona Project, which in 1993 began diverting water for irrigation from the Colo -

rado River, is $209 per acre-foot—yet farmers in Arizona pay only $2 per acre-foot, 

according to the Congressional Budget Office. 31  Similarly, the full cost of delivering 

water from the Central Utah Project is $400 per acre-foot, but farmers pay only 

$8 per acre-foot. 32  In a 2004 study of California water subsidies, the nonprofit Envi -

ronmental Working Group (EWG) found that American taxpayers are providing up 

to $416 million per year for California’s Central Valley Project. On average, farmers 

in the Central Valley pay about $17 per acre-foot of water. In stark contrast, Los 

Angelenos pay about $925 per acre-foot for the water they use. Of the 6,800-plus 

farms in the Central Valley Project, the top 341 largest were given access to about 

half of the subsidized irrigation water. 33  Those large farms have little incentive to 

use the cheap irrigation water efficiently. According to EWG, California’s Central 

Valley has long suffered a host of environmental problems due to over-irrigation, 

including “devastation of fish and wildlife habitat and severe toxic pollution.” Argument #4. More and Cleaner Water • 93 

employ about 2,000. In an analysis of water needs in Western states, the 

Congressional Budget Office concluded that scarce water supplies should be reallocated from agricultural practices to more economically productive uses to improve what it termed “net social welfare.” 37 

## Livestock’s Consumption of Water Is Huge—and Growing 

Farm animals directly consume about 2.3 billion gallons of water per day, or over 800 billion gallons per year. Another 200 billion gallons are used to cool the animals and wash down their facilities, bringing the total to about 

1 trillion gallons. 38 That is twice as much water as is used by the 9 mil -lion people in the New York City area. 39 Although water use for livestock accounts for a tiny share of national water consumption—about 0.5  per -

cent—it is the fastest-growing portion, both in terms of water to drink and the “virtual” water used to grow grains, oilseeds, hay, and pasture. 40 From 

1990 to 1995, most categories of water (surface and ground) consumption fell, but water for public use  grew by 4  percent and water use for livestock (including fish farming) grew by 13  percent. 41 Combined with the grow-

ing number of livestock over the past 20 years, the increasing number of large cattle feedlots and industrial hog farms may contribute to the ris -ing demand for water. 42 Hog farms use large volumes of water to prepare manure for storage in huge lagoons (see “Manure Lagoons: Accidents Wait -

ing to Happen,” p. 94), and feedlots employ misting systems to cool cattle. On traditional farms, in contrast, livestock might find shade or other natu -

ral ways to cool off. Public use includes water withdrawn by public or private water suppliers to use for home, commercial, industrial, or municipal (for example, firefighting and street cleaning) 

> purposes.
> Cattle on this treeless, pondless California feedlot need a lot of water to beat the heat.

94  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

## Modern Farming Practices Pollute Water 

Irrigation water, pesticides, fertilizer, manure, drugs  … they are all widely 

used or produced on farms, and they often end up polluting nearby streams. 

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has estimated that “agricul -

ture generates pollutants that degrade aquatic life or interfere with public 

use of 173,629 river miles (i.e., 25% of all river miles surveyed) and contrib -

utes to 70% of all water quality problems identified in rivers and streams.” 46 

Manure Lagoons: Accidents Waiting to Happen 

Manure lagoons are supposed to 

provide safe storage. One maker 

of lagoon liners advertises 

“long-term durability, resis -

tance to weathering and low 

maintenance  … can withstand 

normal environmental expo -

sure for well over 30 years.” 43 

But sometimes accidents hap -

pen. Then, tidal waves of foul-

smelling, bacteria-laden lique -

fied manure flood the land and 

pollute the water. Just such an 

environmental disaster hap -

pened in June 1995 when an 

8–acre cesspool breached (due 

partly to an unauthorized alter -

ation) and spilled 22 million gal -

lons of waste from the Ocean -

view Hog Farm into North Car -

olina’s New River Basin. That 

was the state’s largest-ever spill. The waste poured onto nearby farmland, made 

its way into the river, and robbed the water of much of its oxygen. Thousands of 

fish were killed, and 364,000 acres of coastal wetlands were closed to shellfish -

ing. 44 

Upstate New York experienced the same kind of manure accident in August 2005 

when, according to the Associated Press, “an earthen wall blew out, sending the 

liquid into a drainage ditch and then into the [Black] River.” The “liquid” was 

3 million gallons of dairy cow waste—a fish-killing “toxic tide” that was predicted 

to reach Lake Ontario several days later. 45 Argument #4.  More and Cleaner Water  • 95 

The pollution, if great enough, kills fish and other aquatic life, prevents peo -

ple from swimming, reduces crop yields, and impairs drinking water. 

Irrigation Leads to Erosion, Runoff, and Salinization 

In addition to wasting water, irrigation can degrade the environment. Ero -

sion affects over 20  percent of America’s irrigated cropland. When furrows 

are used to channel irrigation water, sediment runoff often exceeds 9 tons— 

and sometimes even reaches 45 tons—per acre. Center-pivot sprinkler irri -

gation causes soil losses as high as 15 tons per acre. The financial cost of 

replacing nutrients from lost soil runs into billions of dollars annually (see 

“Erosion,” p. 76). 47  In southern Idaho, for example, irrigation-induced ero -

sion has reduced overall crop-yield potential (the estimated seasonal maxi -

mum yield) by about 25  percent. 48 

Eroded soil pollutes waterways. The USDA considers sediment from 

eroded soil to be the “largest contaminant of surface water by weight and 

volume.” 49  In addition, excess irrigation water may pick up contaminants and 

carry them to rivers and streams. Those contaminants commonly include 

pesticides and heavy metals (which can contaminate fish) and nutrients 

from manure or fertil -

izer (which can lead 

to algal blooms and 

loss of oxygen). 50  In 

California, selenium— 

which is a naturally 

occu rring element in 

soil—was so highly 

concentrated in irriga -

tion water runoff that 

it caused an epidemic 

of deformities in 

migrating waterfowl, 

including hatchlings 

born with no eyes or 

feet (see photo). 51 

Water extracted 

from lakes and 

streams may contain pollutants, such as long-banned pesticides. When that 

water is applied to farmland, some of it evaporates, leaving behind higher 

concentrations of those pollutants. In other cases, pollutants settle at the 

bottoms of streams and lakes, causing them to concentrate and degrade 

water quality. 52           

> These sibling stilt embryos show the effect of selenium
> contamination. The embryo on the right came from an egg with
> relatively low selenium content and is normal in outward appearance
> for this incubation stage. The embryo on the left came from an
> egg with highly elevated selenium content and exhibits overall
> stunting (compare the legs of the two embryos), lacks eyes, and has
> a malformed right foot. 96 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

Perhaps the most serious danger posed by irrigation to agriculture and 

the environment is salinization. Water—especially surface water—naturally 

contains salts. Irrigation water carries those salts onto cropland. When the 

water evaporates, salts are left behind. Salt buildup can reduce crop yields, 

and, in extreme cases, may force farmers to abandon once-fertile land. 

Most estimates put the affected acreage at about 10 million acres, or almost 

20  percent of all irrigated land. 53 

Fertilizers, Including Manure, Suffocate Water Life 

Fertilizer is a critical contributor to modern agriculture’s extraordinary pro -

ductivity. The fertilizer industry suggests that if farmers stopped using fer -

tilizers, yields of some crops would drop by 30 to 50 percent. 54  However, the 

heavy use of fertilizers impairs water quality and harms aquatic life. 

About half of the 21 million tons of fertilizer used annually in the United 

States helps produce feed for America’s livestock (additional fertilizer is 

used to grow feed that is exported). 55  Corn, wheat, and soybeans—all major 

animal-feed crops—are the first-, second-, and fourth-leading consumers of 

fertilizer, respectively. 56  Farmers treat cornfields with some 232  pounds of 

fertilizer per acre. 

Fertilizer runoff into U.S. waterways is steadily increasing. The industry’s 

Potash and Phosphate Institute estimates that before North America was 

settled by Europeans, nitrogen runoff into the Mississippi River Basin was 

0.7 to 2.1  pounds per acre per year. 57  Sediment studies found protozoa that 

lived in the area from 1700 until 1900, but could not survive in low-oxygen 

waters thereafter. 58  That suggests that hypoxia was not a problem until 

farmers began applying large amounts of fertilizers. The U.S. Geological 

Survey (USGS) estimates that the average level of nitrogen runoff is now 

4 pounds per acre per year, with some areas discharging as much as 50 

to 100 pounds. 59  The concentration of dissolved nitrogen (and phosphorus) 

in the Mississippi River has doubled over the past century, and each year 

that enormous river discharges 1.8  million tons of nitrogen into the Gulf of 

Mexico. 60 

According to the EPA, runoff from fertilizer and manure is the biggest 

polluter of lakes and ponds and among the top five polluters of rivers and 

streams. 61  When those nutrients wash into waterways, they promote exces -

sive growth of aquatic plants and algae. That increased growth leads to 

oxygen depletion and eutrophication, which occurs when the decomposi -

tion of vegetation absorbs almost all of the available oxygen in the water 

(hypoxia). Aquatic species then either suffocate or, if they can swim, are 

forced out of the affected area. As Drew Edmondson, attorney general of Argument #4.  More and Cleaner Water  • 97 

Oklahoma, put it when he sued Tyson Foods and 13 other Arkansas poultry 

companies for polluting local waters, “It’s nice to have green land. It’s not so 

nice to have green rivers.” 69 

In 1974, scientists discovered that bottom-dwelling aquatic life could 

not survive in parts of the Gulf of Mexico during the summer. In 1985, that 

“dead zone”—which emerges each summer—covered about 3,100 square 

miles. By 1999, the dead zone had doubled in area, and in 2002 it measured 

8,500 square miles. 70  That represents an area the size of New Jersey in which 

aquatic life—including such commercially valuable species as the brown 

shrimp—cannot survive. 71  Shellfish, starfish, sea anemones, and most other 

slow-moving animals died off 30 to 40 years ago, leaving the area to a few 

species of worms. 72 

The dead zone is caused largely by agricultural fertilizer runoff from 

Midwestern farms that ends up first in the Mississippi River and then 

Phosphate Mines Despoil Land, Air, and Water 

Before phosphate can be used as fertilizer for feed grains and other crops, it 

must be mined. Phosphate is strip-mined from near-surface deposits in Florida 

and Idaho and turned into fertilizer, leaving rivers polluted and landscapes dot -

ted with 200-foot-high hills of slightly radioactive phospho-gypsum by-products. 62 

In Idaho, phosphate deposits are located within the greater Yellowstone ecosys -

tem, so mining there threatens the integrity of one of America’s most treasured 

national parks. Indeed, two phosphate refineries in Idaho and one in Florida have 

been condemned as Superfund sites, ranking them among the nation’s most con -

taminated spots. 63 

Phosphate rock typically is contaminated with heavy metals that are released 

during the mining process. 64  In Idaho, runoff from phosphate mining has polluted 

nearby soil and streams with selenium. On one occasion, over 500 sheep died from 

grazing on heavy-metal-laden grasses near mines, and signs by streams near min -

ing sites warn that the fish may be unsafe to eat. 

Phosphate fertilizers—12 million tons of which are produced annually—are made 

by treating phosphate rock with strong acids. 65  Producing 1 ton of phosphate 

takes almost 3 tons of sulfuric or phosphoric acid. 66  Those highly corrosive chemi -

cals cause both air and water pollution. One such pollutant is hydrogen fluoride, 

deemed hazardous under the 1990 Clean Air Act. 67  Chronic exposure to hydrogen 

fluoride weakens the skeleton, and high concentrations can irreparably damage 

any tissue in the body. Many phosphate factories also produce phosphoric acid, 

some of which escapes into the air, where it hovers as a mist that irritates mucous 

membranes in the eyes, nose, and throat. 68 98  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

the Gulf. Nutrients from agriculture—two-thirds from fertilizer and one-

third from manure 73 —account for 80  percent of the nutrient loading in the 

Mississippi. 

Reducing nitrogen losses from agriculture would be the most cost-

effective way to reduce hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico. The National Science 

and Technology Council, which coordinates the federal government’s 

science policy, estimated the cost of reducing nitrogen runoff from 

agriculture at 40  cents 

for each pound of 

nitrogen kept out of 

the Gulf. In contrast, 

reducing the nitrogen 

flows from industrial 

and municipal “point” 

(that is, definitively 

identifiable) sources 

would cost $5 to $50 

per pound of nitrogen 

removed. 74 

In December 2004, 

Stanford University 

researchers provided 

new evidence linking 

fertilizer runoff to “massive blooms of marine algae in another region.” 75 

They used satellite imagery to study Mexico’s Yaqui River Valley—one of 

that country’s most highly farmed areas. The valley is fertilized and irri -

gated in cycles over a six-month period, with waters draining into the Sea of 

Cortez—a long stretch of ocean that separates the bulk of Mexico from the 

peninsula of Baja California. The researchers saw algal blooms covering up 

to 223 square miles of the sea. Those blooms appeared after each irrigation 

cycle, suggesting that fertilizer from irrigation runoff was the culprit. 

Manure Contaminates Water, but No Treatment Is Required 

Before entering waterways, water polluted with human or other waste is 

processed in accordance with EPA regulations, which set strict limits on 

contaminants. This water—from pipes, ditches, and other easily identifi -

able sites—must be treated and purified, usually at a municipal water treat -

ment plant. 76 

In contrast, livestock manure is  not  regulated by any standards analo -

gous to those that control human waste, and farmers are not required to    

> This summertime satellite photo of the Gulf of Mexico shows where
> decomposition of phytoplankton that had been fed by fertilizer
> created an oxygen-poor environment hostile to marine life—the
> “dead zone.” Reds and oranges indicate the most affected areas. Argument #4. More and Cleaner Water •99

treat it. Rainwater frequently carries manure downhill from pastures and 

feedlots into waterways, and some manure leaches into the soil. The EPA 

recently began to ameliorate the problem by requiring the largest fac -

tory farms to obtain permits under the National Pollution Discharge and 

Elimination System rule—the same rule that governs major industrial and 

municipal polluters. However, only the largest concentrated animal feeding 

operations (CAFOs) with 1,000 or more cattle, 2,500 or more hogs, or 30,000 or 

more broiler chickens are covered by the new rules. The EPA has estimated 

that the new requirements will reduce nitrogen releases by 110  million 

pounds and phosphorus releases by 56 million pounds—about a 25  percent 

reduction in each. 77  Although that is a good start, it still means that, at most, 

20,000 of the more than 450,000 CAFOs in the country will have to obtain 

permits. 78  The remainder will continue to handle excess manure by storing 

it in lagoons or holding tanks, or by spraying it on fields—all methods that 

fail to protect public health and the environment adequately. 

Where There’s Manure, There’s Ammonia 

At concentrations greater than 2 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of water, ammo -

nia can kill aquatic life. 79  Untreated human sewage has an ammonia concen -

tration of about 50 mg/l. Wastewater treatment plants must limit ammonia 

in effluent to 4 mg/l in the winter and 1.5 mg/l in the summer. Yet concen -

trations of ammonia in raw livestock manure can exceed 10,000 mg/l. Con -

centrations in streams in rural Illinois, for example, range from 26 mg/l to 

1,519  mg/l. Between 1985 and 1990, the Illinois Environmental Protection 

Agency attributed 58 different fish kills—some of which destroyed entire 

fish populations—to pollution from livestock wastes, though whether 

ammonia was the primary cause is uncertain. 

Ammonia releases from the growing number of factory farms are 

affecting more and more watersheds. Expanded poultry production in 

Delaware has increased ammonia releases by 60  percent. Delaware water 

feeds into the Chesapeake Bay, which receives 81  percent of its ammonia 

from livestock releases. In North Carolina, ammonia releases have doubled 

over the past 20 years as hog production tripled. 80 

Ammonia (in the ionized form of ammonium) may be deposited into 

waterways as it floats back to the Earth’s surface or is carried down in rain -

fall. Ammonium contributes primarily to air pollution, but also can acidify 

water and increase algal blooms and eutrophication. 81 

Using too much manure on cropland may pollute waterways and 

soil with dangerous bacteria and excess nutrients. In the upper Midwest, 

20  feet of soil protect the water table, reducing the risk that contaminants 100  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

will reach that water. However, in large areas of North Carolina, the water 

table lies just 3 feet below the ground, dramatically increasing the chances 

of contamination. 82 

Pesticides Wash Off of Farmland 

The USDA estimates that 5  percent of agricultural pesticides are washed 

away from farmland through runoff, erosion, and leaching. 83  That threat -

ens the safety of drinking water in many farming regions, where ground -

water supplies up to 95 percent of the water used for domestic purposes. 84 

In California’s heavily farmed San Joaquin-Tulare Basin, at least one pesti -

cide was found in 59 of 100 samples taken from groundwater wells. 85  A 1998 

USGS study found the herbicide atrazine in 38  percent of groundwater sam -

ples tested; groundwater is the source of most drinking water. Metolachlor 

was found in 14  percent of groundwater samples. 86  The pesticides only 

occasionally exceeded drinking water standards, but because the USGS 

found so many (39) different pesticides—the majority associated with live -

stock feed production—the cumulative effects of several pesticides acting 

together might be causing unexpected kinds of harm. Moreover, for several 

decades, pesticides have been accumulating in bodies of water larger than 

those tested by the USGS. For example, Lake Superior now contains almost 

80,000 pounds of atrazine. In 1991, over 540,000 pounds of atrazine washed 

down the Mississippi River. 87  Glyphosate, another widely used herbicide, 

has been detected in about a third of all streams in the Midwest. Its degra -

dation product—aminomethylphosphonic acid—has been found in almost 

70  percent of those streams. 88 

Antibiotics in Manure Contaminate Water 

In 2002, the USGS found low levels of 22 different antibiotics in a national 

survey of organic chemical contamination in 139 streams. 89  Those crucial 

medicines were the eighth-most commonly detected family of chemicals 

in the survey (about the same as insecticides). The USGS study did not 

determine the sources of the antibiotics, but presumably those found 

downstream of livestock operations came mostly from agricultural 

uses, while those found in urban areas came largely from human uses. 

The presence of antibiotics in rural streams reflects the mountains of 

antibiotic-laden manure produced each year and suggests that those 

antibiotics could lead to resistance among all sorts of bacteria. It’s unclear 

if that poses any risk to humans or wildlife, but prudence would indicate 

the value of minimizing the drugs’ presence (see “Factory Farming’s 

Antibiotic Crutch,” p. 68). Argument #4.  More and Cleaner Water  • 101 

## What It All Means 

Extracting water for irrigation and livestock use is one of many areas in 

which agriculture is exceeding the limits of sustainability and harming the 

environment. In some parts of the country, groundwater supplies are being 

gradually but inexorably and irreplaceably depleted. The ecological dam -

age from extensive and excessive irrigation includes soil erosion, fish and 

bird poisonings, impaired fish habitats (threatening the very survival of 

Coho and Chinook salmon throughout much of the Pacific Northwest), and 

damage to roads and houses as the land below them sinks—mostly to raise 

crops that generate only pennies for every 100 gallons of irrigation water. 

In addition, the fertilizer and pesticides used to grow feed grains and other 

crops, and the manure from the animals that eat the feed, pollute water all 

the way from the farm to the nation’s great rivers and the oceans. 

Reducing the number of animals raised for food and raising cattle on 

rangeland instead of in feedlots are obvious ways to reduce water con -

sumption in the West and Great Plains. A complementary approach is to 

use water in more sustainable and productive ways. Cutting back on meat 

consumption would protect waterways from pollution caused by fertilizer 

production, runoff from chemical fertilizer and manure, and soil erosion. 

Of course, producing more fruits, vegetables, beans, and nuts still would 

require water, but far less than is needed to produce animal products. 103 

## Argument #5. 

# Cleaner Air 

In February 2001, two workers at a California dairy farm were ordered by 

their foreman to climb into a manure storage pit to unclog a drainpipe. Soon 

after descending into the 30-foot-deep pit, José Alatorre—standing in manure 

up to his knees—began to complain that the air quality was poor. Moments 

later, he attempted to climb out of the pit, but was overcome by the noxious 

gases given off by the manure. Before losing consciousness, he called out for 

help. When co-worker Enrique Araisa climbed down to help Alatorre, he too 

succumbed to the gas. Both men drowned in the putrid, liquefied waste. 1

# Half a century ago, farms typically raised dozens—or at most, hun -

dreds—of chickens, pigs, 

or cattle in their barnyards 

and on their pastures. Today’s pro -

duction facilities—it’s hard to use 

the word “farm”—are so large and 

house such huge numbers of densely 

packed livestock that they would 

have been inconceivable to farmers 

half a century ago. Consider: While 104  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

our population almost doubled 

between 1950 and 2003, the amount 

of farmland fell by 22 percent to 

939  million acres, and the number of 

farms plummeted by 63 percent to 

2.1 million. 2 At the same time, how -

ever, red meat production more than 

doubled to 47 billion pounds per 

year, and chicken production rock -

eted more than 20-fold to 41  billion 

pounds annually. 3, 

In short, far more animals are 

being raised on far fewer farms. 

One result is massive environmen -

tal harm, including air pollution. 

Whereas problems from livestock and manure odors used to be relatively 

rare, today’s high density of animals means that feces and urine from vast 

herds and flocks stink up the air, afflicting anyone unfortunate enough to 

live or work downwind. 

Livestock excreta—including that stored in foul-smelling manure 

“lagoons” larger than football fields—is only the most obvious form of air 

pollution due to animal agriculture. The production and use of fertilizer to 

nourish feed grains release toxic substances that despoil the atmosphere, 

dust carries germs and risky chemicals, pesticides are blown far and wide, 

cattle belch up great volumes of a greenhouse gas, and even milling grain 

to make animal feed generates clouds of dust. 

## Factory Farms Emit Noxious Gases 

Learning about the various air pollutants produced by today’s farms is 

almost like taking a chemistry lesson. From the most harmful, ammonia, to 

the most offensive, odor, a toxic cornucopia of chemicals harms everything 

from human lungs to the Earth’s atmosphere (see figure 1). 

Ammonia 

Livestock are the largest source of ammonia releases on Earth. In the 

United States, animal agriculture—especially from manure and fertil -

izer—accounts for about 82  percent of ammonia releases. 4 Cattle waste is                     

> The weight of meat or eggs produced, rather than the number of animals raised, is our
> growth gauge, because not only are more animals being raised, but breeds of livestock gener -
> ally have gotten bigger. Data for chicken are for 1950 and 2002.
> Manure and urine on factory farms
> release foul-smelling gases that can
> sicken humans and animals and harm
> the environment.
> Odors from large-scale livestock
> operations can cause drowsiness,
> headaches, and poor concentration
> in nearby residents.
> In 2000, methane belched out by
> cattle and generated by livestock
> manure had the same impact on
> global warming as the carbon diox -
> ide produced by about 33 million
> automobiles.
> 
> 
> 

Argument #5.  Cleaner Air  • 105 

responsible for 43  percent of that discharge, swine 11  percent, and poul -

try 27  percent. Most of the ammonia comes from feces, but urine adds to 

the burden. 

Applying manure to farmland allows large amounts of ammonia to 

evaporate into the air. 5 There, the ammonia reacts with sulfur- and nitro -

gen-containing gases. Those gases can cause respiratory and other health 

problems, as well as contribute to smog and acid rain. 6

Ammonia irritates mucous membranes in humans at concentrations of 

about 10 parts per million (ppm). 7 The National Institute for Occupational 

Safety and Health recommends a maximum safe exposure of 25 ppm. While 

a well-ventilated hog shed has concentrations of 10 to 20 ppm, sheds tend 

to be poorly ventilated during the winter, and ammonia levels can reach 

100 to 200 ppm. At those concentrations, farmworkers are likely to suffer 

intense irritation of the skin, eyes, nose, throat, or lungs. The hogs, which 

breathe the polluted air continuously, have an increased risk of pneumonia 

and other respiratory illnesses. 

The manure lagoons on industrialized hog farms release large amounts 

of ammonia into the air. 8 A study by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 

(USDA’s) James Zahn, an expert on factory-farm emissions, found that a 

2-acre swine manure pond produced more than 100 pounds of ammonia 

per day on over 200 days in a single year. On one hot day, the Missouri 

lagoon under study released 277 pounds of ammonia. 9

Figure 1.  Animal agriculture is a major air polluter 

> Methane
> Ammonia
> Odors
> Carbon
> dioxide
> Volatic organic
> compounds
> Pa rticulate
> matter
> Nitrous oxide,
> nitric oxide,
> nitrogen dioxide
> Pe sticides
> (animal feed)
> Fe rtilizer
> production
> and use
> (animal feed)
> Manure

SOURCES  POLLUT ANTS  HARM S

> Animals
> respiratory illnesse s
> Human health
> respiratory
> problems,
> asphyxiation,
> headache s
> Env ironment
> global warming,
> acid rain, ozone
> destruction,
> smog, eutrophi -
> catio n

106  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

British researchers 

studied plant life near 

a complex that housed 

350,000 chickens. They 

blamed the invisible 

cloud of ammonia for 

eliminating half of the 

plant species found 

near the chicken sheds. 

The number of species 

increased with the 

distance from the live -

stock buildings. How -

ever, the trees, grasses, 

and mosses that survived had high concentrations of nitrogen in their tissue. 

At four-tenths of a mile from the poultry houses—the farthest the scientists 

examined—the nitrogen content of plants was twice the normal level. 10 

Because ammonia is highly water soluble, rain deposits airborne 

ammonia onto land and into waterways. Once there, it can increase the 

acidity of soil and water, decrease the productivity of forests and coastal 

waters, and disrupt ecosystem biodiversity. 11  Ammonia from chicken 

houses has been deemed a “silent killer of the Chesapeake Bay,” the nation’s 

The Effects of Air Pollution: Clouded in Uncertainty 

Despite uncertainty over the exact amount of damage done by air pollutants gen -

erated by livestock, those compounds clearly harm humans, animals, and the envi -

ronment. The National Research Council identified ammonia and odor as “major” 

concerns. Methane, nitrous oxide, nitric oxide, hydrogen sulfide, and particulate 

matter are “significant” concerns. 12 

Most of the research on the health effects of the gases emitted by feedlots and 

other large, concentrated livestock operations has focused on brief exposures to 

high concentrations. But residents living near factory farms are chronically exposed 

to lower concentrations, the effects of which are harder to study. And the health 

effects of certain types of emissions—most notably odor—have only begun to receive 

serious attention. 

Synergistic effects from individual pollutants may exacerbate the damage. For 

example, chemical reactions between carbon monoxide and other pollutants— 

nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds—produce ground-level ozone 

(smog), 13  which can cause asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, and other illnesses.    

> Lagoons on hog farms, such as this one in Iowa, may use hillside
> terraces to purify wastewater, but they still emit ammonia and
> other air pollutants. Argument #5. Cleaner Air •107

largest—and once probably richest—estuary. 14  Over the past 30 years, the 

bay has been severely polluted by ammonia and other gases that evaporate 

from manure at nearby chicken farms. On the Delmarva Peninsula, which 

stretches along the eastern side of the bay, the leavings of almost 600 million 

chickens grown on 2,100 farms release some 20,000 tons of ammonia each 

year. In the summer of 2004, 27  percent of the nitrogen deposited into the 

bay came from ammonia that had risen from surrounding farms into the 

atmosphere and then drifted down into the water. Once in the water, the 

ammonia contributes to algal blooms that deprive waterways—and their 

aquatic life—of oxygen, a process called eutrophication. 15 

When asked about the odor around the bay, a local soybean farmer 

lamented, “When the winds change, [the smell] can get so bad outside you 

got to close the house up with all the windows shut.” 16  The  Chicago Tribune 

observed that the “stench and noxious gases from large-scale livestock 

farms  … are tearing apart some rural communities.” 17 

Methane 

Livestock—primarily cattle—generate methane, a greenhouse gas, when 

they digest food and when bacteria digest manure. Cattle’s belching and flat -

ulence are responsible for 19  percent of all methane gas released in the United 

States. 18  Another 13  percent is released by anaerobic bacteria, which thrive in 

the almost oxygen-free manure lagoons located mostly on hog farms. 

At concentrations of 5 to 15  percent, odorless methane can asphyxiate 

people. 19  It causes occasional deaths across the United States, mostly among 

farmworkers—such as the two mentioned at the beginning of this chapter 

who were cleaning manure storage tanks. 

Methane traps heat in the atmosphere—a process that is slowly raising 

the Earth’s temperature and causing profound climatic and environmental 

changes. On a pound-for-pound basis, methane is 23 times more conducive 

to global warming than carbon dioxide. 20  In 2000, livestock and manure 

lagoons released an amount of methane that was equivalent in environ -

mental damage to the carbon dioxide from about 33 million automobiles. 21 

Nitrous Oxide 

Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas that is about 300 times more powerful 

than carbon dioxide. 22  About 25  percent of the nitrous oxide from animal 

agriculture in the United States comes from bacteria that digest animal 

waste. 23  Nitrous oxide is produced by anaerobic soil bacteria when manure 

or fertilizer is applied to land. Cattle waste accounts for over 90  percent of 

the nitrous oxide derived from livestock manure. 24 108  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

The only human-generated source of nitrous oxide larger than 

animal waste is fertilizer applied to cropland. Because more fertilizer is 

used for growing livestock feed than anything else, raising animals for 

meat and dairy foods is the main driver of the two biggest sources of 

nitrous oxide from human activities in the United States. Nitrous oxide 

accounts for 6  percent of the greenhouse effect in the lower atmosphere. 25 

When it migrates to the upper atmosphere, nitrous oxide catalyzes ozone-

destroying reactions. 26 

Nitric Oxide and Nitrogen Dioxide 

Another nitrogen-based air pollutant is nitric oxide. It comes mainly from 

the burning of fossil fuels but is also produced when bacteria in the soil 

digest nitrogen compounds. The nitrogen from livestock waste, cropland, 

and fertilizer “feeds” those bacteria, accounting for 5  percent of the nitric 

oxide generated by human activity. In Illinois, for example, over one-

quarter of the nitric oxide released comes from the many cornfields. 27  Farm 

equipment also contributes to emissions through fossil fuel combustion. 28 

Sunlight converts nitric oxide into nitrogen dioxide. Those two com -

pounds, which are referred to collectively as nitrogen oxides, or NO x,

can degrade the environment in several ways, including increasing 

Making Fertilizer, Making Pollution 

Natural gas is made into ammonia, which is then used directly as a fertilizer or 

used to produce urea and ammonium nitrate fertilizers. Nitrogen fertilizer fac -

tories discharge ammonia and nitric acid into the air. 29  They also release carbon 

monoxide, a greenhouse gas; fine particulate matter that can clog capillaries in 

the lungs and cause respiratory infections; sulfur dioxide, which readily converts 

into sulfuric acid and contributes to acid 

rain; and nitrogen compounds that con -

tribute to acid rain, global warming, and 

ozone depletion. 30  Worldwide, fertilizer 

production generates 1 percent of all 

greenhouse gases. 31 

The lower ozone levels expose humans 

to higher levels of ultraviolet rays. 

Meanwhile, the acid rain degrades for -

ests, lakes, and streams. The gases that cause acid rain also form fine sulfate 

and nitrate particles that increase the risk of heart and lung disorders, including 

asthma and bronchitis. 

Conversion Fact 

The amount of energy used annu -

ally to produce the 22 billion 

pounds of fertilizer used to grow 

animal feed in the United States 

could support roughly 1 million 

people for one year. 32 Argument #5.  Cleaner Air  • 109 

ozone levels in the lower atmosphere. According to Vaclav Smil, a global-

ecosystems expert at the University of Manitoba, ozone “impairs lung func -

tion, injures cells, limits the capacity for work and exercise, and lowers the 

resistance to bacterial infections.” 33  NO x also can form nitric acid or increase 

airborne particulate matter, contributing to both smog and acid rain. Once 

deposited onto land, NO x increases the acidity of soil and decreases bio -

diversity, including of plant life. 34  Deposited in water, NO x increases the 

acidity and promotes eutrophication. 

Hydrogen Sulfide 

Hydrogen sulfide, another invisible gas released by intensive animal agri -

culture, is the gas with the distinctive “rotten egg” smell. It is produced 

by anaerobic bacteria in animal manure stored under moist conditions. 

Liquefying the waste—as is often done on factory farms—exacerbates the 

problem. 35 

Nationally, the amount of hydrogen sulfide generated from livestock 

manure is small, but at the local level, the gas can be a serious problem. 

Even a concentration as low as 2 ppm can cause headaches. Slightly higher 

levels can cause respiratory, cardiovascular, and metabolic problems. When 

swine waste is agitated—which occurs when storage tanks are drained— 

hydrogen sulfide concentrations near the tanks can reach 200 to 1,500 ppm 

and seriously harm human health. 36 

As with methane, hydrogen sulfide 

vapors have killed farmworkers in 

and around manure storage tanks. 

The National Institute for Occupa -

tional Safety and Health recom -

mends that exposure levels be kept 

below 10 ppm and that individuals 

evacuate if levels exceed 50 ppm. 

An Ohio man suffered memory 

losses, poor balance, a stutter, and 

other symptoms that his doctor blamed on a large hog farm half a mile 

from his house. 38  The doctor pinpointed high levels of hydrogen sulfide as 

the culprit, but other gases also could have been involved. “If I could sell the 

house, I would move in a second, but I don’t know where to go,” the man 

told the  New York Times .

Hydrogen sulfide also harms animals. Factory farms commonly use 

slatted concrete floors to drain manure into storage tanks directly below the 

animals. That practice is most common on hog farms, but is also sometimes 

Toxicity of Hydrogen Sulfide 37   

> 2 ppm: headaches
> 2–10 ppm: respiratory, cardiovascular,
> and metabolic problems
> 50–100 ppm: vomiting and diarrhea
> 200 ppm: immunological problems
> 500 ppm: loss of consciousness
> 600 ppm: often fatal
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 110 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

used with cattle. Spending their lives above a pit full of liquefied manure 

continuously exposes the animals to hydrogen sulfide and other harmful 

gases. Hogs exposed continuously to just 20 ppm of hydrogen sulfide become 

anxious and afraid of light. 39  Animals have died when they breathed the 

higher levels of hydrogen sulfide that occur when waste is agitated. 40 

Volatile Organic Compounds 

A broad array of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) form and then pollute 

the air when manure breaks down. Those chemicals have a carbon back -

bone, which is coupled with hydrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine, 

sulfur, or nitrogen. VOCs from factory farms include organic sulfides, alde -

hydes, amines, and fatty acids. 41 

VOCs may irritate the skin, eyes, nose, and throat. They can be trans -

ported by nerve cells directly to the brain, thus affecting the central nervous 

system. VOCs absorbed by the lungs, digestive tract, and skin can affect 

metabolic and physiological processes. If inhaled, VOCs can increase the 

risk of respiratory infections, such as pneumonia, and might weaken the 

overall immune system. 42  In addition, they contribute to the formation of 

smog and exacerbate the greenhouse effect. Regulatory agencies have not 

yet set exposure limits. 43 

Odor 

Odor is the most readily perceived environmental problem caused by large-

scale animal farming. Although odor is downplayed by some economists 

as only a minor nuisance that might reduce neighbors’ property values, 44  it 

may have serious health consequences that we are only now beginning to 

understand. 

Livestock operations generate a cafeteria of odoriferous chemicals, 

including ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, and VOCs. One study found 331 

distinct odor-causing compounds in hog manure. 45 

Odors from factory farms irritate the eyes, nose, and throat. They 

also cause headaches, drowsiness, allergic reactions, breathing difficul -

ties, and higher incidences of diarrhea. In one study, stench—euphemis -

tically termed “malodor”—was associated with an immunosuppressive 

effect that increases the risk of disease and infection in both humans and 

animals. 46 

Besides causing physical problems, odors have a profound effect on 

mood and performance. One study found that “persons living near  … in -

tensive swine operations who experienced the odors had significantly more 

tension, more depression, more anger, less vigor, more fatigue, and more 

confusion” than people living farther away. 47 Argument #5.  Cleaner Air  • 111 

Particulate Matter 

Intensive animal agriculture generates immense amounts of “particulate 

matter” that comes primarily from animal hair, dried manure, and dan -

der (small flakes of skin, feathers, or hair). The fine dust is easily scattered 

by wind and animal movement. The problems it causes are most severe 

around cattle feedlots because the ground—unlike pasture—is bare and 

exposed to the wind. 

The health effects of particulate matter depend, in part, on its size. 

Particulate matter typically is divided into two categories: PM2.5, which 

includes all particles smaller than 2.5 microns;  and PM10, which includes 

everything smaller than 10 microns. Both categories cause environmental 

and health problems, but PM2.5 is a greater threat because the particles’ 

small size allows them to penetrate even the tiniest airways in the lungs 

and cause respiratory illness and infection. 48  Moreover, the dander in par -

ticulate matter causes some people to develop asthma or allergies to cattle, 

hogs, or sheep. 

Particulate matter produced on farms may carry viruses, bacteria, and 

fungi, as well as traces of the antibiotics added to animal feed. One study of 

the air in a large pig-feeding operation found bacteria, some of which were 

resistant to several antibiotics typically given to hogs. 49  Whether one could 

become infected upon breathing the air depends on the concentration of the 

bacteria. In addition, the antibiotics themselves have been discovered in the 

air and could conceivably cause allergic reactions. 50 

On the environmental front, the particulate matter sent airborne from 

feedlots and farms can react with ozone, generating the low-hanging clouds 

> A micron is one-thousandth of a millimeter.
> Football field-sized mountains of cattle manure stink up the neighborhood and endanger nearby streams.

112  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

of pollution that once were associated only with urban and industrial areas. 53 

As one startling example, California’s San Joaquin Valley, home to one-fifth 

of America’s dairy cows, now competes with Los Angeles and Houston for 

having the most polluted air in the country. A Sierra Club spokesperson 

told the  Washington Post , “It’s not just a stink that’s coming out of these 

farms. It’s a real health threat.” 54 

## What It All Means 

Factory farms produce toxic gases, noxious odors, and particulate matter 

that make life on the farms and downwind miserable—and unhealthy. The 

damage from the pollution generated by these operations extends even up 

to the Earth’s atmosphere. Those ills and the welcome trend toward sus -

tainable agriculture notwithstanding, we will never totally return to the 

less-intensive, less-destructive, but also less-efficient, agricultural practices 

of yesteryear. While industry and government fight over more protective 

regulations, one simple step each of us could take is to eat fewer animal 

products, especially from factory-raised animals. That would reduce the 

number of livestock and the amount of air pollution they generate. 

Pesticides in the Air 

Farmers intend for their pesticides to do their handiwork on crops or soil, but 

when the chemicals are sprayed, some amount inevitably drifts away with air cur -

rents. Also, pesticides may volatilize (evaporate) from the field. Through those 

two processes, as much as 40 to 60  percent of the pesticides applied to crops may 

reach the Earth’s atmosphere. 51 

The pesticides eventually come 

back to Earth—primarily in rain -

fall—far from where they were 

applied. Traces of atrazine—the 

second-most widely used her -

bicide on feed grains—occurred 

in 30  percent of the rainfall 

samples tested in Midwestern 

and Northeastern states. Meto -

lachlor—the fourth-most com -

monly used herbicide on feed 

grains—was found in 13  percent of the samples. 52  About 250,000 pounds of atra -

zine were deposited by rain into the Mississippi and Ohio River Basins in 1991 

alone. Whether the small amounts of pesticides that are blown far from farmers’ 

fields pose any subtle health risks to people or wildlife is not known. 113 

## Argument #6. 

# Less Animal Suffering 

“Our inhumane treatment of livestock is 

becoming widespread and more and more 

barbaric.… A Texas beef company, with 22 ci -

tations for cruelty to animals, was found chop -

ping the hooves off live cattle.…  Secret videos 

from an Iowa pork plant show hogs squealing 

and kicking as they are being lowered into the 

boiling water that will soften  … the bristles 

on the hogs and make them easier to skin.…  Barbaric treatment of helpless, 

defenseless creatures must not be tolerated even if these animals are being 

raised for food.…  Such insensitivity is insidious and can spread and is danger -

ous. Life must be respected and dealt with humanely in a civilized society.” 

—U.S. Senator Robert Byrd 1

# Many animals die to please our palette. About 140 million cattle, 

pigs, and sheep are slaughtered annually in the United States— 

about half an animal for every man, woman, and child (see 

table  1). 2 Add to that 9 billion chickens and turkeys—30 birds for every 

American—plus millions of fish, shellfish, and other sea creatures. 3114  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

The American Meat Institute 

contends that “Animal handling in 

meat plants has never been better.” 4

That might well be true, but “never 

been better” falls far short of “good.” 

There’s no easy way to know 

what constitutes happiness or con -

tentment or pain for a pig, a cow, or a 

chicken. 5 We can anthropomorphize 

livestock, imagining how it would 

feel to undergo some of the same 

experiences: having our teeth pulled 

or being castrated without anesthe -

sia, for example. And in many cases, 

the pain an animal is experiencing 

is perfectly obvious. However, that 

approach is considered by some to be too subjective to establish the effects 

of such practices on animals. New tests are being developed that use the 

behavioral and biochemical markers of stress to evaluate farm animal 

welfare. Because the European, but not the American, legal system treats 

livestock as sentient, conscious creatures, the majority of that research is 

taking place abroad. 

Food animals are not protected by federal animal welfare laws. 6 In 

fact, farm animals are specifically exempted from the laws that protect rats, 

mice, and other laboratory animals. 

While more than 30 states have live -

stock anti-cruelty laws, they typically 

exempt “common” or “customary” 

practices. Therefore, painful proce -

dures—such as when animals’ beaks, 

horns, tails, or testes are chopped 

off—are legal because most farmers 

use them. As Matthew Scully argues 

in his book  Dominion: The Power of 

Man, the Suffering of Animals, and the 

Call to Mercy , “When the law sets bil -

lions of creatures apart from the basic 

standards elsewhere governing the treatment of animals, when the law 

denies in effect that they are animals at all, that is not neutrality. That is 

falsehood, and license for cruelty.” 8           

> Industrially farmed chickens are
> raised in enormous and crowded
> sheds, may never see the outdoors,
> and exhibit abnormal behavior. Layer
> hens live in tiny cages, are debeaked,
> and are periodically starved to maxi -
> mize egg production.
> The unnatural high-grain diets of
> cattle in feedlots sometimes cause
> liver, hoof, and digestive diseases.
> Pregnant and nursing pigs spend most
> of their time in pens so small they
> cannot even turn around in them.
> U.S. farm animals are not legally pro -
> tected as are laboratory animals.
> 
> 
> 
> 

Table 1.  Food animals slaughtered 

in the United States, 2003 7        

> Animal Number
> Sheep 2,900,000
> Ducks 26,000,000
> Cattle/calves 33,800,000
> Hogs 104,000,000
> Turkeys 254,000,000
> Chickens 8,900,000,000
> Total 9,320,000,000

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 115 

“Bycatch”: Bye Animals 

> In addition to the land and sea animals intentionally raised or caught for food,
> millions more die unintentionally as farmers and fishers seek to satisfy our appe -
> tites:
> Billions of pounds of commercially useless fish, turtles, and other sea animals
> are unintentionally caught as “bycatch” and discarded, already dead or dying.
> Wildlife is poisoned by the pesticides applied to crops.
> Farm animals die of injuries or illnesses before they reach the slaughterhouse.
> The egg industry literally shreds millions of male chicks at birth.
> 
> 
> 
> 

In such a lax regulatory environment, agricultural practices that many 

people consider brutal have become the norm. From birth to death, many 

animals never see the outdoors. They are caged or otherwise housed in 

cramped conditions where they sit in their own excrement. That sort of 

husbandry produces unnatural repetitive behaviors called “stereotypies” 

that may result in injury to the animals themselves or to nearby animals. 

Most cattle are fed grain-based diets that may cause ulcers in their stomachs 

and suffocating gases. Near the end of their short and often miserable lives, 

livestock are crammed into crowded trucks lacking food and water and 

transported to slaughterhouses where they sometimes suffer painful deaths. 

It is worth recognizing that many seemingly inappropriate or down -

right inhumane practices have some practical benefits to the animals or 

the farmers or they wouldn’t be done. For instance, indoor confinement of 

chickens, turkeys, and pigs, while unnatural and sometimes unhealthy, 

protects the animals from predators, deadly germs such as the avian influ -

enza virus, and harsh weather. The questions are whether those benefits 

are so great that they outweigh the harm done to the animals and whether 

alternative methods could reduce animal suffering. 

## Farm Animals’ Unnatural Lives 

Separated Early from Their Mothers 

The dairy industry obviously has little use for males, so they typically are 

transferred into veal or beef production systems. Calves are often separated 

from their mothers within one day of their birth—before they can walk 

and before they have received from their mothers’ milk essential proteins 

for growth and immunity to germs. 9 The day of separation is traumatic for 

both mother and offspring, with each bawling for the other. 116  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Early removal 

from their mothers 

and subsequent iso -

lation reduce calves’ 

ability to develop 

normal social behav -

iors and contribute to 

the development of 

abnormal behaviors. 

Because they are fed 

from a bucket rather 

than nursing at teats, 

weaned calves miss the opportunity to satisfy an instinctive desire for 

suckling. 10  That thwarted desire leads calves to lick themselves and other 

animals obsessively, which results in rumen hairballs. Those hairballs can 

weigh as much as 8 pounds and occasionally harm the animals. 11  Calves 

also may try to nurse on each other or induce urination by licking each oth -

ers’ genitalia and then drinking the urine. 12 

Stamped as Property 

Beef cattle—especially out West—are often “branded” with a logo indicat -

ing their ownership. Branding has been used by ranchers for generations 

and has deep cultural resonance, if limited utility. Depending on its age 

at the time of branding, the animal is either pinned on the ground or con -

strained in a chute. The brand is then impressed into its hide using a blaz -

ing hot iron, which creates a third-degree burn; that painful process may be 

repeated when animals are sold to different owners. 13  Many more humane 

alternatives for animal identification exist, such as ear tags or retinal imag -

ing, which should consign this outmoded practice to the history books. 

Furthermore, the threat of mad cow disease highlights the importance of 

instituting a national system for livestock tracking. Branding is practically 

useless for that purpose because of its limited information content. 

Inconvenient Parts Removed 

Castration 

Nearly all bulls are castrated, which involves removing their testicles. The 

most common methods are slitting the scrotum and removing the testi -

cles, blocking the circulation of blood to the scrotal sack with a tight rubber 

band, breaking the spermatic cord with pliers, or injecting the testicles with 

an acid or other chemical. 14  All are performed without painkillers. Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 117 

Most calves are castrated when they are less than a month old. Some 

argue that young animals feel less pain, but Bernard Rollin, a prominent 

animal welfare expert at Colorado State University, says there are “no good 

grounds for believing that pain experience is tied to age. It is well-known 

that cattle are born precocious, and it would be biologically and evolution -

arily incredible that all faculties are formed at birth except pain capacity.” In 

fact, inflicting pain on young animals may lead to chronic pain later in life. 15 

Castration does offer several benefits. It makes steers  more docile, which 

keeps them from injuring one another in crowded feedlots. It also improves 

meat tenderness, primarily by increasing the fat content. However, castra -

tion is not a unique way to obtain those benefits. Giving cattle more space 

decreases aggression, too. 16  And tenderness is not an issue with meat from 

younger bulls and can be improved by aging meat from older bulls. 

Cattle that are not castrated have their own virtues. They are more effi -

cient at converting feed to weight gain and therefore reach market weight 

faster. 17  That means they consume less grain, saving money and natural 

resources. Cattle ranchers compensate for the slower growth of steers by 

implanting hormone pellets in their ears to replace those naturally pro -

duced by the testicles (see “Sex Hormones on Ranches,” p. 131). 

Ultimately, it is economics that spurs ranchers to castrate their bull calves. 

Packers pay less for bulls than for steers, ostensibly because consumers prefer 

the fattier steer meat. Yet some “boutique” beef producers specialize in bull 

meat because of a niche demand for its lower fat content. Meatpacking compa -

nies, which largely are 

responsible for deter -

mining what price 

producers will receive, 

can identify bull and 

steer carcasses because 

U.S. Department of 

Agriculture (USDA) 

inspectors—despite 

the absence of any 

regulatory require -

ments—prominently 

stamp carcasses from 

uncastrated males as “bullock.” 18  The bullock stamp essentially punishes 

ranchers who avoid causing pain to their animals and deliver a leaner, 

healthier product to consumers.   

> Bulls are uncastrated cattle; steers are castrated.
> Branding with a hot iron can be replaced with less painful practices. 118 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

Dehorning 

The major breeds of dairy cattle grow horns, as do some beef cattle breeds. 

Horned cattle are still raised because other breeding priorities—rapid 

weight gain or robust milk production, for example—have trumped the 

desire to breed the horns out of the cattle. 19  To prevent crowded, stressed 

animals from injuring each other or their handlers, dairy cattle are 

dehorned at an early age. 20  The nascent horn is gouged out, cut off, or 

burned with either a hot iron or chemicals. Although horns are commonly 

thought of as woody protuberances devoid of sensation, they are actually 

more similar to teeth—their hard shell covers a rich vascular and nervous 

network. Dehorning can be extremely painful and may cause extensive 

bleeding. As with castration, calves typically are not given painkillers 

when they are dehorned. 

Tail Docking 

Removing the tails of dairy cattle—another terribly painful procedure— 

has become increasingly common. Cows’ tails often become coated with 

dirt and excrement, so when they swish their tails to chase off flies, they 

fling about whatever filth has accumulated on them. Some dairy produc -

ers believe that tail swishing increases the risk of mastitis, a painful bac -

terial infection of the udder, because manure could land on a cow’s udder. 

Another argument for tail docking is that tails may be trampled on by other 

animals, causing lesions and infections. 

Professor Rollin argues that there is “absolutely no scientific basis for 

claims about the benefits of tail-docking. … Removing the tail is another 

example of attempting to handle a problem of human management by 

mutilating the animal.” 21  Instead of docking tails to prevent mastitis, farm -

ers should clean up dirty stalls. The trampling problem could be avoided 

by giving the cows more space. 22  All in all, we suspect that American cows 

would much prefer to live in Sweden, where tail docking is forbidden, local 

anesthesia or a sedative must be used for dehorning, and cows must be kept 

on pasture for at least two to four months out of the year. 23 

Cows   Farmers  

> Lost in the industrial dairy system is the bond between cows and the farmers who
> care for them. Research has demonstrated that dairy farmers who relate well to
> their animals get higher yields. 24 Industrial agriculture, however, increases the
> number of animals per handler, which reduces the interaction between animals
> and farmers.

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 119 

Debeaking, Detoeing, and Maceration 

Because of the economic losses associated with feather pecking, egg farm -

ers routinely trim off the tips of birds’ beaks. Debeaking (see photo) causes 

both acute and chronic 

pain, including pain dur -

ing eating. 25  To prevent 

sometimes serious injury 

during fights, poultry are 

often detoed. 26 

Treatment of male 

chicks is even more gro -

tesque. Because the egg 

industry has no use for 

those birds, they are sum -

marily killed. The current 

method of choice is to dispose of the birds in what is effectively a modi -

fied wood chipper. Industry parlance describes this as “instant maceration 

using a specially designed high-speed grinder.” Other methods of disposal, 

considered less humane, include suffocation and crushing. 27 

Confinement in Tight, Unhealthy Quarters 

Cattle 

Dairy farmers increasingly keep their cows indoors, confined in accor -

dance with industry recommendations of about 20 to 25 square feet per 

1,000 pounds of animal. 28  To put that space into perspective, the tiniest car 

on U.S. roads—the Mini Cooper—occupies about 75 square feet. Its “foot -

print” would accommodate three adult cows with some room to spare. 29 

Beef cattle are simi -

larly confined dur -

ing the last several 

months of their lives, 

albeit in outdoor 

feedlots. Those usu -

ally give the animals 

more space than their 

milked counterparts, 

but the cattle are lim -

ited to only a grass-

less field of manure 

instead of pasture.  Dairy cows, once pasture-raised on small farms, increasingly are   

> being raised in confinement on mega-farms. 120 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

Pigs 

Pigs generally are considered to be the most intelligent of the major live -

stock species, which makes their suffering especially inhumane. 30  Unlike 

beef cattle, which typically are raised on pasture for most of their lives, pigs 

may spend their entire existence in an individual pen or in a limited space 

with a small number of other pigs. Gestation crates are used for pregnant 

sows and farrowing crates for sows that have just given birth. The main dif -

ference is that farrowing crates have a side area where the newborn piglets 

can fit. Those pens usually are only about seven feet by two feet. According 

to Alberta Pork, a pork producers’ association in Canada, “The crate (some -

times called a stall) is a simple pen made of metal that contains the sow in the 

least possible space that is economically feasible. … Sows housed in a crate 

cannot turn around, 

but they can stand up 

and lie down and take 

one step forward or 

backward.” 31 

Confined sows 

suffer health prob -

lems not commonly 

seen in pigs raised 

outdoors. They have 

more foot and leg 

injuries—including 

fractures—probably 

as a result of living 

in pens with slatted floors. 32  They also have more urinary tract infections, 

perhaps because the floors on which they lie are dirtied with their own 

waste. Furthermore, gestation crates increase the likelihood that sows will 

endure particularly long or painful births; fail to secrete milk; and suffer 

from “wasting disease,” which causes them to gradually lose weight, have 

a variety of organ problems, and often die. (The bacterial or other cause of 

wasting disease has not yet been identified.) 

Farrowing crates in which sows could give birth to and nurse their pig -

lets were introduced because the sows had a habit of lying on their piglets 

and crushing them to death. That failure of the maternal instinct is itself 

partly the result of poor breeding practices. Pigs have been selected for lean 

meat and rapid growth; somewhere in their breeding history, they lost the 

ability to protect their young properly. Farrowing crates do help protect 

piglets, so industrial farm operators argue that tight confinement is a wel -   

> Pregnant pigs are typically held in cramped gestation crates. Argument #6. Less Animal Suffering •121

fare measure. But old-fashioned pigs raised the old-fashioned way normally 

didn’t crush their offspring. 

Treating pigs humanely does not necessarily sacrifice productivity. 

Sweden banned gestation crates in 1994, and the United Kingdom banned 

them five years later. (Both the European Union and New Zealand are in 

the process of phasing them out.) In Sweden, pork production actually  rose 

after the ban. In Great Britain, pork production fell, but that was due to an 

ongoing outbreak of post-weaning multisystemic wasting syndrome—an 

illness that kills young pigs but is not related to the use or absence of gesta -

tion crates. 33 

Factory-farmed pigs also must contend with the potentially fatal gases 

released by their manure. In many operations, manure falls through slats 

in the floor into a pool directly below the pens. Dangerous gases rise up 

from that manure. Among them is hydrogen sulfide, which, according to 

James Barker—a North Carolina State University expert on animal manure 

nutrients—can produce “fear of light, loss of appetite, [and] nervousness” 

in pigs. 34  In high concentrations, those fumes can be fatal. Other manure 

gases, such as ammonia, increase hogs’ risk of pneumonia, other respira -

tory diseases, and convulsions. 

Chickens 

Layer hens—chick -

ens raised to produce 

eggs—are housed in 

stacked rows of tiny 

“battery cages,” typ -

ically with five to 

seven birds per cage. 

According to an ani -

mal welfare organiza -

tion, a single farm may 

house up to 800,000 

birds at a time. 35  For 

adult Leghorn chick -

ens, the most widely used breed in the world, academic researchers recom -

mend that each bird be allotted half a square foot. 36  In 2005, the United Egg 

Producers—a major industry group—increased its recommended allotment 

from 0.33 square feet per bird to between 0.47 and 0.60 square feet, depend -

ing on the size of the hen. 37  That recommendation will be phased in over five 

years. (The European Union requires 0.5 to 0.6 square feet, and will increase 122  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

that requirement to 0.8 square feet by 2012. 40 ) Note that an 8½-by-11-inch 

sheet of paper is 0.65 square feet—about 30  percent larger than the space a 

hen in the United States is now provided. 

Although hens that are less crowded are more productive individually, 

the poultry industry gets a higher overall yield of eggs by cramming more 

hens into fewer cages. Rollin, at Colorado State University, notes: “It is none -

theless more economically efficient to put a greater number of birds into 

each cage. … Though each hen is less productive when crowded, the opera -

tion as a whole makes more money with a high stocking density: Chickens 

are cheap, cages are expensive.” 41 

Rollin is also concerned about the wire floors of battery cages, which 

may injure hens’ feet and legs. 42  A chicken may catch its head, neck, or 

wings in the wire sides of the cage, which could lead to serious injury. 

Another problem is that the tight confinement does not permit exercise, 

such as normal wing-flapping and (brief) flying. The absence of exercise 

increases the incidence of lameness, brittle bones (osteoporosis), and mus -

cle weakness. At slaughter, 6.5  percent of caged hens have broken wings 

compared to just 0.5  percent of free-range hens. Dust-bathing—another 

regular activity of chickens and a natural protection against parasites— 

also is impossible in 

the cramped cages. 

In contrast to 

practices in America, 

Switzerland banned 

the use of barren 

cages that lack mate -

rials for nesting, and 

the European Union 

is in the process of 

banning them as 

well. 43 

Concentrated Disasters  

> The confinement of tens of thousands of chickens and thousands of pigs in small
> areas is a prescription for mass disaster. When Hurricane Katrina devastated Loui -
> siana, Mississippi, and Alabama in 2005, it was not just people who were affected:
> Millions of chickens were killed due to power outages and lack of water. 38 The
> same thing happened in North Carolina in 1999, when the winds and rain of Hur -
> ricane Floyd killed more than 2 million chickens and turkeys and hundreds of thou -
> sands of hogs. 39

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 123 

Broiler chickens, in contrast to layer hens, are raised on sawdust floors 

in sheds as big as football fields. They are kept together for their entire, 

albeit brief, six-week lives in groups of 10,000, 20,000, and sometimes even 

50,000. Obviously, it is impossible for farmers to monitor the health of indi -

vidual animals in such a setting. When disease outbreaks occur, they can 

race through entire flocks and cause widespread death, or, in the case of 

Exotic Newcastle disease or avian influenza (bird flu), require the slaughter 

of the entire flock. 44 

The floor covering in a broiler house is not changed during the course 

of a single flock’s life—or even several flocks’ lives. Feathers, feces, and feed 

all become mixed with sawdust. The high acidity of chicken dung that col -

lects on floors can cause burns on chickens’ feet and legs. 45 

Pushed to Produce 

Dairy Cattle 

As the rate of milk production has risen—it is now six times as high as 

100 years ago 46 —dairy cows increasingly have suffered health problems. 

One major problem is mastitis, which is treated with antibiotics. 47  To maxi -

mize milk production, cows on tightly managed farms are impregnated as 

soon as two months after giving birth. That keeps them producing milk as 

though they were nursing, even though their calves usually are removed 

shortly after birth. Modern cows can sustain their extraordinary productiv -

ity for only about five or six years, at which time they are sold for beef. A 

well-cared-for cow normally could live into her 20s. 48 

The dairy industry is the source of at least 75  percent of the cattle that 

arrive at slaughterhouses unable to walk or stand. 49  Dairy farms produce so 

many “downers” because cows are slaughtered when their milk production 

falls, and decreased production usually occurs when the cows are either 

sick or old. Also, intensive milk production can deplete the calcium content 

of bones, increasing the risk that a cow will break a leg or pelvis. Downer 

Growth Hormone: More Milk, Harm to Cows   

> Dairy farmers, ever eager to increase milk production, have turned for help to
> Monsanto’s synthetic bovine growth hormone, Prosilac (also called recombinant
> bovine somatotropin, rBST). The hormone increases milk production by about 10
> percent. However, it also increases the incidence of udder infections (mastitis) by
> about 25 percent, which may increase the need for antibiotics. A meta-analysis
> found that Prosilac also increases lameness by 50 percent, reduces fertility, and
> probably decreases cows’ life spans. 50 124 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

animals are frequently dragged into the slaughterhouse or lifted by a leg 

and hauled in. 

Chickens 

Today’s hens produce 

an average of about 

275 eggs per year, 

four times the 1933 

average of 70. One of 

the key tools for max -

imizing production is 

the practice of forced 

molting. Under natu -

ral conditions, birds 

molt annually, shed -

ding and then replacing their feathers. During the process, egg laying slows 

to a halt, but the hen’s reproductive tract regenerates, extending her produc -

tive life. 

Natural annual molting is not efficient enough for farmers, so they 

induce molting by subjecting their chickens to stressors by restricting food 

(for up to 12 days), water (for up to 3), and sometimes light as well. 51  Accord -

ing to United Egg Producers’ standards, birds subjected to such a regimen 

should lose no more than 30  percent of their weight and less than 1  per -

cent should die. 52  The egg industry defends forced molting, stating that it 

increases hens’ productive lives from 75  weeks to at least 110 weeks and 

decreases the number of new hens needed by 40 to 50  percent. 

Development of Neurotic Behaviors 

Cattle 

Cattle on ranges walk several miles each day and spend 8 to 10 hours graz -

ing. Confined cattle clearly cannot do this, and even lying down and stand -

ing up may be difficult in stalls. One response to this unnatural environ -

ment is that an animal will rub its head repeatedly against a stationary 

object, such as the bars of its cage, for extended periods. It might also bite 

the cage bars, grating its teeth back and forth on the metal. Cattle deprived 

of the ability to move freely sometimes roll their eyes back into their heads 

until only the whites are exposed. 53 

Additionally, the combination of implanted growth hormones, crowd -

ing, and the introduction of new cattle contributes to “buller syndrome” 

whereby one steer is ridden repeatedly by others in the group. That behavior Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 125 

is common in feedlots and may result in serious injuries, including broken 

legs or cracked spines. 54 

Other neurotic behaviors of cattle include stampeding, rejection of 

their young, and failure to produce milk. 55  While sometimes violent, the 

stereotyped behaviors of cattle are less often fatal than are those of pigs and 

chickens, as discussed below. 56 

Pigs 

Pregnant sows confined 

in crates exhibit numerous 

abnormal behaviors. 57  They 

commonly chew while their 

mouths are empty, bite the bars 

of their cage, and constantly 

press the drinking nipple. 

Feed restrictions and boredom 

exacerbate those behaviors. 

Sows in gestation crates may 

sit on their haunches like 

dogs—an atypical position for pigs, but one that they adopt because of the 

challenges of lying down and standing up in such limited spaces. 

While pregnant, farrowing, and nursing sows are housed in tiny cages, 

most other pigs are kept in mid-sized group pens. The size of the pens and 

the number of animals in them varies from one operation to another, but 

when too many pigs are kept in a pen, they fare poorly. In a study of pigs 

subjected to a variety of stressors, being crowded with many other animals 

caused more stress than any other factor. 58  Pigs housed tightly together 

often bite each others’ tails. 59  Once tail-biting begins, the behavior spreads 

rapidly through a herd. In some cases, the tail may be bitten down to the spi -

nal cord, and some victims bleed to death or contract serious infections. 60 

Feral Pigs Versus Domesticated Pigs 

> The behaviors of domesticated pigs that are released into the wild contrast sharply
> with those of pigs raised in crowded indoor quarters. Feral pigs build small nests
> for group sleeping. They urinate and defecate at least 20 feet from their nests. 61
> When wild sows become pregnant, they isolate themselves from the rest of their
> group and build a private nest in which to give birth. That behavior is impossible
> on factory farms, where pigs are trapped together and lack the materials for
> building nests. Also, feral pigs are highly social animals that typically live in family
> groups led by a dominant female.

126  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Many of the abnormal behaviors of confined pigs—including tail bit -

ing—may be reduced simply by providing them with straw, sawdust, or 

other fibrous material. 62  Straw keeps floors drier and helps piglets stay 

warm. It also keeps animals from slipping, thereby reducing leg damage. 

Finally, it helps alleviate the tedium by allowing them to build nests and 

engage in other natural forms of behavior. 

Chickens 

Caged laying hens pace about to the extent they can and shake their heads 

in a neurotic manner. Those behaviors reflect the birds’ perception of dan -

ger and their inability to escape. Under natural conditions, chickens instinc -

tively search and investigate, pecking and scratching in the dirt for food 

most of the day. Denied anything to explore, caged hens exhibit polydip -

sia—the excessive manipulation of water dispensers and overconsumption 

of water. 63 

Chickens also resort to pecking their cage mates, leaving bare and 

bleeding patches on them and disrupting their ability to regulate their body 

temperature. In the worst cases, feather pecking results in death. While 

free-range chickens may peck one another, victims can escape, so injuries 

usually are less severe and fatalities less common. 64 

Confined layer hens obviously cannot engage in their natural nesting 

behavior because they do not have access to straw and other materials. 

Poultry will work hard to obtain nesting material and will go without food 

and water rather than without a nest. 65  Unable to perform that instinctive 

Feral Chickens Versus Domesticated Chickens  

> Wild chickens serve as a useful indicator of how domesticated chickens might
> behave if industrial agriculture did not restrict their behaviors. Colorado State
> University professor Bernard Rollin has noted that feral hens forage over more than
> 100,000 square feet, while roosters cover five times as much ground. 66 That is in
> stark contrast to the 0.5 square feet available to caged layer hens. In the wild, the
> animals roost in groups of 6 to 30, with roosts positioned about 200 feet apart.
> Feral hens demonstrate strong maternal behavior. For example, hens with chicks
> threaten other hens that come within 20 feet. Mothers do not start to leave their
> chicks until they are five to six weeks old. Farmed chicks, in contrast, are never
> mothered.
> Farmed chickens still retain their ancestral instincts, judging from a study of chick -
> ens released into the wild. Amazingly, those highly inbred birds immediately began
> foraging for food, roosting in trees, building nests, and raising their young. 67

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 127 

behavior, chickens may “display agitated pacing and escape behaviors that 

last for two to four hours” before laying eggs. 

For their part, broiler chickens, trapped in huge crowded houses, may 

exhibit “hysteria,” a neurotic behavior marked by panicked vocalizing and 

wild flying. 68  That can lead to serious injuries. 

Chickens also develop what is called deep pectoral myopathy. 69  The 

pectoral muscle normally is used to elevate wings, but in modern chickens 

it is rarely used. When the birds become excited—particularly when they 

are being chased and caught before transport—they suddenly and heavily 

exert that muscle. It expands within its thick, inelastic covering, cutting off 

its own blood flow. The muscle becomes dry and green and begins to die. 

Some 60 million broiler chickens are raised each year strictly for the 

purpose of producing the next generation of broiler chickens. 70  Those hens’ 

genetic makeup not only leads to fast growth, but also to heart disease 

and lameness. To avoid those problems and to increase fertility, producers 

underfeed their hens. Those birds are fed as little as half to a quarter of the 

amount of food they would otherwise eat. As a result, they are chronically 

malnourished and suffer psychological stress. 71 

## What Farm Animals Consume 

Animals raised on factory farms are used as living garbage disposals. In 

addition to grains and roughage, they may be fed newspaper, out-of-date 

baked goods, candy, industrial sludge, manure, and sewage, among other 

waste products. 75  Those “foods” may be contaminated with pesticides, 

Super Chickens        

> Broilers—chickens grown for meat—face unique challenges. Broilers once took
> 13 weeks to reach market weight, during which time they ate 3 pounds of feed for
> every pound of body weight gained. Losses primarily were due to infectious dis -
> eases, and mortality was as high as 30 percent. Now, modern breeding and feed -
> ing practices bring broilers to market weight in five to six weeks—and they need
> to eat only 1.8 pounds of feed to gain 1 pound of body weight. Mortality is only
> about 4 percent. 72 Those figures represent real progress, but the progress brings
> new problems.
> Most deaths in broiler chickens now result not from infections or predators but
> from cannibalism in crowded chicken houses. 73 Also, skeletal growth cannot keep
> up with the extraordinary enlargement of muscle and body mass, so birds fre -
> quently suffer broken bones. 74 Chickens may die from obesity-related disorders,
> such as liver and kidney failure, or cardiovascular disorders.

128  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

heavy metals, and such carcinogens as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 

polybrominated biphenyls, dioxins, and furans, all of which are industrial 

by-products that pollute the environment. 78  In 2000, for instance, tests by the 

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) found that 44  percent of samples 

of animal feed contained pesticide residues, with 2  percent exceeding the 

legal limits. 79 

Some of the toxins livestock consume are fat soluble and build up in their 

body fat. The fattiest beef and dairy products (and, to a lesser extent, poultry 

and pork) deliver the highest concentrations of the toxins. Those chemicals 

also threaten the health of the animals, particularly just before and after birth, 

because during pregnancy and lactation a large portion of fat is mobilized in 

the mother’s body. If the fat in the mother’s milk contains toxins, newborns 

can experience significant exposures that may affect their health. 80 

You Call This Food? 

Cattle, sheep, goats, and other ruminant animals evolved to eat and obtain 

energy from cellulose-rich grasses. That ability allows them to make use of 

plant matter that other animals cannot digest. However, cattle grow more 

slowly when they eat grasses than when they eat high-energy corn and 

other grains. So, to fatten their cattle as quickly as possible, ranchers typi -

cally ship them to feedlots for the final three to five months of their lives. 

There they are fed an unnatural diet that contains as much as 90  percent 

grain. 

Vanishing Veal              

> Veal production is a small and shrinking segment of the U.S. cat -
> tle industry, thanks in large part to outcries from animal welfare
> advocates. Farmers produce only half a pound of veal per person
> per year, one-tenth as much as in the 1950s. 76 Most of the veal
> served at restaurants is white veal, coming from calves whose
> diet is restricted only to milk. Such a diet leads to anemia. The
> paucity of healthy red blood cells gives the meat its char -
> acteristic pale color. Because their diet prevents the devel -
> opment of a natural mix of bacteria, calves tend to
> have diarrhea and other digestive disorders. 77 To add
> insult to injury, veal calves (usually males)
> are confined in pens so small
> that they cannot turn around or
> lie down in a natural position.
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 200 3
> Po unds produced per person

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 129 

High-grain diets cause the gastrointestinal system to be more acidic. 

Normally, the rumen (the part of the stomach in a cow, sheep, or goat that 

digests grass and other food) is slightly acidic, with a pH near 6. On a high-

grain diet, the pH may fall to 5 or even 4. A decrease of 1 pH unit means that 

the rumen is 10 times more acidic, and a decrease of 2 pH units means the 

rumen is 100 times more acidic. 81  The higher acidity alters the natural mix 

of bacteria in the cat -

tle’s digestive system, 

selecting for bacteria 

that better tolerate 

acids. One such bac -

terium is  Escherichia 

coli  O157:H7, the nasty 

foodborne pathogen 

that causes about 80 

deaths annually in 

the United States (see 

appendix A, p. 172). 82 

The altered bac -

terial environment 

can cause ulcers in 

the rumen. Bacteria then may travel through the ulcers to the liver, where 

they frequently cause abscesses. To help prevent that, feedlot operators add 

antibiotics such as tylosin (an antibiotic similar to the erythromycin used 

to treat infections in humans) to the animals’ feed. Without antibiotics, the 

livers from about 75  percent of cattle would have to be discarded due to 

abscesses. Even with antibiotics, about 13  percent of livers are condemned 

at slaughter. 83 

Bacteria that migrate through ulcers also can infect the hooves of cattle 

and cause lameness, which accounts for 16  percent of feedlot health prob -

lems and 5  percent of deaths. 84  Less commonly, a high-grain diet causes 

dehydration, shock, and kidney failure. 85 

An acidified rumen can trigger diarrhea, bloat (likened by one expert 

to “a massive stomach ache”), and grain overload, a potentially fatal con -

dition. 86  James Russell, a Cornell University and USDA microbiologist, 

estimates that about 3 of every 1,000 cattle in feedlots die of grain-related 

disorders. 87 

Grain-based diets must be introduced gradually to cattle. When cattle 

are fed too much grain too suddenly, their rumens may develop bloat, 

expanding to the point where they press up against the lungs. Without     

> The digestive system of cattle is not designed to process large
> amounts of grain. The result: ulcers, bloat, liver abscesses, hoof
> infections, growth of acid-tolerant E. coli O157:H7. 130 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

immediate medical attention, bloat can cause death by suffocation. 88  That 

is what happened in 2005 at a feedlot in Alberta, Canada. Because the 

cattle’s feed was incorrectly mixed and contained too much barley and bar -

ley silage, it caused “acute carbohydrate ingestion” and killed 150 cattle. 89 

High-grain diets appear to cause abnormal behaviors. In pursuit of 

roughage, cattle will chew on any available source, including wooden 

fences. 90  The lack of roughage, coupled with confinement, also results in 

neurotic tongue rolling. That behavior simulates the motion of wrapping 

the tongue around tufts of grass—except that the grass is imaginary. 91  Graz -

ing cattle curl their tongues around tufts of grass thousands of times per 

day, so it is not surprising that the absence of such a customary behavior 

has consequences. Tongue rolling is not observed among cattle on pasture 

or among wild bovines. 

Antibiotics, Antacids, and More 

Industrial agriculture—with its dirty, overcrowded, high-production sys -

tems—often increases the likelihood of certain illnesses and the need for 

ant ibiotics. As mentioned earlier, intensive milk production causes masti -

tis in the udders of dairy cows, which is treated with antibiotics. Hogs in 

cramped pens may bite off one another’s tails, leaving exposed sores ripe for 

infection. Crowding also speeds the spread of disease among animals. And 

processing animal wastes (discussed below) into feed transmits pathogens 

to animals and increases the risk of infections and need for medication. 92 

Feedlot operators use antibiotics and antacids to prevent and treat the 

diseases caused by high-grain diets. The antibiotics are added to cattle 

feed to kill the bacteria that cause liver abscesses and hoof infections (see 

“Factory Farming’s Antibiotic Crutch,” p. 68). Feedlot operators also add 

ordinary baking soda, limestone, and other alkaline substances to feed to 

neutralize excessive acidity in the rumen. 93  In fact, one-fourth of all baking 

soda produced in the United States is fed to livestock. 94 

Pesticides and Other Chemical Toxins 

PCBs and organochlorine pesticides are “endocrine disruptors,” which 

may strengthen or weaken the action of natural hormones in animals 

and humans. Endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs) may affect many 

aspects of development, but especially sexual development. For example, 

they decrease sperm production in many animals, including humans. In 

cattle, EDCs can upset the maturation of oocytes (the cells that produce eggs 

in female mammals). During sensitive periods of development, EDCs can 

induce physiological changes at concentrations less than one-hundredth of 

those that are toxic at other times. 95 Argument #6. Less Animal Suffering • 131 

Sex Hormones on Ranches 

Ranchers routinely castrate their bulls to make them more docile and produce fattier, more tender meat, but castration reduces the levels of growth-promot-ing hormones and the growth rate of steers. For 25 years the cattle industry has compensated for that slower growth by implanting natural (estradiol, progester-one, testosterone) or synthetic (trenbolone acetate, zeranol) sex hormones into steers’ ears (which are discarded after slaughter). Another hormone, melengestrol acetate, is added to feed. A dollar’s worth of hormones saves at least 10 dollars’ worth of feed. 96 Pigs and chickens are not allowed to be treated with hormones. The use of hormones is controversial, because the slightly increased amounts of hormones in beef could conceivably affect growth and development or cause cancer in consumers. In 1989 the European Union banned hormone-treated beef, including imports from North America. (The ban hasn’t stopped many European 

farmers from injecting hormones illegally.) European officials contend that hor -mones—especially estradiol—might cause cancer or neurological, developmental, reproductive, or immunological effects. 97 In fact, there’s little evidence that hormones pose a risk. 98 The World Health Orga-nization explains that hormone implants in treated cattle “contributed only a small additional amount of hormone to the intakes resulting from consumption of other foods.” Indeed, we ingest far more hormones from eggs, milk, and soybean oil than from meat. The FDA and USDA note that hormone levels in meat from treated cattle are within the normal range of untreated animals. Moreover, very little of the hormones in beef is absorbed by the body, and, in any case, even children produce far more hormones than are present in meat. Finally, one marketer of both treated and untreated beef acknowledges that the hormone-free claim is a “marketing tool used to create a false fear.” 99 While one can’t prove that any-thing is perfectly safe, hormone implants (especially the natural ones) do not appear to be worrisome. Separate from health concerns, toxicologists have discovered that hormones in the manure of feedlot cattle (and urban sewage treatment plants) can pol-lute nearby streams. 100 The hormones, both naturally occurring and the extra amount from implants, are associated with smaller testes and fewer offspring in minnows and might also affect other wildlife. Edward Orlando, a reproductive physiologist at Florida Atlantic University, worries that “we know almost nothing about the environmental impact of hormones from agricultural sources.” 101 The solution would be to reduce the concentration of cattle at feedlots and prevent water pollution from manure and urine. 132  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Dioxin causes cancer in animals, as well as reproductive and develop -

mental problems. In 2003, dioxin-contaminated waste from a brass factory 

was inadvertently used in animal feed, causing numerous deaths. 102  The 

contamination eventually was discovered, and the remaining meat and 

milk from the animals that had eaten the feed were removed from the mar -

ket. However, a good deal of dioxin must have passed from meat and dairy 

products to consumers before the problem was identified. 

Sludge, Manure, and Feces 

Sewage sludge—everything pulled out of dirty water at waste-treatment 

plants—and raw or composted manure are commonly fed to livestock both 

directly and indirectly. For example, manure is commonly applied to crop -

land because it contains nutrients that serve as fertilizer. But manure is 

also rich in bacteria and chemical contaminants, including organic com -

pounds and heavy metals. Livestock are exposed to those hazards when 

they graze on manure-treated fields and when they eat crops grown in 

contaminated soil. Since 1992, when Congress banned ocean dumping 

of sewage sludge, municipalities’ most common method for disposing of 

sewage waste has been to offer it to farmers as fertilizer. 103  Excess nitrogen 

from the waste can pollute the water drunk by calves and lambs, caus -

ing “blue baby syndrome,” which on rare occasions results in suffocation 

and death. 104  That syndrome, which also occurs (albeit rarely) in humans, 

develops when young animals consume excess nitrate, which, when con -

verted by bacteria in the gut to nitrite, prevents hemoglobin from carry -

ing oxygen. 

Candid Camera at a Poultry Farm 

> In 2004, workers at a West Virginia facility owned by Pilgrim’s Pride—the second-
> largest poultry producer in the United States—were caught on videotape stomp -
> ing on live chickens, throwing them against walls, and kicking them. Although not
> typical, that despicable behavior serves as a useful reminder that poultry are not
> protected by the Humane Methods of Slaughter Act for livestock, leaving them
> open to a variety of cruel practices. 105

“Poultry litter”—a euphemism for the mixture of manure, feathers, 

wood chips, and spilled feed collected from the floors of poultry houses—is 

commonly fed to other animals. In one extreme case, poultry litter contami -

nated with high levels of copper, which is used to control everything from 

algae to snails, killed cattle and sheep. 106 Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 133 

Animal Parts 

Feeding animal parts back to animals exacerbates the risks from all of the 

contaminants to which they are exposed. Although a federal law forbids 

feeding cattle parts back to cattle, rendered farm animals remain a common 

component of livestock feed. Rendered poultry and hogs may be fed to cat -

tle, and rendered cattle to poultry and hogs. 107  Thus, livestock consume the 

same concentrated toxins from the fat of slaughtered animals as meat and 

dairy eaters. That process may increase contamination of animal products 

over time and keep banned or unused chemicals circulating in the food 

supply. Moreover, that cycle of feeding animals to animals may be a route 

for transferring mad cow disease (for more on that topic, see appendix A, 

p. 174). 

## How They’re Transported 

While some animals may take only one trip during their lives—to the abat -

toir—most cattle and pigs endure the stress of transport several times. 

According to the USDA, only 24  percent of sheep and 29  percent of pigs 

grow up on the farm where they are born. 108  In a single year, 22 million 

cattle and 27 million hogs were shipped to another state to be fattened or 

bred. 

The trucks and railroad cars used to transport livestock from farm to 

farm or to feedlots and slaughterhouses are even more cramped than the 

factory farms themselves. On a truck, the space recommended by animal 

welfare experts for a 1,000-pound cow is only 12.8 square feet—half of what 

typically is provided in a feedlot. 109  Using the Mini Cooper analogy again, 

six 1,000-pound cows 

are packed into an 

area that that petite car 

occupies. Full-grown, 

1,400-pound cattle get 

only 19 square feet. A 

400 -pound hog is allot -

ted 6½ square feet in a 

truck. That’s half the 

size of a gestation crate; 

almost 12 hogs could fit 

into a Mini’s footprint. 

Eighty  percent of the 

calves from Texas and Kansas are shipped an average of about 200 miles 

before they are killed. 110  During transit, animals are generally deprived of 

> Chickens are “harvested” roughly by “catchers” who cram them
> into crates, which are then trucked to the slaughterhouse.

134  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

food and water. Under those conditions, chickens sometimes suffer heart 

failure, pigs die from the cold, and sheep may be smothered. 111  And the 

extreme temperatures—just think of traveling jam-packed in a slat-sided 

tractor trailer on a Texas highway in the August heat—kill some animals 

outright. 112 

Shipping promotes the spread of disease among animals, especially 

when animals from different herds and flocks exchange pathogens. That is 

compounded by the stresses of extreme temperatures, an unfamiliar envi -

ronment, and forced crowding, which can suppress the animals’ immune 

systems. 113 

Movement is particularly difficult for cattle because, according to 

Colorado State University’s Bernard Rollin, they “are creatures of habit, 

and disruption of habits can be highly stressful. … Introduction into a new 

environment is more stressful for cattle than electric shock.” 114  In cattle, the 

most common result of stress and exposure to germs is “shipping fever,” 115 

also called bovine respiratory disease complex. That is a severe form of 

pneumonia and the most common cause of death in factory-farmed cattle. 

Severe outbreaks, though rare, have killed up to 35  percent of a herd. 116 

Rough handling injures broiler chickens. When catching chickens for 

their journey to the slaughterhouse, workers typically carry up to seven at 

a time by one leg. That frequently results in broken bones and dislocated 

wing and leg joints. 117 

## How They’re Slaughtered 

After the miserable lives most farm animals lead before reaching the 

slaughterhouse, one would hope that their deaths would at least be quick 

and painless. Unfortunately, that sometimes is not the case. Animals may 

endure inhumane conditions while waiting at the slaughterhouse, and, 

Candid Camera at a Cattle Slaughterhouse 118   

> Ritual slaughter of animals to provide kosher meat involves cutting the animals’
> necks without stunning them first. A kosher slaughterhouse operated in Pottsville,
> Iowa, by AgriProcessors, Inc., was caught on videotape apparently violating both
> kosher laws and the Humane Slaughter Act. The aggressive animal rights group,
> People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), secretly videotaped mistreat -
> ment. As the New York Times described the tape, “after steers were cut by a ritual
> slaughterer, other workers pulled out the animals’ tracheas with a hook to speed
> bleeding. In the tape, animals were shown staggering around the killing pen with
> their windpipes dangling out, slamming their heads against walls and soundlessly
> trying to bellow. One animal took three minutes to stop moving.”

Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 135 

despite companies’ intentions, their deaths may be slow and excruciating. 

Those conditions also endanger slaughterhouse workers (see “Abattoirs: 

Hell for Workers, Too,” above). The World Organization for Animal Health, 

which is supported by 167 member countries, offers detailed recommenda -

tions for transporting and slaughtering animals in a humane way, but gov -

ernments must implement that advice. 

Some holding areas at slaughterhouses have no water. That means ani -

mals are unable to drink from the time they are first loaded onto the trucks 

Abattoirs: Hell for Workers, Too 

In July 2000, Jesus Soto Carbajal, a worker at a Cargill meatpacking plant in 

Nebraska, was cutting hindquarters of beef “coming down the line at him every 

six seconds.” 119  Eventually, the fast pace caught up with Carbajal when his knife 

slipped and sliced open his jugular vein. He died almost immediately. 

Contemporary meat and poultry slaughterhouses and processing plants are Amer -

ica’s most dangerous places to work. The average slaughterhouse worker is three 

times more likely to be injured than the average factory worker. 120  The handling 

of large and frightened animals, the use of dangerous equipment, and the inad -

equate training of workers all contribute to the epidemic of injuries. 

The demand for speed at slaughterhouses and processing plants creates a dilemma 

for workers: Accept unsafe working conditions or risk being fired. 121  Speed leads to 

carelessness, increasing workers’ risk of injury or death. For instance, when work -

ers fail to completely stun cattle or hogs, the animals can regain consciousness 

and attack the workers. 122 

The greatest workplace dangers include high-speed processing lines, sharp knives, 

heavy lifting or pushing of animal carcasses, dangerous bacteria from animal 

remains, long hours and mandatory overtime, poor training, and a lack of protec -

tive clothing and ergonomically safe equipment. 123  Additionally, a lack of union 

representation removes a strong force for improving working conditions. 

Human Rights Watch characterizes meatpacking and slaughtering plants as places 

“where exhausted employees slice into carcasses at a frenzied pace  … often suf -

fering injuries from a slip of the knife or from repeating a single motion more than 

10,000 times a day.” 124  In  Fast Food Nation , Eric Schlosser describes crippling inju -

ries or death, including ones documented by the Occupational Safety and Health 

Administration: plant workers having hands or other limbs crushed or severed by 

machinery, workers being pulled by conveyor belts into grinding equipment, slip -

pery floors causing workers to fall from great heights to their deaths, and work -

ers suffering asphyxiation from cleaning blood collection tanks filled with toxic 

gases. 125 136  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

until the time they are slaughtered. Many plants use electric prods to drive 

cattle into the slaughterhouse. 126 

The rate of killing in a typical modern slaughterhouse is breathtaking: 

13,200 chickens per hour, 1,100 pigs per hour, 250 cattle per hour. At those 

speeds, it is likely impossible to ensure that all animals have been adequately 

stunned before they are killed. According to a report commissioned by the 

USDA, in some plants, as many as 8  percent of pigs, 20  percent of cattle, and 

47  percent of sheep were not properly stunned. 127 

Slaughterhouses stun broiler chickens by placing their heads in an elec -

trified pool of water. After that, the chickens’ necks are slit. Layer hens are 

not typically stunned, because their osteoporotic, unexercised bones break 

when exposed to the electrical current. 128  Instead, layers are conscious while 

their throats are slit. 

Cattle and pigs usually are stunned by a pneumatic bolt shot into their 

foreheads. But some cattle are not stunned properly and “are often still alive 

and conscious as they proceed down the production line,” according to the 

Humane Farming Association, an animal welfare organization. 129  In both 

kosher and halal slaughter, cattle or chickens typically are not stunned 

before their throats are slit, so they are fully conscious when they are cut 

and as they bleed. 130 

“The chicken industry is way behind the beef and pork industries” in 

terms of adopting more humane practices, according to Professor Temple 

Grandin of Colorado State University, a widely respected expert on animal 

slaughter techniques. 131  Although figures are not available for the United 

States, in Europe—where similar slaughter methods are used—about 

30  percent of broiler chickens are not adequately stunned before slaughter. 132 

That means the animals may suffer extreme pain as they are being “decon -

structed.” Poultry are exempt from the Humane Methods of Slaughter Act 

of 1978, which requires livestock handling and slaughtering to be “carried 

out only by humane methods” and calls for animals to be “quickly rendered 

insensible to pain before they are slaughtered.” The Humane Society of the 

United States has sued the USDA to end that exemption. 133 

## Agriculture Also Affects Non-Farm Animals 

Livestock are not the only animals that suffer from the current system of 

agricultural production in the United States. The USDA acknowledges that 

agricultural practices are the “primary factor depressing wildlife popula -

tions in North America.” 134  Of the 663 species listed as threatened or endan -

gered, 272 made the list because of agricultural expansion and 115 due to 

the use of fertilizers and pesticides. 135  Agricultural pesticides are associ -Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 137 

ated with possible changes in hormonal activity in frogs and other amphib -

ians (see “Pesticides: Gauging the Health Risk,” p. 84). Agricultural fertiliz -

ers and livestock manure pollute streams, causing algal blooms that starve 

fish of oxygen, ultimately suffocating them (see “Modern Farming Practices 

Pollute Water,” p. 94). Sewage sludge applied to pasture not only affects live -

stock, but deer and other animals as well. As with livestock, the toxins in 

the sludge may kill the animals outright or may be stored in their fat and 

passed on to the dwindling number of large predators, such as wolves. A 

more direct threat is that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and state gov -

ernments routinely kill wolves that may threaten livestock. 

Pesticides—especially insecticides—unintentionally kill many species, 

including the natural predators of crop pests. (It is important to note that 

what might be considered a pest to crops could be beneficial in a different 

ecosystem. Thus, the term “pest” does not necessarily mean an organism 

is inherently harmful.) Each year, millions of pounds of pesticides lethal to 

a broad range of species are applied across millions of acres of farmland. 

That usage causes widespread ecological harms to non-target species, such 

as insects, weeds, fish in nearby rivers and streams, and the wildlife that 

depend on those insects and fish for survival. 

Consumers higher up on the food chain—including insects, birds, larva-

eating fish, frogs and other amphibians, and other terrestrial mammals—   

> Sport fish, such as this trout, can be harmed by pesticides. They can also concentrate toxins in their
> fat and harm their predators—both human and animal. 138 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

may be poisoned by consuming pesticide-contaminated prey. Because 

those consumers typically reproduce in smaller numbers than the insects 

and other creatures they eat, their populations are less capable of recover -

ing. Once those populations are reduced, more pesticides are required to 

control the pests that the predators otherwise would have controlled. 

Some species are particularly vulnerable 

to pesticides. For example, the relatively large 

surface area of small insects allows them to 

absorb lethal doses quickly and easily, mak -

ing non-target insects the frequent victims 

of pesticide poisonings. 136  Honeybees, for 

example, have been so devastated by factors 

including pesticides that many farmers need 

to rent beehives to ensure that their crops 

are pollinated. The decline in important pol -

linators has led the American Beekeeping Federation to decry the overuse 

of pesticides, and the North American Pollinator Protection Campaign is 

actively trying to reduce the misuse of pesticides that kill insects that pol -

linate crops. 137 

Birds, fish, and other wildlife are exposed to agricultural-use pesticides 

that remain in the environment. Direct or indirect contact with those pesti -

cides can poison them. 138  Pesticides on U.S. farmland have been estimated to 

kill about 67 million birds each year. 139  With birds, for example, the more they 

feed on fish that have ingested pesticides (as a result of runoff from contami -

nated soil or drift), the more pesticides those birds accumulate in their tissue. 

Fish, too, are highly susceptible to pesticides as a result of soil runoff 

from farmland into bodies of water or from drift during or after pesticide 

applications. Major fish kills have been attributed to aerial sprayings of her -

bicides and insecticides on farmland. High levels of those pesticides were 

found in the fish that survived. 140  Because fish are important prey for many 

species of birds, contaminated fish harm birds and threaten ecosystems. 

## What It All Means 

Humane treatment of livestock should be an ethical imperative. Giving ani -

mals enough space so that they are not driven to attack each other is not dif -

ficult—farmers provided that for generations. Allowing animals to act out 

most of their natural behaviors should be achievable. If they were allowed 

to go outside, given straw so they could build nests, and permitted to estab -

lish a natural social order, fewer animals would be needlessly injured or 

killed. Avoiding certain cruel procedures altogether makes sense—espe -Argument #6.  Less Animal Suffering  • 139 

cially when they are only performed because of inappropriate animal hus -

bandry (as with debeaking chickens and detoeing turkeys). Feeding cattle 

diets that do not make them sick is feasible—let them eat what they always 

ate, instead of fattening them on grain and toxin-tainted feed. When ani -

mals are shipped, they should be given adequate room and protection from 

extreme heat or cold—that is done for horses all the time. Finally, animals 

could be slaughtered humanely if workers were adequately trained, slaugh -

tering lines were slowed down, and poultry were rendered unconscious by 

inert gases. 

Until practice is consistent with theory, the simplest thing a consumer 

could do for animal welfare is to eat less (or even no) meat and other animal 

products. That would reduce the number of farm animals and the potential 

for mistreatment. Consumers also could choose meat and dairy products 

made from more humanely raised animals (see www.certifiedhumane.org 

or www.eatwild.com). Meanwhile, the entire animal-food industry—vol -

untarily or in response to new laws—should be improving its practices 

as much as possible. While those improvements might raise the price of 

animal products, the higher prices we would pay at the grocery store would 

be slight indeed compared to the price livestock are now paying. Making Change 143 

# Changing Your Own Diet 

# As you’ve now seen, 

what you eat has 

effects that ripple not 

just through every organ in 

your body, but also through 

the natural environment and 

farms and other parts of the 

food industry. Will you change 

your diet or continue eating as 

you have been? If you’re like 

most of us, you probably could make some easy and tasty changes that will 

help protect your arteries, protect the planet, and protect farm animals. 

While some people think nutrition is impossibly complicated, today’s 

basic dietary message is actually quite clear and simple. The experts (see 

table 1) recommend that you: 

Base your diet largely on vegetables, fruits, beans, whole grains, and 

healthy oils. 

Eat fish and only modest amounts—if you choose to eat them—of fat-free 

or low-fat meat and dairy products. 



144  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Cut way back on salt, refined sugars, white flour, and partially hydroge -

nated oils. 

Making the right dietary choice can be extended beyond health con -

cerns by eating in an environmentally responsible way. Raising livestock 

requires far more resources—land, energy, pesticides, fertilizer, and 

water—and generates far more pollution than growing fruits, vegetables, 

and grains. Among animal products, producing grain-fed beef harms the 

environment much more than raising poultry and grass-fed beef and pro -

ducing dairy foods. 

In addition, we should consider animal welfare. Out of sight is usually 

out of mind, and it is all too easy to forget about cramped chicken coops, 

filthy slaughterhouses, and the like when we sink our teeth into a juicy 

charbroiled steak or grilled chicken breast. Those considerations suggest 

the benefits of not only avoiding  fatty  meat, dairy foods, and poultry, but 

of eating  less  animal products and getting essential nutrients from other 

sources. Far from being a punishment, eating such a diet opens up a mul -



Table 1.  Health experts’ dietary advice 1

Organization  Nutrition advice 

American Cancer 

Society 

“Eat five or more servings of a variety of vegetables and 

fruits each day.…  Limit consumption of red meats, especially 

those high in fat and processed [bacon, ham, sausage]. 

Choose fish, poultry, or beans as an alternative to beef, 

pork, and lamb.” 

American Diabetes 

Association 

“Reduced intake of total fat, particularly saturated fat, may 

reduce risk for diabetes…  [as would] increased intake of 

whole grains and dietary fiber.” 

American Heart 

Association 

“Consume a diet rich in vegetables and fruits …whole-grain, 

high-fiber foods …fish …lean meats and vegetable alternatives, 

fat-free (skim) or low-fat (1% fat) dairy products.” 

American Institute 

for Cancer Research/ 

World Cancer 

Research Foundation 

“Choose predominantly plant-based diets, rich in a variety 

of fruits and vegetables, pulses (legumes), and minimally 

processed starchy foods.” 

2005 Dietary 

Guidelines for 

Americans 

“A healthy eating plan is one that emphasizes fruits, 

vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk 

and milk products. Includes lean meats, poultry, fish, 

beans, eggs, and nuts. Is low in saturated fats,  trans fat, 

cholesterol, salt (sodium), and added sugars.” 

World Health 

Organization 

“[Eat] more fruit and vegetables, as well as nuts and 

whole grains.…  [Cut] the amount of fatty, sugary foods 

in the diet.…  [Move] from saturated animal-based fats to 

unsaturated vegetable-oil based fats.” Changing Your Own Diet  • 145 

titude of wonderful new taste sensations. Alternatively, you could make a 

special effort to buy meat, dairy products, and eggs from humanely raised 

animals, ideally from small, local farms. 

We can all take control of our diets, even in a culture that encourages 

people to eat hamburgers, hot dogs, and soda pop almost from birth. Two 

healthy diets that are easy to follow—and delicious—are the modified 

Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) Eating Plan (see figure  1) 

and the Mediterranean Food Pyramid (see figure 2). The DASH Eating Plan 

was developed by the National Institutes of Health for studies on blood 

pressure. 2 It is loaded with fruits and vegetables; recommends nuts, seeds, 

and low-fat dairy foods; and includes modest amounts of fish and low-fat 

meat and poultry. It also is low in sodium. The DASH diet includes no more 

than 4 to 5 servings of low-fat animal foods, and 16 to 19 servings of plant 

foods, per day. 

The Mediterranean Food Pyramid (figure 2) was developed by Oldways, 

a nonprofit organization that advocates healthy, traditional diets. It is based  

> Figure 1. The DASH Food Pyramid 3

146  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Figure 2.  Healthy Mediterranean Diet Pyramid 

on the diet once consumed widely in southern Europe, including mainland 

Greece, the island of Crete, and southern Italy. The diet includes modest 

amounts of dairy foods, fish, poultry, and eggs; wine in moderation; and 

plenty of fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains. The Mediterranean 

diet allows red meat only rarely. Both the DASH and Mediterranean diets 

specify much less refined sugars than most Americans eat, and they pretty 

much exclude butter and stick margarine. Oldways’ Healthy Mediterranean 

Diet Pyramid also emphasizes daily physical activity, but that’s a given with 

any diet. Walking, biking, jogging, tennis, swimming, weight-lifting, and 

other activities are essential to good health. 

> © 2000 Oldways Preservation & Exchange Trust, http://oldwayspt.org.

Changing Your Own Diet  • 147 

For those who have ethical concerns about animal welfare or eating 

animal products, a healthy vegetarian or vegan diet is the way to go. Such 

a diet is based on fruits, vegetables, whole grains, dried beans, nuts, and, 

if not vegan, low-fat and non-fat dairy products and egg whites. Either 

a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet or a vegan diet can provide all the necessary 

nutrients while minimizing the risk of chronic disease. 4 For any doubters, 

the American Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada are reassur -

ing: “Appropriately planned vegetarian diets are healthful, nutritionally 

adequate, and provide health benefits in the prevention and treatment of 

certain diseases.” 5 Those groups produced a Vegetarian Food Pyramid that 

features a healthy lacto-ovo vegetarian diet (see figure 3 for our adaptation 

of that pyramid). 6

Notes:  This pyramid is designed for both vegans and those who eat dairy products and eggs. Aim for 

eight servings a day of calcium-rich foods (in  italics ), and be sure to get sufficient vitamins B12 and 

D from foods or supplements. (A serving of milk or yogurt is  ½ cup.) 

# Fruits 

1 ts p

oil, soft 

margarine ,

or mayonnaise 

1 medium fruit, 

½ cup cut-up or cooked 

fruit,  ½ cup fruit juice, 

> 1

/4 cup dried fruit, 

½ cup calcium-fortified fruit juice 

# Fa ts 

½ cup cooked vegetables; 

1 cup  ra w vegetables; ½ cup vegetable juice ;

1 cup cooked  or  2 cups raw bok cho y,  broccoli, 

collards, kale, Chinese cabbage, mustard greens, 

or okra;  ½ cup calcium-fortified tomato juice 

½ cup cooked beans, peas, or lentils; ½ cup tofu or tempeh; 

2 tbs nut or seed butter; ¼ cup nuts (including  almond s); 

1 oz meat analogue; 1 egg;  1/2 cup cow’s milk, 

yogurt,  or  calcium-fortified soymil k; ¾ oz cheese ;

½ cup tempeh or calcium-set tofu ;

½ cup cooked soybeans ; ¼ cup soynuts 

1 slice whole-gr ain bread, ½ cup cooked whole gr ain or cereal (oatmeal, 

brown rice, whole-wheat pasta, wheat berries, bulgur , buckwheat groats), 

1 oz whole-gr ain ready-to-eat cereal (Wheaties,  Cheerios,  All-Br an, 

Shredded Wheat, wheat germ, and others), 

1 oz  calcium-fortified whole-grain breakfast cereal 

# Ve getables 

> 2 or more servings
> a day

Legumes, 

milks, 

nuts, other 

protein foods 

> 5 servings
> a day
> 2 servings
> a day
> 4 or more servings
> a day
> 6 or more servings a day ,
> mostly whole grains

# Gr ains 

Figure 3.  Vegetarian Food Pyramid 7148  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

The Vegetarian Food Pyramid 

replaces meat and poultry with nuts 

(and nut butters), beans (including 

tofu), seeds, and eggs. It emphasizes 

low-fat or non-fat milk, yogurt, or 

cheese or vegetarian substitutes. Veg -

ans can easily adapt that lacto-ovo 

diet to their needs. Because of their 

more restricted diets, vegetarians 

(especially vegans) should eat fortified 

foods or take dietary supplements to 

ensure that they consume adequate amounts of vitamin B12, calcium, vita -

min D, iron, and zinc. 8

Anyone who does continue to eat animal foods should consider buying 

ones that caused the least misery for the animals. That means eggs from 

uncaged hens, beef from cattle that never saw a feedlot, pork and poultry 

from pigs and birds that could roam about, and milk from cows that grazed 

on pastures, weather permitting. Look for label claims like “humanely 

raised” and, if you’re at a farmer’s market, ask the farmers about their prac -

tices. Even animals raised organically are not necessarily raised in the most 

humane ways. Several resources are provided in appendix B, p. 179. 

When changing your diet for health, environmental, or ethical reasons, 

you need to remember that avoiding fatty meat and dairy products is only 

half the solution. The other half is choosing  healthy  plant-based foods. Most 

of the bread, pasta, rice, and other grain foods that Americans consume are 

made from refined grains; soft drinks and candy are made with empty-

calorie sugar and high-fructose corn syrup; and too much once-healthy 

vegetable oil has been partially hydrogenated and contains artery-clogging 

trans fat (that is especially the case for fried foods at restaurants). 

Making several little changes quickly adds up to an overall healthier 

diet. Consider someone who replaced one 3½-ounce serving of beef, one 

egg, and a 1-ounce serving of cheese each day with a mix of vegetables, 

fruit, beans, and whole grains. That modest change would increase the 

person’s daily consumption of dietary fiber by 16 grams (more than half the 

recommended intake) and reduce the intake of fat by 22 grams (one-third 

of the recommended daily limit) and saturated fat by 12 grams (more than 

half the recommended limit). 9 In environmental terms, over a year, those 

changes would spare the need for 1.8 acres of cropland, 40 pounds of fertil -

izer, and 3 ounces of pesticides. It also would mean dumping 11,400 fewer 

pounds of animal manure into the environment. Multiply those improve -

Avoid Food Poisoning              

> Whatever diet you choose, protect
> yourself from germs that lurk in
> animal products and in fruits and
> vegetables. Wash your hands and
> all cooking implements after they
> come in contact with raw meat and
> poultry. Wash fruits and vegetables
> before eating them. And keep hot
> foods hot and cold foods cold. Changing Your Own Diet •149

ments by millions of people and it’s easy to see the dramatic improvements 

in health and reductions in pollution that dietary changes could bring 

about. (You can see the effects of the dietary changes that  you  might make 

by using our computerized calculator at the Center for Science in the Public 

Interest’s web site at www.EatingGreen.org.) 

We’ve created a Diet Scorecard (next page) to help you gauge the overall 

impact of your diet on your health, the environment, and the welfare of 

farm animals (our computerized version is a lot easier to use). The health 

score reflects the benefits of plant foods, seafood, and low-fat animal prod -

ucts and the harm from the saturated fat, cholesterol, and other substances 

in animal foods. The environmental dimension considers such factors as 

air and water pollution from feedlots and industrial-style hog and poultry 

production, methane emitted by cattle, and problems related to fertilizers 

and pesticides. The animal welfare score reflects such practices as crowding 

on factory farms and feedlots and inhumane treatment at slaughterhouses. 150  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Health 

score  Environmental 

score  Animal welfare 

score 

Food 

(average diet) 151 

# Changing Government Policies 

# The preceding chapters have detailed many of the human health, 

environmental, and animal welfare problems stemming from ani -

mal agriculture—particularly when conducted on an industrial 

scale. All of those problems would be diminished if Americans switched to 

a more plant-based diet. 

Although millions of people have 

adopted healthier, more plant-based diets, 

change is hard, because diet is embedded 

in our family traditions and culture and 

perpetuated by major industries. It will 

take more than occasional public service 

messages, newspaper articles, and official 

reports to get the bulk of the population eat -

ing a “greener” diet. 

This chapter suggests a variety of 

government programs and policies—few 

of which would be easily obtained—that 

would help move Americans toward a more plant-based diet. Recogniz -

ing that not everyone would or should become a vegetarian, we suggest 

means of both obtaining healthier animal products and improving how 152  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

animals are raised. Consumer demand will be the most important factor 

in changing what people eat, what food marketers offer, and what farm -

ers grow. But nutrition- and environment-based food and farm policies 

could improve diets indirectly. To that end, some of the policy options 

suggested here would “internalize” the health and environmental costs 

of producing animal products. That would mean paying a little more at 

the supermarket, but paying less in the form of higher medical costs and 

a degraded environment. As Joel Salatin, a Virginia farmer who is a pas -

sionate advocate of small farms and local agriculture, is quoted in Michael 

Pollan’s  The Omnivore’s Dilemma , defending the sometimes higher prices 

small farmers charge:   

> I explain that with our food all of the costs are figured into the price. So -
> ciety is not bearing the cost of water pollution, of antibiotic resistance, of
> foodborne illnesses, of crop subsidies, of subsidized oil and water—all of
> the hidden costs to the environment and the taxpayer that make cheap
> food seem cheap. 1

Our focus here is on government actions, but companies could act a 

lot faster voluntarily. Some progressive companies and farmers, large 

and small, alternative and mainstream, already are producing healthier 

foods, minimizing their impact on the environment, and raising animals 

humanely. We hope other companies will emulate them. 

One activity not discussed below, but important, is research. It is crucial 

that government continues to invest generously in objective scientific and 

economic research on health, the environment, and animal welfare. That 

research will provide insights on the effects of different diets and farming 

methods and suggest ways to improve government policies and industry 

practices. 

## Improving Human Health 

The federal government invests billions of dollars a year in the food stamp 

program, school lunches and breakfasts, and similar programs. It feeds 

millions daily at cafeterias in its hospitals, mess halls, office buildings, and 

prisons. It spends tens of millions of dollars a year on nutrition research 

and provides sensible nutrition advice. But the government makes poor use 

of its knowledge, resources, and facilities when it comes to preventing heart 

disease, diabetes, and other diet-related diseases and saving the tens of bil -

lions of dollars that are now wasted on treating those often-preventable 

diseases. The recommendations outlined here challenge the government to 

put its words into action. Changing Government Policies  • 153 

1. Increase Fruit and Vegetable Consumption 

Consuming more nutrient-dense fruits and vegetables is one of the most 

important dietary changes that consumers should make. Eating more fruits 

and vegetables is heartily endorsed by the  2005 Dietary Guidelines for Ameri -

cans , because doing so would add vital nutrients to diets and could displace 

less-healthful foods. The government should show that it means what it 

says by sponsoring programs, including the following, that would have a 

real impact. 

Intensive media campaigns should be initiated to encourage people to 

consume more fruits and vegetables (as well as whole grains and beans). 

Currently, the “5 A Day” program of the U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services, which encourages people to eat more fruits and vege -

tables, receives only about $5 million in annual funding and has negligi -

ble impact. Other media campaigns should discourage the consumption 

of fatty meat and dairy products, soft drinks, and salty processed foods. 

The overall budget should be at least $150 million per year (50  cents per 

person). 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) highly successful Fruit 

and Vegetable Snack Program provides a free serving each day of a fruit 

or vegetable to schoolchildren. Unfortunately, the program only has the 

funding to reach several hundred schools. Considering that it benefits 

both children and farmers, it should 

be expanded nationally at an annual 

cost of roughly $4 billion. That would 

be a far smarter investment than the 

$20 billion paid in some years to 

grain, cotton, and rice farmers. 

In the Food Stamp program, bonus 

stamps could be provided for the 

purchase of fresh, frozen, canned, 

or dried fruits and vegetables. Sim -

ilarly, as the Institute of Medicine 

has recommended, the Women, 

Infants, and Children (WIC) pro -

gram should provide more fresh 

fruits and vegetables and less juice, 

cheese, milk, and eggs. The USDA 

is required to rewrite its regulations 

by November 2006. 





154  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

City and state governments should sponsor more farmers’ markets, 

especially in low-income communities, to help distribute locally grown 

fresh produce. 

2. Reduce the Fat Content of Meat 

Because animal fat promotes heart disease, it would be helpful if beef and 

pork were as lean as possible. (Hog farmers are raising far leaner hogs than 

they did several decades ago.) Certain breeds of cattle tend to be lower in fat, 

and younger animals usually are lower in fat than older ones. Fat content is 

also increased by the high-grain diets cattle eat at feedlots. The government 

should implement policies that lower the fat content of meat products. 

The approximate fat content of cattle could be assessed at the slaughter -

house, with a modest per-pound tax levied on higher-fat cattle. The rev -

enues from that tax could be used to reward ranchers and feedlot oper -

ators who deliver lower-fat cattle to market, encourage farmers to raise 

lower-fat breeds and feed cattle grain for shorter periods of time, and 

encourage consumers to choose lower-fat and pasture-raised beef prod -

ucts. Though pigs are slimmer than ever, analogous programs could 

ensure that that healthy trend continues. 

The USDA has standards of identity that limit the fat content of certain 

processed meats, but the current limits are a generous 30  percent by 

weight in ground beef and hot dogs and 50  percent in pork sausages. 

(The average hot dog now contains more than twice as much fat as pro -

tein.) Those high-fat products provide a ready market for fat trimmings 

from cattle and hogs and clog consumer arteries. The fat limit for ground 

beef and hot dogs should be lowered—perhaps over several years—to 

20  percent and for pork sausages to 25  percent. Judging from the many 

lower-fat products already on the market, companies could lower the fat 

content and still provide good-tasting foods. 

3. Reduce the Fat Content of Milk 

The saturated fat in cow’s milk is a leading cause of heart disease. Although 

individuals now can choose lower-fat dairy products, the fat that is removed 

inevitably returns to the market in the form of butter, cream, ice cream, or 

other high-fat products. To reduce the volume of saturated fat entering the 

food supply, dairy pricing policies should be revised to encourage farmers 

to deliver lower-fat milk. Producers that deliver milk lower in saturated fat 

could be paid more. The money could come—in a zero-sum manner—from 

lower payments for milk that is higher in saturated fat. Several approaches 

can improve the nutrient content of milk. 





Changing Government Policies • 155 

Use breeds of cows that provide milk with less total and saturated fat, and, within those breeds, select for propagation individual cows whose milk is lower in fat. Add conjugated linoleic acid to the cows’ feed or change feed in other ways to lower the total fat content of milk by about 25 percent. 2Add canola seeds (the source of canola oil) or other sources of unsaturated oil to cows’ feed to lower the saturated fat and increase the 

unsaturated fat content by 20  percent each. 3

4. Label Food More Effectively 

The familiar Nutrition Facts label on packaged foods is used daily by mil-

lions of people, but it has not been as effective as some had hoped in improv -

ing diets and promoting health; also, fish, produce, and unprocessed meat 

and poultry are not required to have nutrition labels. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the USDA should 

develop a more effective labeling system to supplement the Nutrition 

Facts label. One option would be to require companies to put a symbol on the front of a product’s package to highlight the food’s overall nutri-tional value. Foods would be rated according to their content of saturated fat, sodium, vitamins, and other nutrients and then required to put a green (“any time”), yel-low (“sometimes”), or red (“seldom”) circle or square on the front label. An alternative more palatable to industry would be to establish a voluntary system, as the United Kingdom and Sweden have done (see image). Such straight-forward front-label symbols would be a great help to hurried shoppers, children, and others. Steaks, ground beef and poultry, and other fresh and frozen meat and poultry products are not required to provide nutrition information on labels. The USDA should order such labeling, which would help people 

avoid fattier foods. 

While nutrition information is on most packaged foods, people choose blindly when they eat out. Chain table-service restaurants should be required to list on their menus the calorie, saturated and trans fat, and 

  

> “Spreadable” butter is produced naturally in Ireland by feeding cows a source of unsaturated fat, such as canola. Swedish voluntary “good food” symbol. 156 •Six Arguments for a Greener Diet

sodium content of each item. Fast-food restaurants should be required to 

post the calorie content of each item on their menu boards. 4

5. Prevent Foodborne Diseases 

Animals harbor a wide variety of microorganisms that do not harm the 

animals but can cause serious and sometimes fatal diseases in humans. 

Farming and processing practices, as well as the federal government’s reg -

ulatory system, should be improved to minimize the toll of foodborne dis -

eases. Aside from eating (and producing) less meat, actions to prevent food 

poisoning include the following. 

The health and food-safety responsibilities of the USDA, FDA, and 

other federal agencies should be consolidated into a single independent 

agency, as several other countries have done. The current multi-agency 

system is inefficient and suffers from a severe conflict of interest: The 

USDA is charged with both promoting the consumption, and regulat -

ing the safety, of meat and poultry products. A new, streamlined pub -

lic health agency should be empowered to levy stiff fines, recall tainted 

products from the marketplace, and inspect foreign processing plants. 

Congress should give the federal government a specific mandate to 

reduce hazards in the food supply. Pathogen-reduction and enforcement 

authority are largely lacking from our existing meat and poultry inspec -

tion laws. 

The USDA should require cattle ranchers to use bar-coded or radio-fre -

quency identification tags or retinal imaging to track individual cattle 

from birth to the slaughterhouse and to help pinpoint sources of food poi -

soning and mad cow disease. Such systems are already in use in Europe, 

Canada, Japan, and other countries. Fresh produce and grains should 

carry information on the country (and possibly the state and farm) of ori -

gin to facilitate traceback in the event of contamination. 

Food-safety measures—from the farm to the supermarket—should be 

upgraded. Vaccinations, feed additives, carcass washes, temperature 

controls on trucks, and other measures are needed to minimize the pres -

ence of pathogens. On egg farms, for example, layer hens should be cer -

tified as  Salmonella-free, and any eggs that might be contaminated with 

Salmonella  should be pasteurized or cooked in processed foods. 

Outbreak reporting systems should be improved to encourage more thor -

ough investigations and more specific information on the food sources of 

the outbreaks. When animal pathogens are found in plant-based foods, 

investigators should identify how and where the contamination likely 

occurred. 









Changing Government Policies  • 157 

6. Prevent Antibiotic Resistance 

Many farmers add medically important antibiotics to livestock feed to 

compensate for overcrowded and unsanitary conditions. That practice, 

however, increases the likelihood that bacteria harmful to humans will 

become resistant to antibiotics and cause infections that are more diffi -

cult to treat. To maintain the effectiveness of those invaluable drugs for 

human medicine, Congress should ban the routine feeding of medically 

important antibiotics to livestock. Indeed, scientific research and a few 

major producers have found that feeding antibiotics to healthy chickens, 

hogs over 50 pounds, and grass-fed cattle is largely unnecessary. A ban, as 

likely would occur if pending bipartisan legislation (S.742) were to pass, 

would not prevent farmers and ranchers from using antibiotics to treat 

sick animals. 

7. Stop Promoting Unhealthy Meat and Dairy Foods 

The beef, pork, dairy, and egg industries, with administrative assistance 

from the USDA, “tax” themselves to raise war chests for advertising 

(for example, “Pork–The Other White Meat,” celebrity “milk mustache” 

ads, “Beef Gives Strength,” “The Incredible Edible Egg”) and research. 

Together, those industries 

spend tens of millions of 

dollars annually promot -

ing their products—a sum 

that dwarfs what the govern -

ment and industry spend to 

promote the consumption of 

fruits, vegetables, and whole 

grains. Although some of the 

advertising features lower-fat 

types of meat and milk, all 

of it serves as an advertise -

ment for foods that contribute 

to health and environmental 

problems. It is hypocritical for 

the government to facilitate 

the promotion of foods that 

are inconsistent with its own 

dietary guidelines. Congress 

should eliminate federal involvement in the milk, cheese, beef, pork, and 

egg programs or limit the advertising to the healthiest products. 158  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

8. More Healthful Meals at Government-Run Facilities 

Federal, state, and local governments directly feed millions of people every 

day at schools, government cafeterias, military bases, prisons, and hospi -

tals. Government could easily promote healthier diets at those facilities by 

providing more dishes based on fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains. 

Animal products served should be low in fat and salt and made from ani -

mals raised humanely and without medically important antibiotics. Nutri -

tion information should be provided. Such government efforts would pro -

mote health; create markets for healthier foods; and set an example for other 

large employers, hospitals, colleges, and restaurants. 

## Improving the Environment 

A nation’s stewardship of the environment reflects its consideration of 

future generations. Today, though, farmers apply copious amounts of fertil -

izer and pesticides to vast acreages of crops destined for animal feed, pollut -

ing the environment and possibly harming wildlife, farmworkers, and con -

sumers. Raising large numbers of cattle, hogs, and poultry in concentrated 

animal feeding operations (CAFOs) generates air and water pollution. 

Numerous state and federal laws are aimed at protecting the environ -

ment, but some of those laws have limited applicability to agriculture. More -

over, in its regulation of the industry, the federal government sometimes 

has gone in the wrong direction: The Environmental Protection Agency 

(EPA) has exempted some 14,000 poultry, egg, dairy, and hog farms from 

potential fines of up to $27,500 per day for polluting the air or water with 

animal manure. 5

To tackle the noxious problems caused by CAFOs, local and national 

citizens’ groups, including Public Citizen and Global Resource Action 

Center for the Environment, are seeking to stop the building of new large 

animal feeding operations. In 2003 the American Public Health Association 

joined in, urging federal, state, and local governments to impose a morato -

rium on new CAFOs until adequate scientific data on the “risks to public 

health have been collected and uncertainties resolved.” 6 Counties in Iowa, 

Missouri, North Carolina, and other states where the hog industry has been 

most aggressive are beginning to approve moratoriums on CAFOs. 

Shifting to a more plant-based diet is one sure way to lessen numerous 

environmental burdens. But since not everyone is going to do that, federal 

and state governments should adopt new policies to protect the environ -

ment from large-scale animal agriculture. The following measures also 

would nudge people in a more plant-based direction by slightly increasing 

the costs of producing beef, pork, poultry, eggs, and milk. After all, it is only Changing Government Policies  • 159 

fair that livestock producers—and consumers of animal products—bear the 

full economic costs of their activities. Even the Farm Foundation, which 

is supported by the cattle, hog, and other industries, acknowledges that 

“reflecting the true cost and value of manure and byproducts in prices of 

products or services might provide an incentive for producers and proces -

sors to adopt systems that maximize profits while being environmentally 

friendly.” 7

1. Prevent Air Pollution from Factory Farms 

Factory farms that raise cattle, hogs, and poultry are major air polluters. 

Governments should limit the density and total number of animals. The 

EPA should aggressively enforce the Clean Air Act, Superfund (a waste 

abatement program), and Community Right-to-Know laws as they apply 

to CAFOs. 

2. Prevent Water Pollution from Factory Farms 

In its place, nu -

trient-rich ma -

nure is a valu -

able resource. 

But the 1 trillion 

pounds of ani -

mal waste gen -

erated by animal 

feeding opera -

tions frequently 

pollutes nearby 

streams and riv -

ers. 8 When ma -

nure lagoons on 

hog farms are breached—because of major storms, equipment breakdowns, 

or operational errors—the waste pollutes groundwater and nea rby water -

ways, contaminating the water and killing fish. In addition, nutrients in an -

imal manure applied to cropland often pollute waterways. 

Water pollution would be best mitigated by raising fewer animals and 

limiting the size of CAFOs. Short of that, the EPA has mandated that 

CAFOs, as well as smaller or less-intensive feeding operations likely to 

cause water pollution, obtain permits to limit pollution. Those permits 

include comprehensive nutrient management plans, the requirements of 

which are designed by the USDA and vary by state. Management plans 

160  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

are not now, but should be, subject to public review to promote enforce -

ment. The plans also do little to stop the construction or operation of 

open-air lagoons of dirty, smelly manure. Stringent Clean Water Act 

permits with enforceable provisions should be used to prevent pollution 

from CAFOs’ manure storage facilities and when the manure is spread 

or sprayed on fields. Considering how troublesome manure lagoons have 

been, the EPA could ban ones over a certain size. 

The USDA’s Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) gives 

individual CAFOs up to $450,000 to cover the cost of building, improv -

ing, or upgrading their manure lagoons and effluent sprayfields. How -

ever, as the  New York Times  put it, that largesse helps farmers “comply 

with regulations that don’t mean much to begin with.” 9 EQIP grants 

encourage the use of large-scale lagoons and sprayfield systems, because 

they do not limit the size of the operations that receive the grants. EQIP 

support should be limited to smaller, less environmentally harmful live -

stock facilities. 

To prevent phosphorus pollution of waterways, the USDA should 

encourage farmers to use more appropriate animal feed. Two com -

mon approaches are reducing phosphorus levels in feed and adding the 

enzyme phytase, which breaks down the phosphorus-rich phytic acid in 

feed and enables animals to absorb more phosphorus. Adding phytase 

to swine and poultry feed reduces the phosphorus content of manure 

by as much as 25 to 50  percent. 10  Dairy farmers, who commonly add too 

much phosphorus (and nitrogen) to feed, could reduce costs and runoff 

substantially if they cut back. 11 

Government agencies generally give broad discretion to producers 

to create and implement nutrient management plans, though some 

states might impose more stringent requirements. Only Wisconsin has 

allowed nutrient feed-management changes to qualify for funding from 

the USDA’s EQIP. 12  Other states should do the same. 

Hormones—including natural ones and the growth hormones implanted 

in beef cattle—have been found in waterways downstream from feed -

lots. Initial studies show that the minuscule amounts of hormones cause 

malformations in fish. Greatly decreasing the number and density of cat -

tle in CAFOs would solve the environmental problem. 

3. Reduce Water Use 

The enormous amounts of (mostly irrigation) water that are used to pro -

duce feed grains erode soil, pollute water, deplete groundwater reservoirs, 

and poison fish. Ultimately, over-irrigation can deplete water of oxygen and 

harm wildlife in and around ponds and lakes. 







Changing Government Policies  • 161 

Irrigation subsidies encourage farmers to waste water and cultivate poor-

quality land where irrigation contributes to water-quality problems. From 

1902 to 1986, irriga -

tion subsidies cost 

taxpayers as much 

as $70  billion. The 

subsidies just to 

farmers in Califor -

nia’s Central Valley 

Project now amount 

to $400 million a

year, mostly going 

to large farmers, ac -

cording to the En -

vironmental Work -

ing Group. 13  Those subsidies should be reduced or eliminated. Currently, 

many water rate structures charge farmers on a per-acre basis regardless 

of water use. Water deliveries to farms should be measured and farmers 

charged according to how much water they use. 

Federal loans or grants should be available to encourage farmers to use 

more efficient irrigation systems. A portion of farm subsidies could be 

withheld from farmers who waste water. 

4. Reduce Pesticide and Fertilizer Use 

Gargantuan quantities of fertilizer and smaller quantities of pesticides 

help maximize yields of feed grains and other crops but exact a cost from 

the environment and health. The mining of minerals and manufacture of 

fertilizer require huge amounts of energy and nonrenewable resources 

and pollute the air and water. Using the fertilizer generates more air and 

water pollution. Pesticides may harm workers and nearby residents, as 

well as non-target animals and plants. And consumers, of course, would 

prefer not to have pesticide residues in their food. Eating fewer animal 

products would reduce the harm from pesticides and fertilizer (though 

the benefits would be slightly reduced because more food crops would 

have to be produced). Government actions to lessen the problems include 

the following. 

The USDA and state departments of agriculture should mount intensive 

programs to encourage feed-grain producers (and other farmers) to slash 

their use of pesticides and chemical fertilizer by using techniques rang -

ing from integrated pest management to organic farming to biotechnol -





162  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

ogy. Thou gh agriculture departments have long belittled organic agri -

culture, they are beginning to see that thousands of small farmers are 

thriving by growing fruits, vegetables, grains, and livestock for that 

exploding niche market. Just as the European Union provides about 

$500 million a year in subsidies to organize farmers, states could pro -

vide loans, grants, or tax breaks (see next item) to help farmers get off the 

chemical treadmill. 14 

Taxing fertilizers and pesticides would internalize some of their envi -

ronmental costs and reduce their use. Even a small tax, which would 

not affect food prices, would raise signif -

icant revenues to fund research projects 

and support improved farming practices. 

But currently, many farm states actually 

exempt pesticides and fertilizers from 

sales taxes, at a cost to the states of hun -

dreds of millions of dollars each year. 15 

The Soil and Water Conservation Soci -

ety estimates that a 5  percent federal tax 

on agricultural fertilizers and chemicals 

could raise $1 billion annually. 16  The key is 

to earmark tax revenues for environmen -

tal and health programs. Nebraska uses pesticide registration fees ($1.3 

million in 2003) to fund conservation programs, including installation 

of conservation buffers, weed control, and water quality improvements. 

Iowa’s Groundwater Protection Act taxes nitrogen fertilizer (75  cents 

per ton) and imposes pesticide registration fees to support conservation 

activities. In 2001, the state’s fertilizer tax raised $913,000, and its pesti -

cide fees raised $2.7 million, with 35  percent of the revenue allocated to 

the Leopold Cen -

ter for Sustainable 

Agriculture and 

the remainder to 

solid waste and 

agricultural health 

programs. 17 

Even though the 

2002 Farm Bill 

requires producers 

to reduce soil ero -

sion (through the 

USDA’s Conserva -



  

> Insecticides all too often kill harmless
> and helpful insects, such as ladybugs,
> along with pests. Changing Government Policies •163

tion Compliance provisions) and protect wetlands (under the Swamp -

buster provisions) in order to receive subsidies, no such requirement 

directly protects water quality. Subsidies could be made contingent 

upon farmers’ reducing fertilizer and pesticide inputs to appropriate 

levels. 

The Netherlands, in response to a European Union directive aimed at 

protecting the environment, has tested several approaches to limiting 

nitrogen and phosphorus from fertilizer and manure. It recently imple -

mented a complex system of application limits. The USDA could follow 

that example and seek congressional authority to sponsor pilot projects 

that would limit fertilizer and manure use. 18 

5. Reduce Feed Grain Usage 

America’s livestock industry relies heavily on feeding practices designed to 

bring meat and dairy products to market as quickly and cheaply as possible. 

The effects of those feeding 

practices on the environment, 

the animals, and the nutrient 

content of foods have received 

scant attention. Reducing the 

amount of grain in cattle feed 

(and allowing chickens and 

pigs to obtain at least some 

of their food from barnyards 

and pastures) would deliver 

healthier products to consum -

ers, protect the environment, and protect the animals’ welfare. Consumers 

could help move the country in that direction by eating fewer animal prod -

ucts or, at the very least, choosing grass-fed beef. 

Congress should provide greater funding for programs that pay feed-

grain farmers to remove large areas of land, especially environmen -

tally sensitive land, from production. Slightly higher grain prices might 

slightly reduce the amount of grain fed to cattle. 

The high-grain diets fed to cattle at feedlots makes the cattle sick; 

increases the fat content of the beef; and necessitates the use of fertilizer, 

water, pesticides, and land to produce the grain. To protect people, cattle, 

and the environment, the USDA or FDA should set standards that would 

limit the grain content of the feed and the length of time cattle eat it. 

The USDA should develop a labeling system that would identify meat, 

poultry, and milk produced in an environmentally friendly and humane 







164  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Cheap Corn: Indirect Subsidy to Livestock Producers 

Since the Depression, the federal government has maintained farm programs to 

keep farmers afloat and supplies and prices stable. The traditional policies were 

changed radically in 1996, when Congress passed the Freedom to Farm legislation. 

This simplified description of farm programs highlights some key points. 19 

Before 1996, corn and several other major crops had price floors. The government 

used a combination of crop-storage programs and acreage limitations to support 

the prices for those crops. Grain merchants such as Cargill and food processors 

such as General Mills, as well as foreign buyers, had to pay at least the floor prices 

for grains. The 1996 law ended most planting restrictions and replaced price sup -

ports with government payments. 

One subsidy consists of direct payments to farmers regardless of the amount of 

crops produced. The original goal was to phase out those payments over several 

years. 

A second subsidy, using so-called loan deficiency payments (the loans actually 

are not intended to be repaid), pays farmers the difference between the market 

price and the “support price” for corn, wheat, cotton, and other “program crops.” 

Before 1996, if the support price, also called the loan rate, was $2.00 per bushel, 

farmers were essentially assured that they would receive at least $2.00 per bushel 

for their grain. Now, with the use of loan deficiency payments, the farmer receives Changing Government Policies  • 165 

the market price, for example $1.50 per bushel, plus the 50-cent difference from 

the government. Those purchasing grain pay $1.50 per bushel (not $2.00), which 

is well below the cost of producing the grain. That is, the purchasers of the grain 

buy the grain at a subsidized price. 

That system worked well while market prices were high, but when prices dipped 

a couple of years after the 1996 farm bill was passed, Congress began providing 

farmers with emergency subsidies—billions and billions of dollars’ worth of sub -

sidies. Without a program to reduce production, such as acreage set-asides, the 

government did not possess any policy tools to boost crop prices. The 2002 farm 

legislation replaced ad hoc emergency payments with a third subsidy that kicks in 

when prices are low. 

That set of three subsidies helps farmers when harvests are large and prices are 

low. Between 1995 and 2004, according to the Environmental Working Group, corn 

growers “farmed the government” for $42 billion; subsidies for all crops totaled 

$144 billion. In 2005 alone, farm subsidies totaled $23 billion. Importantly, those 

subsidies constitute a multibillion-dollar-a-year boon not just to farmers, but also 

to livestock growers, food processors, and exporters. 

One solution to costly subsidies would be to return to price floors. That would 

ensure that buyers paid a price that reflected the actual direct costs of growing 

corn (though not the costs of pollution). The higher price of animal feed would 

encourage the cattle industry to reduce the time cattle spent at feedlots and 

might increase slightly the cost of beef and, somewhat more so, the cost of pork 

and chicken. 

To keep the price of corn up near the target price, production might have to 

be kept down by limiting the acreage planted in corn, expanding programs that 

protected environmentally sensitive land, and designating acreage that had to 

be planted in crops, such as switchgrass, that could be burned or converted to 

ethanol for cost-efficient energy. In addition, the government should, as it used 

to do, ensure reserves of enough wheat, corn, and other crops to protect against 

droughts or other calamities here or abroad. 

Some of the billions of dollars saved by changing farm subsidy programs (including 

limiting payments to large farmers) should be reinvested in the farming commu -

nity and food policies. Programs should help farmers reduce their use of fertil -

izer and pesticides, transition to organic methods, and raise pasture-fed cattle. 

Smaller farmers, especially ones within driving distance of major cities, should be 

helped to sell produce directly to supermarkets, schools, and consumers at farm -

ers’ markets. The tiny Fruit and Vegetable Snack Program that provides free daily 

snacks to children in a couple of hundred schools should be greatly expanded. 166  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

manner. (In 2006, the USDA took a step in that direction by proposing a 

definition for “grass-fed” cattle and sheep.) 

6. Prevent Overgrazing on Public Lands 

Overgrazing of cattle on public lands contributes to riparian damage (that 

is, damage to surrounding waterways), erosion and water pollution, and 

harm to endangered species. Ranchers who use public lands in the West 

save as much as $500 million a year because the federal government absorbs 

most of the costs of managing the land. 20  Grazing fees should be increased 

to reflect the true cost to the government. 

Another approach would be to buy out ranchers’ grazing rights through 

a voluntary program. A 2003 federal buy-out bill—the Voluntary Grazing 

Buyout Act—had strong support from environmental, conservation, and 

animal welfare organizations, and some ranchers, but died because of 

opposition from the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association. 

## Improving Animal Welfare 

How a nation treats farm animals is a good gauge of that nation’s com -

passion. Most animals raised on contemporary factory farms live in tiny 

spaces; breathe foul air; wallow in their own manure; eat unnatural diets; Changing Government Policies  • 167 

U.K. Farm Animal Welfare Council’s 

5 Freedoms 23 

> The welfare of an animal includes its physical and mental state and we consider
> that good animal welfare implies both fitness and a sense of well-being. Any ani -
> mal kept by man must, at least, be protected from unnecessary suffering.…
> Freedom from Hunger and Thirst— by ready access to fresh water and a diet
> to maintain full health and vigour.
> Freedom from Discomfort —by providing an appropriate environment includ -
> ing shelter and a comfortable resting area.
> Freedom from Pain, Injury or Disease —by prevention or rapid diagnosis and
> treatment.
> Freedom to Express Normal Behaviour— by providing sufficient space, proper
> facilities and company of the animal’s own kind.
> Freedom from Fear and Distress —by ensuring conditions and treatment
> which avoid mental suffering.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.

or endure branding, castration, debeaking, or de-tailing. In some cases, ani -

mals are intentionally harmed—or even tortured—by workers. 

New laws must be adopted and vigorously enforced to ensure that 

all animals are raised and handled humanely, from birth to slaughter (see 

“U.K. Farm Animal Welfare Council’s 5 Freedoms,” above). Recent laws in 

California, to prohibit the force-feeding of ducks and geese for foie gras, 

and in Florida, banning the housing of pregnant sows in cramped crates, 

demonstrate broad public support for protecting farm animals. Overseas, 

sow gestation crates have been banned in the United Kingdom and are 

being phased out in the European Union and New Zealand. Similarly, layer 

hen battery cages were banned in Switzerland 10  years ago and are being 

phased out in the European Union. 21 

Reforms aimed at farm practices and to encourage consumer purchase 

of foods made from humanely raised animals certainly would improve 

animal welfare. Matthew Scully, author of  Dominion: The Power of Man, the 

Suffering of Animals, and the Call to Mercy , a book pleading for more humane 

treatment of animals, proposed a federal Humane Farming Act that “would 

explicitly recognize animals as sentient beings and not as mere commodi -

ties or merchandise.” 22  The problems discussed in Argument #6 (“Less 

Animal Suffering”) suggest that such a law should: 

Impose ample space requirements to prevent crowding of farm animals 

and eliminate restrictive caging of hogs, layer hens, and veal calves. 

168  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Regulate conditions such as temperature, water, and space per animal on 

the trucks and railroad cars that transport animals from farm to farm or 

to feedlots and the slaughterhouse. 

Slow slaughterhouse lines to help ensure that the animals are stunned 

properly. 

Ensure that slaughterhouse operators and workers abide by the federal 

Humane Methods of Slaughter Act, provide for improved enforcement 

of that law by the USDA, and extend the law to include poultry. 

Establish a reliable labeling scheme to encourage consumers to buy meat, 

dairy products, and eggs from more-humanely raised animals and to 

inform consumers when animals are raised on factory farms. 

Limit the amount of grain in feed and the duration of grain feeding at 

cattle feedlots. Doing that also would lessen the need for grain and anti -

biotics, reduce pollution from feedlots, and probably lead to lower-fat 

beef. 

Require cattle to be identified with ear tags or other devices. That would 

mitigate the need for hot-iron branding and also help health officials 

identify animals infected with dangerous bacteria or the prions that 

cause mad cow disease. 

Require husbandry and cleanliness standards to reduce use of 

antibiotics. 

States, too, should enforce their animal cruelty laws as they apply to 

farm animals or amend laws that exempt farm animals from protection. 

In the absence of federal action, states should prohibit practices such as 

debeaking and forced molting of chickens, hot-iron branding of cattle, and 

de-tailing of hogs. 

Such measures would modestly raise the price of animal products, but 

any society that considers itself civilized should ensure that farm animals 

are treated humanely. 













Appendixes and Notes 171 

# A Bestiary of Foodborne Pathogens 

# Farm animals are the source of at least one out of five foodborne ill -

nesses, and possibly many more. They cause illnesses either directly 

(from contaminated meat, poultry, dairy, or egg products) or indirectly 

(from fruits and vegetables that have been contaminated with manure). You 

can’t tell the players without a scorecard, so here are profiles of some of the 

leading causes of food poisoning. 

Campylobacter jejuni 

As the leading cause of foodborne illness in the United States,  Campylo -

bacter  causes 2.4 million sicknesses and over 100 deaths each year. 1 The 

main symptom of campylobacteriosis is diarrhea that lasts up to 10 days; 

it recurs in one out of four people. 2 In severe cases, people can die from 

septicemia (a bacterial infection in the blood) or hemolytic uremic syn -

drome (a cause of short-term kidney failure in children, usually following 

an infection in the digestive system). Longer-term effects of some infec -

tions include arthritis; meningitis (an inflammation of the central nervous 

system); colitis, which results in ulcers in the large intestine; and cholecys -

titis (inflammation of the gallbladder). Each year, several thousand peo -

ple who had contracted campylobacteriosis later develop Guillain-Barré 

## Appendix A. 172  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that causes severe weakness and even 

paralysis. 3

Campylobacter  in feces, water, and urine remains viable at refrigerator 

temperatures for several weeks. 4 It thrives on the manure-strewn floors of 

factory farms, and the animals living there are regularly infected. 

Campylobacter  is mainly found in poultry and sometimes in cattle. 

Healthy chickens and turkeys can carry the bacteria, which spread eas -

ily through flocks. A 1999 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) study 

found  Campylobacter  in over 90  percent of poultry. 5 During slaughter, bac -

teria in the intestines may contaminate the meat, so it was not surprising 

that researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 

found that 44  percent of chickens at supermarkets were contaminated 

with  Campylobacter .6 Even more alarming, 24  percent of the  Campylobacter 

isolates were resistant to the powerful antibiotics—fluoroquinolones—that 

are often a last resort for treating food-poisoning victims. (Those antibiotics 

are no longer allowed to treat poultry flocks; see “Factory Farming’s Anti -

biotic Crutch,” p. 68.) Despite all the concerns about foodborne illnesses, 

illness rates showed little change between 1999 and 2004. 7

Clostridium perfringens 

About 250,000 cases of food poisoning—but only a handful of deaths—are 

caused each year by  Clostridium perfringens . That bacterium is normally 

found in the intestinal tracts of cattle, hogs, poultry, and fish, as well as in 

humans, and it is widely distributed in soil. Because  C. perfringens  produces 

spores that can survive in boiling water, it is often present after cooking, 

and bacterial populations may increase while foods cool. Fully cooked meat 

and gravy are the most common causes of infections. Symptoms include 

severe abdominal cramps and diarrhea lasting for up to two weeks. Rarely, 

the infection may progress to the potentially fatal pig-bel syndrome, which 

destroys the intestines. 8

Escherichia coli 

E. coli  is a natural and abundant resident of the intestinal tract of humans 

and most other mammals. In a healthy person, the bacteria can help pre -

vent disease—particularly foodborne illnesses—by out-competing patho -

gens for nutrients. But certain subspecies of  E. coli —particularly  E. coli  O157: 

H7—cause gruesome foodborne illnesses. 

E. coli  O157:H7 produces a toxin that damages the lining of the intes -

tine, causing bloody diarrhea. The infection may lead to kidney failure and 

death. Each year,  E. coli  O157:H7 and its close relatives cause roughly 94,000 Appendix A.  A Bestiary of Foodborne Pathogens  • 173 

illnesses and kill about 80 people. 9 Infections tend to be most severe in chil -

dren. That was the case in 1993 when contaminated beef patties served at 

Jack in the Box restaurants were linked to more than 600 illnesses and the 

deaths of four young children. 10 

E. coli  O157:H7 resides in up to 6  percent of cattle and one-third of sheep. 

The bug typically infects humans through meat contaminated at slaughter -

houses. During evisceration, workers may damage the intestine, releasing 

its bacteria-laden contents onto meat. 11  The nasty germ also can spread 

from cattle hides contaminated with manure to slaughterhouse workers 

and equipment—and then to meat. 12  Thanks in part to the beef industry’s 

vigorous efforts to clean up its operations, illnesses caused by  E. coli  O157: 

H7 declined by 42 percent between 2002 and 2004. 13  Still, in 2003, 60  percent 

of the nation’s largest meat plants failed to abide by federal regulations. 14 

These germs can infect people through routes other than food. After 

a group of schoolchildren visited a Pennsylvania dairy farm, 51 children 

were sickened by a strain of  E. coli  O157:H7 identical to that found in cattle 

on the farm. 15  And at a county fair in New York, runoff from a dairy barn 

contaminated the unchlorinated water supply, sickening 1,000 people with 

E. coli  O157:H7 and causing two deaths. 16 

Listeria 

Listeria monocytogenes  is one of the deadliest foodborne pathogens. The CDC 

estimates that  Listeria  causes 2,500 flu-like illnesses each year—20  percent of 

which are fatal. 17  The latest data indicate that illness rates stayed the same 

between 2000 and 2004. 18 

Listeria  is widely distributed in the environment and is a hardy bac -

terium that can survive freezing, drying, and heat remarkably well. And, 

increasing its threat,  Listeria  can grow at refrigerator temperatures. 19 

Livestock may get infected by eating contaminated feed. 20  Most human 

infections result from tainted meat, though vegetables can be contaminated 

by  Listeria  in the soil, irrigation water, or manure used as fertilizer. 21 

Listeria  is particularly harmful to people who are immunosuppressed, 

such as the elderly, those with organ transplants, and people with HIV. At 

highest risk, however, are pregnant women. Because of hormonal effects on 

the immune system during pregnancy, pregnant women are 20 times more 

likely to contract a  Listeria  infection than other people and account for about 

one-third of all cases. 22  Listeria  can cross the placental barrier and infect 

the developing fetus, which often results in miscarriages and stillbirths. It 

can also cause meningitis, which, if the child survives, may result in cere -

bral palsy or other chronic neurological illnesses. Pregnant women should 174  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

not eat the foods most likely to be contaminated: hot dogs, deli meats, soft 

cheeses, paté, and smoked seafood. 23 

Mad Cow Disease 

Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) infects the 

brains of cattle, resulting in a cerebrum so riddled with holes that it resem -

bles a sponge. Infected cattle have trouble standing and walking, hence the 

term “mad.” As of April 2006, only eight cases of mad cow disease have 

been confirmed in North America—five in Canada and three in the United 

States—but the human form of the disease (variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis -

ease, or vCJD) is so horrible that it has received enormous attention in the 

media, and deserved attention from government and industry. 

People can suffer vCJD by eating contaminated beef. The infectious 

agents—called prions (improperly folded proteins)—cause brain decay 

similar to that seen in cattle. 24  Victims suffer memory loss, impaired coordi -

nation, and hallucinations, and they invariably die. In the United Kingdom, 

the epicenter of mad cow disease, 3.7 million cattle were slaughtered to stop 

its spread. 25  As of May 2006, 155 Britons had died from the disease (and 

fewer than 20 in other countries). 26 

Several factors contribute to prions’ harmfulness. First, prions have 

a disturbing ability to jump from one species to another, including cattle, 

humans, sheep, and domestic cats. 27  Also, prions are far hardier than bacte -

ria and viruses. They can withstand boiling, the even higher temperatures 

used for sterilizing medical equipment, freezing, irradiation, and most 

acids and bases. 28 

BSE is believed to have spread by adding rendered leftover meat and 

bones of cattle carcasses to cattle feed as a source of protein. 29  A single 

infected cow could infect a large and geographically diverse population of 

other cows. 

The risk to humans of consuming infectious meat is increased by some 

processors’ use of advanced meat recovery (AMR). That mechanical process 

extracts hard-to-reach bits of meat from the bones after most of the meat 

has been removed by hand. Because spinal columns are often processed 

in AMR equipment, the resulting meat may contain high-risk spinal and 

central nervous system tissue. In 2003, the USDA found such tissue in meat 

from more than 75  percent of the plants using AMR equipment. Though 

AMR use is declining, millions of pounds of AMR-recovered beef are used 

each year in such products as ground beef, meatballs, and taco filling. 30 

Fortunately, the chances of contracting vCJD in the United States are 

infinitesimal, because so few cattle are infected. Increasingly stringent Appendix A.  A Bestiary of Foodborne Pathogens  • 175 

controls are reducing the risk even further. Only one confirmed case has 

occurred in the United States, and that involved a person who spent time 

in the United Kingdom when mad cow disease was at its height. That also 

was true of most of the infected individuals in other countries. 31  Eating beef 

is far likelier to cause heart disease than vCJD. 

Salmonella 

A Salmonella  infection can be contracted only by eating contaminated 

food. 32  Infections cause flu-like symptoms—including vomiting, diarrhea, 

and fever—in over 1 million Americans each year.  Salmonella  kills about 600 

Americans each year, with its victims generally being 65 or older. 33  Rarely, 

salmonellosis causes Reiter’s syndrome, a form of arthritis. 34  Illness rates 

have barely changed over the past 10 years. 35 

Salmonella  can live in the digestive tracts of most vertebrates, includ -

ing cattle, hogs, and poultry. It can inhabit the ovaries of laying hens, con -

taminating their eggs before the shells form. On hog farms,  Salmonella  can 

survive for months in manure slurry. 36 

The USDA found  Salmonella  in over half of all large feedlots, 5  percent 

of dairy cows on farms, and 15  percent of the dairy cows sold at livestock 

auctions. The USDA also found  Salmonella  in 9  percent of broiler chickens 

and 38  percent of hog operations. 37 

Antibiotic resistance increases the harmfulness of  Salmonella  infections, 

with some strains being resistant to several different antibiotics. A study by 

the Food and Drug Administration and the University of Maryland found 

that 20  percent of samples of ground chicken, beef, turkey, and pork were 

contaminated with  Salmonella , and 84  percent of those bacteria were resis -

tant to at least one antibiotic. 38 

In recent years, the biggest  Salmonella  problem has been in eggs. 39  About 

1 out of every 20,000 eggs is contaminated with  Salmonella .40  Assuming that 

half the eggs are eaten fresh, Americans have about a 1 in 75 chance of 

being exposed to  Salmonella  through eggs over the course of a year. Proper 

handling and cooking can usually kill the germs. 

The practice of forced molting of layer hens accelerates the spread of 

Salmonella . When they are deprived of food, water, and light to prolong 

their productive lives, molted hens are 100 to 1,000 times more susceptible 

to  Salmonella  infection than unmolted birds. 41 

Staphylococcus 

Over 185,000 cases of food poisoning each year are caused by  Staphylococ -

cus . Meat, poultry, and dairy products are the most common food causes 176  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

of those infections. Because  Staphylococcus  is often present on human skin, 

poor sanitation among food handlers is probably the primary problem. 

However, animals also carry  Staphylococcus , and this bug  has been found in 

the air around hog barns and on the hides of most livestock. 42 

Staphylococcus ’s toxin may be produced in food before cooking, and it is 

stable at high temperatures. Symptoms of infection include nausea, vomit -

ing, headache, muscle cramps, and fluctuations in blood pressure and pulse 

rate. Symptoms usually last about two days. 43 

Toxoplasma gondii 

Toxoplasma gondii  is a parasite that causes about 115,000 foodborne illnesses 

each year, killing 375 people. Toxoplasmosis occurs when  T. gondii  infects 

people who eat undercooked pork, lamb, or other meats or who improperly 

handle those foods during preparation. The infection can also occur through 

exposure to cat feces. Minor infections resemble the flu, but  T. gondii  also can 

enter the central nervous system, damaging the eyes or brain. 44  In pregnant 

women, infections can cause miscarriages or birth defects. 45 177 

## Appendix B. 

# Eating Green Internet Resources 

# These web sites will provide a wealth of information on the topics cov -

ered in  Six Arguments for a Greener Diet . Explore! 

Center for Science in the Public 

Interest 

 www.cspinet.org 

www.eatinggreen.org 

Agriculture 

U.S. Department of Agriculture 

(Agricultural Research Service, 

Economic Research Service, food 

consumption data, etc.) 

 www.usda.gov 

GRACE Factory Farm Project 

Web animated movie 



—

www.factoryfarm.org 

www.themeatrix2.com 

Sierra Club (factory farms)  www.sierraclub.org/factoryfarms/ 178  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Animal welfare 

Compassion in World Farming  www.ciwf.org.uk/ 

Compassion Over Killing  www.cok.net 

Farm Sanctuary  www.farmsanctuary.org; www.factoryfarming.com 

Humane Society of the United 

States 

 www.hsus.org 

People for the Ethical Treatment 

of Animals’ vegetarian campaign 

 www.GoVeg.com; 

www.Meat.org (video) 

Antibiotics 

Alliance for the Prudent Use of 

Antibiotics 

 www.apua.org 

Keep Antibiotics Working  www.keepantibioticsworking.org 

Environment 

Environmental Defense (global 

warming, air and water pollu -

tion, toxic chemicals) 

 www.environmentaldefense.org 

Environmental Working Group 

(farm subsidies, chemical con -

taminants) 

 www.ewg.org 

Monterey Bay Aquarium’s Sea -

food Watch (choosing safe and 

abundant seafood) 

 www.mbayaq.org/cr/seafoodwatch.asp 

Natural Resources Defense 

Council (pesticides, land use, 

global warming) 

 www.nrdc.org 

U.S. Environmental Protection 

Agency (pesticides, air and 

water pollution, etc.) 

 www.epa.gov 

Nutrition and health 

American Institute for Cancer 

Research (diet and cancer; 

recipes) 

 www.aicr.org 

Centers for Disease Control 

NHANES dietary intake studies 

healthy recipes 



—

—

www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm 

www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/5aday/recipes/ 

index.htm Appendix B.  Internet Resources for Eating Green  • 179 

5 A Day (produce industry’s web 

site, with recipes) 

 www.5aday.com 

Harvard School of Public 

Health’s “Nutrition Source” (reli -

able, independent source of 

information) 

 www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/ 

National Institutes of Health 

Medline Plus (sensible, main -

stream information) 

PubMed (abstracts of medical 

research) 



—

—

www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ 

www.pubmed.gov 

U.S. Department of Agriculture 

resources ( Dietary Guidelines for 

Americans , Food Guide Pyramid, 

food safety) 

Nutritional value of foods 

Food and nutrient consumption 



—

—

www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/ 

www.nutrition.gov 

www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/Data/HG72/ 

hg72_2002.pdf 

www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FoodConsumption/ 

FoodAvailIndex.htm 

U.S. Food and Drug 

Administration (nutrition 

labeling, antibiotics used in 

livestock, contaminants in food) 

 www.fda.gov 

Vegetarian diets 

Earthsave  www.earthsave.org 

Meatless Monday  www.meatlessmonday.org 

Physicians Committee for 

Responsible Medicine 

 www.pcrm.org 

Vegetarian Resource Group  www.vrg.org/ 

Vegsource  www.vegsource.com 

Where to buy or eat food that is locally grown or produced humanely 

Community-supported agriculture 

(subscriptions for local produce) 

 www.localharvest.org/csa/ 

Farmers’ markets  www.localharvest.org 

ww.ams.usda.gov/farmersmarkets/ 

Humane Farm Animal Care  www.certifiedhumane.org 

Locally grown meats  www.eatwellguide.com 181 

# Notes 

Preface: Greener Diets for a Healthier World (pp. vii–xiv) 

1.  G. Eshel and P. Martin, “Diet, energy, and global warming,”  Earth Interactions  (2005) 

10(9):1–17. 

2.  I. Hoffmann, “Ecological impact of a high-meat, low-meat and ovo-lacto vegetarian 

diet,” presentation at the Fourth International Congress on Vegetarian Nutrition, Loma 

Linda, CA, Apr. 2002. 

3.  M. Pollan,  The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals  (East Rutherford, NJ: 

Penguin Press, 2006). 

4.  L.R. Brown, “Running on empty,”  Forum Appl Res Pub Pol  (2001) 16(1):6–8. 

5.  R. Naylor, H. Steinfeld, W. Falcon, et al., “Losing the links between livestock and land,” 

Science  (2005) Dec. 9:1621–22. 

The Fatted Steer (pp. 3–13) 

1.  Omaha Steaks, www.omahasteaks.com; Morton’s Steakhouse, www.mortons.com; and 

Ultimate Entree, www.ultimateentree.com/mm5/merchant.mvc?Screen=prime. 

2.  Shula’s, www.certifiedangusbeef.com/shulas/shula1.html. 

3.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (USDA ARS), “Working 

towards a consistently tender steak,”  Agr Res  (2005) 53(2):8–9; www.ars.usda.gov/is/AR/ 

archive/feb05/steak0205.htm. 

4.  G. Fry, “The importance of intramuscular fat” (Rose Bud, AR: Bovine Consulting and 

Engineering), www.bovineengineering.com/impt_intra_musc_fat.html. 182  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

5.  USDA, Agricultural Marketing Service (USDA AMS), “National summary of meats 

graded, fiscal year 2004,” www.ams.usda.gov/lsg/mgc/Reports/MNFY04.pdf. 

6.  USDA AMS, “Comparison of certified beef programs” (2006), www.ams.usda.gov/lsg/ 

certprog/industry.htm. 

7.  USDA, Food Safety and Inspection Service (USDA FSIS), “Inspection & grading – what 

are the differences?,” safe food handling fact sheet, www.fsis.usda.gov/Fact_Sheets/ 

Inspection_&_Grading/index.asp. 

8.  National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, “Beef By Products Usage” (1996), www.beef.org/ 

uDocs/Beef%20By%20Products%20Usage%201996.doc. 

9.  I.B. Mandell, J.G. Buchanan-Smith, and C.P. Campbell, “Effects of forage vs grain feeding 

on carcass characteristics, fatty acid composition, and beef quality in Limousin-cross 

steers when time on feed is controlled,”  J Anim Sci  (1998) 76:2619–30. 

10.  S.P. Greiner,  Beef Cattle Breeds and Biological Types , Publication No. 400–803 (Blacksburg, 

VA: Virginia Cooperative Extension, 2002), www.ext.vt.edu/pubs/beef/400–803/400–803. 

html. 

11.  T.E. Engle and J.W. Spears, “Effect of finishing system (feedlot or pasture), high-oil maize, 

and copper on conjugated linoleic acid and other fatty acids in muscle of finishing steer,” 

Anim Sci  (2004) 78:261–69. 

12.  Mandell, Buchanan-Smith, and Campbell, “Effects of forage.” 

13.  Engle and Spears, “Effect of finishing system.” 

14.  F.L. Laborde, I.B. Mandell, J.J. Tosh, et al., “Breed effects on growth performance, carcass 

characteristics, fatty acid composition, and palatability attributes in finishing steers,” 

J Anim Sci  (2001) 79:355–65. 

15.  S.K. Duckett, D.G. Wagner, L.D. Yates, et al., “Effects of time on feed on beef nutrient 

composition,”  J Anim Sci  (1993) 71:2079–88. 

16.  A useful summary of studies, which vary widely in design, comparing grass-fed and 

grain-fed beef is presented in K. Clancy,  Greener Pastures: How Grass-Fed Beef and Milk 

Contribute to Healthy Eating  (Cambridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists, 2006), 

www.ucsusa.org. 

17.  Iowa Corn Fed, www.iowacornfed.com/. 

18.  P. Letheby, “Organic grass-fed beef: more than a niche?,”  Grand Island Independent  Aug.  1, 

2003, www.theindependent.com/stories/080103/opi_pete01.shtml. 

19.  C. Kummer, “Back to grass,”  Atlantic Monthly  May 2003:138–42. 

20.  P. Brewer and C. Calkins, “Quality traits of grain- and grass-fed beef: a review,”  2003 

Nebraska Beef Cattle Report  (University of Nebraska Cooperative Extension), http://beef. 

unl.edu/beefreports/200327.shtml. 

21.  I.B. Mandell, E.A. Gullett, J.W. Wilton, et al., “Effects of breed and dietary energy content 

within breed on growth performance, carcass and chemical composition and beef 

quality in Hereford and Simmental steers,”  Can J An Sci  (1998) 78:535–38. 

22.  T.R. Neely, C.L. Lorenzen, R.K. Miller, et al., “Beef customer satisfaction: role of cut, USDA 

quality grade, and city on in-home consumer ratings,”  J Anim Sci  (1998) 76:1027–33. 

23.  K. Severson, “Give ‘em a chance, steers will eat grass,”  New York Times  June 1, 2005:F1. 

24.  Cattlemen’s Beef Board, “Beef: it’s what’s for dinner,” www.beefitswhatsfordinner.com/ 

index.asp. 

25.  American Grass Fed Beef, www.americangrassfedbeef.com/grass-fed-beef-steak.asp. 

26.  M. Pariza, “Perspective on the safety and effectiveness of conjugated linoleic acid,”  Am 

J Clin Nutr ( 2004) 79(6 Suppl):1132s–6s. Notes  • 183 

27.  J.M. Gaullier, J. Halse, K. Hoye, et al., “Supplementation with conjugated linoleic acid 

for 24 months is well tolerated by and reduces body fat mass in healthy, overweight 

humans,”  J Nutr  (2005) 135:778–84. 

28.  Y. Wang and P.J. Jones, “Dietary conjugated linoleic acid and body composition,”  Am J 

Clin Nutr  (2004) 79:1153S–8S; and S. Desroches, P.Y. Chouinard, I. Galibois, et al., “Lack 

of effect of dietary conjugated linoleic acids naturally incorporated into butter on the 

lipid profile and body composition of overweight and obese men,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2005) 

82:309–19. 

29.  D.S. Kelley and K.L. Erickson, “Modulation of body composition and immune cell 

functions by conjugated linoleic acid in humans and animal models: benefits vs. risks,” 

Lipids  (2003) 38:377–86; and D. Mozaffarian, M.B. Katan, A. Ascherio, et al., “Trans fatty 

acids and cardiovascular disease,”  N Engl J Med  (2006) 345:1601–13. 

30.  Institute of Medicine (IOM),  Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, 

Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids  (Macronutrients ) (Washington, DC: 

National Academies Press, 2002), pp. 837–38. 

31.  See, for example, IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes ; C. Ip and J.A. Scimeca, “Conjugated 

linoleic acid and linoleic acid are distinctive modulators of mammary carcinogenesis,” 

Nutr Cancer  (1997) 27:131–35; and S. Vissonneau, A. Cesano, S.A. Tepper, et al., 

“Conjugated linoleic acid suppresses the growth of human breast adenocarcinoma cells 

in SCID mice,”  Anticancer Res  (1997) 17:969–74. 

32.  T. Friend, “Fatty acid aids war on cancer,”  USA Today  Apr. 5, 1989:1D. 

33.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes .

34.  The fat in grass-fed beef contains about three to six times as much CLA as that in grain-

fed beef. Grass-fed beef has about half as much fat as grain-fed beef. Engle and Spears, 

“Effect of finishing system”; F. Martz, M. Weiss, R. Kallenbach, et al.,  Conjugated Linoleic 

Acid Content of Pasture Finished Beef and Implications for Human Diets  (Columbia, MO: 

University of Missouri, 2004), www.farmprofitability.org/research/beef/linoleic.htm; 

D.C. Rule, K.S. Broughton, S.M. Shellito, et al., “Comparison of muscle fatty acid profiles 

and cholesterol concentrations of bison, beef cattle, elk, and chicken,”  J Anim Sci  (2002) 

80:1202–11; and C.S. Poulson, T.R. Dhiman, A.L. Ure, et al., “Conjugated linoleic acid 

content of beef from cattle fed diets containing high grain, CLA, or raised on forages,” 

Livestock Prod Sci  (2004) 91:117–28. 

35.  Rule et al., “Comparison of muscle fatty acid profiles.” 

36.  P.M. Kris-Etherton, W.S. Harris, and L.J. Appel, “Omega-3 fatty acids and cardiovascular 

disease: new recommendations from the American Heart Association,”  Arterioscl Thromb 

Vasc Biol  (2003) 23:151–52; and C. Wang, M. Chung, A. Lichtenstein, et al.,  Effects of Omega-3 

Fatty Acids on Cardiovascular Disease: Summary, Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 

94 , AHRQ Publication No. 04-E009-1 (Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research 

and Quality, 2004). 

37.  G. Gerster, “Can adults adequately convert alpha-linolenic acid (18:3n-3) to 

eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5n-3) and docosapentaenoic (22:6n-3)?,”  Int J Vitam Nutr Res 

(1998) 68(3):159–73; G.C. Burdge and S.A. Wootton, “Conversion of alpha-linolenic acid 

to eicosapentaenoic, docosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids in young women,” 

Br  J Nutr  (2002) 88:411–20; and J.T. Brenna, “Efficiency of conversion of alpha-linolenic 

acid to long chain n-3 fatty acids in man,”  Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care  (2002) 

5:127–32. 

38.  P.M. Kris-Etherton, W.S. Harris, and L.J. Appel, “American Heart Association Scientific 

Statement: fish consumption, fish oil, omega-3 fatty acids, and cardiovascular disease,” 

Circulation  (2002) 106:2747–57. [Published correction appears in  Circulation  (2003) 

107:512.] 184  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

39.  An uncooked grass-fed rib steak contains about 13 milligrams of eicosapentanenoic acid 

(EPA) and 2 milligrams of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) per 3½ ounces. It also contains 

about 33 milligrams of alpha-linolenic acid per serving, which provides the body 

with no more than 8 milligrams of EPA and DHA. Thus, a 7-ounce uncooked rib steak 

could provide, at most, about 46 milligrams of EPA and DHA. Certain other cuts have 

twice as much omega-3s. J.D. Wood, M. Enser, A.V. Fisher, et al., “Animal nutrition and 

metabolism group symposium on improving meat production for future needs,”  Proc 

Nutr Soc  (1999) 58:363–70. 

40.  Cleveland Clinic,  The Power of Fish  (Cleveland, 2003), www.clevelandclinic.org/ 

heartcenter/pub/guide/prevention/nutrition/omega3.htm. 

41.  USDA, Economic Research Service, “Briefing room: land use, value, and management: 

major uses of land” (2002), www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/LandUse/majorlandusechapter. 

htm, accessed Dec. 27, 2005. 

42.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),  Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas 

Emissions and Sinks: 1990–1998 , EPA 236-R-00-001 (2000), http://yosemite.epa.gov/oar/ 

globalwarming.nsf/UniqueKeyLookup/SHSU5BMQ76/$File/2000-inventory.pdf, p. K-8. 

43.  American Society of Agricultural Engineers,  Manure Production and Characteristics  (St. 

Joseph, MI, 2002), pp. 687–89. 

44.  K. Richardson and P.A. McKay, “On the farm, chickens come home to roost,”  Wall Street 

Journal  Aug. 12, 2005:C1. 

Argument #1. Less Chronic Disease and Better Overall Health 

(pp.  17–57) 

1.  J.M. McGinnis and W.H. Foege, “The immediate vs the important,”  JAMA  (2004) 

291:1263–64. Their estimated range for 2000 was 340,000 to 642,000 deaths per year, or 16 

to 30  percent of all deaths. 

2.  M.M. Miniño, E. Arias, K.D. Kochanek, et al., “Deaths: final data for 2000,”  Natl Vital Stat 

Rep  (2002) 50(15):1–120. 

3.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly , “Trends in intake of energy and macronutrients: United 

States, 1971–2000,”  MMWR  (2004) 53:80–82; and J. Putnam, J. Allshouse, and L.S. Kantor, 

“U.S. per capita food supply trends: more calories, refined carbohydrates, and fats,” 

FoodReview  (2002) 25(3):2–15. 

4.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of Communications (USDA OC),  Agriculture Fact 

Book 2001–2002  (2003), www.usda.gov/factbook/chapter2.htm. 

5.  USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA NASS),  Milk Production, 

Disposition, and Income 2002 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), p. 2; USDA NASS,  Poultry 

Slaughter 2002 Annual Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), p. 2; USDA NASS,  Livestock 

Slaughter 2002 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), pp. 35, 41, 49; USDA NASS,  Chickens and 

Eggs 2003 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 2; and USDA, Economic Research Service 

(USDA ERS), Food Availability database, www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FoodConsumption/ 

FoodAvailQueriable.aspx#midForm. 

6.  USDA ERS,  Food Availability (Per Capita)  (2005), www.ers.usda.gov/data/foodconsumption/ 

FoodAvailIndex.htm. 

7.  USDA OC,  Agriculture Fact Book .

8.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of 

Agriculture (DHHS/USDA),  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  (2005), www.health. 

gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2005/document/pdf/DGA2005. 

9.  P.A. Cotton, A.F. Subar, J.E. Friday, et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients among US 

adults, 1994 to 1996,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (2004) 104:921–30. Food consumption data from Notes  • 185 

USDA Agricultural Research Service (USDA ARS), Food Surveys Research Group, 

Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals 1994–1996, www.barc.usda.gov/ 

bhnrc/foodsurvey/home.htm. 

10.  A. Keys, J.T. Anderson, and F. Grande, “Serum cholesterol response to changes in the 

diet. IV. Particular saturated fatty acids in the diet,”  Metabolism  (1965) 65:776–87; D.M. 

Hegsted, L.M. Ausman, J.A. Johnson, et al., “Dietary fat and serum lipids: an evaluation 

of the experimental data,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1993) 57:875–83; R.P. Mensink and M.B. 

Katan, “Effect of dietary fatty acids on serum lipids and lipoproteins: a meta-analysis 

of 27 trials,”  Arterioscler Thromb  (1992) 12:911–19; and P.M. Kris-Etherton, A.E. Binkoski, 

G.  Zhao, et al., “Dietary fat: assessing the evidence in support of a moderate-fat diet; the 

benchmark based on lipoprotein metabolism,”  Proc Nutr Soc  (2002) 61(2):287–98. 

11.  J.E. Manson, H. Tosteson, P.M. Ridker, et al., “The primary prevention of myocardial 

infarction,”  N Engl J Med  (1992) 326:1406–16. 

12.  M. Jacobson and H. D’Angelo, “Heart disease deaths caused by animal foods,” 

unpublished report (Washington, DC: Center for Science in the Public Interest [CSPI], 

2006). Estimates based on the four different research groups’ formulas ranged from 

30,000 to 107,000 deaths per year. 

13.  The $1 trillion sum is the present value discounted at 3  percent. It is based on the U.S. 

Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) estimate of the health and economic benefits of 

lowering dietary levels of trans fat, which have adverse effects on blood cholesterol levels 

and cause heart disease. See FDA, “Nutrition labeling,”  Fed Reg  (1999) 64:62746–825. 

14.  American Heart Association (AHA),  Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics: 2005 Update 

(Dallas, 2005), p. 51; and L.S. Longwell, communications department, IMS Health, Inc., 

response to CSPI data request, Oct. 25, 2004. 

15.  Longwell, response. 

16.  American Cancer Society,  Cancer Facts and Figures, 2004  (Atlanta, 2004); AHA,  Heart 

Disease and Stroke ; American Diabetes Association, “Economic costs of diabetes in 

the U.S. in 2002,”  Diabetes Care  (2003) 26:917–32; and E. Frazão,  America’s Eating Habits: 

Changes and Consequences , Agriculture Information Bulletin No. 750 (1999), www.ers. 

usda.gov/publications/aib750/aib750a.pdf. 

17.  N.D. Barnard, A. Nicholson, and J.L. Howard, “The medical costs attributable to meat 

consumption,”  Prev Med  (1995) 24:646–55 (adjusted to 2005 dollars by CSPI). 

18.  A.M. Wolf and G.A. Colditz, “Social and economic effects of body weight in the United 

States,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1996) 63(suppl):466S–69S (adjusted to 2005 dollars by CSPI); and 

E.A. Finkelstein, I.C. Fiebelkorn, and G. Wang, “State-level estimates of annual medical 

expenditures attributable to obesity,”  Obes Res  (2004) 12:18–24. 

19.  USDA ERS,  Data: Food Guide Pyramid Servings  (2005), www.ers.usda.gov/data/ 

foodconsumption/FoodGuideIndex.htm#servings. 

20.  J.F. Guthrie,  Understanding Fruit and Vegetable Choices: Economic and 

Behavioral Influences , Agriculture Information Bulletin 792-1, www.ers.usda. 

gov/publications/aib792/aib792-1/aib792-1.pdf. 

21.  USDA ERS,  Food Availability. 

22.  G.E. Fraser,  Diet, Life Expectancy, and Chronic Disease: Studies of Seventh-day Adventists 

and Other Vegetarians  (New York: Oxford, 2003), p. 5; G.E. Fraser, “Associations between 

diet and cancer, ischemic heart disease, and all-cause mortality in non-Hispanic white 

California Seventh-day Adventists,  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70(suppl):532S–38S; G.E. Fraser, 

P.W. Dysinger, C. Best, et al., “IHD risk factors in middle-aged Seventh-day Adventist 

men and their neighbors,”  Am J Epidemiol  (1987) 126:638–46. 

23.  Fraser, Dysinger, Best, et al., “IHD risk factors.” 

24.  Fraser,  Diet , p. 13. 186  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

25.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

26.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

27.  G.E. Fraser, J. Sabate, W.L. Beeson, et al., “A possible protective effect of nut consumption 

on risk of coronary heart disease: the Adventist Health Study,”  Arch Intern Med  (1992) 

152:1416–24. 

28.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

29.  J. Berkel and F. de Waard, “Mortality pattern and life expectancy of Seventh-day Adventists 

in the Netherlands,”  Int J Epidemiol  (1983) 12(4):455–59, cited in Fraser,  Diet , p.  23. 

30.  M.L. Toohey, M.A. Haris, D. Williams, et al., “Cardiovascular disease risk factors are 

lower in African-American vegans compared to lacto-ovo vegetarians,”  J Am Coll Nutr 

(1998) 17:425–34. 

31.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

32.  Fraser,  Diet , pp. 141–42. 

33.  N. Brathwaite, H.S. Fraser, N. Modeste, et al., “Obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and 

vegetarian status among Seventh-day Adventists in Barbados: preliminary results,” 

Ethn Dis  (2003) 13:34–9; and Fraser, “Associations.” 

34.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

35.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

36.  E.H. Haddad and J.S. Tanzman, “What do vegetarians in the United States eat?,”  Am J 

Clin Nutr  (2003) 78(suppl):626S–32S. 

37.  E.T. Kennedy, S.A. Bowman, I.T. Spence, et al., “Popular diets: correlation to health, 

nutrition, and obesity,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (2001) 101:411–20. 

38.  G.K. Davey, E.A. Spencer, P.N. Appleby, et al., “EPIC-Oxford lifestyle characteristics and 

nutrient intakes in a cohort of 33,993 meat-eaters and 31,546 non-meat-eaters in the UK,” 

Public Health Nutr  (2003) 6:259–69. 

39.  P.N. Appleby, M. Thorogood, J.I. Mann, et al., “The Oxford Vegetarian Study: an 

overview,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70(suppl):525S–31S. 

40.  Appleby et al., “Oxford Vegetarian Study.” 

41.  Appleby et al., “Oxford Vegetarian Study.” 

42.  Appleby et al., “Oxford Vegetarian Study”; and Fraser,  Diet , pp. 233–35. 

43.  P.N. Appleby, G.K. Davey, and T.J. Key, “Hypertension and blood pressure among meat 

eaters, fish eaters, vegetarians and vegans in EPIC-Oxford,”  Public Health Nutr  (2002) 

5:645–54. 

44.  Appleby, Davey, and Key, “Hypertension.” 

45.  Fraser,  Diet , p. 220. 

46.  T. Key and G. Davey, “Prevalence of obesity is low in people who do not eat meat,”  BMJ 

(1996) 313:816–17. 

47.  P.N. Appleby, M. Thorogood, and J.I. Mann, “Low body mass index in non-meat 

eaters: the possible roles of animal fat, dietary fibre and alcohol,”  Int J Obesity  (1998) 

22(5):454–60. 

48.  P.K. Newby, K.L. Tucker, and A. Wolk, “Risk of overweight and obesity among 

semivegetarian, lactovegetarian, and vegan women,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2005) 81:1267–74. 

49.  T.J. Key, G.E. Fraser, M. Thorogood, et al., “Mortality in vegetarians and non-vegetarians: 

detailed findings from a collaborative analysis of 5 prospective studies,”  Am J Clin Nutr 

(1999) 70(suppl):516S–24S. 

50.  T.J. Key, G.K. Davey, and P.N. Appleby, “Health benefits of a vegetarian diet,”  Proc Nutr 

Soc  (1999) 58(2):271–75. Notes  • 187 

51.  Appleby, Thorogood, and Mann, “Low body mass index”; and Key, Davey, and Appleby, 

“Health benefits.” 

52.  Fraser,  Diet , pp. 236–38. 

53.  T.T. Fung, W.C. Willett, M.J. Stampfer, et al., “Dietary patterns and the risk of coronary 

heart disease in women,”  Arch Intern Med  (2001) 161:1857–62. 

54.  F.B. Hu, E.B. Rimm, M.J. Stampfer, et al., “Prospective study of major dietary patterns 

and risk of coronary heart disease in men,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2000) 72:912–21. 

55.  I.L. Rouse, L.J. Beilin, D.P. Mahoney, et al., “Nutrient intake, blood pressure, serum and 

urinary prostaglandins and serum thromboxane B2 in a controlled trial with a lacto-

ovo-vegetarian diet,”  J Hypertens  (1986) 4:241–50; and S.E. Sciarrone, M.T. Strahan, L.J. 

Beilin, et al., “Biochemical and neurohormonal responses to the introduction of a lacto-

ovo vegetarian diet,”  J Hypertens  (1993) 11:849–60. 

56.  Rouse et al., “Nutrient intake”; and L.J. Appel, T.J. Moore, E. Obarzanek, et al., “A 

clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure,”  N Engl J Med  (1997) 

336:1117–24. 

57.  A.M. Lees, A.Y. Mok, R.S. Lees, et al., “Plant sterols as cholesterol-lowering agents: 

clinical trials in patients with hypercholesterolemia and studies of sterol balance,” 

Atherosclerosis  (1977) 28:325–38; and D.J. Jenkins, T.M. Wolever, A.V. Rao, et al., “Effect on 

blood lipids of very high intakes of fiber in diets low in saturated fat and cholesterol,” 

N Engl J Med  (1993) 329:21–6. 

58.  D.J. Jenkins, C.W. Kendall, A. Marchie, et al., “Effects of a dietary portfolio of cholesterol-

lowering foods vs lovastatin on serum lipids and C-reactive protein,”  JAMA  (2003) 

290:502–10; D.J. Jenkins, C.W. Kendall, A. Marchie, et al., “Direct comparison of a 

dietary portfolio of cholesterol-lowering foods with a statin in hypercholesterolemic 

participants,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2005) 81(2):380–87; and D.J. Jenkins, C.W. Kendall, 

A.  Marchie, et al., “The effect of combining plant sterols, soy protein, viscous fibers, and 

almonds in treating hypercholesterolemia,”  Metabolism ( 2003) 52(11):1478–83. 

59.  S.M. Grundy, J.I. Cleeman, B.C.N. Merz, et al., “Implications of recent clinical trials for 

the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines,” 

Circulation  (2004) 110:227–39. 

60.  H.A. Diehl, “Coronary risk reduction through intensive community-based lifestyle 

intervention: the Coronary Health Improvement Project (CHIP) experience,”  Am J 

Cardiol  (1998) 82(10B):83T–87T. 

61.  D.W. Harsha, P.-H. Lin, E. Obarzanek, et al., “Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension: 

a summary of results,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (1999) 99(suppl):S53–59; N.M. Karanja, 

E.  Obarzanek, P.-H. Lin, et al., “Descriptive characteristics of the dietary patterns used 

in the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension trial,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (1999) 99(suppl): 

S19–S27; F.M. Sacks, L.P. Svetkey, W.M. Vollmer, et al., “Effects on blood pressure of 

reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) 

diet,”  N Engl J Med  (2001) 344:3–10; Appel et al., “A clinical trial”; and E. Obarzanek, 

F.M. Sacks, and W.M. Vollmer, “Effects on blood lipids of a blood pressure-lowering 

diet: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) trial,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2001) 

74(1):80–89. 

62.  M. deLorgeril, P. Salen, J.-L. Martin, et al., “Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, 

and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction: final report of 

the Lyon Diet Heart Study,”  Circulation  (1999) 99:779–85. 

63.  A. Leaf, “Dietary prevention of coronary heart disease: the Lyon Diet Heart Study,” 

Circulation  (1999) 99:733–35. 

64.  S.G. Aldana, R.L. Greenlaw, H.A. Diehl, et al., “Effects of an intensive diet and physical 

activity modification program on the health risks of adults,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (2005) 

105(3):371–81. 188  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

65.  D. Ornish, S.E. Brown, L.W. Schenwitz, et al., “Can lifestyle changes reverse coronary 

heart disease?,”  Lancet  (1990) 336:129–33; and D. Ornish, L.W. Schenwitz, J.H. Billings, 

et al., “Intensive lifestyle changes for reversal of coronary heart disease,”  JAMA  (1998) 

280:2001–07. 

66.  J. Koertge, G. Weidner, M. Elliott-Eller, et al., “Improvement in medical risk factors 

and quality of life in women and men with coronary artery disease in the Multicenter 

Lifestyle Demonstration Project,”  Am J Cardiol  (2003) 91:1316–22. 

67.  D. Ornish, G. Weidner, W.R. Fair, et al., “Intensive lifestyle changes may affect the 

progression of prostate cancer,”  J Urol  (2005) 174:1065–69. 

68.  C.B. Esselstyn Jr., “Updating a 12-year experience with arrest and reversal therapy for 

coronary heart disease (an overdue requiem for palliative cardiology),”  Am J Cardiol 

(1999) 84(3):339–41; C.B. Esselstyn Jr., “Resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic 

through plant-based nutrition,”  Prev Cardiol  (2001) 4:171–77; and “Becoming heart attack 

proof” (VegSource Interactive, Inc., 2003), www.vegsource.com/esselstyn/index.htm. 

69.  Institute of Medicine (IOM),  Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, 

Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids  (Macronutrients ) (Washington, DC: 

National Academies Press, 2002), pp. 297–302, 777–87; and Ornish et al., “Intensive 

lifestyle changes for reversal.” 

70.  R.J. Barnard, T. Jung, and S.B. Inkeles, “Diet and exercise in the treatment of NIDDM: the 

need for early emphasis,”  Diabetes Care  (1994) 17:1469–72. 

71.  M.G. Crane and C. Sample, “Regression of diabetic neuropathy with total vegetarian 

(vegan) diet,”  J Nutr Med  (1994) 4:431–39. 

72.  American Cancer Society (ACS), “The complete guide – nutrition and physical activity,” 

www.cancer.org/docroot/PED/content/PED_3_2X_Diet_and_Activity_Factors_That_ 

Affect_Risks.asp?sitearea=PED; DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans; and  World 

Health Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization (WHO/FAO),  Diet, Nutrition 

and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases,  WHO Technical Report Series 916 (Geneva, 2003). 

73.  H.C. Hung, K.J. Joshipura, R. Jiang, et al., “Fruit and vegetable intake and risk of major 

chronic disease,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2004) 96:1577–84; S. Liu, I.M. Lee, U. Ajani, et al., 

“Intake of vegetables rich in carotenoids and risk of coronary heart disease in men: 

the Physicians’ Health Study,”  Int J Epidemiol  (2001) 30:130–35; and L.A. Bazzano, J. He, 

L.G.  Ogden, et al., “Fruit and vegetable intake and risk of cardiovascular disease in 

US adults: the first National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Epidemiologic 

Follow-up Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2002) 76:93–99. 

74.  K.J. Joshipura, F.B. Hu, J.E. Manson, et al., “The effect of fruit and vegetable intake on risk 

for coronary heart disease,”  Ann Intern Med  (2001) 134:1106–14; and S. Liu, J.E.  Manson, 

I.M. Lee, et al., “Fruit and vegetable intake and risk of cardiovascular disease: the 

Women’s Health Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2000) 72:922–28. 

75.  T.H. Rissanen, S. Voutilainen, J.K. Virtanen, et al., “Low intake of fruits, berries and 

vegetables is associated with excess mortality in men: the Kuopio Ischaemic Heart 

Disease Risk Factor (KIHD) Study,”  J Nutr  (2003) 133:199–204. 

76.  Bazzano et al., “Fruit and vegetable intake.” 

77.  P. Van’t Veer, M.C. Jansen, M. Klerk, et al., “Fruits and vegetables in the prevention of 

cancer and cardiovascular disease,”  Public Health Nutr  (2000) 3:103–07. 

78.  L.M. Steffen, C.H. Kroenke, X. Yu, et al., “Associations of plant food dairy product, and 

meat intakes with 15-y incidence of elevated blood pressure in young black and white 

adults: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study,”  Am J 

Clin Nutr  (2005) 82:1169–77; and L.  Dauchet , P.  Amouyel , and J.  Dallongeville , “Fruit and 

vegetable consumption and risk of stroke: a meta-analysis of cohort studies,”  Neurology 

(2005) 65:1193–97. Notes  • 189 

79.  E. Riboli and T. Norat, “Epidemiologic evidence of the protective effect of fruit 

and vegetables on cancer risk,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2003) 78(suppl):559S–69S; T.J. Key, 

A.  Schatzkin, W.C. Willett, et al., “Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of cancer,”  Public 

Health Nutr  (2004) 7:187–200; and WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition .

80.  Key et al., “Diet, nutrition”; WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition ; C.H. van Gils, P.H. Peeters, 

H.B. Bueno-de-Mesquita, et al., “Consumption of vegetables and fruits and risk of 

breast cancer,”  JAMA  (2005) 293:183–93; D. Feskanich, R.G. Ziegler, D.S. Michaud, et al., 

“Prospective study of fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of lung cancer among 

men and women,”  J Natl Cancer Inst ( 2000) 92:1812–23; L.E. Voorrips, R.A. Goldbohm, 

D.T. Verhoeven, et al., “Vegetable and fruit consumption and lung cancer risk in the 

Netherlands Cohort Study on diet and cancer,”  Cancer Causes Control ( 2001) 11:101–15; 

S.A. Smith-Warner, D. Spiegelman, S.S. Yaun, et al., “Intake of fruits and vegetables 

and risk of breast cancer: a pooled analysis of cohort studies,”  JAMA  (2001) 285:769–76; 

M.P. Zeegers, R.A. Goldbohm, and P.A. van den Brandt, “Consumption of vegetables 

and fruits and urothelial cancer incidence: a prospective study,”  Cancer Epid Biomarkers 

Prev  (2001) 10:1121–28; and D.S. Michaud, D. Spiegelman, S.K. Clinton, et al., “Fruit and 

vegetable intake and incidence of bladder cancer in a male prospective cohort,”  J Natl 

Cancer Inst  (1999) 91:605–13. 

81.  Key et al., “Diet, nutrition”; and WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition. 

82.  ACS, “Complete Guide”; DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans ; and WHO/FAO, 

Diet, Nutrition .

83.  W.C. Willett, “Harvesting the fruits of research: new guidelines on nutrition and physical 

activity,”  CA Cancer J Clin  (2002) 52:66–67. 

84.  B.J. Rolls, J.A. Ello-Martin, and B.C. Tohill, “What can intervention studies tell us about 

the relationship between fruits and vegetable consumption and weight management?,” 

Nutr Rev  (2004) 62:1–17. 

85.  B.C. Tohill, “Fruit and vegetables and weight management,” www.hkresources.org/ 

articles/fruit_vegetable.ppt. 

86.  B.C. Tohill, J. Seymour, M. Serdula, et al., “What epidemiologic studies tell us about 

the relationship between fruit and vegetable consumption and body weight,”  Nutr Rev 

(2004) 62:365–74. 

87.  M.K. Serdula, C. Gillespie, L. Kettel-Khan, et al., “Trends in fruit and vegetable 

consumption among adults in the United States: behavioral risk factor surveillance 

system, 1994–2000,”  Am J Pub Health  (2004) 94:1014–18. 

88.  Rolls, Ello-Martin, and Tohill, “What can intervention studies tell.” 

89.  E.S. Ford and A.H. Mokdad, “Fruit and vegetable consumption and diabetes mellitus 

incidence among U.S. adults,”  Prev Med  (2001) 32:33–9; K.L. Tucker, H. Chen, M.T. 

Hannan, et al., “Bone mineral density and dietary patterns in older adults: the 

Framingham Osteoporosis Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2002) 76:245–52; S.A. New, “Intake 

of fruits and vegetables: implications for bone health,”  Proc Nutr Soc  (2003) 62:889–99; 

S.A. New, S.P.  Robins, M.K. Campbell, et al., “Dietary influences on bone mass and 

bone metabolism: further evidence of a positive link between fruit and vegetable 

consumption and bone health?,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2000) 71:142–51; and K.L. Tucker, M.T. 

Hannan, H. Chen, et al., “Potassium and fruit and vegetables are associated with greater 

bone mineral density in elderly men and women,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 69:727–36. 

90.  J.K. Campbell, K. Canene-Adams, B.L. Lindshield, et al., “Tomato phytochemicals and 

prostate cancer risk,”  J Nutr  (2004) 134(12 suppl):3486S–92S. 

91.  S. Mannisto, S.A. Smith-Warner, D. Spiegelman, et al., “Dietary carotenoids and risk of 

lung cancer in a pooled analysis of seven cohort studies,”  Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 

Prev  (2004) 13:40–48. 190  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

92.  Michaud et al., “Fruit and vegetable intake.” 

93.  C.S. Johnston, C.A. Taylor, and J.S. Hampl, “More Americans are eating “5 A Day” but 

intakes of dark green and cruciferous vegetables remain low,”  J Nutr  (2000) 130:3063–67; 

and DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans .

94.  WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition .

95.  2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,  2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee 

Report , www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2005/report/, part D, sec. 6. 

96.  DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans .

97.  USDA OC,  Agriculture Fact Book. 

98.  Fraser et al., “A possible protective effect”; D.R. Jacobs Jr., K.A. Meyer, L.H. Kushi, 

et  al., “Whole-grain intake may reduce the risk of ischemic heart disease death in post-

menopausal women: the Iowa Women’s Health Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1998) 68:248–57; 

S. Liu, M.J. Stampfer, F.B. Hu, et al., “Whole-grain consumption and risk of coronary 

heart disease: results from the Nurses’ Health Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70:412–19; 

S.  Liu, J.E. Manson, M.J. Stampfer, et al., “Whole grain consumption and risk of ischemic 

stroke in women: a prospective study,”  JAMA  (2000) 284:1534–40; and J.W. Anderson, 

“Whole grains protect against atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease,”  Proc Nutr Soc 

(2003) 62:135–42. 

99.  M.A. Murtaugh, D.R. Jacobs Jr., B. Jacob, et al., “Epidemiological support for the 

protection of whole grains against diabetes,”  Proc Nutr Soc  (2003) 62:143–49. 

100.  M.A. Pereira, D.R. Jacobs Jr., J.J. Pins, et al., “Effect of whole grains on insulin sensitivity 

in overweight hyperinsulinemic adults,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2002) 75:848–55. 

101.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 370. 

102.  W.H. Aldoori, E.L. Giovannucci, H.R. Rockett, et al., “A prospective study of dietary 

fiber types and symptomatic diverticular disease in men,”  J Nutr  (1998) 128(4):714–19; 

and IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 372. 

103.  Fraser et al., “A possible protective effect”; J. Sabate, G.E. Fraser, K. Burke, et al., “Effects 

of walnuts on serum lipid levels and blood pressure in normal men,”  N Engl J Med  (1993) 

328: 603–07; L.H. Kushi, A.R. Folsom, R.J. Prineas, et al., “Dietary antioxidant vitamins 

and death from coronary heart disease in postmenopausal women,”  N Engl J Med  (1996) 

334:1156–62; F.B. Hu, M.J. Stampfer, J.E. Manson, et al., “Frequent nut consumption 

and risk of coronary heart disease in women: prospective cohort study,”  BMJ  (1998) 

317:1341–45; J. Sabate, “Nut consumption, vegetarian diets, ischemic heart disease risk, 

and all-cause mortality: evidence from epidemiologic studies,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1993) 

70(suppl):500S–03S; G.A. Spiller, D.A. Jenkins, O. Bosello, et al., “Nuts and plasma lipids: 

an almond-based diet lowers LDL-C while preserving HDL-C,”  J Am Coll Nutr  (1998) 

17(3):285–90; and Jenkins et al., “Effects of a dietary portfolio.” 

104.  J. Mukuddem-Petersen, W. Oosthuizen, and J.C. Jerling, “A systematic review of the 

effects of nuts on blood lipid profiles in humans,”  J Nutr  (2005) 135:2082–89; P.M.  Kris-

Etherton, S. Yu-Poth, J. Sabate, et al., “Nuts and their bioactive constituents: effects 

on serum lipids and other factors that affect disease risk,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 

70(suppl):504S–11S; Fraser,  Diet , p. 257; and FDA, “Qualified health claims: letter of 

enforcement discretion—nuts and coronary heart disease,” Docket No. 02P-0505 (2003), 

www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/qhcnuts2.html. 

105.  USDA ERS,  Food Availability .

106.  L.A. Bazzano, J. He, L.G. Ogden, et al., “Legume consumption and risk of coronary heart 

disease in US men and women,”  Arch Intern Med  (2001) 161:2573–78. 

107.  J.W. Anderson and A.W. Major, “Pulses and lipaemia, short- and long-term effect potential 

in the prevention of cardiovascular disease,”  Br J Nutr  (2002) 88(suppl):S263–71. Notes  • 191 

108.  F.M. Sacks, A. Lichtenstein, L. Van Horn, et al., “Soy protein, isoflavones, and 

cardiovascular health: an American Heart Association science advisory for professionals 

from the Nutrition Committee,”  Circulation  (2006) 113:1034–44. 

109.  P.H. Peeters, L. Boker Keinan, Y.T. van der Schouw, et al., “Phytoestrogens and breast 

cancer risk: review of the epidemiological evidence,”  Breast Cancer Res Trea  (2003) 77:171– 

83; M.J. Messina, “Emerging evidence on the role of soy in reducing prostate cancer 

risk,”  Nutr Rev  (2003) 61:117–31; and Key et al., “Diet, nutrition.” 

110.  S. Kreijkamp-Kaspers, L. Kok, D.E. Grobbee, et al., “Effect of soy protein containing 

isoflavones on cognitive function, bone mineral density, and plasma lipids in 

postmenopausal women,”  JAMA  (2004) 292:65–74. 

111.  Bazzano et al., “Legume consumption.” 

112.  I. Darmadi-Blackberry, M.L. Wahlqvist, A. Kouris-Blazos, et al., “Legumes: the most 

important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities,”  Asia Pac 

J Clin Nutr  (2004) 6:217–20. 

113.  Cotton et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients.” Note that “ice cream” also includes sherbet 

and frozen yogurt, and “cakes, cookies” also includes quick breads and donuts. 

114.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 422. 

115.  These studies link saturated fat to diabetes: F.B. Hu, R.M. van Dam, and S. Liu, “Diet 

and risk of type II diabetes: the role of types of fat and carbohydrate,”  Diabetologia  (2001) 

44:805–17; E.J.M. Feskens, S.M. Virtanen, L. Rasanen, et al., “Dietary factors determining 

diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance: a 20-year follow-up of the Finnish and Dutch 

cohorts of the Seven Countries Study,”  Diabetes Care  (1995) 18:1104–12; and D.R. Parker, 

S.T. Weiss, R. Troisi, et al., “Relationship of dietary saturated fatty acids and body habitus 

to serum insulin concentrations: the Normative Aging Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1993) 

58:129–36. 

Other studies find no such links: M.B. Costa, S.R.G. Ferreira, L.J. Franco, et al., “Dietary 

patterns in a high-risk population for glucose intolerance,”  J Epidemiol  (2000) 10:111–17; 

and J. Salmeron, F.B. Hu, E. Manson, et al., “Dietary fat intake and risk of type 2 diabetes 

in women,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2001) 73:1019–26. 

116.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 422–23. 

117.  DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans .

118.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 542; M. Tanasescu, E. Cho, J.E. Manson, 

and F.B. Hu, “Dietary fat and cholesterol and the risk of cardiovascular disease,”  Am 

J Clin Nutr  (2004) 79:999–1005; and A. Ascherio, E.B. Rimm, E.L. Giovannucci, et al., 

“Dietary fat and risk of coronary heart disease in men: cohort follow up study in the 

United States,”  BMJ  (1996) 313:84–90. 

119.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 1058. 

120.  DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans .

121.  F.M. Sacks, A. Donner, W.P. Castelli, et al., “Effect of ingestion of meat on plasma 

cholesterol of vegetarians,”  JAMA  (1981) 246:640–44. 

122.  Fraser, “Associations.” 

123.  Sacks et al., “Effect of ingestion”; A. Ascherio, C. Hennekens, W.C. Willett, et al., 

“Prospective study of nutritional factors, blood pressure, and hypertension among US 

women,”  Hypertension  (1996) 27:1065–72; and Steffen et al., “Associations of plant food.” 

124.  ACS, “Complete guide”; and WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition .

125.  A. Chao, M.J. Thun, C.J. Connell, et al., “Meat consumption and risk of colorectal cancer,” 

JAMA  (2005) 293:172–82. 

126.  Fraser, “Associations.” 192  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

127.  T. Norat, S. Bingham, P. Ferrari, et al., “Meat, fish, and colorectal cancer risk: the 

European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2005) 

97:906–16. 

128.  T. Norat, A. Lukanova, P. Ferrari, et al., “Meat consumption and colorectal cancer risk: 

dose-response meta-analysis of epidemiological studies,”  Int J Cancer  (2002) 98:241–56. 

129.  M.S. Sandhu, I.R. White, and K. McPherson, “Systematic review of the prospective cohort 

studies on meat consumption and colorectal cancer risk: a meta-analytical approach,” 

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2001) 10:439–46. 

130.  U. Nöthlings, L.R. Wilkens, S.P. Murphy, et al., “Meat and fat intake as risk factors for 

pancreatic cancer: the multiethnic cohort study,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2005) 97(19):1458–65. 

131.  R.M. van Dam, W.C. Willett, E.B. Rimm, et al., “Dietary fat and meat intake in relation 

to risk of type 2 diabetes in men,”  Diabetes Care  (2002) 25:417–24; T.T. Fung, M. Schulze, 

J.E. Manson, et al., “Dietary patterns, meat intake, and the risk of type 2 diabetes in 

women,”  Arch Intern Med  (2004) 164:2235–40. 

132.  DHHS/USDA,  Dietary Guidelines for Americans ; R.P. Heaney, “Calcium, dairy products and 

osteoporosis,”  J Am Coll Nutr  (2000) 19:835S–9S; and R.L. Weinsier and C.L. Krumdieck, “Dairy 

foods and bone health: examination of the evidence,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2000) 72:681–89. 

133.  S. Mizuno, K. Matsuura, T. Gotou, et al., “Antihypertensive effect of casein hydrolysate 

in a placebo-controlled study in subjects with high-normal blood pressure and mild 

hypertension,”  Br J Nutr  (2005) 94:84–91. 

134.  Weinsier and Krumdieck, “Dairy foods.” 

135.  2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,  Report , part D, sec. 6; Appel et al., 

“A  clinical trial”; and L.J. Massey, “Dairy food consumption, blood pressure and stroke,” 

J Nutr  (2001) 131:1875–78. 

136.  Cotton et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients.” 

137.  F.B. Hu, M.J. Stampfer, J.E. Manson, et al., “Dietary saturated fats and their food sources in 

relation to the risk of coronary heart disease in women,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70:1001–08. 

138.  X. Gao, M.P. LaValley, and K.L. Tucker, “Prospective studies of dairy product and calcium 

intakes and prostate cancer risk: a meta-analysis,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2005) 97:1768–77; 

J.M. Chan and E.L. Giovannucci, “Dairy products, calcium, and vitamin D and risk of 

prostate cancer,”  Epidemiol Rev  (2001) 23:87–92; and G. Severi, D.R. English, J.L. Hopper, 

et al., Letter to the editor re. “Prospective studies of dairy product and calcium intakes 

and prostate cancer risk: a meta-analysis,”  J Nat Cancer Inst  (2006) 98:794–95. 

139.  Gao, LaValley, and Tucker, “Dairy product.” 

140.  USDA ARS,  Pyramid Servings Intakes in the United States 1999–2002, 1 Day  (2005), 

http://usna.usda.gov/cnrg/services/ts_3-0.pdf. 

141.  M. Tseng, R.A. Breslow, B.I. Graubard, et al., “Dairy, calcium, and vitamin D intakes and 

prostate cancer risk in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Epidemiologic 

Follow-up Study cohort,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2005) 81:1147–54; and J.M. Chan, M.J. Stampfer, 

J. Ma, et al., “Dairy products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk in the Physicians’ Health 

Study,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2001) 74:549–54. 

142.  These studies link calcium to prostate cancer: C. Rodriguez, M.L. McCullough, 

A.M.  Mondul, et al., “Calcium, dairy products, and risk of prostate cancer in a prospective 

cohort of United States men,”  Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2003) 12:597–603; and 

Chan et al., “Dairy products.” These studies dispute that claim: A.G. Schuurman, 

P.A.  van den Brandt, E. Dorant, et al., “Animal products, calcium and protein and 

prostate cancer risk in the Netherlands Cohort study,”  Br J Cancer  (1999) 80:1107–13; and 

J.M. Chan, P. Pietinen, M. Virtanen, et al., “Diet and prostate cancer risk in a cohort 

of smokers, with a specific focus on calcium and phosphorous,”  Cancer Causes Control 

(2000) 11:859–67. Notes  • 193 

143.  T. Norat and E. Riboli, “Dairy products and colorectal cancer: a review of possible 

mechanisms and epidemiological evidence,”  Eur J Clin Nutr  (2003) 57:1–17; and E. Cho, 

S.A. Smith-Warner, D. Spiegelman, et al., “Dairy foods, calcium, and colorectal cancer: a 

pooled analysis of 10 cohort studies,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2004) 96:1015–22. 

144.  M.-H. Shin, M.D. Holmes, S.E. Hankinson, et al., “Intake of dairy products, calcium, 

and vitamin D and risk of breast cancer,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2002) 94:1301–11; 

M.L.  McCullough, C. Rodriguez, W.R. Diver, et al., “Dairy, calcium, and vitamin D 

intake and postmenopausal breast cancer risk in the Cancer Prevention Study II nutrition 

cohort,”  Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2005) 14(12):2898–904; and P.G. Moorman and 

P.D. Terry, “Consumption of dairy products and the risk of breast cancer: a review of the 

literature,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2004) 80:5–14. 

145.  Cotton et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients.” 

146.  2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,  Report , part D, sec. 4. 

147.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 563. 

148.  Appleby et al., “Oxford Vegetarian Study.” 

149.  R.M. Weggemans, P.L. Zock, and M.B. Katan, “Dietary cholesterol from eggs increases 

the ratio of total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in humans: a meta-

analysis,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2001) 73:885–91. 

150.  F.B. Hu, M.J. Stampfer, E.B. Rimm, et al., “A prospective study of egg consumption and 

risk of cardiovascular disease in men and women,”  JAMA  (1999) 281:1387–94. 

151.  K. He, Y. Song, M.L. Daviglus, et al., “Accumulated evidence on fish consumption and 

coronary heart disease mortality: a meta-analysis of cohort studies,”  Circulation  (2004) 

109:2705–11. 

152.  P.M. Kris-Etherton, W.S. Harris, and L.J. Appel, “Omega-3 fatty acids and cardiovascular 

disease: new recommendations from the American Heart Association,”  Arterioscl Thromb 

Vasc Biol  (2003) 23:151–52; and IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp.  828–29. 

153.  WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition ; P.M. Kris-Etherton, W.S. Harris, and L.J. Appel, “American 

Heart Association Scientific Statement: fish consumption, fish oil, omega-3 fatty acids, 

and cardiovascular disease,”  Circulation  (2002) 106:2747–57; DHHS/USDA,  Dietary 

Guidelines for Americans ; and 2005 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee,  Report .

154.  Norat et al., “Meat, fish, and colorectal cancer risk.” 

155.  M.F. Leitzmann, M.J. Stampfer, D.C. Michaud, et al., “Dietary intake of n-3 and n-6 fatty 

acids and the risk of prostate cancer,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2004) 80:204–16; K. Augustsson, 

D.S. Michaud, E.B. Rimm, et al., “A prospective study of intake of fish and marine fatty 

acids and prostate cancer,”  Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2003) 12:64–7; P. Terry, 

P.  Lichtenstein, M. Feychting, et al., “Fatty fish consumption and risk of prostate cancer,” 

Lancet  (2001) 357:1764–6; and A.E. Norrish, C.M. Skeaff, G.L. Arribas, et al., “Prostate 

cancer risk and consumption of fish oils: a dietary biomarker-based case-control study,” 

Br J Cancer  (1999) 81:1238–42. 

156.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 348. 

157.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 351–61; and American Dietetic 

Association, “Health implications of dietary fiber,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (2002) 102:993–1000. 

158.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 370–72; and Aldoori et al., “Dietary 

fiber types.” 

159.  B. Trock, E. Lanza, and P. Greenwald, “Dietary fiber, vegetables, and colon cancer: 

critical review and meta-analyses of the epidemiologic evidence,”  J Natl Cancer Inst 

(1990) 82:650–61. 

160.  Epidemiology study: Y. Park, D.J. Hunter, D. Spiegelman, et al., “Dietary fiber intake 

and risk of colon cancer: a pooled analysis of prospective cohort studies,”  JAMA  (2005) 194  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

294:2849–57. Intervention studies: D.S. Alberts, M.E. Martinez, D.J. Roe, et al.,”Lack 

of effect of a high-fiber cereal supplement on the recurrence of colorectal adenomas,” 

N Engl J Med  (2000) 342:1156–62; C. Bonithon-Kopp, O. Kronborg, A. Giacosa, et al., 

“Calcium and fibre supplementation in prevention of colorectal adenoma recurrence: a 

randomized intervention trial,”  Lancet  (2000) 356:1300–06; and A. Schatzkin, E. Lanza, 

D. Corle, et al., “Lack of effect of a low-fat, high-fiber diet on the recurrence of colorectal 

adenomas,”  N Engl J Med  (2000) 342:1149–55. 

161.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 377–80; and M.D. Holmes, S. Liu, 

S.E.  Hankinson, et al., “Dietary carbohydrates, fiber, and breast cancer risk,”  Am J 

Epidemiol  (2004) 159:732–39. 

162.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 362–69. 

163.  E.B. Rimm, A. Ascherio, E. Giovannucci, et al., “Vegetable, fruit, and cereal fiber intake 

and risk of coronary heart disease among men,”  JAMA  (1996) 275:447–51. 

164.  L.A. Bazzano, J. He, L.G. Ogden, et al., “Dietary fiber intake and reduced risk of coronary 

heart disease in US men and women,”  Arch Intern Med  (2003) 163:1897–904. 

165.  A. Wolk, J.E. Manson, M.J. Stampfer, et al., “Long-term intake of dietary fiber and 

decreased risk of coronary heart disease among women,”  JAMA  (1999) 281:1998–2004. 

166.  M.A. Pereira, E. O’Reily, K. Augustsson, et al., “Dietary fiber and risk of coronary heart 

disease: a pooled analysis of cohort studies,”  Arch Intern Med  (2004) 164:370–76. 

167.  D.S. Ludwig, M.A. Pereira, C.H. Kroenke, et al., “Dietary fiber, weight gain, and 

cardiovascular disease risk factors in young adults,”  JAMA  (1999) 282:1539–46. 

168.  P. Insel, R.E. Turner, and D. Ross,  Nutrition , 2nd ed. (Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett, 

2004). 

169.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 348. 

170.  WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition ; M.A. Pereira and D.S. Ludwig, “Dietary fiber and body-weight 

regulation: observations and mechanisms,”  Pediatr Clin North Am  (2001) 48:969–80; and 

N.C. Howarth, E. Saltzman, and S.B. Roberts, “Dietary fiber and weight regulation,” 

Nutr Rev  (2001) 59:129–39. 

171.  J.H. Cummings, “The effect of dietary fiber on fecal weight and composition,” in 

G.A.  Spiller, ed.,  CRC Handbook of Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition  (Boca Raton: CRC 

Press, 1993), pp. 263–349; cited in IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 371. 

172.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , pp. 389, 1036. 

173.  E.H. Haddad, L.S. Berk, J.D. Kettering, et al., “Dietary intake and biochemical, 

hematologic, and immune status of vegans compared with non-vegetarians,”  Am 

J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70(suppl):586S–93S; M.S. Donaldson, “Food and nutrient intakes 

of Hallelujah vegetarians,”  Nutr Food Sci  (2001) 31:293–303; N.E. Allen, P.N. Appleby, 

G.K.  Davey, et al., “The associations of diet with serum insulin-like growth factor I and 

its main binding proteins in 292 women meat-eaters, vegetarians, and vegans,”  Cancer 

Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2002) 11:1441–48; Appleby, Davey, and Key, “Hypertension”; 

Davey et al., “EPIC-Oxford”; and E.A. Spencer, P.N. Appleby, G.K. Davey, et al., “Diet 

and body mass index in 38,000 EPIC-Oxford meat-eaters, fish-eaters, vegetarians and 

vegans,”  Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord  (2003) 27:728–34. 

174.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin 

B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 

1998), pp. 260–66. 

175.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin , pp. 265, 269; and Cotton et al., “Dietary sources 

of nutrients.” 

176.  E.P. Quinlivan and J.F. Gregory III, “Effect of food fortification on folic acid intake in the 

United States,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2003) 77:221–25. Notes  • 195 

177.  N.S. Green, “Folic acid supplementation and prevention of birth defects,”  J Nutr  (2002) 

132(suppl):2356S–60S. 

178.  Haddad et al., “Dietary intake.” 

179.  Cotton et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients.” 

180.  Davey et al., “EPIC-Oxford”; and Toohey et al., “Cardiovascular disease risk factors.” 

181.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate 

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2004), p. 244. 

182.  Cotton et al., “Dietary sources of nutrients.” 

183.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Water,  pp. 200–19; and P.K. Whelton, J. He, J.A. Cutler, 

et  al., “Effects of oral potassium on blood pressure,”  JAMA  (1997) 277:1624–32. 

184.  K.L. Tucker, M.T. Hannan, H. Chen, et al., “Potassium and fruit and vegetables are 

associated with greater bone mineral density in elderly men and women,”  Am J Clin 

Nutr  (1999) 69:727–36; H.M. MacDonald, S.A. New, M.H. Golden, et al., “Nutritional 

associations with bone loss during the menopausal transition: evidence of a beneficial 

effect of calcium, alcohol, and fruit and vegetable nutrients and of a detrimental effect of 

fatty acids,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2004) 79:155–65; S.A. New, H.M. MacDonald, M.K. Campbell, 

et al., “Lower estimates of net endogenous non-carbonic acid production are positively 

associated with indexes of bone health in premenopausal and perimenopausal women,” 

Am J Clin Nutr  (2004) 79:131–38; and IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Water , pp. 219–22. 

185.  G.C. Curhan, W.C. Willett, E.R. Rimm, et al., “A prospective study of dietary calcium and 

other nutrients and the risk of symptomatic kidney stones,”  N Engl J Med  (1993) 328:833– 

38; G.C. Curhan, W.C. Willett, F.E. Speizer, et al., “Comparison of dietary calcium with 

supplemental calcium and other nutrients as factors affecting the risk of kidney stones 

in women,”  Ann Intern Med  (1997) 126:497–504; T. Hirvonen, P. Pietinen, M.  Virtanen, 

et al., “Nutrient intake and use of beverages and risk of kidney stones among male 

smokers,”  Am J Epidemiol  (1999) 150:187–94; and P. Barcelo, O. Wuhl, E. Servitge, et al., 

“Randomized double-blind study of potassium citrate in idiopathic hypocitraturic 

calcium nephrolithiasis,”  J Urol  (1993) 150:1761–64. 

186.  P.M. Kris-Etherton, “AHA Scientific Advisory: monounsaturated fatty acids and risk 

of cardiovascular disease,”  Circulation  (1990) 100:1253–58; and F.B. Hu, M.J. Stampfer, 

J.E.  Manson, et al., “Dietary fat intake and the risk of coronary heart disease in women,” 

N Engl J Med  (1997) 337:1491–99. 

187.  Hu et al., “Dietary fat intake.” 

188.  USDA ERS, Food availability database. 

189.  B.C. Davis and P.M. Kris-Etherton, “Achieving optimal essential fatty acid status in 

vegetarians: current knowledge and practice implications,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2003) 

78(suppl):640S–46S; and WHO/FAO,  Diet, Nutrition .

190.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes (Macronutrients) , p. 1324; and American Dietetic Association 

and Dietitians of Canada. Position of the American Dietetic Association and Dietitians 

of Canada: vegetarian diets.  J Am Diet Assoc  (2003) 103:748–65. 

191.  IOM,  Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids 

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2000), p. 52. 

192.  Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group, “The effect of vitamin 

E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers,” 

N Engl J Med  (1994) 330:1029–35. 

193.  A.J. Duffield-Lillico, B.L. Dalkin, M.E. Reid, et al., “Selenium supplementation, baseline 

plasma selenium status and incidence of prostate cancer: an analysis of the complete 

treatment period of the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial,”  BJU Int  (2003) 91:608–12; 

L.C. Clark, B. Dalkin, A. Krongrad, et al., “Decreased incidence of prostate cancer with 196  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

selenium supplementation: results of a double-blind cancer prevention trial,”  Br J Urol 

(1998) 81:730–34; and G.F. Combs Jr., “Status of selenium in prostate cancer prevention,” 

Br J Cancer  (2004) 91:195–99. 

194.  R.H. Liu, “Health benefits of fruit and vegetables are from additive and synergistic 

combinations of phytochemicals,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (2003) 78(suppl):517S–20S. 

195.  W.J. Craig, “Health-promoting phytochemicals: beyond the traditional nutrients,” in 

J.  Sabate, ed.,  Vegetarian Nutrition  (Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2001). 

196.  K. Wakabayashi, M. Nagao, H. Esumi, et al., “Food-derived mutagens and carcinogens,” 

Cancer Res  (1992) 52:2092S–98S; and E.G. Snyderwine, “Some perspective on the 

nutritional aspects of breast cancer research: food derived heterocyclic amines as 

etiologic agents in human mammary cancer,”  Cancer  (1994) 74:1070–77. 

197.  N. Kazerouni, R. Sinha, C.-H. Hsu, et al., “Analysis of 200 food items for benzo[ a]pyrene 

and estimation of its intake in an epidemiologic study,”  Food Chem Toxicol  (2001) 

39:423–36. 

198.  World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research,  Food, Nutrition, 

and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective  (Washington, DC: American Institute for 

Cancer Research, 1997). 

199.  Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program,  Report on Carcinogens,  11th ed. 

(Washington, DC: DHHS, 2004). 

200.  USDA NASS,  Agricultural Chemical Usage: 2001 Field Crops Summary  (2002), http://usda. 

mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/other/pcu-bb/agcs0502.pdf, pp. 6, 68; and USDA 

NASS,  Agricultural Statistics 2003  (2003), www.usda.gov/nass/pubs/agr03/03_ch1.pdf, 

pp.  1–47. 

201.  For example, the International Agency for Research on Cancer publishes monographs 

that include reviews of several pesticides that have been linked to carcinogenicity; see 

http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/allmonos90.php. 

202.  Extension Toxicology Network, “Pesticide information profiles,” http://extoxnet.orst. 

edu/pips/ghindex.html, accessed Mar. 26, 2004; and A. Blair, “An overview of potential 

health hazards among farmers from use of pesticides,” paper presented at Surgeon 

General’s Conference on Agricultural Safety and Health, Des Moines, Apr. 30–May 3, 

1991 (Cincinnati: National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, 1992), p. 237. 

203.  Extension Toxicology Network, “Pesticide information profiles.” 

204.  Blair, “Overview.” 

205.  A. Blair, “Clues to cancer etiology from studies of farmers,”  Scand J Environ Health  (1992) 

18:209–15. 

206.  P.K. Mills and R. Yang, “Prostate cancer risk in California farm workers,”  J Occup Environ 

Med  (2003) 45:249–58. 

207.  M.C. Alavanja, C. Samanic, M. Dosemeci, et al., “Use of agricultural pesticides and 

prostate cancer risk in the Agricultural Health Study cohort,”  Am J Epidemiol  (2003) 

157:800–14. 

208.  S.H. Zahm, D.D. Weisenburger, R.C. Saal, et al., “A case-control study of non-Hodgkin’s 

lymphoma and the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) in eastern 

Nebraska,”  Epidemiol  (1990) 1:349–56. 

209.  From USDA NASS, Agricultural chemical use database (Arlington, VA: National Science 

Foundation Center for Integrated Pest Management, 2004), www.pestmanagement.info/ 

nass/app_usageExcel.cfm. 

210.  J.A. Rusiecki, A. De Roos, W.J. Lee, et al., “Cancer incidence among pesticide applicators 

exposed to atrazine in the Agricultural Health Study,”  J Natl Cancer Inst  (2004) 96:1375– 

82; and A.J. De Roos, A. Blair, J.A. Rusiecki, et al., “Cancer incidence among glyphosate-Notes  • 197 

exposed pesticide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study,”  Environ Health Perspect 

(2005) 113:49–54. 

211.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),  National Report on Human Exposure to 

Environmental Chemicals  (Atlanta, 2001), p. 35; and EPA, “Organophosphate pesticides in 

food—a primer on reassessment of residue limits” (1999), www.epa.gov/pesticides/op/ 

primer.htm. 

212.  USDA NASS,  2001 Field Crops Summary ; USDA NASS,  Agricultural Statistics 2003 ; and 

National Center for Food and Agricultural Policy, National pesticide use database, 

www.ncfap.org/database/download/database.xls, accessed Jan. 30, 2006. 

213.  J.E. Davies, “Neurotoxic concerns of human pesticide exposures,”  Am J Ind Med  (1990) 

18:327–31; and L. Rosenstock, W. Daniell, S. Barnhart, et al., “Chronic neuropsychological 

sequelae of occupational exposure to organophosphate insecticides,”  Am J Ind Med  (1990) 

18:321–25. 

214.  J.A. Thomas, “Toxic responses of the reproductive system,” in C.D. Klassen, ed.,  Casarett 

& Doull’s Toxicology , 5th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996), pp. 547–82. 

215.  National Research Council,  Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and Children  (Washington, 

DC: National Academies Press, 1993); and D. Pimentel and A. Greiner, “Environmental 

and socioeconomic costs of pesticide use,” in D. Pimentel, ed.,  Techniques for Reducing 

Pesticide Use  (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997), p. 54. 

216.  R. Repetto and S.S. Baliga,  Pesticides and the Immune System: The Public Health Risks 

(Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 1996). 

217.  Public Health Service,  Carcinogens .

218.  Environmental Working Group,  PCBs in Farmed Salmon: Factory Methods, Unusual Results 

(2003), www.ewg.org/reports/farmedPCBs/es.php. 

219.  D. Schardt, “Farmed salmon under fire,”  Nutrition Action Healthletter  (2004) 31(5):9–11. 

220.  A. Schecter, O. Papke, K. Tung, et al., “Polybrominated diphenyl ethers contamination of 

United States food,”  Environ Sci Technol  (2005) 38:5306–11. 

221.  EPA, Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, “Polybrominated diphenylethers 

(PBDEs) significant new use rule (SNUR) questions and answers,” www.epa.gov/oppt/ 

pbde/pubs/qanda.htm, accessed Aug. 15, 2005. 

222.  EPA, “What you need to know about mercury in fish and shellfish,” www.epa.gov/ 

waterscience/fishadvice/advice.html, accessed Mar. 30, 2005; and “Mercury in tuna: new 

safety concerns,”  Consumer Reports  July 2006. 

223.  R.J. Deckelbaum, E.A. Fisher, M. Winston, et al., “Summary of a scientific conference 

on preventive nutrition: pediatrics to geriatrics,”  Circulation  (1999) 100:450–56; and ACS, 

“Unified dietary guidelines” (1999), www.cancer.org/docroot/NWS/content/NWS_1_ 

1x_Unified_Dietary_Guidelines.asp. 

Argument #2. Less Foodborne Illness (pp. 59–72) 

1.  P.S. Mead, L. Slutsker, V. Dietz, et al., “Food-related illness and death in the United 

States,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases  (1999) 5:607–25; and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

Economic Research Service (USDA ERS),  Economics of Food-borne Disease  (Washington, 

DC: Government Printing Office, 2003). 

2.  Mead et al., “Food-related illness.” 

3.  Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI),  Outbreak Alert!  (2005), www.cspinet.org/ 

foodsafety/outbreak_report.html. 198  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

4.  C. Sugarman, “Rising fears over food safety: battling the hidden hazard of bacterial 

contamination,”  Washington Post  July 23, 1986:E1; and J. Ackerman, “Food: how safe? 

How altered?,”  Nat Geog  May 2002:2–50. 

5.  CSPI,  Outbreak Alert! 

6.  “How safe is that burger?,”  Consumer Reports  Nov. 2002:29. 

7.  “Of birds and bacteria,”  Consumer Reports  Jan. 2003, www.consumerreports.org/cro/ 

food/chicken-safety-103/overview.htm. 

8.  A. Hingley,  Campylobacter: Low Profile Bug Is Food Poisoning Leader  (U.S. Food and Drug 

Administration, 1999), www.fda.gov/fdac/features/1999/599_bug.html. 

9.  M.F. Jacobson and C. Smith Dewaal, “Egg safety: are there cracks in the federal food 

safety system?,” testimony before the Senate Committee on Government Affairs, July 1, 

1999, www.cspinet.org/foodsafety/egg_safety.html. 

10.  M. Helms, P. Vastrup, P. Gerner-Smidt, et al., “Short and long term mortality associated 

with foodborne bacterial gastrointestinal infections: registry-based study,”  BMJ  (2003) 

326:357. 

11.  CSPI, “Kevin’s law,” brochure (2001), www.cspinet.org/foodsafety/kevinslawbrochure.pdf. 

12.  G. Manning, “Going whole hog for farm security,”  USA Today  Apr. 3, 2003:9D. 

13.  R. Tauxe, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases 

Branch, appearing on “Modern Meat,”  Frontline , Apr. 18, 2002. 

14.  CSPI,  Outbreak Alert! 

15.  Ackerman, “Food.” 

16.  E.B. Solomon, S. Yaron, K.R. Matthews, et al., “Transmission of  Escherichia coli  O157: 

H7 from contaminated manure and irrigation water to lettuce plant tissue and its 

subsequent internalization,”  Appl Environ Microbiol  (2002) 68:397–400; and P. Belluck and 

C. Drew, “Tracing bout of illness to small lettuce farm,”  New York Time s Jan.  5, 1998:A1. 

17.  P. Brasher, “Record recalls hit meat industry,”  Des Moines Register  Dec. 8, 2002:1A; 

T.  Breuer, D.H. Benkel, R.L. Shapiro, et al., “A multistate outbreak of  Escherichia coli  O157: 

H7 infections linked to alfalfa sprouts grown from contaminated seeds,”  Emerg Infect 

Dis  (2001) 7:977–82; and B. Allen, “From the editor,”  Nat Geog  May 2002:1. 

18.  “Epidemiologic notes and reports multistate outbreak of  Salmonella poona  infections: 

United States and Canada, 1991,”  MMWR  (1991) 40(32):549–52; and Associated Press, 

“Kale, turnip greens recalled,” Dec. 26, 2002. 

19.  A. Nunez-Delgado, E. Lopez-Periago, F. Diaz-Fierros Vigueira, et al., “Chloride, sodium, 

potassium and faecal bacteria levels in surface runoff and subsurface percolates from 

grassland plots amended with cattle slurry,”  Bioresour Technol  (2002) 82:261–71; U.S. Dept. 

of Agriculture Animal Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA APHIS),  Cryptosporidium 

and Giardia in Beef Calves  (Fort Collins, CO, 2001), http://nahms.aphis.usda.gov/ 

beefcowcalf/chapa/ChapaCrypto.pdf; and I.V. Wesley, S.J. Wells, K.M. Harmon, et al., 

“Fecal shedding of  Campylobacter  and  Arcobacter  spp. in dairy cattle,”  Appl Environ 

Microbiol  (2000) 66:1994–2000. 

20.  USDA APHIS,  Info Sheet: Salmonella in United States Feedlots  (2001), www.aphis.usda.gov/ 

vs/ceah/ncahs/nahms/feedlot/feedlot99/FD99salmonella.pdf; and USDA APHIS,  Info 

Sheet: Escherichia coli O157 in United States Feedlots  (2001), www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/ 

ncahs/nahms/feedlot/feedlot99/FD99ecoli.pdf. 

21.  S.H. Lee, D.A. Levy, G.F. Craun, et al., “Surveillance for waterborne-disease outbreaks: 

United States, 1999–2000,”  MMWR  (2002) 51:1–47. 

22.  I.D. Ogden, D.R. Fenlon, A.J. Vinten, et al., “The fate of  Escherichia coli  O157 in soil and 

its potential to contaminate drinking water,”  Int J Food Microbiol  (2001) 66:111–7; and Notes  • 199 

S.G. Jackson, R.B. Goodbrand, R.P. Johnson, et al., “ Escherichia coli  O157:H7 diarrhoea 

associated with well water and infected cattle on an Ontario farm,”  Epidemiol Infect 

(1998) 120:17–20. 

23.  Lee et al., “Surveillance.” 

24.  A.J. Lung, C.M. Lin, J.M. Kim, et al., “Destruction of  Escherichia coli  O157:H7 and 

Salmonella enteritidis  in cow manure composting,”  J Food Prot  (2001) 64:1309–14. 

25.  I.T. Kudva, K. Blanch, and C.J. Hovde, “Analysis of  Escherichia coli  O157:H7 survival in 

ovine or bovine manure and manure slurry,”  Appl Environ Microbiol  (1998) 64:3166–74. 

26.  E.E. Natvig, S.C. Ingham, B.H. Ingham, et al., “ Salmonella  enterica  serovar typhimurium 

and  Escherichia coli  contamination of root and leaf vegetables grown in soils with 

incorporated bovine manure,”  Appl Environ Microbiol  (2002) 68:2737–44. 

27.  Kudva, Blanch, and Hovde, “ Escherichia coli  O157:H7 survival.” 

28.  M.E. Ensminger,  Animal Science , 9th ed. (Danville, IL: Interstate Publishing, 1991), 

pp.  31–32. 

29.  L. Saif, “Panel dialogue: challenges faced and met in research on food health,” National 

Academies Workshop, Exploring a Vision: Integrating Knowledge for Food and Health, 

June 9, 2003, Washington, DC. 

30.  J.A. Zahn, “Evidence for transfer of tylosin and tylosin-resistant bacteria in air from 

swine production facilities using sub-therapeutic concentrations of tylan in feed,” 

presentation at International Animal Agriculture and Food Science Conference, July 

24–28, 2001, Indianapolis. 

31.  B.Z. Predicala, J.E. Urban, R.G. Maghirang, et al., “Assessment of bioaerosols in swine 

barns by filtration and impaction,”  Curr Microbiol ( 2002) 44:136–40. 

32.  Appearing on  Morning Edition , Oct. 10, 2005, National Public Radio, www.npr.org. 

33.  D.J. Alexander and I.H. Brown, “Recent zoonoses caused by influenza A viruses,” 

Rev Sci Tech  (2000) 19:197–225; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 

Center for Infectious Diseases (CDC NCID),  The Influenza (Flu) Viruses  (2003), 

www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/flu/viruses.htm; and World Health Organization (WHO), 

Avian Influenza: Assessing the Pandemic Threa t (2005), www.who.int/csr/disease/influenza/ 

H5N1-9reduit.pdf. 

34.  CDC NCID,  Influenza (Flu) Viruses. 

35.  G. Kolata,  Flu: The Story of the Great Influenza Pandemic  (Darby, PA: Diane Publishing Co, 

2001). 

36.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), “What is an influenza 

pandemic?,” www.pandemicflu.gov/general/whatis.html, accessed June 4, 2006; 

Alexander and Brown, “Recent zoonoses”; CDC, “Information about influenza 

epidemics,” www.cdc.gov/flu/avian/gen-info/pandemics.htm, accessed Nov. 22, 2005; 

and R. Stein, “Infections now more widespread,”  Washington Post  June 15, 2003:A1. 

37.  T.K. Taubenberger, A.H. Reid, R.M. Lourens, et al., “Characterization of the 1918 

influenza virus polymerase genes,”  Nature  (2005) 437:889–93; and L.K. Altman, “New 

microbes could become new norm,”  New York Times  Mar. 9, 2004:D6. 

38.  B.W.J. Mahy and C.C. Brown, “Emerging zoonoses: crossing the species barrier,”  Rev Sci 

Tech  (2000) 19:33–40; J. Taylor, “Hong Kong watching for bird flu,”  Australian Broadcasting 

News  Feb. 2, 2004, www.abc.net.au/pm/content/2004/s1036587.htm; B. Wuethrich, 

“Chasing the fickle swine flu,”  Science  (2003) 299:1502–05; Health, Welfare, and Food 

Bureau of Hong Kong, “Preventive and contingency measures to combat avian influenza 

in Hong Kong” (2004), www.info.gov.hk/info/flu/eng/files/legco-e.pdf. 

39.  M. Mellon, C. Benbrook, and K. Benbrook,  Hogging It  (Cambridge, MA: UCS Publications, 

2001). 200  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

40.  M. Swartz, “Human diseases caused by foodborne pathogens of animal origin,”  Clin 

Infect Dis  (2002) 34(3):S111–22; and S.B. Levy, G.B. FitzGerald, and A.B. Macone, “Changes 

in intestinal flora of farm personnel after introduction of a tetracycline-supplemented 

feed on a farm,”  New Engl J Med  (1976) 295:583–88. 

41.  U.S. Government Accountability Office,  Antibiotic Resistance: Federal Agencies Need to 

Better Focus Efforts to Address Risk to Humans from Antibiotic Use in Animals,  Report No. 

GAO-04-490 (2004), www.gao.gov/new.items/d04490.pdf, appendix VII: Comments 

from the Department of Health and Human Services. 

42.  M. Barza and K. Travers, “Excess infections due to antimicrobial resistance: the 

attributable fraction,”  Clin Infect Dis  (2002) 34(3):S126–30. 

43.  D.G. White, S. Zhao, R. Sudler, et al., “The isolation of antibiotic-resistant  Salmonella  from 

retail ground meats,”  New Engl J Med  (2001) 345:1147–53. 

44.  S.D. Holmberg, M.T. Osterholm, K.A. Senger, et al., “Drug-resistant  Salmonella  from 

animals fed antimicrobials,”  New Engl J Med  (1984) 311(10):617–22; also see T.F. O’Brien, 

J.D. Hopkins, E.S. Gilleece, et al., “Molecular epidemiology of antibiotic resistance in 

Salmonella  from animals and human beings in the United States,”  New Engl J Med  (1982) 

307(1):1–6. 

45.  CDC,  Human Isolates Final Report, 2002:  National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring 

System for Enteric Bacteria  (NARMS)  (2004), www.cdc.gov/narms/annual/2002/ 

2002ANNUALREPORTFINAL.pdf. 

46.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Enroflaxin for poultry; opportunity for hearing,” 

Docket No. 00N-1571,  Fed Reg ( 2000) 65(211):64954–65, www.fda.gov/OHRMS/DOCKETS/ 

98fr/103100a.htm. 

47.  FAAIR Scientific Advisory Panel, “Select findings and conclusions,”  Clin Infect Dis  (2002) 

34(Suppl 3):S73–75. 

48.  A.W. Mathews and Z. Goldfarb, “FDA bans use of antibiotic in poultry,”  Wall Street 

Journal  July 29, 2005:B1. 

49.  Animal Health Institute, “The antibiotics debate” (2004), www.ahi.org/antibioticsDebate/ 

index.asp, accessed May 2, 2005. 

50.  WHO,  Global Principles for the Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance in Animals 

Intended for Food  (Geneva, 2001), http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2000/WHO_CDS_ 

CSR_APH_2000.4.pdf; K.M. Shea and the Committee on Environmental Health 

and the Committee on Infectious Diseases, “Nontherapeutic uses of antimicrobial 

agents in animal agriculture: implications for pediatrics,”  Pediatrics  (2004) 114(3):862– 

68; Institute of Medicine,  Microbial Threats to Human Health: Emergence, Detection, 

and Response  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003), p. 208; see www. 

keepantibioticsworking.org for in-depth information about antibiotic resistance. The 

Preservation of Antibiotics for Medical Treatment Act of 2005 is S.742 and H.R. 2562. 

51.  National Research Council,  The Use of Drugs in Food Animals, Benefits and Risks 

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2002), p. 157. 

52.  European Union, “Ban on antibiotics as growth promoters in animal feed enters into 

effect,” press release, Dec. 22, 2005. 

53.  J. Callesen, “Effects of termination of AGP use on pig welfare and productivity,” in 

WHO,  Working Papers from the International Invitational Symposium: Beyond Antimicrobial 

Growth Promoters in Food Animal Production  (Nov. 6–9, 2002, Foulum, Denmark), www. 

agrsci.dk/djfpublikation/djfpdf/djfhu57.pdf. 

54.  WHO,  Working Papers , www.agrsci.dk/djfpublikation/djfpdf/djfhu57.pdf, p. 18; F.M. 

Aarestrup, “Effect of abolishment of the use of antimicrobial agents for growth 

promotion on occurrence of antimicrobial resistance in fecal enterococci from food 

animals in Denmark,”  Antimicrob Agents Chemother ( 2001) 45:2056–59; and M.C. Evans Notes  • 201 

and H.C. Wegener, “Antimicrobial growth promoters and  Salmonella  spp.,  Campylobacter 

spp. in poultry and swine, Denmark,”  Emerg Infect Dis  (2003) 9(4):489–92. 

55.  Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research,  DANMAP 2004: Use of Antimicrobial 

Agents and Occurrence of Antimicrobial Resistance in Bacteria from Food Animals, Foods and 

Humans in Denmark  (2005), www.dfvf.dk/Files/Filer/Zoonosecentret/Publikationer/ 

Danmap/Danmap_2004.pdf, figure 2; and WHO,  Impacts of Antimicrobial Growth Promoter 

Termination in Denmark: The WHO International Review Panel’s Evaluation of the Termination 

of the Use of Antimicrobial Growth Promoters in Denmark  (2003), www.who.int/salmsurv/ 

en/Expertsreportgrowthpromoterdenmark.pdf, pp. 41–44. 

56.  M. Burros, “Poultry industry quietly cuts back on antibiotic use,”  New York Times 

Feb.  10, 2002:A1; E. Weise, “‘Natural’ chickens take flight: four top producers end use 

of antibiotics,”  USA Today  Jan. 24, 2006:5D; and Iowa Pork Producers Association, 

“Proposed resolution number 2004–5: feeding of growth promotant antibiotics” (2004), 

www.iowapork.org/download/2004_resolutions.pdf. 

57.  Animal Health Institute, “Antibiotic use in animals rises in 2004,” news release, June 27, 

2005, www.ahi.org/mediaCenter/documents/Antibioticuse2004.pdf. 

58.  D. Schuettler, “Scientists fear bird flu could trigger pandemic: global action must be 

taken immediately, conference told,”  National  Post  (Reuters) Feb 24, 2005:A16. 

59.  CDC, “Recent avian influenza outbreaks in Asia,” www.cdc.gov/flu/avian/outbreaks/ 

asia.htm, accessed Mar. 3, 2005. 

60.  S. Leahy, “Bird flu defeated—at high cost,” Inter Press News Service Agency, Aug. 27, 

2004, www.ipsnews.net/interna.asp?idnews=25254. 

61.  D. Milbank, “Capitol Hill flu briefing was no trick, and no treat,”  Washington Post  Oct. 13, 

2005:A2. 

62.  CSPI,  Outbreak Alert! 

Argument #3. Better Soil (pp. 73–85) 

1.  C. Niskanen, “Trout in troubled waters: shifts in land use in southeast Minnesota are 

causing sediment damage to streams,”  St. Paul Pioneer Press  Apr. 17, 2005:7G. 

2.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service (USDA ERS), “Briefing 

room: land use, value, and management: major uses of land” (2002), www.ers.usda.gov/ 

Briefing/LandUse/majorlandusechapter.htm, accessed May 2, 2003. 

3.  G. Wuerthner, freelance biologist and former employee of U.S. Bureau of Land 

Management, email to Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI), Sept. 16, 2004. 

4.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA NRCS), 

National Resources Inventory 2001 NRI: Soil Erosion  (2003), www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/ 

land/nri01/erosion.pdf. 

5.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources and Environmental Indicators  (Washington, DC, 2003), 

p.  4.2-15. 

6.  M. Al-Kaisi, “Soil erosion and crop productivity: topsoil thickness” (Ames, IA: Iowa 

State University, 2001), www.ipm.iastate.edu/ipm/icm/2001/1-29-2001/topsoilerosion. 

html. 

7.  The 37 percent figure is from United Nations Development Programme, United Nations 

Environment Programme, World Bank, and World Resources Institute,  World Resources 

2000–2001: People and Ecosystems—The Fraying Web of Life  (Washington, DC, 2001), 

pp.  258–59. 

8.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 4.2-14, 15. 

9.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 4.2-14, 15. 202  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

10.  USDA ERS,  Soil, Nutrient and Water Management Systems Used in U.S. Corn Production 

(Washington, DC, 2002), p. 9. 

11.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 4.2-14, 15. 

12.  USDA ERS,  Summary Report 1997 National Resources Inventory  (Washington, DC, 2000), 

pp. 51, 57. Much of the data on soil erosion in this chapter are adapted from that report. 

Although the 2002  Inventory  has been published, it is not as exhaustive as the 1997 report, 

and USDA maintains that data from the 1997 report are more reliable and consistent. For 

further explanation, see www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/NRI/. 

13.  USDA ERS,  Summary Report , pp. 58–95. USDA NRCS estimates that water erosion impairs 

crop productivity on about 65 million acres, and wind erosion impairs productivity on 

48 million acres. Some of that land experiences both types of erosion. Current national 

data do not allow distinguishing the extent of erosion related to different crops. If those 

data were available, one could estimate the erosion resulting from animal agriculture. 

14.  USDA NRCS,  Managing Soil Organic Matter: The Key to Air and Water Quality  (2003), 

www.nm.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/tech-notes/soils/soil2.pdf. 

15.  P. Sullivan,  Overview of Cover Crops and Green Manures: Fundamentals of Sustainable 

Agriculture  (National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service, 2003), http://attra. 

ncat.org/attra-pub/PDF/covercrop.pdf. 

16.  USDA ERS,  Summary Report , pp. 58–59. 

17.  USDA NRCS, “What is topsoil worth?,” http://soils.usda.gov/sqi/concepts/soil_organic_ 

matter/som_d.html, accessed Dec. 26, 2005. 

18.  W.R. Osterkamp, hydrologist, U.S. Geological Survey, email to CSPI, Apr. 25, 2003. 

19.  USDA NRCS,  Managing Soil Organic Matter .

20.  A. Fletcher, “Soil erosion could devastate food sector” (2006), www.foodnavigator. 

com/news/ng.asp?n=66605-soil-nutrients-crops. 

21.  USDA Agricultural Research Service (USDA ARS), “Technologies for management 

of arid rangelands,” research project description (2001), www.ars.usda.gov/research/ 

publications/Publications.htm?seq_no_115=142788; J. Daniel, Grazinglands Research 

Laboratory, USDA ARS, email to CSPI, Apr. 28, 2003; and J.A. Daniel and W.A. Phillips, 

“Impacts of grazing strategies on soil compaction,” paper presented at American Society 

of Agricultural Engineers 2000 Summer Meeting, Milwaukee, July 9–12, 2000. 

22.  A.J. Jones, R.D. Grisso, and C.A. Shapiro, “Soil compaction  … fact and fiction: common 

questions and their answers” (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Cooperative Extension 

Service, 1988), http://ianrpubs.unl.edu/soil/cc342.htm. 

23.  J.A. Daniel, P. Kenneth, W. Altom, et al., “Long-term grazing density impacts on soil 

compaction,”  Trans ASAE  (2002) 45:1911–15. 

24.  U.S. Geological Survey, “An introduction to biological soil crusts,” www.soilcrust.org/ 

crust101.htm, accessed June 17, 2004. 

25.  J. Belsky and J.L. Gelbard, “Comrades in harm: livestock and weeds in the intermountain 

west,” in G. Wuerthner and M Matteson, eds.,  Welfare Ranching: The Subsidized Destruction 

of the American West  (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002), pp. 203–06. 

26.  USDA NRCS,  Summary Report 1997 National Resources Inventory  (Washington, DC, 2000), 

p. 9. For similar 2003 data, see USDA, “Johanns announces 43 percent decline in total 

cropland erosion,” press release, May 22, 2006, www.usda.gov/2006/05/0170.xml. 

27.  USDA Farm Service Agency, Conservation Reserve Program monthly contract report, 

www.fsa.usda.gov/crpstorpt/06Approved/r1sumyr/us.htm, accessed Aug. 3, 2005. 

28.  USDA NRCS,  National Resources Inventory: 2002  (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 1. 

29.  USDA,  Agricultural Resources and Environmental Indicators  (Washington, DC, 2003), ch.  4.2, 

pp. 22, 41. Notes  • 203 

30.  Purdue University, “Tillage type definitions” (2002), www.ctic.purdue.edu/Core4/CT/ 

Definitions.html. 

31.  Calculations based on acreages in USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA 

NASS),  Agricultural Chemical Usage: Field Crops Summary  for 1998, 2000, 2001; and grain 

used for feed from  Agricultural Outlook  Sept. 2002, www.ers.usda.gov/publications/ 

agoutlook/sep2002/ao294.pdf, p. 44, table 17. 

32.  Calculations based on acreages in USDA NASS,  Field Crops Summary  for 1998, 2000, 

2001. Total U.S. fertilizer use in 2001 was 20.6 million tons according to USDA ERS, 

“Agricultural chemicals and production technology: questions and answers, 2002,” ERS 

Online Briefing Room, www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/AgChemicals/Questions/nmqa2. 

htm, accessed Mar. 23, 2004. 

33.  C.E. Pitcairn, U.M. Skiba, M.A. Sutton, et al., “Defining the spatial impacts of poultry 

farm ammonia emissions on species composition of adjacent woodland groundflora 

using Ellenberg Nitrogen Index, nitrous oxide and nitric oxide emissions and foliar 

nitrogen as marker variables,”  Environ Pollut  (2002) 119:9–21. 

34.  Adapted from USDA NASS,  Milk Production, Disposition, and Income 2002 Summary 

(Washington, DC, 2003), p. 2; USDA NASS,  Poultry Slaughter 2002 Summary  (Washington, 

DC, 2003), p. 2; USDA NASS,  Livestock Slaughter 2002 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), 

pp.  35, 41, 49; and USDA NASS,  Chickens and Eggs 2003 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2004), 

p. 2. 

35.  National Research Council (NRC),  Air Emissions from Animal Feeding Operations: Current 

Knowledge, Future Needs  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003), ch. 3. 

36.  United Nations Industrial Development Organization,  Technical Report No. 26 Part 1: Mineral 

Fertilizer Production and the Environment  (Geneva, 1998), p. 49; and NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 75. 

37.  Potash and Phosphate Institute and Potash and Phosphate Institute of Canada (PPI-

PPIC),  Technical Bulletin 2002–1: Plant Nutrient Use in North American Agriculture— 

Producing Food and Fiber, Preserving the Environment, Integrating Organic and Inorganic 

Sources  (Norcross, GA, 2002), p. 60. 

38.  D. Eckert, “Efficient fertilizer use: fertilizer management practices” (Bannockburn, IL: 

IMC-Agrico), www.agcentral.com/imcdemo/05Nitrogen/05-0.htm; and A. Napgezek, 

“Aging soils?,”  University of Wisconsin Extension NPM Field Notes  Feb./Mar. 1999. 

39.  H. de Zeeuw and K. Lock, “Urban and periurban agriculture, health and environment,” 

discussion paper for Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations-Resource 

Centre for Urban Agriculture and Forestry electronic conference, Urban and Periurban 

Agriculture on the Policy Agenda (2000), www.fao.org/urbanag/Paper2-e.htm. 

40.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics (EPA 

OPPT),  Background Report on Fertilizer Use, Contaminants, and Regulations  (1999), www.epa. 

gov/opptintr/fertilizer.pdf, pp. ii, iv; and U. Krogmann and L.S. Boyles,  Land Application 

of Sewage Sludge (Biosolids), No. 5: Heavy Metals  (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 

Agricultural Experiment Station, 1999). 

41.  EPA OPPT,  Background Report , p. 112. 

42.  EPA OPPT,  Background Report , p. 110. 

43.  J. Kaplan, Z. Ross, and B. Walker,  As You Sow: Toxic Waste in California Home and Farm 

Fertilizers  (San Francisco: California Public Interest Research Group, 1999), p. 1. 

44.  PPI-PPIC,  Technical Bulletin , p. 48. 

45.  R.L. Wershaw, J.R. Garbarino, and M.R. Burkhardt, “Roxarsone in natural water systems,” 

in U.S. Geological Survey,  Proceedings: Effects of Confined Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs) on 

Hydrologic Resources and the Environment , meeting held in Fort Collins, CO, Aug. 30– 

Sept.  1, 1999, http://water.usgs.gov/owq/AFO/proceedings/afo/html/wershaw.html. 204  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

46.  Based on manure data in R.L. Kellogg, C.H. Lander, D.H. Moffitt, et al.,  Manure Nutrients 

Relative to the Capacity of Cropland and Pastureland to Assimilate Nutrients: Spatial and 

Temporal Trends for the United States  (Washington, DC: USDA, 2000), p. 49; and USDA NASS 

data on numbers of livestock, www.nass.usda.gov:8080/QuickStats/indexbysubject. 

jsp?Pass_group=Livestock+%26+Animals. 

47.  Based on a midyear population of 285,317,559 from the U.S. Census Bureau, “State 

population estimates: April 1, 2000 to July 1, 2002,” www.census.gov/popest/archives/ 

2000s/vintage_2002/ST-EST2002-01.html, accessed Jan. 13, 2003; and an average waste 

generation of about 0.518 tons per person per year from EPA,  National Pollutant Discharge 

Elimination System Permit Regulation and Effluent Limitation Guidelines and Standards for 

Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs) , as cited in  Fed Reg  (2003) 68(29):7175–274 

(complete document is at www.epa.gov/EPA-WATER/2003/February/Day-12/w3074.htm). 

48.  Adapted from American Society of Agricultural Engineers,  Manure Production and 

Characteristics  (St. Josephs, MI, 2002), pp. 687–89; and Kellogg et al.,  Manure Nutrients ,

p.  49. 

49.  Kellogg et al.,  Manure Nutrients , p.  74. 

50.  Council for Agricultural Science and Technology,  Storing Carbon in Agricultural Soils to 

Help Mitigate Global Warming , CAST Issue Paper 14 (Washington, DC, 2000), p. 2; and 

Kellogg et al.,  Manure Nutrients , pp.  53, 56. 

51.  PPI-PPIC,  Organic or Inorganic, Which Nutrient Source Is Better for Plants? , Enviro-briefs 

No.  2 (Norcross, GA, 2002). 

52.  University of Maryland Cooperative Extension Service,  Nutrient Manager: Making the 

Most of Manure  (College Park, MD, 1994). 

53.  K.E. Nachman, J.P. Graham, L.B. Price, and E.K. Silbergeld, “Arsenic: a roadblock to potential 

animal waste management solutions,”  Environ Health Perspect  (2005) 113(9):1123–24. 

54.  J.E. Lee, “Sludge spread on fields is fodder for lawsuits,”  New York Times  June 26, 2003:20. 

55.  EPA, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance,  Land Application of Sewage Sludge: 

A Guide for Land Appliers on the Requirements of the Federal Standards for the Use or Disposal 

of Sewage Sludge, 40 CFR Part 503  (1994), www.epa.gov/owm/mtb/biosolids/sludge.pdf. 

56.  Lee, “Sludge.” 

57.  EPA OPPT,  Background Report , p. iii. 

58.  R. Kellogg, R. Nehring, A. Grube, et al., “Trends in the potential for environmental risk 

from pesticide loss from farm fields” (USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, 

1999), www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/land/pubs/pesttrend.html. 

59.  Extension Toxicology Network,  Movement of Pesticides in the Environment , Toxicology 

Information Brief (1993), http://extoxnet.orst.edu/tibs/movement.htm. 

60.  “Roundup kills frogs as well as tadpoles, Pitt biologist finds,” University of Pittsburgh 

news release, Aug. 3, 2005, www.umc.pitt.edu:591/m/FMPro?-db=ma&-lay=a&-format=d. 

html&id=2115&-Find; and “Roundup highly lethal to amphibians, finds University of 

Pittsburgh researcher,”  Medical News Today  Apr. 3, 2005, www.medicalnewstoday.com/ 

medicalnews.php?newsid=22159. 

61.  T. Hayes, K. Haston, M. Tsui, et al., “Atrazine-induced hermaphroditism at 0.1ppb 

in American leopard frogs ( Rana pipiens ): laboratory and field evidence,”  Environ 

Health Perspect  (2003) 111(4):568–75; and L. Tavera-Mendoza, S. Ruby, P. Brousseau, 

et al., “Response of the amphibian tadpole  Xenopus  laevis  to atrazine during sexual 

differentiation of the ovary,”  Environ Toxicol Chem  (2002) 21:1264–67. 

62.  M. Losure, “Frog researcher invited to tell his story,” Minnesota Public Radio, Oct. 26, 2004, 

http://news.minnesota.publicradio.org/features/2004/10/25_losurem_frogresearch/. Notes  • 205 

Argument #4. More and Cleaner Water (pp. 87–101) 

1.  A.J. Laukaitis, “Drought shrinking McConaughy,”  Lincoln Journal Star  May 22, 2005:D1. 

2.  Water Education Foundation, “Colorado river project,” www.water-ed.org/coloradoriver. 

asp. 

3.  Calculations based on D. Pimentel, J. Houser, E. Preiss, et al., “Water resources: 

agriculture, the environment, and society,”  Bioscience  (1997) 47(2):97–106. 

4.  Calculations based on D. Pimentel, B. Berger, D. Filiberto, et al., “Water resources: 

agricultural and environmental issues,”  Bioscience  (2004) 54:909–18. 

5.  U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),  Estimated Use of Water in the United States in 1995 

(Washington, DC, 1998), pp. 18–19. 

6.  USGS,  Estimated Use of Water , pp. 18–19; and U.S. Department of Agriculture, National 

Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA NASS).  2003 Farm and Ranch Irrigation Survey 

(Washington, DC, 2004), pp. 69–89. Other irrigation includes vegetables and fruit 

orchards, irrigation of feed grains for export, other crops (e.g., rice), fish farms, parks, 

and public and private golf courses. 

7.  USDA, Economic Research Service (USDA ERS),  Agricultural Resources and Environmental 

Indicators  (Washington, DC, 2003) p. 2.1-1. 

8.  USGS,  Estimated Use of Water , p. 19. 

9.  S. Postel,  Pillar of Sand  (New York: WorldWatch Institute, 1999), p. 80. The figure of 

21 billion gallons per day originally was recorded by the former U.S. Water Resources 

Council and reported in J. Adler, “The browning of America,”  Newsweek  Feb. 23, 1981:26. 

10.  D. Jehl, “Saving water, U.S. farmers are worried they’ll parch,”  New York Times  Aug. 28, 

2002:A1. 

11.  High Plains Water Conservation District Number 1, “The Ogallala Aquifer” (Lubbock, 

TX), www.hpwd.com/the_ogallala.asp, accessed Mar. 29, 2004; and D. McConnell, 

“Groundwater: on-line resource” (University of Akron, 1998), http://lists.uakron.edu/ 

geology/natscigeo/Lectures/gwater/gwater.htm#ogallala, accessed Aug. 8, 2005. 

12.  Panhandler Plains Historical Museum, “Ogallala Aquifer” (Canyon, TX), www. 

panhandleplains.org/education/pop_geo_ogallala.php, accessed Mar. 11, 2005. 

13.  L.E. Jones, “Saltwater contamination in the Upper Floridan Aquifer at Brunswick, 

Georgia,” in K.J. Hatcher, ed.,  Proceedings of 2001 Georgia Water Resources Conference 

(Athens, GA: Institute of Ecology), http://ga.water.usgs.gov/publications/gwrc2001jones. 

html, pp. 644–47. 

14.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.1-6. 

15.  National Research Council,  Mitigating Losses from Land Subsidence in the United States 

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1991), p. 1. The $125 million is equivalent 

to $180 million in 2005 dollars. 

16.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.1-2. 

17.  Authors’ calculations based on USDA data on irrigated acreages and fractions used to 

feed U.S. livestock. 

18.  USDA NASS,  Irrigation Survey , table 27. 

19.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.1-2. 

20.  USDA NASS,  Irrigation Survey , tables 27, 28. 

21.  USDA NASS,  Irrigation Survey , tables 12, 27, adjusted for fractions of irrigated crops used 

to feed domestic livestock. 206  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

22.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 2.2-2, 3; USDA ERS, “Briefing room: irrigation and 

water use” (2004), www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/WaterUse/Questions/qa10.htm, accessed 

Aug. 8, 2005. 

23.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 2.2-3, 7, 11. 

24.  S. Postel, “Growing more food with less water,”  Scientific American  Feb. 2001:50. 

25.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , pp. 2.2-11. 

26.  USDA NASS,  Irrigation Survey , p. 2-2.11. 

27.  Postel, “Growing more food.” 

28.  T.L. Anderson and P.S. Snyder,  Priming the Invisible Pump  (Bozeman, MT: Property and 

Environment Research Center, 1997). 

29.  U.S. House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the 

Committee on Insular and Interior Affairs, Committee Print, Dec. 1988; referenced in 

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the Committee on Natural Resources. 

Taking from the Taxpayer: Public Subsidies for Natural Resource Development: An Investigative 

Report  (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1994), pp. 41–69 (expressed 

in 1988 dollars). 

30.  U.S. House of Representatives,  Taking from the Taxpayer , pp. 41–69; referenced in Postel, 

Pillar of Sand , p. 231. 

31.  U.S. House of Representatives,  Taking from the Taxpayer , pp. 41–69; referenced in Postel, 

Pillar of Sand , p. 231. 

32.  Environmental Working Group, “Executive summary,” in  California Water Subsidies 

(2004), pp. 1–2, www.ewg.org/reports/watersubsidies/execsumm.php. 

33.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.1-2. 

34.  For example, 100 gallons of irrigation water increases farm income by 3.4 cents for corn 

and 1.6 cents for sorghum. Calculated from USDA NASS,  Irrigation Survey , tables 27, 28; 

and USDA ERS, table 17, supply and utilization,  Agricultural Outlook  Jan.–Feb. 2001:37– 

38, www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/AgOutlook/Jan2001/ao278.pdf. 

35.  USDA NASS, “Quick stats,” www.nass.usda.gov/Data_and_Statistics/Quick_Stats/index. 

asp, accessed Jan. 11, 2006; and USDA NASS,  Noncitrus Fruits and Nuts 2004 Summary 

(2005), http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/fruit/pnf-bb/ncit0705.pdf. 

36.  Natural Resources Defense Council, “Alfalfa: the thirstiest crop,” fact sheet (2001), www. 

nrdc.org/water/conservation/fcawater.asp. 

37.  Congressional Budget Office,  Water Use Conflicts in the West: Implications for Reforming the 

Bureau of Reclamation’s Water Supply Policies  (Washington, DC, 1997). 

38.  USGS,  Estimated Use of Water , p. 37. 

39.  New York City Department of Environmental Protection,  New York City 2004 Drinking 

Water Supply and Quality Report , www.nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/wsstat04.pdf. 

40.  S.A. Ewing, D.C. Lay, and E. von Berell,  Farm Animal Well-Being: Stress Physiology, Animal 

Behavior, and Environmental Design  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1999), p. 235. 

41.  USGS,  Estimated Use of Water , p. 62. 

42.  USDA ERS,  Confined Animal Production and Manure Nutrients  (Washington, DC, 2001), 

www.ers.usda.gov/publications/aib771, p. iii. 

43.  Yunker Plastics, Inc., “Manure lagoons,” www.yunkerplastics.com/manure.htm. 

44.  North Carolina State University, “Frequently asked questions about livestock production,” 

www.bae.ncsu.edu/programs/extension/manure/awm/program/barker/questions/q_doc. 

html, accessed Oct. 9, 2005; and P. Cantrell, “State opens gate, waterways to livestock 

factories,”  Great Lakes Bulletin  Winter 1999:19 (Michigan Land Use Institute). Notes  • 207 

45.  Associated Press, “11 million litres of liquid manure spill into upstate New York river,” 

Aug. 13, 2005. 

46.  M. Cook and E. Stanley, “Reducing water pollution from animal feeding operations,” 

testimony before the House Subcommittees on Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry and 

Forestry, Resource Conservation, and Research of the Committee on Agriculture, May 

13, 1998, www.epa.gov/ocirpage/hearings/testimony/105_1997_1998/051398.htm. 

47.  D. Pimentel, C. Harvey, P. Resosudarmo, et al., “Environmental and economic costs of 

soil erosion and conservation benefits,”  Science  (1995) 267:1117–23. 

48.  P.K. Koluvek, K. Tanji, and T. Trout, “Overview of soil erosion from irrigation,”  J Irrig 

Drainage Engin  (1993) 119:929–46. 

49.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.3-5. 

50.  United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme, 

World Bank, and World Resources Institute,  World Resources 2000–2001: People and 

Ecosystems—The Fraying Web of Life  (Washington, DC, 2001), p. 50. 

51.  Postel,  Pillar of Sand , p. 101. 

52.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 2.2-1. 

53.  D. Neffendorf, chairman and coordinator, USDA Natural Resources Conservation 

Service (USDA NRCS) Grazing Land Conservation Initiative, email to Center for Science 

in the Public Interest (CSPI), Jan. 15, 2004; and Postel,  Pillar of Sand , p. 93. 

54.  Potash and Phosphate Institute and Potash and Phosphate Institute of Canada (PPI-

PPIC),  Technical Bulletin 2002–1: Plant Nutrient Use in North American Agriculture— 

Producing Food and Fiber, Preserving the Environment, Integrating Organic and Inorganic 

Sources  (Norcross, GA, 2002), p. iii. 

55.  Calculations based on USDA ERS, “U.S. fertilizer use and price” (1964–2003), tables 

1 and 2, www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FertilizerUse/; fertilizer usage data from states. The 

analysis included barley, corn, oats, wheat, sorghum, soy, alfalfa, hay, and pasture, but 

that is not an exhaustive list, so the figure given may be an underestimate. 

56.  USDA ERS, “Briefing room: agricultural chemicals and production technology: nutrient 

management” (2005), www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/AgChemicals/nutrientmangement. 

htm, accessed June 4, 2006; and USDA NASS,  Agricultural Chemical Usage 2003 Field Crops 

Summary  (2004), http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/other/pcu-bb/agcs0504. 

pdf, p. 22. 

57.  PPI-PPIC,  Technical Bulletin , p. 51. 

58.  N.N. Rabalais, R.E. Turner, and D. Scavia, “Beyond science into policy: Gulf of Mexico 

hypoxia and the Mississippi River,”  BioScience  (2002) 52:129–42. 

59.  PPI-PPIC,  Technical Bulletin , p. 51. 

60.  Rabalais, Turner, and Scavia, “Beyond science”; and National Science and Technology 

Council, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources (NSTC),  Integrated 

Assessment of Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico  (Washington, DC, 2000), p. 3. 

61.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “Rivers and streams,”  National Water 

Quality Inventory 2000 Report  (2002), ch. 2, www.epa.gov/305b/2000report/chp2.pdf. 

62.  See, for example, G. Martin, “Phosphate risks abound,” Charlotte City, FL,  Sun-Herald ,

www.sun-herald.com/phosphate/part4.htm. 

63.  In Idaho, the sites are Eastern Michaud Flats (EPA ID IDD984666610), which was a 

primary processor of phosphate rock, and Kerr-McGee Chemical Corporation (EPA ID 

IDD041310707), which was a secondary processor of wastes from phosphate rock mining. 

In Florida, the site is Stauffer Chemical Co. in Tarpon Springs (EPA ID FLD010596013). 

For more information on any of those sites, see EPA, Superfund information systems, 

CERCLIS Database, www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/cursites/index.htm. 208  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

64.  B.F. McPherson and R. Halley, “The South Florida environment: a region under stress,” 

USGS Circular 1134, sofia.usgs.gov/publications/circular/1134/wes/chw.html; and 

“Groups threaten selenium lawsuit,” Idaho Falls  Post Register  Sept. 11, 2003:B1. 

65.  Pacific Environmental Services, Inc.,  Background Report AP-42 Section 6.10 Phosphate 

Fertilizers , report prepared for EPA (Research Triangle Park, NC, 1996), pp. 2–3; and World 

Bank,  Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook  (Washington, DC, 1998), p. 387. 

66.  Kongshaug,  Energy Consumption .

67.  Pacific Environmental Services,  Phosphate Fertilizers , pp. 10–12. 

68.  World Bank,  Pollution Prevention , p. 387. 

69.  K. Kurt and M. Nelson, “Oklahoma accuses Arkansas poultry companies of polluting 

its water,” Associated Press, July 21, 2005. 

70.  NSTC,  Hypoxia , p. 9; Rabalais, Turner, and Scavia, “Beyond science”; and N.N. Rabalais, 

executive director, Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium, email to Center for 

Science in the Public Interest, June 14, 2002. 

71.  NSTC,  Hypoxia , p. 3; and Rabalais, email. 

72.  “Hypoxia, the Gulf of Mexico’s summertime foe,”  Watermarks  Sept. 2004(26):3–5; www. 

lacoast.gov/watermarks/2004-09/watermarks-2004-10.pdf. 

73.  J.R. Dandelski,  Marine Dead Zones: Understanding the Problem , Congressional Research Service 

Report for Congress (1998), www.ncseonline.org/nle/crsreports/marine/mar-30.cfm. 

74.  NSTC,  Hypoxia , pp. 4–5. 

75.  “Link between agricultural runoff and massive algal blooms in the sea,”  Medical News 

Today  Dec. 8, 2004, www.medicalnewstoday.com/medicalnews.php?newsid=17524; and 

J.M. Beman, K.R. Arrigo, and P.A. Matson, “Agricultural runoff fuels large phytoplankton 

blooms in vulnerable areas of the ocean,”  Nature  (2005) 434:211–14. 

76.  EPA, “Pretreatment program,” http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/home.cfm?program_id=3, 

accessed Dec. 28, 2005. 

77.  “U.S. sets new farm-animal pollution curbs,”  New York Times  Dec. 17, 2002:D28. 

78.  EPA,  Draft Guidance Manual and Example NPDES Permit for Concentrated Animal Feeding 

Operations  (1999), www.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/dman_afo.pdf, p. 8. 

79.  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,  Understanding the Pollution Potential of Livestock 

Waste  (Springfield, 1991). 

80.  Pew Oceans Commission,  Marine Pollution in the United States  (Arlington, VA: Pew 

Charitable Trusts, 2001), p. 29. 

81.  National Research Council,  Air Emissions from Animal Feeding Operations: Current 

Knowledge, Future Needs  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003), p. 52. 

82.  M.A. Mallin, J.M. Burkholder, and L.B. Cahoon, “The North and South Carolina coasts,” 

Marine Poll Bull  (2000) 41:56–75. 

83.  R. Kellogg, R. Nehring, A. Grube, et al., “Trends in the potential for environmental risk 

from pesticide loss from farm fields” (USDA NRCS, 1999), www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/ 

land/pubs/pesttrend.html. 

84.  EPA,  Pesticides in Drinking-Water Wells , Pub. 20T-1004 (1990), www.pueblo.gsa.gov/cic_ 

text/housing/water-well/waterwel.txt. 

85.  G. Wolff,  Investing in Clean Agriculture: How California Can Strengthen Agriculture, Reduce 

Pollution and Save Money  (Oakland, CA: Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, 

Environment, and Security, 2005), p. 12. 

86.  D.W. Kolpin, J.E. Barbash, and R.J. Gilliom, “Occurrence of pesticides in shallow 

groundwater of the United States: initial results from the National Water-Quality Notes  • 209 

Assessment Program,”  Environ Sci Technol  (1998) 32:558–66. Similar results were found 

in a newer USGS study,  Pesticides in the Nation’s Streams and Ground Water, 1992–2001—A 

Summary , http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2006/3028/pdf/fs2006-3028.pdf. 

87.  USGS,  Herbicides in Rainfall across the Midwestern and Northeastern United States, 1990–91 

(1998), http://ks.water.usgs.gov/Kansas/pubs/fact-sheets/fs.181-97.html. 

88.  USGS, “Glyphosate herbicide found in many Midwestern streams, antibiotics not 

common,” http://toxics.usgs.gov/highlights/glyphosate02.html, accessed Mar. 19, 2004. 

89.  D.W. Kolpin, E.T. Furlong, M.T. Meyer, et al., “Pharmaceuticals, hormones, and other 

organic wastewater contaminants in U.S. streams, 1999–2000: a national reconnaissance,” 

Environ Sci Technol  (2002) 36:1202–11. 

Argument #5. Cleaner Air (pp. 103–112) 

1.  Associated Press, “Jury selection begins in case against dairy farmer for 2 deaths,” 

Sept. 10, 2004, www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/news/archive/2004/09/10/state1644 

EDT0112.DTL. 

2.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA NASS), 

Quick Stats: Agricultural Statistics Data Base, www.nass.usda.gov:8080/QuickStats/, 

accessed June 4, 2006. 

3.  Meat production: USDA NASS,  Farm Numbers ; chicken production: USDA, Economic 

Research Service,  Data Product: Poultry Yearbook  (2004), www.ers.usda.gov/data/sdp/ 

view.asp?f=livestock/89007/. 

4.  Potash and Phosphate Institute and Potash and Phosphate Institute of Canada (PPI-

PPIC),  Technical Bulletin 2002–1: Plant Nutrient Use in North American Agriculture— 

Producing Food and Fiber, Preserving the Environment, Integrating Organic and Inorganic 

Sources  (Norcross, GA, 2002), p. 58. 

5.  R. Koelsch,  Environmental Considerations for Manure Application System Selection ,

G95 -1266 -A (University of Nebraska-Lincoln Extension Publications, 1996), http:// 

ianrpubs.unl.edu/wastemgt/g1266.htm. 

6.  PPI-PPIC,  Technical Bulletin , p. 58. 

7.  J. Barker,  Safety in Swine Production Systems  (Raleigh: North Carolina Cooperative Extension 

Agency, 1996), www.bae.ncsu.edu/programs/extension/publicat/wqwm/pih104.html. 

8.  P. Viney, V.P. Aneja, J.P. Chauhan, and J.T. Walker, “Characterization of atmospheric 

ammonia emissions from swine waste storage and manure lagoons,”  J Geophys Res-

Atmos  (2000) 105:11,535–45. 

9.  J.A. Zahn, A. Tung, B. Roberts, et al., “Abatement of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide 

emissions from a swine lagoon using a polymer biocover,”  J Air Waste Manag Asso  (2001) 

51:562–73. 

10.  C.E. Pitcairn, U.M. Skiba, M.A. Sutton, et al., “Defining the spatial impacts of poultry 

farm ammonia emissions on species composition of adjacent woodland groundflora 

using Ellenberg Nitrogen Index, nitrous oxide and nitric oxide emissions and foliar 

nitrogen as marker variables,”  Environ Pollut  (2002) 119:9–21. 

11.  National Research Council (NRC),  Air Emissions from Animal Feeding Operations: Current 

Knowledge, Future Needs  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003), p. 52. 

12.  NRC,  Air Emissions,  p. 72. 

13.  Ontario Medical Association,  Ground Level Ozone Position Paper , www.oma.org/health/ 

smog/ground.asp. 

14.  T. Pelton, “Critics charge animal farms are feeding pollution into air,”  Baltimore Sun 

Feb.  2, 2005:1A. 210  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

15.  Environmental Law & Policy Center, “Illinois rivers protection initiative,” www.elpc. 

org/forest/water/ammonia.htm. 

16.  Pelton, “Animal farms.” 

17.  A. Martin, “Livestock industry finds friends in EPA: document details lobbyists’ impact 

on air-quality plan,”  Chicago Tribune  May 16, 2004:C9. 

18.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),  Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas 

Emissions and Sinks: 1990–1998 , EPA 236–R-00–001 (2000), http://yosemite.epa.gov/oar/ 

globalwarming.nsf/UniqueKeyLookup/SHSU5BMQ76/$File/2000-inventory.pdf. 

19.  B. Field,  Beware On-Farm Manure Storage Hazards  (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University 

Cooperative Extension Service, 1980), www.agcom.purdue.edu/AgCom/Pubs/S/S-82.html; 

and  Preventing Deaths of Farm Workers in Manure Pits , NIOSH Publication 90-103, (National 

Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1990), www.cdc.gov/niosh/90-103.html. 

20.  NRC,  Air Emissions,  p. 54. 

21.  EPA,  Inventory . Methane emissions from livestock and manure total 54.8 million 

metric tons of carbon equivalent (multiply by 3.67 to convert to carbon dioxide). The 

EPA estimates that the average automobile emits 6.14 metric tons of carbon dioxide 

per year. EPA, “Personal greenhouse gas calculator,” http://yosemite.epa.gov/OAR/ 

globalwarming.nsf/content/ResourceCenterToolsGHGCalculator.html. 

22.  PPI-PPIC,  Technical Bulletin , pp. 60–61; and NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 52. 

23.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 52. 

24.  U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), “Nitrous oxide emissions” (2001), www.eia.doe.gov/ 

oiaf/1605/gg00rpt/nitrous.html#nap, accessed Aug. 5, 2004. 

25.  V. Smil,  Cycles of Life  (New York: Scientific American, 1997), p. 136. 

26.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 52. 

27.  NRC,  Air Emissions , pp. 51, 53. 

28.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 21. 

29.  Pacific Environmental Services, Inc.,  Background Report AP-42 Section 6.8 Ammonium 

Nitrate Fertilizer , report prepared for EPA (Research Triangle Park, NC, 1996), p. 5; and 

EPA.  AP-42: Compilation of Air Pollution Emission Factors, Vol. 1 ., 5th ed. (Washington DC, 

1995), p. 8.3–3. 

30.  EPA,  AP-42 , pp. 8.1-4, 8.8-4, 8.3-7; and EPA, “Effects of acid rain: human health” (2003), 

www.epa.gov/airmarkt/acidrain/effects/health.html, accessed Apr. 3, 2005. 

31.  G. Kongshaug,  Energy Consumption and Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Fertilizer 

Production  (International Fertilizer Industry Association, 1998), www.fertilizer. 

org/ifa/publicat/PDF/1998_biblio_65.pdf. 

32.  Adapted from Kongshaug,  Energy Consumption ; K.J. Hulsbergen and W.D. Kalk, 

“Energy balances in different agricultural systems: can they be improved?,” 

paper presented at International Fertiliser Society Symposium, Lisbon, Mar. 5, 

2001 (York, UK: International Fertiliser Society, 2001), p. 8; and DOE, “Energy 

consumption estimates by source, 1960–2000, United States” (2003), www.eia.doe. 

gov/emeu/states/sep_use/total/use_tot_us.html. 

33.  B.J. Nebel,  Environmental Science: The Way the World Works , 3rd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 

Prentice Hall, 1990), pp. 300–09. 

34.  NRC,  Air Emissions , pp. 69–71. 

35.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Agricultural Safety 

Database: Manure Gas, Hydrogen Sulfide (2002), www.cdc.gov/nasd/docs/d001501– 

d001600/d001535/d001535.html, accessed Mar. 12, 2003. 

36.  Barker,  Safety .Notes  • 211 

37.  Barker,  Safety .

38.  J. Lee, “Neighbors of vast hog farms say foul air endangers their health,”  New York Times 

May 11, 2003:1. 

39.  Barker,  Safety .

40.  CDC, database. 

41.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 54. 

42.  NRC,  Air Emissions , pp. 68–69; and S.S. Schiffman, “Livestock odors: implications for 

human well-being,”  J Anim Sci  (1998) 76:1343–55. 

43.  Schiffman, “Livestock odors”; and NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 68. 

44.  C.M. Williams,  Benefits of Adopting Environmentally Superior Swine Waste Management 

Technologies in North Carolina: An Environmental and Economic Assessment  (Research 

Triangle Park, NC: RTI International, 2003), pp. 6.1–6.3. 

45.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 56. 

46.  Schiffman, “Livestock odors”; NRC,  Air Emissions , pp. 68–69; and R.C. Avery, S. Wing, 

S.W. Marshall, et al., “Odor from industrial hog farming operations and mucosal 

immune function in neighbors,”  Arch Environ Health  (2004) 59(2):101–08. 

47.  Schiffman, “Livestock odors”; and NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 68. 

48.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 55. 

49.  A.R. Chapin, A. Rule, K. Gibson, et al., “Airborne multi-drug resistant bacteria isolated 

from a concentrated swine feeding operation,”  Environ Health Perspect  (2005) 113(2), 

http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/2004/7473/7473.pdf. 

50.  G. Hamscher, H.T. Pawelzick, S. Sczesny, et al., “Antibiotics in dust originating from a 

pig-fattening farm: a new source of health hazard for farmers?,”  Environ Health Perspect 

(2003) 111:1590–94. 

51.  USDA, Agricultural Research Service, “Action plan: Component V: pesticides and 

other synthetic organic compounds,” www.ars.usda.gov/research/programs/programs. 

htm?np_code=203&docid=324. 

52.  U.S. Geological Survey,  Herbicides in Rainfall across the Midwestern and Northeastern United 

States, 1990–91  (1998), http://ks.water.usgs.gov/Kansas/pubs/fact-sheets/fs.181-97.html. 

53.  NRC,  Air Emissions , p. 55. 

54.  J. Eilperin, “In California, agriculture takes center stage in pollution debate,”  Washington 

Post  Sept. 26, 2005:A1. 

Argument #6. Less Animal Suffering (pp. 113–139) 

1.  Congressional Record  July 9, 2001:S7310–11. 

2.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA NASS), 

Livestock Slaughter 2002 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), p.  1. 

3.  USDA NASS,  Poultry Slaughter 2002 Summary  (Washington, DC, 2003), pp.  2–3. 

4.  American Meat Institute, Animal handling frequently asked questions, www. 

animalhandling.org/faqs.htm. 

5.  D. Barboza, “Animals seeking happiness,”  New York Times  June 29, 2003:4-5. 

6.  V. Hirsch,  Legal Protections of the Domestic Chicken in the United States and Europe  (Michigan 

State University, Detroit College of Law, Animal Legal and Historical Center, 2003), 

www.animallaw.info/articles/dduschick.htm#3. 212  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

7.  For cattle, hogs, and sheep slaughtered in commercial plants and on farms: USDA 

NASS,  Livestock Slaughter 2004 Summary , http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/ 

livestock/pls-bban/lsan0305.pdf; for poultry: USDA NASS,  Poultry Slaughter 2004 Annual 

Summary , http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/poultry/ppy-bban/pslaan05. 

pdf. These numbers omit hundreds of millions of additional animals (mostly chickens) 

that die (due to injury or illness) or are killed (such as male chicks by the egg industry) 

before they got to slaughterhouses. 

8.  M. Scully,  Dominion: The Power of Man, the Suffering of Animals, and the Call to Mercy  (New 

York: St. Martin’s Griffon, 2002). 

9.  B.E. Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare  (Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1995), p. 100. 

10.  C.W. Arave and J.L. Albright, “Animal welfare issues: dairy,” in R.D. Reynells and 

B.R.  Eastwood, eds.,  Animal Welfare Issues Compendium: A Collection of 14 Discussion Papers 

(Washington, DC: USDA, Cooperative State Research Extension Education Service, 

Plant and Animal Production, Protection and Processing, 1997), www.nal.usda.gov/ 

awic/pubs/97issues.htm, p. 63; Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 102–03; and C. Phillips, 

Cattle Behaviour and Welfare,  2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2002), p. 211. 

11.  S.M. Abutarbush and O.M. Radostits, “Obstruction of the small intestine caused by a 

hairball in 2 young calves,”  Can Vet J  (2004) 45(4):324–25. 

12.  Phillips,  Cattle Behaviour .

13.  T. Field, “Effects of hot iron branding on value of cattle hides,”  The Final Report of the 

National Beef Quality Audit, 1991  (Englewood, CO: National Cattlemen’s Association, 

1992), p. 127; cited in Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 58. 

14.  Arave and Albright, “Dairy,” p. 60. 

15.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 61; and Rollin, university distinguished professor, Colorado 

State University, email to Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI), Aug. 24, 2004. 

16.  Arave and Albright, “Dairy,” p. 61. 

17.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 62. 

18.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 62–63. 

19.  R. Cobb, “Horns on domestic farm animals,” Working with Farm Animals course 

materials, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, http://classes.aces.uiuc.edu/ 

AnSci103/horns.html. 

20.  Arave and Albright, “Dairy,” p. 61. 

21.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 105. 

22.  Phillips,  Cattle Behaviour , p. 214. 

23.  Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries,  The Animal Welfare Act/The Animal Welfare 

Ordinance  (2004), www.sweden.gov.se/content/1/c6/01/89/74/356685f8.pdf; and R. Silvanic, 

“Dairy production in Sweden,” www.vetmed.iastate.edu/academics/international/ 

recenttrips/sweden2003/studentpapers/swedendairySilvanic.pdf. 

24.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 99. 

25.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 119. 

26.  D.E. Granstrom, “Agricultural (nonbiomedical) animal research outside the laboratory: 

a review of guidelines for institutional animal care and use committees,”  ILAR J  (2003) 

44(3): 206–10. 

27.  J.A. Mench and P.B. Siegel, “Animal welfare issues: poultry,” in Reynells and Eastwood, 

eds.,  Animal Welfare Issues Compendium , p. 105; and Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 134. 

28.  M.E. Ensminger,  Animal Science , 9th ed. (Danville, IL: Interstate Publishing, 1991), p. 184. Notes  • 213 

29.  The Mini Cooper is 142.8 by 75.8 inches, or 75.2 square feet. “Mini Features 

and Specs, 2003,” BMW of North America, www.miniusa.com/link/ourcars/ 

features/minicooper/exterior/dimensions/none. 

30.  S.L. Davis and P.R. Cheek, “Do domestic animals have minds and the ability to think? A 

provisional sample of opinions on the question,”  J Anim Sci  (1998) 76:2072–79. 

31.  S.A. Ewing, D.C. Lay, E. von Berell,  Farm Animal Well-Being: Stress Physiology, Animal 

Behavior, and Environmental Design  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1999), p. 222; 

Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 76, 91; and Alberta Pork, “What is a gestation crate?,” 

www.albertapork.com/news.aspx?NavigationID=1456. 

32.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 93. 

33.  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), FAOSTAT, http://apps. 

fao.org/faostat/collections?version=ext&hasbulk=0&subset=agriculture, accessed Aug. 

11, 2004; and Department for Environment and Rural Affairs, “Introduction to veterinary 

surveillance and emerging diseases,” in  Animal Health 2000; The Chief Veterinary Officer’s 

Report for 2000  (London, 2001), ch. A4. 

34.  J. Barker,  Safety in Swine Production Systems  (Raleigh: North Carolina Cooperative Extension 

Agency, 1996), www.bae.ncsu.edu/programs/extension/publicat/wqwm/pih104.html. 

35.  Compassion Over Killing, “About ISE,” www.isecruelty.com/aboutise.php. 

36.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 250. 

37.  United Egg Producers,  United Egg Producers Animal Husbandry Guidelines for U.S. Egg 

Laying Flocks, 2005 , 2nd ed., www.uepcertified.com/docs/2005_UEPanimal_welfare_ 

guidelines.pdf. 

38.  USDA, “USDA releases estimates of farm production losses,” Release No. 0385.05, Sept. 

20, 2005. 

39.  Scully,  Dominion .

40.  Mench and Siegel, “Poultry,” p. 101; and “Laying down minimum standards for the 

protection of laying hens,”  Official Journal of the European Communities , Council Directive 

1999/74/Ec, http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/1999/l_203/l_20319990803en00530057. 

pdf. 

41.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 119. 

42.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 120–26. 

43.  C. Druce and P. Lymbery,  Outlawed in Europe: Three Decades of Progress in Europe  (Animal 

Rights International, 2001), www.ari-online.org/pages/europe1.html. 

44.  S. Romero, “Virus takes a toll on Texas poultry industry,”  New York Times  May 16, 2003: 

C1; and “Avian flu found on Maryland farm,”  Washington Post  Mar. 7, 2004:C3. 

45.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 133. 

46.  Arave and Albright, “Dairy,” p. 64. 

47.  B. Faye, F. Lescourret, N. Dorr, et al., “Interrelationships between herd management 

practices and udder health status using canonical correspondence analysis,”  Prev Vet 

Med  (1997) 32:171–92. 

48.  Arave and Albright, “Dairy.” 

49.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 106; and Arave and Albright, “Dairy,” p. 59. 

50.  I.R. Dohoo, K. Leslie, L. DesCôteaux, et al., “A meta-analysis review of the effects of 

recombinant bovine somatotropin: 1. Methodology and effects on production, 2. Effects 

on animal health, reproductive performance, and culling,”  Can J Vet Res  (2003) 67(4):241-

64; and Monsanto, “Posilac,” www.monsantodairy.com/. 

51.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 125. 214  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

52.  United Egg Producers,  Animal Husbandry Guidelines .

53.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 103–04; Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-

Being , pp. 189–91; and Phillips,  Cattle Behavior , p. 210. 

54.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , pp. 189–91. 

55.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , pp. 189–91. 

56.  Phillips,  Cattle Behavior , p. 213. 

57.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 220. 

58.  Y. Hyun, M. Ellis, G. Riskowski, and R.W. Johnson, “Growth performance of pigs 

subjected to multiple concurrent environmental stressors,”  J Anim Sci  (1998) 76:721–77. 

59.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 186. 

60.  P.J. Holden and J. McGlone, “Animal welfare issues: swine,” in Reynells and Eastwood, 

Animal Welfare Issues Compendium , p. 127. 

61.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 75. 

62.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 220. 

63.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , pp. 179 and 194–95. 

64.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 119. 

65.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 121. 

66.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 122. 

67.  A.B. Webster, “Behavior of chickens” in D.D. Bell and W.D. Weaver, eds.,  Commercial Chicken 

Meat and Egg Production  (Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002), pp.  71–86. 

68.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 194. 

69.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 133. 

70.  Compassion Over Killing,  A COK Report: Animal Suffering in the Broiler Industry 

(Washington, DC, 2004). 

71.  C.J. Savory, K. Maros, and S.M. Rutter, “Assessment of hunger in growing broiler breeders 

in relation to a commercial restricted feeding programme,”  Animal Welfare  (1993) 2:131– 

52; and C.J. Savory and K. Maros, “Influence of degree of food restriction, age, and time 

of day on behaviour of broiler breeder chickens,”  Behavioural Processes  (1993) 29:179–90. 

72.  D. Sainsbury,  Animal Health , 2nd ed. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Science Ltd, 1998), p. 2. 

73.  Mench and Siegel, “Poultry,” p. 101. 

74.  Sainsbury,  Animal Health,  p. 2. 

75.  M.E. Ensminger and R.C. Perry,  Beef Cattle Science , 7th ed. (Danville, IL: Interstate 

Publishing, 1997), pp. 300–06; E. Schlosser,  Fast Food Nation  (New York: HarperCollins 

Perennial, 2002), p. 202; R.D. Shaver, “By-product feedstuffs in dairy cattle diets in the 

Upper Midwest,” www.wisc.edu/dysci/uwex/nutritn/pubs/ByProducts/ByproductFeed 

stuffs.html; and S.B.  Blezinger, “Energy issues affect choices for cattle feed ingredients,” 

Cattle Today Online , www.cattletoday.com/archive/2005/October/CT421.shtml. 

76.  USDA Economic Research Service (USDA ERS), www.ers.usda.gov/Data/ 

FoodConsumption/FoodAvailQueriable.aspx, accessed Aug. 11, 2005. 

77.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 111–13. 

78.  R.H. Poppenga, “Current environmental threats to animal health and productivity,”  Vet 

Clin North Am Food Anim Pract  (2000) 16:545–58. 

79.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),  Food and Drug Administration Pesticide 

Program: Residue Monitoring 2000  (Washington, DC, 2001), p. 12. 

80.  S.M. Rhind, “Endocrine disrupting compounds and farm animals: their properties, 

actions and routes of exposure,”  Domest Anim Endocrinol  (2002) 23:179–87. Notes  • 215 

81.  V. Ishler, J. Heinrichs, and G. Varga,  From Feed to Milk: Understanding Rumen Function,” 

Penn State Extension Circular 422 (1996), www.das.psu.edu/dairynutrition/documents/ 

rumen.pdf, p. 10; J.C. Plazier, “Feeding forage to prevent rumen acidosis in cattle” 

(University of Manitoba, 2002), www.umanitoba.ca/afs/fiw/020704.html; and J. Couzin, 

“Cattle diet linked to bacterial growth,”  Science  (1998) 281:1578. 

82.  F. Diez-Gonzalez, T.R. Callaway, M.G. Kizoulis, et al., “Grain feeding and the 

dissemination of acid-resistant  Escherichia coli  from cattle,”  Science  (1998) 281:1666–68; 

and J.B. Russell, F. Diez-Gonzalez, and G.N. Jarvis, “Potential effect of cattle diets on the 

transmission of pathogenic  Escherichia coli  to humans,”  Microbes Infect  (2000) 2:45–53. 

83.  “High-grain cattle diets cause drug need,”  Meat Processing  May 23, 2001, www.meatnews. 

com/index.cfm?fuseaction=Article&artNum=1157. 

84.  D. Griffin, L. Perino, and D. Hudson,  Feedlot Lameness  (Lincoln, NE: University of 

Nebraska, 1993), p. 1. 

85.  “Grain overload,”  Merck Veterinary Manual , 9th ed. (2005), www.merckvetmanual.com/ 

mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/21703.htm&word=high%2cgrain%2cdiet. 

86.  “Cattle die after feedlot seized,”  Toronto Star  Jan. 10, 2005:A4; and “Grain overload.” 

87.  “High-grain cattle diets cause drug need.” 

88.  Texas Cooperative Extension, “Animal disorders: bloat,” http://stephenville.tamu.edu/ 

~butler/foragesoftexas/animaldisorders/bloat.html. 

89.  “Cattle die after feedlot seized.” 

90.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , pp. 189–91. 

91.  Phillips,  Cattle Behavior , pp. 210–11. 

92.  Z.O. Müller, “Economic aspects of recycled wastes,” in  New Feed Resources: Proceedings of 

a Technical Consultation Held in Rome, 22–24 Nov. 1976  (FAO), www.fao.org/DOCREP/004/ 

X6503E/X6503E14.htm. 

93.  Plazier, “Feeding forage”; and J.B. Russell, F. Diez-Gonzalez, and G.N. Jarvis, “Effects of 

diet shifts on  Escherichia coli  in cattle,”  J Dairy Sci  (2000) 83(4):869. 

94.  The Innovation Group, “Sodium bicarbonate,” profile, www.the-innovation-group.com/ 

ChemProfiles/Sodium%20Bicarbonate.htm. 

95.  Rhind, “Endocrine disrupting compounds.” 

96.  H.B. Sewell,  Growth Stimulants (Implants) , University of Missouri-Columbia Agricultural 

Pub. G2090 (1993), http://extension.missouri.edu/explore/agguides/ansci/g02090.htm. 

97.  European Commission,  Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures Relating to 

Public Health: Assessment of Potential Risks to Human Health from Hormone Residues in Bovine 

Meat and Meat Products  (1999), http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/scv/out21_en.pdf. 

98.  FDA, Center for Veterinary Medicine, “The use of steroid hormones for growth 

promotion in food-producing animals” (2002), www.fda.gov/cvm/hormones.htm; USDA 

Foreign Agriculture Service, “A primer on beef hormones” (1999), http://www.useu.be/ 

issues/BeefPrimer022699.html; and World Health Organization,  Evaluation of Certain 

Veterinary Drug Residues in Food: 52nd Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on 

Food Additives  (2000), http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_893.pdf. 

99.  Confidential email to CSPI, May 30, 2006. 

100.  J. Raloff, “Hormones: here’s the beef,”  Science News  (2002) 161:10; E.F. Orlando, A.S.  Kolok, 

G. Binzcik, et al., “Endocrine-disrupting effects of cattle feedlot effluent on an aquatic 

sentinel species, the fathead minnow,”  Environ Health Perspect  (2004) 112(5):A270; and 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Funding opportunities: fate and effects of 

hormones in waste from concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOS),” http:// 

es.epa.gov/ncer/rfa/2006/2006_star_cafos.html. 216  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

101.  E.F. Orlando, reproductive biologist, Florida Atlantic University, email to CSPI, May 16, 

2006. 

102.  E. Weise, “Iowa, Minnesota are latest to test for dioxin in animal-feed probe,”  USA Today 

Mar. 26, 2003:9D. 

103.  J. Lee, “Sewer sludge spread on fields is fodder for lawsuits,”  New York Times  June 26, 

2003:A20. 

104.  R.L. Mahler, P. Ernestine, and R. Taylor,  Nitrate and Groundwater  (Moscow, ID: University 

of Idaho, 2002), www.uidaho.edu/wq/wqpubs/cis872.html. 

105.  D.G. McNeil Jr., “KFC supplier accused of cruelty to animals,”  New York Times  July 20, 

2004:C2; and Pub. L. No. 95-445, 92 Stat. 1069 (1978). 

106.  As cited in Poppenga, “Current environmental threats.” 

107.  D. Grady and D.G. McNeil Jr, “Rules issued on animal feed and use of disabled cattle,” 

New York Times  Jan. 27, 2004:A12. 

108.  D.A. Shields and K.A. Mathews,  Interstate Livestock Species  (Washington, DC: USDA ERS, 

2003), p. 4. 

109.  Ewing, Lay, and von Berrell,  Farm Animal Well-Being , p. 241. 

110.  Shields and Mathews,  Interstate Livestock , p. 4. 

111.  N.G. Gregory,  Animal Welfare and Meat Science  (New York: CABI Publishing, 1998), p. 18. 

112.  T. Grandin, “Perspectives on transportation issues: the importance of having physically 

fit cattle and pigs” (2000), www.grandin.com/behaviour/perspectives.transportation. 

issues.html. 

113.  S.D. Eischer, “Transportation of cattle in the dairy industry: current research and future 

directions,”  J Dairy Sci  (2001) 84(suppl.):E19–23. 

114.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 106. 

115.  J.F. Currin and W.D. Whittier,  Feeder and Stocker Health and Management Practices 

(Blacksburg, VA: Virginia Cooperative Extension, 2000), p. 1. 

116.  N.R. Hartwig, “Bovine respiratory disease” (Iowa Beef Industry Council), www.iabeef. 

org/Content/brd.aspx. 

117.  Gregory,  Animal Welfare , p. 35; and D.G. McNeil Jr., “Inquiry finds lax federal inspections 

at kosher meat plant,”  New York Times  Mar. 10, 2006:A13. 

118.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , p. 135. 

119.  L. Compa,  Blood, Sweat, and Fear: Workers’ Rights in U.S. Meat and Poultry Plants  (New 

York: Human Rights Watch, 2004), p. 34. 

120.  World Society for the Protection of Animals,  Industrial Animal Agriculture: The Next 

Global Health Crisis?  (London, 2004), p. 10. 

121.  Compa,  Blood, Sweat, and Fear , p. 40. 

122.  J. Motavalli, “The case against meat,”  E/Environ Mag  (2002) 13(1):5. 

123.  Compa,  Blood, Sweat, and Fear , pp. 33, 38–40, 42–43. 

124.  S. Greenhouse, “Rights group condemns meatpackers on job safety,”  New York Times 

Jan.  26, 2005:A13. 

125.  Schlosser,  Fast Food Nation , p. 178. 

126.  T. Grandin,  Survey of Federally Inspected Beef, Veal, Pork, and Sheep Slaughter Plants 

(Washington, DC: USDA Agricultural Research Service, 1997). 

127.  Gregory,  Animal Welfare , p. 15; and Grandin,  Stunning and Handling , tables 1–3. 

128.  Mench and Siegel, “Poultry,” p. 104. Notes  • 217 

129.  Humane Farming Association, “HFA’s petition to Washington State, affidavit #16” (2005), 

www.hfa.org/hot_topic/wash_petition2.html. 

130.  Rollin,  Farm Animal Welfare , pp. 69–70. 

131.  M. Warner, “Sharpton joins with an animal activist group in calling for a boycott of 

KFC,”  New York Times  Feb. 2, 2005:C1. 

132.  Mench and Siegel, “Poultry,” p. 104. 

133.  U.S. Government Accountability Office,  Humane Methods of Slaughter Act: USDA Has 

Addressed Some Problems but Still Faces Enforcement Challenges  (2004), www.gao.gov/ 

new.items/d04247.pdf, p. 1; Pub. L. No. 95–445, 92 Stat. 1069 (1978); and E. Williamson, 

“Humane Society to sue over poultry slaughtering,”  Washington Post  Nov. 21, 2005:B2. 

134.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources and Environmental Indicators  (Washington, DC, 2003), p. 

3.1-9. 

135.  USDA ERS,  Agricultural Resources , p. 3.1-12. 

136.  National Research Council (NRC),  The Future Role of Pesticides in U.S. Agriculture 

(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2000), p. 19. 

137.  See American Beekeeping Federation, 2006 ABF Resolution CR12, pesticide registration 

process, http://abfnet.org/?page_id=42; and North American Pollinator Protection 

Campaign, “Plans and projects,” www.nappc.org/plansEn.html. 

138.  NRC,  Future Role of Pesticides , p. 82. 

139.  M. Deinlein,  When It Comes to Pesticides, Birds Are Sitting Ducks , Smithsonian Migratory 

Bird Center Fact Sheet No. 8, http://nationalzoo.si.edu/ConservationAndScience/ 

MigratoryBirds/Fact_Sheets/fxsht8.pdf. 

140.  NRC,  Future Role of Pesticides , p. 80. 

Changing Your Own Diet (pp. 143–150) 

1.  American Cancer Society, “The complete guide—nutrition and physical activity,” 

www.cancer.org/docroot/PED/content/PED_3_2X_Diet_and_Activity_Factors_That_ 

Affect_Risks.asp; American Diabetes Association, “Evidence-based nutrition principles 

and recommendations for the treatment and prevention of diabetes and related 

complications,  Diabetes Care  (2002) 25:S50–60; A.H. Lichtenstein, L.J. Appel, M. Brands, 

et al., ”Diet and lifestyle recommendations revision 2006: a scientific statement from 

the American Heart Association Nutrition Committee,”  Circulation  (2006) 114; American 

Heart Association, “Our 2006 diet and lifestyle recommendations,” www.americanheart. 

org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=851; American Institute for Cancer Research/World 

Cancer Research Fund,  Food, Nutrition, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective 

(Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer Research, 1997); U.S. Department of 

Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture,  Dietary Guidelines for 

Americans  (2005), www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2005/document/pdf/DGA2005. 

pdf; and World Health Organization, “Obesity and overweight” (Geneva, 2003), www. 

who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/facts/obesity/en/. 

2.  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI),  Facts about the DASH Eating Plan 

(rev. 2003), www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/hbp/dash/new_dash.pdf. 

3.  Adapted from NHLBI,  DASH Eating Plan , p. 5. 

4.  American Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada, “Position of the American 

Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada: vegetarian diets,”  J Am Diet Assoc  (2003) 

103:748–65; and G.E. Fraser,  Diet, Life Expectancy, and Chronic Disease: Studies of Seventh-

day Adventists and Other Vegetarians  (New York: Oxford, 2003). 

5.  American Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada, “Vegetarian diets.” 218  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

6.  V. Messina, V. Melina, and A.R. Mangels, “A new food guide for North 

American vegetarians,”  Can J Diet Prac Res  (2003) 64:82–86, www.dietitians. 

ca/news/downloads/Vegetarian_Food_Guide_for_NA.pdf. 

7.  Adapted from Messina, Melina, and Mangels, “New food guide.” 

8.  R. Obeid, J. Geisel, H. Schorr, et al., “The impact of vegetarianism on some 

hematological parameters,”  Eur J Haem  (2002) 69:275–79; C. Lamberg-Allardt, M. 

Karkkainen, R.  Seppanen, et al., “Low serum 25–hydroxyvitamin D concentrations 

and secondary hyperparathyroidism in middle-aged white strict vegetarians,”  Am J 

Clin Nutr  (1993) 58:684–89; and E.H. Haddad, L.S. Berk, J.D. Kettering, et al., “Dietary 

intake and biochemical, hematologic, and immune status of vegans compared with non-

vegetarians,”  Am J Clin Nutr  (1999) 70(suppl):586S–93S. 

9.  Calculations were made using the Eating Impact Calculator on the Center for Science in 

the Public Interest’s Eating Green web site: www.eatinggreen.org. 

Changing Government Policies (pp. 151–168) 

1.  M. Pollan,  The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals  (East Rutherford, NJ: 

Penguin Press, 2006). 

2.  L.H. Baumgard, J.K. Sangster, and D.E. Bauman, “Milk fat synthesis in dairy cows is 

progressively reduced by increasing supplemental amounts of trans-10, cis-12 conjugated 

linoleic acid (CLA),”  J Nutr  (2001) 131:1764–69. 

3.  A.M. Fearon, C.S. Mayne, J.A.M. Beattie, et al., “Effect of level of oil inclusion in the diet 

of dairy cows at pasture on animal performance and milk composition and properties,” 

J Sci Food Agric  (2004) 84:497–504. 

4.  Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI),  Anyone’s Guess: The Need for Nutrition 

Labeling at Fast-Food and Other Chain Restaurants  (2003), www.cspinet.org/new/pdf/ 

anyone_s_guess_final_web.pdf. 

5.  Associated Press, “EPA exempts factory farms from high pollution penalties,” Jan. 31, 

2006. 

6.  American Public Health Association, “2003–7 Precautionary moratorium on new 

concentrated animal feed operations,”  Association News , www.apha.org/legislative/ 

policy/2003/2003-007.pdf. 

7.  Farm Foundation,  The Future of Animal Agriculture in North America  (Oak Brook, IL, 2006), 

www.farmfoundation.org/projects/04-32ReportTranslations.htm. 

8.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “Funding opportunities: fate and 

effects of hormones in waste from concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOS),” 

http://es.epa.gov/ncer/rfa/2006/2006_star_cafos.html. 

9.  “The curse of factory farms,”  New York Times  Aug. 30, 2002:A18. 

10.  EPA,  Development Document for the Final Revisions to the National Pollutant Discharge 

Elimination System Regulation and the Effluent Guidelines for Concentrated Animal Feeding 

Operations  (2002), accessible at http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/afo/cafodocs.cfm, pp. 8-1–11; 

and Chesapeake Bay Foundation,  Manure’s Impact on Rivers, Streams, and the Chesapeake 

Bay  (Annapolis, 2004), p.  18. A soil scientist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture 

(USDA) who has studied phytase in hogs says that CAFO producers use whatever 

feed is provided to them by the feed mill and/or the integrator. An obstacle is that hog 

feed is pelletized, which can render the phytase enzyme less effective, but innovative 

technology might solve that problem. D.R. Smith, Ph.D., USDA, Agricultural Research 

Service, email to CSPI, Sept. 10, 2004. 

11.  EPA,  Development Document , pp. 8-1–11; and Chesapeake Bay Foundation,  Manure’s Impact .Notes  • 219 

12.  E. Brzostek, Environmental Quality Incentives Program program specialist, USDA, 

National Resources Conservation Service, email to CSPI, Dec. 22, 2005. 

13.  Environmental Working Group,  California Water Subsidies  (2004), www.ewg. 

org/reports/watersubsidies/. 

14.  C. Dimitri and L. Oberholtzer, “EU and U.S. organic markets face strong demand under 

different policies,”  Amber Waves  (2006) 4(1):12–19. 

15.  V. Frances,  Fair Agricultural Chemical Taxes  (Washington, DC: Friends of the Earth, 1999), 

www.foe.org/res/pubs/pdf/factreport.pdf. 

16.  Soil and Water Conservation Society,  Sharing the Cost: Creating a Working Land Conservation 

Trust Fund Through a Tax on Agricultural Inputs?  (Ankeny, IA: Soil and Water Conservation 

Society, 2003). This analysis notes that two federal programs, the Pittman-Robertson Act 

and the Dingell-Johnson Act, fund wildlife and fisheries conservation, management, 

education, and restoration programs through taxes on hunting and fishing equipment. 

Thus, there are precedents for collecting taxes from certain sectors, distributing funds 

back to the states, and then ensuring that the sectors that pay the taxes benefit from the 

programs that are funded. 

17.  Soil and Water Conservation Society,  Sharing the Cost .

18.  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,  Manure Policy and MINAS: 

Regulating Nitrogen and Phosphorus Surpluses in Agriculture of the Netherlands  (2005), 

http://appli1.oecd.org/olis/2004doc.nsf/linkto/com-env-epoc-ctpa-cfa(2004)67-final; and 

R.  Naylor, H. Steinfeld, W. Falcon, et al., “Losing the links between livestock and land,” 

Science  (2005) Dec. 9:1621–22. 

19.  Farm subsidies are discussed more fully in the following documents: USDA Economic 

Research Service, “The 2002 Farm Bill: provisions and economic implications,” www. 

ers.usda.gov/Features/farmbill/; D.E. Ray, speaker,  Agricultural Policy for the 21st Century 

and the Legacy of the Wallaces , the John Pesek Colloquium on Sustainable Agriculture, 

Mar. 3–4, 2004, www.wallacechair.iastate.edu/endeavors/pesekcolloquium/ISU-Pesek-

Pkg--04-Bro3.pdf; J.E. Frydenlund,  The Erosion of Freedom to Farm , Backgrounder 1523 

(Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation, 2002), www.heritage.org/Research/Agriculture/ 

BG1523.cfm?renderforprint=1; and Environmental Working Group, Farm subsidy 

database, www.ewg.org:16080/farm/findings.php, accessed May 6, 2006. 

20.  The $500 million is the shortfall between what ranchers pay and what the federal 

government pays for range management. Grazing fees to the U.S. Forest Service and 

Bureau of Land Management (BLM) raise about $6 million a year. However, in 2000–01, 

the total direct cost, paid by taxpayers, of range management was $132 million. Indirect 

costs to both agencies for land management planning, habitat management, forest, 

rangeland research, and other costs in 2001 were as high as $176 million for the Forest 

Service and $104 million for BLM. The remainder of the federal subsidy is costs assumed 

by other agencies. K. Moskowitz and C. Romaniello,  Assessing the Full Cost of the Federal 

Grazing Program  (Tucson: Center for Biological Diversity, 2002), www.biologicaldiversity. 

org/swcbd/Programs/grazing/Assessing_the_full_cost.pdf. 

21.  “Laying down minimum standards for the protection of laying hens,”  Official Journal 

of the European Communities , Council Directive 1999/74/Ec, http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/ 

pri/en/oj/dat/1999/l_203/l_20319990803en00530057.pdf; and FARM, “Farmed animal 

treatment,” fact sheet, www.wfad.org/about/treatment.htm. 

22.  M. Scully,  Dominion: The Power of Man, the Suffering of Animals, and the Call to Mercy  (New 

York: St. Martin’s Griffon, 2002). 

23.  Farm Animal Welfare Council, www.fawc.org.uk/freedoms.htm. 220  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

Appendix A. A Bestiary of Foodborne Pathogens (pp. 171–176) 

1.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), “ Campylobacter  infections: technical 

information,” www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/ diseaseinfo/campylobacter_t.htm, accessed 

Oct. 1, 2003. 

2.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (FDA 

CFSAN),  Bad Bug Book: Campylobacter jejuni  (1992), www.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/chap4.html. 

3.  FDA CFSAN,  Bad Bug Book: Campylobacter jejuni ; Guillain-Barré Syndrome Foundation 

International,  GBS: An Overview  (Wynnewood, PA, 2002), www.guillain-barre.com/ 

overview.html; and J.C. Buzby, T. Roberts, and B. Allos,  Estimated Annual Costs of 

Campylobacter -Associated Guillain-Barré Syndrome , Agricultural Economics Report No.  756 

(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 1997). 

4.  I.V. Wesley, S.J. Wells, K.M. Harmon, et al., “Fecal shedding of  Campylobacter  and 

Arcobacter  spp. in dairy cattle,”  Appl Environ Microbiol  (2000) 66(5):1994–2000. 

5.  CDC, “ Campylobacter ”; and A. Hingley,  Campylobacter: Low Profile Bug Is Food Poisoning 

Leader  (Washington, DC: FDA, 1999), www.fda.gov/fdac/features/1999/599_bug.html. 

6.  FDA, “Enroflaxin for poultry; opportunity for hearing,” Docket No. 00N-1571,  Fed Reg 

(2000) 65(211):64954–65, www.fda.gov/OHRMS/DOCKETS/98fr/103100a.htm. 

7.  D. Vugia, A. Cronquist, J. Hadler, et al., “Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of 

infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food—10 states, United States, 

2005,”  MMWR Weekly  (2006) 55(14):392–95. 

8.  FDA CFSAN,  Bad Bug Book: Clostridium perfringens , www.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/chap11. 

html. 

9.  P.S. Mead, L. Slutsker, V. Dietz, et al., “Food-related illness and death in the United 

States,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases  (1999) 5:607–25; and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

Economic Research Service (USDA ERS),  Economics of Food-borne Disease  (Washington, 

DC: Government Printing Office, 2003). 

10.  B. Van Voris, “Jack in the Box ends  E. coli  suits,”  National Law Journal  Nov. 17, 1997. 

11.  USDA, Food Safety and Inspection Service (USDA FSIS), “Beef  … from farm to table,” 

meat preparation fact sheet (2003), www.fsis.usda.gov/Fact_Sheets/Beef_from_Farm_ 

to_Table/index.asp. 

12.  A.V. Tutenel, D. Pierard, J. Van Hoof, et al., “Molecular characterization of  Escherichia 

coli  O157 contamination routes in a cattle slaughterhouse,”  J Food Prot  (2003) 66(9):1564– 

69; and J.M. McEvoy, A.M. Doherty, J.J. Sheridan, et al., “The prevalence and spread 

of  Escherichia coli  O157:H7 at a commercial beef abattoir,”  J Appl Microbiol  (2003) 

95(2):255–66. 

13.  Vugia et al. “Preliminary FoodNet data.” 

14.  “Meat plants faulted on safety rules,”  Washington Post  Feb. 5, 2003:A24. 

15.  J.A. Crump, A.C. Sulka, A.J. Langer, et al., “An outbreak of  Escherichia coli  O157:H7 

infections among visitors to a dairy farm,”  N Eng. J Med  (2002) 347(8):555–60; and CDC, 

“Outbreaks of  Escherichia coli  O157:H7 infections among children associated with farm 

visits—Pennsylvania and Washington, 2000,”  MMWR  (2001) 50:293–97. 

16.  “More than 1,000 sickened in deadly  E. coli  outbreak,”  Orlando Sentinel  Sept. 18, 1999:A16. 

17.  CDC, “Listeriosis: technical information,” www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/ 

listeriosis_t.htm, accessed Oct. 1, 2003. 

18.  Vugia et al. “Preliminary FoodNet data.” 

19.  FDA CFSAN,  Bad Bug Book: Listeria monocytogenes , www.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/chap6. 

html 92); FDA CFSAN and USDA FSIS, “Preventing foodborne listeriosis,” background 

document (1992), http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/fsislist.html; and FDA CFSAN and Notes  • 221 

USDA FSIS, “ Listeria monocytogenes  risk assessment questions and answers,” www. 

foodsafety.gov/~dms/lmr2qa.html. 

20.  P.A. Beloeil, P. Fravalo, C. Chauvin, et al., “ Listeria  spp. contamination in piggeries: 

comparison of three sites of environmental swabbing for detection and risk factor 

hypothesis,”  J Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet Public Health  (2003) 50:155–60. 

21.  CDC, “Listeriosis: general information,” www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/ 

listeriosis_g.htm, accessed Oct. 1, 2003. Outbreaks caused by vegetables are so rare that 

the Partnership for Food Safety Education does not even list vegetables as a source for 

Listeria . Partnership for Food Safety Education, “Organisms that can bug you: causes 

and symptoms” (2000), www.fightbac.org/content/view/14/21/. 

22.  B. Rowland, “Listeriosis,” at Health A to Z: Your Family Health Site (2002), www. 

healthatoz.com/healthatoz/Atoz/ency/listeriosis.jsp. 

23.  USDA FSIS, “Listeriosis and pregnancy: what is your risk?,” foodborne illness and 

disease fact sheet (2001), www.fsis.usda.gov/Fact_Sheets/Listeriosis_and_Pregnancy_ 

What_is_Your_Risk/index.asp; and Mayo Clinic, “Meningitis,” www.mayoclinic.com/ 

health/meningitis/DS00118/dsection=3, accessed Dec. 28, 2005. 

24.  CDC, National Center for Infectious Diseases, “Fact sheet: variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob 

Disease” (2003), www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/vcjd/factsheet_nvcjd.htm, accessed Dec. 29, 

2005. 

25.  National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, “Cattlemen dispute report saying mad cow disease 

may be in U.S.,” www.beefusa.org/newscattlemendisputereportsayingmadcowdisease 

maybeinus9864.aspx, accessed Dec. 29, 2005. 

26.  National Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance Unit, “CJD figures” (Edinburgh: 

Western General Hospital), www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/figures.htm, accessed May 2, 2006; 

and M. Enserink, “After the crisis: more questions about prions,”  Science  (2005) 

Dec.  16:1756–58. 

27.  N. Hunter, “Scrapie and experimental BSE in sheep,”  Br Med Bull  (2003) 66:171–83; and 

M.E. Bruce, “TSE strain variation,”  Br Med Bull  (2003) 66:99–108. 

28.  D. Taylor, “Inactivation of the BSE agent,”  C R Acad Sci III  (2002) 325:75–76; and H. Baron 

and S.B. Prusiner, “Prion diseases,” in D.O. Fleming and D.L. Hunt, eds.,  Biological Safety, 

Principles and Practices  (Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2000), pp. 187–208. 

29.  CDC, “BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), or mad cow disease,” www.cdc.gov/ 

ncidod/dvrd/bse/, accessed Nov. 22, 2005. 

30.  A. Binkley, “Canada, U.S. grapple with new BSE recommendations,”  Food Chem 

News  (2003) 45:27; and J. Marsden,  AMI Fact Sheet: Meat Derived by Advanced 

Meat Recovery  (Washington, DC: American Meat Institute, 2002), www.amif.org/ 

FactSheetAdvancedMeatRecovery.pdf. 

31.  MedicineNet.com, “Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD), www.medicinenet.com/ 

variant_creutzfeldt-jakob_disease/article.htm, accessed Dec. 23, 2005. 

32.  USDA FSIS, “Beef.” 

33.  CDC, “Salmonellosis: technical information,” www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/ 

salmonellosis_t.htm, accessed Dec. 28, 2005; and CDC, “Salmonellosis”; and USDA ERS, 

“Briefing room: economics of foodborne disease— Salmonella “ (2003), www.ers.usda. 

gov/Briefing/FoodborneDisease/Salmonella.htm, accessed Oct. 16, 2003. 

34.  University of Washington School of Medicine, “Reiter’s syndrome,” www.orthop. 

washington.edu/uw/tabID__3376/ItemID__52/mid__10313/Articles/Default.aspx, 

accessed Oct. 17, 2003. 

35.  Vugia et al., “Preliminary FoodNet data.” 

36.  USDA FSIS,  Focus on Beef  (2002), www.fsis.usda.gov/oa/pubs/focusbeef.htm; 

K.  Todar, “ Salmonella  and salmonellosis,” in  Todar’s Online Textbook of Bacteriology 222  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

(University of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Bacteriology), www. 

textbookofbacteriology.net/salmonella.html, accessed Dec. 29, 2005; J. Ackerman, “Food: 

How safe? How altered?,”  Nat Geog  May 2002:2–50; and D. Cole, L. Todd, and S. Wing, 

“Concentrated swine feeding operations and public health: a review of occupational 

and community health effects,”  Env Health Perspect  (2000) 108(8):685–89. 

37.  USDA, Animal Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA APHIS),  Info Sheet: Salmonella 

in United States Feedlots  (Fort Collins, CO, 2001), www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/ncahs/ 

nahms/feedlot/feedlot99/FD99salmonella.pdf; S.J. Wells, P.J. Fedorka-Cray, D.A.  Dargatz, 

et al., “Fecal shedding of  Salmonella  spp. by dairy cows on farm and at cull cow 

markets,”  J Food Prot.  (2001) 64:3–11; J.S. Bailey, N.J. Stern, P. Fedorka-Cray, et al., “Sources 

and movement of  Salmonella  through integrated poultry operations: a multistate 

epidemiological investigation,”  J Food Prot  (2001) 64(11):1690–97; and USDA APHIS, 

“Shedding of  Salmonella  by finisher hogs in the U.S.” (1997), www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ 

ceah/ncahs/nahms/swine/swine95/sw95salm.pdf. 

38.  D.G. White, S. Zhao, R. Sudler, et al., “The isolation of antibiotic-resistant  Salmonella  from 

retail ground meats,”  New Engl J Med  (2001) 345:1147–53. 

39.  CDC, “ Salmonella enteriditis : general information” (2005), www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/ 

diseaseinfo/salment_g.htm, accessed Dec. 29, 2005. 

40.  USDA National Animal Health Monitoring System, “Salmonella enterica serotype 

enteritidis in table egg layers in the U.S.” (2000), www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/ncahs/ 

nahms/poultry/layers99/lay99se.pdf, p. 1. 

41.  P.S. Holt, “Molting and  Salmonella enterica  serovar  enteritidis  infection: the problem and 

some solutions,”  Poult Sci  (2003) 82:1008–10. 

42.  FDA CFSAN,  Bad Bug Book: Staphylococcus aureus , www.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/chap3. 

html; Predicala et al., “Bioaerosols in swine barns”; and M. Hajmeer, “ Staphylococcus 

aureus “ (Davis, CA: University of California, Department of Population Health and 

Reproduction, 2005), www.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/PHR/PHR150/2005/aureus.PDF. 

43.  FDA CFSAN,  Bad Bug Book: Staphylococcus aureus .

44.  Partnership for Food Safety Education,  Ten Least Wanted Foodborne Pathogens  (2003), 

www.fightbac.org/10least.cfm, accessed July 1, 2004. 

45.  CDC,  Toxoplasma Infection  (Division of Parasitic Diseases, 2003), www.cdc.gov/ncidod/ 

dpd/parasites/toxoplasmosis/2004_PDF_Toxoplasmosis.pdf; and J.D. Kravetz and 

D.G.  Federman, “Toxoplasmosis in pregnancy,”  Am J Med  (2005) 118:212–16. 223 

# Photo Credits 

We thank the following sources for their courtesy in providing images for 

this book. 

Animal Welfare Institute, www.awionline.org –  p. xii 

Compassion Over Killing –  pp. 119 (top), 122 

Corbis –  cover photo; pp. 117, 129 

Courtesy of Cynthia Goldsmith, Jacqueline Katz, and Sherif R. Zaki, Centers for 

Disease Control and Prevention  – p. 67 

Coronary Health Improvement Project –  p. 27 

Dale Farm Limited –  p. 155 (top) 

Augustine G. DiGiovanna, Salisbury University (© 2004, used with permission) 

– p. 30 

Farm Sanctuary –  pp. 113, 120, 121, 124, 125 

Janet Green –  pp. 93, 111 

Courtesy  Not Just For Vegetarians—Delicious Homestyle Cooking, The Meatless Way 

by Geraldine Hartman –  pp. 22, 57, 149 

Jason Hoverman, University of Pittsburgh –  p. 85 

Barbara Hunt –  p. 147 

Courtesy of the Kowalcyk family –  p. 63 

Milk Processor Education Program –  p. 157 



























224  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration –  p. 98 

National Cancer Institute (Renee Comet, photographer) –  p. 18 

National Dairy Council –  p. 44 

National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Dis -

ease, Rocky Mountain Laboratories –  p. 62 

National Food Administration of Sweden –  p. 155 (bottom) 

National Park Service –  p. 137 

Photodisc –  frontispiece, p. 147 

Poplar Spring Animal Sanctuary –  p. 166 

Joe Skorupa, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service –  p. 95 

U.S. Congress, Architect of the Capitol –  p. 151 

U.S. Department of Agriculture –  pp. 103, 133, 164 

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service –  frontispiece 

(Michael Macneil, photographer) , pp. vii, xiv, 9, 19, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 39, 42, 47, 50, 

51, 53, 72, 73, 119 (bottom), 131, 138, 143, 153, 162 (top) 

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service –  pp. 

ix, xi, xiii, 10, 13, 65, 69, 71, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 83, 87, 91, 94, 101, 106, 112, 116, 139, 

159, 161, 162 (bottom), 163 

Prof. Kurt Wüthrich, ETH Zürich –  p. 66 



























225 

# Index 

Abbott Laboratories, 69 

Acid rain, 108 

Advanced meat recovery (AMR), 174 

Advertising, 157 

Agricultural Health Study (National 

Cancer Institute), 54 

Agricultural practices.  See also  Fertiliz -

ers; Livestock production; Soil 

affecting non-farm animals, 136–38 

compaction and, 78 

environmental damage from, xii, 77, 

94–100 

erosion and, 76–77 

global, xiii 

of small vs. large farms, 152 

AgriProcessors Inc., 134 

Air pollution 

ammonia and, 104–06 

effects of, 106–07 

fertilizers and, 108–09, 161 

from manure, 104–06, 109–10, 158 

methane and, 107 

nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide 

and, 108 

nitrous oxide and, 107–08 

odor and, 110 

overview of, 103–04 

particulate matter and, 106, 109, 111 

pesticides and, 112, 161 

recommendations to prevent, 159, 

161–62 

volatile organic compounds and, 

106, 110 

Alatorre, José, 103 

Algal blooms, 98 

Alpha-linolenic acid, 11, 51 

American Academy of Pediatrics, 57, 69 

American Beekeeping Federation, 138 

American Cancer Society, 42, 57, 144 

American Diabetes Association, 144 

American Dietetic Association, 147 

American Grass Fed Beef, 10 

American Heart Association, 11, 46, 57, 144 

American Institute for Cancer Research, 144 

American Meat Institute, 114 

American Medical Association, 69 

American Public Health Association, 

69, 158 226  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

American Society of Agricultural Engi -

neers, 78 

Ammonia 

in air, 104–07 

in water, 99–100 

Ammonium nitrate, 80 

Anderson, James W., 37, 39 

Animal feed 

antibiotics in, 129, 130 

grain-based, 128–30 

overview of, 127–28 

pesticides in, 130, 132 

recommendations to reduce use of, 

163, 166 

rendered farm animals in, 133 

sewage sludge in, 132 

Animal products.  See also  Beef; Dairy 

products; Pigs/pork; Poultry;  specific 

products 

environmental contaminants in, 

52–56 

fats and cholesterol in, 20, 40–41 

heterocyclic amines and polycyclic 

aromatic hydrocarbons in, 52 

mercury in, 56 

promotion of unhealthy, 157 

Animal protein 

irrigation water to produce, 88, 89 

sources of, 18 

Animals 

effect of fertilizers and manure on, 

96, 97 

legislation affecting, 114, 132, 133 

number of slaughtered, 112 

protections for laboratory, 114 

Animal welfare 

agricultural practices and, 136–38, 

166–67 

diet and, 127–33, 144, 147 

on farms, 115–27 

overview of, x, 113–15 

slaughterhouse procedures and, 

134–36 

suggestions to improve, 138–39, 

144–45, 147, 148, 167–68 

transport methods and, 133–34 

Animal welfare laws, 114 

Antacids, 130 

Antibiotics 

in animal feed, 129, 130 

in livestock, 3, 69, 70, 157 

in manure contaminate water, 100 

resistance to, 68–70 

Antioxidants, 51 

Araisa, Enrique, 103 

Arsenic pollution, 82, 84 

Atrazine, 53, 84, 85, 100, 112 

Avian flu, 67, 70–71, 123 

Bacillus,  67 

Bacteria.  See also  specific bacteria 

in cattle, 129 

foodborne illness from, viii, 60–66 

in particulate matter, 111 

Battery cages, 121, 122, 167 

Bayer Corporation, 69 

Beans.  See  Legumes 

Beef.  See also  Animal products; Cattle; 

Livestock production 

cancer and, 3, 8, 10, 42–43 

consumption of, 18 

foodborne illness from, 61, 62 

grain- vs. grass-fed, xi, 3–13 

heart disease and, 8, 10, 41 

hypertension and, 41–42 

nutrition labeling for, 155 

reducing fat content in, 154 

USDA grades for, 5–9 

water use to produce, 88–89, 93–94, 

101 

Beta-carotene, 51 

Biosolids fertilizer, 84, 85 

Bird flu.  See  Avian flu 

Blue baby syndrome, 132 

Bone density 

fruits and vegetables and, 35–36 

potassium and, 50 

Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 

(BSE).  See  Mad cow disease 

Branding, 116 

Brown, Lester, xiii 

Bycatch, 115 

Byrd, Robert, 113 

Calcium, 43 

Campylobacter jejuni,  60, 62, 68, 69, 

171–72 

Cancer.  See also  specific types of cancer 

among agricultural workers, 54–55 

in animals, 132 

beta-carotene supplements and, 51 Index  • 227 

conjugated linoleic acid and, 11 

dairy products and, 44–45 

diet and, 17–18, 24, 29 

fish and, 46 

fruits and vegetables and, 33–35 

health-care costs and, 21 

obesity and, 18 

pesticides and, 53–55 

red meat and, 3, 8, 10, 42–43 

selenium and, 51 

Carbajal, Jesus Soto, 135 

Carbohydrates, 30 

Carbon dioxide, x 

Cargill, 164 

Carotenoids, 51 

Castration, 114, 116–17, 131 

Cattle.  See also  Beef; Dairy prod -

ucts; Livestock production; Milk 

production 

antibiotics use in, 3, 69, 70, 157 

branding of, 116 

carcass traits of, 5–7 

castration of, 116–17 

confinement of, 119 

dehorning of, 118 

fat content breeds of, 6 

hormones in beef, 117, 124, 131, 160 

hormones in dairy, 123 

neurotic behavior in, 124–25 

reducing fat content of, 154 

separation of calves from mothers 

and, 115–16 

tail docking of, 118 

Cattlemen’s Beef Board, 9 

Center for Biosecurity (University of 

Pittsburgh), 71 

Center for Science in the Public Interest 

(CSPI), 20, 56, 61, 149, 177 

Centers for Disease Control and Pre -

vention (CDC), 60, 61, 69, 70 

Central Arizona Project, 92 

Central Utah Project, 92 

Central Valley Project (California), 92, 161 

Chemical fertilizers, 80–82, 84, 85.  See 

also  Fertilizers 

Chickens.  See  Poultry 

Children 

antibiotic-resistant infections and, 69 

pesticides and, 55, 56 

Cholesterol level 

animal products and, 40–41 

diet and, 23–25 

eggs and, 45, 46 

heart disease and, 20, 27 

Ciguatoxin, 47 

Citrus fruits, 36 

Clean Air Act of 1990, 97, 159 

Clean Water Act permits, 160 

Clostridium perfringens,  172 

Coleman, 9 

Colon cancer 

diet and, 24 

red meat and, 3, 8, 10, 42 

Community Right-to-Know laws, 159 

Compaction, 78 

Concentrated animal feeding opera -

tions (CAFOs), 99, 158–60 

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), 10–11, 155 

Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) 

(Department of Agriculture), 79 

Conservation tillage, 79 

Corn production, 164–65 

Coronary Health Improvement Project 

(CHIP), 28–29 

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 66, 174 

Cruciferous vegetables, 36 

Cryptosporidium parvum,  65 

Dairy products.  See also  Animal prod -

ucts; Milk production 

cancer and, 44–45 

consumption of, 18 

fats and cholesterol in, 40–41 

foodborne illness from, 61 

health benefits of, 43–44 

heart disease and, 44 

reducing fat content of, 154–55 

Dead zone (Gulf of Mexico), ix, 97–98 

Debeaking, 119 

Dehorning, 118 

Denitrification, 81 

Denmark, 70 

Department of Agriculture (USDA) 

cattle inspection and, 117 

Conservation Compliance provi -

sions of, 162–63 

Continuing Survey of Food Intake, 24 

diet estimates of, 19, 21 

Environmental Quality Incentives 

Program, 160 228  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

food labels and, 155 

food safety and, 71–72 

Fruit and Vegetable Snack Program, 

153 

health and food-safety responsibili -

ties of, 156 

irrigation water and, 91, 92, 95 

meat grades and, 5–9 

non-farm animals and, 136–38 

politics and, xiv 

processed meat fat content and, 154 

promotion of unhealthy foods and, 157 

sex hormones and, 131 

soil conservation program and, 79 

Department of Health and Human Ser -

vices, 52, 68 

Detoeing, 119 

DeWaal, Caroline Smith, 72 

DHA.  See  Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 

Diabetes 

diet and, 24, 25, 30–31 

health-care costs and, 21 

obesity and, 18 

processed meat and, 43 

whole grains and, 38 

Diehl, Hans, 28 

Diet.  See also  specific diets 

American, vii–viii, 18–19, 21, 145 

animal welfare and, 127–33, 144, 147 

cancer and, 17–18, 24, 29 

cholesterol level and, 23–25 

DASH Eating Plan, 28, 145, 146 

diabetes and, 24, 25, 30–31 

disease and, 17–18, 21–31 ( See also 

specific diseases )

environmental issues and, 158–69 

global warming and, x–xi 

health experts’ advice on, 32, 34, 

56–57, 143–44 

heart disease and, 17–18, 20, 25, 26–29 

hypertension and, 23–25, 27–29 

low-fat vegetarian, 27–29 

Mediterranean, 28, 145–46 

obesity and, 18, 25–26 

promotion of unhealthy foods and, 157 

recommendations for changing, 143–49 

stroke and, 17–18, 23, 46 

vegan, 24–26, 147 

vegetarian, 21, 24–31, 49, 147 

web sites with information on, 177–79 

Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyperten -

sion (DASH) Eating Plan, 28, 145 

Dietary fiber, 47–49 

Dietary Guidelines Advisory Commit -

tee, 45 

Dietary Guidelines for Americans,  19, 36, 

40, 46, 144, 153 

Dietitians of Canada, 147 

Diet Scorecard, 149, 150 

Dioxins, 47, 132 

Disease, 17–18, 21–22.  See also  Cancer; 

Diabetes; Foodborne illness; Heart 

disease; Hypertension; Stroke;  spe -

cific diseases 

Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 11, 46, 50, 51 

Downer cows, 123–24 

Duckett, Susan, 7 

Dust-bathing, 122 

Earth Policy Institute, xiii 

Ecological impact 

of diets, x–xi 

of plant diet, 21 

Economics, 21 

Edmondson, Drew, 96–97 

Eggs.  See also  Poultry 

consumption of, 18 

foodborne illness from, 62, 156 

heart disease and, 45–46 

Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 11, 46, 50, 51 

Endocrine-disrupting compounds 

(EDCs), 130 

Environmental issues.  See also  specific 

issues 

air pollution as, 103–12, 159 

animal product contaminants and, 

52–56 

feed grain use and, 163, 166 

government policies and, 158–66 

livestock production and, viii–xi, 9–12 

overgrazing and, 166 

pesticide and fertilizer use and, 161–63 

water pollution as, 77, 94–100, 159–60 

water use as, 160–61 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 

air pollution and, 158 

fertilizer use and, 82, 96 

fish consumption and, 56 

manure use and, 158 

water pollution and, 94, 98–100, 158 Index  • 229 

Environmental Quality Incentives Pro -

gram (EQIP) (Department of Agri -

culture), 160 

Environmental Working Group (EWG), 

55–56, 82, 92, 165 

EPA.  See  Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) 

Erosion 

cropland, 73, 74, 76–77, 85, 88 

from irrigation, 91, 95–96, 101 

methods to reduce, 79, 80, 162 

pesticide runoff and, 100 

soil compaction and, 78 

water, 79 n

wind, 79 n

Escherichia coli,  60, 63–66, 129, 172–73 

Eshel, Gidon, x 

Esselstyn, Caldwell, 30 

European Prospective Investigation 

into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC), 

24, 25, 42, 46 

European Union, 70, 131, 162, 163, 167 

Exercise.  See  Physical activity 

Exotic weeds, 78 

Farm Animal Welfare Council (United 

Kingdom), 167 

Farm Bill of 2002, 162, 165 

Farmers’ markets, 154 

Farm subsidy programs, 92, 161–66 

Fatty acids 

in beef, 11 

omega-3, 11, 46, 50–51 

Fertilizers 

affecting non-farm animals and, 137 

biosolids as, 84, 85 

chemical, 80–82, 84, 85 

environmental issues related to, 

96–100, 108–10, 158 

manure as, 4, 65, 83–84 

recommendations to reduce use of, 

161–63 

sewage waste as, 132 

Fiber.  See  Dietary fiber 

Fish 

bycatch and, 115 

cancer and, 46 

contaminants in, 47, 55–56 

dietary recommendations for, 11 

extinction issues for, 46 

health benefits of, 46 

heart disease and, 46, 50 

mercury in, 47, 56 

5 A Day program (Department of 

Health and Human Services), 153 

Flavonoids, 51 

Fluoroquinolones, 69 

Foie gras, 167 

Folate, 49 

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 

animal feed and, 128 

fish consumption guidelines and, 56 

food safety and, 68, 69, 71–72 

health and food-safety responsibili -

ties of, 156 

nuts and, 38–39 

sex hormones and, 131 

Foodborne illness 

antibiotic resistance and, 68–70 

costs of, 72 

eggs and, 62, 156 

food-safety system and, 71–72 

increased risk for, 63–64 

livestock production and, 61, 63–67, 

72, 156 

from manure, viii, 65–66 

overview of, 59 

pathogens responsible for, 171–76 

poultry-related influenza and, 67, 71 

prevention of, 156–57 

sources of, 60–66 

Food labeling, 155–56 

Food pyramids 

DASH, 145 

Mediterranean, 146 

vegetarian, 147 

Food-safety system.  See also  Foodborne 

illness 

federal government responsibility 

for, 71–72, 156 

risks to, 62–64 

Food Stamp program, 153 

Framingham Heart Study, 41 

Fruit and Vegetable Snack Program 

(Department of Agriculture), 153, 165 

Fruits 

dietary recommendations for, 36–37, 153 

foodborne illness from, 64–65 

health benefits of, 31–36 

programs to increase consumption 

of, 153–54 230  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

statistics regarding consumption of, 21 

weight loss and, 35 

Gastroenteritis, 65 

Gastrointestinal health, 38 

Gates, Larry, 73 

General Mills, 164 

Gestation crates, 114, 120, 121, 125, 167 

Global Resource Action Center for the 

Environment, 158 

Global warming, x–xi, 108 

Glyphosate, 84, 85, 100 

Government policies/practices.  See also 

specific government agencies 

farm subsidies and, 164–65 

food-safety regulation as, 71–72 

irrigation subsidies as, 161 

Government policy recommendations 

to discontinue promotion of un -

healthy meat and dairy foods, 157 

for healthy meals at government-

run facilities, 158 

to help move to more plant-based 

diet, 151–52 

to improve animal welfare, 166–68 

to improve environment, 158–67 

to increase fruit and vegetable con -

sumption, 153–54 

for more effective food labeling, 155–56 

to prevent antibiotic resistance, 157 

to prevent foodborne illness, 156 

to reduce fat content of meat, 154 

to reduce fat content of milk, 154–55 

to reduce feed grain use, 163, 166 

Grain-fed beef.  See also  Animal feed; 

Beef; Livestock production 

background of, 3–7 

environmental issues related to, 11, 

13, 163 

fat content in, 5–8 

Grain production 

effects on soil of, 73 

government subsidies and, 164–65 

for livestock feed, viii–ix, 80 

water for, 88–89 

Grandin, Temple, 136 

Grass-fed beef.  See also  Beef; Livestock 

production 

environmental issues and, xi, 3, 13 

fat content in, 5–8, 10 

health claims regarding, 10–11 

Greenhouse gases, x, 82, 104, 107, 108. 

See also  specific gases 

Groundwater, 89–90 

Groundwater Protection Act (Iowa), 162 

Growth hormone, 123 

Guillain-Barré Syndrome, 62 

Gulf of Mexico 

contaminated shellfish in, 47 

dead zone in, ix, 97–98 

nitrogen discharged into, 96 

Hantavirus, 66 

Hawthorne Valley Farms, 9 

Hayes, Tyrone, 85 

Health-care costs, 21, 72 

Health issues.  See also  Foodborne ill -

ness;  specific diseases 

diet and, 17–18, 21–22, 32, 34 

from foodborne bacteria, viii 

government programs addressing, 152 

from hydrogen sulfide, 109–110 

from pesticide use, 53–55 

related to refined foods, xi–xii, 18, 148 

Heart disease 

animal products and, 41–42 

beef and, 8, 10, 41 

dairy products and, 44 

decreasing risk for, 27–28 

diet and, 17–18, 20, 25, 26–29 

dietary fiber and, 48 

dietary recommendations for people 

with, 11 

eggs and, 45–46 

fish and, 46, 50 

fruits and vegetables and, 33 

health-care costs and, 21 

legumes and, 39–40 

nuts and, 38–39 

obesity and, 18 

reversal of, 29–30 

unsaturated oils and, 50 

whole grains and, 37 

Heterocyclic amines (HCAs), 52 

High blood pressure.  See  Hypertension 

Hogs.  See  Pigs/pork 

Hormones 

in beef cattle, 117, 124, 131, 160 

bovine growth, 123, 124, 160 

in dairy cattle (rBST), 123 Index  • 231 

pesticide use and, 85, 130 

sex, 131 

water pollution and, 160 

Humane Methods of Slaughter Act, 

134, 136, 168 

Human Rights Watch, 135 

Hurricane Katrina, 122 

Hydrogen fluoride, 97 

Hydrogen sulfide, 106, 109–10 

Hypertension 

animal products and, 41–42 

dairy products and, 44 

diet and, 23–25, 27–29 

health-care costs and, 21 

obesity and, 18 

potassium and, 50 

Hypoxia, 96, 98 

Influenza, avian, 67, 70–71, 123 

Insoluble fiber, 48 

Institute of Medicine 

antibiotics in animals and, 69 

conjugated linoleic acid and, 10–11 

dietary recommendations for 

Women, Infants, and Children 

(WIC) program, 153 

fiber and, 49 

saturated fat and, 40 

Intervention studies, 26–27 

Iowa Pork Producers Association, 70 

Irrigation.  See also  Water use 

economics of, 92–93 

environmental problems resulting 

from, 76, 87, 95–96, 101, 160 

erosion from, 91, 95–96, 101 

government policies on, 161 

methods of, 90–91 

statistics regarding, 7, 11, 88–90 

Isoflavones, 51 

Jenkins, David, 27–28, 30 

Kosher meat, 134 

Kowalcyk, Kevin, 63 

Kris-Etherton, Penny, 38 

Kummer, Corby, 8 

Lacto-ovo vegetarian diet.  See also  Veg -

etarian diets 

animal welfare and, 147 

cholesterol level and, 24 

dietary fiber intake and, 49 

ecological impact and, x, xi 

food pyramid for, 147–48 

Laura’s Lean Beef, 9 

Leaf, Alexander, 28 

Legumes, 39–40 

Leopold Center for sustainable Agri -

culture, 162 

Lignans, 51 

Lingins, 51 

Listeria,  60, 67, 173–74 

Listeria monocytogenes,  60 

Livestock production.  See also  Agri -

cultural practices; Animal welfare; 

Beef; Cattle; Pigs/pork 

antibiotics use in, 3, 69, 70, 157 

background of, 3–4 

cattle age and, 7–8 

environmental issues related to, 

viii–xi, 9–12, 144 

exotic weeds and, 78 

foodborne illness and, 61, 63–67, 72, 

156, 172–76 

grain- vs. grass-fed, xi, 3–13 

soil and, 75–76 

treatment of animals and, 12 

water use for, 88–89, 93–94 

Loan deficiency payments, 164–65 

Longevity, 22, 23 

Low-fat vegetarian diets, 27–29 

Lung cancer, 51 

Lyon Diet Heart Study, 28 

Maceration, 119 

Mad cow disease, 66, 116, 133, 156, 168, 

174–75 

Mandell, Ira, 5, 8 

Manure 

air pollution from, 104–06, 109–10, 158 

ammonia and, 99–100 

as fertilizer, 4, 65, 83–84 

foodborne illness from, viii, 65–66 

livestock production and, viii, 10, 12, 

83, 86, 98–99 

water pollution from, 96, 98–100, 

158–60 

Manure lagoons, 18, 94, 105, 107, 159, 160 

Marine algae, 98 

Martin, Pamela, x 

Mastitis, 123 

Maverick Ranch, 9 232  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

McGovern, George, xiv 

Meat.  See  Beef; Cattle; Pigs/pork; Pro -

cessed meat 

Mediterranean diet, 28, 145–46 

Mercury, 47, 56 

Meta-analyses, 25 

Methane, viii, x, 10, 12, 104–07 

Metolachlor, 100 

Microbiotic crust, 78 

Milk production.  See also  Dairy products 

fat content reduction and, 154–55 

methods used in, 123–24 

Mills, Paul K., 54 

Monterey Bay Aquarium, 46 

Morton’s, 3 

National Academy of Sciences, 69–70 

National Cancer Institute, 34, 48, 54 

National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, 

9, 166 

National Cholesterol Education Pro -

gram, 28 

National Institute for Occupational 

Safety and Health, 105, 109 

National Pollution Discharge and 

Elimination System (Environmental 

Protection Agency), 99 

National Research Council, 106 

National Science and Technology 

Council, 98 

National Toxicology Program (Depart -

ment of Health and Human Ser -

vices), 52 

Natural Resources Defense Council, 92 

Neural tube defect, 49 

Nitric oxide, 81, 82, 106, 108, 109 

Nitrogen, 74, 75, 80–83, 96–99, 106, 107, 

110, 132, 160, 162, 163 

Nitrogen dioxide, 81, 82, 108 

Nitrogen oxides (NO x), 81–82, 108, 109 

Nitrous oxide, x, 106–08 

North American Pollinator Protection 

Campaign, 138 

Norwalk-like viruses, 60 

Nurses’ Health Study (Harvard School 

of Public Health), 26, 37, 42, 44 

Nutrition Facts label (Department of 

Agriculture), 155 

Nuts, 38–39 

Obesity 

diet and, 18, 25–26 

fruits and vegetables and, 35 

health-care costs and, 21 

Observational studies, 22 

Odor, 104, 110 

Ogallala Aquifer, 89 

Oldways, 145, 146 

Omaha Steaks, 3 

Omega-3 fatty acids 

beef and, 11 

fish and, 46 

sources of, 50–51 

Organophosphate pesticides, 55 

Orlando, Edward, 131 

Ornish, Dean, 29, 30 

Osteoporosis, 43 

Osterholm, Michael, 67 

O’Toole, Tara, 71 

Overfishing, 46 

Overgrazing, 166 

Oxford Vegetarian Study, 24, 25, 45 

Ozone depletion, 108 

Pancreatic cancer, 43 

Parasites, 60, 82, 84, 122 

Pariza, Michael, 10 

Particulate matter, 106, 109, 111–12 

PBDEs.  See  Polybrominated diphenyl 

ethers (PBDEs) 

PCBs.  See  Polychlorinated biphenyls 

(PCBs) 

Peanuts, 38, 39 

People for the Ethical Treatment of Ani -

mals (PETA), 134 

Pesticides 

affecting non-farm animals, 136–38 

in animal feed, 130, 132 

environmental and health effects of, 

ix, 53, 84–85, 100, 112, 158, 161–63 

recommendations to reduce use of, 

161–63 

Pfiesteria, 66 

Phosphate, 97 

Phosphorus, 72, 83, 96, 99, 160, 163 

Photochemicals, 51–52 

Physical activity 

health and, 17, 18, 32 

heart disease and, 29–30 

Mediterranean diet and, 146 

Phytase, 160 Index  • 233 

Phytochemicals, 51–52 

Phytosterols, 27, 51 

Pigs/pork 

antibiotic use for, 70, 157 

cancer from consumption of, 42 

confinement of, 120–21 

fertilizer use to produce, 81 

hypertension from consumption of, 42 

influenza in, 67 

neurotic behavior in, 125–26 

reducing fat content in, 154 

toxins consumed by, 128 

water consumption by, 93 

Pilgrim’s Pride, 132 

Pimentel, David, 77 n

Politics, xvii 

Pollan, Michael, xii, 152 

Pollution.  See  Air pollution; Environ -

mental issues; Water pollution 

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers 

(PBDEs), 56 

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 47, 

55–56, 130 

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 

(PAHs), 52 

Polyunsaturated fat, 38, 50, 51 

Pork.  See  Pigs/pork 

Potash and Phosphate Institute, 96 

Potassium 

dairy products and, 43 

sources of, 49–50 

Poultry.  See also  Eggs 

air pollution from, 106–07 

antibiotic use for, 69, 70, 157 

cattle products fed to, 66, 133 

cruel treatment of, 114, 119, 121–23 

egg production by, 121, 124, 156 

fat and saturated fat in, 43 

foodborne pathogens in, 172, 175 

influenza-infected, 67, 71 

neurotic behavior in, 126–27 

nutrition labeling for, 155 

Poultry litter, 132 

Prion, 66 

Processed meat 

cancer and, 42, 43 

fat content in, 154 

Prosilac, 123 

Prostate cancer 

dairy products and, 45 

diet and, 24 

fish and, 47 

lifestyle change to control, 29 

pesticides and, 54 

Protein.  See  Animal protein 

Pseudomonas,  67 

Public Citizen, 158 

rBST (recombinant bovine somatotro -

pin), 123 

Rectal cancer, 42 

Reduced tillage, 79 

Refined foods, xi–xii, 18, 19, 26, 30, 37, 

38, 49, 57, 148 

Reiter’s Syndrome, 62 

Relyea, Rick, 85 

Restaurants, 155–56 

Rollin, Bernard, 117, 122, 126, 134 

Roxarsone, 82 

Russell, James, 129 

Sacks, Frank, 41 

Salatin, Joel, 152 

Salinization, 96 

Salmon, 55–56 

Salmonella,  60–62, 64–66, 68–69, 156, 175 

Salt, 19 

Saturated fat 

in animal products, 40–41 

blood cholesterol levels and, 20 

Schechter, Arnold, 56 

Schlosser, Eric, 63, 135 

Scombrotoxin, 47 

Scully, Matthew, 114, 167 

Seafood Watch (Monterey Bay Aquar -

ium), 46 

Selenium, 51, 95 

Seventh-day Adventists (SDAs), 23–24 

Sewage sludge, 132 

Sex hormones, 131 

Shula, Dave, 4 

Slaughter methods, 134–36 

Smil, Vaclav, 109 

Soft drinks, 19, 32, 148, 153 

Soil 

compaction of, 78 

erosion of, 76–77 

exotic weeds and, 78 

fertilizer use and, 80–84 

importance of good, 74–75, 84 

livestock’s demand on, 75–76 234  • Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 

pesticides on, 84–85 

Soil and Water Conservation Society, 162 

Soil conservation, 79–80 

Soluble fiber, 27, 47, 48.  See also  Dietary 

fiber 

Soybean production, 73, 79 

Soy foods, 27, 39 

Spina bifida, 49 

Staphylococcus,  67, 175–76 

Stroke 

diet and, 17–18, 23, 46 

fruits and vegetables and, 33 

potassium and, 50 

Sulfuric acid, 108 

Superfund, 159 

Tail docking, 118 

Tohill, Beth Carlton, 35 

Tomatoes, 36 

Topsoil, 74–85.  See also  Soil 

Toxoplasma gondii,  176 

Transport methods, 133–34 

Tyson Foods, 70, 97 

U.K. Farm Animal Welfare Council, 167 

United Egg Producers, 121 

University of Guelph (Ontario), 5, 7, 8 

Unsaturated fats, 20, 40, 50, 155 

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 82, 96, 

100 

USDA.  See  Department of Agriculture 

(USDA) 

Veal production, 128 

Vegan diet.  See also  Vegetarian diets 

animal welfare and, 147 

cholesterol level and, 24–26 

hypertension and, 25, 26 

recommendations for, 147, 148 

Vegetables 

dietary recommendations for, 36–37 

foodborne illness from, 64–65 

health benefits of, 31–36 

programs to increase consumption 

of, 153–54 

statistics regarding consumption of, 21 

weight loss and, 35 

Vegetarian diets 

cholesterol levels and, 24–25 

diabetes and, 25 

food pyramid for, 147–48 

health-care costs and, 21 

heart disease and, 24–30 

hypertension and, 25 

lacto-ovo, x, xi, 24, 49, 147 

low-fat, 26–27 

studies of, 22–31 

Vibrio,  47 

Viruses, Norwalk-like, 60 

Vitamin C, 51 

Vitamin D, 43 

Vitamin E, 51 

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), 

106, 110 

Water pollution 

agricultural practices and, 94–100 

fertilizers and pesticides and, 161 

from manure, 65, 96, 98–100, 158–60 

recommendations to prevent, 

159–63 

from soil erosion, 77 

Water use 

aquifer depletion and, 89–90 

irrigation and, 76, 87–93, 95–96, 101, 

160, 161 

for livestock production, 88–89, 

93–94, 101 

recommendations to reduce, 160–61 

in United States, 89 

Weight loss, 35, 48 

West Nile virus, 66 

Whole grains, 37–38 

Willett, Walter, 35 

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) 

program, 153 

World Cancer Research Foundation, 

52, 144 

World Health Organization, 33, 35, 46, 

48, 56–57, 69, 144 

World Organization for Animal Health, 

135 

World Resources Institute, 92 

Yang, Richard, 54 

Zahn, James, 105
