Title: Microsoft Corporation, 1 Microsoft Way, Bldg 37, Redmond, WA 98052, US - MapQuest

URL Source: https://www.mapquest.com/us/washington/microsoft-corporation-12544878

Markdown Content:
1 Microsoft Way Bldg 37

Redmond, WA 98052

Opens at 7am

With annual sales revenue of more than $55 Billion, Microsoft Corporation is one of the leaders in software, services and solutions worldwide. The company develops, manufactures, licenses and supports a range of software products for computing devices. Its business division includes the Microsoft Office suites, desktop programs and servers; Microsoft Dynamics; and Unified Communications solutions. It operates an entertainment division that consists of the Xbox video game system, including consoles and accessories, Xbox live operations, Zune digital music and entertainment devices. It also offers surface computing platform and Windows Automotive. Additionally, it provides an online advertising platform for publishers and advertisers and personal communications services, such as e-mail and instant messaging. Its online information offerings include Live Search and MSN portals and channels. Founded in 1975, the public company employs over 88,200 staff members across 85 countries worldwide. Microsoft Corporation operates various subsidiaries, such as Microsoft Ireland Research, Microsoft Capital Group, Microsoft Global Finance, Microsoft Online and MOL Corporation.

Own this business?

See a problem?

You might also like
-------------------

Business services, nec, nec, Software programming applications, Internet connectivity services Infosys Limited Infosys Limited in Bellevue, WA is a global leader in digital transformation, offering a wide range of services and platforms to help businesses navigate the ever-evolving digital landscape. With a focus on innovation and sustainability, Infosys empowers clients across various industries to enhance customer experiences, drive revenue growth, and build cyber resilience. Through their Infosys Knowledge Institute and partnerships with organizations like the ATP World Tour, Infosys is at the forefront of leveraging data analytics, AI, and blockchain to create cutting-edge digital experiences. Their commitment to continuous learning and client collaboration positions them as a strategic partner in driving successful digital transformations for businesses worldwide. Generated from the website

Partial Data by Infogroup (c) 2025. All rights reserved.

Partial Data by Foursquare.
