Title: Explore the Hidden Gems of Chongqing: A Travel Guide

URL Source: https://www.lemon8-app.com/@vinylrevival_brownsg/7381833725908369937?region=sg

Published Time: 2024-06-18T22:26:58.000+09:00

Markdown Content:
30 saved

19

10

Exploring Chongqing ( Part 2)!
------------------------------

2024/6/18 Edited to

Chongqing is a vibrant city that offers a mix of modern and traditional experiences. Not only can you delve into unique shopping opportunities, but discovering the Impressions @ Wulong performance directed by Zhang Yimou is a must for art enthusiasts. The Three Natural Bridges are breathtaking natural formations where movie buffs can appreciate the filming location of 'Bumblebee'. Additionally, be sure to enjoy the picturesque landscape of the Youyang Taohuayuan, a serene retreat known for its beautiful scenery. Gongtan Ancient Town provides a glimpse into Chongqing’s rich history with majestic views and traditional architecture. For an authentic cultural experience, don’t miss the chance to savor tea brewed in a traditional round stove! These attractions, along with the Chiyou Jiuli Ancient City, make Chongqing a gem worth exploring.

Related posts
-------------

Exploring Chongqing (Part 1) 7 likes My ChongQing Itinerary (Part 2) ✨✨ Continuation from February 21 (Day 2) 6:00 PM+ - We had dinner at a random restaurant in 磁器口 called 小颜哥江湖菜, and it turned out to be a nightmare. Since we were in a rush to get to our next destination (下浩里), we wanted a quick meal nearby. As we walked by, a few of the staff were very enthusiastic 4 likes Travel Diaries | Chongqing (6days 5 nights) P2 Landmark Riverside: We actually came here for 河图火锅steamboat as it was recommended on XHS. Chanced upon this place as we decided to take a walk along the riverbank to see the nice citylights of Chongqing on the opposite. You can see Raffles City from here (which resembles our Marina Bay Sands). 7 likes WHERE YOU MUST GO TO IN CHONGQING 🌟if you’re planning a trip to China , save at least half a day for this place! unlimited free flow local food and drinks, massages, and movies… 🍿🎥💆🏻‍♀️ 📍金色印象Golden Impression ⭐️if you check into the place past midnight, you can stay till the following noon! gr8 for aft arriving from a red ey 28 likes day 2 in chongqing vlog places i went — ciqikou ancient town 磁器口 - ate at 猫儿面 and 格桑家藏式酸奶店 - 2 attractions visited were yinglong men gate 迎龙门 and baolun temple 宝轮寺 gongyan dining at 礼宴巴国宮宴 #chongqing #chongqingtravel #chinaitinerary #ciqikou #gongyan 57 likes Where to shop in Chongqing 😍 Hey zesties! I’m currently in Chongqing, so I wanted to share about some really hot shopping places for first-timers coming here. Do save this post for your next trip! 🫶🏼 📍 imix ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ Very HUGE mall, about 12 floors with 4 buildings combined together. I honestly kinda got lost here because 69 likes day 4 in chongqing vlog this day was one of my favourites!! here’s my honest review of the tiktok viral places i’ve been seeing online~ places that we visited in order: 1. Shibati 十八梯 (念念茶香 for lunch) 2. The Ring Shopping Mall 重庆光坏购物公园 3. Nanshan 南山 (BBQ at 落日野茶集) 4. Flavor Lounge #chongqing #chinatravelguide 195 likes CHONGQING 101 Hello! I am back from China 🇨🇳 Chongqing is really the place to visit now and trust me, it’s packed with tourists at the moment. I was in Chongqing for the first 3 days of my trip and then I travelled to Chengdu and Xi’an (more on that another day). Day 1: ✨Jiefangbei 解放碑 ✨Kuixinglou 79 likes 3 Days in 重庆 ChongQing🇨🇳: Frost Frost City🤩 Final stop of our 10-day China trip: 重庆 (Chongqing), where drama “First Frost” was filmed 🎥 After a 5-hour train ride from 张家界 (Zhangjiajie), we landed in 解放碑, Chongqing’s shopping & nightlife hub. Day 1 was chill — just exploring the neon-lit streets and recharging. Day 2: Started with 34 likes MORE interesting things to do | 🇨🇳 Chongqing Pt. 2 Apart from visiting the iconic tourist spots, here are 𝓂𝑜𝓇𝑒 interesting things to do in China, Chongqing! 1️⃣ 𝙒𝙖𝙩𝙘𝙝𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙖 𝙨𝙩𝙖𝙣𝙙𝙪𝙥 𝙘𝙤𝙢𝙚𝙙𝙮 𝙨𝙝𝙤𝙬 😆 (~S$15+) The show I watched is called 原气喜剧脱口秀 (YuanQ Comedy). In each show they have a lineup of comedy actors, some doing an ad-hoc interaction with 19 likes Chong Qing: 10 Mins For The Best Momento If you’re planning on going to Chongqing, you would have came across many post about photoshoots, especially to wear costumes with Douyin make up, but if that’s too much for you or if you have too little time but still want to take some professional shots as a momento, this one will be perfect! 30 likes ultimate 3D2N guide for chongqing 🇨🇳 recently came back from a 10D trip to china which i absolutely loved! here are the details from my time in chongqing ⬇️ DAY ONE 1️⃣ mountain city trail (5/5⭐️) my favourite spot in CQ! a super scenic trail with cute shops, food stalls, and instagrammable spots along a mountain edge. we took th 263 likes THE reason why ill visit chongqing again 🇨🇳 ever thought of what $20 can get you? A LUXURIOUS MASSAGE in a private atas room 🫣 chanced upon this place online bec we had a red eye flight back to sg and wanted somewhere to rest. ngl, they exceeded our expectations so much??? the service was top notch and def value for $$$ we bought en 63 likes Sharing my Chong Qing Itinerary! ✅ Day One 🤍❄️ Chong Qing - 19 to 21 Feb 2025 🤍❄️ Day 0 10pm - Arrived Chong Qing Jiangbei International Airport, take taxi to hotel (60 RMB) 11pm+ - Checked in Chong Qing Hotel (ISBELLO Lixin Landmark High Altitude Hotel - Jiefangbei Branch) - 8/10 (Good Service, Convenience & Clean) Day 1 10am+ 39 likes$650 for 5D6N in Chongqing??? I went to Chongqing, China in June with my sister and here’s a breakdown of how much I spent (for 1 pax) for the 5D6N trip. ✈️: The flight was booked 2 weeks before the trip and we chose to take China Southern Airlines. However, it’s a code share flight so the plane is operated by Chongqing air 95 likes day 3 in chongqing vlog day trip to wulong karst included LOTS of hiking so be prepared! 🥾 took us 4h to visit both attractions places i went — three natural bridges 天生三桥 longshuixia difeng 龙水峡地缝 #chongqing #chongqingtravel #wulong #chinaitinerary #chinatravelguide 194 likes Hotels in Chengdu & Chongqing 🍋 Hello, Lemon8 Fam! 🏨✨ Excited to share more about our accommodations in Chengdu and Chongqing as we wrapped up the last leg of our honeymoon! The feedback on my Yunnan accommodation post has been overwhelming—thank you all for your love and interest. If you missed that, check it out here: 1 593 likes Don’t Visit Chongqing Without This Itinerary!😏 Day 1 •📍Ciqikou I wouldn’t say this place is a must-visit, as many of the stores sell the same things. We didn’t find anything special here 🥹 If you want a photoshoot (写真), a better spot would be📍 Hongyadong ✨ If your itinerary includes this area, here are some snacks I recommend: ⭐️ Nougats 225 likes🇨🇳 solo trip itinerary • Chong Qing read more about my solo trip in Chongqing here TT kept recommending videos of Chongqing to me, and I am really fascinated by the infrastructure and the pretty night view, so I decided to go for a short trip there! here's my solo trip itinerary for 5d4n 🫶 Day 1: ✨ Reach hostel at 9p 289 likes Must-visits in Chongqing!✅✨ Here’s the must-visit guide map for Chongqing🇨🇳 Chongqing, a mountainous megacity in southwestern China ⛰️and a direct-controlled municipality at the confluence of the Yangtze and Jialing Rivers🏞️, thrives as an economic powerhouse renowned for its fiery cuisine, mist-clad skyscrapers, wartime h 160 likes 7D6N CHENGDU & CHONGQING ITINERARY 🇨🇳🐼🌶️ where to go? eat? shop? panda? hotpot? i got you! 😉 Day 1: Sin > Chengdu Tianfu Intl Airport 🛫 Airport > Chengdu East station (train) > ChongQing Xi station (train). 🚆Tickets were booked via trip.com advised to book at least an hour early to prevent missing the train timing. Chongqi 30 likes day 5 in chongqing vlog everything i did on my last day in chongqing~ we ate lots of yummy food, shopped and experienced their nightlife ✨ places we visited: - 点都德 at North City Paradise Walk Shopping Mall 北城天街购物市场 - Guanyin Bridge 观音桥 (nearby the mall!) with the iconic 重庆 sign - 方圆 LIVE for shopping - Liziba Stati 191 likes Where I stayed in Chongqing: From $65/night👀 hello zesties! it’s me again with more bits to share from my recent trip to China👀 today’s post is all about the super aesthetic and spacious hotel room i stayed in at Chongqing . found this gem while hotel-hopping online and booked it through Trip! ‎ 📍𝐘𝐎𝐋𝐎 𝐒𝐤𝐲𝐥𝐢𝐧𝐞 𝐑𝐢𝐯𝐞𝐫𝐯𝐢𝐞𝐰 𝐃𝐞𝐬𝐢𝐠𝐧𝐞𝐫 783 likes what to do for 5 days in chongqing? 🇨🇳 Chongqing here’s an itinerary of how i spent my time in chongqing, china~ feel free to shift the activities and attractions accordingly places you must visit — hongyadong 洪崖洞 jiefangbei 解放碑 ciqikou ancient town 磁器口 wulong karst 乌龙乡 deyi world 得意世界 18 steps 十八梯 liziba station 李子坝站 53 likes 4D4N Chongqing Itinerary ✨ China part 2!!! hehe click here for China part 1 - Chengdu ! Sorry many places are written in Chinese but these are the exact locations, u can just copy paste in amap! Day 1 - check out & take bus back 904am huanglongjiuzhai station to chengdu 1118am train to chongqing - check in 📍Qi 14 likes Summer in Chong Qing: My One-Week Experience This summer, I spent about a week exploring Chong Qing. Even after a lot of research, plans often changed on the go—but that’s part of the adventure! Here’s a day-by-day look at my experiences, from bustling streets to UNESCO sites and hidden gems. ✈️ Day 1: Chongqing Airport, Liziba Station, Ho 11 likes Chongqing travel |the meaning of Ciqikou #chongqing #ciqikou #chinatravelguide #chinatown 1 like Lazy version of Chongqing travel guide Chongqing Free Travel🚇Awesome downtown city walk tips！ #chongqing #chongqinghotpot #chongqingview #chinavisa #chinatravel 1️⃣ City name&Introduction 【Chongqing】 Chongqing is rich in humanities and natural tourism resources, and is a city that tourists from all over the world will wa 40 likes save this itinerary for your next chongqing trip 🇨🇳 If you’re heading to Chongqing soon, this is the ultimate itinerary for you! I recently went during summer, and I gotta say - the weather in China during was no joke… 🥵 It’s best to visit during other seasons as the weather there during summer was even hotter than Singapore! 🙅🏻‍♀️ 👉🏻 Here’s what 286 likes The Ultimate 4D3N Chongqing Guide: Eat, See, Do 🍜💫 exactly a week ago, i got back from a trip to chongqing and chengdu — my summer break finale after interning 😋😋 i thought i'd share my adventures and itinerary for anyone planning a visit to these amazing cities! 🌆 today's post is all about chongqing, and i’ll cover chengdu in the next o 252 likes My 5D6N Chongqing Itinerary 🙌🏼 Hello!! Here to share my 6D6N Chongqing itinerary~ Day 0: Landed in Chongqing at around 7:30pm and only managed to check in and settle down in hotel by 10pm sooooo this day is non-existent in the itinerary. 😅 Day 1: 1. 磁器口 - Ci qi kou (Did not fully explore this place as we didn’t plan 307 likes 2.5h massage with FREE FLOW FOOD <$100 #ChongQing Hi Zesties! I’m back with another recommendation and this time it’s a ChongQing edition! Think free flow food, 2.5h massage, free movies etc., all under $100! After our Xinjiang trip (MORE BOUT IT HERE!) , we headed to ChongQing for our 2nd leg of the trip! After Xinjiang, we were so tired tha 75 likes✈️ 重庆 - idea for your next travel destination You have probably heard of Chongqing because of Chongqing kao yu (重庆烤鱼) in Singapore. Chongqing used to be a city of Sichuan province, but it is now one of the four direct-administered municipalities. It is not a well-known travel destination but I would highly recommend ⭐️ 🏨 Hotel We staye 106 likes My top rated Chongqing hotpot banquet experience 🔥 This was my favourite experience in Chong Qing, and I highly recommend everyone to visit this place 💯 This is Ba Kingdom, and they host ancient China themed banquets - you play the characters of a guest invited to a royal banquet. As the performances take place, dishes are served one by one. 58 likes Chongqing Travel CHONGQING 重庆 1. City Overview Nickname: “Mountain City (Shān Chéng)” Population: 31.24 million Location: Southwest China (with mini map or GPS icon) Fun Fact: One of China’s “Three Furnaces” (Summer: up to 40°C / 104°F) 2. Best Time to Visit Spring (Mar–Jun) & Autumn (Sep–Nov) Ideal Te 12 likes Wulong Day Trip 🚌 (from Chongqing) Wulong is located in the southeast of Chongqing and you can easily travel there by bus! We bought our trip package from a travel agency, there are many in Chongqing city area. It costs around 300-350rmb (approx $60-$70sgd) per pax. Inclusive of: - Bus ride - Tour guide - Breakfast - Tick 22 likes Places we went to on our girl’s trip to Chongqing! In order of the video’s feature: 📍The Ring Shopping Mall 光环购物中心 📍Chongqing Zoo 📍Liberation Monument 解放碑 + Miniso Land 📍Wujiang Chibi Observation Gallery 📍Fairy Mountain 仙女山 📍Three Natural Bridges天生三桥 📍Raffles City Chongqing 莱佛士商场 📍Hongya Cave 洪崖洞 Save this for your next trip to the c 17 likes🇨🇳 | GIRLS HEAVEN IN CHONGQING Spent almost 1 hour to shop at Basement FG, known to be a shopping heaven for the XJJs. Their style are mainly like Y2K fashion. 💰 Price: $20 - $100+ (Something like Brandy Melville) We went to the Chongqing outlet (They are known of having pretty and handsome staffs - pretty true 🤣 They ar 159 likes WHAT TO DO in chongqing china? 🤨🇨🇳 chongqing has been gaining traction and looking back, i really miss my time there🥺 lots of spicy food, mala hotpot, local delights to try that you can’t get in singapore! highlight of the trip would be the hanfu photoshoot which was done in a SUPER cold weather (not sure how we survived it) 🥲 11 likes Chongqing Short Trip 🇨🇳 follow my tiktok gigi_0623 ✨ #china #traveling #transitionreels #capcut #chongqing 14 likes CHONGQING must-do For my girlies who love taking photos, if you haven’t visited Chongqing yet, I highly recommend booking your flight now! I’ve traveled to China many times, but Chongqing felt truly unique to me. Beyond the food and views, the photoshoot experience there exceeded my expectations. I first research 44 likes Basement FG Shopping in Chongqing ✨ ✨Brand: Basement FG 📍Guanyinqiao St, Chongqing, China So I stumbled upon this Gen Z hype ish shop hidden behind a small door in an underground shopping mall in Chongqing. I saw random strangers going into that pink or white door so curiosity took over, and I walked into paradise 😍 Paradise full 161 likes MUST VISIT: 6 Vintage Shop at Chongqing!🛍️ There is a building called HongDing International (红鼎国际名苑) located in GuanYinQiao, Chongqing (重庆观音桥). The building has many shops across multiple levels, and we discovered some beautiful vintage finds inside—it’s really interesting! Hongding building / A 红鼎国际名苑-A座 📍Address: 重庆市-江北区-渝北三村30号 9 likes Chongqing 5d4n itinerary ✨ Booked a last minute flight to CQ on SQ for only $370! The hotels in CQ are surprisingly budget-friendly too, with mine at around $70 per night. If you're looking for a great area to stay, I highly recommend the 解放碑 (jiefangbei) area. Getting around is a breeze; I mainly relied on cabs, but the 345 likes🇨🇳 | China’s tea time hits differently China really have lots of interesting cafe, saw this cafe on xiaohongshu and decided to visit! The staff were very nice to explain each dish and recommend which one is more insta-worthy! Once the dessert came, they will drop some dry ice to let you take pictures through the stream. Quite an int 117 likes❤️‍🔥 BEST CHONGQING SHOPS: brandy, sephora vibes 🙏🏼🇨🇳 hey guys its zing here, been into chinese fashion lately so if u wanna dress like one of those DOUYIN BADDIES i gotchu 🙏🏼🙏🏼🙏🏼 jokes (not rly) aside i went to 重庆 recently and these are just a few shops that stood out!!! ^__^ the ones which have a distinct brandy melville aesthetic would be w.mana 93 likes Chongqing walkology A Chongqing city walk is about observing, and wandering with curiosity — the real scenery is in the streets. Start at Tongyuan Gate and head downhill through quiet roads like Huayi and Linhua, with sky bridges connecting layered neighborhoods—a unique mountain city vibe. Take your time, turn dow 21 likes Our itinerary for a whirlwind tour of Chongqing We reached Chongqing in the early afternoon after our flight from Lhasa - so our first stop was definitely to check in at our hotel. Here’s what we did after that: 1. Liziba 李子坝 Station Arguably one of the most famous landmarks of Chongqing - this is where the train passes through the apartme 9 likes Chongqing hidden gem if you come to Chongqing,come here if time permits #china travel #chongqing #china #tourguidechina 1 like🇨🇳 this helped me save SGD400+ for my trip?! Chongqing . ChengDu in Summer ☀️ Disclaimer: my friend and I planned this knowing that the itinerary is going to turn out a little out of the norm… but our priority was to SAVE $$$$ as much as possible for this trip!!! Let me start by saying oh boy , booking tickets to head to these 2 cities 48 likes

See more
