Title: PRS Asia 2026 - Admission Policy

URL Source: https://prseventasia.com/prsasia2026/en/page/admission-policy

Markdown Content:
Only pre-registered visitors and exhibitor badge holders will be able to attend the show.

No one under the age of 16 will be able to attend the show, this includes babies in arms and pushchairs.

PRS is a TRADE ONLY show.

Badge holders must not allow their badges to be worn by anyone else.

All attendees must comply with any covid-19 protocols as set by the venue to be permitted entry to the show. No-one is to attend the show if they have been unwell in the 14 days prior, have been in contact with a known or suspected case of covid-19, have any respiratory symptoms (even if mild), high temperature, loss of taste of smell or a new cough.

Anyone attending the show must follow the health, safety and hygiene requirements of the show.

Visitors and Exhibitors attend the show at their own risk and the Organisers cannot be held liable if they fall unwell after attending.

Anyone obtaining a visitor or exhibitor badge by theft, deception or other illegal means may be asked to leave the show.

Anyone attending the show should carry some form of photo-ID (passport, photo-ID driving licence, national identity card) or other identification acceptable to the Organisers which the Organisers may ask to see.

Anyone attending the show must not take part in any canvassing, leafleting, demonstrations, objectionable behaviour or wear offensive apparel or be involved in any activity which may disrupt the show.

Press badges at the show are restricted to publishers, editors, journalists, photographers, broadcasters and web bloggers associated with the industry. Members of the press may be required to complete an application form and produce accreditation in the form of a photocopy of a recognised press or media card, business card, a letter from the editor or an official web address linking to a press release in order to verify their position. Press applications from advertising personnel and media sales representatives will not be accepted.

Official show photographers and film crew will be taking photographs and filming at the show. Anyone attending consents to such photography and filming without compensation and confirms that the Organisers shall be entitled to use such photographs and videos, which may include photographs and videos of visitors, for the purpose of marketing the show in future, for exploitation in any and all media, without liability. No other photography or filming will be permitted at the show without prior approval of the Organisers.

The Organisers reserve the right to exclude or remove anyone from the show who does not comply with this policy or who they reasonably consider are likely to break these rules or who is prohibited from attending under any applicable sanctions, laws or regulations, or otherwise at the Organisers’ discretion.

Visitors understand that by choosing to allow their badge to be scanned by an exhibitor or sponsor when at the event, they will be providing the exhibitor or sponsor with their personal data. Visitors consent to this personal data being used to contact them about their products or services.

Non-exhibiting companies attending PRS are requested not to solicit for business on the show floor or from exhibitors within the show.

Thank you for your understanding and we hope you have a great show!

_Policy correct as at January 2022_
