Title: White House has no plans to mandate IVF coverage: Report

URL Source: https://www.beckerspayer.com/policy-updates/white-house-has-no-plans-to-mandate-ivf-care-report/

Published Time: 2025-08-04T19:58:48+00:00

Markdown Content:
By:Andrew Cass

Monday, August 4th, 2025

The Trump administration has no current plans to require payers to provide coverage for _in vitro_ fertilization services, despite a campaign pledge to do so, _The Washington Post_ reported Aug. 3.

Five things to know:

1. During his 2024 presidential campaign, President Donald Trump said that if he returned to office, the government would either pay for IVF services or create rules requiring payers to cover treatment for it.

2. Mr. Trump has not publicly proposed new federal subsidies to make IVF free or more affordable, and White House officials are moving away from policies discussed internally to mandate IVF coverage for people on the ACA exchanges.

3. The president cannot legally make IVF an essential health benefit without Congress first passing legislation to do so, according to the report. Two people with knowledge of internal discussions told the _Post_ that mandating payers to cover IVF is not currently planned.

4. Mr. Trump signed an executive order Feb. 18 directing agencies to develop policy recommendations to protect access to IVF and “aggressively reduce out-of-pocket and health plan costs for such treatments.”

5. A White House spokesperson said Mr. Trump is continuing to work to fulfill his commitment to expand IVF.

Next Up in Payer Policy Updates
-------------------------------

*   Elevance Health is deepening its use of artificial intelligence enterprise-wide, focusing on enhancements to its member services, clinical workflows and… 
*   Oklahoma Attorney General Gentner Drummond challenged the state’s managed care Medicaid in an Oct. 22 letter to the Oklahoma Health… 
*   Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts is expanding its claims review process to address what it is describing as potential… 

Newsletter

Join the payer & health plan leaders who start their day with Becker's
----------------------------------------------------------------------
